XIII
ARCHIMEDES
THE siege and capture of Syracuse by Marcellus during the
second Punic war furnished the occasion for the appearance of
Archimedes as a personage in history; it is with this histori-
cal event that most of the detailed stories of him are con-
nected ; and the fact that he was killed in the sack of the city
in 212 B.C., when he is supposed to have been 75 years of age,
enables us to fix his date at about 287-212 B.C. He was the
son of Phidias, the astronomer, and was on intimate terms
with, if not related to, King Hieron and his son Gelon. 
It
appears from a passage of Diodorus that he spent some time
in Egypt, which visit was the occasion of his discovery of the
so-called Archimedean screw as a means of pumping water.1
It may be inferred that he studied at Alexandria with the
successors of Euclid. It was probably at Alexandria that he
made the acquaintance of Conon of Samos (for whom he had
the highest regard both as a mathematician and a friend) and
of Eratosthenes of Cyrene. To the former he was in the habit
of communicating his discourses before their publication;
while it was to Eratosthenes that he sent The Method, with an
introductory letter which is of the highest interest, as well as
(if we may judge by its heading) the famous Cattle-Problem.
Traditions.
It is natural that history or legend should say more of his
mechanical inventions than of his mathematical achievements,
which would appeal less to the average mind. His machines
were used with great effect against the Romans in the siege
of Syracuse. Thus he contrived (so we are told) catapults so
ingeniously constructed as to be equally serviceable at long or
1 Diodorus, v. 37. 3.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.002 Published online by Cambridge University Press

TRADITIONS 
17
short range, machines for discharging showers of missiles
through holes made in the walls, and others consisting of
long movable poles projecting beyond the walls which either
dropped heavy weights on the enemy's ships, or grappled
their prows by means of an iron hand or a beak like that of
a crane, then lifted them into the air and let them fall again.1
Marcellus is said to have derided his own engineers with the
words, 'Shall we not make an end of fighting against this
geometrical Briareus who uses our ships like cups to ladle
water from the sea, drives off our sambuca ignominiously
with cudgel-blows, and by the multitude of missiles that he
hurls at us all at once outdoes the hundred-handed giants of
mythology ?'; but all to no purpose, for the Romans were in
such abject terror that, ' if they did but see a piece of rope
or wood projecting above the wall, they would cry " there it
is", declaring that Archimedes was setting some engine in
motion against them, and would turn their backs and run
away' 2 These things, however, were merely the ' diversions
of geometry at play3,3 and Archimedes himself attached no
importance to them. According to Plutarch,
' though these inventions had obtained for him the renown of
more than human sagacity, he yet would not even deign to
leave behind him any written work on such subjects, but,
regarding as ignoble and sordid the business of mechanics and
every sort of art which is directed to use and profit, he placed
his whole ambition in those speculations the beauty and
subtlety of which is untainted by any admixture of the com-
mon needs of life.'4
(a) Astronomy.
Archimedes did indeed write one mechanical book, On
Sphere-making, which is lost; this described the construction
of a sphere to imitate the motions of the sun, moon and
planets.5 Cicero saw this contrivance and gives a description
of it; he says that it represented the periods of the moon
and the apparent motion of the sun with such accuracy that
it would even (over a short period) show the eclipses of the
sun and moon.6 As Pappus speaks of c those who understand
1 Polybius, Hist. viii. 7, 8; Livy xxiv. 34; Plutarch, Marcellus, cc. 15-17.
2 Ib., c. 17. 
3 /&., c. 14. 
4 Ib., c. 17.
5 Carpus in Pappus, viii, p. 1026. 9; Proclus on Eucl. I, p. 41. 16.
6 Cicero, Be rep. i. 21, 22, Tusc. i. 63, Be naU deor. ii. 88.
1523.2 
C
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.002 Published online by Cambridge University Press

18 
ARCHIMEDES
the making of spheres and produce a model of the heavens by
means of the circular motion of water', it is possible that
Archimedes's sphere was moved by water. In any case Archi-
medes was much occupied with astronomy. Livy calls him
unicus spectator caeli siderumque '-1 Hipparchus says, ' From
these observations it is clear that the differences in the years
are altogether small, but, as to the solstices, I almost think
that Archimedes and I have both erred to the extent of a
quarter of a day both in the observation and in the deduction
therefrom \2 Archimedes then had evidently considered the
length of the year. 
Macrobius says he discovered the dis-
tances of the planets,3 and he himself describes in his Sand-
reclconer the apparatus by which he measured the apparent
angular diameter of the sun.
(/3) Mechanics.
Archimedes wrote, as we shall see, on theoretical mechanics,
and it was by theory that he solved the problem To 'move a
given iveight by a given force, for it was in reliance (on the
irresistible cogency of his proof that he declared to Hieron
that any given weight could be moved by any given force
(however small), and boasted that, ' if he were given a place to
stand on, he could move the earth' (ira fico, KCCI KLVCO rav yav,
as he said in his Doric dialect). The story, told by Plutarch,
is that, ' when Hieron was struck with amazement and asked
Archimedes to reduce the problem to practice and to give an
illustration of some great weight moved by a small force, he
fixed upon a ship of burden with three masts from the king's
arsenal which had only been drawn up with great labour by
many men, and loading her with many passengers and a full
freight, himself the while sitting far off, with no great effort
but only holding the end of a compound pulley (iroXva-waa-To^)
quietly in his hand and pulling at it, he drew the ship along
smoothly and safely as if she were moving through the sea/ 4
The story that Archimedes set the Roman ships on fire by
an arrangement of burning-glasses or concave mirrors is not
found in any authority earlier than Lucian; but it is quite
1 Livy xxiv. 34. 2. 
2 Ptolemy, Syntaxis, III. 1, vol. i, p. 194. 23.
3 Macrobius, In Somn* Scip. ii. 3; cf. the figures in Hippolytus, Jlefut.,
p. 66. 52 sq., ed. Duncker.
4 Plutarch, Marcellus, c. 14.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.002 Published online by Cambridge University Press

MECHANICS 
19
likely that he discovered some form of burning-mirror, e.g. a
paraboloid of revolution, which would reflect to one point all
rays falling on its concave surface in a direction parallel to
its axis.
Archimedes's own view of the relative importance of his
many discoveries is well shown by his request to his friends
and relatives that they should place upon his tomb a represen-
tation of a cylinder circumscribing a sphere, with an inscrip-
tion giving the ratio which the cylinder bears to the sphere;
from which we may infer that he regarded the discovery of
this ratio as his greatest achievement. 
Cicero, when quaestor
in Sicily, found the tomb in a neglected state and repaired it1;
but it has now disappeared, and no one knows where he was
buried.
Archimedes's entire preoccupation by his abstract studies is
illustrated by a number of stories. We are told that he would
forget all about his food and such necessities of life, and would
be drawing geometrical figures in the ashes of the fire or, when
anointing himself, in the oil on his body.2 Of the same sort
is the tale that, when he discovered in a bath the solution of
the question referred to him by Hieron, as to whether a certain
crown supposed to have been made of gold did not in fact con-
tain a certain proportion of silver, he ran naked through the
street to his home shouting evprjKa, evprjKa.3 He was killed
in the sack of Syracuse by a Roman soldier. The story is
told in various forms; the most picturesque is that found in
Tzetzes, which represents him as saying to a Roman soldier
who found him intent on some diagrams which he had drawn
in the dust and came too close, ' Stand away, fellow, from my
diagram', whereat the man was so enraged that he killed
him.4
Summary of main achievements.
In geometry Archimedes's work consists in the main of
original investigations into the quadrature of curvilinear
plane figures and the quadrature and cubature of curved
surfaces. 
These investigations, beginning where Euclid's
Book XII left off, actually (in the words of Chasles) ' gave
1 Cicero, Tusc. v. 64 sq. 
2 Plutarch, Marcellus, c. 17.
3 Vitruvius, Be architectural ix. 1. 9, 10.
4 Tzetzes, Chiliad, ii. 35. 135.
c 2
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.002 Published online by Cambridge University Press

20 
ARCHIMEDES
birth to the calculus of the infinite conceived and brought to
perfection successively by Kepler, Cavalieri, Fermat, Leibniz
and Newton \ 
He performed in fact what is equivalent to
integration in finding the area of a parabolic segment, and of
a spiral, the surface and volume of a sphere and a segment of
a sphere, and the volumes of any segments of the solids of
revolution of the second degree. In arithmetic he calculated
approximations to the value of ?r, in the course of which cal-
culation he shows that he could approximate to the value of
square roots of large or small non-square numbers; he further
invented a system of arithmetical terminology by which he
could express in language any number up to that which we
should write down with 1 followed by 80,000 million million
ciphers. In mechanics he not only worked out the principles of
the subject but advanced so far as to find the centre of gravity
of a segment of a parabola, a semicircle, a cone, a hemisphere,
a segment of a sphere, a right segment of a paraboloid and
a spheroid of revolution. His mechanics, as we shall see, has
become more important in relation to his geometry since the
discovery of the treatise called The Method which was formerly
supposed to be lost. Lastly, he invented the whole science of
hydrostatics, which again he carried so far as to give a most
complete investigation of the positions of rest and stability of
a right segment of a paraboloid of revolution floating in a
fluid with its base either upwards or downwards, but so that
the base is either wholly above or wholly below the surface of
the fluid. This represents a sum of mathematical achieve-
ment unsurpassed by any one man in the world's history.
Character of treatises.
The treatises are, without exception, monuments of mathe-
matical exposition; the gradual revelation of the plan of
attack, the masterly ordering of the propositions, the stern
elimination of everything not immediately relevant to the
purpose, the finish of the whole, are so impressive in their
perfection as to create a feeling akin to awe in the mind of
the reader. As Plutarch said, ' It is not possible to find in
geometry more difficult and troublesome questions or proofs
set out in simpler and clearer propositions'} 
There is at the
1 Plutarch, Marcellus, c. 17.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.002 Published online by Cambridge University Press

CHARACTER OF TREATISES 
21
same time a certain mystery veiling the way in which he
arrived at his results. 
For it is clear that they were not
discovered by the steps which lead up to them in the finished
treatises. If the geometrical treatises stood alone, Archi-
medes might seem, as Wallis said, ' as it were of set purpose
to have covered up the traces of his investigation, as if he had
grudged posterity the secret of his method of inquiry, while
he wished to extort from them assent to his results \ 
And
indeed (again in the words of Wallis) ' not only Archimedes
but nearly all the ancients so hid from posterity their method
of Analysis (though it is clear that they had one) that more
modern mathematicians found it easier to invent a new
Analysis than to seek out the old'. A partial exception is
now furnished by The Method of Archimedes, so happily dis-
covered by Heiberg. In this book Archimedes tells us how
he discovered certain theorems in quadrature and cubature,
namely by the use of mechanics, weighing elements of a
figure against elements of another simpler figure the mensura-
tion of which was already known. At the same time he is
careful to insist on the difference between (1) the means
which may be sufficient to suggest the truth of theorems,
although not furnishing scientific proofs of them, and (2) the
rigorous demonstrations of them by orthodox geometrical
methods which must follow before they can be finally accepted
as established:
certain things', he says, ' first became clear to me by a
mechanical method, although they had to be demonstrated by
geometry afterwards because their investigation by the said
method did not furnish an actual demonstration. But'it is
of course easier, when we have previously acquired, by the
method, some knowledge of the questions, to supply the proof
than it is to find it without any previous knowledge/ ' This',
he adds, ' is a reason why, in the case of the theorems that
the volumes of a cone and a pyramid are one-third of the
volumes of the cylinder and prism respectively having the
same base and equal height, the proofs of which Eudoxus was
the first to discover, no small share of the credit should be
given to Democritus who was the first to state the fact
though without proof.'
Finally, he says that the very first theorem which he found
out by means of mechanics was that of the separate treatise
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.002 Published online by Cambridge University Press

22 
ARCHIMEDES
on the Quadrature of the parabola, namely that the area of any
segment of a section of a right-angled cone (i. e. a parabola) is
four-thirds of that of the triangle which has the same base and
height. The mechanical proof, however, of this theorem in the
Quadrature of the Parabola is different from that in the
Method, and is more complete in that the argument is clinched
by formally applying the method of exhaustion.
List of works still extant.
The extant works of Archimedes in the order in which they
appear in Heiberg's second edition, following the order of the
manuscripts so far as the first seven treatises are concerned,
are as follows:
(5) On the Sphere and Cylinder : two Books.
(9) Measurement of a Circle.
(7) On Conoids and Spheroids.
(6) On Spirals.
(1) On Plane Equilibriums, Book I.
(3) 
„ 
„ 
„ 
Book II.
(10) The Sand-reckoner (Psammites).
(2) Quadrature of the Parabola.
(8) On Floating Bodies: two Books.
? Stomachion (a fragment).
(4) The Method.
This, however, was not the order of composition; and,
judging (a) by statements in Archimedes's own prefaces to
certain of the treatises and (b) by the use in certain treatises
of results obtained in others, we can make out an approxi-
mate chronological order, which I have indicated in the above
list by figures in brackets. The treatise On Floating Bodies
was formerly only known in the Latin translation by William
of Moerbeke, but the Greek text of it has now been in great-
part restored by Heiberg from the Constantinople manuscript
which also contains The Method and the fragment of the
Stomachion.
Besides these works we have a collection of propositions
(Liber assumptorum) which has reached us through the
Arabic. Although in the title of the translation by Thabit b.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.002 Published online by Cambridge University Press

LIST OF EXTANT WORKS 
23
Qurra the book is attributed to Archimedes, the propositions
cannot be his in their present form, since his name is several
times mentioned in them; but it is quite likely that some
of them are of Archimedean origin, notably those about the
geometrical figures called ap/3rj\os (' shoemaker's knife') and
a-dXivov (probably ' salt-cellar') respectively and Prop. 8 bear-
ing on the trisection of an angle.
There is also the Cattle-Problem in epigrammatic form,
which purports by its heading to have been communicated by
Archimedes to the mathematicians at-Alexandria in a letter
to Eratosthenes. 
Whether the epigrammatic form is due to
Archimedes himself or not, there is no sufficient reason for
doubting the possibility that the substance of it was set as a
problem by Archimedes.
Traces of lost works.
Of works which are lost we have the following traces.
1. Investigations relating to polyhedra are referred to by
Pappus who, after alluding to the five regular polyhedra,
describes thirteen others discovered by Archimedes which are
semi-regular, being contained by polygons equilateral and
equiangular but not all similar.1
2. There was a book of arithmetical content dedicated to
Zeuxippus. We learn from Archimedes himself that it dealt
with the naming 
of numbers (KaTovb\ia£i$ TS>V api6fiS>v)* a n d
expounded the system, which we find in the Sand-reckoner, of
expressing numbers higher than those which could be written
in the ordinary Greek notation, numbers in fact (as we have
said) up to the enormous figure represented by 1 followed by
80,000 million million ciphers.
3. One or more works on mechanics are alluded to contain-
ing propositions not included in the extant treatise On Plane
Equilibriums. 
Pappus mentions a work On Balances or Levers
{irepi Qvy&v) in which it was proved (as it also was in Philon's
and Heron's Mechanics) that ' greater circles overpower lesser
circles when they revolve about the same centre ' 3 Heron, too,
speaks of writings of Archimedes 'which bear the title of
1 Pappus, v, pp. 352-8.
2 Archimedes, vol. ii, pp. 216. 18, 236. 17-22; cf. p. 220. 4.
8 Pappus, viii, p. 1068.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.002 Published online by Cambridge University Press

24 
ARCHIMEDES
" works on the lever "f.1 
Simplicius refers to problems on the
centre of gravity, KtvrpofiapiKd, such as the many elegant
problems solved by Archimedes and others, the object of which
is to show how to find the centre of gravity, that is, the point
in a body such that if the body is hung up from it, the body
will remain at rest in any position.2 This recalls the assump-
tion in the Quadrature of the Parabola (6) that, if a body hangs
at rest from a point, the centre of gravity of the body and the
point of suspension are in the same vertical line. Pappus has
a similar remark with reference to a point of support, adding
that the centre of gravity is determined as the intersection of
two straight lines in the body, through two points of support,
which straight lines are vertical when the body is in equilibrium
so supported. Pappus also gives the characteristic of the centre
of gravity mentioned by Simplicius, observing that this is
the most fundamental principle of the theory of the centre of
gravity, the elementary propositions of which are found in
Archimedes's On Equilibriums 
(ntpl l<roppoTTia>v) and Heron's
Mechanics. Archimedes himself cites propositions which must
have been proved elsewhere, e.g. that the centre of gravity
of a cone divides the axis in the ratio 3:1, the longer segment
being that adjacent to the vertex3; he also says that ' it is
proved in the Equilibriums' that the centre of gravity of any
segment of a right-angled conoid (i. e. paraboloid of revolution)
divides the axis in such a way that the portion towards the
vertex is double of the remainder.4 
It is possible that there
was originally a larger work by Archimedes On Equilibriums
of which the surviving books On Plane Equilibriums formed
only a part; in that case nepl £vy<ov and Kevrpofiapiica may
only be alternative titles. Finally, Heron says that Archi-
medes laid down a certain procedure in a book bearing the
title ' Book on Supports \5
4. Theon of Alexandria quotes a proposition from a work
of Archimedes called Catoptrica (properties of mirrors) to the
effect that things thrown into water look larger and still
larger the farther they sink.6 Olympiodorus, too, mentions
1 Heron, Mechanics, i. 32.
2 Simpl. on Arist. De caelo, ii, p. 508 a 30, Brandis; p. 543. 24, Heib.
3 Method, Lemma 10. 
4 On Floating Bodies, ii. 2.
6 Heron, Mechanics, i. 25.
6 Theon on Ptolemy's Syntaxis, i, p. 29, Halma.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.002 Published online by Cambridge University Press

TRACES OF LOST WORKS 
25
that Archimedes proved the phenomenon of refraction 'by
means of the ring placed in the vessel (of water) \1 
A scholiast
to the Pseudo-Euclid's Catoptrica quotes a proof, which he
attributes to Archimedes, of the equality of the angles of
incidence and of reflection in a mirror.
The text of Archimedes.
Heron, Pappus and Theon all cite works of Archimedes
which no longer survive, a fact which shows that such works
were still extant at Alexandria as late as the third and fourth
centuries A.D. But it is evident that attention came to be
concentrated on two works only, the Measurement of a Circle
and On the Sphere and Cylinder. 
Eutocius (ft. about A.D. 500)
only wrote commentaries on these works and on the Plane
Equilibriums, 
and he does not seem even to have been
acquainted with the Quadrature of the Parabola or the work
On Spirals, although these have survived. Isidorus of Miletus
revised the commentaries of Eutocius on the Measurement
of a Circle and the two Books On the Sphere and Cylinder,
and it would seem to have been in the school of Isidorus
that these treatises were turned from their original Doric
into the ordinary language, with alterations designed to make
them more intelligible to elementary pupils. 
But neither in
Isidorus's time nor earlier was there any collected edition
of Archimedes's works, so that those which were less read
tended to disappear.
In the ninth century Leon, who restored the University
of Constantinople, collected together all the works that he
could find at Constantinople, and had the manuscript written
(the archetype, Heiberg's A) which, through its derivatives,
was, up to the discovery of the Constantinople manuscript (C)
containing The Method, the only source for the Greek text.
Leon's manuscript came, in the twelfth century, to the
Norman Court at Palermo, and thence passed to the House
of Hohenstaufen. 
Then, with all the library of Manfred, it
was given to the Pope by Charles of Anjou after the battle
of Benevento in 1266. It was in the Papal Library in the
years 1269 and 1311, but, some time after 1368, passed into
1 Olympiodorus on Arist. Meteorologica, ii, p. 94, Ideler; p. 211. 18,
Busse.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.002 Published online by Cambridge University Press

26 
ARCHIMEDES
private hands. In 1491 it belonged to Georgius Valla, who
translated from it the portions published in his posthumous
work De expetendis et fiigiendis rebus (1501), and intended to
publish the whole of Archimedes with Eutocius's commen-
taries. On Valla's death in 1500 it was bought by Albertus
Pius, Prince of Carpi, passing in 1530 to his nephew, Rodolphus
Pius, in whose possession it remained till 1544. At some
time between 1544 and 1564 it disappeared, leaving no
trace.
The greater part of A was translated into Latin in 1269
by William of Moerbeke at the Papal Court at Viterbo. This
translation, in William's own hand, exists at Rome (Cod.
Ottobon. lat. 1850, Heiberg's B), and is one of our prime
sources, for, although the translation was hastily done and
the translator sometimes misunderstood the Greek, he followed
its wording so closely that his version is, for purposes of
collation, as good as a Greek manuscript. William used also,
for his translation, another manuscript from the same library
which contained works not included in A. This manuscript
was a collection of works on mechanics and optics; William
translated from it the two Books On Floating Bodies, and it
also contained the Plane Equilibriums and the Quadrature
of the Parabola, for which books William used both manu-
scripts.
The four most important extant Greek manuscripts (except
C, the Constantinople manuscript discovered in 1906) were
copied from A. The earliest is E, the Venice manuscript
(Marcianus 305), which was written between the years 1449
and 1472. The next is D, the Florence manuscript (Laurent.
XXVIII. 4), which was copied in 1491 for Angelo Poliziano,
permission having been obtained with some difficulty in con-
sequence of the jealousy with which Valla guarded his treasure.
The other two are G (Paris. 2360) copied from A after it had
passed to Albertus Pius, and H (Paris. 2361) copied in 1544
by Christopherus Auverus for Georges d'Armagnac, Bishop
of Rodez. These four manuscripts, with the translation of
William of Moerbeke (B), enable the readings of A to be
inferred.
A Latin translation was made at the instance of Pope
Nicholas V about the year 1450 by Jacobus Cremonensis.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.002 Published online by Cambridge University Press

THE TEXT OF ARCHIMEDES 
27
It was made from A, which was therefore accessible to Pope
Nicholas though it does not seem to have belonged to him.
Regiomontanus made a copy of this translation about 1468
and revised it with the help of E (the Venice manuscript of
the Greek text) and a copy of the same translation belonging
to Cardinal Bessarion, as well as another 'old copy' which
seems to have been B.
The editio princeps was published at Basel (apud Herva-
gium) by Thomas Gechauff Venatorius in 1544. The Greek
text was based on a Niirnberg MS. (Norimberg. Cent. V,
app. 12) which was copied in the sixteenth century from A
but with interpolations derived from B; the Latin transla-
tion was Regiomontanus's revision of Jacobus Cremonensis
(Norimb. Cent. V, 15).
A translation by F. Commandinus published at Venice in
1558 contained the Measurement of a Circle, On Spirals, the
Quadrature of the Parabola, On Conoids and Spheroids, and
the Sand-reckoner. 
This translation was based on the Basel
edition, but Commandinus also consulted E and other Greek
manuscripts.
Torelli's edition (Oxford, 1792) also followed the editio
princeps in the main, but Torelli also collated E. The book
was brought out after Torelli's death by Abram Robertson,
who also collated five more manuscripts, including D, G
and H. The collation, however, was not well done, and the
edition was not properly corrected when in the press.
The second edition of Heiberg's text of all the works of
Archimedes with Eutocius's commentaries, Latin translation,
apparatus criticus, &c, is now available (1910-15) and, of
course, supersedes the first edition (1880-1) and all others.
It naturally includes The Method, the fragment of the Stoma-
chion, and so much of the Greek text of the two Books On
Floating Bodies as could be restored from the newly dis-
covered Constantinople manuscript.1
Contents of The Method.
Our description of the extant works of Archimedes
may suitably begin with The Method (the full title is On
1 The Works of Archimedes, edited in modern notation by the present
writer in 1897, was based on Heiberg's first*edition, and the Supplement
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.002 Published online by Cambridge University Press

28 
ARCHIMEDES
Mechanical Theorems, Method (communicated) to Eratosthenes).
Premising certain propositions in mechanics mostly taken
from the Plane Equilibriums, 
and a lemma which forms
Prop. 1 of 0n Conoids and Spheroids, Archimedes obtains by
his mechanical method the following results. The area of any
segment of a section of a right-angled cone (parabola) is § of
the triangle with the same base and height (Prop. 1). The
right cylinder circumscribing a sphere or a spheroid of revolu-
tion and with axis equal to the diameter or axis of revolution
of the sphere or spheroid is 1\ times the sphere or spheroid
respectively (Props. 2, 3). Props. 4, 7,8,11 find the volume of
any segment cut off, by a plane at right angles to the axis,
from any right-angled conoid (paraboloid of revolution),
sphere, spheroid, and obtuse-angled conoid (hyperboloid) in
terms of the cone which has the same base as the segment and
equal height. In Props. 5, 6, 9,10 Archimedes uses his method
to find the centre of gravity of a segment of a paraboloid of
revolution, a sphere, and a spheroid respectively. Props.
12-15 and Prop. 16 are concerned with the cubature of two
special solid figures. (1) Suppose a prism with a square base
to have a cylinder inscribed in it, the circular bases of the
cylinder being circles inscribed in the squares which are
the bases o£ the prism, and suppose a plane drawn through
one side of one base of the prism and through that diameter of
the circle in the opposite base which is parallel to the said
side. This plane cuts off a solid bounded by two planes and
by part of the curved surface of the cylinder (a solid shaped
like a hoof cut off by a plane); and Props. 12-15 prove that
its volume is one-sixth of the volume of the prism. (2) Sup-
pose a cylinder inscribed in a cube, so that the circular bases
of the cylinder are circles inscribed in two opposite faces of
the cube, and suppose another cylinder similarly inscribed
with reference to two other opposite faces. The two cylinders
enclose a certain solid which is actually made up of eight
'hoofs' like that of Prop. 12. Prop. 16 proves that the
volume of this solid is two-thirds of that of the cube. Archi-
medes observes in his preface that a remarkable fact about
(1912) containing The Method, on the original edition of Heiberg (in
Hermes, xlii, 1907) with the translation by Zeuthen (Bibliotheca Mathe-
matica, vii3. 1906/7).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.002 Published online by Cambridge University Press

THE METHOD 
29
these solids respectively is that each of them is equal to a
solid enclosed by planes, whereas the volume of curvilinear
solids (spheres, spheroids, &c.) is generally only expressible in
terms of other curvilinear solids (cones and cylinders). In
accordance with his dictum that the results obtained by the
mechanical method are merely indicated, but not actually
proved, unless confirmed by the rigorous methods of pure
geometry, Archimedes proved the facts about the two last-
named solids by the orthodox method of exhaustion as
regularly used by him in his other geometrical treatises; the
proofs, partly lost, were given in Props. 15 and 16.
We will first illustrate the method by giving the argument
of Prop. 1 about the area of a parabolic segment.
Let ABC be the segment, BD its diameter, GF the tangent
at G. Let P be any point on the segment, and let AKF,
M
A
OPNM be drawn parallel to BD. Join GB and produce it to
meet MO iri N and FA in K, and let KH be made equal to
KG.
Now, by a proposition ' proved in a lemma ' (cf. Quadrature
of the Parabola, Prop. 5)
MO:OP= GAiAO
Also, by the property of the parabola, EB = BD, so that
MN=NO and FK = KA.
It follows that, if HG be regarded as the bar of a balance,
a line TG equal to PO and placed with its middle point at H
balances, about K, the straight line MO placed where it is,
i. e. with its middle point at N.
Similarly with all lines, as MO, PO, in the triangle GFA
and the segment GBA respectively.
And there are the same number of these lines. Therefor^
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.002 Published online by Cambridge University Press

30 
ARCHIMEDES
the whole segment of the parabola acting at H balances the
triangle GFA placed where it is.
But the centre of gravity of the triangle GFA is at W
where CW — 2 WK [and the whole triangle may be taken as
acting at W~\.
Therefore 
(segment ABC): AGFA = WK: KH
= 1:3,
so that 
(segment ABC) = ±ACFA
Q.E.D.
It will be observed that Archimedes takes the segment and
the triangle to be made up of parallel lines indefinitely close
together. In reality they are made up of indefinitely narrow
strips, but the width (dx, as we might say) being the same
for the elements of the triangle and segment respectively,
divides out. And of course the weight of each element in
both is proportional to the area. Archimedes also, without
mentioning moments, in effect assumes that the sum of the
moments of each particle of a figure, acting where it is, is
equal to the moment of the whole figure applied as one mass
at its centre of gravity.
We will now take the case of any segment of a spheroid
of revolution, because that will cover several propositions of
Archimedes as particular cases.
The ellipse with axes AA\ BBf is a section made by the
plane of the paper in a spheroid with axis A A'. 
It is required
to find the volume of any right segment ADC of the spheroid
in terms of the right cone with the same base and height.
Let DC be the diameter of the circular base of the segment.
Join AB, AB'y and produce them to meet the tangent at A' to
the ellipse in K, K', and DC produced in E, F.
Conceive a cylinder described with axis A A' and base the
circle on KK' as diameter, and cones described with AG as
axis and bases the circles on EF, DC as diameters.
Let N be any point on AG, and let MOPQNQ'P'O'M' be
drawn through N parallel to BB' or DC as shown in the
figure.
Produce A'A to H so that HA = AA'.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.002 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Now
THE METHOD
HA:AN = A'A : AN
= KA:AQ
= MN:NQ
= MN2:MN.NQ.
It is now necessary to prove that MN .NQ = NP2 + NQ2
H
31
M
0
B
/
V
A
v V
G 
C/
B'
\
M 1
A'
By the property of the ellipse,
AN. NA': NP2 = &
therefore 
NQ2: NP2 = AN2 :AN. NA'
= NQ2:NQ.QM,
whence 
NP2 = MQ.QN.
Add NQ" to each side, and we have
Therefore, from above,
HA: AN = MN2: (NP2 + NQ2).
(1)
But MNZ, NP2, NQ% are to one another as the areas of the
circles with MM', PP', QQ' respectively as diameters, and these
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.002 Published online by Cambridge University Press

32 
ARCHIMEDES
circles are sections made by the plane though N at right
angles to A A' in the cylinder, the spheroid and the cone AEF
respectively.
Therefore, if HA A' be a lever, and the sections of the
spheroid and cone be both placed with their centres of gravity
at H, these sections placed at H balance, about A, the section
MM9 of the cylinder where it is.
Treating all the corresponding sections of the segment of
the spheroid, the cone and the cylinder in the same way,
we find that the cylinder with axis AG, where it is, balances,
about A, the cone AEF and the segment ADC together, when
both are placed with their centres of gravity at H\ and,
if TFbe the centre of gravity of the cylinder, i.e. the middle
point of AGy
HA:AW= 
(cylinder, axis AG): (cone AEF-\- segmt. ADC).
If we call V the volume of the cone AEF, and S that of the
segment of the spheroid, we have
A A'2
(cylinder): (V+ 8) = 3 V. - ^ : (V+S),
while
A A
Therefore 
AA':\AG=ZV. 
^ ~ :(V + S),
and
whence
Again, let V be the volume of the cone ADC.
Then 
V:V'=EG*:DG*
But 
DG2: AG - GA' = BB'2: AA'2.
Therefore 
V:V = AG2:AG .GA'
= AG:GA'.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.002 Published online by Cambridge University Press

It follows that * =
THE METHOD 
33
, AG
%AA'-AG
' 
A'G
= V.
A'G
which is the result stated by Archimedes in Prop. 8.
The result is the same for the segment of a sphere. The
proof, of course slightly simpler, is given in Prop. 7.
In the particular case where the segment is half the sphere
or spheroid, the relation becomes
8 = 2 V\ 
(Props. 2, 3)
and it follows that the volume of the whole sphere or spheroid
is 4 V, where V is the volume of the cone ABB'; i.e. the
volume of the sphere or spheroid is two-thirds of that of the
circumscribing cylinder.
In order now to find the centre of gravity of the segment
of a spheroid, we must have the segment acting where it is,
not at H.
Therefore formula (1) above will not serve. But we found
that 
MN.NQ = (NP2 + NQ2),
whence 
MN2: (NP2 + NQ2) = (NP* + NQ2): NQ2;
therefore 
HA : AN = {NP2 + NQ*): NQ2.
(This is separately proved by Archimedes for the sphere
in Prop. 9.)
From this we derive, as usual, that the cone AEF and the
segment ADC both acting where they are balance a volume
equal to the cone AEF placed with its centre of gravity at H.
Now the centre of gravity of the cone AEF is on the line
J f f a t a distance f AG from A. Let X be the required centre
of gravity of the segment. Then, taking moments about A,
we have 
V.HA = 8. AX + V.
or 
(
%
)
$ A Af
2==
- l)AX, from above.
1523.2
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.002 Published online by Cambridge University Press

34 
ARCHIMEDES
Therefore AX: AG = 
(AA'-iAG):(%AA'-AG)
whence 
AX:XG = (4 AA'- 3 AG): (2 AA'- AQ)
which is the result obtained by Archimedes in Prop. 9 for the
sphere and in Prop. 10 for the spheroid.
In the case of the hemi-spheroid or hemisphere the ratio
AX: XG becomes 5 : 3, a result obtained for the hemisphere in
Prop. 6.
The cases of the paraboloid of revolution (Props. 4, 5) and
the hyperboloid of revolution (Prop. 11) follow the same course,
and it is unnecessary to reproduce them.
For the cases of the two solids dealt with at the end of the
treatise the reader must be referred to the propositions them-
selves. Incidentally, in Prop. 13, Archimedes finds the centre
of gravity of the half of a cylinder cut by a plane through
the axis, or, in other words, the centre of gravity of a semi-
circle.
We will now take the other treatises in the order in which
they appear in the editions.
On the Sphere and Cylinder, I, II.
The main results obtained in Book I are shortly stated in
a prefatory letter to Dositheus. Archimedes tells us that
they are new, and that he is now publishing them for the
first time, in order that mathematicians may be able to ex-
amine the proofs and judge of their value. The results are
(1) that the surface of a sphere is four times that of a great
circle of the sphere, (2) that the surface of any segment of a
sphere is equal to a circle the radius of which is equal to the
straight line drawn from the vertex of the segment to a point
on the circumference of the base, (3) that the volume of a
cylinder circumscribing a sphere and with height equal to the
diameter of the sphere is § of the volume of the sphere,
(4) that the surface of the circumscribing cylinder including
its bases is also § of the surface of the sphere. It is worthy
of note that, while the first and third of these propositions
appear in the book in this order (Props. 33 and 34 respec-
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.002 Published online by Cambridge University Press

ON THE SPHERE AND CYLINDER, I 
35
tively), this was not the order of their discovery; for Archi-
medes tells us in The Method that
' from the theorem that a sphere is four times as great as the
cone with a great circle of the sphere as base and with height
equal to the radius of the sphere I conceived the notion that
the surface of any sphere is four times as great as a great
circle in it; for, judging from the fact that any circle is equal
to a triangle with base equal to the circumference and height
equal to the radius of the circle, I apprehended that, in like
manner, any sphere is equal to a cone with base equal to the
surface of the sphere and height equal to the radius'.
Book I begins with definitions (of ' concave in the same
direction' as applied to curves or broken lines and surfaces, of
a ' solid sector' and a ' solid rhombus') followed by five
Assumptions, all of importance. Of all lines which have the
same extremities the straight line is the least, and, if there are
two curved or bent lines in a plane having the same extremi-
ties and concave in the same direction, but one is wholly
included by, or partly included by and partly common with,
the other, then that which is included is the lesser of the two.
Similarly with plane surfaces and surfaces concave in the
same direction. Lastly, Assumption 5 is the famous ' Axiom
of Archimedes', which however was, according to Archimedes
himself, used by earlier geometers (Eudoxus in particular), to
the effect that Of unequal magnitudes the greater exceeds
the less by such a magnitude as, when added to itself can be
made to exceed any assigned magnitude of the same kind;
the axiom is of course practically equivalent to Eucl. V, Def. 4,
and is closely connected with the theorem of Eucl. X. 1.
As, in applying the method of exhaustion, Archimedes uses
both circumscribed and inscribed figures with a view to com-
pressing them into coalescence with the curvilinear figure to
be measured, he has to begin with propositions showing that,
given two unequal magnitudes, then, however near the ratio
of the greater to the less is to 1, it is possible to find two
straight lines such that the greater is to the less in a still less
ratio (> 1), and to circumscribe and inscribe similar polygons to
a*circle or sector such that the perimeter or the area of the
circumscribed polygon is to that of the inner in a ratio less
than the given ratio (Props. 2-6): also, just as Euclid proves
D 2
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.002 Published online by Cambridge University Press

36 
ARCHIMEDES
that, if we continually double the number of the sides of the
regular polygon inscribed in a circle, segments will ultimately be
left which are together less than any assigned area, Archimedes
has to supplement this (Prop. 6) by proving that, if we increase
the number of the sides of a circumscribed regular polygon
sufficiently, we can make the excess of the area of the polygon
over that of the circle less than any given area. Archimedes
then addresses himself to the problems of finding the surface of
any right cone or cylinder, problems finally solved in Props. 13
(the cylinder) and 14 (the cone). Circumscribing and inscrib-
ing regular polygons to the bases of the cone and cylinder, he
erects pyramids and prisms respectively on the polygons as
bases and circumscribed or inscribed to the cone and cylinder
respectively. In Props. 7 and 8 he finds the surface of the
pyramids inscribed and circumscribed to the cone, and in
Props. 9 and 10 he proves that the surfaces of the inscribed
and circumscribed pyramids respectively (excluding the base)
are less and greater than the surface of the cone (excluding
the base). Props. 11 and 12 prove the same thing of the
prisms inscribed and circumscribed to the cylinder, and finally
Props. 13 and 14 prove, by the method of exhaustion, that the
surface of the cone or cylinder (excluding the bases) is equal
to the circle the radius of which is a mean proportional
between the 'side' (i.e. generator) of the cone or cylinder and
the radius or diameter of the base (i.e. is equal to nrs in the
case of the cone and 2-rrrs in the case of the cylinder, where
r is the radius of the base and s a generator). As Archimedes
here applies the method of exhaustion for the first time, we
will illustrate by the case of the cone (Prop. 14).
Let A be the base of the cone, G a straight line equal to its
radius, D a line equal to a generator of the cone, E a mean
proportional to 0, D, and B a circle with radius equal to E.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.002 Published online by Cambridge University Press

ON THE SPHERE AND CYLINDER, I 
37
If S is the surface of the cone, we have to prove that $ = J3.
For, if S is not equal to B, it must be either greater or less.
I. Suppose B < S.
Circumscribe a regular polygon about B, and inscribe a similar
polygon in it, such that the former has to the latter a ratio less
than 8: B (Prop. 5). Describe about A a similar polygon and
set up from it a pyramid circumscribing the cone.
Then 
(polygon about A): (polygon about JB)
= (polygon about A): (surface of pyramid).
Therefore 
(surface of pyramid) = (polygon about B).
But 
(polygon about B): (polygon in B) < 8: B;
therefore 
(surface of pyramid): (polygon in B) < S: B.
But this is impossible, since (surface of pyramid) > 8, while
(polygon in B) < B;
therefore B is not less than 8.
II. Suppose B > 8.
Circumscribe and inscribe similar regular polygons to B
such that the former has to the latter a ratio < B:8. 
Inscribe
in A a similar polygon, and erect on A the inscribed pyramid.
Then 
(polygon in A): (polygon in B) — C2 : E2
= O:D
> (polygon in A): (surface of pyramid).
(The latter inference is clear, because the ratio of C: D is
greater than the ratio of the perpendiculars from the centre of
A and from the vertex of the pyramid respectively on any
side of the polygon in i ; in other words, if /3 < a < ^TT,
sin a > sin/3.)
Therefore 
(surface of pyramid) > (polygon in B).
But 
(polygon about B): (polygon in B) < B: 8,
whence (a fortiori)
(polygon about B): (surface of pyramid) < B:S,
which is impossible, for (polygon about B) > B, while (surface
of pyramid) < 8.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.002 Published online by Cambridge University Press

38 
ARCHIMEDES
Therefore B is not greater than 8.
Hence 8, being neither greater nor less than B, is equal to B.
Archimedes next addresses himself to the problem of finding
the surface and volume of a sphere or a segment thereof, but
has to interpolate some propositions about 'solid rhombi'
(figures made up of two right cones, unequal or equal, with
bases coincident and vertices in opposite directions) the neces-
sity of which will shortly appear.
Taking a great circle of the sphere or a segment of it, he
inscribes a regular polygon of an even number of sides bisected
FIG. 1.
by the diameter A A', and approximates to the surface and
volume of the sphere or segment by making the polygon
revolve about A A' and measuring the surface and volume of
solid so inscribed (Props. 21-7). He then does the same for the
a circumscribed solid (Props. 28-32). Construct the inscribed
polygons as shown in the above figures. Joining BB\ CG\ ...,
CB\ DC ... we see that BB', CC ... are all parallel, and so are
AB,CB\ DC...
Therefore, by similar triangles, BF.FA = A'B: BA, and
BF-.FA = B/F:FK
= CG:GK
= C'G:GL
= E'I:IA* in Fig. 1
(= PM-.MN in Fig. 2),
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.002 Published online by Cambridge University Press

ON THE SPHERE AND CYLINDER, I 
39
whence, adding antecedents and consequents, we have
(Fig. 1) (BB' + CC + ... + EE'): AA' = A'B: BA, (Prop. 21)
(Fig. 2) {BW + CC+... + \PF) :AM=A'B:BA. 
(Prop. 22)
When we make the polygon revolve about AA', the surface
of the inscribed figure so obtained is made up of the surfaces
of cones and frusta of cones; Prop. 14 has proved that the
surface of the cone ABB' is what we should write n. AB. BF,
and Prop. 16 has proved that the surface of the frustum
BCC'B' is n.BC(BF+CG). 
It follows that, since AB =
BC = ..., the surface of the inscribed solid is
IT .AB {%BB' + %(BB' + CC') + ...},
that is, 
7T. AB {BB' + CC + ... + EE') (Fig. 1), (Prop. 24)
or 
TT.AB(BB' 
+ CC +... + ±PP') (Fig. 2). (Prop. 35)
Hence, from above, the surface of the inscribed solid is
7r. A'B. A A' or w . A'B . J-itf, and is therefore less than
IT . A A'2 (Prop. 25) or TT . -4/4 . AM, that is, ?r. AP2 (Prop. 37).
Similar propositions with regard to surfaces formed by the
revolution about A A' of regular circumscribed solids prove
that their surfaces are greater than -jr. A A'2 and n.AP*
respectively (Props. 28-30 and Props. 39-40). The case of the
segment is more complicated because the circumscribed poly-
gon with its sides parallel to AB, BC ... DP circumscribes
the sector POP'. Consequently, if the segment is less than a
semicircle, as CAC, the base of the circumscribed polygon
(cc') is on the side of CC towards A, and therefore the circum-
scribed polygon leaves over a small strip of the inscribed. This
complication is dealt with in Props. 39r40. 
Having then
arrived at circumscribed and inscribed figures with surfaces
greater and less than TT.AA'2 
and TT. AP2 respectively, and
having proved (Props. 32, 41) that the surfaces of the circum-
scribed and inscribed figures are to one another in the duplicate
ratio of their sides, Archimedes proceeds to prove formally, by
the method of exhaustion, that the surfaces of the sphere and
segment are equal to these circles respectively (Props. 33 and
42); 7r. A A'2 is of course equal to four times the great circle
of the sphere. The segment is, for convenience, taken to be
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.002 Published online by Cambridge University Press

40 
ARCHIMEDES
less than a hemisphere, and Prop. 43 proves that the same
formula applies also to a segment greater than a hemisphere.
As regards the volumes different considerations involving
' solid rhombi ' come in. For convenience Archimedes takes,
in the case of the whole sphere, an inscribed polygon of 4w
sides (Fig. 1). It is easily seen that the solid figure formed
by its revolution is made up of the following: first, the solid
rhombus formed by the revolution of the quadrilateral ABOB'
(the volume of this is shown to be equal to the cone with base
equal to the surface of the cone ABB' and height equal to p,
the perpendicular from 0 on ABy Prop. 18); secondly, the
extinguisher-shaped figure formed by the revolution of the
triangle BOO about AAf (this figure is equal to the difference
between two solid rhombi formed by the revolution of TBOB'
and TO0C respectively about AA\ where T is the point of
intersection of OB, C B' produced with A'A produced, and
this difference is proved to be equal to a cone with base equal
to the surface of the frustum of a cone described by BO in its
revolution and height equal to p the perpendicular from 0 on
BO, Prop. 20); and so on; finally, the figure formed by the
revolution of the triangle OOD about AA' is the difference
between a cone and a solid rhombus, which is proved equal to
a cone with base equal to the surface of the frustum of a cone
described by CD in its revolution and height p (Prop. 19).
Consequently, by addition, the volume of the whole solid of
revolution is equal to the cone with base equal to its whole
surface and height p (Prop. 26). But the whole of the surface
of the solid is less than 47rr2, and p<r; therefore the volume
of the inscribed solid is less than four times the cone with
base TTT2 and height r (Prop. 27).
It is then proved in a similar way that the revolution of
the similar circumscribed polygon of 4n sides gives a solid
the volume of which is greater than four times the same cone
(Props. 28-31 Cor.). Lastly, the volumes of the circumscribed
and inscribed figures are to one another in the triplicate ratio of
their sides (Prop. 32); and Archimedes is now in a position to
apply the method of exhaustion to proVe that the volume of
the sphere is 4 times the cone with base nr2 and height r
(Prop. 34).
Dealing with the segment of a sphere, Archimedes takes, for
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.002 Published online by Cambridge University Press

ON THE SPHERE AND CYLINDER, I 
41
convenience, a segment less than a hemisphere and, by the
same chain of argument (Props. 38, 40 Corr., 41 and 42), proves
(Prop. 44) that the volume of the sector of the sphere bounded
by the surface of the segment is equal to a cone with base
equal to the surface of the segment and height equal to the
radius, i. e. the cone with base ir. AP2 and height r (Fig. 2).
It is noteworthy that the proportions obtained in Props. 21,
22 (see p. 39 above) can be expressed in trigonometrical form.
If 4 n is the number of the sides of the polygon inscribed in
the circle, and 2n the number of the sides of the polygon
inscribed in the segment, and if the angle AOP is denoted
by a, the trigonometrical equivalents of the proportions are
respectively
(1) 
sin-— +sin— + ... + sin (2^—1) — = cot-—;
v ' 
2n 
2n 
v 
' 2n 
4n
(2) 
2^sin- +sin — + ... +sin(n —1)-
= (1 —cosa) cot-—
v 
' 
2n
Thus the two proportions give in effect a summation of the
series
sin 0 +sin 2 0 + ... +sin(7i —1) 0,
both generally where nd is equal to any angle a less than TT
and in the particular case where n is even and 0 = ir/n.
Props. 24 and 35 prove that the areas of the circles equal to
the surfaces of the solids of revolution described by the
polygons inscribed in the sphere and segment are the above
series multiplied by 47rr2 sin — and nr2. 2 sin —- respectively
and are therefore 47rr2eos A— and nr2. 2 cos —- (1— cos a)
4n 
2nx 
}
respectively. 
Archimedes's results for the surfaces of the
sphere and segment, 4?rr2 and 27rr2(l—cos(x), are the
limiting values of these expressions when n is indefinitely
increased and when therefore cos — and cos -—- become
4c7b 
2n
unity. 
And the two series multiplied by 47rr2sin— and
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.002 Published online by Cambridge University Press

42
ARCHIMEDES
7rr2. 2 sin —- respectively are (when n is indefinitely increased)
2n
precisely what we should represent by the integrals
sin6d6, or 47rr2,
and 
7rr2.\ 2 sin Odd, or 27rr2(l-cos(x).
Jo
Book II contains six problems and three theorems. Of the
theorems Prop. 2 completes the investigation of the volume of
any segment of a sphere, Prop. 44 of Book I having only
brought us to the volume of the corresponding sector. If
ABB' be a segment of a sphere cut off by a plane at right
angles to AA\ we learnt in I. 44 that the volume of the sector
OBAB' is equal to the cone with base equal to the surface
of the segment and height equal to the radius, i.e. §TT . AB2. r,
where r is the radius. The volume of the segment is therefore
Archimedes wishes to express this as a cone with base the
same as that of the segment. Let AM, the height of the seg-
ment, = h.
Now 
AB2:BM2 = A'A.A'M^ 
2r:(2r-h).
Therefore
That is, the segment is equal to the cone with the same
base as that of the segment and height h(3r — h)/(2r — h).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.002 Published online by Cambridge University Press

ON THE SPHERE AND CYLINDER, II 
43
This is expressed by Archimedes thus. If HM is the height
of the required cone,
HM:AM=(OA' 
+ A'M):A'M, 
(1)
and similarly the cone equal to the segment A'BB' has the
height H'M, w/here
H'M: A'M = (OA + AM): AM. 
(2)
His proof is, of course, not in the above form but purely
geometrical.
This proposition leads to the most important proposition in
the Book, Prop. 4, which solves the problem To cut a given
sphere by a plane in such a way that the volumes of the
segments are to one another in a given ratio.
Cubic equation arising out of II. 4.
If m: n be the given ratio of the cones which are equal to
the segments and the heights of which are h, h\ we have
/3r — h\ 
m
and, if we eliminate h' by means of the relation h + h' = 2r,
we easily obtain the following cubic equation in h,
Archimedes in effect reduces the problem to this equation,
which, however, he treats as a particular case of the more
general problem corresponding to the equation -
where b is a given length and c2 any given area,
or 
x2(a — x) = 6c2, where x = 2r—h and 3r = a.
Archimedes obtains his cubic equation with one unknown
by means of a geometrical elimination of if, H' from the
equation HM = —. R'M, where HM, H'M have the values
n
determined by the proportions (1) and (2) above, after which
the one variable point M remaining corresponds to the one
unknown of the cubic equation. His method is, first, to find
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.002 Published online by Cambridge University Press

44 
ARCHIMEDES
values for each of the ratios A'H': H'M and H'H: A'H' which
are alike independent of H, H' and then, secondly, to equate
the ratio compounded of these two to the known value of the
ratio HH'.H'M.
(a) We have, from (2),
A'H': H'M = OA : (OA + AM). 
(3)
(/3) From (1) and (2), separando,
AH:AM=OA':A'M, 
(4)
A'H':A'M=OA:AM. 
(5)
Equating the values of the ratio A'M: AM given by (4). (5),
we have 
OA': AH = A'H': OA
= OH':OH,
whence 
HH': OH' = OH': A'H', 
(since OA = OA')
or 
HH'.A'H' = OH'2,
so that 
HH': A'H' = OH'2: A'H'2. 
(6)
But, by (5), 
0A': A'H' = AM: A'M,
and, componendo, OH': A'H' = 4 J/: A'M.
By substitution in (6),
HH': A'H' = ^ / 2 : il'Jf2. 
(7)
Compounding with (3), we obtain
HH''.H'M={AA'2:A'M2).(OA:OA+AM). 
(8)
[The algebraical equivalent of this is
4r3
which reduces to
n 
(2r-A)2(
4r3
m
or 
h3 — Sh2rA 
r3 = 0, as above.]
m + n 
J
Archimedes expresses the result (8) more simply by pro-
ducing OA to D so that OA = AD, and then dividing AD at
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.002 Published online by Cambridge University Press

ON THE SPHERE AND CYLINDER, II 
45
E so that AD:DE=HH':H'M 
or (m + n):n. We have
then OA = AD and OA +AM = JfD, so that (8) reduces to
AD:DE = (AA'*: .4'Jf2). (4D: 1TD),
or 
ilfZ): BE = A A'2: A'M2.
Now, says Archimedes, D is given, since AD — OA. Also,
: DE being a given ratio, DE is given. Hence the pro-
blem reduces itself to that of dividing A'D into two parts at
M such that
MD: (a given length) = (a given area): A'M2.
That is, the generalized equation is of the form
x2 (a — x) = be2, as above.
(i) Archimedes's own solution of the cubic.
Archimedes adds that, ' if the problem is propounded in this
general form, it requires a 8iopi<rfi6$ [i.e. it is necessary to
investigate the limits of possibility], but if the conditions are
added which exist in the present case [i.e. in the actual
problem of Prop. 4], it does not require a 8iopi<r/i6?' (in other
words, a solution is always possible). He then promises to
give ' at the end' an analysis and synthesis of both problems
[i.e. the Stopicr/Ao? and the problem itself]. The promised
solutions do not appear in the treatise as we have it, but
Eutocius gives solutions taken from ' an old book' which he
managed to discover after laborious search, and which, since it
was partly written in Archimedes's favourite Doric, he with
fair reason assumed to contain the missing addendum by
Archimedes.
In the Archimedean fragment preserved by Eutocius the
above equation, x2(a — x) = be2, is solved by means of the inter-
section of a parabola and a rectangular hyperbola, the equations
of which may be written thus
c2
x2 = — y, 
(a—x) y = ab.
a
The Siopio-fios takes the form of investigating the maximum
possible value of x2(a — x), and it is proved that this maximum
value for a real solution is that corresponding to the value
x = §a. This is established by showing that, if 6c2 = 247a3>
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.002 Published online by Cambridge University Press

ARCHIMEDES
the curves touch at the point for which x — %a. If on the
other hand 6c2 < -i^a^, it is proved that there are two real
solutions. In the particular case arising in Prop. 4 it is clear
that the condition for a real solution is satisfied, for the
expression corresponding to 6c2 is
m
m + n
4r3, and it is only
necessary that
m
4r3 should be not greater than
or
m + n
4r3, which is obviously the-case.
(ii) Solution of the cubic by Dionysodorus.
It is convenient to add here that Eutocius gives, in addition
to the solution by Archimedes, two other solutions of our
problem. One, by Dionysodorus, solves the cubic equation in
the less general form in which it is required for Archimedes's
proposition. This form, obtained from (8) above, by putting
A'M = x, is
4 r 2: x2 = (3 r — x):
n
m + nr,
and the solution is obtained by drawing the parabola and
m 
n
D
P
x 
F* 
A ! 
M
/ 
y
o J
R
A'
the rectangular hyperbola which we should represent by the
equations
r (3r—x) = y2 and 
2r2 = xy,
m+n 
x 
' 
* 
m+n 
u
referred to A'A and the perpendicular to it through A as axes
of x, y respectively.
(We make FA equal to OA, and draw the perpendicular
AH of such a length that
FA:AH=CE:ED =
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.002 Published online by Cambridge University Press

ON THE SPHERE AND CYLINDER, II 
47
(iii) Solution of the original problem of II. 4 by Diodes.
Diocles proceeded in a different manner, satisfying, by
a geometrical construction, not the derivative cubic equation,
but the three simultaneous relations which hold in Archi-
medes's proposition, namely
HM.H'M = 
m:n\
HA: h = r :h'i,
H ' A ' : k' = 
r:hj
with the slight generalization that he substitutes for r in
these equations another length a.
H 
R
The problem is, given a straight line AA\ a ratio m: n, and
another straight line AK (= a), to divide A A' at a point M
and at the same time to find two points H, Hf on A A'
produced such that the above relations (with a in place
of r) hold.
The analysis leading to the construction is very ingenious.
Place AK(= a) at right angles to AA\ and draw A'K' equal
and parallel to it.
Suppose the problem solved, and the points M, H, H' all
found.
Join KM, produce it, and complete the rectangle KGEK'.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.002 Published online by Cambridge University Press

48 
ARCHIMEDES
Draw QMN through M parallel to AK. 
Produce K'M to
meet KG produced in F.
By similar triangles,
FA:AM = K'A':A'Mf or FA:h = a:h\
whence FA = AH (k, suppose).
Similarly 
A'E = A'R' (k\ suppose).
Again, by similar triangles,
{FA + AM): (A'K' + A'M) = AM: A'M
= (AK + AM): (EAf + A'M),
or 
(k + h):(a + h') = (a + h): (k' + h%
i. e. 
(k + h) (k' + V) = (a + h) (a + /*/)• 
(1)
Now, by hypothesis,
m : ^ = (fe + h): (k' + h!)
= (a + A) (a + tf): (&' + A')2 [hJ
Measure ^LiJ, J/JR' on ^.J.7 produced both ways equal to a.
Draw JRP, JR'P' at right angles to RR' as shown in the figure.
Measure along MN the length MV equal to MA' or hf, and
draw PP' through V, Af to meet RP, R'P'.
Then 
QV=k' + h', P'V= V2(a + h')y
PV= V
whence 
PF. P'V = 2(a + h)(a + hf);
and, from (2) above,
2m:n = 2 (a + A) (a + h'): (fc' + A')2
= PV.P'V:QV2. 
(3)
Therefore Q is on an ellipse in which PP r is a diameter, and
QVis an ordinate to it.
Again, a GQNK is equal to O AA'K'K, whence
GQ.QN= AA'.A'K'^ 
(h + h')a = 2m, 
(4)
and therefore Q is on the rectangular hyperbola with KF,
KKr as asymptotes and passing through A'.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.002 Published online by Cambridge University Press

ON THE SPHERE AND CYLINDER, II 
49
How this ingenious analysis was suggested it is not possible
to say. It is the equivalent of reducing the four unknowns
h, h\ k, k' to two, by putting h — r + x, h' = r—x and k' = y,
and then reducing the given relations to two equations in x, y,
which are coordinates of a point in relation to Ox, Oy as axes,
where 0 is the middle point of AA', and Ox lies along OA',
while Oy is perpendicular to it.
Our original relations (p. 47) give
7/ 
ah! 
r — x 
7 
ah 
r + x 
, m 
h + k
y = h = -j— = a 
9 
A; = - — = a 
* a n d 
— =
* 
& 
r + x 
I! 
r x 
n
-—= a 
* and — = r?—r>*
I! 
r — x 
n 
h' + k'
We have at once, from the first two equations,
2
whence 
(r + x)y = a(r—x),
and 
(x + r) (y + a) = 2ra,
which is the rectangular hyperbola (4) above.
( + )( +
— = 77—p/
whence we obtain a cubic equation in x,
(
which gives
fYY)
(r-\-x)2(r + a — x) = — (r — x)2 (r + a + x),
(
)
\ r + x /
— (r—
« . 
'V 
a 
, 
y + r — x
But 
—£— = 
, whence
r—a?
and the equation becomes
which is the ellipse (3) above.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.002 Published online by Cambridge University Press

50 
ARCHIMEDES
To return to Archimedes. Book II of our treatise contains
further problems: To find a sphere equal to a given cone or
cylinder (Prop. 1), solved by reduction to the finding of two
mean proportionals; to cut a sphere by a plane into two
segments having their surfaces in a given ratio (Prop. 3),
which is easy (by means of I. 42, 43); given two segments of
spheres, to find a third segment of a sphere similar to one
of the given segments and having its surface equal to that of
the other (Prop. 6); the same problem with volume substituted
for surface (Prop. 5), which is again reduced to the finding
of two mean proportionals; from a given sphere to cut off
a segment having a given ratio to the cone with the same
base and equal height (Prop. 7). The Book concludes with
two interesting theorems. If a sphere be cut by a plane into
two segments, the greater of which has its surface equal to 8
and its volume equal to V, while 8', V are the surface and
volume of the lesser, then V: V < S2: S'2 but > 8*:8'*
(Prop. 8): and, of all segments of spheres which have their
surfaces equal, the hemisphere is the greatest in volume
(Prop. 9).
Measurement of a Circle.
The book on the Measurement of a Circle consists of three
propositions only, and is not in its original form, having lost
(as the treatise On the Sphere and Cylinder also has) prac-
tically all trace of the Doric dialect in which Archimedes
wrote; it may be only a fragment of a larger treatise. The
three propositions which survive prove (1) that the area of
a circle is equal to that of a right-angled triangle in which
the perpendicular is equal to the radius, and the base to the
circumference, of the circle, (2) that the area of a circle is to
the square on its diameter as 11 to 14 (the text of this pro-
position is, however, unsatisfactory, and it cannot have been
placed by Archimedes before Prop. 3, on which it depends),
(3) that the ratio of the circumference of any circle to its
diameter (i.e. ir) is < 3^ but > 3^£. Prop. 1 is proved by
the method of exhaustion in Archimedes's usual form : he
approximates to the area of the circle in both directions
(a) by inscribing successive regular polygons with a number of
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.002 Published online by Cambridge University Press

MEASUREMENT OF A CIRCLE 
51
sides continually doubled, beginning from a square, (b) by
circumscribing a similar set of regular polygons beginning
from a square, it being shown that, if the number of the
sides of these polygons be continually doubled, more than half
of the portion of the polygon outside the circle will be taken
away each time, so that we shall ultimately arrive at a circum-
scribed polygon greater than the circle by a space less than
any assigned area.
Prop. 3, containing the arithmetical approximation to rr, is
the most interesting. The method amounts to calculating
approximately the perimeter of two regular polygons of 96
sides, one of which is circumscribed, and the other inscribed,
to the circle; and the calculation starts from a greater and
a lesser limit to the value of V3, which Archimedes assumes
without remark as known, namely
How did Archimedes arrive at these particular approxi-
mations? 
No puzzle has exercised more fascination upon
writers interested in the history of mathematics. De Lagny,
Mollweide, Buzengeiger, Hauber, Zeuthen, P. Tannery, Heiler-
mann, Hultsch, Hunrath, Wertheim, Bobynin: these are the
names of some of the authors of different conjectures. The
simplest supposition is certainly that of Hunrath and Hultsch,
who suggested that the formula used was
b 
, 
b
a + — > v (a2 + 6) > a -f
- 2a 
v - ' 
- 2a+l
where a2 is the nearest square number above or below a2 ± bf
as the case may be. The use of the first part of this formula
by Heron, who made a number of such approximations, is
proved by a passage in his Metrica1, where a rule equivalent
to this is applied to V720; the second part of the formula is
used by the Arabian Alkarkhi (eleventh century) who drew
from Greek sources, and one approximation in Heron may be
obtained in this way.2 Another suggestion (that of Tannery
1 Heron, Metrica, i. 8.
2 Stereom. ii, p. 184. 19, Hultsch; p. 154. 19, Heib.
instead of 7T
5^.
E2
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.002 Published online by Cambridge University Press

52 
ARCHIMEDES
and Zeuthen) is that the successive solutions in integers of
the equations
x2-3y2=l 
J
x2-3y2 
= - 2 )
may have been found in a similar way to those of the
equations x2 — 2y2-= ±1 given by Theon of Smyrna after
the Pythagoreans. The rest of the suggestions amount for the
most part to the use of the method of continued fractions
more or less disguised.
Applying the above formula, we easily find
or 
I > \/3 >'§.
Next, clearing of fractions, we consider 5 as an approxi-
mation to Vs . 32 or \/27, and we have
whence
ff
Clearing of fractions again, and taking 26 as an approxi-
mation to >/3.152 or A/675, we have
which reduces to
-VW- >
Archimedes first takes the case of the circumscribed polygon.
Let GA be the tangent at J. to a circular arc with centre 0.
Make the angle AOG equal to one-third of a right angle.
Bisect the angle AOG by OD, the angle AOD by OE, the
angle AOE by OF, and the angle AOFby OG. Produce GA
to AH, making AH equal to AG. 
The angle GOH is then
equal to the angle FO A which is ^fth of a right angle, so
that GH is the side of a circumscribed regular polygon with
96 sides.
Now 
OA: AG[= V 3 : l] > 265:153, 
(1)
and 
OG: GA = 2:1 = 306:153. 
(2)
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.002 Published online by Cambridge University Press

MEASUREMENT OF A CIRCLE 
53
And, since OD bisects the angle GO A,
GO:OA = GD:DA,
so that 
(CO + OA) :OA = GA: DA,
or 
(CO + OA) :GA = OA: AD.
Hence 
0A : AD > 571:153, 
by (1) and (2).
And 
OD*: AD2 = (OA2 + AD2) : AD2
> (5712 + 1532):1532
> 349450: 23409.
Therefore, says Archimedes,
OD.DA > 591|: 153.
Next, just as we have found the limit of OD: AD
from OG: CA and the limit of OA : AC, we find the limits
of OA.AE 
and 0E:AE 
from the limits of OD.DA and
OA: AD, and so on. This gives ultimately the limit of
0A:A0.
Dealing with the inscribed polygon, Archimedes gets a
similar series of approximations. ABC being a semicircle, the
angle BAG is made equal to one-third of a right angle. Then,
if the angle BAG is bisected by AD, the angle BAD by AE,
the angle BAE by AF, and the angle BAF by AO, the
straight line BG is the side of an inscribed polygon with
96 sides.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.002 Published online by Cambridge University Press

54 
ARCHIMEDES
Now the triangles ABB, BDd, AGd are similar;
therefore 
AD: DB = BD:Dd= AC: Cd
= AB: Bd, since AD bisects Z BAG,
= (AB + AG):(Bd + Cd)
= (AB + AG):BG.
But 
AG:CB < 1351 :780,
while 
BA : BC = 2 :1 = 1560 : 780.
Therefore 
AD : DB < 2911 : 780.
Hence
AB2:BD2< 
(29112-h7802):7802
< 9082321:608400,
and, says Archimedes,
AB.BD < 3013|:780.
Next, just as a limit is found for AD: DB and AB: BD
from AB: BG and the limit of AC: CB, so we find limits for
AE: EB and AB: BE from the limits of AB: BD and AD: DB,
and so on, and finally we obtain the limit of AB: BG.
We have therefore in both cases two series of terms a0, alf
a2... an and 60, b1)b2...bn, for which the rule of formation is
where 
bx = V(a* + c2), b2 = V{a* + c2) ...;
and in the first case
a0 = 265, b0 = 306, c = 153,
while in the second case
a0 = 1351, b0 = 1560, c = 780.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.002 Published online by Cambridge University Press

MEASUREMENT OF A CIRCLE 
55
The series of values found by Archimedes are shown in the
following table:
a 
b 
e 
n 
a 
b 
c
265 
306 
153 0 1351 
1560 
780
571 > [v/(5712+1532)] 
153 1 2911 
< '/(29112 + 7802) 780
1162|>[V{(1162|)2+1532}] 
153 2(5924:^^ 
... 
780)*
>1172| 
Jl823 f<>/(18232+2402) 240J
I 
I < 1838T
9
T
2334j>|V{(2334i)2+1532}] 
153 3 3661T
9
T 
... 
240 f
> 2339| 
1007 J< >/(10072 + 662) 
66
{ 
< 1009|
4673i 
153 4 2016|J < V{(2016|)2 + 662} 66
and, bearing in mind that in the first case the final ratio
a4: c is the ratio 0A : AG = 2 OA : GH, and in the second case
the final ratio 64: c is the ratio AB : BG, while GH in the first
figure and BG in the second are the sides of regular polygons
of 96 sides circumscribed and inscribed respectively, we have
finally
96X153 
96x66
> 7 r 
>
4673|
Archimedes simply infers from this that
3i >TT > 3ft.
. . . 
96X153 
. Q67% 
667|
As a matter of fact - ^ - = 3 ^ 
and ^ 
= i.
It is also to be observed that 3ft = 3 + — — * and it may
have been arrived at by a method equivalent to developing
n o DC
the fraction 
=- in the form of a continued fraction.
2017J
It should be noted that, in the text as we have it, the values
of bx> b2, bz, b^ are simply stated in their final form without
the intermediate step containing the radical except in the first
* t Here the ratios of a to c are in the first instance reduced to lower
terms.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.002 Published online by Cambridge University Press

56 
ARCHIMEDES
case of all, where we are told that OD2:AD2 > 349450 : 23409
and then that OD.DA > 591^:153. At the points marked
* and f in the table Archimedes simplifies the ratio a2: c and
a3: c before calculating 62, 63 respectively, by multiplying each
term in the first case by T% and in the second case by ±±.
He gives no explanation of the exact figure taken as the
approximation to the square root in each case, or of the
method by which he obtained it. 
We may, however, be sure
that the method amounted to the use of the formula (a±b)2
= a2±2ab + b2, much as our method of extracting the square
root also depends upon it.
We have already seen (vol. i, p. 232) that, according to
Heron, Archimedes made a still closer approximation to the
value of IT.
On Conoids and Spheroids.
The main problems attacked in this treatise are, in Archi-
medes's manner, stated in his preface addressed to Dositheus,
which also sets out the premisses with regard to the solid
figures in question. These premisses consist of definitions and
obvious inferences from them. The figures are (1) the right-
angled conoid (paraboloid of revolution), (2) the obtuse-angled
conoid (hyperboloid of revolution), and (3) the spheroids
(a) the oblong, described by the revolution of an ellipse about
its ' greater diameter' (major axis), (b) the fiat, described by
the revolution of an ellipse about its ' lesser diameter' (minor
axis). Other definitions are those of the vertex and axis of the
figures or segments thereof, the vertex of a segment being
the point of contact of the tangent plane to the solid which
is parallel to the base of the segment. The centre is only
recognized in the case of the spheroid; what corresponds to
the centre in the case of the hyperboloid is the 'vertex of
the enveloping cone' (described by the revolution of what
Archimedes calls the 'nearest lines to the section of the
obtuse-angled cone', i.e. the asymptotes of the hyperbola),
and the line between this point and the vertex of the hyper-
boloid or segment is called, not the axis or diameter, but (the
line) ' adjacent to the axis'. The axis of the segment is in
the case of the paraboloid the line through the vertex of the
segment parallel to the axis of the paraboloid, in the case
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.002 Published online by Cambridge University Press

ON CONOIDS AND SPHEROIDS 
57
of the hyperboloid the portion within the solid of the line
joining the vertex of the enveloping cone to the vertex of
the segment and produced, and in the case of the spheroids the
line joining the points of contact of the two tangent planes
parallel to the base of the segment. Definitions are added of
a ' segment of a coneJ (the figure cut off towards the vertex by
an elliptical, not circular, section of the cone) and a ' frustum
of a cylinder7 (cut off'by two parallel elliptical sections).
Props. 1 to 18 with a Lemma at the beginning are preliminary
to the main subject of the treatise. The Lemma and Props. 1, 2
are general propositions needed afterwards. 
They include
propositions in summation,
2 {a + 2a+k3a+... 
+na} > n*na > 2{a + 2a+ ... + (n— I)a}
(Lemma)
(this is clear from Sn = %n(n + l)a);
{n + 1) (no)2 + a(a + 2a + 3a+...+ na)
(Lemma to Prop. 2)
whence (Cor.)
2 + (3a)2+...+(na)2} 
> n(na)2
lastly, Prop. 2 gives limits for the sum of n terms of the
series ax + x
2, a.2x + (2x)
2, a.3x + (3x)
2,..., in the form of
inequalities of ratios, thus:
n{a .nx + (nx)2}: S/^fa. ra-
> n{a.nx 
+ (nx)2}:2^{a.rx 
+ (rx)2}.
Prop. 3 proves that, if QQ' be a chord of a parabola bisected
at Fby the diameter PV, then, if PV be of constant length,
the areas of the triangle PQQ' and of the segment PQQ' are
also constant, whatever be the direction of QQ'; to prove it
Archimedes assumes a proposition ' proved in the coniesJ and
by no means easy, namely that, if QD be perpendicular to PV,
and if p, pa be the parameters corresponding to the ordinates
parallel to QQ' and the principal ordinates respectively, then
QV*:QD2=p:Pa.
Props. 4-6 deal with the area of an ellipse, which is, in the
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.002 Published online by Cambridge University Press

58 
ARCHIMEDES
first of the three propositions, proved to be to the area of
the auxiliary circle as the minor axis to the major; equilateral
polygons of 4n sides are inscribed in the circle and compared
with corresponding polygons inscribed in the ellipse, which are
determined by the intersections with the ellipse of the double
ordinates passing through the angular points of the polygons
inscribed in the circle, and the method of exhaustion is then
applied in the usual way. Props. 7,8 show how, given an ellipse
with centre C and a straight line CO in a plane perpendicular to
that of the ellipse and passing through an axis of it, (1) in the
case where OC is perpendicular to that axis, (2) in the case
where it is not, we can find an (in general oblique) circular
cone with vertex 0 such that the given ellipse is a section of it,
or, in other words, how we can find the circular sections of the
cone with vertex 0 which passes through the circumference of
the ellipse; similarly Prop. 9 shows how to find the circular
sections of a cylinder with CO as axis and with surface passing
through the circumference of an ellipse with centre C, where
CO is in the plane through an axis of the ellipse and perpen-
dicular to its plane, but is not itself perpendicular to that
axis. Props. 11-18 give simple properties of the conoids and
spheroids, easily derivable from the properties of the respective
conies; they explain the nature and relation of the sections
made by planes cutting the solids respectively in different ways
(planes through the axis, parallel to the axis, through the centre
or the vertex of the enveloping cone, perpendicular to the axis,
or cutting it obliquely, respectively), with especial reference to
the elliptical sections of each solid, the similarity of parallel
elliptical sections, &c. Then with Prop. 19 the real business
of the treatise begins, namely the investigation of the volume
of segments (right or oblique) of the two conoids and the
spheroids respectively.
The method is, in all cases, to circumscribe and inscribe to
the segment solid figures made up of cylinders or ' frusta of
cylinders \ which can be made to differ as little as we please
from one another, so that the circumscribed and inscribed
figures are, as it were, compressed together and into coincidence
with the segment which is intermediate between them.
In each diagram the plane of the paper is a plane through
the axis of the conoid or spheroid at right angles to the plane
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.002 Published online by Cambridge University Press

ON CONOIDS AND SPHEROIDS
59
of the section which is the base of the segment, and which
is a circle or an ellipse according as the said base is or is not
at right angles to the axis; the plane of the paper cuts the
base in a diameter of the circle or an axis of the ellipse as
the case may be.
The nature of the inscribed and circumscribed figures will
be seen from the above figures showing segments of a para-
boloid, a hyperboloid and a spheroid respectively, cut off
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.002 Published online by Cambridge University Press

60 
ARCHIMEDES
by planes obliquely inclined to the axis. 
The base of the
segment is an ellipse in which BB/ is an axis, and its plane is
at right angles to the plane of the paper, which passes through
the axis of the solid and cuts it in a parabola, a hyperbola, or
an ellipse respectively. The axis of the segment is cut into a
number of equal parts in each case, and planes are drawn
through each point of section parallel to the base, cutting the
solid in ellipses, similar to the base, in which PPf, QQ', &c, are
axes. Describing frusta of cylinders with axis AD and passing
through these elliptical sections respectively, we draw the
circumscribed and inscribed solids consisting of these frusta.
It is evident that, beginning from A, the first inscribed frustum
is equal to the first circumscribed frustum, the second to the
second, and so on, but there is one more circumscribed frustum
than inscribed, and the difference between the circumscribed
and inscribed solids is equal to the last frustum of which BB'
is the base, and ND is the axis. Since ND can be made as
small as we please, the difference between the circumscribed
and inscribed solids can be made less than any assigned solid
whatever. Hence we have the requirements for applying the
method of exhaustion.
Consider now separately the cases of the paraboloid, the
hyperboloid and the spheroid.
I. The paraboloid (Props. 20-22).
The frustum the base of which is the ellipse in which PPf is
an axis is proportional to PP/2 or PN2, i. e. proportional to
AN. 
Suppose that the axis AD (= c) is divided into n equal
parts. Archimedes compares each frustum in the inscribed
and circumscribed figure with the frustum of the whole cylinder
BF cut oft* by the same planes. Thus
(first frustum in BF): (first frustum in inscribed figure)
= BD2: PN2
= 
AD:AN
= BD: TN.
Similarly
(second frustum in BF): (second in inscribed figure)
= HN:SM,
and so on. The last frustum in the cylinder BF has none to
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.002 Published online by Cambridge University Press

ON CONOIDS AND SPHEROIDS 
61
correspond to it in the inscribed figure, and we should write
the ratio as (BD : zero).
Archimedes concludes, by means of a lemma in proportions
forming Prop. 1, that
(frustum BF) : (inscribed figure)
= (BD + HN+...):(TN+8M+...+X0)
— \k),
where XO = k, so that BD = nk.
In like manner, he concludes that
(frustum BF): (circumscribed figure)
But, by the Lemma preceding Prop. 1,
h + 2k + 3h + ... + n— 1 h < %n2k < k +
whence
(frustum BF): (inscr. fig.) > 2 > (frustum BF): (circumscr. fig.).
This indicates the desired result, which is then confirmed by
the method of exhaustion, namely that
(frustum BF) = 2 (segment of paraboloid),
or, if V be the volume of the ' segment of a cone', with vertex
A and base the same as that of the segment,
(volume of segment) = | F .
Archimedes, it will be seen, proves in effect that, if k be
indefinitely diminished, and n indefinitely increased, while nk
remains equal to c, then
limit of k{k + 2k + 3k+ ...+(n~l)k} 
= |c 2,
that is, in our notation,I
xdx = he2.
0
Prop. 23 proves that the volume is constant for a given
length of axis AD, whether the segment is cut off' by a plane
perpendicular or not perpendicular to the axis, and Prop. 24
shows that the volumes of two segments are as the squares on
their axes.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.002 Published online by Cambridge University Press

62 
ARCHIMEDES
II. In the case of the hyperboloid (Props. 25, 26) let the axis
AD be divided into n parts, each of length A, and let AA'=a.
Then the ratio of the volume of the frustum of a cylinder on
the ellipse of which any double ordinate QQf is an axis to the
volume of the corresponding portion of the whole frustum BF
takes a different form; for, if AM = rh, we have
(frustum in BF): (frustum on base QQ')
= BD2: QM2
= AD . A'D : AM . A'M
= {a.nh + (nh)2} : {a .rh + (rh)2}.
By means of this relation Archimedes proves that
(frustum BF): (inscribed figure)
= n{a. nh + (nh)2} : S^"1 {a.rh + (rh)2},
and
(frustum BF): (circumscribed figure)
= n{a.nh + (nh)2} :21
n{a.rh + (rh)2}.
But, by Prop. 2,
n{a.nh + (nh)2} '.^^{a.rh+irh)2} 
> (a + nh):(%a + ^nh)
>n{a. nh + (nh)2} : 2* {a. rh + (rh)2}.
From these relations it is inferred that
(frustum BF): (volume of segment) = (a + nh): (ia + ^nh),
or 
(volume of segment): (volume of cone ABB')
= (AD+3CA):(AD + 2CA);
and this is confirmed by the method of exhaustion.
The result obtained by Archimedes is equivalent to proving
that, if h be indefinitely diminished while n is indefinitely
increased but nh remains always equal to 6, then
limit of
or 
limit of - Sn = b2 (£a + J b),
where
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.002 Published online by Cambridge University Press

ON CONOIDS AND SPHEROIDS 
63
so that
f
Jo
The limit of this latter expression is what we should write
(ax + x2) dx = b2 (%a +16),
Jo
and Archimedes's procedure is the equivalent of this integration.
III. In the case of the spheroid (Props. 29, 30) we take
a segment less than half the spheroid.
As in the case of the hyperboloid,
(frustum in BF): (frustum on base QQ')
= BD2: QM2
= 
AD.A'D:AM.A'M;
but, in order to reduce the summation to the same as that in
Prop. 2, Archimedes expresses AM. A'M in a different form
equivalent to the following.
Let AD (=b) be divided into n equal parts of length h,
and suppose that AA'= a, CD = \c.
Then 
AD . A'D = 4a2 - ic2,
and 
AM. A'M = \a2- (%c + rh)2 
(DM = rh)
= AD . A'D-{c 
.rh + (rh)2}
Thus in this case we have
(frustum BF): (inscribed figure)
and
(frustum BF) : (circumscribed figure)
= n(cb + b2): [w(c& + ft2)-S^-1 {c - rh+(rh)2}].
And, since b = nh, we have, by means of Prop. 2,
n(cb + b2): \n{cb + b2)-\n{c 
. rh + (rh)2}]
> n(cb + b2): [n(cb + b2) -^2l
n~1 {c . rh + (rh)2}].
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.002 Published online by Cambridge University Press

64 
ARCHIMEDES
The conclusion, confirmed as usual by the method of ex-
haustion, is that
(frustum BF): (segment of spheroid) = (c + b): {c + b - (£ c +§ b)}
= (c + 6):(*c + |6),
whence (volume of segment): (volume of cone ABB')
= (3CA-AD):(2CA-AD), since CA =
As a particular case (Props. 27, 28), half the spheroid is
double of the corresponding cone.
Props. 31, 32, concluding the treatise, deduce the similar
formula for the volume of the greater segment, namely, in our
figure,
(greater segmt.): (cone or segmt.of cone with same base and axis)
AD):AD.
On Spirals.
The treatise On Spirals begins with a preface addressed to
Dositheus in which Archimedes mentions the death of Conon
as a grievous loss to mathematics, and then summarizes the
main results of the treatises On the Sphere and Cylinder and
On Conoids and Spheroids, observing that the last two pro-
positions of Book II of the former treatise took the place
of two which, as originally enunciated to Dositheus, were
wrong; lastly, he states the main results of the treatise
On Spirals, premising the definition of a spiral which is as
follows:
' If a straight line one extremity of which remains fixed be
made to revolve at a uniform rate in a plane until it returns
to the position from which it started, and if, at the same time
as the straight line is revolving, a point move at'a uniform
rate along the straight line, starting from the fixed extremity,
the point will describe a spiral in the plane/
As usual, we have a series of propositions preliminary to
the main subject, first two propositions about uniform motion,
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.002 Published online by Cambridge University Press

ON SPIRALS
65
then two simple geometri3al propositions, followed by pro-
positions (5-9) which are all of one type. Prop. 5 states that,
given a circle with centre 0, a tangent to it at A, and c, the
FIG. 1.
circumference of any circle whatever, it is possible to draw
a straight line OFF meeting the circle in P and the tangent
in F such that
FP.OP < (arc AP): c.
Archimedes takes D a straight line greater than c, draws
OH parallel to the tangent at A and then says * let PH be
placed equal to D verging (vevovcra) towards A'. 
This is the
usual phraseology of the type of problem known as vevo-is
where a straight line of given length has to be placed between
two lines or curves in such a position that, if produced, it
passes through a given point (this is the meaning of verging).
Each of the propositions 5-9 depends on a vtvons of this kind,
FIG. 2.
which Archimedes assumes as ' possible' without showing how
it is effected. 
Except in the case of Prop. 5, the theoretical
solution cannot be effected by means of the straight line and
circle; it depends in general on the solution of an equation
of the fourth degree, which can be solved by means of the
1623.2
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.002 Published online by Cambridge University Press

66 
ARCHIMEDES
points of intersection of a certain rectangular hyperbola
and a certain parabola. It is quite possible, however, that
such problems were in practice often solved by a mechanical
method, namely by placing a ruler, by trial, in the position of
the required line: for it is only necessary to place the ruler
so that it passes through the given point and then turn it
round that point as a pivot till the intercept becomes of the
given length. In Props. 6-9 we have a circle with centre 0,
a chord AB less than the diameter in it, OM the perpendicular
from 0 on AB, BT the tangent at B} OT the straight line
through 0 parallel to AB; D: E is any ratio less or greater,
as the case may be, than the ratio BM:M0. 
Props. 6, 7
(Fig. 2) show that it is possible to draw a straight line OFP
FIG. 3.
meeting AB in F and the circle in P such that 
FP:PB=D:E
(OP meeting AB in the case where D\E < BM:M0, and
meeting AB produced when D : E > BM.MO). 
In Props. 8, 9
(Fig. 3) it is proved that it is possible to draw a straight line
OFP meeting AB in F, the circle in P and the tangent at B in
G, such that FP:BG=D:E 
(OP meeting AB itself in the case
where D :E < BM:M0, and meeting AB produced in the
case where D:E > BM: MO).
We will illustrate by the constructions in Props. 7, 8,
as it is these propositions which are actually cited later.
Prop. 7. If D : E is any ratio > BM : MO, it is required (Fig. 2)
to draw OP'F' meeting the circle in P' and AB produced in
F' so that
F/P/:P/B = D:E.
Draw OT parallel to AB, and let the tangent to the circle at
B meet OT in T
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.002 Published online by Cambridge University Press

ON SPIRALS
67
Then 
D:E > BM:MO, by hypothesis,
> OB : BT, by similar triangles.
Take a straight line P'H' (less than BT) such that D: E
= OB: P'H', and place P'H' between the circle and OT
< verging towards BJ (construction assumed).
Then 
F'P': P'B = OP': P'H'
= OB: P'H'
= D:E.
Prop. 8. If D : E is any given ratio < BM:MO, it is required
to draw OFPG meeting AB in F, the circle in P, and the
tangent at JB to the circle in G so that
FP:BG = D:E.
If OT is parallel to AB and meets the tangent at B in T,
BM-.MO = OB : BT, by similar triangles,
whence 
D : E < OB : BT.
Produce TB to (7, making BG of such length that
D:E= OB.BG,
so that BG > BT.
Describe a circle through the three points O,TyG and let OB
produced meet this circle in K.
6 Then, since BG > BT, and OK is perpendicular to CT, it is
possible to place QG [between the circle TKC and BG) equal to
BK and verging towards 0' (construction assumed).
F 2
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.002 Published online by Cambridge University Press

68 
ARCHIMEDES
Let QGO meet the original circle in P and AB in F. Then
OFPG is the straight line required.
For 
CG.GT=OG.GQ 
= OG. BK.
But 
OF: OG = BT: GT, by parallels,
whence 
OF.GT=OG.BT.
Therefore 
CG . GT :0F. GT = OG. BK :0G . BT,
whence 
OG:OF=BK: BT
= BO:OB
= BC:OP.
Therefore 
OP: OF = BO: CG}
and hence 
PF:OP = BG: BC,
or 
PF:BG=0B:BO = D:E.
Pappus objects to Archimedes's use of the vtvcris assumed in
Prop. 8, 9 in these words:
' it seems to be a grave error into which geometers fall
whenever any one discovers the solution of a plane problem
by means of conies or linear (higher) curves, or generally
solves it by means of a foreign kind, as is the case e.g. (1) with
the problem in the fifth Book of the Conies of Apollonius
relating to the parabola, and (2) when Archimedes assumes in
his work on the spiral a l/evcris of a "solid" character with
reference to a circle; for it is possible without calling in the
aid of anything solid to find the proof of the theorem given by
Archimedes, that is, to prove that the circumference of the
circle arrived at in the first revolution is equal to the straight
line drawn at right angles to the initial line to meet the tangent
to the spiral (i.e. the subtangent)/
There is, however, this excuse for Archimedes, that he only
assumes that the problem can be solved and does not assume
the actual solution. Pappus1 himself gives a solution of the
particular vevais by means of conies. Apollonius wrote two
Books of vevaeis, and it is quite possible that by Archimedes's
time there may already have been a collection of such problems
to which tacit reference was permissible.
Prop. 10 repeats the result of the Lemma to Prop. 2 of On
1 Pappus, iv, pp. 298-302.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.002 Published online by Cambridge University Press

ON SPIRALS 
69
Conoids and Spheroids involving the summation of the series
l2 + 22 + 32+ ... + n2. Prop 11 proves another proposition in
summation, namely that
> (na)2: {na .
> (n
The same proposition is also true if the terms of the series
are a2, (a + b)2, (a+2b)2 ... (a + n —16)2, and it is assumed in
the more general form in Props. 25, 26.
Archimedes now introduces his Definitions, of the spiral
itself, the origin, the initial line, the first distance (= the
radius vector at the end of one revolution), the second distance
(= the equal length added to the radius vector during the
second complete revolution), and so on; the first area (the area
bounded by the spiral described in the first revolution and
the ' first distance'), the second area (that bounded by the spiral
described in the second revolution and the ' second distance'),
and so on; the^rs^ circle (the circle with the 'first distance'
as radius), the second circle (the circle with radius equal to the
sum of the 'first' and 'second distances', or twice the first
distance), and so on.
Props. 12, 14, 15 give the fundamental property of the
spiral connecting the length of the radius vector with the angle
through which the initial line has revolved from its original
position, arid corresponding to the equation in polar coordinates
r = a0. 
As Archimedes does not speak of angles greater
than 7r, or 2ir, he has, in the case of points on any turn after
the first, to use multiples of the circumference
of a circle as well as arcs of it. He uses the
' first circle' for this purpose. Thus, if P, Q
are two points on the first turn,
OP:OQ = (arc AKP'): (arc AKQf);
if P, Q are points on the -nth turn of the
spiral, and c is the circumference of the first circle,
OP:OQ = {(n-
Prop. 13 proves that, if a straight line touches the spiral, it
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.002 Published online by Cambridge University Press

70 
ARCHIMEDES
touches it at one point only. For, if possible, let the tangent
at P touch the spiral at another point Q. Then, if we bisect
the angle POQ by OL meeting PQ in L and the spiral in R,
0P + 0Q = 20R by the property of the spiral. But by
the property of the triangle (assumed, but easily proved)
0P + 0Q> 2 0L, so that OL < OR, and some point of PQ
lies within the spiral. Hence PQ cuts the spiral, which is
contrary to the hypothesis.
Props. 16, 17 prove that the angle made by the tangent
at a point with the radius vector to that point is obtuse on the
' forward' side, and acute oh the ' backward' side, of the radius
vector.
Props. 18-20 give the fundamental proposition about the
tangent, that is to say, they give the length of the subtangent
at any point P (the distance between 0 and the point of inter-
section of the tangent with the perpendicular from 0 to OP).
Archimedes always deals first with the first turn and then
with any subsequent turn, and with each complete turn before
parts or points of any particular turn. Thus he deals with
tangents in this order, (1) the tangent at A the end of the first
turn, (2) the tangent at the end of the second and any subse-
quent turn, (3) the tangent at any intermediate point of the
first or any subsequent turn. We will take as illustrative
the case of the tangent at any intermediate point P of the first
turn (Prop. 20).
If 0A be the initial line, P any point on the first turn, PT
the tangent at P and OT perpendicular to OP, then it is to be
proved that, if ASP be the circle through P with centre 0,
meeting PT in S, then
(subtangent OT) = (arc ASP).
I. If possible, let OT be greater than the arc ASP.
Measure off OU such that OU > arc ASP but < OT.
Then the ratio P0:0U 
is greater than the ratio P0: OT,
i.e. greater than the ratio of %PS to the perpendicular from 0
on PS.
Therefore (Prop. 7) we can draw a straight line OQF meeting
TP produced in F, and the circle in Q, such that
FQ:PQ = P0:0U.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.002 Published online by Cambridge University Press

ON SPIRALS
Let OF meet the spiral in Q'.
Then we have, alternando, since PO = QO,
< (arc PQ): (arc ASP), by hypothesis and a fortiori.
Componendo, FO:QO< (arc ASQ): (arc ASP)
<OQ':OP.
But QO = 0P; therefore FO < OQ'; which is impossible.
Therefore OT is not greater than the arc ASP.
II. Next suppose, if possible, that OT < arc ASP.
Measure OV along OT such that OV is greater than OT but
less than the arc ASP.
Then the ratio PO : OV is less than the ratio 
PO:OT,Le.
than the ratio of %PS to the perpendicular from 0 on PS;
therefore it is possible (Prop. 8) to draw a straight line OF'RG
meeting PS, the circle PSA, and the tangent to the circle at P
in F', R, G respectively, and such that
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.002 Published online by Cambridge University Press

72 
ARCHIMEDES
Let 0 F'Q meet the spiral in Bf.
Then, since PO = RO, we have, alternando,
F'R:RO = GP:OV
> (arc PR): (arc ASP), a fortiori,
whence 
F'O : RO < (arc ASR): (arc ASP)
<OR':OP,
so that ^ 0 < 0R'\ which is impossible.
Therefore 0T is not less than the arc ASP. 
And it was
proved not greater than the same arc. Therefore
0T= (zrcASP).
As particular cases (separately proved by Archimedes), if
P be the extremity of the first turn and cx the circumference
of the first circle, the subtangent = cx; if P be the extremity
of the second turn and c2 the circumference of the 'second
circle', the subtangent = 2e2; and generally, if cn be the
circumference of the nth circle (the circle with the radius
vector to the extremity of the nth turn as radius), the sub-
tangent to the tangent at the extremity of the nth turn = ncn.
If P is a point on the nth turn, not the extremity, and the
circle with 0 as centre and OP as radius cuts the initial line
in K, while p is the circumference of the circle, the sub-
tangent to the tangent at P = (n—I)p +a,rc KP (measured
' forward ')}
The remainder of the book (Props. 21-8) is devoted to
finding the areas of portions of the spiral and its several
turns cut off by the initial line or any two radii vectores.
We will illustrate by the general case (Prop. 26). 
Take
OB, 00, two bounding radii vectores, including an arc BG
of the spiral. With centre 0 and radius 0G describe a circle.
Divide the angle BOG into any number of equal parts by
radii of this circle. The spiral meets these radii in points
P, Q ... Y, Z such that the radii vectores OB, OP, 0Q ... 0Z, 0G
1 On the whole course of Archimedes's proof of the property of the
subtangent, see note in the Appendix.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.002 Published online by Cambridge University Press

ON SPIRALS
73
are in arithmetical progression. Draw arcs of circles with
radii OB, OP, OQ ... as shown; this produces a figure circum-
scribed to the spiral and consisting of the sum of small sectors
of circles, and an inscribed figure of the same kind. As the
first sector in the circumscribed figure is equal to the second
sector in the inscribed, it is easily seen that the areas of the
circumscribed and inscribed figures differ by the difference
between the sectors OzG and OBp''; therefore, by increasing
the number of divisions of the angle BOC, we can make the
difference between the areas of the circumscribed and in-
scribed figures as small as we please; we have, therefore, the
elements necessary for the application of the method of
exhaustion.
If there are n radii OB, OP... 00, there are (n— 1) parts of
the angle BOC. Since the angles of all the small sectors are
equal, the sectors are as the square on their radii.
Thus (whole sector Ob'C): (circumscribed figure)
= (w- l)0C 2: (OP2 + 0Q2 +... + 0C2),
and 
(whole sector Ob'C): (inscribed figure)
= (n- l)0C2: (0B2 + 0P2 + 0Q2+... + 0Z2).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.002 Published online by Cambridge University Press

74 
ARCHIMEDES
And OB, OP, OQ, ...OZ, OG is an arithmetical progression
of n terms; therefore (cf. Prop. 11 and Cor.),
(n-l)OC2 
:(OP2 + OQ2 + ... + 0C2)
<(n-l)OG2:(OB2
Compressing the circumscribed and inscribed figures together
in the usual way, Archimedes proves by exhaustion that
(sector Ob'G): (area of spiral OBG)
= OC*: {OC.OB + %(OC-OB)2}.
If OB = b, 0C= c, and (c-b) = (n-l)h, 
Archimedes's
result is the equivalent of saying that, when h diminishes and
n increases indefinitely, while c—b remains constant,
limit of h{ 
^
that is, with our notation,
r
Jb
In particular, the area included by the first turn and the
initial line is bounded by the radii vectores 0 and 2ira\
the area, therefore, is to the circle with radius 2ira as §(2?ra)2
to (27ra)2, that is to say, it is -| of the circle or ^7r(27ra)2.
This is separately proved in Prop. 24 by means of Prop. 10
and Corr. 1, 2.
The area of the ring added while the radius vector describes
the second turn is the area bounded by the radii vectores 2TT(L
and 47ra, and is to the circle with radius 4?ra in the ratio
of {^2
ri + 'l(r2~ri)2} t° r22> where rx = 2?ra and r2 = 47ra;
the ratio is 7 : 12 (Prop. 25).
If Rx be the area of the first turn of the spiral bounded by
the initial line, R2 the area of the ring added by the second
complete turn, R3 that of the ring added by the third turn,
and so on, then (Prop. 27)
jR3 = 2i?2, i?4= 3i?2, R5= 4JR2, ...Rn = (n-
Also i?2= 6RX.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.002 Published online by Cambridge University Press

ON SPIRALS 
75
Lastly, if E be the portion of the sector VOG bounded by
VB, the arc b'zG of the circle and the arc BG of the spiral, and
F the portion cut off between the arc BG of the spiral, the
radius OG and the arc intercepted between OB and OG of
the circle with centre 0 and radius OB, it is proved that
E:F= {0B + $(0C-0B)}:{0B + i(0C-0B)} (Prop. 28).
On Plane Equilibriums, I, II.
In this treatise we have the fundamental principles of
mechanics established by the methods of geometry in its
strictest sense. 
There were doubtless earlier treatises on
mechanics, but it may be assumed that none of them had
been worked out with such geometrical rigour. Archimedes
begins with seven Postulates including the following prin-
ciples. Equal weights at equal distances balance; if unequal
weights operate at equal distances, the larger weighs down
the smaller. If when equal weights are in equilibrium some-
thing be added to, or subtracted from, one of them, equilibrium
is not maintained but the weight which is increased or is not
diminished prevails. When equal and similar plane figures
coincide if applied to one another, their centres of gravity
similarly coincide; and in figures which are unequal but
similar the centres of gravity will be 'similarly situated'.
In any figure the contour of which is concave in one and the
same direction the centre of gravity must be within the figure*.
Simple propositions (1-5) follow, deduced by reductio ad
absurdum; these lead to the fundamental theorem, proved
first for commensurable and then by reductio ad absurdum
for incommensurable magnitudes, that Two magnitudes,
whether commensurable or incommensurable, balance at dis-
tances reciprocally proportional to the magnitudes (Props.
6, 7). Prop. 8 shows how to find the centre of gravity of
a part of a magnitude when the centres of gravity of the
other part and of the whole magnitude are given. Archimedes
then addresses himself to the main problems of Book I, namely
to find the centres of gravity of (1) a parallelogram (Props.
9, 10), (2) a triangle (Props. 13, 14), and (3) a parallel-
trapezium (Prop. 15); and here we have an illustration of the
extraordinary rigour which he requires in his geometrical
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.002 Published online by Cambridge University Press

76 
ARCHIMEDES
proofs. We do not find him here assuming, as in The Method,
that, if all the lines that can be drawn in a figure parallel to
(and including) one side have their middle points in a straight
line, the centre of gravity must lie somewhere on that straight
line; he is not content to regard the figure as made up of an
infinity of such parallel lines; pure geometry realizes that
the parallelogram is made up of elementary parallelograms,
indefinitely narrow if you please, but still parallelograms, and
the triangle of elementary trapezia, not straight lines, so
that to assume directly that the centre of gravity lies on the
straight line bisecting the parallelograms would really be
a petitio principii. 
Accordingly the result, no doubt dis-
covered in the informal way, is clinched by a proof by reductio
ad absurduin in each case. In the case of the parallelogram
ABGD (Prop. 9), if the centre of gravity is not on the straight
line EF bisecting two opposite sides, let it be at H. 
Draw
HK parallel to AD. Then it is possible by bisecting AE, ED,
then bisecting the halves, and so on, ultimately to reach
a length less than KH. 
Let this be done, and through the
points of division of AD draw parallels to AB or DO making
a number of equal and similar parallelograms as in the figure.
The centre of gravity of each of these parallelograms is
similarly'situated with regard to it. Hence we have a number
of equal magnitudes with their centres of gravity at equal
distances along a straight line. 
Therefore the centre of
gravity of the whole is on the line joining the centres of gravity
of the two middle parallelograms (Prop. 5, Cor. 2). But this
is impossible, because H is outside those parallelograms.
Therefore the centre of gravity cannot but lie on EF.
Similarly the centre of gravity lies on the straight line
bisecting the other opposite sides AB, CD; therefore it lies at
the intersection of this line with EF, i.e. at the point of
intersection of the diagonals.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.002 Published online by Cambridge University Press

ON PLANE EQUILIBRIUMS, I
77
The proof in the case of the triangle is similar (Prop. 13).
Let AD be the median through A. The centre of gravity-
must lie on AD.
For, if not, let it be at H, and draw HI parallel to BC.
Then, if we bisect DC, then bisect the halves, and so on,
we shall arrive at a length DE less than IH. 
Divide BC into
lengths equal to DE, draw parallels to DA through the points
of division, and complete the small parallelograms as shown in
the figure.
The centres of gravity of the whole parallelograms 8N, TP,
FQ lie on AD (Prop. 9); therefore the centre of gravity of the
figure formed by them all lies on AD; let it be 0. Join OH,
and produce it to meet in V the parallel through 0 to AD.
Now it is easy to see that, if n be the number of parts into
which DC, AC are divided respectively,
(sum of small As AMR, MLS ... ARN, NUP ...): (A ABC)
= n. AN*: AC2
= 1 :n ;
whence
(sum of small As): (sum of parallelograms) = 1: (TI— 1).
Therefore the centre of gravity of the figure made up of all
the small triangles is at a point X on OH produced such that
XH=(n-l)0H.
But VH: HO < CE: ED or (n - 1): 1; therefore XH > VH.
It follows that the centre of gravity of all the small
triangles taken together lies at X notwithstanding that all
the triangles lie on one side of the parallel to AD drawn
through X: which is impossible.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.002 Published online by Cambridge University Press

78 
AECHIMEDES
Hence the centre of gravity of the whole triangle cannot
but lie on AD.
It lies, similarly, on either of the other two medians; so
that it is at the intersection of any two medians (Prop. 14).
Archimedes gives alternative proofs of a direct character,
both for the parallelogram and the triangle, depending on the
postulate that the centres of gravity of similar figures are
'similarly situated' in regard to them (Prop. 10 for the
parallelogram, Props. 11, 12 and part 2 of Prop. 13 for the
triangle).
The geometry of Prop. 15 deducing the centre of gravity of
a trapezium is also interesting. It is proved that, if AD, BG
are the parallel sides (AD being the smaller), and EF is the
straight line joining their middle points, the centre of gravity
is at a point G on EF such that
Book II of the treatise is entirely devoted to finding the
centres of gravity of a parabolic segment (Props. 1-8) and
of a portion of it cut off by a parallel to the base (Props. 9, 10).
Prop. 1 (really a particular case of I. 6, 7) proves that, if P, P'
R'
be the areas of two parabolic segments and D, E their centres
of gravity, the centre of gravity of both taken together is
at a point G on DE such that
P:P'=CE:GD.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.002 Published online by Cambridge University Press

ON PLANE EQUILIBRIUMS, I, II 
79
This is merely preliminary. Then begins the real argument,
the course of which is characteristic and deserves to be set out.
Archimedes uses a series of figures inscribed to the segment,
as he says, 'in the recognized manner' (yi/copi/xcos). The rule
is as follows. Inscribe in the segment the triangle ABB' with
the same base and height; the vertex A is then the point
of contact of the tangent parallel to BB\ 
Do the same with
the remaining segments cut off by AB, AB\ then with the
segments remaining, and so on. If BRQPAP'Q'R'B' 
is such
a figure, the diameters through Q, Q', P, P', Ry R' bisect the
straight lines AB, AB',AQy AQ', QB, Q'B' respectively, and
BB' is divided by the diameters into parts which are all
equal. It is easy to prove also that PP\ QQ', RR/ are all
parallel to BB\ and that AL: LM: MN-.NO =1:3:5:7, the
same relation holding if the number of sides of the polygon
is increased; i.e. the segments of AO are always in the ratio
of the successive odd numbers (Lemmas to Prop. 2). The
centre of gravity of the inscribed figure lies on AO (Prop. 2).
If there be two parabolic segments, and two figures inscribed
in them ' in the recognized manner' with an equal number of
sides, the centres of gravity divide the respective axes in the
same proportion, for the ratio depends on the same ratio of odd
numbers 1:3:5:7... (Prop. 3). The centre of gravity of the
parabolic segment itself lies on the diameter AO (this is proved
in Prop. 4 by reductio ad absurdwm in exactly the same way
as for the triangle in I. 13). It is next proved (Prop. 5) that
the centre of gravity of the segment is nearer to the vertex A
than the centre of gravity of the inscribed figure is; but that
it is possible to inscribe in the segment in the recognized
manner a figure such that the distance between the centres of
gravity of the segment and of the inscribed figure is less than
any assigned length, for we have only to increase the number
of sides sufficiently (Prop. 6). Incidentally, it is observed in
Prop. 4 that, if in any segment the triangle with the same
base and equal height is inscribed, the triangle is greater than
half the segment, whence it follows that, each time we increase
the number of sides in the inscribed figure, we take away
more than half of the segments remaining over; and in Prop. 5
that corresponding segments on opposite sides of the axis, e. g.
QRB, QfR B' have their axes equal and therefore are equal in
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.002 Published online by Cambridge University Press

80
AECHIMEDES
area. Lastly (Prop. 7), if there be two parabolic segments,
their centres of gravity divide their diameters in the same
ratio (Archimedes enunciates this of similar segments only,
but it is true of any two segments and is required of any two
segments in Prop. 8). Prop. 8 now finds the centre of gravity
of any segment by using the last proposition. It is the
geometrical equivalent of the solution of a simple equation in
the ratio (m, say) of AG to AO, where G is the centre of
gravity of the segment.
Since the segment = § (A ABB'), the sum of the two seg-
ments AQB, AQ'B'= 
%(AABB').
Further, if QD, Q'D' are the diameters of these segments,
QD, Q'D' are equal, and, since the centres
of gravity H, H' of the segments divide
QD, Q'D' proportionally, HH' is parallel
to QQ', and the centre of gravity of the
two segments together is at K, the point
where HH' meets AO.
Now AO = 4:AV (Lemma 3 to Prop.
2), and QD = \A0 - AY = AY. 
But
H divides QD in the same ratio as G
divides AO (Prop. 7); therefore
VK = QH = m.QD = 
m.AV.
Taking moments about A of the segment, the triangle ABB'
and the sum of the small segments, we have (dividing out by
AV and A ABB')
| . 4 = | . 4 m ,
or
15m = 9, .
and m = •§.
That is, 
AG = %A0, or AG: GO = 3 : 2.
The final proposition (10) finds the centre of gravity of the
portion of a parabola cut off between two parallel chords PP',
BB'. 
If PP' is the shorter of the chords and the diameter
bisecting PP', BB' meets them in If, 0 respectively, Archi-
medes proves that, if NO be divided into five equal parts of
which LM is the middle one (L being nearer to JV" than M is),
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.002 Published online by Cambridge University Press

ON PLANE EQUILIBRIUMS, II 
81
the centre of gravity G of the portion of the parabola between
PPf and BB' divides LM in such a way that
LG:GM=B0K(2PN+B0):PN2.(2B0 + PN').
The geometrical proof is somewhat difficult, and uses a very
remarkable Lemma which forms Prop. 9. If a, 6, c, d, x, y are
straight lines satisfying the conditions
a 
b 
c , 
7
d 
_ 
x
a — d ~ § (a — c)'
, 
flU-T'VTU^T^^ 
y
5
a — c
then must 
x + y = fa.
The proof is entirely geometrical, but amounts of course to
the elimination of three quantities 6, c, d from the above four
equations.
The Sand-reckoner (Psammites or Arenarius).
I have already described in a previous chapter the remark-
able system, explained in this treatise and in a lost work,
'Ap-^ai, Principles, addressed to Zeuxippus, for expressing very
large numbers which were beyond the range of the ordinary
Greek arithmetical notation. Archimedes showed that his
system would enable any number to be expressed up to that
which in our notation would require 80,000 million million
ciphers and then proceeded to prove that this system more
than sufficed to express the number of grains of sand which
it would take to fill the universe, on a reasonable view (as it
seemed to him) of the size to be attributed to the universe.
Interesting as the book is for the course of the argument by
which Archimedes establishes this, it is, in addition, a docu-
ment of the first importance historically. It is here that we
learn that Aristarchus put forward the Copernican theory of
the universe, with the sun in the centre and the planets
including the earth revolving round it, and that Aristarchus
further discovered the angular diameter of the sun to be 7-|^n
of the circle of the zodiac or half a degree. Since Archimedes,
in order to calculate a safe figure (not too small) for the size
1523.2 
G
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.002 Published online by Cambridge University Press

82 
ARCHIMEDES
of the universe, has to make certain assumptions as to the
sizes and distances of the sun and moon and their relation
to the size of the universe, he takes the opportunity of
quoting earlier views. Some have tried, he says, to prove
that the perimeter of the earth is. about 300,000 stades; in
order to be quite safe he will take it to be about ten times
this, or 3,000,000 stades, and not greater. The diameter of
the earth, like most earlier astronomers, he takes to be
greater than that of the moon but less than that of the sun.
Eudoxus, he says, declared the diameter of the sun to be nine
times that of the moon, Phidias, his own father, twelve times,
while Aristarchus tried to prove that it is greater than 18 but
less than 20 times the diameter of the moon; he will again be
on the safe side and take it to be 30 times, but not more. The
position is rather more difficult as regards the ratio of the
distance of the sun to the size of the universe. Here he seizes
upon a dictum of Aristarchus that the sphere of the fixed
stars is so great that the circle in which he supposes the earth
to revolve (round the sun) 'bears such a proportion to the
distance of the fixed stars as the centre of the sphere bears to
its surface \ 
If this is taken in a strictly mathematical sense,
it means that the sphere of the fixed stars is infinite in size,
which would not suit Archimedes's purpose ; to get another
meaning out of it he presses the point that Aristarchus's
words cannot be taken quite literally because the centre, being
without magnitude, cannot be in any ratio to any other mag-
nitude ; hence he suggests that a reasonable interpretation of
the statement would be to suppose that, if we conceive a
sphere with radius equal to the distance between the centre
of the sun and the centre of the earth, then
(diam. of earth): fdiam. of said sphere)
= (diam. of said sphere): (diam. of sphere of fixed stars).
This is, of course, an arbitrary interpretation; Aristarchus
presumably meant no such thing, but merely that the size of
the earth is negligible in comparison with that of the sphere
of the fixed stars. However, the solution of Archimedes's
problem demands some assumption of the kind, and, in making
this assumption, he was no doubt aware that he was taking
a liberty with Aristarchus for the sake of giving his hypo-
thesis an air of authority.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.002 Published online by Cambridge University Press

THE SAND-RECKONER
83
Archimedes has, lastly, to compare the diameter of the sun
with the circumference of the circle described by its centre.
Aristarchus had made the apparent diameter of the sun ^^th
of the said circumference; Archimedes will prove that the
said circumference cannot contain as many as 1,000 sun's
diameters, or that the diameter of the sun is greater than the
side of a regular chiliagon inscribed in the circle. First he
made an experiment of his own to determine the apparent
diameter of the sun. With a small cylinder or disc in a plane
at right angles to a long straight stick and moveable along it,
he observed the sun at the moment when it cleared the
horizon in rising, moving the disc till it just covered and just
failed to cover the sun as he looked along the straight stick.
He thus found the angular diameter to lie between i^R 
and
2^0 R, where R is a right angle. But as, under his assump-
tions, the size of the earth is not negligible in comparison with
the sun's circle, he had to allow for parallax and find limits
for the angle subtended by the sun at the centre of the earth.
This he does by a geometrical argument very much in the
manner of Aristarchus.
Let the circles with centres 0, G represent sections of the sun
and earth respectively, E the position of the observer observing
G 2
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.002 Published online by Cambridge University Press

84 
ARCHIMEDES
the sun when it has just cleared the horizon. Draw from E
two tangents EP, EQ to the circle with centre 0, and from
G let OF, GG be drawn touching the same circle. With centre
G and radius GO describe a circle: this will represent the path
of the centre of the sun round the earth. Let this circle meet
the tangents from C in J., B, and join AB meeting GO in M.
Archimedes's observation has shown that
> Z.PEQ
and he proceeds to prove that AB is less than the side of a
regular polygon of 656 sides inscribed in the circle AOB,
but greater than the side of an inscribed regular polygon of
1,000 sides, in other words, that
The first relation is obvious, for, since GO > E0}
L PEQ > L FGG.
Next, the perimeter of any polygon inscribed in the circle
AOB is less than -^ GO (i.e. ^ times the diameter);
Therefore 
AB < ^ 
• -\«- GO or Tfa °0>
and, a fortiori, 
AB < T ^ GO.
Now, the triangles GAM, GOF being equal in all respects,
AM= OF, so that ^ £ = 2 0 ^ = (diameter of sun) > GH+ OK,
since the diameter of the sun is greater than that of the earth;
therefore 
CH+0K < ^ 0 0 , and HK > -fa CO.
And 
GO > CF, while HK < EQ, so that EQ >
We can now compare the angles 0CF, 0EQ;
10CF r 
tan OGFi
ZOE?QL> t O ^ Q j
EQ
GF
> TO9O) a fortiori.
Doubling the angles, we have
> since I PEQ >
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.002 Published online by Cambridge University Press

THE SAND-RECKONER 
85
Hence AB is greater than the side of a regular polygon of
812 sides, and a fortiori greater than the side of a regular
polygon of 1,000 sides, inscribed in the circle AOB.
The perimeter of the chiliagon, as of any regular polygon
with more sides than six, inscribed in the circle AOB is greater
than 3 times the diameter of the sun's orbit, but is less than
1,000 times the diameter of the sun, and a fortiori less than
30,000 times the diameter of the earth;
therefore (diameter of sun's orbit) < 10,000 (diam. of earth)
< 10,000,000,000 stades.
But (diam. of earth) : (diam. of sun's orbit)
= (diam. of sun's orbit): (diam. of universe);
therefore the universe, or the sphere of the fixed stars, is less
than 10,000s times the sphere in which the sun's orbit is a
great circle.
Archimedes takes a quantity of sand not greater than
a poppy-seed and assumes that it contains not more than 10,000
grains; the diameter of a poppy-seed he takes to be not less
than ^ t h of a finger-breadth; thus a sphere of diameter
1 finger-breadth is not greater than 64,000 poppy-seeds and
therefore contains not more than 640,000,000 grains of sand
(c 6 units of second order + 40,000,000 units of first order')
and a fortiori not more than 1,000,000,000 (' 10 units of
second order of numbers'). Gradually increasing the diameter
of the sphere by multiplying it each time by 100 (making the
sphere 1,000,000 times larger each time) and substituting for
10,000 finger-breadths a stadium (< 10,000 finger-breadths),
he finds the number of grains of sand in a sphere of diameter
10,000,000,000 stadia to be less than ' 1,000 units of seventh
order of numbers' or 1051, and the number in a sphere 10,0003
times this size to be less than ' 10,000,000 units of the eighth
order of numbers' or 1063.
The Quadrature of the Parabola.
In the preface, addressed to Dositheus after the death of
Conon, Archimedes claims originality for the solution of the
problem of finding the area of a segment of a parabola cut off
by any chord, which he says he first discovered by means of
mechanics and then confirmed by means of geometry, using
the lemma that, if there are two unequal areas (or magnitudes
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.002 Published online by Cambridge University Press

86 
ARCHIMEDES
generally), then however small the excess of the greater over
the lesser, it can by being continually added to itself be made
to exceed the greater; in other words, he confirmed the solution
by the method of exhaustion. 
One solution by means of
mechanics is, as we have seen, given in The Method] the
present treatise contains a solution by means of mechanics
confirmed by the method of exhaustion (Props. 1-17), and
then gives an entirely independent solution by means of pure
geometry, also confirmed by exhaustion (Props. 18-24).
I. The mechanical solution depends upon two properties of
the parabola proved in Props. 4, 5. If Qq be the base, and P
the vertex, of a parabolic segment, P is the point of contact
of the tangent parallel to Qq, the diameter PV through P
bisects Qq in F, and, if VP produced meets the tangent at Q
in T, then TP = PV. 
These properties, along with the funda-
mental property that QV2 varies as PV, Archimedes uses to
prove that,, if EO be any parallel to TV meeting QT} QP
(produced, if necessary), the curve, and Qq in E, F, R} Q
respectively, then
QV:VO = OF:FR,
and 
QO:Oq =ER: RO. 
(Props. 45 5.)
Now suppose a parabolic segment QRX q so placed in relation
to a horizontal straight line QA through Q that the diameter
bisecting Qq is at right angles to QA, i.e. vertical, and let the
tangent at Q meet the diameter qO through q in E. Produce
QO to A, making OA equal to OQ.
Divide Qq into any number of equal parts at 0lt 02... 0ni
and through these points draw parallels to OE, i. e. vertical
lines meeting OQ in H19 H2, ..., EQ in E19 E2> ..., and the
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.002 Published online by Cambridge University Press

THE QUADRATURE OF THE PARABOLA 
87
curve in R13 R2, .... Join QRX, and produce it to meet OE in
Fy QR2 meeting 01E1 in Fl9 and so on.
Now Archimedes has proved in a series of propositions
(6-13) that, if a trapezium such as O1E1E2O2 is suspended
from H1H2i and an area P suspended at A balances O1E1E2O2
so suspended, it will take a greater area than P suspended at
A to balance the same trapezium suspended from H2 and
a less area than P to balance the same trapezium suspended
from Hx. 
A similar proposition holds with regard to a triangle
such as EnHnQ suspended where it is and suspended at Q and
Hn respectively.
Suppose (Props. 14, 15) the triangle QqE suspended where
it is from OQ, and suppose that the trapezium E01, suspended
where it is, is balanced by an area I[ suspended at A, the
trapezium Et02) 
suspended where it is, is balanced by P2
suspended at A, and so on, and finally the triangle EnOnQ,
suspended where it is, is balanced by Pn+1 suspended at A;
then Px+P2+ ...+Pn+1&tA 
balances the whole triangle, so that
since the whole triangle may be regarded as suspended from
the point on OQ vertically above its centre of gravity.
Now 
AO:OH1 = QO:OH1
= Qq--qO1
= E&-.0&, 
by Prop. 5,
— (trapezium EO^j: (trapezium FOJ,
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.002 Published online by Cambridge University Press

88 
ARCHIMEDES
that is, it takes the trapezium FOX suspended at A to balance
the trapezium E01 suspended at Hv 
And P1 balances E01
where it is.
Therefore 
{FOJ > Px.
Similarly 
(Fi02) > Pz> a n d s 0 o n-
Again AO:OH1 = E ^ i O ^
= (trapezium Ex02): (trapezium R102),
that is, {Rx0^ at A will balance {Ex02) suspended at HXi
while P2 at A balances (Efi^ suspended where it is,
whence 
P2>
Therefore 
{FM 
> P2 >
(F20z) > P3 > JR2O3, and so on;
and 
finally, 
*En0nQ 
> Pn+1 > ARn0nQ.
By addition,
therefore, a fortiori,
That is to say, we have an inscribed figure consisting of
trapezia and a triangle which is less, and a circumscribed
figure composed in the same way which is greater, than
It is therefore inferred, and proved by the method of ex-
haustion, that the segment itself is equal to § AEqQ (Prop. 16).
In order to enable the method to be applied, it has only
to be proved that, by increasing the number of parts in Qq
sufficiently, the difference between the circumscribed and
inscribed figures can be made as small as we please. This
can be seen thus. We have first to show that all the parts, as
qF, into which qE is divided are equal.
We have E101: 0 ^ = Q0 : 0H1 = (n+ l): 1,
or 
0^! = 
.Eflv 
whence also 028 = ^—. 
02E2.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.002 Published online by Cambridge University Press

THE QUADRATURE OF THE PARABOLA 
89
And 
E2O2: 02R2 = QO : 0H2 = (n+ 1): 2,
or 
O2R2= —-0E2,
2 
2 
n+1 
2 2
It follows that 028 = 8R2, and so on.
Consequently 0xR19 02R2, 03R3... are divided into 1,2, 3 ...
equal parts respectively by the lines from Q meeting qE.
It follows that the difference between the circumscribed and
inscribed figures is equal to the triangle FqQ, which can be
made as small as we please by increasing the number of
divisions in Qqi i.e. in qE.
Since the area of the segment is equal to ^AEqQ, and it is
easily proved (Prop. 17) that AEqQ = 4 (triangle with same
base and equal height with segment), it follows that the area
of the segment = § times the latter triangle.
It is easy to see that this solution is essentially the same as
that given in The Method (see pp. 29-30,-above), only in a more
orthodox form (geometrically speaking). For there Archi-
medes took the sum of all the straight lines, as 01Rl> 
02R2...,
as making up the segment notwithstanding that there are an
infinite number of them and straight lines have no breadth.
Here he takes inscribed and circumscribed trapezia propor-
tional to the straight lines and having finite breadth, and then
compresses the figures together into the segment itself by
increasing indefinitely the number of trapezia in each figure,
i.e. diminishing their breadth indefinitely.
The procedure is equivalent to an integration, thus:
If X denote the area of the triangle FqQ, we have, if n be
the number of parts in Qq,
(circumscribed figure)
= sum of As QqF, QRXF1} QR2F2,...
= sum of As QqF, QO^, 
Q028, ...
Similarly, we find that
(inscribed figure) = ^ - 2 . X {X2 + 2*X2+ ... + (n- 1)2X2}.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.002 Published online by Cambridge University Press

90
AECHIMEDES
Taking the limit, we have, if A denote the area of the
triangle EqQ, so that A — nX,
1 CA
area of segment = -js 
X2dX
A Jo
II. The purely geometrical method simply exhausts the
parabolic segment by inscribing successive figures 'in the
recognized manner' (see p. 79, above). 
For this purpose
it is necessary to find, in terms of the triangle with the same
base and height, the area added to the
inscribed figure by doubling the number of
sides other than the base of the segment.
Let QPq be the triangle inscribed ' in the
recognized manner', P being the point of
contact of the tangent parallel to Qq, and
PV the diameter bisecting Qq. If QF, Vq
be bisected in M, m, and RM, rm be drawn
parallel to PV meeting the curve in R, r,
the latter points are vertices of the next
figure inscribed 'in the recognized manner',
for RY, ry are diameters bisecting PQ, Pq
respectively.
Now QV2 = 4RW2, so that PV = ±PW, or RM = 3PTF.
YM= %PV=2PWy 
so chat YM = 2RY.
APRQ =
But
Therefore
Similarly
= ±APVq; whence (APRQ + APrq)= %PQq. (Prop. 21.)
In like manner it can be proved that the next addition
to the inscribed figure adds J of the sum of As PRQ, Prq,
and so on.
Therefore the area of the inscribed figure
= {1 + i + (i)2 + . . . } . AP(&. 
(Prop. 22.)
Further, each addition to the inscribed figure is greater
than half the segments of the parabola left over before the
addition is made. For, if we draw the tangent at P and
complete the parallelogram EQqe with side EQ parallel to PV,
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.002 Published online by Cambridge University Press

THE QUADRATURE OF THE PARABOLA 
91
the triangle PQq is half of the parallelogram and therefore
more than half the segment. And so on (Prop. 20).
We now have to sum n terms of the above geometrical
series. Archimedes enunciates the problem in the form, Given
a series of areas A, B, C, D ... Z, of which A is the greatest, and
each is equal to four times the next in order, then (Prop. 23)
The algebraical equivalent of this is of course
To find the area of the segment, Archimedes, instead of
taking the limit, as we should, uses the method of reductio ad
abmrdum.
Suppose 
K = | . APQq.
(1) If possible, let the area of the segment be greater than K.
We then inscribe a figure ' in the recognized manner' such
that the segment exceeds it by an area less than the excess of
the segment over K. 
Therefore the inscribed figure must be
greater than K, which is impossible since
where A = APQq (Prop. 23).
(2) If possible, let the area of the segment be less than K.
If then APQq = A, B — \A, C = ±B, and so on, until we
arrive at an area X less than the excess of K over the area of
the segment, we have
A+B + C+ ... +X+IX = §A = K.
Thus K exceeds A + B + C+ ... -fXbyan area less than X,
and exceeds the segment by an area greater than X.
It follows that A+B + C+ ... + X > (the segment); which
is impossible (Prop. 22).
Therefore the area of the segment, being neither greater nor
less than K, is equal to K or f APQq.
On Floating Bodies, I, II.
In Book I of this treatise Archimedes lays down the funda-
mental principles of the science of hydrostatics. These are
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.002 Published online by Cambridge University Press

92 
ARCHIMEDES
deduced from Postulates which are only two in number. The
first which begins Book I is this:
' let it be assumed that a fluid is of such a nature that, of the
parts of it which lie evenly and are continuous, that which is
pressed the less is driven along by that which is pressed the
more; and each of its parts is pressed by the fluid which is
perpendicularly above it except when the fluid is shut up in
anything and pressed by something else';
the second, placed after Prop. 7, says
' let it be assumed that, of bodies which are borne upwards in
a fluid, each is borne upwards along the perpendicular drawn
through its centre of gravity \
Prop. 1 is a preliminary proposition about a sphere, and
then Archimedes plunges in medias res with the theorem
(Prop. 2) that ' the surface of any fluid at rest is a sphere the
centre of which is the same as that of the earth \ and in the
whole of Book I the surface of the fluid is always shown in
the diagrams as spherical. The method of proof is similar to
what we should expect in a modern elementary textbook, the
main propositions established being the following. A solid
which, size for size, is of equal weight with a fluid will, if let
down into the fluid, sink till it is just covered but not lower
(Prop. 3); a solid lighter than a fluid will, if let down into it,
be only partly immersed, in fact just so far that the weight
of the solid is equal to the weight of the fluid displaced
(Props. 4, 5), and, if it is forcibly immersed, it will be driven
upwards by a force equal to the difference between its weight
and the weight of the fluid displaced (Prop. 6).
The important proposition follows (Prop. 7) that a solid
heavier than a fluid will, if placed in it, sink to the bottom of
the fluid, and the solid will, when weighed in the fluid, be
lighter than its true weight by the weight of the fluid
displaced.
The problem of the Grown.
This proposition gives a method of solving the famous
problem the discovery of which in his bath sent Archimedes
home naked crying evprjtca, evprjKa, namely the problem of
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.002 Published online by Cambridge University Press

ON FLOATING BODIES, I 
93
determining the proportions of gold and silver in a certain
crown.
Let W be the weight of the crown, w1 and w2 the weights of
the gold and silver in it respectively, so that W = wx + w2.
(1) Take a weight IF of pure gold and weigh it in the fluid.
The apparent loss of weight is then equal to the weight of the
fluid displaced ; this is ascertained by weighing. Let it be Fr.
It follows that the weight of the fluid displaced by a weight
Wi of gold is ^ . Fr
(2) Take a weight W of silver, and perform the same
operation. Let the weight of the fluid displaced be F2.
Then the weight of the fluid displaced by a weight w2 of
silver is ^ • F2.
(3) Lastly weigh the crown itself in the fluid, and let F be
loss of weight or the weight of the fluid displaced.
We have then 
^ . F x + ^ . F 2 = F,
that is, 
w1 F1 + w2F2= \wx + w2) F,
w 
F2-F
whence 
—x = ^ - r r -
w2 
F-J^l
According to the author of the poem de ponderibus et men-
suris (written probably about A.D. 500) Archimedes actually
used a method of this kind. We first take, says our authority,
two equal weights of gold and silver respectively and weigh
them against each other when both are immersed in water;
this gives the relation between their weights in water, and
therefore between their losses of weight in water. Next we
take the mixture of gold and silver and an equal weight of
silver, and weigh them against each other in water in the
same way.
Nevertheless I do not think it probable that this was the
way in which the solution of the problem was discovered. As
we are told that Archimedes discovered it in his bath, and
that he noticed that, if the bath was full when he entered it,
so much water overflowed as was displaced by his body, he is
more likely to have discovered the solution by the alternative
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.002 Published online by Cambridge University Press

94 
ARCHIMEDES
method attributed to him by Vitruvius,1 namely by measuring
successively the volumes of fluid displaced by three equal
weights, (1) the crown, (2) an equal weight of gold, (3) an
equal weight of silver respectively. Suppose, as before, that
the weight of the crown is W and that it contains weights
wx and w2 of gold and silver respectively. Then
(1) the crown displaces a certain volume of the fluid, F, say;
(2) the weight W of gold displaces a volume Vv say, of the
fluid;
therefore a weight wx of gold displaces a volume ^ . V1 of
the fluid ;
(3) the weight W of silver displaces V29 say, of the fluid;
therefore a weight w2 of silver displaces ^ - V2.
01) 
Q(J
It follows that 
V = -^ • Fx + ^ • Vv
whence we derive (since W = w1 + w2)
wx_ 
V2-V
w2 ~ V- V,'
the latter ratio being obviously equal to that obtained by the
other method.
The last propositions (8 and 9) of Book I deal with the case
of any segment of a sphere lighter than a fluid and immersed
in it in such a way that either (1) the curved surface is down-
wards and the base is entirely outside the fluid, or (2) the
curved surface is upwards and the base is entirely submerged,
and it is proved that in either case the segment is in stable
equilibrium when the axis is vertical. This is expressed here
and in the corresponding propositions of Book II by saying
that, ' if the figure be forced into such a position that the base
of the segment touches the fluid (at one point), the figure will
not remain inclined but will return to the upright position \
Book II, which investigates fully the conditions of stability
of a right segment of a paraboloid of revolution floating in
a fluid for different values of the specific gravity and different
ratios between the axis or height of the segment and the
1 De architecture ix. 3.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.002 Published online by Cambridge University Press

ON FLOATING BODIES, I, II 
95
principal parameter of the generating parabola, is a veritable
tour de force which must be read in full to be appreciated.
Prop. 1 is preliminary, to the effect that, if a solid lighter than
a fluid be at rest in it, the weight of the solid will be to that
of the same volume of the fluid as the immersed portion of
the solid is to the whole. The results of the propositions
about the segment of a paraboloid may be thus summarized.
Let h be the axis or height of the segment, p the principal
parameter of the generating parabola, s the ratio of the
specific gravity of the solid to that of the fluid (s always < 1).
The segment is supposed to be always placed so that its base
is either entirely above, or entirely below, the surface of the
fluid, and what Archimedes proves in each case is that, if
the segment is so placed with its axis inclined to the vertical
at any angle, it will not rest there but will return to the
position of stability.
I. If h is not greater than %p, the position of stability is with
the axis vertical, whether the curved surface is downwards or
upwards (Props. 2, 3).
II. If h is greater than f p, then, in order that the position of
stability may be with the axis vertical, s must be not less
than (h — %p)2/h2 if the curved surface is downwards, and not
greater than {h2 — (h — \pf)/lfi2 
if the curved surface is
upwards (Props. 4, 5).
III. If h>lp, but A/Jp<15/4, the segment, if placed with
one point of the base touching the surface, will never remain
there whether the curved surface be downwards or upwards
(Props. 6, 7). (The segment will move in the direction of
bringing the axis nearer to the vertical position.)
IV. If h>%p, but h/%p<15/4> 
and if s is less than
(h—^p)2/h2 in the case where the curved surface is down-
wards, but greater than {h2— (h — ip)2}/h2 
in the case where
the curved surface is upwards, then the position of stability is
one in which the axis is not vertical but inclined to the surface
of the fluid at a certain angle (Props. 8, 9). (The angle is drawn
in an auxiliary figure. The construction for it in Prop. 8 is
equivalent to the solution of the following equation in 0,
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.002 Published online by Cambridge University Press

96
ARCHIMEDES
where k is the axis of the segment of the paraboloid cut off by
the surface of the fluid.)
V. Prop. 10 investigates the positions of stability in the cases
where h/%p> 15/4, the base is entirely above the surface, and
s has values lying between five pairs of ratios respectively.
Only in the case where s is not less than (h — %p)2/h2 is the
position of stability that in which the axis is vertical.
BAB1 is a section of the paraboloid through the axis AM.
C is a point on AM such that AC — 2 CM, K is a point on CA
such that AM:CK =15:4. 
CO is measured along CA such
that CO = \p, and R is a point on AM such that ME = f 00.
A2 is the point in which the perpendicular to AM from K
meets AB, and A3 is the middle point of AB. ' BA2B2, BAZM
are parabolic segments on A2M2, ASM3 (parallel to AM) as axes
and similar to the original segment. 
(The parabola BA2B2
is proved to pass through 0 by using the above relation
AM: GK = 15:4 and applying Prop. 4 of the Quadrature of
the Parabola.) The perpendicular to AM from 0 meets the
parabola BA2B2 in two points P 2, Q2, and straight lines
through these points parallel to AM meet the other para-
bolas in P1? Q1 and P3, Qs respectively. P^T and Q^ U are
tangents to the original parabola meeting the axis MA pro-
duced in T, U. Then
(i) if s is not less than AR2:AM2 or (h-%p)2:h2, there is
stable equilibrium when AM is vertical;
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.002 Published online by Cambridge University Press

THE CATTLE-PROBLEM 
97
(ii) if 8 < AR2: AM2 but > Q1Q3
2: AM2, the solid will not rest
with its base touching the surface of the fluid in one point
only, but in a position with the base entirely out of the fluid
and the axis making with the surface an angle greater
than U ;
(iiia) if s = QXQ2'. AM2, there is stable equilibrium with one
point of the base touching the surface and AM inclined to it
at an angle equal to U;
(iiib) if s = i ^ i y : AM2, there is stable equilibrium with one
point of the base touching the surface and with AM inclined
to it at an angle equal to T\
(iv) if s>P1P2:AM2 
but <QXQ2:AM2, there will be stable
equilibrium in a position in which the base is more submerged ;
(v) if SKP^^IAM2, 
there will be stable equilibrium with
the base entirely out of the fluid and with the axis AM
inclined to the surface at an angle less than T.
It remains to mention the traditions regarding other in-
vestigations by Archimedes which have reached us in Greek
or through the Arabic.
(a) The Cattle-Problem,.
This is a difficult problem in indeterminate analysis. It is
required to find the number of bulls and cows of each of four
colours, or to find 8 unknown quantities. The first part of
the problem connects the unknowns by seven simple equations;
and the second part adds two more conditions to which the
unknowns must be subject. If W, w be the numbers of white
bulls and cows respectively and (X, x), (F, y), (Z, z) represent
the numbers of the other three colours, we have first the
following equations:
(I) 
W=(i + l)X+Y, 
(a)
X = (4 + T) Z+Y, 
(/3)
Z =(i + i)W+Y, 
(y)
(0
(v)
H
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.002 Published online by Cambridge University Press

98 
ARCHIMEDES
Secondly, it is required that
W+X = a square, 
(0)
Y+Z = a triangular number. 
(i)
There is an ambiguity in the text which makes it just possible
that W+X need only be the product of two whole numbers
instead of a square as in (0). Jul. Fr. Wurm solved the problem
in the simpler form to which this change reduces it. The
complete problem is discussed and partly solved by Amthor.1
The general solution of the first seven equations is
W= 2.3.7 . 5 3 . 4657 n = 1036648271,
X— 2.3 2. 89. 465771 
= 746051471,
Y= 3 4. 11.4657W, 
= 414938791,
Z — 22. 5.79.4657^1 
= 
735806071,
W— 23. 3. 5.7.23.373n= 
720636071,
x = 2. 3 2. 17. 1599171 = 
489324671,
y = 3 2.13. 4648971 
= 
543921371,
2 = 22. 3. 5.7.11.76171= 
351582071.
It is not difficult to find such a value of n that W+ X = a
square number; it is n = 3 .11. 29 . 4657£2 = 4456749£2,
where £ is any integer. 
We then have to make Y+Z
a triangular number, i.e. a number of the form •!?(?+1).
This reduces itself to the solution of the * Pellian' equation
£2-4729494u2 = 1,
which leads to prodigious figures; one of the eight unknown
quantities alone would have more than 206,500 digits!
(j8) On semi-regular polyhedra.
In addition, Archimedes investigated polyhedra of a certain
type. This we learn from Pappus.2 The polyhedra in question
are semi-regular, being contained by equilateral and equi-
1 Zeitschrift fur Math, u. Physik (Hist.-litt. Abt.) xxv. (1880), pp.
156 sqq.
2 Pappus, v, pp. 352-8.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.002 Published online by Cambridge University Press

ON SEMI-REGULAR POLYHEDRA 
99
angular, but not similar, polygons; those discovered by
Archimedes were 13 in number. 
If we for convenience
designate a polyhedron contained by m regular polygons
of oc sides, n regular polygons of /3 sides, &c, by (ma, %...),
the thirteen Archimedean polyhedra, which we will denote by
Pv P2 ... P1S, are as follows:
Figure with 
8 faces: Px = (43, 46).
Figures with 14 faces: P2 = (83, 64), P3 = (64, 86),
P* = (88, 68).
Figures with 26 faces: P5 = (83, 184), P6 = (124> 86, 68).
Figures with 32 faces: P7 = (203, 125), P8 = (125, 206),
P9 = (203, 1210).
Figure with 38 faces: P10= (323, 64).
Figures with 62 faces: P n = (203, 304, 125),
P]2 = (304,206J1210).
Figure with 92 faces: P13 = (803, 125).
Kepler1 showed how these figures can be obtained. A
method of obtaining some of them is indicated in a fragment
of a scholium to the Vatican MS. of Pappus. If a solid
angle of one of the regular solids be cut off symmetrically by
a plane, i.e. in such a way that the plane cuts off the same
length from each of the edges meeting at the angle, the
section is a regular polygon which is a triangle, square or
pentagon according as the solid angle is formed of three, four,
or five plane angles. If certain equal portions be so cut off
from all the solid angles respectively, they will leave regular
polygons inscribed in the faces of the solid; this happens
(A) when the cutting planes bisect the sides of the faces and
so leave in each face a polygon of the same kind, and (B) when
the cutting planes cut off a smaller portion from each angle in
such a way that a regular polygon is left in each face which
has double the number of sides (as when we make, say, an
octagon out of a square by cutting off the necessary portions,
1 Kepler, Harmonice mundi in Opera (1864), v, pp. 123-6.
H2
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.002 Published online by Cambridge University Press

100
ARCHIMEDES
symmetrically, from the corners). We have seen that, accord-
ing to Heron, two of the semi-regular solids had already been
discovered by Plato, and this would doubtless be his method.
The methods (A) and (B) applied to the five regular solids
give the following out of the 13 semi-regular solids. We
obtain (1) from the tetrahedron, Px by cutting off angles
so as to leave hexagons in the faces ; (2) from the cube, P2 by
leaving squares, and P4 by leaving octagons, in the faces;
(3) from the octahedron, P2 by leaving triangles, and P3 by
leaving hexagons, in the faces; (4) from the icosahedron,
P7 by leaving triangles, and P8 by leaving hexagons, in the
faces; (5) from the dodecahedron, P7 by leaving pentagons,
and P9 by leaving decagons in the faces.
Of the remaining six, four are obtained by cutting off all
the edges symmetrically and equally by planes parallel to the
edges, and then cutting off angles. Take first the cube.
(1) Cut off from each four parallel edges portions which leave
an octagon as the section of the figure perpendicular to the
edges; then cut off equilateral triangles from the corners
(see Fig. 1); this gives P5 containing 8 equilateral triangles
and 18 squares. (P5 is also obtained by bisecting all the
edges of P2 and cutting off corners.) 
(2) Cut off from the
edges of the cube a smaller portion so as to leave in each
face a square such that the octagon described in it has its
side equal to the breadth of the section in which each edge is
cut; then cut off hexagons from each angle (see Fig. 2); this
FIG. 1.
FIG. 2.
gives 6 octagons in the faces, 12 squares under the edges and
8 hexagons at the corners; that is, we have P6. An exactly
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.002 Published online by Cambridge University Press

ON SEMI-REGULAR POLYHEDRA
101
similar procedure with the icosahedron and dodecahedron
produces Pn and P12 (see Figs. 3, 4 for the case of the icosa-
hedron).
FIG. 3.
FIG. 4.
The two remaining solids P10, Pl3 cannot be so simply pro-
duced. They are represented in Figs. 5, 6, which T have
FIG. 5.
FIG. 6.
taken from Kepler. P10 is the snub cube in which each
solid angle is formed by the angles of four equilateral triangles
and one square; P1Z is the snub dodecahedron, each solid
angle of which is formed by the angles of four equilateral
triangles and one regular pentagon.
We are indebted to Arabian tradition for
(y) The Liber 
Assumptorum.
Of the theorems contained in this collection many are
so elegant as to afford a presumption that they may really
be due to Archimedes. In three of them the figure appears
which was called ap/3r]\o$, a shoemaker's knife, consisting of
three semicircles with a common diameter as shown in the
annexed figure. If N be the point at which the diameters
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.002 Published online by Cambridge University Press

102
ARCHIMEDES
of the two smaller semicircles adjoin, and NP be drawn at
right angles to AB meeting the external semicircle in P, the
area of the dp^Xos (included between the three semicircular
arcs) is equal to the circle on PN as diameter (Prop. 4). In
Prop. 5 it is shown that, if a circle be described in the space
between the arcs AP, AN and the straight line PN touching
all three, and if a circle be similarly described in the space
between the arcs PB, NB and the straight line PN touching
all three, the two circles are equal. If one circle be described
in the apPrjXos touching all three semicircles, Prop. 6 shows
that, if the ratio of AN to NB be given, we can find the
relation between the diameter of the circle inscribed to the
apftrjXos and the straight line AB; the proof is for the parti-
cular case AN = %BN, and shows that the diameter of the
inscribed circle = -£QAB.
Prop. 8 is of interest in connexion with the problem of
trisecting any angle. If AB be any chord of a circle with
centre 0, and BG on AB produced be made equal to the radius,
draw GO meeting the circle in D, E; then will the arc BD be
one-third of the arc AE (or BF, if EF be the chord through E
parallel to AB). 
The problem is by this theorem reduced to
a vevaris (cf. vol. i, p. 241).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.002 Published online by Cambridge University Press

THE LIBER ASSUMPTORUM
103
Lastly, we may mention the elegant theorem about the
area of the Salinon (presumably 'salt-cellar') in Prop. 14.
AGB is a semicircle on AB as diameter, AD, EB are equal
lengths measured from A and B on AB. 
Semicircles are
drawn with AD, EB as diameters on the side towards C, and
a semicircle with DE as diameter is drawn on the other side of
AB. 
CF is the perpendicular to AB through Q, the centre
of the semicircles ACB, DFE. 
Then is the area bounded by
all the semicircles (the Salinon) equal to the circle on CF
as diameter.
The Arabians, through whom the Book of Lemmas l^as
reached us, attributed to Archimedes other works (1) on the
Circle, (2) on the Heptagon in a Circle, (3) on Circles touch-
ing one another, (4) on Parallel Lines, (5) on Triangles, (6) on
the properties of right-angled triangles, (7) a book of Data,
(8) De clepsydris: statements which we are not in a position
to check. But the author of a book on the finding of chords
in a circle,1 Abu'l Raihan Muh. al-Biruni, quotes some alterna-
tive proofs as coming from the first of these works.
(8) Formula for area of triangle.
More important, however, is the mention in this same work
of Archimedes as the discoverer of two propositions hitherto
attributed to Heron, the first being the problem of finding
the perpendiculars of a triangle when the sides are given, and
the second the famous formula for the area of a triangle in
terms of the sides,
^
)
See Biblioiheca mathematica, xi3, pp. 11-78.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.002 Published online by Cambridge University Press

104 
ERATOSTHENES
Long as the preeent chapter is, it is nevertheless the most
appropriate place for ERATOSTHENES of Cyrene. It was to him
that Archimedes dedicated The Method, and the Cattle-Problem
purports, by its heading, to have been sent through him to
the mathematicians of Alexandria. It is evident from the
preface to The Method that Archimedes thought highly of his
mathematical ability. He was, indeed, recognized by his con-
temporaries as a man of great distinction in all branches of
knowledge, though in each subject he just fell short of the
highest place. On the latter ground he was called Beta, and
another nickname applied to him, Pentathlos, has the same
implication, representing as it does an all-round athlete who
was not the first runner or wrestler but took the second prize
in these contests as well as in others. He was very little
younger than Archimedes; the date of his birth was probably
284 B.C. or thereabouts. He was a pupil of the philosopher
Ariston of Chios, the grammarian Lysanias of Cyrene, and
the poet Callimachus ; he is said also to have been a pupil of
Zeno the Stoic, and he may have come under the influence of
Arcesilaus at Athens, where he spent a considerable time.
Invited, when about 40 years of age, by Ptolemy Euergetes
to be tutor to his son (Philopator), he became librarian at
Alexandria; his obligation to Ptolemy he recognized by the
column which he erected with a graceful epigram inscribed on
it. This is the epigram, with which we are already acquainted
(vol. i, p. 260), relating to the solutions, discovered up to date,
of the problem of the duplication of the cube, and commend-
ing his own method by means of an appliance called fiecroXafiov,
itself represented in bronze on the column.
Eratosthenes wrote a book with the title IlXaTcoviKos, and,
whether it was a sort of commentary on the Timaeus of
Plato, or a dialogue in which the principal part was played by
Plato, it evidently dealt with the fundamental notions of
mathematics in connexion with Plato's philosophy. It was
naturally one of the important sources of Theon of Smyrna's
work on the mathematical matters which it was necessary for
the student of Plato to know ; and Theon cites the work
twice by name. It seems to have begun with the famous
problem of Delos, telling the story quoted by Theon how the
god required, as a means of stopping a plague, that the altar
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.002 Published online by Cambridge University Press

PLATONIGUS 
AND ON MEANS 
105
there, which was cubical in form, should be doubled in size.
The book evidently contained a disquisition on proportion
(avaXoyia)) a quotation by Theon on this subject shows that
Eratosthenes incidentally dealt with the fundamental defini-
tions of geometry and arithmetic. 
The principles of music
were discussed in the same work.
We have already described Eratosthenes's solution of the
problem of Delos, and his contribution to the theory of arith-
metic by means of his sieve (KOGKIVOV) for finding successive
prime numbers.
He wrote also an independent work On "means. This was in
two Books, and was important enough to be mentioned by
Pappus along with works by Euclid, Aristaeus and Apol-
lonius as forming part of the Treasury of Analysis1) 
this
proves that it was a systematic geometrical treatise. Another
passage of Pappus speaks of certain loci which Eratosthenes
called 'loci with reference to means' (TOTTOL irpbs /zeoror^ras)2;
these were presumably discussed in the treatise in question.
What kind of loci these were is quite uncertain; Pappus (if it
is not an interpolator who speaks) merely says that these loci
' belong to the aforesaid classes of loci', but as the classes are
numerous (includingc plane',' solid',' linear',' loci on surfaces \
&c.)j we are none the wiser. Tannery conjectured that they
were loci of points such that their distances from three fixed
straight lines furnished a 'm^di^t^', i.e. loci (straight lines
and conies) which we should represent in trilinear coordinates
by such equations as 2y = x + z, y*=xz, 
y(x + z) = 2x2,
xix — y) — z{y — z)> xi® — y) — y(y — z)> the ^rs^ three equations
representing the arithmetic, geometric and harmonic means,
while the last two represent the ' subcontraries' to the
harmonic and geometric means respectively. 
Zeuthen has
a different conjecture.3 
He points out that, if QQ' be the
polar of a given point C with reference to a conic, and CPOP'
be drawn through 0 meeting QQ' in 0 and the conic in P, P',
then GO is the harmonic mean to CP, CP'; the locus of 0 for
all transversals GPP' is then the straight line QQ'. If A, G
are points on PPr such that CA is the arithmetic, and GG the
1 Pappus, vii, p. 636. 24. 
2 26., p. 662. 15 sq.
8 Zeuthen, Die Lehre von den Kegelschnitten im Altertum, 1886, pp.
320, 321.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.002 Published online by Cambridge University Press

106
ERATOSTHENES
geometric mean between CP, CP', the loci of A, G respectively
are conies. 
Zeuthen therefore suggests that these loci and
the corresponding loci of the points on CPP' at a distance
from C equal to the subcontraries of the geometric and
harmonic means between GP and CP' are the floci with
reference to means' of Eratosthenes; the latter two loci are
'linear', i.e. higher curves than conies. Needless to say, we
have no confirmation of this conjecture.
Eratosthenes*s measurement of the Earth.
But the most famous scientific achievement of Eratosthenes
was his measurement of the earth. Archimedes mentions, as
we have seen, that some had tried to prove that the circum-
ference of the earth is about 300,000 stades. 
This was
evidently the measurement based on observations made at
Lysimachia (on the Hellespont) and Syene. It was observed
that, while both these places were on one meridian, the head
of Draco was in the zenith at Lysimachia, and Cancer in the
zenith at Syene; the arc of the meridian separating the two
in the heavens was taken to be 1/I5th of the complete circle.
The distance between the two towns
was estimated at 20,000 stades, and
accordingly the whole circumference of
the earth was reckoned at 300,000
stades. Eratosthenes improved on this.
He observed (1) that at Syene, at
noon, at the summer solstice, the
sun cast no shadow from an upright
gnomon (this was confirmed by the
observation that a well dug at the
same place was entirely lighted up at
the same time), while (2) at the same moment the gnomon fixed
upright at Alexandria (taken to be on the same meridian with
Syene) cast a shadow corresponding to an angle between the
gnomon and the sun's rays of l/50th of a complete circle or
four right angles. The sun's rays are of course assumed to be
parallel at the two places represented by S and A in the
annexed figure. If a be the angle made at A by the sun's rays
with the gnomon (OA produced), the angle SO A is also equal to
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.002 Published online by Cambridge University Press

MEASUREMENT OF THE EARTH 
107
a, or l/50th of four right angles. Now the distance from 8
to A was known by measurement to be 5,000 stades; it
followed that the circumference of the earth was 250,000
stades. This is the figure given by Cleomedes, but Theon of
Smyrna and Strabo both give it as 252,000 stades. The
reason of the discrepancy is not known; it is possible that
Eratosthenes corrected 250,000 to 252,000 for some reason,
perhaps in order to get a figure divisible by 60 and, inci-
dentally, a round number (700) of stades for one degree- If
Pliny is right in saying that Eratosthenes made 40 stades
equal to the Egyptian a^olvos, then, taking the o-ypwos at
12,000 Royal cubits of 0-525 metres, we get 300 such cubits,
or 157-5 metres, i.e. 516-73 feet, as the length of the stade.
On this basis 252,000 stades works out to 24,662 miles, and
the diameter of the earth to about 7,850 miles, only 50 miles
shorter than the true polar diameter, a surprisingly close
approximation, however much it owes to happy accidents
in the calculation.
We learn from Heron's Dioptra that the measurement of
the earth by Eratosthenes was given in a separate work On
the Measurement of the Earth. According to Galen1 this work
dealt generally with astronomical or mathematical geography,
treating of ' the size of the equator, the distance of the tropic
and polar circles, the extent of the polar zone, the size and
distance of the sun and moon, total and partial eclipses of
these heavenly bodies, changes in the length of the day
according to the different latitudes and seasons'. Several
details are preserved elsewhere of results obtained by
Eratosthenes, which were doubtless contained in this work.
He is supposed to have estimated the distance between the
tropic circles or twice the obliquity of the ecliptic at ll/83rds
of a complete circle or 47° 42' 39"; but from Ptolemy's
language on this subject it is not clear that this estimate was
not Ptolemy's own. What Ptolemy says is that he himself
found the distance between the tropic circles to lie always
between 47° 40' and 47° 45', 'from which we obtain about
(a-^eSov) the same ratio as that of Eratosthenes, which
Hipparchus also used. For the distance between the tropics
becomes (or is found to be, yiverai) very nearly 11 parts
Galen, Instit. Logica, 12 (p. 26 Kalbfleisch).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.002 Published online by Cambridge University Press

108 
ERATOSTHENES
out of 83 contained in the whole meridian circle'.1 The
mean of Ptolemy's estimates, 47° 42' 30", is of course nearly
ll/83rds of 360°. It is consistent with Ptolemy's language
to suppose that Eratosthenes adhered to the value of the
obliquity of the ecliptic discovered before Euclid's time,
namely 24°, and Hipparchus does, in his extant Commentary
on the Phaenomena of Aratus and Eudoxus, say that the
summer tropic is ' very nearly 24° north of the equator'.
The Doxographi state that Eratosthenes estimated the
distance of the moon from the earth at 780,000 stades and
the distance of the sun from the earth at 804,000,000 stades
(the versions of Stobaeus and Joannes Lydus admit 4,080,000
as an alternative for the latter figure, but this obviously
cannot be right). Macrobius2 says that Eratosthenes made
the 'measure' of the sun to be 27 times that of the earth.
It is not certain whether measure means 'solid content' or
' diameter' in this case; the other figures on record make the
former more probable, in which case the diameter of the sun
would be three times that of the earth. Macrobius also tells
us that Eratosthenes's estimates of the distances of the sun
and moon were obtained by means of lunar eclipses.
Another observation by Eratosthenes, namely that at Syene
(which is under the summer tropic) and throughout a circle
round it with a radius of 300 stades the upright gnomon
throws no shadow at noon, was afterwards made use of by
Posidonius in his calculation of the size of the sun. Assuming
that the circle in which the sun apparently moves round the
earth is 10,000 times the size of a circular section of the earth
through its centre, and combining with this hypothesis the
datum just mentioned, Posidonius arrived at 3,000,000 stades
as the diameter of the sun.
Eratosthenes wrote a poem called Hermes containing a good
deal of descriptive astronomy; only fragments of this have
survived. The work Catasterismi (literally ' placings among
the stars') which is extant can hardly be genuine in the form
in which it has reached us; it goes back, however, to a genuine
work by Eratosthenes which apparently bore the same name;
alternatively it is alluded to as KardXoyoi or by the general
1 Ptolemy, Ayntaxis, i. 12, pp. 67. 22-68. 6.
2 Macrobius, In Somn. Scip. i. 20. 9.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.002 Published online by Cambridge University Press

ASTRONOMY, ETC. 
109
word 'Ao-Tpovofita (Suidas), which latter word is perhaps a mis-
take for 'Ao-rpoOeo-ca corresponding to the title 'Aorrpodeo-Lcu
gcoSicov found in the manuscripts. The work as we have it
contains the story, mythological and descriptive, of the con-
stellations, &c, under forty-four heads; there is little or
nothing belonging to astronomy proper.
Eratosthenes is also famous as the first to attempt a scientific
chronology beginning from the siege of Troy; this was the
subject of his Xpovoypa(f)iaif with which must be connected
the separate 'OXv/nriouiKaL in several books. 
Clement of
Alexandria gives a short resume of the main results of the
former work, and both works were largely used by Apollo-
dorus. Another lost work was on the Octaeteris (or eight-
years' period), which is twice mentioned, by Geminus and
Achilles; from the latter we learn that Eratosthenes re-
garded the work on the same subject attributed to Eudoxus
as not genuine. His Geographica in three books is mainly
known to us through Suidas's criticism of it. It began with
a history of geography down to his own time; Eratosthenes
then proceeded to mathematical geography, the spherical form
of the earth, the negligibility in comparison with this of the
unevennesses caused by mountains and valleys, the changes of
features due to floods, earthquakes and the like. It would
appear from Theon of Smyrna's allusions that Eratosthenes
estimated the height of the highest mountain to be 10 stades
or about 1/8000th part of the diameter of the earth.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.002 Published online by Cambridge University Press

