trays of philosophy and science. For its genre this is an unusual book,
not least, though engagingly, for the virtually ‘actual’ presence of its
author on every page. Ted Honderich’s checklists and their interrela-
tions should provide themes for many seminars to come.
Alastair Hannay
This review first published online 12 November 2014
Are You an Illusion?
By Mary Midgley,
Acumen 2014, pp. viii + 167, £12.99
ISBN-13: 978-1844657926
doi:10.1017/S0031819114000278
Mary Midgley asks: ‘How has it come about that a number of highly
educated and sophisticated scholars – people dedicated to the life of
the mind – are now claiming that their own minds, and other
people’s minds too, do not exist?’ (149). She shows by quotations
that that they really do make these claims. And she argues that they
are not just adopting a colourful way of speaking; their claims consti-
tute a myth by which people are starting to live (4), and one which not
only conflicts with common sense (36) but impedes our attempts to
unify discordant strands within ourselves and to arrive at satisfactory
relations with the rest of nature.
‘In a very fundamental way’, she quotes J. Westerhof as saying in
New Scientist, ‘we are not real. Instead, our self is comparable to an
illusion – but without anyone there that experiences the illusion’
(24). How do writers today fail to see an absurdity here that was
obvious to Descartes and before him to Augustine? In the seven-
teenth century Western Europeans conceived the world as made
up, ultimately, of spirit and matter. Matter was intrinsically power-
less and inert; spirit provided organising force – the Creator was a
spirit – and also a space ‘on which the inner life of human beings
could go on’ – our minds or souls were spirits (12, 114). This view
was grounded in Christianity. But Christianity became ‘politically
unpopular’, Midgley suggests, for causing religious wars and for
making compromises with oppressive regimes (12, 140). First God
was discarded, and more recently spirits generally in a rage of ‘intel-
lectual spring cleaning’: philosophers campaigned ‘to solve the mind-
body problem by removing the mind’ (13). It proved impossible,
however, to live without religion. For some people physical science
takes its place: they ‘believe in’ it as from Galileo’s day to Darwin’s
328
Reviews
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0031819114000278 Published online by Cambridge University Press

people ‘believed in’ God. Steven Weinberg calls for the building of
Supercolliders as ‘the cathedrals of our age’ (4). Mechanistic materi-
alism is ‘professed by scientists and many other people today in the
half-casual way in which people used formerly to recite the
Christian creeds’ (149).
Although, however, the reciters may think they are saying merely
that human souls are an illusion left over from Christianity, in fact
they are saying that it is an illusion that thinking can affect the
world. As Francis Crick observed, what is actually at issue is free
will: ‘something that is believed to be science is clashing here with
the irremovable practical principles by which we live our lives’ (22,
36–8). By ‘free will’ she means ‘not a general licence to escape caus-
ality but, as we normally understand the word, a sense that our
efforts can be genuinely effective’ (38). We think we can affect and
change the world by trying. It is impossible to live without thinking
this, and those who declare that all our behaviour is determined by
physical causes, nevertheless try to find valuable documents they
lose (111), and exhort the rest of us to try to do science and
abandon
superstition.
They
are
imprisoned
in
a
kind
of
schizophrenia.
A central doctrine in modern materialism is that there is no purpose
either in human action or elsewhere in nature. Officially natural selec-
tion is supposed to do the organising work formerly done by God.
That it and the laws of particle physics alone, however, are sufficient
between them to account for the evolution of the species we see
around us is hard to believe, especially as the laws of physics are
applied in a mathematicised world, deprived of time and change
(136–8). Midgley points out that in practice people sneak purpose
back into it in various ways. An animistic account is given of genes.
Genes are not, in fact, physical realities but abstract objects, patterns
or structures that physical entities exemplify; but this is overlooked,
and they are credited with a purpose, self-replication, and rather dis-
agreeable moral characteristics. ‘This lush mythology of gene-selfish-
ness’, as Midgley puts it (82–3), ‘supplies the teleological jam that is
needed to make thin scientific stories like this go down.’ Then when
human beings appear to do things just for fun, or to benefit their
friends, or to preserve their society, it is claimed that their action is
really aimed at their good as individuals, that is, at survival and repro-
duction. This involves a systematic confusion of purpose and conse-
quence; the alleged consequences – being helped by others and self-
replication – are taken as what the agent really wants (63).
Midgley quotes Darwin more often than anyone else, and particu-
larly passages in his writing that make Darwinians today blush, like
329
Reviews
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0031819114000278 Published online by Cambridge University Press

his admission of ‘the difficulty or rather impossibility of conceiving
this immense and wonderful universe, including man, with his cap-
acity of looking far backward and far into futurity, as the result of
blind chance or necessity’ (87). She does not say we must postulate
a source of the natural order outside it; she speaks of ‘innate creative
capacities of matter’ (72, 88); but nor does she propose any crude
form of vitalism. She will not accept the suggestion of Tom Nagel
and Russell that ‘some kind of stuff, neither mind nor matter, is
present to underlie both of them’; she advises us, if we wish to under-
stand the growth of organisation in the universe, to ‘cease asking what
everything is made of’ (141). Having digested these denials and pro-
hibitions, the reader might wish her to offer a clear positive statement
on the matter. She says on page 146 ‘We are as we are because we have
grown that way’, and quotes with approval Aristotle’s words ‘Nature
proceeds little by little from things lifeless to animal life in such a way
that it is impossible to determine the line of demarcation’ (144). She
believes, I think, that there is a continuous natural passage in the uni-
verse from what from what is definitely lifeless to what is definitely
conscious and purposive, continuous in that it runs through what is
not definitely either. This continuous progression cannot, she
holds, be explained by the kinds of explanation current in physical
science, but I do not find her saying what sort of explanation
would be appropriate, whether, for instance, it would be in terms
of goods immanent in the universe to which the process tends. She
blames Plato with some justice for giving people the ideal of reducing
physics to mathematics, but she might be sympathetic to his praise in
the Phaedo for explanations in terms of what is best and his endow-
ment of the world with soul in the Timaeus (34 b) and Sophist
(248–9).
Midgley is more explicit on the mind-body relation: she advocates
a dual aspect theory based on the difference between two ways we
have of perceiving ourselves. We have an ‘outer’ awareness of our-
selves as the sources of mirror images, footsteps in the snow, creaks
as we climb the stairs, and an ‘inner’ awareness of our thoughts, feel-
ings and desires. ‘Roughly speaking’, she says, ‘mind and body are
names that correspond with what we perceive in these two ways’
(113). ‘Your mind is YOU, considered as a thinker, feeler and
chooser’ (56). But although what is viewed in these two ways is a
single living organism, we are nonetheless ‘divided beings, full of
conflicts’, with warring motives, ideals and visions of life. ‘Our indi-
vidual unity is not a state fully attained but an enterprise, an effort, an
aspiration that is central to our lives, all the more central because we
are so much troubled by the clashes’ (131–2). In this enterprise it does
330
Reviews
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0031819114000278 Published online by Cambridge University Press

not help us to be told that the clashing elements are illusory and that
our behaviour is really caused by ‘a vast assembly of nerve cells’ (22).
Her opponents may say that an explanation in terms of brain cells
(why brain cells, she asks acutely (26), rather than quarks?) is more
genuine or profound than one in terms of thoughts and feelings.
But this is a metaphysical, not a scientific statement, and needs meta-
physical backing. There are no metaphysical grounds for saying that
human beings are less real than their components, and there are argu-
ments, which she provides in her Chapter 4, for saying that since
explanation is always directed to some purpose, the genuineness of
an explanation must be assessed relatively to that purpose. If what
we are trying to explain is conscious human behaviour, we need
something like the metapsychology of Freud (or, she might have
said, Plato); reference to brain cells is not so much profound as
irrelevant.
She does, however, allow some utility to the study of the two hemi-
spheres of the brain. The left, apparently, is used in attention to
detail, the right in taking broad views. As she wants us to combine
our inner and outer views of ourselves, so she urges us to coordinate
a detailed with a holistic way of thinking generally – rather as it is the
convergence of the optic axes that gives us stereoscopic vision.
Obsession with the small, combined with blindness to the broader
picture not only emboldens educated scholars to doubt their own
existence; it leads biologists since Darwin to overlook group selection
(69–71), and politicians to overlook phenomena like climate change
(55).
Mary Midgley is now well into her tenth decade, but the reader
need have no fear that time, which blunts the lion’s claws, has
dulled the edge of her wit or deprived her pen of its pristine
vigour. Far from that, it has simply worn away her inhibitions. She
feels free to speak her mind about ‘bad faith’ and ‘pseudo-scientific
superstitions, doctrines professed for the sake of appearances but
not seriously believable’ (19). ‘The current stream of our thought’,
she says, ‘is like a river that has been gradually shifted from its
former course by accumulations of silt and is now flowing in very
odd directions’ (19–20). The limpid prose in which she carries out
her dredging operations sparkles with happy phrasing.
William Charlton
william.charlton1@btinternet.com
This review first published online 14 July 2014
331
Reviews
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0031819114000278 Published online by Cambridge University Press

