
ARITHMETIC


ARITHMETIC
Paul Lockhart
The Belknap Press of
Harvard University Press
Cambridge, Massachusetts
London, England
2017

Copyright © 2017 by the President and Fellows of Harvard College
All rights reserved
Printed in the United States of America
First printing
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Names: Lockhart, Paul, author.
Title: Arithmetic / Paul Lockhart.
Description: Cambridge, Massachusetts : Harvard University Press, 2017. |
   Includes index.
Identifiers: LCCN 2016055136 | ISBN 9780674972230 (alk. paper)
Subjects: LCSH: Arithmetic. | Arithmetic--History.
Classification: LCC QA115 .L713 2017 | DDC 513--dc23 LC record available 
at https://lccn.loc.gov/2016055136

CONTENTS
Dear Reader	
vii
Things	
1
Language	
5
Repetition	
10
Three Tribes	
15
Egypt	
25
Rome 	
32
China and Japan	
41
India	
48
Europe	
75
Multiplication	
87
Division	
117
Machines	
136
Fractions	
151
Negative Numbers	
180
The Art of Counting 	
197
Afterword	
215
Index	
217


Dear Reader,
It’s fun to count and arrange things. We like doing it, 
and we have even developed it into something of a folk 
art. This art is called arithmetic. Arithmetic is the skill-
ful arrangement of numerical information for ease of 
communication and comparison. It is a fun and enjoy-
able activity of the mind and a relaxing and amusing 
pastime—a kind of “symbol knitting,” if you will. But 
please understand that’s all it is. Being good at it doesn’t 
make you particularly smart or mathematically inclined 
or anything like that. Similarly, being unskilled at arith-
metic does not mean that you are stupid or that you do 
not have a mathematical mind. Arithmetic is just like 
any other craft; you can get good at it if you want to, 
but it is no big deal either way. My hope is that by 
reading this book you will be inspired to try it out for 
yourself and to experience firsthand the simple plea-
sure and satisfaction that comes with numerical fluency. 
Have fun!


1
THINGS
We find ourselves in a world full of things: plants and animals, 
rocks and trees, the stars in the sky and the sand on the beach. 
We are surrounded by multitudes. And we count them. Why 
exactly do we bother counting things? The truth is, we usually 
don’t. Most situations do not really call for any careful count-
ing, just a sense that “we have plenty enough” or “we’re way 
short.” The main reason why we count is to compare. Usually 
these comparisons are easy to make: “So these together are 
about sixteen bucks . . . Oh, I have a twenty. No problem.” 
In fact, most transactions these days sound less like “sixteen 
seventy-one out of twenty, that’s three twenty-nine. Have a 
nice day,” and more like “Beep. Boop. Swipe.” Most of the 
time we don’t need to do much actual counting. Still, there 
are times when we do want an accurate idea of exactly how 
many what-have-yous we happen to have. What sorts of 
things do we keep track of, and why?
One of the oldest is time. We can imagine meetings between 
prehistoric tribes being scheduled for so-many moons hence, 
or scratches carved in a tree counting the days the hunting 
party has been away. We certainly do keep track of time—too 
much, if you ask me. Money, of course, is another one. People 
definitely keep careful track of that stuff (don’t get me started). 
Property also: “Are all of my marbles here in my marble bag?” 
“I hope we have enough silverware.” Land, grain, cattle, the 
inventories of the ages. Seven years of famine, seven of plenty. 
Boy, do we like to count!
Then there is curiosity counting—counting for the sake 
of pure wonder. “How many stars are in the Milky Way?” 
“For how many seconds can I hold my breath?” Or the more 
mathematical: “How many ways can I arrange the books on 
my bookshelf?”
Whatever the purpose or rationale, we occasionally find 
ourselves wanting to know how many of something there are. 
This is where arithmetic begins, with desire. There’s no point 

a r i t h m e t i c
2
counting something you don’t care about. Don’t ever do that. 
It’s boring, and it will make you hate counting. There are 
actually a lot of people who hate arithmetic (far too many to 
count!), and it makes me sad. Usually it’s because they were 
made to do something they weren’t interested in doing. Let’s 
not have that be you.
The point is that there are things, and we sometimes want to 
count them. Actually, there are some quantities that we don’t 
so much count as measure. What we do when we measure 
something—and this could be an amount of milk, or some-
one’s height, or a piece of land—is we take some agreed-upon 
amount, known as a unit (e.g., a cup, an inch, or an acre), and 
we count the number of those. This has the effect of turning 
something smooth and continuous into something discrete 
and lumpy. So let’s confine ourselves to thinking about count-
ing distinct individual items.
As I said before, counting is really all about comparison. 
Even when you count something out of curiosity—say you 
happen to have thirty-two pennies—the only sense in which 
you “know” how many you have is by comparison with certain 
other amounts (e.g., thirty), which have special names in your 
language and serve as familiar benchmarks of size. Just saying 
the word thirty-two means you have unconsciously performed a 
comparison: you have a little more than three double handfuls.
Comparison is always the issue. “Do we have enough?” 
“Is that all going to fit?” “There were more of them before. 
Where’d they all go?” We count so that we can compare 
amounts. Now, it would be great if we could just look at 
two collections and know which one was bigger, as though 
we had a “number sense” akin to smell or taste. Maybe there 
are creatures like that who can just tell. Occasionally, some 
humans come along (usually severely neurologically impaired 
ones) who can do essentially that, but most of us are pretty 
bad at it. I think pretty much everyone can perceive “three-
ness”—knowing that there are three things without having 
to literally count them—but past about six or seven it starts 
to get a little dicey.

t h i n g s
3
Try out your ability to directly perceive quantity.
I wonder if we can get better at it with practice?
One problem is that we are a little too good at pattern 
recognition. Our brains are quite good at storing patterned 
information; we don’t do so well with random spatters. Here 
are two examples of sixness:
I can’t really say that I’ve got sixness perception. I had to 
count the first collection. But the second one was immediate. 
We’ve all seen that arrangement a million times. Dice players 
don’t need to count the pips. We know those shapes like the 
backs of our hands. Better, in fact.
So it helps if the things we want to count are somewhat 
organized. Nobody wants to count a bunch of random objects 
strewn all around the room. For one thing, the act of counting 
strongly relies on memory and time sense: “Which ones have 
I already counted?” Everyone who has ever lived knows the 
sickening feeling of losing count—forgetting where you were 
and having to start over. This may in fact be the single most 
common shared experience of humanity. We are all, under the 
skin, people who have at one time or another lost count. This 
is especially easy to do if you can’t remember which things 
you have already counted because they all look the same and 
are scattered about topsy-turvy and higgledy-piggledy.
Not that we don’t lose count anyway, even when things are 
nicely organized. The truth is that we’re just not very good at 
boring, repetitive activities. Such things simply don’t hold our 
attention, and our minds tend to wander. We’re just too darn 
smart and interesting, I guess.
OK, so we don’t have instant number perception past five 
or so, and we have trouble with chaos and disorder. Also, we 
are careless daydreamers who can’t be trusted to perform one 

a r i t h m e t i c
4
simple mind-numbing and repetitive task. So what do we do? 
We come up with art and science, that’s what. We develop 
a creative and entertaining craft of counting well, using our 
pattern-seeking minds.
How would you arrange a number of rocks
to make it easy to tell if it is even or odd?

5
LANGUAGE
One way to think about counting is that we are measuring 
the size of a collection. Implicit in this is the recognition of 
the fact that the number of things is independent of how 
they are arranged. If I put seven marbles in my pocket, it 
doesn’t matter how I jiggle them around; when I take them 
out, there will still be seven (assuming I don’t jiggle them so 
hard they shatter, and that I don’t have a hole in my pocket). 
At some point in our mental development, we become aware 
of this number permanence. What this means is that we get to 
arrange and rearrange our collections in various ways without 
disturbing the information we are interested in—namely, how 
many things the collection has in it.
This is all very well and good when the things are relatively 
easy to hold, carry, and manipulate (e.g., marbles, coins, or 
jelly beans). Often, however, the things we want to count are 
inconveniently large, far away, or, even worse, moving. And 
sometimes, as in the case of time, what we wish to count is 
ephemeral and fleeting.
What we do in these cases, of course, is to substitute. We 
replace the things we are actually interested in counting by 
something that is easier to work with. We make a representation 
of the situation and work with that instead.
It is hard to say when this idea first originated, but it is clear 
from cave paintings and carved figurines that we have been 
representing things by other things for quite some time.
Although there are instances of this behavior in other 
species (primate gestures, bumblebee dances, etc.), nothing 

a r i t h m e t i c
6
comes close to the extent and frequency with which humans 
perform these substitutions, often unconsciously. Language 
itself is nothing other than a vast interconnected set of 
sense-memory substitutions, with words used to represent 
instances of similar sensory experiences. It is safe to say that 
representation is one of the fundamental ingredients of 
consciousness.
In fact, we are so good at making representations that we 
often lose track of the distinction between the representation 
and the thing itself. The word cat, for instance, is a string of 
three letters. It does not have a tail and it does not purr. The 
string of letters is a code—it stands for the thing with a tail 
that purrs. This is what Juliet is referring to when she muses 
to herself,
What’s in a name? That which we call a rose
By any other name would smell as sweet.
In particular, when we start designing arithmetic systems, it 
will be crucial to keep clear the distinction between a number 
and its representation. A lot of people are walking around in 
a muddle about this, and I don’t want you to be one of them.
Anyway, at some point—let’s say two hundred thousand 
years ago—people started representing things by other things. 
One big advantage of doing this is portability. If I use pebbles 
to represent my sheep, I can then easily carry them around in 
a bag and use them to buy and sell and keep track of my flock, 
without having to carry around any actual sheep. (This is not 
only much easier on my back but is also vastly preferred by 
the sheep.) This is undoubtedly the way money originated. 
Similarly, a football coach can use a diagram of Xs and Os to 
represent players and can then move the symbols around on 
paper instead of having to position actual large and cumber-
some football players.
A caveman wanting to convey some vital numerical infor-
mation, such as how many caribou he spotted down by the 
water hole or (perhaps more important) how many lions, could 

l a n g uag e
7
quickly gather some rocks or berries, matching each animal 
with its more portable representative, and return with the infor-
mation literally in the palm of his hand. That’s what numbers 
are, really: information. And the point is that the replacement 
of caribou by rocks doesn’t change the information. It does, 
however, change the ease with which the information is held 
and transmitted. So that’s why we do it. The history of language 
(and arithmetic in particular) is a history of increasingly abstract 
and portable substitutions: from actual antelope to drawings of 
antelope, to rocks, sticks, or fingers, to scratches on bones, to 
verbal utterances (i.e., words), to abstract symbols.
My guess is that each of these developments in the evolution 
of language arose from the need to explain and communicate 
information. Mathematics, in particular, is an explanatory art 
form, and ultimately all of its structures arise as “informa-
tion carriers” for the purpose of explaining a pattern or idea. 
Numbers are simply the most basic kind of mathematical 
information.
So in this book I’m going to tell you the story of arithmetic, 
and in a large part this is a history of representation—differ-
ent choices and strategies for organizing and communicat-
ing numerical information. Throughout this story, it will be 
important to keep in mind the distinction between a number 
in and of itself, as opposed to the way in which it is being 
represented. For concrete things like cats this isn’t usually too 
difficult—I don’t think too many people are going around 
petting the letters C, A, T. But numbers are a bit more elusive. 
I can easily understand how a conflation of the number three 
and the symbol 3 can occur. If 3 is merely a symbol repre-
senting the number three, then what exactly is three itself, 
independent of its representation? I’ve held cats and petted 
them, but how can I feel or touch three?

a r i t h m e t i c
8
Of course, it’s not as bad as some abstract ideas, such as hope 
or love—at least I can hold three oranges or three feathers in 
my hand. Nevertheless, threeness, that property of collections, 
is a bit intangible and wispy. Be that as it may, three has prop-
erties and truths (such as being odd) that are independent of 
its representation.
It is especially vital that we be clear about this distinc-
tion if we are going to examine representation systems other 
than those with which we are familiar. For example, the 
number thirteen does not “start with a one and end with a 
three.” Numbers don’t start or end at all; they just are. The 
Hindu-Arabic decimal place-value representation is the 
thing that starts and ends and has a look to it. Thirteen does 
a lot of things—it is prime, it is a sum of two square numbers 
(namely four and nine), and it is odd—but it doesn’t “look 
like” anything. I myself like to think of numbers as creatures 
of some kind that exhibit various behaviors, and this helps 
me play and work with them, but I don’t want to get stuck 
into thinking of them as having any particular visual form—
or rather, I understand that the form they take is up to me, 
and I can represent them well or badly depending on my 
choices.
Among my favorite ways to represent quantities is to 
imagine them as piles of rocks. As we’ve seen, depending on 
the size of the collection there will be a myriad of possible 
visual arrangements, some more organized (and thus easier to 
remember and recognize) and some less so.
For each number of rocks up to twelve,
what is your favorite arrangement?
For example, the arrangements of pips on a die are particu-
larly simple and easy to remember:
K  L  M  N  O  P

l a n g uag e
9
(By the way, the five shape O is called a quincunx, a word one 
does not often get the opportunity to use. Naturally, I jumped 
at the chance.)
If the only numbers we ever wanted to communicate were 
the numbers one through six—as in a game of Chutes and 
Ladders, for instance—then these dice arrangements would 
constitute a perfectly valid and convenient number language. 
It’s the same with fingers. When someone (such as a referee) 
holds up two fingers of one hand and all five fingers of the 
other, everyone can immediately recognize the finger pattern 
of seven. The real problem in designing an intelligent numer-
ical representation system is what to do when the quantities 
get big. And as we will see, the problem is not just that we 
run out of fingers. The problem is that we run out of memory.
Can you invent a way to represent the numbers
one through twenty using only the fingers of one hand?

10
REPETITION
Undoubtedly the oldest and simplest way to represent 
numbers is by using tally marks—an organized series of 
strokes or scratches, one for each item to be counted. The 
number four, for instance, would be represented as D. One of 
the earliest known examples of this is the Ishango bone, dated 
from about 18,000 bc.
Though it is unclear what was being counted, it certainly 
appears to be a record of something. (Of course, it’s possi-
ble that these scratches are just a record of idle boredom or 
mere decoration.) In any case, people have been representing 
numbers in this way from time immemorial.
The tally mark scheme has a number of things going for 
it. First of all, it is organized. We replace the possibly random 
assembly of objects to be counted with a nice, regular sequence 
of more or less identical, evenly spaced strokes. What could be 
simpler or more natural? This is the traditional way of keeping 
track of the score in many games, as well as the number of 
days one has been in prison. Tally marks are simple, portable, 
and convenient.
As always, the trouble starts when the numbers get big. For 
small quantities (say five or fewer), we can easily distinguish 
these representations and immediately perceive and compare 
amounts. Nobody needs to count the individual strokes in 
the tally mark representation of four; we can just tell there are 
four of them. But as we’ve seen, we tend to lose this ability for 
larger quantities. Even though the tally mark system is simple 
and easy to use, it still doesn’t solve the “perception problem.”
Which is larger, DDD or DDC? 

r e p e t i t i o n
11
There are many ways we can improve this system, the most 
familiar being the so-called five-barred gate. In this scheme 
(which is also older than recorded history), we make a diago-
nal slash at every fifth item. For example, the five-barred gate 
representation of thirteen would be 
EEC
The diagonal strokes help to break up the monotony and 
allow us to easily distinguish one amount from another. The 
tally marks are bundled into little groups of five, each resem-
bling the typical pasture gate of five bars. We can immedi-
ately perceive two “handfuls” and three “leftovers.” It is now a 
simple matter to compare two quantities expressed in this way. 
If one of them has more gates (or handfuls) then it is larger. 
If they have the same number of gates, then we compare the 
leftovers. So that is a simple and elegant solution, and most 
people find it easy to learn and use.
Which is larger, EEEC or EEEB ?
This is an example of a very general and important tech-
nique in arithmetic known as grouping. Since long sequences 
of repeated symbols are difficult to perceive, remember, and 
compare, we break the list up into little clumps of a fixed size 
and indicate that in some way. This complicates the language 
a bit (in that we need a new mark or word or something), but 
it is almost always worth it. The same idea appears in music, 
where long sequences of beats are grouped into rhythmic 
patterns. It’s something we seem to do naturally.
One of the principal benefits of this grouping idea is that it 
saves time. Not only does it make perception and comparison 
easier, but it also allows us to communicate numerical infor-
mation more rapidly and accurately.
Once you have decided to put things into groups, the first 
question is, what size groups? A composer, for instance, needs 
to decide how to break the rhythmic pulses into measures, 

a r i t h m e t i c
12
among the many options being the waltz pattern of three 
beats per measure: TA-ta-ta / TA-ta-ta. Other standard 
choices include two-, four-, six-, eight-, and twelve-beat 
patterns.
Similarly, an arithmetician will make a choice of group-
ing size convenient for the counting problem at hand. Entire 
number languages—words, symbols, and calculating devices—
are designed around such choices and become part of the 
tribal culture. The five-barred gate system, for instance, places 
emphasis on the number five and makes that particular quan-
tity feel more “solid” or “clean” than other amounts. Nobody 
really likes leftovers; they feel like unpleasant remnants, or at 
any rate, details that will have to be remembered and kept 
track of. How nice to be able to say “four handfuls” instead of 
“three handfuls and (grumble) two leftovers.”
Of course, one’s grouping size is a completely arbitrary and 
personal choice. There is nothing particularly special about 
the number five, other than the fact that we happen to have 
that many fingers on each hand. Over the centuries people 
have experimented with many different grouping sizes in 
many different contexts. We can still see traces of these choices 
in the number words of various languages. The words dozen 
in English and zwolf in German reveal a history of grouping 
by twelves (which we still do with inches and eggs), and an 
ancient choice of twenty as a grouping size still resonates in 
the words vingt (French) and score (English).
Aside from the fact that we are curious and easily bored 
(which has indirectly led to art, science, and technology), 
another great hallmark of humanity is that we are lazy. We 
get tired of making busloads of tally marks, and we want to 
find a way out of doing it. The solution is abbreviation. This is 
the way we always use language. Any time we find ourselves 
saying the same thing over and over, we simply come up with 
a new, shorter word for it. This is true for both written and 
spoken language.
Imagine we are shepherds in nearby pastures (say in ancient 
Greece), and I want to tell you how many of my sheep were 

r e p e t i t i o n
13
eaten by wolves during the night. Let’s say we have worked 
out a system (a language, really) whereby I bang two sticks 
together for each lost sheep. Just as we tire of looking at 
endless rows of tally marks, we also aren’t very good at keep-
ing track of long sequences of identical sounds. So one idea 
would be to use a different sound—maybe a somewhat lower 
pitch—to indicate a group of five. Just as we write EEEB, 
we could tap out clop-clop-clop-click-click and save time and 
energy that way. 
Similarly, if we get tired of making five-barred gates all 
day long, we could invent a new shorthand symbol, such as a 
horizontal stroke F, in place of the more time-consuming E. 
Then our number above could be written simply as F F FB, 
or even G. That’s the kind of thing we humans do. We get 
lazy and bored and then we use our intelligence and creativity 
to come up with clever new ways to get out of doing work. 
We are all Tom Sawyers on some level. Necessity may be the 
mother of invention, but boredom is surely the father.
However we wish to communicate numbers—by words, 
gestures, or in written form—repetition, grouping, and abbre-
viation are the natural linguistic means. It’s up to the users of 
such languages to decide on a convenient grouping size and 
how they wish to indicate both groups and leftovers.
So how do we decide on a good grouping size? What 
makes one size better than another? Of course it depends 
on what you are counting, who you will be communicating 
with, and, most important, how large the numbers are going 
to get. 
If you are only counting a small handful of things (e.g., 
your marble collection), then it doesn’t really matter whether 
or not you organize it into groups or what size groups you 
use. On the other hand, if the numbers you are using are very 
large, you may want to put a little thought into choosing an 
appropriate grouping size.
If your choice of grouping size is too small, say two or three, 
then it kind of defeats the whole purpose of grouping. At 
some point, even with the five-barred gate, the numbers will 

a r i t h m e t i c
14
get so large that you will need a ton of groups. So many, in 
fact, that you will no longer be able to grasp at a glance how 
many groups you have. You will experience a “higher level” 
perception problem. As an illustration, can you tell which 
collection is larger?
	
EEEEEEEE	
EEEEEEE
	
EEEEEEEB	
EEEEEEEC
Clearly the thing to do is to organize the gates themselves 
into groups. And here we have an interesting choice. Each 
gate represents a group of five individuals; that is, we chose 
five as our grouping size. But now it is the gates themselves 
that become the individuals, and for the same reasons as before 
(perception and comparison), we want to organize them into 
groups. How should we bundle them? Should we group them 
by fives again or by some different number?
Suppose we decide to group the gates into fours. (This 
would be natural if we were thinking of the gates as handfuls, 
so that all our fingers and toes together make four hands’ 
worth.) A nice abbreviation for four gates might be a square 
shape, H (the four corners remind me that it stands for four 
gates). This allows us to write rather large numbers quite 
easily: HHHEEB.
The point is that with any repetition system, as the numbers 
get larger we will continually need new words and symbols. 
Each time we hit the next “perception wall” where we start 
losing track, we will need to decide on a grouping size and 
a representation for it. Throughout the centuries there have 
been hundreds of ingenious systems for doing this, some very 
simple and elegant, others somewhat awkward and annoying. 
I will be showing you some of my favorites to give you an 
idea of the range of possibilities.
Can you design your own system of
repetition and grouping?

15
THREE TRIBES
I want to imagine a period before recorded history—let’s say 
thirty thousand years ago, by the banks of the Nile. (This way 
I can make up stuff and not worry about being contradicted 
by actual facts). Let’s imagine three groups of early humans 
living and interacting with each other, each tribe using its 
own unique number language with its own particular choice 
of grouping size.
We’ll start with the Hand People. In this tribe, the hand-
ful—five fingers’ worth—is the conventional grouping size, 
just as in the five-barred gate system. Being a preverbal soci-
ety, the Hand People communicate using a system of hand 
gestures. The number one is represented by a single clap, two 
by two claps, and so on. Five claps are considered difficult to 
distinguish from four, so a group of five is instead represented 
by a thump on the chest with a closed fist. Thus, the number 
that we call seven would be communicated by the gesture: 
thump-clap-clap. The Hand People possess no spoken or writ-
ten forms of communication.
Can you count to twenty in the
language of the Hand People?
Our second tribe is the Banana People. This group expresses 
its numbers verbally. The word for one is na, two is na-na, and 
so on. The Banana People group in fours, and their word for a 
group of four (a bunch) is ba. So the number seven would be 
rendered in Banana language as ba-na-na-na. 
Naturally, those Banana tribesmen who wish to converse 
with the neighboring Hand People will have to translate 
between the two systems. A Banana merchant would become 
quite fluent in both systems—either by intentional study or 
(more likely) simply from constant daily use—and immedi-
ately upon seeing a thump will think to herself ba-na, perhaps 
even unconsciously.

a r i t h m e t i c
16
Try counting to twelve in Banana language.
Our third group is the Tree People. In this tribe, numbers 
are communicated not by words or gestures but in written 
form—scratches on bark, let’s say. Their grouping size is seven, 
and their first six numbers signs are:
Now, I myself can imagine getting a little confused by the 
last two. That is, I don’t really trust my own sixness perception. 
But let’s suppose that the Tree People can handle it.
Such a notation system clearly cannot continue indefinitely, 
so naturally they reserve a special symbol for a group of seven, 
namely a tree: T. For the Tree People the number seven is 
quite special and sacred, being a solid and reliable number 
with no obnoxious leftovers. Of course, any Tree People who 
wish to exchange information (or bananas) with the other 
tribes would need to be able to translate fluently among the 
three systems.
Just to be clear, I am choosing to mention this hypothetical 
(and admittedly rather far-fetched) period of human history in 
order to illustrate a point. My point is that the artful rearrange-
ment of numerical information—in particular, the translation 
among different grouping sizes—is the soul and essence of 
arithmetic.
As you would expect, each of these three tribes has its 
own cultural norms and expectations, and grouping size is 
no exception. Growing up in a world where people group 
things in fours endows that number with a certain mystical 
and emotional significance. When, from your earliest memo-
ries, you hear people counting: na, na-na, na-na-na, ba, ba-na, 
ba-na-na, ba-na-na-na, ba-ba, the rhythm of it gets into your 
bloodstream and consequently ba-ba starts to feel like a very 
solid, safe, and understandable quantity, from which a number 
like ba-ba-na-na is an unpleasant departure.

t h r e e  t r i b e s
17
This is exactly how most of us feel about a number like 
twelve, for instance. In fact, the word twelve comes from an 
Old Teutonic root meaning “two left.” This is not due to 
any particular intrinsic property of the number twelve but 
simply because we are used to grouping things into piles of 
ten. And because we do that, even our names for numbers 
are built around groups of ten. When we say “forty-six,” for 
instance, we are really saying “four groups and six leftovers.”
This is unfortunate for me because if I want to tell you 
about numbers and their properties or about arithmetic and 
its history, the very English words I am using are already 
biased toward a particular grouping size. So there is an issue 
of perspective. (In fact, it reminds me a little of teaching 
perspective drawing. The drawings that I make to illustrate 
the mechanism of perspective are themselves perspective 
drawings!) 
So I’ll need you to be open to the idea that any grouping 
size is just as good as any other and to be as “multicultural” in 
this respect as you can. In particular, try to resist the tempta-
tion to convert everything into familiar (ten-centric English 
language) terms. See if you can really experience these tribal 
number systems as a native.
Let’s imagine a simple trading scenario in which one of 
the Hand People has some tools to trade in return for some 
bananas. Suppose he feels that each tool is worth thump-
thump-clap-clap-clap bananas. A Banana tribesman who was 
sufficiently fluent in Hand language would probably think 
to himself: “thump is ba-na. So thump-thump-clap-clap-clap is 
ba-na, ba-na, na-na-na. I can take those leftover na’s and call 
them ba-na, so I get ba-ba-ba-na.” In fact, a really fluent trans-
lator would probably not even need to do any of that kind of 
thinking but would just know from experience what thump-
thump-clap-clap-clap is in terms of ba’s and na’s. One would 
quite rapidly get used to certain special numbers—like thump-
thump-clap-clap being simply ba-ba-ba—as reference points, 
just as we think of thirty-one as being one more than the 
solid number thirty.

a r i t h m e t i c
18
Each number language will have its own set of “nice” 
numbers. These are the numbers that are especially easy to say, 
which in turn depends on what numbers you have bothered 
to give special names to. In particular, one’s grouping size 
always has a special (and usually short) name.
This means that when translating between grouping sizes, it 
pays to have a few reference points already learned. If I were 
a Hand-Banana translator, I would make it my business to 
know that thump is ba-na, ba-ba is thump-clap-clap-clap, and that 
ba-ba-ba is thump-thump-clap-clap.
Are there any numbers that
are nice in both languages?
But what if one is not very fluent? How can we make the 
correct translations? Being humans, we devise clever strate-
gies. In particular, we can use representations of various sorts. 
Let’s take one of the simplest: Piles of Rocks.
Imagine that you are an apprentice translator and one of 
the Hand People has just offered the tools for the above-men-
tioned price of thump-thump-clap-clap-clap. (Boy, I wish we 
were in the same room so that we could actually make these 
sounds together. Could you just clap and thump when I write 
those words? It might actually help to get my point across. It’s 
also pretty fun.)
Not being fluent, you simply lay out rocks according to 
what was just said: thump-thump-clap-clap-clap.
Here we can literally see each thump as a handful and the 
claps as individual leftovers. Or, if you prefer a tidier arrange-
ment, you can arrange your rocks in rows:

t h r e e  t r i b e s
19
In this scheme, each row represents a handful, or thump, 
with the last row being an incomplete row of leftovers.
Either way, you now have a representation of the number 
that you can actually see and touch. And being primates with 
primate brains, we sure do like seeing and touching! That’s 
why we make those “busy box” toys for infants—so they can 
turn the crank, open the door, and look in the mirror. (There 
are plenty of adult versions as well.)
As humble as it may appear, the Piles of Rocks system is 
actually a very powerful calculating device. To use it, you 
simply rearrange the rocks into whatever different group-
ing sizes you wish. For example, our Hand-Banana translator 
(that is, you) can simply slide the rocks around to make a new 
pattern:
Now it is easy to see the new groups of size ba, and we see 
that we have a leftover as well. (Perhaps even more artfully, 
you could simply move one rock in the earlier diagram from 
the second row to the third.) So we can confidently tell our 
fellow Banana tribesmen that the offer is ba-ba-ba-na.
Piles of Rocks is the world’s first calculator. Notice that the 
user does not need to have any special knowledge or skill, just 
the ability to put rocks in piles (and not lose any, I guess). The 
downside is having to find (or carry around) a bunch of rocks 
or other convenient objects.
Let’s try another example. Suppose now that the Tree 
People also wish to trade for some Hand People tools. They 

a r i t h m e t i c
20
have carved wooden beads to trade and will pay T T TS beads 
for each tool. You, as a somewhat inexperienced Tree-Hand 
translator, decide to get out your Piles of Rocks:
Rearranging this into handfuls (crudely or cleverly, depend-
ing on your taste and skill) yields the arrangement:
This is what is known as “doing arithmetic.” You have 
taken numerical information presented in one form, and 
you have reorganized it into another. Congratulations. 
Arithmetic doesn’t actually get much more complicated 
than this, so if rearranging piles of rocks into different-sized 
groups makes sense to you, then it’s probably going to be 
pretty smooth sailing from here on out. Of course, there’s 
the question of getting really good at it—but that’s entirely 
up to you and how much you want to practice and play 
around with it.
Now, you may have noticed that the number in the 
preceding example was rather large as numbers go. In fact, it 
is the largest number conveniently sayable in the language of 
the Hand People. Of course, they could say (and try to hear 
and remember) a number like thump-thump-thump-thump-
thump-thump-thump-thump, but this brings back the whole 
perception problem again, which was the motivation for 
grouping and naming in the first place. The natural thing to 
thump - thump - thump - thump -  
clap - clap - clap - clap

t h r e e  t r i b e s
21
do when numbers get big would be to start grouping the 
groups.
We’ll focus on the Banana People. I want to imagine that a 
few centuries have gone by and that they have picked up the 
idea of using tools from the Hand People and also the idea of 
writing from the Tree People.
While we’re at it, let’s say that an entire Banana Civilization 
has come into full flower and with it the need to commu-
nicate larger numbers and more complicated transactions. 
The idea of four as a special and satisfying quantity remains, 
however.
The new written system might look like this. For each left-
over we make a curved stroke, Q (this being, as we all know, 
the universal symbol for a single banana). For a bunch of four 
bananas, we use a four-sided figure, H. Thus, the number ten 
(ba-ba-na-na) would be written HHQQ.
Naturally, after a certain point, the number of ba’s would 
become so large that we would want to start grouping them as 
well. How many should constitute a group of groups? This is 
one of the more important decisions one has to make when 
designing a numerical representation system.
You might think that there’s no question about it; we chose 
four (ba) as our grouping size, so that’s that. Of course we will 
group our groups into fours—as opposed to what? Grouping 
things into fours and then grouping our groups into sixes? 
That would be insane!
But it happens all the time. Inches are grouped into twelves 
to make feet, and then three feet make a yard. And the old 
British monetary system had twelve pence to the shilling 
and twenty shillings to the pound. Such mixed-base number 
systems have always existed and continue to exist. The Baby-
lonians, for instance, grouped their tens into “big groups” of 
sixty; that is, six groups of ten was their grouping of groups. 
Still, if one had one’s way, it seems simplest to pick a grouping 
size and stick with it.
So let’s suppose that for the same reasons that the Banana 

a r i t h m e t i c
22
People group their bananas into bunches, they also want to 
group their bunches into bunches. This quantity (ba-ba-ba-ba) 
is called la and is written R. This is a nice symbolic represen-
tation of a bunch of bunches:
Now larger numbers can be more easily represented and 
compared. For example, the number that the Tree People 
write as T T T would be understood by the Banana People as 
RHQ (la-ba-na).
How would the Banana People say and write T T T T?
These three tribal number languages are examples of what 
are called marked-value systems, meaning that each word or 
symbol has a fixed, definite meaning. No matter where the 
symbol T or R occurs, it always represents the same quan-
tity. In particular, for representation systems like these, the 
order of the symbols doesn’t matter. Just as the change in 
your pocket can jiggle around without affecting its value, the 
representations
RHHQQQ      QRQHQH      QHRQQH
all refer to the exact same number. This is a very convenient 
feature and makes systems like these particularly easy to work 
with. Marked-value systems (such as money) are very sturdy; 
you can scramble up all the symbols on the page (or all the 
coins in the jar) and it won’t affect any of the information. Of 
course, it will affect the form that the information is in, so if 
you wanted it organized in a particular way then you might 
want to be a little more careful.

t h r e e  t r i b e s
23
In particular, most people like to arrange their numbers 
(and often their money as well) into a form that makes for 
easy comparison. Usually this is done by collecting together 
the largest denominations first, and then working your way 
down to the smallest amounts. In other words, even though 
we can write our symbols in any order, it pays to put them 
down in order of importance. This makes it easy to see what the 
big picture is: “Oh. I’ve got five hundred and something,” 
as opposed to giving a penny and a twenty-dollar bill equal 
status.
Any pile of rocks on the table represents that number 
of things no matter how it is arranged, but some arrange-
ments are more communicative than others. Even though 
the representations RHHQQQ and QQRHQH refer to the exact 
same number, the first one screams out the headline “la and 
then some,” whereas the second one hides its largest quantity 
under a bushel of bananas.
So we will usually want to express our numbers this way, 
from largest to smallest (whether that is written from left to 
right or not is a cultural choice). Again, the point of doing 
arithmetic is for comparison, and expressing our quantities in 
this way makes comparison particularly convenient.
For the same reason, we usually prefer our number repre-
sentations to be “packed up” into nice groups, rather than 
spilled out all over the place like so many socks and under-
wear. It can be confusing to compare packed and unpacked 
representations:
	
RRHQQ	
HHHHH
	
	
HHHHH
Here the second number is actually larger, even though it 
has no la’s explicitly written. So although the second repre-
sentation is perfectly meaningful and unambiguous, it is 
somewhat inconvenient for comparison purposes.
On the other hand, nothing could be simpler than to 
compare two numbers that are both nicely packed into 
groups and organized by size.

a r i t h m e t i c
24
	
RRHHQQ	
RRHQQQ
Here the first number is clearly larger: both representations 
contain the same amount of la’s in them but the first has more 
ba’s. This way of organizing and comparing is called lexico-
graphic ordering. It is essentially the same idea as alphabetical 
order. First compare the largest groups; whichever number 
has more of them is the bigger one. If there is a tie, then 
compare the next grouping size down, and so on.
So, for the purposes of comparison, we will usually want 
to order our symbols in this fashion. There will be times, 
however, when it will be more convenient to keep things 
unpacked and unordered. The point is we can do whatever 
we want. If you organize things in such a way that it takes a 
little longer, or you have to redo or undo something that you 
have already done, so be it. The stakes are pretty low. Mostly 
the idea with arithmetic is to have some fun, keep track of a 
few things, and occasionally enjoy a bit of cleverness.
You are a Banana tribesman with la-la-la bananas 
to trade for tools and wooden beads. Each tool costs
thump-thump-clap-clap-clap bananas, and
a single banana is worth two wooden beads.
After buying three tools (and eating one banana for lunch),
how many beads (in Tree language) can you afford?

25
EGYPT
One of the earliest and simplest examples of a marked-
value system is the one used by the ancient Egyptians from 
about 3000 bc. The idea is exactly the same as with the 
(fictional) tribal systems we were just looking at, except that 
this one really exists in the historical record. Also, as with 
most numerical representation systems used by humans, the 
grouping size is ten.
The number ten occurs often as a grouping size, not for 
any intrinsic mathematical or aesthetic reason but simply 
because it is the number of fingers we happen to have. In 
fact, ten (as a number) does not possess any particularly 
attractive features. Twelve would be better for divisibility 
purposes; eight is smaller and well suited to repeated halv-
ing. Ten is a purely cultural choice, and if you ask me, it’s a 
bit too large.
In particular, ten is well beyond the limit of most people’s 
number perception abilities. So in order to design a conve-
nient marked-value system, the Egyptians first needed to 
solve the perception problem.
The Egyptian symbol for a leftover was the usual stroke, 1. 
Instead of the five-barred gate, however, the Egyptian idea 
was to use stacking. Rather than eight being represented as 
EC, the Egyptians preferred 8. In general, they tried to avoid 
using more than four strokes in a row. Thus, the numbers one 
through eight were typically represented as:
	
1	
2	
3	
4	
5	
6	
7	
8
	one	 two	 three	
four	
five	
six	
seven 	
eight
Notice how the stacking patterns also make it easy to see 
if a number is even or odd—the stacks either line up or they 
don’t. Now the number nine becomes something of a prob-
lem, since it would seem to require a row of five strokes. 

a r i t h m e t i c
26
Rather than allow this, the Egyptians had a different plan: 
nine is three rows of three.
9
nine
So the stacking patterns allow us to tell at a glance what 
we’ve got. As with dice, the designs are simple enough to be 
easily learned and recognized. We even have some flexibility 
in our choice of stacking patterns. The Egyptians often wrote 
four as two on top of two, for instance.
Since our grouping size is ten, we will need a special 
symbol for it. The Egyptians chose g, which is thought 
to represent a heel mark (presumably coming from the 
measurement of plots of land by digging in one’s heels every 
ten paces).
Naturally, we use the same stacking patterns for groups 
as we did with leftovers. Thus, the number that we call 
forty-five would be written j 5. It is also perfectly fine 
to write it the other way, as 5 j, depending on whether 
you are writing right to left or left to right. The Egyptians 
did both.
Of course, as the numbers we are dealing with get larger—
and civilization tends to make that happen, what with stor-
ing grain and building armies and raising taxes—we will 
need symbols of greater value to denote groups of groups 
and so on.
The Egyptian symbol for a group of groups (that is, one 
hundred) is p, supposedly a coil of rope. For a group of p’s 
(what we call one thousand) they used the lotus flower 
symbol, X.
The Banana People have been conquered by the Egyptians
and now they must learn to use the Egyptian system.
How would these numbers be translated:
RHHQ, RRHQQQ, RRRHHQQ ?

e g y p t
27
Another wonderful innovation, which replaces Piles of 
Rocks as a calculation tool, was the introduction of counting 
coins. The idea is simply to make objects (usually wooden or 
ceramic chips of some kind) that are marked so as to indicate 
their value. These coins do not need to have any actual worth 
whatsoever, just as long as they stand for specific values. In 
a way, this is another level of abstraction: a coin marked g 
represents a pile of ten rocks, which in turn represents what-
ever it is that you are actually counting.
Let’s imagine that we have a large bag full of these counters, 
marked with the various symbols 1 , g , p , and X . We can then 
spill them out onto the table (also known as the counter) and 
sort them and arrange them into piles or rows however we 
wish. This then becomes a simple and convenient calculating 
device, or abacus. An abacus is simply a manual representation 
system; that is, a way of representing numbers by things that 
can be held and manipulated. Just as with Piles of Rocks, 
counting coins can be grouped and rearranged easily, and 
calculating can be done relatively quickly. Then the results 
can be written down at the end, if desired.
Make your own set of Egyptian counting coins.
Of course, for very simple calculations, an abacus system is 
usually unnecessary; you can often do such computations in 
your head, rearranging symbols and keeping track of infor-
mation as you go. This requires a decent memory, however, 
and many people throughout history have found this sort of 
thing annoying and mentally painful. On the other hand, lots 

a r i t h m e t i c
28
of people really enjoy mental arithmetic and even consider 
the use of an abacus system to be cheating or in some way 
beneath their dignity. No matter. If you enjoy storing and 
moving around detailed information in your head, then please 
do. If you would prefer to use some sort of calculating device, 
then be my guest. Both approaches to arithmetic are fun and 
full of surprises and amusement.
Anyway, to use the Egyptian counting coins is simplicity itself. 
We merely translate the numbers directly, each written symbol 
being replaced by the corresponding marked coin, like so:
And now our number can be manipulated (literally!), set 
aside, or combined with other quantities easily.
Imagine you are an Egyptian scribe, circa 1850 bc. The 
Pharaoh has asked for an accurate accounting of the grain 
supplies. The three granaries contain the following amounts, 
measured in bushels:
	
Thebes Granary:	
Y s k 2
	
Giza Granary:	
X m 6
	
Aswan Granary:	
u 3
What is the total amount of grain?
Assuming you are not comfortable calculating this total in 
your head, or you don’t want to risk making an error and incur-
ring the wrath of the Pharaoh, you make your way to the count-
ing house and get behind the counter. Taking out your sack of 
counting coins, you proceed to lay out the numbers carefully:

e g y p t
29
To calculate the total, you simply push the piles of coins 
together:
The great thing about marked-value abacus systems is their 
wonderful flexibility—it doesn’t matter how you scramble 
them up or rearrange them, the coins will always represent 
the same quantity. (Later, we will see some more modern 
abacus systems that are far more delicate but have their own 
advantages.)
So that’s it, you’ve done the computation! The total is 
exactly the amount sitting there on the table. There are a 
couple of problems with this representation, however. First, it 
is inconvenient to have to carry a bunch of coins around (and 
you could accidentally drop a few, which, if they happened to 
be lotus coins, would be disastrous). We would prefer a more 
portable written representation. Secondly, for the purposes of 
comparison (which will undoubtedly occur at some point), 
we would want the number packed up into tidy groups, not 
eighteen coils of rope in a row.
So the next step is to “cash in” or exchange the coins until 
they are as compact as possible. In particular, if we have a 
group of ten coins of the same kind, say heel marks g, we 
can trade them in for one coil of rope p. This clearly doesn’t 
change the actual number we are talking about, because p 
literally means ten g’s. This exchange maneuver does however 
affect the form our representation takes, and that is in fact the 
entire point. Every number can be represented in a variety 
of ways, and we want to choose a form that is as useful and 
convenient as possible. Sometimes, happily, this means doing 
absolutely nothing. Other times, we may want to “clean up” 
the representation a bit. It all depends on the circumstances 
and what we want in the particular situation. In this case, 

a r i t h m e t i c
30
where we are presenting a number that will be recorded and 
compared with other numbers, it is a good idea to pack it up 
and arrange it in order of size.
So we trade in ten coils for one lotus, and ten heel marks 
for one coil. That leaves us with four lotus coins, one coil of 
rope, two heels, and a pile of leftovers:
Trading in ten leftovers in exchange for a heel, we finally 
get:
We now have a compact representation of our total, and all 
that remains is to write it down: a p i 1 .
Notice that these exchanges can be made in any order 
and at any time. You have complete flexibility about if and 
when you want to do any of these trades. Sometimes you 
may perform a certain exchange, only to find yourself later 
making the exact opposite trade (e.g., in order to subtract). 
Part of being a fluent and efficient arithmetician is learning 
to avoid these sorts of redundancies. Think ahead and try 
not to do unnecessary actions—that is, if you want to. It’s 
not really a big deal; it’s just about the craft of it and how 
much you care about doing something well—just as with 
knitting.
In particular, it often saves time to do your exchanges “from 
the bottom up.” That is, cash in your leftovers first, then the 
groups, then the groups of groups, and so on. This will prevent 
your having to go back and recash a pile that you have already 
dealt with.

e g y p t
31
Three Egyptian goatherds decide to combine their flocks
for safety. The first goatherd has q j 7 goats,
the second has p n 3 , and the third has p 2 .
Despite their precautions, the wolves take m 6 .
How many goats remain?

32
ROME
The most popular and familiar marked-value representation 
system is the one used by the ancient Romans. This is argu-
ably the most successful arithmetic system in human history, 
at least in terms of longevity. It is simple, convenient, and easy 
to learn. The Roman system also provides a rather different 
solution to the problems of repetition and perception. The 
grouping size is still ten, and being a marked-value system, it 
has special names for a group, a group of groups, and so on. In 
the Roman system these are represented by various letters of 
the Roman alphabet. (The Greek and Hebrew alphabets were 
also used in a similar way.) Thus, leftovers were denoted by 
the letter I (no need to specify a capital I, since the Romans 
had no lowercase letters), a group of ten was represented by 
an X, and a group of groups by the letter C (the first letter of 
the Latin word centum, meaning “hundred”). A group of ten 
hundreds was written M (for mille, “thousand”).
The new idea was to introduce subgroup symbols in place of 
stacking. Instead of a long string of Is, which is hard to read and 
interpret, the Romans created a new symbol, V, to stand for five 
Is. Thus, rather than an obnoxious sequence of seven identical 
letters IIIIIII, one would simply write VII. Of course, the same 
thing was also done with the larger grouping sizes: L means five 
Xs (that is, fifty), and D stands for five Cs (five hundred).
What we are doing here is making a trade. We are elimi-
nating the need for stacking but at the cost of having more 
symbols to get used to. Once again, the new symbols (and 
their English equivalents) are:
	
I	
V	
X	
L
	
one	
five	
ten	
fifty
	
C	
D	
M
	
one	
five	
one
	
hundred	
hundred	
thousand

r o m e
33
It is a good idea to view the subgrouping symbols V, L, and 
D as less significant. They are mere “convenience” symbols, as 
opposed to the major grouping symbols I, X, C, and M. 
In essence, the Roman system is really the same as the 
Egyptian system, except that instead of stacking we solve 
the perception problem by introducing additional subgroup 
symbols. The choice of five as the subgroup size is very natu-
ral; it is the number of fingers on each hand. Both the Hand 
People and users of the five-barred gate system would whole-
heartedly approve. Presumably, a creature with eight manual 
protuberances (e.g., an octopus) would find that number to be 
a convenient group or subgroup size as well.
Let’s say you are a Roman scribe at the time of Cleopatra 
(circa 45 bc), and it is your job to translate the records of 
the Egyptian treasuries into Latin. How would you write the 
number Z u m 9 in the Roman system?
Here we can simply substitute the corresponding symbols 
(thankfully, the grouping sizes are the same) and use the 
convenient subgrouping symbols when there are five or more 
of a particular hieroglyph:
Z u m 9    MMMDCLXXVIIII
Notice that because there is no stacking, all of the symbols 
on the right have the same height. This is very convenient for 
inscriptions in stone (which the Romans were keen on), as 
well as for keeping lines of writing neat and even.
By the way, there is a popular misconception about Roman 
numerals that I would like to dispel. You may have seen (e.g., 
in chapter headings, dates, and on clocks and watches) the use 
of subtractive notation, where four is written as IV and nine 
as IX. The idea is that since I is smaller than V, we can write 
VI for six and IV for four without ambiguity. But in fact the 
Romans never did this, and for good reason. The main benefit 
of using a marked-value system is the convenience of having 
symbols whose values are fixed and independent of the order 
in which they are written. The second you start placing 

a r i t h m e t i c
34
symbols in some relation to others that needs to be kept track 
of, you introduce a delicate fragility into the system. You also 
add an extra layer of possible confusion to the computation 
process. No one would ever choose to do such a thing, as it 
would add unnecessary complexity.
Numbers are used for other purposes besides counting, 
however. For example, numbers make very convenient labels. 
Chapter numbers and copyright dates are good examples of 
instances where we often use numbers but not for arithme-
tic purposes. No one adds up house numbers either. These 
are simply stamps or labels we put on things for reference 
purposes. The subtractive shorthand became popular in the 
thirteenth century as a way to make such labels as short as 
possible. This was seldom done by the Romans and certainly 
never (by anyone) for the purposes of doing arithmetic.
While perusing the treasury records, you discover a
damaged papyrus scroll containing three entries
from the Aswan Granary:
 Y s k 3    X q h 1    r h 4 
Unfortunately, their sum is missing. Can you
translate the hieroglyphs into Roman numerals
and calculate the total?
A nice way to interpret the subgroup symbols (one that the 
Hand People would certainly appreciate) is to think of them 
as handfuls or, better yet, as an open palm with five fingers. 
In this way, a number like VIII can be viewed as a hand and 
three fingers:
VIII

r o m e
35
This is why I like to think of V as being part of the I-family. 
Similarly, when I see DC it looks like six to me (of course, I 
have to remember that it is six hundreds that I’m counting). 
So a fluent user of the Roman system would look at a large, 
complicated number like
MMMDCCLXVIII
and break it up in her mind as MMM (three thousands), 
DCC (seven hundreds), LX (six tens), and then finally VIII 
(eight leftovers).
Of course, the Romans did not speak English (it didn’t 
exist as a language back then) and had their own Latin names 
for numbers, many of which are related to our own English 
number words. For example, the above number would be read 
in Latin as tres milia septingenti sexaginta octo and in English as 
three thousand seven hundred sixty-eight. 
Computation in the Roman system is almost as easy as it was 
in Egypt. Being a marked-value system, there are no worries 
about where we place the symbols (although the Romans 
consistently wrote them left to right, from larger to smaller). 
In particular, if we are calculating a total we can just gather all 
the symbols together and arrange them however we like.
Imagine you’re a Roman merchant assigning cargo to be 
loaded onto a Mediterranean trading vessel. The ship can hold 
two thousand tons of cargo. The goods at the dock, together 
with their weights (in tons), are:
	
Wine: 	 DCCLXVII
	
Olives: 	 DLII
	
Togas: 	 DCLXXIII
Can all of this fit on the ship?
For this calculation we can simply count the number of 
occurrences of each symbol and exchange when needed:
DDDCCCLLLXXXVIIIIIII    MDCCCCLXXXXII

a r i t h m e t i c
36
And so all three shipments can be safely loaded on board with 
a little room to spare.
Just as with the Egyptian system, you may find yourself 
wanting some sort of an abacus to help you do your calcula-
tions more easily and with greater confidence. And in fact the 
Romans did have such a device, known as the tabula (Latin 
for “tablet”). Of course, you could still use counting coins, 
but the tabula is in many ways faster and easier to use. It also 
makes use of a powerful new idea: place value.
The idea is simple and elegant. We take a block of wood 
or marble and incise horizontal grooves in it, labeling each 
groove with the corresponding grouping and subgrouping 
symbols:
I like to make the subgrouping lines somewhat shorter, 
for reasons that will become evident. To represent a quantity 
on the tabula abacus, we simply place small stones in the 
grooves, one for each of the corresponding written symbols. 
Thus, the number MMDCCLXVII would be placed on the 
tabula as:

r o m e
37
These stones were known as calculi (the plural of calculus, 
or “counting stone”). This is the Latin root of such words 
as calculator and calculation. In fact, the word calculus itself 
comes from calx, meaning “limestone.” So there is an amus-
ing etymological connection between the words calculator and 
calcium (also chalk).
The important thing here is that the calculi are not marked 
in any way; they are all identical. What gives a counting stone 
its value is where it is located. This is the place-value idea. A 
calculus stone sitting in a bowl has no meaning at all until 
you drop it into a groove. Then it takes on the corresponding 
value. That means you don’t have to keep track of any markers 
or denominations. It doesn’t really even matter what you use 
for calculi, as long as they fit in the grooves and stay put (I 
wouldn’t recommend using ladybugs, for instance).
Make your own tabula abacus.
(If you like, you can draw lines on a piece of paper
and use buttons or pennies in place of stones.)
In moving from counting coins to the tabula, there is a 
tradeoff. We benefit from the flexibility of having unmarked 
calculi—a bunch of small, identical objects is easier to deal 
with than having to sort and keep track of marked denom-
inations—but we pay a price. The price is a certain amount 
of fragility. Because it now matters where a counting stone is 
placed, we have to be careful not to accidentally move it. If 
the cat jumps onto a pile of marked-value counting coins, 
it’s no big deal; their value is unaffected. But if Fluffy starts 
walking around on your tabula, a whole morning’s worth of 
calculation could be ruined. So that’s the trade: flexibility and 
convenience in exchange for being careful. This is a deal that 
has been made many times in the history of arithmetic, as we 
shall see.
Let’s say you’re a Roman scribe in charge of the olive oil 
storehouse. The senate has ordered MMDCXXXV flasks of 
oil for their upcoming bacchanal. Checking the supplies, you 

a r i t h m e t i c
38
find MCCCLXIII flasks upstairs and another MCCLXXIII 
in the cellar. Do you have enough to fill the order?
Let’s calculate the total using the tabula. We’ll start by load-
ing the first number (MCCCLXIII) onto the abacus, placing 
the calculus stones on the left side of each groove:
Now we can add in our second quantity (MCCLXXIII) on 
the right hand side:
Our desired total is now sitting there on the tabula, only 
not in the most convenient form for comparison purposes. 
We’ll need to do some exchanging to make it as simple and 
packed up as possible. Starting at the bottom, we can trade 
in five stones on the I-line for one on the V-line. Then the 
two stones on the L-line become one stone on the C-line. 
This gives us a total of six C-line stones, five of which can be 
cashed in for a stone on the D-line. After performing these 
exchange maneuvers, the tabula now looks like this:

r o m e
39
The total is now easy to write down: MMDCXXXVI. 
Comparing this to the quantity we need (MMDCXXXV), 
we see that we have exactly one flask of oil to spare. So the 
senators will enjoy their debauchery, and nobody will have to 
get stabbed or anything.
Notice how the exchange procedure is slightly more 
complicated on the tabula. That is another part of the trade. 
We replaced stacking by subgrouping, but then the exchange 
rate is different for groups and subgroups. This is why I made 
the subgrouping lines shorter. Five stones on a long line is 
worth one on the next higher (short) line, whereas it takes 
only two stones on a short line to cash in for a stone on the 
next higher (long) line. But that’s not really so bad—at least it’s 
the same consistent pattern for all long and short lines. In any 
case, it doesn’t take very long to get used to it, and even small 
children can become quite fluent at using the tabula after a 
few hours of practice.
Use the tabula to calculate the sum of MCCLXVII, 
MDCLVI, and LXXXVIIII. Is it more than MMM?
I like how easy it is to read the stone patterns on the tabula. 
Numbers like seven or seventy appear as one calculus stone 
on top of two, which feels just like a hand and two fingers.
By the way, if you are interested in becoming skilled at 
the tabula (an important part of the education of a Roman 

a r i t h m e t i c
40
scribe), you may wish to try a somewhat more advanced tech-
nique: rather than taking five calculi out of a long groove 
and replacing it with one on the next line, you can instead 
remove four of them and simply slide the fifth one up a line. 
This saves some time, but of course it also opens up a world 
of possibilities for confusion. You may find yourself staring at 
the stones in your hand with no clear idea of where you were 
in the exchange process, as it slowly dawns on you that you 
have lost track.
How would you design a tabula abacus
 for the Banana People?

41
CHINA AND JAPAN
The Roman system is an interesting mix of both marked-
value and place-value ideas. The written system is fully marked 
(including marked subgrouping symbols), whereas the abacus 
system—the tabula—is entirely place-valued. Another inter-
esting example of this kind of hybrid system is the one used 
in China from about 200 bc up until the last century. The 
same written system was also widely used in Japan, having 
been imported from China (along with calligraphy and liter-
ary culture in general) around 500 ad.
The new idea here is a bold (and perhaps definitive) solu-
tion to the perception problem. Instead of subgrouping, 
where new symbols are introduced to cut down the amount 
of repetition, the Chinese system goes further and gives every 
number from one to nine its own special symbol. This is a 
pretty extreme solution. Now there is no repetition at all to 
worry about, but the cost is fairly high—we need to learn a 
ton of new symbols. These (along with their English equiva-
lents) are:
	 一	 二	 三	
四	
五	 六	 七	
八 
九
	
one	
two	
three	
four	
five	
six	
seven	
eight	
nine
Notice that the first three symbols (apart from being hori-
zontal and somewhat stylized) are essentially the same as those 
employed by the Egyptians and Romans. After that, though, 
it’s an entirely new set of (rather arbitrary-looking) characters.
So, unlike the simple repetition-based representation 
schemes, the Chinese system has a bit of an initial hurdle: 
we need to memorize these nine symbols and what they 
stand for. On the other hand, most alphabets contain twenty- 
something letters, not to mention all the punctuation and 
accent marks we end up learning. So nine new symbols isn’t 
so bad. And it does utterly solve the perception problem. 

a r i t h m e t i c
42
There is really no possibility of confusion once the symbols 
are learned.
Of course, we will still need grouping symbols as well. 
These are:
 
十	
百	
千
	
ten	
hundred	
thousand
Here is the way the number MMDCLXXVIII would be 
rendered in Chinese:
二
千
六
百
七
十
八
First off, notice that the writing goes from top to bottom, 
instead of left to right. Second (and more important), notice 
how each grouping symbol is preceded by a single character 
that counts how many of those groups we want. So instead of 
repeating, as in MMM, we write
三
千
This can save a lot of time and space, as illustrated by these 
various representations of the number nineteen:
	
EE	
十
	
ED	
g 9	
XVIIII	
九

c h i na  a n d  j a pa n
43
In order to read a Chinese or Japanese numeral, we simply 
look for the grouping symbols and see how many are indi-
cated by the preceding character. It is also customary not 
to include such counting symbols when you have only one 
of a particular grouping size present. For example, here 
are three numbers written in both Roman and Chinese 
representations:
	
千
	
三	
	
九
	
百	
六	
百
	
十	
百	
四
	
四	
二	
十
	
MCCCXIIII	
DCII	
DCCCCXXXX
How would you write the following
numbers in the Chinese system?
RRHHHQQ , X t j 7 , 
DCLV, eight hundred ninety-one.
As you might expect, the Chinese and Japanese cultures 
have devised their own unique abacus devices as well. The 
Japanese abacus, the soroban, is the simpler of the two, and is 
closely related to the Roman tabula. The new feature of the 
soroban is that instead of grooves containing pebbles, we have 
beads mounted on a bamboo frame:

a r i t h m e t i c
44
To use the soroban, place it flat on the table as shown so 
that the beads are free to move along the posts. To place a 
number on the soroban, we must first “clear” the abacus by 
pushing all the beads away from the crossbar. This is analogous 
to removing all the calculi from the tabula.
Each post of the soroban corresponds to a pair of grooves 
on the tabula. For example, the rightmost beads count the 
ones, or leftovers. The four beads below the crossbar repre-
sent the four potential calculi on the I-line of the tabula, and 
the single bead above the crossbar corresponds to a possi-
ble stone on the V-line. To indicate that you wish a bead to 
count, simply move it up toward the crossbar (or down, if it 
is a five bead). Here is the same number represented in both 
systems:
The main difference between the Japanese soroban and the 
Roman tabula is that we don’t need to carry around a bowl of 
calculi; the stones (in the form of beads) are built in. It’s just a 
question of indicating which of them “count.” So, rather than 
putting stones on and taking them off, we are simply sliding 
beads back and forth. The great advantage is portability. The 
disadvantage? Well, if you thought the tabula was delicate and 
subject to being bumped and disturbed by cats, the soroban 
makes the tabula look like the Rock of Gibraltar. Talk about 
fragile! One slight jostle and the beads go willy-nilly. So yes, 
you as a sixteenth-century Japanese accountant can put your 
entire abacus system in the pocket of your kimono, but you’d 
better find a calm, secluded place to do your figuring—pref-
erably one with no pets or small children.

c h i na  a n d  j a pa n
45
Make your own soroban.
(If you like, you can simply draw a frame on paper
and use pennies or buttons for beads.)
The other major drawback to the bead-frame abacus is that 
you cannot insert additional beads. On the tabula, you have the 
freedom to load a groove with as many calculus stones as you 
please—to be cashed in later, perhaps, but at least you have the 
option to leave a groove uncashed. With the soroban, however, 
you experience the elegant Japanese minimalist aesthetic of 
having no more beads than are absolutely necessary. In a way 
this is nice; your numbers are always displayed in fully packed 
form, plus it keeps the weight down. On the other hand—and 
this is a very big other hand—it means you have to do all the 
exchanging in your head. That’s enough to make most people 
pretty squeamish, and it does mean that you have to practice a 
lot. Of course, anyone serious about doing a lot of arithmetic 
(e.g., our sixteenth-century Japanese accountant) will get quite 
a bit of practice on a daily basis and will gradually get used to it. 
Or you can go to school and get trained, whichever you prefer.
Let’s say you’re a medieval Japanese rice merchant. You have 
agreed to deliver sixty (六十) baskets of rice to the emperor’s 
concubines. (I will write the Japanese numerals left to right to 
save space, and I’ll throw in the concubines just to keep things 
interesting.) Checking the inventory, you find 二十七 baskets 
in the first storehouse and 三十五 in the second. Do you have 
enough rice to make the delivery? Will the concubines be 
pleased with you? (Now, this is why people do arithmetic!)
So we need to add the numbers 二十七 and 三十五 to 
see if they total at least 六十. Let’s begin by loading the first 
number onto the soroban:

a r i t h m e t i c
46
To do this, we slide up two ten beads (二十), and then enter 
the seven (七) as a five and two ones. (I’m using the words 
up and down, but since the soroban lies horizontally, it’s really 
away from and toward the user.)
Now, to add in the number 三十五, we need to add three 
more tens and five ones. Starting with the ones, we would like 
to add five (五) by simply sliding down a five bead. Unfor-
tunately, the five bead in the ones column is already down 
(meaning it counts). Here’s where we have to get clever. In 
order to add five, we’ll add ten and then take five away. This 
entails sliding up a ten bead and then sliding up the five bead 
in the ones column as well, so that it no longer counts. Our 
soroban now looks like this:
We just have to add in the three remaining tens (三十), and 
we’re done. So we proceed to slide up three more ten beads, 
only to find that there are not enough beads remaining. It’s 
time to be clever again. We want to add three beads to the 
tens column, so what we’ll do is add five and remove two. 
Sliding down an upper bead and two lower beads does the 
trick, leaving us with:
So our total is 六十二, and it turns out we have two baskets 
more than we need. (Do you think one of the concubines 
might like an extra basket?)

c h i na  a n d  j a pa n
47
This is pretty much what it’s like to use a soroban. It’s actu-
ally a lot of fun, in its own way. You get to be clever and 
creative, and it also feels good sliding a bunch of beads around. 
You do have to be on your toes, however.
Of course, one way to alleviate the mental stress of the 
soroban would be to add more beads. The Chinese abacus, 
for instance, uses five beads below the crossbar and two above. 
This gives you a little more leeway (not having to exchange 
mentally quite so often) at the cost of some mathematical 
elegance. Going further, you could design an abacus frame 
with twenty or thirty beads on each post (mimicking the idea 
of a large bowlful of calculus stones), but then you’re back to 
having perception difficulties: it’s hard to tell the difference 
between a stack of seven beads as opposed to eight.
No matter what plan you come up with, it will have advan-
tages and disadvantages, pros and cons, and will undoubt-
edly require a fair amount of practice before you get really 
comfortable.
What if the Banana People made a frame abacus?
What would it look like?

48
INDIA
Now that we’ve taken a look at a few different arithme-
tic systems—our imaginary tribal languages, the Egyptian 
system, and those used by the ancient Romans, Chinese, and 
Japanese—maybe it’s a good idea to start thinking about what 
we want out of such a system. What makes one representation 
scheme better than another? What should we look for in an 
abacus? If we wanted to get all snobby and academic about 
it, I suppose we could even christen this sort of investigation 
“comparative arithmetic.”
For symbolic numerical representation systems (that is, 
number languages), we’ve seen that an important requirement 
is that we solve the perception problem. There’s not much 
point in coming up with a representation scheme if we can’t 
easily tell at a glance what it is that we’ve represented. This 
means that our symbols need to be chosen with some care. 
They should be easy to tell apart and also quick and easy to 
write.
Most ancient Egyptians, for example, when doing a calcula-
tion would not bother spending five minutes carefully draw-
ing perfect lotus symbols. Instead, they would use a shorthand 
version—quick, easy squiggles that get the job done. Often 
the number four was written as a single horizontal stroke, 
rather than spending the time to make four vertical ones. This 
sort of thing happens all the time with all forms of language 
and communication. We are lazy and easily bored, and we 
want to get things over with.
If our written system uses repetition, then of course we 
need to choose a grouping scheme of some kind (e.g., stack-
ing or subgrouping) so that we can tell what we’ve got. The 
Chinese system solves this nicely, at the cost of memorizing a 
few more symbols. As for choosing a grouping size, we want 
to be a little careful. If our groups are too large then we will 
have a large number of potential leftovers and will either need 
to subgroup a lot or invent and learn busloads of new symbols.

i n d i a
49
The Babylonians, for instance, used a sexagesimal system, 
meaning that their fundamental grouping size was sixty. This 
means you might have as many as fifty-nine leftovers! Since 
no one wants to look at a string of fifty-nine identical cune-
iform hash marks, some sort of solution to the perception 
problem is required. The Babylonians chose to subgroup in 
tens, and then use stacking patterns for the numbers one 
through nine—the point being that a large grouping size 
means having to take some extra trouble.
On the other hand, if your grouping size is too small, then 
although there are no problems caused by repetition, things 
get annoying when the numbers get big. The Banana system, 
for example, does a great job representing numbers on the 
order of a few dozen, but when the numbers get very large 
(say, in the millions), we’re going to need tons of higher group-
ing symbols and the representations will be obnoxiously long.
The compromise we seem to have more or less settled on 
is to use ten as the standard grouping size (bakeries with their 
dozens and grosses notwithstanding). This is not so bad as far 
as it goes, but on the whole I’d say that ten is a bit too big. 
Maybe eight would be better. (Hopefully, the alien octopodes 
will one day conquer Earth and force us to use their elegant 
and well-designed octal system.)
Thus, our criteria for written systems should be ease of 
perception, ease of reading and writing, and a sensible group-
ing size.
What are the important features of an abacus device? A big 
one is portability. It’s pretty annoying to have to carry around 
a heavy and unwieldy marble tabula, not to mention a sackful 
of calculus stones. It’s much nicer to slip a light, self-contained 
bamboo soroban into your pocket and be on your way. (A 
more modern example would be using a laptop computer 
versus having to reserve time on the university mainframe.)
Another serious issue, as we’ve seen, is fragility (sensitivity 
to cats, in particular). That’s a big tradeoff with the soroban, to 
be sure. Perhaps most important, there is the issue of simplicity. 
How easy is it to learn to use? Is it straightforward and user 

a r i t h m e t i c
50
friendly, like Piles of Rocks and counting coins, or does it 
require a fair amount of training and mental gymnastics, like 
the soroban?
The truth is, there’s no best solution. Every written and 
spoken number language and every abacus device ever 
invented has its advantages and disadvantages. Undoubtedly 
the best approach is to be so flexible and intelligent that you 
can easily move from one to the other. This of course would 
entail doing some work and would require that you care. If 
you do not, then the typical strategy would be to become 
reasonably proficient at the language and abacus system in use 
in your particular culture. Luckily for you, you happen to live 
in a golden age of information processing, and the handheld 
electronic calculator is easy to use, cheap, and ubiquitous. So 
lucky you.
On the other hand, we’re not here just to be accountants. 
The point of studying arithmetic and its philosophy is not 
merely to get good at it but also to gain a larger perspec-
tive and to expand our worldview. At least that’s why I enjoy 
learning things. Plus, it’s fun. Anyway, as connoisseurs of arith-
metic, we should always be questioning and critiquing, exam-
ining and playing.
All of which brings me to what I wanted to talk about: 
India. Specifically, the bold and original approach to arithme-
tic devised by the Hindu mathematicians of the sixth century 
ad. In some ways, this system combines the best features of 
the Roman and Chinese systems (though as far as I know 
there was no direct influence by either civilization).
Just as in the Chinese system, the Hindu number language 
uses distinct symbols instead of stacking or subgrouping. The 
grouping size (as usual) being ten, this entails choosing easily 
distinguishable written symbols for the numbers one through 
nine. In the traditional Devangari script, these are:
	
१	
२	
३ 
४ 
५	
६	
७	
८ 
९
	 one	 two	 three	 four	
five	
six	
seven	 eight	
nine

i n d i a
51
In order to spare us having to learn an additional raft of 
new symbols, I’m going to instead replace these by their more 
familiar-looking (westernized) Arabic equivalents:
1  2  3  4  5   6  7  8  9
Before you start accusing me of historical inaccuracy and 
cultural insensitivity and so on, let me just point out that India 
is a big place, and different districts and principalities have used 
a variety of symbols and scripts over the centuries anyway. In 
any case, Arab traders were introduced to the Hindu system as 
early as 700 ad and quickly adapted it, using their own alpha-
bet. So to avoid redundancy, allow me to explain the workings 
of the Hindu system using the more familiar Arabic number 
symbols. This historically important hybrid is commonly 
known as the Hindu-Arabic decimal place-value system.
The big new idea is this: instead of using a marked-value 
written system together with a place-value abacus (as both 
the Romans and Chinese did), the Hindu innovation was to 
make the written system place-valued from the start. To do 
this, we’ll begin by drawing a frame of vertical lines:
This has the effect of dividing the page into columns. The 
idea is that each column corresponds to a different place 
value, like the long grooves in a tabula, or the posts of a soro-
ban. Specifically, the rightmost column (or “place”) will hold 
the leftovers, the next column represents the groups of ten, 
the next column hundreds, and so on. Thus, the number four 
thousand nine hundred seventy-two would be expressed as: 
4
9
7
2

a r i t h m e t i c
52
What we’re doing here is using a place-value representa-
tion system with marked-value entries. The symbols in each 
column are known as digits (from the Latin digitus, meaning 
“finger”). This really is the best of both worlds, since the 
place values of the columns eliminate the need for group-
ing symbols like C and百, while the marked values within 
the columns allow us to dispense with the rocks and beads. 
What this means is that our written system is an abacus 
system. And talk about portable—our abacus is a piece of 
paper and a pencil! There’s nothing for the cat to mess up, 
either. So what is the price we pay for all this luxurious 
durable portability?
The tradeoff comes when we start calculating. Suppose we 
wanted to increase a number by one. On the tabula, all we 
would need to do is add a calculus stone to the I-line. On 
the soroban, we just slide a bead. But here, using the Hindu- 
Arabic pencil-and-paper abacus, we need to do something 
utterly new: we need to change the symbol in the leftovers 
column. 
In the Roman and Japanese systems, the abacus is separate 
from the written encoding. We can perform computations 
(and any necessary rearrangements) using tangible objects 
and then write down the results later, after the smoke has 
cleared. But with the Hindu-Arabic system the writing and 
the calculating are inextricably linked. Instead of moving 
stones or sliding beads, our manipulations become trans-
mutations of the symbols themselves. That means we need to 
know things. We need to know that one more than 2 is 3, for 
instance. In other words, the price we pay is massive amounts 
of memorization.
To take a specific example, suppose we wanted to add 
two numbers together, say twenty-four and eighteen. If we 
were using a Roman tabula, we would simply place the two 
numbers XXIIII and XVIII on the abacus like so:

i n d i a
53
Cashing in five stones on the I-line for one on the V-line, 
and then exchanging two V’s for one X, we easily obtain 
XXXXII, and we really didn’t have to do too much thinking.
This same calculation on a soroban would be a bit more 
mentally taxing. We could start by loading the number 二十四 
onto the soroban:
To add the number 十八 onto this, we would slide up 
another ten bead and then we would want to add eight by 
sliding down a five bead and sliding up three more one beads. 
Unfortunately, all four one beads are already up, so we’ll have 
to be clever: we will add eight by adding ten and taking away 
two. So we slide up another ten bead and remove two ones, 
leaving us with 四十二.
With the Hindu-Arabic abacus, things get even more 
mentally strenuous. Now there’s nothing to pick up or slide 
around at all. We’ll just have to stare at these symbols and 
know how they “behave.” This introduces a whole new level 
of abstraction. We replace concrete objects we can hold in 

a r i t h m e t i c
54
our hands with abstract symbols dancing in our heads like 
sugarplum fairies.
The usual procedure is to put both numbers on the abacus, 
writing one above the other like so:
Then we can write their total below. Now, however, the 
entire exchange process must be done mentally. I will need 
to somehow know that four and eight combine to make one 
group and two leftovers. There are no rocks or beads to do it 
for me. Let’s do the calculation in a couple of stages.
First, we can add the leftovers together: four and eight make 
twelve, which means one group and two leftovers. We can 
write that down on the next line. Next, we can move on to 
the groups of ten: two and one make three. We write that 
down as well. Then, collecting it all together, we get a grand 
total of four groups and two leftovers, as expected:
The point is, we need a way to get the totals in each 
column—not as a total number of rocks or beads but as a 
symbol that represents the total of two numbers represented 
by symbols. This is yet another level of abstraction added on to 
our already fairly abstract representation system. So when we 
say that 3 added to 5 makes 8, we are doing something one 
step removed from adding piles of rocks. In particular, we aren’t 
counting. The symbol 3 isn’t three of anything; it’s a code that 
stands for three things. When we add we aren’t pushing any 
piles together, we are manipulating and transmuting symbols 
2
4
1
8
2
4
1
8
1
2
leftovers
3
groups
4
2
total

i n d i a
55
so that they encode the result of pushing piles together, and that 
is a decidedly more abstract and mentally challenging activity.
The total of two or more numbers is usually written 
symbolically using the plus sign (+), a Renaissance-era abbre-
viation for “and.” The equals sign (=) is used to indicate that 
the quantities on both sides of it are the same. Thus we write 
3 + 5 = 8, for instance, and the information is all there, short 
and sweet. Similarly, the minus sign (–) is used to denote 
subtraction. Thus we write 8 – 5 = 3. People say, “three plus 
five is eight” and “eight minus five is three.” (The words plus 
and minus are simply Latin for “more” and “less.”)
Anyway, the upshot is that we need to memorize a whole 
bunch of symbolic sums and differences. In particular, we’ll 
need to know (in symbolic form) the sums of each pair of 
numbers one through nine. One way to go would be to write 
all of this information down once and for all and keep it with 
us every time we want to do some arithmetic. This way, if 8 
plus 4 happens to come up, we can just look on our chart and 
find that the total is 12. Of course, we would need a similar 
chart for subtraction as well. (And, in a pinch, we can always 
count on our fingers if we need to.)
Make a chart of all sums and differences
of Hindu-Arabic digit symbols.
Do you notice any patterns?
Though this would spare us having to memorize a mass of 
symbolic data, it would quickly get tedious and annoying. It 
might be a reasonable way to get started, just as “Every Good 
Boy Does Fine” is a helpful mnemonic device for learning 
the lines of the treble clef, but such things have a tendency to 
quickly become obstacles instead of aids. When we learn to 
read there is a necessary initial stage of sounding out letters 
and fighting our way through a sentence, but what we are 
hoping to attain is fluency—the effortless comprehension of 
what is written without recourse to any external devices; the 
instant recognition of letter patterns seen hundreds of times 

a r i t h m e t i c
56
before. The same goes for the Hindu-Arabic decimal place-
value system.
The mistake that people usually make with this sort of 
thing (aside from trying to teach it to young children way 
before they are interested in it) is that they try to memorize 
by brute force. This is not really a very good way to memorize 
a body of information. I suppose that if for some reason you 
absolutely had to memorize the state capitals by tomorrow 
morning, then maybe you would simply have to cram them 
into your head somehow (and now that you know the capital 
of Kentucky is Frankfort, think of the whole new world of 
creative intellectual possibilities that opens up!).
No, it’s no good remembering things that way, especially 
highly patterned interrelated information like the Hindu-Ar-
abic digit sums. The best way to learn such things is to play 
with them a lot. The patterns will naturally become familiar 
just from experience. And you may find yourself forgetting 
them and having to reconstruct them from scratch. That is 
all to the good. The same thing happens with reading sheet 
music (I still screw up on the bass clef sometimes) and with 
spelling—that’s what dictionaries are for.
In fact, getting stuck (say on 7 + 8, for instance) is one of 
the best things that can happen to you because it gives you an 
opportunity to reinvent and to appreciate exactly what it is 
that you are doing: you are rearranging numerical information 
for comparison purposes. You have an amount of things, seven 
of them added to eight of them, and that is a complete and 
unambiguous description of what you have. There is no need 
to do anything. The number 7 + 8 is not a problem requiring 
a solution, nor a question seeking an answer. It is a number, 
that’s all. Oh, what’s that you say? You want to compare it with 
something else? Well, all right. That’s another matter. Now 
we might want to rearrange the form that our representation 
takes to make the comparison more convenient. We might 
need to know if that many eggs (one hen laid seven and the 
other eight, say) will all fit in a single egg carton—that is, 
whether seven added to eight is more than twelve.

i n d i a
57
Assuming we wish to operate using the Hindu-Ara-
bic system, we would then want to express these numbers 
symbolically by grouping them into tens and leftovers. So the 
question then becomes: How many groups of ten do we create 
when we combine seven and eight, and how many leftovers?
The way I like to do this is to take one of the numbers, say 
eight, and ask myself what I would need to do to bring it up to 
a full group of ten—in this case, I’d need to increase it by two. 
Thinking in terms of rocks, I would steal two rocks away from 
the pile of seven and move them onto the pile of eight, thus 
making a group. That reduces the seven pile by two, making 
it a pile of five. So I have a group and five leftovers, otherwise 
known as fifteen. When we say that seven plus eight is fifteen 
what we are really saying is that seven combined with eight 
can be rearranged into a group of ten and five leftovers. In fact, 
the very word fifteen is simply an abbreviation for five and ten. 
So it is vital (if you want to attain any kind of real arithmetic 
fluency) that you play around and get to be friends with small 
numbers and how they form groups of various sizes—espe-
cially tens, if you want to use the Hindu-Arabic system. There 
is actually a lot of fun and satisfaction to be had by noticing 
such things and seeking out clever ways to arrange and rear-
range quantities. For example, if I wanted to total up a list of 
numbers like 7, 8, 4, 3, 2, and 5, it is mildly amusing to notice 
that the 7 combines with the 3 to make a group of ten, and the 
8 goes along with its partner 2 to make another, leaving me 
with 4 and 5, which I happen to know make 9, so I get two 
groups and nine leftovers, or 29. The word twenty-nine reflects 
this grouping, since twenty is short for two tens.
Anyway, my point is that by playing around for a while the 
behavior of your new friends will start to become familiar. 
You don’t need to intentionally set out to memorize anything. 
Unless, of course, you want to.
Design a Hindu-style system for the Banana People.
There are much fewer symbols now.
Can you learn the various digit sums?

a r i t h m e t i c
58
Let’s suppose that we know all the single-digit sums or that 
we have a table of them handy. Just to give you an idea of the 
flexibility and convenience of our new system, let’s see if we 
can answer this question: Can I load my one thousand eight 
hundred and four pound elephant and my six hundred nine-
ty-seven pound gorilla safely onto the freight elevator, which 
has a two thousand five hundred pound weight limit?
We’ll start by entering our two numbers into the abacus 
frame:
Notice that our first number happens to have no tens and 
our second number has no thousands, so of course we leave 
those spaces blank.
Now we can start totaling the various quantities of tens, 
hundreds, and so on. Just to give you an idea of your options 
here, we could start with the hundreds. Knowing (by what-
ever means) that six and eight make fourteen (i.e., a group of 
ten and four leftovers), we see that we have fourteen hundreds. 
Similarly, seven and four make eleven (the seven steals three 
from the four to make a group, leaving one), so we have a 
total of eleven leftovers.
A perfectly reasonable thing to say at this point would be 
that our total is one thousand, fourteen hundred, ninety- 
eleven. This is not at all wrong or bad—confusing, perhaps, 
but in no way incorrect. It’s just that it’s still unpacked and 
inconvenient for comparison purposes. We could even write 
it this way if we wanted:
This is very much like putting two numbers on a tabula and 
then gathering all the calculi on each line together, the point 
being that we still have some exchanging to do if we want it 
as packed up as possible. On the tabula or soroban this means 
1
8
4
6
9
7
1
8
4
6
9
7
1
14
9
11

i n d i a
59
moving some rocks and beads around, getting rid of some 
here, adding others there.
On the Hindu abacus it means reinterpreting our symbols. 
Instead of exchanging ten pennies for one dime, or removing 
ten calculi from the I-line and replacing them with one stone 
on the X-line, we need to simply understand ten in the ones 
column as being the same as one in the tens column. Similarly, 
ten in the hundreds column can be thought of as one in the 
thousands column.
So another way of writing the same sum would be:
Here I’ve simply totaled each column separately and 
entered these subtotals into the abacus. Instead of writing 
14 in the hundreds column, however, I’ve reinterpreted this, 
exchanging the ten in the hundreds column for a one in the 
thousands. Same with the eleven ones. So this is yet another 
form of our number. Of course, it is still somewhat unpacked 
and spread all over the place in various rows and so forth, so 
we still have some work to do. Namely, we need to total these 
columns to get:
1
8
4
6
9
7
1
thousands total
1
4
hundreds total
9
tens total
1
1
ones total
1
8
4
6
9
7
1
column totals
1
4
with
9
exchanges
1
1
2
4
collected
1
totals
1
2
5
1
final total

a r i t h m e t i c
60
Notice that the tens column overflows this time to form 
a group of ten tens (i.e., one hundred) with no leftover tens. 
So in the end we find a total of two thousand five hundred 
one pounds, putting us slightly over the weight limit. It’s good 
that we figured this out before we loaded the animals into the 
freight elevator!
Now, you may have observed the preceding calculation 
with a mixture of dismay and disgust. Yes, it was lengthy. Yes, 
it was somewhat inefficient. That is to be expected. The first 
time you do anything it’s usually a bit of a mess. And, in fact, 
over the past fifteen centuries there have been a number of 
improvements made to the system, both in notation as well as 
in the way we operate the abacus.
If you are neat and careful, and reasonably well organized, 
one simple improvement would be to eliminate the frame 
itself and simply line the digits up as you write them:
	
18	 4
	
  69	7
That saves a lot of time and energy and has a simpler visual 
appearance as well. There are problems with this scheme, of 
course, the most obvious being that it places an extra burden 
on the user to be tidy and to have fairly decent penmanship. If 
that’s not you, then I would recommend sticking to the frame 
and its lines—you could use lined notebook paper sideways, 
for example.
The other big problem with removing the gridlines is 
possible ambiguity: if I write 2 8, do I mean twenty-eight 
(and I’m just giving the 2 and the 8 plenty of room), or do I 
actually mean two hundred eight, or even two thousand eight, 
and the blank space matters? We can’t have a written system 
that requires us to leave set amounts of space between our 
symbols; we’re way to lazy and sloppy to stand for anything 
like that.
So the Hindu arithmeticians came up with a wonderful, 

i n d i a
61
revolutionary, and hilarious solution: create a new symbol to 
stand for nothing. We simply expand our number language to 
include a “blank” or placeholder symbol, so we can tell if a 
column is intended to be empty (as opposed to just being a 
space between consecutive symbols).
I think it is ironic and clever to have a symbol that stands 
for nothing. Not only does it mean that we are adding a 
new symbol to our representation system, it also means that 
we are subtly adding a new number to our world of quanti-
ties: zero, the number of lemons you have when you haven’t 
got any lemons at all. Clearly, this is not a quantity we have 
any trouble perceiving (I know when I’m broke and when 
I’m completely out of chocolate), and it’s also not a terribly 
complicated or difficult amount to work with, either. Noth-
ing from nothing leaves nothing, as the song says.
Of course, zero has no real practical utility as a number. 
Its function in the Hindu-Arabic system is to be a place-
holder—its meaning is to give meaning to the other symbols 
by telling us where they stand in relation to each other. As 
I’m sure you know, the usual Hindu-Arabic symbol for zero 
is 0. (This can be confusing, since it looks so much like the 
letter O, but that’s what you get for importing an Arabic 
symbol into an Anglo-Saxon language using a Roman 
alphabet.) 
So now we really can dispense with the abacus frame alto-
gether and just write our numbers freely, using the new zero 
symbol whenever we wish to indicate an empty column. 
Thus, we can write 28, 208, or 2008 with no possibility of 
confusion.
While we’re on the subject of zero, let me just say that 
I’ve never quite understood what all the fuss is about. For 
some reason, people seem to get all bent out of shape about 
“the invention of zero” as some kind of landmark event, not 
only in the history of arithmetic but in the development of 
civilization itself. I say poppycock. I would further go on to say 
balderdash. The zero idea allows us to dispense with the abacus 

a r i t h m e t i c
62
frame, that’s all. It’s a good idea, I grant. But it’s not zero that 
is the breakthrough concept, it’s the idea of a symbolic place-
value system—frame lines or no.
Yet another way to improve the Hindu-Arabic abacus 
system is to reduce the number of exchanges by always 
operating from right to left: we cash in all of the leftovers 
first, collecting together any groups of ten, and then proceed 
to the tens column from there. This way, once a column is 
fully cashed in, it will never need to be revisited. Here is our 
previous example, worked in this somewhat more efficient 
manner:
	
1804
	
  697
	
1
Starting at the right (with the ones), we get four and seven 
make eleven, which is one group and one leftover, so we 
write down that leftover. Now, remembering (and this is the 
key) that I just made a group of ten, this means that I actually 
have one more ten then just the nine that are written, so that 
means I have ten tens total. (Notice that this is all going on in 
our heads.) So that makes one hundred and no leftover tens. 
That means there will be no tens at all when the smoke clears. 
So let’s write down that fact:
	
1804
	
  697
	
01
At this stage, we have just cashed in the tens to make one 
hundred, which means we have to remember that. Less writing, 
more thinking—those are the terms of the deal.
Next, we move on to the hundreds, and we see that we 
have eight and six makes fourteen of them—and oh yes, the 
one more we had to remember from cashing in the tens—so 
that’s fifteen hundreds total. That means five and ten of them, 

i n d i a
63
or five hundreds and another ten hundreds, which is one 
thousand. So that’s five leftover hundreds, which we quickly 
write down:
	
1804
	
  697
	
 501
And again we need to be on our toes and remember that 
we just made an extra thousand. This, together with the one 
we already have on the abacus gives us two of them, so that’s 
the total number of thousands and we’re done:
	
1804
	
  697
	
2501
So that’s quite a bit faster and requires much less writing. 
Of course, the price we pay is that it’s much more demand-
ing on our memory. But really, what is it that we need to 
remember?
Assuming we’re only adding a couple of numbers together, 
the worst that can really happen is that one column “spills 
over” and makes an extra in the next column. That is, we only 
really need to remember whether there’s an overflow or not. 
Is that really so hard?
One way I like to think of it is to imagine that I’m sewing 
with an imaginary needle (we won’t need any imaginary 
thread). I start by passing the needle through the ones column 
(from top to bottom), picking up the quantities contained in 
that column:

a r i t h m e t i c
64
Thus the needle first picks up the nine, then the three, 
making twelve. Then I drop off the leftovers (2 in this case) 
in that column, leaving the 1 that may still be there due to 
making a group of ten. Then the needle goes back up to the 
top of the next column, and the 1 on the needle now gets 
counted as part of that column. (This cleverly takes care of the 
exchanging and reinterpreting process, because the 1 which 
formerly stood for ten in the ones column is now simply a 
one in the tens column.)
This process is usually called carrying, and here we are liter-
ally carrying the 1 on our imaginary needle (OK, maybe 
figuratively). What I then like to do is to make the carried 1 
“active” by having it increment the topmost number in that 
column. So here the 6 becomes (in my mind) a 7 symbol. 
Then the process repeats until I finish with the last (leftmost) 
column.
The point being that all I need to remember and visualize is 
whether at the time of each “stitch” my needle has a 1 on it or 
not. This metaphor also emphasizes the somewhat mechanical 
quality of the Hindu-Arabic abacus, making it feel a lot like 
knitting and sewing and other relaxing manual crafts. Anyway, 
it’s how I like to think of it. The good news is that it’s pretty 
quick, not too mentally taxing, and it gets the job done.
Of course, there are those for whom even this small expen-
diture of mental energy is too much; who for some reason do 
not trust themselves to remember what’s on their needle. In 
fact, many people have been trained to actually write down 
little 1’s above the relevant column so they don’t forget:
	
1	 1
	
2569
	
  803
	
3372
This has always struck me as a bit silly. How hard is it to 
remember that you just made a group of ten, just a second 
ago? Of course you should do as you wish. But if you want 

i n d i a
65
to attain real fluency, you’ll want to dispense with the little 
1’s. Plus, they mess up your paper and obscure the origi-
nal numbers. My advice would be to use a different abacus 
system, like a tabula or counting coins. Then you don’t have 
to remember anything (except the exchange rate).
Naturally, things get a bit more demanding when you’re 
adding three or more numbers together. For example, if we 
wanted the total of 3278, 867, and 2389, we would first align 
them as usual:
	
3278
	
 867
	
2389
Then the first pass of the needle would pick up 8, 7, and 9, 
for a total of 24 leftovers. (Notice all the mental carrying we 
need to do even at this stage.) Dropping off the four ones, we 
are left with a 2 on our needle for the second stitch:
	
3278
	
867
	
2389
	
4
The 2 on the needle turns the 7 into a 9, which together 
with 6 and 8 makes 23, so we write down the 3 and leave the 
2 on the needle:
	
3278
	
 867
	
2389
	
34
The carried 2 together with the 2, 8, and 3 in the third 
column give us 15, so we drop off the 5 and carry the 1 over 
to the final column, giving us a total of 6 in the thousands 
place:

a r i t h m e t i c
66
	
3278
	
 867
	
2389
	
6534
And we’re done. The same technique applies no matter 
how many numbers you wish to add together; the only real 
difficulty is keeping track of the column totals in your head. 
Whether or not this is something you want to take the time 
to get good at, it is nice to know that the method is perfectly 
general.
Of course, many people (including myself ) often dispense 
with any systematic procedures whatsoever and simply rear-
range and exchange mentally: “Let’s see here, 2569 + 803. 
Two thousand five hundred and another eight hundred, that’s 
thirty-three hundred, then I’ve got sixty and twelve, so seven-
ty-two, making thirty-three seventy two, 3372. Done.” Natu-
rally this sort of thing requires a bit more concentration and 
a fair amount of experience, but it’s well within most people’s 
ability.
Sometimes, for instance, I prefer to move from left to right, 
despite the additional labor of recashing a column, because a 
lot of times I’ll see that my total is already too big, and then I 
don’t need to continue. Anyway, the point is that you can do 
whatever you like, and you should. Especially when it comes 
to inventing your own personal ways of operating.
You are a tenth-century Arab trader on the Mediterranean.
One of your ships can hold 800 tons of cargo, and the
other can hold 825 tons. Your shipments are:
Spices: 152 tons
Carpets: 721 tons
Tea: 312 tons
Silk: 465 tons
Can you fit everything onto the ships?

i n d i a
67
Now let’s see what subtraction looks like in the Hindu-Ar-
abic system. Right away this means we have a whole new 
boatload of symbolic “number facts” to memorize (e.g., 12 
take away 7 leaves 5). Again, the best way to learn such things 
is not to try; just work them out with rocks or on your fingers 
each time, and they will start to sink in after a while. Not that 
it’s a big deal if they don’t. I’m sure there are certain words 
you have to look up every time you read them and no matter 
what you do you can’t seem to remember what they mean. I 
have that with the word ontological for some reason. (Damn! 
Now I have to go look it up again.)
So let’s suppose we know all the small number differences 
from experience (all of this would be so easy if our grouping 
size were five or six, but alas). Now the question is, what does 
the mental exchange process look like when we subtract?
Imagine we are twelfth-century Arab silk merchants. We 
recently sailed to Naples with 1876 bolts of saffron and 1422 
bolts of indigo dyed silk. We sold 1551 bolts of the saffron 
colored silk and 973 of the indigo. What is our remaining 
stock?
Let’s start with the saffron-colored silk. Of course, most 
experienced merchants would do such calculations in their 
heads, but let’s say we don’t trust ourselves to do that. The 
usual procedure would be to write down the amounts, the 
smaller one below the larger (not that it really matters):
	
1876
	
1551
On the tabula we would simply remove the requisite 
calculi: take one stone off the I-line, one from each of the 
L- and D-lines, and one from the M-line. Now, however, this 
must be done purely symbolically, which means by memory:
	
1876
	
1551
	
 325

a r i t h m e t i c
68
If we happen to know the differences between small 
numbers, then we can simply write them down: 6 minus 1 is 
5, 7 minus 5 is 2, and 8 minus 5 is 3. So we have 325 remain-
ing bolts of saffron silk.
As for the indigo-colored silk, things are a bit more compli-
cated. Placing the numbers on the abacus (i.e., writing them 
down, aligned on top of each other), we have:
	
1422
	
  973
If we were using a tabula or a soroban, we would need to 
start exchanging. For example, on the I-line we would have 
only two stones and we need to remove three. So we would 
exchange one of the calculi on the X-line for ten stones on 
the I-line (or, if you wanted to save time, one stone on the 
V-line and five on the I-line). Now we would have enough 
stones on the I-line to allow us to remove the three we want 
to take away. So on the tabula, subtraction entails uncashing 
or unpacking some of the information to provide a supply 
of lower-valued objects for removal—while, of course, not 
actually changing the represented quantity, only its outward 
form.
With the soroban, we would need to do a similar, though 
somewhat more elaborate maneuver: we remove a ten bead 
(that is, we move it away from the crossbar so that it no longer 
counts) and then note (mentally) that since we need to put 
the ten back in, and we are also subtracting three, this is the 
same as adding seven, so we would add on a five bead and 
two one beads.
In the Hindu-Arabic system all of this exchanging must be 
done in our heads: we take one of our tens (so we now have 
only one ten left), and we crumble it into ten ones (so now 
we have twelve in the ones column. Taking away three leaves 
us with nine ones. So we can write:

i n d i a
69
	
1422
	
  973
	
9
The only slightly confusing thing being that the 2 in the 
tens column is actually a 1, since we cashed in one of our tens 
already. (This procedure is commonly known as borrowing, but 
it’s really more of an exchange than a loan; in any case, we’ve 
already paid it back.)
Some people go so far as to actually cross out the 2 and 
replace it with a 1:
	
1
	
1422
	
 973
	
9
This is done out of fear, I suppose, that they will forget about 
the exchange that they just did two seconds ago. That seems 
ridiculous to me. First of all, it slows us down for no reason, 
and even more heinously, it messes up the very numbers we 
are interested in working with! Is it really so hard to remem-
ber what you just did? If you must do such things, why not 
simply place a dot over the number you borrowed from, or 
some other harmless mark to indicate that it is actually one 
less than it appears?
My advice is to shun such pointless and time-consuming 
devices and simply get on with the calculation. Just as we 
needed to remember whether our needle was “loaded” or 
not, here we just need to be aware of when we have stolen or 
borrowed, or whatever you want to call it.
So now we have only one ten and we need to remove 
seven. This will require another exchange. Taking one of our 
hundreds and exchanging it for ten tens (which is, after all, 
what a hundred is—our special name for a group of groups) 

a r i t h m e t i c
70
gives us eleven tens to work with. Now we can easily take 
away the seven tens, leaving us with four of them:
	
1422
	
  973
	
  49
The computation is going very smoothly—we just need to 
be conscious of the fact that the 4 in the hundreds column 
should be regarded as a 3. And again, since nine hundreds are 
to be subtracted, we still need to exchange once more: we 
turn the thousand into ten hundreds to give us thirteen of 
them, then remove nine, leaving us with four:
	
1422
	
  973
	
 449
As complicated as this may seem at first—memoriz-
ing a bunch of symbolic information, exchanging mentally, 
remembering when we have done so, and aligning every-
thing properly—with a little practice it becomes quite easy 
and even enjoyable. Like I said before, it’s really just symbol 
knitting: a small number of basic moves that are repeated over 
and over to produce something of value—information, in this 
case. Now we know that we have 449 bolts of indigo cloth 
left, so we know that we cannot promise to deliver 450, for 
instance.
A warehouse fire has destroyed 288 of the 449 bolts
of indigo silk. Moths have ruined another 75.
Do you still have enough left to fill
the sultan’s order of 84 bolts?
One important thing to notice about the Hindu-Arabic 
system is that the exchange rate is uniform. Each column 
is worth exactly ten times the one next to it. There are no 

i n d i a
71
subgroups as with the tabula; each exchange is always the 
same: we take one away from a column and increase the 
column to the right of it by ten. Once this becomes familiar, 
then it ceases to matter whether you are working in the tens 
column or in the ten millions column; the process is always 
the same. That’s a very nice feature.
There is one case where things can get slightly confusing, 
and that is when you are subtracting from a column and you 
need to borrow, but the next column is empty. That is, there’s 
nothing there to cash in. For example, suppose we are faced 
with a subtraction like this:
	
2057
	
  386
	
   1
Here we are in the second column (the tens), having only 
five and needing to take away eight. The usual thing to do 
would be to cash in a hundred, giving us fifteen tens. But alas, 
we have no hundreds at all.
What a Roman would do, of course, is to take a stone off 
the M-line and exchange it for a bunch of hundreds so that 
there would be enough of them to use. For us this would 
mean regarding the 0 in the hundreds column as actually 
being a ten, and the 2 in the thousands column becomes a 1 
in our minds:
2057  on paper    1  10  5  7  mentally.
Now there are plenty of tens, so we can easily cash one of 
them in to make ten ones:
1  10  5  7    1  9  15  7
In essence, we are thinking of the number two thousand 
fifty-seven as being one thousand nine hundred fifteenty- 
seven. So when zeros are present there can be a drop more 

a r i t h m e t i c
72
mental labor involved. Mostly, the effort is to keep clear about 
what you are doing and not get confused. But that’s true with 
ordinary knitting as well; occasionally you drop a stitch and 
have to backtrack a bit. It’s all part of the fun of it, really. So on 
paper, our calculation would now look like this:
	
2057
	
  386
	
  71
Here is where we gave ourselves the extra tens (so that we 
have fifteen of them), took away eight to leave us with seven, 
and now we just need to be awake to the fact that we are 
left with only one in the thousands column but nine in the 
hundreds. So we conclude with:
	
2057
	
  386
	
1671
One thing I like to do at this point is to quickly add the two 
bottom numbers to make sure they total to the top number, 
as they should. Since I’m a lot faster at addition, this is an easy 
way to check myself. Sure enough, it all works out.
Generally speaking, when one is subtracting from a number 
it is always nice when its digits are large, because that cuts 
down on the number of exchanges. I usually go so far as 
to allow numbers in the teens and even twenties to occupy 
a single mental column. For example, if I need to add two 
numbers, say 453 and 866, and then subtract another, say 395, 
I usually won’t bother cashing in at all: 453 and 866 is 12 11 
9 (that is, twelve hundred eleventy-nine), and then it is easy 
to remove 395 to get 924. Anyway, real fluency means you 
are comfortable with any sort of representation, and you often 
like to invent your own methods. So do that.
Which is larger, 5003 – 2684 or 4086 – 1767 ?

i n d i a
73
I guess my real point here (and with this book in general) is 
that there are many good strategies for encoding and manip-
ulating numerical information, and you can use them in any 
way you see fit. Instead of thinking in terms of systems and 
rules, think of it more as options and tools at your disposal. 
There’s no rule saying I can’t have forty-seven in the tens 
column if I want to; the only issue is whether I know what I 
mean and what I want. So play around!
One more thing about the Hindu-Arabic system: now that 
we have a fully symbolic place-value representation system 
(which also functions as a lightweight and durable abacus), 
it is almost effortless to extend it to larger and larger quan-
tities. Whereas the Egyptians, Romans, and Japanese would 
need to add new symbols at each new stage of grouping, the 
Hindu-Arabic system carries with it no such burden. The 
only thing needed is to add more columns, and that’s triv-
ial. In principle, we could even work with such astronomical 
numbers as 
180224600381257928805.
It is amusing to note that our system allows us to easily 
write and calculate with such vast quantities, regardless of 
whether we can conceive or comprehend them.
There remains the question of how to say such a number. 
In a way, this presents us with a new kind of perception prob-
lem. Of course it doesn’t really matter very much, since the 
digit sequence itself holds all the information. There is actu-
ally no real need for words like ten, hundred, or thousand. We 
could just say “three-two-eight” instead of “three hundred 
twenty-eight” (and people often do).
In fact, there are words out there, like million, billion, and 
trillion (and even absurd pseudo-words like octillion), that 
correspond to increasingly larger place values. In English, the 
usual practice is to break the columns into groups of three 
(notice how often we group things!) and invent a new group-
ing name every third place. Thus, a number like 40261396 

a r i t h m e t i c
74
would be separated as 40 261 396 and read as “forty million, 
two hundred sixty-one thousand, three hundred ninety-six.” It 
has been customary (at least in the United States) to separate 
these groups by commas—that is, to write 40,261,396—but 
that tradition seems to be on the way out. In Europe, the 
period (40.261.396) is often used as a separator. Curiously, in 
many Asian countries it is customary to introduce new place 
names every four columns.
The alien octopodes have arrived and have instituted 
their octal (base-eight) regime. Thankfully, they have  
allowed us to retain the digit symbols 01234567.
How would the number two hundred seventy-three
be written in this new system?

75
EUROPE
Now that we have arrived at a point in our brief pseudo- 
history of arithmetic where things are starting to feel a bit 
more familiar, I think it is especially vital to be conscious and 
clearheaded. The problem with familiarity is not so much 
that it breeds contempt but that it breeds loss of perspective. 
Having grown up with the Hindu-Arabic decimal place-
value system and being constantly inundated with these 
particular symbols and digit sequences, as well as our names 
for them, it is easy to lose sight of the big picture and to 
allow convention (not to mention schooling) to substitute 
for understanding.
In particular, I want to make sure that we remain awake 
to the distinction between a number in and of itself (that is, 
a quantity in the abstract) as opposed to a culturally deter-
mined choice of representation. There is nothing sacrosanct 
about this Hindu-Arabic symbolic encoding of ours. It’s one 
of many such systems that people have come up with, and 
though it is certainly widespread and popular, it is certainly 
not the only one in common use. The five-barred gate is still 
going strong, for instance.
Numbers have an unlimited variety of ways in which they 
can be represented, and regardless of how we may feel about 
the pros and cons of these various choices, I can tell you 
one thing for sure: the numbers themselves don’t care. Six has no 
interest in your little pet name for it, or by what silly scrawl 
you care to represent it. Six is six, or rather, six is the entity 
that embodies sixness. Six is even, and six is one more than 
five. These are intrinsic properties independent of language 
and culture. The observation that six looks like a nine upside 
down is not really a statement about the number but about the 
shapes of some Arabic squiggles. The more you can step back 
and free yourself from the language (especially the choice of 
ten as a grouping size), the more flexible and mathematical 
your viewpoint will be.

a r i t h m e t i c
76
As a mathematician, I tend not to think of numbers 
symbolically, or even necessarily as quantities. To me, numbers 
are creatures that exhibit behavior, and I occupy my time 
observing, studying, and trying to understand that behavior. 
Depending on the circumstances, I may choose to represent 
a number symbolically, but my choice will be guided by my 
own purposes and aesthetic sensibilities more than what the 
shopkeepers of my era happen to be using. All I’m trying to 
say is that we need to be wary and not let our familiarity with 
a particular system blind us to its arbitrariness.
The Hindu-Arabic decimal place-value system was intro-
duced to Europe in the early thirteenth century. Instrumen-
tal in the spread and popularization of this new arithmetic 
system was Liber Abaci (Book of the Abacus), written by the 
mathematician Leonardo of Pisa, also known as Fibonacci. 
Essentially, this was the first European arithmetic textbook.
Despite its obvious advantages over the clumsier Roman 
system, which were immediately recognized by scholars and 
professional accountants, the Hindu-Arabic system was slow 
to catch on with the general public. Even as late as the eigh-
teenth century, well-educated adults found it confusing and 
overly technical.
Eventually, the convenience of a symbolic calculating system 
free of rocks, beads, and coins, together with the increasing 
availability of inexpensive paper, finally won out over people’s 
natural unwillingness to learn something new. (I wonder how 
reluctant people would be now to adopt any further improve-
ments to the system?)
Actually, one such improvement was proposed following 
the French revolution of 1789. The new government, in its 
zeal to do away with all remnants of the ancien regime, voted to 
abolish the old system of weights and measures that had been 
in place since the time of the Romans, and replace it with a 
more modern, rational, and scientifically enlightened version, 
commonly known as the metric system.
The idea is that if we are going to adopt a numerical repre-
sentation scheme that is based on a grouping size of ten—and 

e u r o p e
77
certainly by the late eighteenth century the Hindu-Arabic 
system was the conventional choice throughout most of 
Europe—then it makes good sense to have all of our measur-
ing units organized along similar lines.
Thus, instead of a mile being eight furlongs, each furlong 
being two hundred twenty yards, a yard being three feet, and 
a foot being twelve inches (which are then further subdi-
vided into quarters, eighths, and sixteenths), the revolutionary 
government took the suggestion of the leading scientists of 
the day to adopt a more decimally oriented system of units: 
a kilometer is ten hectometers, each of which is ten decame-
ters, a decameter being ten meters. A meter is then divided 
into ten decimeters, each of which consists of ten centime-
ters, which are then divided into ten millimeters. The way the 
units are grouped and subdivided then matches the grouping 
size of the number system. It’s not the number ten itself that 
matters so much, it’s consistency. We could just as well choose 
eight as our grouping size for both numerical representation 
as well as for our measuring units, and things would be every 
bit as convenient, if not more so.
Mind you, not all of these metric units are equally popular 
or useful in actual practice. Meters and kilometers are used 
quite frequently, hectometers almost never. Most people 
seem to prefer thinking of a half meter as fifty centimeters 
rather than five decimeters. Taste and habit certainly play a 
role in such decisions, but no matter what your preferences, 
it is always more convenient to have consistent agreement 
between your measuring units and your number system.
One interesting example where the old nondecimal units 
have been retained is in the measurement of time. For what-
ever reason, we have held on to the division of the day into 
twenty-four segments (known as hours), and the hour into 
sixty minutes, which are then further divided into sixty 
seconds. Clearly this goes back to the Babylonians with their 
standard grouping size of sixty. Perhaps this way of measur-
ing time is simply too deeply ingrained. Changing ells and 
fathoms to meters is one thing, but noon not being twelve 

a r i t h m e t i c
78
o’clock—madness! Maybe the French scientists feared that 
messing with the way people tell time would start a riot or 
some other violent protest. (The guillotines were still stand-
ing, after all.)
Nevertheless, there is in fact nothing special about twelve, 
twenty-four, sixty, or any other such grouping sizes. We 
could just as easily call a day ten periods (or whatever word 
you like) and subdivide these into tenths, and so on. The 
choice of twelve is a cultural and historical one, based on 
the fact that there happen to be twelve more or less equally 
spaced clumps of stars observable in the Egyptian night sky. 
One could keep track of time in the ancient world by seeing 
which constellation was overhead. So it’s mildly annoying 
that my ten fingers conflict with my twelve constellations. 
In any case, the twenty-four-hour day and the sixty-minute 
hour seem to be fairly well entrenched. (Sometimes I even 
confuse the two systems and think that $4.59 is only a penny 
away from five dollars.)
The point is that Earth turns on its axis and it takes a 
certain amount of time to do that. How you choose to chop 
that up into smaller amounts of time is up to you. What 
is not up to you would be things like the number of days 
in a year or how many days there are between full moons. 
These numbers are built into the solar system and are in 
no way culturally determined. And in fact, both of these are 
somewhat unpleasant (and fractional), a year being just a hair 
under 365¼ days, for instance. (The Babylonian astronomers 
must have been bitterly disappointed that it wasn’t exactly 
360—six sixties!) 
Incidentally, one holdover from the Babylonian system is 
the division of a full turn into 360 degrees of arc (which are 
often subdivided into minutes and seconds just as with hours). 
Though mathematicians long ago abandoned such a ridic-
ulous and arbitrary scheme, it remains as the conventional 
angle measurement system among carpenters, architects, and 
even many engineers and scientists.

e u r o p e
79
Again, the point here is consistency. If you are going to go 
around grouping things or breaking them up into pieces, it 
is far more convenient to choose a fixed grouping size and 
stick with it, as opposed to the haphazard sort of bundling and 
subdividing that seems to occur historically.
Rather than illustrate the convenience of a fixed-base 
measurement system, I think the case will be made even more 
strongly by subjecting ourselves to the alternative—a clunky 
and awkward mixed-base system of the Old World variety. 
And there is no such example quite as annoying and unnec-
essarily complicated as the British monetary system of the 
nineteenth century.
Given its history, it is no surprise that the traditional 
system of British units is a disaster. In pretty much every 
arena of measurement, from acres to ounces, from leagues to 
hogsheads, is written the record of scores of invasions and 
conquests, together with their inevitable cultural and linguis-
tic side effects. The monetary system is merely one of a vast 
number of such casualties.
Two thousand years ago the Romans introduced to the 
British Isles their monetary system based on the libra, or 
“pound” of silver. Thus, the British pound sterling (still 
denoted by a fancy script £) represents the value of a pound 
(that is, sixteen ounces) of that precious metal. (This is also 
the source of the abbreviation lb. for pound.) Naturally, this 
is divided into twenty shillings (represented by s. for solidus, 
an old Roman coin). And of course, each shilling was itself 
divided into twelve pennies (the abbreviation for penny being 
d. from denarius, as you might expect). Thus, twelve pennies 
(or pence, as the plural is commonly rendered) make a shil-
ling, while it’s twenty shillings to the pound.
Putting aside the absurd profusion of denominations avail-
able to Jane Austen and her contemporaries (e.g., the crown 
worth five shillings or the guinea worth twenty-one shillings), 
we already have a logistical and computational nightmare just 
dealing with pounds, shillings, and pence.

a r i t h m e t i c
80
Suppose you are a London shopkeeper in 1820. Lady 
Smythington-Jones has just run up the following bill of 
purchases:
 
pearl inlaid snuffbox, 1£ 8s. 6d.
 
set of six matched spoons, 13s. 8d.
 
two salt cellars, 2s. 7d. each.
 
pair of silver candlesticks, 1£ 14s. 4d.
What is her total, and what is her change when she hands you 
a five-pound bank note?
This is exactly the sort of arithmetic calculation that Brit-
ish schoolchildren would practice in their lessons. (Perhaps 
this example may help you to sympathize with the plight 
of Bob Cratchit and his fellow clerks, scratching their quills 
along columns of figures in the dim candlelight, enduring the 
tyranny of both Ebenezer Scrooge and a mixed-base repre-
sentation system, even as Britannia rules the waves and the 
sun never sets on the empire.)
Organizing pounds, shillings, and pence into appropriately 
labeled columns (and doubling the price of the salt cellars in 
our heads), we proceed to produce the following receipt:
	
£	
 s.	  d.
	
1	
 8	
 6
	
	
13	
 8
	
	
 5	
 2
	
1	
14	  4
Next, we total these amounts in the customary way, starting 
with the pence (keeping in mind what every British school-
boy knows, that twelve pennies doth a shilling make). Adding 
in our heads (or on our fingers and toes if necessary), we find 
a total of twenty pence, or one shilling and eightpence.
Dropping off the eight pennies in the pence column, we 
proceed to tally up the shillings (having learned our lesson 
well, that twenty shillings make a pound). Together with the 
one shilling carried over from the pence column, we get forty-

e u r o p e
81
one. (Notice all the base-ten figuring we must do, even when 
ultimately grouping by twelves and twenties. What a mess!) 
This is of course the same as two pounds one shilling, so we 
arrive at a total bill for four pounds one shilling and eightpence.
	
£	
 s.	
 d.
	
1	
 8	
 6
	
	
13	
 8
	
	
 5	
 2
	
1	
14	
 4
	
4	
 1	
 8
Being slightly over four pounds, we will clearly be giving 
Lady Smythington-Jones a little under a pound in change 
from her five-pound note. If not for the eight pennies, it 
would be a simple matter of nineteen shillings. As it is, we 
need to reduce that by eightpence, so her change becomes 
eighteen shillings and fourpence. “And good day to you, 
milady” (tipping your hat ever so slightly).
The British finally abandoned this absurd system in 1971 
in favor of a decimal currency. There are now 100 pennies to 
the pound, instead of the 240 in the former system. I must 
confess to having felt a certain sadness and loss of romance as 
£1 8s. 6d. (“one pound eight and six”) gave way to the more 
prosaic, if undeniably more convenient £1.425. (I suppose I 
can drown my sorrows with a pint of lager from a stout publi-
can who stands six foot one and weighs all of fifteen stone.)
While we’re on the subject of consistency, I want to 
mention a useful and convenient extension of the Hindu-Ar-
abic system that is frequently employed (and for some reason 
seems to generate a fair amount of confusion and dismay). 
Just as it makes sense to choose a grouping size and stick with 
it—bundling the same way at every level, so to speak—it also 
pays to subdivide in the same way.
So not only do we group liters into ten decaliters, but we 
also choose to split a liter into ten deciliters, and each deciliter 
into ten centiliters. Similarly, US dollars are broken into ten 
dimes and dimes into the same number of pennies.

a r i t h m e t i c
82
This consistency in the way we group and subdivide allows 
us to extend our notation system easily. To record a sale of 
one hundred forty-two dollars and seventy-nine cents, for 
example, we could use a Hindu-style grid system like so:
Notice the use of the double line to separate the “ones” 
(the dollars) from the cents. Some sort of indicator like this is 
necessary in order to keep track of our unit choices: Are we 
counting in dollars or in pennies?
Of course, just as the introduction of the zero symbol 
allowed us to dispense with the gridlines altogether, we can 
also indicate the ones column in a simpler way. This is the 
idea behind the so-called decimal point. Thus, we can write 
142.79 and understand at a glance that we have two whole 
dollars and that the 7 represents seven dimes, or tenths of a 
dollar. Likewise, the 9 counts the pennies, or hundredths.
The upshot of this is that we can easily record and manipulate 
quantities that are not only unlimited in size (larger numbers 
merely requiring more columns on the left) but also unlimited 
in their precision or fineness. Each new breakdown or subdi-
vision simply adds a new column (or “decimal place”) on the 
right. A scientist, for example, may require as many as a dozen 
decimal digits to properly encode a highly accurate measure-
ment. The Hindu-Arabic system, together with a well-cho-
sen and consistent system of measuring units (e.g., the metric 
system), provides an efficient and convenient way to do this.
Let’s say you are an environmental chemist, and you are 
testing the air quality of a certain city. A 20-gram sample of 
air is found to contain the following quantities of various 
gases (the symbol g stands for grams):
	
Nitrogen:	 15.622 g
	
Oxygen:	
4.2 g
	
Argon:	
0.17 g 
1
4
2
7
9

e u r o p e
83
What is the total mass (in grams) of the remaining impurities?
The important thing is to remember what the decimal 
point really means: it tells us what the various decimal places 
signify. Here we are measuring in grams, so the column 
immediately to the left of the period is for counting the 
grams themselves (the ones), whereas the final 2 in the nitro-
gen measurement is counting the milligrams, or thousandths 
of a gram.
The point is that in order to combine such amounts in 
the usual way, we now need to align their decimal represen-
tations appropriately, so that all the ones are lined up in the 
ones column. Of course this just means we have to align the 
decimal points, and everything else will line up automatically. 
Thus we add:
	
15.622
	
4.2
	
0.17
Notice the various empty spaces, both on the left and on 
the right of the decimal points. If you like, you can simply fill 
these blanks with zeros, or even draw in the gridlines if that 
feels better:
Of course, these are minor issues of visual display and 
presentation, but they can be surprisingly powerful psycho-
logically. The only thing that really matters is that we under-
stand what we mean by our symbols and notations—that we 
own our language and feel comfortable and free to play and 
invent.
In any case, it is now a simple matter to calculate the total 
mass of these gasses to be 19.992 grams, meaning the remain-
1
5
6
2
2
4
2
1
7

a r i t h m e t i c
84
ing impurities account for 0.008 grams, or 8 milligrams, if 
you prefer.
Naturally, there are all sorts of conventions and protocols 
within the scientific community for how to produce and 
record physical measurements and how to indicate toler-
ances and known accuracy and other such issues that I’m not 
particularly interested in discussing. All I’m saying is that if 
you choose your units wisely (that is, consistently), you reap 
certain benefits of uniformity and avoid the unpleasantness of 
shillings and pence.
This is ultimately the point (and the only real value) of 
the metric system—it’s simpler, that’s all. Having all of our 
units (with the exception, alas, of time) grouped and subdi-
vided into tens, in agreement with our conventional number 
system, makes things easier and, if anything, less technical and 
confusing.
Not that ten matters at all. We could just as easily imagine an 
alternative history, where the Tree People somehow defeated 
the Egyptians and ended up ruling over a vast empire, eventu-
ally establishing a septimal place-value system throughout the 
world. Presumably, at some point scientists and others would 
then adopt units that are intelligently grouped and subdivided 
into sevens.
Surprisingly, this would not look or feel all that different 
from our own decimal-based metric system. We could imag-
ine that the Tree People would sooner or later hit upon the 
idea of a place-value abacus with marked-value entries just 
like our own, the only differences being that the columns 
would represent successive groupings by seven instead of ten 
and that they would thus require only seven distinct symbols 
(including zero if they thought of it).
In order not to drive ourselves crazy memorizing new 
symbols (or worse, dealing with the original Tree hiero-
glyphics), let’s imagine the Arab traders again importing the 
system into Europe using the same numerals we are already 
used to, namely 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, and 6. The advantage is that 
we instantly recognize and understand the meaning of these 

e u r o p e
85
signs, the disadvantage being that our familiarity with the 
marked-value aspect may blind us to the substantial change 
in grouping size. With that small caution, let’s see how such a 
system would work.
First of all, notice that the number seven itself (that is, 
one group) would then be written 10, just as we are used to 
writing ten. A code like 34 would mean three groups and 
four leftovers. You might say to yourself, “Oh, I see. That 
would be three groups of seven and four leftovers, so it’s 
really twenty-five.” Well, yes and no. Yes, it certainly is the 
same as the quantity that we are used to calling twenty-five, 
but no, that’s not what it is really. That’s only what it is famil-
iarly. To the Tree People and their descendants, it’s not two 
groups of ten and five leftovers, it’s three groups of seven 
and four leftovers. Their sense of what an amount is and 
how it feels would have evolved around groups of seven, 
including their spoken number words. We feel that fourteen 
is a sloppy number full of leftovers, midway between the 
solid and upstanding quantities ten and twenty. Not so for 
the Tree People. This number is simply two groups, written 
20 and referred to by a simple name like twotree, which 
means two whole groups. Counting by sevens would be 
almost effortless—tree, twotree, thirtree— just as we count 
ten, twenty, thirty.
Going further, we could even extend the system to frac-
tional parts of a unit in the same way as before, using a “septi-
mal point” to keep track of the meaning of the columns. Thus, 
the septimal digit sequence 12.3 would stand for nine full 
units (meters, say) along with three subdivided units (septi-
meters, I suppose). In other words, 12.3 would encode the 
number that we would normally call nine and three-sevenths. 
Does that make sense?
Obviously, converting from one grouping size to another 
is complicated and technical, and we’ll have to talk about it 
lots more; all I’m trying to get across right now is that there 
is nothing at all special about the number ten, and that all the 
conveniences and advantages of the Hindu-Arabic system, as 

a r i t h m e t i c
86
well as the associated metric system of units, would equally 
apply to any grouping size whatsoever.
Suppose the Hand and Banana tribes also developed
place-value systems in the same way. Using
modern numerals, how would you write the quantities
sixteen, twenty-seven, fifty-two, and eighty-eight
in the three tribal systems?

87
MULTIPLICATION
At first glance, it may seem that all of these strategies and 
choices of how to represent and manipulate quantities are 
pretty much the same; that the differences between repetition 
and grouping, stacking and subgrouping, marked value and 
place value don’t amount to a hill of beans (or a pile of rocks). 
And for most everyday counting and bookkeeping purposes, 
this is probably true. If you are playing a game of dominoes, it 
hardly matters what system you use to keep score, and in fact, 
the five-barred gate is probably just as good if not better than 
any of the fancier, more technically demanding alternatives. 
One might well wonder what all the fuss is about.
The truth is that for most arithmetic purposes—counting 
and recording quantitative information, making comparisons, 
keeping track of income and expenditures, additions and 
subtractions—all of the systems we have discussed are pretty 
much equivalent and have all flourished and proven their util-
ity at one time or another (with the exception of the tribal 
systems that I invented out of whole cloth).
In particular, there is nothing so great about the Hindu-Ar-
abic decimal place-value system. You could become just as 
fluent and proficient at using the Roman system, for example. 
So why do we bother? What is really to be gained by learning 
to use a symbolic place-value representation system? I suppose 
there is the convenience and portability of a pencil and paper 
abacus, but we could just as easily do this with the Roman 
system. It doesn’t take any great skill, for instance, to add two 
Roman numerals together on paper: MMDCCLXXVII and 
MCCLXXXVI combine to make MMMMLXIII. You can 
simply count the number of occurrences of each symbol, 
cashing in and exchanging in your head—mimicking the 
maneuvers of the tabula in your imagination. This is surely 
no more difficult than the mental gymnastics needed for the 
Hindu-Arabic system.

a r i t h m e t i c
88
On the face of it, it looks like the whole “place-value with 
marked-value entries” idea is a lot of trouble and memori-
zation without a lot of payoff, aside from maybe making our 
representations a bit shorter.
There is one situation, however, that occurs rather frequently 
in arithmetic, where place-value representation possesses a 
clear and overwhelming advantage: making copies.
It often happens when counting and keeping track of quan-
tities that the same number needs to be added (or subtracted) 
repeatedly—a dozen muffins are sold, twenty cases get 
shipped, we need to triple the recipe, and so forth. Essentially, 
this comes down to adding a number to itself several times. 
This is known as multiplication (from the Latin multiplicatus, 
“folded many times”). People say things like “six times seven” 
(usually abbreviated as 6 × 7), meaning that seven is to be 
added to itself six times; that is, we want the total of six copies 
of seven. 
Notice that there is a subtle yet important difference in 
status between the two numbers here. When one writes 5 × 
8, the 8 is the actual quantity we are adding—the price of a 
single muffin, say. The 5 is a counter; it indicates the number 
of copies we want. In a sense, the 5 is “operating” on the 8, 
and not the other way around.
So there is an asymmetry to multiplication: 5 × 8 does not 
mean the same thing as 8 × 5. Surprisingly, however, the two 
totals happen to be the same. That is, even though five baskets 
holding eight eggs each is an entirely different scenario from 
eight baskets of five, the total amount of eggs is nonetheless 
equal. My favorite way to see this is to imagine rocks laid out 
in rows:

m u l t i p l i cat i o n
89
Here we have a simple visual representation of five copies 
of eight. Each row contains eight rocks, and there are five 
such rows. So 5 × 8 is five rows of eight. On the other hand 
(and here’s the clever part), we can also view this layout of 
rocks as consisting of columns—namely, eight columns of five 
rocks each. Another way to say it is that by turning our heads 
sideways, the five rows of eight become eight rows of five. 
Thus 5 × 8 equals 8 × 5 because both are counting the same 
rectangular array of rocks. So multiplication turns out to be 
symmetrical after all. This is not only unexpected and pretty, 
but it also turns out to be quite useful and important.
For example, if I were called upon to add up seventeen copies 
of two (that is, 17 × 2), rather than heaving a deep sigh and 
proceeding to add twos together until the cows come home, I 
could cleverly make use of symmetry to reimagine this as 2 × 
17 (i.e., seventeen doubled), which is a much simpler compu-
tation. This picture of multiplication as a rectangle of rocks 
also clearly pertains to the measurement of areas such as a 
rectangular plot of ground, or a wall that needs to be plastered 
and painted. Usually, such areas are sectioned off into a grid, 
and then the grid squares can be counted using multiplication.
Let’s suppose you are tiling the bathroom floor, which 
measures six by eight feet. Linoleum tile comes in one-foot 
squares, fifty to a box. Will one box be enough to get the 
job done?
Here we can imagine the floor sectioned into one-foot 
grid squares:
We could, of course, simply count these squares one by one, 
and in fact that wouldn’t really be all that bad; there aren’t 
that many of them, and it would only take a few seconds. On 

a r i t h m e t i c
90
the other hand, it is valuable to view this as a multiplication 
(namely, 6 × 8), not only for the insight and the intellec-
tual pleasure it may give us to think of it this way but also 
because as the numbers get larger (e.g., 173 × 62), counting 
the squares individually becomes increasingly obnoxious and 
time consuming.
So the question is whether 6 × 8 is smaller or larger than 
50. Here is the fundamental arithmetic issue again: compar-
ison. On the one hand, we have a number (6 × 8) simply 
expressed and nicely organized into groups of eight, which 
we want to compare to another number, fifty, which is being 
held linguistically as five groups of ten. So it’s just like the 
Hand People trading with the Banana People. We have two 
different grouping sizes, and we want to translate between 
them so we can compare.
One way to proceed would be to stick with ten as our 
grouping size and try to rewrite six groups of eight in terms 
of tens, then see how it compares to five groups. This is 
what most people mean when they say they are multiplying: 
converting a quantity conveniently expressed in one group-
ing size into piles of ten and leftovers. Let’s try to do it visually 
with rocks, sliding them around to make nice rows of ten:
Taking rocks away from the first row, I can add two rocks to 
each of the four bottom rows, making nice rows of ten, and 
ending up with four complete rows and eight leftovers. Thus 
we discover that six groups of eight is the same as four groups 
of ten and eight leftovers. In other words, 6 × 8 = 48.
In this way, we can think of the number 48 as having been 
“produced” from 6 and 8 via multiplication. People say that 
48 is the product of 6 and 8.

m u l t i p l i cat i o n
91
Alternatively, we could simply add eight to itself six times, 
cashing in and exchanging when necessary. One amusing way 
to proceed would be to start by doubling 8 to get 16, then 
adding on another 8 to get 24. This counts three copies of eight, 
so to get all six copies all I need to do is double this number 
to get 48. This is what I mean when I say that arithmetic is the 
art of rearranging quantities—noticing and taking advantage 
of specific features of your counting problem to make your life 
easier and to have a bit of amusement while you’re at it.
Either way, we now have our number expressed in groups 
of ten, so it is easy to do the comparison and see that, in fact, 
one box of fifty tiles will indeed do the job. (In real life, of 
course, things are never that simple. You’ll have to cut a few 
tiles to get around the bathtub and the toilet, and you’ll prob-
ably also ruin a few by accident, etc.)
Probably the most frequently occurring instance of multi-
plication is doubling—adding a number to itself. Of course this 
is just a special case of adding two numbers together. Because 
it occurs so often, though, people who do a lot of arithme-
tic tend to become very accustomed to the way doubling 
behaves and get quite familiar with the doubles of small 
numbers in particular. Thus, one comes to learn and remem-
ber such things as “six doubled is twelve” and “two fours 
make eight” and so on. This would be true regardless of what 
representation system you happen to use; a Banana tribesman 
would also know from experience that na-na doubled is ba, 
and twice na-na-na is ba-na-na. 
In marked-value systems, doubling is almost literally just 
that: every symbol, counting coin, or calculus stone is simply 
repeated. Exchanges can then be performed if necessary.
Calculate the doubles of the following numbers,
packed up and written in their respective languages:
ba-ba-na-na, p j 7, MCCCLXXVI, 538. 
The Egyptians were particularly fond of doubling and used 
it in very clever ways to calculate larger multiples. To triple a 

a r i t h m e t i c
92
number, for instance, we can double it and then add on the 
original number. To quadruple a number (that is, to make four 
copies), all we need to do is double it and then double again. 
To multiply by six, we can double our number, then redouble 
it and add these two together.
What would be a good way to use doubling
to multiply by five? How about by twelve?
Multiplication by small numbers like three or five is partic-
ularly easy to do using a simple abacus system like Piles of 
Rocks, counting coins, or the Roman tabula. We simply lay 
our number out as many times as we need, then cash in 
and we’re done. The soroban is somewhat less convenient, as 
is the Hindu-Arabic pencil-and-paper abacus. In particular, 
both of these require a considerable amount of memoriza-
tion and mental gymnastics. When I have occasion to double 
something like 427, for instance, I tend to think of it like 
this: “OK, I have four hundreds, two tens, and seven leftovers. 
Doubling everything gives me eight hundreds, four tens, and 
fourteen. So, eight hundred forty-fourteen, which is eight 
hundred fifty-four, or 854.” Similarly, tripling in my head 
would give me twelve hundred, sixty, twenty-one; in other 
words, 1281.
Of course, with a purely symbolic abacus like this, it pays to 
know your small multiples—like how I happen to remember 
that three sevens is twenty-one. This can be a bit of a chore, 
especially with a large grouping size like ten. I do not recom-
mend that you intentionally set out to memorize such things. 
It’s far better to simply play around a lot with numbers, get 
used to using your own clever strategies and observations, get 
occasionally frustrated with your inability to recall, and grad-
ually these facts will become familiar and friendly and may 
even carry with them pleasant reminders of a problem you 
enjoyed or a moment of cleverness on your part.
One thing that is often done is to make a chart (the infa-
mous “times tables”) that lays out the various small multiples 

m u l t i p l i cat i o n
93
in tabular form. This can be a handy thing to have around if 
you are going to be doing a lot of multiplying, and it can also 
be an easy way to notice many amusing patterns. The danger 
is that in attempting to memorize such a mass of data you will 
get bored and frustrated and turned off to arithmetic. So my 
advice would be to make such a chart if you wish to consult 
it but don’t stress out about it or put too much importance on 
it. After all, we live in the so-called Information Age. If I can’t 
remember the capital of Turkmenistan, I can always look it 
up; the same goes for 7 × 8 (which is one that has always been 
a problem for me).
Oh, right. It’s 56. While we’re on the subject, let me just 
emphasize a couple of things. First of all, let’s understand 
that 7 × 8 is not a question and 56 is not an answer. Seven 
times eight is a number, and it is capable of being represented 
in a great many ways. At the moment it is held as seven 
groups of eight, and a user of an octal system would be 
quite pleased and would not feel the need to “do” anything 
to it. When we ask, “What is seven times eight?” what we 
are really asking is, “How can seven groups of eight be 
rearranged into groups of ten for ease of comparison with 
other numbers similarly grouped?” Numbers couldn’t care 
less what grouping size you happen to use and neither do 
mathematicians. Numbers are what they are, and they do 
what they do; your desire to compare is the issue, and your 
culturally determined choice of representation system is 
quite secondary.
Another thing to notice is that when we say something like 
“seven times ten is seventy,” there is an amusing content-free 
circularity to such a statement. After all, the word seventy is 
simply an abbreviated form of seven tens.
Languages always reflect the culturally agreed-upon group-
ing sizes, and the names for these numbers will then become 
the familiar benchmarks for size and quantity. To say that 
seventy is the answer to the question “what is seven times 
ten?” is particularly ludicrous. It’s like looking up a word in 
the dictionary only to find it defined in terms of itself. What 

a r i t h m e t i c
94
seven times ten is is seven groups of ten. In a decimal culture 
one would then already be quite satisfied—the number is 
already expressed in a way convenient for comparison. The 
Banana People would be less happy and would want to start 
arranging this quantity into bunches of four.
How would the Tree People feel about seventy?
One frequent situation where multiplication comes into 
play is the sale and purchase of several items of equal value. 
For instance, here is a typical receipt from a nineteenth-cen-
tury silversmith:
Bill of Sale
	
Qty	 Description	
 
s. 
d.
	
 6 
silver spoons, 4s. 5d. ea. 
1	
6	
6
	
 3 
snuffboxes, 1 ea. 
3
	
 2 
candlesticks, 10s. 6d. ea. 
1	
1	
 
 
Total 
5	
7	
6
Here the silversmith has cleverly done the separate multi-
plications mentally, which I imagine one would eventually 
get quite used to doing.
Is the silversmith’s total correct?
Let’s look at a more ancient version using the Egyptian 
system: one hundred bushels of wheat remain in the store-
house. You, the miller, have recently received several orders for 
grain. The local baker needs seven large baskets of wheat, the 
temple has ordered eight small baskets, and the pharaoh’s tax 
collectors are to be given five large baskets as well. The small 
baskets hold three bushels, and the large ones hold six bushels. 
Do you have enough?
Here the arithmetic problem is to determine whether the 
total of seven copies of six, eight copies of three, and five 
copies of six is safely below one hundred.

m u l t i p l i cat i o n
95
There are, of course, many ways to proceed from here, the 
most likely being that you, as an experienced tradesman, would 
simply know what these amounts come to (in terms of groups 
of ten) and can tot them up in your head. But let’s suppose that 
you are only an apprentice miller and are relatively unskilled at 
mental calculation. Then you could simply get out your enor-
mous bag of marked-value counting coins and proceed to lay 
these amounts out on the counter. Gathering together groups 
of ten and making the necessary exchanges would certainly 
get the job done, albeit in the most boring and rote mechani-
cal way. Instead, let’s try to be a bit more creative. Being Egyp-
tians, we’ll begin by doing a little doubling:
	
one copy of six:  6
	
two copies of six:  6 6 , or g 2
	
four copies of six:  g 2 g 2 , or h 4
Now we can get seven copies of six by totaling these 
amounts (since seven is one plus two plus four). This makes 
a total of
6 g 2 h 4 , or j 2
Similarly, we see the five copies of six as being four copies 
plus one more copy, that is
h 4 6 , or i
Now, the eight copies of three we can cleverly view as four 
copies of six (each pair of threes makes a six), so we already 
have that as h 4. Thus, our grand total is
j 2 i h 4 , or o 6 ,
and we are just a few bushels under p. So there actually is 
enough in the storehouse, and we needn’t panic.

a r i t h m e t i c
96
How would you do this same calculation
using the Roman tabula?
In a symbolic place-value setting, such as the Hindu-Ara-
bic system, the situation is pretty much the same, except we 
have no counting coins or calculi to jiggle around. We must 
manipulate symbols with our minds, instead of objects with 
our hands.
Just as with addition and subtraction, this presents us with 
a bit of a challenge. If we wish to become truly fluent users 
of such a system, we will need to figure out how the symbols 
transform (e.g., 6 + 7 = 13, 4 × 3 = 12), and commit such 
patterns to memory.
Again, my advice is to work them out from scratch each 
time, using your fingers, rocks, tally marks, or whatever. Yes, it 
will be annoying. But the annoyance is what will make them 
stick in your mind. It doesn’t matter how long it takes (nor 
does it matter if it ever happens). If you like to count and 
you play around enough, eventually all of these things will 
become quite familiar.
Suppose you’re at your neighbor’s yard sale and you find 
three shirts for seven dollars apiece. All you have is a twenty. 
Can you get all three shirts?
The question is whether 3 × 7 is safely below 20. Laying 
out three rows of seven rocks, we can move a few from one 
row to build two nice rows of ten:
Thus we discover that 3 × 7 is in fact 21. So we’ll either 
have to leave one of the shirts, borrow a dollar, or do some 
haggling. (Since it’s a yard sale, they’ll probably just let you 
have them.)
Calculate the doubles and triples of each number
from one to nine by rearranging rows of rocks.

m u l t i p l i cat i o n
97
So far, the differences among our various representation 
systems with respect to multiplication have not been all that 
great. Whether you are using a repetition system (like tally 
marks), a marked-value system (like the Egyptians), or a place-
value system (such as the Roman tabula or the Hindu-Ara-
bic system), as an experienced arithmetician you will simply 
come to know all of the small multiples by memory, and 
can do most of the exchanges and so forth in your head. 
A moderately talented Egyptian, Roman, Japanese, or Indian 
scribe would easily calculate seven copies of one hundred 
sixty-three in more or less the following way:
“Let’s see. I’ve got seven hundreds, plus another seven 
copies of sixty—that’s seven copies of six tens. Since seven 
sixes is forty-two, that makes forty-two tens, which means 
four hundreds and two tens. So really I’ve got eleven 
hundreds, two leftover tens, and then don’t forget the three 
sevens, which is twenty-one. So eleven hundred forty-one.” 
He would then proceed to write it down in whatever repre-
sentation system he was using. Only the most elaborate (or 
delicate) calculations would require getting out a soroban or 
tabula.
In many ways, the fun really begins when you try to do 
your calculations mentally like this. Of course, you will mess 
up a lot and get delightfully lost and confused. It’s a tricky 
and challenging exercise, like playing chess blindfolded. 
There are a bunch of simple rules and patterns, and you 
have to keep it all straight. But the stakes are quite low, and it 
can be pretty amusing at times. Also, a little familiarity with 
numbers and their behavior can lead to larger questions 
and curiosity about number patterns in general. Arithmetic 
can be a gateway drug for mathematics. So play around and 
make all kinds of ridiculous and nonsensical blunders—I 
certainly do!
The multiples of five have a particularly simple  
pattern in the Hindu-Arabic system. 
What is the pattern and why does it work?

a r i t h m e t i c
98
Being so close to the grouping size, the multiples
of nine and eleven also make nice patterns.
Can you figure out what they are?
I want to point out something about that last calculation 
that turns out to be pretty useful and important. When the 
time came to make seven copies of sixty, our experienced 
scribe thought of it in an interesting way. Sixty literally means 
(and is an abbreviation for) six tens. So we’re talking about 
seven copies of six copies of ten. This kind of thing happens 
quite frequently, in fact, where we have some amount and we 
multiply it by some number, and then that entire amount gets 
copied as well.
One way that such “triple products” occur naturally is in 
the calculation of three-dimensional volume. Just as we were 
able to view the product of two numbers as being a rectangle 
of rocks, we can think of something like 4 × 5 × 6 as being a 
box of rocks, like so:
There are several ways we can imagine counting such a 
block. Thinking of it as a stack of horizontal plates, we can 
see that each layer is a 5 × 6 rectangle. There are four of 
them, so we have 4 × (5 × 6). On the other hand, we can 
also view the same box as comprising six vertical sheets, 
each of which is a 4 × 5 rectangle. This way, we can see the 
total as 6 × (4 × 5). Still another way is to imagine it as a 
stack of five 4 × 6 rectangles coming up out of the page, 
giving us 5 × (4 × 6). The point being that not only is 
multiplication pairwise symmetric (e.g., 4 × 5 = 5 × 4), but 
it is also symmetric in this larger sense—that when several 
numbers are multiplied together, it doesn’t matter what 
order we do things in. This not only spares us from having 

m u l t i p l i cat i o n
99
to worry about parentheses, it also allows us to be creative 
and to choose an ordering that is clever and efficient.
In the scribe example, this meant thinking of 7 × (6 × 10) 
(i.e., seven copies of sixty) as (7 × 6) × 10—in other words, 
as a number of groups (namely, 7 × 6 of them). This makes 
forty-two groups. The number of groups of ten is itself four 
groups and two leftovers. So in total we have four groups of 
groups and two remaining groups, if you follow me. Since 
the only thing the word hundred ever meant was a group of 
groups, we see that the total is four hundred twenty. That’s 
certainly a lot easier than adding sixty to itself seven times, 
if you ask me.
Of course, being a mathematician, I’m always looking for 
ways to avoid tedious mundane labor. Especially if it means 
I get to do a bunch of interesting abstract thinking. That’s 
kind of the whole math thing: working hard to find ways to 
get out of working hard. If you are really, really lazy, and also 
happen to be really, really clever, then math just might be the 
life for you (assuming you also have no interest in wealth, 
fame, or popularity).
While we’re on the subject of numbers in the abstract, 
especially their behavior with respect to multiplication, let 
me just mention an extremely important, though patently 
obvious fact. When we say that two plus three is five, what 
we mean is that two of anything, together with three more of 
those same things, whatever they may be, makes a total of five 
of them. Two cows added to three cows makes five cows, two 
years added on to a prison sentence of three years makes five 
years in the slammer, and so on.
In particular, this means that two dozen and three dozen 
make five dozen; two copies of thirty-seven together with 
three more thirty-sevens makes five thirty-sevens. Turning 
this around, we can say that if a number is multiplied by a sum 
of two numbers, it is the same as if we multiplied it by each of 
the numbers separately and then added the results:
(2 + 3) × 37 = (2 × 37) + (3 × 37).

a r i t h m e t i c
100
At first blush, this may seem a rather trivial and pedantic 
observation. But it turns out to be an extremely powerful 
arithmetic tool. It means we have the freedom to break up our 
multiplications into smaller pieces as we see fit, and this free-
dom can be used cleverly and creatively to make calculating 
simpler and easier.
Before we look at such clever maneuvers, let’s first under-
stand this breaking up principle in terms of rocks and 
rectangles.
Here we have a four by seven array of rocks, sliced into 
two smaller rectangles. The seven columns of four have been 
broken into two parts: the one on the left being two columns 
of four and the one on the right five columns of four. So we 
see 7 × 4 broken into 2 × 4 and 5 × 4. 
Alternatively, we could think of this subdivision as saying 
that four rows of seven is the same as four rows of two together 
with four rows of five. Symbolically,
4 × 7 = (4 × 2) + (4 × 5).
That is, when making copies of a sum, we can simply 
multiply each piece separately and then add them. It’s like 
when you order two pizzas and three root beers and then you 
decide to double the order: the pizzas and the root beers are 
both doubled separately.
Of course the same is true no matter how many parts you 
break a number into.

m u l t i p l i cat i o n
101
Here we have 5 × 12 viewed as 5 × (3 + 4 + 5), and naturally 
this shatters into rectangles as (5 × 3) + (5 × 4) + (5 × 5). So 
the principle is completely general.
In fact, we can even go a step further and imagine both 
rows and columns broken into pieces to form a tiling of our 
rectangle by smaller rectangles of various sizes.
Here is our 5 × 12 rectangle again, only this time we are 
thinking of it as being the product of (2 + 3) and (3 + 4 + 5). 
What this tiling shows is that
	
(2 + 3) × (3 + 4 + 5) = (2 × 3) + (2 × 4) + (2 × 5) +
	
(3 × 3) + (3 × 4) + (3 × 5).
What’s happening here is that each number in the first sum 
is being multiplied separately by every number in the second 
sum. This is really the whole thing about grids and rectangles—
they chop up nicely. The pattern that we’ve discovered here is 
probably the single most important property in all of arithmetic: 
the product of two sums is equal to the sum of the individual products. 
Of course, we have to know which products to add together—
namely, all the possible choices of one number from each sum.
What happen if we multiply three sums together?
So how does this chopping up idea help us multiply more 
easily? Of course, having knowledge of the way something 
behaves is always going to be helpful, if for no other reason 
than to increase familiarity and understanding. If you happen 
to have already figured out 5 × 17 and 3 × 17, then to get 8 
× 17 you need merely add them together. So that’s nice to 
know, even if it is pretty obvious.

a r i t h m e t i c
102
The real power of this method comes when we combine 
it with a place-value representation system that uses a 
consistent grouping size, such as the Hindu-Arabic system. 
The reason is that now there is at least one number that is 
always easy to multiply by: the grouping size itself. This is such 
an important discovery that it pays to look at it a bit more 
generally.
Let’s suppose we have a marked-value system like the 
Egyptians. Here we have a consistent grouping size (ten) 
and marked-value symbols 1, g, p, X for each stage of collec-
tion. What happens if we have a number represented in this 
language, say q j 3, and we multiply it by the grouping size? 
We will then have ten copies of every symbol. I suppose we 
could simply write down all these copies and then start cash-
ing them in, but there is a much simpler (and way more effi-
cient) procedure: simply replace all the 1’s by g’s! And of course 
each g becomes a p, and each p is transformed into a X. What 
amazing Egyptian alchemy! (The word alchemy, by the way, 
comes from Khem, the ancient name for Egypt.)
The point being that since ten is our grouping size, of 
course ten ones make a group.  Ten of any symbol makes the 
next higher symbol. This is the benefit of having the group-
ing sizes be uniform and consistent. Multiplication by the 
grouping size then becomes a simple symbol-manipulation 
game. Similarly, if you had some pennies and dimes in your 
pocket, multiplying your money by ten would be tanta-
mount to somehow magically transforming each penny 
into a dime and each dime into a dollar. (Notice that no 
such simple transformation would work for shillings and 
pence.)
The same holds for the Roman system. Multiplication by 
ten would have the effect of turning Is into Xs, Vs into Ls, 
Xs into Cs, and so on. Things are even more elegant on the 
tabula: multiplication by ten simply moves each calculus stone 
up to the next corresponding line. All you have to do is shift 
all the calculi on the I-line to the X-line, the V-line stones to 
the L-line, and so on. That’s pretty convenient.

m u l t i p l i cat i o n
103
What happens when the Banana People
multiply by their grouping size?
Of course, it’s really with the Hindu-Arabic system that 
things become almost effortless. Here, since each digit symbol 
sits in a column whose position controls its value, the effect of 
multiplication by ten is simply to shift each symbol one place 
to the left.
For example, to multiply a number like 137 by ten, we just 
shove each digit over one place:
Now the 7 symbol, instead of counting ones, is counting 
tens—as if each leftover were “upgraded” to a group. What 
could be easier than that?
By the way, a lot of people are under the mistaken 
impression that to multiply a number by ten, you simply 
add a zero on to the end of its digit sequence: 137 becomes 
1370. In a sense this is true—at least visually. But I think it’s 
important to understand that we’re not really adding a zero 
on the end; it’s that the whole sequence is being shifted, so 
that each symbol is counting a collection ten times larger 
than before.
I could come up with several arguments in favor of the 
Hindu-Arabic system over its marked-value cousins—light-
weight portability, low cost, and so forth—but the truth is 
that it is this place-shifting business that is the real advan-
tage. No transmutation of coins or symbols, no sliding rocks 
around from one line to another. It’s just symbols lightly 
dancing on the page, leaping from one column to the next. 
That’s the ultimate reason why the Roman system had to 
make way and why pretty much the whole world now uses 
the Hindu-Arabic system.
In fact, this place-shifting idea gives us a whole new way 
to view numbers such as 20, 500, and 3000. I like to think of 
1
3
7
1
3
7

a r i t h m e t i c
104
numbers like these as being single-digit numbers, just like 2, 5, 
and 3. The number 500, for instance, is really just 5 (hundreds). 
I’m certainly not saying that five lemons is the same as five 
hundred lemons. I’m just noticing that both quantities are 
counting five of something, and those somethings are simply 
our various places—the slots or columns in our Hindu-Ara-
bic representation scheme.
So let’s start thinking of 500 as being 5 double-shifted. Then 
20 is 2 shifted, and 3000 is the same as 3 with a triple shift. 
Each shift corresponds to a multiplication by ten, so another 
way to say this is that 3000 = 3 × 10 × 10 × 10. The only 
thing these multiplications by ten do is cause some shifting, 
so in some sense the real content is the 3—what scientists and 
engineers like to call the significant digit.
The reason this is a useful viewpoint is that when two 
such single-digit numbers are multiplied together, some-
thing very simple and pretty happens. Let’s take for example 
30 × 200. Of course you are free to write down thirty copies 
of two hundred and add them all up in whatever way suits 
you. That is, after all, what multiplication means—repeated 
addition. But who wants to do that? Not only would it 
be tedious and boring but, as we’ve talked about before, 
the tedium would undoubtedly lead to sloppy, error-prone 
miscalculation. The whole point of arithmetic is to be clev-
erer than that so that computation is faster and easier and 
more fun.
All right, so let’s think about 30 × 200 in a better way—and 
I don’t mean two hundred copies of thirty! Instead, let’s view 
it as
(3 × 10 ) × (2 × 10 × 10).
Now we can take advantage of all the symmetries we’ve 
discovered to rewrite this five-term product as
(3 × 2) × (10 × 10 × 10) = 6000.

m u l t i p l i cat i o n
105
Notice that the two digits at the head of our original numbers 
(namely, 2 and 3) are getting multiplied, and that the shifts are 
being compounded into one big total shift. So 3 with one 
shift, multiplied by 2 with two shifts, comes out to be 6 with 
three shifts. So it’s particularly easy to multiply these sorts 
of single-digit numbers: just multiply the digits and add the 
shifts. Does that make complete sense?
Calculate the products: 20 × 40, 30 × 500, 800 × 5000.
What a fantastic time and energy saver this is! Of course, 
you may be saying to yourself, “Yeah, that’s great and all, but 
how often am I going to be in the luxurious position of 
multiplying such simple numbers together? How does this 
help with some nightmare like 37 × 168?”
What we would like, if possible, is a simple procedure 
whereby we can take the digit sequences of the two numbers 
alone (without the need for any rocks or coins or beads) and 
produce—in a reasonably quick and efficient (and hopefully 
accurate) way—the digit sequence of their product. It turns 
out that for the Hindu-Arabic system, this is, in fact, quite 
possible.
The idea is to combine the shifting business with the 
breakdown strategy we talked about earlier. Let’s start with 
some relatively small numbers, say 12 × 27. Imagining this as a 
twelve by twenty-seven rectangle, we can break it down into 
smaller rectangles in many ways. The simplest and most natu-
ral breakdown (at least from the ten-centric point of view) is 
to chop each number into its single-digit pieces, like so:
Notice that each subrectangle becomes a product of  
single-digit numbers. These are easy to calculate by shifting: 
20
7
10
10 × 20
10 × 7
 2
2 × 20
2 × 7

a r i t h m e t i c
106
10 × 20 = 200, 10 × 7 = 70, 2 × 20 = 40, and 2 × 7 = 14. 
(Here’s where knowing your small multiples comes in handy.) 
So, putting the pieces together, we get
12 × 27 = 200 + 70 + 40 + 14 = 324.
Yes, we have to do some adding here at the end, and yes, 
there may be some nasty carrying and exchanging to do, but 
you can’t get something for nothing. At least we didn’t have 
to add a dozen twenty-sevens together!
But of course the power of this method lies in its complete 
generality—we need no additional ideas in order to multiply 
any two numbers together, no matter how large. The only 
thing that will change is the number of pieces the rectangle 
shatters into.
Let’s imagine that you run a pickle factory. Each barrel of 
pickles weighs 144 pounds fully packed. You want to ship 56 
barrels, but the delivery truck can carry a maximum of 8000 
pounds. Can you do it in one shipment?
Here the question is whether 56 × 144 is safely less than 
8000. Of course we could just get out a bunch of rocks or do 
a ton of repeated addition, but the point of our new method 
is to take advantage of our place-value encoding so that we 
can perform such calculations purely symbolically, without 
any rocks or beads, and also quickly and efficiently, minimiz-
ing redundant labor.
In this case, our (imaginary) rectangle would break down 
like this:
Here I’ve filled each subrectangle with the correspond-
ing number of imaginary rocks. Thus, the 50 × 40 rectan-
gle receives the entry 2000, since 5 × 4 = 20 and we have 
100
40
4
50
5000
2000
200
6
600
240
24

m u l t i p l i cat i o n
107
another two shifts. This means the total weight of all the 
barrels together is
5000 + 2000 + 200 + 600 + 240 + 24 = 8064.
So we are sixty-four pounds overweight. You may decide to 
risk it, or to leave a barrel or two off the truck, but at least you 
know where you stand. 
Which is larger, 381 × 44 or 598 × 28 ?
Of course, once we have a purely symbolic algorithm like 
this, especially if it makes good sense and we understand 
why it works, then naturally we get lazy and impatient and 
we want to streamline the procedure to make it even easier. 
One possible first step is to eliminate the imaginary rect-
angle altogether. It certainly is a useful device for explain-
ing to ourselves what we are doing and provides a clear 
visual image of how we are organizing our counting, but 
in fact it is in no way essential to the actual performance of 
the calculation. Once we fully understand the breakdown 
and place-shifting principles, we no longer need a pictorial 
representation.
For example, to multiply 173 by 254, we can simply run 
through the various possible single-digit products (in what-
ever order we wish), making sure we include every possibility 
and account for all the shifts:
	
100 × 200 = 20000	
100 × 50 = 5000	
100 × 4 = 400
	
70 × 200 = 14000	
70 × 50 = 3500	
70 × 4 = 280
	
3 × 200 = 600	
3 × 50 = 150	
3 × 4 = 12
These can then be totaled as usual. One popular way to 
organize this kind of work on the page is to write down 
the two numbers you wish to multiply, one below the other 
(properly aligned, of course), and simply enter the single-digit 
products below:

a r i t h m e t i c
108
	
173
	
254
	
12	
4 × 3, no shifts
	
280	
4 × 7, one shift
	
400	
4 × 1, two shifts
	
150	
5 × 3, one shift
	
3500	
5 × 7, two shifts
	
5000	
5 × 1, three shifts
	
600	
2 × 3, two shifts
	
14000	
2 × 7, three shifts
	
20000	
2 × 1, four shifts
	
43942
This way, the various pieces are all lined up in the correct 
columns and ready to be totaled. Of course, if this seems too 
abstract and you prefer to draw imaginary rectangles of rocks, 
then by all means do that. Eventually you will come to see the 
pattern to how all the parts are generated and assembled, and 
you will no longer require its services. This is what we humans 
always do once we’ve mastered something—look for shortcuts.
In fact, many people choose (or have chosen for them) an 
even more streamlined version, wherein the pieces are subto-
taled as they are produced. This requires a bit more mental labor 
and memory, but it’s quite a bit faster and takes up considerably 
less space. Apparently, this has become the standard algorithm 
taught in elementary schools. Let’s see if I can explain it.
To begin with, let’s imagine you want to multiply a largish 
number, say 1783, by a one-digit number like 4. With our 
current scheme, this computation would appear like so:
	
	1783
	
	
4
	
	
12
	
32
	
28
	
4	
	
7132

m u l t i p l i cat i o n
109
Notice that I have left off writing all the zeros and have used 
the column alignment itself to keep track of all the shifting—
less writing but more care required.
One thing to observe is how the various shiftings make it 
that there are at most two digit symbols in each column. This 
is because the product of two digits can be at most 9 × 9 = 
81, which is a two-digit number. Also, each line is shifted at 
least one place over from the previous. So never will we have 
three digits in any one column.
This means you can attempt to total these numbers at the 
same time you are producing them, provided you can hold 
each digit in your mind long enough to produce each succes-
sive single-digit product. Yet another good reason to commit 
the times tables to memory—so that you can produce the 
pieces fast enough not to forget them.
Using our sewing needle metaphor, this calculation would 
proceed as follows:
	
	1783
	
	
4
	
	
2
Starting with the ones digits on the right, we have 4 × 3 = 12. 
All future pieces will be shifted, so the 2 really is the ones digit 
of the total. We may as well write it down in its correct place. 
The 1 (which is really a ten) we store in our minds for a 
second—it’s on the needle, so to speak.
Now, for the next stitch, we have 4 × 8, although the 8 
is shifted, so it’s really eight tens. Thus we have our next 
piece, which is 32 shifted (I supposedly know from memory 
that 4 × 8 = 32). If you look back at our previous version 
of this computation, you can see these first two pieces, 12 
and a shifted 32. Notice how the 1 and the 2 line up in the 
tens column. This is because the 1 is counting the tens in 
the number 12, and the 2 is recording the tens in 320, the 
shifted version of 32. The point being that we need to add 
them together. That is, the ones digit of 32 gets combined 

a r i t h m e t i c
110
with the carried 1 from 12, which is currently residing on 
the needle. 
This all feels a bit awkward to describe, let alone read, so 
I hope you can follow me. In some ways I’d almost prefer to 
let you figure it out for yourself. But we’ve come this far, so 
let’s see how it all plays out (and also see what a mess I make 
trying to explain it).
We’ve gotten to this point:
	
	1783
	
	
4
	
	 32
Here is the 3 (coming from 32 + 1 = 33 tens) and there 
is also a 3 on the needle. The next stitch (which gives us the 
hundreds) would be 4 × 7 = 28, plus the 3 on the needle 
makes 31, so we write down the 1 and store the 3 on the 
needle:
	
	1783
	
	
4
	
	 132
Finally, the thousands digit is obtained from 4 × 1 = 4, plus 
the three on the needle makes 7:
	
1783
	
	
4
	
7132
Frankly, if you ask me, I’m not sure all this needlework is 
really worth it. I actually prefer our previous method. It’s a 
little more writing but far less confusing and mentally taxing. 
Still, if you like such things, the fancy version is there as an 
option.
The full-blown implementation of this algorithm would 
look like this:

m u l t i p l i cat i o n
111
	
	1783
	
	 274
	
	7132
	
12481
	
3566	
	
488542
Here each line is produced by needlework in the way we just 
saw, remembering to shift each successive line one place to 
the left to account for the place values. For instance, the 7 in 
274 is really a shifted 7, so the entire product 7 × 274 = 12481 
must also be shifted. In any case, one still has to total all the 
pieces; there are just fewer of them.
How do our two methods compare when
the numbers get extremely large?
One thing I want to make sure is clear—because it really 
is the whole point here: these symbolic multiplication algo-
rithms are nothing more than a natural consequence of the 
rectangle breakdown idea, together with the happy observa-
tion that in a consistent place-value system multiplication by 
the grouping size is equivalent to place shifting.
In particular, these methods have nothing whatever to do 
with the number ten. They will work just as well for any 
grouping size whatever. Rectangles chop up into smaller rect-
angles regardless of how you choose to represent quantities. 
This is a mathematical feature, not a cultural one.
To illustrate, let’s imagine that the Banana People have 
independently hit upon the place-value idea and have 
replaced their repetition-based, marked-value system with 
Hindu-style columns. We’ll suppose further that they also 
came up with the zero symbol idea to obviate the need for 
column lines.
Of course, they would then also need marked-value symbols 
for their leftovers, namely one, two, and three. The specific 
choice of symbols doesn’t really matter, but they should at 

a r i t h m e t i c
112
least be easy to write down and recognize. Let’s imagine they 
settled on these:
	
Ο 
Ι 
Λ	
Δ
	
zero	
one	
two	
three
(I like how each digit symbol is made of the correspond-
ing number of strokes.) Thus we obtain a “quaternary”, or 
base-four place-value representation system. The number 
that we call twenty-seven, which would formerly have been 
rendered in Old Banana as RHHQQQ, would now be written 
more succinctly as ΙΛΔ.
In particular, the Banana grouping size (four) would be 
represented by ΙΟ, just as our conventional grouping size 
(ten) is written 10, the point being that a group (in whatever 
language) is always one group and no leftovers. Notice also 
that the shifting thing still applies. To multiply by four is the 
same as converting Q’s into H’s, H’s into R’s. This means that in 
the place-value version, we are simply shifting one place to 
the right, just as before.
So the only really substantive change to our addition, 
subtraction, and multiplication procedures is that the single-
digit sums and products have different representations. For 
instance, instead of memorizing 3 × 3 = 9, a Banana tribes-
man would want to remember Δ × Δ = ΛΙ. Notice that now 
the addition and multiplication tables are much smaller. In 
fact, here they are in complete totality:
That’s not a lot of memorizing to do. So a smaller group-
ing size is great for cutting down the mental workload. 
On the other hand, it does mean our representations will 
get somewhat longer. For instance, our number 1783 from 
+
Ι
Λ
Δ
×
Ι
Λ
Δ
Ι
Λ
Δ
ΙΟ
Ι
Ι
Λ
Δ
Λ
Δ
ΙΟ
ΙΙ
Λ
Λ
ΙΟ
ΙΛ
Δ
ΙΟ
ΙΙ
ΙΛ
Δ
Δ
ΙΛ
ΛΙ

m u l t i p l i cat i o n
113
before would now be expressed by the Banana digit sequence 
ΙΛΔΔΙΔ. Longer sequences mean more shifting and hence 
more steps in the algorithms. So you save time memorizing, 
but you pay later in calculating. Of course, as we will see, all 
of these step-by-step arithmetic procedures have been fully 
mechanized, and thus so-called pencil-and-paper arithmetic 
is now a rather obsolete skill. So get as good at it as you wish 
to. The important thing is to understand the ideas—at least if 
you want to be an arithmetician of wit and intelligence.
The multiples of Λ, Δ, and ΙΙ have particularly nice
patterns in the Banana system. What are these patterns?
How do they compare with the multiples of 5, 9, and 11
in the Hindu-Arabic system?
Amusingly, our previous calculation of 4 × 1783, which was 
somewhat involved using the Hindu-Arabic system, is now a 
complete triviality in the Banana system. After all, four is our 
grouping size. So we would just take our number ΙΛΔΔΙΔ 
and shift it one place to get ΙΛΔΔΙΔΟ. This could then be 
easily compared to other quantities similarly expressed. (And 
without some sort of eventual comparison, there would be no 
point in doing the computation in the first place.)
Let’s try a more complicated example, say ΙΛΛ × ΛΔ (this 
would be 26 × 11 in decimal). Organizing our single-digit 
products and shifts just as before, and either consulting or 
memorizing our small quaternary times tables, we get:
	
	 	 Ι Λ Λ
	
	 	  	Λ Δ
	
	 	 	Ι Λ
	
	 	 Ι Λ Ο
	
	 	Δ Ο Ο
	
	 	 Ι Ο Ο
	
	 Ι Ο Ο Ο
	
  	Λ Ο Ο Ο
	
Ι Ο Ι Δ Λ

a r i t h m e t i c
114
And of course, if you wished, you could streamline this 
further with needles and so on. The point here is that place 
value and multiplication are friends; the particular grouping 
size is irrelevant to their friendship. This is why all of the 
earlier marked-value systems have gone by the wayside.
While we’re on the subject, an extreme case of small group-
ing size would be a binary system, with a grouping size of two. 
There would be only two symbols needed, 0 and 1. The only 
thing to remember is that 1 + 1 = 10; there are no pesky times 
tables at all. Of course, the price we pay is having extremely 
long digit sequences. For example, the number one hundred 
would be encoded as 1100100. Now doubling is accomplished 
by place shifting. Everything works fine; multiplication 
becomes a babyishly simple but quite lengthy procedure.
Calculate 110 × 111. What do these numbers
correspond to in the Hindu-Arabic system?
Incidentally, the whole place-shifting idea still works 
perfectly well in the case of subdivided units, provided the 
subdividing is consistent with the grouping size. For instance, 
129 pennies when multiplied by ten would be 1290 pennies 
(one shift to the left), but if we preferred to count in dollars, we 
could just as easily say that 1.29 becomes 12.9. Again, pennies 
become dimes, and dimes turn into dollars. The consistency of 
the representation system (each column being worth exactly 
ten times as much as the previous) allows for a simple visual 
interpretation of multiplication by ten—namely, place shifting.
In particular, this gives us an alternative way of viewing 
numbers like 1.29, as being 129 with two antishifts. This 
means that for numbers represented in such a form, division 
by ten is just as simple as multiplication—we just shift to the 
right instead of the left.
Some people are in the habit of thinking that multiplica-
tion or division by ten moves the decimal point one space 
over, as with 10 × 1.29 = 12.9. This is certainly apparent visu-
ally. But really what is happening is that the decimal point 

m u l t i p l i cat i o n
115
is staying put, and the digits are moving, shifting over so that 
their value changes. It’s obviously a minor point, but I think 
it’s worth keeping in mind.
What this means, of course, is that we needn’t make any 
changes to our methods in order to incorporate these sorts 
of representations. The crucial thing is to keep all the align-
ment information intact. As we’ve seen, to add numbers of 
this form together, we need to make sure the decimal points 
are aligned, else we will be adding apples and oranges (or at 
any rate, ones and hundreds).
In a way, multiplication is a bit simpler in this regard, 
because the various place shiftings can be dealt with inde-
pendently. For example, if we wanted to calculate 12 × 3.85, 
we could just as easily view this as being 12 × 385 with two 
antishifts that can be performed later if we desire. This is yet 
another advantage of using a consistent base. In this way, even 
a very abstract-seeming calculation such as 2.3 × 4.72 can be 
seen as being essentially 23 copies of 472, the only difference 
being the units one is choosing to work with. This allows 
us to not have to worry about the meanings of the different 
place values while we perform the calculation and instead let 
the shifting do the bookkeeping for us.
Of course, it’s even better to allow some common sense into 
the proceedings. Were I to calculate 2.3 × 4.72 myself, I would 
start by getting a reasonable estimate of what I should expect: 
I’m more or less multiplying two by five, so my answer should 
be in the neighborhood of ten, maybe a little more or a little less 
but definitely not in the hundreds or thousands, for instance.
Now I can ignore all the decimal point business and simply 
multiply 23 × 472 to get
8000 + 1400 + 40 + 1200 + 210 + 6 = 10856.
So, since I know it really needs to be around 10, it must 
in fact actually be 10.856. Alternatively, I could look at my 
original numbers and see that they are off from the numbers 
I multiplied by a total of three antishifts. Taking these into 

a r i t h m e t i c
116
account, I again get 10.856. But I think the estimation idea 
is better.
While we’re on the subject of decimal representation, place 
shifting, and estimation, it often happens (especially in scientific 
work) that one is presented with numbers—usually measure-
ments of some kind—that are both astronomically large (or 
microscopically small) as well as approximate. In these cases it 
becomes convenient to take advantage of the place-shifting 
apparatus in order to save space. Instead of writing the number 
four billion six hundred million as 4 600 000 000, I could 
use the more succinct version 4.6 [9], meaning 4.6 with nine 
shifts. The approximate number of carbon atoms in a 12-gram 
sample is 6.02 [23] and the radius of a proton in meters is 
about 8.5 [–16] (meaning sixteen antishifts). This is a quick 
and convenient way to encode large-scale information in a 
compact form. 
Calculate 110 × 101.1 in binary. What numbers
do these correspond to in the Hindu-Arabic system?
How would the Banana People write this?

117
DIVISION
Let’s step away from the issues of representation and symbolic 
manipulation for a moment and think about what we are 
really doing when we are doing arithmetic. As I’ve said before 
(probably too many times), arithmetic is the art of arranging 
quantities for ease of comparison. This often takes the form 
of a collection of known quantities (however they may be 
represented or encoded) that we wish to combine in some 
way. For instance, we may have two amounts and wish to 
know their total. Fundamentally, we have two piles of rocks 
and we want to push them together to form one big pile. This 
is the essence of addition, independent of any representations 
or language. (And of course, this can be extended to as many 
piles as we wish.) The point being that addition is simply 
pushing piles together. Similarly, subtraction is the separation 
of a pile into two smaller piles, whose sum is then the original 
pile. In this way, we can see that adding and subtracting are 
inverse activities.
The modern view of arithmetic is that it consists of two 
categories of objects: numbers and operations. Numbers are 
the actors; operations are the actions. We certainly want to 
name our actors so as to be able to distinguish and compare 
them easily, but the content of the play is in what they 
do—the actions that the stage directions call upon them to 
perform. In the realm of arithmetic, numbers may be the 
nouns, but it is the operations that are the verbs. In some 
sense it is the operations that take center stage; the numbers 
serve only as a substrate for the operations to operate on. 
Perhaps I’m getting a little ahead of myself. All I mean to 
say is that we often find ourselves asking questions about 
numbers that concern their interplay, and it is the behavior 
of these various arithmetic activities (i.e., operations) that 
attracts our interest and curiosity. At any rate, this is the 
modern viewpoint—what matters is not the actors but the 
acting.

a r i t h m e t i c
118
Addition, for instance, is an operation in the abstract 
(namely, pushing piles together) that does what it does inde-
pendent of anyone’s language or representation scheme. Of 
course, once you have adopted such a scheme, then it certainly 
behooves you to investigate what the operation of addition 
“looks like” in that system and to develop algorithms (and 
mnemonic devices such as needles) to make things quick and 
convenient. That’s what we’ve been talking about this whole 
time. Be that as it may, addition is not columns of symbols and 
carrying; it’s pushing piles together.
Clearly, addition is one of the simplest and most basic oper-
ations one can perform with numbers. What could be more 
fundamental than pushing two piles together? (Actually, as 
I’ve mentioned, there is one activity that is even more funda-
mental: comparison, the sine qua non of arithmetic. If we are 
not eventually going to compare quantities, then what is the 
point of reorganizing them? We may as well leave 173 × 248 
alone.) Addition seems to be about the simplest thing you 
can do with two piles of rocks. And of course subtraction is 
really just unaddition, breaking the large total pile into two 
smaller ones.
Multiplication, on the other hand, is a bit more sophisti-
cated. As an operation, we are taking two piles and using one 
of them to dictate how many copies to make of the other. Or, 
if you prefer, the two piles refer to the number of rows and 
columns of a rectangle of rocks, the total of which is their 
product. So multiplication is a bit indirect, a sort of meta- 
addition. And the fact that it happens to be symmetrical (e.g., 
5 × 6 = 6 × 5) should really be appreciated—not only as 
convenient but also as a surprising and beautiful feature of 
the operation itself (in keeping with the modern behavior-
alist viewpoint). In any case, multiplication is a perfectly nice 
operation—another verb in the grammar of arithmetic.
The thing about verbs is that whenever we have one, we 
always seem to get two. If I lock the door, then at some point 
I will need to unlock it. Tie a piece of string, and sooner or 
later someone will want to untie it. Actions that can be done 

d i v i s i o n
119
almost always need to be undone. And this is especially true in 
mathematics, where symmetry is so highly prized and where 
the imaginary nature of the place allows us the freedom to 
reverse our actions so easily.
So we can view subtraction, for example, as an almost 
necessary linguistic construct. Once we can speak of addi-
tion, we then have the ability to ask questions: What do I add 
to this to get that? The desire to unadd follows immediately. 
What two-year-old, having learned to walk, does not eventu-
ally hit upon the perverse idea of walking backward?
Thus to every operation, activity, or transformation, we 
have the implicit possibility of an inverse, the reversal of the 
process. For every up there is a down; for every clockwise 
there is a whatchamacallit. To paraphrase the Book of Ecclesi-
astes, there is a time to cast away stones, and a time to gather 
stones together.
It so happens that making copies has a very natural inverse 
that arises quite frequently in arithmetic: sharing. Suppose 
you are lucky enough to be in possession of a rather large 
bag of chewy, mouthwatering jelly beans. Further suppose 
that you have somewhat foolishly promised to share them 
with your six so-called friends (or generously, if you want to 
put a brave face on it). The seven of you will receive equal 
shares to avoid the inevitable comparisons and accusations 
of favoritism.
The interesting aspect of such a sharing scenario is that 
we have no idea how many jelly beans each person should 
receive, only that we want the amounts to be equal. That is, 
whatever this mystery quantity is, seven copies of it should 
make the original total. This is the way that sharing is the 
inverse of multiplication.
This sharing business is technically known as division (from 
the Latin divisus, “separated”), and one is said to “divide” one 
number by another. In our case, we wish to divide the total 
number of jelly beans by seven. Let’s suppose there happen to 
be two hundred forty-eight jelly beans in the bag. We want 
to know how to split it up—how to divide the jelly beans 

a r i t h m e t i c
120
among the seven people. We know the number of copies, and 
we know their total. How do we figure out what each share 
should be? In short, what is 248 divided by 7?
One simple way to proceed would be to start handing out 
jelly beans, one to each person, going around in a circle in 
“eeny, meeny, miney, mo” fashion, until the bag (and you) 
are completely exhausted. The problem with this method is 
that it takes forever. Of course, if you only had a few dozen 
jelly beans, then it would actually be an ideal method—
quick, easy, and very reliable. When the numbers get large, 
however, you’ll be eeny-meenying yourself into an early 
grave. (Maybe this is why people don’t like to share; commu-
nism will never work because the arithmetic is too annoying 
and time consuming?)
Luckily, there is a more efficient way. Instead of handing 
out jelly beans one at a time, we could hand them out two 
at a time, or three, or a whole pile. This will make the whole 
process go much more quickly (and may also restore our 
hopes for a communist utopia).
The danger here is that we will get too greedy. Not greedy 
for jelly beans but for efficiency. The more we hand out, the 
faster it will go, but we run the risk that we will give out too 
many too soon and run out before we get to everyone. That’s 
bound to lead to trouble. In my experience, if there’s one 
thing people don’t like, it’s giving back jelly beans.
This puts us in an amusing and interesting predicament. We 
want to distribute as large a handful to each person as we can, 
yet if we go too far, we may find ourselves “holding the bag,” 
as they say. This means that a necessary part of any efficient 
sharing method is the ability to estimate—to get a rough idea 
of how many we can safely afford to hand out so that we 
don’t run out too fast.
The other amusing (and possibly quite annoying) issue with 
sharing is that we often find ourselves with a few leftovers. 
After distributing the same number of jelly beans to all seven 
people, we may be left with two or three jelly beans in the 
bag. In other words, division doesn’t always come out evenly. 

d i v i s i o n
121
What to do with the leftovers will of course depend on the 
circumstances. Let’s say that in our case, to be fair, we will feed 
any leftovers to the dog. The general problem then becomes 
how to efficiently determine the division of the total, as well 
as the number of leftovers, if any. Incidentally, the number of 
leftovers is usually called the remainder (from Latin remanere, 
“to stay back”).
In the case of jelly beans (or rocks), it probably makes 
the most sense to simply pour them out on the table and 
start making seven piles. We could start with a dozen or 
so in each pile, and then keep handing out five or so until 
the source pile gets smallish, then switch to maybe two 
each and then eeny-meeny it at the very end, until we see 
that we have too few left to give. These will constitute the 
remainder. Of course we could get lucky and have no left-
overs. That’s always very satisfying (unless you happen to be 
the dog).
A similar process would clearly work for a marked-value 
system, such as Egyptian counting coins. In practice, you 
may not have the actual objects to be distributed, or they 
may be too awkward to handle (e.g., goats). So you substi-
tute counting coins for the actual objects and divide these 
instead. The point being that it is the numbers that we are 
interested in. You can always turn them back into goats at a 
later date.
Since you happen to be an ancient Egyptian goatherd, you 
may as well get some practice right now: a total of v l 3 
goats are to be divided among five goatherds. How many 
goats does each receive, and are there any leftovers?
Here we can imagine making five piles of coins, one for 
each goatherd. We could start by giving each pile a p coin and 
a g coin, since we clearly have enough to go around:
p g    p g    p g    p g    p g
This leaves us with q g 3 to distribute. Not having five of 
anything, it’s time to do some arithmetic in the form of cash-

a r i t h m e t i c
122
ing in, rearranging the form of the number to make it easier 
to work with. Cashing in each p coin in exchange for ten g 
coins, we get a total of twenty-one g’s to spread among the 
five piles. Here is an opportunity to either be clever (e.g., by 
noticing that twenty is four fives and therefore also five fours) 
or prosaic (eeny-meeny until you’re done). Either way, our 
piles now look like this: 
p k    p k    p k    p k    p k
and we are left with g 3. Finally, cashing in the g coin for ten 
1 coins, we can give each pile two and be left with three. So 
each goatherd gets p k 2 goats, and they can celebrate their 
successful division with a delicious three-goat stew. (This may 
also provide leftovers of a different sort.)
The pharaoh wishes to divide r k 7 jewel-encrusted 
bracelets equally among his three daughters. How many 
does each princess get? Are there any leftover bracelets?
The hallmark of our division procedure is its iterative 
nature. At each stage of the process, we have a certain number 
of items to be distributed among a given number of piles. We 
then estimate roughly how many we can afford to give away 
(keeping our estimates on the low side to be safe), and then 
we subtract these from our total and repeat the process. The 
larger our estimate (i.e., the amount we give to each pile) the 
faster everything will go but also the greater the danger will 
be of running out too soon. If, on the other hand, our esti-
mates are too low, we will certainly be safe but probably also 
sorry that it is taking so long.
Let’s see how this plays out in the Hindu-Arabic system. 
We’ll use our jelly-bean example from before. What happens 
when 248 jelly beans are divided among 7 people? Rather 
than drawing pictures of piles, let’s try to be as simple 
and efficient as possible. We’ll need to keep track of a few 
things—namely, how many we have given to each person 

d i v i s i o n
123
and how many are left to be handed out. So let’s make a 
little table:
	
Amount Given to Each	
Number Remaining
	
	
248
Our table begins like this. And now we hit our first snag. 
We don’t actually have in our hands any objects to arrange 
and distribute. This is one of the chief advantages of things 
like rocks and counting coins. Here we’re going to somehow 
have to distribute things mentally and symbolically.
Not only that, but our estimates and our totals are going 
to have to be calculated symbolically as well. We will have 
to somehow—just by looking at the symbol 248—come up 
with an idea of how many we can afford to give each of the 
seven people, as well as knowing how many we will be giving 
away in total so we can deduct this from our original amount. 
How can we best go about doing this?
My advice (as always) is not to work too hard. Whatever 
amount we decide to give everyone, we’re clearly going to 
have to multiply it by 7, so we should choose amounts that 
are easy to multiply. My suggestion would be to use only 
single-digit numbers like 8 or 400. Then we can let shifting 
do the work for us. We may possibly err on the side of giving 
away fewer than we could, and it may consequently take a bit 
longer, but at least we won’t have to fill up mounds of scratch 
paper with a bunch of side computations. 
Of course, even to use this lazy man’s method requires 
that we have some sort of feeling for roughly how big vari-
ous single-digit products are. But that’s exactly the kind of 
thing, like language fluency, that comes from practice (and 
lots of it). For instance, I happen to know that 7 × 3 = 21, 
not because I burned that into my memory with drills and 
flashcards but because I care about numbers and am interested 
in their properties. Over the years, information like that even-
tually just sticks, especially if it is useful for my lifelong pursuit 
of entertainment.

a r i t h m e t i c
124
Returning to our division project, I see that we have 248 
jelly beans to distribute among 7 people, so I would like to 
find a simple quantity (i.e., a single-digit number) that when 
multiplied by 7 is more or less 248—actually, not more or 
less, just less. I want it to be as large as possible while still 
being safely below 248, and I don’t want to work very hard, 
either. 
Here is where my knowledge and experience with multipli-
cation comes in. Clearly, I can’t afford to give away a hundred 
to each person, because that would mean giving a total of 
seven hundred, which I ain’t got. So, since I can’t give away 
any hundreds, I’ll try to give away as many tens as I can. Well, 
what if I give everyone ten? That would be a total of seventy, 
which I can certainly afford. Let’s say we do that. Then we’ll 
need to record the fact that we’ve given everyone ten, as well 
as figure out how many we have left. Here’s a convenient way 
to do that with our table system:
	
Amount Given to Each	
Number Remaining
	
	
248
	
10	
  70
	
	
178
After writing down 10 in the first column, I multiplied that 
by the seven people to get 70, and aligned it with the 248 so 
that I would be all set to subtract in the usual way. Now I see 
that each person has 10 and there are 178 jelly beans left in 
the bag. Does that all make sense? (Obviously, you can invent 
your own format for how you want to keep track of all this 
information; this way seems reasonably simple and straight-
forward to me.)
Notice that we were not terribly efficient here with our 
estimate. We could have given away a lot more and made 
more of a dent in the total. Not that it’s a big deal in any way. 
Truth be told, we could have given thirty jelly beans to each 
person and still been safe. Since 7 × 3 = 21, shifting tells me 
that 7 × 30 = 210, still well below 248. So if we had been a 

d i v i s i o n
125
trifle more courageous, we could’ve gotten rid of a lot more 
jelly beans in one go.
There always seems to be a kind of “conservation of 
energy” principle with things like this. We can do a lot of 
simple arithmetic over and over, or we can work a little 
harder mentally but get it over with faster. (It reminds me 
a lot of pulleys: you can pull hard over a short distance 
and sweat like a pig, or you can invent a more elaborate 
compound pulley and have an easy—though lengthy—time 
of it.)
In any case, it’s all water under the bridge. Let’s not cry 
over spilled multiples. So we could have used 30 instead of 
10, big deal. Let’s just continue with our calculation. We have 
178 jelly beans left. Any convenient multiples of seven lying 
around? Well, experience tells me that 7 × 2 = 14, so I know 
that 7 × 20 = 140, which is reasonably close and also safely 
under. So let’s go with that:
	
Each	
Remaining
	
	
248
	
10	
  70
	
	
178
	
20	
140
	
	
38
What our table tells us is that we have given away a total of 
10 + 20 = 30 to each person, and we have only 38 left. (This 
is where we would have been had we been clever enough to 
go with 30 in the first place.)
OK, so we have 38 jelly beans left. Clearly, giving even ten 
to each person is now too much. Of course, we could start 
handing out ones, but we can probably do a bit better. How 
about five? Since 7 × 5 happens to be 35, that’s pretty much 
right on the money. So we end up with a total of 35 jelly 
beans for each person, with 3 leftovers. At the end, our table 
looks like this:

a r i t h m e t i c
126
	
Each	
Remaining
	
	
248
	
10	
  70
	
	
178
	
20	
140
	
	
38
	
  5	
	
35
	
35	
	
3
Here I’ve added up the entries in the Each column to give 
me the total distributed to each person. (In this sort of calcu-
lation, it always pays to align the entries so that all the addi-
tions and subtractions are easy to perform and to read clearly.) 
Anyway, that’s our division method in a nutshell.
What happens if we divide 5625 by 4?
Of course, people have found ways to streamline this process. 
We don’t really need to label the columns, for instance; we 
could just agree to always put the Each numbers on the left 
and the Remaining on the right. And who’s going to be look-
ing anyway? If such a computation is going to be done at all, 
it will be done by you for your own purposes, so do whatever 
you like. Just be clear about what your symbols mean so you 
don’t get confused.
More substantively, we can make our division procedure faster 
and easier by improving our estimates. In principle, we could 
try to maximize efficiency by always choosing the largest single-
digit quantity we can afford so that there are fewer stages in the 
calculation. This is again a trade. To be faster and more efficient, 
we will have to be more knowledgeable and experienced.
In particular, we will need to have a fairly fluent command 
of the single-digit multiples. That’s pretty much all that people 
mean when they say someone is “good with numbers.” They 
mean that when such a person sees or hears “twenty-seven” 
they immediately think to themselves “three nines.” Maybe 
it’s a case of familiarity breeds contempt, but I actually don’t 

d i v i s i o n
127
think that arithmetic skill is anything to be all that proud of 
or envious about. If you care to develop that kind of skill, then 
you will. Walking and talking are infinitely more difficult, and 
most toddlers eventually seem to get it down. So get as good 
at it as you like, but please don’t stress over it.
Anyway, let’s suppose that we more or less know our single-
digit multiples (i.e., the times tables). We need to know this 
information in reverse as well; not just that three sixes is eigh-
teen, but that eighteen is three sixes. That’s pretty much what 
is means—that two things can be used interchangeably. It’s a 
bit like learning a foreign language; you need to be able to go 
from English to German and back again. And here we really 
are talking about a dictionary—we’re translating from groups 
of six to groups of ten and back again. That’s what the times 
tables really are: a dictionary from decimal to other grouping 
sizes. Anyway, let’s suppose we know all that. Then we can 
speed up our method a bit.
The idea will be to give away all the thousands we can 
(making our estimates maximal), then all the hundreds, tens, and 
finally, ones. So there will be one stage of the process for each 
decimal place. Let’s put it into practice with an example: 6842 
divided by 5. Here is what it would look like in table form:
	
	
	6842
	
1000	
	5000
	
	
	1842
	
300	
	1500
	
	
	 342
	
60	
	  300
	
	
	  42
	
     8	
	 40
	
1368	
	
2
At each stage we used our intimate knowledge of multi-
ples of five to always make the largest (and therefore most 
efficient) estimate. So if you like that sort of thing, it’s there 
for you.

a r i t h m e t i c
128
In fact, this process can be streamlined even further if you 
are so inclined. Since we are always making single-digit esti-
mates, they are particularly easy to add up. Notice how we 
obtained the grand total 1368: it came from adding 1000 + 
300 + 60 + 8. In other words, the single-digit numbers don’t 
interfere with each other; there is no exchanging or carrying 
or anything like that. The digit sequence 1368 is just sitting 
there in the estimates themselves. Some people like to exploit 
this feature to make the algorithm even faster and to save 
space. One popular format is to put the single-digit estimates 
above the original quantity, aligned correctly with the corre-
sponding place values:
	
	1368
	
	6842
	
	5000
	
	1842
	
	1500
	
	 342
	
	 300
	
	 42
	
	 40
	
	
2
The point here is that no adding needs to be done at the 
end; the digits just fall into place as you go. This can be a 
convenient time and space saver when the numbers get big.
Try the new method with 53219 divided by 8.
Of course, things can get complicated. For instance, not 
only might the number of jelly beans get quite large but 
also the number of people. You may find yourself needing 
to divide 17503 by 13, say. In this case both the estimation as 
well as the multiplication are going to get messy. Let’s give it 
a try.

d i v i s i o n
129
Our calculation begins simply enough, seeing that we can 
easily give away 1000 each. Let’s make the usual table:
	
	
	 17503
	
1000	
	 13000
	
	
	
4503
Now we have to ask, how many hundreds can we afford? 
Knowing the multiples of thirteen would certainly help, 
but we can’t know all multiples of all numbers—there are 
infinitely many of them! So sometimes we have to buckle 
down and do some side calculations. I know that three 
copies of 13 is 39. Can I afford four? I guess I can use the 
fact that a deck of cards has four suits of 13 cards each and 
is 52 cards total. (Don’t laugh—all experience is grist for the 
arithmetic mill.) This means that 300 each will cost 3900 
and 400 each would be 5200. So I can only afford to give 
three hundreds:
	
	
	 17503
	
1000	
	 13000
	
	
	
4503
	
300	
	3900
	
	
	
  603
So you see this division business can be a lot of work: esti-
mating, multiplying, subtracting, and aligning everything—no 
wonder I avoid it whenever possible!
At this stage we need to estimate how many tens we can 
afford to give away. I wouldn’t blame you (or myself) if we 
got lazy at this point and simply gave away 30 each, since we 
already know it’s 390. This would spare us some multiplica-
tion, but we would then need to give away more tens later. 
On the other hand, we can still get away with doing no labor 
by employing the deck of cards again: 13 × 40 must be 520, 
which is larger but still affordable. So let’s go with that:

a r i t h m e t i c
130
	
	
	17503
	
1000	
	13000
	
	
	 4503
	
 300	
	 3900
	
	
	   603
	
  40	
	 520
	
	
	    83
Being complete slobs, let’s just use 13 × 4 again for the ones, 
and then deal with the aftermath (no pun intended):
	
	
	17503
	
1000	
	13000
	
	
	 4503
	
300	
	 3900
	
	
	   603
	
  40	
	   520
	
	
	    83
	
   4	
	    52
	
	
	    31
	
     2	
	    26
	
1346	
	     5
OK, so we could have afforded six ones at the end. In 
any event, we are done: 17503 divided by 13 is 1346, with 
a remainder of 5. The (slightly) more efficient version would 
appear thus (I’ve even gotten cute here and suppressed unnec-
essary zeros to save writing):
	
	  1346
	
	17503
	
13	
	
	 4503
	
	
39	
	
	
603
	
	
52	
	
	
83
	
	
78
	
	
5

d i v i s i o n
131
Truth be told, I’m not actually all that big a fan of the 
more efficient version. I don’t really want to work that hard 
to ensure that I’m always giving away the greatest possible 
amount each time. I’d rather just give out whatever I want to 
whenever I want to. In fact, sometimes I will even give away 
too much (that is, more than I can afford) and then take a little 
back later just to make my life easier with the estimation. So 
my advice is to do what you like, efficiency be damned.
The truth is, pencil-and-paper division is not a terribly 
common occurrence, and as we shall see, most of these sorts 
of lengthy algorithmic procedures are pretty much obsolete at 
this point anyway. But here is a problem to try out just for fun.
Four thousand six hundred forty-eight chocolate bars
are to be divided into seventeen equal shipments.
You have been promised the leftovers, if any.
How many chocolate bars do you get?
While we’re on the subject of division and sharing, I want 
to mention an amusing feature. When we say that we are 
dividing a bag of jelly beans among seven people, we are 
asking what number, when multiplied by seven, makes the 
given total (let’s ignore leftovers for the moment). In other 
words, seven times what makes a bagful? For definiteness, let’s 
say that each person gets eight, so there are fifty-six jelly beans 
in all. The fact that 7 × 8 equals 56 is capable of multiple 
interpretations (another unintended pun!).
On the one hand, we can think of 7 × 8 as seven copies 
of eight (so that each of the seven people receives eight jelly 
beans). Alternatively, using the symmetry of multiplication, 
we can also view it as being eight groups of seven. So seven 
is the number of people to whom we could give eight jelly 
beans each. In other words, instead of asking how many can 
go in each pile, we can ask how many piles can receive a 
given amount. The symmetry of multiplication gives us two 
slightly different ways to think about division: we are chop-
ping a quantity up into a given number of piles whose size we 

a r i t h m e t i c
132
seek, or we are chopping it into piles of a fixed size and we 
want to know how many piles there will be.
Of course, these are really the same in the abstract; the issue 
is really one of interpretation. Neither seven nor eight (nor 
their product, fifty-six) cares about you and your arithmetic 
problems. They are too busy doing what they do (namely, 
multiplying) to bother with your petty interpretation issues. 
The modern view would be to ignore piles and shares and 
people and just focus on behavior: fifty-six divided by eight 
is seven because seven times eight is fifty-six, period. Who 
cares which number is thought of as people and which one 
as piles?
The other thing I wanted to point out is that our divi-
sion procedure gets along very well with place shifting. Just 
as multiplying by sixty is essentially the same as multiplying 
by six, so it is with division. In fact, since multiplication by 
ten can be thought of as simply a shift (one place to the left), 
division by ten can likewise be viewed as an antishift (i.e., a 
shift one place to the right).
This means that all of our division procedures survive 
the passage to decimals, that is, representations involving 
subdivided units and decimal points. For example, if a loan 
payment of $324.87 is to be divided into five equal install-
ments, we could proceed in the following way. First of all, 
forget the decimal point. We have 32487 of something (in this 
case, pennies). Let’s divide by five as usual:
	
	
	32487
	
6000	
	30000
	
	
	 2487
	
400	
	 2000
	
	
	 487
	
90	
	 450
	
	
	
37
	
     7	
	
35
	
6497	
	
2

d i v i s i o n
133
Because the place shifting can be done at any time (i.e., 
you don’t have to commit to what your units are), we save 
it until the very end. So here I could say that since I initially 
did a double shift to turn 324.87 into 32487, now I can undo 
that to see that each installment should be $64.97, with $.02 
remaining—in other words, there are two leftover pennies. 
(You’ll have to work that out with your lender.)
The point is that we have a lot of flexibility with these 
place-value algorithms as long as we can keep a clear head.
What happens if we are to pay the $324.87
in fifty equal installments?
It often happens, especially in more technical arenas such 
as science and engineering, that we require a higher degree 
of accuracy in our computations. In such cases remainders 
become problematic. For example, if I have an 8 liter sample 
of liquid weighing 7.25 kilograms (that is, 7250 grams), the 
density of the liquid (measured in grams per liter) would be 
calculated by division: we want 7250 divided by 8. Running 
the usual procedure gives: 
	
	
	7250
	
900	
	7200
	
	
	 50
	
    6	
	 48
	
906	
	
2
But here the leftovers cause trouble. Yes, we could say that 
the density is roughly 906 grams per liter, but that’s what it 
would be if the sample weighed 2 grams less. I suppose we 
could pour off a little and reweigh it, but then the 8 liters 
would be wrong. The correct thing to do with something like 
this is to subdivide our units more finely. Instead of viewing 
7.25 kilograms as 7250 grams, let’s think of it as 7250000. 
(This would mean we are measuring in milligrams, but it 

a r i t h m e t i c
134
doesn’t really matter. The point is that we are adding on a 
bunch of shifts to increase the accuracy.) Now we get:
	
	
	7250000
	
900000	
	7200000
	
	
	 50000
	
6000	
	 48000
	
	
	
2000
	
200	
	
1600
	
	
	
400
	
       50	
	
400
	
906250	
	
0
and there are no unpleasant remainders. Shifting back—to 
return to our original units—we obtain a density of 906.25 
grams per liter.
Had there still been leftovers, we could either shift again 
(to get even more accuracy), or we could simply ignore the 
remainder if it represents an amount so small that the error is 
negligible. We may not care about being off by .00003 grams 
per liter, say.
In every practical, real-world scenario (including even parti-
cle physics and cosmology), there is always going to be some 
threshold of accuracy beyond which things become point-
less. For one thing, your original data is always approximate 
anyway. So scientists and engineers, carpenters and seam-
stresses, bakers and farmers all use arithmetic frequently, but 
the most important skill is knowing what degree of accuracy 
is appropriate—in particular, when remainders can safely be 
discarded. If there is such a thing as an accepted convention, 
it would be this: don’t bother being more accurate than your data. 
If the situation calls for you to divide 125.26 by 3.8, it would 
be absurd to work hard to produce a figure like 32.9631579, 
when the original numbers are only given to one or two 
places after the decimal point. I would probably just go with 
33, seeing as it’s so close.
Generally, when someone writes a number like 3.8, what 

d i v i s i o n
135
they mean is that all they can guarantee is that it’s around 3.8, 
somewhere between 3.75 and 3.85, say. If more were known 
(or cared about), then maybe we would have a more accurate 
estimate like 3.83, which would again only tell us the number 
up to a certain tolerance—the final digit always being a bit 
iffy. The decision of how accurate one’s measurements should 
be, and thus how many so-called significant figures to provide, 
is a very basic one. It really just depends on what you are 
doing and why.
You are in the laboratory measuring the amount of liquid 
contained in three test tubes. The volumes (in milliliters) are  
found to be: 30.25, 27.12, and 32.62. After combining them,  
you find the total volume to be just a hair over 90 milliliters. 
Should you be surprised?

136
MACHINES
Perhaps the most surprising and powerful aspect of place-
value arithmetic is how it reduces any calculation to a set of 
purely abstract symbolic manipulations. In principle, I suppose, 
one could even be trained to perform such symbol-jiggling 
procedures without any comprehension whatever of the underly-
ing meaning. We could even (if we can possibly imagine being 
so cruel) force young children to memorize tables of symbols 
and meaningless step-by-step procedures, and then reward or 
punish them for their skill (or lack thereof ) in this dreary 
and soulless activity. This would help protect our future office 
workers from accidentally gaining a personal relationship to 
arithmetic as a craft or enjoying the perspective that outlook 
would provide. We could turn the entire enterprise into a 
rote mechanical process and then reward those who show the 
most willingness to be made into reliable and obedient tools. 
I wonder if you can imagine such a nightmarish, dystopian 
world? Let’s try not to think about it.
Whenever humans start to realize that they are performing 
mindless repetitive tasks, someone eventually has the bright 
idea to build a machine to do it instead. Arithmetic is no 
exception. Why should I waste my time moving symbols 
around in a purely rote mechanical way when I can get my 
servant to do it for me? And why should I put up with a 
cranky and unreliable human servant (who might even expect 
to be paid) when I can employ an inanimate object to do my 
work for me? Even the human machines that we produce in 
our obedience schools are no match for a mechanical slave.
From the plow to the potter’s wheel, from the loom to the 
sewing machine, humans have always found ways to mecha-
nize useful activities, transferring the hard boring labor over 
to the machines, freeing us up to think and relax and make 
art. (It is also a great way to eliminate and impoverish entire 
swaths of the industrial labor force and create widespread 
inequity, social unrest, and eventual class warfare.)

mac h i n e s
137
The simplest mechanical arithmetic device would be a 
counter, such as an odometer or a turnstile, where each turn of 
the wheel causes the counter to increment. There are simple 
handheld devices that are used to tally: when a button is pushed 
the number increases by one. How do such machines work?
The trick to getting a machine to do something for us is 
to find a way to remove comprehension and understanding 
from the process; to reduce it to a purely mechanical activity, 
where not only is it unnecessary to understand what is going 
on, but it is essential that there be no understanding needed, 
else how are we going to get a bunch of mindless gears and 
springs to do it?
Which is not to say that machines are in principle unable 
to think, only that we don’t yet know exactly what think-
ing is, or how to make it happen (though we seem to have 
gotten pretty good at finding ways to make it not happen). Of 
course, there are biological machines that are apparently able 
to think—us, for example—but we didn’t design them and 
we don’t really know how they work.
So the first step in the construction of any machine is to 
break down the procedure you wish it to perform into a 
sequence of mindless, rote mechanical activities. When we are 
weaving a tapestry, we are well aware of how we are choosing 
a green thread to make part of a leaf design, but an auto-
mated loom can have no such ideas; it must simply follow 
instructions uncomprehendingly, selecting a green thread not 
because it intends to but because it is forced to by its own 
design. Similarly, I don’t choose to have blood course through 
my veins; my heart beats whether I like it or not. (For the 
most part, I’m glad that it does.)
So we have to somehow get a mechanical counter to 
“know” how to increment (that is, add one to the count) 
without really knowing. In particular, although the device 
may display Hindu-Arabic numerals for our benefit, it will 
not (and cannot) understand their meaning. That means we 
need to come up with a physical interpretation of “adding 
one” that is inherently meaningless.

a r i t h m e t i c
138
One simple idea would be to make a scroll—a long strip 
of paper with consecutive numbers written on it—so that 
each turn of a crank, say, would advance the scroll to the next 
higher number. 
This is certainly mindless enough. The deluxe version would 
probably include some sort of a housing or box to put it in to 
make it easy to hold and to operate. We would also want some 
kind of display window so we could see which number we’ve 
gotten to. Finally, we’d probably like to engineer some way 
to keep it from being turned accidentally, or slipping back-
ward, so that it isn’t too fragile and finicky. Maybe a satisfying 
click each time we advance the scroll would be nice as well. 
The typical solution is to include a ratchet mechanism. This is 
simply a gear, together with a spring-loaded pin to keep the 
crank from turning too freely. 
Though almost laughably simple, this tallying device has 
some very convenient features. It is certainly easy to use: 
just turn the crank! The current count appears in the display 

mac h i n e s
139
window. With very slight modification to the ratchet, we 
could even allow it to turn backward, if that were desired, to 
correct for accidental overcounting, say.
Sooner or later (maybe now, even), you may start to notice 
some inconveniences inherent in this design. Quite apart from 
the annoyance of having to prepare a long scroll of consecu-
tive numbers in the first place (and how long would depend 
on what you intended to use it for), there is the problem of 
having to reset it, or “zero it out,” each time you want to use 
it. If yesterday’s tally made it to three hundred and something, 
then in order to reset the device for today’s count, you would 
have to spend some time rewinding the scroll back to the start 
(which would presumably display the number zero). That’s 
pretty annoying.
Can we do better? I suppose we could have a ready supply 
of fresh scrolls and switch them out each time, but that hardly 
seems best. I’d prefer not to open the thing up and tinker 
around if I don’t have to. I just want a reliable, easy-to-use 
handheld device—and I don’t really want to make a long 
scroll of numbers either, if I can avoid it.
The thing about technology is that it evolves. Just as plants 
and animals respond to the changing vicissitudes of the envi-
ronment, flourishing or suffering depending on the aptness 
of their design, becoming extinct or mutating into better-
adapted forms, so it goes with the machines. The environ-
ment is human usage, and innovation drives the evolutionary 
process. Once a new idea is discovered that corrects a problem 
or eliminates an annoyance, it’s curtains for the old design. 
Museums are filled with dinosaurs of both the animal and 
mechanical kind. The big difference is the rate of evolutionary 
change. Technology evolves much faster than natural organ-
isms because our innovations are intentional, as opposed to a 
random, directionless process of genetic mutation. When we 
wish to improve a feature of an existing mechanical design, 
we do it on purpose, with a goal in mind. We don’t always 
succeed, and we are notoriously bad at foreseeing unintended 
side effects and negative consequences, but it is far from 

a r i t h m e t i c
140
random. This means that technological change is both rapid 
and unpredictable, but what are you gonna do? Humans are 
insatiably curious, remarkably clever, and unbelievably stupid.
Hopefully, improving our tally machine won’t cause too 
much unintentional harm. The big historical innovation is the 
idea of a digit wheel. Instead of a cumbersome written scroll 
of numbers, we simply use a separate wheel and axle for each 
digit. This not only frees us from having to make a long list 
of numbers but also allows us to affect and control each digit 
separately, making it much faster and easier to reset.
Each digit wheel will require its own ratchet mechanism, 
and there will be further complications as well, as we will 
shortly see. This is quite typical of technological innova-
tion and evolution. We certainly saw it with the history and 
development of number languages. Almost always it comes 
down to a trade: easier to use, harder to understand; faster 
and more convenient, less intuitive; has more features, breaks 
more often.
The problem with evolution—whether mechanical, biolog-
ical, or cultural—is in knowing when to stop. Were eighty-
foot lizards really such a good idea? How about high heels and 
TV remotes? Which innovations are really useful and which 
are merely fads that later generations will find ludicrous?
I think the digit wheel is a good invention. There are many 
variations on the basic idea, but the one I like best looks like 
this:
In this design, each time the wheel is turned on its axle, the 
ratchet makes a click and the front-facing digit is advanced. 

mac h i n e s
141
For a multidigit counter, we would simply arrange several of 
these digit wheels in sequence. 
Here is a design for a four-digit counter. Each digit gets its 
own display window, and the crank (or knob, if you prefer) 
can be attached directly to the axle of the ones digit wheel. 
You may already have noticed our first snag. When the 
counter reaches the number nine, and we then give the crank 
another turn, instead of going on to ten, the counter will reset 
to zero. The trouble is that the ones digit just spins around; 
we need to give it some way to inform the tens digit that it 
has just “rolled over” to zero, and it is time for the tens place 
to increment. So the snag is that there is no actual snag—we 
need to get the ones digit wheel to catch onto the tens digit 
wheel at just the right time. 
The simplest way to do this is to attach a “carry pin” to the 
ones axle and a corresponding “carry gear” on the tens axle, 
like so:
The carry pin simply rotates along with the ones digit 
wheel, doing nothing at all for most of its journey, until the 

a r i t h m e t i c
142
wheel gets to the all-important 9 position. At this point, the 
carry pin engages with the carry gear on the tens axle so that 
when the ones digit advances to the 0 position, it automat-
ically forces the tens wheel to rotate as well. Of course, the 
width of the pin and the spacing of the gear teeth will have to 
be designed with great care so that the tens digit wheel will 
advance just the right amount, but that’s the kind of nitpicky 
detail that engineers drool over. 
There is a curious side effect of this plan, actually, which 
is that the rotation of the ones digit wheel from 9 to 0 will 
cause the tens wheel to rotate the other way. It is the nature of 
interconnected gears to rotate oppositely. If the ones wheel 
(and thus the carry pin) is rotated clockwise, the tens wheel 
will necessarily rotate counterclockwise. That means we have 
to reverse the order of the digits on the tens wheel, as I have 
done in the drawing. For some reason I find this rather amus-
ing. Of course if you don’t like it, you can always try to engi-
neer your way around it (e.g., by inserting more gears and so 
forth), but let’s keep things simple.
While we’re at it, another improvement we can make is not 
only to replace the crank with a less cumbersome knob or 
dial but also to install one of these on each of the digit axles 
to make them independently adjustable. Our new, improved 
counting device might look something like this:
Each axle is provided with a carry pin as well as a carry 
gear (though the axles at each end do not require both). Since 

mac h i n e s
143
these can be placed arbitrarily high or low along the axles, 
they can be staggered (as shown) so as not to interfere with 
each other. The wheels will then rotate in alternate fashion, 
clockwise and counterclockwise.
At last we have a counting machine worthy of the name. 
Also, since each axle has its own control, we can easily add 
twenty to the count simply by turning the tens dial twice (in 
the proper direction, of course). Not only that, but it is also 
easy to subtract by turning the dials the opposite way.
When I was a kid and my mom took me to the market, she 
used exactly this kind of device to keep track of how much 
she was spending. Often she would let me hold it and would 
tell me the price of the next item, say $2.39. Then I got to 
turn the dials (or were they buttons?) to add it on to the 
total: two turns of the hundreds wheel, three for the tens, and 
nine for the ones place. It simply delighted me when a digit 
rolled over and advanced the next place automatically. I loved 
it when I was six, and I love it now. Can anyone resist watch-
ing an odometer roll over to 100,000 miles? What exactly is 
the universal appeal of the carry pin?
I think it is the essence of life itself. Inanimate objects are 
somehow intrinsically boring compared to things that move. 
When something moves by itself, we like to watch. Not only 
that, but we tend to endow that thing with the status of a 
fellow being. We say, “Look what it’s doing” and “What does 
it want?” and things like that. We ascribe to it a certain level 
of consciousness and intentionality. If a thing is complex 
enough, we may even grant it a personality, as in “My car has 
been really cranky lately” or “The toaster doesn’t seem to like 
me today.” This is also borne out by the etymology of words 
like animate and animal (from the Latin anima, “soul”). When 
things move by themselves, requiring no impetus from us, we 
tend to view them as living creatures.
Perhaps the most crucial requirement is that the thing 
reacts—it does different things depending on external circum-
stances. Just because water flows along a riverbed doesn’t 

a r i t h m e t i c
144
make it alive. We want to see it adjust its behavior and “make 
decisions.”
In an admittedly laughable and simplistic way, this is exactly 
what a carry pin does. It makes our counting machine appear 
to understand something about place-value arithmetic. The 
tens wheel is just sitting there, minding its own business while 
we turn the ones dial, until we pass 9 and get to 0, at which 
point the tens wheel seems to react to that news and moves, 
in a somewhat creepy way, all by itself.
Perhaps you roll your eyes and scoff at my fanciful notion 
of endowing a counting device with a consciousness (of 
whatever limited form). But don’t people often do some-
thing like this with computers? We may understand intel-
lectually that such machines (which are obviously quite a 
bit more complex than our mechanical counter) are nothing 
but a massive pile of interconnected transistors, yet we still 
find ourselves saying, “What is it up to?” and “I wonder why 
it decided to erase my file?” and so forth. Fundamentally, a 
transistor is a switch: it transmits electrical current or not 
depending on a certain input voltage. That is, it reacts differ-
ently to different circumstances. So it’s really just a fancy 
carry pin of sorts. Hook enough of them together, and you 
get a “thinking machine.”
For that matter, what is a neuron but a (ridiculously sophis-
ticated) biological carry pin? Neurons also send electrical 
impulses depending on their inputs, just like transistors—the 
major difference being that we didn’t invent them. Conse-
quently, we don’t yet entirely understand how they work. 
Nevertheless, a neuron is a biological switch all the same, and 
if you connect enough of them together (say one hundred 
billion or so), you get a person’s brain. And we don’t seem to 
have a problem endowing those things with intentionality and 
consciousness.
So I wonder if it’s really so silly after all to feel a certain 
animal response when we watch a counter roll over from 
0999 to 1000. Who’s to say that’s not what we are all doing, 
more or less, when we sit and talk with a friend over a cup of 

mac h i n e s
145
coffee? A few million neuronal carry pins in my brain have 
just triggered my (apparent) desire to take a sip of coffee and 
to quickly glance at my watch and say, “Yes, I completely 
understand your feelings.” I don’t know about you, but I’m 
not too proud to accept the idea that I’m nothing more than 
a complicated mass of carry pins. Which is pretty funny, given 
that I’m sitting here talking to you about them.
In fact, the whole world is pretty much a case of runaway 
automation. Everything’s just moving around, reacting to the 
carry pins of chemistry and physics. So laugh all you want. I’m 
sticking with my six-year-old feeling of delight in things that 
move by themselves. You don’t want to think of an odometer 
as alive and possessed of a soul, then don’t. But Odometer and 
I have a beautiful relationship, and when she rolls over, I go 
to pieces.
In any event, we have a simple and reliable mechani-
cal device that automatically keeps count. Using the indi-
vidual place value dials, we can easily add any quantity to 
the current total and the machine (via its carry pins) will 
perform the necessary “exchanges” despite its complete lack 
of comprehension.
As you might imagine, people have elaborated on these 
ideas considerably over the centuries, from Leonardo’s 
fifteenth-century wooden gears and carry pins to modern 
high-precision machine parts. Design improvements not 
only allowed for increased reliability and ease of operation 
but also expanded the range of operations to include addi-
tion, subtraction, place shifting, multiplication, and divi-
sion. Naturally, these require considerably more elaborate 
mechanical realizations, but in principle it should be in no 
way surprising. If a task can be performed in a completely 
rote, step-by-step manner, it’s only a matter of time before 
some clever engineer finds a way to get some gears and levers 
to do it as well.
The epitome of handheld mechanical calculating devices 
was attained in the late 1930s with the development of the 
Curta calculator.

a r i t h m e t i c
146
Designed by an Austrian engineer (and concentration camp 
inmate) during World War II, the Curta was (and still is) the 
most reliable, convenient, and powerful mechanical calculat-
ing machine of its size. Accurate to as many as fifteen decimal 
places, the device was capable of performing any multidigit 
addition, subtraction, multiplication, or division in a matter 
of seconds.
Of course, it wasn’t long before fully automatic electric 
versions made their appearance. I remember playing with my 
dad’s electric tabletop calculator when I was little. It was large, 
green, heavy, and most of all, loud.
To multiply two numbers, you would push digit keys for 
each decimal place, press the multiply button, and—ka-chunk-
a-chunk-a-chunk—it would start place shifting and totaling. A 
few seconds later the product would appear in the display 
window. You didn’t even have to turn a crank!
The electric mechanical desktop calculator (along with 

mac h i n e s
147
its cousin, the automatic cash register) pretty much meant 
the end of old-fashioned pencil-and-paper arithmetic. Sure, 
people still do short back-of-the-envelope computations now 
and then, but for most large-scale commercial or scientific 
calculations, we let the machines do the work, as well we 
should. After all, they’re better at it than we are. (These days, 
the only people who actually bother to carry out the pencil-
and-paper algorithms are schoolchildren, and only because 
they are forced to.)
The real inconvenience of these machines was their size 
and weight, making them far less portable than a soroban 
or a pencil. This final technical hurdle was overcome in the 
early 1950s with the invention of the transistor, a solid-state 
electronic device that essentially acts as a voltage-controlled 
switch, replacing the older and more cumbersome vacuum 
tubes of my childhood. (I can still remember how exciting it 
was when my dad would let me use the tube tester at the local 
drugstore to check for faulty radio and TV tubes.) Almost 
immediately, smaller, more lightweight and portable transistor 
radios appeared, allowing people for the first time in human 
history to have music wherever they go.
The transistor, like the vacuum tube before it, is a triode, a 
device that allows current to flow (or not) in a definite and 
controllable way.
Here, in this schematic diagram, current will flow between 
terminals A and B, but only if the third terminal C is set 
to the correct voltage level. Otherwise, the current will not 
flow. This allows us to design and build electronic circuits 

a r i t h m e t i c
148
that act “intelligently”: like carry pins, they behave differently 
depending on the circumstances.
In particular, we can create logic and memory circuits 
that can hold and manipulate information depending on, for 
instance, which buttons are pressed. In this way, the mechan-
ical calculator can be completely redesigned electronically, 
with no noise and no moving parts at all (except electrons, 
which are notoriously quiet). The role of the carry pin is taken 
over by the logic circuitry, and the digit wheels and display 
window are replaced by the (now ubiquitous) seven-segment 
light-emitting diode (LED) display pictured below. 
Each terminal supplies current to a separate LED. The 
various digit symbols then correspond to their own pattern 
of input voltages (which, for simplicity, I’ve labeled ON and 
OFF). Thus, the digit 4 is displayed as shown with the pattern
OFF  ON  ON  ON  OFF  ON  OFF
There is something rather amusing about this situation, 
which provides yet another example of numerical representa-
tion. First of all, because of the simple two-state nature of digi-
tal circuitry—voltages can be either ON or OFF—it is typical 
to encode information in binary (i.e., base two). The number 
thirteen, for instance, would be held in a calculator’s memory 
as the sequence ON  ON  OFF  ON, corresponding to the binary 
representation 1101. Then all of the logic circuitry for addi-
tion and so forth must be designed accordingly. That is, we add 
numbers in base two. Finally, in order to please the conven-

mac h i n e s
149
tional hidebound human operators (who want to see the usual 
base-ten digit symbols), the circuitry must then take the addi-
tional step of converting this information into a completely 
different ON / OFF sequence in order to drive the display LEDs.
Of course, it is no small matter to design and build all of 
these circuits and to get them to behave properly, but that’s 
what makes electronics such challenging fun. And talk about 
seeming alive—even the “take a number” thing at the deli 
increments automatically and without any gears at all.
By the time I was in high school in the late 1970s, the 
electronic pocket calculator was everywhere—fast, silent, 
cheap, and dependable. Easy to use, lightweight, and portable, 
these devices instantly made all previous calculating technol-
ogy obsolete. Now there’s one in every kitchen junk drawer. 
Continued miniaturization and mass production have made 
them not only faster and more convenient than pencil and 
paper but also cheaper and lighter as well.
These days, even the most powerful handheld electronic 
calculators are essentially extinct (surviving only by virtue of 
the bribes paid by the manufacturers to the educational test-
ing companies), having been replaced by software versions 
on multipurpose appliance computers such as laptops and 
smartphones. Now you can perform a calculation instantly on 
your wristwatch that would have taken Archimedes months 
to scratch in the sand.
This is the way of all technology, of course. What begins as 
a sophisticated human craft requiring years of apprenticeship 
and experience is gradually refined and reduced to a series 
of repetitive steps to be performed mindlessly and eventually 
relegated to a machine. This has the positive effect of free-
ing the craftsman to put his energies into the more creative 
aspects of the work. A painter has more time to work on the 
composition and lighting effects if she doesn’t have to manu-
facture her own paints and brushes.
The downside of all of this mechanization is that it allows 
for the operation of the devices without the understanding 
and sophistication of taste that comes with the older artisanal 
approach. Growing up in a print shop not only exposes you 

a r i t h m e t i c
150
to a variety of typefaces and graphic design options, but the 
hand-setting of each line of type, the demands of registra-
tion and alignment required by a hand press, the smell and 
texture of the ink under your fingernails creates a culture 
and an appreciation for the aesthetic fine points that is clearly 
and woefully lacking in the modern point-and-click world of 
automated typesetting.
So I guess the question comes down to one of goals and 
practicality. If you want to produce printed works of impec-
cable taste and quality, I suggest you apprentice yourself to an 
Old World printer and get out the composing sticks and chase 
furniture. If all you want is to print out the office party flyer, 
then I guess you might as well just grab the mouse and click 
on “flyer template,” or whatever.
Similarly, if all you want out of arithmetic is to total today’s 
receipts or to do your taxes, then by all means get out the 
calculator. I certainly would. There really is no practical reason 
why anyone needs to understand arithmetic on a deeper level 
unless he or she wants to. For myself, I could never be satis-
fied with using a system or a machine without understanding 
how and why it works. My curiosity is just too strong. I step 
on a pedal and the car moves by itself. How on Earth does 
that work? (I think I’d rather take a car apart than use it to 
carry groceries.) In the case of arithmetic, not only do I want 
understanding for its own sake—“because it’s there”—but 
also because as a mathematician I’m interested in numbers and 
how they behave, both in the abstract as well as in symbolically 
encoded form. That’s why I especially want to be independent 
from any particular cultural choices and to be as flexible in my 
thinking as possible. I want the perspective and the intellectual 
and creative power that comes from an abstract understand-
ing of arithmetic, as well as the convenience of fast, reliable, 
inexpensive, and lightweight electronic calculators. Give me 
a machine for the dull mechanical grunt work, and leave my 
mind (that other machine) free for the more interesting and 
imaginative things in life, such as mathematics.

151
FRACTIONS
So the practical problem of arithmetic has been completely 
and utterly solved. Virtually every human being now has 
access to a cheap, portable, and absolutely reliable electronic 
calculating device, and a great many carry such things on their 
persons wherever they go. The long historical saga of repre-
sentations and abacus systems has come to an end. So you can 
take your tabula and your calculus stones, your counting coins 
and soroban and throw them all away. Leave the pencil and 
paper in the drawer. If you need to do some Hindu-Arabic 
decimal place-value arithmetic, simply take out your phone 
and push some buttons.
There is no cause for weeping and moaning; it is simply the 
way of all things. Where is your family spinning wheel? Who 
wove that shirt you are wearing? I’ll tell you who: a massive 
automated programmable industrial textile loom, that’s who. 
But it’s no great loss. You can still knit and spin the Old World 
way, if you want to. It will take a lot longer (and will probably 
cost a lot more), but you can go buy yourself a skein of wool 
and some knitting needles and have a grand old time. In fact, 
I recommend it.
Similarly, you can still do arithmetic by hand if you want to. 
Piles of Rocks is still there as an option, and you can always 
make your own tabula (if you haven’t already). Many older 
Japanese still prefer using the soroban, and are remarkably 
quick and skillful at it. Perhaps this may even rekindle your 
relationship to pencil-and-paper arithmetic—seeing it anew 
as a quaint, outmoded thirteenth-century folk art. What-
ever. The point is that the story of arithmetic, at least from a 
mundane practical point of view, is over. Now we can turn 
our attention to the more conceptual, theoretical aspects of 
this beautiful subject. Our goal is not utility or practicality but 
intellectual pleasure and understanding.
I want to return to an issue that came up when we were 
talking about division—namely, what to do with those pesky 

a r i t h m e t i c
152
remainders. Let’s say we have seventeen jelly beans we wish to 
divide among four people. Certainly we can give each person 
four jelly beans, and then we are stuck with one leftover. 
Before, we simply fed it to the dog. Now I want to look at a 
different option.
Suppose we get out a sharp knife and actually chop up our 
remaining jelly bean into pieces. If we are careful, we can 
cut the jelly bean into four pieces of the same size, and then 
give each person one of the pieces. The upshot is that we 
have completely divided the jelly beans among the four people, 
with no leftovers at all. Each person receives four whole jelly 
beans and one (possibly sticky) partial jelly bean, known as 
a fraction (from the Latin fractus, “broken”). We would say 
that the leftover jelly bean was quartered (i.e., chopped 
into four equal pieces) and that each person gets four and a 
quarter jelly beans. So, depending on the situation, we have 
the option of dividing completely (using fractional pieces 
if necessary) or sticking with our old system of remainders 
(and possibly dogs). 
Of course, not all objects are equally amenable to this chop-
ping procedure. If we were dividing up a collection of violins, 
for example, there’s not going to be any chopping into pieces. 
Some things allow for that and others don’t. It has to do with 
whether we consider them to be irreducible or not—what I 
like to call “lumpy” versus “smooth.” Violins are quite lumpy; 
if you cut one in half, it is no longer a violin. The same goes 
for dogs. Milk, on the other hand, is happy to be subdivided 
into as many parts as you like. If we have a gallon of milk to 
share among four people, then each person gets a quarter 
gallon (or quart, for short). If we have more people, then we 
might have to resort to pints, cups, tablespoons, and eventually 
drops, but the milk does not put up a fuss or cease being milk. 
Milk is smooth, as are all other liquids.
The point being that when you are dividing things, it is 
important to understand whether they are lumpy or smooth. 
Do they come in individual, indivisible units, or are they 
capable of arbitrary, unlimited subdivision?

f rac t i o n s
153
Of course, in real life, this decision can get rather tricky. 
There is a long history of philosophical and scientific 
debate concerning the nature of reality—is matter smooth, 
or does it come in lumps? (The word atom, in fact, comes 
from the Greek for “indivisible.”) And what about time and 
space? The truth is, we still don’t know the extent to which 
real objects can be chopped. A chemist might say that an 
atom of gold is still gold, but once it is split up into its 
constituent subatomic particles, it ceases to be gold. In that 
sense, gold is lumpy. On the other hand, an ounce of solid 
gold (which consists of billions upon billions of individual 
atoms) is, for all practical purposes, perfectly smooth. So it 
really depends on the context in which you are operating. 
Things are lumpy or smooth depending on how you intend 
to treat them. Do you allow them to be chopped into frac-
tional pieces or not?
Make a list of things that you think of as smooth or lumpy. 
What are some things that can be treated both ways?
The point is, if we are comfortable subdividing our individ-
ual objects, then we can always divide completely and avoid 
any unpleasant remainders. Let’s imagine we are in such a 
situation. In fact, let’s say that we are ancient Egyptian goat-
herds dividing up a quantity of goat milk. Let’s suppose we 
have k 3 jars of milk to share among the four of us.
Well, we can each take g jars and still have g 3 jars remain-
ing. Then we can each take 3 more, and have one leftover 
jar to split between us. That means we should each receive 
an additional one-quarter (what the Egyptians called “the 
fourth part”) of a jar. This was written d, the lentil-shaped 
symbol indicating “part.” Similarly, one-half could be repre-
sented f (although for the more commonly used fractions 
such as one-half and two-thirds, there were special shorthand 
versions as well).
If instead we had twenty-seven jars of milk (that is, h 7 ), 
then after giving out six jars each to the four of us, we would 

a r i t h m e t i c
154
be stuck with three remaining jars. How do we divide three 
things among four people?
The Egyptian method was to simply continue doling out 
milk, but instead of asking how many tens or ones we can 
afford, we switch to subdivided units and ask how many halves 
we can afford, then how many thirds, quarters, and so on.
Here we have three jars to share among four people. We 
clearly cannot afford to give away a whole jar to each. How 
about giving away half jars? If we give each of the four goat-
herds half a jar, that would make two full jars with one jar still 
remaining. So then we can split that jar into four quarters as 
before. Thus, each of us receives six full jars, one half jar, and 
one quarter jar. This would be written
6 fd
In this way, any amounts—full or partial—can be represented 
symbolically.
What if seventeen jars of milk need to be divided
among six goatherds?
The Egyptian scribes became rather skilled at working with 
such partial quantities, and a number of papyrus scrolls have 
survived that were (apparently) used as practice exercises for 
apprentice scribes in training, such as this one:
By how much does the sum of one-half, one-third,
and one-quarter exceed a whole?
This way of handling fractional quantities—breaking them 
down into increasingly smaller pieces, or aliquot parts—has 
advantages as well as drawbacks, like any other representation 
scheme. On the one hand, it is a clear and consistent system. 
When I see the quantity
i 7 e b c ,

f rac t i o n s
155
I am getting the numerical news in order of importance: 
thirty-seven whole things (whatever we are counting), plus 
an additional third, another eighth, and (if I care) a smidgen 
more, equal to an eleventh part. There’s nothing at all ambig-
uous or confusing about this notation system.
It is, however, a bit long and clunky. If the subdivision 
gets very fine (yea, verily, even unto the thousandth part), 
these written and spoken representations could get a little 
unwieldy.
A somewhat different approach is to subdivide our quanti-
ties once and for all, then distribute lots of tiny pieces to each 
person. For example, when we were sharing the twenty-seven 
jars of goat milk among the four of us and we each took six 
jars and had three left over, instead of switching to half jars 
and then quarter jars we could simply have gone straight to 
quarter jars and given three to each of us. That is, we would 
each receive six full jars and three quarter jars.
By modifying the Egyptian notation slightly, and using 
modern Hindu-Arabic numerals, we can write such quanti-
ties very economically, like so:
6 3--4     “six and three-quarters”
Here the lentil has become a crossbar (or sometimes 
a slash, as in 3/4), and the 4 underneath indicates that we 
have chopped our unit into quarters. Taking advantage of the 
empty space above the crossbar, we then indicate the number 
of these pieces that we want, namely three.
What would be the modern notation
for f b ? How about f e ?
How would an ancient Egyptian have written 7--8?
This notational device allows us to express all fractional 
quantities in the same compact and convenient format. For 
instance, the representation 15--
32 tells us that our unit quantity 
has been chopped into thirty-two equal pieces and we are 

a r i t h m e t i c
156
taking fifteen of them. Essentially, the bottom number (below 
the crossbar) tells us what the pieces are (i.e., which aliquot 
part of the whole), and the top number indicates how many 
of these we are talking about. The bottom number is known 
as the denominator (Latin for “namer”), and the top number 
is called the numerator (“counter”). This means that the two 
numbers play different roles, and we’ll need to be conscious 
of that.
Before, when we were discussing multiplication, I was 
talking about how 3 × 5 does not literally mean the same 
thing as 5 × 3, since the first number is counting the number 
of copies of the other. We were fortunate to discover that 
despite the difference in meaning, the resulting quantities 
turn out to be the same—multiplication is symmetric.
We will have no such luck with fractions. The number 3--5 
is quite different from 5--3 , and not just in appearance. For one 
thing, the first number is clearly less than 1 (that is, smaller 
than a whole), because we have chopped our unit into five 
equal parts (fifths) and taken only three of them, while the 
second number is grabbing more than three thirds, and so is 
more than a whole.
Incidentally, it is perfectly meaningful and in no way incor-
rect to write down a number like 5--3 . In fact, as we shall see, 
there are definite advantages in doing this, just as there were 
with “eleventy-seven.” Of course, you could also call it 1 2--3 if, 
perhaps for comparison purposes, you prefer to see how many 
wholes you’ve got.
These two representations are the results of two slightly 
different mental strategies for dividing five by three: we give 
one to each, then chop up the two leftovers (1 2--3), or we just 
chop everything into three pieces and give each person five of 
them ( 5--3).
Which is larger, 17--3 or 11--
2 ?
The important thing to understand here is that we are 
simply counting. If I have a number like seven, it means seven 

f rac t i o n s
157
of whatever I’m choosing to call one; that is, whatever I 
consider as my unit of thing-ness. It could be seven cows, 
seven lemons, or, in the case of multiplication, seven sixes or 
seven hundreds. Similarly, the number 7--8 is also seven of some-
thing—namely, eighths.
Just as seven cows added to five cows makes a total of twelve 
cows, the same goes for counting lemons, sixes, hundreds, or 
eighths. Thus, 7--8 + 5--8 = 12--8. Much of the art of arithmetic simply 
comes down to choosing one’s units creatively.
In particular, there is a very close connection between frac-
tions and grouping. When we say that seven eighths added to 
five eighths makes twelve eighths, we are really just adding 
seven and five. When we go on to say that twelve eighths 
is the same as one whole and four leftover eighths, it’s as if 
we were members of an octal tribe that groups in eights; we 
prefer to see twelve organized as one group and four leftovers. 
Eight ones being a group is the same as eight eighths making 
one whole.
We can even imagine using Piles of Rocks to assist us 
in these calculations, where we now include half rocks 
and quarter rocks and so forth. Or, even more familiarly, 
we could introduce fractional counting coins as is often 
done with money: a quarter is one-quarter of a dollar, for 
instance. Just as we are used to cashing in ten ones for one 
ten, we can also imagine exchanging four quarters for one 
whole.
A dozen eggs is both one (dozen) as well as twelve (indi-
vidual eggs), and the choice of how to think of it is entirely 
up to you. If you want to think of a half dollar as 2 quarters, 5 
dimes, or 50 cents, please be my guest. Every quantity has an 
infinity of possible names depending on which representation 
you prefer to work with.
In the modern notation (with numerators and denomina-
tors), we can write the same number, say one-half, in a multi-
tude of ways:
1--2 = 2--4 = 3--6 = 4--8 = 5--
10 = 6--
12 = …

a r i t h m e t i c
158
These different symbolic representations all refer to the 
exact same quantity—half of whatever our unit happens to 
be. If it is a jar of goat’s milk, then we are talking about a 
jar half full (or half empty if you want to be in a bad mood 
about it).
All we are doing is measuring this quantity using different 
measuring units. Measured in half jars, it is clearly 1 of them; 
measured in quarter jars, we have 2; in sixths we have 3—
same amount, different grouping sizes.
I suppose, if we wanted to, we could even measure in thirds 
and report that we have one and a half of them. That is, we are 
perfectly justified in writing
1--2 = 1½
--3 ,
if we so desire. It’s a little hard to imagine having that desire, 
but who knows. Maybe you have a thing for thirds.
How could you write one-half as a number of sevenths?
Truth be told, people don’t often chop things up into 
sevenths or elevenths or other wacky amounts like that. 
Halves, thirds, and quarters occur fairly regularly—especially 
in sewing and baking—but I’ve never seen a recipe that called 
for 2 3--5 cups of sugar.
The old imperial units tended to use repeated halving, 
which leads to fractions expressed in halves, quarters, eighths, 
and sixteenths. The same goes with music, subdivisions of 
the beat (the rhythmic unit) giving rise to half notes, quarter 

f rac t i o n s
159
notes, and so on. Only the most avant-garde twentieth-cen-
tury composers write scores using eleventh-notes. 
As we talked about before, the metric system was intro-
duced to clean up all these messy units and put everything 
on the same footing—namely, groups of ten—to match the 
grouping size of the (now universally adopted) Hindu-Arabic 
system. In particular, this means measuring fractional amounts 
in tenths, hundredths, thousandths, and so on. The decimal 
point then marks the division between wholes and parts.
The decimal representation of three and one-half, for 
instance, would be 3.5, the one-half being measured as five 
tenths. This means we already have a way to record and 
calculate fractional amounts—we just express everything 
in a ten-centric format. Of course, if you are a scientist, or 
live outside the United States, all of your measurements are 
already expressed in this convenient way, so there’s no need to 
convert or rethink anything.
On the other hand, maybe you have a one-gram sample of a 
substance and you need to split it equally among eight test tubes, 
or you bought five meters of cloth to cut into four match-
ing curtains. How do we represent an eighth of a gram or one 
and one-quarter meters in a decimal format? An eighth is not 
a tenth, no matter how hard we squint, just as eight is not ten.
One way to think about fractions is to see them as not only 
arising from the division process but as being divisions them-
selves. Thus, the number one-eighth can be regarded literally 
as one divided by eight. After all, we are chopping our unit 
into eight equal pieces. This means we can express 1--8 in deci-
mal terms by dividing the number 1 by the number 8. The 
clever idea here is to replace 1 by a much larger number, say 
1000, and then use place shifting. Essentially, we are regarding 
1 as being one thousand somethings (namely, thousandths).
Dividing 1000 by 8 gives us 125, with (thank heaven) no 
leftovers. (Try it yourself!) This means that one-eighth can 
also be thought of as 125/1000, or .125 in decimal form. In 
other words, one-eighth happens to be the same as one tenth 
plus an additional two hundredths, and then a tiny smidgen 

a r i t h m e t i c
160
of five thousandths more. Thus, any time you find yourself 
dealing with the number one-eighth, you can instead use the 
decimal representation .125 if that’s more convenient. 
What are the decimal representations of  3--8 and 5--8 ?
Similarly, one-quarter can be written .25 and three quarters 
as .75, which are probably familiar if you live in a place with a 
reasonable monetary system (unlike Jane Austen and Charles 
Dickens).
One familiar arena in which fractional quantities are typi-
cally expressed in decimal form is in the recording of batting 
averages in baseball. These are computed by counting the 
number of times a player gets a hit and comparing it to the 
total number of opportunities. For example, if Ted Williams 
was at bat seventy-seven times in a certain season and got a 
hit (meaning he actually made it on base) twenty-nine times, 
then his batting average would be the ratio 29/77. In order to 
compare players with each other (or with past performances by 
themselves), it is convenient to express all such proportions in 
the same format, namely decimals, traditionally approximated 
(or “rounded”) to the nearest thousandth. Thus the batting 
average above would be calculated by dividing 29 by 77:
	
	
    376
	
77	
29000
	
	
231
	
	
590
	
	
539
	
	
510
	
	
462
	
	
48
Here we would probably round up to .377, since the left-
over 48 is more than half of 77. Baseball fans would say, “He 
batted three-seventy-seven that season” (which, by the way, is 
sensational). 

f rac t i o n s
161
Another common instance is the use of percentages. Here the 
idea is to express our fractions in terms of hundredths, thus 
measuring a given ratio as so many out of a hundred (or per 
centum, whence the abbreviation “percent”). Thus, a fraction 
like 1--4 could be expressed as 25 percent, meaning 25/100. Of 
course this is nothing other than .25 dressed up in slightly 
different clothes. 
There is an amusing notational history here, by the way. Just 
as medieval scribes got tired of writing et (the Latin word for 
“and”) every five seconds and began abbreviating it using the 
ampersand symbol (&), the notation “per 100” was gradually 
shortened and smeared together to form the percent sign (%). 
Thus, the number 25/100, or twenty-five percent, became 25%. 
Essentially, the percent sign is just shorthand for hundredths.
All that’s going on here is that we are adapting our various 
fractions (with whatever denominators they may have) to a 
base-ten culture, just like with the metric system. All that is 
required is to do some division and then ignore the leftovers 
once they become insignificantly small.
Of course, if the fractional quantity you are interested in 
already has a denominator of ten or one hundred, then we 
don’t need to do any converting at all: .01 already means 
one-hundredth. So a number like 37
---
100 (or 37%) would be 
rendered in decimal form as .37, or 37 with two antishifts, if 
you like.
On the other hand, ten is a perfectly arbitrary grouping size, 
and not every fraction is going to get along with it so nicely. 
For example, if we try to express the number 2--3 in decimal by 
dividing 2000 by 3, we encounter this amusing phenomenon:
	
  666
	
2000
	
18
	
20
	
18
	
20
	
18

a r i t h m e t i c
162
Each time we give away three sixes (in whatever place), we 
get a remainder of two, and we enter an infinite loop. This is 
both annoying and really cool. So 2--3 is not any nice number 
of tenths or hundredths or thousandths—it always leaves a 
remainder no matter how far we go.
What we’re seeing is that three and ten simply do not get 
along. Thirds are not very conducive to being represented by 
tenths. Similarly, if you like to group in threes and you build 
a whole place-value system around that grouping size, tenths 
would not be very cooperative.
So not every fractional amount can be expressed precisely 
in decimal format. That is, unless you want to allow infinitely 
long representations. You can, in fact, express the number 2--3 in 
the form .666... (where the sixes continue indefinitely). This 
is an interesting idea in principle but clearly quite impractical. 
(The helpful smile will quickly fade from the draper’s face as 
you take out your electron microscope to measure another six 
nanometers of chintz.)
Of course, in real life nobody measures anything that 
precisely, for the simple reason that we can’t. Nor would 
it make any sense to do so. How accurate do a carpenter’s 
measurements need to be? Wood expands in the summer and 
absorbs water when it rains. Besides, if a piece of wood is a 
few hundredths of an inch too long, then sand it down. That’s 
what sandpaper and tile grout are for. Exactitude in carpentry, 
sewing, and baking is preposterous—estimation and approxi-
mate rules of thumb are far more valuable.
This is true for scientists and engineers as well, though the 
tolerances are somewhat more precise. Whereas a carpenter 
or a seamstress would be happy to ignore a millimeter here 
or there, a nuclear physicist may require an accuracy of seven 
or eight additional decimal places. Still, when it comes to a 
billionth of a billionth of a millimeter, we simply lack the 
equipment to make such fine distinctions.
Moreover, the physical universe itself seems to have a few 
things to say about our ability to measure it precisely. Not 

f rac t i o n s
163
only is exact measurement unnecessary and impractical, it 
is also (by the apparent nature of physical reality) impossible. 
How long is my nose, exactly? Where exactly does nose end 
and air begin? In fact, molecules of air and nose are trading 
places and jiggling around constantly. Noses are only statisti-
cal, so they don’t really have a precise length. And neither does 
anything else in this universe.
Of course, there are other universes. We can imagine a 
perfect world of exact measurements and see where that leads 
us. Mind you, this would be a purely philosophical inves-
tigation, not so much motivated by any practical concerns 
but for the sheer intellectual pleasure and entertainment it 
might provide. Also, despite the fact that the world we live in 
is fuzzy, random, and inexact, it’s often pretty close to exact, 
and a perfect mathematical realm (which would necessarily 
be fictitious) may give us a new perspective on reality and also 
a new understanding and appreciation for numbers and their 
properties in the abstract.
Not to mention how much simpler and more elegant such 
a place would be. This place, which I like to call Mathematical 
Reality, is actually where I spend the bulk of my time, as do 
most of us mathematicians.
All right, so what if we accept such a reality. Then 2--3, for 
instance, is an exact quantity and is decidedly not equal to 
.6666 or any other approximation. Two-thirds is exactly what 
it claims to be: two of those things called thirds. And a third is 
simply the thing that, were you to put three of them together, 
would make the number one.
But one what? What are we counting and measuring in 
this purely mathematical realm? This is one of the first great 
examples of the simplicity and abstract beauty of mathe-
matics. We aren’t talking about cows or lemons at all. When 
we say “one” we don’t mean one actual real-life object, we 
mean one in the abstract—the imaginary entity that holds 
the information of oneness. (Do I sound like a New Age 
guru?)

a r i t h m e t i c
164
So along with the usual “counting numbers” one, two, 
three, and so on, we now have a whole slew of additional 
numbers like one-half, two-thirds, fifty-seven-elevenths, and 
so on. We know exactly what we mean by these things, and 
we have a perfectly nice representation system for them—
namely, the numerator and denominator language: 1--2 , 2--3 , 57--
11. 
There are no perception problems here; we know at a glance 
exactly what we’ve got. The notation 57--
11 precisely indicates the 
number obtained by chopping one into eleven equal parts 
and taking fifty-seven of them.
With new numbers to talk about, we have a host of new 
arithmetic problems—new opportunities to exercise our wit 
and imagination. The most immediate question is, how do we 
compare such quantities? 
Of course, if the two fractions we wish to compare happen 
to have the same denominator, then it’s easy: 9--
11 is larger than 
7--
11 because they are both counting elevenths, and nine is bigger 
than seven.
Similarly, the comparison is also straightforward if the two 
numbers have the same numerator. Now both fractions are 
counting the same number of pieces, but the pieces are not the 
same size. For instance, we can easily tell that 4--5 is larger than 4--7, 
because a fifth is bigger than a seventh. The more pieces you 
chop something into, the smaller the pieces must be.
Which is larger, 3--7 or 2--5 ?
The difficulty here lies in the fact that we are using different 
size pieces. One number is counting sevenths and the other 
is talking about fifths—we’re comparing apples and oranges.
This is actually a familiar problem. The same thing happened 
with multiplication, you may remember. The trouble with 
comparing 5 × 8 and 6 × 7 is that one number is currently 
grouped in eights and the other is a bunch of sevens. So what 
did we do? We rearranged them for ease of comparison—that 
is, we did some arithmetic.

f rac t i o n s
165
More precisely, we converted both representations to 
the same grouping size. We could rearrange five eights into 
groups of seven, or put the six sevens into piles of eight, or, 
if we preferred, we could convert both amounts into some 
third convenient grouping size (typically tens). The important 
thing is to get a common language so we can more easily 
understand what’s going on.
The same thing is going on here with fractions. In a sense, 
a number like 3--7 is really a multiplication: it is three copies 
of a group, where the grouping size is sevenths. So, because 
one of our numbers is grouped in sevenths and the other in 
fifths, what we need is a common grouping size that works 
for both—one that allows us to express both of our quantities 
easily and precisely.
Tenths, for instance, would not be advisable here. Although 
the number 2--5 is amenable to being expressed nicely in tenths 
(it would be four of them), the number 3--7 is not so happy. Of 
course we could approximate it using a decimal representa-
tion and then use that to compare:
2--5 = .400...
3--7 = .428...
This does indeed show us that 3--7 is slightly larger than 2--5 , 
though it requires a bit of work to produce the approxima-
tions. (I would suggest using a calculator.) Also, it’s kind of 
ugly and technical feeling.
And there is a subtle problem with this approach. What if 
two fractions are really, really close but not equal? Then their 
decimal representations will agree in the first several decimal 
places, and you’ll have to keep dividing until you encounter 
a mismatch. Only then will you know which one is larger. 
Even worse, if the two fractions happened to be exactly equal, 
but not obviously so due to their different representations 
(e.g., 91---
117 and 273
---
351 ), you would continue dividing and producing 
decimal digit expansions that always agree, no matter how far 

a r i t h m e t i c
166
you carry out the process. Then you would never know if one 
of them were larger than the other—the digit that reveals this 
fact might be just around the corner. This is way too cumber-
some and time consuming an approach.
Better would be to find a “common denominator”—a 
grouping size compatible with both fifths and sevenths simul-
taneously. Then both numbers could be expressed in the same 
language. Essentially, we will be renaming our fractions to 
make comparison easy and straightforward.
We saw before that every fraction can be represented by a 
numerator and a denominator in infinitely many ways. Thus, 
the number 1--3 is the same as 2--6, which is also equal to 3--9 . This 
is because any subdivision of a unit into smaller pieces can 
always be further subdivided if we wish.
Just as with ordinary counting, if I am keeping track of egg 
cartons (i.e., dozens) and you are counting individual eggs, 
our numbers are going to differ because our units do. Simi-
larly, if I am counting in thirds and you are counting in sixths, 
then you will end up with twice as many pieces as I. This is 
simply because each of my pieces is worth two of yours.
The point is that if your units are smaller than mine, then 
you will need more of them to measure the same quantity. If 
my unit is exactly five times larger than yours, then you will 
need five times as many of yours as I need of mine. Make 
good sense?
The pattern here is that a fraction is unchanged if both 
its numerator and denominator are enlarged by the same 
factor—that is, multiplied by the same amount. For example, 
2--3 can be rewritten as 8--
12. Here we have multiplied (or “scaled”) 
both the numerator and denominator by a factor of four. So 
instead of measuring in thirds and counting two of them, we 
are chopping our unit into four pieces to make twelfths, and 
consequently we need four times as many of them, namely 
eight.
Thus we are free to “blow up” both the numerator and 
denominator of a fraction by the same factor without 

f rac t i o n s
167
changing the number itself. This gives us some flexibility in 
choosing our names for things, just as we are free to change 
grouping sizes (which, in fact, is exactly what we are doing, if 
you think about it).
Can the number 49--
21 be written with a smaller
numerator and denominator?
Speaking of blowing up, one way to view a fraction like 
3--7 is to imagine a “number enlarger” that allows you to 
blow up (or shrink down) numbers, just as a copier does to 
printed images. You can set the enlarger to double or triple 
the size of a number, and you can also shrink it down by a 
given factor. Then we can think of 3--7  as the result of putting 
in the number 1, shrinking it down by 7 (i.e., making it 
one-seventh the size), and then blowing it up by 3 (that is, 
tripling it).
Conveniently, the results of these processes are independent 
of the order in which they are performed. If you blow up by 2 
and then by 3, you have effectively blown up by a factor of 6, 
which is also what you would get if you tripled first and then 
did the doubling. In the same way, we could also get 3--7  from 1 
by tripling first (to get 3) and then shrinking down by 7. This 
is because 3 ones, divided by 7, is the same as 3 “shrunken 
ones,” each of which is one-seventh of the original. It’s the 
same thing as before when, to multiply some pennies and 
dimes by ten, we imagined the pennies transforming into 
dimes and the dimes into dollars.
What we’re saying is that at any time we wish, we can freely 
rename or regroup a given fraction by blowing up (or shrink-
ing down) both the size of the pieces (the denominator) along 
with the number of them (the numerator).
So how does this help us compare two fractions? The idea is 
to use scaling to rewrite both numbers so that they share the 
same denominator. Then they will be counting the same size 
pieces, so then the numerators will tell us the story. For exam-

a r i t h m e t i c
168
ple, the numbers we had before, 3--7 and 2--5, are hard to compare 
directly because 5 and 7 are different. Let’s list some alternative 
names for them:
	
3--7 = 6--
14 = 9--
21 = 12--
28 = 15--
35
	
2--5 = 4--
10 = 6--
15 = 8--
20 = 10--
25 = 12--
35 = 14--
35
Aha! We discover that among the various representations 
of these two numbers, there is a common denominator, 
thirty-five. So hiding beneath their mild-mannered appear-
ances, 3--7 and 2--5 have “secret identities” 15--
35 and 14--
35, respectively.
This makes it laughably easy to compare the two: 3--7 is a 
little larger than 2--5. In fact, it’s also easy to see exactly how 
much larger, namely 1--
35. So the common denominator idea 
is really the nicest approach. Don’t change anything, don’t 
bother approximating, just rewrite and rename until it 
becomes obvious.
Of course, this raises the question of how best to go about 
finding a common denominator in the first place. We got 
ours by trial and error—listing each possibility until we found 
denominators that matched. That’s pretty slow and tedious. 
There’s actually a much easier (and decidedly more clever) 
way.
Notice that we began with denominators 7 and 5 and 
ended up using a common denominator of 35, which 
happens to be the product of the two. This is no coinci-
dence. In fact, the easiest way to get a common denominator 
is to simply blow up each fraction by the denominator of 
the other—that is, we scale the numerator and denominator 
of 3--7 by 5, and we scale the top and bottom of 2--5 by 7. Since 
the new denominators will now both be equal to the prod-
uct of the old ones, they will necessarily be the same. Each 
number simply looks to the other for its choice of scaling 
factor.
Let’s try it out. Suppose we want to know which is larger, 

f rac t i o n s
169
3--8  or 2--5 . (We just saw that 2--5  is smaller than 3--7 , but 3--8 is also 
slightly smaller than 3--7 , so it’s not clear.) All right, let’s use our 
new method: we rescale 3--8 by 5 and 2--5 by 8 to get
3--8 = 15--
40 and 2--5  = 16--
40.
Now it is easy to see that 2--5 is the larger one. And we get the 
free bonus of knowing they are off by exactly 1--
40, should that 
be of interest.
Thus we see that for the purposes of addition, subtraction, 
and comparison, having the same denominator makes life 
much simpler. All quantities are measured with the same unit; 
all the pieces have the same name. For example, the sum of 
these two numbers, 3--8 + 2--5 , is easy to calculate in the rewrit-
ten form
15--
40 + 16--
40 = 31--
40.
Now we can see that the total is just a smidgen (namely 1--
40) 
larger than 3--4.
Is 1--2 + 1--3 + 1--5 larger than 1?
As I mentioned before, there really is no compelling ratio-
nale for making such calculations in the real world. Using a 
standard ten-digit pocket calculator, we could simply have 
the machine perform the requisite divisions and so forth to 
obtain accurate approximations that are more than adequate 
for any practical workaday purposes. If for some reason (and 
it’s a little hard to imagine such a scenario) you really needed 
to calculate 2--7 + 5--8 to see if it was safely below 1, you could 
simply pick up the nearest phone or wristwatch and punch 
in 2 ÷ 7 + 5 ÷ 8 = to get 0.910714285, and your problem 
is solved.
Oh, that reminds me. I forgot to mention the division 
symbol (÷) that often appears on calculators and covers of 

a r i t h m e t i c
170
math textbooks. Of course, it’s just the fraction crossbar with 
dots indicating where the numbers would go. Thus people 
write 12 ÷ 3 = 4, and so forth.
So the arithmetic of fractions is not really of any practi-
cal concern. It’s more about numbers and their patterns of 
behavior. If that is of no interest to you, then we’re done here, 
and you can close this book right now. On the other hand, 
if you want to see something elegant and intriguing, albeit 
abstract and useless, then please read on!
What is the sum of 2--7 and 5--8 exactly?
How far off from 1 is it?
Using the common denominator approach, we reduce 
addition, subtraction, and comparison of fractions to work-
ing with numerators only—that is, we’re back to simple 
whole-number counting.
But what about multiplication and division? Can we have 
2 1--2 copies of 3 1--4 ? What about 3--8 divided by 4--5 ? Do such ques-
tions even make sense? Who needs to share 171--2 jelly beans 
among 4 1--2 people?
Before we delve into these questions, I want to say a 
few words about the various representation options we’ve 
discussed, along with their advantages and disadvantages. This 
is mostly an issue of aesthetics, so I’ll really just be offering up 
my own personal tastes and opinions (which, as it happens, 
I’m not terribly averse to doing).
Let’s imagine we have a certain fractional quantity, say two 
and one-quarter. Among the many options (forgetting about 
Egyptians or Banana tribesmen for the moment), we have the 
standard Hindu-Arabic representations
2 1--4 , 2.25, 9--4 .
The first version is what you typically see in cookbooks 
and carpentry manuals. The advantage is that it makes the 
comparison news very clear (it’s a bit larger than two), and is 

f rac t i o n s
171
a good choice when you are working with natural physical 
units (e.g., rulers and measuring cups) and you want to get 
the whole units out of the way first.
The second form is preferred by scientists and engineers who 
deal in highly accurate approximations and want a standardized 
scale for comparison. Hence the metric system and all that.
You may sneer and turn up your nose at the third option, 
9--4 , as being top heavy and impractical. After all, it’s not even 
obvious how big it is. We would have to do some reorganiza-
tion (that is, arithmetic) to determine if it is larger than two, 
for instance.
On the other hand, it is the only form I would even consider 
using for mathematical (that is, purely theoretical) purposes. 
All the information is there in compact form. I can easily see 
it as being nine of something (namely quarters), and it will 
be much simpler to operate on as a result. Moreover—and 
this is the real advantage—it puts all of our numbers in the 
same linguistic category and makes no distinction between 
wholes and parts. In this context, I might even prefer to write 
a number like six as 6--1, as ludicrous as that might seem.
How would you write eight and one-third
in these three formats?
My advice (taste, really) is to use wholes and parts (e.g., 
2 1--4 ) when sewing and baking cookies, decimal expansions 
(2.250) in the laboratory, and pure ratios ( 9--4 ) when investigat-
ing numbers and their properties. Or do whatever you want 
whenever you want (which is my real advice, anyway).
One of the things that makes thinking about fractions fun 
and enjoyable, as well as potentially confusing, is the multitude 
of possible interpretations. The number 2--3 can be regarded as 
a measurement (breaking our unit into three equal parts and 
taking two of them), a division (the result of sharing two jelly 
beans among three people), a ratio (holding the information 
that a pair of quantities are in proportion as two is to three), 
a scaling (blowing up by 2 and shrinking down by 3), or, most 

a r i t h m e t i c
172
abstractly, as simply being “the entity that when multiplied by 
three is two.” Each of these viewpoints carries with it a set 
of mental images and connotations, which can be useful in 
different circumstances.
When it comes to multiplication and division, for instance, 
I often like to think in terms of scaling. Multiplication by two 
(i.e., doubling) is blowing up by a factor of two. Division by 
two (that is, cutting in half ) can be seen (and felt) as shrinking 
down by two. This does not mean taking two away but rather 
scaling it down to half its former size. Two is the scaling factor 
by which the entire quantity is being shrunk or enlarged, as if it 
is being fed into some sort of abstract numerical copy machine. 
Multiplication is often expressed verbally (at least in 
English) using the preposition of—“I’d like eight of those 
yummy muffins, please” or “Hey, someone ate two-thirds of 
my yummy muffin!” To multiply a quantity by a fraction is to 
specify that much of it, just as multiplying an amount by three 
is to take three of it.
So what we would mean by one and one-half times six is 
that we want one and a half copies of six—that is, one whole 
copy of six and then an additional half of a six, which would 
be three. Thus, 1 1--2 × 6 = 9.
Alternatively, we could think of 1 1--2 as being 3--2, and that we 
are interested in “three halves of six,” which, just as it says, 
means three “halves of six,” that is, three threes, or nine, as 
before. Or, if you prefer, we can imagine that we are putting 
6 into the copy machine and asking it to shrink it down by 
2 and then blow it up by 3. We could just as well reverse the 
order and have it blow up by 3 first (to get 18) and then 
shrink down by 2 to get 9. I hope this all makes sense to you 
and that you find it amusing and enjoyable to have so many 
cute alternative ways to think about it.
Another one just occurred to me, actually. Using the 
symmetry of multiplication, one and a half sixes could also be 
treated as six copies of 1 1--2 . Since two copies would make 3, 
and six is three twos, again we see that it’s the same as three 
threes.

f rac t i o n s
173
In general, I think the copy machine metaphor works best. 
Suppose we wanted 3 1--2  copies of 2 1--3 , for instance. This kind 
of thing can actually occur in real life (e.g., when scaling a 
recipe). There are many ways to proceed here, but the way I 
usually like to operate would be to first express everything in 
purely fractional terms: 7--2 × 7--3 . Then I can view each of these 
numbers as a set of copy machine instructions, that is, I am 
sticking the number 1 into the copier and asking it to blow 
up by 7 and shrink down by 3. That gives me my 7--3 . Then I 
proceed to blow up again by 7 and down by 2. That multiplies 
it by 7--2. All told (and in any order I please) I have started with 
1 (of whatever my unit is, if I even have one), done two blow-
ups by a factor of 7 and two shrink-downs, by factors of 2 and 
3. This can be rephrased as a blowup by 49 and a shrink-down 
by 6. In other words, I’m left with the number 49--6 . (And the 
copier is now making an annoying beeping noise because I 
left my original on the glass.)
So we find that 7--2 × 7--3 = 49--6 . Of course, if you want to rewrite 
this quantity as 8 1--6 , be my guest. If you work in a bakery 
and need to measure out that many cups of flour, then by 
all means do—eight full cups and an additional one-sixth of 
a cup is a lot less scooping and pouring than doing forty-
nine individual sixths of a cup, that’s for sure. But if you are a 
mathematician interested in numbers for their own sake, then 
49--6  might be a more convenient and informative representa-
tion. For one thing, it reveals clearly the behavior of fractions 
under multiplication: to multiply two fractions we can simply 
multiply their numerators and denominators separately. This 
is what the copy machine interpretation shows us. So that’s 
very nice, and that’s why I like to work this way.
Which is larger, 3 1--2  copies of 2 1--3,
or 2 1--2  copies of 3 1--3 ?
Division of fractions does not occur terribly often in 
everyday life, although one could imagine an occasional 
scenario such as the following: A large vat containing 200 

a r i t h m e t i c
174
gallons of maple syrup needs to be poured into individual 
jugs, each of which holds 1 1--3 gallons. How many jugs will 
be required?
Essentially, we are asking what number, when multiplied 
by 1 1--3, makes 200. In other words, what is 200 divided by 
1 1--3 . Weirdly, it’s the same as if we were trying to share 200 
jelly beans among 1  1--3 people. The symmetry of multiplication 
means we can entertain either view.
Before we analyze this situation further, you may have 
noticed something about multiplication and division—in a 
way, they’re sort of the same. Dividing by two, for instance, is 
exactly the same thing as multiplying by one-half. What this 
means is that we don’t really need a shrink-down button on 
our copier; we could just blow up by one-half or one-third 
or whatever. The distinction between enlarging and reduc-
ing, blowing up or shrinking down, is merely the difference 
between multiplying by numbers larger or smaller than 1. 
Maybe humans care about that distinction, but numbers don’t 
seem to. We multiply by two or we multiply by one-half. 
Either way, we multiply. 
Of course, I’m not trying to say that doubling and halving 
are the same process, or that 2 and 1--2  are the same number. 
But there is a close connection between them: dividing by 
one is the same as multiplying by the other. This is what is 
known as a reciprocal relationship (from Latin reciprocare, “to go 
back and forth”). The numbers 2 and 1--2  are said to be recip-
rocals of each other. 
What this means, really, is that they have opposite effects 
under multiplication. One way to undo doubling is to 
multiply by one-half. Another way to say it is that 2 and 1--2 
cancel each other out—if you blow up by 2 and then blow 
up by 1--2 , you end up back where you started. This is because 
2 × 1--2  = 1, and blowing up by a factor of 1 is the same as 
doing nothing. So two numbers being reciprocals of each 
other means their product is 1. The reciprocal of a number is 
its multiplication partner—the thing that it multiplies with 

f rac t i o n s
175
to make 1. Thus 1--2  is the reciprocal of 2, and 2 is the recip-
rocal of 1--2 .
What is the reciprocal of 2--3 ?
When we are dividing, we are asking an implicit question: 
What do we have to multiply by to get the total we want? 
Calculating 100 ÷ 7 is really just asking what number of 
sevens makes a hundred. Or, perhaps more suggestively, how 
do I “unmultiply” 100 by 7?
If we think of multiplication by a number as a process that 
we can perform on quantities, then division can be seen as the 
reverse process. To undo multiplication by 7, we divide by 7. 
Or, as we’ve seen, we can multiply by 1--7. This means we get to 
make an interesting trade: instead of undoing the multiplica-
tion activity with division (i.e., the inverse activity), we undo 
multiplication with another multiplication! That is, we are 
transferring the undoing responsibilities away from the oper-
ations and over to the numbers themselves. Instead of unmul-
tiplying by seven, we are multiplying by unseven. Rather than 
putting on my shoe and then taking it off (which requires two 
different operations, putting on and taking off), I can imagine 
that all I ever do is put things on. In the morning I put on my 
shoes and in the evening I put on my “antishoes,” that is, my 
reciprocal shoes that cancel and annihilate my regular shoes. I 
make my shoes do the work so I don’t have to.
So what does it mean to divide a number by 1--2 , say? It 
does not mean to divide it in half—that’s what dividing by 
two does. We’re dividing by one-half, not in half. If we want 5 
divided by 1--2 , we are asking how many copies of  1--2  make 5, or 
what do I have to cut in half to get five? Clearly, it’s ten. So 
5 divided by 1--2  is 10? We divided a number and it got bigger. 
Does that make sense?
Perhaps we are used to dividing by numbers larger than 1, 
which means we would be shrinking down. Here, however, 
we are dividing by a small number, so it takes more copies of 

a r i t h m e t i c
176
it to make the required total. Specifically, it takes ten halves to 
make five wholes.
Here we see the beauty and symmetry of the reciprocal 
relationship. Just as dividing by 2 is the same thing as multi-
plying by 1--2 , we find that division by 1--2  has the exact same 
effect as multiplying by 2.
Let’s see if we can understand this behavior more deeply. 
We are choosing to view division as a kind of unmultiplica-
tion. If we imagine our copier as having an input slot and an 
output slot, so that when we stick in a number it comes out 
seven times larger, then division by seven could be thought 
of as taking a number and trying to shove it into the output 
slot, running the machine in reverse. (Don’t try this with a 
real copier!) What I’m saying is that this would be the same 
as running it through the machine normally but with the 
scaling factor set to 1--7 instead of 7. Again, it’s just what I was 
saying about trading inverse processes for inverse numbers.
Suppose now that I have the machine set to multiply by 
2--3. As a process, this means that I am blowing up by two and 
shrinking down by three. Clearly the inverse (or backward) 
version of this would be to blow up by 3 and shrink down 
by 2. That is, to undo multiplication by 2--3, you just need to 
multiply by 3--2 . The reciprocal of a fraction simply interchanges 
numerator and denominator. How beautifully unexpected 
and yet so perfectly sensible.
There is one amusing exception to this pattern, actually, 
and that is the number zero. Not that anyone would ever 
have reason to divide a quantity into no parts at all (whatever 
that might possibly mean). My point is that if we are going 
to reimagine division as multiplication by the reciprocal (or 
running the copier in reverse), we should be aware that the 
metaphor crashes to the ground in the case of multiplication 
and division by zero. The reason is that multiplication by zero 
destroys information. Any number times zero is still zero, or 
to put it another way, blowing up by a factor of zero reduces 
everything to a single point. No matter what number you 
put in the copier, zero keeps coming out. This means there 

f rac t i o n s
177
cannot be a reverse process. Some activities are so destructive 
they cannot be undone. Still another way to say it is that since 
0 times anything is always 0, in particular it can never be 1. 
So zero (and zero alone) fails to have a reciprocal. Other than 
that small proviso, everything works fine.
So division by fractions (and that includes whole numbers 
if you want to think of them as having a denominator of 1) is 
the same as multiplication by their reciprocals, and these can 
be easily obtained visually by flipping them upside down, as it 
were. That’s both pretty as well as convenient.
It is also dangerous, like many things in mathematics that 
obey simple, elegant patterns. The danger is that people come 
to think of the visual and tactile symbolic manipulations as 
definitional rather than behavioral. The number 5 × 3 does 
not mean 3 × 5; the two numbers happen to be equal, and 
that is both beautiful and fortunate, but it is not built into the 
definition of multiplication as making copies—rather, it is a 
discovery that demands an explanation (which we in fact have, 
in the form of rows and columns of rocks, if we like).
Similarly, division does not mean “flip and multiply” (as 
some unfortunate victims of compulsory schooling seem to 
believe), any more than taking off my shoe means putting 
on my antishoe. That’s not what we mean by meaning. 
That’s what we mean by viewing, considering, deducing, or 
interpreting. Numbers aren’t symbols on a page or screen, 
and arithmetic operations are not patterns of motion or 
transmutation of these symbols. However, it certainly is 
wonderful that we can encode everything in such a way 
that the notation is easy to work with, and I’m certainly 
not knockin’ it. I just like to be clear in my own mind as 
to what’s what.
To return (finally) to our maple syrup example, we wanted 
to divide 200 gallons of syrup into 1 1--3 -gallon jugs. The number 
of jugs would then be 200 divided by 4--3. If we like, we can view 
this as 200 × 3--4 , or 600
---
4 . So that’s how many jugs we need. Of 
course, we’re not really interested in quarter jugs; we want to 
measure in whole jugs (and not jugs with holes, we hope). 

a r i t h m e t i c
178
One easy way to divide by four (that is, to quarter some-
thing) is to cut it in half twice. So 600 becomes 300, then 150. 
Perfect! No leftovers to worry about. So we can empty our 
200-gallon vat into exactly 150 jugs.
What would have happened if we had 201 gallons?
To sum up, here’s the deal with fractions as I see it. First off, 
they are in no way necessary in the practical everyday world. 
Even if you live in a backward country like the United States 
that still uses outdated imperial units, you can still just take 
out a calculator and do all of the necessary computations. Put 
everything in the same decimal format, and let the machine 
do its thing. Then use as many digits of this approximation as 
are appropriate.
Of course, there’s more to life than just getting things done; 
there’s learning and understanding, joy, love, and fun to be 
had. And if you are intrigued by numbers and other abstract 
imaginary constructions of the human mind, then there’s 
mathematics. Numbers have beautiful and amusing properties 
for us to discover and investigate, and fractions are an espe-
cially elegant and interesting mathematical environment.
They are particularly good at holding onto exact measure-
ment information (which is why they are particularly unfit 
for practical and scientific purposes). Any quantity that can be 
obtained from a unit by repeated chopping and copying can 
be held in the form of a pure fraction with a numerator and a 
denominator. We can then add, subtract, multiply, divide, and 
compare such quantities easily.
The simplest pattern is with multiplication—the numera-
tors and denominators just get multiplied independently (e.g., 
2--3 × 5--7 = 10--
21). Division is the same; we just view it as multiplica-
tion by the reciprocal, for example, 2--3 ÷ 5--7 = 14--
15.
For addition, subtraction, and comparison, we usually want 
to express everything in the same grouping size, so that means 
scaling to obtain common denominators. Then we can simply 
add, subtract, or compare the corresponding numerators. For 

f rac t i o n s
179
example, 3--4 and 2--3 can be dealt with easily, once we rewrite 
them as 9--
12 and 8--
12 , respectively. In this way, we see that we are 
really just dealing with the numbers 8 and 9; the fact that they 
are counting twelfths can be pushed to the background. The 
arithmetic of fractions is really just the arithmetic of whole 
numbers (i.e., counting), as long as you are clearheaded about 
your units.
Which is larger, 3--5 × ( 2--7 + 1--3) or 13--
11 × ( 3--5 – 2--7)?

180
NEGATIVE NUMBERS
As useless and unnecessary as they may be from a practical 
standpoint, these new numbers—the perfect fractions—are 
certainly simple and convenient and possess many beautiful 
and elegant properties. And the fact that they can be used 
to approximate real-world measurements to arbitrarily high 
precision allows us to construct simplified models of reality 
that are easier to think about and work with. A real desktop 
is a nightmarish tangle of organic compounds—wood fibers, 
water, oils, not to mention all the dust mites and bacteria 
crawling all over the place. When we replace this fuzzy, hairy, 
jiggling mass of atoms with an imaginary perfect rectangle, 
we dispense with all of this complexity and move to a quieter, 
more peaceful realm of simplicity and exactitude.
Of course, the extent to which this is a good idea will 
depend on what you are doing and what you care about. 
If you are planning to paint and decorate this desktop, and 
its corners happen to be quite rounded, you may need to 
incorporate this fact in your mathematical model. We all want 
to simplify, but sometimes we can go too far and leave out 
important information.
The same goes with measuring. If we get out a tape 
measure and find that the desktop measures (approximately) 
32 1--2 × 18 3--
16 inches, then calling it a 32 × 18 rectangle might 
not be good enough. Depending on what we’re doing, the 
ignored half-inch might actually matter. On the other hand, 
there is some level of precision (perhaps extremely fine) after 
which we no longer care, or can no longer tell the difference. 
Let’s suppose that in our case we’re happy to ignore things 
smaller than an eighth of an inch, say. Then we can round 
off the 18  3--
16 to a simpler 18 1--4 , and model our desktop with 
a mathematical rectangle of exact dimensions 32 1--2 × 18 1--4 . If 
we wanted, we could even make a scale model using a quar-
ter-inch as our unit. Then, rewriting these fractions as 130
---
4  and 

n e g at i v e  n u m b e r s
181
73---
4 , respectively, we can imagine our abstract rectangle to have 
whole number dimensions 130 × 73 units. We could then 
proceed to plan our painting and decorating project, away 
from the actual wooden object, using this more portable and 
convenient mental construct.
This is pretty much what scientists and engineers spend their 
time doing. They construct simplified mathematical models 
of their problems and then work on them using the precise 
and elegant patterns that mathematical objects obey. Then they 
translate back to reality, making any necessary approximations as 
they see fit. In this way, mathematics can be viewed as a “model 
shop”—a source of convenient simplified models of reality.
For mathematicians, however, the correspondence works 
the other way. The objects of interest are the abstract imagi-
nary patterns, and reality serves merely as a source of model-
ing material. If I want to think about perfect imaginary 
rectangles, I can use a desktop or a piece of paper as a crude, 
admittedly inaccurate physical model. Of course, we under-
stand that such a clumsy prosaic object could never contain 
any actual mathematical truths (in particular, it cannot have 
exact measurements), but it can still give me ideas and lead me 
to observations and understanding nonetheless. So for mathe-
maticians like myself, reality is the model shop. This was more 
or less Plato’s view: real things are merely the shadows of the 
true, idealized mathematical forms.
In particular, numbers themselves have such a dual exis-
tence. When you say that you have five lemons in your basket, 
or that you are five feet tall, we all understand (at least implic-
itly) that this is a crude, real-world statement. Questions of 
exactly what is meant by “lemon” or “foot” are not gener-
ally asked. Without really giving it much thought, we tend 
to model the situation mathematically by ignoring the feet 
and lemons and simply encoding the information using the 
number five.
But what really is five, in the abstract? Five what? I 
suppose we could say five ones, but then we have to address 

a r i t h m e t i c
182
the question of what “one” means mathematically. What 
exactly is unity, divorced from any reference to reality? 
Ignoring the long (and to my mind rather pedantic and 
trivial) history of Greek and medieval scholastic thought on 
the subject, I’d like to tell you about the way modern math-
ematicians think about numbers, or at any rate how I like to 
think about them.
I think I can sum up the modern mathematical viewpoint 
in a single phrase, which we could take as the algebraists’ 
creed: a number is what a number does. What we’re saying is that 
it doesn’t really matter what numbers are, it matters how they 
act, or behave; that their behavior is tantamount to a defining 
characteristic, or implicit description. Does it really matter 
what a duck is, as long as it swims and quacks?
Mathematics is the study of pattern. And of course I mean 
pattern in the abstract—the patterns of Mathematical Reality. 
Mathematical structures, such as triangles and numbers, enjoy 
a wide variety of intriguing and amusing properties, and it 
becomes almost impossible not to endow them with a kind 
of existence. They become “creatures” of Mathematical Real-
ity, and the various patterns we discover are their “observed 
behavior.”
In particular, numbers start to feel less like quantities and 
more like entities—creatures that interact with each other and 
engage in curious and intricate arithmetical dances.
Thus, the number 2--3, rather than representing two-thirds of 
some quantity, such as a chocolate bar or a meter stick, can be 
viewed abstractly as “that which when multiplied by 3 is 2.” 
As an imaginary mathematical entity, it is completely defined 
and determined by what it does. Anything with the property 
that when multiplied by three is two serves as an embodiment 
of two-thirds-ness.
OK, you might say, but what are two and three themselves 
then; what is it that they do? The modern view would be 
that whole numbers like two and three are simply the result 
of addition: 3 is shorthand for 2 + 1, and 2 itself is merely an 
abbreviation for 1 + 1.

n e g at i v e  n u m b e r s
183
But what is 1? Surely the buck has to stop somewhere, 
doesn’t it? We can’t just keep defining everything in terms of 
everything else. Or can we?
It turns out that we can, actually. The number zero, for 
example, can be defined behaviorally as well. Rather than a 
symbol representing nothing, or the number of lemons you 
have when you haven’t any lemons at all, we can instead think 
of the number zero as being the entity with the very specific 
property that when added to numbers leaves them alone.
Similarly, we can define the number 1 to be the thing that 
when multiplied by a number leaves it unchanged. Here we 
see these two very special creatures, zero and one, being char-
acterized not by their real-world images (i.e., as sizes of small 
collections) but operationally, in terms of their behavior and 
relationship to other numerical entities. Instead of counting 
nothing or being nothing, we’re seeing zero as doing nothing 
(at least with respect to the addition operation).
But what is adding, then? Isn’t it pushing piles of rocks 
together? If we’re thinking of numbers not as counting or 
measuring but as “behaving” in some abstract sense, then 
what is the viewpoint on operations like addition and multi-
plication? How can there be adding without counting?
Again, the modern idea is to forget where the concrete 
real-world notion came from and to focus our attention on 
the behavioral patterns. The question becomes not what 
addition is, or what it means, but what patterns does it exhibit. 
What are the outward behaviors that characterize addition, as 
opposed to some other activity?
It’s high time for an analogy of some sort. Let’s suppose 
you have a cage full of hamsters and you are interested in 
their behavior. You may notice that some of them engage 
in various mating rituals and other social behavior, and you 
may also have observed that some of the hamsters appear to 
have special status within the hamster community. There are 
both general properties shared by all hamsters (e.g., they all 
have a skeleton), as well as particularities that make each indi-
vidual hamster unique and special. This is more or less the 

a r i t h m e t i c
184
way a modern mathematician (this one, anyway) feels about 
numbers.
In particular, my imaginary hamsters like to do things that 
normal hamsters cannot: they like to “combine” to form 
other hamsters. We could attempt to shoehorn in some 
kind of reproductive metaphor, but it’s not really very apt. 
The thing about mathematical operations (e.g., addition and 
multiplication) is that they don’t really “create” new numbers; 
they interrelate the ones we already have. The simplest way 
to think about operations is not as an activity or a process 
like combining or joining but more abstractly as an assign-
ment. That is, to each pair of hamsters we simply designate 
a certain hamster as their “sum.” All arithmetic operations 
are then on the same equal footing as being abstract assign-
ments of numbers to pairs of numbers. The question then 
becomes how these various assignment patterns differ from 
one another. 
So the question we (as mathematicians) would then ask is, 
what does addition do? How does it distinguish itself from a 
purely random assignment of hamsters to pairs of hamsters? 
Well, for one thing, addition is symmetrical. That is, it does not 
depend on the order of the two numbers being added. This 
is a rare property of an operation, which is not enjoyed by 
division, for instance. Three divided by five is a completely 
different thing from five divided by three, yet five plus three 
happens to equal three plus five, and this is not due to any 
special feature of the numbers three and five; it’s true no 
matter what the numbers are.
What we have here is an example of a universal prop-
erty—one that is true for all hamsters, not just a special few. 
One way to indicate this would be to write down a generic 
formula, such as
H + V = V + H.
The idea is that the box and triangle represent any numbers 
whatsoever, so the above statement tells us that the sum of 

n e g at i v e  n u m b e r s
185
two numbers is independent of their order. Operations with 
this property are said to be commutative (from Latin commu-
tare, “to exchange”). In any case, this is certainly a property 
enjoyed by traditional addition: pushing two piles together is 
a symmetrical activity.
Are there any other universal properties of addition worthy 
of mention? Actually, there is an important feature of addition 
that we use almost unconsciously, but it is by no means triv-
ial: we can push several piles together, and it doesn’t matter 
in what order we do it. That is, we can extend the addition 
activity from two numbers to as many as we like.
Let’s say (at least initially) that addition is a binary opera-
tion—that is, it assigns a number to a pair of numbers only. 
(We have trained our hamsters to engage in this activity two at 
a time.) We could then get three of them involved by adding 
the first two together and then adding the third to that result. 
Thus, to combine 2, 3, and 7, we would assign to them the 
entity (2 + 3) + 7. Of course, someone else might decide to 
pair them off in a different way, say 2 + (3 + 7). Fortunately, 
when it comes to addition, these two approaches always lead 
to the same final result. That is, we have the universal property
(H + V) + W = H + (V + W).
This is by no means the case for your random, garden-variety 
operation. (In fact, it’s not even true of subtraction or division.) 
An operation that satisfies this very convenient property is said 
to be associative (from the Latin socius, “companion”). It means 
that numbers, when being added, get along very well and don’t 
mind being grouped together in whatever order. It also means 
we can dispense with all the obnoxious parentheses and simply 
write 2 + 3 + 7 without ambiguity.
So the addition operation (as an assignment of numbers 
to number pairs) already distinguishes itself from the herd by 
possessing these two very nice universal properties. And, as 
we have seen, multiplication enjoys both of them as well. This 
means we can add (or multiply) whole bunches of numbers 

a r i t h m e t i c
186
together without having to worry about in what order 
anything is done. This is an extremely convenient luxury that 
most operations do not afford us.
Define the midpoint operation ◊ to be
the number halfway between two numbers
(e.g., 3 ◊ 5 = 4, 9 ◊ 3 = 6, 4 ◊ 1 = 5--2 ).
Is this operation associative?
Already we see that addition and multiplication set them-
selves apart from most other operations by their symmetry. 
In particular, subtraction and division now seem rather unat-
tractive and ungainly by comparison. From a purely aesthetic 
standpoint, addition is a beautiful princess and subtraction a 
hideous toad. 
In fact, the modern approach would be to dispense with 
subtraction and division altogether as ultimately redundant 
and unnecessary operations. This is an amusing and unex-
pected consequence of the modern mathematical viewpoint, 
so I’d like to tell you about it.
We saw earlier that it is natural to think of these “lesser” 
operations as being opposite, or inverse, to their more 
symmetrical cousins. That is, when we subtract two numbers, 
say 8 – 5, we are really asking an addition question: What do 
you add to 5 to make 8? We could even think of the symbol 
8 – 5 as naming and describing a certain entity: “that which 
when added to five is eight.”
Of course, we already have a name for this creature, namely 
3 (as well as many other names such as 1 + 2, 12 ÷ 4, and so 
on). Since 8 is obtained from 3 by the process of adding 5, we 
can just as well say that 3 comes from 8 by doing the reverse—
that is, subtracting 5 can be thought of as unadding 5. 
This shows that an inverse process may be less symmet-
rical and well behaved than the original. Addition is beau-
tifully commutative and associative; unaddition is neither. 
The same goes for division vis-à-vis multiplication. So that’s 
kind of interesting. It reminds me of many situations in life 

n e g at i v e  n u m b e r s
187
where undoing something is not as simple or easy as the 
original doing. Like dropping an egg on the floor, for exam-
ple. Jigsaw puzzles rely on a fundamental asymmetry: cutting 
up a photograph into hundreds of small pieces is easy to do, 
while reassembling them is a time-consuming and laborious 
process—trying to find that piece with just a little bit of pink 
on it that forms part of the kitten’s nose.
Anyway, we have these operations we want to study and 
understand, and it becomes convenient (as well as interesting) 
to have the ability to undo them, but we can’t expect the 
undoings to behave as nicely as the original doings did.
And while we’re on the subject, there’s an even uglier 
feature of subtraction that we haven’t yet considered: not only 
does it fail to be symmetrical, it often fails to have any mean-
ing at all. Before we can even start to worry about whether 
five minus three is the same as three minus five, we have to 
face the more serious problem of what “three minus five” is 
supposed to mean in the first place.
From a Piles of Rocks standpoint, such a thing would be 
nonsensical. How can I take five rocks away when I only 
have three? I could certainly take three away, leaving none, 
but then I would still need to take two more. How can I take 
something from nothing?
In the real world of rocks, of course, I can’t. But the nice 
thing about mathematics is that I get to do whatever I want, 
whether or not it is physically possible. As long as I can imag-
ine or invent some sort of logically coherent structure, then 
it immediately becomes part of Mathematical Reality and is 
every bit as “real” as anything else in mathematics.
The issue here is symmetry—or rather, the lack thereof. 
With addition, no matter what number I have and no matter 
what number I want to add to it, their sum is a perfectly valid 
entity, already extant in the realm of numbers (or hamsters, 
if you prefer that mental image). With the subtraction oper-
ation, however, we have an unpleasant restriction: the number 
we are taking away cannot exceed the number we have. There 
definitely is already a number that when added to three makes 

a r i t h m e t i c
188
five, but (at the moment) none of our numbers play the role 
of “the thing that when added to five makes three.” This is 
the sort of unpleasantness that makes a mathematician’s nose 
wrinkle in disgust. (At least mine does, anyway.)
A practical, commonsense sort of person would probably 
just shrug his shoulders and say that this is simply the way 
things are. The asymmetry is built in to the nature of subtrac-
tion. After all, adding makes things bigger, right? So it stands 
to reason that you can’t take away more than you have. You 
mathematical dreamers will just have to face reality; you can’t 
always get what you want.
Well, phooey to that. As a matter of fact, I can get what 
I want. The problem appears to be that I am lacking some 
numbers. So why don’t I just make them up? After all, there 
weren’t any fractions until we had the idea to chop up our 
remainders into pieces. Can’t we simply invent some new 
numbers to play the roles we require? What’s to stop us?
This is a major theme in mathematics, actually. We have a 
structure of some sort—maybe it originated in a real-world 
context, maybe not—but in any case, we now have a purely 
abstract imaginary mathematical structure, and we want to 
investigate its patterns and features. At some point we may 
discover an unpleasant lack of some sort—the structure feels 
incomplete in some way, and we wish it were richer, fuller, 
and thereby more capable of fulfilling its aesthetic purpose: to 
hold patterned information in the most elegant way possible. 
This is what is known as an extension problem. We want to take 
our existing structure (in our case, it is the world of numbers 
and operations) and improve it by adding new entities to it, 
hopefully without losing any of the nice features and symme-
tries we already have.
The long and the short of it is that we’re going to create 
some new numbers in order to make subtraction better 
behaved. I would like to be able to take anything away from 
anything, and, in particular, I want to be able to take some-
thing from nothing. For instance, I would like there to be a 
number that when added to two makes zero.

n e g at i v e  n u m b e r s
189
One way to do this (at least metaphorically) is to imagine 
a flock of sheep. Along with the usual, ordinary sort of sheep, 
I also want to imagine what we might call “antisheep.” These 
are just like regular sheep, except for the curious property 
that whenever a sheep and an antisheep come into contact, 
they immediately annihilate each other and disappear. I know 
there aren’t any sheep like that; I’m just pretending. (Actually, 
our present understanding of the physical universe suggests 
that such antisheep could very well exist, or be manufactured; 
it would just be prohibitively expensive.) The point is that 
now we have something that we can add to a pair of sheep to 
get none—namely, a pair of antisheep.
We’ve actually talked about this idea before, with shoes 
and antishoes. The idea was to trade operations for entities. 
Just as I can replace the activity of taking off my shoe with 
putting on my antishoe, we can replace subtraction of sheep 
with addition of antisheep. For example, if I have five sheep 
and I wish to remove three of them, one way to do this 
would be to bring in three antisheep and then let nature 
take its course.
More abstractly (and much less violently), we can simply 
bring into existence an entity like “anti-two,” which would 
be defined as “the thing that when added to two is zero.” The 
sheep imagery is in no way necessary; anti-two does not need 
to be a collection or a number of anything, just an actor with 
a part to play.
Of course we are talking here about the invention (or 
discovery, if you prefer) of so-called negative numbers—quanti-
ties or measurements that are (or can be interpreted as being) 
less than zero. This has become a fairly commonplace idea, 
especially in colder climates where the temperature falls well 
below the (completely arbitrary) zero degree mark on the 
thermometer. Everyone in North Dakota knows that when 
it’s twenty below it’ll need to get twenty degrees warmer just 
to get to zero.
As ordinary and familiar as all this might seem today, nega-
tive quantities were generally held in some suspicion through-

a r i t h m e t i c
190
out history, regarded as more of a bookkeeping trick than 
as legitimate numbers in their own right. In fact, the typi-
cal Renaissance tradesman never used such things. Income 
and expenditures were typically recorded separately, using 
two different colors of ink—black for profit, red for losses 
(whence the expression “in the red” for being in debt). The 
black and red numbers could be totaled separately and then 
compared.
At some point somebody must have noticed that if you 
perform all the various additions and subtractions that 
accounting and bookkeeping entail, the final total is inde-
pendent of the order in which they are done. That is, you 
don’t have to wait until you have enough money in order 
to spend it (as many of us have since woefully discovered). 
Going below zero simply means that you owe. Thus, if you 
like, you can think of negative numbers in commercial terms—
as measures of debt. 
This way of thinking, like the antisheep metaphor, is an 
example of reification—making an abstract idea seem more 
real or tangible. We have a purely abstract mathematical 
construct (that is, negative numbers), and in order to feel 
more comfortable with it, to internalize it in such a way that 
we can have intuition about it, we come up with these sorts 
of concrete images and real-world analogies. After all, as intel-
ligent and imaginative as we may be, we’re still primates with 
hands and eyes and experiences, and our minds can use all the 
help they can get.
So although no such imagery is required to bring these 
new creatures into existence mathematically, it sure doesn’t 
hurt to have a thermometer or some antisheep in your mind 
occasionally.
Let’s proceed with the plan. For each ordinary “positive” 
number like 2 or 5, we call into existence a companion 
“negative” number with the property that when added to it 
makes zero. (So we have essentially doubled our collection 
of hamsters.) We could, I suppose, call them black and red 

n e g at i v e  n u m b e r s
191
numbers and even write them in these colors, but it’s a lot 
simpler (and a lot less expensive) to just use a mark of some 
kind to distinguish them. The customary notation is the nega-
tive sign (–), which is admittedly a bit confusing; it looks rather 
a lot like the subtraction symbol, the minus sign (–). There is 
good reason for this, as we will see, and it is quite convenient 
once you get used to it, but it’s always a little uncomfort-
able having the same (or nearly the same) symbol mean two 
different things, even (and maybe especially) if the ideas they 
signify are closely related.
The upshot is that we now have numbers such as –2 
(pronounced “negative two”) and – 5--3 (“negative five-thirds”), 
whose only function in life is to annihilate their partner. That 
is, all that –2 does for a living is to be the thing that when 
added to 2 makes 0. Thus,
2 + (–2) = 0.
Notice how the notation makes me want to put –2 in 
parentheses, to separate the plus (+) symbol from the negative 
sign. That’s pretty lame, actually. The trouble with mathemati-
cal notation is that it was often improvised by printers so as to 
be cost effective; it’s easier to use a piece of type you already 
have than to carve a new one.
In any case, 2 and –2 are like sheep and antisheep. They 
cancel each other out, so to speak. Notice that this is a 
symmetrical relationship: not only is –2 acting as an “anti-
two,” but 2 itself acts to annihilate –2, in effect making it anti-
anti-two. So we should really think of the negative sign not as 
a mere label, distinguishing the two kinds of numbers but as 
a negation operator acting on all numbers, turning each one 
into its opposite. So –2 means the negation of 2 (that is, nega-
tive two as before), whereas –(–2) would mean the negation 
of negative two, otherwise known as 2.
What is –0?

a r i t h m e t i c
192
So now we have both the subtraction operation, which 
involves a pair of numbers, as well as the negation operator, 
acting on a single number. And just to add to the confusion, 
we use essentially the same symbol for both. On the other 
hand, there are close connections between the two. For one 
thing, –2 could be thought of as shorthand for the subtrac-
tion 0 – 2. After all, that’s what we built it to do—to be the 
thing that you would get if you took two away from noth-
ing. More generally, subtracting two from anything is the 
same as adding negative two. It doesn’t matter whether we 
take two sheep away normally or toss in a pair of antisheep 
instead.
What this means is that we can dispense with subtraction 
forever. All that subtraction does is to add the opposite, so 
once everybody has an opposite (which they now do), we 
can use adding to do our subtracting, just as “putting on” is 
enough for me once I have antishoes at my disposal.
This is good news. Any time we can unload something 
large and expensive like an operation in exchange for some 
cheap and abundant mental hamsters, it’s worth doing. Now 
all we have to do is add, and adding is nicer because it’s more 
symmetrical.
In fact, we now get an interesting window into the asym-
metry of subtraction: only one of the numbers we are adding 
gets negated. That is, 3 + (–2) is manifestly not symmetric, the 
2 being negated and not the 3.
In the modern abstract way of thinking, we do not need 
a concept of annihilation to say what we mean by nega-
tion. The pattern is simply that to each number is associated 
another number (its negative) with the property that they add 
up to zero (where zero, recall, is that which when added does 
nothing).
The charming thing about this viewpoint (which possibly 
also makes it seem pointless and confusing) is that nowhere 
do we require that these entities be quantities of any kind; that 
is, they don’t have to be numbers, per se. We don’t actually 
care what they are, only how they act. We are content to say 

n e g at i v e  n u m b e r s
193
that if it behaves the way we need it to then it’s good enough. 
If it quacks like zero, then it is zero.
So let us accept these new negative quantities as being 
every bit as real as their positive counterparts. Mathemati-
cally there is no problem, because the whole enterprise is a 
made-up game in our heads. More practically, we have the 
various reifications we’ve discussed, such as antisheep, debt, 
and thermometers, to ease any occasional queasiness we may 
have.
The question now is how our new hamsters get along—
both with the old ones as well as with each other. The addi-
tion situation is fairly clear, especially thinking in terms of 
sheep: 5 + (–2) = 3, and (–1) + (–1) = –2. Amusingly, there is 
a new wrinkle to subtraction. If we’re saying that subtraction 
means addition of the opposite, then a consequence would be 
that subtracting –2 would be the same as adding 2. In other 
words, removing two antisheep is the same as adding in two 
more sheep.
An amusing way to see why this makes sense is to imagine 
adding two sheep and two antisheep to your flock. Since these 
together add up to nothing, you haven’t changed anything. 
But now if you take the two antisheep away, it is easy to see 
that the sheep population has just gone up by two.
What is the debt interpretation?
Despite the initial weirdness of addition sometimes 
making things smaller and subtraction making them 
bigger, this new system of numbers is actually an excellent 
improvement and gives us a far prettier, more symmetri-
cal number environment in which to operate. We can now 
freely add and subtract without any worries or restrictions, 
every number has an opposite, and all the patterns (e.g., 
symmetry of addition) remain intact. Moreover, we now 
have the luxury of relegating subtraction to the trash bin 
if we wish and can henceforth think of ourselves as adders 
(not the snake kind).

a r i t h m e t i c
194
But what about multiplication and division? When we 
brought negative numbers into existence, we asked only 
that they behave in a certain additive way—namely, that they 
combine with their partners to make zero. We neglected to 
tell them how to multiply. What do we even want (–2) × (–3) 
to mean? How am I supposed to make –2 copies of some-
thing? I don’t know how to do anything a negative number 
of times.
Clearly we are in need of some reification. Ideally, we could 
use a new copier metaphor that somehow incorporates nega-
tion and would help provide intuitive meaning to negative 
multiplication. There is a nice way to do this, actually, but we 
have to be a little bit careful. This is again an extension prob-
lem—we need to extend the meaning of multiplication to a 
wider realm. We could, of course, just do it at random. After 
all, if (–2) × (–3) has no meaning (and it currently doesn’t), 
then can’t we just call it 42 or –5 1--2 and move on, assigning 
arbitrary values to all such products at will?
We certainly could do that, but then we run the risk of 
ruining all of our beautiful patterns and symmetries. The 
modern approach is to let the patterns themselves dictate our 
choices. I don’t really care what (–2) × (–3) is chosen to be, so 
long as it keeps my pretty patterns intact. (The stained-glass 
window is so beautiful, we’ll build the cathedral around it.)
In particular, it would be heartbreaking to lose the symme-
try of multiplication. So whatever we choose this number 
(–2) × (–3) to be, it had better be the same as (–3) × (–2) or 
I’m going to be upset.
That’s our first demand—that we keep the symmetry. This 
actually does force a few decisions. For instance, I know 
what I want doubling to mean, so that tells me what 2 × (–1) 
should be: two copies of one antisheep is two antisheep. Thus, 
2 × (–1) = –2. If we insist on preserving the symmetry (and 
we do), we are forced to choose (–1) × 2 to mean –2 as well.
Here is our first extension of meaning, and I want to be 
clear about it. Initially, multiplication meant making copies; 3 
× 5 means “three copies of five.” Now we are changing that a 

n e g at i v e  n u m b e r s
195
bit. We are taking (–1) × 2 to mean not “negative one copies 
of two” (which is senseless) but rather “whatever it needs to 
mean to keep the symmetry intact.”
Of course, the same argument could be made with 5 in 
place of 2. Any number of –1’s is that many antisheep, so 5 × 
(–1) = –5. In other words, we’re simply counting antisheep. 
(Does that help you stay awake?) Even more generally, if 
we put an antisheep in the copier and reduce or enlarge it, 
we get a smaller or larger antisheep. Thus 2--3 × (–1) = – 2--3 . A 
2--3 -scale antisheep would exactly annihilate a 2--3 -scale sheep, 
for instance. Preserving the symmetry would force us to 
choose (–1) × 5 = –5 and (–1) × 2--3 = – 2--3 .
So we actually get a fairly nice interpretation: multiplying 
a number by –1 simply negates it. If we want, we can reinter-
pret negation as multiplication by –1.
Similarly, multiplication by –2 can also be dealt with in this 
way. Since five copies of –2 is –10 (I’m thinking antisheep), 
we would want (–2) × 5 to be the same. Thus, multiplying by 
–2 acts by doubling and negating. This also makes sense if we 
think of –2 as being (–1) × 2. Then multiplying by –2 is the 
same as multiplying by both –1 and 2, so we get the effects 
of both. 
It’s not hard to extend the copy machine metaphor, now 
that we see how we want it to behave. Negation is a self- 
inverse process—to undo it, you just do it again, like flipping 
over a coin or turning halfway around. Negation is a sort of 
reflection activity, moving numbers to the other side of zero. 
So let’s model it with actual reflection—that is, in addition 
to enlarging and reducing, we can allow our copier to make 
“backward” copies (as I’m sure many real-life copiers are built 
to do).
Now we have a very simple reification of our extended 
multiplication operation. Multiplying by a positive number 
simply scales by that factor as before, but multiplying by a 
negative number scales and reverses.
One consequence of this choice—insisting on symmetry 
come what may—is that the product of two negative numbers 

a r i t h m e t i c
196
is then forced to be positive. For example, (–2) × (–3) must be 
equal to 6, since that is what you get when you double and 
negate –3. Another way to think of it is to imagine feeding 
the number 1 into the copier, setting it to enlarge by –3 (i.e., 
to triple and then flip), and then scale again by –2, doubling 
and flipping again. Clearly this is the same as just enlarging 
by 6. The point being that all these processes—blowing up, 
shrinking down, and flipping—can be done in any order, and 
flipping twice is the same as not flipping at all.
It is not hard to see what the reciprocal of a negative number 
should be. To undo multiplication by –2, we need only multi-
ply by – 1--2 . The reciprocal of – 2--3 would have to be – 3--2 . We 
need the negative sign to kill off the other negative sign. Two 
wrongs make a right, if you like. (Of course, zero continues to 
have no reciprocal, for the same reason as before—there’s no 
way to undo such a destructive multiplication.)
If we like, we can then define division by a negative number 
to be multiplication by its reciprocal, or better yet, dispense 
with division altogether as redundant and unnecessary.
We now have a completely symmetrical number environ-
ment where we are free to add, unadd, multiply, and unmul-
tiply whatever we want, whenever we want. This system, 
consisting of the positive and negative fractions (which 
includes, of course, whole numbers like 5, 0, and –3), is 
known as the rational number field. The adjective rational here 
refers to the fact that these numbers are describable as whole 
number ratios (that is, fractions), not that they are necessarily 
calm and collected in their reasoning. The rational number 
field is the proper setting for arithmetic (at least in the perfect 
mathematical sense) and provides a rich and fertile landscape 
for investigation and play.
Suppose we wanted there to be two zero entities,
each having the property that when added to any number 
leaves it alone. Does anything go wrong?

197
THE ART OF COUNTING
Now I’d like to show you something really pretty. Let’s go 
back to the simple idea of counting—desiring to know how 
many of some thing there are. We’ve talked about the craft 
of arithmetic—the organizing and rearranging of symbolic 
numerical information for the purpose of comparison. 
Now it’s time to talk about the fine art: the art of counting 
beautifully.
Of course, if the thing you want to count is a random 
jumble of haphazard information, such as the total of today’s 
receipts or the number of listings in the phone book, then 
there’s really nothing else to do but roll up your sleeves and 
do some good old-fashioned countin’ and arithmatikin’. Not 
much art there, I’m afraid.
If, however, the thing you are trying to count happens to 
be very patterned, orderly, and symmetrical in some way, the 
situation may allow for clever and imaginative ways to count, 
without the tedium of actually counting. Of course, this may 
require quite a bit of extra mental labor, but this is all in keep-
ing with the mathematician’s general philosophy: to be willing to 
think really hard in order to find clever ways to get out of doing any 
actual work.
Thus, not only do we spare ourselves the tedium and 
drudgery of actually counting, we also get the supreme satis-
faction of having had an elegant and powerful idea, which 
will continue to give pleasure long after any utility it may 
have provided.
So be prepared to see some breathtakingly beautiful ideas. 
We are counting for counting’s sake, and the things we want 
to count are the beautiful things—the things that have a simple 
and elegant pattern to them.
Let’s start with this pretty design.

a r i t h m e t i c
198
Here is a ring of six dots, with each dot connected by a line 
to every other dot. You can’t get much more patterned and 
symmetrical than that! The question is, how many lines is that 
all together?
Of course, we could just count them one by one. If you’re 
reasonably careful you’ll get fifteen. But isn’t that sort of 
a wretched existence, being a counter? “Did I forget one? 
Wait. Did I count that one already? Oh, no. Have I lost 
track?!”
Not for me, thank you. I simply can’t handle the stress. With 
something this beautiful there has to be a better way. One idea 
might be to count in an organized fashion that guarantees no 
lines will be accidentally omitted or counted twice. A natu-
ral approach would be to start with one dot, count the lines 
coming out of it, and then mark them as already counted. 
Then move on to the next dot, counting the unmarked lines 
coming out of it, and so forth.
In fact, this is quite pretty. The first dot has five lines, and 
the next dot will then have four, and so on. That’s a nice 
pattern. We can now see the total number of lines as being
5 + 4 + 3 + 2 + 1 = 15.
Notice that the final dot adds no lines because they have 
all been counted already. (So there’s really a zero at the end of 
this sum, if you like.) Clearly, this same idea would work no 
matter how many dots we had. If there were eleven dots, for 
instance, the total number of lines would have to be
10 + 9 + 8 + 7 + 6 + 5 + 4 + 3 + 2 + 1 = 55.

t h e  a r t  o f  c o u n t i n g
199
What’s great about this idea is that it’s not just a count, it’s 
a counting pattern. The idea is so simple and robust, it survives 
the passage to any number of dots whatsoever, no matter 
how large—or how small, for that matter. For three dots, the 
pattern would predict 2 + 1 = 3 lines, and that is quite right; a 
triangle has three sides. Amusingly, the idea keeps working—
not just the number pattern; the actual idea itself still makes 
complete sense as we go to fewer dots. So that’s pretty great.
I’d like to show you an even more elegant and amusing way 
to think about this question. It’s a method I like to call “inten-
tional overcounting.” The idea is that we’re going to make a 
very simple and easy count, which will be wrong but wrong 
in a very simple and easily corrected way.
Look at each of the six dots independently. They all have 
five lines coming out of them. That’s six dots, five lines 
each. Sounds like 6 × 5 to me. But of course this is wrong. 
We’ve double-counted some of the lines. As a matter of 
fact, we’ve double-counted all of the lines (once from each 
end). This means our initial count of 6 × 5 must be exactly 
double the correct value, so all we have to do is cut it in 
half. Thus we get
(6 × 5) ÷ 2 = 15.
I’ve always loved intentional overcounting. It just feels so 
deliciously irreverent, somehow. But boy, is it quick! And 
instead of adding up a long list of consecutive numbers, we 
just have to multiply a couple of numbers together and divide 
by two.
Once again, the idea is so general that it applies equally well 
to any number of dots. If we had eleven dots the thinking 
would be “eleven dots, ten lines each, makes 110, but I’ve 

a r i t h m e t i c
200
double-counted, so it’s really 55.” The same result as before 
but more gracefully achieved.
Incidentally, by counting the same thing in two different 
ways, we’ve uncovered a very pretty arithmetical pattern:
	
1 = (1 × 2) ÷ 2
	
1 + 2 = (2 × 3) ÷ 2
	
1 + 2 + 3 = (3 × 4) ÷ 2
	
1 + 2 + 3 + 4 = (4 × 5) ÷ 2
	
1 + 2 + 3 + 4 + 5 = (5 × 6) ÷ 2
The total of the consecutive numbers from 1 up to some 
number is the same as simply multiplying that number by the 
next higher number and then taking half.
Another nice way to see this is to imagine making rows of 
rocks of increasing length to make a triangular design:
This design clearly represents the sum 1 + 2 + 3 + 4 + 5. Now 
here’s the clever part: putting two of these designs together, 
one upside down, creates a 5 × 6 rectangle!
So again we see that the original sum must be the same as half 
the rectangle, or (5 × 6) ÷ 2.
Notice that we’re not really doing a lot of calculation or 
comparison here. I’m more interested in ways of seeing—

t h e  a r t  o f  c o u n t i n g
201
insights into the behavior of numbers in general, not the sizes 
of anything in particular. For this reason, we won’t be doing 
a lot of arithmetic in the traditional sense. The expression 
(5 × 6) ÷ 2, for instance, is actually more valuable and more 
revealing of the structure of the argument than the calculated 
value 15. Truth be told, I don’t really care how many rocks or 
dots or lines I’ve got; I care about the patterns of ideas. I’m 
happy that I have a way to see that the numbers from 1 to 
99 add up to (99 × 100) ÷ 2, but I don’t really care how big 
that is or what it looks like in Hindu-Arabic decimal form.
What happens when you total only the odd numbers?
For our next example of elegant counting, let’s look at 
something really prosaic and mundane: automobile license 
plates. How many license plate combinations are there? When 
I was a kid growing up in California, the license plate format 
was three letters followed by three numbers, like so:
Since then, due to the completely insane explosion in the 
number of vehicles, they’ve had to add another digit at the 
front, and that has already gotten up to 7 as I write.
Of course, I’m not asking about the number of plates 
currently out there on the road. That’s a totally random collec-
tion, contingent upon all sorts of ugly, real-world complexities. 
I’m interested in the total number of possible combinations of 
three letters and three numbers. This is at least independent of 
whatever people may be doing with their cars at the moment.
So how are we going to count something massive like this? 
If you are a masochist, you could start listing the license plates 
by hand in some way, cross-checking every so often to make 

a r i t h m e t i c
202
sure you haven’t accidentally counted anything twice, but 
then you may as well count the stars in the sky or the hairs on 
your head. This approach takes no advantage of the symmetry 
and structure of what we are counting: all possible arrange-
ments of three letters followed by three numbers. While we’re 
at it, we may as well forget about license plates entirely and 
just view our objects as abstract sequences of symbols. I’m 
interested in finding a simple and elegant way to count these 
sequences; I have no interest in what the department of motor 
vehicles is going to do with them.
As with many mathematical questions, it is often a good 
idea to start with something smaller and simpler. Let’s imag-
ine that our sequences consist of a single letter and a single 
digit, zero through nine. So we’re counting such things as
A5,  Q9,  B7,  F0,  Z5,  T4
Making a list of all such combinations is still not something 
I really want to do. However—and this is really one of the 
key ideas in the art of counting—there is nothing stopping 
me from imagining such a list. I have no intention of actually 
writing anything down, mind you, but I can still play around 
with the mental image of a list.
So the imaginary list technique, as I like to call it, is to see 
if we can find a way to organize our list (at least in principle) 
in order to break it into well-regulated and patterned pieces 
that are easy to count. We can then use arithmetic to assemble 
the separate counts into a total.
In the present case of single-letter, single-digit license 
plates, this isn’t terribly hard to do. How would an organized, 
systematic person arrange their imaginary list? A natural way 
would be to simply list them in alphabetical order—those 
that begin with A, then the ones that start with B, and so 
on. In this way, our imaginary list is broken into chapters, or 
subsections: Chapter A, followed by Chapter B, all the way to 
Chapter Z.
What makes this organization scheme valuable (as obvious 

t h e  a r t  o f  c o u n t i n g
203
as it may be) is that it breaks our list into twenty-six chapters 
of equal size. Since every digit is allowed to occur with every 
letter, each chapter contains exactly ten sequences. (We could 
even imagine these listed in numerical order, so that Chapter 
A begins A0, A1, A2, etc.)
This means we can calculate our total without having to 
list even a single sequence. There are twenty-six chapters, 
each containing ten entries. So that’s 26 × 10 = 260 total 
combinations.
The reason this worked out so nicely is that the sizes of the 
chapters were all the same, allowing us to use multiplication. 
If we had broken the list up in a less organized way, into 
chapters of various sizes, we would then need to add them 
all together, which might have been something of a chore. So 
the first principle of making an imaginary list is to break it 
into equal-size pieces, if possible.
Returning to the original 1960s California setting, 
let’s imagine making a list of all three-letter, three-digit 
sequences. Working as before, we can still break the list up 
into chapters depending on the first letter. Then, each of 
these can be further subdivided according to the second 
letter. Since each choice of first letter can be followed by all 
26 possible second letters, the total number of subsections 
must be 26 × 26.
Of course, each of these can be further subdivided by the 
choices for the third letter (aren’t you glad we’re not actually 
doing this?), giving us a total of 26 × 26 × 26 different 
three-letter categories. In each of these there are exactly one 
thousand license plates, since the numbers go from 000 to 
999. Or, if you prefer, we can think of it as 10 × 10 × 10 by 
the same subdividing approach we used for the letters.
What this means is that there are exactly
26 × 26 × 26 × 10 × 10 × 10
possible license plate combinations, and our small mental 
labor has relieved us of a great deal of physical toil. Plus we 

a r i t h m e t i c
204
know we’re right—our method guarantees that everybody 
gets counted exactly once.
Is this enough license plates for twenty million cars?
As another example of this sort of behavior, let’s imag-
ine a three-wheel slot machine at a casino (or pretty much 
anywhere in Nevada). Each wheel has a set of symbols on it, 
such as cherries, lemons, and lucky sevens, and these show up 
in a display window like so:
These machines are rather closely related to odometers 
(sigh) and other mechanical counters, except there’s no carry 
pin. Each wheel is completely independent of the others, and 
it is this independence that makes things easy to count. The 
point being that for each possible state of the first wheel, there 
are exactly the same number of possible combinations for 
the other two wheels—namely, all of them. The first wheel 
showing a lemon in no way influences or interferes with the 
other two wheels.
Let’s say each wheel has six possible symbols. Then our 
imaginary list of possible outcomes could be divided into 
six categories (depending on the first wheel), each of which 
would have six subsections, and each of these would contain 
six actual entries, for a total of 6 × 6 × 6 possible combinations.
So here we have a very general and versatile counting prin-
ciple. If you can find a way to view the things you are count-
ing as being slot-machine possibilities with independent 
wheels (or slots), then you can calculate the total number of 
these by simply multiplying together the possibilities for each 

t h e  a r t  o f  c o u n t i n g
205
slot. This is exactly the situation with license plates, where 
we had three slots with 26 possible entries and three with 10.
Rhode Island plates look like QZ458.
How many plates does that format allow?
While we’re on the subject of gambling, it often happens 
that in addition to enjoying the fun and excitement of a game 
of chance, people sometimes want to make a rational decision 
about whether such a game is financially worthwhile—that 
is, to have some kind of a crude measure as to how likely it is 
that they will win. Obviously, there can be no guarantees, but 
on the other hand, some things are more likely to happen than 
others. One very common way to measure the likelihood of a 
particular event is to compare the number of ways that event 
could happen with the total number of possible outcomes.
For example, let’s suppose you are playing a slot machine 
like the one we imagined—three wheels of six symbols each. 
So that’s 6 × 6 × 6 = 216 total possible outcomes. If the only 
winning combinations were 777 and three cherries, then you 
would have only 2 chances out of 216. This measurement can 
be put in the form of a ratio if you like, so that you have a 
probability of  2---
216, which is about 0.9%, if you prefer that sort 
of thing. Another way to say it is that the odds against you are 
214 to 2, meaning that out of the 216 total possibilities, 214 
are against you and only 2 are in your favor. The point is that 
all these measurements of likelihood come down to counting.
A deck of cards has been shuffled. How likely is it
that the top card is either a spade or a face card?
Now let’s look at a more sophisticated counting problem. 
This one is also connected to my childhood, in particular 
my interest in stamp collecting, the nations of the world, 
and especially their various flags. To keep things simple, let’s 
confine ourselves to flags with three vertical stripes, such as 
those of France and Italy.

a r i t h m e t i c
206
Obviously, we’re not going to be counting the number 
of such flags in actual use. There are few things less elegant 
and mathematical than global politics. (I can’t even keep up 
with all the new countries that are always popping in and 
out of existence, let alone whatever ghastly flag designs they 
may have adopted.) Instead, let’s suppose we are launch-
ing our own new country, and we’ve narrowed down our 
choice of colors to these four: red, black, yellow, and green. 
That is, we’ve decided on a flag with three vertical stripes, 
but we haven’t yet committed to what color each stripe 
will be. 
If we take the slot-machine view that each stripe is a slot 
with four possible values, then we would get 4 × 4 × 4 = 64 
possible flag designs. But this would include such (presumably 
unacceptable) colorings as black-black-red and green-green-
green, which we did not intend. That is, we want each stripe 
to be a different color, with no repeats. So here we have a 
restriction on our choices, and that makes things a bit more 
interesting. 
Of course, we can still make an imaginary list and try to 
break it up into sections in a nice way. In fact, the slot-ma-
chine idea even works but with an amusing little twist. We 
can still subdivide our list of flags into chapters accord-
ing to the color of the first stripe (say the leftmost one). 
Now, however, the second stripe can receive only three of 
the four colors, since we can’t repeat. Luckily, though, this 
number is the same for all choices of the first color. It is 
true that the set of available colors will depend on what 
we used for the first stripe (e.g., if it is green, then the 
second stripe can’t be), but the number of possible colors is 
the same, namely three.

t h e  a r t  o f  c o u n t i n g
207
So our imaginary list breaks into four chapters, each with 
three subsections. Finally, each of these subsections contains 
exactly two flags. This is because after the first two stripes 
have been colored, there are only two colors left for the 
third and final stripe. For instance, in the red-black subsec-
tion we would find the two designs red-black-yellow and 
red-black-green.
So, even though we placed a restriction on the colorings, we 
still have independence of a sort—namely, independence of 
number. It’s as if we have a slot machine where the first wheel 
has 4 symbols, the second has 3, and the third only 2. The total 
number of possible flag designs is then 4 × 3 × 2 = 24.
Of course, that is a small enough number that we actually 
could list them all, and it might even be fun to get out some 
colored pencils and draw them. I would even recommend 
doing so if these ideas are at all new to you.
Draw all 24 possible flags.
Which ones do you like best?
Obviously, counting, like any other art form, requires care 
and patience and years of experience to master. Making imag-
inary lists and being sensitive to independence is an excellent 
start.
What if we allow the first and third colors to be the same?
One commonly occurring scenario is when we have a 
collection of objects—say, books on a bookshelf—and we 
want to know how many ways there are to put them in order. 
To keep things simple, let’s call the books A, B, C, and D. So 
now the different orderings will simply be letter sequences, 
such as DACB and BDCA. How many of these are there?
The first slot has 4 possibilities. Then the second slot has 
only 3, independent of what the first choice happened to be. 
That’s crucial. Each successive space on the shelf offers one 
less possibility because the remaining books keep dwindling. 

a r i t h m e t i c
208
There are two possibilities for the third slot and only one for 
the fourth. That is, the last book is forced to go at the end, no 
matter which book it happens to be.
Again, we have number independence, thankfully, and so 
we get 4 × 3 × 2 × 1 = 24 possibilities, same as with the 
striped flags. This is because the colors are essentially acting 
as books, and the stripes are the places on the bookshelf. The 
unused color plays the role of the last book.
This happens a lot with counting. Two apparently differ-
ent counting problems end up being the same. And I don’t 
mean the final tallies are the same; I mean the problems them-
selves are the same, once we think of them in the right way. 
That’s a lot of what being a mathematician is all about: seeing 
things in the simplest, most abstract way possible, so you can 
make connections and understand more deeply. There are few 
things as powerful and affecting as these kinds of mathemat-
ical epiphanies.
We’ve just discovered a very simple and general counting 
principle. If you have a bunch of things, say thirteen of them, 
and you want to put them in order, the number of ways to 
do this would be 
13 × 12 × 11 × 10 × 9 × 8 × 7 × 6 × 5 × 4 × 3 × 2 × 1.
This sort of product occurs frequently in counting prob-
lems, so it’s worth abbreviating. The usual way to do this is 
to write 13!, pronounced “thirteen factorial.” The exclama-
tion point is a funny choice, but it has become quite stan-
dard. (Again, the printers like to choose from symbols that are 
already lying around.) The main drawback is that you have to 
restrain your enthusiasm when writing about numbers; if you 
write “the answer is 5!” it might be confusing.
Thus, there are 3! = 6 ways to order three objects, and of 
course only 2! = 2 ways to put on your shoes (the usual way 
and the uncomfortable way with shoes on the wrong feet). Of 
course 1! = 1, corresponding to the one and only way to put 
one thing in order. And if that weren’t pedantic enough, we 

t h e  a r t  o f  c o u n t i n g
209
could even agree to say that 0! = 1 as well, there being only 
one way to order an empty bookshelf—do nothing! All in all, 
it’s a very beautiful pattern.
Show there are more than five thousand
ways to order seven things.
What if two of the books are identical
and cannot be distinguished?
Aside from rearranging and permuting objects, another 
wide class of counting problems involves selecting groups 
of things from a pool of possibilities. As a simple example, 
suppose that I need two kids to help me screw in a lightbulb 
and six kids happen to volunteer. I need to choose two out of 
the six to be my helpers. How many ways are there to do this?
Obviously, in real life I would just pick two of them (by 
whatever means) and get on with it. Even then, I could 
still wonder how many choices I actually had. Anyway, we’re 
wondering.
A fantastic way to get out of doing any work is to realize 
that this is really the same as the dots and lines problem: each 
dot is a kid, and the lines correspond exactly to the possible 
pairs. Ha! So it’s 15 again.
OK, Mr. Smarty-Pants, suppose then that I need three help-
ers. Groups of three are not so easily captured by dots and 
lines, so we’ll actually need to do some thinking. One clever 
approach is to intentionally overcount. Let’s think of it as 
having three slots to fill, one for each of my three helpers. 
There are 6 ways to fill the first slot, then 5 for the second 
(the first kid is now unavailable), and 4 for the last spot. So 
that’s 6 × 5 × 4 possible choices. Of course, we’ve overcounted 
quite drastically, since each group of three has appeared on 
our list several times. If, for instance, we chose Jane first, then 
Michael, then Chris, that would get counted separately from 
choosing Chris first, then Jane, then Michael, even though it 
results in the exact same team of helpers. Our slot-machine 

a r i t h m e t i c
210
approach to counting has introduced an ordering within the 
teams that is irrelevant to our problem. 
So, how many times did a given team of three get counted? 
There are exactly 3! = 6 ways to put three people in order, so 
we’ve accidentally (on purpose) counted each team exactly six 
times. That means our total is six times what it should be. So 
again all we have to do is divide by six. The final count would be
(6 × 5 × 4) ÷ 6 = 20.
There are twenty ways to choose a group of three out of 
a group of six. In the counting biz, this is referred to as “six 
choose three” and is usually abbreviated as ( 6--3). Notice this is 
not a division (there is no crossbar), and the parentheses are a 
formal part of the symbol, not just a safety precaution.
Thus, ( 8--5) represents the number of ways to select five things 
out of a group of eight, with the tacit understanding that 
there is no order to anything and no restrictions on which 
things can be chosen. By the same reasoning as before, we see 
that this can be calculated as
( 8--5) = (8 × 7 × 6 × 5 × 4) ÷ 5!
The 5! corresponds to the number of possible orderings of 
five things, which is the factor by which we’ve overcounted. If 
you like, we can even evaluate this expression for the purposes 
of comparison. One simple way to do this is to write out 5! 
explicitly, then cancel out any common factors in the top and 
bottom:
8 × 7 × 6 × 5 × 4
5 × 4 × 3 × 2 × 1 = 8 × 7 × 6
3 × 2 × 1  = 8 × 7 = 56.
So there are exactly fifty-six ways to choose five things out of 
a group of eight.
How many ways are there to separate eight people
into two groups of four?

t h e  a r t  o f  c o u n t i n g
211
Here’s a funny one. Suppose I have a box of eight dough-
nuts, let’s say five chocolate and three coconut. Of course, 
I can arrange them in the box in any way I like, but I 
only care about the order of the flavors, not the individual 
doughnuts themselves. That is, if we let the symbols A and 
B denote chocolate and coconut, then one box arrange-
ment would be
ABAABABA.
Switching two chocolate doughnuts has no effect on this 
pattern. So I’m wondering, how many sequences of five As 
and three Bs are there?
Here the idea is to view the slots as the objects, not the 
doughnuts. All I need to do is choose five of the eight spots 
and put the As in those places. Then the Bs fill in the rest. In 
this way (without really having to do too much), I can imme-
diately deduce the total to be ( 8--5).
Why is this the same as ( 8--3)?
Things get a bit subtler if we add in a third flavor. Let’s 
imagine a box of a dozen doughnuts—five chocolate, three 
coconut, and four with sprinkles. So we want to count the 
number of twelve-letter “words” consisting of 5 As, 3 Bs, and 
4 Cs. One such word would be
CAABCABACCBA.
See if you can use intentional overcounting to get a handle 
on this. If we could tell the doughnuts apart, then we would 
easily get 12! (I mean twelve factorial, not an enthusiastic 
twelve.)
Can you solve this three-flavor doughnut problem?
(If your reasoning is correct, you should arrive at
a total of 27720 possible arrangements.)

a r i t h m e t i c
212
While we’re here in the doughnut shop, allow me to show 
you another of my absolute favorites. This is a perfect exam-
ple of the kind of creative and imaginative thinking that a 
good counting problem inspires.
Let’s make another box of a dozen doughnuts, only this 
time we’ll allow any number of As, Bs, and Cs, so long as they 
add up to twelve. I don’t really care about the order of the 
doughnuts in the box, only the amounts of each flavor. So 
all boxes with 2 As, 3 Bs, and 7 Cs are the same as far as I’m 
concerned. In fact, we may as well agree to put all the As first, 
followed by the Bs, and then the Cs.
This means we can rephrase the question: How many ways 
are there to break 12 into a sum of three numbers? More 
precisely, we want to count the number of ordered triples of 
numbers that add up to 12. We need to think of 2 + 3 + 7 as 
different from 7 + 2 + 3 because they correspond to different 
choices of flavors—the first number indicates the number of 
As, for instance. This includes the possibility that one or more 
of the numbers is zero, the sum 6 + 6 + 0 corresponding to a 
box with 6 As, 6 Bs, and no Cs.
So how are we going to count this collection? We could 
certainly make an imaginary list and try to organize it in some 
way. For example, we could break it up by the number of As: 
first the ones with no As, then the arrangements with a single 
A, two As, and so on, until the final chapter, consisting of a 
single arrangement with twelve As and nothing else.
The trouble with this approach is that the chapters are all 
different sizes. There are tons of arrangements with no As, but 
only one with twelve. That’s going to get messy, especially 
since the same will be true of the subdivisions within each 
chapter. Ouch.
So here’s the insanely gorgeous idea I want to show you. 
Let’s first imagine that we do something quite practical, which 
is often done in real-life bakeries and doughnut shops. We 
will introduce cardboard separators in between the different 
flavors, so the chocolate doesn’t get all over the coconut (not 
that I would mind, those being pretty much my two favorite 

t h e  a r t  o f  c o u n t i n g
213
substances in the whole wide world). Anyway, a typical box 
would now look like this:
AAA | BBBBB | CCCC
To be as consistent and symmetrical as possible, let’s say 
that we will always insert two separators, even when a flavor 
is missing. For example, the box with 7 As and 5 Bs (and no 
Cs) would receive one separator between the As and Bs, and 
another at the end, like so:
AAAAAAA | BBBBB |
Other amusing examples would be
| | CCCCCCCCCCCC
AAAAAA | | CCCCCC
| BBBBBBBBBBBB |
No matter what, we always have two separators, and if there 
are no doughnuts on one side or the other, that’s fine.
My favorite thing to do at this point is to imagine the 
separators not as flimsy pieces of cardboard or waxed paper 
but as fake plastic doughnuts. Then we can think of our boxes 
as containing fourteen doughnuts, exactly two of which are 
fake. What’s more, any positioning of the two fakes is allowed 
and corresponds to a legal doughnut flavor arrangement.
Now the heavens part and the simple truth is revealed: all 
we are doing is choosing two things out of fourteen—namely, 
the two spots where the fake doughnut separators go. So the 
answer to our question is simply ( 14--2 ) = 91. Is that great, or 
what?
What if there were four flavors to choose from?
I hope I’ve managed to convey something of the depth, 
beauty, and subtlety of the art of counting. The best way to 

a r i t h m e t i c
214
appreciate it, of course, is to devise your own counting prob-
lems and especially your own clever and witty solutions. I’ll 
leave you with one more gem before I go.
You have arranged to meet a friend at a café
five blocks north and eight blocks east of your house.
Assuming you only walk north and east,
how many different routes are possible?

215
AFTERWORD
Well, Reader, we’ve come to the end of our time together. 
I hope this has all made sense—both the technical details 
of arithmetic and, more importantly, the larger philosoph-
ical and aesthetic perspective. I especially hope that I have 
managed to get across the idea of viewing your mind as a 
playground—a place to create beautiful things for your own 
pleasure and amusement and to marvel at what you’ve made 
and at what you have yet to understand. If this book has given 
you an appreciation for mathematical beauty—on whatever 
level—then I will be happy indeed.


INDEX
Abacus, 27, 28, 36, 43, 47, 49, 50, 52, 
73, 84, 92, 151
Abbreviation, 12, 13
Accuracy, 133, 134
Acre, 2, 79
Adders, 193
Addition, 28, 34, 35, 38, 45, 52, 58, 
65, 117-118, 183-187
symmetry of, 184-187, 192
Aesthetics, 170, 188, 215
Alchemy, 102
Algebraists’ creed, 182
Algorithm, 107, 108, 110, 111, 113, 
118, 131, 133, 147
streamlining of, 107, 108, 114, 
126, 128
Alien octopodes, 49, 74
Alignment, 60, 65, 68, 70, 83, 107-
109, 115, 126, 150
Aliquot part, 154, 156
Alphabetical order, 24, 202
Ampersand (&), 161
Anti-anti-two, 191
Anti-two, 189, 191
Antisheep, 189-195
Antishift, 114-116, 132, 161
Antishoe, 175, 189, 192
Apples and oranges, 115, 164
Approximation, 116, 134, 160, 169, 
171, 180-181
Arabic numerals, 51, 61, 75, 155
Arabs, 51, 66, 67, 84
Archimedes, 149
Area, 89
Arithmetic, vii, 16, 20, 24, 91, 97, 104, 
117, 151, 197
Arithmetic system, 6, 48
Artisanal approach, 149
Assignment, 184-185
Associative, 185-186
Astronomical, 73, 116
Atom, 153
Austen, Jane, 79, 160
Axle, 140-143
Ba, 15
Babylonians, 21, 49, 77, 78
Baking, 158, 162, 171, 173, 212
Banana People, 15, 21-22, 24, 26, 40, 
47, 57, 86, 90, 94, 103, 111, 116
Banana system, 49, 113
Bananas, 16, 17, 21-24
Base-eight. See Octal
Base-four, 112
See also Quaternary
Base-seven. See Septimal
Base-sixty. See Sexagesimal
Base-ten, 81, 149, 161
See also Decimal
Base-two, 148
See also Binary
Bathroom floor, 89
Batting average, 160
Beat, 11, 158
Billion, 73
Billionth, 162
Binary, 114, 148
See also Base-two
Binary operation, 185
Blowing up, 166-168, 174, 176, 196
Books, 1, 207-209
Borrowing, 69
Box of rocks, 98
Brain, 144
Breakdown strategy, 100, 101, 105, 
107, 111
British monetary system, 21, 79, 160
Bushel, 28, 94
Busy box, 19
Café, 214
Calcium, 37 
Calculator, 19, 37, 50, 146, 148-150, 
151, 169

a r i t h m e t i c
218
Calculus stones, 37, 44-45, 49, 52
Capulet, Juliet, 6
Carry gear, 141-142
Carry pin, 141-145, 148, 204
Carrying, 64, 65, 106, 118, 128
Cash register, 147
Cashing in. See Exchange
Cats, 6, 37, 44, 49, 52
Cave paintings, 5
Centiliter, 81
Centimeter, 77
Centum, 32, 161
Chalk, 37
Cherries, 204, 205
Chinese abacus, 47
Chinese system, 41, 48, 50
Chocolate, 131, 182, 211, 212
Choose notation, 210
Chutes and Ladders, 9
Clap, 15
Class warfare, 136
Cleopatra, 33
Clockwise, 119, 142, 143
Coconut, 211, 212
Code, 6, 54
Coil of rope, 26, 29, 30
Collection, 5, 183, 211
Column. See Place
Combination, 202-204
Common denominator, 166, 168-
170, 178
Common sense, 115
Communication, vii, 7
Communist utopia, 120
Commutative, 185-186
Comparative arithmetic, 48
Comparison, vii, 1, 2, 11, 14, 23-24, 
29, 56, 90, 93, 113, 117-118, 197
Concubines, 45, 46
Consciousness, 6, 143, 144
Conservation of energy, 125
Consistency, 77, 79, 81, 84, 102, 115, 
213
Constellations, 78
Copies, 88, 119, 194
backward, 195
Copy machine, 167, 172-174, 176, 
194-196
Counter, 27, 88, 95, 137, 140, 198, 
204
multidigit, 141
Counterclockwise, 142, 143
Counting, 1,2,156, 166, 170, 183, 
197, 201, 202, 207-209
Counting coins, 27-28, 37, 95, 121, 
123, 157
Counting numbers, 164
Counting pattern, 199
Counting symbols, 43
Cows, 89, 99, 157, 163
Crank, 138, 141, 142, 146
Cratchit, Bob, 80
Creatures, 2, 8, 76, 143, 182
Cross out, 69
Crown, 79
Cup, 2, 152, 158, 173
Curta, 145
Debt, 190, 193
Decaliter, 81
Decameter, 77
Deciliter, 81
Decimal, 94, 113, 116, 127, 159, 165, 
178
See also Base-ten
Decimal currency, 81
Decimal place, 82, 83, 146
See also Place
Decimal point, 82, 83, 114, 132, 159
Decimeter, 77
Deck of cards, 129, 205
Degrees, 78
Denarius, 79
Denominator, 156-157, 161, 164, 
166-167, 176, 178
Density, 133
Desktop, 180, 181
Devangari, 50
Dice, 3, 9
Dickens, Charles, 160
Dictionary, 127
Digit, 52, 74, 103, 109, 115, 128, 140, 
142, 148, 149

i n d e x
219
Digit sequence, 73, 75, 105, 113, 114, 
165
Digit wheel, 140-142, 148
Dime, 81, 82, 102, 114, 157, 167
Dinosaurs, 139, 140
Display window, 138, 141, 148, 204
Division, 114, 119, 122, 131, 151, 159, 
171, 174-176, 184-186
asymmetry of, 184-186
Division symbol (÷), 169
Dog, the, 121, 152
Dollar, 81, 82, 102, 114, 157, 167
Dots, 198, 199, 209
Double line, 82
Doubling, 91, 95, 114, 172, 174, 194, 
195
Doughnuts, 211-213
Dozen, 12, 49, 88, 99, 157, 166, 212
Drop, 152
Earth, 78, 150
Ecclesiastes, Book of, 119
Eeny, meeny, miney, mo, 120, 121, 
122
Eggs, 12, 56, 88, 157, 166, 187
Egyptian system, 25, 26, 33, 48, 94
Egyptians, 25, 26, 41, 48, 91, 95, 102, 
121, 153-154
Electronic circuits, 147-149
Eleven, 98
Eleventh-note, 159
Ell, 77
Entertainment, 123, 163
Equals sign (=), 55
Estimation, 115-116, 120, 122, 126-
128, 131, 162
Et, 161
Even, 4, 25, 75
Evolution, 7, 139, 140
Exchange, 29, 35, 39, 40, 45, 54, 64, 
66-69, 71, 87, 106, 145
Exchange rate, 39, 65, 70
Extension problem, 188, 194
Factorial, 208, 211
Fathom, 77
Fibonacci. See Leonardo of Pisa
Fifteen, 57
Fingers, 7, 9, 12, 52, 67, 78
Finger pattern, 9, 39
Five-barred gate, 11-13, 15, 25, 33, 
75, 87
Flags, 205-208
Flipping, 195-196
See also Negation
Foot, 77, 181
Football players, 6
Fractions, 152, 157, 159, 161, 165, 
166, 170, 171, 180, 188
addition of, 169, 170, 178
comparison of, 156, 164, 166, 
170-171
division of, 170, 173, 178
multiplication of, 170, 173, 178
subtraction of, 169, 170, 178
Fragility, 37, 49
France, 205
Frankfort, Kentucky, 56
French revolution, 76
Furlong, 77
Gallon, 152, 174
Gambling, 205
Generic formula, 184
Goats, 31, 121, 122, 153
Gold, 153
Gram, 82, 83, 133, 134, 159
Grouping, 11, 13, 14, 20, 21, 79, 84, 
87, 157
Grouping size, 12-18, 48-49, 67, 77-
78, 85, 90, 93, 102, 111, 114, 127, 
165-167
Grouping symbols, 33, 36, 42, 43, 49, 
52, 73
Guinea, 79
Hamsters, 183-184, 187, 190, 192, 
193
Hand People, 15, 17-21, 33, 34, 86, 90
Handful, 2, 11, 12, 14, 15, 18, 34, 120
Hectometer, 77
Heel mark, 26, 29, 30
Hindu mathematicians, 50, 60

a r i t h m e t i c
220
Hindu-Arabic system, 8, 51-53, 57, 
62, 70, 73, 75-77, 103, 116, 122
Hogshead, 79
Hour, 77, 78
Housing, 138
Hundred, 26, 32, 42, 60, 69, 73, 99, 
114
Hundredth, 82, 159, 161, 162
Imaginary list, 202-204, 206-207, 211
Inch, 2, 12, 77
Increment, 64, 137, 141
Independence, 204, 207, 208
India, 50, 51
Infinite loop, 162
Information, vii, 3, 5-7, 11, 20, 22, 50, 
56, 70, 148, 176, 188
Information Age, 93
Intentional overcounting, 199, 209, 
211
Inverse, 117, 118, 175, 176, 186
Ishango bone, 10
Italy, 205
Japanese, 45, 48, 52, 151
Jelly beans, 5, 119, 120, 121, 125, 128, 
131, 152, 170, 171, 174
Jigsaw puzzles, 187
Junk drawer, 149
Khem, 102
Kilogram, 133
Kilometer, 77
Knitting, 30, 64, 72, 151
See also Symbol knitting
La, 22
Labels, 34
Laboratory, 135, 171
Ladybugs, 37
Language, 6, 7, 12
League, 79
LED (light-emitting diode), 148, 149
Leftovers, 11, 12, 18, 48, 85, 111, 120-
121, 122, 133
Lemons, 61, 104, 157, 163, 181, 183, 
204
Lentil, 153, 155
Leonardo da Vinci, 145
Leonardo of Pisa, 76
Lexicographic ordering, 24
Liber Abaci, 76
Libra, 79
License plates, 201-205
Life, 143
Liter, 81, 133, 134
Loom137, 151
Losing count, 3
Lotus symbol, 26, 30, 48
Lucky seven, 204, 205
Lumpy, 2, 152, 153
Machine, 136, 137, 139, 144, 149
Maple syrup, 174, 177
Marbles, 1, 5, 13
Marked value, 41, 51, 52, 85, 87, 88, 
95, 103
Marked-value system, 22, 25, 29, 32, 
33, 35, 91, 97, 102, 111
Mathematical Reality, 163, 182, 187
Mathematics, 7, 97, 99, 119, 150, 163, 
178, 181, 182, 187, 188
Meaning, 177
Measurement, 2, 89, 116, 166, 171, 
180, 181
Measuring cup, 171
Memorization, 52, 55-57, 92, 93, 112, 
113, 136
Memory, 9
Mental arithmetic, 28
Mental column, 72
Mental gymnastics, 50, 87, 92
Meter, 77, 85, 159
Metric system, 76, 82, 84, 86, 159, 
161, 171
Midpoint operation, 186
Mile, 77
Milk, 2, 152, 153, 155, 158
Milky Way, 1
Mille, 32
Milligram, 83, 84, 133
Milliliter, 135
Millimeter, 77, 162
Million, 49, 71, 73

i n d e x
221
Minus sign (–), 55, 191
Minute, 77, 78
Mixed-base system, 21, 79
Model, 180, 181
Modern viewpoint, 117, 118, 132, 
182, 186, 192, 194
Money, 1, 6, 22
Muffins, 49, 71, 73
Multicultural, 17
Multiplication, 88, 89, 103-111, 118, 
174-176, 195, 203
symmetry of, 89, 98, 118, 131, 
156, 174, 185, 186
Multiplication tables. See Times tables
Mutation, 139
Na, 15
Nanometer, 162
Needle, 63-65, 69, 109, 110, 114, 118
Negation, 194-195
Negation operator, 191, 192
symmetry of, 191
Negative numbers, 189-190, 194-196
division of, 194, 196
multiplication of, 194
Negative sign (–), 191, 196
Neuron, 144
Nevada, 204
Nine, 25, 98
North Dakota, 189
Nose, 163, 187, 188
Nothing, 61, 106, 174, 183, 187, 188, 
192, 209
Number, 7, 8, 75, 93, 99, 117, 150, 
174, 177, 181, 182
Number language, 9, 15, 18, 22, 48, 
50, 61
Number permanence, 5
Number sense, 2
Number system, 77, 84
Number words, 85
Numerator, 156, 157, 164, 166, 167-
170, 176, 178
Octal, 49, 74, 93, 157
Octillion, 73
Odd, 4, 8, 25, 201
Odds, 205
Odometer, 137, 143, 145, 204
Old Banana, 112
Old World, 79, 150, 151
ON/OFF, 148-149
One, 163, 182, 183
Oneness, 163
Ontological, 67
Operation, 117, 177, 183, 184, 187, 
188, 192
Ounce, 79, 153
Overflow, 63
Packed, 23, 38, 45, 58, 91
Part, 153
Pattern, 182, 183, 188, 193, 194, 197, 
198, 200, 201, 209
Pattern recognition, 3
Pence, 21, 79, 84, 102
Pencil-and-paper, 52, 87, 92, 113, 131, 
147, 149, 151
Pennies, 81, 102, 114, 132, 167
Percent, 161
Percent sign (%), 161
Perception, 3, 11, 14, 16, 25, 32, 47
Perception problem, 10, 14, 20, 25, 
33, 41, 48, 49, 73, 164
Perspective, 17, 50, 75, 136, 150, 163, 
215
Pharoah, 28, 94, 122
Physical reality, 163, 181
Pickles, 106
Piles of Rocks, 18-20, 27, 50, 92, 151, 
157, 187
Pint, 81, 152
Pips, 3, 8
Place, 51, 73, 104, 115
ones, 46, 51, 59, 64, 83
hundreds, 51, 59, 70, 71
tens, 51, 59, 62, 64, 71, 73
thousands, 59, 65, 71, 72
Place name, 73, 74
Place shifting, 103, 107, 114, 116, 132, 
133, 145, 146, 159
See also Shift
Place value, 36, 37, 41, 51, 87-88, 114, 
136, 144

a r i t h m e t i c
222
Place-value system, 52, 62, 73, 84, 86, 
97, 102, 111, 162
Placeholder, 61
Plato, 181
Plus sign (+), 55, 191
Portability, 6, 44, 49, 52, 103, 149, 181
Positive, 190, 196
Pound, 21, 79
Prime, 8
Printers, 150, 191, 208
Prison, 10, 99
Probability, 205
Product, 90, 98, 105, 109, 118, 146, 
174, 208
of sums, 101
Proportion, 171
Pulleys, 125
Quadruple, 92
Quart, 152
Quarter, 152, 157
Quaternary, 112, 113
See also Base-four
Quincunx, 9
Ratchet, 138-140
Ratio, 171, 196, 205
Rational number field, 196
Really, 85
Reciprocal, 174-177
of a negative number, 196
symmetry of, 176
Rectangle, 105-107, 111, 180, 181
of rocks, 88, 98, 100, 101, 108, 
118, 177, 200
Reference point, 17, 18
Reflection, 195
Reification, 190, 193, 194
Remainder, 121, 133, 152, 153
Renaming, 166-168
Repetition, 13-14, 32, 41, 48, 49, 87, 
97, 111
Representation, 5-8, 18-19, 48, 75, 
93, 107, 117-118, 148, 151, 170
Reset, 139, 141
Reverse, 195
Rock of Gibraltar, 44
Rocks, 4, 7, 67, 88, 90, 96, 106, 121, 
123, 187, 200
piles of, 8, 54, 87, 117, 183
Roman alphabet, 32, 61
Roman numerals, 33-34, 87
subtractive notation for, 33
Roman system, 32, 33, 35, 41, 50, 52, 
76, 87, 102, 103
Romans, 32, 36, 41, 48, 51, 71, 76, 79
Rote, 136, 137, 145
Ruler, 171
Sawyer, Tom, 13
Scale model, 180
Scaling, 166, 168, 171-173, 178, 195
Scaling factor, 168, 172
School, 45, 75, 108, 177
Score, 12
Scribe, 28, 37, 39, 97-99, 154, 161
Scroll, 138-140, 154
Scrooge, Ebenezer, 80
Second, 77, 78
Septimal, 85
Septimal point, 85
Seven-segment display, 148
Sexagesimal, 49
Sharing, 119
Sheep, 6, 12, 13, 189, 191-193
Shift, 103-105, 109, 111-113, 123, 
132, 134
See also Place shifting
Shilling, 21, 79, 84, 102
Shrinking down, 167, 174-176, 196
Significant digit, 104
Significant figures, 135
Silver, 79
Silversmith, 94
Silverware, 1
Simplicity, 49
Single-digit numbers, 104, 105, 123, 
124, 126, 128
multiples of, 126
products of, 107, 112, 113, 123
sums of, 58, 112
Sixness, 3, 16, 75
Slash (/), 155
Slot machine, 204-206, 209

i n d e x
223
Smooth, 2, 152, 153
Smythington-Jones, Lady, 80-81
Solar system, 78
Solidus, 79
Soroban, 43-47, 49, 53
Spinning wheel, 151
Sprinkles, 211
Square numbers, 8
Stacking, 25, 32, 33, 39, 48, 49, 50, 87
Stone, 81
Stone patterns, 39
Subatomic particles, 153
Subdivided units, 81, 84, 114, 132, 
153, 155, 166
Subgrouping, 39, 41, 48, 49, 50, 71, 87
Subgrouping symbols, 32-34, 36, 41
Subrectangle, 105, 106
Subtraction, 55, 67, 68, 117-118, 
183-188
asymmetry of, 185-187
Sugarplum fairies, 54
Symbols, 7
Symbol knitting, vii, 70
Symmetry, 119, 193-195, 197-198, 
202, 213
Tablespoon, 152
Tabula, 36-40, 44, 49, 87, 96, 102
Tally marks, 10, 12, 13, 96, 97
Technology, 139, 149
Ten, 25, 49, 73, 75, 76, 84-85, 90, 103, 
111, 112, 161
Tenth, 82, 159, 162
Test tube, 135, 159
Thermometer, 189, 190, 193
Thing-ness, 157
Thinking, 99, 137, 144, 150, 197
Thirtree, 85
Thousand, 26, 42, 58, 63, 73
Thousandth, 83, 159, 160, 162
Three-ness, 2, 8
Thump, 15
Time, 1, 5, 77, 84
Time sense, 3
Times tables, 92, 109, 112-114, 127
Ton, 35
Transistor, 144, 147
Translation, 16, 18, 90, 127
Transmutation, 52, 54, 103, 177
Tree, 16, 85
Tree People, 16, 19, 21, 22, 84, 85, 94
Triangle182, 200
Tribal systems, 48, 86, 87
Trillion, 73
Triode, 147
Triple product, 98
Turkmenistan, 93
Twelve, 17, 78
Two-thirds-ness, 182
Twotree, 85
Unaddition, 118, 119, 186, 196
Units, 2, 77, 79, 82, 152, 158, 171, 
179, 180
imperial, 158, 178
metric, 77, 86
United States, 159, 178
Universal property, 184, 185
Unmultiplication, 175, 176, 196
Unpacked, 23, 58, 59, 68
Unseven, 175
Vacuum tube, 147
Verb, 118
Vingt, 12
Volume, 98, 135
Waltz, 12
Williams, Ted, 160
Wit, 113, 164, 214
Wolves, 13, 31
Yard, 77
Yard sale, 96
You, 2, 6, 19, 45, 50, 66, 94, 121, 135
Zero, 61-62, 84, 111, 176-177, 183, 
196
Zwolf, 12










