                                                
     Boris and Arkady Strugatsky. The snail on the slope
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------
 © Copyright Arcady And Boris Strugatsky
 © Copyright Introduction by Theodore Sturgeon.
 © Copyright Translated from the Russian by Alan Meyers, 1980
 © Copyright Bantam Books, Inc.
 Origin: "Ulitka na sklone"
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------
     Chapter One
     From this height, the  forest was like  foam,  luxuriant and blotchy, a
gigantic  world--encompassing  porous  sponge,  like an  animal  waiting  in
concealment,  now fallen asleep and  overgrown with  rough moss. A  formless
mask hiding a face, as yet revealed to none.
     Pepper shook off his sandals and sat down with  his bare legs  dangling
over the precipice. It seemed to  him that his heels at once became damp, as
if he had actually immersed them in the warm lilac fog that lay banked up in
the shadows under the cliff. He fished out the pebbles he had collected from
his pocket  and  laid  them out  neatly  beside  him.  He then selected  the
smallest  and gently tossed it down into  the living and silent, slumbering,
all-enveloping  indifference, and  the  white  spark  was  extinguished, and
nothing happened--no branch trembled, no eye half-opened to glance up.
     If he were  to throw a pebble every one and a half minutes, and if what
the one-legged cook, nicknamed Pansy, said  was true and what Madame Bardot,
head  of  the Assistance  to  the Local Population Group,  reckoned, if what
driver  Acey whispered to the  unknown  man from the Engineering Penetration
Group was untrue, and if human  intuition was worth anything at all, and  if
wishes  came true once in a lifetime, then at the seventh stone,  the bushes
behind him would part with a crash, and the director would step out onto the
soft crushed grass of the dew-gray  clearing.  He would be stripped  to  the
waist in his gray garbardines with the lilac braid, breathing heavily, sleek
and  glossy,  yellow-pink and shaggy, looking nowhere in particular, neither
at the forest beneath him nor at the sky above him, bending down to bury his
arms in  the grass, then unbending to raise a breeze with  his  broad palms,
each time the mighty fold on his belly  bulging out over his trousers, while
air, saturated with carbon dioxide and nicotine, would burst out of his open
mouth with a whistling gurgle.
     The bushes behind parted with a crash. Pepper looked around cautiously,
but  it  wasn't  the  director,  it  was someone he knew,  Claudius-Octavian
Haus-botcher from  the Eradication  Group. He  approached without  haste and
halted two paces away, looking Pepper up and  down  with  his piercing  dark
eyes. He  knew something  or suspected something, something  very important,
and this knowledge or suspicion had frozen his long face,  the stony face of
a man who had  brought here  to  the precipice a strange,  alarming piece of
news. No one  in the whole world knew what this news was, but it was already
clear that everything had  altered decisively; what had gone  before was  no
longer  significant  and  now,  at  last,  everyone  would  be  required  to
contribute all he was capable of.
     "And whose might these shoes be?" said he, glancing about him.
     "They're   not   shoes,   they're  sandals,"  said   Pepper.  "Indeed?"
Hausbotcher sneered and withdrew  a large notepad from his pocket. "Sandals?
Ver-ry good. But whose sandals are they?"
     He  edged  toward the  brink, peeped  cautiously down  and stepped back
smartly.
     "Man  sits  by  the  precipice," he  said,  "next to  him, sandals. The
question inevitably raises itself: whose sandals are they and where is their

owner?"  "They're  my sandals,"  said  Pepper.  "Yours?" Hausbotcher  looked
doubtfully at the large notepad. "You're sitting barefooted, then? Why?"
     "Barefoot because  I've  no  choice," explained  Pepper.  "Yesterday  I
dropped my right shoe and decided from now on, I'll always sit barefoot." He
bent down and looked  between his splayed knees. "There she lies. I can just
drop this pebble in. . "
     Hausbotcher adroitly seized him by the arm and appropriated the pebble.
     "It  is indeed just a  pebble,"  he  said.  "That,  however,  makes  no
difference as yet. Pepper, it's incomprehensible why you're lying to me. You
can't possibly see the shoe from here--even if it's there, and whether it is
or not is another question, which will  be gone into later--and if you can't
see the shoe,  ergo you can't hit it with a stone, even if you possessed the
necessary accuracy  and actually did wish to do that  and only that. I  mean
hitting. . .  .  But  we'll sort all that out presently." He hitched up  his
trousers and squatted down on his haunches.
     "So you were here yesterday as  well," he said. "Why? For  what  reason
have you come a  second time to the precipice,  where  the other Directorate
personnel, not to  mention temporary  staff,  only come to obey the call  of
nature?"
     Pepper slumped. This  is just plain ignorance, he thought. No, no, it's
not  a challenge, nor  is it spite,  no need to take it seriously. It's just
ignorance. No need to take ignorance seriously. Ignorance excretes itself on
the forest. Ignorance always excretes itself over something.
     "You like sitting here, seemingly," Hausbotcher went  on insinuatingly.
"You  like the forest a lot, seemingly. You love it, don't  you? Answer me!"
"Don't you?" asked Pepper.
     "Don't  you  forget  yourself," he said aggrieved and  nipped open  his
notepad. "As  you very  well know,  I belong to  the  Eradication Group  and
therefore  your question, or  rather your counterquestion is entirely devoid
of meaning. You  understand perfectly well that my attitude to the forest is
defined by  my  professional  duty; what defines your attitude  to it is not
clear to me. That's  bad, Pepper, you need to think about that. I'm advising
you for your own  good, not for mine. You mustn't be so unintelligible. Sits
on the edge of the cliff  in bare feet, throwing pebbles.  .  .  . Why,  one
asks?  In  your place I'd tell  me everything straight  out.  Get everything
sorted out.  Who  knows, there could be extenuating circumstances. Nothing's
threatening you anyway. Is it, Pepper?"
     "No,"  said  Pepper,  "that  is,  of  course,  yes."  "There  you  are.
Simplicity  disappears  at  once and never comes back.  Whose hand? we  ask.
Whither the cast? Or, perhaps, to whom? Or, as it may be,  at whom? And why?
And how is it you can sit on the edge of the cliff? Is it inborn or have you
done special training? I,  for example, am unable to sit  on the edge of the
cliff, and I can't bear to  think why I  might train for such a thing. I get
dizzy at the thought. That's only natural. Nobody needs to sit on the  cliff
edge. Especially if he doesn't have a  permit to enter  the forest. Show  me
your permit,  if you please, Pepper." "I haven't got one." "So. Not got. Why
is that?"
     "I don't know. . . . They won't give me one, that's all."
     "That's right, not given out. This we know. And why don't they give you
one? I've got one,  he's got one, they've got  one,  plenty  of people  have
them, but for some reason you don't get one."
     Pepper stole  a cautious  glance at him.  Hausbotcher's long  emaciated
nose was sniffing, his eyes constantly blinking.
     "Probably  it's  because I'm an outsider,"  suggested Pepper. "Probably
that's why."
     "I'm not the only one taking an interest in you, you know," Hausbotcher
confided. "If it were only me! People  a bit higher up than me are taking an
interest. Listen, Pepper, could you come away from the edge, so we can carry
on. I get dizzy looking at you."
     Pepper  got up and  began leaping about  on one  leg as he fastened his

sandal.
     "Oh dear, please come away from the edge!"  cried Hausbotcher in agony,
waving his notepad at Pepper.
     "You'll be the death of me someday with your antics."
     "That's it," said Pepper,  stamping  his foot. "I  shan't do  it again.
Let's go, shall we?"
     "Let's  go,"  said Hausbotcher. "I  assert, however,  that you  haven't
answered a single  one of my questions. You pain me, Pepper. Is this any way
to go on?"  He looked at  the bulky notepad and placed  it under  his armpit
with  a  shrug.  "It's  very  odd,  definitely  no  impressions,  let  alone
information."
     "All right, what should I answer?" said Pepper. "I just wanted to  have
a talk with the director here."
     Hausbotcher froze, as if  trapped in the bushes. "So that's  how you go
about it." His voice was altered.
     "Go about what? There's no going about. . . ."
     "No, no," whispered Hausbotcher,  gazing  about him, "just keep silent.
No need for any words. I realize now. You were right."
     "What've you realized? What was I right in?"
     "No,  no, I haven't understood anything. I haven't  understood, period.
You may rest absolutely  assured. Haven't understood a thing. I  wasn't even
here, I didn't see you."
     They passed by the little bench,  climbed the  crumbling  steps, turned
into  an  alley  strewn with  red  sand,  and  entered the  grounds  of  the
Directorate.
     "Total clarity can  exist only on  a  certain  level," Hausbotcher  was
saying.  "And  everybody  should  know what he  can  lay claim to. I claimed
certainty  on  my level, that was my  right and I exercised it  fully. Where
rights end, obligations begin. . . ."
     They passed the ten flat cottages with tulle  curtains at  the windows,
passed the garage, cut across the  sports ground, and went by  dumps and the
hostel,  in  whose  doorway  stood  a  deathly-pale  warden with  motionless
pop-eyes, and  by the long fencing beyond which could be  heard the snarling
of engines. They kept  quickening their  pace  and as there was little  time
left, they began to run. But  all the same, they burst  into the canteen too
late, all the  seats were taken. Only at  the  duty table  in the far corner
were there two places,  the third being  occupied by driver Acey, and driver
Acey,  observing  them shuffling in indecision on the  threshold,  waved his
fork at them, inviting them over.
     Everybody  was drinking yogurt and Pepper took  the same,  so that they
had six bottles on the crusted tablecloth, and when Pepper  moved his legs a
bit under the table, making himself more comfortable  on the backless chair,
there was a clink of glass and an empty brandy bottle rolled out between the
little tables.  Driver Acey swiftly grabbed it and thrust it back  under the
table; more glass clinked.
     "Careful with your feet," he said.
     "I couldn't help it," said Pepper. "I didn't know."
     "Did I know?" responded Acey. "There's four of them under there.  Prove
your innocence later if you can."
     "Well  I, for instance,  don't drink  at  all,"  said Haus-botcher with
dignity.
     "We  know how you  don't  drink," said  Acey.  "That's how we all don't
drink."
     "But  I  have  liver trouble!"  Hausbotcher  was growing uneasy. "Look,
here's  the certificate." He pulled a  crumpled exercise-book  page out from
somewhere; it had a triangular stamp. He shoved  it under  Pepper's nose. It
was indeed a certificate written in an  illegible medical hand. Pepper could
only make out one word "antabus." "I've got last  year's and the year before
that as well, only they're in the safe."
     Driver  Acey  didn't look at  the  paper. He  drained  a  full glass of

yogurt, sniffed the joint of his index finger, and asked in a tearful voice:
     "Well, what else is there in the forest? Trees." He wiped his eyes with
his sleeve. "But they don't stand still: jump. Got it?"
     "Well?" asked Pepper eagerly, "what was that-- jump?"
     "Like this. It stands still. A tree, right? Then it starts hunching and
bending, then whoosh! There's a noise,  crashing, I don't know what all. Ten
yards. Smashed my cab. There it is standing again." "Why?" asked Pepper.
     " 'Cos it's called a jumping tree," explained Acey pouring himself more
yogurt.
     "Yesterday, a consignment  of new  electric  saws  arrived,"  announced
Hausbotcher, licking his lips.  "Phenomenal productivity.  I would go so far
as to say that they weren't  electrosaws but  saw-combines. Our saw-combines
of eradication."
     All  around  they were  drinking  yogurt out of cut glasses, tin  mugs,
little  coffee  cups, paper cones,  straight out of the  bottle. Everybody's
legs were stuck , under their chairs.  And everyone  probably could show his
certificate of liver, stomach, small  intestine trouble.  For this  year and
for the last several.
     "Then the manager calls me  in," Acey went on, raising  his voice, "and
he asks why my cab's stove in. 'Again,' he says, 'sod, giving people lifts?'
Now you, Mr. Pepper, play chess with him, you might put in a little word for
me.  He  respects you, he  often talks of you,  'Pepper,'  he says, 'he's  a
character! I won't  give a vehicle for Pepper  and don't ask. We can't let a
man like  that go. Understand, all you zombies, we couldn't carry on without
him!' Put in a word, eh?"
     "All right," Pepper brought out in a low voice, "I'll try."
     "I can  speak with the manager," said Hausbotcher. "We served together.
I was a captain and he was my lieutenant. He greets me to this day, bringing
his hand to his headgear."
     "Then there's the mermaids," said Acey, weighing his  glass of  yogurt.
"In big clear lakes. They lie there, get it? Nothing on."
     "Your yogurt's putting ideas into your head," said Hausbotcher.
     "I haven't  seen them myself," rejoined Acey. "But the water from those
lakes isn't fit to drink."
     "You  haven't seen them because they  don't exist,"  said  Hausbotcher.
"Mermaids, that's mysticism."
     "You're another mysticism," said Acey, wiping his eye with a sleeve.
     "Wait a bit," said Pepper, "wait a bit. Acey, you say they're lying ...
is that all? They can't just lie and that's all."
     "Maybe they live underwater and float up onto the surface, just like we
go out onto the balcony to  escape from smoke-filled rooms on moonlit nights
and, eyes closed,  bare our face  to the chill, then they can just lie. Just
lie and that's all. Rest. And talk lazily and smile at each other. . . ."
     "Don't argue with  me," said Acey, looking obstinately at  Hausbotcher.
"Have  you ever been in  the forest? Never been in there once, have  you, to
hell."
     "Silly if I did,"  said  Hausbotcher.  "What would I  be doing there in
your forest? I've got a permit into your forest.  And you, Acey, haven't got
one at all. Show me, if you please, your permit, Acey."
     "I  didn't see the mermaids myself," repeated Acey,  turning to Pepper,
"but I  entirely believe in them.  Because the boys  have told  me.  So  did
Kandid  even, and he was the one who  knew  everything about the forest.  He
used  to go  into that forest  like a man  to his  woman, put  his finger on
anything. He perished there in his forest."
     "If he did," said Hausbotcher significantly.
     "What do you mean 'if'? Man flies off in his helicopter, three years no
sight or  sound. His obituary was in the paper, we  held the wake, what more
d'you want? Kandid crashed, that's for sure."
     "We  don't  know enough,"  said Hausbotcher,  "to  assert anything with
complete certainty."

     Acey spat and went to the counter to order another bottle of yogurt. At
this,  Hausbotcher  leaned  over and  whispered  in Pepper's  ear, his  eyes
darting:
     "Bear in mind that touching Kandid  there was a sealed directive. ... I
consider it  right  for  me  to inform  you, because you are a  person  from
outside."
     "What directive?"
     "To regard him as  alive," said Hausbotcher in  a  hollow  whisper  and
moved away. "Nice, fresh yogurt today," he announced loudly.
     Noise increased  in the canteen. Those who had already breakfasted were
getting up, scraping  chairs,  and  making  for  the exit, lighting  up  and
throwing  match-sticks on the floor. Hausbotcher  surveyed them malevolently
and said to  everyone as they passed: "Strange behavior,  gentlemen, you can
surely see we're having a discussion."
     When Acey returned with his bottle, Pepper spoke to him.
     "The  manager didn't really say he wouldn't provide  me with a vehicle,
did he? He was just joking, wasn't that it?"
     "Why should he? He likes you, Mister Pepper, bored without you and it's
just not worth his  while to let you go. ... Well  if he lets you, what's in
it for him? No joking."
     Pepper bit his lip.
     "How the devil can I get away? There's nothing  more for me to do here.
My visa's running out, and anyway I just want to get away."
     "Anyhow,"  said Acey,  "if you get three  reprimands, they'll sling you
out in two shakes. You'll get a special bus, they'll get  a driver up in the
middle of the night, you won't get time to collect your bits of things.  . .
.  Here  the boys  work  it this way.  First warning,  a reduction in  rank;
second, you're sent  to the  forest to expiate your  sins.  Third reprimand,
thank you and good  night. If I wanted the sack, for example, I'd drink half
a jar and sock this guy in the jaw," he indicated Hausbotcher.  "They'd take
away my  privileges and transfer me  to the crap-wagon. Then  what do I  do?
Drink  another half-jar and give him another one--got it? They'd take me off
the crap-wagon and send me out to the biostation to catch some old microbes.
But I don't go. I drink another half-jar and give it to him across the chops
for the  third time. Well  that's the end of it. Sacked for hooligan conduct
and deported in twenty-four hours."
     Hausbotcher waved a threatening finger at Acey.
     "Misinformation,  misinformation, Ace. In the  first  place, at least a
month must elapse between the actions, otherwise all  the misdemeanors  will
be  regarded as one and the transgressor  will simply be put in jail without
any further  steps being taken  within the Directorate. Secondly,  following
the  second misdemeanor, they send the  convicted man to the forest  at once
under guard, so that he will be  deprived of any opportunity to  carry out a
third offense at his own discretion. Don't pay any attention to him, Pepper,
he knows nothing about these matters."
     Acey took a mouthful of yogurt, frowned, and wheezed out a confession.
     "True, enough. I really . . . well. I'm sorry, Mister Pepper."
     "Doesn't matter, what the. . . ." said Pepper sadly. "I still can't hit
a man in the face whichever way you put it."
     "It doesn't have to be the .  . . jaw," said Acey. "You can make it the
... the behind. Or just rip  his suit."  "No, I can't  do it,"  said Pepper.
"Too bad, then," said Acey. "That's your trouble, Mister Pepper. Here's what
we'll  do. Tomorrow  morning around sevenish, come around to the garage, get
in my truck, and wait. I'll take you."  "You  will?"  Pepper was  overjoyed.
"Well I've  got  to  take a  load of scrap  metal to the mainland.  We'll go
together."
     Somebody  suddenly gave a terrible  shout in the  corner.  "What do you
think you're doing? You've spilled my soup!"
     "A man  ought to be simple and straightforward,"  said  Hausbotcher. "I
don't understand, Pepper, why you want to get  away  from here. Nobody wants

to leave,just you."
     "I'm always like that," said Pepper. "I always do the opposite. Anyway,
why should a man always be simple and straightforward?"
     "A man ought to be teetotal," announced Acey, sniffing the joint of his
index finger, "what d'you think, eh?"
     "I don't drink," said Hausbotcher. "And I don't drink for a very simple
reason, one that anyone can understand. I have a liver complaint.  You can't
catch me out, Ace."
     "What gets  me about the  forest,"  said  Acey, "is the swamps. They're
hot, get  me?  It turns me around. I just can't get used to  it. You plop in
somewhere  . .  . then you're  off the brushwood road. There I am in my cab,
can't climb out. Just like hot cabbage soup. There's steam coming off it and
it smells  of cabbage soup--I tried  a mouthful  once, but it's no good, not
enough salt or something . . . no,  the forest is  no place  for a man. What
more do they want to know about it? They drive their machines on and on into
it,  like a hole in the ice--and they still write if off, and down  they go,
and they still. ..
     "Green  odorous  abundance.  Abundance of  colors, abundance of smells.
Abundance  of  life. And all of  it alien. Somehow  familiar,  a resemblance
somewhere, but  profoundly alien. The hardest part was to accept it as alien
and familiar at one and the same time, derived from our world, flesh  of our
flesh--but broken away, not  wishing to know us. An  apeman  might think the
same way about us, his descendants, grieving and fearful . . ."
     "When the order comes out," proclaimed Hausbotcher, "we shall move some
real stuff in there, not your lousy bulldozers and landrovers--in two months
will turn it all into ... er ... a concrete platform, dry and level."
     "You will turn it," said Acey. "If you don't cop one in the jaw, you'll
turn your own father into a concrete platform. For straighforwardness sake."
     The  siren  started up thickly.  The glass  in the  windows rattled and
above the door a  massive  bell hammered out, lamps flickered on the  walls,
while above the counter a large sign lit up: "Get up and leave!" Hausbotcher
rose hastily, adjusted his watch and without a word went off at a run.
     "Well, I'm off," said Pepper. "Work to be done."
     "Time to go," agreed Acey. "Time's up."
     He  divested himself  of  his quilted jacket,  rolled it up neatly, and
moved the chairs so as to lie down, using the jacket as a pillow.
     "Tomorrow at seven, then?" said Pepper.
     "What?" asked Acey in a drowsy voice.
     "I'll be here tomorrow at seven."
     "What d'you  say?"  Acey asked,  tossing about on the chairs. "Place is
going  to the  dogs, bastards," he mumbled. "How many times have I told them
to get a sofa in here. . . ."
     "To the garage," said Pepper. "Your truck."
     "Ah-h. . . . Well, to do that thing, we'll see. It's not that easy."
     He tucked up his legs, stuck  his palms under his armpits, and  started
snuffling. His  arms  were heavy  and  a tattoo could be glimpsed  under the
hair. "What destroys us" was written there, also, "Ever onward." Pepper made
for the exit.
     He  crossed an enormous puddle in  the backyard  on a board,  skirted a
mound of empty jam-jars, crept through a hole in the fence,  and entered the
Directorate building via the service  entrance. It was cold and dark in  the
corridors, which reeked  of  tobacco, dust, and  old papers. There wasn't  a
soul anyway, no  sound could  be heard from  behind  the leatherette  doors.
Pepper went up to the second  floor  by way of a  narrow staircase without a
handrail, clinging to the dilapidated wall. He went up to a door above which
a  sign flickered on and off. "Wash  your hands  before work." A large black
letter M showed up on the door.  Pepper thrust at the door and experienced a
slight  shock  on discovering it was his own office. That is, of course,  it
wasn't his office; it was Kirn's, chief of  Science Security, but Pepper had
put  a table  in there and now it stood sideways near  the door by the tiled

wall;  half the table was,  as usual, taken up  with  a mothballed Mercedes.
Kirn's  table  stood  by  the large, well-cleaned window;  he was already at
work, sitting hunched-up and consulting a slide rule.
     "I wanted to wash my hands," said Pepper, at a loss.
     "Wash away, wash away," Kim nodded. "There's the washbasin.  It's going
to be very convenient. Now everybody will be coming to see us."
     Pepper went over  to  the basin and  began washing his hands. He washed
them  in hot and cold water, two kinds of soap, and special grease-absorbent
paste,  rubbed  them with a  bast whisp and  brushes of varying  degrees  of
stiffness. After  that he switched  the  electric dryer on and for some time
held his moist pink hands in the howling stream of warm air.
     "They announced at four that  they  were transferring us  to the second
floor," said Kim. "Whereabouts were you? With Alevtina?"
     "No,  I was  at the cliff-edge,"  said Pepper,  seating  himself at his
table.
     The door opened wide and Proconsul entered  the room with a rush, waved
his  briefcase in greeting, and disappeared behind the curtain. The door  of
his study  creaked  and the bolt  shot home. Pepper took  the sheet off  the
Mercedes,  sat without moving, then  went over  to the  window  and flung it
open.
     The forest wasn't visible from here,  but it  was there. It  always was
there, though  it could  only  be seen from  the cliff. Anywhere else in the
Directorate something was in the way.  In the  way were the cream structures
of the mechanical workshops and the four-story garage for staff cars. In the
way were the cattle-yards of the farm area and the washing hung out near the
laundry with its spin dryer  permanently out  of commission. In  the way was
the   park  with   its   flowerbeds   and  pavilions,   its  big-wheel   and
plaster-of-paris bathers,  covered with penciled grafitti. In the  way stood
cottages with  ivy-draped verandahs adorned with  the crosses of  television
antennae. From here, however, the first-floor window,  the forest was hidden
by a  high brick wall,  incomplete as yet,  but very high, which rose around
the flat-roofed one-story Engineering Penetration building. The forest could
only be seen from the cliff-edge.
     However, even a man  who had never seen the forest, heard nothing about
it, never thought about it, wasn't afraid of it, and  never  yearned for it,
even such a  man could easily have guessed at its existence if  only because
of the  simple  existence of the Directorate. I, for example,  have  thought
about  the  forest, argued  about it,  dreamed  about  it, but  I never even
suspected its actual existence. I became convinced of its existence not when
I first went out onto the cliff-edge, but when I first read the  notice near
the entrance:  "Forest  Directorate." I  stood  before  this  notice with  a
suitcase in  my  hand, dusty and dehydrated after the long  journey, reading
and  re-reading it,  and  felt weak at  the knees, for now I knew  that  the
forest existed and that meant that everything that I had thought about it up
till now was the toyings of a  feeble imagination, pale impotent falsehoods.
The forest  exists and this  vast, somewhat grim  building is concerned with
its fate.
     "Kim,"  said  Pepper,  "surely  I'll  get into the  forest. I'm leaving
tomorrow, after all."
     "You really want to  go there?" asked Kim  absently. "Hot green swamps,
irritable and timorous  trees, mermaids, resting on the water under the moon
from  their mysterious activity in  the depths, wary  enigmatic  aborigines,
empty villages . . ." "I don't know," said Pepper.
     "It's not for you, Peppy," said Kim. "It's only for people who've never
thought about the forest, who've never given a  curse  about it. You take it
too much to heart. The forest, for you, is dangerous, it will trap you."
     "Very likely," said Pepper, "but after all I came here just to see it."
     "What  do  you want  the bitter  truth for?" asked Kim. "What'll you do
when you've got it? What'll you do  in the forest, anyway?  Cry over a dream
that's become your  destiny? Pray  for it to  be  different?  Or, who knows,

maybe start to re-work what there is and must be?"
     "So why did I come here?"
     "To convince yourself. Surely  you realize how  important it  is--to be
convinced. Other people  come for  different  reasons. Maybe to see miles of
firewood, or find the bacteria of life, or write a thesis. Or get  a permit,
not to go into the forest  but just in  case: come in handy sometime and not
everybody's  got one.  The  limit of their little intentions is  to  make  a
luxury park  out of the  forest, like a  sculptor producing  a statue from a
block of marble. So they can keep it trim. Year in, year  out. Not let it be
a forest again."
     "It's time I got away from here," said Pepper. "There's nothing  for me
to do here. Somebody's got to go, either me or all of you."
     "Let's  multiply," said  Kim  and  Pepper  seated himself at his table,
found the wall-plug by feel, and plugged in the Mercedes.
     "Seven  hundred and  ninety three, five hundred  and  twenty-two by two
hundred and sixty-six, zero eleven."
     The machine began  to chatter and leap. Pepper waited for it to settle,
then hesitantly read out the answer.
     "All right. Clear it,"  said Kim. "Now, six  hundred and  ninety-eight,
three hundred and twelve, divide for me by twelve fifteen. . . ."
     Kim  dictated  the  figures,   Pepper  picked  them  out,  pressed  the
multiplier  and divider  keys, added,  subtracted, derived roots, everything
proceeded as normal.
     "Twelve by ten," said Kim. "Multiply."
     "One oh oh  seven," dictated  Pepper  automatically, then  woke  up and
said: "Wait, it's lying. It should be a hundred and twenty."
     "I know,  I  know," said  Kim,  impatient.  "One  zero zero  seven," he
repeated. "Now get me the root of ten zero seven. . . ."
     "Just a minute," said Pepper.
     The bolt clicked again behind the curtain and Proconsul appeared, pink,
fresh, and  satisfied. He  began to wash his hands,  humming the while  "Ave
Maria" in a pleasant voice. After this he announced:
     "What a marvel it is  after all, this forest,  gentlemen! It's criminal
how  little  we talk  and  write  about  it!  And  it  is  indeed  worthy of
description. It ennobles, it  arouses the highest  feelings.  It facilitates
progress.  We, however, are totally unable to stem the spread of unqualified
rumors, stories, and jokes. There is  no real forest propaganda  being done.
People talk and think about the forest hell knows. . . ."
     "Seven   hundred  and  eighty-five  multiplied  by   four  hundred  and
thirty-two," said Kim.
     Proconsul raised his voice.  His voice was powerful and well modulated.
The Mercedes became inaudible.
     " 'As if we lived in the forest. . .'  'Forest people . . .' 'You can't
see  the  wood for the trees.'  'If  you're  in  the  forest,  you're  after
firewood.'  That's what we have  to  fight against! To eradicate! Let's  say
that you,  Monsieur Pepper, don't fight against it, why not?  After all, you
could  do a detailed, meaningful lecture  on the forest at the club, but you
do no such thing. I've been keeping tabs on you for quite a while, it's been
wasted time waiting. What's the matter?"
     "Well,  I've never been  there,  have I?" said  Pepper.  "That  doesn't
matter. I haven't been there either, but I've read a lecture, and judging by
the response, it was most useful. It's not whether you've been in the forest
or not, it's a matter of ridding the facts of this encrustation of mysticism
and superstition, laying bare  the essence of things, having cleansed  it of
adornments placed upon it by philistines and utilitarians. . . ."
     "Twice eight divide into forty-nine minus seven times seven," said Kim.
     The Mercedes got going. Proconsul once again raised his voice:
     "I  did it as  a trained  philosopher. You could do  it as  a qualified
linguist. I'll give  you the points and you can develop them in the light of
the latest linguistic research ... if that's the theme of your thesis?"

     "It's 'Stylistic and  Rhythmic Characteristics of Feminine Prose in the
Late Heian based on Makwa-no Sosi,' " said Pepper. "I'm afraid that . . ."
     "Ex . . . cell . . . ent!  Just the thing.  And emphasize the fact that
it's not swamps, it's excellent therapeutic mud-baths; not jumping trees but
the end product  of high-power  research;  not natives or savages, rather an
ancient civilization  of proud, free, modest, and powerful people with noble
intentions. And no mermaids. No lilac veils of fog, no veiled hints--forgive
me for a poor pun--  That will  be excellent, mynheer Pepper, just splendid.
It's  a  good thing you know  the forest,  so's you  can introduce your  own
personal  impressions.  My  lecture  was  good  too,  but,  I fear, somewhat
over-speculative.  As the  basis of my material,  I  made use  of conference
minutes. Whereas you as one who has researched into the forest . . .."
     "I'm not a forest  researcher," said Pepper earnestly. "I'm not allowed
into the forest. I don't know the forest at all."
     Proconsul, nodding absently, wrote something swiftly on his shirt cuff.
     "Yes!" said he. "Yes, yes. It is the bitter truth, alas. Alas, we still
find   pockets  of  formalism,  bureaucracy,   heuristic  approach   to  the
personality. . . . You can talk about that as well, by the way. You can, yes
you can, everybody talks about  that. Meanwhile, I shall attempt to get your
speech  agreed  with the  higher-ups. I'm damned glad that you'll give  us a
hand in our work after all, Pepper. I've had a very careful eye on you for a
very long time. . . . There you are then. I've noted your name down for next
week!"
     Pepper unplugged the Mercedes.
     "I won't be here next week. My visa has expired and
     I'm going tomorrow."
     "Well, we'll fix that  somehow. I'll  go to the director,  he's  a club
member himself, he'll understand. You can reckon to stay another week."
     "No," said Pepper. "That won't  be  necessary." "Oh, yes it will!" said
Proconsul, looking him straight in the eye. "You know perfectly well it  is,
Pepper! Good day."
     He brought  two  fingers  to  his  temple  and  made  off,  waving  his
briefcase.
     "It's like a  spider's web!" said Pepper.  "Am I a fly to them or what?
The  manager doesn't  want me  to leave, Alevtina doesn't and now this  one.
..."
     "I don't want you to leave either," said Kim.
     "But I  can't stand it here anymore!"  "Seven hundred and eighty-seven,
multiply by four hundred and thirty-two. ..."
     "I'll leave all the  same," thought Pepper,  depressing the keys. "I'll
leave anyway. You may not want it but I will. I shan't  be playing ping-pong
with you, or  playing chess, or sleeping with you, or drinking tea with jam.
I  don't  want  to sing  you any more  songs  or calculate  for  you on  the
Mercedes, sort out your arguments for you or now read you lectures you won't
understand anyway. And I'm not going to  think  for you,  either. Think  for
yourselves, and I'm leaving. Leaving. Leaving. You'll never  understand that
thinking isn't a pastime, it's a duty. . . ."
     Outside, beyond  the incomplete  wall,  a piledriver  thumped  heavily,
pneumatic  hammers knocked,  bricks spilled with a  roar.  Four  workmen  in
forage caps were sitting side by side, stripped to the waist and smoking. As
a finishing stroke,  a  motorcycle  roared into  life under  his window  and
ticked over noisily.
     "Somebody  from  the forest," said Kim. "Better multiply me  sixteen by
sixteen."
     The  door  burst open  and  a  man  ran  into  the room.  He  had on  a
boiler-suit and  an  unbuttoned hood dangled  on his chest from a  length of
radio flex. From boots to waist the boiler-suit bristled with  the pale-pink
arrows  of  young  shoots while the right leg was  entwined with  an  orange
plaited liana of endless length and which trailed along the floor. The liana
was  still twitching a bit  and it seemed to  Pepper a very tentacle  of the

forest,  which would reach out at any moment and drag the man  back--through
the corridors of the Directorate down the  staircase,  along the yard  wall,
past the  canteen  and  the workshops, then down the dusty road, through the
park, past the statues and  pavilions, up to the entrance to the Serpentine,
to the gates, but not into them, past them to the precipice, and down. . . .
     He was wearing motorcycle  goggles,  and with his face thickly powdered
with dust,  Pepper did  not  at  once  recognize  Stoyan Stoyanov  from  the
biostation.
     He was  holding  a large paper bag. He made several steps on  the tiled
floor with its mosaic picturing a woman taking a shower, and halted in front
of  Kim,  concealing  the  paper bag  behind his  back  and making odd  head
movements as if his neck was itching.
     "Kim," he said, "it's me."
     Kim made  no reply. His pen  could be heard tearing and  scratching the
paper.
     "Kimmy," Stogan said, ingratiating. "I'm asking you, on my knees."
     "Get lost," said Kim. "Maniac."
     "It's  the very  last  time," said Stoyan.  "The very, very last little
time!"
     He moved his head again and Pepper saw in the depression at the back of
his skinny shaven neck a tiny little pink shoot, sharply pointed and already
twining, trembling, avid.
     "Just pass it  over  and say it's from Stoyan, that's all. If he starts
telling you to go to the cinema, tell him you've got urgent  overtime. If he
offers you tea, say you've already had some. And don't accept any wine if he
suggests it. Eh? Kimmikins! For the very last time for ever and ever!"
     "What're you  fidgeting about  for?"  Kim asked irritably. "Here,  turn
around!" "Got one again?" asked Stoyan, turning. "Well,  it doesn't  matter.
Just so you hand that over, nothing else matters."
     Kim, leaning forward over the  table,  was busy with his neck, kneading
and  massaging,  elbows  spread. He  bared  his teeth from squeamishness and
muttered curses. Stoyan patiently shifted his weight from foot to foot, head
bent and neck extended.
     "Hello, Peppy," said he.  "Long time  no see. What're  you  doing here?
I've brought some  again .  .  . what can  I do? . . .  Very, very last time
ever."  He  unwrapped  the  paper  and  showed  Pepper  a  small   bunch  of
poison-green forest flowers. "Boy, what a smell! What a smell!"
     "Stop pulling, you," cried Kim. "Stand still. Maniac.
     Useless."
     "Maniac.  Useless," agreed Stoyan ecstatically. "But! For the last time
ever and ever!"
     The pink  shoots on his boiler-suit  were already wilted and wrinkling,
raining down on the brick face of the lady under the shower.
     "There," said Kirn. "Now get out."
     He moved away from Stoyan and threw something half alive, squirming and
bloody into the waste-bin.
     "I'm going," said Stoyan. "Right away. But, well, our Rita's acting  up
again. I'm afraid to be away from the biostation. Peppy, you might come over
and have a word with them, eh?"
     "What next!" said Kim. "Pepper's not needed there."
     "What d'you mean, not needed?" Stoyan exclaimed. "Quentin's fading away
before  your  eyes! Just listen. Rita ran off  a week ago--all right.  Okay,
what can you do? But, she came back that night all wet, white, and icy cold.
The guard was questioning  her, unarmed,  and she  did something to  him, so
he's been senseless ever since. And the whole experimental compound has been
invaded by grass."
     "Well?" said Kim.
     "Quentin cried all morning. . . ."
     "I know all about that," Kim broke in.  "What I don't get is how Pepper
comes into it."

     "What  d'  you mean  how?  What're you talking  about?  Who else if not
Pepper? Not me,  eh? And not you.  . . . We're  not calling  in Hausbotcher,
Claudius-Octavian."
     "Stop  it," said Kim, slamming his palm on the table. "Get back to work
and  don't let me see you here in working hours again. Don't make me lose my
temper."
     "All right," said Stoyan hastily. "Okay. I'm off. You'll hand it over?"
     He placed the bouquet on the  table and ran off,  shouting  as he left:
"and the cess-pit's working again."
     Kim picked up a broom and swept all the droppings into a corner.
     "Mad fool," he said. "And that Rita. . . . Now calculate the lot again.
To hell with them and their love affairs. . . ."
     The motorbike  started banging nerve-rackingly under  the  window, then
all was quiet, with only the piledriver thudding behind the wall.
     "Pepper," said Kim. "Why were you at the cliff this morning?"
     "I was hoping to catch  sight of the director. I was told  he sometimes
does  physical jerks there.  I wanted to ask him  to send me  but he  didn't
come. You know, Kim, I think everybody lies here. Sometimes I even think you
do."
     "Director," said Kim,  ruminating, "you know that's an  idea. You're on
the ball. You've got guts. . . ."
     "All the same, I'm leaving tomorrow" said Pepper. "Acey's taking me, he
promised. Tomorrow I shan't be here, official."
     "I never expected  that, no," continued Kim, unheeding. "Plenty of guts
. . . maybe we should send you over there, to sort things out. . . ."
     Chapter Two
     Kandid  woke and thought at once: I'll go tomorrow. At the same  moment
Nava stirred in the other comer.
     "Are you asleep?" she asked.
     "No."
     "Let's  talk,  then," she suggested.  "We haven't spoken to  each other
since yesterday evening after all. All right?"
     "All right."
     "First you tell me when you're going."
     "I don't know," he said, "soon."
     "That's what you  always  say: soon. Soon, or  the  day after tomorrow.
Maybe you think it's the same thing? Well no, you've learned to talk now. At
first you mixed everything up, mixed everything up, mixed the hut up and the
village, grass and  mushrooms, even people and deadlings, mixed  them up you
did and then you'd mutter away. We couldn't make it out, couldn't understand
a word. . . ."
     He opened his eyes and stared  at the low,  lime-encrusted ceiling. The
worker ants were on the move in two even columns, from left to right loaded,
right to left empty. A month ago  it had been the other way around, right to
left loaded with mushroom spawn, left to right empty.
     A month hence it would be the other way again unless someone  told them
to  do something else. Dotted here and there along the column stood  the big
black signalers motionless, antennae slowly waving, awaiting orders. A month
ago I used to wake up  and think  I'd go the day after tomorrow but we never
went, and long before  that  even I used to wake up  and think the day after
tomorrow  we'd be off at last  and we never went. But if we don't go the day
after  tomorrow,  this time I'll go on  my  own. I used to  think like  that
before as well of course, but this time it's for sure. The  best thing would
be to  go now, straight away, no talking  or  trying to  persuade. But  that
needed a clear head. Better not. The best thing would be  to decide once and
for all: as  soon  as I can  wake with a clear head, be up, and straight out
into the street and away into the forest, and not let anybody  start talking
to me. That's vital: don't let anybody start talking to you, distracting you

with their whining, starting your head  buzzing, especially  just here above
the eyes, till your ears  start ringing  and you  feel like vomiting and the
whining  goes on and on right through you. And Nava was already talking. . .
.
     ". . . so that's what happened," Nava was saying,  "the  deadlings took
us along in the night, and they can't see very well at night. Blind as bats,
anyone'll tell  you that,  even that Humpy,  though he  doesn't belong here,
he's from the village that was next to ours, not this one of ours where  you
and I live now, but ours where I lived with mam, so you can't know Humpy, in
his village everything's  covered  in mushrooms,  the spawn fell  and that's
something  not  everybody  likes, Humpy went away  from the village straight
away.  It's  the Accession, he says,  and now there's no place for people in
the  village. . .  . So-o-o. There was  no moon that night and they probably
lost the track, anyway they all  bunched together, us in the middle,  and it
got so hot, you couldn't breathe. . . ."
     Kandid looked  at her.  She was  lying on her back, legs crossed,  arms
folded behind her head. Only her lips moved endlessly, and from time to time
her eyes flashed in the half darkness. She went on talking even when the old
man came in  and seated  himself at  the table. He drew  a  pot  toward him,
sniffed at  it noisily  and with a slurp set to. At  that Kandid got up  and
with his palms wiped the night sweat from his body. The old man was champing
and slobbering, not  taking his eyes from the bin with the lid protecting it
from mold. Kandid  took the pot away and set it  next  to  Nava  to stop her
talking. The old man sucked his teeth comprehensively.
     "Not very tasty," he said, "it's the same everywhere you go these days.
And that path's  all grown over I used to go  along; I used it a lot too,  I
went  to the training there  and just bathing, I often went bathing in those
days,  there  was a lake there, now it's just a swamp and it's dangerous but
somebody  still goes along there  otherwise how come there's so many drowned
bodies? And  reeds.  I can ask anybody: how  come there's  paths through the
reeds? And  nobody can  tell me, and  no more they ought.  What have you got
there  in that bin? If it's berries  in  soak I'll have  them, I love soaked
berries, but if  it's something  of yesterday's then  it doesn't  matter,  I
won't eat  leavings, you can eat your own leavings." He paused, looking from
Kandid to Nava and back again. Getting no answer he went on:
     "You can't  sow  anymore where the reeds have grown over.  They used to
sow there before. They had to for the Accession, and they took everything to
Clay  Clearing,  they still take  it  there but they  don't  leave it on the
clearing,  they bring it back. I told  them they  shouldn't,  but they don't
know  the meaning  of the word. The  elder asked me straight out in front of
them all: 'Why shouldn't we?' Buster  was standing there, look, where you're
standing,  closer  even, and Ears just here, say, and  over there where your
Nava's lying, there are the Baldy brothers, and he asks me in front of them,
in front of everybody. I  tell him don't you realize, I tell him, we're  not
alone  here. .  . .  His father was a very wise man, or maybe  he wasn't his
father, some say he wasn't and to be sure it doesn't seem like it. 'Why,' he
asks me, 'can't I ask why I shouldn't in front of eyeryone?' "
     Nava got up and, passing the pot to Kandid, started tidying  up. Kandid
began to eat. The old man fell silent and watched him for a while chewing on
his lip before observing: "That food's not good, you shouldn't eat it."
     "Why not?" asked Kandid to tease.
     The old man cackled.
     "Eh,  listen to  him! Dummy, you'd  do  better to keep quiet. You'd  be
better  off answering what I keep asking,  does it  hurt  much when you have
your head cut off?"
     "What's it to you?" shouted Nava. "Why do you keep prying?"
     "Shouts at me," announced the old  man. "Lifts up her voice against me.
She's borne  no child and raises her voice against me.  Why don't you have a
child? Living with Dummy all this  time and no child. Everybody has them but
not you. You shouldn't go on like this.  Do you know what 'shouldn't' means?

It means undesirable, not approved, and since it's not approved it means you
shouldn't. What you should do may not  be  clear but what you shouldn't  do,
you shouldn't. Everybody should know that and you most  of all seeing as how
you  live in  a  village not your own, got a house  given, got Dummy  for  a
husband.  Maybe  he's got a  different head stuck  on him,  but  he's got  a
healthy body, you've no right not to have  a child. So that's it, shouldn't,
not desirable. . . ."
     Nava,  by  now bad tempered and sulky, snatched the bin from  the table
and went off  into the  pantry. The old man looked  after her then went  on,
snuffling:
     "How else can shouldn't be understood? It can and ought to be realized,
shouldn't is harmful. . . ."
     Kandid finished his meal and  plunked the empty pot in front of the old
man. Then he went out onto  the street. The house had been heavily overgrown
during the night and  the only thing visible in the surrounding greenery was
the  path made  by the old  man and the place  by the door where  he had sat
fidgeting waiting for them to  wake up. The street had already been cleared,
the green creeper, thick  as  a man's arm, which had slid out of the network
of boughs hanging above the village on the previous night and put down roots
in front of the house next  door  had already been chopped up and fermenting
fluid poured on it. It had  turned dark and  was going nicely sour.  It gave
out a strong appetizing smell and the neighbor's boys sat around it and tore
out chunks of the soft brown matter, damp  and juicy, and stuffed them  into
their mouths. When Kandid  walked past, the  eldest  shouted  with his mouth
full, "Dumbling--deadling!" but  the cry was not taken up, they were all too
busy. Otherwise  the street, orange and red from the tall grass in which the
houses lay drowned, somber, and mottled  with dusky green patches  where the
sun penetrated the forest  roof,  lay deserted.  From  the  direction of the
field could be heard the monotonous ragged choir  of voices: "Hey, hey, make
it gay, right way, left way, hey, hey."
     From the forest came the echo. Or maybe not an echo. Maybe deadlings.
     Hopalong was sitting at home, of course, massaging his leg. "Sit down,"
was  his affable greeting. "Here I've put some soft grass for visitors. They
tell me you're going?"
     Once more, thought Kandid, once more from the very beginning.
     "What's the matter, leg hurting again?" he inquired, seating himself.
     "Leg? No, it's just nice sitting here and giving it a rub. When are you
off then?"
     "Just as we've been fixing it, you and  I. If  you were to come with me
then we could go the day after tomorrow. Now I'll have to find somebody else
who knows the forest. I can see you don't want to go."
     Hopalong cautiously extended his leg and spoke weightily:
     "As soon as you leave me, turn left, and carry on  till you get  to the
field.  Across  the field,  past the two  stones  and you'll  see  the  road
straight away, it's  not much overgrown, there's  too many  boulders on  it.
Along the  road you'll pass through two villages. One's deserted, mushroomy,
mushrooms started  growing there, so nobody  lives there, there's funny folk
living in the other village, the  blue  grass  went through there  twice and
since then  they've been sick, no need to start talking to  them they  won't
understand a word,  it's like they've lost their  memory. Through there then
and on  the right you have  your Clay Clearing.  No need for guides, you can
get there on your own, no sweat."
     "We'll get as far as Clay Clearing," agreed Kandid, "and after that?"
     "What do you mean, after that?"
     "Across the swamp where the lakes used to be. Remember you were telling
me about the stone road?"
     "What road? To  Clay  Clearing.  Well I'm trying to tell you, aren't I?
Turn left, across the fields up to the two stones. . . ."
     Kandid heard him out before speaking.
     "Now I know the way to Clay Clearing. We'll get there. But I have to go

further,  as you know, I must get to the  City, and you promised  to show me
the way."
     Hopalong shook his head in sympathy.
     "To the Ci-i-i-i-ty, ah now, is  that where you're heading. I remember,
I remember .  . . yes to the City  . . . you can't get there, Dummy. To Clay
Clearing now,  that's  easy;  past  the two  stones,  through  the  mushroom
village,  past funny village, then  Clay Clearing'11 be on your right. Or to
the Reeds, say,  turn right as you  leave me through the  scrub, past  Bread
Fen, then keep following the sun. Where the sun goes, you follow. It's three
days travel, but if you really have to go, we'll do it. We  used to get pots
there  before we planted our own. I know the Reeds like the back of my hand,
you should have said that's where you wanted to go. No need to wait till the
day after tomorrow either, we'll  start tomorrow in  the morning, we needn't
take any food with us, seeing as we're going by Bread Fen... .
     "You know, Dummy, you speak so fast it  hurts to listen to you. A man's
just started to take in what you say when you  shut your mouth.  Well, we'll
go to the Reeds, tomorrow morning we'll go. . . ."
     Kandid heard him out once more.
     "Listen, Hopalong, I don't have  to  go to the Reeds. The Reeds  aren't
where  I want to go.  Where  I want  to be  isn't  the Reeds." Hopalong  was
listening  and nodding. "I want to go  to the City. We've often spoken of it
before I told you yesterday I wanted to go to the City.  I told you  the day
before I wanted  to to the City. I said a week ago I wanted to go there. You
told me you knew the  way to the  city. You said that yesterday. And the day
before.  Not  to  the Reeds, to the City. I  don't want to  go to  the Reeds
[don't let me  get mixed up, he thought, maybe I'm mixed up already. Not the
Reeds, the City. The City and not the Reeds]. The City, not  the Reeds,"  he
repeated aloud.  "Understand? Tell me about the road to the City. Not to the
Reeds, to the City. Still better, let's go to the City together.  Not to the
Reeds together, together to the City."
     He stopped. Hopalong started rubbing his sore knee again.
     "Likely when they  cut  your head off, Dummy, something  got damaged in
there. Like my leg.  It used to be just an ordinary leg like anybody else's,
then once I was going through the  Anthills at night, carrying  an ant queen
and  I put this  foot  in  a hollow tree and now the leg's twisted. Why it's
twisted nobody knows, but it doesn't  walk straight, and that's a fact.  But
it'll get  me to the Anthills. And I'll take you along. What  I don't get is
why  you told me to  get food  ready for the  trip-- the Anthills is only  a
stone's throw from here."
     He looked at Kandid, floundered, mouth open.
     "Of course  you don't want to go to the Anthills, do you? Where is  it,
now? I know,  the Reeds. Well I can't  go there, I'd  never make it. See how
twisted this leg is?  Listen, Dummy, what  is it you've got against going to
the Anthills? Let's go there, eh? I've never been there once since that day,
maybe the  hills aren't there  anymore. Let's have  a look  for that  hollow
tree, what say?"
     He'll sidetrack me, I know it, thought  Kandid. He leaned  over  on his
side and rolled a pot over to him.
     "Good pot you've got here," he said, "I don't remember when I saw a pot
as good as this ... so you'll take me to the City? You  told me nobody knows
the road to the City  except  you. Let's go to the City,  what do you think,
will we make it?"
     "Make it? Course we'll make it! To the City, of course we will. And you
have seen pots as good as these, know where? The funny folk  make them  like
that. They  don't grow them, you know,  they make them out of clay,  they're
not far  from  Clay Clearing, I told you: left away from me and past the two
stones  as  far  as  Mushroom Village,  only nobody  lives  there anymore so
there's no sense in going.  Why should we? Haven't we seen mushrooms before?
Even when my leg was all right I never went to Mushroom Village, I only know
the  funny folk live two  ravines past there. Yes  ... we could go tomorrow,

yes. .  .  .  Listen,  Dummy, let's  not  go there  eh?  I  don't like those
mushrooms. There's mushrooms in our part  of  the forest,  that's different,
you can eat them, they taste good. Over there they're sort of green and they
smell rotten. Why do you want to  go there? You'll bring spawn back with you
as well. We'd better go to the City. A lot nicer. Only we can't go tomorrow,
there's  food to  get together and we'll have to find out the way--or do you
know the way? If you  do, I won't need to ask. In fact I  can't think who to
ask. Maybe the elder knows --what do you think?"
     "Don't you know the way to the  City yourself?" asked Kandid. "You know
a lot about it, don't you? You even got to the City almost once, didn't you?
Only  you got  frightened of  the  deadlings  and  decided you couldn't  get
through on your own. . . ."
     "I wasn't frightened of  deadlings any  more than I am  now,"  objected
Hopalong.  "I'll tell you what I am  afraid of, though. Are you going to  be
quiet all the way? That's something I could never do. There's something else
as well . . . don't get angry  at me. Dummy,  just  tell me, or if you don't
want to say it aloud, whisper, or nod, or if you don't even want to nod just
close that eye of yours, the right one in the shadow, nobody'll see only me.
The  question I want  to put is  this:  aren't you just  a  teeny bit  of  a
deadling? I  can't  stand deadlings, you know, I get the  tremble when I see
them, can't do a thing with myself. . . ."
     "No, Hopalong, I'm not a  deadling,"  said Kandid. "I can't stand  them
myself. If you're afraid I'll be too quiet for you, just remember we'll  not
be alone, I've told you often enough,  Buster's going with us, Barnacle, and
two men from New Village."
     "I'm not going with Buster," said Hopalong with decision. "First Buster
took  my  daughter away and didn't  take care  of her.  Lost  her, he did. I
didn't  mind him taking her,  I do mind him  not taking care  of her. He was
going with her  to New Village  and robbers set on him and  took my daughter
and he gave her up.  Your Nava and me looked ages for her but we never found
her. No, Dummy, there's no  sense messing  with robbers.  If we went to  the
City, you and I, there'd be no peace from them. Now if it were the Reeds, no
trouble at all. We'll start tomorrow."
     "The day after," said Kandid. "You'll go, Buster, Barnacle, and the two
from New Village. And we'll get right to the City."
     "If  there's  six of us, we'll get there,"  said Hopalong  confidently.
"I'd never get there on my  own of  course, but  if there's six of us, we'll
get there.  With six  of us  we'd get as far as Devil's Rocks, only  I don't
know the way there. Shall we go to Devil's Rocks? Listen, Dummy, let's go to
the City and decide there, eh? There's food to get ready  though, and plenty
of it."
     "Okay," said Kandid, rising to his feet. "So the day after tomorrow, we
start  for  the City. Tomorrow  I'll  go to New  Village, then I'll see  and
remind you."
     "Come around,"  said Hopalong. "I'd come to see you, only my leg aches,
no strength in it. You come around. We'll have a chat. There's a lot of folk
don't like talking to you, Dummy, it's  pretty  hard going, you know, but  I
don't mind, I've got used to it, I even like it. Come around, and bring Nava
with you, she's a  good girl, your  Nava,  no children  though, they'll come
she's young yet, that Nava of yours. . . ."
     Out  on  the  street,  Kandid  wiped  the  sweat away with  his  palms.
Somewhere near, somebody cackled and started coughing. Kandid turned and saw
the old man waving a knotted finger of warning.
     "The  City,  eh?  So  that's where you're  off to? That's  interesting,
nobody's ever got there  alive, what's  more it's not done.  Even you should
know that even if you have got a transplanted head."
     Kandid swung off  to  the right along  the  street. The old man trailed
along in the grass after him, muttering:
     "If  it's  not  done, then  it's always forbidden in some  sense or the
other, of course ...  for instance, it's  not done without the  elder or the

assembly, with the  elder  and  the assembly it is  permissible,  of course,
though  not in every  sense. . . ."  Kandid  was walking as  quickly as  the
ennervating  heat  and humidity  would allow and the old man  gradually fell
behind.
     On  the village square, Kandid caught  sight of Ears. Ears,  staggering
and  crossing  his  bandy  legs,  was  moving around  in circles, sprinkling
handfuls of brown grass-kiHer from a huge pot slung around his belly. Behind
him the grass was already smoking and shriveling. Ears had to be avoided and
Kandid  tried  to do just that, but Ears  smartly changed direction and came
face to face with him.
     "Ah .  . . Dummy!" he cried joyously, hastily un-slinging the  pot from
his neck  and setting it on  the ground. "Where are you off to. Dummy? Home,
is it to Nava? Well could be wrong but your Nava's not at home, your  Nava's
in the  field, with these eyes I saw her going to the field, you may believe
me  or not. . . . Maybe, of course, she  hasn't gone to the  field, could be
wrong. Dummy, but  your Nava definitely  went along  tha-at alley over there
and  if you  go along  there  the field's the only  place  you  come to, and
where's else should she go, your  Nava? Not looking for you, would she be. .
. ."
     Kandid  made another effort to get by but again ended up  face to  face
with Ears.
     "No  need anyway  to  follow  her  to  the field. Dummy,"  he  went  on
convincingly. "Why go after her? I'm just killing off the grass then I'll be
calling them all here, the  land surveyor came and said  the  elder had told
him  to  tell me to kill  the grass  on the  square because there's  to be a
meeting on the  square. As there's a meeting they'll all  come here from the
field, your Nava  among them if it's to the field she's gone, and where else
could  she have gone  along that alley? Although now I think of  it, you can
get to other places than the field there, you can. . . ."
     He suddenly  stopped and  gave a shuddering sigh. His  eyes screwed up,
his  hands lifted palms upward, as  if of  their own  accord. His face broke
into a sweet smile,  then abruptly sagged. Kandid about to make off, stopped
to listen. A small dense  purplish cloud had formed around  Ears' bare head,
his  lips quivered and he  began to speak swiftly and distinctly, in a voice
not  his own, a  sort of announcer's voice; the intonation was alien and the
style was one no villager would use, it was as if he spoke an alien language
so that only certain phrases seemed comprehensible.
     "In  the  far Southlands  new . .  .  are  going into  battle.  .  .  .
retreating further to the South ...  of the victorious march . . . the Great
Harrowing  in  the  Northern lands  has  been  temporarily  halted owing  to
isolated  and  sporadic  .  .  .  new advances  in  Swamp-making are  giving
extensive areas for peace and new progress toward ... In all settlements . .
. great victories . . . work and efforts . . . new detachments of Maidens  .
. . tomorrow and forever calm and amalgamation."
     The  old man had caught up  to Kandid and  now  stood  at his  shoulder
interpreting wildly:
     "All the settlements, hear that? That means here as well. . . .  'Great
victories.' It's  what I always say, you can't . . . calm and amalgamation .
. . you've got to understand. Here as well, if they say everywhere . . . and
new detachments of Maidens, got it?"
     Ears fell  silent  and  dropped to his haunches.  The lilac  cloud  had
dissipated. The old man impatiently tapped Ears on his bald pate. He blinked
and rubbed his ears.
     "What  did I say?" he asked. "Was it  a  broadcast? How's the Accession
going? Progressing or what? And you don't go to the field, Dummy, at a guess
I'd say you're going after your Nava, but your Nava ..."
     Kandid stepped over the pot of grass-killer and hurried on.
     The old man  was no longer audible--either he'd got caught up with Ears
or else he'd gone into one of the houses to get his  breath back and  have a
bite to eat on his own.

     Buster's  house  stood  on  the  very  edge  of  the  village, There an
embattled old woman,  neither  aunt nor mother,  said  with a sneer  full of
malice that Buster wasn't at home, Buster was in the field and  if he was at
home, there'd be no point  in looking for him in the field, but as he was in
the field, why was he, Dummy, standing there for nothing?
     In  the  field the sowing was in progress.  The oppressive stagnant air
was  saturated with a powerful  range  of  odors,  sweat, fermenting  fluid,
rotting grain. The morning harvest lay in great  heaps along the furrow, the
seed  already beginning to sprout. Clouds of working flies swarmed  over the
pots of fermenting fluid and  in the  heart of this black, metallic-glinting
maelstrom  stood the elder. Inclining  his head  and screwing up one eye, he
was minutely examining a single drop of whey on  his thumbnail. The nail was
specially prepared, flat, polished to a gleam and cleaned with the necessary
fluids.  Past  the elder's legs the  sowers crawled along  the furrows,  ten
yards apart. They  had stopped singing by  now,  but the  heat of the forest
still oohed and aahed, obviously now, no echo.
     Kandid walked along  the chain of workers bending and peering  into the
lowered faces. Finding Buster, he touched him on the shoulder and  Buster at
once climbed out of the furrow  without question. His beard was clogged with
mud.
     "Who're  you  touching,  wool on  yer nose?"  he  croaked,  looking  at
Kandid's feet. "Somebody once  touched  me like that, wool on yer nose,  and
they  took him  by his hands  and feet and  threw him up in  a tree, he's up
there  to  this  day, and  when  they  take him  down  he won't do any  more
touching, wool  on yer  nose. .  .  ." "You  coming?" asked  Kandid shortly.
"Course I'm coming, wool on yer nose, when  I've prepared leaven  for seven;
it  stinks in the house, there's no living with it, why not go, when the old
woman  can't  stand  it  and  I can't bear to  look at it--only where are we
going? Hopalong  was saying yesterday  we were  going to the  Reeds,  and  I
shan't  go there, wool  on yer nose, there's no people there,  in the Reeds,
never mind dames. If a man wants to  grab somebody by the leg  and throw him
into  a  tree, wool  on yer nose,  there's  nobody  there, and I  can't live
without dames any longer and that elder'll be the death of me. . . . Look at
him standing there, wool on yer nose, staring his eyes out  and him as blind
as  a mole, wool on yer nose . . . somebody once stood like that on his own,
he got one in the eye,  doesn't stand anymore, wool on yer nose but I'm  not
going to the Reeds, just as you like. . . ." "To the City," said Kandid.
     "Oh well, the City, that's another affair altogether, I'll go there all
right,  specially as I hear  tell  there's no  City there anyway,  that  old
stump's lying  his head  off--he comes  in  the morning eats  half a pot and
starts, wool  on  yer nose,  laying  down  the  law:  that's not right,  you
shouldn't do that. ... I  ask him: who are you  to tell me what's right  and
what's wrong, wool on yer nose? He doesn't say, he doesn't know himself. . .
. Mutters on about some City."
     "We'll set off the  day  after  tomorrow,"  said Kandid.  "What are  we
waiting for then?" burst  out  Buster. "Why the  day after tomorrow? I can't
sleep at night in my house, the leaven is stinking, let's  go this  evening,
somebody once waited and waited, they gave him  round  ears and he's stopped
waiting, never waited since. .  . . The old woman's cursing there's no life,
wool on yer nose! Listen, Dummy, let's take my  old woman with  us maybe the
robbers would take her, I'd give her up all right!"
     "The day after tomorrow we'll go," repeated Kandid patiently. "You're a
good fellow, making up so much leaven, from New Village, you know. . . ."
     He failed to finish; from the fields came shouting.
     "Deadlings! Deadlings!" roared the elder. "Women home! Run off home!"
     Kandid  looked  around. Between the trees on  the extreme  edge of  the
field stood  the  deadlings:  two  blue  and quite close,  one yellow  a bit
farther off.  Their heads  with the round eye-holes and the black slash of a
mouth slowly revolved from  side to side. Their huge arms hung loosely along
the length  of their bodies. The earth where they stood was already smoking,

white trailers of steam mingled with gray-blue smoke.
     The deadlings  knew a thing or two and so behaved with extreme caution.
The  yellow one  had the whole of his right side eaten  away by grass-killer
while the  blue ones  were covered  in  rashes caused by  ferment  burns. In
places, the skin had died  off and hung in rags. While they stood and stared
about them,  the  shrieking  women  fled  to the  village and  the  menfolk,
muttering threats, crowded together with pots of grass-killer at the ready.
     Then the elder spoke. "What are we standing  here for, I ask you? Let's
go,  why  stand here?" Everyone moved  slowly forward, spreading  out into a
line, toward the deadlings. "Get them in the eyes," the elder kept shouting.
"Try and splash  them in the eyes.  Best  get the eyes, not much good if  we
can't get their eyes. . . ."
     The line sang  out ominously. "Ooh-hoo-hoo,  get out!  Ah-ha-ha-ha-ha!"
Nobody was inclined to get too close.
     Buster, picking the dried mud from his beard, walked next to Kandid and
shouted louder than the others; between shouts he argued with himself.
     "No, no-o-o, we're wasting our time, wool on yer nose, they won't stay,
they'll  run in a minute. .  . .  Deadlings are they? Rubbish, I'd say, they
won't stay. . . . Hoo-hoo-hoo! You lot!"
     Coming within  twenty  paces of the deadlings, the men stopped.  Buster
hurled a  clod  of earth  at the yellow one,  but with surprising agility it
stuck  out  its broad palm and deflected the  clod  to  one  side. Everybody
started hooting and stamping their  feet,  some displayed  the pots and made
threatening  motions toward the deadlings. Nobody wanted to waste  the fluid
and nobody wanted to drag all the way to the village for more. The deadlings
were battered and wary, they could be got rid of this way.
     So it turned out.  Steam and smoke thickened under the deadlings' feet,
they were faltering. "Well that's it" was  said  along  the chain.  "They've
given ground, they'll turn in a minute. . . ."
     The deadlings imperceptibly  altered, as  if they were  turning  inside
their own skins. Their eyes and mouth disappeared from view--they had turned
their  backs. In a second  they were retreating, flickering among the trees.
Where they had stood, a cloud of steam slowly settled.
     The men,  in an excited hubbub,  moved back  toward the furrow.  It was
suddenly realized that it was time to return to the village for the meeting.
They set off.
     "Go onto the square," repeated the elder to everyone. "Onto the square.
The meeting  will  take place on the  square,  so  everyone  must  go to the
square."
     Kandid was looking  for Barnacle, but he was nowhere in the  crowd  for
some reason. Barnacle had disappeared somewhere.  Buster was talking nervily
beside him.
     "Remember, Dummy, when you jumped on that deadling? Yes, jumped on him,
you did, wool  on yer nose, took him by the head an'  all, cuddling him like
your Nava, wool on yer  nose, and what a yell. . . . Remember, Dummy, what a
yell you gave out  with? You got  burned, and then came out in blisters, wet
and  painful as well. .  . . Why did you  jump  on him,  Dummy? Somebody did
that, jumpy-jumped on a  deadling, took all the  skin off his belly,  now he
doesn't jump anymore; tells children to jump,  wool on yer nose. . . .  They
say, Dummy, you jumped on his back so he'd carry you to the City, but you're
no dame, why  should he carry you away  with him? Anyway there's no City  at
all, it's that  old stump making up  his  words City, Accession. . . . Who's
seen  this Accession? Ears gets drunk on beetles and goes  out burbling, the
old stump listens, then he wanders off  everywhere,  guzzling other people's
food and repeating. . . ."
     "I'm going  out  to New  Village in the morning," said Kandid. "I'll be
back at night, I shan't be here during the  day. You see Hopalong and remind
him about  the  day after tomorrow. I've  been reminding  him and I'll do it
again, still, you do it, otherwise he'll wander off . somewhere."
     "I'll remind him," promised Buster. "I'll remind him if I have to break

his other leg off."
     The whole  village had come out onto the square. Everybody was talking,
shoving  and scattering seeds on the  bare earth so that stems might come up
and provide  soft seating. Children were mixed in  underfoot; their  parents
were pulling them along by their ears or hair to avoid a mix-up. A column of
poorly trained ants attempting to drag worker-fly larvae straight across the
square  were  being driven off by  the cursing elder. He was asking by whose
orders there  were ants here, it was a disgrace that's what. Ears and Kandid
were suspected, but the matter was not conducive to proof.
     Kandid  found Barnacle and wanted  to talk  with him, but failed as the
assembly was then declared open and as always the old man crawled forward to
speak first. What he spoke about nobody  could  understand but everybody sat
quietly  listening and  hissed at  their scuffling  children not to scuffle.
Some--those  seated most comfortably well  away from the  sunny  spots--fell
into a doze.
     The  old man went  on at length about what was  not "right" and in what
senses this was to be understood. He called for a mass Accession, threatened
victories  in  North and  South, cursed  the  village  and,  separately, New
Village, announced that new detachments of Maidens were  everywhere and that
neither  in  the  village  nor  in  the  New  Village  was  there   calm  or
amalgamation, that all this was a consequence of  people forgetting the word
"shouldn't" and thinking everything was permitted. Dummy,  for instance, was
set on going to the City, though nobody had summoned him.  The village  bore
no responsibility for that, seeing as he was foreign,  but if  it turned out
by chance that he was a deadling after all, and such  an  opinion existed in
the village, then nobody knew what would  happen, especially as Nava, though
of  course  she was an alien too, had had no children by Dummy, and this was
not to be tolerated, yet the elder tolerated it. ...
     Toward  the middle  of the oration, the  elder dozed  off as well,  but
hearing his own name, started and immediately gave a threatening bark: "Hey!
No sleeping! You can  sleep  at home," he said, "that's what houses are for,
sleeping in, nobody  sleeps on the square, meetings are held  on the square.
Nobody has ever been allowed to sleep  on the square, nobody is  allowed and
nobody will be." He glanced toward the old man.
     The old man  gave  a satisfied nod. "And  so we have our  general  'not
permitted.'  "  He  smoothed his  hair  and  announced: "A  bride  has  been
announced at New Village. And we have a groom, Loudmouth, whom you all know.
Stand up. Loudmouth, and show yourself, no  better  not, you just sit there,
everybody knows you anyway.  Now we have the question: shall Loudmouth go to
New Village or alternatively shall we bring the bride here to the village. .
. . No, no.  Loudmouth, sit you  down,  we'll decide this  without you . . .
those sitting next to him keep a good hold on him till the meeting is  over.
Who has any opinion, let him speak."
     There turned out to  be  two opinions.  One (Loud-mouth's neighbors for
the most part) demanded Loudmouth's dismissal to New Village,  let the  rest
live  here. Others, calm and serious  men, living well  away  from Loudmouth
proposed  the  opposite, women  were getting short,  some had  been  stolen,
therefore the  bride  should  come to the  village. Loudmouth  was that  all
right, but suppose there would be children, let there be  no doubt, that was
for sure.  The  argument was long,  and at first to the point. Then Hopalong
unfortunately  shouted out that it was wartime and everybody was  forgetting
that. Loudmouth was instantly forgotten. Ears started to explain  that there
was no war and never had  been, there was and would be the Great  Harrowing.
Not Harrowing, objected someone in the crowd, it was Essential Swamping. The
Harrowing was over long  ago, the Swamping had been going on for years, Ears
didn't know a thing, how could he, he was Ears wasn't he? The old man got up
and  rolling his  eyes,  croaked  out  hoarsely that  there was  no war,  no
Harrowing; there was no Swamping either, there had been,  was, and would  be
the Personal Struggle in North and South. How was  there no war, wool on yer
nose,  came from the  crowd, when  there was  a whole  lake full of  drowned

bodies  past Funny Village?  The meeting exploded.  What about  the  drowned
bodies? Where there was  water  you found bodies, past Funny Village  wasn't
like  here, you couldn't  go by Funny Village, they ate out of  clay  there,
lived under clay, gave  their wives to the  robbers, now people talked about
drowned bodies.  It  wasn't drowned bodies, no  struggle and no war,  it was
Calm  and Amalgamation in the interests of the Accession! Why then was Dummy
going to the City? Dummy was going to the  City, therefore the City existed,
and if it existed where was your war? It must be Amalgamation! Anyway did it
matter where  Dummy went? Somebody went as well once, they gave it him right
in the nose and he doesn't go anywhere anymore. . . . Dummy was going to the
City  because there was  no City, they knew Dummy, Dummy  was a fool if ever
there was  one,  and if there was no City, how could there be  Amalgamation?
There was no  Amalgamation, there had been one time mind you,  but  that was
ages ago  . . . and no Accession either! Who says there's no Accession? What
do  you mean? What's that? Loudmouth . . . hold Loudmouth!  They've  let him
go! Why couldn't they hold onto him?
     Kandid,  knowing  this  would  go  on  for long, attempted to  start  a
conversation with Barnacle, but Barnacle was in  no mood  for  conversation.
"Accession," he  shouted. "Then  what about the deadlings? You're forgetting
the deadlings! Why? Because you haven't  any idea what  to think about them,
that's why you're all shouting about this Accession! . . ."
     They  went on  shouting  about the deadlings,  then about the mushroomy
villages, then  they got tired  and began to quiet down, mopping their faces
and shrugging one another off wearily. Soon it transpired that everybody had
fallen silent and only the old man and Loudmouth were carrying  on. Everyone
came to  their  senses. Loudmouth was  borne down and his mouth stuffed with
leaves.  The  old  man  went on for  a while but  lost  his voice and became
inaudible. Then  a  disheveled  representative  from New Village  got up and
pressing his hands to his  breast  and  staring about him, began to beg in a
broken voice that  Loudmouth shouldn't be sent to New  Village, they  had no
need  of  him, they had lived a hundred years  without  him  and could do it
again,  they should bring the bride to the village  and then  they would see
New  Village  would make  no trouble over  a  dowry.  . . . Nobody  had  the
strength to start  arguing again--they promised to think about it and decide
later, especially as the matter wasn't urgent.
     People began  to drift off to dinner.  Barnacle  took Kandid by the arm
and dragged him to one side under a tree.
     "Right,  when  do  we  leave?" he asked. "I'm so  fed  up  here in  the
village, I  want off into  the forest, I'll be ill of boredom here soon. ...
If you're not going, say  so and I'll go alone, I'll talk Buster or Hopalong
into going too."
     "We're  going the day  after  tomorrow,"  said Kandid. "You've prepared
food?"
     "Prepared it and eaten  it. I haven't got patience to look at it, lying
there and  nobody to eat it except the old  man--he's getting on my  nerves,
I'll make a cripple of him yet if I don't go  soon. . . . What do you think,
Dummy, who is that  old man and  why does he eat  everybody out of house and
home, where does he live? I'm a traveled man, I've been in a dozen villages,
I've  been  with  the funny  folk, I've even visited the skinnies, spent the
night  there--nearly  died of fright, but I've  never seen  an  old man like
that, he must be a rare specimen, that's why we keep him and don't beat him,
but  I've  no  patience left to watch  him rummage  around my  pots  day and
night--he eats in  the  house  and takes stuff away with him,  why my father
used to  curse him  before  the deadlings smashed him up. . .. Where does he
put it all? He's just skin and bones, there's no room inside him, but he can
lap up two jars and take  two away  with him, and he never brings  any  jars
back. .  . . You know, Dummy,  maybe we've got more than one old man,  maybe
there's two or even three? Two sleep while one works. When he's had his fill
he wakes up the next and goes to sleep himself. . . ."
     Barnacle accompanied Kandid  as far as the  house but declined to  have

dinner, out of tact. After chatting for fifteen minutes about how they lured
fish in  the Reed-bed lake by wiggling their  fingers, and promising to drop
in on Hopalong to remind him of the journey  to the City, and asserting that
Ears was  no  Ears  at  all, but only  a  very  deranged  man,  and that the
deadlings caught women for food, since men had tough flesh and the deadlings
had no teeth, and promising  to prepare fresh supplies and drive off the old
man without mercy, he at last departed.
     Kandid got his  breath back with difficulty, and  before going in stood
awhile  in the  doorway  shaking  his  head. You, Dummy,  don't  forget that
tomorrow you've to go to  New Village, early  in  the morning, don't forget:
not to  the Reed-beds, not to Clay Clearing,  but New Village . .  . and why
should you go there, Dummy, better go to the Reed-beds, lots of fish there .
. .  good fun. ... To  New Village,  don't forget, New Village, don't forget
Kandid  . . . tomorrow morning to New Village . .  .  talk the boys into it,
you'll never get  to the City with just the  four of you. ... He entered the
house without realizing it.
     Nava was still absent, but the old man was  seated at the table waiting
for someone to put his dinner out. He squinted testily at Kandid and said:
     "You  walk  slow, Dummy, I've  been in two  houses-- everybody's having
dinner  but here  there's nothing.  . .  .  Likely that's  why you've got no
children, you walk slow and there's nothing in the house at dinner time. . .
."
     Kandid went right up to him and stood there for some time,  reflecting.
The old man continued:
     "How long will you take to get to the  City,  if you're as late as this
for dinner? It's a long way to the City, they say, a mighty long way, I know
everything about you now, I know you've  decided to head for the City,  only
thing I don't know is how you're going to  reach it if you spend a whole day
getting to a pot of food and still don't get there.  . .  . I'll have to  go
with you, I'll lead you there, I should have gone long  ago,  only  I  don't
know the road, but I've got  to get to the  City to fulfill my duty and tell
everything about everything to the proper person. . . ."
     Kandid took him under the arms and hoisted him swiftly from  the table.
The  old  man was dumbfounded.  Kandid  carried him  out  of  the  house  in
outstretched  arms and placed  him on the road; he  wiped  his hands on  the
grass. The old man recovered his wits.
     "Just  don't  forget to take along  food  for me," he said  to Kandid's
back. "Take a lot of good stuff for me, because I'm going to fulfill my duty
and you're going for your own pleasure and though 'not done'. . . ."
     Kandid returned  to the house, sat down at the  table  and lowered  his
head onto clenched fists. Never mind, I'm leaving the day after tomorrow, he
thought. Let  me not forget that: day after tomorrow. Day after tomorrow, he
thought, day after tomorrow.
     Chapter Three
     Pepper was  awakened by the touch of cold fingers on his bare shoulder.
He  opened his eyes and  perceived someone  standing  over  him, dressed  in
underwear.  The  room was  dark,  but the man  was standing  in  a  shaft of
moonlight. Pepper could make out his pale face and
     staring eyes.
     "What  do you want?" whispered Pepper. "You  have to  vacate,"  the man
whispered in return.
     It's only the warden, thought Pepper, relieved. "Why  vacate?" he asked
loudly, raising himself on his elbow. "Vacate what?"
     "The hotel is overbooked, you'll have to vacate the room."
     Pepper glanced around the room in confusion. Everything  was as  it had
been, the other three bunks were empty as before.
     "You  needn't stare," said the  warden. "We  know the situation. In any
case the sheets on your bed have to be  changed and sent to the laundry. You

won't be washing them yourself, not brought up to. . . ." Pepper understood.
The warden was very frightened and was being rude to keep his spirits up. He
was in  that state where  one  touch and  he would  cry  out, squeal, twitch
convulsively, call for help.
     "Come on, come on," said the warden and pulled the  pillow from beneath
Pepper's head in a sort of weird impatience. "Sheets, I said. . . ."
     "Look,  what is this," said Pepper.  "Does it  have  to be now?  In the
night?" "Urgent."
     "Good God," said Pepper, "you're off your head.  Well, all right. . . .
You collect the sheets, I'll get by. I've only got this one night left."
     He  slid  from the bunk onto the  chilly  floor and began stripping the
pillowcase off. The warden, as if frozen to the spot, followed his movements
with bulging eyes. His lips quivered.
     "Repairs,"   he  said  finally.  "Repairs  got  to  be  done.  All  the
wallpaper's peeling off, the ceiling's cracked, the floors need re-laying. .
. ." His  voice took on a firmer note. "So you've got to vacate in any case.
We're starting repairs right away here."
     "Repairs?"
     "Repairs. Look at that wallpaper. The workmen will be here directly."
     "What, now?"
     "Right now. Why wait? The ceiling's full of cracks. Just take a look."
     Pepper began  to shiver. He  left  the  pillowcase  and  picked up  his
shorts.
     "What's the time?" he asked.
     "Well  after twelve," said the  warden, again  whispering, and, forsome
reason, glancing around.
     "Where on earth shall I go?" said Pepper,  pausing with one leg in  his
shorts. "You'll have to fix me up. Another room. ..."
     "Full up. And where it isn't, repairs are under way."
     "In the duty room, then."
     "Full up."
     Pepper stared at the moon in despair.
     "Well, the  storeroom  will do," he  said. "The storeroom, the laundry,
the isolation  ward. I've only got six more hours to sleep. Or maybe you can
fix me up in your place. . . ."
     The  warden  began rushing about the  room. He  ran  between the bunks,
barefoot, white, and terrible as a specter. Then he stopped and groaned:
     "What a  business, eh?  I'm a civilized  man  as well,  graduate of two
colleges, I'm not  a  savage  or  anything.  ...  I know  it  all.  But it's
impossible, get me? It's absolutely out of the question!"
     He bounded  up to Pepper and whispered in his  ear, "Your visa  has run
out! Twenty-seven minutes ago it ran out and  you're still here. You mustn't
be here. I beg  you.  . . ." He collapsed  onto  his knees and drew Pepper's
boots and socks out from under the bed. "I woke up at five to twelve covered
in sweat," he mumbled. "Well, I thought, this is it. This is the end of  me.
I ran  off just as I was. I don't remember a thing. Clouds over the streets,
nails catching my feet--and my wife's expecting! Get  dressed,  please,  get
dressed. . . ."
     Pepper  got dressed in a hurry.  He found it hard to  think. The warden
kept running between the bunks,  shuffling across  the  moonlit squares, now
glancing out into the  corridor, now looking out of the  window, whispering,
"Good lord, what a business."
     "Can I at least leave my suitcase with you?" inquired Pepper.
     The warden clacked his teeth.
     "Not at any price! You'll  be the ruin of me.  .. . You might have some
sympathy. . . . Good lord, good lord... ."
     Pepper gathered  his books together, closing his case  with difficulty,
and picked up his raincoat. "Where shall I go now?" he asked.
     The warden was mute. He waited fidgeting with impatience. Pepper hefted
his suitcase and went off down the  dark and silent staircase to the street.

He  paused  on  the verandah and  while attempting to control his shivering,
spent some  time  listening  to the  warden instructing  the somnolent  duty
clerk:  "He'll  ask  for  readmittance.  Don't let  him  in!  He's  got  ...
[inaudible sinister whisper] Got  it!  You're responsible.  .. ." Pepper sat
down on his suitcase and placed his raincoat across his knees.
     "I'm afraid not, sorry," said the warden behind him. "I must ask you to
leave the verandah. I must ask you to vacate the hotel premises completely."
     He had to go down and put his case on  the  roadway. The warden stamped
around, muttering: "I must  ask you. . . . My wife .  . . and no fuss. . . .
Consequences . . .  can't be done. ..." and left,  white underwear gleaming,
stealing  along  the  fence.  Pepper  glanced  at  the  dark windows  of the
cottages,  the  dark windows  of the  Directorate, the dark windows  of  the
hotel.  There was no light anywhere, even the street lighting was off. There
was only the moon, round, brilliant, and somehow malevolent.
     He suddenly realized he  was alone. He had  nobody.  All  around people
were asleep  and they all like me, I know that, I've seen it many times. Yet
I'm alone, just as if they'd  suddenly died or become  enemies . . . and the
warden--kind, ugly man, a martyr to Basedow's  disease, a  loser who latched
on to me the  very first day. We played the piano  together, four hands, and
argued. I was the  only one  he dared to argue with and next to whom he felt
himself a real person,  not  just the  father of seven children. And Kim. He
had returned from the chancellery and brought a huge document case with him,
full  of informers  reports. Ninety-two  denunciations of me, all written in
one hand and with different signatures. That I steal official sealing wax at
the post office, that I  brought an  underage girl in my suitcase and am now
keeping her in the bakery cellar, and much besides. . . . And Kim read these
denunciations  and threw some  into the  wastebasket, and kept others to one
side, muttering: "I'll have to put some  headwork in on  that." And that was
unexpected and horrible, senseless and repulsive. . . . How he would timidly
glance at me and drop his eyes at once.
     Pepper rose, gripped his case and wandered off, following his nose. His
nose  led nowhere. Not that there was anywhere to  lead  to along these dark
empty streets.  He kept stumbling,  the  dust made him sneeze, and he fell a
time or two. The suitcase was incredibly heavy and somehow ungovernable.  It
rubbed  its.bulk  against  his  leg  then  swung  out to one side  and then,
returning from the dark, struck his kneee a  tremendous clout. In the park's
dark alley where there was no  light at all and  only  the statues, like the
warden,  glimmered shakily in the gloom, the case got caught up  in a thread
of his trouser-leg and Pepper abandoned it in despair. The hour  of  despair
had  arrived.  Weeping and blind  with  tears, Pepper struggled through dry,
dusty,  spiky hedges, rolled down steps, fell, painfully striking  his back,
and finally drained of strength and gasping with exasperation and self-pity,
went down on his knees at the edge of the cliff.
     The forest, however, remained indifferent. So indifferent  that it  was
invisible.  Below the edge was  inky  blackness.  Only  on the  far  horizon
something layered, gray, and formless lazily reflected the rays of the moon.
     "Wake up," asked Pepper. "Look at me just this once, while we're alone,
don't  worry, they're all  asleep.  Surely  you need at least one of  us? Or
don't you understand what  a  need  is? It's when you can't do without . . .
when  you think all the  time about . .  .  when  all your life  you've been
striving  toward. ... I don't know  what  you are. Nor do those who are dead
sure they know. You are what you are, but I can hope  that you're what  I've
wanted  to see all my life: kind,  intelligent, indulgent, and  considerate,
perhaps even grateful.  We've dissipated  all that, we've no energy  or time
for it,  all  we  do  is construct  historical monuments, ever higher,  ever
cheaper,  but  consideration  is  something  we  can't  manage.  But  you're
different, because  from a  long way off I  came  to you, not  believing you
actually existed. So you really don't need me? No, I won't lie. I'm afraid I
don't need you either. We've caught sight of each other, but came no closer.
It shouldn't  have been that way.  Perhaps they stand  between us? There are

plenty of them and only one of me, but I'm--one of them, you, probably can't
pick me out in the crowd, maybe it isn't worth the trouble.
     Maybe I invented those  human characteristics that would appeal to  you
myself, to you that is, not as you are, but as I had imagined you to be. ...
     Suddenly  from  beyond the horizon, bright  white puffs of light slowly
swam up and hung, dissipating  and  at once  to  the right under the  cliff,
under the overhanging rocks, searchlight beams began hunting  wildly, haring
about  the sky and encountering massed banks  of fog. The  light balls above
the  horizon  continued to  thin out  and  disperse and turned into  silvery
clouds before extinguishing. A minute later the searchlights went out.
     "They're afraid," said Pepper. "I am too. I'm afraid for myself but I'm
afraid for  you as well.  You  don't know them after  all, yet. Even I don't
know  them at all well.  All I know is they're  capable of  any extreme, the
furthest extremes  of  stupidity and  wisdom,  cruelty and  pity,  fury  and
restraint.  There's  only one  thing they  lack--understanding.  They always
substituted  some  sort  of  surrogate  for  understanding,  be  it   faith,
disbelief,  indifference,  or  neglect. That  always  turned out  to be  the
simplest   way.  Easier  to  believe  than  comprehend.  Easier  to   become
disenchanted than to comprehend. I'm leaving  tomorrow, by the way, not that
that  matters.  I  can't  help you  here,  here  everything's too  solid and
well-established. I'm just too obviously  superfluous here, alien. I'll find
the pressure  point  though,  don't  worry.  It's  true  they can  ruin  you
irretrievably, but that needs time and plenty of it. They've yet to find the
most  effective, economic, and above  all, cheap method of  approach.  We'll
keep up the struggle, it will have been worth it. ... Good-bye."
     Pepper got up from  his knees and wandered back  by way of  the bushes,
the park, the alley. He tried without success to locate  his suitcase. After
that he got back to the main street, empty and illuminated only by the moon.
It was  already after one when he halted outside the Directorate library, it
was open invitingly. The windows were hung with heavy curtains but inside it
was brightly lit,  like a dance hall.  The parquet  floor had  dried out and
squeaked desperately; all around were  books.  The shelves groaned under the
weight of books, books lay in heaps on tables and in corners, and apart from
Pepper and the books there wasn't a soul in the library.
     Pepper lowered himself  into a big old armchair and  stretched  out his
legs; reclining he  calmly placed his arms on the  rests. Well now, what are
you standing there  for, said he to the books. Lazy devils! That's not  what
you were written for? Tell us,  you  tell me how the  sowing went,  how many
acres? How many acres "of the wise, the good, the everlasting"? What are the
prospects for the  harvest? Above all--how  is it sprouting?  Quiet now, you
there, what's your name two-volume! How many people have read  you? How many
understood? I've a lot of affection for  you, old man, you're a good, honest
friend.  You never bawled or boasted or beat your chest.  Good  and  honest.
Those who read  you also become good and honest, at  least  for a  time.  At
least to  themselves.  You know, though,  don't  you, that some  are of  the
opinion that goodness and honesty are not all that indispensable if we're to
forge ahead. For that you need legs. And boots. Even unwashed legs and dirty
boots.  Progress can be perfectly indifferent  to concepts of  goodness  and
honor, as  it has been indifferent up to now. The Directorate, for  example,
has  no need of goodness or honor  in order to function properly.  Pleasant,
desirable,  but  by no  means  essential. Like  a knowledge  of  Latin  to a
bathhouse attendant, or biceps  on an  accountant. Or  respect  for women to
Hausbotcher. ...  It all depends on your definition  of  progress.  You  can
define it  so the famous "for  all  that" appears: an alcoholic but for  all
that  an  outstanding specialist;  a  lecher but for  all that  an excellent
preacher; a thief, you know, a rogue, but for all that what an executive!  A
murderer but for all  that, what discipline and  dedication.  . . .  You can
also  look on progress as a transformation of  everyone into good and honest
men. Then we'll live to hear people say: he's a specialist, of course, knows
his stuff, but he's a dirty type, he'll have to go. ...

     Listen, books, do you know there are more of you than there are people?
If all the people were to disappear, you could populate the earth and supply
their  place.  You've  got good  and  honest among you,  wise  and  erudite,
frivolous  rattles, sceptics and madmen, murderers, corrupters of  children,
children, prophets  of  doom, complacent fools, and  hoarse demagogues  with
flaming eyes. You wouldn't  know why you were here either. Why are you here,
anyway? A lot of you give knowledge but what use is it in the forest? It has
no  connection  with  the  forest.  It's  like drilling  the  principles  of
fortification into a future builder of sun cities, and then no matter how he
tried  to build sanatoria  or  stadia,  he  kept  producing gloomy  redoubts
complete  with  bastions,  scarps, and  counterscarps. All  you've given  to
people coming to the forest is prejudice, not knowledge. . . . Others of you
instill mistrust and depression. And that's not because they're miserable or
cruel or suggest hope be  abandoned, but because they lie. Occasionally they
lie radiantly, accompanied  by rousing songs and jaunty whistling, sometimes
maudlin,  moaning, and defensive, but--they lie. For some reason nobody ever
burns books like that and never removes them from libraries, never has there
been  a case  in human  history where a lie has  been given  to  the flames,
unless people chanced not to understand it, or indeed believed in it. In the
forest they're not  needed either. They're never needed. Probably that's why
there  are so many  of them  ...  or  rather  it's because people like them.
"Dearer to us than the bitter truth. . . ." What? who's  that talking there.
. . . Oh,  it's me ... as I was saying, there are other books. . . . What? .
. .
     "Quiet.  Let  him  sleep."  "Why  sleep.  Better  have a  drink." "Stop
scraping about like that. . . . Here, it's old Pepper!"
     "What if it  is, watch you don't  fall." "He's sort  of unlooked-after,
he's pathetic!" "I'm not  pathetic," mumbled Pepper as he woke up. A library
stepladder stood  opposite Pepper.  On  its top  step sat Alevtina from  the
photo laboratory,  while below, driver Acey was holding  the  steps with his
tattooed arms  and gazing upward.  "He's always wandering  about like a lost
soul," said Alevtina, looking at Pepper. "No supper, likely. He wants waking
up,  a  glass of vodka  at least. What do  people like that  dream about,  I
wonder?"
     "Ask me what I'm seeing awake!" said Acey gazing up.
     "Anything new?" asked Alevtina. "Never seen it before?"
     "Well, no," said  Acey. "Can't  say it's especially new, but it's  like
the movies--you see it twenty times over but it's still nice."
     On the third step  from the bottom lay pieces of a massive  strudel, on
the fourth were laid out  cucumbers and  peeled oranges, a half-empty bottle
and a plastic pencil-cup stood on the fifth step.
     "Look as  much as you like as long as you  keep the steps steady," said
Alevtina, and she  set  to work getting  weighty journals and  faded folders
down from the top shelves of the stack. She blew the dust off and frowned as
she flipped the  pages; she  put  some  to one side  and replaced  the rest.
Driver Acey snuffled loudly.
     "Do you need the year's before last?" asked Alevtina.
     "There's only one thing I want just now," said Acey mysteriously. "I'll
just wake Pepper up."
     "Keep near the steps," said Alevtina.
     "I'm not asleep," said Pepper. "I've been watching you for ages."
     "You  can't see  anything from  there,"  said  Acey. "Come  over  here,
Monsieur Pepper. We've got the lot here, women, wine, fruit. . . ."
     Pepper got up, stumbling on one numb leg, and  came uo to the steps; he
poured himself a drink. "What did you dream about, Peppy?" inquired Alevtina
from aloft.
     Pepper glanced up mechanically and averted his eyes at once.
     "What I dreamed . . . rubbish. ... I was talking to the books."
     He drained the drink  and took a piece of orange. "Just a minute there.
Monsieur Pepper," said Acey. "I'll have a drink myself."

     "So  do you  want  the  year before  last's?" "I'll  say!"  said  Acey,
splashing into his  glass and choosing  a cucumber. "And  for the one before
that. I  always need it. I've  always had it and can't do without it. Nobody
can. Some need more, some less ... I always say,  why lecture me? What I am,
I am." Acey tossed down his drink with the greatest of pleasure and crunched
into a cucumber. "But you can't live the way I live  here. I'll put up  with
it just a little bit more and then I'll drive  my  truck into the forest and
catch myself a mermaid. . . ."
     Pepper stood  holding  the steps and tried to think about the following
day, while Acey seated himself on the bottom step and began relating a story
of his youth. He and a group of cronies caught a couple on the edge of town,
beat up the boyfriend and chased him off and tried to make use of  the dame.
It  was  cold  and  damp  and  being extremely  young nobody  could  achieve
anything,  the  lady friend was crying and afraid and  one by  one the  boys
drifted off. Acey  on  his own tagged after  her for a long time through the
dirty backstreets, grabbing at her, swearing. He kept thinking he would make
it, but nothing transpired until  he had got  her to her own house and there
in  the  dark hallway he had his way up against the iron  railing. In Acey's
account the incident seemed extraordinarily thrilling and cheerful.
     "So the mermaids won't escape me," said Acey. "I never let go and won't
start now. What I have in the window is what's in the shop--fair dealing."
     He had a darkly handsome face, bushy eyebrows, lively eyes,  and a full
mouth of excellent teeth.  He looked very like an Italian. Except  that  his
feet smelled.
     "Good lord, what've they been doing," said Alev-tina. "All the  folders
are mixed up. Here, hold this lot for a bit."
     She bent down  and gave Acey a pile of  papers  and journals. Acey took
it, scanned  several papers, read to himself, lips  moving,  and counted the
folders.
     "I need two more."
     Pepper  kept  holding  the ladder  and looked  at  his  clenched fists.
Tomorrow at  this time I won't be here, he  thought. I'll be sitting next to
Acey in the cab. It'll be hot. The metal will just be starting to cool down.
Acey will switch on the headlights, settle  down more  comfortably with  his
elbow out  of the window  and will start  up  about world  politics. I'm not
going to let him talk about anything else. Let  him stop at every snack bar.
Let  him pick  up anybody he wants,  even let him make  a detour to  deliver
somebody's  repaired motorbike. But we're going to talk about world politics
only.  Or I could ask him  about various cars,  fuel consumption, accidents,
murders  of  bribe investigators. He  tells a  good story, and you can never
guess if he's telling the truth.
     Acey drank another, smacked his lips,  glanced at Alevtina's legs,  and
continued his  narration, fidgeting and making expressive gestures, bursting
out in  delighted  laughter. With a  scrupulous  adherence to  chronology he
related the story of his  life, from year to year, month to month.  The cook
at a concentration camp  where he'd  done time  for stealing paper (the cook
had commented meanwhile: "Don't let me down, Acey, see you don't! .  .  ."),
the daughter  of a political prisoner at the same camp (it was all the  same
to her,  she was sure  she  was  a  goner anyway), a sailor's  wife  in some
seaside town, who was trying this way of revenging  herself on her tomcat of
a husband for  his multitudinous betrayals. A  certain rich widow, from whom
Acey had had to flee in the middle of the night clad only in his drawers, as
she wanted  Acey  under her  wing and  force him  to  traffic  in  drugs and
shameful  medical  preparations.  Women  he'd  transported  when  he  was  a
taxi-driver; they paid  him in coin for each of their guests, and at the end
of  the night with their bodies.  ("I says to  her,  what's  all this  then,
nobody thinks about me, you've  had four and  I've not had one yet.  . . .")
Then  a  wife,  a  fifteen-year-old  girl  whom  he  married  on  a  special
dispensation--she bore him twins and finally  left him when  he attempted to
use her in payment for the use of his friend's lady friends. Women ... birds

.  .  . stinkers . . . butterflies . . .  shits . . . bitches. . . . "So you
see I'm no lecher," he concluded. "I'm just a man with a bit  of spirit, not
some gutless impotent."
     He finished  off the liquor, collected up the folders, and left without
saying good night, scraping the parquet and whistling. Oddly bent forward as
he was, he was surprisingly like a cross between a spider and a neanderthal.
Pepper was looking helplessly after him when Alevtina spoke.
     "Give me your hand, Peppy."
     She  sat down on the top step,  put one hand on his shoulder and  leapt
down with a  small shriek. He  caught her under the arms and lowered her  to
the  floor; for some time they stood close to one another, face to face. She
kept her hands on his shoulders and he kept holding her under the arms.
     "I've  been thrown  out  of the hotel," he  said.  "I know," she  said.
"Let's go to my place, okay?" She was kind-hearted and  warm and looked  him
in the eyes calmly, though without any particular assurance. Looking at her,
one could imagine many kindly, warm sweet pictures and Pepper avidly flicked
through them all, one after  the other, and tried to imagine himself next to
her, but  was suddenly aware that it  wasn't working. Instead  of himself he
kept seeing Acey, handsome and naked, economical in movement and smelling of
feet.
     "No, thank you," taking his hands from her. "I'll get by all right."
     She immediately turned from him and set about collecting the  leftovers
onto a newspaper.
     "Why 'get by'?"  she said. "I  can put you  up on the sofa. Sleep  till
morning, then we'll find you  a room. You  can't  sit  in the library  every
night. . . ."
     "Thank you," said Pepper. "Only I'm leaving tomorrow."
     She looked around at him in astonishment. "Leaving. For the forest?"
     "No. Home."
     "Home. . . ." She slowly wrapped the food in the newspaper. "But you've
wanted to get into the forest all the time. I've heard you myself."
     "Yes,  you see, I did want to.  But they won't let me  go. I don't even
know why. And there's nothing for me to do in the Directorate. So I've fixed
it.  Acey's  taking me away  tomorrow.  It's three  already.  I'll go to the
garage, get into Acey's truck and wait till morning. So don't you worry. . .
."
     "So,  we'll be  saying good-bye. .  .  .  Maybe we'll go  to  my  place
anyway?"
     "Thanks, but  better in the  truck. ... I'd be  afraid of oversleeping.
Acey won't wait for me, will he?"
     They went out into the street arm in arm and walked toward the garage.
     "So you didn't like Acey's storytelling?" she asked.
     "No," said  Pepper.  "I  didn't like  it  at all. I don't  like it when
people talk about that. Why? It's  sort of embarrassing ... for him, you and
me  ...  for  everybody.  It's too pointless,  all  of this.  Just one  vast
boredom."
     "It  usually is," said Alevtina. "But don't be embarrassed for me.  I'm
absolutely indifferent. . . . Well, this is your road. Kiss me good-bye."
     Pepper  kissed her, aware of a  vague  regret.  "Thank  you," she said,
turning away  quickly and walking off in another direction. For some reason,
Pepper waved a hand after her.
     He came into the garage,  which was lit up by blue lamps and,  stepping
across  the snoring guard on his  car-seat, found Acey's truck and got  into
the cab. It smelled of  rubber, gas,  and dust. On  the  windshield  hung  a
spreadeagled Mickey Mouse. Nice and cozy, thought Pepper. I should have come
here  straight  away.  All  around stood silent  trucks, dark and empty. The
guard  snored sonorously. The  trucks  slept,  the  guard  slept,  the whole
Directorate slept. And Alevtina was undressing before the mirror in her room
alongside her neatly-made bed, large, double, soft, and very warm. . . . No,
no  sense thinking about that because during the day  the chatter got in the

way, the tapping of the Mercedes, the whole busy, meaningless chaos, but now
there was no eradication, no penetration, no security, or the other sinister
stupidities. There was a dream world above  the abyss, transparent like  all
dream worlds, invisible and inaudible, not a whit more real than the forest.
The forest was at this moment more real: the forest, after all, never slept.
Or perhaps it slept and dreamed us. We are the  forest's dream. An atavistic
dream. The crude ghosts of its cooled sexuality. . . .
     Pepper lay down, curled up,  and put his  rolled-up raincoat  under his
head as a pillow. Mickey Mouse swung gently on his thread. On seeing the toy
the girls always  cried:  "Ah, isn't it  pretty!" and driver Acey  answered:
"What's  in  the  window's  always in  the shop." The  gear-lever  dug  into
Pepper's side and he didn't  know how to remove  it or  whether it could be.
Maybe if he moved  it, the truck would move, slowly at first then quickening
straight toward the sleeping sentry while Pepper flung himself about the cab
pressing everything  he  could  reach with  a hand or  foot,  and the  guard
getting ever closer, his open snoring mouth already visible.  Then the truck
would leap and  turn viciously, slamming into the  garage wall; the blue sky
would be seen through the hole. . ..
     Pepper woke  up and saw it was already morning. Mechanics were  smoking
in  the gaping  garage doors,  the  square in front of the garage was yellow
with sunlight. It  was  seven  o'clock.  Pepper  sat up, wiped his face  and
looked at himself in the rear mirror. Need a shave, he thought but he didn't
get out of the truck. Acey wasn't around yet and he had to wait for him here
on the  spot,  since all the  drivers  were  forgetful  and always  went off
without  him. There were two  rules governing relations with drivers: first,
never get  out of the cab if you  can be  patient and wait; secondly,  never
argue with the driver who's  carrying you.  If worse comes to worst, pretend
to be asleep.
     The mechanics  at the doors had  thrown away their  cigarette butts and
ground  them  out  carefully with their  heels. They  came into the  garage.
Pepper  knew only one of them and he was  no mechanic, he  was  the manager.
They  passed by Acey's  truck,  where the manager paused  by  the  cab  and,
placing his  hand on  the  wing, for some reason glanced under  the vehicle.
Then Pepper heard him giving orders:
     "Move now, get the jack."
     "Where is it?" asked the unknown mechanic.
     "!" said the manager calmly. "Look under the seat."
     "How  should I know," said the mechanic, irritably. "I kept telling you
I was  a  waiter." There  was silence  for a while,  then the  driver's door
opened  and the  frowning  tense  face  of the  waiter-mechanic appeared. He
glanced at Pepper, gazed around  the cab, tugged the wheel for  some reason,
then put both arms under the seat and started feeling around.
     "Would this be the jack?" he asked quietly.
     "N-no," said Pepper. "I believe it's the starting handle."
     The mechanic raised the  handle to his eyes, examined it, placed  it on
the step, and thrust his arms once more under the seat.
     "What about this?" he asked.
     "No,"  said  Pepper,  "I can  be  absolutely sure  of that one.  It's a
calculating machine. Jacks aren't like that."
     The waiter-mechanic wrinkled his low  forehead  and  looked the machine
over carefully.
     "What are they like then?" he inquired.
     "We-11 ...  a sort of metal rod .  . . there's different kinds. They've
got a sort of movable handle."
     "Well there's a handle on this, like a cash register."
     "No, it's a different handle altogether."
     "What happens if you turn this one?"
     Pepper was completely at a  loss.  The mechanic  waited  for  a moment,
placed the machine  on the step,  and  got back under the seat. "Would it be
this?" he said.

     "Could be. It looks very like it. Only there  should be  another  metal
spoke to it, a thick one."
     The mechanic  found that, too. He hefted it in his palm, saying: "Okay,
I'll take this along to him for a start," then  left, leaving the door open.
Pepper  lit a cigarette.  Somewhere  behind  him  came  the  sound  of metal
clanking accompanied by swearing. The truck began creaking and trembling.
     There  was  still no sign of  Acey,  but Pepper wasn't worried.  He was
picturing  them bowling down the main street  of the  Directorate and no one
looking at them. Then they would turn toward the settlement dragging a cloud
of  yellow dust behind them. The sun would  rise higher and higher, it would
be to their right and would soon start scorching, then  they'd turn from the
settlement onto the  main  road,  it  would  lie  long, even,  gleaming  and
monotonous, on the horizon mirages would flow like great shining pools.  . .
.
     Once again the mechanic walked past the cab, rolling before him a heavy
rear wheel. The  wheel raced along the concrete floor and it was obvious the
mechanic wanted to  stop it  and  lean  it up against  the wall. The  wheel,
however,  wobbled a little and ponderously trundled  out into the  yard, the
mechanic in  awkward pursuit,  but  being outdistanced. At this point,  they
disappeared  from  view.  Out  in  the  yard  the  mechanic  began  shouting
despairingly. Came the tramp  of  many  feet  past the gates and  shouts of:
"Catch it! Come in from the right." More people ran past.
     Pepper noticed that the truck was not standing as evenly as before  and
looked out of the cab. The manager was busy with the rear wheel.
     "Hello," said Pepper. "What're  you .  .  ." "Ah, Pepper, friend!"  the
manager cried  happily, continuing  his  work. "You  stay there, stay there,
don't get out! You're not bothering us. Jammed, blast it. One came off fine,
the other's jammed."
     "How's that? Something broken?"
     "Don't think so,"  said the manager,  straightening up  and  wiping his
brow  with the  back end of the palm with which he  held the  spanner. "Just
rusted in a  bit,  probably. I'll  do it  right  away.  Then  we'll  get the
chessmen out. What d'you say?"
     "Chess?" said Pepper, "but where's Acey?"
     "Acey? That is, Ace? Ace is our senior lab assistant. He's been sent to
the forest. Ace doesn't work with us anymore. What d'you want him for?"
     "Nothing,  just .  . ." said Pepper  quietly. "I just thought . . ." He
opened the door and leapt down onto the cement floor.
     "No  need to get out. You could have  stayed there,  you're  not in our
way."
     "Why sit in here," said Pepper. "This  truck's  not  going anywhere, is
it?"
     "No, it  isn't.  Can't go without  wheels,  and these want  taking off.
That's all I needed--jammed! Ah,  to ... Never mind,  the  mechanics'll take
them off. Let's go and set up the board."
     He took Pepper's arm and led him into his office.  They sat  down at  a
table,  the  manager pushed away a heap  of papers,  set out  the board, and
disconnected the telephone.
     "Are we going to play with a clock?" he asked.
     "Well I don't know, really," said Pepper.
     It was  dim and cold in the office, blue tobacco smoke  floated between
the cupboards like  frozen  seaweed, and  the  manager,  warty, rotund,  and
covered in  mottled  patches,  was  like  a  gigantic  octopus  opening  the
lacquered  shell  of the  chess board  with  two hairy tentacles, and busily
extracting  its  wooden  innards. His round  eyes  held  a  dull gleam,  the
righthand one, the false one,  was permanently  directed toward the ceiling,
whereas the left one, lively  as a mercury dot, rolled freely in its srcket,
fixing its stare in turn on Pepper, the door, and the board.
     "With  a clock," the manager decided finally. He took a  clock from the
cupboard, wound it up and, pressing the button, made his first move.

     The sun was coming  up. From the yard came a shout of "come in from the
right!"
     At eight o'clock,  the manager, in a difficult position, went into deep
thought, then abruptly  ordered breakfast for two. Cars were rumbling out of
the garage. The manager lost one game and proposed another. They breakfasted
solidly,  two bottles  of  yogurt and  a crustly strudel apiece. The manager
lost a  second game and offered a third, his good eye gazing  at Pepper with
devoted  admiration.  He  played  an identical  queen's gambit  every  time,
indefatigably  sticking  to  an  inevitably losing  variation. He had, as it
were, worked out his defeat perfectly and Pepper moved his pieces absolutely
automatically feeling like  a programmed machine; neither  in him nor in the
world was there anything except a chess board, clock buttons,  and a  firmly
fixed program of action.
     At  five to nine the tannoy crackled and announced in a sexless  voice:
"All Directorate personnel to stand by telephones. The Director will address
all  staff." The  manager became most serious, reconnected the telephone and
put  the  receiver to  his  ear. Both his  eyes  were now  contemplating the
ceiling. "Can I go, now," asked Pepper. The manager frowned horribly, placed
his  finger  to  his lips,  then  waved  his  hand at Pepper.  An unpleasant
quacking resounded in the receiver. Pepper left on tiptoe.
     There were  lots of  people in  the garage. Every  face was  stern  and
impressive,  even  solemn.  No  one  was working,  everybody  had  telephone
receivers pressed  to their  ears. In  the yard,  only the  waiter-mechanic,
sweaty,  red and tormented, pursued his  wheel, breathing heavily. Something
very important was taking place. This can't go on, thought  Pepper,  it just
can't. I'm  always left out, I never know anything, perhaps that's the whole
trouble, perhaps everything's  really  all right,  but I  don't know  what's
what, so I'm always superfluous.
     He sprang into the nearest automatic telephone, snatched the  receiver,
and listened eagerly.  He  could only hear  the ringing tone. At once he was
aware of a sudden fear, a nagging apprehension that he was missing something
again, that somewhere everybody was getting something, and he, as usual, was
going without. Leaping  over the ropes and inspection pits,  he crossed  the
construction site,  gave a wide  berth  to a guard blocking the  road with a
pistol in one hand and a receiver in the other, and shinned up a ladder onto
the partially-built wall. In all the windows he could make out people frozen
to telephones  in attitudes  of  concentration;  just then  something whined
above his  ear and almost at once he heard the  sound of a revolver shot. He
leaped down  into a heap of rubbish and  rushed to the  service entrance. It
was locked. He yanked at the  handle  several  times until it came  off.  He
flung it to one side and for  a second debated what to do next.  There was a
narrow open window  alongside the door and, covered in dust, his nails torn,
he climbed in.
     There were two tables in the room in which he found himself. At one sat
Hausbotcher with a telephone. His  eyes  were closed, his face stony. He was
pressing the receiver  to his  ear with his shoulder and  jotting  something
down with a pencil on a large notepad.  The other  was vacant, on it stood a
telephone. Pepper took off the receiver and began to listen.
     Hissing. Crackling. An  unfamiliar  squeaky  voice: "Directorate can in
practice only  control an  infinitesimal area in  the  ocean  of the forest,
which laps the continent. The  meaning of life does not  exist, nor does the
meaning of action. We can do an extraordinary amount, but  up to now we have
not  understood what, out of  what we can do,  we  really  need. It does not
resist,  it   simply  takes   no  notice.  If  an  action  has  brought  you
pleasure--well and good,  if it hasn't--it  was pointless." More hissing and
crackling.  "We oppose with millions  of horsepower, dozens  of land-rovers,
airships, and helicopters, medical science and the finest  logistics  theory
in  the  world. The  Directorate has  at least  two  major failings.  At the
present time  similar actions can have far-reaching  cipher communication in
the name of Herostratus, so that he remains  our  dearly  beloved friend. It

cannot  create  at  all without  destroying authority and  ingratitude. ..."
Hooting,  whistling,   noises  like  an  explosive  cough.  ".  .  .  it  is
particularly  fond   of  so-called  simple  solutions,  libraries,  internal
communications,  geographical  and  other  maps.  The  ways  it  regards  as
shortest,  so as to consider the meaning of life  for  everyone at once, and
people don't  like  that. Personnel sit with their legs  dangling  over  the
cliff, each  in his own  place, tussle together, make jokes and hurl stones,
each trying to  hurl a  heavier stone,  at the same time, the expenditure on
yogurt does not help  grafting or eradication,  nor the due amount of forest
security. I  am afraid that we have  not realized what  we really  want, and
nerves, let us face it  also need to be trained, as capacity for receptivity
can be trained. Reason does not  blush or suffer from pangs  of  conscience,
since  a question from a scientific, a  correctly posed one, becomes a moral
one. It  is deceitful and slippery,  it is impermanent and dissimulates. But
someone must irritate, not relate legends, and carefully prepare himself for
a trial exit.  Tomorrow  I  will receive  you again and  see  how  you  have
prepared   yourself.   Twenty-two  hundred   hours--radiological  alarm  and
earthquake. Eighteen hundred--  meeting  of  all  off-duty personnel  in  my
office, so to speak, on the carpet. Twenty-four hundred--general evacuation.
. . ."
     Through the  receiver came  a sound of pouring water.  Then  everything
went quiet and Pepper noticed Hausbotcher watching him with sternly accusing
eyes.
     "What's he saying?"  asked Pepper in a whisper.  "I can't understand  a
thing."
     "Hardly surprising," said Hausbotcher icily. "You picked  up the  wrong
telephone." He  dropped  his eyes,  noted something on  his pad and went on:
"That is,  incidentally, an  absolutely impermissable  contravention  of the
rules. I insist  that you replace the receiver and leave. Otherwise I  shall
summon official personnel."
     "All right,"  said  Pepper. "I'll  go. But  where's my telephone?  This
isn't mine. Where's mine, then?"
     Hausbotcher made no reply. His eyes had  closed again, and he once more
pressed the instrument to his ear. Pepper could hear croaking noises.
     "I'm asking  you, where's my phone?" shouted  Pepper. Now he could hear
nothing at all. There was hissing, there was crackling, then came  the rapid
beeps of the signing-off signal.  He dropped the instrument and ran out into
the  corridor.  He  opened the  doors of  the offices one  after another and
everywhere saw staff familiar and unfamiliar. Some were sitting or standing,
frozen into total immobility, like wax figures with glassy eyes; others were
treading from one corner to another, stepping over the telephone wires  they
trailed after them; still others were feverishly  writing in  thick exercise
books, on scraps of paper, or the margins of  newspapers.  And  every one of
them had the telephone clamped close to his ear, as if afraid to miss even a
word. There were no spare telephones.  Pepper  attempted to take  a receiver
away  from one of the entranced ones,  a  young  man in  a  boiler-suit. He,
however,  at once  came  alive,  began  squealing and kicking, at  which the
others began shushing and waving their hands. Somebody shouted hysterically:
"Disgraceful! Call the guard!"
     "Where's  my telephone?" Pepper was shouting. "I'm a man like you and I
have a right to know! Let me listen! Give me my telephone!"
     He  was pushed out and the doors locked in his  face. He wandered up to
the last story,  where, almost into  the  attic,  next to  the never-working
elevator machinery, there sat two duty mechanics at a table, playing noughts
and crosses. Pepper leaned  against  the wall, out  of breath. The mechanics
glanced at him, gave him an absent smile, and once more bent over the paper.
     "Haven't you got your own telephone?" asked Pepper.
     "Yes," said one. "Naturally. We haven't come to that yet."
     "Well,  why  aren't  you  listening?"  "You  can't  hear  anything. Why
listen?" "Why can't you hear anything?"

     "Because we've cut the wire."
     Pepper  wiped his face  and  neck with a crumpled  handkerchief, waited
till one mechanic  defeated  the other, then went downstairs. The  corridors
had  become noisy; doors  were open wide, staff were coming out for a smoke.
Lively, excited, exhilarated voices exclaimed  and buzzed. "I'm telling  you
the truth.  Eskimos invented the Eskimo ice cream. What? Well, all  right, I
just  read it  in a book. .  .  .  You  can't  hear the assonance  yourself?
Es-ki-mos. Es-ki-mo. What?  .  .  ."  "I saw it  in the Hiver  catalogue,  a
hundred  and  fifty  thousand francs--and  that  was  in  fifty-six. Can you
imagine what that would be  today?" "Funny cigarettes. They  say they aren't
putting tobacco into cigarettes  anymore.  They get special paper, crush it,
and saturate it  in nicotine. . . ."  "You can get cancer  from tomatoes  as
well.  Tomatoes, a  pipe, eggs,  silk  gloves. . . ." "Did you  sleep  well?
Imagine, I couldn't get to  sleep  all night: that piledriver keeps thumping
all the  time. Can you hear  it? Like  that all night. Hello, there, Pepper!
They were saying you'd left. . . . You're staying, good lad!" "They've found
that thief at last, remember, all those things kept  disappearing? It turned
out  to be the discus-thrower from the park,  you know,  the statue near the
fountain.  He had  something  filthy written  on his leg, too." "Peppy, be a
pal, lend me five till payday--tomorrow that is. . . ." "But he wasn't after
her. She kept throwing herself at him. Right  in front of  her  husband. You
won't believe this, but I saw it with my own eyes. . . ."
     Pepper  went  down to his office, said hello  to  Kirn,  and washed his
hands. Kim  wasn't working.  He was  sitting  quietly with his hands  on the
table,  gazing  at  the tiled  wall.  Pepper took  the  dust-cover  off  the
Merce-des, plugged it in, and glanced expectantly at Kim.
     "Can't  work today," said  Kim. "Some  goon is going  around  repairing
everything. I'm sat here not knowing what to do."
     At this point a note on his  desk  caught Pepper's eye.  "To Pepper. We
are to  advise you that  your telephone is located in office 771." Signature
illegible. Pepper sighed.
     "No use sighing," said Kim, "you should have got to work on time."
     "Well, I didn't know," Pepper said. "I was intending to leave today."
     "It's your own fault," Kim said shortly.
     "Anyway I did hear something. Kim, you know. I  didn't understand it at
all. Why was that?"
     "Hear something!  You're a  fool. You're an  idiot. You missed  such an
opportunity I can hardly bear to speak to you. I'll have to introduce you to
the director. Out of pity."
     "Do that," said Pepper. "You know," he went  on, "sometimes I thought I
caught  the  sense  of  something,  some  scraps  of  ideas,  I  think  very
interesting ones, but I'm trying to recall them--and nothing."
     "Whose telephone was it?"
     "I don't know. Where Hausbotcher sits!"
     "Ah-h, yes, she's having a  baby. Hausbotcher's out of luck. Gets a new
assistant,  works  six months--and a baby.  Yes, Pepper,  you got  a woman's
telephone. So I don't know  how  I can help you. . . .  Nobody listens to it
all  right through,  women  either,  I suppose. After all,  the  director is
addressing  everybody at  once, but at the same time everybody separately as
well. Understand?"
     "I'm afraid not."
     "I  for  instance,  recommend  listening like this. Put the  director's
speech into one line,  omitting punctuation  marks, and choose the  words at
random, mentally putting down dominoes.  Then if the domino halves coincide,
the word is accepted and noted  down on a separate  list. If it doesn't--the
word is temporarily rejected, but remains in the line. There are a few other
refinements to do with the  frequency of vowels and  consonants, but that is
an effect of secondary significance. Get it?"
     "No," said  Pepper. "That is, yes. Pity I  didn't know that method. And
what did he say today?"

     "It's not the only method. There is, for example, the
     intermittent spiral method. It's rather crude,  but  if  the speech  is
only  about equipment and  economic problems,  it's very convenient  because
it's  simple.  There  is   the  Stevenson-Zade  method,  but  that  requires
electronic gadgets. ... So  that, all round, the domino  method's  the best,
but when the terminology is specialized and narrow--the spiral method."
     "Thank  you,"  said Pepper.  "But what was the  director  talking about
today?"
     "What d'you mean, what about?"
     "What? . . . Well. .. what about? Well, what did he ,say?"
     "To whom?"
     "To  whom?  Well, you  for instance." "Unfortunately, I can't tell  you
that.  It's  classified material,  and  after  all.  Peppy,  you're  not  on
permanent staff here. So don't get mad."
     "No, I'm not angry," said Pepper. "I'd have liked  to know, that's all.
... He said something about the forest and  free will. ... I'd recently been
lobbing pebbles over the cliff, well, just  like that for no real reason and
he said something about it."
     "Don't you tell me  about  that," said Kirn nervously. "It's nothing to
do with me. Or you either if it wasn't your telephone."
     "Now wait a minute, did he say something about the forest?"
     Kim shrugged.
     "Well, naturally.  He  never talks about  anything  else. Anyway, let's
stop this sort of talk. Tell me how you meant to get away." Pepper told him.
     "You shouldn't beat him all the time," said Kim, thoughtful.
     "There's nothing I can do. I'm a  pretty  strong player, you  know, and
he's just an amateur. And he plays a queer game."
     "That doesn't matter. I'd have thought a bit in your shoes. I'm getting
not to like you just lately. .  . . They're writing denunciations about you.
. . . You know what, I'll fix a  meeting with the director for you tomorrow.
Go to him and  explain yourself fully. I reckon he'll let you go. Stress the
fact  that you're a linguist, an arts  graduate, and got  here accidentally.
Mention, as  if in passing, that you were very keen to get into the  forest,
but you've  changed  your mind,  because you  don't think you're competent."
"All right."
     They were silent for a while. Pepper imagined himself face to face with
the director and was terrified. Domino method, he thought, Stevenson-Zade. .
. .
     "Main thing, don't be afraid to cry," said Kim. "He likes that."
     Pepper sprang to his feet and paced the room in agitation.
     "Good lord," he said. "If  I only knew what he looks like. What sort of
a man he is."
     "What sort? He's not very tall, gingerish. ..."
     "Hausbotcher was saying that he was a real giant."
     "Hausbotcher's a  fool. Boaster and liar. The director is a ginger sort
of guy, stoutish, small scar on right  cheek. Bit pigeon-toed when he walks,
like a sailor. In fact that's what he used to be."
     "But Acey said he was skinny and  had  long hair because of his missing
ear."
     "What Acey is this?"
     "Driver. I was telling you about him."
     Kim gave an irritated laugh.
     "How would driver Acey know about all that? Take my advice, Peppy,  and
don't be so trusting."
     "Acey said he'd been his driver and seen him several times."
     "Well, what of it? He's lying, probably.  I was his  personal secretary
and never saw him once."
     "Who?"
     "The director.  I  was  his secretary for ages till  I  got  my further
degree."

     "And never saw him once?"
     "Well, naturally! You imagine it's that easy?"
     "Wait a minute, how do you know he's ginger and so forth?"
     Kim shook his head.
     "Peppy,"  said  he tenderly. "Dear lad.  Nobody's  ever seen a hydrogen
atom,  but  everybody  knows   it  has  an  electron  shell  having  certain
characteristics  and a  nucleus  consisting in the  simplest instance of one
proton."
     "That's  true enough," said Pepper  limply. He felt weary. "So I'll see
him tomorrow."
     "Now, now, ask me something easier," said Kim. "I'll fix you a meeting,
that I can guarantee you. But what you'll see or who--that  I don't know. Or
what you'll hear, either. You don't ask me whether the director will let you
go or not, do you? And rightly so, I can hardly know that, can I?"
     "That's a different matter, surely," said  Pepper. "Same thing. Peppy,"
said Kim. "Believe me, the same."
     "I  must seem very  stupid," Pepper  said sadly. "A bit." "I just slept
badly, that's all."
     "No, you're not practical, that's all. Why did you sleep badly anyway?"
     Pepper told  all and became alarmed. Kirn's kindly face flushed and his
hair  became  disarranged. He  snarled  and grabbed  the  telephone,  dialed
furiously and barked:
     "Warden? What  does this mean? How dare you turn Pepper out? Si-1-ence!
I didn't ask what had run out. I'm asking you how you dared move Pepper out?
What? Si-1-ence!  You  don't  dare! What?  Rubbish, blather! Si-1-ence! I'll
walk all over you!  You  and your  Claudius-Octavian!  You'll  clean out  my
toilet,  you'll  go into the forest in twenty-four hours, in sixty  minutes!
What? Yes ...  yes. ... What? Yes ... that's right. Now you're talking.  And
the best sheets. . . . That's your business. In the street if you like. .  .
. What? All right. Okay. Okay. Thank you. Sorry to disturb you. . .  . Well,
naturally. Thanks a lot. Bye." He replaced the receiver.
     "Everything's  okay,"  he said.  "Marvelous man when all's said. Go and
lie down. You'll  be living in his flat, he and his family  are moving  into
the hotel room you had,  otherwise, unfortunately, he can't. . . . And don't
argue, for  heaven's sake, it's not at all our business. He decided himself.
Go on, go, that's an order. I'll call you about the director."
     Pepper  went  out  into  the  street, swaying. He stood for  a  moment,
blinking in the sun, then  set off for the park to look for his suitcase. He
did not find it at once since it was firmly held in the muscular gypsum hand
of the  thieving discus-thrower  by the fountain. The  filthy inscription on
his  thigh  was  not as filthy as all  that. A chemical pencil had  written:
"Girls, beware of syphilis."
     Chapter Four
     Kandid left before sunup so as to get back by dinner-time. It was about
ten kilometers to New Village,  the road was familiar, well-trodden, spotted
with bald patches from spilled grass-killer.  It was reckoned safe to travel
on. Warm, bottomless swamps lay to right and left, rotten branches poked  up
out  of  the  stinking  rusty  water,  the  sticky  caps  of  enormous swamp
toadstools thrust  up their round shining domes. Sometimes by the very  road
could be found the crushed homes of water spiders. From the road it was hard
to  make out anything taking  place on the  swamps;  myriads of thick  green
columns, ropes, threads as shimmering  as gossamer hung down from  the dense
interlocking  tree-crowns overhead and sank their  questing  roots into  the
ooze. A  greedy, relentless  greenery stood like a wall of fog and concealed
everything except sounds and smells. Every now and again something broke off
in  the yellow-green twilight  and fell with an endless crashing,  finishing
with a thick,  oily splash. The swamp sighed, rumbled, champed,  and silence
fell  again, and a minute  later, the fetid stench  of the  perturbed depths

penetrated the green curtain and drifted onto  the road.  It  was  said that
nobody could walk across these bottomless places, though the deadlings could
walk  anywhere, for  the good reason  thai they  were deadlings--  the swamp
would not accept them.  Just in case, Kandid broke off a branch for himself,
not that he was afraid of deadlings, deadlings did no harm to men as a rule,
but various rumors went the rounds concerning the fauna and  flora of forest
and  swamp,  and some  of them  might  turn  out to be true,  with all their
absurdity-He had gone about five hundred paces from  the village,  when Nava
called him. He halted.
     "Why go without me?" asked Nava, somewhat breathlessly. "I told you I'd
go with you, I shan't stay alone in that village, nothing for me to do on my
own, nobody likes me there, you're my husband, you have to take me with you,
it doesn't signify that we've got no  children yet all  the  same, you're my
husband,  and I'm your wife, we'll have children sometime. .  . . It's just,
I'll tell  you honestly,  I don't want children  yet, I can't understand why
they're necessary or what we could  do with them. . . . Never mind what that
elder says or that old man of yours, in our village it  was quite different:
who wants to, has children, and who doesn't doesn't. ..."
     "Now, now,  go back home," said Kandid. "Where did you  get  the idea I
was going  away? I'm just going to New Village, I'll  be home for dinner all
right. . . ."
     "That's all  right,  I'll go  with  you then, and  we'll come  back for
dinner together, the dinner's been  ready since yesterday, I've hidden it so
that even that old man of yours won't find it."
     Kandid walked on. It was useless to argue, let her come. He cheered up,
even. He felt like tangling with somebody, swinging his stick and taking out
on them all the  frustration and anger and  helplessness  built up over  how
many years was it. On robbers. Or deadlings --it made no difference. Let the
little girl come along. My wife, too, wants no children. He hit out with all
his  force,  swung  at a  dank tree-root  on  the verge, and  almost knocked
himself over: the root  had rotted completely and the stick went through  it
like  thin air.  Several  sprightly gray animals leaped  out  and, gurgling,
disappeared into the dark water.
     Nava skipped alongside, now running ahead, now lagging behind. Now  and
again she took hold of Kandid's arm with both of hers and hung on thoroughly
contented. She talked of the  dinner, which  she  had so cunningly concealed
from the  old man,  of how wild ants might have  eaten it if she hadn't made
sure they'd never find it, of how some noxious fly had woken her up and that
when she was going  to sleep  last night, he, Dummy, was already snoring and
muttering incomprehensible words in  his  sleep, and how  did  you know such
words, Dummy, it's amazing when nobody in our village knows words like that,
only you know,  you  always  had, even when you  were  quite ill, knew  even
then... .
     Kandid  listened   and  didn't  listen,  the  usual   monotonous  drone
penetrated his brain, he strode on  and pondered  dully and at length, about
why he  could never  think about anything,  perhaps  because of the  endless
inoculations  that went  on in  the  village  when  they took time off  from
chattering,  or perhaps from  something else. . . . Perhaps it was the whole
dozy, not  even primitive,  just vegetable way of life  he had led since the
long-forgotten days when the  helicopter had flown into an invisible barrier
at  full  speed,  heeled over, snapped its rotors, and crashed like  a stone
into the swamps. . .  .  Probably I  was thrown out  of the  cabin then,  he
thought. Thrown out of the cabin, he thought for the thousandth time. Hit my
head on something, so I never  recovered . . . and  if I hadn't been  thrown
out, I'd have drowned in the swamp along with the aircraft,  so  it's a good
thing I  got thrown out. ... It suddenly struck him that all this was actual
ratiocination and he rejoiced; it had  seemed that he'd lost his ability  to
think clearly long ago, could only affirm one thing: day after tomorrow, day
after tomorrow. . . .
     He glanced at Nava. The  girl was hanging  on his  left arm and talking

recklessly as she looked up at him:
     "They all got into a huddle, and it got  terrible hot, you know how hot
they are, and there was no moon at all that night. Then mam  started pushing
me away quietly, and I crawled on  all fours between all their legs, and mam
never got to see me anymore...."
     "Nava," said Kandid. "You're telling me  that story  again. You've told
it to me two hundred times."
     "Well, what if I  have?" asked  Nava, astonished. "You're a queer  one.
Dummy. What  else  can I tell you about? There's nothing else I can remember
or know about. I'm  not going to tell you  how we dug a cellar together last
week, you saw all that yourself, didn't you? Now if I'd  dug the cellar with
somebody else, with Hopalong, now, or Loudmouth. . . ." She suddenly livened
up. "You know. Dummy, that's interesting now. Tell me how we dug the cellar,
nobody's told me about that yet, 'cos nobody saw. . . ."
     Kandid's attention was drawn  away again, the yellow-green  undergrowth
floated by on either  side, slowly waving, some creature snuffled and sighed
in  the water, a swarm of soft white bugs,  the  sort they made intoxicating
liquors from, sailed by with a thin whine, the road under their feet was now
soft where  there was tall grass, now  rough  from gravel and crushed stone.
Yellow, gray, green, blotches--nothing for the eye to latch onto, nothing to
lodge in the memory. Now the path  turned sharply to the left; Kandid walked
on another few paces and halted, trembling. Nava abruptly fell silent.
     By the road, with its head in the swamp, lay a large deadling. Its arms
and legs were flung  out and unpleasantly distorted, it was perfectly still.
It  was lying on crushed grass, now yellow  from the heat, pale,  broad, and
even from a distance it was obvious that it had been terribly beaten. It was
like jelly. Kandid  cautiously circled it. He became alarmed.  The fight had
taken  place  fairly  recently:  the  crushed,  yellowing grass-blades  were
straightening up as he watched. Kandid carefully  surveyed  the road.  There
were  plenty of tracks, but he could make  nothing of them, while  the  road
made another bend some little  way ahead, and  what lay beyond that he could
not guess. Nava was still looking back at the deadling.
     "Our  people  didn't do  it," said she  very quietly. "Our people don't
know how.  Buster always threatens  but  he can't do this either, just waves
his arms all over the place. . . . Nobody from New Village can either. . . .
Dummy, let's go back, eh? Maybe they're freaks. They walk here, so they say,
not  often, but it happens. Better go back, eh? ... What're you taking me to
New Village for anyway? Haven't I seen New Village before?"
     Kandid lost  his temper. What  the devil was all this? He'd walked this
road  a hundred times without meeting anybody, something worth recalling and
pondering.  And  now, when  they  were leaving tomorrow-- not even  the  day
after, but  tomorrow,  of course it  had to happen!--this one and  only safe
road  becomes  dangerous.  . . . You could  only reach the  City through New
Village.  If  there  was  any reaching the City  at all,  if the  City  even
existed, then the road to it led through New Village.  He went back  to  the
deadling. He pictured to himself  Hopalong, Buster, and Barnacle, chattering
ceaselessly,  boasting,  and  threatening,  as   they  stamped  around  this
deadling, and then still continuing  the  boasts  and  threats, turning back
from sin and going back to  the  village. He bent down and took the deadling
by the legs. They were still hot  but not enough to burn. With a  flurry, he
shoved the bulky body  into the swamp. The  quag champed,  groaned, and gave
way. The deadling disappeared, a ripple ran across the dark water and died.
     "Nava,"  said  Kandid, "go  to the  village." "How  should I go to  the
village if you aren't  going  there?" said  Nava calculatingly,  "now if you
were to go to the village too. . . ."
     "Stop chattering,"  said Kandid. "Run away now to the  village and wait
for me. And don't talk to anybody there."
     "What about you?"
     "I'm a man," said Kandid, "nobody's going to do anything to me."
     "Oh yes they will,"  objected Nava. "I'm telling  you: what if  they're

freaks? It's all  the  same  to  them,  you know, man, woman,  or  deadling,
they'll make you into one of their own kind, you'll walk here, horrible, and
grow  onto a tree at night.  How can I go on my own, when they could be back
there?"
     "There's  no  such  thing  as  freaks,"   said   Kandid,  without  much
confidence. "That's all travelers' tales. . . ."
     He looked back. There was a bend in  the road  and what lay beyond that
he could not guess either.  Nava was saying something to him copiously, fast
and whispering, which  made it speciaHy unnerving. He took a better  grip on
his club.
     "All right. Come with me. Just stick close to me and  if I order you to
do something, do it straight away. And keep quiet, close your mouth, and say
nothing till we get to New Village. Let's go."
     Keep quiet, of course she couldn't. She did stick close by his side, no
more running  ahead or lagging behind, but kept up a continuous muttering to
herself:
     at  first  it  was something about freaks then  about the  cellar, then
about Hopalong and how she had walked these parts with him and made a flute.
.  . .  They  negotiated the dangerous bend,  then another  and  Kandid  had
relaxed somewhat, when right out of the tall grass in the  swamp came people
who halted silently before them.
     So it  goes, thought Kandid wearily. Just my luck. Always just my luck.
He glanced sideways at Nava. Nava was shaking her  head and wrinkling up her
face.
     "Don't you give me up to them, Dummy," she was muttering. "I don't want
to go with them. I want to go with you, don't give me up. . . ."
     He  looked  at the  people.  There were  seven of  them,  all men,  all
overgrown  with  hair to  the eyes  and all with  huge knobbly  clubs.  They
weren't local people, they weren't  clothed  after the local  fashion, quite
different plants. These were robbers.
     "Well. why've you stopped?" said their leader in a deep  rolling voice.
"Come  here, now.  We  mean  you no harm. ... If you were deadlings, then of
course,  we'd have a different  sort of talk, that is no  talk at  all, we'd
take  you to little bits, and  that's all the talk there'd be. ... Where are
you heading  for? To New  Village, I'd guess. That's all  right,  you can do
that. You, pop,  you get  along. The  little daughter, of  course, you leave
with us. Don't you fret, she'll be better off with us. . . ."
     "No," said Nava, "I don't want to go with them. You hear that, Dummy, I
don't want to go with them, they're robbers. . "
     The robbers began laughing, not gloating, just from habit.
     "Maybe,  you'd let us both  through?"  asked  Kandid.  "No,"  said  the
leader, "both is out.  Just now there are deadlings around here, your little
daughter would  be a  goner, she'll get to be a splendid Maiden or some such
rubbish, and we get nothing out of that,  nor do you,  pop, think it out for
yourself if you're a man and not  a  deadling, and you don't  look much like
one of them, though you've an odd look about you for a man."
     "She's still a girl, you know," said Kandid. "Why hurt her?"
     The leader was astonished.
     "Why do we have to harm her? She won't be a girl forever, when the time
comes she'll be a  woman, not  one  of  your  what d'you  call 'em  splendid
Maidens, but a woman. . . ."
     "It's all lies," said Nava, "don't you believe him, Dummy, do something
quick as you've brought  me  here,  or they'll cart me off  this minute like
they did  Hopalong's daughter, since then nobody's set eyes on her,  I don't
want to go with them, better if I become one of them splendid Maidens. . . .
Look how  wild  they  are and  skinny, they've got nothing  to  eat  by them
either, very like. . . ."
     Kandid looked about him helplessly,  then an idea occurred to  him, one
that seemed  good  to him. "Listen, people," he pleaded, "take us both." The
robbers approached  without  haste. Their leader inspected Kandid  carefully

from head to foot.
     "No," he said. "What do we  need somebody like you for? You village lot
are not fit for anything, you've got no desperation in you, why you're alive
I don't know,  we could come in and take the lot of you with our bare hands.
We don't need you, pop, you talk a bit queer, no knowing what sort of a  man
you are, you get yourself to New Village and leave the little daughter  with
us."
     Kandid sighed deeply, took a grip  on his club with both hands and said
softly to Nava:
     "Now, Nava, run! Run, don't look back, I'll hold them back."
     Stupid, he thought. Of  course it would  turn out stupid. He remembered
the deadling lying with  its head in  the dark water, like jelly, and lifted
his club above his head.
     "Ey-ey!" cried the leader.
     All seven, shoving and  slithering,  rushed forward  in a mass.  Kandid
could still hear the pattering of Nava's heels, then  there  was no time for
that.  He  was frightened and ashamed,  but his fear left  him very quickly,
since unexpectedly  it pretty soon became clear that  the only  real fighter
among the robbers was the leader. Fending off his blows, Kandid saw that the
rest  of  them,  while  continuing  to  wave  their  clubs  in an  aimlessly
aggressive  manner, were just knocking into one another tottering from their
own heroic swings,  stopping  often  to  spit on  their palms. One  of  them
suddenly gave a despairing squeal: "I'm sinking!" and collapsed noisily into
the swamp, two of the  robbers  at once threw away their weapons and set  to
work dragging him out. The leader, however, pressed on croaking and stamping
his feet,  until Kandid caught  him a chance blow on the kneecap. The leader
dropped  his  staff,  hissed  sharply, and squatted  on his haunches. Kandid
leaped back.
     The two thieves were busy dragging the sinking one from the bog; he was
completely stuck, his face had gone bluish. Their leader sat on his haunches
and  was examining his injury solicitously. The other three,  sticks raised,
were crowding about  behind his  back,  also  examining the  injury over his
head.
     "You're a fool, pop," said the leader reproachfully. "You didn't  ought
to do that, you village yokel. I've never seen the likes of  you, and that's
a  fact. . .  .  You can't see  what's good for  you, village yokel, blasted
thick oaf. . . ."
     Kandid waited no longer. He turned and raced after  Nava as fast as his
legs would carry him. The robbers called out after him,  jeering and  angry,
the leader shouting:  "Stop him! Stop him!" They didn't  come after him, and
Kandid wasn't happy  about that. He experienced feelings  of  disappointment
and annoyance and as he ran tried to  imagine how these clumsy, awkward, and
unmalicious  people could so terrorize the  villages and  also  in  some way
destroy deadlings, those agile and merciless fighters.
     Soon he  caught sight of Nava; the girl was bounding along about thirty
yards ahead,  banging her  hard  bare heels  down  on the ground. He saw her
disappear around a bend and suddenly reappear coming toward him, then freeze
for an  instant  and race sideways  straight across the swamp, leaping  from
root to root, amid flying spray. Kandid's heart stopped.
     "Don't," he roared, breathless. "Have you gone crazy? Stop!"
     Nava at once halted, grabbing at a liana, and turned toward him. Now he
saw another three  robbers emerging from the bend,  who stopped, looking now
at him, now at Nava.
     "Dummy!"  cried  Nava penetratingly. "You  hit  them and run  here! You
won't sink here don't be scared! Hit them, beat them! That's the way! Go on!
Go on! Give it to them!"
     "You there," said one of the robbers solicitously, "stop that shouting,
just hold on, or you'll fall in, drag you out after. . . ."
     Behind him the robbers began stamping and crying:
     "Ooh-hoo!" The three  in front waited. Then Kandid, seizing hold of his

cudgel at both ends, thrust it ahead of  him  across his chest  and  flew at
them, knocked all three down and fell over himself. He knocked himself badly
on somebody but leaped up at once. Everything swam before his eyes. Somebody
again cried out in terror: "I'm  sinking." Someone's  bearded face thrust at
him and  Kandid struck it a blow  with his staff without  looking. The staff
broke in half. Kandid flung the fragment from him and jumped into the swamp.
     A root subsided under his foot and he very nearly came to grief, but at
once leaped for the next and proceeded jumping heavily from one snag root to
another, in a spray of  black stinking  mud. Nava  squealed  in triumph  and
whistled  as  he came  toward her. In the rear angry voices resounded: "What
happened to you, butterfingers, clumsy devil?"
     "What about you, then, tell me that!"
     "We let the girl go, the girl won't last long now. . . ."
     "The man's gone mad, fighting!"
     "He ripped my clothes, blast it, what clothes too, best you can get, my
clothes, but he tore them. Not even him, it was you tore them. . . ."
     "That's  enough talky-talk, when all's done; we've got  to catch  them,
not talky-talk. . . . See, they're running, and you talky-talk!"
     "What about you, then, tell me that!"
     "He hit my leg,  see? Damaged my poor knee, but  how he did it, I don't
understand, I just swung and . . ."
     "And where's Seveneyes? Boys, Seveneyes is sinking."
     "Sinking!  That's  right,  sinking. . .  .  Seveneyes sinking  and they
talky-talk!"
     Kandid came to a halt, and likewise grabbed  hold of a liana; breathing
heavily, he  listened and  watched the  odd people piled  up  on  the  road,
flailing their  arms  about, dragging their Seveneyes out of the  bog by leg
and  head. Gurgling and  snoring  sounds  filled the  air. Two robbers  were
already  moving toward Kandid,  knee-deep  in  the black sludge, testing the
quagmire with their staves. They  were  avoiding the root-snags. Lies again,
thought Kandid.  You could cross the swamp  by a ford and everybody said you
could only do it  by the road. They used the robbers as bugbears, good Lord,
what bugtoears!
     Nava  tugged  his  arm. "Let's  go,  Dummy,"  she  -said. "What're  you
standing there for? Let's  go  quick ... or maybe you  want to  fight a  bit
more[9]  Wait then and I'll find you a good  stick,  then you can
beat these two and  the Others'11 get scared.  Though  if they  don't,  then
they'll  get the better  of you, 'cos you're only one, and they're one . . .
two . . . three . . . four. . . ."
     "Go where?" asked Kandid. "Will we get to New Village?"
     "We'il  get there very like," said Nava. "I don't know why we shouldn't
get to New Village. . . ."
     "G"  forward  then," said Kandid, who  had got his breath back by  now.
"Show me the way."
     Nava lightly sprang off  into the  forest, into the very depths  of the
green fog of undergrowth.
     "I'm not too sure which way we should go  or how," said she as she ran.
"But I've been here once, or maybe not once but more. Hopalong and I used to
come  here, before you  came.  ... Or no, you were here, only you were still
going about witless, couldn't understand  anything, couldn't talk, looked at
everybody like a  fish, then they gavie  me to you,  I married you,  but you
don't remember anything, likely. . . ." Kandid jumped after her, striving to
keep his breathing regular and keep exactly to her  footprints. From time to
time he glanced back. The robbers were not far off.
     "I came here wilth Hopalong," continued Nava, "when Buster had his wife
abducted  by thieves, Hopa-long's  daughter. He  always used to take me with
him, wanted to exchange me maybe, or just wanted to take me as his daughter,
anyway he went with me into the forest, 'cos  he was wasting away with grief
for his daughter. . . ."
     The lianas stuck to their arms, lashed their faces, and dead tangles of

them dragged at their clothes and tripped them up. From above, detritus  and
insects  rained down, and  sometimes heavy, shapeless masses accumulated and
plunged downward through the tangle of greenery and swayed about above their
heads.  To left or right could  be glimpsed sticky purple clusters. fungi of
some sort, or fruits, or some repulsive creatures' nests.
     "Hopalong used to  say,  that there's a village somewhere  here. . . ."
Nava  spoke lightly as she ran, as if she weren't running at all but lolling
on her bed at home: it was  obvious straight away she wasn't a  local  girl,
the locals couldn't run. "Not our village  and not New Village, some  other,
Hopalong told me the  name but I've forgotten, it was a long time ago, after
all, before you came ... or no, you  were here, only you couldn't think, and
they hadn't given me to you yet. . . . And  use your mouth when you breathe,
no sense in using your nose, you can talk fine that way too, this way you'll
get  out of breath, we've a  long way to run  yet, we  haven't got past  the
wasps, where we'll have to run fast, though  maybe the  wasps have gone from
there since. . .  . They were  the  wasps  of that village I was telling you
about, but Hopalong used  to  say there's been no people in the  village for
ages, the Accession's happened there, he says, so there's no  people left. .
. . No, Dummy, I'm lying, he was talking about another village. . . ."
     Kandid had got his second wind and running was easier. They were now in
the very  heart of the forest,  the very depths of  the thickets. Kandid had
been  as  deep  as  this  only  once, when  he had attempted  to  straddle a
deadling, so as to reach its masters  on its back, the deadling had galloped
along, it  was as  hot  as a boiling  kettle and  Kandid  had  finally  lost
consciousness from the pain and fallen off into the mud. He had suffered for
ages afterward from burns on chest and palms.
     It was getting darker and darker. The sky was no longer visible at all,
the air  became more and more stifling. At the same time,  the stretches  of
open water became rarer, mighty clumps of red  and  white moss appeared. The
moss was soft and cool, and extremely springy, it was pleasant to step on.
     "Let's. .  .  have  a rest. . . ."  breathed Kandid.  "No, what are you
thinking of. Dummy," said Nava. "We can't possibly rest here. We have to get
past  this moss  as quick as  we  can, it's dangerous  moss, it's  a sort of
animal lying down, like a spider, you  go to sleep on  it and you won't wake
up anymore, that's what sort of  moss it is, let the robbers rest on it, but
likely they know that you mustn't, otherwise that'd be good...."
     She looked at Kandid and slackened to a  walk. Kandid hauled himself to
the nearest tree,  leaned his back on it, the back of  his head, finally all
his weight  and closed his  eyes. He very much wanted  to sit down,  to fall
down, but he was afraid. He assured himself; they're surely lying around the
moss as well. But all the same he was  afraid. His heart was  beating like a
mad thing, his legs might  not have existed at all, his lungs were  bursting
and  expanded  painfully in  his  chest at every breath, and  everything was
slippery and salty with sweat.
     "What  if they catch up  with us?" he heard Nava's voice  as if through
cotton wool. "What  will  we  do, Dummy, when they catch us up. You're about
all in, likely you couldn't fight anymore, eh?"
     He wanted to  reply: I could, but only managed to move his lips. He was
no longer frightened of  the  robbers. He wasn't frightened  of anything. He
was only afraid of moving and of lying down in the  moss. It was the forest,
after all, whatever lies they told, it was the forest, this was something he
well recalled, he  never  forgot that ever, even  when  he  used  to  forget
everything else.
     "You haven't even  got a stick now," Nava was saying. "Shall I look for
a stick. Dummy, shall I?"  "No," he  mumbled. "Don't bother . . . heavy. . .
."  He opened his eyes  and  listened  intently. The robbers were  near, and
could be  heard  panting  and trampling  in  the undergrowth,  the trampling
wasn't very lively either, the robbers too were having a hard time of it.
     "Let's get on," said Kandid.
     They passed  through  a  zone of  dangerous white moss, then a  zone of

dangerous red  moss, the wet bog began again with  still,  thick  water,  on
which reclined gigantic pale flowers  with a repellent meaty smell, and  out
of each flower peered a gray, speckled animal, which followed them with eyes
on stalks.
     "You, Dummy, splash along a  bit faster," Nava was saying  practically,
"or  something'll  suck  you  in and you'll never get free  afterward, don't
think just because you've had an inoculation, you won't get  sucked in, 'cos
you just will. Then it'll conk out,  of course, but that won't help you any.
. . ."
     The bog suddenly came to an end, and the terrain began to rise steeply.
A  tall striped grass with  sharp cutting  edges made its appearance. Kandid
looked  back and  caught sight of the  robbers.  For some  reason  they  had
halted. For some reason they  were standing  up  to  their  knees  in swamp,
leaning  on  their  clubs  and looking after them. Done  in, thought Kandid,
they're done  in as  well. One of the  robbers  raised his arm  and made  an
inviting gesture, shouting:
     "Come on down, what do you think you're doing?"
     Kandid turned away and went after Nava. After the  quagmire, walking on
solid ground seemed an  easy matter,  even uphill. The robbers were shouting
something, two and  then  three voices. Kandid turned for the last time. The
robbers were still standing in the swamp,  in  the filth,  full of  leeches;
they hadn't even come  out onto dry land. Seeing him look back, they started
waving their arms desperately and began shouting again  discordantly; it was
hard to make out.
     "Back!" they were shouting, it seemed. "Ba-a-ck! We won't  to-ouch you!
. . . You're goners, you foo-o-ols!"
     You  don't  catch  me,  thought  Kandid,  with  cheerful malice. Fools,
yourselves, and I believed in you. I've had enough of believing. . .  . Nava
had already disappeared behind the trees and he hastened after her.
     "Come ba-a-ack! We'll let you go-o-o!" roared the leader.
     They  can't  be as  done in as  all  that  if they can bawl  like that,
thought Kandid fleetingly and at once began to reflect that a little farther
on and he would sit down and  rest, and search  out any leeches and ticks he
had picked up.
     Chapter Five
     Pepper  presented  himself  in  the director's anteroom at exactly ten.
There was  a line there  already, about  twenty  people. Pepper was  put  in
fourth place. He took an armchair between Beatrice Vakh of the Aid to Native
Populations Group and a morose member of the Engineering  Penetration Group.
The morose member, judging by the identification button on his chest and the
legend on  his  white mask,  bore  the name  Brandskugel.  The anteroom  was
decorated in pale pink, on one wall hung a board, "No smoking, no litter, no
noise,"  on  the  other  a  large picture  of  pathfinder Selivan's exploit:
Selivan with arms upraised, was turning into a  jumping tree before the eyes
of his stunned comrades. The  pink blinds on the windows were  tightly down,
an enormous chandelier blazed from the ceiling. Apart from the entrance door
on which was  written "Exit," the room possessed one other  door,  vast  and
covered  in yellow leather, with the sign "No Exit." This notice was done in
fluorescent colors and had  the effect of a lugubrious warning. Under it the
secretary's  desk  stood with  its  four  different-colored  telephones  and
electric  typewriter.  The  secretary herself,  a plump middle-aged  lady in
pince-nez,  was  haughtily  perusing  the  Textbook  of  Atomic Physics. The
visitors  talked  among themselves in restrained voices. Many  were  plainly
nervous and were compulsively leafing through old illustrated magazines.
     It was  all extraordinarily like a  dentist's  waiting room  and Pepper
again experienced an unpleasant chill, a quiver in the jaw, and a desire  to
go somewhere else quickly.
     "They're not lazy even," said Beatrice Vakh, turning her beautiful  red

head slightly toward  Pepper. "But they can't tolerate systematic work. How,
for instance, can you explain the extraordinary ease with which they abandon
their living places?"
     "Are you addressing me?" asked Pepper timidly. He hadn't  the  faintest
idea how to explain the extraordinary ease.
     "No,  I  was  talking  to  Monsher  Brandskugel."  Monsher  Brandskugel
adjusted  his left  moustache,  which had  come unstuck, and gave  a muffled
mumble. "I don't know!"
     "Nor do  we," said Beatrice bitterly. "As soon as our groups get near a
village,  they leave their  houses  and  possessions  and  go.  You get  the
impression  they're absolutely  uninterested  in  us.  We've got nothing for
them. Do you see it that way?"
     Monsher Brandskugel was silent  for  a while as if pondering and looked
at  Beatrice through  the  strange cross-shaped embrasures of his  mask.  At
length he brought out in his previous intonation, "I don't know."
     "It's a  great pity,"  Beatrice  continued, "that our group is  made up
exclusively of women. I realize that • there is an underlying reason for it,
but  we  often  lack  masculine  toughness  and   endurance,   I'd  call  it
pur-posefulness. Women  unfortunately tend to dissipate their  energies,  no
doubt you've noticed that?"
     "I don't know," said Brandskugel, at which his  moustaches came off and
floated softly  to the floor. He picked them  up,  inspected them carefully,
lifting the edge of his mask  and, applying spit  matter-of-factly, replaced
them.
     A  bell rang sweetly on the secretary's desk.  She put aside  her book,
glanced through her  list, holding on her pince-nez with an elegant gesture,
and announced:
     "Professor  Cockatoo, please  go in."  Professor  Cockatoo dropped  his
picture  magazine, jumped  to his feet, sat down again, glanced around, grew
perceptibly pale and  then, biting his lip and  with  a violently  distorted
face, pushed off from his  chair and disappeared behind the  door marked "No
Exit."  A painful silence reigned in the anteroom  for several seconds. Then
voices resumed humming and pages rustling.
     "We simply cannot find any way of engaging their interest, of absorbing
them. We  built them convenient  day houses on piles. They fill them up with
peat and colonize it with insects of some kind. We tried to offer them tasty
food in place  of the  sour filth  they eat. Useless. We tried to dress them
like human  beings. One died,  two fell ill. Well, we're pushing on with our
experiments. Yesterday we scattered a truckload of mirrors  and gilt buttons
in  the forest. . . . The cinema doesn't interest them,  neither does music.
Immortal works are just received with giggles. . . . No, we'll have to start
with the  children.  For  instance,  I  suggest  catching  the children, and
organizing  special  schools.  Unfortunately  that's  linked with  technical
difficulties; human hands can't touch them, special machines are needed. . .
. Anyway, you know that as well as I dp."
     "I don't know," said Brandskugel miserably.
     The bell  tinkled again and the secretary said,  "Beatrice, you now. Go
through, please."
     Beatrice started fussing about.  She was about to rush toward the door,
stopped, however, looking  about her in dismay. She came back, glanced under
the chair, whispering: "Where on earth is it? Where?" sweeping the room with
her enormous eyes; pulling at her hair, she exclaimed loudly, "Where is it?"
and  suddenly  seized  Pepper by the  jacket and rolled him out of his chair
onto the floor. A brown briefcase was discovered where he had been. Beatrice
seized  it and stood  for some seconds with eyes closed and an expression of
immense  happiness, pressing  the case to  her chest; she  then moved slowly
toward  the door of yellow leather and disappeared behind it. Amid a deathly
hush, Pepper got up and, trying not to look at anyone, brushed his trousers.
Nobody was paying him attention in  any  case: everyone was  looking  at the
yellow door.

     What on earth am I going to say to him? thought Pepper. I'll say I'm an
arts graduate, can't be of any use to the Directorate, let me go, I'll leave
and never come back, I give my word. And why on earth did you come here? I'd
always been interested in the forest, but well, nobody lets me get  into the
forest. And  anyway  I  got here purely by  chance, I'm  an  arts man.  Arts
people, writers, philosophers are out of place  in  the Directorate. They do
right to  keep  me  out,  I  accept  this. ...  I  can't  possibly be  in  a
Directorate where they excrete  onto the forest,  or in a forest where  they
catch  children  with  machines.  I  should leave  and  occupy  myself  with
something simpler. I know I'm popular here, but they like me the way a child
is fond of  a toy. I'm here for amusement, I can't teach anybody here what I
know. . . . No, I can't say that. I have to cry  a  bit, how can I do  that?
I'll blow up  in there, just let him try and keep me here.  I'll blow my top
and leave on foot. Pepper pictured himself walking the dusty road mile after
mile  under  the  blazing  sun,  with  his  case,  getting   more  and  more
empty-headed. And  every  step  carrying  him  farther and farther  from the
forest, his dream,  his anxiety, that which had long ago  become the meaning
of his existence. . . .
     They haven't  called  anybody  in  for  a  long  time, he thought.  The
director's  probably  vastly taken  by the  children-trapping plan. And  why
didn't anyone come out of the study? Doubtless, another exit.
     "Excuse me," he  said,  addressing  Monsher Brandskugel, "what  time is
it?"
     Monsher Brandskugel looked at his wristwatch and thought for a moment:
     "I don't know," he said.
     At this,  Pepper bent  over  and whispered in  his  ear, "I shan't tell
anybody. An-y-body."
     Monsher  Brandskugel  hesitated.  He  fingered  his  plastic  button in
indecision, stole a look around, yawned nervously, took another look around,
and fixing his mask more firmly, answered in a whisper:
     "I don't know."
     After which he rose and hurriedly betook himself to the other corner of
the anteroom.
     The secretary spoke:
     "Pepper, your turn."
     "How's that," Pepper said, surprised. "I'm fourth."
     "Temporary staff Pepper," the secretary raised her voice, "your turn."
     "Arguing," grumbled somebody.
     "Should get rid of the  likes of him," someone on the left said loudly,
"with a red-hot broom!"
     Pepper got to his feet. His legs were like cotton wool. He was scraping
his palms senselessly along his sides. The secretary was looking intently at
him.
     "The cat knows when he's in for it. . . ."
     "However much you twist. . . ."
     "We've put up with the likes of him!"
     "Pardon me, you may have. I've never seen him before."
     "Well, I don't see him every day."
     "Quiet!" said the secretary, raising her voice. "Observe  silence!  And
don't drop litter on the floor--you there . . . yes,  yes, you I'm  speaking
to. Now then, Pepper, will you go through? Or shall I call the guard?"
     "Yes," said Pepper, "I'm going."
     The  last  person  he  saw  in  the anteroom  was Monsher  Brandskugel,
barricaded behind an armchair in the corner, teeth bared,  on  his  haunches
with his hand in his rear trouser pocket. Then his eye fell on the director.
     The director turned out to be  a slender well-proportioned man of about
thirty-five, in an expensive superbly-cut suit. He was  standing by the open
window scattering crumbs for the  pigeons clustered on  the  windowsill. The
study was completely empty, there wasn't  a  single chair, not even a table,
on the wall opposite the window hung  a small  copy of "Pathfinder Selivan's

Exploit."
     "Temporary employee Pepper?" the director said in a clear ringing bass,
turning toward Pepper the fresh face of a sportsman.
     "Y-yes.  I..."  mumbled   Pepper.   "Glad,  very  glad  to   make  your
acquaintance at last.  How d'you do. My name's Alas.  I've heard a lot about
you. Shake hands."
     Pepper stooping  timidly pressed  the proffered  hand. The hand was dry
and firm.
     "As you see, I'm feeding the pigeons. Curious bird. One senses enormous
potential there. How do you see the pigeon, Pepper?"
     Pepper faltered.  He  couldn't  stand  pigeons.  The  director's  face,
however,  was  radiating  such  joy   and  weird  interest,  such  impatient
expectation that Pepper took a grip on himself and lied:
     "I  like  them  very much, Monsieur Alas."  "You like  them roasted? Or
stewed? I like them in a pie, myself. Pigeon pie with a glass of good wine--
demi-sec--what could be nicer? What's your opinion!"
     Once more Monsieur Alas' face expressed  the most  lively  interest and
impatient expectation.
     "Terrific," said Pepper. He had decided  to give  up guessing and agree
with everything.
     "What about Picasso's 'Dove'?" said  Monsieur Alas. "I call to mind  at
once: 'Nor eat,  nor drink, nor kiss, the moments fly unchecked.  . . .' How
exactly that catches the idea of our incapacity to catch and materialize the
beautiful!"
     "Splendid verses," said Pepper stupidly. "What I first saw the  'Dove,'
I, like many another I expect, thought  the drawing  a  poor likeness, or at
any rate unnatural. Later, however, in the course of service, I had occasion
to  observe  pigeons closely  and  I  suddenly realized that  Picasso,  that
magician, had  seized  on that moment when the bird folds its wings prior to
landing. Its feet are already  touching the ground while  the bird itself is
still in the air, in flight. The moment when movement turns into immobility,
flight into rest."
     "Picasso has strange paintings, which I don't understand," said Pepper,
demonstrating his independent judgment.
     "Ah, you've simply not looked at them long enough.
     To understand real art, it's  not  enough to go through a museum two or
three times a year. You should look at a picture for hours on end. As  often
as  possible. And only originals. No reproductions. No  copies. . . . Take a
look at that picture there. I can see by your face what you think of it. And
you're right: it's a bad copy.  If you'd ever familiarized yourself with the
original, you would understand the artist's idea." "What exactly is it?"
     "I'll try to explain  it  to you," said  the director readily. "What do
you see in  that picture?  Formally-- half man, half  tree.  The  picture is
static. What can't be seen, isn't caught, is the transition from one essence
into the other. The most important element is missing from  the picture--the
direction of time. Now if you  had  the opportunity of studying the original
you would  realize that  the artist  had succeeded in  introducing into  the
image  a  most  profound  symbolic meaning,  that  he had  depicted,  not  a
man-tree, not even a man turning into a  tree, but a tree turning into a man
and that only. The artist made  use of the old legend in order to depict the
emergence of a new  personality. New from old. Life from death. Intelligence
from inert matter. The  copy is absolutely static and everything pictured in
it exists outside the stream  of time. The original contains that time-flow!
Vector! The arrow of time as Eddington would have said. . . ."
     "Where exactly is the original?" asked Pepper politely.
     The director smiled.
     "The original, naturally, has been  destroyed  as  a  work of art,  not
permitting  ambiguous interpretation.  The first and second copies were also
destroyed as a precautionary measure."
     Monsieur Alas  returned  to the window and elbowed the pigeons off  the

sill.
     "Well. We've talked  of pigeons," said  he  in a  new, somehow official
voice. "Your name?"
     "Pardon?"
     "Name. Your name."
     "Pe--Pepper."
     "Year of birth." "Thirty."
     "More precisely!"  "Nineteen  thirty. Fifth of  March." "What  are  you
doing here?"
     "Temporary employee. Seconded to Science security."
     "I'm  asking you: what are you doing here?" said the director,  turning
his  distant eyes on Pepper. "I  ... don't know.  I  wish  to  leave." "Your
opinion of  the  forest. Briefly." "The forest  ... is. ... I always... I...
fear it. And love it."
     "Your opinion of the Directorate." "There are lots of good people here,
but . . ." "That's enough."
     The  director came up  to Pepper, clasped  him by  the  shoulders  and,
looking him in the eyes, said:
     "Listen,  friend!  Drop  it! Let's  make  a  threesome? Let's call  the
secretary  in,  did  you see the  dragon?  She's  no dragon, she's a box  of
delights! 'Come lads, let's open the long-cherished wine,' " he sang through
his nose. "Well? Shall we open  it? Drop  that, I don't like it. Understand?
How does it grab you?"
     He  suddenly gave off a smell of  liquor and  garlic sausage,  his eyes
came together over his nose.
     "We'll  get  the engineer  in, Brandskugel. My  mon cher," he  went on,
clasping Pepper to his chest. "He can tell  such a  tale--you'll  not need a
bite to eat with it. Shall we?"
     "Well, why not?" said Pepper. "But after all,  I ..." "Well, what about
you then?" "Monsieur Alas, I ..."
     "Drop that! What sort of monsieur am I? Kamerad --see? Mio Caro!"
     "I, Kamerad Alas, came to request you  . . ." "Ask  aw-a-y! I shan't be
mean! You want money? Take it! Somebody you  don't like?  Just say and we'll
look into it! Well?"
     "N-no. I just want to  leave. I can't get away no matter what I try.  I
came here by accident. Permit me to  leave. Nobody wants to help me, and I'm
requesting you as director. . .."
     Alas released Pepper, put his tie right, and smiled coldly.
     "You're in  error, Pepper,"  said he, "I'm not  the  director.  I'm the
director's personnel  officer. Forgive me, I've delayed you somewhat. Please
go through that door. The director will receive you."
     He threw the  door wide before Pepper at the far end of his bare office
and made  inviting  gestures. Pepper coughed, nodded in  restrained fashion,
and leaned forward as he passed into the next room. As he did so  he thought
he  was  lightly struck on  the  rear. Probably his  imagination, or perhaps
Monsieur Alas was in some haste to close his door.
     The room in which he  found  himself  was  a facsimile of the anteroom;
even the secretary here was an exact copy of the first one. She was reading,
however, a book entitled Sublimation of  Genius. The same pale visitors were
sitting in  armchairs with newspapers and  magazines. Professor Cockatoo was
here, suffering  severely from nervous  itch as was  Beatrice Vakh with  her
brown briefcase  across  her  knees. True, all the  others were  unfamiliar.
Under  a  copy  of  "Pathfinder  Selivan's Exploit"  a sign saying  "Quiet!"
regularly  flared and dimmed.  For this reason, nobody  here talked.  Pepper
cautiously lowered himself onto the edge of a chair. Beatrice Vakh smiled at
him--somewhat warily but welcoming on the whole.
     After a  minute of apprehensive silence  the  little bell rang and  the
secretary  put  aside  her  book.  "The  venerable  Luke,  go through."  The
venerable Luke  was  frightful  to  look  upon and  Pepper averted his gaze.
Doesn't matter, he thought, closing his eyes. I  can stand it. He remembered

the rainy autumn  evening when they had brought Esther  into his flat, after
she  had been  knifed by a  drunken yob in  the  hallway, and  the neighbors
hanging onto him, and the glass shards in his mouth--he had chewed the glass
when they brought him some water. . . . Yes, he thought, the worst was past.
     His attention was attracted by swift scratching  sounds. He  opened his
eyes and looked about him. In the next chair but one. Professor Cockatoo was
furiously scratching himself under the arms with both hands. Like a monkey.
     "What  do you think, should we separate the boys from the girls?" asked
Beatrice  in  a  trembling  voice.  "I  don't  know," Pepper said irritably.
"Co-education has its advantages, of course," Beatrice went on, "but this is
a special situation. . .  . Lord!" she said, suddenly lachrymose. "Surely he
won't  throw me out? Where could I go then? I've been thrown out everywhere,
I haven't  got a  single  pair of decent  shoes left. All  my tights are  in
holes, my powder's all lumpy. . . ."
     The secretary put aside Sublimation of Genius to say severely:
     "Don't lose your concentration." Beatrice Vakh froze in terror. At once
the small  door opened and  a completely  shaven  head was  thrust  into the
waiting room.
     "Is there a Pepper here?" it inquired in a stentorian voice.
     "Yes,"  said Pepper, leaping to his feet. "To the  outbound  area  with
your stuff!  Vehicle leaves in ten minutes. Jump  to it!" "Vehicle where to?
Why?" "You're Pepper?" "Yes.  . . ." "You wanted to leave or not?" "I wanted
to, but . . ."
     "Well, just as you like,"  bellowed  the shaven  one angrily. "I'm just
supposed to tell you."
     He disappeared and the door slammed. Pepper rushed after him.
     "Back,"  cried  the  secretary,  and  several  hands  clutched  at  his
clothing. Pepper struggled desperately and heard his jacket rip.
     "The vehicle is there!" he groaned.  "You're off your head!"  said  the
secretary peevishly.
     "Where are you trying  to get? The door  marked 'Exit'  is  over there,
where are you going?"
     Horny hands propelled Pepper to the 'Exit' sign.  Beyond the door lay a
spacious  polygonal hall, with  a multiplicity of doors; Pepper rushed about
opening one after the other.
     Bright sunlight, sterile-white walls,  people in white  coats. A  naked
back, smeared with iodine. Smell of a chemist's shop. Not that one.
     Blackness.  Whirring of a cine-projector.  On the screen, someone being
pulled by the ears  in all directions. White patches  of displeased faces. A
voice:
     "Door! Shut the door!" Not that  one  either. . .. Pepper  crossed  the
hall, slipping on the parquet. Smell of a cake shop. A short line with bags.
Behind the  glass counter glint  bottles  of yogurt,  cakes, and  gateaux in
colorful array.
     "Gentlemen!" shouted Pepper. "Where  is the exit?" "Exit out of where?"
asked a plump assistant in a cook's hat.
     "Out of here. . . ." "It's the door you're standing  in." "Don't listen
to him," said  a  feeble old  man in  the line. "We've got a wise guy around
here who just holds lines up. ... Keep serving, don't pay any attention."
     "No, no, I'm not joking," said Pepper. "I've  got a car, it'll  go in a
minute. . . ."
     "No, it's not him," said a fair-minded old man. "That bloke always asks
where the toilet is. Where is the car you speak of, sir?" "In the street."
     "What street?" asked the assistant. "There's plenty of streets."
     "I don't care as long as it's outside!" "No," said the shrewd old  man.
"It's the  same chap. He's just  changed his program.  Pay  no  attention to
him."
     Pepper looked around in  despair,  leaped back into the hall and pushed
against the next door. It was locked. A testy voice inquired:
     "Who's there?"  "I have to get out!" shouted Pepper.  "Where's the exit

here?"
     "Just a moment."
     Behind the door came noises, the splash of water, the clatter  of boxes
being moved. The voice said:
     "What do you want?"
     "To get out! I must get out!"
     "Right away."
     A key scraped and the door opened. It was dark inside.
     "Come through," said the voice.
     It smelled  of fumigation. Pepper put his hands up in front of him  and
essayed several uncertain steps.
     "I can't see a thing," he said.
     "You'll get used to it in a minute," the voice assured. "Well, come on,
why've you stopped?"
     Pepper was taken by the sleeve and led on.
     "Sign here," said the voice.
     A pencil appeared in Pepper's fingers. Now he perceived in the darkness
the vague whiteness of paper.
     "Have you signed?"
     "No. What am I signing?"
     "Don't you be afraid, it  isn't a death sentence. Sign that you haven't
seen anything."
     Pepper signed  anywhere.  He was seized firmly by  the sleeve again and
propelled between some door curtains, then the voice asked:
     "Are there a lot of you here?"
     "Four," came from behind the door apparently.
     "Is  there a line formed? Bear in mind  I'm  opening the  door  now and
letting a person out.  Move  up one,  don't push and no  funny remarks. That
clear?" "All right.  Not the  first time." "Nobody's forgotten his clothes?"
"Nobody, nobody. Let  him  out." The key scraped  again.  Pepper was  almost
blinded by  the bright  light and  he was pushed out. Still  not opening his
eyes properly, he reeled down some steps and only then realized  that he was
in the Directorate's inner courtyard. Peevish voices were shouting:
     "Come on now, Pepper! Get a move on! How long are we supposed to wait?"
     In  the  middle  of  the yard  stood a  truck, packed  with  Scientific
Security personnel. Kim was  looking out of  the  cab and gesturing angrily.
Pepper ran up to the truck  and scrambled aboard, they tugged at him, lifted
him  and dumped him on the  bottom  of  the truck. The  vehicle revved up at
once, gave a  jerk, somebody stood on Pepper's hand, somebody else gaily sat
on him, everyone started up singing and laughing, and they set off.
     "Peppy,  here's  your  suitcase," said  somebody.  "Is it  true  you're
leaving, Pepper?" "Care for  a  cigarette, Monsieur  Pepper?" Pepper lit up,
seated himself on his case and turned up his jacket collar. Someone gave him
a raincoat;
     Pepper smiled his thanks  and wrapped himself  up in it. The truck sped
on faster and faster and  although it  was a  hot day, the head wind  seemed
savagely  penetrating.  Pepper smoked, concealing  the cigarette in his fist
and  gazed about him.  I'm on my way, he thought, I'm on my way. This is the
last time  I'll  see you, wall. Last  time I'll  see you, cottages. Good-bye
scrap-heap,  I  left my galoshes  here somewhere.  Good-bye  pool,  good-bye
chess, good-bye yogurt. It's so marvelous, so  easy! I'll never drink yogurt
in my life again. Never will I sit down to a chess board. . . ."
     The  personnel,  crowded  up  near the  cab, clutching  one another and
huddling behind each other from the wind, conversed on abstract subjects.
     "It's been worked out, and I've worked it out. If it goes on like this,
in a hundred years there'll be ten scientists for every square yard, and the
total mass will cause the cliff to collapse. So much transport for  food and
water  delivery will be needed, they'll have to have a  continuous transport
service between the  Mainland  and  the  Directorate; the trucks  will go at
twenty-five miles an hour, one yard apart, and be unloaded on the move.  . .

. No,  I'm absolutely certain the top people  are considering regulating the
recruitment of  new  personnel. Well  now, judge  for yourselves: the  hotel
warden --you can't have the  likes of that, seven and one more arriving. All
healthy.  Hausbotcher  thinks something  should  be  done about it. No,  not
sterilization, necessarily, as he suggests. . . ."
     "Hausbotcher is the last person who should suggest that."
     "That's why I say, not necessarily sterilization."
     "They say the annual holidays are being extended to six months."
     They went by the park, and Pepper suddenly realized that  the truck was
going in the wrong direction. They'd be out of the gates soon and descend by
way of the hairpins to the foot of the cliff.
     "Here listen, where are we going?" he asked, alarmed.
     "What d'you mean--where? To get paid."
     "Not to the Mainland?"
     "Why on earth should we? The cashier's arrived at the biostation."
     "You mean you're going to the biostation, the forest."
     "Well  of  course.  We're  Science  Security   and  get  paid   at  the
biostation."
     "And what about me?" asked Pepper in bewilderment.
     "You'll be paid as well. You're  due  for  a bonus. . . . Incidentally,
everybody got his papers?"
     The men  fussed about, extracting  from their pockets stamped papers of
assorted shapes and colors. These they examined intently.
     "Pepper, did you fill the questionnaire in?"
     "What questionnaire?"
     "Pardon me, but what a question! Form number eighty-four."
     "I didn't fill anything in," Pepper said.
     "Dear sirs! What have we here? Pepper's got no papers."
     "That doesn't matter. He's probably got a permit. . . ."
     "I haven't got a permit," said Pepper. "I  haven't got anything. Only a
suitcase and a raincoat. ... I didn't intend going into the forest, I wanted
to get away altogether. . . ."
     "And the medical check? Inoculations?"
     Pepper shook  his head. The  truck was already rolling down through the
hairpins and Pepper took a detached look at  the forest, at the level porous
layers  of  it  on the horizon,  at its  arrested storm-cloud  seething, the
clinging web of mist in the shade of the cliff.
     "You can't get away with things like that," somebody said.
     "Well now, there aren't any classified objects along the road."
     "What about Hausbotcher?"
     "Well what of him, if there's no classified objects?"
     "Let's assume you  don't know that.  Nobody does. There now,  last year
Kandid flew out without documents and where's Kandid now, desperate lad?"
     "In the  first  place  it wasn't last year, it was  long  before  that.
Secondly, he was simply killed. At his post."
     "Oh yes? Have you seen the directive?"
     "That's true, there was no directive."
     "So,  there's nothing to argue about.  Since they put him in the bunker
at the checkpoint, he's been sitting filling in forms. . . ."
     "How did you not fill in the  forms.  Peppy? Maybe  you've got a  black
mark against you?"
     "One  moment,  gentlemen!  This  is  a  serious  matter.  I  propose we
investigate employee  Pepper to be on the safe side. By democratic  methods,
so to speak. Who'll be secretary?"
     "Hausbotcher for secretary!"
     "Excellent   suggestion.   As  honorary   secretary   we   choose   our
much-respected  Hausbotcher. I see by your faces--unanimous. And who will be
the secretary's assistant?"
     "Vanderbilt for secretary's assistant!"
     "Vanderbilt?  . . . Well,  why not. ...  We have Vanderbilt proposed as

secretary's assistant. Any other  nominations? For? Against? Abstentions? Hm
. . . two abstainers. Why did you abstain?"
     "Me?"
     "Yes, yes, I mean you."
     "I don't see the sense. Why torment a man? He's in a bad way as it is."
     "All right. And you?"
     "None of your damned business."
     "As   you  wish.  .  .  .  Secretary's  assistant,  note  please,   two
abstentions.  Let's begin. Who  first?  No takers? Then  permit me. Employee
Pepper answer the following question. What distances have we covered between
years twenty-five and thirty; (a)  on foot (b) by land transport (c) by air?
Take your time, think. Here's paper and pencil."
     Pepper  took  the   paper  and  pencil  obediently  and  set  to   work
remembering. The  truck  shook. To start with everybody looked  at him,  but
eventually they all got bored.
     "I'm  not  afraid of overpopulation," mumbled  somebody. "But have  you
seen   how   much  hardware  there   is?   On  the  empty   lot  behind  the
repair-shops--have you seen  it?  And what is it, d'you know? Of course it's
in packing cases, nailed  down. Nobody's got time to  open it up and have  a
look. D'you know  what I saw  night  before last over  there? I'd stopped to
have  a smoke when I heard a sort of crash. I turn around and I see the side
of  one of the cases, the size of  a  house end, cracking open, and widening
like a set  of gates.  Out of the  case  crawls a machine. I'm not  going to
describe it,  you understand why. But what a sight. . . . It stood there for
a few seconds then threw up this long tube with a rotating thing on the  end
as if it were taking a look around, then it crawled back into  the case  and
the  lid  shut.  I felt bad then  and  couldn't believe  what I'd seen. This
morning  I  think: 'I'll have another look anyway.'  I arrived  and  my skin
crept, I  can  tell  you. The  packing case was perfectly all right,  not  a
crack,  but the side was nailed  up from the inside! The nails stuck out  as
long  as your  finger, shiny and  sharp. And  now  I'm  thinking, why was it
climbing  out? Was it the only one? Maybe they come  out every  night and...
have a look around.  While we're getting over-populated they're organizing a
Bartholomew massacre and our bones will go flying over  the cliff--or what's
left of them . . . What? No thank you, friend, you tell the engineers if you
want.  After  all I  saw that  machine and  how  do  I know  whether  that's
forbidden or  not?  There's no markings  on  the cases.  .  .." "All  right,
Pepper.  You ready?" "No," Pepper said. "I can't remember anything. It was a
long time ago."
     "That's odd. I can remember perfectly, for example. Six  thousand seven
hundred  and  one  kilometer  by  rail,  seventeen thousand one hundred  and
fifty-three by air  (out  of that three thousand two hundred and fifteen for
personal travel) and fifteen thousand  and seven on foot. And I'm older than
you. Strange, very strange, Pepper.  .  . . W-e-ll all right.  Let's try the
next point. What toys were you specially fond of before you went to school?"
     "Clockwork  tanks,"  said  Pepper,  wiping sweat  from  his brow.  "And
armored cars."
     "Aha! You remember! And yet it was before you went to school, times, so
to speak, a great deal further  removed. Though less care-laden, eh, Pepper?
So then. Tanks  and  armored cars it  is. ... Next. At what age  did  women,
brackets,  men  become  attractive  to  you?  The expression in brackets  is
addressed as a rule, to women. Go ahead and answer."
     "A long time ago," said Pepper. "It was long, long ago."
     "Exactly when?"
     "What about you?" asked Pepper. "You say first, then I will."
     The presider shrugged. "I've nothing to hide. The first time was when I
was nine, when they bathed me and my female cousin together. . . . Now you."
     "I can't," said Pepper. "I don't wish to answer such questions."
     "Idiot," somebody whispered in his ear.  "Tell some lie with a straight
face, and that's it. Why torment yourself? Who's going to check you?"

     "All  right,"  Pepper said  submissively.  "When I  was ten.  When they
bathed me and Murka the dog together."
     "Splendid!"  exclaimed the presider.  "Now list me all the  diseases of
the legs you've had."
     "Rheumatism."
     "What else?"
     "Intermittent lameness."
     "Very good. What else?"
     "Cold," said Pepper.
     "That's not a leg disease."
     "I don't know. With you no, perhaps. With me it's the legs. My legs get
wet--a cold."
     "We-ll, let it pass. Anything else?"
     "Isn't that enough?"
     "As you wish. But I warn you: the more the better."
     "Spontaneous  gangrene," said Pepper. "Subsequent amputation. That  was
my last leg disease."
     "That's enough then. Last question. Your world-view. Briefly."
     "Materialist," Pepper said.
     "What sort of a materialist exactly?"
     "Emotional."
     "I've no more questions. Any questions, gentlemen?"
     There were no more  questions. Some of the travelers were  half-asleep,
some  were chatting with their backs to  the presider.  The truck was  going
slowly now. It  was getting hot and the forest's damp and sharp unpleasant •
smell  was ever-present.  The smell never  reached the Directorate on normal
days.
     The  truck rolled along  with the engine switched off, and far far away
could be heard the faint rumbling of a storm.
     "I'm amazed, looking at you," said the secretary's assistant, also with
his back to  the presider. "It's unhealthy  pessimism. Man is an optimist by
nature,  that's  one  thing. And the second  and main  thing  is--surely you
realize the director  considers these matters as much as you do? It makes me
laugh.  In the last speech addressed  to me, the  director revealed majestic
prospects. I  caught my breath  from sheer  admiration, I'm  not  ashamed to
admit. I always was an optimist, but that  picture. ... If you want to know,
everything's going  to be cleared, all these  rocks, cottages. . . . Instead
buildings of dazzling beauty will rise from transparent and semi-transparent
materials,  stadia, swimming-pools, aerial parks,  crystal  bars, and cafes.
Stairways  to  the  sky!  Slender,  swaying  women with  dark  supple  skin!
Libraries!  Muscles! Laboratories!  Penetrated  by sun  and  light!  A  free
timetable!   Cars,   gliders,  airships   .   .   .   debates,  hypnopaedia,
stereo-cinema. .  . . After  their working hours,  the workers  will sit  in
libraries,  ponder,  compose  melodies,   play  guitars  and  other  musical
instruments, carve in wood, read poems to each other!"
     "And what will you be doing?"
     "I shall do wood-carving."
     "What else?"
     "I shall write poetry.  They will teach me to write poetry. I have good
handwriting."
     "What will I do?"
     "Whatever you  like!"  said  the  secretary's  assistant magnanimously.
"Carve wood, write poetry. . . . Whatever you like."
     "I don't want to carve wood. I'm a mathematician."
     "Well all right! Do maths to your heart's content!"
     "I do it now to my heart's content."
     "Now you get paid for doing it. Silly. You'll jump from towers."
     "Why?"
     "There you go--why? It's interesting isn't it?"
     "No."

     "What are you trying to say, then?  That apart from mathematics  you're
not interested in anything?"
     "Well now, that's about right. After a day's  work you're so fagged out
that you take no interest in anything."
     "You're just a narrow  person. Never mind, you'll  develop. You'll find
you have some aptitudes, you'll be composing music, doing a bit of fretwork,
or something. . . ."
     "Composing music isn't the trouble, it's finding an audience."
     "Well, I'll listen to you with pleasure. . . . Pepper here."
     "You  just  think that.  You  won't do it  though.  You'll  do a bit of
fretwork then you'll be off to join the ladies. Or get drunk. I know you all
right,  I  know everybody here.  You'll  shamble  about  from crystal bar to
diamond  cafeteria.  Especially if work is  optional.  I'm afraid  to think,
even, what it'll be like if they make work optional here."
     "Every man is a genius at something," retorted  the assistant.  "You've
only to find what  it is. We don't even suspect that I'm,  say,  a genius at
cooking, you,  perhaps, a pharmaceutical  genius, but we have other jobs and
find out little about ourselves. The director said specialists would  be put
on that, they'll bring to light our hidden potential. ..."
     "Potential,  now,  that's  a murky  business.  I'm  not arguing,  maybe
everybody's  a potential  genius, only what's to  be done if it  can only be
applied, say, in the distant past or future, and it isn't regarded as genius
now whether you've got  it or not? Very good if you're a cooking genius. But
how's  it  going  to  be  discovered that you're a cab-driver of genius,  or
Pepper's a genius at  chipping arrow  heads, or I'm  a genius  at finding an
X-field about which nobody knows yet and which won't be  discovered for  ten
years? . . . Well then, as the poet said, leisure's black face will turn our
way.. . ."
     "Boys,"  said  someone,  "we've  brought no grub  with  us. While we're
traveling and till they pay us. . . ."
     "Stoyan'll see us all right."
     "Like heck he will. They're on rations there."
     "Never mind, we'll last out. There's the checkpoint already."
     Pepper extended his  neck. In front,  the forest  stood, a yellow-green
wall  and  the  road  ran  straight into it, like  a  thread  going  into  a
multi-colored carpet. The truck passed by a plywood sign:
     ATTENTION! REDUCE SPEED! PREPARE TO SHOW DOCUMENTS!
     The striped bar was already visible; it was lowered and had to the left
of it a  sentry-box,  on the  right, barbed wire, white insulators,  lattice
towers  with searchlights. The truck came to a halt. Everybody looked at the
guard  who  was  dozing  with  his  carbine  under  his  arm,  as  he  stood
cross-legged in his box.  An extinguished cigarette  hung on his lip and the
concrete around the box was littered with ends. Next to the box stood a pole
with various admonishments nailed to it:
     ATTENTION! FOREST! DISPLAY  PERMITS! DON'T SPREAD INFECTION! The driver
hooted  tactfully. The guard opened his eyes and stared muz-zily before him,
he then detached himself from the box and walked around the lorry.
     "There's plenty of you," said he. "Money, is it?"
     "Right first time," said the former presider.
     "That's fine, good,"  said the guard. He  circled the vehicle,  hoisted
himself up onto the step and glanced inside. "Gee, there's a lot of you," he
said reproachfully. "What about hands? Hands clean?"
     "Yes!" chorused everyone.
     "Everybody?"
     "Everybody."
     "All righty,"  said the guard, thrusting the top half of his  body into
the cab.  From the cab: "Who's  in charge? You? How  many you got? Aha . . .
you telling the  truth?  Name? Kim? Well now Kirn, I'm writing  your surname
down. . . . Great, Voldemar! Drive all the time do you? I'm on guard all the
time. Show  us your pass.  . . . Now, now, no snarling, just show us it. ...

Pass in  order, otherwise  I'd. . .  .  Why d'you write telephone numbers on
your pass? Wait  a minute .. . what Charlotte is  this? Ah yes,  I remember.
Give it  here, I'll  write it  down as  well.  . . . Okay, thanks. Drive on.
Permission to pass."
     He jumped  down from the step, raising the dust as he did so, went over
to the barrier, and  dropped on the counterweight. The barrier slowly  rose,
and  the  long  underpants strung along it dropped into the dust.  The truck
started up.
     There  was  a  hubbub of  conversation in the back,  but  Pepper  heard
nothing.  He  was  going  into the forest.  The  forest was  getting closer,
nearing  and massing higher and higher,  like an ocean wave and suddenly, it
swallowed him. There was no more sun and sky, space or time,  the forest had
taken their place.  All there was, was a  flickering  of  murky tints, thick
moist air, incredible smells, fumes rather, and an acrid taste in his mouth.
Only sound  was  untouched  by  the forest:  the noises of  the forest  were
overpowered by the roar of the engine  and the chatter of the passengers. So
here's  the  forest,  Pepper kept repeating,  here I am in  the  forest,  he
repeated  meaninglessly. Not from up above, but  inside,  not an observer, a
participant. Here I am in the forest. Something cool  and moist touched  his
face, ticklish, detached itself and slowly descended to his knees. He looked
down: a long,  thin, filament of some plant or other,  or maybe some animal,
or maybe  just the  contact  of the forest,  a friendly greeting  or  a wary
feeling out; he did not touch the filament.
     Meanwhile the truck roared along the road of glorious advance;  yellow,
green and brown meekly sank away behind, while along the verges streamed the
untidy, forgotten  columns of  the  veterans  of  the invading  army,  black
bulldozers upended  with  shields furiously ripped, tractors buried  in  the
earth  as far as the driving-cab, their caterpillar tracks squashed flat and
trailing  behind them,  lorries lacking wheels  or glass-- everything  dead,
deserted forever, but maintaining their former fearless gaze ahead, into the
depths of the forest with their wrenched radiators and shattered headlights.
And all around, the forest stirred, palpitated,  and contorted, changing its
hues, blurring and flaring up, flowing forward and retreating, deceiving the
sight, the  forest  terrified and mocked and gloated, and it was all strange
and it was impossible to describe, and it was nauseating.
     Chapter Six
     Pepper opened the door of the landrover and looked  at the thickets. He
didn't  know what he  was  supposed  to  see. Something  in the  nature of a
nauseating  blancmange.  Something strange, something indescribable. But the
most  strange, the  most unimaginable  thing  in  this undergrowth  was  the
people, therefore  Pepper  saw  only  them.  They  were  walking toward  the
landrover, slender and neat in their movements, confident and elegant,  they
walked  easily,  never backtracking,  instantly choosing  the exact place to
step. They acted  as if  they didn't notice the forest, as  if they were  at
home in it  and the forest belonged to  them.  They weren't pretending even,
they really did think that, and the forest hung above them silently laughing
and pointing  with myriads of jeering fingers, while adroitly  contriving to
be familiar, obedient  and  simple--absolutely  trustworthy. Until the time,
the day. . . .
     "Oh what a wench, that Rita," said former driver Acey to Pepper. He was
standing next  to  the landrover, his somewhat bandy legs set wide across  a
rasping and  trembling motorcycle, which he  held lightly  with his  thighs.
"I'd have got my hands on  her for sure if it wasn't for her Quentin, he's a
sharp one."
     Quentin and Rita had approached quite close and Stoyan climbed out from
behind the wheel to meet them.
     "Well, how is she?" asked  Stoyan.  "Breathing," said Quentin,  closely
studying Pepper. "Has the money arrived, then?"

     "This is Pepper," said Stoyan. "I was telling you."
     Rita and Quentin smiled at Pepper. There was no time to study  them but
the thought crossed  Pepper's mind that he had  never seen a  stranger woman
than Rita or a more deeply unhappy man than Quentin.
     "Hello, Pepper," said Quentin, continuing to smile piteously.  "Come to
have a look? Never seen it before?"
     "I don't see it now," said Pepper. And it was true, the unhappiness and
the strangeness were impossible to pin down, though linked powerfully.
     Rita  lit  a cigarette and turned away.  "You're looking  in  the wrong
direction, man. Look straight ahead of you. Don't tell me you can't see?"
     Then Pepper  did  see and at once  forgot  about  the  people.  It  had
appeared  like  a hidden image  on photographic paper, like  a  figure in  a
child's  puzzle picture  "where is the rabbit hiding" and once  having found
it, it was impossible to lose it from view.  It was very close, it began ten
paces  from  the  landrover's wheels  and the  path.  Pepper  shuddered  and
swallowed.
     A living column rose  to  treetop level, a  sheaf  of thin  transparent
threads, sticky, shiny,  writhing and  tense, a sheaf penetrating the  dense
foliage and climbing farther and  farther into the clouds. It had its origin
in  a  cesspit, an oily gurgling cesspit, full up  with protoplasm,  living,
active, swelling up  in bubbles of primitive flesh, busily organizing and as
quickly  decaying,  pouring  out the  products of decay onto its flat  banks
spitting gluey foam. . . .  And at once, as if unseen sound-filters had been
switched on, the voice  of  the cesspit stood  out  from the chugging of the
motorbike:  gurgling,  splashing,  sobbing,  bubbling, long drawn-out  swamp
groans; a heavy wall of smells drew nearer of raw sweating meat, pus,  fresh
bile,  serum, hot paste--  only  then  did Pepper notice  that both Rita and
Quentin had oxygen masks hanging on their chests;  he saw Stoyan squeamishly
grimacing and raising  a respirator to his face. He  himself did  not  start
putting his respirator on, he was somehow hoping that the smells might  tell
him what his eyes and ears had failed to do. . . .
     "It stinks around here," said Acey, revolted. "Like a morgue...."
     Quentin was talking to Stoyan.
     "You  might have  asked Kim to see about  our rations.  We  should  get
danger money. We're due milk, chocolate. . . ."
     Rita was  smoking pensively, dribbling smoke  through her  thin  mobile
nostrils. . . .
     Around the cesspit, bending tenderly over it, trembled the trees; their
branches  were all turned in one  direction and  drooped toward the seething
mass, while along the branches thick hairy lianas wriggled  and dropped into
the  cesspit. The  cesspit  took  them  to itself and the protoplasm  gnawed
around them and converted them into  itself, as it could  dissolve and  make
its own all that surrounded it. ...
     "Peppy," said Stoyan, "don't goggle like that, your eyes'll pop out."
     Pepper smiled, though he knew it looked forced.
     "Why did you bring the motorbike, anyway?" asked Quentin.
     "In  case  we got  stranded.  They crawl  along the path--I go with one
wheel on the path, the other on the grass, and the motorbike goes behind. If
we get stuck, Acey nips off on the bike and gets a tractor."
     "You'll get stuck for sure," said Quentin.
     "Course we will," said  Acey. "This is a stupid idea,  I've said so all
along."
     "You just  be quiet," Stoyan said to him. "Your part is  small  enough.
... Is the eruption soon?" he asked Quentin.
     Quentin looked at his watch.
     "Well now. . . ." he said. "It  reproduces every  eighty-seven minutes.
So in ... in ... in nothing, there, she's starting already."
     The cesspit was reproducing. Out onto  its level banks, in a series  of
convulsive  jerks, came spurting  out  one after  another,  bits of  whitish
rippling goo. They rolled along the earth, helpless and blind, then stopped,

flattened out,  threw  out cautious pseudopodia  and  suddenly began  moving
purposefully--still  fussing,  still prodding about,  but  now  in  one  set
direction, wandering from  the direct path, now and again colliding, but  in
one set direction, along one radius from the womb, out into the thickets, on
and  out in  a  single  flowing  off-white  column,  like  gigantic  clumsy,
slug-like ants. . . .
     "It's a quagmire  all around here," Acey was saying. "We'll  plop in so
deep no tractor'll ever get us out-- the ropes'll just snap."
     "Do you want to come with us?" said Stoyan to Quentin.
     "Rita's tired."
     "Rita can go home and we'll push  on. . . ." Quentin was wavering. "How
d'you feel, Rita, dear?" he asked. "Yes, I'll go on home," said Rita. "Well,
that's fine," Quentin said. "We'll go and take a look eh? We'll be back soon
enough I expect. Not long,eh, Stoyan?"
     Rita  threw away her cigarette end and  went off along the track toward
the  biostation, without  saying  good-bye.  Quentin shuffled in  indecision
before saying to Pepper in an undertone:
     "Allow me ... get past. . . ."
     He pushed  through into the back  seat; at which  moment  the motorbike
with  tremendous roar, tore itself from under Acey and bounding  high in the
air,  hurtled into  the cesspit.  "Stop!" Acey  shouted, as  he  sank to his
haunches.  "Where  are  you off  to?" Everybody froze. The bike raced over a
hummock,  squealing  wildly, stood on end  and fell into  the pit. Everybody
rushed  forward. Pepper  thought  the  protoplasm rose  up  under the  bike,
softening the blow;  then it easily and soundlessly accepted  it  and closed
over it. The motorbike shut off.
     "Clumsy bastard," said Stoyan to Acey. "What the devil are you doing?"
     The  cesspit  had become  a maw,  sucking,  tasting, enjoying.  It  was
rolling the machine around inside, the way  a man rolls a mint from cheek to
cheek with  his tongue. The motorcycle was swirling  around  in  the foaming
mass,  now  disappearing, now  surfacing, helplessly waving  its handlebars;
with every appearance it  got smaller and smaller, its metal plating thinner
and thinner, now transparent as thin paper. Already the engine innards could
be glimpsed through it, then the plating melted away, the tires disappeared,
the bike dived down for the last time and appeared no more.
     "Swallowed it," said Acey with idiotic joy.
     "Clumsy bastard," repeated Stoyan. "You'll  pay me for that.  You'll be
paying me the rest of your life for it."
     "Well all right then," said Acey. "So I'll pay for it! Was it my fault?
I just turned the throttle the wrong way," he said to Pepper. "That's how it
got  away. I really  wanted to throttle down, Monsieur Pepper,  so it didn't
rattle so much, well I just  turned it the wrong way. I'm not  the  first or
the last to do that. Anyway it was an old bike. . . . I'm off then," said he
to Stoyan. "I'm no use here now. I'll go home."
     "Where are your eyes wandering  then?"  Quentin said abruptly  with  an
expression that caused Pepper to step aside involuntarily.
     "What's the matter?" said Acey. "I look where I want."
     He was  looking  back  at  the  path,  where  Rita's  orange  wrap  was
flickering under the dense yellowy-green awning of branches as she receded.
     "Come on, let me pass," said Quentin to Pepper. "I'll just have a  word
with him."
     "Where're  you going, d'you think?" mumbled Stoyan. "Think on, Quentin.
. . ."
     "What d'you mean, think on? I've known what he was after long enough. .
. ."
     "Listen, don't be a kid. .. . Just stop it! Just think on!"
     "Let go, I tell you, let go my arm!"
     There was a noisy struggle around Pepper who was being shoved from both
sides.  Stoyan  held Quentin's jacket  firmly by the  back  and  sleeve,  as
Quentin, now red and sweating,  keeping his eyes fixed on Acey,  was fending

off Stoyan with one hand while bending Pepper double  with the  other in his
attempt to step over him. He was jerking about and emerging farther from his
jacket  with  each jerk. Pepper  chose  this  moment  to tumble  out  of the
landrover. Acey was still looking after Rita, his mouth half-open, his  eyes
lustful and tender.
     "What's  she  doing  wearing  trousers," said he to  Pepper. "It's  the
latest craze they've got, going about in trousers. . . ."
     "Don't defend him!"  roared  Quentin  in  the car.  "He's not  a sexual
neurasthenic, he's just a bastard! Let me go, or I'll give you one as well!"
     "They used to wear  skirts," said Acey dreamily. "A  piece  of material
wrapped around and fixed with a  pin.  And I  would get  hold of the pin and
unloose. . . ."
     If this had been in the  park. ... If it had been in the hostel or  the
library  or the assembly  hall. .  .  . And it  had  been--in  the park, the
library and  even in the assembly hall  during Kirn's lecture on  "What  all
Directorate personnel should know about methods of mathematical statistics."
But now the forest  was  seeing it all  and hearing  it  all--the lascivious
obscenity that filled Acey's eyes, Quentin's  purple face swaying in the van
doorway, some dull, ox-like, droning mumble  of  Stoy-an's,  something about
work, responsibility, stupidity and the  crack of flying buttons against the
windshield . . . and its reaction couldn't be guessed, whether it was one of
horror, amusement or a fastidious grimace. "--" said Acey with satisfaction.
And Pepper hit him.  Hit him  on the  cheekbone apparently,  with a  crunch,
spraining his finger. Everybody stopped talking at once. Acey held his cheek
and looked at Pepper in vast astonishment.
     "Don't say things like that,"  said  Pepper firmly. "Not here. Don't do
it."
     "Well I'm not  arguing," Acey said with a shrug.  "I only meantthat I'm
doing no good here, haven't got a
     motorbike you can see that.... So what good can I do here?"
     Quentin inquired loudly:
     "You want one across the jaw?"
     'There you are," said Acey, vexed.  "Right  across the cheekbone, right
on the bone. . .. Good job, you missed my eye."
     "No, I mean it, one to the jaw."
     "Yes," Pepper said severely, "because here that sort of thing is out."
     "Let's go then," said Quentin, lying back in his seat.
     "Ace," said Stoyan. "Climb in. If we get stuck you can give us a hand."
     "I've got  a  new pair of pants  on," objected  Acey.  "Better  let  me
drive."
     Nobody answered, so  he climbed into the back  seat next to Quentin who
moved up. Pepper got in next to Stoyan and they set off.
     The pups had already gone  quite  a way, but Stoyan, driving with great
skill, keeping the offside wheels on the path and  the nearside on the dusty
moss,  soon  overtook  them and  crawled slowly behind  carefully using  the
clutch to adjust his speed.  "You'll burn the  clutch  out,"  said Acey.  He
turned to Quentin and began explaining  that he'd had no ulterior motive, he
had no motorbike anymore anyway and a man's  a man and if he's normal always
will be, forest or no, no matter whether . . .
     "Have  you had one in the jaw?" Quentin kept asking. "No, you just tell
me, the truth now, have you  ever  had one on the jaw  or not?" Quentin kept
asking and interrupting  Acey. "No," Acey would  answer, "no, wait a minute,
you hear me out first. . . ."
     Pepper stroked his swollen finger and looked at the pups.  The children
of the forest. Or perhaps its servants.  Or maybe its experiments. They were
proceeding slowly and  tirelessly  one after  the other in line ahead, as if
flowing  along the  ground; they oozed across  rotting tree  stumps, crossed
ruts, pools of stagnant water in the tall grass, through prickly bushes.
     The  track  kept disappearing,  diving into evil-smelling  mud,  hiding
itself  under layers of tough gray mushrooms that crunched under the wheels,

then again appearing, while  the pups held their direction and stayed white,
clean, smooth; not a blade of grass stuck to them, not a thorn wounded them,
they were unstained by the sticky black mud. They oozed along with a kind of
stupid  unthinking  confidence, as if along a road  long-known and habitual.
There were forty-three of them.
     I was dying to get  here  and now I've arrived, at least I'm seeing the
forest  from inside and I'm  seeing nothing. I  could have imagined all this
sitting in  my bare  hostel room  with  its  three empty  bunks;  late night
insomnia, everything quiet all about, then right on  midnight the piledriver
starts thumping on  the construction site. I could have  thought it  all up:
mermaids, walking trees and these pups, turning into pathfinder Selivan--the
most absurd  things, the holiest. And everything there is in the Directorate
I  can imagine and bring to  mind.  I could have stayed at  home and dreamed
this  all  up, lying  on my  sofa listening to symphojazz  or voices talking
unfamiliar languages on the  radio.  . . . But that doesn't mean a thing. To
see and not understand is the same as making it up. I'm alive, I can see and
I don't understand.  I'm living  in a world someone has  thought  up without
bothering   to   tell   me,  or   maybe   even   himself.  A   yearning  for
understanding--that's my  sickness, thought Pepper suddenly, a  yearning for
understanding.
     He stuck his hand  out of the window and held his aching finger against
the cool  car-body. The pups were  paying  the landrover  no attention. They
probably had no suspicion of its existence. They gave off a sharp unpleasant
smell;  their membrane  now seemed transparent  and it was as  if  wave-like
shadows moved beneath.
     "Let's  catch one," suggested Quentin. "It's simple enough,  we'll wrap
it in my jerkin and take it to the lab."
     "Not worth it," said Stoyan.
     "Why not?" Quentin asked. "We'll have to catch one sooner or later."
     "Doesn't seem right,  somehow,"  Stoyan said. "In the  first place, God
help us, the  thing'll  die  on  us  and  I'll have  to write a  report  for
Hausbotcher."
     "We've had  them  boiled," Acey announced suddenly.  "I didn't like the
taste, but the boys  said it  was all right. Bit like rabbit,  I can't touch
rabbit, to me a cat and  a rabbit's just the same; can't bear the stuff. . .
."
     "I've noticed one thing," said Quentin. "The number of pups is always a
simple number: thirteen, forty-three, forty-seven. . . ."
     "Nonsense,"  objected  Stoyan.  "I've  come  across  groups of  six  or
twelve."
     "That's  in  the forest,"  said Quentin, "after that groups scatter  in
different directions. The cesspit always  produces  a simple number, you can
check the log, I've put all my conclusions down."
     "Me and  the boys caught one of the local girls once, what a laugh that
was!"
     "Well all right, write an article then," said Stoyan.
     "1 already have," said Quentin. "That'll make fifteen. . .."
     "I've done  seventeen," said Stoyan. "And  one  at the printers.  Who's
your co-author?"
     "I don't know yet," said Quentin. "Kirn recommends the manager, he says
transport's the coming thing now, but Rita advises the warden."
     "Not him," said Stoyan.
     "Why?" asked Quentin.
     "Don't choose the warden," Stoyan repeated. "I'm not saying anything to
you--just keep it in mind."
     "The  warden used to dilute  the yogurt with  brake fluid," said  Acey.
"That  was when  he  was the manager of the barbershop.  So me and the  boys
slipped a handful of bedbugs into his room."
     "They say they're preparing a directive," said  Stoyan.  "Whoever's got
less than fifteen articles to their name have to undergo treatment."

     "Oh Lord," said Quentin, "that's a bad business. I
     know what special treatment  means, after one of them  your hair  stops
growing and you have bad breath for a year... ."
     Home, thought Pepper. Get home as soon as  you can. Now there really is
nothing for me here. Just then he saw that the pup formation  had broken up.
Pepper counted:  thirty-two  pups went  straight  ahead, while  a column  of
eleven had turned  off left and down,  where a lake became suddenly  visible
between the trees-- dark motionless water, quite near the  landrover. Pepper
glimpsed a  low  misty sky and  the vague outline of  the Directorate on the
horizon. The eleven pups were  heading confidently toward the water.  Stoyan
shut  the engine off and everybody climbed out to watch the pups oozing over
a twisted bough at the water's edge and plop heavily  one after another into
the lake. Oily circles rocked along the dark water.
     "They're going down," said Quentin in amazement. "They're drowning."
     Stoyan got his map and spread it out over the bonnet.
     "Right enough," he  said. "This  lake isn't  marked. There's a  village
marked but no lake. . . . Here it is written: 'Vill. Aborig. Seventeen point
one one.' "
     "That's  always the way," said Acey. "Who uses a map in this forest? In
the  first  place all  the maps are inaccurate and secondly,  you don't need
them here. Say there's a road here today, tomorrow  they'll have barbed wire
up and a watchtower. Or you'll find a dump all of a sudden."
     "I  don't sort of feel like going on  farther," said Stoyan, stretching
himself. "Maybe we'll call it a day?"
     "Surely," said Quentin. "Pepper's still got his pay to collect. Back to
the van."
     "A pair of binoculars would  be handy," said Acey suddenly, cupping his
eyes and avidly  staring into  the lake. "I reckon there's a woman in  there
bathing."
     Quentin halted.
     "Where?"
     "She's  got nothing  on," said Acey. "True as I'm standing here. Not  a
stitch."
     Quentin suddenly went pale and made a headlong rush for the van.
     "Where is it you see her?" asked Stoyan.
     "Over there at the far bank. . . ."
     "There's  nothing  there,"  croaked Quentin.  He was  standing  on  the
running-board  and  sweeping the far bank with  his  binoculars.  His  hands
shook.  "Damned  bigmouth.  . . . Asking for another one.  . .  . No, not  a
thing!" he repeated passing Stoyan the glasses.
     "What d'you mean,  nothing?"  said Acey. "I'm no four-eyes, I've got an
eye like a water-level. . . ."
     "Wait a minute,  wait, don't grab them," said Stoyan. "There's manners,
grabbing them out of my hand...."
     "There's  nothing  there,"  muttered  Quentin. "He's pulling your  leg.
There's plenty of travelers' tales...."
     "I know what it is," said Acey. "It's a mermaid. I'm telling you."
     Pepper roused himself.
     "Give me the binoculars," he said quickly.
     "Nothing to see," said Stoyan, holding out the glasses.
     "Fine guy to believe, I must say," muttered Quentin, now calming down.
     "Honestly, there was," said Acey. "She must have dived. She'll be up in
a minute.. . ."
     Pepper  focused the  glasses. He  didn't  expect to  see anything: that
would have been too simple. And nothing was what he saw. The unruffled lake,
a distant bank overgrown with forest and the silhouette of a  rock above the
forest's jagged skyline.
     "What was she like?" he asked.
     Acey  began a detailed  description of her, with much use of the hands.
His narrative was succulent  and full  of fervor, but it wasn't at all  what

Pepper wanted.
     "Yes, naturally . . ." said he, "yes . . . yes."
     Perhaps she  came  up  to  welcome the pups,  he thought as he  bounced
around  in  the  back  seat  alongside a  gloomy Quentin, gazing at the even
movement  of  Acey's ears. Acey  was chewing something. She came out  of the
forest  thickets  white,  cold, confident, and stepped into  the water,  the
water she knew so well, entered into the lake as I walk into a library, sank
into the rippling  green  twilight  and swam  toward the  pups. She met them
straight away in the  center of  the lake, on the bottom,  and led  them off
somewhere, for some reason, at someone's behest, and one more knot of forest
events is  tied. And perhaps miles away from  here something will happen  or
start to happen; banks of the lilac  fog that  isn't fog will seethe between
the trees,  or  another  cesspit will  start  up in a peaceful clearing,  or
mottled aborigines who've just been sitting and watching an educational film
and  patiently listening to  a lecture by Beatrice Vakh,  earnestly  hoarse,
will all of a sudden get up and go off into the forest, never to return. . .
.  And  it will all  be replete  with  profound  significance, the  profound
significance that  informs  the movements of complicated machinery,  and  it
will all be strange and, therefore, meaningless to us, at any rate for those
of us who still can't get used  to lack of meaning or accept it as the norm.
He sensed the significance of each and  every event,  every phenomenon about
him: that no batch of pups could number forty-two or forty-five and that the
trunk of that tree  there was overgrown with red moss and no other, that the
sky was invisible along the path because of overhanging branches.
     The vehicle shook. Stoyan was  driving extremely slowly and  from  some
way off Pepper could see a leaning post and a sign with something written on
it. The legend had been washed out by  rain and faded,  it  was a  very  old
notice  on  a very old, dirty-gray board,  pinned to  the pole with two huge
rusty  nails.  "Here,  two  years  ago,  pathfinder  Gustave was  tragically
drowned.  Here his memorial  will  be set  up." The landrover  made its  way
around the pole, lurching from side to side.
     Whatever got  into you,  Gustave, Pepper thought. How did you manage to
drown here?  You were a  tough guy no doubt,  your head was shaved, your jaw
was bristly and square, a  gold tooth,  tattooed from  top to toe, your arms
hung below your knees, you'd a finger missing on the right,  bitten off in a
drunken  brawl.  It  wasn't  your  heart  that  sent  you  off  to become  a
pathfinder, things just panned out that  way, you served your time up on the
cliff where the Directorate stands now and there was nowhere for you  to run
to except  the forest.  And you wrote no articles  in  the forest, you never
even  gave them a  thought, you thought about  other articles written before
that and aimed at you.  And you built a strategic road,  laid concrete slabs
and chopped down the  forest  far away on both sides  so that  eight-engined
bombers  could  land here if need be. Could the forest put up with that?  It
drowned you in  a dry place, but they'll put a monument  up  to you  in  ten
years time and maybe give your name to  some  cafe. The cafe  will be called
"Gustave's" and driver Acey will  drink yogurt there and stroke  the rumpled
girls from the local choir. . . .
     Apparently Acey had two convictions, neither, for some reason, for what
might  be  expected.  The first time he'd landed up in  a  labor colony  for
stealing stationery from  some concern, and  the second  time  for  offenses
against  the passport regulations.  Stoyan  there  was  clean. Doesn't drink
yogurt, nothing.  He loves Alevtina tenderly  and purely,  whom nobody  ever
loved  tenderly and purely. When article number  twenty  came out, he  would
offer Alevtina his  heart  and hand and  would be  turned down, his articles
notwithstanding,   his    broad   shoulders   and   beautiful   Roman   nose
notwithstanding, for Alevtina couldn't stand anybody fastidious,  suspecting
in him (not without reason)  a rake of such  refinement as to be  beyond her
comprehension. Stoyan lives in the  forest whither, unlike Gustave,  he came
voluntarily. He never  complains about anything although for him  the forest
is just  a  vast  pile  of material for articles,  guaranteeing him  against

treatment. . . .
     One might marvel endlessly at the fact that  there  were people able to
get used to the forest, and  yet such people were the overwhelming majority.
At  first  they  were attracted  by  the forest as  a romantic or  lucrative
location,  or  a  place where  control was not  over-strict,  or a place  of
refuge.  Then they got a bit afraid of it, and  then they made the discovery
that "it's just the  same mess here as everywhere else," and that reconciled
them to the strangeness of the forest,  but nobody intended to live out  his
old  age  here. Quentin now, as  rumor  had it, only lived  here because  he
feared to  leave Rita unguarded, and Rita refused to go away from the forest
at any  price, though  she  never told anybody  why. .  .  . There, I've got
around to Rita. . . . Rita can go off into  the forest and not come back for
weeks.  Rita bathes in forest lakes. Rita breaks  all  the rules  and nobody
dares to criticize. Rita writes no  articles. Rita  doesn't  write anything,
even letters. It's common knowledge that Quentin cries  of a night  and goes
off to sleep with the canteen assistant if she's not busy with somebody else
. . . it's  all over the biostation. . .. Good god, they light  up the club,
plug in the record-player, drink yogurt;  they drink a vast amount of yogurt
and  in the moonlight they hurl the bottles into the  lake and  see who gets
the  farthest. They  dance,  play  forfeits and spin the  bottle, cards  and
billiards, they swap women, and by day  in their  laboratories they pour the
forest from one  test tube to another,  study the forest under a microscope,
reckon it up on adding  machines, while the forest stands  all around  them,
looms above them, grows up through  their bedrooms and in the stifling hours
before the thunderstorm, wandering trees come crowding up  to their windows,
and they  also, no  doubt wonder what these people are, why they're here and
why they exist at all. . . .
     A  good  thing I'm  getting  out of  here, he  thought. I've been here,
understood nothing, found  nothing I wanted to  find, but I know now that  I
never will understand anything, that there is a time for everything. There's
nothing in  common between the forest and me, the forest is no nearer to  me
than the Directorate is. Anyway, at least I'm not staying here to be covered
in shame. I'm going away, I shall work and wait. I shall hope  for the  time
to come when. . . .
     The  biostation yard  was  empty.  There was no  sign of the truck, and
there was no line at the pay-out window. All there was was Pepper's suitcase
standing  on the porch that barred his  way,  his gray  raincoat hung on the
verandah  rail.  Pepper got out  of  the  landrover  and  looked  around  in
perplexity.  Acey, arm  in  arm with Quentin  was  already  heading for  the
canteen,  which gave out a clink  of cutlery and a  smell of burning. Stoyan
said:  "Let's go and  have supper, Peppy," and  drove the vehicle  into  the
garage.  Pepper,  to  his horror,  suddenly realized what all  this meant: a
howling record-player, senseless chatter, yogurt, another little glass,  eh?
And the same every evening, on and on for evening after. . . .
     The  pay-window  rattled  and  an  angry cashier  stuck his  head  out:
"Where've you been,  Pepper? How long haye I got to  wait? Get over here and
sign up."
     Pepper approached the window on  stiffened  legs. "Right here--I'll put
the total in," the cashier said. "No, no, not there, here. Why're your hands
shaking? Here you are."
     He began counting out notes.
     "But where are the rest? asked Pepper.
     "Don't rush. . . . The rest are in the envelope here."
     "No, I mean. . . ."
     "What  you mean  doesn't affect anybody.  I--canf change the  procedure
just for you. There's your salary, have you got it?"
     "I wanted to find out. . . ."
     "I'm asking you, have you received your salary? Yes or no?"
     "Yes."
     "Thank the Lord. Now your bonus. Have you received that?"

     "Yes."
     "That's it then. Allow me to shake your hand. I'm in a hurry. I have to
be at the Directorate by seven."
     "I only wanted  to ask,"  said Pepper hurriedly, "where all the rest of
the people . . . Kim, the truck . . . they did promise to take me ... to the
Mainland."
     "Can't do it to the Mainland, I  have to be at  the Directorate. Excuse
me, I'm shutting the window now.
     "I won't take up much room," said Pepper.
     "That's not the  point. You're  not  a  child, you must realize, I'm  a
cashier. I have payrolls--what if anything happens to them? Take your  elbow
away."
     Pepper took his elbow  away and  the  window slammed down.  Through the
murky  thumb-printed glass, Pepper could  make out the cashier collecting up
his payrolls, screwing them up any how and stuffing them into his briefcase;
then the office  door  opened, two  massive  guards  came in  and  bound the
cashier's  hands, throwing a noose  about  his  neck;  one of  them led  the
cashier off on the rope while  the other took the briefcase and gazed around
the room, catching sight of Pepper as he  did so. For a while they stared at
one another through the dirty  glass, then very slowly and carefully,  as if
fearing to scare someone, the  guard placed the briefcase on  the chair and,
without taking  his  eyes  from Pepper,  reached out for the rifle  that was
leaning against the wall. Pepper waited, cold and incredulous, as the  guard
took up the rifle, stumbled and went out, shutting  the door behind him. The
light was extinguished.
     Pepper then fell back  from the window, ran  on tiptoe to his suitcase,
seized it and fled, anywhere, as far as  might be from this  place.  He took
cover behind  the garage and  watched  the  guard  come out onto the  porch,
holding  his rifle at  the port, a glance left and right, then underfoot; he
took Pepper's raincoat, weighed it in his hand, rummaged in the pockets  and
after another glance around, went off into the house. Pepper sat down on his
suitcase.  It  was chilly  and  night was  falling.  Pepper sat  pointlessly
staring at the lighted  windows, whitened for half their height. Beyond  the
window  shadows moved;  on the roof  the latticed vane of the radar silently
rotated. Crockery  rattled, night  creatures  called  in  the  forest.  Then
somewhere a searchlight flashed out a blue beam and into it from behind  the
corner  of the building rolled a shovel  truck, rumbling and  leaping on the
rutted road; followed by the searchlight, it reached the gates. In the scoop
sat the guard with the rifle. He was smoking, muffled up against the wind; a
thick fleecy rope was  wrapped around his left wrist and led off through the
half-opened window of the driver's cab.
     The truck drove  off and  the searchlight  went  out. Across the  yard,
scraping his gigantic boots, passed the second guard, a menacing shadow with
a rifle  under his armpit. Every now  and again he bent down and prodded the
earth, looking for footprints, seemingly. Pepper pressed  his sodden back to
the wall and, motionless, followed him with his eyes.
     There  came a terrible  drawn-out cry from the  forest. Somewhere doors
slammed.  A light went on on the first floor, someone said loudly: "Not half
stuffy in  your  place." Something round and shining dropped  into the grass
and rolled to Pepper's feet. Pepper froze  into stillness  once  more,  than
realized it was a yogurt bottle.
     On foot, thought Pepper. It'll have to be on foot. Twelve miles through
the  forest. Through the  forest, that was  bad. Now the forest would  see a
pitiful trembling man, damp with  fear and fatigue, dead under the weight of
his suitcase, yet for  some reason clinging onto it. I'll be trailing  along
and the forest will hoot and yell at me from both sides.
     The guard had reappeared in the courtyard.  He was not alone. Alongside
came something else, breathing heavily and  snorting, huge and  four-footed.
They  halted  in  the middle of the yard and  Pepper  could  hear the  guard
muttering: "Grab that, go on. . . . Don't  eat the thing, then .... It's not

sausage, it's  a raincoat, smell it  then. . . . Well?  Cherchez when you're
told.  .  . ." The  four-footed  one whined  and  squealed.  "Gaw!" said the
exasperated  guard. "Hunting fleas  is  your job. .  . . Get on there!" They
melted into the darkness. Heels clacked along the porch, a door shut.
     Just then something cold and moist  knocked against Pepper's cheek.  He
shuddered and almost fell.  It  was an enormous  wolfhound.  It whined  very
quietly,  gave a heavy sigh,  and  laid  its heavy  head on Pepper's  knees.
Pepper stroked it behind the ears. The wolfhound yawned and seemed  about to
shift itself around to get comfortable when the record-player thundered  out
from the first floor. The wolfhound silently started up and bounded off.
     The record-player raged on, for  miles around nothing else existed. And
then, just like in an adventure film, the gates were suddenly bathed in blue
light  and silently opened wide, and  an  enormous truck slid into  the yard
like a vast ship lit  up with constellations of signal lamps. It stopped and
dipped its  headlights,  which died slowly as  if  some forest  monster were
giving  up the ghost. Driver Voldemar thrust his head out of the  window and
started shouting something, mouth wide, and kept it up, straining  away, his
eyes  fierce, then  spat and dived  back  into the  cab,  came out again and
chalked "Pepper!!!" on  his door upside  down. At  this, Pepper realized the
truck had come for him, seized hold of his suitcase and ran across the yard,
fearing to look back, fearful of hearing shots behind him. He made hard work
of scrambling up the two steps into  a cab the size of a  room  and while he
got his  suitcase settled, then  himself  a dug-out cigarette, Voldemar kept
talking, purple in the  face, his voice straining, gesticulating and pushing
Pepper's  shoulder with  the palm of his hand.  Only when the  record-player
stopped suddenly did  Pepper at last hear  his voice: Voldemar wasn't saying
anything in particular, he was just swearing violently.
     The truck  had  not succeeded  in passing  the gates,  when Pepper fell
asleep, as if someone had placed an ether mask over his face.
     Chapter Seven
     The village was very strange. When they emerged from the forest and saw
it below in the  dip, the silence  stunned them. It was so quiet that  their
joy was  dampened. The  village  was triangular in  shape and  the  sizeable
clearing on  which it stood was similarly  three-sided--a  wide clay outcrop
without a single bush  or blade  of grass, as if it had  been burned off and
then stamped down,  completely black  and  sheltered  from the  sky  by  the
interlacing tops of mighty trees.
     "I don't like  this village,"  announced Nava. "It'll likely be hard to
beg a bite  to  eat there.  They're not likely to have  food if they haven't
even got fields, just bare clay. They're likely hunters, trapping and eating
animals, makes you sick to think. . . ."
     "Perhaps  we've landed up  at Funny Village?" inquired Kandid. "Perhaps
it's Clay Clearing?"
     "How  can  it  be  Funny Village?  Funny  Village  is just an  ordinary
village, like our village  only  funny folk live there. But here, the  quiet
and nobody to be seen,  no kids, they might be in bed, mind. . . . And why's
there nobody about,  Dummy? Let's not go into that  village, I don't like it
at all. . . ."
     The sun was setting, and  the village below was sinking into shadow. It
had the  air of being very  empty but  not deserted,  not abandoned,  simply
empty, unreal, as if it were not  a village  at all but  some  sort of stage
scenery. Yes, thought Kandid, probably we shouldn't  go there,  only my feet
are  hurting and I'd give a lot for a roof over  my  head. And  something to
eat. And  the  night's coming on. ... We've been wandering around the forest
all day,  even  Nava's  weary,  hanging on  to my arm, not letting  go. "All
right," he said hesitantly, "let's not go."
     "Not go,  not go," said Nava, "just when I want to eat? How long can  I
last without eating? I've had nothing since morning . . . and your robbers .

. . that made me mighty hungry. No, let's go down there, have a  bite and if
we don't like it, we'll leave  straight away. The night's going  to be warm,
no rain . . . let's go, what're you standing there for?"
     As  soon as  they reached the edge of the village  someone called them.
Alongside the first house,  on  the  gray earth  sat a gray man, practically
naked. It was hard to pick him out  in  the  twilight, he almost merged with
the earth and  Kandid  was only able to make out his  silhouette against the
background of a whitewashed wall.
     "Where are you going?" asked the man in a feeble voice.
     "We're going  to spend the night here and in the morning we  have to go
to  New Village. We've  lost our way, we ran away from some robbers and lost
the way."
     "You came  here  yourselves, then?" said the man weakly.  "You've  done
well then,  good people. .. .  You come in, come in, there's lots of work to
be done and hardly  any people  left now.  . .  ." He could hardly bring the
words out, as if he were nodding off. "And the work must be  done, it's just
got  to be, got to  be. . .  ." "Will you give  us something to  eat?" asked
Kandid.  "Just  now  we've got . . ."  The man spoke some words  that struck
Kandid as familiar, except that he  knew he'd never heard them before. "It's
good that a  boy's come, because a  boy .  . ." He started talking  strange,
incomprehensible words again.
     Nava tugged at Kandid, but he tore his arm away  in annoyance."I  can't
understand you,"  he said to the man, trying to get a better look at him  at
least. "Just tell me whether you've got food by you or not."
     "Now if there were three. . . ." said the man.
     Nava dragged Kandid off to one side by main force.
     "Is  he ill?" said  Kandid  angrily. "Did you  understand what  he  was
saying?"
     "What are  you talking to  him for?" whispered  Nava. "He hasn't  got a
face! How can you talk to him if he hasn't got a face?"
     "How d'you mean 'no face'?" Kandid looked around in  amazement. The man
was not to be seen;
     either he'd gone or had melted into the shadows.
     "He's like a deadling," she said. "Only he's not, he's got a smell, but
for all  that, he's like a deadling. . . . Let's go to some other house, but
we won't get anything to eat here, don't think you will."
     She  hauled  him  off  to  the  next house  and  they  glanced  inside.
Everything  in the house was odd, no beds, no smell of habitation, inside it
was empty, dark, unpleasant. Nava sniffed the air.
     "There's never been any food here," she said, repelled. "You've brought
me  to some  stupid village,  Dummy. What shall we do here? In my life  I've
never  seen  villages  like this. There's no children  shouting and  there's
nobody in the street."
     They walked  on. Beneath  their feet lay  a cool fine dust; their  very
steps were soundless and  there  were none of the usual evening hootings and
gurgling from the forest.
     •'He  spoke  in a  funny way,"  said Kandid. "I've been thinking,  I've
heard that  talk somewhere before . . . but when and where I don't remember.
. . ."
     "I don't  remember either," said Nava, after a pause, "but  it's  true.
Dummy, I've heard words like that, maybe in a dream,  maybe in our  village,
not the one where you and I  live  now, but the other one where I was  born,
only then that would have been a  very  long time  ago, because I  was still
very  little, I've forgotten everything  since,  just  now  it  was as if  I
remembered, but I just can't remember properly."
     In  the  next  house they saw a  man lying  flat  on the  floor by  the
entrance, asleep.  Kandid bent  down and shook him by the  shoulder, but the
man did not wake up. His skin was moist and  cold like an amphibian, he  was
flabby,  soft,  and  lacked   muscle  almost  entirely.  His   lips  in  the
semi-darkness seemed black and had an oily gleam.

     "He's asleep," said  Kandid, turning  to Nava. "What d'you mean asleep,
when he's looking at us?" said Nava.
     Kandid bent over the man again and it  now seemed that he was  watching
them through barely-open eyes. The impression lasted only briefly.  "No, no,
he's asleep all right," said Kandid. "Let's go."
     Unusually for her, Nava said nothing. They made their way to the center
of the  village, glancing into  every  house, and in every  house  they  saw
sleepers. All  the sleepers were plump,  fleshy men. There  wasn't a  single
woman or child. Nava was now completely silent and  Kandid also felt uneasy.
The bellies of the sleepers rumbled heavily. They didn't wake up, but almost
every time that Kandid looked back  at them as he passed out into the street
it seemed that they were following him with quick cautious glances.
     By  now it had got dark and scraps of sky made ashen by the moon peeped
through between the branches; to Kandid it once more seemed weirdly like the
backdrop in  a  good  theater.  He felt weary to  the  ultimate  degree,  to
complete and  utter indifference.  Just now he wanted only one thing; to lie
down somewhere  under a  roof  (in case some  nocturnal horror  fell on  him
asleep),  let it  be on a  hard stamped floor, but better anyhow in an empty
house, not with these suspicious sleepers. Nava was now literally hanging on
his arm. "Don't you be afraid," said Kandid, "there's absolutely nothing  to
be afraid of here." "What d'you  say?" she asked sleepily. "I said: don't be
afraid, they're all half dead here, I could turf them out with one hand."
     "I'm not afraid of anybody," said Nava  angrily, "I'm  tired out and  I
want to go to sleep, if you can't give me anything to eat. You keep going on
from  house to house,  house to  house. I'm  fed up, it's  the same in every
house anyway, all the  people are lying down resting, and you and me are the
only ones wandering about. . . ."
     Kandid  then made  up  his  mind and entered  the  first house he  came
across. It  was  pitch  black inside.  Kandid  pricked  his  ears trying  to
determine whether anyone was  inside or not,  but all he could hear was  the
snuffling of Nava who had her forehead buried in his side. He found the wall
by groping and  scrabbled about on  the floor  to see if it was  wet; he lay
down placing Nava's head on his stomach. She was already asleep. He hoped to
himself he had done the right thing, there was  something  wrong  about this
place  . .  . still, just  one night . . . then ask  the way . .. they won't
sleep in the daytime ... at worst into the swamp, the robbers had gone . . .
and if they  hadn't. . . how  were the lads in New Village? . . . Surely not
the day after tomorrow again? .... Not at all, tomorrow . . .  tomorrow. . .
.
     He was  awakened by  a  light and thought it  was the moon.  Inside the
house it was dark,  the lilac light was coming in  by the door and it struck
him  as interesting that  this light  could enter by  both the door and  the
window in  the opposite wall,  then  he remembered he was in the forest  and
this could be no real moon; he  at once forgot all this as the silhouette of
a man appeared in the strip  of light  falling from the window. The  man was
standing in the house with his back to Kandid, gazing out of the window, and
it was obvious by his silhouette that he  was  standing with his arms behind
his back and head bowed. The forest inhabitants never stood like that--there
was simply no reason for them  to do so--but  Karl  Etinghof used to like to
stand like that by the laboratory window during the rain and fog season when
there was no work to do, and the clear realization came to him that this was
Karl  Etinghof, who  had gone absent from the biostation one day and had not
returned from the  forest.  He had  been posted  as missing  without  trace.
Kandid gave a gasp of ex  citement and cried  "Karl!" As Karl slowly turned,
the lilac light fell across his face and Kandid saw that it was not Karl but
some  unknown local inhabitant;  he  came noiselessly up  to Kandid and bent
over him,  hands still  behind his back, so  that  his  face  became clearly
visible--an  emaciated, beardless face, indeed quite  unlike Karl's face. He
straightened up  without a word, seeming not to see Kandid, and made for the
door,  stooping as before, and when  he  was  stepping  across the threshold

Kandid realized that it was Karl after all, leaped to his feet and ran after
him.
     Beyond the entrance he halted and looked up and down the street, trying
to suppress a nervous tremor that had suddenly taken hold of him. It was now
very  bright outside from  the luminous  lilac cloud  hanging low  over  the
village and all the houses seemed two-dimensional and more than ever unreal,
while  at an angle on the  other  side of the street rose  a long outlandish
structure unlike any normal forest building. Near to it figures were moving.
The man resembling Karl was heading along for  the building; when he reached
the crowd he  mingled with  it and vanished as if he had  never been. Kandid
also wanted to get to the building but his legs felt like cotton wool and he
couldn't move. He  was astonished  that he  could still stand  up. Afraid he
would fall, he looked for  something to support him; there  was  nothing but
emptiness  all around. "Karl," he  mumbled, swaying,  "Karl, come  back!" He
repeated the words several times, finally  shouting aloud in despair; no one
heard him, for at that very  moment a much louder cry rang out,  piteous and
wild,  a frank  sob of  pain that  rang in his ears and forced tears to  his
eyes; for some reason he realized at once that  the cry came from that  long
structure, perhaps because there was nowhere else it could be.
     "Where's  Nava?"  he  began to  shout.  "My  girl, where are  you?"  He
realized that he would lose her now,  that the moment had  come for  him  to
lose everything that was  close to him, all that linked him  to life, and he
would be  alone. He turned to  rush  into  the  house and saw  Nava,  slowly
falling  backward. He caught and lifted  her without understanding  what had
happened to her. Her head was  thrown back and her open throat was  in front
of  his eyes; where everybody has a hollow between  their collarbones,  Nava
had two and he would never see them again. The screaming sob had not stopped
and he knew that he had to go where it was. He was only too well aware  what
a feat this  would  be, dragging her  over there, but he also knew that they
would simply consider it  normal  procedure, because they didn't  understand
what it meant to  hold  a wife in your arms, warm and  unique  and carry her
yourself to a place of weeping.
     The cry broke off.  Kandid saw  that he  was standing right in front of
the building before the square black door,  and strove to understand what he
was  doing there with  Nava  in his arms. He did not succeed, for out of the
square  black door  came  two  women  and  Karl,  all three  displeased  and
frowning, and halted in  conversation. He saw their  lips moving and guessed
they were arguing irritably but the words he could not understand, just once
he caught the half-familiar word "chiasmus."  Then one of the women, without
interrupting  the conversation,  turned  to  the crowd and  gestured  as  if
inviting all of them into the  building. Kandid  said,  "Right  away,  right
away," and hugged  Nava to  him more tightly than ever. Once  again the loud
cry rang out  and everybody began shuffling about,  the fat people began  to
embrace one  another,  hug one another close, stroke and  caress each other;
their eyes were  dry and  their lips  tightly closed, nevertheless they were
crying and shouting, taking farewell  of each other, for it turned out  they
were men and women and the men were saying good-bye to the women forever. No
one wanted to go first, so Kandid  went up first,  since he was a brave man,
since he knew he had to  and since he knew that there was no help for him in
any case. Karl, however, glanced at him and motioned him aside with a barely
perceptible shake of  the  head,  and Kandid felt  utterly weird  because it
wasn't Karl after all, but he  understood and retreated,  knocking into soft
and slippery bodies with his back. And when Karl gave
     another shake of  the head, he turned, slung Nava over his shoulder and
ran on rubbery legs along the bright, empty village street as if in a dream;
there was no sound of pursuit.
     He  came to  himself as he collided with  a tree. Nava shrieked  and he
lowered her to the ground. There was grass underfoot.
     From  here the  whole  village  could  be  surveyed.  A  fog  of  lilac
luminescence hung in  a cone over the village, and the houses looked blurred

as the figures of the people seemed blurred.
     "For  some  reason I can't  remember anything," said Nava,  "why are we
here? We went to bed. Or am I dreaming?"
     Kandid lifted her and carried  her farther and farther crashing through
bushes, tripping  over  grass, until all around  became completely dark.  He
pushed on a little farther yet, set Nava down once  more and sat down beside
her.  Around them grew  tall warm  grass, keeping  the damp  out;  never had
Kandid chanced upon such a  dry, warm, blissful place  since he had been  in
the  forest. He had a  headache  and drowsiness  kept  coming on; he felt no
desire to think at  all, there was just this feeling of  huge relief that he
had been about to do something terrible and had not done it.
     "Dummy," said Nava dreamily, "you know.  Dummy, I've remembered where I
heard talk like that before. You  used to  talk  like  that, Dummy, when you
hadn't recovered your wits. Listen, Dummy,  maybe you've just forgotten. You
were very sick then, Dummy, lost your wits altogether. . . ."
     "Go  to  sleep,"  said Kandid.  He  didn't  want  to think.  Not  about
anything. Chiasmus, he recalled and fell asleep at once. Not quite at  once.
He  recalled suddenly that it wasn't Karl  that had gone  missing;  that was
Valentine,  it was Valentine's name that had been  posted up in orders, Karl
had  perished  in  the forest  and they had  put  his  body,  discovered  by
accident, in a lead coffin and shipped it to the Mainland. But he thought he
might be dreaming all that.
     When he  opened his eyes, Nava  was still asleep. She  was lying on her
stomach in the hollow between two roots, her face buried in the crook of her
left arm with  her right flung out to one  side; Kandid  saw a  thin shining
object in her dirty, half-open fist. At first he didn't realize what it was,
and he  was occupied with the sudden memory of the strange half-dream of the
night, his fear, and the relief he felt  at something terrible which had not
happened.  It then  occurred to him what the  object actually  was, even its
name swam into his memory. It was a scalpel. He waited a while,  testing the
shape of the object with the sound of the word, realizing at the back of his
mind that it  was correct, but impossible, because a scalpel by its name and
shape was monstrously incongruous in this world. He roused Nava.
     Nava awoke and, sitting up, began to talk at once.
     "What a dry place, I never in all my life thought there were dry places
like  this, look how  high the grass grows, eh, Dummy?" She became quiet and
brought the scalpel in  her fist  close to her eyes.  She gazed at  it for a
second,  then squealed and flung it, shuddering, from her. She leapt  to her
feet. The scalpel sliced into the grass and stood quivering.  They looked at
it and both were terrified.
     "What is it, Dummy?" whispered Nava at last, "what a horrible thing ...
is it a  thing? Maybe it's a plant? Look, it's all dry around here--maybe it
grew here?"
     "Why -horrible'?" asked Kandid.
     "Why ever not?" said Nava. "You  pick it up ... you try, try, go on ...
then you'll know why it's horrible. I don't know, myself, why it's horrible.
. . ."
     Kandid  picked up the scalpel. It was  still warm, but the sharp  point
struck cold. Passing a  cautious  finger along it, he found where it changed
from warm to cold.
     "Where did you pick it up?" asked Kandid.
     "I didn't pick it up anywhere," said Nava. "It  likely crawled  into my
hand by itself,  while I was asleep. See how cold it is? It likely wanted to
get warm and crawled into my hand. I've never seen anything like it,
     I  don't  know what to call it. Likely it's not a plant, it's some kind
of beastie, maybe he's got  legs just tucked them up, only so hard and nasty
. .  . maybe we're  asleep, Dummy, you and I?" She faltered all of  a sudden
and looked at Kandid. "Were we in the village tonight? Surely we were, there
was a man without a face as  well, and  he kept thinking I was--a boy. . . .
And we hunted for somewhere to  sleep . . . yes, and then I woke up, you had

gone and I started feeling  about with my hands. That's when it crawled into
my hand!" she said,  "but it's surprising, Dummy, I wasn't at all frightened
of  it  then, just the opposite even ... I even wanted it for something. . .
."
     "It was all a dream," said Kandid decisively. The hair had risen on his
scalp. He remembered all the events of the night. And  Karl. And  how he had
shaken  his  head  just slightly;  run while you can. And  that when he  was
alive, Karl had been a surgeon.
     "Why don't  you say  anything, Dummy?" asked Nava,  gazing anxiously at
his face. "Where are you looking?"
     Kandid pushed her away. "It was  a dream," he repeated harshly, "forget
it. Better hunt up something to eat, and I'll bury this thing."
     "What did I need  it  for, don't  you  know?" asked Nava. "I had  to do
something.  . .  ."  She shook  her head. "I  don't  like dreams  like that,
Dummy," she said, "you can't remember  a  thing. You bury  it deep otherwise
it'll get out and crawl into the village and frighten somebody. Good idea to
put a stone  on top,  a  pretty  heavy one, too. . . . Well, you bury it and
I'll go  and look for food." She sniffed the air. "There's berries somewhere
near here. I never did, berries in such a dry place?"
     She ran off lightly and noiselessly over the grass and was soon lost to
view beyond the  trees. Kandid remained seated,  holding the  scalpel in his
palm.  He didn't  bury it.  He wiped  the blade with a handful  of grass and
tucked  it  in his blouse. Now he  recalled everything and could  understand
nothing. It  was  a kind of strange and terrible  dream, and  owing to  some
oversight,  the scalpel had fallen out of it. What a pity, he thought, today
my head's clearer than it's ever been and  all the same I can't understand a
thing. That means I never will.
     Nava quickly returned and dug out from her bosom a pile  of berries and
several sizeable fungi.
     "There's a path  over there, Dummy,"  she said. "Let's  not go back  to
that village, you and I, why should we, let it ... let's you and I go by the
path, we're bound to get somewhere. We can ask there the way to New  Village
and everything'll be all right. It's just amazing how much I want now to get
to New Village, never  before wanted to so  much. Let's  not go back to that
nasty  village, I didn't like it there, you know if we hadn't got  away from
there,  something  awful  would have  happened.  If  you  want  to  know, we
shouldn't have  come here,  those robbers did shout at you  not to go or you
were  done for, but of course you never listen to  anybody. . . . Because of
you we nearly got into trouble.  . .  . Why don't you eat? The mushrooms are
filling and the  berries are nice, rub them in your palm and make  them into
crumbs, you're like a  kid today.  I remember now, mam  used to  tell me the
best  mushrooms grow where it's dry,  but I didn't know what dry  meant, mam
used to say that there were lots of dry places  before, like on a good road,
that's why she understood and I didn't. . . ."
     Kandid tried a mushroom  and ate it. They really were good, and so were
the  berries; he felt his strength coming back. He still didn't know what to
do next,  however.  He wasn't keen  to go  back to the village.  He tried to
visualize the locality as Hopalong had drawn  it on the ground with a stick,
and recalled that Hopalong used to speak of a road to the City, a road which
should run through  these parts. "It's a very good road," Hopalong would say
regretfully, "the most  direct road to the City,  only  we  can't get  there
across the quagmire, that's the trouble." He lied. The lame one lied. He had
gone across  the quagmire  and had been in the  City probably, but  for some
reason he lied. But  perhaps Nava's path was  that self-same road? It had to
be risked. But first they had to go back, back to the village. . . .
     "We'll  have  to go  back all the same, Nava," he said, after  they had
eaten.
     "Where to? Back to that nasty village?" Nava was upset. "Now why do you
say that to me, Dummy? What's there left to see in that village? That's what
I can't like about you, Dummy, there's no making  any arrangements with you.

.  . . We'd already decided that we wouldn't go back to that  village, and I
found the path for you, now you start saying we've got to go back...."
     "We have to," he answered, "I don't want to either, Nava, but  we  have
to. What if they can tell us there the quickest way to get to the City?"
     "Why  to the City? I don't want  to go to the City, I want to go to New
Village!"
     "We're  going straight  to the City," said Kandid, "I  can't  stand any
more of this."
     "Well, all  right," said Nava, "all  right, let's  go to the City, even
better,  what's left  to be seen in New  Village? Let's go  to  the  City, I
agree, I'm always in agreement with  you, only don't let's  go back to  that
village. You think what  you like, Dummy, but for my part, I'd  never return
to that village. . . ."
     "It's the same with me," he said, "but it's got  to be  done. Don't  be
angry, Nava, I really don't want to.. . ."
     "If you don't want  to, why go?" He didn't want to and couldn't explain
to her why. He rose and without  looking back, went in the direction  of the
village,  through  the  warm,  dry  grass, past  the warm,  dry tree trunks,
squinting from  the warm  sun of which  there was unusually much hereabouts,
heading toward  a  horror from  which all his muscles were  still  painfully
strained, toward a  strange  and quiet hope that broke through  the  horror,
like a blade of grass through asphalt.
     Nava  caught him  up and walked alongside. She  was angry and  was even
silent for some time, but couldn't keep it up.
     "Just  don't think that I'm going to talk to those people, you can talk
to them,  you're going there, you talk to them. I don't like having anything
to do with a  man if he hasn't got a face, I don't like that. Expect no good
from a man like that, if he can't tell  a boy  from a girl.  . . . My head's
been aching since morning, and now I know why. , . ."
     They  came  on the village unexpectedly. Apparently,  Kandid had veered
off the true direction and the village now opened out among the trees on the
right.  Everything was altered, though. Kandid didn't at  first realize what
had happened. Then he did; the village had drowned.
     The  triangular clearing was  awash  with  black water, and  water  was
entering before  their eyes,  filling  the  clay  dip, drowning the  houses,
silently eddying along the streets.  Kandid stood and watched helplessly  as
windows disappeared under the water and waterlogged walls crumbled and sank,
roofs caved in  and  nobody ran out of the houses, nobody attempted to reach
the shore, not a single person appeared on the surface of the water. Perhaps
there were no  people there,  perhaps they'd left that night,  but  he  felt
it-wasn't as simple as  that. It's not a village, he thought, it's a  model,
it stood forgotten and dusty and then somebody got curious as to what  would
happen if it  were covered with water.  It might be interesting? ... So they
did it. But it wasn't interesting. . . .
     Gently caving in, the roof of a smooth building slid into the  water. A
light breath  seemed  to float  over the water, waves  fled  over  the  even
surface and all was over. Before Kandid lay an ordinary triangular lake, for
the  moment quite shallow and lifeless.  Later it would deepen into a  gulf,
fish would appear, for us to catch, prepare, and place in formalin.
     "I know what this  is called," said Nava. Her  voice  was so calm, that
Kandid glanced at her.  She  really was  absolutely  calm, even,  it seemed,
pleased. "It's called  the  Accession," she said,  "that's why  they had  no
faces and I didn't understand straight away. Likely  they wanted  to live in
the lake. They  used to tell me that the people  who lived in the houses can
stay and live in the lake, there'll be a lake here now for always, those who
don't want to can leave. Take me for example, I would leave, though maybe it
would  be better  living in the lake. But that nobody  knows. . . . Maybe we
could bathe here?" she suggested.
     "No,"  said Kandid, "I don't want  to bathe here. Let's  get on to your
path. Come on."

     I've  just got to get out of here, he thought, unless I want to be like
that machine in the maze. . . . We all stood around and laughed as it busily
probed and searched and sniffed .  . . then we  filled a small trough in its
path  with water and it panicked touchingly but  only for a moment, then its
busy antennae got going  again, buzzing and  sniffing, not  knowing that  we
were  observing it,  and  in  general  we  couldn't have cared less  that it
didn't, though it was that which was the  most terrible  thing of all. If it
was terrible at all, he thought. Necessity can't be either terrible or kind.
Necessity is necessary, and anything else about it we imagine ourselves,  or
machines in  mazes,  if they can  imagine.  It's just that  when we  make  a
mistake,  necessity  grips  us  by  the  throat  and  we  start  crying  and
complaining  how cruel and  terrible it is, and  it's  just exactly  what it
is--it's  us who  are stupid  or blind.  I can even philosophize  today,  he
thought. Probably  from  the  lack of  humidity.  That's  all I  need, I can
philosophize. . . .
     "There it is, your path," said Nava angrily, "come on, if you please."
     Angry,  he  thought.  Won't  let  me  bathe,  I  can't  talk,  it's dry
everywhere, nasty . . . never mind, let her be angry, she's quiet, and thank
God  for  that. Who  walks  these paths? Surely they  can't be walked  often
enough to keep the grass  down? It's an odd path all right,  it is as  if it
were dug out, not trampled down. . . .
     The path led  at first  through comfortable dry places, but  after some
time it descended steeply and  became a vicious strip of black mud. The pure
forest ended, bogs appeared  on all sides, moss grew everywhere, it got damp
and stifling.  Nava at once livened  up. She  felt much better here. She was
now talking continuously and  soon  the well-known ringing hum took over and
established itself in Kandid's  head;  he moved in  a half-dream, forgetting
all his  philosophy, almost forgetting where he was going, giving himself up
to chance thoughts, not even thoughts, fancies.
     .... Hopalong comes hobbling down the main street and tells everyone he
meets  (and even if he meets nobody,  he still puts  it out), that Dummy has
gone off, yes, and taken Nava with him, to the City, likely he's gone to the
Reed-beds,  good fish  to  trick  there;  just  stick  your  finger  in  the
water--there you  are, a  fish. Only why should he, if  you  think about it.
Dummy doesn't eat fish, fool, although maybe he'll decide to catch a few for
Nava, Nava eats fish, there now he'll feed her up on fish. . . . But why did
he  go  on asking  questions about the City?  No-o-o, he's  not gone to  the
Reed-beds, we can't expect him back soon.
     Toward him along the  main street comes  Buster and  tells everyone  he
meets  that Dummy now, used to go about trying to  talk people into going to
the City, Buster, let's go day after tomorrow  to the City, and when  I make
too much food so the old woman tells me off, then off he goes without me and
without food . . . on  his own, yes, wool on yer nose, off he goes, no food,
give him one in the eye and put a stop to that, no going with food, and with
no food he'd be frightened to go, sit at home, give him one. . . .
     And Barnacle stands next  to the old man  breakfasting at his house and
says  to him: you're eating again, and  eating  somebody else's again. Don't
think  I begrudge it, I'm just  amazed how many pots of filling food can  be
stowed away inside a skinny old man like you. You eat, he says, but you tell
me  is there  really only one  of  you in  the village? Maybe there's really
three, or two at least? It's weird looking at you, eat, eat till you're full
up, then explain that it's not right to. ...
     Nava walked alongside, hanging on to his arm with both of hers, talking
with a reckless air:
     "And  there  was  another  man  living in our village, who  they called
Anger-Martyr,  you wouldn't  remember him, you were  witless then,  and this
Anger-Martyr was always annoyed at  us and he used  to ask:  Why? Why  is it
light in the daytime and dark at night? Why is it beetles that get you drunk
but  not ants?  Why are  the deadlings interested in women  but not men? The
dead-lings stole two  wives from him, one after the other. The first one was

before  my time,  but I remember the  second, he went  about asking why,  he
asked, did they steal  my wife and not me? He deliberately walked whole days
and nights in the forest, so's he could be picked up  and find his wives, or
one of them at least, but of  course  it didn't  work, they  don't want men,
it's women  they need, that's  how  they're made,  and they're  not going to
change their ways because of any Anger-Martyr. ... He used to ask us as well
why we had to work in the fields when there was more than enough food in the
forest, just pour some  ferment  on the ground then eat your fill. The elder
says to him: don't work if you don't want to, nobody's grabbing your arm . .
. but he still went on: why, but why ...  or  he would go up  to Buster, Why
says he, is Upper Village grown over with mushrooms and ours has nary a one?
At first Buster quietly explains:  the Accession happened up there  and  not
here yet,  that's  all  about it.  But he  goes  on:  Why haven't we had the
Accession,  Buster, after such a long time? What if it hasn't come then asks
Buster,  you miss it or something? Anger-Martyr  won't  leave  off,  he wore
Buster out. Buster started shouting, all the village heard him, he waved his
fists about and  ran off to the  elder to complain, the elder got  angry  as
well and called the village together. They all set on Anger-Martyr to punish
him,  but they couldn't catch  him. ...  He used to get onto the old  man as
well an awful lot  At first, the  old man stopped going to his  house to eat
then he tried hiding from him but  eventually he couldn't stand it: Leave me
alone, says he, the food won't go into my mouth because of you, how should I
know--why? The City knows why and that's all about it. Anger-Martyr went off
to the City and never came back. . . .
     Greeny-yellow  blotches  swam   slowly  by  to  right  and  left,  ripe
dope-toadstools  puffed  deeply  and  hurled  out  their  spores  in  ginger
fountains; a wandering forest  wasp tried to  sting their eyes,  prompting a
hundred-yard dash to escape; multi-colored water spiders clung to the lianas
fussing about  building  their  constructions;  jumping trees  alighted  and
hunched for another jump before, sensing the presence of people, they  froze
and  pretended to be  ordinary trees--there was nothing for the  eye to rest
on, nothing to record. And nothing to think about either, since to think  of
Karl and last night and the drowned village meant delirium.
     "Anger-Martyr was a good man--it was he  and  Hopalong found you beyond
the Reed-beds. They  went off toward the Anthills, but  drifted over somehow
to  the  Reed-beds  and  found you  there  and  dragged  you  in, or  rather
Anger-Martyr  dragged you in, Hopalong just walked  behind  picking  up  the
things that fell out of you. .  . .  Ever such a lot of things he picked up,
then, he said he got scared and threw them all away. No such thing ever grew
in  our village, or  could ever. Then Anger-Martyr took the clothes off you,
very strange clothes you had, nobody could understand where things like that
grew or how. . .  . Then he cut  them up and planted them,  thinking  they'd
grow. But nothing ever grew  for him not even a shoot, and he  started going
around  again asking why,  if  you cut up and planted anybody's clothes they
grew, but yours, Dummy, never even sprouted. ... He pestered you a lot, gave
you no peace, but you  had no wits then,  just muttered  something or other,
like that one with no face, and  covered your face with your hand. Otherwise
he'd never  have left you alone. After that lots of men went over beyond the
Reed-beds--Buster, Hopalong, even the elder went, hoping to find another one
like you. But they never did. . . . Then they brought me to you.  Marry him,
say  they,  while  you can,  get married, you'll  have  a  husband,  he's  a
stranger, so  what? So are you, sort of. I'm a  stranger too. Dummy. This is
how  it was:  the  deadlings had  kidnapped  mother and me, it  was  a night
without moon. . . ."
     The  terrain was again  beginning to rise,  but the humidity  remained,
although the forest did begin to thin out.  The  root-snags, decayed boughs,
and piles of rotting  lianas  had disappeared.  The  greenery had  gone, all
around was yellow and orange. The trees  were now slender, and the swamp had
changed  oddly--it was  now level,  without moss and  without mud-heaps. The
tangled web  of undergrowth had disappeared and visibility was good to  left

and right. The grass on the verges was now softer and juicier, blade against
blade as if someone had specially selected and planted them.
     Nava halted in mid-word, drew breath and said matter-of-factly glancing
around; "Where could you hide here? Looks like nowhere to hide. . . ."
     "Is someone coming?" asked Kandid.
     "A lot of someones, and I don't know who. . . . It's not deadlings, but
best to  hide  anyway. We could  stay in the open of course,  they're pretty
close anyway, and there's nowhere to hide. Let's get on the verge and have a
look.  .  . ." She sniffed again.  "Nasty sort of smell,  not dangerous, but
better if  it wasn't there. . . . You, Dummy, can't  you smell it? It stinks
like over-rotted ferment--a pot of over-rotted ferment covered in mold right
in front  of your nose.  . . . There  they are! Eh, little ones, they're all
right, you can chase them away, shoo! shoo!"
     "Be quiet," said Kandid, taking a closer look.
     At first he thought that white tortoises were crawling toward him along
the path.  Then he realized  that he'd never seen animals  like this before.
They resembled enormous opaque amoebas or very  young tree-slugs except that
the slugs had  no pseudopodia and were a  little larger. There were a lot of
them.  They crawled along  in  single  file, quite  quickly, hurling forward
their pseudopodia neatly and flowing on into them.
     Soon they were  quite near,  white  and shining;  Kandid also  sensed a
sharp, unfamiliar smell and stepped from the path to the verge, drawing Nava
after him.  The slug-amoebas  crawled on past  them,  one  after the  other,
paying them no  attention whatever. There turned out to be twelve of them in
all. Nava kicked  out  at the twelfth  and last, unable to restrain herself.
The slug neatly tucked in its behind and went on in hope. Nava was delighted
and wanted  to rush  forward and deliver another kick, but Kandid caught her
dress.
     "They're so funny," said Nava, "and they crawl along the path just like
people walking . . . where are they going, I wonder?  Likely, Dummy, they're
off to that nasty village, they're from there likely, and they're going back
now knowing the Accession's happened  there. They'll march  around the water
and head back. Where will  they go, poor things? Find another village? . . .
Hey!" she shouted, "stop! your  village has gone, there's only a  lake there
now!"
     "Be  quiet,"  said  Kandid.  "Let's  go.  They  don't  understand  your
language, don't waste your breath."
     They  went on.  After the slugs the path  seemed somewhat slippery. Met
and parted,  mused Kandid. Met and went our separate ways. And I was the one
to  step  out of the  way. I,  not they.  This  circumstance suddenly seemed
extremely important to  him. They  were  small and defenseless,  I'm big and
strong,  but  I stepped  off the  path and  let them  through,  and now  I'm
thinking about them,  they've passed through and  probably don't remember me
at all. Because they're at home in the forest and  there's plenty of strange
sights in  the forest.  Just  as  in a house there are cockroaches, bedbugs,
woodlice, the odd brainless butterfly, or a fly banging  against the  glass.
Anyway  they  don't bang  against  the  glass. Flies  think  they're  flying
somewhere when they fly into the glass. I think  I'm walking somewhere, only
because I'm  moving my legs.  .  . . Probably I look funny from the side and
... as it were . . . pitiful ... piteable . . . which is correct.
     "There'll be a lake soon," said Nava. "Let's get  on, I want to eat and
drink. Maybe you can catch some fish for me."
     They put on speed. The reed-thickets began. Well, that's  fine, thought
Kandid. I'm just  like the fly.  Am  I like  a man?  He remembered Karl  and
remembered  that Karl wasn't like  Karl. Very  possible, he  thought calmly,
very possibly I'm not the man who crashed his helicopter how many years ago.
Only in  that  case why do I bang  against  the glass. After all, Karl, when
that happened to him, didn't bang against the glass. It'll be strange when I
get out to  the  biostation and they see me. A good thing I thought of that.
I've got to think good and hard about that. Good thing there's still lots of

time and I won't reach the biostation all that soon....
     The path forked.  One arm obviously led  to the lake,  the other turned
off sharply to one side.
     "We won't go that way," said Nava, "it leads up and I want a drink."
     The path became narrower and narrower, and eventually turned into a rut
and petered out in the undergrowth. Nava halted.
     "You know.  Dummy," she  said, "let's  not  go  to  this  lake. There's
something I don't  like about  this lake,  there's something not right about
it. I don't even think it is a lake, there's a lot of  something there apart
from the water. . . ."
     "But  there  is water there?"  asked  Kandid. "You wanted  a  drink,  I
wouldn't mind either. . . ."
     "There is  water,"  said Nava reluctantly, "but  it's warm, bad  water,
unclean. . . . You know what, Dummy, you stay here. You  make too much noise
when you walk,  I can't  hear a thing,  you stay and wait  for me, I'll call
you. I'll call like a hopper. You know what a hopper sounds like? Well, I'll
call like that. You stand here, or better still, sit down. .. ."
     She  dived  into  the  reeds and disappeared.  Kandid  then  turned his
attention  to the deep, cushioned silence that  reigned here. There  were no
insects droning, no sighings and suckings from the swamp, no cries of forest
creatures, the damp hot air was still.  This wasn't the  dry  silence of the
nasty village; there it was  quiet  like behind a theater  curtain at night.
Here it was like being under water.
     Kandid cautiously squatted on his haunches, pulled  off  some blades of
grass. He  pulled up  a clump of grass, rubbed it  between his  fingers  and
unexpectedly realized that the earth here should be edible and began eating.
The turf effectively combatted hunger and thirst, it was cool  and salty  to
the taste. Cheese, thought Kandid, yes, cheese  ... what  was cheese?  Swiss
cheese,  processed cheese,  sweating  cheese . .  .  what  was cheese?  Nava
noiselessly ducked out of  the  reeds.  She squatted  beside him and started
eating, rapidly and neatly. Her eyes were round.
     "It's a good thing we've eaten here," she said finally. "Do you want to
see  what sort of  a  lake  it  is? I want to see it again but on my own I'm
scared. It's the  lake Hopalong keeps  talking  about, only I thought he was
making it  up or he  dreamed it, but  it  looks like it's true, if  I'm  not
dreaming, that is. . . ."
     "Let's take a  look," said Kandid.  The lake was  about fifty yards in.
Kandid  and  Nava came down  the boggy bank and parted the reeds. Above  the
water lay a thick layer of white mist.  The  water was warm,  even  hot, but
clean and transparent. There was a  smell of food. The mist slowly eddied in
a  regular rhythm and after a minute  Kandid felt he was going  dizzy. There
was  someone in the mist. People. Lots  of people. They were  all  naked and
were  lying absolutely  motionless on the  water. The mist rhythmically rose
and  fell,  now revealing, now concealing the yellowy,  white bodies,  faces
lying  back--the people weren't  swimming, they lay on the water as if  they
might on  a beach. Kandid retched. "Let's get out of here," he whispered and
pulled  Nava by the arm.  They got  out onto  the shore  and returned to the
path.
     "They're  not  drowned,"  said Nava, "Hopalong didn't understand,  they
were just  bathing here then a hot spring  started up suddenly  and they all
got boiled. . . . That's really awful,  Dummy," she said after a silence. "I
don't  even  feel like  talking  about it...  so  many of them  ... a  whole
village. . . ." They had reached the place where  the path forked. Here they
halted. "Now up?" asked Nava.
     "Yes," said Kandid, "now up."
     They turned right and began to ascend a slope. "And they're all women,"
said Nava, "did you notice?"
     "Yes," said Kandid.
     "That's  the most  awful thing, that's  what  I just  can't understand.
Maybe . . ." Nava looked at  Kandid, "maybe  the deadlings drive  them here?

Likely  the deadlings drive them here--catch them around  all  the villages,
drive them to this lake and boil them. . . . Listen, Dummy, why did we leave
the  village?  We'd have lived there and not seen any of this. Thought  that
Hopalong had dreamed it up,  lived quietly,  but  no, you had  to go  to the
City. . . . Well, why did you have to go to the City?"
     "I don't know," said Kandid.
     Chapter Eight
     They  were lying in bushes at the very edge of the trees  and gazing at
the crest of the hill through the foliage.  The hill was steep and bare, and
its crest was  capped by a cloud  of lilac mist. Above the hill was the open
sky; a gusty wind  was bringing drizzle. The lilac mist was motionless as if
there were no  wind. It was rather cool,  even fresh; they were  soaked, and
had gooseflesh  from  the  cold,  their teeth chattered but they couldn't go
away; twenty paces  from them,  upright  as  statues, stood three deadlings,
their wide black mouths open, also looking  at  the crest  of the hill  with
empty eyes. These deadlings had arrived five minutes before. Nava had sensed
them and was set to flee, but Kandid had clamped his palm  across  her mouth
and forced her down into the grass. Now she had calmed down a little; though
she still shuddered heavily, it was due  to  the cold rather than fear.  She
was now watching the hill, not the deadlings.
     On  and around the hill something  strange was happening, some kind  of
grandiose ebbing and flowing. Out of the forest, with a dense, deep droning,
suddenly erupted  enormous swarms of flies, which  headed into the lilac fog
on the hill and were hidden from view. The slopes were alive with columns of
ants and spiders,  hundreds of slug-amoebas  were pouring out of the bushes,
huge swarms of bees and  wasps, clouds  of  multi-colored beetles flew over,
under the rain. It sounded like a typhoon. This wave reached the heights and
was sucked in, disappeared, and  there  came a sudden  silence. The hill was
dead once more and bare; some time  passed and the noise and roar rose again
and  it  all erupted again from the mist and headed for the forest. Only the
slugs remained on the hilltop. In their place came spilling  down the slopes
the most incredible animals--hairies came rolling,  clumsy  arm-chewers came
lurching down on frail legs, and there were plenty of others unknown as yet,
speckled, multi-eyed, naked,  shining  half-beast,  half-insects.  Then  the
silence again, then the process started up  once more, and again, and again,
in a frightening, urgent rhythm, an inexorable energy. It seemed  as  though
this rhythm and this energy had  always been and would always be. ... Once a
young hippocete emerged from the mist with  a frightful roar, deadlings came
running out from time to time  and at once  rushed into  the forest, leaving
white trails of cooling steam in  their wake. And the motionless lilac cloud
kept swallowing and spitting out,  swallowing and spitting out, tireless and
regular as a machine.
     Hopalong used to say  that the  City stood on a hill, that thing is the
City, perhaps,  that's  what they call  the City. Yes,  probably  that's the
City.  But what's the meaning  of it? Why is it like this?  And the  strange
activity. ...  I  expected  something  like  this. .  .  .  Rubbish, I never
expected anything like it. I thought only about the  masters, and  where are
the masters here? Kandid looked  at the  deadlings. These  were  standing in
their  former  postures,  their mouths  open as  before. Perhaps I'm  wrong,
thought Kandid. Perhaps they are the masters. Probably  I'm mistaken all the
time. I've  completely forgotten  how to think here.  If ideas come to me, I
can't  fit  them together.  Not  a single slug has come out  of the fog yet.
Question: why hasn't a single slug come out of the fog yet? . . . No, that's
not  it. Get  it  straight.  I am  searching for the  source of  intelligent
activity. . . . Not true,  again not true. I'm not interested in intelligent
activity at all. I'm simply looking for someone to help me get home. Help me
to get through six hundred miles of forest. Tell me which direction to go at
least. . . . The deadlings must have masters, I'm looking for these masters,

I'm looking  for the source  of  intelligent activity.  He was quite pleased
with himself;  it was  quite coherent. Let's start from the beginning, we'll
think it  all through--calmly and  slowly. No  need to hurry, now's just the
time  to think  everything through slowly  and  calmly. Start  from the very
beginning.  The  deadlings  must  have  masters--because  deadlings   aren't
people--because they  aren't  animals. Therefore they are  manufactured.  If
they  aren't people.  .  . .  But  why aren't  they  people? He  rubbed  his
forehead. I've  already worked that out. Long ago, in  the village, I worked
it out twice even,  because the first time I forgot the answer, and now I've
forgotten the proofs. . . .
     He  shook his head as hard  as  he could and Nava quietly  whispered at
him. He was quiet and for  a while lay with  his face  pressed into  the wet
grass.
     Why they aren't animals--I worked that out before sometime.  . . . High
temperature. . . .  No,  no rubbish. . . . Suddenly, he realized with horror
that he'd  forgotten what  deadlings looked  like.  He remembered only their
red-hot bodies and a sharp pain in his palms. He turned his head to look  at
them.  Yes, I ought  not to think. Thinking's out for me, right now,  when I
have to think more intensively than ever before.
     Time to eat; you've told me that before, Nava; we set off the day after
tomorrow--that's  my  limit.  But I did go! And I'm here. Now I'm going into
the City. Whatever it is--it's the City. My brain's overgrown with forest. I
understand nothing. . . . I've remembered. I  was going to the City, to find
an explanation for everything; about the Accession, the deadlings, the Great
Harrowing,  the  lake  of  drowned  bodies  ...  all a deception  it  seems,
everybody's  lied their heads off nobody  can be trusted.  ... I hoped  they
would explain how I could  get back to my own  people,  the old man used  to
keep on saying: the City knows  everything--it couldn't  possibly  not  know
about our biostation, about the Directorate. Even Hopalong nattered on about
Devil's Rocks and flying  trees.  .  . . But surely a  lilac  cloud couldn't
explain  anything? It  would  be  terrible if the master turned out  to be a
lilac cloud. And  why "would be"? It's  terrible now! It's  in front of your
nose, Dummy:  the lilac fog is the  master, here, surely  you remember? Yes,
and it's no fog either. . . . So that's the way it is, why people are driven
away like beasts into dense forest, into swamps, drowned in lakes: they were
too weak, they didn't understand and even when they understood they couldn't
do  anything to interfere with the process. . . . When  I hadn't been driven
out, when I was still living at home, somebody proved very convincingly that
contact between human-oid and non-humanoid intelligence was impossible. Yes,
it is impossible. Of course it's impossible. And now nobody can  tell me how
to get home.
     I  can have no contact with  people, and I  can prove that. I can still
get a sight of Devil's Rocks, so they say, you can see them sometimes if you
climb the right tree in the right season, but  you've got  to find the right
tree first, an ordinary human tree. That doesn't jump and  doesn't throw you
off,  and doesn't try and spike your eyes. Anyway, there's no tree I can see
the biostation from. . . . Biostation?  Bi-o-sta-tion. I've forgotten what a
biostation is.
     The forest began to hum and buzz, crackle and snort, once again myriads
of flies  and  ants whirled toward the lilac  dome.  One swarm passed  above
their heads and the bushes were  deluged with  the weak  and  the dying, the
still and the barely twitching,  those  crushed  in the press of the  swarm.
Kandid sensed  an  unpleasant burning sensation in his arm and glanced down.
Slender  threads  of mushroom spawn  were  creeping over  the  elbow  he had
propped upon  the porous  earth. Kandid indifferently brushed them  off with
his  palm. Devil's Rocks  was a mirage, thought he, none of  that exists. If
they told you stories about Devil's Rocks,  then it was all lies, none, none
of that existed, and now I don't know why I ever came here. . . .
     Away to one side  came a  familiar terrifying snort. Kandid  turned his
head. At once a mother hippocete looked stupidly out  from  behind the seven

trees  on the  hill. One  of the deadlings  suddenly sprang to  life, got in
gear,  and  made  a few  steps  toward  the hippocete.  Once  more  came the
appalling  snort,  the trees  crackled,  and  the  hippocete  made off. Even
hippocetes are afraid of the deadlings, thought Kandid. Who isn't? Where can
you   find  someone  who  isn't?  .  .  .  Flies  roaring.  Stupid,  absurd.
Flies--roaring. Wasps roaring. . . .
     "Mam!" whispered Nava suddenly. "It's mam coming. . . ."
     She was on all fours  and gazing over his shoulder. Her  face expressed
huge astonishment and disbelief. And Kandid saw that three women had emerged
from the forest, and, without noticing  the  deadlings, were heading for the
foot of the hill.
     "Mam!"  shrieked Nava in  a  voice not her own, leapt  over Kandid, and
raced to intercept them.  At  that Kandid also jumped  up; it seemed  to him
that the  deadlings  were  right next to him and he could  feel the heat  of
their bodies.
     Three, he  thought. Three. . . . One would have been  more than enough.
He looked at the deadlings. This is the end for me, he thought.  Stupid. Why
did these  old  birds  have  to come  barging in here? I  hate women, always
something going wrong because of them.
     The deadlings closed their mouths, their  heads slowly  swiveling after
the  sprinting  Nava. Then they strode off  in  unison and  Kandid compelled
himself to leap up from the bushes and face them.
     "Back!"  he  yelled  to  the women  without looking. "Get  out  of  it!
Deadlings!"
     The deadlings were enormous, broad-shouldered, in mint condition, not a
single scratch or rough edge. Their incredibly long arms reached down to the
grass. Without taking  his eyes from them, Kandid halted  in their path. The
deadlings were gazing over the top of his head and moved  unhurriedly toward
him; he faltered, gave ground, putting off  the inevitable beginning and the
inevitable end, contending  with  a nervous desire to bs  sick and trying to
bring  himself  to make a stand. Behind  his back,  Nava was shouting: "Mam!
It's me. Mam, main!"  Stupid women, why  don't they run? Too  scared to run?
Stop,  he said to  himself, stop, blast you! How long can you walk backward?
He was unable to stop. Nava's there, he thought. And those three idiots. . .
. Fat, dreamy, indifferent idiots. . . . And Nava. . . . What are they to me
anyway,  he  thought. Hopalong would have made off long ago on  his one leg.
Buster quicker than that. . . . But  I've got  to stay. Not fair. But I must
stay! Well, stop then! . . . He was unable to stop, and despised himself for
it, and  applauded himself for it, and  hated  himself for  it, and  kept on
going backward.
     The deadlings stopped. Straight away, as if at an order. The one in the
lead froze with one leg in the air, then slowly, as if undecided, lowered it
to the grass. Their  mouths dropped  slackly open and their  heads  swiveled
toward the hilltop.
     Kandid,  still  retreating,  glanced  around. Nava, legs  kicking,  was
hanging around the neck of one of the women, who, it seemed, was smiling and
clapping her lightly  on the back. The other two women  were standing calmly
by  watching  them. Not  watching  the  dead-lings, not the  hill.  Not even
Kandid, a  strange  hairy  man, perhaps a  robber. The deadlings,  for their
part, were standing stock-still, like some primitive graven image of old, as
if their  legs grew straight into the earth, as  if in all  the forest there
were no woman left to seize and carry off somewhere, in obedience to orders;
from  beneath their feet, like the smoke of a sacrificial fire, rose pillars
of steam.
     Kandid  now swung around and walked toward the women.  Not walked,  but
rather trailed,  totally uncertain,  not  believing  eyes,  ears,  or  brain
anymore.  His  skull  was a seething mass  of pain, and his whole body ached
from the tension of his brush with death.
     "Run," he said again from a distance. "Run before it's too late, why're
you standing there?" He already knew he was talking nonsense, but it was the

inertia of obligation, and he continued his mechanical  mumbling: "Deadlings
here, run, I'll delay them. . . ."
     They  paid  him no attention. It  wasn't that  they didn't hear  or see
him--the young woman, a girl really, perhaps  a  couple of  years older than
Nava,  still  slim-legged,  examined   him  and  smiled  in  very   friendly
fashion--but he meant nothing to them, no more than if he were  a big  stray
hound, the sort that dash aimlessly about in  all directions and are willing
to stand about for hours near people,  waiting  for reasons  known  only  to
themselves.
     "Why aren't  you running?" asked Kandid quietly.  He expected no answer
and received none.
     "My,  my, my," the  pregnant woman was saying, laughing and shaking her
head. "And  who would have thought it? Would you?" she inquired of the girl.
"I certainly  wouldn't. My dear,"  said she  addressing Nava's mother, "what
was  it like? Did  he puff and pant? Or  did he just twitch  about and break
into a sweat?"
     "It wasn't like that," said the girl, "he was beautiful,  wasn't he? He
was fresh like the dawn, and fragrant. . . ."
     "As a  lily," chimed  in the pregnant woman, "you were dizzy  from  his
smell, you got all tingly from his paws. . . . Did you have time to squeal?"
     The  girl burst out laughing.  Nava's  mother  smiled reluctantly. They
were all thick-set, healthy, surprisingly  cleanly, as if thoroughly washed,
which  indeed  they  were--their  short hair  was wet  and  their  yellowish
sacklike garments clung to their damp  bodies. Nava's mother was the tallest
of  them and apparently the eldest. Nava  was hugging her around  the waist,
her face buried in her bosom.
     "How should you  know," said Nava's mother  with feigned  indifference.
"What can you know about it? You've a lot to learn. . . ."
     "All right," said the pregnant woman at once. "How can we know?  That's
why we're  asking  you. . . . Tell  us,  please,  what  was the root of love
like?"
     "Was it bitter?" said the girl, and shook with laughter again.
     "There, there, the fruit's pretty sweet if  grubby. . . ." "Never mind,
we'll wash it clean,"  said Nava's mother.  "You don't know if Spider Pond's
been cleaned out yet, do you? Or do we have to take her into the valley?"
     "The root  was  bitter,"  said  the  pregnant woman  to  the girl. "She
doesn't  like  recalling   it.  Strange  isn't   it,   and  they  say   it's
unforgettable! Listen dear, you do dream about him, don't you?"
     "Not very funny," said Nava's mother. "And sick. . . ."
     "We're not trying to be funny, are  we?" The pregnant woman was amazed.
"We're just interested."
     "You  tell a story so well," said the girl with a flashing smile. "Tell
us more. . . ."
     Kandid was all ears, attempting to discover some hidden meaning in this
conversation, but could understand nothing. He could only  perceive that the
two  of  them  were  making fun of  Nava's mother,  that Nava's  mother  was
offended and was trying to  hide  this  or turn  the conversation in another
direction, and was failing to  do so. Nava,  meanwhile,  had raised her head
and was gazing from one to another of the speakers.
     "You'd think you'd been born in the lake  yourself," said Nava's mother
to the pregnant woman, now displaying open irritation.
     "Oh,  no," said  she,  "but  I never  managed  to pick up  such a broad
education, and  my  daughter," she slapped her belly, "will  be born  in the
lake. That makes all the difference."
     "Why  don't  you  leave mam alone, fat  old woman?" said Nava suddenly.
"Take a look at yourself,  what you look like, then start upsetting  people!
Or  I'll  tell my  husband, and he'll warm your fat backside with  a  stick,
teach you to bother her."
     The  women,  all  three,  roared with  laughter. "Dummy!" Nava  started
yelling. "What're they laughing at me for?"

     Still  laughing,  the  women  looked  at  Kandid.  Nava's mother,  with
surprise, the pregnant woman indifferently, the girl more enigmatically, but
with apparent interest.
     "What's this Dummy, then?" asked Nava's mother. "It's my husband," said
Nava. "See how nice he is. He saved me from the robbers. . . ."
     "What d'you  mean,  husband?"  the pregnant  woman  brought  out  in  a
unfriendly tone. "Don't make things up, little girl."
     "Same to you,"  Nava said at once. "What're  you butting in for? What's
it to you? Is he your husband then?  If you want to know, I'm not talking to
you anyway. I'm talking  to mam. And you butt in, like  the old man, unasked
and without a by your leave. . . ."
     "Are you really her husband then?" asked the pregnant woman of Kandid.
     Nava became silent. Her mother embraced her and pressed her to herself.
She looked at Kandid with loathing and horror.
     Only the  girl  was still smiling, and her smile  was  so pleasant  and
tender that Kandid addressed himself to her.
     "No, no,  of  course not," he said. "She's  no wife of mine.  She's, my
daughter...." He wanted to say  that Nava had niursed him, that he loved her
very much  and he was very  pleased that everything  had turned out so well,
though he didn't understand a thing.
     But the girl  suddenly dissolved in  laughter, her arms waving. "I knew
it," she  groaned. "It's not her husband  . .  . it's  hers!" she pointed at
Nava's mother. "It's . . . her . . . husband! Oh dear, oh dear!"
     The face of the pregnant woman expressed  cheerful bewilderment and she
began to examine Kandid from top to toe with exaggerated minuteness.
     "My, my, my ..."  she began in her former tone,  but Nava's mother said
irritably, "Stop it  now! That's enough of it! Go away from here,"  she said
to Kandid. "Go on,  go on, what're you waiting for? Go  on into  the forest!
..."
     "Who would have thought that the root of love could be so bitter ... so
filthy ... so  hairy. . .  " She intercepted  Nava's mother's furious glance
and gestured  to her. "All right, all right," said she, "don't get angry, my
dear. A joke's  a joke. We're just very  pleased you've found your daughter.
It's an incredible piece of luck. .. ."
     "Are  we going  to do any work or not?" said Nava's  mother. "Or are we
going to stand here gossiping?"
     "I'm  going,  don't get  angry,"  said  the  girl. "The  output's  just
starting anyway."
     She  nodded,  and once more  smiled at Kandid,  and  ran lightly up the
slope. Kandid watched her  running--controlled, professional,  not  womanly.
She ran up to the summit and, without pausing, dived into the lilac mist.
     "Spider Pond hasn't been cleaned  out yet,"  said  the  pregnant  woman
anxiously, "we've always got these muddles with the constructors. . . . What
are we going to do?"
     "It's okay," said Nava's mother, "we'll go along to the valley."
     "I understand, but  it's extremely stupid all the  same--take  all that
trouble, carry a nearly adult person all the way to the valley, when we have
our own pond."
     She gave a vigorous shrug and suddenly pulled a face.
     "You  ought to  sit down,"  said Nava's mother;  she looked  about her,
stretched  out her  arm in the  direction of the deadlings and  snapped  her
fingers.
     One of the deadlings at once left his place and ran up, slipping on the
grass in its haste; it fell to its knees and all of a sudden flowed somehow,
fashioned itself into a curve, and flattened itself out.
     Kandid blinked: the deadling had ceased to exist, what did exist was an
apparently comfortable and  convenient armchair. The pregnant  woman, with a
groan of relief, sank into  her soft seat  and reclined her head against its
soft back.
     "Soon,  now," she purred,  extending her  legs plea-surably,  "make  it

soon. . . ."
     Nava's mother  squatted in front of her daughter  and began to look her
in the eyes.
     "She's grown," said she. "Run wild. Glad?"
     "Well  of  course I am," said Nava, uncertainly.  "You're my mam, after
all. I dreamed about you  every  night. . . . And this is Dummy, mam.  . .."
And Nava started talking.
     Kandid stared  about him, clenching his jaws, all this wasn't delirium,
as he  had at  first hoped.  It  was something  everyday, very natural, just
unfamiliar to him,  but there was plenty unfamiliar in the forest. He had to
get  used  to this, as he had got used to the noise in his head, and  edible
earth and deadlings and  all the  rest of it. The masters, he thought, these
are  the masters.  They're not afraid of anything. They  control  deadlings.
Therefore,  they're  the  masters.  Therefore, it's they who send  deadlings
after women. Therefore, it's they. .  . .  He looked at the damp hair of the
women. Therefore. . . . And Nava's mother, who was abducted by deadlings. ..
.
     "Where do you bathe?" he asked. "Why? Who are you? What do you want?"
     "What?"  asked  the  pregnant  woman.  "Listen,  my  dear, he's  asking
something."
     Her mother spoke to Nava: "Wait a moment, I can't hear anything because
of you. . . . What do you say?" she asked the pregnant woman.
     "This little lamb," said she. "There's something he requires."
     Nava's mother  looked at Kandid. "What can he want?"  she asked. "Wants
to  eat,  I expect. They're always hungry  and they eat an  awful  lot, it's
quite baffling why they want so much food, they don't do anything after all.
. . ."
     "Little lamb," said the pregnant woman.  "Poor little lamb wants grass.
Be-e-e! Do you know," she said, turning to Nava's mother,  "it's  a man from
White Rocks.  They're  turning  up a lot  more often. How  do they get  down
there?"
     "It's harder  to understand  how they get up there.  I've seen how they
come down. They fall. Some get killed, some stay alive. . . ."
     "Mam,"  said Nava, "why are you looking at him  like that?  It's Dummy!
Say something nice  to  him  or he'll  get  annoyed. Strange  that he  isn't
annoyed already, in his place I'd have got annoyed long ago. . . ."
     The hill once again began to roar, black clouds of insects covered  the
sky. Kandid  could hear nothing,  all he could see was  Nava's mother's lips
moving; she appeared to be impressing something  on  Nava.  The lips  of the
pregnant  woman, who was addressing him,  were  also  moving  and her facial
expression indicated that she was in fact talking to him as if to a domestic
goat, strayed into the garden. Then the roaring ceased.
     ". . . .only a mite grubby," the pregnant woman was saying. "Aren't you
sorry, now?" She turned from him and began to watch the hill.
     Deadlings  were creeping out  of the lilac cloud  on  hands  and knees.
Their  movements  were  uncertain and clumsy, and they kept falling forward,
head-first into the ground. The girl was walking among them; she  bent down,
touching and nudging  them  till, one after another, they hoisted themselves
to their feet, straightened up and, after initial stumbles,  strode  on more
and  more  confidently and  set  off into the forest.  The  masters,  Kandid
assured himself. The masters. I don't  believe it. And what to do? He looked
at  Nava. Nava was  asleep. Her mother was sitting on  the  grass,  and  she
herself was curled up in a ball next to her and slept, holding her hand.
     "They're all weak, somehow," said the pregnant woman. "Time to clean it
all out again. Look at them stumbling about... the Accession  will never get
finished with workers like that."
     Nava's mother made some reply, and they  commenced a conversation which
Kandid couldn't make head or tail of. He could make out only isolated words,
like Ears  did  when  the  fit  was on  him.  He consequently just stood and
watched  the girl coming down the hill, dragging a  clumsy armchewer by  the

paw. Why  am I standing here, he  thought, there was something I needed from
them,  they  being  the  masters.  .  . . He couldn't  remember.  "I'm  just
standing, that's all," he said aloud bitterly. "They've stopped  chasing  me
away so I'm just standing. Like a deadling."
     The pregnant woman glanced fleetingly at him and turned away.
     The girl  came up and said  something, indicating  the  armchewer; both
women began examining the monster intently, the  pregnant one had even risen
from her  chair. The  huge  armchewer,  the terror  of the village children,
squeaked plaintively,  and made  feeble  efforts  to break loose, helplessly
opening and closing its fearful horned jaws. Nava's mother took hold of  its
lower jaw and with a  powerful, assured movement, detached it. The armchewer
gave a sob and froze into stillness, closing its eyes with an oily film. The
pregnant woman was speaking: ". . . . obviously, insufficient . . . remember
my girl, .  . . weak jaws, eyes not fully open . . . surely  won't stand the
pace,  therefore useless, perhaps even  harmful, like  every mistake  . .  .
it'll have to be cleaned up, moved elsewhere, and  clean everything up here.
. . ."
     "The hill, ... dry  and dusty. . .  ." the girl  was saying, ". . . the
forest has slowed right down .  . . that  I don't know yet  ... but you said
something totally different. . .."
     ". .. you try it yourself," Nava's mother was  saying,  "you'll see, go
on, try!"
     The  girl dragged the armchewer  off to  one side, took a pace backward
and began looking at  it. It was as if she were taking aim. Her  face became
grave, tense even.  The armchewer tottered on its awkward feet, despondently
working  its  remaining jaw; it whined  feebly. "You see," said the pregnant
woman. The girl  went  right up to the armchewer and squatted lightly before
it,  resting her hands on her knees.  The  armchewer fell convulsively, paws
outspread, as if a heavy weight had dropped on it. The woman laughed.
     Nava's mother said: "Stop it now, why don't you believe us?"
     The  girl  made no  reply.  She  was standing  over  the armchewer, and
watching  as  it  slowly and  carefully tucked in  its paws and attempted to
rise. Her  features sharpened. She snatched the armchewer upright, set it on
its feet, and made a movement as if to embrace it.
     A stream of  lilac  mist  flowed  between  her  palms and  through  the
armchewer's  body. The armchewer  began to squeal, writhing  and  arcing its
body  and thrashing its paws. It tried to escape, wriggle away to safety; it
tossed  about,  while the girl followed behind it, looming above it. It fell
with its paws  unnaturally entwined, and began  curling up into a knot.  The
women were silent.  The armchewer was transformed into a multi-colored ball,
oozing slime. The girl  then walked away and said, glancing aside, "Rubbish,
really. . . ."
     "Still have  to  be  cleaned  up, cleaned  up," said the pregnant woman
rising. "Get on with it, no sense in delaying matters. Is everything clear?"
The  girl nodded. "We'll go then and you  make a start." The girl turned and
went up the  hill toward the  lilac  cloud.  She paused by the multi-colored
ball,  seized a  feebly twitching paw and proceeded on her way, trailing the
ball behind her.
     "Splendid Maiden," said the pregnant woman. "Excellent."
     "She'll be a controller one day," said Nava's mother, also getting  up.
"She's got a bit of character to her. Well then, we must be going. . . ."
     Kandid barely heard them. He still couldn't take his eyes from the dark
puddle, on the spot where the armchewer had been screwed up. She hadn't even
touched  it, not laid a finger on it, she'd just stood over it and done what
she wished .  . . such a sweet girl . . . so gentle  and  loving. .  . . Not
even  laid a finger on it  ... had he to get  used to that  as well? Yes, he
thought. Has to be done. He began to watch as Nava's mother and the pregnant
woman carefully set Nava on her feet, before taking her hand and leading her
into  the  forest, down  toward  the lake. This  without  noticing him, this
without  a word to him.  He took another look at the puddle. He felt himself

to  be  small, pitiable, helpless, nevertheless he nerved himself and  began
the descent after them; he caught  up  with them and, sweating with  terror,
followed two  steps  behind.  Something hot approached  his back. He glanced
back and leaped to one side. At his heels strode a gigantic deadling--heavy,
hot, silent, dumb.  Well,  now,  well,  thought Kandid, it's only a robot, a
servant.  I really  am doing well, he thought  suddenly, I thought that  out
myself, didn't I?  I've forgotten how I got there, but that's not important,
what is important  is that I understood, I  grasped it.  I weighed it all up
and grasped it--on my own. . . .  I've a brain, got it? he said to  himself,
gazing at the women's backs. You're not so special. . . . I'm not completely
incapable.
     The women were talking of somebody who hadn't minded their own business
and  had made  themselves a  laughing-stock. They were amused at  something,
they laughed. They were walking through the forest and laughing. As if going
down a village street for a gossip. And all around was the forest; they were
not  walking on a path even, but on light-colored dense grass,  which always
concealed  tiny  flowers  that  hurled  spores to  penetrate  the  skin  and
germinate  in   the  body.  And  they  were  giggling  and   chattering  and
scandal-mongering, while Nava walked between them and slept, but they did it
so that she walked  fairly  steadily and  stumbled hardly at all. .  . . The
pregnant woman shot a glance back  at Kandid and  said absently, "You  still
here? Go into the forest, go on. . . . Why are you following us?"
     Yes, thought Kandid, why?  What business have I with them? But there is
some business,  something  I have to find out. . .  . No, that's not it. ...
Nava! he suddenly recalled. He realized that he had lost Nava. Nothing to be
done about that. Nava was going away with  her mother, all as it should  be,
she was going to the masters. And me? I'm staying. Still, why am I following
them? Seeing Nava off?  She's asleep anyway,  they put her  to sleep. A pang
shot through him. Goodbye Nava, he thought.
     They came to where the  paths forked, the women turned off to the left,
toward  the lake. The lake of  drowned women.  They  were drowned  women all
right. . . . Again lies from everybody, everybody mixed up. . .. They passed
the  place where Kandid had waited for Nava and eaten earth. That  was long,
long  ago,  thought Kandid, almost  as  long ago as the  biostation.  . .  .
Biostation.  ...  He could  scarcely  plod  along; had it  not  been for the
deadling walking at  his heels, he would probably have fallen behind by now.
Then the women halted  and  looked  at him. All  around were Reed-beds,  the
ground underfoot was warm and squelchy. Nava was standing with  eyes closed,
imperceptibly  swaying, while the women regarded  him  thoughtfully. Then he
remembered.
     "How  do  I  get to the  biostation?"  he asked. Their faces  expressed
astonishment, and he realized that he had spoken in his native  language. He
was himself astonished: he couldn't  now  remember when  he  had last spoken
that tongue. "How do I get to White Rocks?" he asked.
     The pregnant woman said, grinning:
     "So that's what our little lamb wants... ." She wasn't talking to  him,
but to Nava's  mother. "It's amusing how  little they understand. Not one of
them realizes. Imagine them  wandering to White Rocks and  suddenly  finding
themselves in the battle zone!"
     "They rot  alive there,"  said  Nava's mother pensively, "they go about
and rot as they walk and don't even notice that they're not going  anywhere,
just marking time. .  . .  Well anyway, let  him  go,  it can only help  the
Harrowing. If he rots,  that's useful.  Dissolves--useful again.  .  . . But
perhaps he's protected? Are you protected?" she asked Kandid.
     "I don't  understand," said Kandid, cheerlessly. "My dear, what are you
asking him? How could he be protected?"
     "In this  world all  things  are possible," said Nava's  mother.  "I've
heard of such things."
     "Just  talk," said the  pregnant woman. She  inspected Kandid carefully
once  more.  "Now, you  know," said she, "he could indeed  be more use here.

Remember what the Teachers were saying yesterday?"
     "Ah, yes," said Nava's mother. "Indeed yes ... let him. .  .  . Let him
stay."
     "Yes, yes, stay," said Nava suddenly. She was no longer asleep and also
felt something untoward  was taking  place. "You stay, Dummy,  don't  you go
anywhere, why should you  go  anywhere? You wanted to go to the City, didn't
you, and  this lake  is the City, isn't it, mam? ... Or are you offended  at
mam?  Don't be hurt, she's really kind, only she's in a bad  temper today. I
don't know why. . . . Likely because of the heat. . . ."
     Her mother  caught  her by the  hand. Kandid saw that a familiar little
lilac cloud had  condensed  over the mother's  head. Her  eyes  glazed for a
second and  closed. Then  she said, "Let's  go, Nava, they're waiting for us
now."
     "What about Dummy?"
     "He'll stay here. . . . There's nothing for him to do in the City."
     "But  I want him to be  with me! Why can't you understand, mam, he's my
husband, they gave him to  me  for a husband,  and  he's been my husband for
ever so long... ."
     Both women grimaced.
     "Let's go, let's go," said Nava's  mother. "You don't understand things
yet.  . . . Nobody  needs  him,  he's  superfluous,  they  all  are, they're
a--mistake. . . . Come on now! Well, all right you can come to him afterward
... if you want to then."
     Nava  was putting up  a  struggle, doubtless  feeling  what  Kandid was
feeling--that they were parting forever. Her mother was dragging her by  the
arm into the reeds, while she kept looking back and shouting:
     "Don't you go away, Dummy! I'll be back  soon, don't you think of going
away without me, that wouldn't be right, that would be dishonest! All right,
you're not my husband, they seem not to like that, I don't know why, but I'm
your wife all the same, I nursed you, so now you wait for  me!  Do you hear?
Wait! . . ."
     He  followed her  with  his  eyes,  waving  his  hand  feebly,  nodding
agreement, and trying hard  to smile. Good-bye, Nava, he thought.  Good-bye.
They were hidden  from view  behind the  Reed-beds, but  Nava's voice  could
still be heard, then she  went quiet, the sound of  a splash  came back, and
all was silent.  He swallowed the lump in his  throat and asked the pregnant
woman:
     "What will you do with her?"
     She was still examining him closely.
     "What will we do with her?"  said she thoughtfully.  "That  isn't  your
worry,  lambkin, what  we'll do with her. At  all  events,  she won't need a
husband anymore.  Or a father. . . . But what are we going to do  with  you?
You're from White Rocks, after all, you can't just be let go...."
     "What do you want of me?"
     "What  do we  want  ...  at all events,  husbands  we don't  need." She
intercepted Kandid's look and laughed scornfully. "Not needed,  don't worry,
not needed. Try for  once in your life  not to be a sheep. Try to imagine  a
world  without sheep. .  . ." She was speaking without  thinking, or rather,
thinking  of  something else. "What  else  are you  good for? . . .  Tell me
lambkin, what can you do?"
     There  was  something behind all her words, and  her  tone,  behind the
casual indifferent  authority, something important, something unpleasant and
frightening, but it  was hard to pin down and Kandid,  for some reason, kept
remembering the  square  black doors and Karl with the  two women--just  the
same, indifferent and imperious.
     "Are you listening to me?" asked the pregnant woman. "What can you do?"
     "I can't do anything," Kandid said limply.
     "Perhaps you know how to control?"
     "I did  once," said Kandid. Go to hell, he thought, why don't you leave
me alone? I ask you how to get to White Rocks, and you start bothering me. .

. . He realized suddenly that he was afraid of her, otherwise he'd have gone
long ago.  She was the  master  here, and he  was a pitiful,  dirty,  stupid
lambkin.
     "Did once," she repeated. "Tell that tree to lie down!"
     Kandid looked at the tree. It  was a big  solid  tree with a  luxuriant
topgrowth and shaggy trunk. He shrugged his shoulders.
     "Very well," said she.  "Kill that tree, then. . . .  Not  that either?
Can you make the living die at all?" "Kill, you mean."
     "Not necessarily kill. An armchewer can  do  that. Make the living die.
Compel something living to become dead. Can you?"
     "I don't  understand," said Kandid.  "Don't  understand.  . . . What on
earth do you get up to on  your  White  Rocks  if you can't even  understand
that? You can't make dead things live either?" "No."
     "What can you do  then? What did you do on White Rocks  before you fell
down? Just guzzled and denied women?"
     "I studied the forest." She regarded him severely.
     "Don't  dare  lie to me.  One man  can't  study  the forest,  it's like
studying the sun. If you won't speak the truth, just say so."
     "I really  did  study the  forest," Kandid said.  "I studied. . . ." he
faltered.  "I  studied the  smallest creatures in  the forest.  The ones you
can't see with your eyes."
     "Lying again," said the woman tolerantly. "You can't study what the eye
can't see."
     "It's possible," said Kandid.  "Only you  have  to  have.  .  .  ."  he
faltered  again.  Microscope .  . . lenses  . . . instruments.  . .  .  That
wouldn't get across. Untranslatable. "If you take a drop of water," he said,
"if you  have the necessary things, you can see thousands upon  thousands of
tiny animals. . . ."
     "You don't  need any  'things'  for  that," the woman said. "I can  see
you've  got  corrupted  by  your  dead things on  your  White  Rocks. You're
degenerating. I noticed long ago  the  way  you've  lost the capacity to see
what anybody can see in the forest, even a  filthy man. . . . Wait a minute,
were you  talking about small creatures or the smallest ones? Perhaps you're
referring to the constructors?"
     "Perhaps," said Kandid. "I  don't  understand you.  I'm speaking of the
small creatures that make people ill, but  which can cure as well, they help
in food production, there's very many  of them and they're everywhere. ... I
tried to find  out their constituents  here in your forest, what sorts there
were and what their function was. . . ."
     "They're different on White Rocks, of course," she said  with  sarcasm.
"All right, anyway, I've got what your work was. You have  no power over the
constructors, of course. The veriest village idiot can do more than you. . .
. What can I do with you? You came here unasked, after. . . .
     "I'm going," Kandid said wearily. "I'm going. Good-bye."
     "No wait. .  . .  Stop, I said!" she cried  and Kandid felt the burning
hot pincers  gripping his  elbows  from  behind.  He  struggled, but it  was
pointless. The woman was meditating aloud:
     "He did come of his own free  will. There have  been such cases. If  we
let him go,  he'll go off to his village and  be completely  useless. . .  .
There's no point in rounding  them up.  But if they come voluntarily. . .  .
Know what I'll do?"  she said. "I'll hand you over to the Teachers for night
work.  After all,  there  have  been  successful cases.  .  . . Off  to  the
Teachers, then,  off to  the Teachers!" She  waved  her hand and unhurriedly
waddled off into the Reed-beds.
     Kandid then felt himself being  turned about onto the path. His  elbows
had gone numb, it seemed to him that they were charred through. He strove to
break  free and  the  vice gripped  tighter.  He  hadn't grasped what was to
become  of him and where he  was to be taken, who the Teachers were and what
this night work was, but  he recalled the most terrible things he  had seen:
Karl's specter in  the midst of the weeping crowd and the armchewer screwing

up into  a multi-colored knot. He  continued  to kick the deadling, striking
backward in blind desperation, knowing this could never work twice. His foot
sank into soft heat, the deadling snorted, and relaxed its grip. Kandid fell
flat  in  the  grass,  leapt up,  turned  and  cried  out--the deadling  was
advancing  on him  once more, opening  its  incredibly long arms. There  was
nothing  to hand,  no grass-killer,  no  ferment,  no  stick  or stone.  The
squelchy  warm earth was giving  beneath his feet.  Then  he  remembered and
thrust his hand in his blouse; when the  deadling loomed above, he struck it
with the scalpel  somewhere  between the eyes, then  leaned his whole weight
forward, drawing the blade downward to the ground and fell once again.
     He lay, cheek pressed  to the grass, and gazed  at the deadling,  as it
stood, swaying, its orange carcass slowly  swinging open like a suitcase; it
stumbled and collapsed flat on its back, flooding the surrounding earth with
a thick white fluid, gave a few twitches and lay  still. Kandid then  got up
and  wandered off. Along the  path. As far as possible from here. He vaguely
recalled that  he had wanted to wait for somebody,  wanted to find something
out,  there  was something  he  was  intending  to  do.  Now  all  that  was
unimportant. What was important  was  to get as far away as possible, though
he  realized  that he would never get away. He  wouldn't,  and neither would
many, many, many another.
     Chapter Nine
     Discomfort awakened Pepper, sadness, and an unbearable, as it seemed to
him,  weight on his  mind and  all his sense  organs. Discomfort reached the
pain threshold and he groaned involuntarily as he slowly came to.
     The burden on his mind turned out to be despair and exasperation, since
the truck was not going to the Mainland; once again it was  not going to the
Mainland--in fact it wasn't going anywhere. It was  standing with its engine
switched  off, icy  and dead, doors open wide. The windshield was covered in
trembling  droplets,  which  now  and again  coalesced  and  flowed in  cold
streams. The night  beyond  the glass was lit up by the dazzling flashes  of
searchlights and headlamps, nothing  else could be  seen but these continual
flashes that  made  the eyes ache. Nothing could be heard either  and Pepper
initially even thought he'd gone deaf only realizing after a while that  his
ears  were oppressed  by a steady deep chorus  of  roaring sirens.  He began
flailing around the  cab striking painfully against levers  and  projections
and his blasted suitcase, tried to scrub the windshield, stuck his  head out
of one door, then the  other. He simply couldn't make out where he was, what
sort of a place it was and what was  going on. War, he thought, my god, it's
war! The  searchlights beat into his eyes with  malicious pleasure, he could
see nothing apart  from some  large  unfamiliar building  in which  all  the
windows  on all the floors were flashing on and off in unison. He could also
see an enormous number of patches of lilac mist.
     A  monstrous  voice  calmly  pronounced,  as  if  in complete  silence:
"Attention,  attention. All personnel to  stand by their posts according  to
regulation  number six hundred  and seventy-five point Pegasus omicron three
hundred  and  two  directive  eight  hundred  and  thirteen,  for  triumphal
reception of  padishah  without special  suite, size of  shoe fifty-five.  I
repeat. Attention, attention. All personnel . . ." The  searchlights stopped
racing about and Pepper was able to  make out at last the familiar  arch and
the  legend "Welcome," the main street of the Directorate, the dark cottages
lining  it  and  various  individuals  in underwear  standing  by them  with
paraffin lamps in their hands. Then he noticed quite close at hand a line of
running men in billowing black capes. These were strung out across the whole
width of the street as they ran, towing something strangely bright.  Looking
more closely, Pepper  realized  they  were  dragging  something like a cross
between a  fishing net and one  used  in volleyball, and  at once  a cracked
voice  began  screaming  by his ear: "Why  the truck?  Why  are you standing
here?"

     Swaying back, he saw next to him an  engineer in a white cardboard mask
marked on the forehead in indelible pencil "Libidovich,"  and this  engineer
crawled  straight across him with his filthy boots, jabbing his elbow in his
face, snuffling and stinking  of sweat. Then he collapsed into  the driver's
seat  and  scrabbled  for  the  ignition key;  not finding  it, he  screamed
hysterically and rolled out of the  cab on the opposite side. All the street
lamps went on and  it  became light as  day, though the people with paraffin
lamps went on standing in the cottage doorways. Everyone had a butterfly net
in his hand and they waved these nets  rhythmically, as if driving something
unseen from their  doors. Along the  street toward and past him rolled  four
grim black  machines one after another,  like  buses  only without  windows,
their roofs were equipped with latticed vanes. After that an ancient armored
car  turned out of a side street and  followed  them. Its rusty turret swung
around with  a piercing squeal  as its  machine gun's  slim barrel  rose and
fell. The  armored car had  trouble in squeezing past the  truck; the turret
hatch opened and a man  in a calico  nightshirt with dangling  ribbons stuck
his head  out and shouted angrily at Pepper: "Now what's this, my dear? I've
got to get by and you're stuck here!" At this Pepper dropped his head on his
hands and closed his eyes.
     I'll never get out of here, he thought dully. Nobody here needs me, I'm
totally  useless but they won't let me go even if it means starting a war or
causing a flood....
     "I'd like to see your papers," said a leisurely old man's voice. Pepper
felt himself clapped on the shoulder.
     "What?" said Pepper. "Your little papers. Got 'em ready?" It was an old
man  in an  oilskin coat  with an obsolete rifle slung across his chest on a
worn metal chain. "What  papers? What documents?  Why?" "Ah, mister Pepper!"
said the old man.  "Why  aren't you  carrying  out the  procedure? All  your
papers should be in your hand, open for inspection, like in a museum. . . ."
     Pepper gave him his identity card. The old man placed his elbows on his
rifle and studied the stamp closely, checked the photograph against Pepper's
face, then said:
     "Looks as if you've got thinner, Herr Pepper. Your face has lost a lot.
You're working hard." He handed back the card.
     "What's going  on?" asked Pepper. "What's  happening is what's supposed
to be happening," the old  man said, suddenly  becoming sterner. "Regulation
number  six hundred and seventy-five point Pegasus is what's  going on. That
is, escape." "What escape? Where from?"
     "Whatever escape  the regulation states," said the old man,  commencing
to climb  down the steps.  "Anyway  they'll be  banging I expect, so protect
your ears by keeping your mouth open."
     "All right," said Pepper. "Thanks."
     "What  are  you  doing  here, you  old sod,  creeping  about?"  came  a
bad-tempered voice below. It was driver Voldemar. "I'll give you your little
documents! There  you are, smell them! Right, got it?  Now shove off, if you
got it. . . ."
     A  concrete-mixer was towed by amid a general racket.  Driver Voldemar,
disheveled and  bristling,  scrambled  up  into the cab. Muttering curses he
started  up  the engine and slammed  the  door. The truck  shot  forward and
roared down  the  street past the people in underwear waving  their nets. To
the garage, thought Pepper. Oh well, what difference does  it  make? But I'm
not  touching that case again.  I just don't  want to lug it around, to hell
with it. He kicked it hatefully.  The truck  swerved sharply  off  the  main
street, slammed into a barricade of empty  barrels and carts scattering them
in all directions, and sped onward. For some time a splintered droshky board
flapped about on the radiator, then whipped  off,  and  crunched  under  the
wheels.  The truck  was now traveling along  narrow side streets.  Voldemar,
scowling, with his extinguished  cigarette  on his lip, bending and twisting
his body, manipulated the enormous  wheel.  No, it isn't  the garage, Pepper
thought. Or the workshops. Or the Mainland. The side  streets  were dark and

empty. Just once, cardboard faces with  names, hands  outstretched flickered
in the headlights and disappeared.
     "Hell's flames,"  said  Voldemar.  "I wanted to  drive straight to  the
Mainland.  I look, and there you are asleep, well  thinks I, let's just drop
by the garage,  play a bit of chess. . . . Then I came  across Achilles, the
fitter, ran off for  some yogurt, brought  it back, set up the pieces. ... I
offer the Queen's gambit, he accepts, so far so good. I  go  P-K.4,  he goes
P-B6. ... I tell him: well now start praying. And then it all  started.. . .
Haven't got a cigarette have you. Pepper?"
     Pepper gave him one.
     "What's this about an escape?" he asked. "Where are we driving?"
     "The usual escape," said Voldemar, lighting up.
     "We get them every year.  One of  the  engineers'  little machines  got
away. Order for all, catch it. There they are at it over there. . . ."
     The  habitations fell  away.  People were  wandering around  over  open
country, lit by the moon. It looked as if they were playing blind-man's buff
as  they went about on bent legs with  their arms spread wide. Everybody was
blindfolded. One  of them went full tilt into a post  and probably uttered a
cry of pain,  for  the  others  at once halted and cautiously began  turning
their heads.
     "Every  year  the  same  game,"  Voldemar   was  saying.  "They've  got
photoelements  and  acoustics of all  sorts, cybernetics and layabout guards
stuck  up  on every corner--all  the same,  every  year one  of their little
machines  gets away. Then they tell you: drop everything and go and look for
it. Who wants to do  that? Who wants to get involved, I ask you? If you just
catch  sight of it out of the corner of your eye--that's it. Either  you get
drafted into  the engineers or they send  you off into the forest somewhere,
to  the advance base  to  pickle mushrooms  so's you can't  talk  about what
you've  seen, for  God's sake. That's why the  people get  around it as best
they can. Some of them blindfold themselves so's not to see what's going on.
, .  .  . The brighter  boys just run around and shout as loud as  they can.
They ask  people for documents, search people or just get up on the roof and
howl as if they're taking part, no risk involved. . . ."
     "What about us, are we trying to catch anything?" Pepper asked.
     "I'll say we are. The public here are out hunting and we're the same as
everybody else.  Six  hours by the clock  we'll be on  the  hunt.  There's a
directive: if  in  the  course  of six hours the  runaway  mechanism is  not
detected, it's blown up by remote control. So everything can stay hush-hush.
Else it might fall into unauthorized hands. You saw what a mess-up there was
in the Directorate? Well,  that's heavenly peace--you see what it'll be like
in six hours time. See, nobody knows where the machine's got to. It might be
in your pocket.  And  the  charge they use is pretty powerful,  just to make
sure.  Last  year,  for example, the  machine turned up in a bathhouse,  and
there  were  plenty of people  packed in there--for  safety.  They  think  a
bathhouse is a damp sort of place, out of the way. .. .  Well I was there as
well. A bathhouse, that's the place, thinks I. ... So I was blown out of the
window, nice and smooth like being on a wave.  I hadn't time to blink before
I was sitting in a snowdrift, burning beams flying by overhead. . . ."
     The land around was flat sickly grass, fitful  moonlight, a tired white
road. On the left stood the Directorate where lights were racing madly about
again.
     "What  I don't understand,"  said Pepper,  "is how  we're going  to lay
hands on  it. We  don't even know  what  it is ...  big  or  small  dark  or
light-colored."
     "That you'll see soon  enough," Voldemar assured  him. "That I'll  show
you in five minutes. How the  clever lads  do  their  hunting. Hell, where's
that place. .. . Lost it. Went left, didn't I? Aha, left. . . . Yonder's the
machine-depot, we need to be right of that."
     The truck veered off  the road and went bumping over the  hummocks. The
storage area was on the left--rows of enormous pale containers, like  a dead

city on the plain.
     . . . Probably couldn't stand it. It was tested on the vibrostand; they
set their minds  to tormenting  it,  dug  about in  its innards,  burned the
subtle nerves with soldering-irons, it suffocating from  the smell of rosin.
They  made it  do stupid things, they created it to  do  stupid things, they
went on perfecting  it to perform stupider things, and in  the evenings they
left it, tortured,  drained of  strength  in  a  hot dry cubicle. Finally it
decided to go, although it knew everything--the pointlessness of flight, and
its  own doom. And  it  went, carrying within itself a self-destruct charge,
and is now standing somewhere  in the shadows. Softly picking about with its
jointed legs, and  watching, and listening  and  waiting.  . . . And now  it
understands with absolute clarity what before it only guessed at: that there
is no freedom, whether doors are open before you  or not, that everything is
stupidity and chaos, there is loneliness alone... .
     "Ah!" said Voldemar, pleased. "There she is, the little beauty. . . ."
     Pepper opened his  eyes but all he saw was a black pond of considerable
extent, a swamp in fact. The engine roared, a wave of filth rose and crashed
onto the windshield. The engine  managed another crazy howl and died. It was
very quiet.
     "Now that's more like it," said Voldemar. "All six wheels spinning like
the soap in a bathtub." He stubbed  his cigarette  in the ashtray and opened
his door a little. "There's somebody else out here," he said,  then a shout.
"Ho, mate! How's it going?"
     "Okay!" from somewhere outside.
     "Caught it yet?"
     "All I've caught is a cold!" from outside. "And five tadpoles."
     Voldemar firmly shut his door, and switched on the light; he glanced at
Pepper, gave  him  a wink, retrieved  a  mandolin  from  under the  seat and
commenced to pluck the strings, his head tucked into his right shoulder.
     "You just make  yourself  at home,"  said he hospitably. "Till morning,
till the tow gets here."
     "Thank you," Pepper said meekly.
     "This doesn't bother you?" asked Voldemar politely.
     "No-no," said Pepper.  "Don't mind me. . . ." Voldemar  leaned his head
back, began rolling his eyes and singing in a sad voice:
     I  see  no limit to my many woes. I wander  here alone bereft of sense.
Please tell me why  you do not want my love.  Why trample down a love that's
so intense?
     The  mud was slowly slipping down the windshield and the swamp could be
seen  gleaming beneath the moon; a car of odd design was sticking  up in the
middle  of the swamp.  Pepper switched on the wind-shield wipers and after a
while, to his amazement, he  discovered  that, sunk up to  the turret in the
quagmire, was an ancient armored car.
     Another holds you in his arms tonight;
     I stand here anxious, weary, and alone.
     Voldemar  struck  the  strings with all his might, sang  falsetto,  and
started clearing his throat.
     "Hey, mate!" a voice from outside. "Got a bite to eat?"
     "What if?" cried Voldemar.
     "We've got yogurt!"
     "There's two of us!"
     "Out you  come!  There's enough  for everybody! We  stocked up--we knew
we'd have a job on!"
     Driver Voldemar turned to Pepper.
     "What  d'you think?"  he said,  delighted. "Let's go,  eh?  We'll  have
yogurt, maybe a game of tennis ...eh?"
     "I don't play tennis," said Pepper.
     Voldemar  gave  a shout: "Okay  we're coming! We'll  just  inflate  the
boat!"
     Quick as a monkey, he clambered out of the cabin and set to work in the

back of the truck,  metal clanked,  something dropped and  Voldemar whistled
gaily. Then came a splash, a scraping of legs  along the side and Voldemar's
voice calling from somewhere below: "Okay, Mister Pepper! Hop down here, and
don't forget the mandolin!" Below, on the brilliant  liquid surface  of  the
mud, lay an inflated dinghy, and in it, legs wide apart, stood Voldemar like
a  gondolier  with  a  sizeable  engineer's  shovel in his  hand;  he smiled
delightedly as he gazed up at Pepper.
     ... In the old rusted armored car of Verdun vintage, it was sickeningly
hot and stank  of  hot oil and gas fumes. A dim  lamp  burned over  the iron
command  table  scarred  with indecent messages.  Underfoot,  squelching mud
chilled the feet; a dented tin ammunition rack  was packed tight with yogurt
bottles, everybody was in pajamas and scratching their hirsute
     chests  with all five  fingers,  everybody  was  drunk, a mandolin  was
droning.  The turret-gunner in  a calico  shirt, not finding room below, was
dropping tobacco  ash  from  up aloft  and sometimes  fell backward himself,
saying each time: "Beg  pardon, I took  you for  someone else. ..." and they
propped him up again in an uproar. ...
     "No," said Pepper. "Thanks, Voldemar, I'll hang  on here. I've got some
washing  to  get  through. ...  I  haven't done my  physical  exercises  yet
either."
     "Aha," said Voldemar, respecting this, "that's a different matter. I'll
drift across then and  as  soon as  you've finished your  washing give us  a
shout and we'll come over for you . . . just give us the mandolin."
     He floated  off with it and  Pepper remained  sitting and  watching him
trying at first to row across  with his shovel. This just made the dinghy go
around in a circle; after that, he began to use the shovel as a pole and all
was well. The moon bathed him in its  dead  light; he was  like the last man
after  the  last  Great  Flood,  sailing  among  the roofs  of  the  highest
buildings, very much  alone, seeking rescue from loneliness,  still  full of
hope.  He  poled up to the armored car and banged his  fist on the carapace;
somebody stuck his  head out of the turret, guffawed cheerfully, and dragged
him inside upside down. And Pepper was left alone.
     He  was alone, like the only passenger  on a train  at night, trundling
along with its three  battered carriages  along  some  decayed branch  line,
everything  creaks  and sways inside the carriage, the smell  of  locomotive
cinders wafts in through the shattered warped windows, cigarette butts  leap
about the floor along with  screwed-up  bits  of paper. Somebody's forgotten
straw hat  swings on its hook, and when  the train pulls into the  terminus,
the sole passenger steps out onto the rotting platform  and  nobody is going
to meet him. He's certain nobody's going to meet him, and he'll wander home,
brown himself a two-egg omelette  on the stove along  with a bit of  sausage
three days old and going green... .
     The  armored car suddenly began to shake and was lit up with convulsive
flashes. Hundreds of brilliant multi-colored threads extended from it across
the  plain,  and the glare  of  the flashes and the moonlight showed circles
welling out  from the  armored car across  the  smooth  mirror of the swamp.
Someone in white poked out of the turret; in a strained voice he proclaimed:
     "Dear sirs! Ladies and gentlemen!  Salute to tthe nation! With the most
humble respect, your Excellency, I have the honor to remain,  most respected
Princess  Diko-bella, your obedient servant, technical supervisor, signature
indecipherable!  .  .  ." The  armored car once  more  started  shaking  and
emitting flashes, then subsided.
     I will afflict  you with vines to  cling to  yo"u, thought Pepper,  and
your accursed  race  will be  swept away by  the  jungle,  your  roofs  will
crumble, the beams will fall, your houses will be grown about with wormwood,
the bitter wormwood.
     The forest was  moving in closer, climbing the  hairpins, scrabbling up
the  cliff  overhang  preceded  by waves  of  lilac fog,  and out of it came
crawling, gripping, and crushing, myriads of green tentacles, cesspits gaped
open on the streets and  houses tumbled into bottomless lakes, jumping trees

got  up on  the concrete runways  in front of  packed  airplanes, where  the
people  lay   in  piles,  anyhow,  with  their  yogurt  bottles,  slate-gray
document-cases and heavy  safes, and the ground beneath the cliff yawned and
sucked  it d'own. That would be so natural, so much to  be expected, that no
one  would  be surprised.  Everybody  would  be  afraid  simply  and  accept
annihilation as a vengeance long feared and  expected. Driver Acey  would be
running like a spider between the swaying cottages looking for  Rita, to get
what he wanted at last, but be wouldn't have time. . ..
     Three rockets went soaring up from the armored car and a military voice
bellowed:  "Tanks  on  the right, cover  on  the  left!  Crew, under cover!"
Someone at once added thickly:  "Dames to the left, bunks to the right! Crew
to  your  b-bunks!" Came  sounds of neighing and stamping, quite  unhuman by
now, just  as  if a  herd of pedigree stallions were  kicking  and thrashing
about in that iron box searching for a door to liberty, to the mares. Pepper
swung  his door wide and  peered out. There was swamp beneath his feet, deep
swamp,  since the truck's monstrous  wheels  were more than hub deep  in the
mire. The edge wasn't far off, however.
     Pepper  crawled onto  the back and made the long walk to the tailboard,
thudding and clanking as he strode the length of the immense steel trough in
the rich moon-shadow. Once there he climbed onto the tailboard and descended
by way of endless small ladders  to  the water. He  remained suspended for a
time  over  the icy  slime,  screwing up his courage, then, as  a  burst  of
machinegun  fire once more came  from the armored  car, closed his  eyes and
jumped.  The bog  gave  way  beneath  him  and  continued  to  do  so for  a
considerable time, it seemed endless, and by the time he touched bottom, the
mud was up to  his chest. He pressed his whole body down onto  the mud, trod
with his knees, and used  his palms  to  push off.  At first he  could  only
struggle  on the  spot, but he got the hang of it  after a while  and  began
making progress; to his surprise he soon found himself out of the wet.
     It'd be  a  good  idea  if  I could  dig up  some people  somewhere, he
thought,  just  people  would  do  for a start--clean,  shaved, considerate,
hospitable. No high-flown ideas necessary,  no blazing talents. No  stunning
ideals needed,  or self-hatred.  Just  let them clap hands on seeing me  and
somebody  can run and fill the bath, somebody else provide  clean sheets and
put  the  kettle on.  Just don't let  anybody  request  documents  or demand
signatures in  triplicate  with twenty pairs  of  fingerprints,  let  nobody
spring  to the telephone to report in  a meaningful whisper that  a stranger
had appeared covered in filth, calling himself Pepper, but this could hardly
be the truth since Pepper had left for the Mainland and a directive about it
had  already  been  issued and would  be made public tomorrow.  ... No  need
either for them to be supporters or opponents of anything in principle. They
wouldn't have to be principled opponents of drinking as long as they weren't
drunkards themselves. Nor would  they have to be supporters  of truth at all
costs so long as they didn't lie or say spiteful things to anybody's face or
behind their backs. They shouldn't demand  that anyone conform fully  to any
set  of ideals, just accept and  understand him as  he was. . . . Good  god,
thought Pepper, is that too much to ask?"
     He  emerged  onto the  road and  wandered  for a  long  time toward the
Directorate. Searchlights flashed on unremittingly, shadows flitted,  clouds
of multi-colored  smoke continued rising. As Pepper walked on, water gurgled
and squelched in his  boots, his drying clothes hung like a tent and slapped
together like  cardboard;  every  now  and again lumps of mud  fell from his
trousers  and  slopped  onto  the road,  every  time deceiving  Pepper  into
thinking that he'd dropped his wallet and  papers causing him  to  snatch at
his pocket, panic-stricken. When he had almost reached the machine depot the
frightful idea seized him that his papers had got wet and all the stamps and
signatures had run and were now indecipherable and irretrievably suspicious.
He came to a stop and opened  his wallet  with icy hands, he pulled  out all
his identity cards, passes, certificates, and chits and began examining them
under the moon. It turned out that nothing  terrible had happened; water had

done  some damage only to one  prolix document  on crested paper, certifying
that  the  bearer had undergone  a course of inoculations and was passed for
work on calculating machines. He put the lot  back in his  wallet, inserting
banknotes  neatly between each, and was about to proceed on  his way when he
suddenly  pictured  himself  coming  out  onto  the highway  and  people  in
cardboard masks and  beards  stuck on anyhow grabbing his arms, blindfolding
him, giving him something to smell.
     "Search! Search!"  they  would order.  "Remember  the  smell,  employee
Pepper?" "Cherchez, mutt, cher-chez" setting him on. Imagining all  this; he
turned off the road without  checking  his  pace, and  ran, stooping, to the
machine depot, dived into the shadow of huge, pale containers,  got his legs
tangled in something soft, and fell full tilt on a pile of rags and tow.
     Here it was warm and  dry. The rough sides of the containers were  hot,
something that pleased him at first, but after a while caused him to wonder.
Inside the cases all was silent, but he recalled the tale about the machines
crawling out of  their containers  by themselves;  he realized that  another
life was going on inside there and he wasn't afraid. He felt secure even. He
eased his  sitting position, took  off his  old boots,  peeled off  his  wet
socks, and used the tow to wipe his  feet. It  was so pleasant here, so warm
and cosy, that he thought: Odd if I'm alone here--surely somebody's realized
it's far better sitting here than crawling about the  waste  lands blindfold
or  hanging around some  stinking bog? He leaned his back up against the hot
plywood bracing his feet against the hot plywood opposite and felt a  strong
desire to purr. There was a tiny crack  over his head through which he could
see a strip of sky pale with moonlight, complete with  a few dim stars. From
somewhere came rumbling, crashing, the roar of  engines, but all that had no
connection with him.
     Marvelous to  stay here for  always,  he thought. If I can't make it to
the Mainland, I'll stay here. Machines, so what? We're all  machines. We are
the failed machines, or just badly put together.
     . . . The opinion exists, gentlemen, that  man will never come to terms
with the machine.  We shan't argue  that, citizens. The  director  feels the
same. And in  addition, Claudius-Octavian Hausbotcher  takes  the same view.
What  is a machine, after all? An inanimate mechanism, deprived of the  full
range  of feelings and incapable of being cleverer than a  man. Moreover its
structure is not albuminous. Moreover life cannot be reduced to physical and
chemical  processes, therefore reason.  . .  . Here,  an intellectualyricist
with three chins and a bow tie climbed to the stand, tore mercilessly at his
starched shirt-front and sobbingly proclaimed:
     "I cannot bear it ... I don't want that. ... A rosy babe playing with a
rattle . . . weeping willows bending over a pond . . . little girls in white
pinafores.. . . They are reading poetry . . . they weep . . . weep! Over the
poet's beautiful lines.  ... I don't want  electronic  metal to quench those
eyes.  . . those  lips . .. these  young modest  cheeks. . . . No, a machine
will never be cleverer than a man! Because I  ...  because we ...  We do not
wish it! And it will never be! Never!!! Never!!!"
     Hands reached out  with glasses of water, while  two hundred and  fifty
miles  above those  snow-white curls, silently, deathly, passed an automatic
sputnik-interceptor,  keen-eyed  and  unbearably   brilliant,  stuffed  with
nuclear explosive. . . .
     I don't want that either, Pepper thought, but you don't have to be such
a stupid  fool  as that. You can, of course, announce  a campaign to abolish
winter,  do a bit  of shamanism after eating mushrooms full  of  drugs, beat
drums, screech curses, but  all the same, it's better  to sew yourself a fur
coat and buy  warm boots. .  .  .  Anyhow,  that grizzled protector of timid
cheeks will have his little shout from the platform,  then steal an  oil can
from his lover's sewing-machine case, steal up to some electronic giant, and
start oiling its pinions, glancing  at the  dials and  giggling respectfully
when it gives  him  a shock.  God preserve us from  grizzled old fools.  And
while you're about it, God, save us from clever fools in cardboard masks.

     "In my  opinion,  it's your  dreams," someone announced  up above  in a
kindly bass. "I know  from  experience that dreams can leave a really  nasty
feeling. Sometimes it's as  if  you  were paralyzed.  You can't move,  can't
work. Then  it all  wears off. You should work  a bit. Why not? Then all the
aftereffects disappear in the pleasure of it."
     "Oh I can't bring myself to that," returned a thin  fretful voice. "I'm
sick of it all. Always the same:
     metal, plastic,  concrete, people. I'm  fed up to here with them. I get
no  pleasure out of  it anymore. The world's so  beautiful  and  so  full of
different things and I sit in one place and die of boredom."
     "You should  have  upped and transferred  to another job," creaked some
peevish oldster.
     "Easily said--transfer! I've  been transferred  already  and  I'm bored
stiff all the same. And it was hard getting away, let me tell you!"
     "All right, now," said the bass judiciously. "Just what do you want? It
almost passes understanding. What can one want if not to work?"
     "Why  can't you understand? I want  to live life to the full. I want to
see  new places, have new experiences, it's always the same old around here.
. ."
     "Dismissed!"   barked  a   leaden  voice.   "Idle  chatter!   Same  old
around--good thing. Constant aim. All clear? Repeat!"
     "Ah, to hell with you and your orders. . . ."
     There  could be no doubt  it  was the  machines conversing. Pepper  had
never set  eyes on them and couldn't  imagine what they looked like,  but he
had  the feeling  that he was hiding under a toyshop counter and hearing the
toys talking, toys he'd known since childhood, only huge, and by  virtue  of
that,  frightening.  That  thin hysterical voice  belonged  of  course to  a
fifteen-foot doll called Jeanne. She had a bright-colored tulle dress on and
a fat, pink unmoving face with rolling eyes, fat, foolishly spread arms, and
legs with fingers and toes stuck together. The bass was a  bear, an enormous
Winnie  the  Pooh  bursting  out   of   the   container,   gentle,   shaggy,
sawdust-filled, brown, with glass-button eyes.  The  others  were toys, too,
but Pepper couldn't place them yet.
     "All the same, I suggest you ought  to work a bit," rumbled Winnie  the
Pooh. "Remember, my dear,  that there are creatures who are a good deal less
fortunate  than  yourself.  Our gardener, for instance. He  really wants  to
work, but he sits here thinking day and night, because he hasn't worked  out
a  plan  of action properly. But  nobody's heard  any  complaints  from him.
Monotonous work's  still  work.  Monotonous  pleasure's  still  pleasure. No
reason for talk of death and stuff like that."
     "Oh, there's  no  making  you  out," said  Jeanne  the  doll. "For you,
everything's  caused  by  dreams,  or  I  don't  know  what.  But  I've  got
premonitions.  I can't  stay  still. I know  there's going to  be a terrible
explosion and I'll be blown to tiny pieces. I'll  turn  into steam. I  know.
I've seen. . . ."
     "Dismissed!" burst out the leaden voice. "I can't stand it! What do you
know about explosions? You can  run toward  the horizon  with any  speed you
like at any angle.  But the one whose business it is can overtake you at any
distance  and that'll be a  real explosion, not some intellectual vapor. But
I'm  not the one whose business it is, am I? Nobody will tell you that,  and
even if they wanted to tell, they wouldn't be able. I know what I'm  saying.
All clear? Repeat."
     There  was  a  good deal of blind self-assurance  in  all  this. It was
probably  a  huge  wind-up  tank  speaking.  With  exactly  the  same  blind
self-assurance it used to  move its rubber tracks forward, scrambling over a
boot placed in its way.
     "I don't know what you mean," said the Jeanne doll. "But if I fled here
to you, the  only creatures  of my own kind, that doesn't  mean, in my view,
that I intend at whoever's pleasure to run off to the horizon at some angle.
And anyway  I would like you to  observe that I'm not talking to you. ... If

it's work we're discussing, well  I'm not ill,  I'm a normal creature, and I
need pleasures just as all of you do. But this isn't real work, just a  sort
of unreal pleasure. I keep waiting  for my real work, but there's no sign of
it, no sign. I don't know what's  the  matter but when I  start thinking,  I
think myself into all sorts of nonsense." She gave a sob.
     "Well, well, now. . .." rumbled Winnie the Pooh. "On the whole, yes. Of
course . . . only. .. . Hmm. . . ."
     "It's  all  true!"  observed a  new voice,  ringing  and cheerful. "The
little girl's right. There's no real work...."
     "Real  work,  real work!" creaked  the  old  man venomously. "All  of a
sudden whole seams of real work. Eldorado! King Solomon's mines! They're all
around me with their sick insides, sarcomas, delightful fistulas, appetizing
adenoids and appendixes, ordinary but so  attractive.  Let us speak frankly.
They get in  the way, they prevent you  from  working. I don't know what the
matter is here, perhaps they  give  off some sort  of  special  odor or they
radiate an unknown field, but  whenever they're  near  I go schizophrenic. I
become two persons. One half of me longs for enjoyment, yearns to seize hold
of and  accomplish  the necessary, the sweet, the desirable, the other falls
into prostration and hammers away at the  eternal questions--is it worth it,
why, is it moral? . . . You, it's you I'm talking about, what are you doing,
working?"
     "Me?" said Winnie the Pooh. "Of course .  . . why not? It's odd to hear
that from you, I  didn't expect. I'm finishing a helicopter design and after
that  ...  I  was telling you  I'd  created  a  marvelous tractor, such pure
enjoyment that was. ... I believe you have no  grounds for doubting that I'm
working."
     "No, I don't doubt it,  don't doubt it at all," the old one ground out.
(Horrible boneless old  man, between a  goblin  and an astrologer, wearing a
black  plush shawl with gold spangles.) "If you'll  just tell me where  this
tractor is?"
     "Well  now  ...  I don't quite understand. .  . .  How do I  know? What
business is it of mine? The helicopter interests me now. . . ."
     "That's just  what I'm talking  about!" said the Astrologer. "Nothing's
your business, seemingly. You're satisfied with everything. Nobody's in your
way. They  even  help you! You gave birth to a  tractor, choking  with sheer
pleasure,  and  the people  took it  away  from  you  at once, to  keep  you
concentrating on your main  job, so's you  didn't enjoy  yourself over much.
You just ask him whether people help him or not. . . ."
     "You talking to me?" Tank bellowed. "Crap! Dismissed! Whenever somebody
goes out  on the testing area and decides to stretch his legs a bit, keeping
his pleasure going,  playing about, taking aim on the azimuth,  or let's say
the  vertical  bracket,  they  raise  a racket  and  uproar, their  shouting
makes^you  feel awful,  anybody can get upset by it.  But I didn't say  that
anybody was--me, did I? No! You'll have a long wait to hear that from me. Is
that clear? Repeat!"
     "Me, too, me as well!" Jeanne began  chattering. "I've wondered lots of
times, why do they exist? Now everything  in the world has a meaning, hasn't
it? I don't think they do. Probably they're not there, it's a hallucination.
When you try to  analyze them, and take  a sample from the lower parts, then
the upper, then the middle, you're sure to run into a wall or go right  past
them or you fall asleep all of a sudden. . . ."
     "Of course  they  exist,  you stupid hysteric!" creaked the Astrologer.
"They've got  upper, lower, and middle  parts, and all the parts are full of
diseases. I know nothing more delightful than people,  no other creature has
so many objects  of enjoyment  within itself. What can  you know  about  the
meaning of their existence?"
     "Oh, stop complicating  matters!" said the gay, ringing voice. "They're
simply beautiful. It's  a genuine  pleasure to look at  them. Not always, of
course, but just imagine a garden.  It can be  as beautiful as you like, but
without  people it  won't be perfect,  won't  be complete. Just one sort  of

people would be enough to give it  life, they can be little people with bare
extremities that never  walk but just run and throw stones . . . or middling
people  picking flowers ...  it doesn't matter. Even  hairy  people will do,
running about on four extremities. A garden without them is no garden."
     "That sort of nonsense could  make somebody feel sick," announced Tank.
"Bunkum! Gardens reduce visibility, and as for people, they get in a certain
person's  way all  the time,  and  you can't say  anything  good about them.
Anyhow,  if  a  certain  person were to  send over  a damn  good salvo on  a
building where for some reason  people were located, all his desire for work
would disappear, he'd feel sleepy, and anybody would fall asleep. Naturally,
I  don't speak  of myself, but if someone  were to  say it  of me, would you
object?"
     "You've taken to talking  a  lot about people just lately," said Winnie
the  Pooh.  "Whatever  the  conversation  starts on,  you get it  around  to
people."
     "Well  why on earth not?"  the Astrologer jumped in at once. "What's it
to you?  You're an  opportunist! If we feel  like talking, then  we'll talk.
Without asking your permission."
     "Please, please," Winnie the Pooh said gloomily. "It's just that before
we used to talk mainly about living creatures, enjoyments, plans, but now, I
note  that people are beginning  to occupy  a larger and larger  part of our
conversations and therefore of our thoughts."
     A  silence  ensued. Pepper,  trying  to  move  noiselessly, altered his
position to  be on  his side and  draw his knees up into his stomach. Winnie
the Pooh was wrong. Let  them talk about  people  as much as  ever possible.
Apparently  they  had  a  very poor knowledge  of them and  it was therefore
interesting  to hear what they had to say.  From out  of the mouths of babes
and sucklings. . . .  When people  talked of  themselves,  they either shoot
their mouths off or made you confessions. Sick of it. ...
     "You are  pretty silly in  your  judgments,"  said the Astrologer. "The
gardener, for instance. I hope you realize I'm being reasonably objective so
as to  share the satisfaction  of my friends. You enjoy planting gardens and
destroying parks. Splendid. I'm with you. But be so  good as to tell me what
people have to do with it? What connection have those who lift their legs up
against trees  or  those  who do  it  another  way?  I sense here  a certain
unhealthy  aestheticism. It's as  if I were to operate on  glands and demand
for my fuller satisfaction that the patient be wrapped in a floral gown. . .
."
     "You're just cold by nature," the Gardener  put in,  but the Astrologer
was unheeding.
     "Or take yourselves," he  went on. "You're forever  slinging your bombs
and  rockets  about,   calculating  corrections   and   playing  about  with
range-finders.  Aren't  you indifferent whether  there's people in there  or
not? It might be thought that you could  spare a  thought  for your friends,
me, for instance, sewing up  wounds!" he spoke dreamily. "You  can't imagine
what that is--sewing up a really good jagged stomach wound."
     "People again, people again," Winnie the Pooh said  in a crushed voice.
"This is the seventh night we've talked only about people. It's queer for me
to talk  about  this  but clearly  some  sort  of link,  vague  as yet,  but
powerful, has sprung up  between you and people. The nature of this  link is
totally obscure to me, if I don't count you, Doctor, for  whom people are an
essential source of  satisfaction. . . . All  around, it all seems absurd to
me, and in my opinion the time has come to ..."
     "Dismissed!"  roared  Tank. "The  time  has  not  yet come." "Wh-a-at?"
inquired Winnie  the  Pooh, at a loss. "I say  the time has not come,"  Tank
repeated.  "Some, of course, are  incapable of knowing whether the time  has
come  or  not,  some--I  don't name  them-- don't even  know what time it is
that's  coming, but someone knows  absolutely for certain that the time will
inevitably come  when it will  not only be permissible but necessary to open
fire on the  people in the buildings! He who does  not fire  is an enemy!  A

criminal! Annihilate! That clear? Repeat!"
     "I can  guess  at  something  like  that," put in  the Astrologer in an
unexpectedly  soft  tone.  "Jagged wounds. Gas  gangrene.. . .  Third degree
radiation burns."
     "They're all ghosts," sighed doll Jeanne. "What a bore! How miserable!"
     "Since  there's no stopping your talk of people," said Winnie the Pooh,
"let us try to elucidate the nature  of this bond. Let  us attempt to reason
logically. . . ." "One of the two," said a new voice, measured and dull. "If
the bond mentioned exists, then either they or we are the dominant."
     "Stupidity," said the Astrologer. "What's this 'or'? Of course we are."
     "What's 'dominant'?" asked doll Jeanne, crestfallen.
     "In the  present context,  'dominant' means prevailing," the lackluster
voice elucidated. "As far as the  actual phrasing of the question goes, it's
not stupid, it's the only true phrasing, if we intend to argue logically."
     A pause. Everybody, seemingly,  expected a continuation. At last Winnie
the Pooh could stand it no longer and asked: "Well?"
     "I am not clear if you intend to argue logically." "Yes, yes, we do," a
general  murmur.  "In that case,  accepting  the  existence  of  a  bond  as
axiomatic, either  they  are for us, or you are for them. If they are for us
and they hinder  your work according to the laws of your nature, they should
be eliminated,  like any other interference. If you  are  for them, but that
situation  does not please  you, they must  similarly be eliminated like any
other  reason for an unsatisfactory situation. That is all I can say  on the
subject of your conversation."
     Nobody said a word; from inside the containers  came noises of scraping
and clicking, just as if enormous toys were settling down to sleep, weary of
talking. A general uneasiness hung in the air, as when a group of people who
have let themselves go in conversation, not sparing anyone in their urge for
eloquence, suddenly realize they've gone too far. "Humidity's rising a bit,"
creaked the Astrologer  in a subdued voice.  "I've  noticed  that for ages,"
squeaked doll Jeanne. "Its verv nice: new figures. . . ."
     "Don't  know why,  my input's  acting up,"  mumbled  Winnie  the  Pooh.
"Gardener, you haven't got a spare twenty-two volt accumulator, have you?"
     "I've not got anything,"  responded the Gardener. After this there came
a crash  as  of  splintering  wood,  then a  mechanical  whistle  and Pepper
suddenly saw something  shining and moving in the crack above him; he seemed
to see someone gazing at him in the shadow between  the cases. He broke into
a cold sweat,  got  up and tiptoed out into the moonlight  and sprinted  off
toward the road. As he ran with all his strength he seemed to feel dozens of
strange  grotesque eyes following him and watching the small pitiful figure,
defense-less on the plain exposed to every wind, laughing  to see his shadow
so much larger than himself;  out of fear he had forgotten to don  his boots
and was now scared to go back for them.
     He skirted the bridge across  the  dry gully and could already make out
the outlying  houses of the Directorate in front of him:  he felt breathless
and his toes pained him intolerably. He wanted to stop but heard through the
noise of his own breathing the staccato clump  of a multitude of feet behind
him. At this, he  lost his head again and  raced  on with his last strength,
not  feeling  the earth beneath him, nor his  own  body, spitting out sticky
lengths of saliva, all attempts at thinking gone.
     The  moon  raced with him across the plain and the thudding was getting
nearer and  nearer. He thought, This is it, finish, and the thudding reached
him and somebody white, huge, and  hot as a driven horse appeared alongside,
eclipsing  the  moon, drove past and began drawing  slowly  away, long naked
legs pumping in  furious rhythm. Pepper saw it was a man in a football shirt
with  number fourteen  on it and  white running  pants  with  a dark stripe.
Pepper  was even more frightened. The multitudinous thudding  behind him did
not cease,  groans and painful cries  could  be  heard. They're  running, he
thought  hysterically.  They're  all  running!  It's  started!  And  they're
running, but it's late, late, late! . . ."

     He caught vague glimpses of cottages  along the  main street and frozen
faces as he strove to keep up with the long-legged number fourteen, since he
had no idea where to run to or where safety lay, and maybe they were already
distributing arms somewhere, and I don't know where, and I'm out of it again
on the sidelines,  but I don't  want that, I can't be on the sidelines  now,
because those  in  the boxes might be  right  in their  way, but they're  my
enemies too. . . .
     He rushed into the crowd, which gave way before him; a square checkered
flag  flashed  in front of  his  eyes and exclamations  of approval rose all
around. Someone familiar ran alongside, speaking: "Don't  stop, don't stop."
Then he stopped, and  everybody  clustered  around and an enormous wrap  was
thrown around his shoulders. A booming radio announced:
     "Second place,  Pepper  of Science Security Department  with a  time of
seven minutes twelve  and three  tenths seconds.  . . . Now here's the third
man coming!"
     The  familiar figure turned out to be Proconsul: "You're  a  great lad,
Pepper, I never expected anything like this. When your name was announced at
the start I laughed, but I see now you should be included in the main group.
Away you go and relax, be at the  stadium tomorrow before twelve. We have to
get  over  the  assault course  somehow.  I'm entering you for  the  fitters
workshop team. . . . Don't argue, I'll fix it with Kirn."
     Pepper looked around. All about  him  were crowds of familiar people in
cardboard masks. Not far off they were tossing in the air  and catching  the
long-legged man who came in  first. He flew  up to the very moon, stiff  and
straight  as a log, clutching a  large metal cup  to his chest. Right across
the  street  hung  a sign "Finish," underneath it, glancing  at a stopwatch,
stood Claudius-Octavian  Hausbotcher in a  severe black coat with an  armlet
saying: "Ch. judge."
     ". . . And if you'd taken part in sports dress," rumbled Proconsul, "it
would have  been possible  to  take  that  time into  consideration for  you
officially." Pepper elbowed him aside and wandered off through the  crowd on
rubbery legs.
     ". .  . instead  of  sweating with  fear sitting at home,"  someone was
saying in the crowd, "better take up sport."
     "Just said the same thing to Hausbotcher. It's not being scared though,
you're not right there; The search groups should have been better organized.
Since everybody's running around, let them at least run to some purpose. . .
."
     "Whose invention  was it?  Hausbotcher's! He  never misses a  trick. He
knows what's what!"
     "No need to  run around in long underpants though. It's one thing to do
your duty in  long Johns, all respect  due. But compete in  them--in my view
that's a typical organizational oversight. I shall write on the matter."
     Pepper escaped  from  the  throng, and wandered  off, swaying along the
murky street. He felt  sick, his chest was  hurting and he kept on imagining
those things  in the cases, extending their metal necks  and staring  at the
road  in  amazement  at  the crowd  of  blindfolded  people  in  underpants,
earnestly  striving to  understand what  link existed  between  them and the
activity  of this  crowd  and, of course, failing  to do so; whatever served
them as sources of patience must now be near exhaustion. . . .
     It was dark in Kirn's cottage. A baby was crying.
     The  hostel door  was boarded up and the windows were  dark but someone
was walking around inside  with  a shielded lamp  and Pepper could make  out
some pale faces at the first-floor windows warily peeping out.
     An  inordinately  lengthy gun  barrel  with a  thick  muzzle-brake  was
sticking out of the library door, while on the opposite side of the street a
shed was  burning up; around the conflagration, men in  cardboard masks were
prowling about with mine detectors, lit up in crimson flame.
     Pepper headed for the park. In a dark alley, however, he was approached
by a woman who took  his  arm and led him off without a word. Pepper made no

resistance, he was past caring. She was  all in black, her hand was soft and
warm, her white face shone through the dark.
     Alevtina,  thought Pepper. She's bided  her time all right, he  thought
with frank lack of  shame. Well, what's wrong in that?  So she waited. Don't
know why, or why I'm giving in to her, but it's me she waited for. ...
     They entered the house. Alevtina  switched on the light and said: "I've
waited for you here a long time."
     "I know," he said.
     "So why were you walking past?"
     Yes  indeed, why?  thought Pepper. Probably because I  didn't care.  "I
didn't care," he said.
     "Okay, never mind," she said. "Sit down, I'll make you something."
     He perched himself on the edge of a chair,  put his hands on  his knees
and watched her fling off the black shawl from her neck  and hang it up on a
nail--white, plump, warm.  Then she  disappeared  into the  recesses  of the
house and soon a gas heater began humming  and  there came a  sound of water
splashing. He experienced severe pain in  the soles of his feet, drew up his
leg and looked at the bare sole. The balls of his  toes were bloody, and the
blood had mixed with  dust  and dried in  black  crusts. He pictured himself
submerging  his  feet  in  hot water, at first very  painful, then the  pain
passing and being soothed. Today I'll sleep in the bath, he thought. And she
can come in and pour in hot water.
     "This way," Alevtina summoned him.
     He  rose with difficulty,  all his bones  seemed to  creak together. He
limped across the ginger carpet to the  door that  led into the corridor, in
the  corridor,  along  a black  and white carpet to  a dead end,  where  the
bathroom  door  was already open  wide. The businesslike blue flame  in  the
geyser  hummed,  the  tiles  sparkled,  and  Alevtina  bent  over  the  bath
sprinkling powder into the water. While he was getting  undressed, stripping
off  his  underclothes stiff with dirt, she fluffed up the water;  above the
water  rose a blanket  of  foam, over the rim of the  bath it came, white as
snow. He sank into that foam closing his eyes from  pleasure and the pain in
his feet, while Alevtina seated herself on the edge of the bath and gazed at
him, sweetly smiling, so kind, so welcoming, and not a word about documents.
     She washed his head as he spat water out and  snorted and brooded  over
her strong, expert hands just like his  mother's,  just as good  a cook too,
likely, then she asked: "Want your back rubbed?"
     He slapped his ear to get rid of the soap and  water and said: "Well of
course, surely! .  . ." She scrubbed his back with a rough loofah and turned
on the shower.
     "Hold  on," he said. "I want to lie just  like  this a bit longer. I'll
let this  water out now, let  in fresh and just lie here, and you sit there.
Please."
     She turned the shower off, went out for a moment, and came back with  a
stool.
     "Lovely!" said he. "You know, I've never felt so good here as now."
     "There you are," she smiled. "And you never wanted to."
     "How did I know?"
     "Why  did you have to  know in advance? You could have just tried. What
had you to lose? You married?"
     "I don't know," he said. "Not now, seemingly."
     "I thought as much. Loved her a lot, didn't you? What was she like?"
     "What was she like? ...  She  wasn't afraid  of anything.  And she  was
kind. We used to daydream about the forest."
     "What forest?"
     "What d'you mean? There's only one."
     "Ours, you mean?"
     "It's not  yours. It's its  own. Anyway maybe it really  is  ours. Only
it's hard to picture it like that."
     "I've  never  been  in  the  forest,"  said Alevtina.  "They  say  it's

frightening."
     "The unknown always is. Everything would  be  simple if  people learned
not to be afraid of the unknown."
     "Well I think you  shouldn't invent  things," she said. "If there was a
bit less making things up, there wouldn't be anything unknown in  the world.
Peppy, you're always making things up."
     "What about the forest?" he reminded her.
     "Well, what about it? I've never got there, but if I did, I don't think
I'd  do  too  badly. Where there's  a forest, there's paths,  where  there's
paths, there's people, and you can always get by with people."
     "What if there's no people?"
     "If there's  no people then  there's  nothing to do there. You  have to
stick to people, they won't let you down."
     "No," Pepper said. "It's  not  as simple as  that.  I'm going downhill,
people and all. I don't understand a thing about them."
     "Lord, what on earth don't you understand?"
     "Anything.  That's  what   started  me  dreaming   about  the   forest,
incidentally. Only now I see that it's no easier in the forest."
     She shook her head.
     "What a child you still are,"  she said. "Why can't you ever understand
that nothing exists in the world except love, food, and power. All rolled up
together of course,  but whatever thread you pull, you're sure  to arrive at
love, or power, or food. . . ."
     "No," said Pepper. "I don't want that."
     "Darling," she said quietly. "Who's going to  ask  you whether you want
it or not. Of course, I might ask you: what're you tossing about for, Peppy,
what the hell more do you want?"
     "I  don't think I need anything," said Pepper. "To clear out of here as
far as possible  and  become  an  archivist  or  a restorer. That's all  the
desires I have."
     She shook her head again.
     "Hardly. That's a bit too complicated. You need something simpler."
     He didn't argue, and she got up.
     "Here's  your towel,"  she said. "I've put your under-things over here.
Come out and we'll have some tea. You'll have all  the tea and raspberry jam
you want, then go to bed."
     Pepper had already pulled  the plug  and was standing up  in  the  bath
rubbing  himself down with a huge shaggy towel, when the windows rattled and
there came the  muffled thud of a  distant explosion. Then he remembered the
spares dump and Jeanne the  silly, hysterical doll. He cried: "What's  that?
Where?"
     "They've blown up the machine," replied Alevtina. "Don't be afraid."
     "Where? Where'd they blow it up? At the depot?"
     Alevtina was silent for a while, apparently looking out of the window.
     "No," she said at last. "Why the depot? In the  park. . . . There's the
smoke going up. .. . There they all are, running, running. . . ."
     Chapter Ten
     The  forest was invisible. In  its place,  below the rock as far as the
horizon, lay dense clouds. It  resembled  an  ice-field powdered  with snow:
ice-hummocks and snow dunes, holes and crevasses concealing endless depths--
if  you  jumped  down from the rock your fall would be broken, not by earth,
warm swamps, or spreading branches, but by hard ice sparkling in the morning
sun,  powdered  lightly  with dry snow, and  you would stay lying on the ice
under the  sun, flat, motionless, black. It might be thought to  resemble an
old, well-washed white blanket, thrown over the treetops. .. .
     Pepper  hunted around to  find a pebble,  lobbed it from  palm to palm,
thinking what a  good little  place this was above  the  precipice:  pebbles
about,  no sense  of  the  Directorate, wild  thorn bushes all around, faded

untrodden grass, even some little birdy permitting itself  a chirp. Best not
to look over to the right,  though, where a  luxurious four-hole latrine was
suspended over  the precipice,  its fresh paint brazenly shining in the sun.
Quite  a way off, it's  true, and  possible  if you wanted, to make yourself
imagine  it  a summerhouse or some sort of  scientific pavilion, but  it did
spoil the scene.
     Perhaps  it  was  actually  because of this new  latrine,  erected  the
previous turbulent night, that  the  forest  had shrouded  itself in clouds.
Hardly  likely  though. The forest  wouldn't wrap itself  up to the  distant
horizon for anything so  petty, it was used to  a  lot worse than  that from
people.
     At any rate, Pepper  thought,  I can  come here every morning. I'll  do
what  they  tell  me, I'll tote up on  the broken  Mercedes,  I'll  beat the
assault  course, I'll play the  manager at chess, even  try to  get to  like
yogurt: it's  probably not too bad if practically everybody likes it. And of
an evening (and for the night), I'll go over to Alevtina's and eat raspberry
jam and  lie in  the director's bath. There's  something to be said for that
even, he thought. Dry yourself with the  director's towel and warm your feet
up in  the director's  woolly socks, meanwhile  crammed into the  director's
dressing  gown. Twice a  month  I'll  go  over to the biostation to  collect
salary and bonuses, not the forest, just the biostation, and not even there,
just to the pay-out window, but no meeting  with  the forest and no war with
the forest,  just  salary  and bonuses.  But in  the  morning, early  in the
morning, I shall come here and look on the forest  from afar and lob pebbles
into it.
     The bushes  behind  him  parted  with  a crash.  Pepper  glanced around
warily, but  it wasn't the  director, just Hausbotcher  once  again.  He was
carrying a fat  file folder and halted some distance away, looking Pepper up
and down with  his moist eyes.  He clearly  knew  something,  something very
important, and had brought this strange alarming information that no  one in
the world knew of  save himself,  here to the cliff-edge,  and it was  plain
that everything that  had  gone before  was no  longer  significant and from
everyone would be required to contribute all he was capable of.
     "Hello,"  he  said, and bowed,  clasping the case  to  his  hip.  "Good
morning. Did you rest well?"
     "Good morning," said Pepper. "Well, thank you."
     "Humidity   today   seventy-six    percent,"   Hausbotcher   announced.
"Temperature--seventeen degrees.  No wind.  Cloud cover--nil."  He had drawn
nearer noiselessly, arms along the seams of his trousers, and, inclining his
body toward Pepper, continued: "Double-u today--sixteen."
     "What's double-u?" asked Pepper, getting up.
     "Quantity of spots,"  said Hausbotcher swiftly. His eyes became shifty.
"On the sun," he said. "On the s-s-s. .. ." He ceased, staring Pepper in the
face.
     "And why are you telling me this?" asked Pepper with distaste.
     "I beg your  pardon," said  Hausbotcher rapidly. "It won't be repeated.
So,  just humidity,  cloud cover . . . hmm . . . wind  and . . .  you  won't
require me to report planetary oppositions?"
     "Listen," said Pepper dismally. "What do you want from me?"
     Hausbotcher retreated  a pace or two and  hung his head. "I beg pardon.
Perhaps I intruded,  but there  are a few papers that require . . . that is,
immediate . . . your personal..." He held out the file folder toward Pepper,
like an empty tray. "Do you order me to report?"
     "You know what. . . ." said Pepper menacingly.
     "Yes  . . .  yes?" said  Hausbotcher. Without  relinquishing  the  file
folder,  he  began  rummaging  through his pockets, as  if in  search of his
notepad. His face was blue-tinged as if from sheer zeal.
     Fool,  fool, thought Pepper,  trying to control  himself.  What  was  I
expecting from the likes of  him? "Stupid," he  said striving for restraint.
"That clear? Stupid and not in the least witty."

     "Yes-yes," said Hausbotcher. Bent double, with  the file folder clasped
between elbow  and  thigh,  he  scribbled frantically on the  notepad.  "One
second .. . yes, yes?"
     "What  are  you  writing  there?"  asked  Pepper.  Hausbotcher  glanced
fearfully at him and read out:
     "Fifteenth  June  .  .  .  time  .  .  .  seven forty-five  ...  place:
cliff-edge. . . ."
     "Listen, Hausbotcher," said Pepper, exasperated. "What the hell do  you
want? Why d'you  trail  about after me all the time? I've had enough of  it,
just lay off! [Hausbotcher scribbled.] This joke of yours is sheer stupidity
and there's no need to spy around me. You should be ashamed at your age. . .
.  Now stop  writing, idiot! It's damned stupidity! Why  don't  you do  your
exercises or get washed, just take  a look at yourself, you're like  nothing
on earth! Ugh!"
     He began doing up his sandal straps with fingers trembling with fury.
     "They're probably  right about  you,"  he  panted.  "They  say you  get
everywhere and take a note of the conversation.  I used  to think these were
your stupid jokes. ... I didn't want to believe it, I can't stand  that sort
of thing at all, but it looks as though you're quite brazen about it now."
     He straightened up and  saw that Hausbotcher  was standing staunchly at
attention, tears were flowing down his cheeks.
     "Just what's the matter with you today?" asked Pepper, alarmed.
     "I can't.. . ." mumbled Hausbotcher, between sobs.
     "What can't you?"
     "Exercises. . . . My liver ... chit. . . and washing."
     "Good  God in heaven," said Pepper. "Well if you can't, you needn't, it
was  just a manner of speaking. . . . Well anyway, why are  you following me
around? Don't you see, for God's sake,  it's not exactly pleasant.. . . I've
nothing against you, but can't you grasp? . . ."
     "Won't happen again!" cried Hausbotcher,  ecstatic. The  tears  on  his
cheeks dried instantly. "Never again!"
     "To blazes with  you," said Pepper wearily and walked  off  through the
bushes. Hausbotcher forced his way after  him.  Old clown,  thought  Pepper,
feebleminded ...
     "Absolute urgency," Hausbotcher was muttering, breathing heavily. "Only
extreme necessity.. . . Your personal attention."'
     Pepper looked around.
     "What the hell?" he exclaimed. "That's my suitcase, give it here, where
did you get it?"
     Hausbotcher placed  the case on  the  ground  and  was on  the point of
opening his  mouth  twisted by the effort of breathing, when Pepper snatched
the  case handle, not  bothering to  listen  to  him.  At  this, Hausbotcher
without a word lay belly-down on the case. "Give me that case!" said Pepper,
going ice-cold from fury.
     "Never!" croaked Hausbotcher, scraping his  knees about in the  gravel.
The  file folder was  in  his way  so  he gripped  it between his  teeth and
embraced  the suitcase with both arms. Pepper heaved with all his  might and
succeeded in ripping off the handle.
     "Stop this outrageous behavior!" he said. "At once!"
     Hausbotcher shook his head  and  burbled something. Pepper loosened his
collar and  stared helplessly around. In the shadow  of an oak tree not  far
off,  two  engineers in cardboard  masks  were  standing  for  some  reason.
Catching  his glance, they straightened up and clicked their  heels.  Pepper
peered around him like a hunted animal, then hurriedly walked along the path
out of the park. There'd been plenty  of  surprises up till now, he  thought
feverishly, but this beat all. . . . They were all in it together . . . run,
he had to run!  But how? He  emerged from the park and was about to turn off
toward the canteen, but  he  found Hausbotcher blocking  his  way once more,
filthy and appalling. He was standing with the suitcase on his shoulder, his
blue face was  bathed  in  tears or water or sweat, his eyes roved beneath a

white  film of moisture, he gripped  the  file folder with  teethmarks on it
close to his chest.
     "Not here, please. . . ." he croaked. "I beg you . . . to the study . .
. intolerably urgent . . . not forgetting interests of subordination. . . ."
     Pepper recoiled from him and ran off along the main street. People were
standing  like statues along the pavements,  heads back and eyes staring.  A
truck speeding toward him pulled up with a squeal of brakes and smashed into
a newsstand. People with spades spilled out of the back and began forming up
in  two ranks. A  security guard went by with ceremonial  step, holding  his
rifle at the present-arms. . . .
     On two occasions Pepper attempted to turn off into  a  side street, but
each time Hausbotcher appeared before him. Hausbotcher was no longer able to
speak, he just moaned and growled, rolling beseeching eyes. Thereupon Pepper
ran off toward the Directorate building.
     Kim, he thought desperately, Kim won't permit. . . surely Kim wasn't in
with  them  as well? . . . I'll lock myself in the lavatory ... let them try
... I'll use my feet. . . I'm past caring. . .
     He burst into the  hallway only  to be greeted  at once with the brazen
clangor of the amalgamated local orchestras thundering out a march. Strained
faces,  protruding eyes,  inflated chests  flashed  before him.  Hausbotcher
caught  him  up  and  chased  him  up the main staircase with  its raspberry
carpets, a route forbidden to everyone at all times, through some unfamiliar
two-tone halls, past security guards in full-dress uniform with decorations,
along  slippery  waxed  parquet, up  to the  fifth  floor along  a  portrait
gallery, upstairs again to floor six, past some bedecked females frozen like
mannequins, into a sort of luxurious dead end with fluorescent lighting, and
up to an enormous leather door  with the  nameplate "Director." Nowhere else
to run.
     Hausbotcher  caught  up  with  him  and  slid under his  elbow, croaked
horribly  like  an  epileptic  and  flung  the leather door wide before him.
Pepper entered, and  sank up to his  insteps in a monstrous  tiger skin, and
immersed his  whole being  into the austere executive twilight of half-drawn
door curtains, into the noble aroma of expensive tobacco, in the cotton-wool
silence, into the even tenor and serenity of an alien existence.
     "Hello,"  he  said into space. But no  one was  sitting behind the huge
table.  No one was sitting in the huge armchairs.  And no one met his glance
except Selivan the Martyr in a vast picture occupying the whole of one  side
of the room.
     Behind him,  Hausbotcher  dropped  the suitcase  with  a thump.  Pepper
started and turned around. Hausbotcher  was standing, swaying and proffering
the file folder like an empty tray. His eyes  were dead, glassy.  The man'll
die any minute, thought Pepper. But Hausbotcher did not die.
     "Unusually  urgent..."  he  grated,  panting.  "Not   possible  without
director's signature . . . personal... would never dare. . . ."
     "What director?" Pepper whispered. A terrible surmise had begun to take
vague shape in his brain.
     "You. . . ." Hausbotcher  croaked. "Without your official  stamp ... no
way. . . ."
     Pepper leaned against the table and supporting  himself on its polished
surface, wandered around it to  the chair  that seemed  nearest. He  dropped
into its cool leather embrace and took  in the rows of colored telephones on
his left and the gold stamped  volumes on the right. In front of him stood a
monumental  inkwell with  Tannhauser  and  Venus, and  above it,  the  white
beseeching eyes of Hausbotcher  and the proffered document case. He drew his
elbows in, thought: Well, so that's how it is? You scum, sods, lackies . . .
that's  it, eh?  Well, well,  you bastards,  slaves, cardboard snouts. . . .
Well, all right, let it be. ...
     "Stop waggling that over the table," he said severely. "Give it here."
     Things began moving in the  office, shadows flitted^ a  small whirlwind
started up and Hausbotcher materialized at his  right  shoulder;  the folder

lay on the table and opened as if of its own accord,  sheets of fine quality
paper peeped out, and he read a word printed in large letters: DRAFT. "Thank
you," he said severely. "You may go."
     Once  more  the  whirlwind, an  aroma  of  sweat  was  sensed and  then
vanished, Hausbotcher was already by the door pausing, trunk inclined, hands
by his seams, appalling, piteous, and ready for anything.
     "One  moment," said Pepper. Hausbotcher froze.  "Can you kill  a  man?"
asked  Pepper. Hausbotcher did not  hesitate. He  pulled out a small notepad
and spoke: "Your orders?"  "And commit suicide?" Pepper asked. "What?"  said
Hausbotcher.  "Go," said  Pepper. "I'll call  for  you  later."  Hausbotcher
vanished. Pepper cleared his throat and wiped his cheeks.
     "Let's assume that," he said aloud. "And now what?"
     On the table he observed a desk  diary,  turned the page, and  read the
present day's entry. The previous director's handwriting  disappointed  him;
it was  large and legible  like  a primary school teacher's. "Group leaders.
9:30.   Foot  examination.  10:30.   Power  for  Ala.  Try  aerated  yogurt.
Machinization. Reel: who stole it? Four bulldozers!!!"
     To hell with the bulldozers, thought Pepper, that's it: no  bulldozers,
no excavators, no  saw-combines of eradication. . . . Good idea to  castrate
Acey at the same time--can't, pity  .  . . and that machine-depot. Blow that
up, he decided. He pictured the Directorate  from above  and realized that a
great deal needed blowing  up. Too much.  . . . Any fool can use explosives,
he thought.
     He pulled out the desk's middle drawer  and  saw there heaps of papers,
blunted pencils, and two philatelic  perforation-gauges, and  on top  of all
this, a twisted golden general's  epaulette. Just one. He had a look for the
other,  raking  his hand around under the papers,  received  a pinprick  and
found a bunch of safe keys. The safe  itself stood  in  the far  comer and a
pretty  odd  safe it  was;  decorated  like a sideboard. Pepper  got  up and
crossed the room to  the safe; he glanced around him and noticed a good many
odd things he'd not seen before.
     Under the window stood a hockey stick, next to it--a crutch and a false
leg wearing  a boot with a rusty skate. There turned out  to be another door
in the recesses of the office; a rope was stretched across it on which  hung
some black swimming trunks and several odd socks, a number of them holed. On
the  door was a tarnished metal plate with the inscribed  legend CATTLE.  On
the  windowsill,  half-hidden by the curtain, stood a small aquarium; in the
pure  transparent  water among varicolored seaweeds,  a  plump black axoloti
stirred  its feathery  gills  in  measured  tempo. From  behind the  Selivan
picture protruded a splendid bandmaster's  baton complete with horses tails.
Pepper was busy with the  safe a  good while, trying the  keys.  At last the
heavy armored door  swung  open.  The  inside of the  door  was  covered  in
indecent pin-ups from men's  magazines, and the safe was practically  empty.
Pepper  found a pair of pince-nez, the left lens broken, a crumpled cap with
a  mysterious  cockade, and  a photograph of  an  unknown  family  (grinning
father, mother  with cupid's-bow lips, and two boys in cadet uniform). There
was  a parabellum  pistol too, well cleaned and looked after, a single round
up the barrel, another twisted general's  epaulette, and  an iron cross with
oak leaves.  There  was another pile of file folders  in the  safe, but they
were  all empty  except for the bottom one,  which held  a rough draft of an
order imposing punishment on driver Acey for systematic nonattendance at the
Museum of Directorate  History.  "That's got  him, that's got him,  rascal,"
muttered Pepper.  "Fancy that, skipping the museum. . . . We'll do something
about this." Always Acey, what the . . . ?
     Yogurtomaniac, repulsive womanizer, junky,  still, all the drivers were
that... no,  a stop  would be put to it: yogurt, chess during working hours.
By the  way, what exactly does  Kim add up on  the  broken Mercedes?  Or  is
everything as it should be--some sort of stochastic processes going  on. ...
Look, Pepper,  you  don't know much; everybody's hard at  work,  after  all.
Hardly anybody  loafs around. They work at night. Everybody's busy, nobody's

got  any  time.  Orders  are  carried  out, that I  know,  seen  it  myself.
Everything looks to be  in order: guards do  their guarding, drivers  drive,
engineers construct, scientists write articles, pay-clerks dish out money. .
..
     Listen, Pepper, he thought,  maybe all  this merry-go-round exists just
for  that--so  everybody's kept  busy? In actual fact  a good  mechanic  can
service a car in  two hours.  What  happens after that? What about the other
twenty-two hours? And if  in addition competent workmen operate the machines
so as to keep them  in good order?  The answer's not  far  to seek: give the
good  mechanic  a job as  a cook, make the cook a mechanic. That way you can
fill twenty-two  years, never mind hours. No,  there  was a certain logic in
it. Everybody works, discharging his obligations to humanity, not like well,
monkeys . .  . and  they extend their specialization  range. .  .  . Anyhow,
there's no logic at all there, it's an unholy mess, that's all. .. . My god,
I'm  standing   here  like  a  post,  while  they're  defiling  the  forest,
eradicating it, turning it into a park. Something's got to be done, now  I'm
responsible for every acre, every pup, every mermaid, I'm responsible for it
all now. . . .
     He  moved into action, somehow got  the  safe shut, rushed over to  the
table, pushed the file folder from him and pulled out a clean sheet of paper
from the drawer. . . . There's thousands of people here, though, he thought.
Traditions have been  founded, accepted attitudes, they'll laugh  at me. ...
He recalled  the wretched,  sweating Hausbotcher and indeed  himself in  the
director's  anteroom. No, they wouldn't laugh  at  him. They'd cry, complain
... to  ... Monsieur Alas . . . they'd kill each other. But not  laugh. That
was the worst part of  it, he  thought, they didn't know how to laugh,  they
didn't  know what that was or  the reason for it. People, he thought, people
and  little people and littler people. Democracy's what's wanted, freedom of
opinion,  freedom of  criticism, I'll get them  all together and  tell them:
criticize! Criticize and  laugh. . . .  Yes, they would criticize. They'd do
it at length  with warmth and  ecstasy  since they'd been ordered  to do it,
they'd criticize the  inadequate supplies of  yogurt,  the  poor food in the
canteen, they'd lay into the street  cleaners with particular  relish: roads
unswept  in  donkey's years,  they'd criticize driver  Acey  for  systematic
bathhouse avoidance,  and in between they'd hurry to the latrine overhanging
the precipice. . . . No, I'll get things in a tangle that way, he thought. A
set procedure is what we want. What have I got now?
     He began writing swiftly and illegibly on the sheet:
     "Forest  Eradication Group,  Forest  Research  Group,  Forest  Military
Guard,  Assistance  to  Native  Population Group. .. ." What else was there?
Yes! "Engineering  Penetration  Group." Yes,  and  . . .  "Science  Security
Group." The lot,  apparently.  So. What  did  they all do?  Odd, I've  never
wondered up till now what they all do here. What's more, I've never wondered
what  the Directorate  does  anyway.  How is it possible to  combine  forest
eradication  with a forest  guard,  and  assist the local populations at the
same time.
     Well,  now,  he  thought.  For  a  start,  no  eradications.  Eradicate
Eradication.  Engineering Penetration too,  most likely. Or let them work up
top,  they're no use  down there, anyway. Let their machines  cope. Let them
build a good  road, let them drain that stinking bog.. ..  What's left then?
The military guard. And wolfhounds. Well, anyway . . . anyway the forest has
to  be guarded.  Only  ...  he  recalled the faces  of  the  guards  he  had
encountered and gnawed his lip  doubtfully, Mm-yes. . .  .  Well all  right,
we'll  assume  that.  But  why the  Directorate? Why  me!  Dispense with the
Directorate, eh?  He  had  a feeling  of weird  gaiety. Now  that  would  be
something,  he thought. I can do it! Disperse  it and that's it, he thought.
Who's my judge? I'm the director, the chief. One order--finish!
     Suddenly  he  heard  ponderous  footsteps  somewhere  close.  The glass
chandelier  tinkled, the drying socks swayed  on the line. Pepper  rose  and
tiptoed to the little door. Just  beyond it  someone was walking unsteadily,

as it might  be stumbling,  but nothing else could be heard and there wasn't
even a keyhole to look  through. Pepper cautiously  pulled at the handle but
the door did not yield.
     "Who's there?" he asked loudly, placing his  lips to the crack. No  one
replied but  the footsteps continued. It was  like  a drunk wandering along,
falling over his own legs. Pepper  tried the handle again, gave a shrug, and
went back to his chair.
     Anyway, power  has its advantages,  he  thought. I shan't disperse  the
Directorate,  of  course,  stupid--why  get  rid of  a ready-made  well-knit
organization? One simply  had to redirect it, turn it onto its true  course.
Stop the intrusion into the forest, intensify careful research, try to  find
points of contact, learn from it.  ... They didn't even know what the forest
was, after all. Just imagine,  a forest!  Mountains of firewood.  . .  . No,
there  was  a  lot of work  ahead. Real, important  work.  People  would  be
forthcoming, too--Kim, Stoyan . . . Rita . .. Good lord, what was wrong with
the  manager?  .  . . Alevtina. . .. Well and why not this Alas as  well, no
doubt  a good man, brains there, doing  a silly job that was all.  ... We'll
show them, he  thought cheerfully. We'll show them yet, hell! All right. How
are things going just now?
     He drew the file folder toward him. On the top sheet was written:
     DRAFT DIRECTIVE ON PROCEDURE
     1.  Over  the past year the Forest Directorate  has materially improved
its work  and attained  splendid  results in all spheres  of activity.  Many
hundreds  of  acres  of forest  territory have  been  taken  over,  studied,
eradicated, and  put under military and scientific  security. The skills  of
specialist and  worker alike show continued steady development. Organization
is being perfected, unproductive spending is being reduced, bureaucratic and
other impediments external to productivity are being eliminated.
     2. However, alongside the achievements achieved, the harmful effects of
the Second  Law  of  Thermodynamics,  as well as  the  Law  of Large Numbers
continue to be felt, thus lowering the general level of attainment. Our most
pressing task is now the elimination  of chance effects, productive of chaos
and destructive of rhythm as well as inductive of a relaxation of tempo.
     3. With reference to the above-mentioned, it is suggested in the future
that all manifestations of chance be regarded as exceptional and at variance
with  the   ideal  of   organization,  and  involvement  in  chance  effects
(probability)--as  a  criminal activity,  or,  if the involvement  in chance
effects  (probability) is  not  attended  by major  consequences--as a  most
serious breach of office and production discipline.
     4.   The   guilt   of   any   person  involved   with  chance   effects
(probabilities),  is defined and delimited by articles of the Criminal  Code
nos.  62, 64,  65  (omitting  paras.  S and  0) 113,  and  192  par.  K,  or
Administrative  Codex  12,  15  and  97.  NOTE:  The  fatal  upshot  of  any
involvement  with chance effects (probabilities) is not regarded per se as a
justifying  or  extenuating  circumstance.  Conviction, or penalty  in  this
instance, will be imposed posthumously.
     5. The present Directive promulgated .. . month .. . day . . . year. No
retroactive application.
     Signature: DIRECTOR (---------------).
     Pepper moistened his  dry lips and  turned  the page over. On  the next
sheet was an order concerning a summons for a member of the Science Security
Group,  one H. Toity, with  reference to  the Directive "On procedure," "for
malicious indulgence of the law of large numbers, to wit, sliding on the ice
with concomitant damage to the ankle  joint, which criminal involvement with
chance effects (probability) took place on March llth this year." Officer H.
Toity should be referred to in all documents henceforward as probabili-trick
Toity.
     Pepper clicked  his  teeth and glanced  at the  next sheet. This was an
order too:  the  imposition  of  administrative punishment--a fine  of  four
months pay,  posthumously--on dog-breeder G.  de Montmorency of the military

guard,  "carelessly  permitting himself  to be struck  down  by  atmospheric
discharge (lightning)." Further on were  requests for leave, requests  to do
with a  lump-sum benefit on the loss  of a breadwinner,  and  an explanatory
note from one Z. Lumbago concerning the loss of a reel. .. .
     "What  in  the  name  of!"  said  Pepper  aloud  and  reread  the draft
Directive. He began to sweat. The draft was printed on art paper with a gold
edge. I need advice from somewhere, thought  Pepper miserably, otherwise I'm
done for. . . .
     At this the  door flung open and into the study, pushing a wheeled cart
before  her,  came  Alevtina, dressed with  extreme elegance  in the  latest
fashion, and wearing a grave expression on her expertly powdered and made-up
face.
     "Your breakfast," said she in a delicate voice.
     "Close the door and come here," said Pepper. She shut the  door, pushed
the cart with her foot and, adjusting her hair, came over to Pepper.
     "Well now, ducky?" said she, smiling. "Satisfied now?"
     "Listen," said Pepper. "This is rubbish. Have a read."
     She seated  herself  on the arm  of the  chair, put her  bare  left arm
around Pepper's neck, and picked up the Directive with the bare right one.
     "Well, I know," she said. "It's all in order. What's the matter? Should
I  bring the Criminal Code  in?  The previous director  couldn't  remember a
single article either."
     "No, no, wait," said  Pepper impatiently.  "What's  the  code got to do
with it, what's that to do with it? Have you read it?"
     "Not  only read,  typed.  And  corrected  the  style.  Hausbotcher's no
writer, and he only learned to  read here. . .  . Incidentally,  ducky," she
said, solicitously, "Hausbotcher is waiting  out  there in the anteroom, see
him during breakfast,  he likes that. He'll do your sandwiches for you. .  .
."
     "I sent him packing!" said Pepper. "Just you explain to me what I ..."
     "You  shouldn't  send  Hausbotcher packing,"  put in Alevtina.  "You're
still my little ducky, you still don't know anything." She  pressed Pepper's
nose like a button. "Hausbotcher has two notepads. In one he writes who said
what--for the director--in the other he notes down what the  director  said.
Ducky, you remember that and don't go forgetting."
     "Wait," said  Pepper. "I want your  advice. That Directive .. . I'm not
signing crazy stuff like that."
     "How do you mean not?"
     "What I say. My hand won't move--to sign anything like that."
     Alevtina's face became stern.
     "Ducky," she  said. "Now don't  get  obstinate. Just  sign.  It's  very
urgent. I'll explain it all to you later, but now . . ."
     "What's there to explain?" asked Pepper.
     "Well  if you  don't  understand,  it means you need an explanation. So
that's what I'll do later."
     "No, explain  it now," Pepper  said. "If you can," he added.  "Which  I
doubt."
     "Ooh, then, my little one," said Alevtina and kissed him on the temple.
She glanced at her watch concernedly. "Well, fine, all right."
     She  shifted  her seat to the  table, placed her hands  beneath her and
began, her screwed-up eyes fixed above Pepper's head.
     "Administrative work exists as the basis of all else. This  work didn't
come into  being today or yesterday,  the  vector has its base back  in  the
depths of time. At present it is embodied in existing orders and directives.
But  it  extends  far  into  the  future  too, and there it  waits  for  its
embodiment. It's like laying a highway through a section already marked off,
where the asphalt ends and the surveyor stands with his back to the finished
section looking into his theodolite.
     "That  surveyor is you. The imaginary line traveling along the  optical
axis  of  the theodolite  is the unrealized administrative vector which only

you of all people can see and to which it is your duty to give substance. Do
you follow?"
     "No," Pepper said firmly.
     "Doesn't matter, keep listening. . . . Just as the  highway can't  turn
as it pleases to  left or right, but has to follow the  optical axis of your
theodolite,  just  so every  directive must be a continuation of  all  those
preceding  it....  Ducky, sweety, don't  probe into  it,  I don't understand
anything about it myself, but that's  good really,  because probing stirs up
doubts,  doubts make  people mark time,  and  marking time is the  death  of
administrative activity, consequently yours, mine and every. . . .
     "That's elementary. Not a single day without a Directive and everything
will  be  all right. This Directive  on procedure, now--it doesn't exist  in
vacuo, it's tied up with the preceding Directive on nonabsence, and that was
linked with  the Order on nonpregnancy, and that Order flowed logically from
the Injunction on excessive indignation, and that . . ."
     "What the  hell!"  said Pepper. "Show  me these injunctions and orders.
No, better show me the very first order, the one in the depths of time."
     "Now why do you need that?"
     "What do you  mean, 'why'? You say they stem logically. I don't believe
that!"
     "Ducky,"  said Alevtina.  "You'll see all that. I'll show you all that.
You'll read it all with your  dear  little short-sighted eyes. But  realize,
there was no directive day before yesterday and none yesterday if  you don't
count a petty little order about capturing a machine and that was by word of
mouth. . .  .  What do you think, how long can the Directorate exist without
directives? Since yesterday morning it's  all been a mix-up: some people are
walking around everywhere changing burned-out bulbs, imagine? No, ducky, you
do  as  you like, but the Directive has to be  signed. I'm on your side, you
know.  You just  sign  it  straight  off, do the  conference  with the group
leaders, tell them something encouraging, then I'll bring you everything you
want. You can read, study, probe . . . better if you don't probe though."
     Pepper took hold of  his cheeks  and  rocked his head. Alevtina briskly
jumped down from the table, dipped a pen into Venus' skull and held the stem
toward Pepper.
     "Well write, sweetie, just a quick one. . . ."
     Pepper took the pen.
     "But I'll be able to cancel the thing later?" he asked fretfully.
     "Of course, ducky, of course," said Alevtina, and Pepper knew she lied.
He hurled  the  pen away. "No," he said. "No,  never. I won't sign that. Why
the hell  should I  sign  lunacy  like that when there's  probably dozens of
sensible and useful orders, and  instructions,  absolutely essential, really
necessary in this bedlam. . . ."
     "For example?" asked Alevtina briskly.
     "Good lord. . . .  Well, anything you  like . .  . hell's  bells. Well,
what about . . ."
     Alevtina got out her notepad.
     "Well,  let's   say  ...  let's   say  an  order,"   said  Pepper  with
extraordinary bitterness,  "to  the  members of  the  Eradication  Group  to
self-eradicate  as soon as  ever possible.  Yes, indeed! Let them  all throw
themselves off  the cliff  ... or shoot  themselves . . . make it  today! In
charge--Hausbotcher. Now that really is something more useful. . . ."
     "One moment," said Alevtina. "That is,  commit suicide with the  aid of
firearms today  before twenty-four  hundred hours.  In charge--Hausbotcher."
She closed her notepad and considered. Pepper looked at her in astonishment.
"So!" she said. "It's all  right. It's  even more progressive. . . . Sweety,
understand  this: you don't like the directive--don't bother  about  it. But
issue another. That's what  you've done and I've no more to ask of you.  . .
."
     She jumped down to the floor and busied herself arranging plates before
Pepper.

     "Here's the pancakes, here's the jam. . . . Coffee in the thermos, it's
hot--watch you don't burn yourself. . . . Eat up and I'll do the draft quick
as a flash and bring it in half an hour."
     "Wait," said Pepper, stunned. "Wait. . . ."
     "Who's my clever one," said Alevtina tenderly. "You're great, only be a
bit nicer to Hausbotcher."
     "Wait," said Pepper. "What d'you think you're doing?"
     Alevtina  ran for the door,  Pepper rushed after her shouting: "Are you
crazy?" but failed to catch her. Alevtina vanished and  in her place, like a
ghost, Hausbotcher materialized  out  of emptiness. Now slicked and cleaned,
now a normal color, as before ready for anything.
     "A  stroke of  genius," he said softly, edging Pepper toward the table,
"it's brilliant. It will surely go down in history. . . ."
     Pepper recoiled as if from a giant centipede, bumped into the table and
pushed Tannhauser onto Venus.
     Chapter Eleven
     He woke  up,  opened his eyes  and  stared at the  low,  lime-encrusted
ceiling. The  ants were again heading across  it. Right to the left, loaded,
left to right, empty. A month ago it had been the other way around, a  month
ago Nava had  been here. Nothing else had changed. Day after tomorrow, we'll
go, he thought.
     The  old man  was sitting at the table  looking at him and cleaning out
his ear. The old man  had got terribly thin, his eyes were sunken, he hadn't
a tooth left. Probably he'll soon die, that old man.
     "Why  on earth is it. Dummy," said the old man tearfully, "you've not a
thing to eat. Since Nava  got  taken from you,  you've  no more food  in the
house. Not in the morning or at dinnertime, I told you: don't go, shouldn't.
Why did you go away?  Paid too  much heed to Hopalong  and  went, what  does
Hopalong know about  what's  done  and what isn't? Hopalong  doesn't realize
that,  and  his father before him  was just  as slow, his  granddad just the
same, all the Hopalong breed just the same, so they've all died, and so will
Hopalong,  no way out.  . . . Maybe  you  have  got  some food, Dummy, maybe
you've hidden it, eh? A lot  of them  do ... if you  have, get it quick, I'm
hungry, I can't do without food, I've eaten all my life, got used to it. ...
So now you've got  no Nava, Barnacle killed by a tree  as well, . . . that's
who always had a lot of food,  Barnacle! I used to get through three pots at
his place, thought it  was always low-grade stuff, nasty,  why he got killed
by a tree, likely. ... I used to tell him: shouldn't eat food like that. . .
."
     Kandid  got  up  and  searched  the  hiding  places  Nava  had  devised
throughout the house. There was no food at  all. After that he went out into
the  street, turned  left  and headed for the square, to Buster's house. The
old  man trailed along  behind, sniveling and whining. From the field  there
came  coarse  and ragged shouting: "Hey, hey,  make it gay,  left way, right
way. .  .  ."  The forest returned an echo. Every  morning, so it  seemed to
Kandid, the forest had moved closer. In fact, this wasn't so, and even if it
was, it would  hardly have been perceptible to the human  eye. The number of
deadlings in the forest, probably, had not increased, but it seemed so. Very
likely because Kandid  now  knew what  they were,  and  that he  hated them.
Whenever a dead-ling appeared  out of the forest, the cry at  once went  up:
"Dummy! Dummy!"  And he would  go  there and  destroy the deadling  with his
scalpel, swiftly, surely, with cruel enjoyment. The  whole village would run
to  view  the spectacle and invariably exclaimed in unison and covered their
faces,  when  the  terrible white scar opened  up along  the  steam-shrouded
carcass.  Little bovs no  longer teased Dummy, they were now mortally afraid
of him, ran  and hid at his approach. The scalpel  was discussed in whispers
at home in the evenings,  and by order of the resourceful elder they started
making storage bins out of deadling hides. They were good ones, too, big and

tough. . . .
     In the  middle of the  square stood Ears,  up to his waist in grass and
shrouded in lilac mist; his palms were raised, his eyes glassy and there was
foam  on  his  lips.  Around  him  crowded  curious toddlers,  listening and
watching,  open-mouthed;  this  spectacle never wearied  them.  Kandid  also
stopped to listen, and the toddlers scattered like leaves.
     "Into the  battle  new.  .  . ." burbled  Ears  in  a  metallic  voice.
"Successful movement. . . extensive areas of peace . . . new detachments  of
Maidens. . . . Calm and Amalgamation. . . ."
     Kandid  passed  on.  Since that  morning, his head had been  reasonably
clear, and he felt he  could think,  and bsgan to consider who he  was, this
Ears,  and  what  his  function  was.  There  was some  point  now  in  such
speculation,  since Kandid now knew something, and sometimes it  even seemed
that  he knew a great deal, if not everything. Every  village had its  Ears,
we've got one, New  Village has, and the old man used to brag of how special
the Ears  had  been  in the now mushroomy village. No doubt there had been a
time  when  many  people knew  what the Accession  was, and understood  what
successes were being referred to; then, very likely, they had been concerned
to inform  everybody about it,  or had assumed they were concerned, later it
dawned that a whole lot of people could perfectly well be done without, that
all  these villages were--a  mistake, the villagers no more than sheep . . .
that occurred when it was  discovered how to control the lilac mist, and the
first deadlings emerged from the lilac clouds  . . .  and the first villages
found themselves at the bottom  of the first triangular lakes . .  . and the
first detachments of Maidens appeared.  .  . . The Ears had remained and the
tradition  had  survived,  something that wasn't wiped out because they  had
simply forgotten about it. A pointless tradition, as pointless as this whole
forest,  as  all  these  artificial   monsters  and  cities,  which  spawned
destruction,    and   these    terrible   hoyden-amazons,   priestesses   of
parthenogenesis, cruel and complacent mistresses of the virus, sovereigns of
the forest, fresh-water plump . . . and this vast activity in the jungle all
these Great  Harrowings,  and  Swampings,  undertakings monstrous  in  their
absurdity. . . . His ideas flowed freely almost, even automatically, for the
last month they  had managed to carve  for themselves permanent channels and
Kandid knew in advance what emotions would spring up in him the next second.
In our  village this is  called "thinking." Here, now doubts would  come up.
... I saw nothing after all.  I  encountered three forest witches. Plenty of
strange things in the forest. I saw the destruction of a deceptive  village,
a hill resembling a factory of living creatures, hellish violence done to an
armchewer ... destruction, factory, violence. . . . Those words are mine, my
concepts. Even for Nava destruction  isn't destruction, it's the Accession .
. . but I know what the Accession is. To me  it's  terrible, revolting,  and
all because to me  it's alien, and perhaps one  should  say not "a cruel and
senseless driving of  the forest over people," but "a  systematic,  superbly
organized, precisely  thought-out  drive of  the new  against the  old,"  "a
well-timed and matured, abundantly powerful offensive of the new against the
rotten,  hopeless, old order. . . ." Not a perversion, but a revolution. The
natural order of things, a natural order I regard from the outside, with the
partial view of  a stranger who understands nothing  and  by virtue  of that
fact, imagines that he  knows it all and that he has a right to judge.  Just
like a little boy indignant at the nasty cock for trampling the poor hen.. .
.
     He  looked back  at  Ears. Ears  was  sitting  in the  grass  with  his
customary dazed look,  turning his head, endeavoring to recall who and where
he was. A living radio receiver. So, there must be living transmitters . . .
and living mechanisms and living machines, yes, the deadlings for example. .
. . Well now, why, why doesn't all this, so superbly thought-up, so superbly
organized, rouse in me a shred of sympathy--only disgust and loathing. . . .
     Buster came  up  noiselessly  behind  him and clapped  him  between the
shoulder blades.

     "Stands  there gawping, wool on  yer  nose," said  he.  "There  was one
gawped like that, they  twisted his arms and  legs off, no more gawping from
him. When are we  leaving, Dummy? How  long are you going to keep pulling my
leg? My  old woman's gone to another house, wool on  yer nose, and I've been
sleeping at the elder's  for three nights, just now I'm thinking I'll go and
spend the night  with  Barnacle's widow. The food's so rotten that even that
old stump  doesn't want to guzzle it, makes  a face, says: everything you've
got's rotten, you  can't bear  to smell it, never mind guzzle,  wool  on yer
nose. . . . Only  I'm not going to Devil's Rocks, Dummy. I'll go with you to
the City, we'll pick up some babes there. If we meet thieves we'll give them
half,  we won't  be mean, wool on yer nose, and bring the other half back to
the village, let  them live here, what  do they want floating  about  there,
there was one floated, gave her a good  'un up  the hooter, no more floating
and hates the sight of water, wool on yer  nose.  . . . Listen, Dummy, maybe
you  lied  about  the  City and  those  babes?  Or  maybe  you  were  seeing
things--the  robbers  took  Nava away from  you,  and you imagined it out of
sorrow? Hopalong there doesn't believe  it; reckons you were  seeing things.
What's  that  City in the lake, wool on yer nose, everybody said on  a hill,
not in a lake. Who can live in a lake,  wool on yer nose? We'll all drown in
there, there's water there, wool on yer nose, never mind the babes in there,
I'm not  going in even for them,  I  can't swim, and anyway  what for? Now I
could stand on the bank, while you drag them  out. . . . You'll go into  the
water  then, and I'll  stay on the bank, and we'll soon  manage it that way,
you and I. . . ."
     "Have you got yourself a stick?" asked Kandid.
     "Where can I get you a stick in the forest, wool on yer nose?" objected
Buster. "That means a trip  to the swamp, for a stick. And I've no time, I'm
hiding food  so's the old man won't guzzle it, anyway what do I  want with a
stick, I don't intend to fight anybody. . . . There was one who fought, wool
on yer nose. . . ."
     "Okay,"  said  Kandid.  "I'll get  you one myself. We  leave day  after
tomorrow. Don't forget."
     He turned and retraced  his  steps. Still the  same old Buster. None of
them  had changed.  No matter  how hard he  had tried  to  get it into their
heads, they couldn't grasp anything, and seemingly,  didn't believe  what he
said.
     Deadlings  can't  be  servants to women, you're  putting  it on  there,
Dummy, boy, three of them you couldn't drive away. Women are scared stiff of
dead-lings,  take a  look at mine,  then tell us  again.  As for the village
going under, that's the Accession happening, nobody needs you to  tell  them
that, what those women of yours have got to do with it I can't make out. . .
. Anyway, Dummy, you weren't in the City,  go on now, confess, we won't take
offense, you tell a rattling good  story. Only you haven't been in any City,
we all know that, 'cos if anyone gets to the City, they don't come back. ...
It wasn't  any women  took away your Nava, just robbers, our local ones. You
could never fight off robbers. Dummy.  Though  a man you are, of course,  of
the  bravest, and the  way  you  tackle deadlings--that's just  terrible  to
watch. . . ."
     Any idea of  approaching destruction simply couldn't enter their heads.
Destruction  was approaching  too slowly and began its advance too long ago.
Probably,  the  trouble  was that  destruction  was  a  concept linked  with
immediacy, right now, with some sort of  catastrophe.  They  were unable and
had  no  desire to  generalize,  couldn't and  wouldn't  think of the  world
outside their village. There was the village and  there  was the forest. The
forest was the more powerful, but then the forest had always been and always
would be more powerful. What had destruction to do with it? What destruction
do you  mean?  It's  just life. Now,  when a tree  crushes  somebody, that's
destruction all right, but you've just  got to use your head and  figure out
what's what. .  . . One day they'd realize. When there  were no women  left;
when  the  swamps had advanced  up  to  the house  walls; when  subterranean

springs were tapped and the lilac mist hung over the rooftops. ...  Or maybe
they wouldn't even then--just say: "Can't live here anymore--the Accession."
And go off to build a new village. . . .
     Hopalong  was  sitting before  his door, pouring ferment on  a  prop of
mushrooms that had come up during the night, and preparing to breakfast.
     "Take a seat," said he affably. "Something to eat? Good mushrooms."
     "I will," said Kandid and seated himself alongside.
     "Eat up, eat up," said Hopalong. "Now you've got no Nava, while  you're
adjusting yourself without Nava.
     I've heard you're going off  again. Who was it telling me? Ah, yes now,
it  was you yourself said to me: I'm going, so you  did. No sitting  at home
for you. Better if you did, would have been better. ...  To the Reed-beds is
it, or the Anthills? I'd go with you to the Reed-beds. You and I, we'd  turn
right down the street, pass by way of  the  scrub, we  would,  we'd stock up
with mushrooms  there  at the  same  time, we'd take along some  ferment and
eat--grand mushrooms there in the scrub, not like in the village, don't grow
anywhere else  either, but there  eat and eat, never get enough. . . .  When
we'd eaten, you and I, we'd leave the scrub, then  past Bread Fen, eat again
there--fine cereals grow there, sweet, amazing, growing on the marsh, on the
mud there and cereal's like that coming up. ... Well, after that, of course,
straight after the sun, three days  walking, and there's your Reed-beds. . .
."
     "We're going to Devil's Rocks," Kandid patiently reminded him. "Leaving
day after tomorrow. Buster's going too."
     Hopalong shook his head, dubiously. "Devil's Rocks. . . ." he repeated.
"No, Dummy, we  won't get to Devil's  Rocks, won't  get there.  Do  you know
where it is, Devil's Rocks?  Maybe  they don't even  exist, people just say:
Rocks, they say, Devilish. ... So I'm not  going  to Devil's  Rocks, I don't
believe in  them.  If it was to the City now, or the Anthills, still better,
that's  a stone's  throw from  here, right next door.  .  . . Listen, Dummy,
let's  go, you and  I, to the Anthills.  Buster'll  go too. . . . I've never
been there since the time I damaged my leg. Nava often used to beg me: let's
go, she says, Hopalong, to  the Anthills. . . . Wanted,  you  see, to have a
look  at  the  hollow  tree,  where  I hurt my leg. ...  I tell  her I don't
remember where that  hollow tree  is, and  anyway, maybe there's no Anthills
there anymore, it was long ago when I was there."
     Kandid masticated  mushroom and  regarded Hopalong. Hopalong talked and
talked  about the Reed-beds, about the Anthills, his  eyes were downcast and
he looked at Kandid  only occasionally. You're a  good  man, Hopalong, and a
kind one, a great orator, the elder takes notice of you, and Buster, and the
old  man is just terrified of you,  it  wasn't an accident that you were the
best friend and companion to  the  notable  Anger-Martyr, a man questing, an
unquiet man, one who found nothing and rotted in the forest. .  . . However,
that's the trouble: you don't  want  to let me go into the forest, Hopalong,
you pity the wretch. The forest is  a  place of  danger  and disaster, where
many have  gone and few  returned, and if they have  returned they're  badly
frightened, and, occasionally, crippled . . . one with a broken leg, another
with . . . And you pretend, Hopalong,  out of cunning either to be a halfwit
yourself or to take Dummy for one,  but really you are sure of one thing: if
Dummy has  come  back  once,  having  lost  a girl, two  such miracles can't
happen. . . .
     "Listen, Hopalong," said  Kandid. "Hear me out carefully. Say what  you
want, think what you like, but T ask one thing of you:  don't abandon me, go
into the forest with me. I shall need you very much in the forest, Hopalong,
we're setting off the day after tomorrow and I want you very much to be with
us. Do you understand?"
     Hopalong looked at Kandid and his washed-out eyes were inscrutable.
     "Surely," he said. "I understand you very well. We'll go together then.
So we go out from here, turn left, go as far  as the field, and past the two
stones, to the path. You can  tell this path straight  away, there's so many

boulders  you can break your leg.  . . .  Yes, eat them  up,  Dummy, they're
fine. ... By  this path, then we'll  get to the mushroom  village, I've told
you about that already, I think, it's empty, all grown  over with mushrooms,
not like these ones here for example, nasty ones, we won't eat them, you can
get sick or die that way. So we won't even  stop in that village we'll press
on right away  and after a time  we'll  get to Funny Village, they make pots
out of earth there, what next? That happened with them  after the blue grass
went through. Nothing happened,  no sickness  even, they just started making
their  pots out of earth. ...  We  won't stop there  either, nothing to stop
there for, we'll go sharp right from them and there's your Clay Clearing for
you."
     Perhaps I shouldn't take  you  then? thought Kandid.  You've been there
already, the forest has chewed you over, and who knows, maybe you've already
rolled  on  the ground yelling with pain and fear with a young girl standing
over you,  biting her delicious  lip, her childish littie palms outspread. I
don't know, don't know. But I've got to go. Grab one at least, two at least,
find everything  out, sort every  last  bit  out. . . . After that?  Doomed,
doomed  and wretched.  Or rather--happy and doomed,  since  they  don't know
they're  doomed,  that the  mighty of their world see  in them only a  dirty
tribe of  ravishers,  that the mighty  have  already aimed at them clouds of
controlled viruses, columns of robots, the very forest itself, that for them
everything is  preordained and--worst of all--that historical truth here, in
the forest, is not on  their side, they are relics, condemned to destruction
by objective laws, and to assist them means to go against progress, to delay
progress on  some tiny sector of the front.  Only that  doesn't interest me,
thought  Kandid. What has their progress to do with me, it's not my progress
and I  call it progress  only because there's  no other suitable word. . . .
Here the  head doesn't choose. The heart chooses. Natural  laws  are neither
good nor  bad,  they're outside morality. But I'm not! If those  Maidens had
picked  me  up,  cured  me  and showed  me  kindness, accepted me  as one of
themselves, taken pity on me--  well, then, I would probably  have taken the
side of this  progress  easily and  naturally,  and  Hopalong  and all these
villages would have been for me an exasperating survival, taking up too much
effort for too  long.  . . . But perhaps  not, perhaps it wouldn't have been
simple  and easy,  I can't stand it when people are regarded as animals. But
perhaps  it's  a  matter of  terminology,  and if I'd  learned  the  women's
language,  everything  would  have  sounded  different  to  me:  enemies  of
progress, gluttonous stupid idlers.  . .  . Ideals.  . . . Great aims. . . .
Natural  laws.  .  .  .  And  for  the  sake  of  this annihilate  half  the
inhabitants! No, that's not for me. In any language, that's not for me. What
do I  care if Hopalong is a pebble in the  millstones of their progress? And
if  I ever  manage to reach the biostation,  which I probably won't, I'll do
everything  I  can  to  stop  those  millstones.  Anyway,  if  I  reach  the
biostation. .  . . M--  yes. It's  odd,  it's never occurred to me before to
look at the Directorate from the  side. And Hopalong never dreams of looking
at the forest  from the  side.  Nor do those  Maidens, either, probably. And
it's  really a  curious  spectacle--the  Directorate,  seen from above.  All
right, I'll have a think about that later.
     "We're agreed, then," he said. "We leave day after tomorrow."
     "Surely," replied Hopalong at once. "Sharp left from me. . . ."
     A  sudden  hubbub was  heard from the  field.  Women began shrieking. A
great many voices began shouting out in unison:
     "Dummy! Dummy! Hey, Dummy!"
     Hopalong roused himself.
     "Doubtless deadlines!" said he, rising  hastily. "Come on, Dummy, don't
sit there, I want to watch."
     Kandid got up, drew the scalpel from  his blouse, and strode off to the
outskirts of the village.
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------
Last-modified: Tue, 05 Dec 2000 10:37:40 GMT

                                                

