
This page intentionally left blank 

ART HISTORY   

Art History Special Issue Book Series 
In this distinctive series, developed from the annual special issue of Art History, leading 
scholars are invited to publish new research on key issues and to reﬂect on contemporary 
concerns in the discipline. Each collection of essays takes a particular theme and the scope is 
wide: from painting and sculpture to photography and video, urban history and architecture, 
institutions, collecting, and historiography. 
Titles in the series include: 
Art and Architecture in Naples, 1266–1713: New Approaches 
Edited by Cordelia Warr and Janis Elliott 
About Mieke Bal 
Edited by Deborah Cherry 
Spectacle and Display 
Edited by Deborah Cherry and Fintan Cullen 
Location 
Edited by Deborah Cherry and Fintan Cullen 
About Stephen Bann 
Edited by Deborah Cherry 
Between Luxury and the Everyday: Decorative Arts in Eighteenth-Century France 
Edited by Katie Scott and Deborah Cherry 
Art: History: Visual: Culture 
Edited by Deborah Cherry 
Difference and Excess in Contemporary Art: The Visibility of Women’s Practice 
Edited by Gill Perry 
Tracing Architecture: The Aesthetics of Antiquarianism 
Edited by Dana Arnold and Stephen Bending 
Other Objects of Desire: Collectors and Collecting Queerly 
Edited by Michael Camille and Adrian Rifkin 
Fingering Ingres 
Edited by Susan Siegfried and Adrian Rifkin 
The Metropolis and its Image: Constructing Identities for London, c. 1750–1950 
Edited by Dana Arnold 
About Michael Baxandall 
Edited by Adrian Rifkin 
Image: Music: Text 
Edited by Marcia Pointon, Simon Miller and Paul Binski 

ART HISTORY   
CONTEMPORARY PERSPECTIVES ON METHOD   
EDITED BY   
DANA ARNOLD   

This edition ﬁrst published 2010 
Originally published as Volume 32, Issue 4 of Art History 
r 2010 Association of Art Historians 
Blackwell Publishing was acquired by John Wiley & Sons in February 2007. Blackwell’s publishing 
program has been merged with Wiley’s global Scientiﬁc, Technical, and Medical business to form 
Wiley-Blackwell. 
Registered Ofﬁce 
John Wiley & Sons Ltd, The Atrium, Southern Gate, Chichester, West Sussex, PO19 8SQ, United Kingdom 
Editorial Ofﬁces 
350 Main Street, Malden, MA 02148-5020, USA 
9600 Garsington Road, Oxford, OX4 2DQ, UK 
The Atrium, Southern Gate, Chichester, West Sussex, PO19 8SQ, UK 
For details of our global editorial ofﬁces, for customer services, and for information about how to apply 
for permission to reuse the copyright material in this book please see our website at www.wiley.com/ 
wiley-blackwell. 
The right of Dana Arnold to be identiﬁed as the author of the editorial material in this work has been 
asserted in accordance with the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988. 
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or 
transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise, 
except as permitted by the UK Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988, without the prior permission of 
the publisher. 
Wiley also publishes its books in a variety of electronic formats. Some content that appears in print may 
not be available in electronic books. 
Designations used by companies to distinguish their products are often claimed as trademarks. All brand 
names and product names used in this book are trade names, service marks, trademarks or registered 
trademarks of their respective owners. The publisher is not associated with any product or vendor 
mentioned in this book. This publication is designed to provide accurate and authoritative information 
in regard to the subject matter covered. It is sold on the understanding that the publisher is not engaged 
in rendering professional services. If professional advice or other expert assistance is required, the 
services of a competent professional should be sought. 
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 
Art history : contemporary perspectives on method / edited by Dana Arnold. 
p. cm.—(Art history special issues)   
‘‘Originally published as Volume 32, Issue 4 of Art History.’’   
Includes bibliographical references and index.   
ISBN 978-1-4443-3359-6 (pbk.: alk. paper) 1. Art—Historiography. I.   
Arnold, Dana. II. Art history.   
N7480.A773 2010   
707.2’2—dc22   
2010009540 
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library. 
Set in 10/12pt SwiftEF-Regular by Macmillan India Ltd., Bangalore, India 
Printed in Singapore 
01 2010 

CONTENTS 
Notes on contributors   
vi   
1   Art history: Contemporary perspectives on method 
1   
Dana Arnold 
2   Sexing the canvas 
8   
Nicholas Chare 
3   Phenomenology and interpretation beyond the ﬂesh 
34   
Amanda Boetzkes 
4   Surveying contemporary art: Post-war, postmodern, 
56   
and then what?   
Dan Karlholm 
5   Michel Foucault and the point of painting 
78   
Catherine M. Soussloff 
6   Karl Mannheim and Alois Riegl: From art history to the 
99   
sociology of culture   
Jeremy Tanner 
7   Art ﬁction 
129   
H. Perry Chapman 
8   Dancing years, or writing as a way out 
150   
Adrian Rifkin 
Index   
165   
v 

NOTES ON CONTRIBUTORS   
Dana Arnold is Professor of Architectural History at the University of South­
ampton UK. 
She was editor of Art History 1997–2002 and now edits the book 
series New Interventions in Art History; Companions to Art History and Anthologies in Art 
History, all published by Wiley-Blackwell. She is the author of the bestselling Art 
History: A Very Short Introduction (2004) together with Rural Urbanism: London Land­
scapes in the Early Nineteenth Century (2006); Reading Architectural History (2002); Re­
presenting the Metropolis: Architecture, Urban Experience and Social Life in London 1800– 
1840 (2000). Her recent edited and co-edited volumes include: Biographies and Space 
(2007); Rethinking Architectural Historiography (2006); Architecture as Experience (2004); 
Cultural Identities and the Aesthetics of Britishness (2004); Art and Thought (2003). She 
has held research fellowships at Yale University; the University of Cambridge and 
the Getty Research Institute, Los Angeles and numerous visiting Professorships. 
Amanda Boetzkes is Assistant Professor in the Department of Art and Design at 
the University of Alberta, Canada. She recently completed a postdoctoral fellow­
ship in the Department of History of Art and Architecture at Harvard University. 
Her upcoming book The Ethics of Earth Art (University of Minnesota Press, 2010) 
discusses the aesthetics and ethics of ecology as these are carried out in art from 
the late 1960s to the present. She has published in the journal Reconstruction: 
Studies in Contemporary Culture and RACAR (Revue d’art canadien/Canadian Art 
Review). Her current research focuses on the topic of waste, consumption and 
contemporary art. 
H. Perry Chapman, Professor of Art History at the University of Delaware, was 
editor-in-chief of The Art Bulletin from 2000 to 2004. She is the author of 
Rembrandt’s Self-Portraits: A Study in Seventeenth-Century Identity and co-author of 
the exhibition catalogue Jan Steen: Painter and Storyteller, as well as articles on 
Dutch painting, art theory and artistic identity. She is co-editor (with Joanna 
Woodall) of The Artist in the Early Modern Netherlands (forthcoming). Her work has 
been supported by the Guggenheim Foundation, Center for Advanced Study in 
the Visual Arts, and National Endowment for the Humanities. 
Nicholas Chare is currently a Leverhulme Research Fellow at the Department of 
History of Art and Architecture, University of Reading. He is a former editor of the 
journal Parallax. His recent publications include articles in Angelaki, Convergence, 
Cultural Critique, Southern Review: Communication, Politics and Culture, and  The Year’s 
Work in Critical and Cultural Theory. 
vi 

N O T E S  O N  C O N T R I B U T O R S  
Dan Karlholm is Professor of Art History at So¨derto¨rn University, Stockholm, 
Sweden. He is the author of Art of Illusion: The Representation of Art History in 
Nineteenth-Century Germany and Beyond (Bern, 2004). His current research project 
investigates the establishment and gradual dissolution of Internet art as a 
subversive tactic and aspect of contemporary art in general since the mid-1990s. 
The present chapter is part of a future project on the genealogy of contemporary 
art. 
Adrian Rifkin is a professor of Art Writing at Goldsmiths College, London, and is 
author of Ingres Then, and Now (Routledge, 2000) as well as a former editor of Art 
History. His article ‘Apart from sex’, on the seeing of sex in Andres Serrano, gay 
internet photography and Victor Burgin’s early conceptual work, appeared in the 
Journal of Visual Culture in 2009, and he has been writing a number of short pieces 
on artists including Vivienne Koorland, for the Freud Museum, and Susan Pui San 
Lok for Film and Video Umbrella. 
Catherine M. Soussloff is Professor and Head of the Department of Art History, 
Visual Arts, and Theory at the University of British Columbia, Vancouver, Canada. 
Her books include: The Subject in Art: Portraiture and the Birth of the Modern (Duke, 
2006); The Absolute Artist: The Historiography of a Concept (Minnesota, 1997); Editing the 
Image: Strategies in the Production and Reception of the Visual (with Mark Cheetham 
and Elizabeth Legge, Toronto, 2008) and Jewish Identity in Modern Art History 
(California, 1999). She is the author of essays and articles that address the 
historiography of art history and visual culture, performance studies, and early 
modern European art and theory. 
Jeremy Tanner is Reader in Classical and Comparative Art at the Institute of 
Archaeology, University College London. His publications include: The Sociology of 
Art: A Reader (Routledge, 2003); The Invention of Art History in Ancient Greece: Religion, 
Society and Artistic Rationalisation (Cambridge University Press, 2006); and Art’s 
Agency and Art History, co-edited with Robin Osborne (Blackwell, 2007). 
vii 

I N T R O D U C T I O N  
1 Unknown photographer, Maria Bueno, c. 1962. 

1   
ART HISTORY: CONTEMPORARY   
PERSPECTIVES ON METHOD   
D A N A  A R N O L D  
The historiography of art history has been a potent theme in the discourses of the 
discipline of the last thirty years. And the approaches and methods in the study of 
the visual are probably more varied, and more vigorously debated, than in any 
other area of historical enquiry. This is so much so that the interest in the practice 
and history of the history of art history has at times appeared to be equal to 
object-based study and it is arguable that this now forms part of the archive of the 
discipline. There is of course no doubt that since the inception of art history as a 
ﬁeld of academic study, works of art have been ‘read’ in a variety of ways. These 
different modes of description and interpretation inscribe meaning in to art and 
it is here that art and its history are perhaps most intricately linked. 
The interest in historiography and method is manifest in a broad spectrum of 
the literature of art history from the general introduction or survey to the highly 
focused academic monograph. At points art history and the history of art history 
become so closely intertwined as to be almost indistinguishable. This is evident 
for instance in surveys of art history that are at once general introductions which 
aim to explain what art is and how it has been written about.1 These studies 
present overviews of the different ways art histories have been written, covering 
such large topics as Hegelianism, Marxism and post-colonialism as well as the 
inﬂuence of the work of individual historians. But a common theme in these 
analyses and explanations of art and its history is the effect that a chosen method 
of enquiry has on the objects themselves and on the subjects of art history. In 
other words the ways in which the methods used deﬁne the artwork. The study of 
the historiography of art history has also occasioned several anthologies of key 
writings taken from a broad historical sweep.2 Here the authentic voices of art 
history whether it be Giorgio Vasari’s biographical narratives, Jacob Burckhardt’s 
historical observations, or Johann Joachim Winckelmann’s reﬂections on the 
cultural context of art speak for themselves, albeit annotated and truncated by 
the deft hand of the volume editor. Needless to say, art historians have also added 
to this body of literature in the form of both collections of newly commissioned 
sets of essays and monographs.3 At least from Vasari, if not before, the concept of 
the artist as genius continues to be a mainstay of art historical enquiry. And the 
debates around authorship, authenticity and how biographies determine our 
understanding of the myth of the artist remain live. An equally important theme 
is the organization of symbolic form and the processes through which the visual 
1 

A R T  H I S T O R Y:  C O N T E M P O R A R Y  P E R S P E C T I V E S  O N  M E T H O D  
world has been, and continues to be, systematized and homogenized into a uniﬁed 
ﬁeld of enquiry – art history – and the ways in which art can in fact resist these 
pressures. This line of enquiry follows the development of art history as an 
academic discipline in Germany in the late nineteenth and early twentieth 
centuries in the work of historians such as Panofsky, Warburg, Riegl and Benjamin 
through to the engagement with structuralist and post-structuralist thought. 
The chapters in this volume aim to respond in a range of ways to these various 
patterns in and approaches to the discipline of art history as they are manifest 
across the scholarship of all periods over the last thirty years. There are points of 
contact and common themes across the chapters as they examine the impact and 
inﬂuence of a given approach on the formulation of histories of art alongside its 
intellectual consequences. A central concern in the volume is how these issues in 
turn raise questions to do with our preoccupation with authorship, authenticity 
and chronologically deﬁned linear progression, all of which have informed the 
canon of art history but which may be only one way of looking at, analysing and 
historicizing art. Of particular interest is what is lost or left out through these 
methods of historical enquiry and the points of contact and convergence with 
other methodologies. In addition, the porosity between art history and other 
related disciplines is brought to the fore and in turn how the archive of the 
discipline has changed over time. We now see the link between cognate ﬁelds 
such as philosophy, sociology, anthropology and art history as a given, and a 
signiﬁcant number of recently published studies of these trans-disciplinary 
trends conﬁrm this.4 Together the chapters combine to present a cross-section of 
art history and offer timely new perspectives on method. 
A central concern is the emergence of how other kinds of histories – social 
histories of art, feminist art history, queer art history – differ from and interact 
with the writing on art history at the moment when it emerged as a discipline 
during the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. Speciﬁc attention is 
paid to the bias towards a male interpretation of the subject, which it is 
argued leaves its trace in feminist art history through the binary categories of 
gender. Our bodily experience of artworks and the effect this has on art 
history is also re-evaluated, and this takes us back to one of the fundamental art-
historical problems, the complex business of turning visual phenomena into 
verbal history. The result of this process is the establishment of canonical subjects 
for art history and the notion of linear progression as these are placed in 
chronological order to provide stepping stones across the temporal spread of the 
discipline. Here the limits of chronology and with it our expectations of progress 
are reviewed. 
The role of Germany as a locus for the beginnings of art history is also 
revisited, and the effects and reception of the intellectual diaspora that spread 
from there in the middle years of the twentieth century. The idea of the trans-
disciplinary nature of art history is again a common theme across the chapters 
and this extends beyond art history’s relationship to philosophy and sociology to 
investigate the ways the narratives of artists’ lives become subjects of ﬁction, both 
literary and ﬁlmic, and ﬁnally how the intertwining of the biography of the 
historian and his/her subject object produces discourse. 
In the opening chapter, Nick Chare works to destabilize the ways in which our 
categories and taxonomies of art are tacitly based on heterosexual discourse. 
2 

A R T  H I S T O R Y:  C O N T E M P O R A R Y  P E R S P E C T I V E S  O N  M E T H O D  
Gender is deﬁned as a social construct – in this it is unlike sex, which is biolo­
gically determined – and the implications of this established position within art 
history are worked out for the discipline. The gendered nature of art-historical 
discourse is here undermined in order to disturb our habitual acceptance of male/ 
female binaries. Chare demonstrates how the discourses of art history are often 
complicit with biological and philosophical ‘Old Master narratives’ of sexual 
difference, and explores the various ways this complicity has been challenged 
over the past thirty years. He considers how concepts of gender have enabled art 
historians to expose the ways in which both art and art history have contributed 
to the cultural construction of identity. This growing interest in sexuality has 
encouraged some art historians to displace the predominantly heterosexual 
framework that has characterized the discipline’s understanding of difference. 
Through his case studies Chare demonstrates how some of these gendered 
approaches to art history have proved problematic and may actually have inhib­
ited our understanding of visual cultures of the past. For instance, the Venus of 
Willendorf is usually interpreted as a representation of a Mother Goddess, but 
Chare suggests that this relies upon a cognitive style that would have been alien 
to any prehistoric beholder. Chare argues that such an interpretation actually 
reveals more about the sexual politics of the late twentieth century than about 
any possible gender relations in the Upper Palaeolithic period. He goes on to 
consider the representation of sexual difference in art and how ideas about 
gender have historically been articulated and reproduced through speciﬁc media 
and techniques. There has been much scholarship on the ways in which both the 
spaces of production and reception and the subject matter of artworks at given 
historical moments have functioned to reinforce or subvert norms of femininity 
and masculinity, but less research has been devoted to how different media and 
techniques enact sexual difference. Chare shows how unstable these binary 
categories of male/female can be by examining the ways in which the gendering 
of the materials and modes of making art have contributed signiﬁcantly to the 
construction or deconstruction of sexual difference. 
The object–viewer relationship and the physicality of both the art work and 
onlooker is analysed in a very different way by Amanda Boetzkes. She moves our 
attention towards a consideration of the role of phenomenological interpretation 
in art history, speciﬁcally how one’s encounter with an artwork calls embodied 
experience into question. Particularly since the 1960s, when Maurice Merleau­
Ponty’s Phenomenology of Perception (1945) and The Visible and the Invisible (1959) had 
a substantial inﬂuence on artists, critics and art historians, the issue of 
embodiment has centred not purely on embodied perception, but speciﬁcally 
on the extent to which the spectator perceives from a state of quasi-immersion in 
the artwork. She investigates how our bodily experience in relation to the artwork 
can in fact operate to conﬁrm and reproduce our expectations of it, and so 
produce a ﬁction of the object, providing distance rather than engagement with 
it. In this way the chapter calls into question our acceptance of phenomenological 
approaches in the study of artworks. Boetzkes argues that, as the validity and 
possibilities of phenomenology as an art-historical method are reconsidered, we 
must take on board the fact that not only are our interpretations of art informed 
by our embodied condition, but, even more strongly, that this condition exter­
iorizes the subject and denaturalizes our perspective rather than afﬁrming it. 
3 

A R T  H I S T O R Y:  C O N T E M P O R A R Y  P E R S P E C T I V E S  O N  M E T H O D  
Using examples from contemporary art, postminimalist sculpture, and 
installation art, Boetzkes explores the ethical questions surrounding our 
phenomenological approach to art-historical interpretation. Through her inves­
tigation of the notions of embodiment, intentionality, and modes of confronta­
tion, Boetzkes suggests that phenomenology not only mediates a trenchant 
understanding of the perceptual experience of the artwork, but that it is predi­
cated on an acknowledgement of the resistance of art to interpretation. In this 
way, phenomenology demands a recognition of the ethical dimension of aesthetic 
experience. This ethical dimension is potentially of crucial importance to the 
writing of art history, as it calls into question a predetermined history of repre­
sentation by shifting our focus to the immediacy of the work of art. 
In Dan Karlholm’s chapter, our understanding of chronology as a standard tool in 
the writing of Art Histories comes under scrutiny. Karlhom examines a widespread 
and inﬂuential art-historical genre, the survey text, and concentrates on how the 
‘contemporary’ has been absorbed into this form of narrative since the early 1980s. 
He is mainly concerned with the uses of language and the problems of classiﬁcation 
and periodization in the writing of these large-scale and broadly ranging art histories. 
Karlholm focuses on the accounts given in a series of survey texts of two conceptual 
artists, Joseph Beuys and Cindy Sherman, and forges links between contemporary art 
of recent decades and philosophical constructions of the contemporary in the 
nineteenth century. In this way Karlholm questions our established notions of 
chronology and sequence in art history. He proposes instead the idea of co-existing 
temporalities for art that run contrary to these accepted norms. 
Karlholm’s chapter opens up debate about the function of a genre which, by 
deﬁnition, presumes the existence of a continuing story of art that has a linear 
direction and no end point. At the crux of his argument is the theoretical under­
standing of art, prevalent in recent decades, that has privileged the context and 
institutions of art over the artwork and artist. This prompts Karlholm to question 
ﬁrst of all how we should engage with this way of thinking about the art of the last 
thirty years. Secondly he asks what methods we should use to incorporate the 
notion of the contemporary into our chronological, object-based, histories. 
Another aspect of how we write about art is examined in the concluding pages 
of Catherine M. Soussloff’s chapter in which she reﬂects on the relationship 
between art history and visual studies. Soussloff concentrates on Michel Foucault, 
but shifts attention away from Foucault’s acknowledged role as one of the 
founders of the ﬁeld of visual studies to ask what happens if we consider him as 
an art historian. This question is explored with speciﬁc reference to the four 
essays Foucault wrote between the years 1965 and 1975, addressing the impor­
tance of high art, its history, and its episteme, through the medium of easel 
painting. Soussloff demonstrates how Foucault used painting to address technical 
and theoretical matters of signiﬁcance to art history and theory. Many of the 
themes raised connect with the concerns of the chapters in this volume: for 
instance, the nature of the medium of painting, and with it the role of light, shade 
and colour; the meaning of representation and resemblance in Western art; the 
relationship between word and image; and the effects of photography on painting. 
Soussloff goes on to argue that Foucault’s choice of painting, rather than 
another medium, is signiﬁcant in his exploration of its history, or, rather, in his 
own terms, its archaeology. For Foucault this archaeology of painting is not about 
4 

A R T  H I S T O R Y:  C O N T E M P O R A R Y  P E R S P E C T I V E S  O N  M E T H O D  
intentionality but is instead about the discursive practice that is embodied in 
techniques and effects. Foucault shared this understanding of the history of 
painting with his contemporaries, including Hubert Damisch, and the writing 
they produced differed signiﬁcantly from the phenomenological approaches 
found in mid-twentieth-century writings on art by the philosophers Jean-Paul 
Sartre and Merleau-Ponty. While Foucault accepted the primacy of painting in the 
visual arts, as Merleau-Ponty and Sartre had, unlike them he turned to earlier, 
Renaissance theories of painting in rejecting a phenomenological approach. 
Jeremy Tanner turns our attention to Karl Mannheim, as he says a somewhat 
forgotten ﬁgure by both sociologists and art historians. Mannheim’s ambiguous 
role in the history of art history is outlined by Tanner. On the one hand, he has 
been characterized as a secondary player in the development of iconology and 
iconography for which Mannheim’s contemporary Erwin Panofsky is better 
known. On the other hand, and less positively, Mannheim was the focus of both 
Karl Popper’s and Ernst Gombrich’s rage as an ‘enemy of reason’. Tanner takes a 
more afﬁrmative view of Mannheim and explores how he and Erwin Panofsky 
used Alois Riegl’s concept of Kunstwollen as a common point of departure in the 
development of their theories of cultural appropriation. The very different 
readings and uses of Riegl by the two thnkers as they grappled with the problem 
of how to construct feasible histories of the visual is closely mapped by Tanner. He 
shows how the sociological appropriation and transformation of the concept of 
Kunstwollen was central to the development of Mannheim’s sociology of knowl­
edge, and in particular to the analysis of ‘styles of thought’ in his classic study 
Conservative Thought (1927). 
The journey that Tanner takes us on in his analysis of Mannheim passes 
through the early years of art history as an academic discipline in Germany during 
the opening decades of the twentieth century. The repositioning of Mannheim in 
the group of writers who set out the parameters of the discipline at this time allows 
Tanner to offer a new conﬁguration of the relationships between them. In this way, 
connections we do not regularly make become apparent between Mannheim and, 
for instance, Walter Benjamin and Wilhelm Dilthey. And the resonance of 
Mannheim’s thinking is traced forward by Tanner into the work of Foucault, 
Bourdieu and Baxandall. The academic diaspora occasioned by the rise of Nazism in 
Germany is also unravelled by Tanner, and here he makes particular reference to 
the limited reception of Mannheim’s synthesis of sociology and art history as 
interpreted in the intellectual context of early post-war Britain. 
The biographical trace receives very different treatment in H. Perry 
Chapman’s consideration of three recent novels that ﬁctionalize early modern 
Netherlandish painters and paintings. These are Tracy Chevalier’s Girl with a Pearl 
Earring (1999); Susan Vreeland’s Girl in Hyacinth Blue (1999) and Michael Frayn’s 
Headlong (1999). Chapman argues that ﬁction about art elucidates a form of art 
history that runs in parallel with the more traditional loci of the academy and the 
museum, but which also rests outside these powerful and coercive institutions. 
This enables her to examine how such ﬁctionalizations operate as mirrors to our 
own practices as art historians. The novels focus on paintings of life in ordinary 
domestic settings and use similar narrative techniques as artists such as Vermeer 
and Bruegel in order to make these everyday scenes appear extraordinary. 
Chapman argues that each of these books both exploits and challenges recent 
5 

A R T  H I S T O R Y:  C O N T E M P O R A R Y  P E R S P E C T I V E S  O N  M E T H O D  
trends in art-historical method. For instance Chevalier responds to the emphasis 
of the social history of art on economics and cultural context in preference to the 
artist. Vreeland and Frayn both take on board reception theory that privileges the 
viewer’s response to the artwork and so moves attention away from the artist. 
Chapman uses this fact to critique the tendency in visual studies and material 
culture to downgrade the status of both artist and work. Through her discussion 
of art ﬁction she argues against this tendency, exploring the unfamiliar idea that, 
however determinedly we downplay the role of the artist as author/creator, 
images continue to have a vital impact on humankind. 
The multifaceted nature of art history is explored further by Adrian Rifkin in a 
discussion which delves forcefully into the discontinuities and diversity of the 
discipline. Rifkin argues that the strength of art history is rooted in what he sees as 
its constitutive irrationality, precisely the quality in art that ultimately prompts us 
to speak about art, or to speak through and with it, and to desire art in the ﬁrst 
place. For Rifkin, art history as an academic subject encompasses such a vast archive 
and broad spectrum of knowledge that it can sustain scholarship that ranges from 
Aby Warburg to Bernard Berenson, Griselda Pollock to Herbert Read. The relation­
ship between these various modes of art history is complex and, he argues, some­
times unexpected. These considerations lead Rifkin to reﬂect on his own work, 
especially the notion of a ﬁnished piece of writing. For Rifkin, articulating the 
almost inﬁnite possibilities of meaning and interpretation in art history helps him 
to understand the reasons why he can never think of a piece of work as complete 
and what this implies for the project of the discipline and for its capacity to help us 
understand and think about the world that art and its commentaries can offer us. 
My ambition in this volume has been to try to refocus attention on contem­
porary views on method in a series of newly commissioned chapters. The range of 
subjects and the ways in which the authors chose to frame their arguments are 
representative of the breadth, complexity and ultimately the richness of the disci­
pline. The format of the edited volume is also important here. Rather than trying to 
put together a monograph by many hands I instead wanted, in editing the volume, 
to explore and exploit the diversity of the subject matter, methods of writing, and 
ways of expressing the authorial voice possible in art history writing. In this way, 
Contemporary Perspectives on Method offers a picaresque journey through the 
discipline of art history, which I hope is as thought provoking as it is inconclusive. 
Notes 
A volume such as this is the product of the hard work of many for which it is easy 
for the editor to receive too much credit. First of all I would like to thank the David 
Peters Corbett for giving me the opportunity to return to Art History and guest edit 
this review of the discipline as it has evolved over the thirty years of the journal’s 
existence. This would not have been possible without the contributors, all of whom 
stepped up to the plate to provide me with a fascinating set of chapters that are as 
intellectually rigorous as they are original and incisive. I am also grateful to my 
editorial assistant Karen Fielder whose organizational and technical skills have 
been invaluable assets to this project and to Sam Bibby for his help in preparing 
and designing both the journal and book versions of this volume. Any lapses and 
shortcomings in this collection remain my own responsibility. 
6 

A R T  H I S T O R Y:  C O N T E M P O R A R Y  P E R S P E C T I V E S  O N  M E T H O D  
1   See inter alia Michael Hatt and Charlotte Klonk, 
Art History: A Critical Introduction to its Methods, 
Manchester, 2006, which surveys approaches 
from Hegel to post-colonialism again with an 
undergraduate audience in mind. Similarly, 
Vernon Hyde Minor, Art History’s History, Engle­
wood Cliffs, NJ, 2000, and Laurie Schneider 
Adams, The Methodologies of Art: An Introduction, 
Boulder, CO, 1996 are both aimed speciﬁcally at 
undergraduates in the United States. My own Art 
History: A Very Short Introduction, Oxford, 2004, 
attempts to explore thematically the different 
ways in which art has been written about, 
historicized and presented in galleries and 
exhibitions. 
2   Eric Fernie, Art History and its Methods, London, 
1995; Steven Edwards, ed., Art and its Histories: A 
Reader, New Haven, CT and London, 1996. 
3   See, for instance, Karen Lang, Chaos and Cosmos: 
On the Image in Aesthetics and Art History, Ithaca, 
NY, 2006; Catherine M. Soussloff, The Absolute 
Artist: The Historiography of a Concept, Minneapolis, 
MN, 1997; Patricia Lee Rubin, Giorgio Vasari: Art 
and History, New Haven, CT and London, 1995; 
Mark A. Cheetham, Michael Ann Holly and Keith 
Moxey, eds, The Subjects of Art and History: Historical 
Objects in Contemporary Perspectives, Cambridge, 
1998. 
4   See, for instance, my book series ‘New Interventions 
in Art History’ that explicitly aims to explore the 
interaction between art history and other disci­
plines, and my complementary series ‘Companions 
to Art History’ and ‘Anthologies in Art History’, 
both of which aim to include historiographical and 
methodological aspects of the discipline. All of the 
above are published by Wiley-Blackwell. 
7 

S E X I N G  T H E  C A N VA S  
1 Anonymous, Venus of Willendorf, c. 25,000 BCE. Oolitic limestone, 11.1 cm (height). Vienna: 
Naturhistorisches museum. Photo: r Photo SCALA, Florence. 
8 

2   
SEXING THE CANVAS   
N I C H O L A S  C H A R E  
Painting women on to a male-primed and outlined canvas palls as quickly as painting by 
numbers as an excitement-generating activity.1 
Frances Heidensohn, 1992 
O U T  O F  TO U C H  
The origins of art are to be found in male fantasy, speciﬁcally in the ancient 
reveries of the Aurignacian men of the Upper Palaeolithic period.2 In idle 
moments these hunter gatherers engaged in daydreams about ‘the sight of a 
nice edible reindeer or the touching of a nice rounded pair of buttocks’ and were 
then ‘led by the strength of such fantasies to scratch silhouettes of animals on 
pieces of rock and to form stone into the resemblance of female bodies’.3 At least 
this is what was suggested in the inaugural issue of Art History in 1978 in an 
article, ‘The Origins of Art,’ co-authored by Desmond Collins and John Onians. The 
essay puts forward the argument that early animal imagery emerges out of 
hunger and the desire to hunt, and that representations of the female form such 
as the Venus of Willendorf should be understood as evincing a prehistoric interest 
in love-making (plate 1).4 
The evidence provided for the latter assertion is that the areas of the Willendorf 
ﬁgurine’s ‘body which are shown in all their rounded perfection are precisely those 
which would be most important in the preliminary phases of love-making, that is 
the belly, buttocks, thighs, breasts and shoulders, while the lower legs, lower arms, 
feet and hands are withered to nothing’.5 Figures from the period are ‘shown 
either in the round or in high relief and so respond to the palm of the hand in 
much the same way as would the buttocks and breasts of a real woman’.6 The likely 
identity of the fabricators of these hand jobs are, it is suggested, ‘adolescent, or 
adult males’.7 In this interpretation, the Venus of Willendorf is perceived as a 
prehistoric equivalent to modern and contemporary glamour models. She is envi­
saged as the ancient antecedent of the Playboy playmate, a plastic form created to 
embody erotic daydreams and sate sexual urges. 
The reading of the Venus of Willendorf provided by Collins and Onians 
certainly contains strong elements of fantasy. The desire to see woman as a passive 
presence in prehistory is so great that they amputate the Willendorf Venus in their 
interpretation, withering her limbs to nothing. This description ignores the reality 
9 

S E X I N G  T H E  C A N VA S  
of the ﬁgurine’s carefully carved arms, the hands held against her bosom, the 
individually sculpted ﬁngers. The male hands that craft art’s origins cannot be seen 
to give woman her own grip in prehistory. 
For Collins and Onians, men were initially stimulated to make ﬁgurative 
imagery because they developed a ‘faculty of projection’.8 This enabled 
our male ancestors of 30,000 years ago to ‘have imagined female genitals 
warming to their ﬁnger tips as they touched pieces of limestone or have visua­
lized a running horse as they looked at a broken rock’.9 It is a more recent 
employment of the faculty of projection that allows Collins and Onians to paint 
what is, in many ways, a stultifying picture of prehistory. Their interpretations of 
the past carry particular assumptions about gender and sexuality. The X-rated 
reading of ﬁgurines they provide, for example, only makes sense if nakedness is 
taken to be a sign of eroticism.10 As Sarah M. Nelson suggests, however, there are a 
number of possible reasons that could account for it in ﬁgurines. The women of 
prehistory may ‘have been usually unclothed inside the cave or hut, so that 
nakedness was not a special condition’ or the sculptures ‘could have been 
teaching devices for girls’ puberty rites’.11 This latter interpretation is developed 
by Catherine McCoid and LeRoy D. McDermott in their article ‘Toward Decolo­
nizing Gender’, in which they suggest that ﬁgurines such as the Venus of Will­
endorf can be seen as ‘a form of self-representation by women’.12 The plastic 
images, they say, were created to play a didactic function in relation to feminine 
health and hygiene.13 
Collins and Onians also presume that sexual desire in prehistory is predo­
minantly heterosexual. The existence of a perceived carved stone phallus is 
acknowledged in the article but it is implied that it is made by a man for 
males, for reasons unknown. The notion that a stone phallus could have been 
made by a woman as an expression of her desire or by a man as an expression of 
his is not countenanced. Those carvings which are interpreted unquestioningly as 
stone vulvas are, however, explicitly perceived to be erotic objects created by 
14
men. 
‘The Origins of Art’ constructs a particular vision of gender. It is one in 
which men are associated with culture whilst women are aligned with nature. 
Collins and Onians fantasize the role of prehistoric woman to be that of ‘play­
mate’ for the men who hunt and create. A very different vision of prehistory 
was, however, also being offered in the late 1970s by the archaeologist 
Marija Gimbutas. It is to that image of the past that Collins and Onians are 
responding when they explicitly challenge the idea that the mass of imagery of 
the female form represents evidence of a fertility cult.15 The three scholars join in 
deploying history for what Ludmilla Jordanova has called ‘openly manipulative 
ends’.16 
Gimbutas argued that it was possible to see continuity between ﬁgurines of 
the Upper Palaeolithic period and those of the Neolithic. Her research focused 
primarily on Neolithic ﬁgurines fabricated between 6500 and 3500 BCE in the 
region she called Old Europe.17 She suggested, however, that the origins of these 
later carvings were to be found in the earlier Venuses.18 Gimbutas explained that 
‘the Palaeolithic motif of a pregnant woman with her hands on her abdomen 
continues into the Neolithic’.19 This means, in Lucy Lippard’s words, that it ‘is 
possible that Old Europe was heir to Palaeolithic goddess religions’.20 For Gimbutas, 
10 

S E X I N G  T H E  C A N VA S  
the ﬁgurines of women provided evidence for a culture which venerated a mother 
goddess. This goddess was one of regeneration. She gave life and promoted fertility. 
The carvings, with their large breasts and stomachs symbolizing fecundity, were 
created for a ritual purpose to be used as part of communal worship. 
The work of Gimbutas had a great inﬂuence upon second-wave feminism. 
Lippard explains that with ‘the rise of the new feminism in the late 1960s, 
women’s longing for a history and mythology of our own found an outlet in a 
revisionist view of prehistoric matriarchies’.21 Gimbutas used the past ‘as an 
historical authority for contemporary efforts to secure gender equality (or 
superiority) in spiritual and social domains’.22 Collins and Onians, by contrast, 
used the past to reassert gender inequalities. Both these approaches reveal that 
historiography has often not been gender neutral in relation to its representation 
of prehistory. 
The facts of prehistoric artefacts have been ‘not so much found as constructed 
by the kinds of questions which the investigator asks of [them]’.23 This can be said 
of all practices of archaeology and of art history. The questions produced from 
within such discourses hold speciﬁc, historically contingent, ideas about gender. 
Theresa de Lauretis has argued that gender ‘is the product of various social 
technologies . . . and of institutionalized discourses, epistemologies, and critical 
practices, as well as practices of daily life.’24 The histories provided by Collins, 
Onians and Gimbutas form such social technologies, reﬂecting and reproducing 
them by way of particular representations of a past culture. 
The argument that follows, beginning with the example of prehistory, seeks to 
analyse how particular discourses about gender have governed the kinds of ques­
tions that can be asked of artworks of the past. It will suggest that on occasion an 
overemphasis on gender as an issue has acted to impede historical understanding. 
It will also argue, however, that the study of gender could potentially offer greater 
insights into the signiﬁcance of past artworks if it moved beyond a limited concern 
with a work’s obvious subject matter to engage with the import of its medium and/ 
or technique. Medium is never gender neutral. Both the artist’s and the art 
historian’s relationship to the substances out of which art objects are crafted is, and 
probably always has been, mediated by values and assumptions about the sexes. 
These beliefs are often disavowed and unacknowledged in the writing of art history, 
yet have held prominence for artists and critics in the past and continue to inﬂu­
ence attitudes towards artistic media today. 
I N  T O U C H  
In the study of prehistoric culture, questions governed by issues of gender are 
not necessarily the most productive ones to pose if we wish to further our 
understanding of the period. Collins and Onians fragment the female body into a 
set of delectable parts on hand for (prehistoric) man to appraise and appreciate. 
This interpretation seems to manifest the ‘obsessive, unreasonable nature of 
physical desire’ that Kenneth Clark describes as having sought ‘relief in images’ 
from earliest times.25 The notion, however, that the oolitic limestone of the 
Willendorf Venus somehow feels like a woman’s buttocks, breasts, or thighs 
seems far-fetched. The scale of the ﬁgurines means that their bodies are minia­
turized. A reading that argues that they are made to create arousal by way of acts 
of fondling thus seems at odds with real erotics of touch: the stone breasts, for 
11 

S E X I N G  T H E  C A N VA S  
example, cannot be cupped. If these objects were just to be looked at then such 
an interpretation would make more sense. The naked men and women in 
pornographic magazines, for instance, are usually diminutive, shrunk to ﬁt an 
A4 environment. 
Touch has, however, been advanced as a sense which played a key role in the 
appreciation of ﬁgurines in prehistory. It is a rich, complex sense, albeit one that 
as Elizabeth Grosz explains is difﬁcult ‘to analyze as it is composed of so 
many interacting dimensions of sensitivity, involving a number of different 
functions (touch, pressure, texture, frequency, pain, and heat)’.26 Douglass Bailey 
has recognized how important this complex sensation was for the prehistoric 
beholders of ﬁgurines. He has endeavoured to render some sense of touching 
prehistoric sculpture by way of visual representation by means of a set of 
photographs he includes at the beginning of Prehistoric Figurines. In one carefully 
focused image the grimy hand of an archaeologist gently clasps a ﬁgure (the dirt 
sticking to the person’s ﬁngers and palm providing the picture with a kind of 
archaeological veracity, giving it a ‘fresh from the soil of the trench’ feel). A later 
image of the same ﬁgurine, this time resting in a clean palm, has been deliber­
ately manipulated.27 The photograph ripples and bulges. The sense here is that 
the signiﬁcance of the ﬁgurine cannot be ‘grasped’ through seeing alone. To 
merely see these objects is to have a distorted view of them. They were designed to 
be handled, wielded. In feeling ﬁgurines, however, in ‘turning over [a] ﬁgurine in 
one’s hand, the spectator (or the handler) never holds the entire view at any one 
time’.28 
In this sense, as Bailey suggests in Prehistoric Figurines, ‘three-dimensional 
objects escape complete comprehension’.29 He recognizes that facets of a ﬁgurine 
will always remain out of reach as it is clasped and manipulated by the hand. 
Bailey fails, however, to address the ways in which complexity of touch itself 
(rather than its limited contact with the surface of a given object) always miti­
gates against complete comprehension. Even if the entire surface of a ﬁgurine 
could be touched, total tactile understanding would be impossible. It is feasible, 
for example, to understand the relative solidity of a ﬁgurine through the act of 
squeezing, but this action is not one which could ascertain its weight. In order to 
weigh a small sculpture a lighter touch is required. The hand can be still as it 
gauges heaviness but it must move if it is also to understand texture. Both touch 
and seeing are processes of sequential revelation.30 
The key point here, however, is that Bailey’s arguments about touch would 
not be possible if gender were adopted as the principal means of explaining 
the signiﬁcance of ﬁgurines. Touch, in fact, works against the recognition of 
sexual difference. The perception of physical difference – be it masculine 
or feminine – is more a product of seeing than touching. Through touch, differ­
ence is threatened with redundancy. This proximity underlying physical intimacy 
holds within it the potential of a ‘nearness so pronounced that it makes 
all discrimination of identity [. . .] impossible’.31 The contact of skin against skin 
or against another substance brings together two different bodies in such a way 
that the possibility of ‘distinguishing what is touching from what is touched’ no 
longer exists.32 The act of touching, when unaccompanied by seeing, is touch 
without gender, leading the ﬁngers that trace another’s sex, for example, to 
become sexless.33 
12 

S E X I N G  T H E  C A N VA S  
GAYDAR IN THE A RCHIV E 
There may be an anxiety about engaging with touch in relation to the art of the 
past because it undermines reassuring visions of sexual difference and of sexu­
ality. Political struggles related to sexuality have led it to become an important 
aspect of gender studies in art history. Historians have sometimes felt a need to 
seek precedents for contemporary ideas about sexuality in the art of the past. 
Recently, to take one example, there has been a strong desire to cruise the archive 
in search of homosexual artists. The work of Caravaggio, which will not form the 
main focus of my enquiry, is perhaps the most obvious case.34 
In relation to Caravaggio, it is worth noting that Adrian Rifkin has written of 
the challenge to queer art history posed by the paintings of Mattia Preti. Rifkin 
accepts that queer art historians wish to discover artists who echo their desires, 
that there are images by these artists which you would want ‘to be like yourself, or  
in which you would like to hear yourself’.35 Preti’s paintings are troubling in this 
context though because, whilst they sometimes pass for Caravaggio’s work, there 
are no legal records or other documents in the archive that are at all suggestive 
about the later artist’s sexuality.36 The fact that images by both artists are not 
that different from each other therefore tests the queer art historian who invests 
their desire in the Caravaggesque. 
Here, however, I want to examine the way in which Michelangelo’s works are 
now sometimes interpreted as manifestations of a gay subjectivity. To understand 
either Caravaggio or Michelangelo as homosexual is problematic. In The Will to 
Knowledge, the ﬁrst volume of his history of sexuality, Michel Foucault argues that 
it is only from the nineteenth century onwards that sexual acts have come to 
deﬁne individuals rather than to constitute mere ﬂeeting pleasures. He gives as 
an example the nineteenth-century homosexual who: 
became a personage, a past, a case history, and a childhood, in addition to being a type of life, a 
life form, and a morphology, with an indiscreet anatomy and possibly a mysterious physiology. 
Nothing that went into his total composition was unaffected by his sexuality. It was everywhere 
present in him: at the root of all his actions because it was their insidious and indeﬁnitely active 
principle; written immodestly on his face and body because it was a secret that always gave itself 
away. It was consubstantial with him, less as a habitual sin than as a singular nature.37 
This modern conception of lives governed by sexuality, in which an individual’s 
actions express their sexuality, has been adopted, implicitly or explicitly, in some 
readings of Michelangelo’s art. Howard Hibbard, for instance, suggests that while 
there are ‘few if any desired female ﬁgures in his entire oeuvre’, Michelangelo 
‘shaped the buttocks of David and Christ alike with sensuous joy’.38 The reason for 
this, according to Hibbard, is that when the artist’s ‘infatuations did crop up they 
were overwhelmingly homosexual in form’. Hibbard, however, refuses to read any 
evidence about Michelangelo’s sexuality as conclusive.39 He contends that there is 
‘no evidence that Michelangelo had a sexual life of any kind’.40 This statement is a 
tacit recognition of the fact that in the Renaissance ‘doing’ was ‘being’. 
James M. Saslow, however, feels able to claim that Michelangelo was a 
suppressed homosexual. He acknowledges Foucault’s work and admits that in 
the ‘pre-Freudian era, connections between an individual’s sexual psychology 
and other behaviour were not so readily assumed or investigated’.41 He also 
13 

S E X I N G  T H E  C A N VA S  
recognizes that the: ‘two crucial factors in deﬁning the modern ‘‘gay’’ identity are 
a sense of core individual identity as an inherently homosexually oriented person 
and a sense of group identity based on this shared orientation and participation 
in collective institutions. Neither, it is argued, could come into existence prior 
to the rise of self-aware urban subcultures in the eighteenth century and the 
invention of the medico-psychological term, hence the social category, of 
the ‘‘homosexual’’ in the nineteenth.’42 Yet Saslow still suggests that during the 
artist’s lifetime ‘many important elements of the modern conception of homo­
sexuality – as a distinct psychological construct and social status, requiring its 
own expressive vocabulary even if it sometimes had to be concealed – were 
beginning to emerge.’43 He believes that the temporal frontier of an emerging 
sense of distinctive homosexual identity can be pushed back, ‘at least in 
embryonic form, to the beginning of the sixteenth century’.44 
Saslow’s major sources of evidence for ‘outing’ Michelangelo are the latter’s 
poetry and also the gossip recorded during the artist’s lifetime about his sexual 
preferences. This is an odd strategy to adopt if the aim is to claim Michelangelo as 
a gay artist rather than poet. The only artworks Saslow refers to at length are the 
paired drawings of the Rape of Ganymede and the Punishment of Tityos which 
Michelangelo gave to Tommaso de’ Cavalieri.45 He argues that Michelangelo’s 
drafts for the letter which was to accompany the drawings ‘strongly imply that 
there was something in the drawings which was best left unstated’.46 In support 
of such an interpretation it should be acknowledged that it was during a 
discussion of the artist’s drawings for Cavalieri that Adrian Stokes writes, ‘art 
requires of unconscious bents that they be poeticized’ and ‘there has never been a 
more careful vehicle than the Greek myths’.47 
Frequently, however, art historians have turned to other artworks for evidence 
of the artist’s sexual proclivities. As Anthony Hughes acknowledges, ‘there is a 
good deal in Michelangelo’s painting and sculpture that betrays a purely sensual 
delight to be found in gazing at naked men.’48 This delight can be seen to extend 
to Michelangelo’s depictions of the feminine form which Hughes regards as being 
often only minimally differentiated from those of the masculine.49 When 
Michelangelo paints women they frequently manifest a bulk and musculature 
conventionally associated with men. The Cumaean and Libyan sibyls of the Sistine 
chapel ceiling, for example, possess powerful physiques (plate 2). These bodies 
refuse an easy visual differentiation of their sex. The oracles could pass for men. 
In writing of the Libyan sibyl and of its chalk preparatory drawing (which reveals 
that the model for the ﬁgure was male), Hibbard notes that she is ‘not a believable 
ﬁgure – the artiﬁce of the pose and elegance of conception far outweigh the 
references to the possible and the real.’50 She is, he states, ‘not so much a Sibyl as 
a Style’.51 The pose is indeed counter-intuitive, a mannered turn; but the unreal 
quality of the depiction seems to rest more in the sibyl’s physique than in her 
positioning. It is therefore tempting to read Hibbard’s description as enacting a 
form of displacement. The pose is emphasized over the ﬁgure’s androgyny, yet it is 
really the latter that renders the ﬁgure unbelievable. 
This act of displacement can either be understood as a symptom of Hibbard’s 
lack of desire to engage with Michelangelo’s sexuality, something not borne out 
by Michelangelo in its entirety, or as a refusal to contemplate the sibyl’s massive­
ness, the way she exceeds the norms of female corporeality. The modern spectator 
14 

S E X I N G  T H E  C A N VA S  
2 Michelangelo, Libyan Sibyl, 1508–12. Fresco. Rome: Sistine Chapel, Vatican Museums. Photo: r 
Photo SCALA, Florence. 
15 

S E X I N G  T H E  C A N VA S  
perhaps baulks at sibylline bulk. Although ‘bulk is an essential element of the 
male nude’s athleticism’, for ‘a woman to be big with muscle – rather than with 
child or with fat – puts into question deeply held beliefs about gender.’52 The 
decision to read the oracles as men masquerading as women – that is, to read 
their bodies as evidence of Michelangelo’s homosexuality – suppresses their 
potential to challenge conventional ideas about female corporeality. The kinds of 
bodies the sibyls foretell, whilst still uncommon, have after all now been attained 
and exceeded by some women. 
The desire to see the sibyls as big men, expressions of homosexual desire, or as 
big women, preﬁguring contemporary female bodybuilders, whilst potentially 
empowering for some, does not do justice to the way the works were received and 
understood in the early sixteenth century. If the sibyls did offer obvious evidence of 
‘unnatural’ urges, then this was not remarked upon at the time or for a long period 
afterwards. The matter is complicated by the fact that the nude ﬁgures of the Last 
Judgement, in which female ﬁgures were also often heavily muscled, were adjusted 
under the papacy of Pope Paul IV so as to no longer give offence. But, while the 
puritans of the curia could not countenance the representation of nudity in the 
Sistine chapel no repainting was carried out on the sibyls. This suggests that the 
notion these ﬁgures were an expression of Michelangelo’s sexuality was not held at 
the time. The danger of a queer reading, and also of a feminist one, is that it can 
obscure the historical signiﬁcance of artworks in this way. 
It would therefore seem ill-informed to read Michelangelo’s art as an expres­
sion of his sexuality. In the Renaissance, an art commission was an exercise in skill 
rather than an act of individual confession. Anthony Hughes suggests that 
Michelangelo’s art reﬂects the Renaissance tendency to ‘regard the male body as 
superior to the female’.53 In this light, ‘the perfect body of a man could be quite 
legitimately admired as a pinnacle of creation’.54 The women who are only mini­
mally differentiated from men in Michelangelo’s art therefore have their infer­
iority deemphasized. The practicality of painting ﬁgures on a ceiling to be viewed 
from a distance may also have contributed to their portrayal larger than life.55 The 
photographic reproductions made of the sibyls and other ﬁgures from the Sistine 
ceiling as details of the fresco, are too proximate to reproduce the actual viewing 
experience of a visitor to the chapel. The images exaggerate the size of the ﬁgures. 
This should not, however, detract from the reality of how enabling the fantasy 
of the gay Michelangelo has been. It was this fantasy that permitted small-scale 
ﬁgurines of David fabricated in the 1950s to signify ‘in a safe and respectable way 
(i.e. to those in the know), the homosexual orientation of [their] owners’.56 These 
ﬁgurines, unlike those of prehistory, were certainly erotically ﬁgured and ﬁngered. 
T H E  FE M A L E  F R E S C O  PA I N T E R  
As the previous examples of Michelangelo and of the Willendorf Venus attest, the 
history of the study of gender within art history has been predominantly struc­
tured around analyses of the sex of the artist, the sex of the audience, and sexed 
subject matter, such as the female or male nude. The sexing of substance has been 
overlooked. Material is instead seen through. As David Peters Corbett suggests, 
‘too often the response to mark-making, the physical manipulation of paint, or 
surface is edited out of professional dialogue and conﬁned to personal experi­
ence, as if the encounter with the object is somehow not a part of what art history 
16 

S E X I N G  T H E  C A N VA S  
is about.’57 The various media that have been employed in art-making are 
perceived by many art historians as vehicles of meaning, seen as superﬂuous to 
interpretation, rather than as possessing meaning in their own right. Artists’ 
materials are, however, always invested with signiﬁcance. 
The meanings impressed upon, or within, these materials shift with time. In his 
life of Sebastiano Viniziano, for example, Giorgio Vasari famously quotes Miche­
langelo as having denounced oil painting as ‘a woman’s art and only ﬁt for lazy 
well-to-do people’.58 By implication, fresco in the High Renaissance is man’s work. 
By the late eighteenth century, however, such a view of oil painting had shifted. It 
was ﬁrmly established as masculine, whilst drawing and watercolour were some­
times coded as feminine. Fresco was still perceived as a man’s medium at the time 
as practitioners of watercolour sought to assert watercolour’s status by linking it to 
buon affresco. The watercolourist William Marshall Craig, for instance, contended 
that watercolour was fathered by fresco painting, an ancient medium which, in 
part, involved employing pigments suspended in water applied to wet plaster.59 
This argument served to align watercolour paintings with ‘masterpieces’ of the past 
such as Michelangelo’s Sistine Chapel frescoes. Craig claimed that both fresco and 
watercolour painting required greater skill than oil. Watercolour, he stated, was 
‘founded in the soundest deductions of reason and philosophy’.60 
It seems unlikely that Michelangelo would appreciate Craig’s comparison, 
however, for what differentiated oil from fresco for the Renaissance artist was not 
so much the reduced skills required for the former as the absence of endeavour. 
Frescoes on the scale of those in the Sistine and Pauline chapels were substantial 
physical undertakings. The humorous sonnet complaining of his body’s woes 
which Michelangelo sent to Giovanni da Pistoia during the painting of the Sistine 
ceiling attests to this: 
This miserable job has given me   
a goitre like the cats in Lombardy   
get from the water there – or somewhere else.   
The force of it has jammed my belly up   
beneath my chin. Beard to the sky, I feel   
my seat of memory rests on a hump.   
I’ve grown a harpy’s breast. Brush splatterings   
make a mosaic pavement of my face.   
My loins have moved into my guts.   
As counterweight, I stick my bum out like   
A horse’s rump.61   
This quotation emphasizes the manual, rather than mental, labour involved in 
fresco painting. Art-making is not here simply a mental exercise, a product of 
‘reason and philosophy’, but of hard, deforming, graft. Fresco painting is man’s 
work because it requires endurance, strength, the ability to tolerate and trans­
cend discomfort. Michelangelo’s gendering of oil painting as feminine should 
therefore be understood to stem from the relative lack of effort required to 
produce works in that medium when contrasted with the exertions necessary to 
create a fresco. And it is only when we understand the artist’s criticism of oil in 
this context that we can comprehend the rhetoric of an image such as Artemisia 
Gentileschi’s Self-Portrait as an Allegory of Painting (plate 3). Gentileschi’s depiction 
17 

S E X I N G  T H E  C A N VA S  
3 Artemisia Gentileschi, 
Self-Portrait as an Allegory of 
Painting, 1630. Oil on 
canvas, 96.5  73.5 cm. 
The Royal Collection. 
Photo: r 2009 Her 
Majesty the Queen. 
of herself an allegory of painting is noteworthy for its breadth of gesture, parti­
cularly the height of the right hand poised to apply paint to canvas.62 
In her chapter on the self-portrait in her 1989 study Artemisia Gentileschi, Mary  D.  
Garrard compares this painting with Felice Antonio Casoni’s Portrait Medal of Lavinia 
Fontana (1611), which possesses an image of an allegory of painting on the reverse.63 
This image, Garrard suggests, ‘carries an implied possibility of interpreting Fontana 
the artist and the Allegory of Painting as overlapping identities’.64 The female 
personiﬁcation of painting can potentially fuse with the identity of an actual 
woman painter in Fontana. The personiﬁcation is seated, painting at an easel. A 
palette lies at her feet. She is shown holding a brush in her right hand at a height 
just below the level of her chin, and applying a stroke of paint to a canvas. 
The pose in the image created by Gentileschi is far more dynamic. The artist 
stands rather than sits, she holds the palette, her right arm reaches outwards 
towards a canvas but, unlike the Casoni medallion, also upwards. Garrard reads 
the pose as designed to evoke both theory and practice, ‘one arm raised . . . the 
hand stretched toward the top of the canvas, suggesting the higher, ideal 
aspirations of painting, . . . the other resting on a table, the hand holding the 
brushes and palette, which are the physical materials of painting’.65 In this 
18 

S E X I N G  T H E  C A N VA S  
interpretation theory and practice, art and craft, are ‘joined in the mind of the 
artist, here the head of Artemisia Gentileschi, which intersects the curve of 
the arms and, as the compositional fulcrum, provides the point of resolution for 
the two aspects of painting’.66 This reading, which is also echoed in Garrard’s 
later book Artemisia Gentileschi around 1622 (2001), ignores the signiﬁcance of the 
medium the artist employs in the image, the importance of oil paint itself.67 
Gentileschi’s gestures are far more expansive than many contemporary or later 
self-portraits by male artists of themselves working in oil paint.68 The pose she 
adopts in the portrait is reminiscent of the outstretched right arm of Michelangelo 
in the self-caricature that he drew in the margin of the sonnet he sent to Giovanni 
about the labour of painting the Sistine ceiling. Several feminist art historians have 
recognized the importance of Gentileschi’s depiction of herself as allegory given 
her profession. Rozsika Parker and Griselda Pollock, for example, see the work as 
playing on ‘the contradiction between woman as painter’s muse, symbolic embo­
diment of the art, and woman as professional practitioner of the art’.69 The 
emphasis on the gender of the portrait’s subject, the allegory-artist, however, comes 
at the expense of a consideration of its medium. 
The oil out of which Gentileschi’s portrait is made forms a part of its subject 
matter as does the pigment and plaster of Michelangelo’s Sistine ceiling. The latter 
represents masculinity not just through the many male and ‘she-male’ ﬁgures, but 
through the matter out of which it is created, the plaster surface impregnated by 
pigment. In the High Renaissance, the medium of fresco signalled masculinity 
whatever the subject matter, just as works in oil could connote femininity. Genti­
leschi, however, paints herself painting in oil in the guise of a fresco painter. 
Garrard describes the artist as showing herself ‘in the heat of work’.70 It is this 
work, this labour, which is of note. This not simply because Gentileschi is partici­
pating in a profession dominated by men but because she is working in a medium 
which was, in the past century, gendered as feminine. The ‘heat’ of her work 
identiﬁed by Garrard can be read to imply a rapidity of execution comparable with 
that required of the fresco painter engaging with the intonaco. Garrard draws 
attention to the artist’s golden chain ‘that has slipped aside on her breast’.71 The 
displacement of the chain captures a sense of rapid movement. 
This is not to suggest that Gentileschi rushed her work, the artist’s careful use of 
colour and controlled, precise, handling is evinced by the ﬁnished portrait. It is a 
painting into which much thought has been invested – undoubtedly it took a 
considerable period of time to plan and complete – but the composition had to stress 
physical action over passive contemplation. The pose had to be coded as that of the 
conventionalized artisan of the previous century, the fresco painter. Gentileschi’s 
portrait explores gender assumptions that adhered to the mediums of fresco and oil. 
The painting argues both that a woman can paint alfresco, can paint on the scale and 
with the vigour of a man, and that oil painting offers them the possibility of doing 
this. The work is both a proto-feminist statement and an argument for the status of 
oil paint. The moment Gentileschi depicted herself painting in oil but with the 
athleticism and expansiveness of an artist working alfresco she made a statement 
not just about herself as a woman artist but also about the manliness of the medium 
she employed. The medium is a part of the message here, and any interpretation, 
such as Garrard’s, that ignores the work’s material, materiality as signiﬁer, will miss 
this. This metaphorical mixing of media will be written out of the artwork’s history. 
19 

S E X I N G  T H E  C A N VA S  
MI XI N G  ME D IA  
The signiﬁcance of gender in Thomas Girtin’s watercolour View of Pont Saint 
(plate 4) or J. M. W. Turner’s watercolour Warkworth Castle, Northumberland (plate 5) 
is not immediately apparent from the subject matter but it becomes obvious 
when viewed in the context of art criticism from the period about watercolour as 
a medium. The paintings, which provide picturesque views, were created only a 
few years before Craig was staking a claim for watercolour by attempting to locate 
its provenance in the tradition of fresco painting. This means the medium out of 
which View of Pont Saint and Warkworth Castle were made would have been coded by 
many spectators in the early nineteenth century as feminine. These works were 
looked at in gendered terms although, in the case of watercolour, the speciﬁcity 
of that gender was hotly debated.72 
Kay Dian Kriz has examined the way criticism from the period sometimes 
employed tropes which aligned painterly surface effects and brilliant chromatics in 
landscape paintings, traits frequently achieved through using watercolour, with 
illicit sexual desire. Works that manifested these suspect qualities were described 
as cosmetic-wearing courtesans. The paintings were ﬁgured as female which made 
their ‘gaudy colour and painterly effects assume the status of ornaments or make­
up applied by the artist, who becomes identiﬁed as a pimp – the lowest form of 
‘merchant’ within the commercial sphere’.73 This kind of language, whilst 
constructing the medium as feminine, left the artist’s manhood intact, if debased. 
It seems probable, however, that some painterly effects, while they contrib­
uted to the femininity of a ﬁnished painting, played a different role during its 
actual creation. Whilst the gendering of watercolour was being negotiated at the 
turn of the century through criticism and practice, it was the way certain effects 
4 Thomas Girtin, View of Pont Saint, c. 1800. Watercolour on paper, 150  234 mm. London: British 
Museum. Photo: r Trustees of the British Museum. 
20 

S E X I N G  T H E  C A N VA S  
5 J.M.W. Turner, Warkworth Castle, Northumberland, 1799. Watercolour on paper, 81.5  107.7 cm. 
London: Victoria & Albert Museum. Photo: r Victoria & Albert Museum, London. 
were achieved which may have prompted an artist to utilize them. The focus of art 
criticism at the time and of later art-historical analyses has been on such paint­
ings as end product rather than on the creative decisions and processes behind 
them. A desire to mitigate the unmanning engendered by operating in the 
medium of watercolour sometimes manifested itself in an artist’s choice of 
materials and techniques. The act of scraping the surface of painted paper, for 
example, produces a particular effect.74 This effect, whilst it might be interpreted 
as a signiﬁer of femininity within the work, would have been produced from 
without by an aggressive action coded as masculine. The scrape could be read as a 
kind of maquillage but it is one applied with violence. 
There are anxieties in play during the making of an artwork that inﬂuence its 
ﬁnal form but which are often excluded from subsequent interpretations. In his 
analysis of Thomas Girtin, for example, David Hill remarks upon the artist’s choice 
of ‘a coarse-looking paper, a prominently wire-marked cartridge ﬂecked with the 
detritus of the recycled linen rags from which it was made’.75 This paper, which 
was bought folded like foolscap, had creases in it that accumulated greater quan­
tities of paint than the rest of the paper, causing the colour to pool and end up 
darker in those areas. This effect was sometimes admired at the time. The paper 
also absorbed paint in such a way that rubbing and scrubbing was not possible. 
This leads Hill to contrast Girtin with Turner, whose choice of tough Whatman 
paper allows him to ‘work out his colour much further, and to overwash, soak, 
scratch, abrade and recolour’.76 In this formal analysis Girtin is seen as sponta­
neous whilst Turner is studious. If we recognize the importance assumed by gender 
21 

S E X I N G  T H E  C A N VA S  
6 J.M.W. Turner, Norham Castle, Sunrise, c.1845. Oil on canvas, 908  1219 mm. London: Tate Britain. 
Photo: r Tate, London 2009. 
in relation to the medium of watercolour at the time, however, we ﬁnd the 
underlying motivation for the two practices to be the same. Girtin’s rough paper 
and Turner’s technique of abrading both act as masculine counters to the feminine 
medium the two artists employ. They both assuage the anxiety of the artists over 
their choice of material, an anxiety whose nature I will return to later. 
Paying greater attention to the sexing of media also assists the historian when 
it comes to reading past critical writings on art. In Image of the People, T. J. Clark 
recommends reading art criticism as an analyst might listen to his or her 
patient.77 The unconscious manifests itself through caesuras and silences in 
critical discourse. Greg Smith offers a way into, although he does not pursue, 
some of these silences when he examines critical writings from the early years of 
the nineteenth century in his book The Emergence of the Professional Watercolourist. 
Smith identiﬁes a great concern at the time that oil paintings were contaminated 
by watercolour practice. In the late eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries in 
Britain there was ‘a crisis in the identity and integrity of the oil medium’.78 He 
quotes George Beaumont, who felt that great harm had been done ‘by endea­
vouring to make painting in oil to appear like water colours, by which in 
attempting to give lightness and clearness the force of oil painting has been 
lost’.79 Smith also discusses the example of William Hazlitt who singles out 
Turner for criticism. He claims that Turner’s landscapes in oils ‘are nothing but 
stained water-colour drawings, loaded with oil-colour’.80 
22 

S E X I N G  T H E  C A N VA S  
Beaumont and Hazlitt are both made anxious by works that refuse easy 
differentiation at the level of medium. They do not appreciate works in oil that 
have the appearance of watercolour, that we might think pass as such. Gender is 
not mentioned by either author, but when the mediums are sexed in criticism of 
the time oil is allied to masculinity and watercolour to femininity.81 Beaumont’s 
and Hazlitt’s silence on the question of gender, which Smith does not examine, can 
be read as a product of the anxiety caused by works in oil that do not announce 
their sex, their oiliness, or which could even be mistaken for the fairer sex, the 
watercolour. Turner’s oil painting Norham Castle: Sunrise (c. 1835–40), although of a 
later date than the criticism, provides a good example of such a work. Seen from a 
distance the ﬁne, almost evanescent, tones of this landscape mean that it could 
pass for a watercolour. This is not to suggest that Norham Castle is an oil painting in 
drag (plate 6). For a drag act to work it requires the recognition that the gender of 
the performer differs from that of the gender being performed. Norham Castle is oil 
simulating watercolour to such an extent that it possesses many of the qualities, 
such as translucence, associated with the former. Through its ability to feign the 
appearance of watercolour, the oil threatens traditional distinctions between the 
two media and by extension between the sexes connoted by each. 
M A C HO  I M PA S T O  
The reluctance in art historiography to engage with the gendering of a medium 
carries forward into histories of the art of the second half of the nineteenth 
century. The shift to an emphasis on surface in French avant-garde painting is 
discussed by T. J. Clark as the product of several ‘complex and compatible values’ 
that derive ‘from elsewhere than art’.82 Clark suggests, for instance, that ﬂatness 
could be understood as an acknowledgement of the ‘honest manual labour’ that 
constituted picture-making; that it could signify modernity, a painting’s surface 
conjuring the ‘two dimensions of posters’; that it could constitute an attack on 
‘the ordinary bourgeois’ by acting as ‘a barrier put up against the viewer’s normal 
wish to enter a picture and dream’.83 He goes on to acknowledge that for some 
painters ﬂatness also signiﬁed something that resisted transformation into 
metaphor, foregrounding paint as mere stuff. Even for these painters, however, he 
writes, ‘there was no fact without the metaphor, no medium without its being 
made the vehicle of some sense or other’.84 Nowhere, however, does he suggest 
that this sense might be linked to gender. 
Thick accretions of oil would seem obvious signals of masculinity considering 
how the medium was coded, some impressionists and post-impressionists even 
describing paint as semen. Pierre Auguste Renoir notoriously told his son that he 
painted with his prick.85 Vincent Van Gogh also referred to his paintings as 
seminal.86 In a letter to E ´mile Bernard, from early August in 1888, Van Gogh 
advised the artist, who was scheduled to embark on military service, to ‘eat a lot, 
do your military exercises well, don’t fuck too much; when you do this your 
paintings will be all the more spermatic’.87 These avant-garde artists appeared to 
view painting as not just a creative but a procreative act. The practice of applying 
paint to canvas can be seen as always ‘charged with sexual connotations’.88 These 
connotations are carried over into contemporary art practice by Pricasso who 
creates acrylic works, often of women, which are literally made by using his 
posterior and penis as paintbrushes (plate 7). 
23 

S E X I N G  T H E  C A N VA S  
7 Pricasso, Portrait of Ree, 2006. Acrylic on canvas, 
70  120 cm. Private Collection, Photo: r 
Timothy Patch, courtesy of the artist. 
Sperm, however, in its viscidity, 
has an ambiguous relationship with 
the masculine. Fluids have tradition­
ally been aligned with femininity. In a 
phallocentric economy focused upon 
the hard-on, the hard one, liquids and 
ﬂuids are fantasized as feminine. The 
ﬂuid nature of sperm, and of its 
analogues such as paint on the palette 
or in the tube, therefore renders it 
female. Fluid is usually conceived of as 
a continuum: ‘a hypothetical contin­
uous substance’.89 It is indiscrete. 
Patriarchy privileges symbolization 
that ‘grants precedence to solids’.90 It 
harbours fantasies of ﬁrm contours 
and ﬁxity. These are catered for by 
paint when it dries. 
During the creative process artists 
of either gender, however, must 
confront the feminine as it is mani­
fested through the ﬂuid medium of 
paint, molten bronze, wet plaster, or 
other similar media. At the moment 
art-historical writing is too insensitive 
to the psychic value of (un)certain 
materials. Michelangelo’s preference 
for fresco can, in part, be explained by how quickly it ossiﬁes. Oil paint remains 
sticky for some time after its application. It is a slimy, ‘aberrant ﬂuid’.91 It takes 
longer to get hard. Once paint or those other media that metamorphose from 
liquid to solid states are rigid, however, they can become representative of a 
triumph over the feminine. The act of art-making has the potential to ‘ﬁx’ anxiety-
inducing materials. 
In existing scholarship that has acknowledged the issue of gendered materials 
the feminine aspect of paint has been largely ignored. It is usually only the canvas 
that is coded as female. Griselda Pollock, for example, argues that the legacy 
of the sexual hierarchy of the male artist and the female model pictured in 
Brassai’s photograph of Henri Matisse in his Studio (undated) is carried over into 
pictorial practices such as that of Jackson Pollock, in which ‘the potency and 
activity of the masculine body now directly [masters] the supine feminine space of 
the canvas, patterning that surface, that imaginary body, with his inscriptions’.92 
In this reading paint is gendered as masculine and linen as feminine. The canvas 
represents a troubling lack that must be covered over. This ignores Pollock’s 
relationship with the substance of the paint in its ﬂuid state. His aggressive 
handling can be explained as a response to anxiety about touching such a viscous 
medium. The ‘metaphorics of masculinity’, which T. J. Clark perceives as char­
acterizing abstract expressionist facture, are symptomatic of an aggressive dislike 
for wet paint, for the womanly within pigment.93 
24 

S E X I N G  T H E  C A N VA S  
8 Jack Vettriano, Scarlet Ribbons, Lovely Ribbons, 1996. Oil on 
canvas, 15  12 in. Private Collection. Photo: r Jack 
Vettriano, courtesy of the artist (www.jackvettriano.com). 
The artist’s identiﬁcation of 
the canvas with the feminine 
has been given a contemporary 
twist by Jack Vettriano, whose 
Scarlet 
Ribbons, 
Lovely 
Ribbons 
depicts a woman tied to a paint-
spattered easel (plate 8). In this 
original composition, Vettriano 
presents us with a woman in 
place of a painting. She literally 
stands in the stead of canvas. 
The ribbons that tie her to the 
easel can be interpreted as 
metaphors for the role of paint 
itself: a material designed, in 
ﬁgurative painting at least, 
to secure a likeness, to ﬁx an 
image for all time. This is 
indeed what has occurred in 
Scarlet Ribbons, Lovely Ribbons.94 It 
is a work which can be under­
stood to reﬂect the process of 
painting, to provide a metaphor 
for the painter’s practice. The 
ties that bind the woman to the 
easel are composed of pigment 
that has itself become afﬁxed to 
canvas, that is now dried and secure. It can also be understood, however, to refer to 
the fact that it is through the solidiﬁcation of paint that the feminine within 
pigment itself is seen to be mastered. In patriarchy the desire is to see paint ‘dry’. 
The metaphorics that Clark and Pollock recognize to be at work in some 
exponents of abstract expressionism, and which are given an updated outing by 
Vettriano, can produce a disturbing hostility. Artists such as Pollock (popularly 
referred to as ‘Jack the Dripper’) and Willem de Kooning (whose ‘Women series’ is 
manufactured out of a particularly macho impasto) handle ﬂuid paint with an 
overt aggression. When coupled with this quality, the gendering of the canvas as 
feminine leads the application of paint to signal a form of hostility towards 
women, even when the subject matter is entirely abstract as in Pollock’s drip 
paintings. This violence against women, part of the historical cultures to which 
these artists belonged, is enacted through technique. Susan Brownmiller has 
written that ‘the theory of aggressive male domination over women as a natural 
right is so deeply embedded in our cultural value system that all recent attempts 
to expose it . . . have barely managed to scratch the surface.’95 This exposure has 
indeed too seldom been applied in art history to the meanings of paint as surface. 
RES ISTING AN EITHER /OR   
The aggressive masculinity favoured by many proponents of abstract expres­ 
sionism was not espoused by all artists. Some members of the second generation   
25 

S E X I N G  T H E  C A N VA S  
of the New York school practised very different techniques. Helen Frankenthaler, 
for instance, through her slower, more intimate, technique of staining canvases 
caused an ‘uneven saturation’ of colour to occur.96 Frankenthaler diluted her 
pigment to the consistency of a wash causing her acrylics to bear similarities to 
watercolours. The artist also sometimes worked with watercolour. The uneven 
colouring of the canvases created both an emphasis on surface and a repre­
sentation of depth. Alison Rowley perceives the works as creating ‘a seeing of 
depth, an illusion of space triggered by the ﬂat, dyed material, but differentiated 
surface: a surface maximizing the potential of coloured paint as differance, as  the  
space of movement between the proximity of surface and distance as illusion of 
depth’.97 This differance or neither/norism, a perpetual oscillation between 
surface and depth in Frankenthaler’s works, ‘holds in balance a space between 
surface and depth which is neither a falling into the undifferentiated, a collapse 
into the inscription of femininity as a claustrophobic engulfment in tactile 
surface qualities, nor a distance so great as to deny the possibility, the pleasure, of 
a tactile involvement.’98 Rowley therefore sees Frankenthaler’s work as forming a 
hinge between proximity and distance, between touch and vision, between 
femininity and masculinity.99 
Frankenthaler’s practice demonstrates that it is possible to operate with a 
technique that refuses to be ﬁxed as either masculine or feminine, and cannot be 
readily resolved as a particular gendering. A similar argument has been made 
about the handling demonstrated by Jasper Johns. As part of an analysis of Johns’ 
Flag (1954), Fred Orton reads the range of adjectives associated with the artist’s 
touch by critics ‘as not securely gendered as masculine’.100 The artist’s technique 
is one that is ‘caressing and gentle; concerned; controlled; elegant; delicate and 
reﬁned; fastidious; ﬂuent; patient; intimate; most personal; sensual and 
sensuous, beloved and loving, of and affecting that feeling of attachment that is 
based on sex’.101 The handling and touch ‘may have been seen and written as 
veering towards the feminine, but its ﬁnesse and reﬁnement prevented it from 
being compromised and written as that’.102 The critics employed a language of 
sexual difference to write about Johns’ technique but could not resolve it into 
‘either a masculine or a feminine handling and touching’.103 Orton reads this as a 
reaction to the character and technique of the ﬁrst generation of New York school 
painters. Johns makes something that differs from the works of that generation, 
which goes against abstract expressionism, with its ‘machismotiﬁcs’.104 The artist 
seems to be striving to work with and against a form of masculinity through his 
technique, in an effort to mark ‘a space for the situation of another identity’.105 
For Orton, this other identity is a gay identity. Orton argues that Johns’ touch 
provides ‘an allegory of homosexuality made at a moment when there was no 
space available in avant-garde practice for its self-representation or identiﬁca­
tion’.106 Gavin Butt also contends that Johns’ ‘painterly handling evinces a kind of 
‘‘queer touch’’, one which works at the limit point of the heterosexist construc­
tions of gender difference purveyed within the languages of 1950s painting’.107 
Johns’ technique is similar to Frankenthaler’s in the undecidability it 
engenders about the sexing of technique. The motivations may differ but the 
effect of irresolution is the same. Both the artists refuse to privilege methods of 
making art that connote either masculinity or femininity. A greater emphasis 
within art history on analysing artistic media and techniques in gender terms 
26 

S E X I N G  T H E  C A N VA S  
9 Francis Bacon, Study for Head of George Dyer, 1967, 1967. Oil on canvas, 35.5  30.5 cm. Private  
Collection. Photo: r The Estate of Francis Bacon, all rights reserved. DACS 2009.  
27 

S E X I N G  T H E  C A N VA S  
would undoubtedly reveal more instances of such a resistance to the either/or 
logic of gendering. I suggest, for example, that Francis Bacon’s technique can be 
understood to operate in a similar way to that of Johns. 
Bacon’s impasto smears in portraits such as Study for Head of George Dyer, 1967, 
invite in their thick intensity coding as aggressive in the same way as many of De 
Kooning’s and Pollock’s works (plate 9). Bacon, however, also liked to abandon the 
brush – Renoir’s ‘prick’ – and apply paint using other means. He would often 
squeeze paint onto the door or walls of his studio and then press fabric into the 
pigment, which he would then print the canvas with. A number of pairs of 
corduroy trousers were found in his studio that carried traces of this activity. He 
also found ‘cashmere sweaters, ribbed socks, cotton ﬂannels, even towelling 
dressing gowns all served his purpose’.108 Quantities of red paint in Study for Head 
of George Dyer, 1967 appear to have been impressed on the canvas by textile. The 
technique of using fabric is also visible in the centre panel of Three Studies for 
Portrait of Henrietta Moraes (1969, private collection). 
Bacon’s varied handling has been recognized for some time, but has not yet, 
to my knowledge, been interpreted as a means of articulating sexual difference. 
The ﬁne patterning of colour created by applying paint by way of fabric, however, 
contrasts markedly with the thick strokes of paint that parallel it. The delicate 
traces of colour left by pigment-soaked textiles connote intimacy, whereas the 
swift smears of thick paint come across as more aloof. The masculinity of the 
abstract expressionist, their painterly aggression, manifested itself by way of a 
brief yet brutal interaction with the canvas. Paint was usually ﬂung and daubed 
from a distance and with speed. The fabricant of Study for Head of George Dyer, 1967, 
however, carefully pressed an expanse of corduroy against canvas in an act of 
conjoining that brought the hand of the painter close to the ‘skin’ of the canvas, 
the threads of the linen. In the paintings by Bacon that make use of textiles to 
enhance their tactile effects there seem to be two different registers of handling 
at work. Those touches that involve the use of fabric can be gendered as feminine. 
Those that make use of impasto, however, denote masculinity. Bacon’s facture 
possesses in the oscillation of variant touches such as these a similar quality of 
neither/norism to Johns’. 
Bacon also disrupts the masculine metaphorics of much avant-garde art 
through parody. The gobs of paint that Bacon was known to lob onto his paintings 
in their ﬁnal stages, an example of which can be seen below Dyer’s chin in Study 
for Head of George Dyer, 1967, were, he claimed, efforts to cultivate chance effects in 
his works. In an interview with David Sylvester, Bacon suggests that by throwing 
paint he hopes to exploit its extraordinary suppleness as a medium; he enjoys the 
fact that an artist can never ‘quite know what paint will do’.109 In the section of 
the interview devoted to chance, Bacon also twice endeavours to distance himself 
from abstract expressionism, which he regards as undisciplined.110 It is note­
worthy that abstract expressionism is on Bacon’s mind when he discusses chance. 
Not I think simply because he is loathe to let his paintings look like them, 
although the chance blobs and spatters of paint necessarily bear some resem­
blance to Pollock’s drips. I suggest the thick globs of pigment Bacon threw onto 
his paintings amount to an exaggeration of the aggressive techniques of the 
abstract expressionists. It is an exaggeration that makes the underlying mascu­
linity of abstract expressionist technique overtly obvious. The thrown paint 
28 

S E X I N G  T H E  C A N VA S  
frequently looks like ejaculate. This is powerfully the case in a work like Triptych 
(1976), where this similarity is exploited deliberately. In the left panel of the 
triptych there are two thick blobs of white paint. The sheer quantity of pigment 
has caused oil to bleed outwards into the light green ground forming dark circles. 
The effect resembles ejaculate as it seeps into a bed-sheet.111 The contingent globs 
of paint that Bacon throws onto his painting represent a hyperbolic performance 
of abstract expressionist technique, a parodic enactment of its masculinist values 
paraded as dirty laundry. If maleness is to be equated with aggression, then Bacon 
shows that he can out-male Pollock and his ilk. 
Bacon, as I have argued, is also fully capable of adopting a feminine touch 
when it suits him. The variety of techniques in his works allows them to resist a 
straightforward embodiment of sexual identity. In this they are similar to those of 
Johns. It is only through a historical understanding of the gendering of paint and 
forms of handling it, that readings that can engage with and reveal these 
meanings becomes possible. At present art history is not sufﬁciently willing to 
entertain discussion of such potential relationships between gender and tech­
nique in the art of the past. 
We also need more investigation into how the particular gendering of 
mediums and techniques originate and are maintained and into how they have 
worked to structure the artistic canon. In The Subversive Stitch, Rozsika Parker 
explores how embroidery has become ‘indelibly associated with femininity’ and 
has therefore fallen off the page of art history.112 She does not, however, consider 
how thread has actually come to be gendered in this way. Thread always threatens 
to become unﬁxed, to unravel, to emasculate.113 Parker argues that the ‘art/craft 
hierarchy suggests that art made with thread and art made with paint are 
intrinsically unequal: that the former is less signiﬁcant. But the real differences 
between the two are in terms of where they are made and who makes them.’114 This 
misses the point. Both media are equally signiﬁcant but one – paint – transcends 
its femininity in the act of drying. The other, however, whilst its femininity is held 
in check as weave, always threatens to unmake itself. The real anxieties that exist 
about what a work is made of need to be investigated. 
Whilst disquiet about ﬂuidity and loss of ﬁxity persist, whilst patriarchy still 
exerts a hold over the ‘matter’ of art history, certain forms of art-making will 
always risk being overlooked. This includes some made possible by very recent 
technological advances. Sadie Plant has written of digital fabrications, such as 
computer generated art, as extensions of textile art.115 She suggests that ‘the 
sampled sounds, processed words, and digitized images of multimedia reconnect 
all the arts with the tactility of woven fabrications.’116 The rootedness of 
contemporary art-making technologies in textiles, which Plant feels privilege 
tactility, helps to explain why there is still a strong tendency to disdain or over­
look works created in these new media. Plant connects such works with art made 
with thread. She writes of the latter’s producers that they are ‘written out of 
an ofﬁcial history which draws them in only as its minor footnotes to itself, 
cloths, weavers, and their skills turn out to be far in advance of the art forms 
digitization supersedes’.117 The digital as today’s textile art currently risks being 
treated as inferior, as relegated to the margins of art-historical writing, because 
weaving is still gendered as feminine and the feminine is perceived as anxiety-
generating and inferior within patriarchy. Until relationships of this kind 
29 

S E X I N G  T H E  C A N VA S  
between gender and medium are properly acknowledged and examined over­
sights and inequalities within art history will persist. The reluctance of art 
historiography to confront this issue may, perhaps, be traced to an added anxiety 
about revealing history’s own embroidered status. It is itself lacking in ﬁxity. 
‘History is a yarn.’118 
Notes 
I would like to thank Dana Arnold, Eckart Marchand, Angela Mortimer, and Art 
History’s anonymous reviewers for their insightful comments and criticisms of 
earlier drafts of this chapter. I would also like to acknowledge the generous 
support of the Leverhulme Trust for my research on aspects of this topic. 
1   
Frances Heidensohn, Women in Control?, Oxford, 
1992, 12. 
2   
The Aurignacian period is dated roughly as 
32,000–26,000 BCE and the Upper Palaeolithic 
in its entirety as occurring 40,000–10,000 BCE. 
3   
Desmond Collins and John Onians, ‘The origins 
of art’, Art History, 1: 1, 1978, 15. I am indebted 
to Olivia Horsfall Turner, Maria Mileeva, 
Marion Richards and Patricia Rubin for our 
discussions around the possible interpreta­
tions that can be offered for prehistoric ﬁgur­
ines. 
4   
Collins’ and Onians’ decision to focus on the 
origins of ﬁgurative rather than abstract 
imagery allows the origins of ‘art’ to be 
securely located in what is now called Europe. 
If the article had explored abstract work 
instead, then the earliest imagery, dating from 
77,000 years ago, has been found in the cave of 
Blombos in the southern Cape of South Africa. 
It is ‘a piece of ochre, carefully engraved with 
crosses with a central and a containing line’. 
See David Lewis-Williams, The Mind in the Cave, 
London, 2002, 98. 
5   
Collins and Onians, ‘The origins of art’, 12–13. 
6   
Collins and Onians, ‘The origins of art’, 13. 
7   
Collins and Onians, ‘The origins of art’, 14. 
8   
Collins and Onians, ‘The origins of art’, 17. 
9   
Collins and Onians, ‘The origins of art’, 17. 
10   Even if nakedness is taken to suggest eroticism 
at the time, Collins and Onians do not take 
account of the fact that the body’s erogenous 
zones are not set in stone but are historically 
contingent. The Venus of Willendorf, for 
instance, may have been given hands because 
hands were considered alluring in prehistory. 
As Carolyn Steedman discusses, as recently as 
the late eighteenth century ‘the hand mattered 
in ways that have now disappeared from our 
own erotic register’. See Steedman, Master and 
Servant: Love and Labour in the English Industrial 
Age, Cambridge, 2007, 45. 
11   Sarah M. Nelson, ‘Diversity of the Upper 
Palaeolithic ‘‘Venus’’ ﬁgurines and archae­
ological mythology’, in Caroline B. Brettell and 
Carolyn F. Sargent, eds, Gender in Cross-Cultural 
Perspective, New Jersey, 1993. 
12 
Catherine Hodge McCoid and LeRoy D. McDer­
mott, ‘Toward decolonizing gender: female 
vision in the Upper Palaeolithic’, American 
Anthropologist, 98, 2, 1996, 319–26, esp. 319. 
13 
McCoid and McDermott, ‘Toward decolonizing 
gender’, 323. 
14 
The stone ‘vulvas’ may actually be carvings of 
entoptic phenomena. Navicular entoptic forms 
can, by way of our retrospective projections, be 
seen to resemble the vulva. 
15 
Collins and Onians, ‘The origins of art’, 12. 
16 
Ludmilla Jordanova, History in Practice, London, 
2000, 163. 
17 
For Gimbutas, Old Europe occupies an area 
that ‘extends from the Aegean and Adriatic, 
including the islands, as far north as Czecho­
slovakia, southern Poland and the western 
Ukraine’. Marija Gimbutas, The Goddesses and 
Gods of Old Europe: Myths and Cult Images, 
London, 1982, 17. 
18 
Gimbutas, The Goddesses and Gods of Old Europe, 
195. 
19 
Gimbutas is not referring here to the Venus of 
Willendorf which she does not believe repre­
sents a pregnant woman. Gimbutas, The 
Language of the Goddess, New York, 2001, 141. 
20 
Lucy Lippard, Overlay: Contemporary Art and the 
Art of Prehistory, New York, 1983, 62. 
21 
Lippard, Overlay, 41.  
22 
Lynn Meskell, ‘Goddesses, Gimbutas and ‘‘new 
age’’ archaeology’, Antiquity, 69, 1995, 74–86, 
esp. 75. 
23 
Hayden White, Tropics of Discourse: Essays in 
Cultural Criticism, Baltimore, 1978, 43. 
24 
Theresa de Lauretis, Technologies of Gender: Essays 
on Theory, Film, and Fiction, Bloomington, 1987, 2. 
25 
Kenneth Clark, The Nude: A Study of Ideal Art, 
London, 1956, 64. 
26 
Elizabeth Grosz, Volatile 
Bodies: 
Toward 
a 
Corporeal Feminism, Bloomington, IN, 1994, 98. 
30 

S E X I N G  T H E  C A N VA S  
27 
Whether the two photographs are of the same 
hand is uncertain. The ﬁrst, dirty hand has no 
jewellery whereas the second, dirt-free, wears 
two rings. The presence of jewellery implies the 
second hand could be feminine whereas the 
size of the ﬁrst is suggestive of that of a male. 
The images are open to being interpreted as 
active/passive, one holding and the other 
resting. The implied message is that the male 
archaeologist is willing to get his hands dirty 
manning the trenches whilst the female 
archaeologist is only ﬁt to cradle the fruits of 
his manual labour. 
28 
Douglass Bailey, Prehistoric Figurines: Representa­
tion and Corporeality in the Neolithic, London, 
2005, 40. 
29 
Bailey, Prehistoric Figurines, 40. 
30 
Bailey also appears to operate with a reductive 
notion of seeing. The eye cannot see in several 
ways simultaneously, so an object cannot be 
comprehended instantaneously. Eyes cannot 
glance and contemplate, scan and focus, 
concurrently. In similar fashion the eye cannot 
see both the rabbit and the duck in the trick 
drawing Ernst Gombrich discusses in Art and 
Illusion. Gombrich writes that ‘we can switch 
from one reading to another with increasing 
rapidity’ but ‘we cannot experience alternative 
readings at the same time’. See Gombrich, Art 
and Illusion, London, 1962, 4–5. 
31 
Luce Irigaray, This Sex which is Not One, trans. C. 
Porter, Ithaca, NY, 1985, 31. 
32 
Irigaray, This Sex which is Not One, 26. 
33 
In this context the modern desire, the fetish, 
for long, manicured nails on a woman, for 
example, can be understood as a means by 
which to counteract the loss of secure markers 
of sexual difference that attends touch. The 
ﬁne, sliding, teasing, tingling touch of a 
woman’s manicured nails or their sharp dig, 
graze and scratch can come to represent reas­
suring tactile signals of difference against a 
lover’s skin. 
34 
The scholarship on the topic is voluminous and 
the list that follows can only give a ﬂavour of it. 
The earliest scholarly account of Caravaggio to 
imply that the artist’s paintings could be 
interpreted as exemplars of his ‘homo­
sexuality’ appears to be Roger Hinks’s Miche­
langelo Merisi da Caravaggio, London, 1953. 
Hinks discusses Caravaggio’s relief at turning 
from the ‘unsatisfying experiment’ of St Francis 
in Ecstasy (Hartford, Wadsworth Athaneum, c. 
1595) to the ‘alluring youths’ of Una Musica 
(New York, Metropolitan Museum, c. 1595) who 
are clad in ‘inappropriate draperies’ (45). 
Another key early consideration is Donald 
Posner’s essay, ‘Caravaggio’s homo-erotic early 
works’, Art Quarterly, 34, 1971, 301–24. Howard 
Hibbard provides a nuanced reading in Cara­
vaggio. Hibbard tracks Caravaggio’s potential 
homosexual identiﬁcation with his namesake 
Michelangelo through the artist’s use of the 
Sistine ignudi as sources of inspiration. See 
Hibbard, Caravaggio, London, 1983, 151–60. 
More recently Leo Bersani and Ulysse Dutoit 
discuss Caravaggio’s desire to ‘give head’ for 
the spectator in Caravaggio’s Secrets but ulti­
mately refuse to ascribe a speciﬁc sexual iden­
tity to the artist. See Bersani and Dutoit, 
Caravaggio’s 
Secrets, Cambridge, MA, 1998. 
Though not works of art history in the 
conventional sense, both Derek Jarman’s ﬁlm 
Caravaggio (UK, 1986) and Peter Robb’s novel M 
have contributed signiﬁcantly to the construc­
tion of Caravaggio as a homosexual artist. See 
Peter Robb, M, London, 1998. I am grateful to 
Simon Lee for drawing my attention to this last 
text. 
35 
All emphases are present in the originals 
unless 
otherwise 
stated. 
Adrian 
Rifkin, 
‘Inventing recollection’, in Paul Bowman, ed., 
Interrogating Cultural Studies: Theory, Politics and 
Practice, London, 2003, 101–24, esp. 122. 
36 
Adrian Rifkin, however, is far from concerned 
by the visual similarities between Caravaggio’s 
and Preti’s works, seeing them as enabling in 
that they permit both the emergence of a 
critique of existing criticism about Caravaggio 
as homosexual ‘ﬁgure’ and an expansion of 
queer theory’s potential. A queering of Preti, as 
against Caravaggio, permits a radical inter­
rogation of desire itself. See Adrian Rifkin, 
‘Waiting and seeing’, Journal of Visual Culture, 2:  
3, 2003, 325–39. 
37 
Michel Foucault, The Will to Knowledge: The 
History of Sexuality Volume 1, trans. Robert 
Hurley, London, 1990, 43. 
38 
Howard Hibbard, Michelangelo, London, 1978, 
232. 
39 
Hibbard, Michelangelo, 233. 
40 
Hibbard, Michelangelo, 231.  
41 
James M. Saslow, ‘‘‘A veil of ice between my 
heart and the ﬁre’’: Michelangelo’s sexual 
identity and early modern constructs of 
homosexuality’, in Wayne R. Dynes and 
Stephen Donaldson, eds, Studies 
in 
Homo­
sexuality, New York, 1992, 135–48, esp. 136. 
42 
Saslow, ‘‘‘A veil of ice between my heart and the 
ﬁre’’’, 138. 
43 
Saslow, ‘‘‘A veil of ice between my heart and the 
ﬁre’’’, 144. 
44 
Saslow, ‘‘‘A veil of ice between my heart and the 
ﬁre’’’, 139. 
45 
Saslow, ‘‘‘A veil of ice between my heart and the 
ﬁre’’’, 141–3. 
46 
Saslow, ‘‘‘A veil of ice between my heart and the 
ﬁre’’’, 143. 
47 
Adrian Stokes, Michelangelo, London, 2002, 153. 
48 
Anthony Hughes, Michelangelo, London, 1997, 
327. 
49 
Hughes, Michelangelo, 327. 
50 
Hibbard, Michelangelo, 128–9. 
51 
Hibbard, Michelangelo, 129. 
31 

S E X I N G  T H E  C A N VA S  
52 
Joanna Frueh, Monster Beauty: Building the Body 
of Love, Berkeley, CA, 2001. 
53 
Hughes, Michelangelo, 327. 
54 
Hughes, Michelangelo, 327–8. 
55 
Charles De Tolnay, for instance, emphasizes 
how Michelangelo took account of the viewing 
distance when designing the sibyls. See De 
Tolnay, Michelangelo Volume 2: The Sistine Ceiling, 
Princeton, NJ, 1945, 62. 
56 
Gavin Butt, Between You and Me: Queer Disclosures 
in the New York Art World, 1948–1963, Durham, 
NC, 2005, 62. 
57 
David Peters Corbett, The World in Paint: Modern 
Art and Visuality in England, 1848–1914, Manche­
ster, 2004, 259. 
58 
Giorgio Vasari, The Lives of the Painters, Sculptors 
and Architects: Volume 3, trans. A. B. Hinds, 
London, 1963, 119. Michelangelo’s views on the 
gendering of oil help explain the comment 
attributed to him by Francisco de Hollanda 
that works by Flemish artists ‘will appeal to 
women’. See Hollanda, Four 
Dialogues 
on 
Painting, Oxford, 1928, 15–16. Oil was a medium 
commonly employed in Flanders. Michelangelo 
appears to be saying that Flemish art is made 
by ‘women’ for ‘women’. This demonstrates 
how the meaning of a given medium is always 
overdetermined. In this instance regional 
rivalries are being played out alongside and 
through the gendering of substance. For a 
discussion of the authenticity of Hollanda’s 
dialogues, see Clare Robertson, Il Gran Cardinale: 
Alessandro Farnese, New Haven, CT, 1992, 237. 
59 
Greg Smith, The Emergence of the Professional 
Watercolourist: Contentions and Alliances in the 
Artistic Domain, 1760–1824, Aldershot, 2002, 34. 
60 
Quoted in Smith, The Emergence of the Professional 
Watercolourist, 34. 
61 
Quoted in Hughes, Michelangelo, 132. 
62 
I am grateful to Alison Wright for our discus­
sion about the signiﬁcance of the artist’s pose 
in this painting. 
63 
Mary D. Garrard, Artemisia Gentileschi, Prin­
ceton, NJ, 1989, 337–70. 
64 
Garrard, Artemisia Gentileschi, 358. 
65 
Garrard, Artemisia Gentileschi, 358. 
66 
Garrard, Artemisia Gentileschi, 358. 
67 
Mary D. Garrard, Artemisia Gentileschi around 
1622, Berkeley, CA, 2001, 68–70. 
68 
See, for example, the resting ﬁgure in 
Rembrandt’s Painter in his Studio (c. 1629) or 
Vela´zquez, poised to paint, in Las Meninas 
(1656). The deliberate underplaying of the 
physicality of picture-making in many seven­
teenth-century portraits is symptomatic of a 
desire to emphasize the intellectual aspect of 
painting, to represent painting not as a menial 
craft but as elevated idea, as art. 
69 
Roszika Parker and Griselda Pollock, Old 
Mistresses: Women, Art and Ideology, London, 1981, 
27. 
70 
Garrard, Artemisia Gentileschi, 354. 
71 
Garrard, Artemisia Gentileschi, 354. 
72 
Watercolour became established as a respect­
able medium for art-making in England 
because concerns about the gender of the 
technique were overridden by pride in national 
identity. Watercolour became celebrated as a 
particularly English medium, one to be 
contrasted with the French preference for 
works in oil. 
73 
Kay Dian Kriz, The Idea of the English Landscape 
Painter: Genius as Alibi in the Early Nineteenth 
Century, New Haven, CT, 1997, 46. For further 
discussion of the way particular forms of 
handling became associated with a certain 
class of society in art criticism of the time see 
Sam Smiles, ‘‘‘Splashers’’, ‘‘scrawlers’’ and 
‘‘plasterers’’: British landscape painting and 
the language of criticism, 1800–40’, Turner 
Studies, 10, 1, 1990, 5–11, esp. 5–6. 
74 
See, for instance, Kriz’s discussion of scraping 
in Turner’s The Upper Falls of the Reichenbach: 
Rainbow (c. 1810). Kriz, The Idea of the English 
Landscape Painter, 109. 
75 
David Hill, Thomas Girtin: Genius in the North, 
Leeds, 1999, 24. 
76 
Hill, Thomas Girtin, 24. 
77 
T. J. Clark, Image of the People: Gustave Courbet and 
the 1848 Revolution, London, 1973, 12. 
78 
Smith, The Emergence of the Professional Water­
colourist, 38. 
79 
Quoted in Smith, The Emergence of the Professional 
Watercolourist, 38. 
80 
Quoted in Smith, The Emergence of the Professional 
Watercolourist, 38. 
81 
See the ﬁrst chapter of Smith’s The Emergence of 
the Professional Watercolourist for a discussion of 
the media hierarchy of the time, 13–51. 
82 
T. J. Clark, The Painting of Modern Life, Princeton, 
NJ, 1984, 13. 
83 
Clark, The Painting of Modern Life, 13.  
84 
Clark, The Painting of Modern Life, 14.  
85 
Lynda Nead, The Female Nude, London, 1992, 56. 
The analogy between penis and paintbrush was 
more recently made in Internal Affairs (Dir. Mike 
Figgis, 1990, USA). There is a scene in this ﬁlm 
in which the wife of the main character praises 
her husband for being ‘a good painter’ and 
reassures him that his ‘brush’ is ﬁne during a 
discussion of their sex life. 
86 
Parker and Pollock, Old Mistresses, 83. 
87 
Vincent Van Gogh, The Complete Letters of Vincent 
Van Gogh: Volume 3, New York, 1959, 509. 
88 
Nead, The Female Nude, 56. 
89 
John F. Douglas, Janusz M. Gasiorek and John A. 
Swafﬁeld, Fluid 
Mechanics, Fourth Edition, 
Harlow, 2001, 9. 
90 
Irigaray, This Sex which is Not One, 110.  
91 
Jean-Paul Sartre, Being and Nothingness, trans. 
Hazel E. Barnes, London, 1989, 607. 
32 

S E X I N G  T H E  C A N VA S  
92 
Griselda Pollock, ‘Painting, feminism, history’, 
in Miche`le Barrett and Anne Phillips, eds, 
Destabilizing 
Theory: 
Contemporary 
Feminist 
Debates, Cambridge, 1992, 142. 
93 
T. J. Clark, ‘Jackson Pollock’s abstraction’, in 
Serge Guilbaut, ed., Reconstructing Modernism: 
Art in New York, Paris and Montreal 1945–1964, 
Cambridge, MA, 1992, 229. 
94 
At some stage Vettriano most probably posi­
tioned a model in the pose depicted and then 
photographed her before going on to create 
this painting. For a discussion of Jack 
Vettriano’s 
working 
practices, 
see 
Jack 
Vettriano, Studio Life, London, 2008, 26–35. 
95 
Susan Brownmiller, Against 
our 
Will: 
Men, 
Women and Rape, New York, 1975, 389. 
96 
Alison Rowley, ‘On viewing three paintings by 
Jenny Saville’, in Griselda Pollock, ed., Genera­
tions and Geographies in the Visual Arts: Feminist 
Readings, London, 1996, 101. 
97 
Rowley, ‘On viewing three paintings by Jenny 
Saville’, 101. 
98 
Rowley, ‘On viewing three paintings by Jenny 
Saville’, 101. 
99 
Griselda Pollock offers a different reading of 
the technique of staining and soaking, 
suggesting that it is ‘useful to view [them] 
through the prism of sexual difference’ but 
that doing so reveals how they function to 
create a site through which to communicate 
the ‘feminine dimension of loss and separa­
tion’ that characterizes ‘the loss of the 
maternal body’. See Pollock, ‘Killing men and 
dying women’, in Fred Orton and Griselda 
Pollock, eds, Avant-gardes and Partisans Reviewed, 
Manchester, 1996, 258. 
100  Fred Orton, Figuring Jasper Johns, London, 1994, 
120. 
101 Orton, Figuring Jasper Johns, 120. 
102 Orton, Figuring Jasper Johns, 124. 
103 Orton, Figuring Jasper Johns, 124. 
104 Orton, Figuring Jasper Johns, 123. 
105 Orton, Figuring Jasper Johns, 124. 
106 Orton, Figuring Jasper Johns, 124. 
107 Gavin Butt, Between You and Me, 71.  
108 Margarita Cappock, Francis 
Bacon’s 
Studio, 
London, 2005, 208. 
109 David Sylvester, Interviews with Francis Bacon, 
London, 1993, 93. 
110  Sylvester, Interviews with Francis Bacon, 92–4. 
111   See, for example, Nan Goldin’s photograph of 
Brian B after coming (1983) which is reproduced 
in Nan Goldin and David Armstrong, A Double 
Life, New York, 1994, 88. 
112   Rozsika Parker, The Subversive Stitch, London, 
1984, 2. 
113   This capacity for reversion to a ‘ﬂuid’ state 
helps to explain why artworks in wax have not 
been accorded great status within histories of 
art. See Georges Didi-Huberman, ‘Viscosities 
and survivals: art history put to the test by 
material’, in Roberta Panzanelli, ed., Ephemeral 
Bodies: Wax Sculpture and the Human Figure, Los 
Angeles, CA, 2008, 154–69. 
114  Parker, The Subversive Stitch, 5.  
115  See Sadie Plant, Zeros and Ones, London, 1998, 
189–90. 
116 Plant, Zeros and Ones, 185. 
117 Plant, Zeros and Ones, 190. 
118 Graham Swift, Waterland, London, 1992, 68. 
33 

3   
PHENOMENOLOGY AND INTERPRETATION  
BEYOND THE FLESH  
A M A N D A  B O E T Z K E S  
The ethical quandaries surrounding issues of subjectivity and the interpretation 
of art often revolve around the questions of who is representing, who is repre­
sented, and who is looking; and around how these dynamics produce and 
reproduce visual systems of power on the basis of gender, race, and libidinal 
desire. On a slightly different trajectory, phenomenology interrogates how we 
interpret in the ﬁrst place. Though it presumes that the artwork and the spectator 
situate one another within a shared network of sense, this is not to say that 
information is easily communicated between them. The viewer’s task is not to 
ascertain the artwork’s objective meaning, but rather to respond to the artwork 
with the question, ‘how does this artwork mean to me?’ The ethical charge of this 
questioning lies in its acknowledgement that the meaning of the artwork is not 
inherent but rather presents itself to the spectator, historian, or critic through 
the body’s actions, reactions or non-actions. Meaning may be either enabled or 
encumbered by the viewer’s response to the artwork. 
In this way a phenomenological approach to writing art history usually 
entails an analysis of how an artwork’s meaning presents itself through the 
spectator’s ﬁeld of perception. It is predicated on an understanding of the 
meaning of the work of art as co-extensive with – as deﬁning and deﬁned by – the 
spatial, temporal and material conditions it shares with the viewer. What is often 
at stake in a phenomenological interpretation is the issue of how the artwork 
brings these conditions to attention. The most signiﬁcant contribution of 
phenomenology, however, is not simply that it raises questions about this 
embodied experience of art, but that it calls both the body itself and the meaning 
of the artwork into question through one another. Otherwise put, a phenomen­
ological standpoint presumes that the work of art and the viewer are enmeshed in 
a contingent encounter, in which ‘embodiment’ is neither a natural or prede­
termined position from which to interpret, nor is the meaning of the artwork 
inherent to the object. Phenomenology has thus served as a counterpoint to art-
historical analyses that explain the meaning of an artwork through deference 
to the historic context (or socio-political framework) from which it emerged. That 
is to say, it challenges the presumption that the artwork’s meaning is conﬁned to 
its historic period, as well as the presumed stability of a given context. This is not 
to suggest that phenomenology ignores the ideological apparatuses at work in 
artistic production and reception. On the contrary, it addresses them in the most 
34 

P H E N O M E N O L O G Y  A N D  I N T E R P R E TAT I O N  B E Y O N D  T H E  F L E S H  
trenchant way by investigating how structures of language and power 
materialize in the artwork, the spectator, and the relationship between. In this 
way, it asserts that the materiality of the artwork, and the way in which it 
presents itself to the viewer, actually constitutes what we understand to be 
‘historic context’. 
Insofar as phenomenology takes the relation between the viewer and the 
artwork to be variable, it foregrounds the fact that the writing of art history, and 
particularly making claims about the meaning of the artwork, takes place 
through acts of interpretation. While it may seem that this would invite a kind of 
relativism – as though as many meanings could be ‘applied’ to an artwork as 
people to ‘read into’ it – in fact the real risk is not that phenomenology might 
invoke a plurality of meanings, but, quite the opposite, that it might permit a 
solipsistic interpretation that would close down the potential meanings of the 
artwork. That is to say, the main concern is that the historian’s reading of the 
artwork cloaks it in a narrative that afﬁrms her or his preconceived judgement of 
it, thus limiting the possibilities and power of its meaning. 
The spectre of solipsism is not merely present in the discipline of art history, 
but appears to have haunted phenomenology since its inception. Indeed, Maurice 
Merleau-Ponty’s ontology of the ﬂesh, which is predicated on the entanglement of 
the subject with others and with things of the world, aimed to deﬂect various 
charges of solipsism. He insists: ‘We are interrogating our experience precisely in 
order to know how it opens us to what is not ourselves.’1 As I will discuss, the 
intertwinement with the other, or with the art object, forecloses a totalized 
knowledge of it. It does mean, however, that one is always privy to the object’s 
invisibility, the way in which it deﬁes categorization, judgement, and historical 
narration. The crucial issues for art historians in their deployment of phenom­
enology, then, are, ﬁrstly, how the embodied entanglement with the artwork 
reveals its resistance to preconceived meanings, and, secondly, how its taciturn 
quality gives rise to meanings beyond the restrictions of the interpreter’s 
assumptions. 
Perhaps it is precisely because phenomenology has had to contend with the 
charge of solipsism that it has also had to account for the ethical dilemmas of 
interpretation. Though a phenomenological approach in the wake of Merleau-
Ponty often emphasizes the spectator’s individual (because bodily) experience of 
the work of art, it nevertheless also posits this encounter as a precondition for an 
intimate awareness of the material object and a description of it that responds to 
its subtleties. It therefore positions the viewer in a state of extreme openness to 
the artwork that allegedly precedes any preconceived notions about it, and gives 
rise to the inevitable crystallization of sense into knowledge – be it an aesthetic 
judgement, historical categorization, or conceptual assessment. The phenomen­
ology of art is located at the crossroads between a receptive mode of confronta­
tion – one that is acutely aware of the way in which the artwork initially presents 
itself to the senses – and a commitment to making a critical statement about 
what and how the artwork means in the history of art now. Otherwise put, the 
writing of art history generates a disarticulation between the embodied experi­
ence of the object in its sensorial excess and the interpretation one brings to it. 
The ethical impetus of phenomenology is to reveal this disarticulation as it 
occurs. 
35 

P H E N O M E N O L O G Y  A N D  I N T E R P R E TAT I O N  B E Y O N D  T H E  F L E S H  
In speaking about phenomenology as an approach to art history that is 
attentive to the artwork’s alterity, I will focus on three areas in particular: 
embodiment, intentionality, and mode of confrontation. My goal is to show how 
each of these recurrent themes galvanizes the ethical questions of art-historical 
interpretation. I will examine post-1960s art, with particular focus on post-
minimalist sculpture and the rise of installation art, as way of highlighting the 
stakes of a phenomenological approach. Phenomenology’s inﬂuence in the 
discipline is more varied than I can undertake to explain in depth here.2 This 
discussion aims to highlight its strengths and drawbacks, as well as point towards 
its convergences with other methods of art-historical inquiry. 
T HE  P RO B LE MATI C S  OF  T HE  F LES H  
Phenomenology is often associated with the notion of embodiment, and this is 
largely due to the considerable inﬂuence of Maurice Merleau-Ponty’s writings. In 
the 1960s, that theorist’s Phenomenology of Perception (1945) and The Visible and the 
Invisible (1959) had a profound impact on artists, critics, and art historians, 
particularly in the United States. Though since then other theorists of phenom­
enology have come to the foreground of the discipline, his work still poses a 
number of ethical challenges that are worthwhile considering further.3 
Merleau-Ponty initiated a line of questioning on the a priori conditions of 
perception. He hypothesized that perception is founded on a pre-objective 
awareness of oneself as interwoven in a network of sense with other people, 
objects, and the world. Moreover, each of the body’s senses, particularly the senses 
of touch and sight, inform one another to produce a coherent perception. His 
term ‘the aesthesiological body’ best captures this notion of a subject that is both 
physically embedded in the fabric of the surrounding world and wholly geared 
towards garnering sense from it with every facet of the body, in its every motion, 
gesture, and expression. 
In the Phenomenology of Perception, Merleau-Ponty deliberates on the issue of 
how and why one perceives the world and things as stable and coherent, despite 
one’s mobility and inﬁnitely shifting perspective. He puts forward a critique of 
Kantian transcendentalism, which argues that the perception of objects as 
constant results from our logical understanding of those objects. By contrast, 
Merleau-Ponty maintains that prior to any concept of the world, the body is 
engaged with it in a pre-logical encounter by which the subject comes to grips 
with objects as part of a wider system that constitutes the spatial and temporal 
environment. Because of this pre-cognitive multi-sensorial contact, the world has 
a uniﬁed appearance within the perceptual ﬁeld. Among the most signiﬁcant 
aspects of Merleau-Ponty’s elaboration of the bodily experience are his insistence 
on the primacy of the sense of touch, and his emphasis on the active, expressive 
body. He argues that tactility gives the fullest articulation of the object’s visual 
properties. From the sense of touch, which localizes an object in its environment, 
the other senses formulate an understanding of that object’s implicit nature, 
including its colour and organization in relation to other things and one’s own 
body. For this reason, perception is not achieved by senses that passively await 
stimulation from the external world, but rather is delivered through the move­
ments, gestures and expressions of the body. 
36 

P H E N O M E N O L O G Y  A N D  I N T E R P R E TAT I O N  B E Y O N D  T H E  F L E S H  
In The Visible and the Invisible Merleau-Ponty further developed his argument 
that perception arises from the body’s intimate connection to the world. Through 
the metaphor of the chiasm he describes an intercorporeal relationship, whereby 
what we know of ourselves and others is generated by a sense of the body’s ﬂesh as 
intertwined with, what he calls, ‘the ﬂesh of the world’. The ontology of the ﬂesh, 
however, elucidates more than a physical connection with the external world. The 
ﬁgure of the chiasm has both bodily and linguistic connotations. Derived from 
the Greek letter ‘chi’ (X), it implies a criss-crossing structure, as is found, for 
example, in the optic chiasm, the point in the brain where the optic nerves from 
the right visual ﬁeld cross to the left side of the brain and vice versa. In rhetoric, a 
chiasmus is a ﬁgure of speech involving two clauses, in which the second clause 
inverts the order of words in the ﬁrst, as in the phrase ‘Fair is foul and foul is fair’. 
This structural intertwining and inversion is the basis of Merleau-Ponty’s 
understanding of the constitutive relation between the body and language, 
between the subject and the other, between the seer and the visible, between the 
one who touches and the one who is touched. Perception does not come simply 
from seeing and touching; it is developed through the sense of being seen and 
touched as well. The subject of the aesthesiological body knows itself as both 
subject and object to another, is both seer and seen. These two domains of 
experience, the visible and the invisible, respectively, are the reverse and obverse 
sides of embodied perception. Moreover, Merleau-Ponty extends this model of 
reversibility to the relationship between the senses of vision and touch, postu­
lating that the latent tangibility of the world is the condition of its visibility. 
Vision is founded on pre-cognitive touching, gesture and movement, and thus the 
look behaves like a hand that ‘envelops, palpates and espouses visible things’. 
For this reason, the term ‘embodiment’, as it appears in the history of post-
minimalist sculpture, and more recently in that of installation and virtual art, is 
understood to refer to the spectator’s state of quasi-immersion in the artwork. A 
phenomenological interpretation often assumes that the viewer is not merely 
physically located in relation to the artwork, but is actually incorporated by it, 
and formulated as a viewing subject through this corporeal relation. But even this 
description does not do justice to the more complex predicament of the chiasmic 
relation, for if it were merely the case that the artwork formulated the viewing 
subject, in the sense that it prefabricated how the viewer sees it, there would be 
no need for critical or historical interpretation. Perception would be reproduced 
from one viewer to the next. A phenomenological account of the artwork would 
merely describe how it ‘enframes’ the viewer (to borrow a phrase from Heidegger) 
as though art is merely a technological apparatus that anticipates and produces 
its own viewer.4 In fact, Merleau-Ponty’s ﬂeshly ontology prevents us from 
understanding the relationship between art and the spectator in this way 
precisely because of his fundamentally ambiguous deﬁnition of the ﬂesh. 
Judith Butler astutely asks what exactly Merleau-Ponty means when he refers 
to the ‘ﬂesh’, for this term is not to be taken as simply synonymous with the body 
per se.5 It might be more accurate to say that the ﬂesh is the shared corporeal 
condition between oneself and the world which makes visibility possible. Thus, 
corporeity is not limited to the individual body; it is the more generalized 
elemental state of the world. Merleau-Ponty writes: ‘The ﬂesh is not matter, is not 
mind, is not substance. To designate it, we should need the old term ‘‘element’’, in 
37 

P H E N O M E N O L O G Y  A N D  I N T E R P R E TAT I O N  B E Y O N D  T H E  F L E S H  
the sense it was used to speak of water, air, earth, and ﬁre, that is, in the sense of a 
general thing, midway between the spatio-temporal individual and the idea, a sort 
of incarnate principle that brings a style of being wherever there is a fragment of 
being. The ﬂesh is in this sense an ‘‘element’’ of Being.’6 Merleau-Ponty goes to 
great pains to expand his notion of perception from individual sense reception to 
a broader notion of the visible that evokes the body’s touch, motility, and 
expression and coalesces it into a ‘style of being’. He thus explains the discrete 
body’s entrenchment in and communicability with the world at large. 
Interestingly, this relation between the body and the world, between oneself 
and another, between vision and touch – a relation that Merleau-Ponty describes 
as ‘reversibility’ – comes to fruition in The Visible and the Invisible through an 
analogy to language and speech: 
As there is a reversibility of the seeing and the visible, and as at the point where the two 
metamorphoses cross what we call perception is born, so also there is a reversibility of the 
speech and what it signiﬁes; the signiﬁcation is what comes to seal, to close, to gather up the 
multiplicity of the physical, physiological, linguistic means of elocution, to contract them into 
one sole act, as the vision comes to complete the aesthesiological body.7 
In this way, embodiment itself is not just a corporeal foundation, but is the 
prerequisite for thinking outside oneself and interacting with that which lies 
beyond the horizon of one’s own being. There is thus a certain malleability to 
Merleau-Ponty’s deﬁnition of the ﬂesh that has led art historians away from the 
body as a topic (the question of how bodies are represented in art, for example) 
and toward questions about how the body functions as a locus of transaction; how 
discursive relations are incorporated; and, more strongly, how this process of 
incorporation in the visible (the relation between artwork, spectator, and the 
visible world) constitutes the trajectory of an artwork’s meaning. The art histor­
ian’s goal is therefore not to uncover an objective meaning, but to explain the 
work of art through reﬂection on the tenor of its appearance to her or him, and 
how this appearance positions her or him as a viewing subject. 
A phenomenological description, however, is not meant to concretize this 
relation between viewer and object; rather, it enacts what Merleau-Ponty terms an 
interrogative mode, a way of following experience through a questioning of it 
without deducing a thesis or deﬁnition of Being (whether the artwork’s or the 
spectator’s) that could be realized as fact. Since phenomenology takes a prior 
ontological connection between the viewer and the object as a starting point, the 
goal is not to question the meaning of the object as a discrete entity. Instead, it is to 
ask what brings the subject and the object into relation, such that the question of 
their meaning to one another might be posed in the ﬁrst place. In this respect, 
Butler argues, Merleau-Ponty concurs with Heidegger’s insistence in Being and Time 
that the ontological relation that binds subject and object leads the path of ques­
tioning,  and that it is  in being  guided  by  this  interrogation that meaning  is  
discovered.8 Thus, when Merleau-Ponty declares that interrogation is an ontological 
organ that bears the ultimate relation to Being, he echoes Heidegger’s statement 
that ‘in what is asked about there lies also that which is to be found out by the asking [das 
Efragte] . . . Inquiry, as a kind of seeking, must be guided beforehand by what is 
sought. So the meaning of Being must already be available to us in some way.’9 
38 

P H E N O M E N O L O G Y  A N D  I N T E R P R E TAT I O N  B E Y O N D  T H E  F L E S H  
1 Robert Morris, Untitled (L-beams), 1965. Stainless steel in 3 parts, dimensions variable. New York: 
Whitney Museum of American Art (gift of Howard and Jean Lipman). Photo: r Whitney Museum 
of American Art, New York. 
Bearing in mind the primacy of the ontological connection between the 
subject and the object, we can understand phenomenology’s inﬂuence in North 
America in minimalist and postminimalist art beginning in the 1960s. Michael 
Fried’s condemnation of minimalist art as theatrical, for example, is at its basis 
an observation that the art objects were conceived and built with the express 
purpose of acknowledging the spectator’s place in the space of exhibition. The 
artist Robert Morris thereby justiﬁes this alleged ‘theatricality’ by claiming that 
there was a trend in post-war art to expose the process of production as part of the 
artwork itself, a move that revealed the ontological primacy of the subject–object 
relation. In positing the artwork as unformed, or at different stages in its 
formation, artists presented the artwork in a state prior to its emergence as a 
distinct object. They therefore positioned the basis of the artwork’s meaning in 
the interaction between its raw materiality and the bodily behaviour of either the 
artist or the viewer. In his 1970 essay, ‘Some Notes on the Phenomenology of 
Making: The Search for the Motivated’, Morris traces this tendency to Jackson 
Pollock, whom he sees as one of the ﬁrst artists to attempt this surfacing of the 
interaction between materials and artistic process. The drip technique, he 
suggests, directly involved the use of the entire body as opposed to merely the 
hand and body. Pollock investigated how paint behaves within the restraints of 
gravity in such a way that the canvases divulge the possibilities of form that arise 
from the tension between the body’s movement and the set of constraints 
imposed by the natural world and the materials. In this way, Morris concludes, 
39 

P H E N O M E N O L O G Y  A N D  I N T E R P R E TAT I O N  B E Y O N D  T H E  F L E S H  
postwar art became engaged in making its means visible in the ﬁnished work. By 
‘means’, he is referring to the ‘factors of bodily possibility, the nature of materials 
and physical laws, the temporal dimensions of process and perception’.10 He does 
not merely speak of a stable relation between the artwork and the body that views 
it, but makes the stronger contention that the artwork is predicated on the 
exploration of the limits and possibilities of bodily behaviour. To retrieve the 
artwork’s meaning, then, would be to track this exploration. 
In the same way that Morris emphasizes the bodily behaviours involved in the 
process of making the artwork, Rosalind Krauss underscores the bodily behaviours 
at stake in viewing it. Indeed, she argues that Morris’s work thematizes the very 
gestures by which one perceives the world. In Passages in Modern Sculpture (1977) she 
suggests that Morris’s Untitled (L-beams) is analogous to the human body (plate 1). For 
this work, Morris positioned three identical large plywood Ls in different positions 
relative to the ground; one upended, another on its side, and a third standing on its 
two ends. Though each is ‘objectively’ the same, the a priori structure of the beams is 
not visible. The appearance of their difference from one another is the basis of their 
sculptural meaning. Morris’s work, she argues, addresses itself to the way in which 
our bodies and gestures are dependent on the other beings who perceive them. The 
L-beams ‘serve as a kind of cognate for this naked dependence of intention and 
meaning upon the body as it surfaces into the world in every external particular of 
its movement and gestures’.11 Morris uses phenomenology as a framework through 
which to understand a trend towards revealing the means of the artwork’s 
production, and thus sees artistic meaning as rooted in the relation between the 
artist and the object. However, Krauss deploys it in order to disrupt the notion that 
the object possesses an inherent meaning (which is usually taken as the expression 
of, and an analogy for, the inner psychological life of the artist), and locates it 
instead in the relation between the art object and the viewer. 
There are two important implications to this understanding of the artwork’s 
contingency: ﬁrst, it presents a model of interpretation that is based on the 
communication between viewer and object; and second, insofar as this commu­
nication is predicated on a shared language, it raises a dilemma concerning the 
point at which  an  object’s  expression  may  depart from a  viewer’s  interpretation.  
Since the meaning of the artwork is activated in the encounter between object and 
viewer as two discrete entities, it is their separation from one another that sparks 
interrogation, gesture and movement in the ﬁrst place. Merleau-Ponty writes: ‘We 
understand then why we see the things themselves, in their places, where they are, 
according to their being . . . It is that the thickness of the ﬂesh between the seer and 
the thing is constitutive for the thing of its visibility as for the seer of his corporeity; 
it is not an obstacle between them, it is their means of communication.’12 Once 
again, it is signiﬁcant that Merleau-Ponty’s ontology of the ﬂesh, and particularly 
the embodied subject’s interrogative mode of encounter with others and the world, 
operates under a linguistic model. As Butler argues, the relations to which the 
‘interconnective tissue’, or ﬂesh, give rise are parallel to a linguistic web in which 
the totality of language supersedes apparent differences.13 
Butler’s observation raises the question, if, as Heidegger suggests, one’s 
interrogation of the world is already guided by it on the basis of one’s ontological 
connection to it, does this not ultimately close down the possibility that the world 
(including the Other, and, as in this case, the art object) can express something 
40 

P H E N O M E N O L O G Y  A N D  I N T E R P R E TAT I O N  B E Y O N D  T H E  F L E S H  
more than or different from what one already expects to perceive in any given 
encounter? In art history, does phenomenology prevent new meanings from 
arising in presuming to link the object and the viewer together in the condition 
of shared ﬂesh? If the object invites a particular look, and a speciﬁc path of 
questioning, what allows the possibility of reading it differently? How can one ask 
new questions if all the answers are presupposed? Or, to modify the question, can 
a different look ever ﬁnd its place in the chiasmic relation between the seer and 
the object? 
Luce Irigaray criticizes Merleau-Ponty on precisely the grounds that the ﬂesh 
ontology risks masking the alterity of the other and the subject from one another 
in the totality of the embodied relation. Irigaray argues that the model of the 
chiasm never delineates a recognizable distinction between oneself and the ﬂesh 
of the world, so that the phenomenological subject exists in a state of primordial 
indeterminacy akin to being in the womb. Because Merleau-Ponty does not 
identify a point of birth and separation for the subject, the visible world becomes 
like the interior of the maternal body to which the subject has unencumbered 
tactile access. The subject never really sees what lies outside the sensory network 
of the ﬂesh in which she or he is immersed, and therefore cannot see the other 
and the world from outside an egocentric position. The ﬂesh is a totalizing 
structure that reafﬁrms the subject’s centrality in the world through bodily 
perception. Perception occurs within a ‘fog’ or ‘mist’ of the seer’s intentions, and 
the subject is thus incapable of a truly reciprocal exchange with the other. 
Irigaray maintains that this failure to recognize a process of differentiation 
results in a model of perception based on solipsism. All sensation becomes 
translated into ‘Sameness’, a visible world that merely fulﬁls one’s perceptual 
expectations so that no true understanding of difference can register. She writes: 
The world cannot be perceived without language, yet all language exists virtually in silence. All 
that remains to be said is that the world is isomorphic with the subject and vice versa, and the 
whole is sealed up in a circle . . . According to Merleau-Ponty, energy plays itself out in the 
backward-and-forward motion of a loom. But weaving the visible and my look in this way, I 
could just as well say that I close them off from myself. The texture becomes increasingly tight, 
taking me into it, sheltering me there but imprisoning me as well.14 
Irigaray’s assessment of the ﬂesh ontology raises the doubt that there is ever an 
opportunity for the subject to perceive the alterity of the other and the world. Her 
focus is on how the intimacy of the chiasm both relies on metaphors of the femi­
nine body, and at the same time disavows the speciﬁcity of that body. Thus, sexual 
difference is negated in order to reinforce male subjectivity as the default, central, 
and universal position of perception. This analysis is equally applicable to other 
differences; as post-colonial theorists have explained, differences such as race, reli­
gion and nationality are deﬁned within a framework that supports and justiﬁes 
the ideology of the colonizing empire. At its core, Irigaray’s argument is that at the 
threshold of one’s perceptual ﬁeld all differences are inhibited or construed in such 
a way as to reinforce what the seer already knows about his or her place in the 
world. The seer is never really shaken, touched, or moved out of this solipsistic 
standpoint by that which does not fulﬁl the intention of his or her look. The act of 
seeing and the visible world are merely extensions of the seer. 
41 

P H E N O M E N O L O G Y  A N D  I N T E R P R E TAT I O N  B E Y O N D  T H E  F L E S H  
Interestingly, Irigaray seizes Merleau-Ponty’s idea of an interrogative mode, 
and indeed it becomes the basis of an ethical relation that would allow irre­
ducible difference to register. For Irigaray, Merleau-Ponty does not fulﬁl the 
promise of this possibility, however. She argues that ‘the phenomenology of the 
ﬂesh that Merleau-Ponty attempts is without question(s). It has no spacing or 
interval for the freedom of questioning between two.’15 What is required is a 
disruption of the system of signiﬁcation that sublimates differences, an ethical 
imperative that is initiated for Irigaray by the paradigmatic questions: ‘Who art 
thou? . . . Who am I? What sort of event do we represent for each other when 
together?’ The ethical relation, then, is one that both recognizes the co-implica­
tion of oneself with the other, and at the same time gives rise to a recognition of 
the other’s excess beyond that co-implication. 
THE INTENTIONA L EXPERIENCE AND EMBOD IE D ACTION 
The ethics of phenomenological interpretation, it seems, comes to rest on the 
balance between the seer’s intentionality and her or his return to the ‘spacing or 
interval for the freedom of questioning between two’. To speak of intentionality is to 
raise a topic that has been at the heart of phenomenology since Husserl. It might 
therefore be useful to investigate the term, and its appearance in art history, in 
order to consider further the ethical terrain of phenomenological interpretation. 
From his mentor, Franz von Brentano, Husserl inherited an interest in how 
objects appear through what Brentano called ‘psychical acts’. Essentially, Bren­
tano initiated a line of questioning into how objects are perceived through 
psychical phenomena such as judgements, emotions and presentations (by which 
he means the manner in which consciousness refers to an object). Husserl ulti­
mately argues that there is no perception of objects without these psychical acts 
and he binds the two together under the term ‘intentional experience’. He notes, 
‘There are . . . not two things present in experience, we do not experience the 
object and beside it the intentional experience directed upon it, there are not 
even two things present in the sense of a part and a whole which contains it: only 
one thing is present, the intentional experience . . . ’16 
Using an example that calls to mind Tony Smith’s Die (plate 2), Husserl demon­
strates not only the inextricability of the perceived object and the visual experience 
but also how intentional experience reveals the object as a stable entity. He writes: 
I see a thing, e.g. this box, but I do not see my sensations. I always see one and the same box, 
however it may be turned and tilted . . . In the ﬂux of experienced content we imagine ourselves 
to be in perceptual touch with one and the same object . . . For we experience a ‘consciousness 
of identity’ . . . Must we not reply that different sensational contents are given, but that we 
apperceive or ‘take them in the same sense’ and that to take them in this sense is an experienced 
character through which the ‘being’ of the object for me is ﬁrst constituted.17 
The intentional experience is at the core of perception; the presentation of the 
thing, in this case a box, constitutes its essence (being) for the seer. In other words, 
the subject’s perception of the object reveals its essence. Cinching together the 
being of the thing with perception, Husserl turns attention away from empirical 
statements about the world and towards questions of how it appears. 
42 

P H E N O M E N O L O G Y  A N D  I N T E R P R E TAT I O N  B E Y O N D  T H E  F L E S H  
2 Tony Smith, Die, 1962. Steel, 6  6  6 ft. New York: Museum of Modern Art. r Tony Smith (ARS). 
Photo: Museum of Modern Art, New York/Licensed by SCALA/Art Resource, NY. 
In doing so, however, Husserl opens the possibility of an anthropomorphic 
world, in which things do not merely exist in and of themselves, but rather as things 
that present themselves quasi-consciously to the subject. In the case of the percep­
tion of a box, the sense of it comes as an experienced character, or a ‘consciousness 
of identity’. When Michael Fried addresses Smith’s Die in ‘Art and Objecthood’, he 
emphasizes how the object’s theatricality stems from its anthropomorphism. At 6 
feet high, the object stands at an imposingly human scale, a fact that shows how, in 
its very construction, the object acknowledges, and aims to interact with, the 
spectator who views it. As a stable object that is identical from every vantage point, 
Die overcomes any inﬂux of sense that may come from moving around it. In this 
respect, it seemingly presents its ‘being’ as a cube to the viewer. 
Yet in anticipating a viewer and addressing itself to her or him, Die demonstrates 
its own intentionality, reversing the relation so that it appears not simply as an 
object but as an ‘other’ who is experiencing, or at least responding to, the spectator. 
Through this shifting between  its status as an object for  the viewer  and  as an  
anthropomorphic object for whom the viewer is the object, Die implements an 
awareness of the reciprocity underlying the intentional experience. Die’s anthro­
pomorphism brings the matter of reversibility to bear on intentionality. And it is the 
possibility of a reversible relation that Merleau-Ponty grapples with in his model of 
the chiasm, and which for Irigaray is the threshold to the domain of ethics. 
For Merleau-Ponty, the intentional experience is mediated by the body, and 
not merely by psychical acts. Indeed, in his later work, he attempts to completely 
43 

P H E N O M E N O L O G Y  A N D  I N T E R P R E TAT I O N  B E Y O N D  T H E  F L E S H  
relocate the intentional experience to the body and eschew notions such as ‘acts of 
consciousness’ or ‘states of consciousness’.18 Indeed, what  is most relevant for  
Irigaray, despite her critique, is that Merleau-Ponty shows a striking awareness of 
the complexity of the meeting of two intentional perceivers. He describes the 
coupling of oneself with another in such a way that the subject is thrown out of the 
world she or he already knows, and returns to a state of exploration, not just of the 
other, but of oneself through the other. As soon as we see other seers, he explains: 
I appear to myself completely turned inside out under my own eyes . . . For the ﬁrst time, the 
body no longer couples itself up with the world, it clasps another body, applying [itself to it] 
carefully with its whole extension, forming tirelessly with its hands the strange statute which 
in its turn gives everything it receives; the body is lost outside of the world and its goals, 
fascinated, by the unique occupation of ﬂoating in Being with another life . . . And henceforth 
movement, touch, vision, applying themselves to the other and to themselves, return toward 
their source and, in the patient and silent labor of desire, begin the paradox of expression.19 
Much as Merleau-Ponty attempts to forestall the charge of solipsism in his 
elucidation of the embodied subject, Irigaray insists that in the very bodily 
gestures of expression, the subject ultimately fabricates the other through a 
projection of the intentional experience and ultimately re-establishes her or his 
own perception as primary. Thus, she posits that reversibility is in actual fact a 
sort of animism in which seeing and the visible, oneself and the other are merely 
two metamorphoses of oneself.20 She suggests further that when the body and its 
expressions ‘apply themselves’, they are not seeking a reciprocal touch, but are 
reinforcing and repeating the relation that the subject already knows. And so, in 
Merleau-Ponty’s many vivid examples of how touch elaborates vision and creates a 
passage to the world and others, a certain hierarchy is established through active 
gestures that ultimately cover over the other and the world: my hands form 
tirelessly; my body clasps the other’s body; my eye envelops and palpates the 
world, and so forth. 
The difﬁculty of bringing the intentional experience to bear on the embodied 
condition appears, then, in the conﬂation of actions that deliver tactile sense 
with those that seek a stable and deﬁned sense of the object, the other, and the 
world. The interrogative mode that Merleau-Ponty advocates is perhaps at odds 
with the expressive actions that forge the intentional experience of the embodied 
subject. Or it may be more accurate to say that the subject’s interrogation 
through expressive actions closes her or him off from the world and the other. 
This criticism of the relation between the subject and another person might be 
equally pertinent to the relation between a spectator and an art object. This is not 
to suggest an easy parallel between other people and objects, but rather to 
propose that there is always a general risk that the subject inhibits reciprocal 
communication with the world in her or his interrogation of it. 
It is with this dilemma in mind that we might consider Alex Potts’ discussion 
of sculpture in the late 1960s and early 1970s.21 Potts argues that at this time 
artists were questioning the parameters that deﬁned the medium of sculpture; 
more precisely they were challenging the presumption that sculpture should be 
deﬁned in terms of a harmonious relationship between the material of the object 
and its structural form. He posits that painters and sculptors alike were blurring 
44 

P H E N O M E N O L O G Y  A N D  I N T E R P R E TAT I O N  B E Y O N D  T H E  F L E S H  
3 Joseph Beuys, Felt Suit, 
1970. Felt suit and 
wooden hanger. r ARS, 
NY. Photo: Tate, London/ 
Art Resource, NY. 
the deﬁnitions of their respective media by privileging the tactile and through an 
unrelenting focus on the raw materials of the object, a move that subsequently 
led to the disappearance of the category of sculpture altogether. Where tradi­
tionally, a presumed separation of visual and tactile senses had underpinned the 
distinction between painting and sculpture as media, in the 1960s the widespread 
investment in the substance of artistic materials forged a common ﬁeld of prac­
tice between the two. Joseph Beuys, for example, cultivated a shared space for two-
dimensional and three-dimensional media in Felt Suit (1970), a work that like 
many of his projects considers the physical qualities of its material, felt (plate 3). It 
does so, however, in such a way that it negates formal structure. Though Felt Suit is 
suspended from a wooden hanger on the wall, the fabric is heavy and one is 
instantly aware of its mass. Furthermore, its thick bulk and stark lines override 
the human form that a piece of clothing would normally connote. Like his many 
other works which foreground unprocessed materials such as fat, wax and wood, 
Beuys’ use of felt overturns the notion that a work of art emerges through the 
process of endowing an inchoate material with a compelling structure.22 
Signiﬁcantly, Potts suggests that the insistent attentiveness to the tactile 
sense evoked by unformed materials displaces the structural qualities associated 
45 

P H E N O M E N O L O G Y  A N D  I N T E R P R E TAT I O N  B E Y O N D  T H E  F L E S H  
4 Claes Oldenburg, Floor Cake, 1962. Synthetic polymer paint and latex on canvas ﬁlled with foam 
rubber and cardboard boxes, 58 3/8 in  9 ft 6 1/4 in  58 3/8 in. r Claes Oldenburg. Photo: 
Museum of Modern Art, NY/Licensed by SCALA/Art Resource, NY. 
with sculpture, such as plastic form. Indeed, in the case of Floor Cake by Claes 
Oldenburg the overwhelming invitation to touch effects the deformation of the 
art object (plate 4). Here, the sculpture of an oversized slice of cake, made of 
canvas and stuffed loosely with foam rubber, invites the sense of touch by evoking 
food that is handled and tasted. At the same time, because it is enlarged and 
pliable the work verges on an amorphous heap of matter. It is therefore precisely 
because Floor Cake, in its gigantic size and yielding shape, anticipates and pursues 
the spectator’s touch, or at least a tactile eye, that its armature has collapsed. 
Potts maintains that before the 1960s the understanding of medium speciﬁcity 
was grounded in the presupposition that the structure of the object emerged from 
the mind’s way of processing the distinct sensory effects produced by the particular 
medium. In the case of sculpture, the form of the object would ﬁgure the mind’s 
grasp of three-dimensional space delivered from the sense of touch. However, works 
such as those by Beuys and Oldenburg exacerbate tactility, bringing it to an extreme 
that exceeds form, and thus yielding no perceptual grasp as such, only an abun­
dance of matter. Furthermore, the artwork as excess of material can also be 
understood as a visual spectacle, traversing sculpture in its appeal to the pictorial 
imagination. For this reason, Potts argues, in the contemporary era the notion of 
sculpture as a discrete medium has been liquidated. 
46 

P H E N O M E N O L O G Y  A N D  I N T E R P R E TAT I O N  B E Y O N D  T H E  F L E S H  
What is interesting about Potts’ analysis for phenomenology is his demonstra­
tion that the structural integrity of the object is rendered redundant in the quest for 
an unencumbered tactile access to the artwork through which the spectator 
assumes a position of quasi-immersion in the texture and substance of its mate­
rial.23 The armature that deﬁnes the object and separates it from the spectator 
crumples in the wake of her or his interrogation of its materiality. This situation 
reiterates Butler’s supposition that the ﬂeshly ontology risks subsuming difference 
within the totality of the intersubjective relation. Within the paradigm offered by 
the ﬂesh, the object becomes amorphous and the medium of sculpture is dispelled 
into a postmedium condition that delivers a multi-sensory experience in which 
tactility is co-extensive with visuality. 
The postmedium predicament that Potts describes also opens onto a series of 
historiographic difﬁculties in the ﬁeld of contemporary art history, such as the 
problem of how to track changes, transitions, and developments that are not 
bound to a medium.24 The phrase ‘installation art’, for example, is readily used to 
describe contemporary art, speciﬁcally works that are self-consciously integrated 
into and responsive to the space of exhibition and the spectators that occupy it. 
Yet installation remains a broad category that refers to a wide variety of media 
and practices, and calls upon any number of discursive frameworks, many of 
which stem from phenomenology, from relational aesthetics to institutional 
critique, theories of identity and embodiment, to site-speciﬁcity and the political 
economy of art. The appearance of this category arose from the incisive exposure 
of the broader social, political and economic ﬁelds determining artistic produc­
tion and reception that coincided with the rejection of medium speciﬁcity in the 
1960s. However, the term is not, in and of itself, rooted in a speciﬁc critical 
investment with regard to the art in question. Indeed, the word ‘installation’ 
suggests that the art merely reiﬁes the structural relations between the spectator 
and the artwork that it aims to reveal. Indeed, as Jonathan Crary argues, instal­
lation might give the mistaken impression that much contemporary art gives the 
spectator a clear sense of position through spatial homogeneity.25 Thus, in the 
same way that the chiasmic relation runs the risk of fulﬁlling the subject’s 
solipsistic fantasy of the other, the notion of installation art is haunted by the 
possibility that it will merely satisfy perceptual expectations and stabilize the 
spectator’s pre-existing sense of her or himself. 
The Danish artist Olafur Eliasson acknowledges this risk in his installation 
projects, though ultimately they strive against this tendency. His works deploy 
various strategies to disrupt the viewer’s orientation. The installations situate 
spectators in constructed environments that alter the expected dimensions of a 
space by, for example, building a ground that slopes upward on one side, or by 
saturating the space with colour, or again by framing it with angled mirrors so 
that multiple perspectives interfere with the singularity of one’s own view. 
However, despite these attempts to upset the viewer’s position of visual mastery of 
the space, implying the contingency of perception on the varying temporal, 
spatial and environmental conditions, there is a certain ambivalence in the titles 
of Eliasson’s works which, time and again, refer to the individuality of the spec­
tator’s perceptual experience through an emphasis on the word ‘your’: Your color 
memory (2004, plate 5), Your spiral view (2002), Your space embracer (2004), Take your 
time (2008) and so forth. On the one hand, the titles are a restatement of Merleau­
47 

P H E N O M E N O L O G Y  A N D  I N T E R P R E TAT I O N  B E Y O N D  T H E  F L E S H  
5 Olafur Eliasson, Your colour memory, 2004. Wood, stainless steel, ﬂuorescent lights and colour 
ﬁlter foils (red, green, blue), control unit and projection foil, 323  530  887 cm. Berlin: 
Neugerriemschneider. Photo: Courtesy of the artist. 
Ponty’s initial claim that perception is mediated through the subject’s bodily 
contact and intertwining with the world. At the same time, the insistence that 
this sensual experience is conﬁned to the limits of individual perception is a 
concession to the solipsism of the embodied condition. 
Interestingly, Eliasson’s work is usually discussed in terms of how it invites 
the formation of new social relations within the space of exhibition. Crary, for 
example, argues that the perceptual disruptions at play in Eliasson’s installations 
establish ‘conditions out of which other events might tentatively occur, out of 
which communication, interpersonal exchange, and provisional forms of under­
standing might be possible.’26 From this perspective, the excesses of perception 
that invite interrogation also generate the need for ‘interpersonal exchange’. This 
is not to say that installation subsumes all viewers into one. Rather, it provokes 
viewers to reconstitute themselves in response to a shared set of environmental 
alterations that at once posit, and elicit a striving beyond, the solipsism of 
perception. Not only are the limits of the ﬂesh understood by phenomenology in 
linguistic terms, then, a domain that extends far beyond the relation between the 
subject and the other, they are the locus of the subject’s constitutive relationship 
with the world as an ethical response to its excess. 
RECIPROCITY AND THE ETHICS O F I NTE RPRETAT ION 
The dispersal of speciﬁc media into a postmedium condition is now often 
described as a ﬁeld of social, political, psycho-sexual and bodily relations. It 
signals a turn towards an exposure of the limits of the embodied subject as a 
48 

P H E N O M E N O L O G Y  A N D  I N T E R P R E TAT I O N  B E Y O N D  T H E  F L E S H  
means to identify the parameters within which the interrogation of the artwork 
takes place. Merleau-Ponty’s understanding of the ﬂesh is not conﬁned to the rela­
tionship between oneself and an other, or oneself and the world, but rather is 
socially charged insofar as it includes the communication of language as well as the 
expression of the body. The issue at stake in a phenomenological account of art 
is therefore how the totalizing bond of the ﬂesh might be the site at which 
new possibilities of interpretation, beyond individual investments, are born. How 
does phenomenology reinvigorate a truly interrogative mode, in the sense Irigaray 
intends, as a questioning of the other/object that recognizes its fundamental alterity? 
In her reading of Merleau-Ponty, Judith Butler notes that despite the solipsistic 
orientation of the senses, there are signiﬁcant ways in which Merleau-Ponty shows 
how the world ﬂesh overcomes the closure of the subject’s perceptual ﬁeld. Indeed, 
Merleau-Ponty points to the excess of the other and the world in the ﬂeshly relation, 
often grappling with the asymmetry between the subject’s perceptual grasp and the 
intentional object. He is impelled to concede that the reversibility of the ﬂesh ‘is a 
reversibility always imminent and never realized in fact. My left hand is always on 
the verge of touching my right hand touching the things, but I never reach coin­
cidence; the coincidence eclipses at the moment of realization . . .’27 However, he 
explains that this ‘incessant escaping’ is not an ontological void or a non-being. It is 
‘spanned by the total being of my body, and by that of the world; it is the zero of 
pressure between two solids that makes them adhere to one another.’ In other 
words, it is precisely because of this asymmetry that the subject is hinged to the 
world. Butler considers this equally in semantic terms, recalling the use of the 
chiasmic structure in grammar, in which the order of words in one of two parallel 
clauses is inverted in the other. Thus, a phrase such as ‘when the going gets tough, 
the tough gets going’, appears to have a formal symmetry, but in fact there are two 
meanings of the term ‘going’ and two of the word ‘tough’, so that the two clauses 
are not semantically equivalent at all.28 In a similar way, she argues, despite its 
seeming totality, the ﬂesh always has the potential to escape itself.29 
It is this potential for meaning to exceed the ﬂeshly relation between the 
artwork and the spectator that allows for a phenomenology of difference. One might 
consider, for example, Rosalind Krauss’s use of phenomenology in her reading of 
Richard Serra’s work, as a means of thinking sculpture outside a modernist narra­
tive. In Passages in Modern Sculpture, Krauss challenges the assumption that sculpture 
can be read as an inherently meaningful object, the form of which is taken to be an 
analogy for the private psychological space of the artist in which thought is gener­
ated. Krauss presents a counter-narrative, in which meaning is externalized and seen 
to occur in the intertwining between the spectator and the object. The sculpture and 
the spectator are brought together in a ‘ﬁeld of reciprocity’, which Krauss deﬁnes 
using the metaphor of a passage – a moment-to-moment experience of movement 
through time and space. More strongly though, she elucidates the formation of 
meaning through this movement, so that not only are the sculpture and the spec­
tator bound to one another as though in a common ﬂesh, but meaning emerges 
through the spectator’s motility, actions and gestures in response to the artwork. 
In her analysis of Richard Serra’s work, bodily actions become synonymous 
with gestures of interpretation. Or, to put it another way, Krauss shows how the 
object comes into consciousness through the activity of the viewer. She observes 
that in the early 1970s, Serra began to structure the sculptural object as a kind of 
49 

P H E N O M E N O L O G Y  A N D  I N T E R P R E TAT I O N  B E Y O N D  T H E  F L E S H  
6 Richard Serra, Strike: To Roberta and Rudy, 1971. Hot-rolled steel, 96  288  1 1/2 in. Installation 
view, Lo Giudice Gallery, New York, 1971. r Richard Serra/Artists Rights Society (ARS), New York. 
New York: Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum. Photo: Peter Moore. 
perceptual cut in a given space, thus inviting the spectator to actively suture 
together the continuity of the visual ﬁeld in her or his movement through that 
space.30 For example, Serra’s Strike: To Roberta and Rudy, an 8-foot high and 24-foot 
long steel plate that projects out of the corner of the room, interrupts a clear view 
of the space (plate 6). Krauss notes that as one moves around Strike, it contracts 
from a ﬂat plane to a single line when one faces it head-on, and then expands once 
again to a plane. Correspondingly, the space is blocked off, then opened up on either 
side of the edge, and ﬁnally blocked once again.31 In its alternation between a plane 
that occupies the visual ﬁeld, obscuring the surrounding space, and an invisible 
depth that gathers behind a single edge, Strike cuts the visible world and locates the 
spectator as ‘the operator of this cut’ who must work to reconvene visual continuity. 
For this reason, Krauss sees a parallel between the perceptual effect of Serra’s work 
and a cinematic montage, whereby the spectator knits together meaning from 
completely disparate shots that appear in sequence in a ﬁlm. Likewise, Serra invites 
the spectator to suture together a perception of space through embodied action. 
Thus, Krauss states that the wholeness of the viewer’s body becomes the guarantor 
of the reconstructible wholeness of the room’s continuity.32 
Much as the spectator actively re-forms a coherent view across the visual break 
that the sculpture presents, however, the artwork nevertheless prevents the 
50 

P H E N O M E N O L O G Y  A N D  I N T E R P R E TAT I O N  B E Y O N D  T H E  F L E S H  
assembly of a totalizing perception that would reinforce the spectator’s ontological 
centrality and separateness – a solipsistic orientation. Precisely because the artwork 
impels movement through space, it physically locates the spectator within the same 
visual fabric that it occupies and structures. The disruption of the object calls to 
mind that which is disavowed from the transcendental perspective, namely, the 
situatedness of vision in the body, and the situatedness of the body in space. 
Although Serra’s work might seem to locate the viewer within the sculpture 
in the same way that Merleau-Ponty describes the subject as immersed in the 
world ﬂesh, however, Krauss’s analysis shows that the phenomenological experi­
ence is determined by the way in which the artwork appears as an exterior surface 
that runs against the limits of the visual ﬁeld. Furthermore, in her later account 
of Serra’s work she posits the artwork as a ﬁssure that binds and separates the 
horizon of the body with that of the world beyond it. The ﬂesh, then, is not the 
amorphous envelope of the world that houses and is continuous with the subject 
but rather an abutment between the subject’s body and the world, that is always 
transitive. Krauss argues that this jointure must be seen as the subject matter of 
the work.33 The interpretation of the artwork, indeed the only meaning one 
could posit, is founded on the shifting conditions that the work sets against the 
body. Bodily action, then, is not necessarily an expression of the subject’s will or 
pre-existing intention towards an object, which might manifest as the covering 
over, grasping, or assimilation of it, but rather is a response to the spatial 
conditions that the artwork asserts in the ﬁrst place. 
By insisting that the meaning of the artwork is determined by the friction 
between the artwork and the viewer’s attempt to stabilize a perception of it, Krauss 
gets to the heart of the ethical dilemma: the question is whether the external world 
genuinely informs perception or whether the subject merely conceals/blankets it in 
her or his attempt to grasp it. She resolves the problem by maintaining that the 
relation between the body and the world is reciprocal. This is not to suggest that 
phenomenological interpretation is a kind of give-and-take between the material 
world and one’s personal responses to it. On the contrary, her understanding 
of reciprocity assumes the asymmetry of this relation, as seen between the viewer 
and the artwork. To elaborate her alternative model of sculpture as passage, 
she remarks, ‘the image of  passage serves  to place both  viewer  and artist before the  
work, and the world, in an attitude of primary humility in order to encounter 
the deep reciprocity between himself and it’ (my emphasis).34 
Interestingly, a phenomenological interpretation here is a way of ﬁrst, 
‘placing the viewer and artist before the artwork’, which is to say that the artwork 
confronts the viewer/artist as something outside her or himself. Second, it is to 
demand an attitude appropriate to that placement. The term ‘primary humility’ 
is notable insofar as it assumes the bodily connection of the subject to the earth, 
for the word ‘humility’ derives from the Latin word humilis, meaning ‘from 
humus’, the decayed organic matter that composes soil. Humus evokes the 
elemental basis of growth, and the land into which the body is committed when it 
dies.35 In advocating for humility as a humble stance or modesty of behaviour in 
the face of the artwork, Krauss insists on differentiating the viewer and the 
artwork from one another, despite the intimacy of the corporeal bond. What 
Krauss describes as a relation of deep reciprocity, a stance that recognizes both 
the continuity between the viewer and the artwork in a broader corporeal, spatial 
51 

P H E N O M E N O L O G Y  A N D  I N T E R P R E TAT I O N  B E Y O N D  T H E  F L E S H  
and linguistic ﬁeld and a fundamental differentiation between the two, recalls 
Butler’s understanding of the asymmetry of the ﬂesh as the locus of an excess of 
meaning. The suggestion is not that one cannot presume to know or make 
statements about the artwork (and the world) because it always escapes our grasp, 
but rather that, in order to do so, one must ﬁrst be receptive to that which lies 
beyond the limits of what one knows. This is why Merleau-Ponty is at pains 
to insist that the ﬂesh of the world is always imminent, but never realized in 
fact. Interpretation is not to make an initial proclamation about the meaning of 
the artwork (a statement of fact about it), but rather to respond to the demands 
the work makes of the viewer, particularly how it overturns, upsets or otherwise 
departs from one’s expectations. 
To further explore this disarticulation between the subject and the world, as 
well as the viewer and the artwork, art historians have turned to Emmanuel 
Levinas’ understanding of ethics, particularly the paradigmatic encounter of the 
‘face-to-face’ which he describes in Totality and Inﬁnity. For Levinas, the subject is 
constituted as a response to the other’s appeal or demand for recognition. 
Essentially, the other calls the subject into being – an imperative for the subject to 
differentiate itself. The other’s command is the initial moment that the subject 
recognizes the other’s irreducibility to her or himself. For Levinas, this recogni­
tion deﬁnes ethics: the subject is constituted as a fundamental acknowledgement 
of the other. The subject is therefore founded upon her or his ethical response – a 
confrontation with the alterity of the other, which Levinas calls the ‘face’. He 
writes, ‘The way in which the other presents himself, exceeding the idea of the other 
in me, we here name face. This mode does not consist in ﬁguring as a theme under 
my gaze, in spreading itself forth as a set of qualities forming an image. The face 
of the Other at each moment destroys and overﬂows the plastic image it leaves me 
. . . It does not manifest itself by these qualities . . . It expresses itself.’36 
Clearly, Levinas is not concerned with the image of the other, but rather how 
the other exceeds that image, and thereby exceeds the subject’s knowledge of it. 
Similarly, and to return to an earlier point, phenomenological interpretation 
does not attempt to explain the meaning of an image or representation, but to 
examine how art means, beyond and in spite of representation. Noticeably, 
Levinas insists that the face appears as a mode, as opposed to an image or set of 
qualities. Insofar as the face is a stance, or manner of being, it is best understood 
as a kind of bodily assertion. It is a presentation that exceeds, destroys and 
overﬂows the idea. Furthermore, as Alphonso Lingis explains, the ethical 
imperative of the face is a demand for bodily reciprocity. That is to say, the subject 
differentiates itself from the other in order to offer itself as a physical recognition 
to that other. For this reason, the other’s face does not manifest as a look, but as a 
gesture, ‘a pressure on the hand’, or a ‘shiver of the skin’.37 
Ethics, then, is an acknowledgement of the artwork’s alterity that takes place 
through the interrogation of the limits of the perceptual ﬁeld. For Krauss, this 
interrogation takes place through bodily acts that are predicated on a stance of 
primary humility in the presence of the object. In this mode of confrontation, 
actions are responsive rather than pre-emptive. Further, bodily actions are 
synonymous with gestures of interpretation. The artwork’s demand for the 
expression of the body – and correspondingly, a revealing of the limits of the ﬂesh 
– establishes reciprocity. Interestingly though, Krauss’s notion of primary humi­
52 

P H E N O M E N O L O G Y  A N D  I N T E R P R E TAT I O N  B E Y O N D  T H E  F L E S H  
7 Pipilotti Rist, Pour Your Body Out (7354 Cubic Meters), installation view, Museum of Modern Art, New 
York, 2008. Courtesy of the artist, Luhring Augustine, New York, and Hauser & Wirth, Zurich and 
London. r Pipilotti Rist. Photo: Libby Rosof (http://theartblog.org). 
lity is equally pertinent to artworks that distinctly limit movement and bodily 
action, as is often the case in installation art. Indeed, contemporary art has 
recently demonstrated a persistent investment in problematizing and encum­
bering movement. In many of Olafur Eliasson’s works the viewer often remains 
still, or, in the many Skyspaces of James Turrell, the visitor lies down to fully 
experience the work, as though to literally enact humility as a ‘grounding’ of the 
body by relocating it to a horizontal register. 
The speciﬁcally horizontal positioning of the body is particularly noticeable 
in Pipilotti Rist’s video and sound installation Pour Your Body Out (7354 Cubic Meters) 
designed for the atrium of the Museum of Modern Art in New York in 2008 
(plate 7). The richly coloured panorama created by a 25-foot high and 200-foot 
long video projection spanning three walls, saturates the senses with close-up 
images of tulips in a ﬁeld, a hand reaching into dirt, earthworms, a snail, a pig 
snifﬁng the ground, the gentle lapping of water against a woman’s legs. The 
camera explores these ‘earthly’ themes from a distinctly low vantage point, 
skimming the surface of the ground and water, and slowly homing in on the 
creatures and vegetation in such a way as to enlarge even the tiniest details. 
To reinforce her humble perspective, Rist constructed a large sculptural 
seating area in the shape of an eye. A grey, doughnut-shaped sofa set on a round 
white rug, surrounded a black interior space – the pupil located in the centre of 
the atrium. Visitors were invited to lie down on the sofa and view the video from a 
53 

P H E N O M E N O L O G Y  A N D  I N T E R P R E TAT I O N  B E Y O N D  T H E  F L E S H  
supine position. In this way, Rist’s installation invokes a stance of humility 
through which the viewer can enter into an appropriately transitive relation with 
the artwork. The experience of the video projection takes place on the sculptural 
eye, the very site where the viewer lies. That is to say, the ﬁgure of the eye becomes 
the point of transaction between the intensely colourful projection and the body 
as exposed surface. This horizontal position of abandon upends verticality, and 
with it, perceptual closure. Correspondingly, we can read this as a move from a 
solipsistic grasp of the world to a stance of openness in which interpretation is 
suspended and an abundance of sensation ensues. The interior subject is turned 
inside out as vision is relayed via the exterior surface of the body, a condition 
subtly implied by the title of the work, Pour Your Body Out. Rist thereby brings the 
body to an ethical stance before the artwork by foregoing both the standard 
upward position from which one usually views the world, and discouraging 
deﬁnitive actions (even reactions) in the space. Instead, the encounter between 
viewer and artwork, between the body and its elemental basis (a key theme of the 
installation), is forged through the limitation of the body, and attentiveness to 
the excess of the artwork. 
CONC L USION 
The strength of phenomenology lies in its effectiveness at uncovering the way in 
which an artwork means: that is to say, the way in which it expresses, commu­
nicates or presents itself to a viewer. In foregrounding a bodily condition shared 
by the artwork and the viewing subject, and taken to be mutually constitutive of 
each, phenomenology opposes itself to historical narratives that wish to disavow 
the contingency of its statements of ‘fact’. However, a legitimate criticism arises 
that in its deep concern with the individual embodied experience, phenomen­
ology conceals the potential meanings of an artwork; or rather it obscures the 
possibility that the artwork is meaningful in ‘other’ ways. This risk became 
acutely present in the 1960s when a noticeable staging of the artwork’s defor­
mation appeared in conjunction with an emphasis on tactility. The destructura­
tion of the artwork and the transition into a postmedium condition appears as 
the artwork’s refusal to deliver itself to the senses in a totalized form. 
As I have shown, the ﬂeshly relation does not guarantee an exclusive 
knowledge of the artwork, nor can it be the pretext for a kind of positivist 
authority. However, by considering the ﬂesh itself as interpenetrated by language, 
phenomenology opens the bodily relation to a larger social sphere charged with 
acts of communication (speech, motions, moods and expressions). The linguistic 
dimension of embodiment testiﬁes to the fundamental disarticulation between 
the viewer’s perception and the artwork itself, for this divide is the condition that 
impels communication, but also leads to slips and alterations in meaning. The 
ethics of interpretation in phenomenology thus hinge on an acknowledgement 
that the artwork cannot be reduced to preconceptions of its place in a seamless 
art-historical narrative. Ethical acknowledgement, moreover, appears as a distinct 
surfacing and overﬂowing of the limits of the embodied subject through gestures 
of concession or humility in the face of the artwork’s alterity. In this attentiveness 
to the differentiation of the subject and the artwork from one another, and to 
how this provokes a speciﬁc mode of confrontation, phenomenology foregrounds 
the ethical dimension implicit in the aesthetic experience. 
54 

P H E N O M E N O L O G Y  A N D  I N T E R P R E TAT I O N  B E Y O N D  T H E  F L E S H  
Notes 
1   Maurice Merleau-Ponty, ‘Preobjective being: the 
solipsist world’, in Claude Lefort, ed., The Visible 
and the Invisible, trans. Alphonso Lingis, Evanston, 
IL, 1968, 159. 
2   To name just a few trajectories, the convergence 
of ecology with phenomenology has raised new 
lines of inquiry in the domain of geoaesthetics, 
earth art, and urban space; see Elizabeth Grosz, 
Deleuze and the Framing of the Earth, New York, 
2008; Amanda Boetzkes The Ethics of Earth Art, 
Minneapolis, MN, 2010; Gary Shapiro, ‘Territory, 
landscape, garden’, Angelaki: Journal of the Theore­
tical Humanities, 9: 2, 2004, 103–15. The domain of 
relational aesthetics extends the phenomen­
ological encounter to the socio-political sphere, 
provoking a rethinking of how the ethical rela­
tion can be developed into a model of commu­
nity and political democracy; Nicolas Bourriaud, 
Relational Aesthetics, Dijon, 2004; Claire Bishop, 
Installation Art: A Critical History, New York, 2005. 
For scholarship on the encounter between the 
body and new media technologies, see Eugene 
Thacker, The Global Genome: Biotechnology, Politics, 
Culture, Cambridge, MA, 2005; Lev Manovich, The 
Language of New Media, Cambridge, MA, 2001; 
Pierre Le´vy, Becoming Virtual: Reality in the Digital 
Age, New York, 1998. This line of inquiry has also 
stimulated an interest in models of time, and 
particularly 
how 
new 
media 
technologies 
provoke varying experiences of time in the body; 
Mark Hansen, New Philosophy for New Media, 
Cambridge, MA, 2004; Christine Ross, ‘The 
temporalities of video: extendedness revisited’, 
Art Journa, l 65: 3, 2006, 92–9. 
3   Particularly in the ﬁeld of contemporary art, 
Henri Bergson’s writing on temporality has 
become increasingly important, as has the work 
of Gilles Deleuze and Felix Guattari. 
4   Martin Heidegger, ‘The question concerning 
technology’, in The Question Concerning Technology 
and Other Essays, New York, 1977, 19. 
5   Judith Butler, ‘Sexual difference as a question of 
ethics’, in Dorothea Olkowski and Gail Weiss, 
eds, Feminist Interpretations of Maurice Merleau-
Ponty, University Park, PA, 2006, 117. 
6   Merleau-Ponty, ‘The intertwining – the chiasm’, 
in Lefort, The Visible and the Invisible, 139. 
7   Merleau-Ponty, ‘The intertwining’, 152. 
8   Butler, ‘Sexual difference’, 113. 
9   Martin Heidegger, Being and Time, trans.  John  
Macquarrie and Edward Robinson, New York, 1962, 
24–5. 
10 Robert Morris, ‘Some notes on the phenomen­
ology of making: the search for the motivated’, 
Continuous Project Altered Daily: The Writings of 
Robert Morris, Cambridge, MA, 1993, 73. 
11 Rosalind Krauss, Passages in Modern Sculpture, 
Cambridge, MA, 1996, 267. 
12 Merleau-Ponty, ‘The intertwining’, 135. 
13 Butler, ‘Sexual difference’, 114. 
14 Luce Irigaray, An Ethics of Sexual Difference, trans. 
Carolyn Burke and Gillian C. Gill, Ithaca, NY, 
1993, 183–4. 
15 Irigaray, Ethics of Sexual Difference, 183. 
16 Edmund Husserl, Logical Investigations, Volume II, 
trans. J.N. Findlay, London, 1970, 558. 
17 Husserl, Logical Investigations, 565–6. 
18 Merleau-Ponty, ‘Preobjective being’, 158. 
19 Merleau-Ponty, ‘The intertwining’, 143–4. 
20 Irigaray, Ethics of Sexual Difference, 172. 
21 Alex Potts, ‘The interrogation of medium in art 
of the 1960s’, Art History, 27: 2, April 2004, 
282–304. 
22 Potts, ‘The interrogation of medium’, 288. 
23 Potts, ‘The interrogation of medium’, 286. 
24 There is also the added difﬁculty of deﬁning 
contemporary art according to its historical 
position. The phrase ‘contemporary art’ is 
used to describe a great range of art since the 
1950s. The rubric of ‘the contemporary’ there­
fore begs the question, what is shared in the art 
of the last ﬁve decades that continues to renew 
itself? 
25 Jonathan Crary, Installation Art in the New 
Millenium: The Empire of the Senses, London, 2003, 7. 
26 Crary, ‘Your color memory: illuminations of the 
unforeseen’, Olafur Eliasson: Minding the World, 
Aarhus, Denmark, 2004, 223. 
27 Merleau-Ponty, ‘The intertwining’, 147. 
28 Butler, ‘Sexual difference’, 124. 
29 Interestingly, 
she 
argues, 
it 
is 
precisely 
because Merleau-Ponty’s essay on the ﬂesh 
has this same potential to exceed itself, and to 
be read differently, that enables Irigaray’s 
critique. 
30 Rosalind Krauss, ‘Richard Serra: sculpture’, in 
Hal Foster and Gordon Hughes, eds, Richard Serra, 
Cambridge, MA, 2000. 
31 Krauss, ‘Richard Serra’, 119–20. 
32 Krauss, ‘Richard Serra’, 120–1. 
33 Krauss, ‘Richard Serra’, 133. 
34 Krauss, Passages, 283. 
35 This is especially relevant to the relationship of 
phenomenology to ecology and geoaesthetics. 
36 Emmanuel Levinas, Totality and Inﬁnity: An Essay 
on Exteriority, trans. Alphonso Lingis, Pittsburgh, 
1969, 50–1. 
37 Alphonso Lingis, Sensation: Intelligibility in Sensi­
bility, New Jersey, 1996, 101. 
55 

S U R V E Y I N G C O N T E M P O R A R Y A R T: P O S T- WA R ,  P O S T M O D E R N , A N D  T H E N  W H AT ?  
1 Cindy Sherman, Untitled Film Still # 35, 1979. Black and white photograph, 10  8 in, edition of 10.  
Photo: Courtesy of the Artist and Metro Pictures.  
56 

4   
SURVEYING CONTEMPORARY ART: POST­ 
WAR, POSTMODERN, AND THEN WHAT?   
D A N K A R L H O L M  
This book is a survey of the richest, most controversial and perhaps most thoroughly confusing 
epoch in the whole history of the visual arts – the period from 1960 to the present.1 
Edward Lucie-Smith, 1995 
How can what is deﬁned as in existence now – the contemporary – be written into (a) history? Is the 
notion of ‘contemporary art history’ or a ‘history of contemporary art’ a contradiction in terms?2 
Amelia Jones, 2006 
How is it possible to write a survey of contemporary art in an era of apparently anarchic 
pluralism?3 
Eleanor Heartney, 2008 
Some of the difﬁculties in writing a history of contemporary art evidently have to 
do with the character of the ‘epoch’ or ‘era’ of which this art is a sign or 
expression. Another difﬁculty concerns the alleged opposition between historical 
or past and the contemporary or present: in popular abbreviation, art now.4 A 
historiographic study of various solutions to these problems, in surveys of 
contemporary art in whatever form or shape (teleological, thematic, chronicle-
like, and so on) would perhaps focus on how this epoch or age is historicized by 
these texts. For example,what artists and artworks are selected; what tendencies 
registered; what links are established between them and between the art and the 
era, or art and life, culture, or society? What difference does it make, for instance, 
that Edward Lucie-Smith’s Art Today begins in 1960, Amelia Jones’s anthology 
begins in 1945, and Eleanor Heartney is dealing, in Art & Today, with art from the 
1980s to the present? How are we to understand such terminological and 
conceptual disagreement about the contemporary among authors contempora­
neous with each other? 
This chapter is historiographic, too, but in a different sense. I am interested 
in the notion of contemporary art, and how it is used, explicitly or implicitly, in 
history writing from around 1980 to the present. I will not discuss particular 
57 

S U R V E Y I N G C O N T E M P O R A R Y A R T: P O S T- WA R ,  P O S T M O D E R N , A N D  T H E N W H AT ?  
artists or artworks taken to belong to this category in detail, because my interest 
here is in the activity of labelling and its uses in standard texts of, and on, art 
history from the last three decades. Following Michel Foucault’s method of 
archaeology, it would be as futile to try to get to the core of contemporary art as a 
historiographical problem by studying ‘art now’, as it would be to ‘look for the 
unity of the discourse of psychopathology or psychiatry in ‘‘mental illness’’’.5 
Paraphrasing Gombrich, assisted by Foucault, we could perhaps say that there is 
no such thing as contemporary art – there is only a discursive formation.6 We 
could ever only aspire to reveal the content of this discursive formation by 
searching for textual repetitions and regularities in the discourse of contem­
porary art at large. As part of a more extensive historical project on the genealogy 
of contemporary art, I will restrict my investigation of this discourse to texts 
devoted to art-historical representation in a global context. My brief survey, in 
other words, will cover a selection of the most widespread survey texts on world 
art history where the latest period is linked in different ways to what came before. 
Foucault stressed that ‘[n]o book exists by itself, it is always in a relation of 
support and dependence vis-a`-vis other books; it is a point in a network – it 
contains a system of indications that point, explicitly or implicitly, to other books, 
other texts, or other sentences.’7 Nevertheless, I will not take into account 
publications which speciﬁcally deal with art after 1945/1960/1980, since they tend 
to be preoccupied with art criticism, and to list the most recent distinguished art. 
Without a non-contemporary time frame, however, they are less serviceable in 
determining the function of the ‘contemporary’ assignment – for example, when 
this word enters the discourse and how the issue of periodization is handled with 
respect to previous art history. There are very few texts – compared to the cultural 
and ﬁnancial boom in, and ‘massive expansion in the infrastructure of’,8 
contemporary art – that critically investigate how this notion is put to use, and 
what interests are thereby served.9 
When I ask someone involved in the business of contemporary art, as a critic, 
curator or dealer, how this class is delimited; when it begins or whether every 
artistic product of the same span of years belongs here; they tend to twist uncom­
fortably, or pretend not even to understand such a boring academic question. What 
they mean, they will sometimes acknowledge, is the advanced art or ‘potentially the 
cutting edge of what people calling themselves artists (or understood by others as 
such) are making and doing’10 on the international (that is, Western-based) art 
scene, from at least a couple of decades back, or however far they choose to extend 
the ‘now’ of art. What this implies is that the seemingly innocent temporal deter­
minant ‘now’ covers, when applied to art, two complementary principles of exclu­
sion; or, more positively put, two ways of selecting and sorting members of the 
contemporary class. One is of course the temporal or historical principle, based on a 
working deﬁnition or hunch of what constitutes the present. This is the easy part, 
despite the range of opinions hinted at above. The other principle is based on a 
typically tacit judgement of quality and/or relevance. What art is potentially cutting 
edge? What art faces up to ‘our own troubled times’11 and is able to connect, 
critically or afﬁrmatively, to ‘our’ bewildering present? 
Contemporary art as a category involves a dual logic of exclusion: from that 
which precedes it diachronically; and from that which is deemed other to it on a 
synchronic plane. We could perhaps call the ﬁrst dividing line historical and the 
58 

S U R V E Y I N G C O N T E M P O R A R Y A R T: P O S T- WA R , P O S T M O D E R N , A N D  T H E N W H AT ?  
latter aesthetic. Although the conundrum posed by the ﬁrst (how to deﬁne 
contemporary art temporally or historically) is safely academic, that raised by the 
latter (how to choose between all the ‘candidates for appreciation’ of art made by 
professional artists in the present – to use George Dickie’s term) is of critical 
political importance for artists and other art-world representatives on both sides 
of the great divide between contemporary and non-contemporary, and has 
substantial economic, cultural and social implications. 
Having made this distinction, however, I have to note that the synchronic and 
more clearly value-based determination re-introduces the issue of temporality. 
Diverging temporalities co-exist in the global art community because of regional 
and cultural differences as well as the fact that certain artists, and their works, 
are simply taken to belong to the current historical moment (as deﬁned by those 
in power to deﬁne such things and get credit for it). This ‘now’ is perhaps not, 
despite how it sounds, so much a temporal extension as a kind of space or 
privileged place, intimately connected to ‘our’ expectations of the future. Artists 
outside this deﬁnition, undoubtedly the majority, are ungraced by the Zeitgeist 
and remain in the past or in those spaces of the present where exits are permitted 
exclusively through the backdoor. They belong to a ‘noncontemporaneous 
contemporaneity’12 upsetting a conventional idea of modernity, governed by 
homogenous historical progression, ‘whereas the temporality speciﬁc to the arts 
is a co-presence of heterogeneous temporalities’, according to Jacques Rancie`re.13 
The argument is that this aesthetic regime is established with Romanticism: but 
whether we agree or not with the author’s assumption that this regime runs 
seamlessly into our own present, the stakes in the discourse on contemporary art 
are predicated on much older conﬂicts and longer cultural developments than is 
usually acknowledged. 
Unless we subscribe, as I think we still do, to Charles Baudelaire’s high 
evaluation of the present’s ‘essential quality of being present’,14 we would ﬁnd 
the word ‘contemporary’, that is ‘now’,15 almost completely empty and mean­
ingless. Contemporary art, however, has become a saturated sign indeed, 
and overdetermined in its commercial implications. Since the market ‘boom’ 
of the 1980s, and during the 1990s especially, contemporary art has been 
increasingly valorized, symbolically and economically. More than that, it has 
become increasingly de-relativized, by which I mean that it is paradoxically 
assuming period term status, as witness my initial examples. The language game 
of contemporary art, it seems, retains a number of key modernist features, such 
as the imperative to be in sync with one’s own time, which is presumably better 
(since ‘newer’) and more interesting (since ‘our’) than times passed. We seem to be 
drawn into a continuous competition of development and improvement, 
conducted partly on a global scale despite being told that we have left that behind 
for postmodernism or contemporary multiculturalism, perpetuating old ﬁgures 
of development, novelty and progress. The contemporary, however, is itself a 
cultural product or, better, the expression of a highly differentiated cultural 
process, and not some real time, unmarked ‘now’. It may have more to do, again, 
with certain issues of, and spaces for, exchange and communication than with 
time, despite the ring of it. It may have more to do with ‘us’ than with ‘them’, and 
it most certainly invokes old attempts to divide the world in terms of power 
relations between the present and the past, where some people’s present is other 
59 

S U R V E Y I N G C O N T E M P O R A R Y A R T: P O S T- WA R ,  P O S T M O D E R N , A N D  T H E N W H AT ?  
people’s past. To take this to the next level, we need to turn to the textbooks 
themselves, where many of the labelling problems of contemporary art, or what 
amounts to the same, are revealed. 
1 9 4 5  A N D / A S  C O N T E MP O R A RY  
The last chapter of the very ﬁrst edition of Helen Gardner’s Art Through the Ages: An 
Introduction to its History and Signiﬁcance (New York, 1926) is entitled ‘Contemporary 
Art in Europe and America. 1900–1925 AD’. The book, which would become ‘the 
most disseminated model for world art history’16 begins thus: 
Any evaluation of the art of the last two decades must be only tentative. The best we can do is to 
estimate the general trend of the present, and consider to what extent contemporary art is an 
expression of contemporary life.17 
The ﬁrst sentence does not necessarily refer to the conventional wisdom that it is 
precarious, not to say impossible, to try to cover historically what is still devel­
oping. Instead, the author ﬁnds this particular period uniquely difﬁcult to arrest; 
a view attested to in passing in the Preface as well: ‘these decades have been an 
age of restlessness and transition in all aspects of life’. While this perception of 
one’s own time as particularly complex belongs to the oldest of historical topoi, 
the ﬁrst two decades or so of the twentieth century did indeed set the agenda for 
the century to follow. The second sentence could almost be written today, 
although it would sound a little different, more assertive than tentative. Some­
thing like this: 
Largely due to the vitality of the innovations in the visual arts over the past 60 years . . . the 
visual arts are now arguably one of the most crucial areas of cultural practice in terms of 
understanding what and how people convey, contest, or otherwise negotiate aspects of 
contemporary life.18 
Given a relativist understanding of the contemporary in art, the historical limit 
should logically be pushed forward in time, instead of back towards the 1939–45 
war. From Amelia Jones’s perspective in 2006, Gardner’s ‘contemporary’ has 
become a petriﬁed part of the history of modern art or modernism. Drawing on 
the demarcation line of ‘1945’, to use an appropriately military metaphor, Jones, 
however, is not just reviewing the latest years or the ‘general trend of the present’, 
as did Gardner, but is, in effect, writing history.19 But to what effect? Is ‘1945’ 
simply a year, or has it become an overdetermined symbol, like 1968 or 1989? Is it 
not Eurocentric, despite the established term ‘world’ war?20 And furthermore, 
does it not indicate that contemporary now overlaps with (late) modernism and 
postmodernism in a new, seemingly more neutral or de-historicized guise? I am 
not arguing here with any speciﬁc author, and could as well refer to the anon­
ymous Wikipedia entry on ‘contemporary art’ where the term is ‘deﬁned 
variously as art produced at this present point in time or art produced since [and 
presumably closer to] World War II’.21 
If we were for a ﬂeeting moment to compare the uses of contemporary art and 
contemporary fashion, following Baudelaire’s attempt to arrest the ‘ephemeral’ 
moment of his modernity, a striking difference would be that, in fashion, 
60 

S U R V E Y I N G C O N T E M P O R A R Y A R T: P O S T- WA R , P O S T M O D E R N , A N D  T H E N W H AT ?  
contemporary is a very short time span.22 The collections of last year are 
surpassed by those of the present year. A handful of years is the utmost limit for 
something to be still ‘contemporary’. Meanwhile, in art, the contemporary cate­
gory is curiously expanding backwards into the 1940s. Many of today’s artists 
were not even born then, and nor were their parents. The 1940s is ancient history. 
Moreover, this relatively arbitrary threshold invalidates some commonly used 
yardsticks with which to differentiate contemporary art from non-contemporary 
art without value judgements: artists born after 1950; artists beginning to exhibit 
in the 1960s, for example. To cover artists working in the 1940s within the (still) 
contemporary category threatens to obliterate any historical distinction between 
contemporary and non-contemporary or modern, let alone between modern and 
postmodern. Where and when, in other words, does contemporary (post-world 
war) art connect with or metamorphose into contemporary (postmodern or post­
postmodern) art? Some survey texts would respond by dividing the contemporary 
into different chapters, others would follow Sotheby’s and think ‘modern and 
contemporary’, without having to decide exactly where to insert the ‘and’. 
L A S T  C H A P T E R S O F  T H E H I S T ORY O F A RT  
Before turning to the last chapters of the history of art within the latest histories 
of world art, something should perhaps be said about the genre itself. A wide­
spread view is that this kind of writing – which is directed towards the general 
reader, art lover, artist or, and nowadays almost exclusively, student of art history 
– is merely educational, basic or comprehensive, viz. not part of the progression of 
Wissenschaft itself.23 Such a view, which is almost as old as the genre itself, seems 
prompted by the scholar’s need to distance him- or herself from the very foun­
dation on which he or she is standing so as not to threaten the claims of art 
history to be numbered among the human sciences. But at the very centre of the 
professional pursuit of art history, since Hegel, is the conception of a ﬁeld of study 
which is ultimately held together by a grand narrative of art’s unfolding through 
time and space. The centrality and importance of this assumption is, para­
doxically, linked to the inclination of professional art historians to resist every 
attempt actually to write the history of art unless it is directed towards the novice 
and thus de-legitimized as Wissenschaft. Each instance of this seminal narrative 
comes across as an offence to the learned. However, this allegedly popular 
abbreviation is the narrative foundation – brief, biased and blatantly constructed 
– upon which all scholarly activities rely and towards which they ultimately 
point. Differences in degree between popular and expert discourse notwith­
standing, art history as a Western discipline is still – after all the critical revisions 
and canon-bashings – based upon the monographic History of Art. And the 
evidence for this, of course, is the continuing success of this genre, with its 
individual instances gradually thickening with every edition, as the educational 
foundation of all future professionals. 
Among a number of current candidates to choose from, I have decided to look 
at the following ﬁve tomes on world art history, all of which have been widely 
distributed and read throughout the Western world despite their Anglo-American 
bias. Using their brand name-like abbreviations these texts are: Gardner, 
Gombrich, Janson, Honour and Fleming, and Stokstad.24 I will not discuss the 
changes to the various editions of each volume. Instead, I will proceed roughly 
61 

S U R V E Y I N G C O N T E M P O R A R Y A R T: P O S T- WA R ,  P O S T M O D E R N , A N D  T H E N W H AT ?  
chronologically, highlighting particular statements and patterns rather than 
authorial preferences. This procedure is not only in tune with my Foucauldian 
proclivities, but with the sublimely generic quality of the universal survey itself as 
a genre, where new authors change places with old without much fuss. The 
reader is clearly meant to be following the unfolding of history, or ‘how it all 
happened’,25 and not some individual’s historical interpretation. I will also not 
attempt a sustained discourse analysis, but attempt to provide what I see as the 
characteristic features of each text. However, even the latest editions of these 
histories present too vast an amount of material to cover here. I have opted for the 
following shortcuts: one being to focus on a particular art form of strategic 
interest – conceptual art26 – and another to look at how two different artists are 
represented by these texts: Joseph Beuys and Cindy Sherman. Conceptual art is 
old enough to be represented by all of these texts, and apparently deemed 
important enough to be still counted as contemporary. Beuys and Sherman are 
two of the most famous artists of the later twentieth century, a European male, 
dealing with objects, performance and installation, and an American woman 
working with photography and ﬁlm. I will omit architecture, despite its alleged 
introduction of postmodernism, but ﬁnally look at how these open-ended 
narratives terminate. The impatient reader jumps to the conclusion. 
THE ( LONG ) 19 80S 
Gardner’s Art Through the Ages, ed. Horst De la Croix and Richard G. Tansey (6th edn, 
New York, 1975), contains a timeline and an interesting map showing the 
unilinear succession of art movements during ‘The Twentieth Century’ followed 
later on by a ﬂow chart on ‘interrelations of major movements of twentieth-
century art’ reminiscent of Alfred Barr’s, which partly contradicts the ﬁrst map.27 
The relevant section is contained within part four, ‘The Modern World’, chapter 
17, ‘The Twentieth Century’, and begins with: ‘Sculpture and Painting after World 
War II’. This edition does not yet mention postmodernism and ends with process 
and conceptual art. What unites these two tendencies is that process becomes 
‘more important than the eventual product’. While process-based thinking was 
central to abstract expressionism as well, the advance of conceptual art makes the 
concept more important than both object and process. Conceptual art is literally 
unrelated to minimal art as diagrammed in the chart. Both process and 
conceptual art arrange ‘‘‘environments’’, . . . which are composed of both objects 
and audiences’. This introduces the importance of audience participation: ‘The 
audience is introduced into a setting that is automated, sometimes in such a way 
that the audience itself becomes an element of the circuitry, functioning, via 
‘‘feed back’’, like a component of some modern electronic system.’ The audience is 
subject to various sensory experiences, but ‘[a]s receptors of the informational 
output the audience need not deal with images and appearances that stay to be 
evaluated; rather, they need only react.’ What this means, is ‘that the artist is 
himself a node in such a network of informational relationships, rather than an 
isolated system. . . . Art, artist, and audience become functions of systems 
modelled on those of modern electronically controlled universes.’28 Thus ends 
this history of world art in 1975. 
Ernst Hans Gombrich’s The Story of Art (13th edn, Oxford and New York 1978) 
stops a considerable distance from the contemporary disarray.29 A few words on 
62 

S U R V E Y I N G C O N T E M P O R A R Y A R T: P O S T- WA R , P O S T M O D E R N , A N D  T H E N W H AT ?  
art after the 1930s are gathered in ‘The Changing Scene: A Postscript’ (inserted 
into the 11th edn, 1966), which begins: 
Can one write the history of art ‘up to the present day’ as one can perhaps write the history of 
aviation? Many critics and teachers hope and believe that one can. I am less sure. True, one can 
record and discuss the latest fashions, the ﬁgures that happen to have caught the limelight at 
the time of writing. But only a prophet could tell whether these artists will really ‘make 
history’, and on the whole critics have proved poor prophets. 
The ‘ﬁgures who happen to have caught the limelight’ at the time of this piece of 
writing are Kurt Schwitters, Jackson Pollock, Franz Kline, Pierre Soulages, Zoltan 
Kemeny, Nicolas de Stael, and Marino Marini. 
The chapter entitled ‘Contemporary Art’ of Hugh Honour and John Fleming’s A 
World History of Art (1st edn, London, 1982) begins with a description of the American 
art scene after the war, in which abstract expressionism is succeeded by pop art. The 
sub-chapter of relevance here is called ‘Minimal and Conceptual art to Photo-
Realism’. Minimalism is presented as quintessentially American, anticipated in 
Europe by Yves Klein and Christo. Photo-realism is presented as a reaction to 
minimalism, as are a number of other movements; process art, land art, body art and 
eventually conceptual art. ‘The general idea of Conceptual Art is that the work of art 
is  essentially an idea  which  may (or  may not) generate  a  visible form.’ It was  ‘fore­
shadowed’ by John Cage and Klein. Sol LeWitt’s Untitled cube (6) is illustrated (1968). All 
postminimal and conceptual art assumes the product to be of less importance than 
the process. A chapter follows tracing ‘Modernism and Post-Modernism’ in archi­
tecture and ending with Joseph Beuys, prefaced by a conclusion on the art of today: 
In the present century . . . [f]or the ﬁrst time, an artist is inevitably, unavoidably aware of the art of 
the whole world from prehistoric times to the present day, and this has provoked anxious and often 
introspective enquiry into the meaning and purpose of art. In the past the question hardly arose – 
art, as we have seen, was predominantly sacred. Today art has largely lost this religious function 
and nothing comparable has taken its place, unless it be a preoccupation with the problem of the 
artist’s and art’s role. (This has, indeed, increasingly become the  subject  of art  itself.)  
This text recalls the situation in early nineteenth-century-Germany when Hegel in 
his lectures on aesthetics stated that ‘art, considered in its highest vocation, is 
and remains for us a thing of the past’, and declared that it could no longer 
satisfy us in the way it used to.30 Hegel’s scope, like that of his more empirical art-
historically minded successors, was worldwide, from prehistoric times to the 
present. What troubled him was that the artist became aware of this predicament 
and began to ponder what art was, philosophically and historically. Franz Kugler, 
who wrote the ﬁrst survey art history with a global scope, suggested in 1837 that 
art had to be rescued from this situation, otherwise – the unspeakable implica­
tion – this was really the end of it.31 
‘The German sculptor Joseph Beuys (b. 1921) is . . . one of the most signiﬁcant 
living artists, the creator of intensely personal but widely relevant, transient yet 
haunting images.’ His 1965 performance How to explain pictures to a dead hare is 
singled out for description in the conclusion to the chapter on architecture that 
ends the book. The ritual and mythic aspects of this performance, in which the face 
63 

S U R V E Y I N G C O N T E M P O R A R Y A R T: P O S T- WA R ,  P O S T M O D E R N , A N D  T H E N W H AT ?  
of the artist himself is covered in honey and gold leaf, are noted. This work is said to 
deal with problems of thought and communication. Beuys is quoted on his ambi­
tion to transform the idea of art in general. His guiding principle as a teacher is that 
‘[o]ne can no longer start from the old academic concept of educating the artists [but 
now must start from] the idea that art and experience gained from art can form an 
element that ﬂows back into life’. The verb ‘ﬂow’ may connote high technology or 
monetary transactions, but also something more romantic. Instructing students/ 
dead hares on art or pictures is perhaps doomed to fail, whereas art itself may re­
connect with life. Beuys’s latter conclusion – rhetorically turned into a ﬁnal phrase 
for this book by Honour  and  Fleming – rings with powerful German  precedents –  
Nietzsche as well as Hegelesque art history. The performer’s inaudible murmur 
arises from behind a dehumanized face and addresses his passive audience (the 
dead hare connotes ‘life’ as an animal, however bizarrely) in an evacuated art 
gallery. As it does so a rather tragic image of the historian emerges, talking himself 
through his passion while inevitably widening the gap between art and life rather 
than re-connecting the two. Nietzsche’s famous disgust at history’s invasion of life is 
paralleled here by an allegorical God/father of art history obsessively trying to 
invade or inﬂuence life.32 
Included in Horst Waldemar Janson’s History of Art, rev. and expanded by 
Anthony F. Janson (3rd edn, New York, 1986) for the ﬁrst time are two sections on the 
history of photography; ‘though its status is still challenged, photography now 
merits treatment as a legitimate ﬁeld of art historical investigation’.33 This, however, 
does not entail discussing Sherman in his survey, despite the inclusion, for the ﬁrst 
time too, of ‘the achievements of women artists’. ‘My primary aim was to preserve 
the humanism that provided the foundation of this book’, the new author explains. 
Conceptual art is represented in ‘Part Four: The Modern World’, ch. 4: 
‘Twentieth Century Painting and Sculpture’, subheading ‘Painting since World 
War II’, between ‘Environments; Assemblages; Installations’ and ‘Photorealism’. 
The short section is called ‘KOSUTH’ and is illustrated with One and Three Chairs 
(1965) (plate 2). ‘This deliberately anti-art approach, stemming from Dada,’ the 
text begins, ‘poses a number of stimulating paradoxes’. But: 
As soon as the documentation takes on visible form, it begins to come perilously close to more 
traditional forms of art (especially if it is placed in a gallery where it can be seen by an audi­
ence), since it is impossible fully to divorce the imagination from aesthetic matters. 
The text never mentions what it argues against, namely the general aim of the 
conceptualists to avoid traditional art forms or aesthetic considerations and to 
emphasize the idea rather than the work or object of art. The making of the work of 
art, however – ‘[w]hatever the Conceptual artist’s [still unmentioned] intention’ – is 
said to be as important as ever in the history of art. Beuys is absent here, but a new 
addition to this edition is ‘Painting of the 1980s’ discussing two representative 
names: Clemente (without Francesco) and Anselm Kiefer (presented by his full name). 
A general remark on the art of the present moment prepares the ground for them. 
For all the recent ferment, the direction of art has yet to appear in sufﬁcient clarity to let us 
chart the future. Having received a rich heritage, artists are sorting through a wide variety of 
alternatives without yet arriving at durable conclusions. The ﬁrst sign of this transition 
64 

S U R V E Y I N G C O N T E M P O R A R Y A R T: P O S T- WA R , P O S T M O D E R N , A N D  T H E N W H AT ?  
2 Joseph Kosuth, One and Three Chairs, 1965. Chair, photograph of chair, and photographic 
enlargement of dictionary deﬁnition of chair. New York: Museum of Modern Art. Photo: Courtesy 
of the artist. 
occurred in the early 1970s with the widespread use of ‘Neo-’ to describe the current tendencies. 
Art in the 1980s has been called more simply Post-Modern. The term is, of course, incongruous: 
modernity can never be outdated, because it is simply whatever is contemporary. 
The lack of distinction between a relative and a more absolute sense of ‘modern’ will 
be discussed in my conclusion. The concluding chapter of the book deals with 
architecture and photography and the ﬁnal artwork to be presented is David 
Hockney’s photographic montage Gregory Watching the Snow Fall, Kyoto, February (1983). 
THE 1 990 S 
Marilyn Stokstad’s Art History (1st edn, New York, 1995) is decorated with a fron­
tispiece, as it were, to the chapter ‘Art in the United States and Europe since World 
War II’ (written by Bradford R. Collins): Allan Kaprow’s The Courtyard (1962). This 
happening was apparently criticized for being too enjoyable and entertaining to 
the public, which certainly marks the distance from earlier avant-garde attempts 
of ´epater le bourgeois. This is deemed to raise questions about what art is and what 
role it may have in society in the ‘richly innovative period following World War II’. 
In the sub-chapter ‘Alternative Developments Following Abstract Expressionism’, 
we learn that ‘three related styles that emerged in the wake of Abstract Expres­
sionism – post-painterly abstraction, Hard Edge, or Minimalist, art, and Concep­
65 

S U R V E Y I N G C O N T E M P O R A R Y A R T: P O S T- WA R ,  P O S T M O D E R N , A N D  T H E N W H AT ?  
3 Joseph Beuys, Coyote (I Like America and America Likes Me), 1974. Week-long action staged in the 
Rene´ Block Gallery, New York. Photo: r Caroline Tisdall, courtesy Ronald Feldman Fine Arts, 
New York/www.feldmangallery.com. 
tualism – shared a commitment to reducing art to its essentials.’ Conceptualism 
as style is represented with one work only: Bruce Nauman’s Bound to Fail (1966–67/ 
70), followed by this sentence: ‘Although Conceptualist works usually provide 
little for the mind to ponder, on a second level the work suggests that given the 
overly ambitious social agenda of the modernist artist, he or she was bound to 
fail.’ Nauman’s visual pun is turned into a pun on the failure of modernism, or 
perhaps conceptual art. The attitude that conceptual art has little for the mind to 
ponder is articulated through a twist on the more conventional lament that in its 
espousal of the conceptual, it has little for the eyes to offer. Nauman’s work is also 
invoked to represent ‘the end of modernism’. The many new ‘approaches’ to art 
are brought together by the [italicized] term ‘postmodernism’. 
In the next, longer, sub-chapter ‘From Modernism to Postmodernism’, we 
encounter ‘Post-Conceptual Art’, represented by Hans Haacke ‘who employed the 
Conceptual vocabulary of the preceding decade’ and William Wegman. The 
following sub-chapter is entitled ‘Postmodernism’. Beneath the heading ‘The 
Resurgence of European Art’, Beuys is presented after Anselm Kiefer whose 
‘unofﬁcial mentor’ he was and who ‘helped shape Kiefer’s sense of art’s social 
mission’. Foregrounded is Coyote: I Like America and America Likes Me (1974), where 
the artist, covered in felt, spent three days in an empty gallery space with a live 
coyote (plate 3). Beuys is thus inserted into this chapter – into art history – as 
virtually already historical (he was, in fact, already dead), but reawakened or 
actualized by Kiefer. The place for Beuys in history is provided by his Postmodern 
66 

S U R V E Y I N G C O N T E M P O R A R Y A R T: P O S T- WA R , P O S T M O D E R N , A N D  T H E N W H AT ?  
successor. Also we learn that ‘Neo-Conceptualism’ is a ‘style’ – an ‘analytical and 
often cynical style’ – emerging in the mid-1980s (reﬂecting the ideas of Roland 
Barthes, Jacques Derrida, Jean Baudrillard and Foucault). The representatives are 
Mark Tansey, Louise Lawler, Peter Halley and Sherrie Levine. Sherman is presented 
as ‘one of the most prominent’ among the group connected to ‘Later Feminism’. 
Not one of the most prominent contemporary artists, obviously, she is certainly 
among the top late-feminist (women) artists. Her work is reduced to the Untitled 
Film Stills series, one of which is illustrated (from 1978 without identifying 
number). The last work of this book is Rebecca Horn’s High Moon, an installation 
with two riﬂes and two pools of red liquid from 1991. 
The ﬁrst thing to note in Gombrich (16th edn, London and New York, 1995) is 
perhaps Table 1: The Millennial Perspective 3000 BC–AD 2000, which ends with 
the following currents: abstract expressionism, pop art, op art and post­
modernism (putting a uniquely strong emphasis on op art). The last chapter had 
been added to the original text with the 11th edn in 1966 (Postscript 1966). This 
chapter is now inserted into a larger one entitled ‘A Story Without End: The 
Triumph of Modernism’. It is not a regular last chapter, but remains a kind of 
postscript containing some comments on the state of art and art history. 
Gombrich’s 1966 view of the task of the historian was ﬁrmly Rankean: ‘It is the job 
of the historian to make intelligible what actually happens.’ The job of criticizing 
it is assigned to the critic. Thirty years later, the historian agrees with his former 
‘critical’ self: the list of artists from the 1966 Postscript is preserved, except for the 
replacement of Pollock by Morandi. The text concludes by listing three male 
artists who might not accept the ‘slogan’ ‘Post-Modern’: Lucian Freud, Henri 
Cartier-Bresson and David Hockney. Beuys and Sherman never enter this history, 
nor does conceptual art. 
In 1995, the 5th Janson edition, revised by A. F. Janson, ‘has more changes 
than all previous ones combined since it ﬁrst appeared’ according to the Preface. 
But we should look ﬁrst at ‘Part Four: The Modern World’, which has a section on 
‘Twentieth Century Sculpture’. Further down, ‘Sculpture after 1945’ encompasses 
‘Conceptual Art’. References are made to Marcel Duchamp and Kaprow. Concep­
tual art is presented as a ‘view’ that bypasses execution: ‘According to this 
view, works of art can be dispensed with altogether, since they are incidental 
by-products of the imaginative leap’, which is to take the outer form for the 
entire work of art, bypassing precisely the conceptual element. Galleries can 
also be ‘dispensed with’ and ‘even the artist’s public’, which amounts to the 
opposite position on the audience to Gardner’s in 1975. Conceptual art 
also ‘eliminates aesthetics from art’, in tune with some of the conceptualists’ 
own statements. Two examples are given and illustrated. Following Kosuth’s One 
and Three Chairs (1965) is John Baldessari’s Art History (1972), which is a photograph 
with added typed text (not immediately readable as sculpture, that is). This work 
is praised for its ‘ironic humour’, if ultimately rejected as an empty gesture. 
Before the conclusion there is a short section on performance art, the only 
representative of which is Beuys. It is, despite its heavy reliance ‘on the shock 
value of irreverent humour or explicit sexuality’, perhaps ‘the most characteristic 
art form of the 1980s’. The piece Coyote [subtitle missing] is illustrated, and judged 
in fairly positive terms. Beuys comes across as a sincere (political) but hopelessly 
romantic artist. 
67 

S U R V E Y I N G C O N T E M P O R A R Y A R T: P O S T- WA R ,  P O S T M O D E R N , A N D  T H E N W H AT ?  
Cindy Sherman does not feature in ‘Twentieth-Century Photography’. In 
Janson, her work makes its debut in the chapter entitled ‘Postmodernism’. A 
perhaps unprecedented diatribe in the history of survey texts is followed by a tiny 
sub-section on (the?) two approaches to blame for the current state of affairs: 
‘Semiotics and Deconstruction’. The latter is characteristically described as 
‘destructive, not constructive’. These theories are said to have had a devastating 
effect on art. The next section of the text is ‘Postmodern Art’. In the main, it ‘can 
be traced back to Conceptualism, which led the initial attack on modernism. . . . 
Indeed, it has been argued that the beginnings of postmodernism can be dated to 
the rise of Conceptualism in the mid-1960s.’ The text denounces appropriation, 
which borders on ‘bankruptcy’, a position that resonates with the old Hegelesque 
concern about artists turning to established styles instead of facing the new. 
Baudelaire is summoned to disqualify postmodernism as inferior eclecticism. 
After having dealt extensively with architecture in comparison, the text turns, 
as it always has in previous editions, to the next art form, sculpture, followed 
by painting: ‘To the extent that it can be said to exist at all, however, postmodern 
painting is an outgrowth of Conceptualism, Pop Art, and Neo-Expressionism’. As 
the text approaches photography, Barbara Kruger is introduced, followed by 
Sherman as ‘a paradigm of postmodernism’, which sounds disquieting in this 
context. Yet the discussion her work is afforded is positive in tone, complimenting 
the artist for her originality and non-textual approach. The price for this is a de-
politicized reading. Her Untitled Film Stills are so ‘skilful that they look like the real 
thing’ (see plate 1). Her work’s supposed feminism is questioned, but the photo­
graphic example chosen ‘is strangely affecting in its aura of nostalgia and the 
sense of mystery it communicates’. This is the last work of art in Janson’s world 
history, followed merely by a postscript on theory in which semiotics and 
deconstruction are revisited in a negatively biased manner. 
The differences from the third Janson edition are striking, although some 
elements are retained, such as the decision to focus on a small number of indi­
viduals. Other than that, this text is wholly concerned with the perils of post­
modernism, which turns it into a pamphlet. For example: ‘Postmodernism is a 
trend that [is] opposed to the world order as it exists today and to the values that 
created it.’ And: ‘Deprived of traditional guidelines, the postmodernist drifts 
aimlessly in a sea without meaning or reality.’ Finally: ‘Postmodern people are 
thus fated to become pleasure-seeking narcissists without any strong identity, 
purpose, or attachments. Cynical and amoral, they live for the moment.’ This text 
survived into the edition of 2002, but was then replaced. 
The last chapter of Gardner’s survey (10th edn, Fort Worth, 1996) is ‘The Later 
Twentieth Century’. It includes, apart from the usual timeline, a map of the post­
colonial world of today featuring the spread of religions. Before turning to art in 
the ordinary sense, several pages are devoted to fashioning a more political 
picture of the situation (attested to by labels like post-imperialism, international 
migration, political equality and cultural equivalence). This amounts to an 
unusually ambitious post-colonial embedding, deﬁning ‘the ideology of egali­
tarianism/multiculturalism [as] the most widespread and signiﬁcant of those 
ideologies that comprise Postmodernist thinking’. As we head into the text, we 
ﬁnd the sub-chapter ‘Pop Art and Postmodern Trends’ and more familiar 
language. Tying ‘Happenings, Performance Art, Conceptual Art’ together into one 
68 

S U R V E Y I N G C O N T E M P O R A R Y A R T: P O S T- WA R , P O S T M O D E R N , A N D  T H E N W H AT ?  
heading means that conceptual art (divorced here from minimalism), shares the 
section with Beuys and Sherman. Let us ﬁrst see how this particular sub-chapter 
ﬁts into the previous history of modern(ist) art: 
Readers will notice that in the course of narrating the stylistic changes of twentieth-century art 
we have been shifting from labelling it ‘Modern’ to ‘Modernist’; and its ideology, the set of ideas 
by which it explains itself, we now call ‘Modernism’. The complex of Modernist styles origi­
nating at the end of the nineteenth century is now identiﬁed as a distinct period; its art-
historical development seems to be reaching a conclusion or, at least, a bewildered pause – 
perhaps a transition to something new. Modernist art and ideology are being revised and 
reacted against. The revisions and reaction go by the name Postmodernism. 
After presenting Kaprow’s happenings (in general; there is no speciﬁc example), 
Beuys is represented by a performance, Iphigenia/Titus Andronicus (1969), which 
means this time that he features as a living representative of the then contem­
porary scene. The text on Beuys ends rather cynically by noticing that ‘the artist 
believed that the world could be changed’. Immediately following this is a dry 
description of the next phase: 
Conceptual art communicates message and meaning through the more permanent media, two 
dimensional or three dimensional or both, often in combination with printed text. The primary 
purpose is to get across an idea, a concept, with whatever visual means are available. In this 
respect, Conceptual art resembles advertising art and display, which no doubt have strongly 
inﬂuenced it. 
The examples are Sylvia Plimack Mangold, Two Exact Rules on Dark and Light Floor 
(1975) and Gilbert and George, We Are (1985). Conceptualism is then associated 
with feminist activism, where it is claimed it can be ‘most effective’. Sherman is 
represented by Untitled (1992). ‘The concept clearly determines the expressive 
distortions of the forms, and Sherman’s art can be classiﬁed as both Conceptualist 
and Expressionist, with more than a touch of Surrealism’ and, presumably, as 
activist or feminist, although these are not labels of style. The last picture of this 
history of art is not an artwork, but an Associated Press Photograph: Tinnamen 
Square, June 6, 1989, showing the individual ﬁgure who confronted a parade of 
tanks in front of the international news media. The attached comment is not on 
contemporary visual culture or the end of art, but an expression of political hope 
for moral force and bravery. 
THE 2 000 S 
Two chapters are of interest in Honour and Fleming (6th edn, London, 2002, 
without John Fleming). The ﬁrst is ‘Post-War to Post-Modern’, including the 
section ‘Minimal and Conceptual Art’, where conceptual art is diminished to a 
few lines following minimalism, without mention of Kosuth or any more 
prominent representative. No illustration covers this phase. This is, pretty much, 
it: ‘The central theory of Conceptual Art is that the work of art is essentially an 
idea which may, or may not, generate a visible form.’ The next chapter, ‘Conti­
nuity and Change: The Twilight of the Second Millennium’, extended by Michael 
Archer (from ‘The Post-Medium Condition’ to ‘Globalization’), begins to sketch a 
69 

S U R V E Y I N G C O N T E M P O R A R Y A R T: P O S T- WA R ,  P O S T M O D E R N , A N D  T H E N W H AT ?  
political situation, then turns to art and the distinction between modern and 
postmodern in particular: ‘By the latter half of the 1990s . . . increasing familiarity 
with the critical positions articulated in Post-Modern art made artists feel much 
less need to work in explicit opposition to Modernism.’ This introduces a new 
theme, and suggests ways away from postmodernism. Instead of concluding the 
chapter on contemporary art in 1982, Beuys is now part of this chapter’s very 
beginning (‘Questioning Modernism’), tagged with the words ‘most provocative 
questioner of all received ideas about art’. The hare performance is joined by an 
illustration of ‘his last and perhaps greatest work’: Plight (1985). ‘Art as Identity’ 
features Sherman represented by two illustrations; an Untitled Film Still (unnum­
bered, from 1980) and Untitled No. 120 (1983), the latter a development along the 
same lines of mask and identity, now in colour. The last artwork illustrated, in the 
sub-section ‘Spectacle’ within ‘Globalization’, is Tracey Emin’s mixed media 
installation My Bed (1998). 
In Honour and Fleming (7th edn, London, 2005) the section from the former 
edition on minimal and conceptual art has more than doubled in size, and has 
been divided into two headings. The text on conceptual art has been completely 
rewritten and ﬂeshed out with three illustrations and two longer quotations from 
LeWitt and Kosuth. One and Three Chairs (1965) is back – in colour! References are 
made to Fluxus, Cage, the Gutai group, Happenings, Black Mountain College, 
Duchamp, Dan Graham, Daniel Buren, the ‘Information’ exhibition of 1970, 
computer technology, Vito Acconci, Ed Rusha, Baldessari, Bernd and Hilla Becher. 
The new title to the last chapter, extended again by Michael Archer, is ‘Into the 
Third Millennium’. The text is virtually the same, but some headings are changed 
or new, most notably ‘Art after Post-Modernism’ (reprinting the same text, 
however, on painters like Laura Owens and Luc Tuymans). A new sub-chapter is 
‘The Turn of the Millennium’, which reveals nothing about its content. The last 
artist is Beatriz Milhazes and the painting Mares do Sul (2001). 
In Stokstad (rev. 2nd edn, Upper Saddle River, 2005), ‘The International Avant-
Garde since 1945’ starts off with an example – Jannis Kounellis’ installation of 
twelve horses in a Roman gallery in 1969 – which sets the (conceptual) tone for 
the chapter. This work ‘stimulates our imaginations even as it deﬁes our normal 
expectations of a work of art and – like much innovative art since World War II – 
causes us to question the nature of art itself.’ The sub-chapter ‘Conceptual and 
Performance Art’ (following minimalism and postminimalism) contains Kosuth, 
One and Three Chairs (1965), in which the artist is ‘eliminating the art object itself. 
Although the Conceptualists always produced something physical, it was often 
only a printed statement, a set of directions, or a documentary photograph.’ 
Duchamp’s growing importance is asserted, as (for Kosuth) is Wittgenstein’s. 
Bruce Naumann is represented by a new work, Self-Portrait as a Fountain (1966–67), 
followed by Beuys’ Coyote (1974), while Fluxus and Cage are mentioned in passing. 
In the section entitled ‘Postmodernism’ the so-called ‘Neoconceptualists’ are still 
represented by Halley and Levine, but Jeff Koons has replaced Tansey and Lawler. 
Enumerated under ‘Later Feminist Art’, immediately following, are Kruger and 
Sherman (represented by Untitled Film Still # 21, 1978). Postmodernism is said to be 
a nebulous term, but whatever its signiﬁcance, ‘it involves rejection of the 
concept of the mainstream and recognition of artistic pluralism, the acceptance 
of a variety of artistic intentions and styles [bold in original]’. The last artwork is 
70 

S U R V E Y I N G C O N T E M P O R A R Y A R T: P O S T- WA R , P O S T M O D E R N , A N D  T H E N W H AT ?  
by Wenda Gu, United Nations – Babel of the Millenium (1999), a site-speciﬁc instal­
lation made of human hair. The text picks up a comment by the artist, on the 
possibility of a ‘great ‘‘utopia’’’ within the art world, if not the world. 
The 7th edn of Janson (Upper Saddle River, 2007) is ofﬁcially renamed Janson’s 
History of Art: The Western Tradition, which follows the pattern set by Gardner in 
1975 and is part of a growing tendency openly to declare what the geo-political 
boundaries of texts like these actually are. Six authors are listed for this edition.34 
Two chapters cover the period of interest here: ‘Postwar to Postmodern 1945– 
1980’, and ‘The Postmodern Era: Art Since 1980’. This draws a clear dividing line 
between modern and postmodern exactly thirty years ago. The title word post­
modernism is exchanged here for postmodern, perhaps indicating an era or 
period more than aesthetics, expression, or style. 
The caption containing conceptual art now sounds like conceptual art: 
‘Conceptual Art: Art as Idea’. The Kosuthian reference notwithstanding, the text 
now contains two artists: Kosuth and Beuys (Baldessari is gone). Idea is empha­
sized ‘rather than the aesthetics of style’. Furthermore: ‘In Conceptual Art, the art 
generally exists solely as an idea, with no visual manifestation other than words.’ 
This cliche´ is spawned by the conceptualists themselves, with very little basis in 
fact (as acknowledged by Stokstad in 2005). Smithson’s Spiral Jetty is referenced 
here as well. Kosuth’s piece One and Three Chairs (1965) is now interpreted, with 
more sympathy and understanding, as a ‘textbook study in semiotics’. The work 
also reﬂects a new approach to photography – sculpture is not a viable context 
anymore. The next representative of conceptual art is Beuys, ‘who produced work 
so complex and rich in ideas it is nearly impossible to pin down exactly what his 
art is’, which threatens to dilute the sense of conceptual art beyond reason. His 
performance How to explain pictures to a dead hare (1965) is described and contex­
tualized, but the Coyote is left out. Former references to Fluxus and Cage are now 
covered under a new subheading: ‘Television Art: Nam June Paik’. 
Sherman is divorced from feminist art and Judy Chicago. Her appearance is in 
‘Deconstructing Art: Context as Meaning’, sub-section ‘Photography and LED 
Signs’.35 Illustrated is the Untitled Film Still # 15 (1978) about ‘the complex ways in 
which images become invested with meaning’ and thus also pointing to semio­
tics. The very last illustration in this book is Cai Guo-Qiang, Light Cycle: Explosion 
Project for Central Park (2003). The artist is presented as ‘primarily a conceptual 
artist working in a broad range of media’. References are made, by artist and 
author, to extraterrestrials and to an art for the universe. 
Gardner’s Art Through the Ages: A Global History (13th edn, 2009, international 
student edition, not for sale in the US) has a new subtitle and once again a single 
author in Fred S. Kleiner. It is interesting to compare the ambitions, commu­
nicated by the subtitles, between Janson 2007 and Gardner 2009 (in which the 
wider geographical scope is made possible by a more condensed textual coverage 
of areas and ages). ‘Europe and America After 1945’ (with a reference to the 
international terrorism plaguing the world today) contains just a few sub-chap­
ters, one of which is ‘Painting and Sculpture since 1970’, in which postmodernism 
is introduced with the following words: ‘By the 1970s, the range of art produced 
in both traditional and new media in reaction to Abstract Expressionism, 
Minimalism, and other formalist movements had become so diverse that only a 
broad general term can describe the phenomenon: postmodernism [italics in 
71 

S U R V E Y I N G C O N T E M P O R A R Y A R T: P O S T- WA R ,  P O S T M O D E R N , A N D  T H E N W H AT ?  
original].’ This art ‘comprises a dizzying array of artworks in different media. Only 
a representative sample can be presented here.’ While these lines disclaim any 
historical account more elaborate than the sample, they still claim to provide the 
correct sample; representative, presumably, of what has actually happened. 
Between Miriam Schapiro and Barbara Kruger, we ﬁnd Sherman as a sample of 
‘feminist art’. Her art is represented by Untitled Film Still # 35 (1979), a series 
supposedly inﬂuenced by the stereotypical depiction of women in ‘soft-core 
pornography magazines’, as well by popular ﬁlm genres. The next, and last, 
section is called ‘Performance and Conceptual Art and New Media’. Beuys exem­
pliﬁes performance art, illustrated by the hare piece. The story of his rescue is 
retold here without reservations.36 There are two conceptual artists: Kosuth and 
Naumann. The former is presented by One and Three Chairs, and the latter by the 
neon piece The True Artist Helps the World by Revealing Mystic Truths (1967). But 
perhaps after all there is only one conceptual artist rather than two or three. 
Naumann’s identity as a conceptual artist is effectively denied when his ‘work of 
the 1960s’ is said to have ‘intersected with that of the Conceptual artists’. 
The last artist in the most recent edition is Matthew Barney, represented by 
the Cremaster cycle (1994–2002). The cycle, installed in the Guggenheim Museum 
rotunda in 2003, ‘typiﬁes the scale of many contemporary works’ which are 
deemed congruent to ‘the immense scale and often frenzied pace of contem­
porary life’. Underlined in this concluding paragraph on the global history of art 
are multimedia and new (i.e. digital) technologies: 
No one knows what the next years and decades will bring, but given the expansive scope of 
postmodernism, it is likely that no single approach to or style of art will dominate. But new 
technologies will certainly continue to redeﬁne what constitutes a ‘work of art’. The universally 
expanding presence of computers, digital technology, and the Internet may well erode what few 
conceptual and geographical boundaries remain and make art and information about art 
available to virtually everyone, thereby creating a truly global artistic community. 
CONC L USION 
It is not altogether easy to detect a steady course of development in this material – 
either in the sense of increasing sophistication or of narrative improvement 
between the 1980s and the end of the 2000s. What was understood to constitute 
art history after the 1939–45 war has of course been increasingly augmented with 
new empirical material, information, and challenges from the impact of devel­
opments in the interpretative possibilities of art history, visual studies, and 
related approaches.37 My interest has been in the terms in which the new 
material has been cast, and, ultimately, what historical trajectories compete with 
each other in deﬁning this art-historical era. 
Why, to begin by looking at the whole three decades, does the Gardner text of 
1975 sound more up-to-date or modern than the survey competitors of the mid­
2000s? They are, after all, almost twice the size. Was Gardner’s grasp of the 
material still saturated with optimistic expectations for a new role for art, 
involving audience interaction enhanced by new technology? As well as the 
expectation that art should be orientated towards the future, and encouraged to 
embrace it by this technology? One might say, in hindsight, that these attitudes 
72 

S U R V E Y I N G C O N T E M P O R A R Y A R T: P O S T- WA R , P O S T M O D E R N , A N D  T H E N W H AT ?  
deﬁne the ﬁrst Gardner as still modernist, or perhaps pre-postmodern. But it was 
also, at least in this regard, less prone than modernist thought to cling to the idea 
of succeeding ‘isms’, movements or art forms. It was less occupied with form, style 
and artistic individuals than was modernism, and instead showed interest in 
addressing what seemed visible on the horizon, such as audience participation, 
systems theory and a digital revolution. 
Before turning to the ‘contemporary’ assignment and to postmodernism, let me 
comment on how the test cases were dealt with in these texts. Conceptual art was 
closely linked to minimal art in 1982, but then largely disassociated from it in many 
later texts until the 2000s. No one places such weight on conceptual art – or 
conceptualism – as a style as Stokstad (which is the only survey to specify post- and 
neo-conceptualism by headings). In the earlier texts, conceptual art is almost wholly 
identiﬁed, not only with Joseph Kosuth, but with One and Three Chairs (1965), which 
seemed almost to denote conceptual art to the exclusion of any possible competitor. 
The exceptions to this are Honour and Fleming (who in 1982 favoured Sol LeWitt 
and in 2002 no one) and Stokstad (1995), where the only (negative) example of 
this art form is by Naumann. As the years pass, however, conceptual art is awarded 
more space and appreciation, which is a sign of its increased functional contem­
poraneity, whereby work from the Vietnam War era is treated as contemporary 
with art practices from the present decade or so. At times (Janson, 1995), a lack 
of insight and sympathy is likely due to perceived links between conceptual art 
and postmodernism. 
For some of these authors, Joseph Beuys is a distinguished representative of 
conceptual art, and for others, of performance art or of postmodern art. His work 
is illustrated by his most fetching performances, and almost never by his more 
conceptual installations (except in Honour and Fleming, 2002). Cindy Sherman 
enters this history in the mid-1990s. For most authors she is evidently a feminist 
artist, with only Janson (1995) contesting the identiﬁcation, with the apparent 
consequence that he bestows considerable lyrical praise on her art. Feminist 
or not, Sherman apparently belongs for all commentators to the postmodern 
scene, and is strongly identiﬁed with her Untitled Film Stills series. The choice of 
which one to illustrate is not deemed overly important, due most likely to the 
conceptual underpinnings of her work. Sherman is also described, following 
traditional art-historical procedure, as a combination of previous styles (Gardner, 
1996), and as iconographically coupled to issues about identity (Honour and 
Fleming, 2002). 
Looking at who is awarded until further notice the symbolic status of the last 
artist in art history gives a sense of the structure of these narratives, which are 
open-ended, and to that extent optimistic. Those who are posited at the threshold 
to the future are, at various moments and in various editions, Joseph Beuys, 
Marino Marini, David Hockney, Rebecca Horn, Cindy Sherman, an Associated 
Press Photograph, Tracey Emin, Wenda Gu, Beatriz Milhazes, Cai Guo-Qiang and 
Matthew Barney. These latter artists especially are connected to something 
greater than themselves and art: the world, peace, the human spirit, democracy 
or the universe. 
When ‘contemporary art’ is invoked, on the one hand, as a chapter title in 
1982, I read it as completely relative, comprising whatever is deemed the latest 
work of interest. Since divisions of time such as ages, centuries, periods and 
73 

S U R V E Y I N G C O N T E M P O R A R Y A R T: P O S T- WA R ,  P O S T M O D E R N , A N D  T H E N W H AT ?  
movements, all belong to the chronological logic of the survey genre, and provide 
a foundation for the discipline of art history, we might say that this chapter 
collects art belonging to a period that does not yet have a name. When, on the 
other hand and at the other end of the time span, ‘contemporary art’ is refer­
enced in 2009 in connection to the ‘frenzied pace of contemporary life’ 
we recognize the topos from Gardner, who spoke in 1926 of art as a reﬂection 
of life. More importantly, I would suggest we understand ‘contemporary’ here 
as pointing to a perception of some higher level of complication, based on certain 
developments in ‘life’ due to new information technology, multicultu­
ralism, globalization and so forth, which are understood to have altered and 
literalized the meaning of contemporary. Contemporary no longer refers only to 
the latest work or moment of interest – and as such to phenomena notoriously 
difﬁcult to summarize (a commonplace clearly expressed here by Gombrich and 
Janson). Now it signals a new era, with its quicker pace, frenzy, dizzying qualities, 
etc., all of which are instantly recognizable as modernist tropes – already present 
in Baudelaire and ceaselessly elaborated in his wake – that by the 1960s had 
attained the status of cliche´. However, when contemporary today points to 
co-existing approaches, styles or problems; to ‘time–space compression’,38 or a 
perceived simultaneity made possible by digital communication networks; we 
seem to have rather material justiﬁcation for the growth of ‘contemporary’ in our 
terminology. Another reason is that the term is ‘liquid’ or ﬂuid enough to move at 
high speed in a transcultural environment of capitalist exchange without having 
to confront prevailing problems of historical periodization (modern, modernist, 
late modern, postmodern, post-historical, most prominent, though there are 
others), which ultimately refer to larger, more content based, issues of identity 
and power.39 
Postmodernism is ﬁrst mentioned in 1982, and with exclusive reference to 
architecture. When Janson refers with disdain to this term in 1986, it is to accuse 
it of being both facile and illogical, since ‘modernity can never be outdated, 
because it is simply what is contemporary’. The modern and the contemporary 
can be and have been used as synonyms, but by 1986, ‘The Modern World’, a 
concept referenced in almost all of these texts, has gained a fairly stable period 
quality, extending by most accounts from sometime in the nineteenth century to 
the present. The problem of any usage of ‘contemporary’ is that it causes confu­
sion between what is ‘simply’ the latest, most recent, and the like, and what is 
coloured, in a more absolute and deﬁnitive way, by ‘modern’ characteristics. The 
OED lists four meanings of the adjective ‘contemporary’, the ﬁrst three of which 
are relatively neutral, having to do with the co-existent, coeval and simultaneous, 
whereas the forth reads as follows: 
4. a. Modern; of or characteristic of the present period; esp. up-to-date, ultra-modern; spec. 
designating art of a markedly avant-garde quality, or furniture, building, decoration, etc., having 
modern characteristics . . .40 
When the adjective ‘modern’ is connected to expressions such as ‘ultra-modern’ 
and ‘avant-garde’ it is anchored in history, more precisely to the late nineteenth 
and early twentieth centuries. ‘Modern’ can and is, of course, still commonly used 
in a relative sense to describe periods preceding as well as succeeding the so­
74 

S U R V E Y I N G C O N T E M P O R A R Y A R T: P O S T- WA R , P O S T M O D E R N , A N D  T H E N W H AT ?  
called modern period. But by and large ‘modern’ without qualiﬁcation has come 
to designate the cultural period preceding our own. The issues of delimitation 
opening up here, however, are too vast to pursue in the present context; given, to 
take just a single instance, the widespread reading of the postmodern as an aspect 
of the modern.41 Formulating what is now a common position, Hal Foster 
claimed in 1982 that, ‘if postmodernism is truly deconstructive of modernism, it 
would seem to be a discursivity within it’, and continued by positing that ‘it may 
be less a break with modernism than an advance in a dialectic in which 
modernism is re-formed’.42 
In my survey, postmodernism is described as a straightforward and incon­
gruous term (Janson, 1986), a ‘slogan’ (Gombrich, 1995) and a ‘trend’ (Janson, 1995, 
Gardner, 1996), none of which is very helpful in determining its historical 
implications. In Stokstad (1995), postmodernism is an ‘approach to art’ in reaction 
to modernism; and in Gardner in 1996 it is not only a ‘trend’ but also a ‘revision’ 
or ‘reaction’ to the period of modernism. But whether such a revision is a passing 
fad, or something more durable, the text does not say. The ﬁrst clear use of 
postmodern as a period term in the texts I have considered is in Honour and 
Fleming, 2002, where the chapter title reads ‘Post-War to Post-Modern’. The latter 
word appears to be distinguished from ‘postmodernism’ in lower case, which 
refers to the aesthetic response to this captitalized historical phase.43 In 2007, 
Janson complies with this precedent. ‘Postwar to Postmodern 1945–1980’ is 
followed by ‘The Postmodern Era: Art Since 1980’. But more than that, the peri­
odization has been nailed down to a precise moment between post-war and 
postmodern, the year 1980. In a sense then, all of the texts included in my survey 
belong, following Janson, to ‘The Postmodern Era’ (which is taken to begin in the 
1960s or 1970s and reach its peak in the 1980s). Now, in order for such an era to be 
established or be distinguishable as such, it would need to have ended, and in fact 
both the last two editions of Honour and Fleming (2002, 2005) have moved beyond 
‘The Postmodern Era’. This alerts us to the peculiar place of ‘the contemporary’ in 
this discourse. The page is turned towards a new chapter, connected not to 
centuries or movements, but to millennia: ‘Into the Third Millennium’ is Honour 
and Fleming’s. This text was the ﬁrst to include postmodernism, and the ﬁrst to 
leave it behind. What this draws attention to, among other things, is the problem 
facing those accounts of contemporary art that stretch back to 1945. How could 
‘contemporary’ cover – without innumerable distinctions – what precedes as well 
as what succeeds the postmodern? How much further into the third millennium 
will the contemporary label be applicable if it is to preserve any substantial 
number of its meanings for us? What might succeed it? 
Talking about postmodernism in this way may warrant a word of warning. 
This kind of ‘isolation of different points of emergence does not conform to the 
successive conﬁgurations of an identical meaning; rather, they result from 
substitutions, displacements, disguised conquests, and systematic reversals’.44 
While I have indeed presented various isolated points of emergence of the post-
modern in these texts, the issue is neither which point is the correct one, nor 
which text is the more accurate description of the world; the point is that no such 
coherent formation of meaning exists against which to measure variations or 
deviations. What these histories give us are not different interpretations of a solid 
and factual historical phenomenon; they constitute this phenomenon through 
75 

S U R V E Y I N G C O N T E M P O R A R Y A R T: P O S T- WA R ,  P O S T M O D E R N , A N D  T H E N W H AT ?  
their discourse. In a certain sense, postmodernism conforms in reality to all of 
these partly conﬂicting descriptions. It is only what it is being conjured up as. 
Thus, it is simultaneously, among other things, a style, an approach, a trend, a 
rejection, a slogan, a phenomenon and a period. Where we would put our money 
is a different matter, which ultimately the critic within us (not the genealogist) 
will decide. 
Notes 
1  Edward Lucie-Smith, Art Today, London, 1995, 7. 
2  Amelia Jones, A Companion to Contemporary Art 
since 1945, Malden, MA, 2006, 3. 
3  Eleanor Heartney, Art & Today, London, 2008, 7. 
4  e.g. Uta Grosenick and Burkhard Riemschneider, 
eds, Art Now, Ko¨ln, 2001, and the Art Now exhibi­
tion programme on current developments in 
contemporary British art at Tate Modern, begun 
in 1995. 
5  Michel Foucault, ‘On the archeology of the 
sciences: response to the epistemology circle’, in 
Foucault, Aesthetics, Method, and Epistemology, ed. 
James Faubion, London, 2000, 312. 
6  The reference is to the opening lines of E. H. 
Gombrich, The Story of Art, 13th edn, London, 
1978, 4: ‘There really is no such thing as Art. 
There are only artists.’ 
7  Foucault,Aesthetics, 304. 
8  Brandon Taylor, Art Today, London, 2005, 9. 
9  See Julian Stallabrass, Art Incorporated: The Story of 
Contemporary Art, Oxford, 2004; Terry Smith, 
‘What is contemporary art?: contemporaneity 
and art to come’, Konsthistorisk tidskrift/Journal of 
Art History, 2002, 71, 1–2, 3–15; Arthur C. Danto, 
‘Introduction: modern, postmodern, contem­
porary’, After the End of Art: Contemporary Art and 
the Pale of History, Princeton, 1997, 3–19. 
10 Amelia Jones, ‘Introduction: writing contem­
porary art into history, a paradox?’, in Jones, ed., 
Companion to Contemporary Art since 1945, 3.  
11 Hugh Honour and John Fleming, A World History 
of Art, 7th edn, London, 2005, xii. 
12 Harry Harootunian, ‘Remembering the historical 
present’, Critical Inquiry, 33, Spring 2007, 471–94, 
esp. 475. See also Reinhart Koselleck, Futures Past: 
On the Semantics of Historical Time, trans. Keith 
Tribe, Cambridge, MA and London, 1985. 
13 Jacques Rancie`re, The Politics of Aesthetics: The 
Distribution of the Sensible, trans. with introduc­
tion by Gabriel Rockhill, London and New York, 
2004, 26. 
14 Charles Baudelaire, ‘The painter of modern life’ 
in The Painter of Modern Life and Other Essays, trans. 
and ed. Jonathan Mayne, London, 2003, 1. 
15 Jonathan Harris, Art History: The Key Concepts, 
London and New York, 2006, 67. 
16 James Elkins, Master Narratives and their Discon­
tents, New York and London, 2005, 157. 
17 Helen Gardner, Art through the Ages, New York, 
1926, 466. 
18 Amelia Jones, ‘Writing contemporary art into 
history’, 4. 
19 Contemporary history, however, habitually uses 
either the 1914–18 war or the 1939–45 war to 
delimit the contemporary period. 
20 My survey certainly is Eurocentric, since I have 
not been able to discuss here what is presented 
as the most recent state of the arts within the 
chapters, in so far as they exist, on non-European 
art. 
21 ‘Contemporary art’, http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ 
Contemporary_art (accessed 13 October 2008). 
22 Baudelaire, ‘The Painter’, 1–41. See also Stephen 
Bann, Ways Around Modernism, New York and 
London, 2007, which is highly relevant apropos 
the relationship between modernism and post­
modernism and what preceded both. 
23 I base this on my larger study of the general 
survey art history in Germany, Art of Illusion: The 
Representation of Art History in Nineteenth-Century 
Germany and Beyond, Bern, 2004. 
24 My choice of these ﬁve – three American and two 
produced in the UK – has to do with the fact that 
they are probably the most inﬂuential survey 
texts of general art history since the twentieth 
century. 
25 Gombrich, preface to the 15th edition (1989), 
included in The Story of Art, 16th edn, London and 
New York, 2002, 12. 
26 The interpretation of conceptual art is under­
going signiﬁcant changes during the period, 
which point to its esteemed increasing relevance 
as a foundation for postmodern or contemporary 
art practices. See, for example, Claire Doherty, 
ed., Contemporary Art: From Studio to Situation, 
London, 2004; Alexander Alberro and Sabeth 
Buchmann, eds., Art after Conceptual Art, Vienna, 
2006. 
27 Alfred H. Barr Jr’s diagram of the development of 
cubism and abstract art (1890–1945) has been 
discussed by many. See for example Sybil Gordon 
Kantor, Alfred H. Barr Jr and the Intellectual Origins 
of the Museum of Modern Art, Cambridge, MA and 
London, 2002, and James Elkins, Stories of Art, 
New York and London, 2002, ch. 1. 
76 

S U R V E Y I N G C O N T E M P O R A R Y A R T: P O S T- WA R , P O S T M O D E R N , A N D  T H E N W H AT ?  
28 For the whole context of these artistic interests, 
see Donna De Salvo, ed., Open Systems: Rethinking 
Art c. 1970, exh. cat., London, 2005. 
29 The book was ﬁrst published in 1950. For 
commentary and criticism, see Elkins, Stories of 
Art, New York and London, 2002 and Dana 
Arnold, Art History: A Very Short Introduction, 
Oxford and New York, 2004, ch. 2. 
30 G. W. F. Hegel, Aesthetics. Lectures on Fine Art, 1,  
trans. T. M. Knox, Oxford, 1998, 11. 
31 Franz Kugler, ‘Uber die gegenw
.
. 
alt­
artigen Verh. 
nisse der Kunst zum Leben’ (last chapter of his 
Handbook on Painting, 1837), reprinted in Kugler, 
Kleine Schriften, 3, Stuttgart, 1854, 206–32. The 
equivalent of an art, in the 1980s (post-concep­
tual if not yet unequivocally named post-
modernist) in the nineteenth century is what 
Baudelaire and others referred to as philosophic 
art, which was precisely concerned with the role 
and meaning of art as such. 
Baudelaire, ‘Philosophic art’, 205–13. See also 
Karlholm, Art of Illusion, 2004, ch. 4. 
32 Friedrich Nietzsche, The Use and Abuse of History 
(1873), New York, 2005. 
33 H. W. Janson, History of Art was ﬁrst released in 
1962. 
34 Penelope J. E. Davies (ed.), Walter B. Denny, Frima 
Fox Hofrichter, Ann M. Roberts, and David L. Simon. 
35 LED 5 light-emitting diodes, a medium used by 
Jenny Holzer, among others. 
36 Already in 1980, serious doubts about the 
authenticity of this recollection, and more, were 
recorded by Benjamin H. D. Buchloh, ‘Beuys: the 
twilight of the idol, preliminary notes for a 
critique’ (1980), reprinted in Buchloh, Neo-Avant­
garde and Cultural Industry: Essays on European and 
American Art from 1955 to 1975, Cambridge, MA 
and London, 2000, 41–64. 
37 See for example A. L. Rees and Frances Borzello, 
eds, The New Art History, London, 1986; Nicholas 
Mirzoeff, An Introduction to Visual Culture, London 
and New York, 1999; Elkins, Visual Studies: A 
Sceptical Introduction, New York, 2003. 
38 David Harvey, The Condition of Postmodernity: An 
Enquiry into the Origins of Cultural Change, Malden, 
MA and Oxford, 1990, part 3. 
39 ‘There are reasons to consider ‘‘ﬂuidity’’ or 
‘‘liquidity’’ as ﬁtting metaphors when we wish to 
grasp the nature of the present, in many ways 
novel, phase in the history of modernity.’ Zygmut 
Baumann, Liquid Modernity, Cambridge and 
Malden, MA, 2000, 2. 
40 ‘contemporary’, Oxford English Dictionary, 2000, 
http://dictionary.oed.com/ 
41 Among the ﬁrst to formulate postmodernism’s 
intricately paradoxical relation to modernism, as 
prior to it, in effect, was Jean-Francois Lyotard. 
See his ‘Answering the question: what is post­
modernism?’, included as Appendix in The Post-
modern Condition: A Report on Knowledge (1979), 
trans. Geoff Bennington and Brian Massumi, 
Manchester, 1984. 
42 Hal Foster, ‘Re: post’ (1982), reprinted in Brian 
Wallis, ed., Art after Modernism: Rethinking Repre­
sentation, New York, 1984. Lyotard, The Postmodern 
Condition. 
43 This conforms to a widely accepted reading, 
for instance, in Fredric Jameson, Postmodernism 
or, The Cultural Logic of Late Capitalism, London 
and New York, 1991, and Terry Eagleton, The 
Illusions of Postmodernism, Malden, MA and 
Oxford, 1996. 
44 Foucault, ‘Nietzsche, genealogy, history’, in 
Donald F. Bouchard, ed., Language, Counter-
Memory, Practice: Selected Essays and Interviews by 
Michel Foucault, Ithaca, NY, 1977, 51. 
77 

5   
MICHEL FOUCAULT AND THE POINT OF   
PAINTING   
C A T H E R I N E  M .  S O U S S L O F F  
Commenc¸ons par comprendre qu’il y a un langage tacite et que la peinture parle a` sa fac¸on. 1 
Merleau-Ponty, 1960 
What would it mean to consider the major French philosopher Michel Foucault 
(1926–84) as a historian of art who specialized in European painting, in addition 
to his already established position as one of the fathers of the ﬁeld of visual 
studies? How are Foucault’s views on painting entailed in the ﬁelds of art history, 
aesthetics, and visual studies in the twenty-ﬁrst century? In this historiographical 
introduction to Foucault’s writings on painting, I seek to understand their 
signiﬁcance for art history in Foucault’s time and in ours. 
By way of introduction, I remind readers that Foucault’s ﬁrst essay on 
painting explored a single masterpiece by Diego Vela´zquez (1599–1660), Las 
Meninas, which art historians have long considered one of the most important 
works in the history of art. Each of the subsequent four essays provided a 
monographic treatment of the canonical works of a single major European artist: 
the French realist and Impressionist, Edouard Manet (1832–83); the Belgian 
Surrealist Rene´ Magritte (1898–1967); and Ge´rard Fromanger (1939–), Foucault’s 
contemporary and a member of the movement called ‘La Figuration Narrative’. 
PAI N T I N G  I N  HI S T O RY  
I presume the seriousness of Foucault’s address to painting in both its speciﬁcity 
and in its cumulative effect. There is a wide range of references to the visual and 
to the art-historical in Foucault’s writing, but his study of painting has a parti­
cular weight at a particular time in both the development of his thought and in 
the historiography of art history.2 There was nothing exceptional in taking 
painting as central to the theory of art or even to aesthetics, but Foucault’s 
unique contribution to art history was to see painting, at least for a time, as both 
evidence of and explanation for ‘the discontinuity of events and the transfor­
mation of societies’ that both led to modernity and distinguished it from his own 
time.3 In 1972 he wrote: ‘Serial history makes it possible to bring out different 
layers of events as it were, some being visible, even immediately knowable by the 
78 

M I C H E L  F O U C A U L T  A N D  T H E  P O I N T  O F  PA I N T I N G  
contemporaries, and then, beneath these events that form the froth of history, 
so to speak, there are other events that are invisible, imperceptible for the 
contemporaries, and are of a completely different form.’4 Foucault’s systematic 
study of painting occurred during that period of his early work often called 
his structuralist phase. The essays on painting, therefore, are of a piece with 
his elaboration of an approach to history as the search for the contacts 
between moments of transformation and typological analyses. Painting and 
particular paintings provided the actual and material points of contact, or sedi­
mentations if you will, of what could not be seen elsewhere or explained using 
other means. 
Foucault’s essays on painting take up the relation of painting to knowledge 
(savoir) – particularly the question of how visual language means – using this 
innovative approach that he termed historical. Like the phenomenologists who 
preceded him, Foucault understood painting as in some way contributing to an 
understanding of how knowledge is communicated. By the third quarter of the 
twentieth century, when Foucault focused on painting, it had already been a 
major topic of interest for Jean-Paul Sartre and Maurice Merleau-Ponty. Sartre’s 
essays included ‘The Paintings of Giacometti’ (1954), who was primarily known as 
a sculptor, and ‘The Prisoner of Venice’ (1957) on Jacopo Tintoretto. Merleau-Ponty 
wrote three essays on painting: ‘Cezanne’s Doubt’ (1945); ‘Indirect Language and 
the Voices of Silence’ (1952); and ‘Eye and Mind’ (1960). Like these older philoso­
phers, Foucault accepted the primacy of painting in the ﬁeld of the visual arts as a 
whole, but unlike them he sought to understand painting’s signiﬁcance as 
historical, that is, as occurring over time.5 
Foucault looked at and understood Italian, Spanish, and French painting and 
theory from the early modern period to his own day. Foucault’s biographer Didier 
Eribon reports on an early and long-lasting fascination with the history of art, 
particularly the painting of the Italian Renaissance.6 According to Jacqueline 
Verdeaux, she and Foucault journeyed to Florence and Venice in the summer of 
either 1952 or 1953 ‘‘‘He loved painting . . . he made me understand the frescoes of 
Masaccio in Florence’’’7 (plate 1). This early interest by Foucault in the paintings 
by Masaccio in Florence in the Brancacci Chapel in Santa Maria del Carmine and 
in Santa Maria Novella signals an interest in the Western art-historical canon and 
its masterpieces, particularly its history paintings that would surface in 
Foucault’s work in the following decade. These frescoes were understood by art 
historians to have initiated the pictorial narrative histories, or discourses, so 
integral to the history of European art. 
The paintings on the walls of the Brancacci Chapel are visually ordered and 
framed for legibility in accordance with the biblical stories they depict. The 
frescoes depict ﬁgures which, in their novel anatomical precision and sombre, yet 
clear colours, demonstrate a new naturalism. Perhaps for the ﬁrst time in the 
history of art, Masaccio employed a form of geometrical perspective in the 
composition of the frescoes in Santa Croce. These scientiﬁc principles, as they 
were called at the time, led Leon Battista Alberti (1410–72) to name the deceased 
Masaccio in the dedication of his book On Painting (1435).8 In Masaccio’s Flor­
entine frescoes Foucault would have found many of the topics that engaged him 
in the essays on painting written between 1965 and 1975: the naturalism of the 
classical age, which he explored at length in the essay on Las Meninas; the use of 
79 

M I C H E L  F O U C A U L T  A N D  T H E  P O I N T  O F  PA I N T I N G  
1 Adrian Fletcher, The Brancacci Chapel, Santa Maria del Carmine, Florence, c. 2000. Digital photograph. 
Photo: r Adrian Fletcher, www.paradoxplace.com. 
darks and lights to give the illusion of shape and roundness to the ﬁgures in space 
that he explored in Manet; the use of pictures to illustrate words that he explored 
in Magritte; and the ways in which numerous pictures can be disposed coherently 
in a pictorial space that he found elaborated and transformed in Fromanger. 
PA I NT I NG A S KNO W L E DGE 
During approximately one decade Foucault wrote four essays that addressed the 
question of art, its history, and its relationship to the episteme through the high 
art medium of easel painting. Foucault’s lengthy deﬁnition of the episteme, given 
in The Archaeology of Knowledge (L’Arche´ologie du Savoir) in 1969 and published only 
two years after his ﬁrst essay on painting, i.e. the chapter on Las Meninas in The 
Order of Things (Les Mots et les Choses), provides a useful starting point for a histor­
iographical understanding of the place of painting in his thought: ‘The episteme 
is not a form of knowledge (connaissance) or type of rationality which, crossing the 
boundaries of the most varied sciences, manifests the sovereign unity of a subject, 
a spirit, or a period; it is the totality of relations that can be discovered, for a given 
period, between the sciences when one analyses them at the level of discursive 
regularities.’9 In some more or less obvious ways Foucault certainly understands 
painting as possessing a ‘discursive regularity’, or episteme, but painting differs in 
that ‘it is discursive practice that is embodied in techniques and effects’.10 
80 

M I C H E L  F O U C A U L T  A N D  T H E  P O I N T  O F  PA I N T I N G  
Discussing technique in the visual medium of ﬁlm, Barthes had said that ‘the 
ingredients of ‘‘technique’’’ constituted ‘this glue which established . . . natural­
ness’.11 This different discursive practice, embodied by the techniques and effects 
of the painted representation, is what gives painting a theoretical shape unlike 
the sciences and philosophy. Foucault wrote: ‘In this sense, the painting is not a 
pure vision that must be transcribed into the materiality of space; nor is it a 
naked gesture whose silent and eternally empty meanings must be freed 
from subsequent interpretations. It is shot through – and independently of 
scientiﬁc knowledge (connaissance) and philosophical theme – with the positivity 
of a knowledge (savoir).’12 
From Alberti onwards, arguments have been made for the superiority of 
painting as a method or medium of knowledge production, distinct from writing. 
Primary among these positions is the understanding of painting as speaking 
without words: ‘Painting does not speak’, wrote Leonardo, ‘but it is self-evident 
through its ﬁnished product. . . . If you call painting mechanical because it is 
primarily manual, in that the hands depict what is found in the imagination, you 
writers draft with your hand what is found in your mind . . . painting embraces 
not only the works of nature but also an inﬁnite number that nature never 
created.’13 Importantly, in his writings on painting, Foucault insisted on a further 
distinction: that between painting as savoir and the kind of knowledge produced 
by philosophy or science, which he called connaissance.14 Here the postmodernist 
Foucault diverged dramatically in his conception of painting from earlier art 
theorists, most importantly the inﬂuential French art critic and philosopher Paul 
Vale´ry (1871–1945), who had understood painting as connaissance.15 Vale´ry saw the 
paintings by Leonardo as the exempliﬁcation of connaissance as a style of knowl­
edge.16 In his 1929 essay, ‘Leonardo and the philosophers’, Vale´ry argued that the 
artist painted as a philosopher and that painting is philosophy: ‘Leonardo is a 
painter: I say that he has painting for philosophy. In truth, he says it himself and he 
speaks painting as one speaks philosophy: that is, he brings to it everything. He 
makes of that art (which at ﬁrst appears so distinctive in regard to thought and so 
far from the possibility of satisfying all intelligence) an excessive idea. He sees it as 
the ultimate effort of a universal spirit.’17 
In understanding painting as savoir, Foucault followed Merleau-Ponty’s sug­
gestions on how to proceed in delineating the differences and similarities 
between verbal and visual signs in the essay ‘Indirect language and the voices of 
silence’, ﬁrst published in a two-part instalment in the journal Les Temps Modernes 
in 1952 and subsequently as one essay in the book called Signes in 1960.18 
Originally intended as a chapter of his never-completed book called The Prose of the 
World (La prose du monde), it can be no accident that Foucault used this title for the 
second chapter of The Order of Things. In this essay, Merleau-Ponty contested Andre´ 
Malraux’s analysis of painting by attempting to demonstrate the nature of its 
being in the world. The argument is complex and long, but aspects of it related 
directly to Foucault’s later essays on painting and these are the ones that concern 
me here. Merleau-Ponty began his essay with a homage to Ferdinand de Saussure’s 
linguistics: ‘What we have learned from Saussure is that, taken singly, signs do 
not signify anything, and that each one of them does not so much express a 
meaning as mark a divergence of meaning between itself and other signs.’19 In an 
interview, Foucault acknowledged that Saussure had been a major inﬂuence in 
81 

M I C H E L  F O U C A U L T  A N D  T H E  P O I N T  O F  PA I N T I N G  
his exploration of ‘the relation between meaning and the sign’ in The Order of 
Things.20 In the explanation of the episteme Foucault cast Saussure’s ‘divergence of 
meaning’ in a distinctly historical light: ‘the episteme is not what may be known 
at a given period, due account taken of inadequate techniques, mental attitudes, 
or the limitations imposed by tradition; it is what, in the positivity of discursive 
practices, makes possible the existence of epistemological ﬁgures and sciences.’21 
Further, and more directly concerned with the topics to be found in 
Foucault’s writing on painting, a long passage in Merleau-Ponty’s essay explains 
the prominence that Foucault gave to oil painting, its techniques and master­
pieces, and to the focus on changes over time in ideas of visual representation. 
Merleau-Ponty begins by acknowledging the speciﬁcity of oil painting both in its 
technique and in its history of representing the world. 
To begin with, oil painting seems to enjoy a special privilege. For more than any other kind of 
painting it permits us to attribute a distinct pictorial representation to each element of the 
object or of the human face and to look for signs which can give the illusion of depth or 
volume, of movement, of forms, of tactile qualities or of different kinds of material . . . These 
processes, these secrets augmented by each generation, seem to be elements of a general 
technique of representation which ultimately should reach the thing itself (or the person 
himself), which cannot be imagined capable of containing any element of chance or vagueness, 
and whose sovereign function painting should try to equal.22 
Merleau-Ponty continues with an explanation of the masterpiece in painting as 
being the result of this accretion of the knowledge of technique over time: 
The career of a painter, the productions of a school, and even the development of painting all go 
toward masterpieces in which what was sought after up until then is ﬁnally obtained; master­
pieces which, at least provisionally, make the earlier attempts useless and stand out as land­
marks in the progress of painting.23 
From the idea of the masterpiece Merleau-Ponty goes on to posit the exceptional 
kind of representation found in ‘the classic age’, the era in which Foucault found 
Las Meninas.24 Merleau-Ponty asks whether we do not all see the representation in 
the same way with the same senses; a question he answered in the negative in the 
following paragraph by insisting on the importance of both the painter and the 
cultural speciﬁcity in what we see. 
The fact remains that the classical painters were painters and that no valuable painting has 
ever consisted in simply representing . . . That is why the works of the classical painters have a 
different meaning and perhaps more meaning than the painters themselves thought, why 
these painters frequently anticipate a kind of painting that is free from their canons, and why 
they are still necessary mediators in any initiation to painting. At the very moment when, their 
eyes ﬁxed upon the world, they thought they were asking it for the secret of a sufﬁcient 
representation, they were unknowingly bringing about that metamorphosis of which painting 
later became aware. . . . The perception of classical painters already depended upon their 
culture, and our culture can still give form to our perception of the visible. It is not necessary to 
abandon the visible world to classical formulas or shut modern painting up in a recess of the 
individual.25 
82 

M I C H E L  F O U C A U L T  A N D  T H E  P O I N T  O F  PA I N T I N G  
Here Merleau-Ponty insists on understanding the transformations that occur in 
the masterpiece which are beyond the norms of representation prior to them and 
beyond the consciousness of the painter. One could say that these are made 
visible if the meaning of a masterpiece is known. Additionally, Merleau-Ponty 
asserts the validity of contemporary painting. These points were to be key to 
Foucault’s thinking about painting. 
HIS T O R I C A L  M E T H O D  A N D  R E A L IS M  I N  PA I N T I N G  
In the ﬁrst Preface to The Order of Things Foucault went much further than simply 
acknowledging the importance of a chronologically structured comparative 
method as essential to his approach.26 He distinguished the results obtained 
using his comparative method from other mono-disciplinary approaches. 
Foucault’s novel comparative method that takes place over time, and which I see 
as profoundly important for the four essays on painting, pertains to a historio­
graphical analysis. Foucault called it a revelation of ‘a positive unconscious of 
knowledge: a level that eludes the consciousness of the scientist and yet is part of 
scientiﬁc discourse’.27 After the publication of The Order of Things he explained it 
this way: ‘But I can deﬁne the modern age in its singularity only by contrasting it 
with the seventeenth century on the one hand, and with us, on the other hand; 
so, in order to effect this transition it is necessary to bring out in all our state­
ments the difference that separates us from it. It is a matter of pulling oneself free 
of that modern age which begins around 1790 to 1810 and goes up to about 1950, 
whereas for the Classical age it’s only a matter of describing it.’28 The conscious 
freeing of oneself from the immediately preceding era (‘up to 1950’) allows the 
historian to achieve the critical distance necessary to an archaeology of knowl­
edge. For these reasons, perhaps paintings, as both the objects of description and 
as material artefacts with which one could either identify or from which one 
could be physically separated (‘pulling oneself free’), served as ideal methodolo­
gical elements in Foucault’s historiography. Foucault’s repeated defence of The 
Order of Things rested on his understanding of its place as a ‘history of discourse’.29 
Thus, when taken together we might think of Foucault’s essays on painting on 
both the macro and micro levels: as a history of visual representation and as a 
partial history of art. On the level of method, Foucault’s history of painting may 
be considered partially fractured and containing deep contradictions and 
tensions inherent to painting – particularly the masterpiece – rather than as a 
continuous, and predictable, narrative about art. 
The essays on painting follow Foucault’s approach as expressed in the preface 
to The Order of Things. He began in the seventeenth century, the classical age, that 
is, with an extensive description of Vela´zquez’s monumental oil painting of 1656 
known as Las Meninas. This is Foucault’s best-known writing on art, in one of his 
most read books, and although many art historians and philosophers in France, 
England, Spain, Germany and the Americas have interpreted it extensively since 
the late 1970s, they have done so without considering it of a piece with the three 
later essays on painting.30 After this book, Foucault moved from baroque Spain to 
France in the mid-nineteenth century, that is, the modern age, with his three 
lectures on Manet written between 1967 and 1971. Foucault had planned these as 
a book entitled Le Noir et la Couleur (no doubt a pun on Stendhal’s realist novel of 
83 

M I C H E L  F O U C A U L T  A N D  T H E  P O I N T  O F  PA I N T I N G  
1830 Le Rouge et le Noir). The centrepieces of this chronological study were three of 
Manet’s masterpieces: Music at the Tuileries (1862), The Balcony (1868–69), and The Bar 
at the Folies Berge`re (1881–82). Although under contract directly after Les Mots et les 
Choses appeared, this book was never published, the essays have been lost, and it is 
known only through the publication in French of a recording of a lecture 
Foucault gave in Tunis in 1971 as a coda to a course on Italian Renaissance 
painting.31 Foucault moved on to Surrealism in an investigation of pictures and 
words in the essay on Magritte Ceci n’est pas une pipe. His essay of 1968 was named 
after a painting of 1926 by Magritte of the same name, was expanded and 
published as a book in 1973, and was later translated into English.32 In that essay, 
Foucault’s associative method manifests itself in a discussion of Manet’s The 
Balcony, with its internal references to Goya’s painting of Majas on a Balcony, and 
returns in an analysis of Magritte’s response to it. Finally, in 1974 Foucault 
published an essay, which appeared the next year as an illustrated book, on his 
contemporary, Ge´rard Fromanger, entitled ‘La peinture photogenique’ (‘Photo­
genic painting’). This essay was translated into English in 1999 in an extremely 
valuable edition with facing French text.33 Fromanger has been given serious 
consideration in France and Britain, but otherwise he is not well known despite 
his close afﬁliation with the Situationists, the performance artist and painter, 
Yves Klein, the ﬁlmmaker Jean-Luc Goddard, and the philosophers Felix Guattari, 
Gilles Deleuze, and Foucault, most of whom he portrayed in portraits.34 
Considering what Merleau-Ponty had said regarding the continuing value of 
painting for the transformation of representation, it is worth noting that 
Foucault concluded his writings on painting with a discussion of Fromanger. His 
work depicts current events using painterly techniques together with photo­
graphic projection, thus remaining within the tradition of the history of painting 
while at the same time transforming it. Fromanger’s paintings can be said to 
bring into visibility simultaneously that which is known about the history of 
painting and that which is known about the events of the present. 
Certain conclusions regarding Foucault on painting may now be drawn. First, 
Foucault thought about painting chronologically, century by century from the 
seventeenth century to his own day.35 Indeed, painting is central to his analysis of 
modernity, for, according to my analysis of the four essays, it is through painting 
or with paintings in mind that the major concerns of the modern age may be seen 
and by which they are revealed. 
A second, related point may also be made: Foucault was one of the ﬁrst 
scholars of the post-war generation to explore the place of realism in painting, in 
particular how French realism with its concerns for the representation of a 
contemporary reality played a role in and helped to construct the modern epis­
teme. In more recent art history, the new direction in painting that took place in 
the middle of the nineteenth century has been called realism or realist ﬁgure 
painting.36 But for Foucault the topic of realism in painting and elsewhere had 
intertwined in philosophy since Hegel and in political theory since Marx. The 
meaning of reality and the nature of realism in philosophy and cultural criticism 
had occupied numerous thinkers important for the intellectual formation of 
Foucault. Most notably, his mentor and teacher Jean Hippolyte had offered a 
structuralist revision of the earlier thinking of the French existentialists on the 
relationship between Marx and Hegel that included in it some thoughts on 
84 

M I C H E L  F O U C A U L T  A N D  T H E  P O I N T  O F  PA I N T I N G  
realism and reality.37 In Hegel, according to Hippolyte, reality pertains to 
appearance; it can be construed as the actualization of appearance. He argued 
that for Hegel: ‘Reality is the manifestation that does not aim beyond itself; it not 
dependent but sufﬁcient in its own self-manifestation.’38 Following Hippolyte, 
Foucault desired a history ‘detached from the ideological system in which it 
originated and developed’.39 In his four essays on painting, Foucault looked to 
realist painting – that which could be said to have been apparently sufﬁcient in 
its own terms – in order to escape the ideological system in which it, like all art, 
was imbedded. Foucault explored this painting because issues of resemblance, 
representation, appearance, and social class or position are all central to the 
modes and methods of depiction. Taken together, using both Marx and Hegel, 
these are the issues for ‘realism’ according to Hippolyte. If Foucault’s choices for 
his exploration of painting followed Hippolyte, as I argue here, then he found in 
this art not a universal or absolute reference to knowledge as philosophy 
(connaissance) but exactly what he found depicted there: knowledge (savoir) as  
situated in what it represented; transparent only to the actual appearance of the 
painting and contingent upon it.40 
In the study and practice of nineteenth- and twentieth-century art and 
literature – in Stendhal for example – realism indicated ﬁrst and foremost a visual 
and verbal verisimilitude, such as that found in Manet’s paintings, or in the 
individual pictorial elements in Magritte’s Surrealism. But it also indicated, as 
Hippolyte had argued, a signiﬁcant relationship to historical representation and 
the attendant political realities writ large. ‘The characters, attitudes, and rela­
tionships of the dramatis personae, then’, wrote Erich Auerbach in his inﬂuential 
study of the problem of the representation of reality in literature, ‘are very closely 
connected with contemporary historical circumstances; contemporary political 
and social conditions are woven into the action in a manner more detailed and 
more real than had been exhibited in any earlier novel, and indeed in any works 
of literary art except those expressly purporting to be politico-satirical tracts.’41 
It is signiﬁcant that Foucault’s argument about modernity and representa­
tion in The Order of Things based itself upon a historiography of realism in litera­
ture and art that had been established in France in the nineteenth century, as I 
will demonstrate in due course. So too, Foucault continued this argument about 
realism throughout the subsequent essays on painting. Again, signalling the 
importance of nineteenth-century realism even in his study of his contemporary, 
Foucault wrote that Fromanger re-created a kind of reality effect of the image that 
had been released at the time of the invention of photography: ‘The emergence of 
realism cannot be separated from this great surge and ﬂurry of multiple and 
similar images. A certain penetrating and austere relation to the real, suddenly 
demanded by the art of the nineteenth century, was perhaps itself made possible, 
balanced and alleviated by this mania for ‘‘illustrations’’. Fidelity to things 
themselves was both a challenge to and the occasion for this glide of the images 
that danced and turned about them, always the same and imperceptibly 
different.’42 
Foucault explored masterpieces and canonical artists with a particular focus 
on French painting and on what was considered by art historians in the nine­
teenth century to have been the major art-historical inﬂuence on the beginnings 
of modern French painting: the Spanish tradition. The Galerie Espanole in the 
85 

M I C H E L  F O U C A U L T  A N D  T H E  P O I N T  O F  PA I N T I N G  
Louvre had been established by 1838, indicating the importance of the Spanish 
masters for the French context. By the 1880s Vela´zquez had become ‘the harbinger 
of modernity in painting’.43 Recent studies by Gary Tinterow, Svetlana Alpers, 
and others have revealed the extent of the indebtedness to Spanish painting, 
particularly to Vela´zquez, on the part of Manet and those radically inclined artists 
who sought in the middle of the nineteenth century to revise painting in order to 
make it ‘modern’.44 Twenty years ago, T. J. Clark observed that the contribution of 
Manet to modernity lay in his revision of the meaning of representation: 
‘Something decisive happened in the history of art around Manet which set 
painting and the other arts upon a new course. Perhaps the change can be 
described as a kind of skepticism, or at least an unsureness, as to the nature of 
representation in art.’45 
With Foucault’s essays in mind, we can now see how these perceptions of 
realism’s contributions to modernity lay in a distinctly French historiography of 
art, as well as in French painting itself. Foucault’s recognition of the centrality of 
Manet’s debt to the Spanish School and its signiﬁcance for the history of art owed 
much to his familiarity with French nineteenth-century art history. A primary 
source for Foucault’s concerns with the role of painting in the archaeology of 
knowledge, as delineated in The Order of Things and in the essay(s) on Manet, may 
be found in a book by Inspecteur des Beaux-Arts Paul Lefort (1829–1904). Lefort began 
his monograph Velazquez with the caption: ‘Caracte`res de la peinture de Velaz­
quez, ses afﬁnite´s esthe´tiques avec les tendances de l’art moderne’.46 Lefort’s ﬁrst 
chapter explained the signiﬁcance of ‘le naturalisme’ in modern art by allying it 
with the observational and positivistic sciences, such as archaeology and ethno­
graphy.47 Moreover, as Lefort explained his understanding of the tendencies of 
the art of the present, he also stated his belief that the art of the future would 
respond to the sea changes brought about in modern society by science and 
philosophy because it remained true to the nature of its own techniques and 
realities. In terms that have much in common with Foucault’s essays on Vela´zquez 
and on Manet’s paintings, Lefort spoke of the nature of the realism of 
both Vela´zquez and of the nineteenth-century French painters as faithful to the 
laws of light, as close to scientiﬁc in its observational qualities, and as taken from 
real life.48 
In The Order of Things Foucault began with an extensive and expansive analysis 
of a Spanish painting. As Foucault stated in the preface to the book, the painting 
of Las Meninas by Vela´zquez epitomizes the classical age of representation, when 
parity and cohesion existed among the domains of representation, language, 
science, wealth and value.49 It was no accident that the essay(s) on Manet 
followed directly upon Foucault’s point in the chapter on Las Meninas that 
established the function of the visual representation of reality. Foucault had 
claimed that beginning in the nineteenth century a rupture occurred with the 
qualities of the classical age that he had delineated so extensively in Las Meninas: 
‘It is this conﬁguration that, from the nineteenth century onward, changes 
entirely; the theory of representation disappears as the universal foundation of 
all possible orders; language as the spontaneous tabula, the primary grid of 
things, as an indispensible link between representation and things, is eclipsed in 
its turn; a profound historicity penetrates into the heart of things, isolates and 
deﬁnes them in their own coherence, imposes upon them the forms of order 
86 

M I C H E L  F O U C A U L T  A N D  T H E  P O I N T  O F  PA I N T I N G  
implied by the continuity of time.’50 In the Manet essay it is light cast from 
outside the painting that illuminates within its penumbra the meaning of the 
ﬁgures found there. 
Turning again to Foucault’s essay on Fromanger, it becomes clear how the 
concerns found in the ﬁrst and second essays on painting continued to develop 
for him. For Foucault, Fromanger’s paintings functioned as contemporary 
histories, just as Vela´zquez and Manet had painted the histories of their times. La 
peinture photogenique, the title of the essay, is a pun on le dessin photogenique 
(literally, ‘photogenic drawing’), the French phrase normally used to translate 
‘William Henry Fox Talbot’s name for the results of his ﬁrst, cameraless photo­
graphic process’.51 At the beginning of the essay, Foucault positions us in the 
history of the medium and institution of photography to which Fromanger’s 
paintings refer and which they transform. Next, Foucault turns to the techniques 
use by the artist, in order to demonstrate how they are intertwined with his 
subject matter. Fromanger projected black-and-white snapshot slides or trans­
parencies of contemporary events onto canvas, such that Foucault called these 
paintings ‘photo-slide-projection-painting’. Once the photographic image had 
been thrown onto the canvas by the projector, Fromanger ﬁxed it there by 
painting it alla prima, as the Renaissance technique is known. He added the 
colours later, after the ﬁrst layer of black and white or monochromatic paint 
dried. Of this process, which combined the technologies of photography with the 
time-honoured techniques of oil painting, Foucault wrote: 
. . . the most intense and disturbing moment is when, having ﬁnished work, he turns off the 
projector, causing the photograph he has just painted to disappear and leaving his canvas to 
exist ‘all by itself’. A decisive moment when, the current switched off, it is the painting itself 
and its own powers which must let the event through and sustain the existence of the image. 
The image and its colours, from now on, must generate the electricity; it has the responsibility 
for the celebrations it will ignite. In the movement by which the painter removes the photo­
graphic substrate from the painting, the event slips through his hands, spreads out in a sheaf, 
gaining inﬁnite speed, instantaneously joining and multiplying points and times, generating a 
population of gestures and looks, tracing a thousand possible paths between them – and 
ensures indeed that the painting, emerging from the night, will never again be ‘all alone’.52 
According to Foucault, Fromanger’s paintings made using this innovative tech­
nique possess the residue of the process of projection, including its ‘electricity’, 
which virtually generates the painted image seen on the canvas. When combined 
with the subject matter of the photographed and then painted contemporary 
event, the method promises a knowledge of both event and technique that is 
visible and known. 
PAINTIN G’S PLEASUR ES 
Thus far we have seen that Foucault used painting to address technical and 
theoretical matters common to the history of art and its theory: the nature of the 
medium itself; the meaning of representation and resemblance in the mimetic 
system of Western art history; the meaning of light and shadow; the differences 
between words and pictures; the effects of photography on the ﬁne art of 
painting. For Foucault all of these issues of painting pertain to its place in 
87 

M I C H E L  F O U C A U L T  A N D  T H E  P O I N T  O F  PA I N T I N G  
knowledge (savoir). However, it was also of interest to Foucault that since the 
beginning of the Renaissance, painting has been acknowledged in art theory as 
the medium that most appealed to the mind, precisely through its ability to give 
pleasure as a result of its beauty. ‘How much painting contributes to the honest 
pleasures of the mind, and to the beauty of things, may be seen in various ways 
but especially in the fact that you will ﬁnd nothing so precious which association 
with painting does not render far more valuable and highly prized’, wrote Alberti 
in 1435.53 In an interview in 1975 Foucault echoed Alberti’s views on the pleasure 
of painting: ‘That which gives me pleasure in painting is that one is truly obliged 
to look. So, that gives me a sense of repose. It is one of the rare things about which 
I write with pleasure and without having to argue with anyone about it. I believe 
I do not have any technical or strategic relationship with painting.’54 
The pleasure (plaisir) to be found in painting, referred to twice here by 
Foucault, was a commonplace in art theory. Foucault also used the term in a 
similar fashion in the second volume of The History of Sexuality (1984), whose title 
in French, L’usage des Plaisirs, can be associated with the theoretical aspects 
attributed to painting in Foucault’s archaeology of knowledge. In the introduc­
tion to The Use of Pleasure[s], Foucault explained the history of sexuality as an 
exploration of the ‘arts of existence’ by which men ‘seek to transform themselves, 
to change themselves in their singular being, and to make their life into an oeuvre 
that carries certain aesthetic values and meets certain stylistic criteria’.55 Here, 
Foucault used a familiar art-historical terminology: the ‘singular being’ could 
have referred to the ﬁgure of the artist; ‘oeuvre’ is the French term used 
commonly in art history for a collection of works by the singular artist; the 
‘stylistic criteria’ referred to that which distinguishes the singular artist’s oeuvre 
from that of others; and ‘aesthetic values’ referred to the methods of discrimi­
nating works of art or connoisseurship. 
Near the end of The Archaeology of Knowledge, published in 1969, Foucault had 
asked whether one could ‘conceive of an archaeological analysis that would reveal 
the regularity of a body of knowledge, but which would not set out to analyse it in 
terms of epistemological ﬁgures and sciences?’56 Answering himself in the 
afﬁrmative, Foucault provided three other possible ‘orientations’ to the episteme: 
the archaeological descriptions of sexuality, of painting and of political knowl­
edge.57 The choice of painting, rather than the ﬁne arts or sculpture, is signiﬁ­
cant and, once again, speciﬁc to it. According to Foucault in The Archaeology of 
Knowledge, the aim of an archaeology of painting would not be centred on the 
artist and the ‘murmur of his intentions’ ‘transcribed’ ‘into lines, surfaces, and 
colours’.58 For that matter, in this articulation of the point of painting, Foucault 
rejects the singular artist as promoter of the meaning of the work of art, just as he 
had refuted the traditional idea of the author in his famous essay written at the 
same time.59 Instead, the archaeology of painting would demonstrate that ‘it is 
discursive practice that is embodied in techniques and effects’, and as such, that 
it possesses what Foucault calls ‘the positivity of knowledge itself (savoir)’.60 The 
savoir in painting returns us again to the historiography of art. 
F O U C A U LT  A N D  F R E N C H  A RT  H I S T O RY  
Foucault shared his understanding of the history of painting with his contem­
poraries, post-war French art historians, particularly those working on Italian 
88 

M I C H E L  F O U C A U L T  A N D  T H E  P O I N T  O F  PA I N T I N G  
Renaissance art. The early twentieth-century French art historian, E ´mile Maˆle 
(1862–1954), who had held the Chair of Art History at the Sorbonne, had mainly 
studied medieval sculpture and architecture: most particularly, the history of the 
French Gothic. His successor at the Sorbonne, Henri Focillon (1881–1943), who 
began as a historian of prints, also turned in later years to the study of the 
Gothic.61 In this regard it should be noted that in France in the related ﬁeld of 
medieval philosophy, there had been great interest in the problems of reality and 
realism.62 With the turn towards Italy in French and American art history after 
the 1939–45 war, the medium of painting again emerged in the ascendant. The 
art historian, Hubert Damisch (1928–), Foucault’s exact contemporary, held posts 
at the E ´cole des Hautes-E ´tudes en Sciences Sociales from 1958 to 1971 and from 
1974 to 1996 and at the E ´cole Normale Superieure from 1967 to 1973. In his ﬁrst 
book, a study of the theory of painted clouds published in 1972 and subtitled Pour 
une Histoire de la Peinture, Damisch began, as had Foucault, from the assumption 
‘that the meaning of art can only be effectively addressed by considering it as a 
form of thinking’.63 On close reading, Damisch’s project in this book appears to 
have also been an elaboration and reﬁnement of the arguments that Merleau-
Ponty had made about painting in ‘Indirect language and the voices of silence’.64 
Damisch’s book on clouds posits them as closest to painting (‘The cloud is the zero 
degree of painting’) in their materiality and in their signiﬁcation for pictorial 
theory.65 He writes: 
And there is even less justiﬁcation for postulating the existence, over and above the diversity of 
works of art, of an aesthesis, a network of structural constraints and formal and expressive 
possibilities that might bestow upon the pictorial products of any given period their historical 
coherence. No justiﬁcation at all, apart from a few signs or indications to which the context 
lends a certain emphasis, a particular charge – signs around which it seems possible to construct 
the project of an analysis that might, by means of a kind of symptomology afford access to the 
deep structures of the images of paintings, seized upon within the unity of the semiotic process 
of which they are the object.66 
In Damisch’s pursuit of the unique theoretical value of painting through the 
semiotics of clouds and in Foucault’s exploration of realism in painting as the 
sign of modernity I ﬁnd an important historiographical conjunction. 
F O U CA U LT  O N  PA I N T I N G  A N D  TH E  D I S C I PL I N E S  
I will now consider some disciplinary positions on Foucault and painting in the 
context of his considerable prominence as a philosopher and cultural theorist. It 
can be said that Foucault’s total body of work on painting has received little 
attention from philosophers, historians, and art historians, particularly outside 
France, with the exception of Hubert Damisch.67 In 1987 Allan Megill published 
an interpretative account of some quantitative data that he had gathered on the 
reception of Foucault’s books, mainly by American, British, and French historians. 
In his discussion of Foucault’s inﬂuence on the discipline of history he argued 
that ‘Foucault’s failure to adhere to ‘‘the usual criteria of historical scholarship’’’ 
meant that his inﬂuence on the discipline – with the possible important excep­
tion of his books on sexuality – could only be minor.68 Because, argued Megill, 
Foucault’s work is ‘anti-disciplinary’ he tended to be seen as isolated in his 
89 

M I C H E L  F O U C A U L T  A N D  T H E  P O I N T  O F  PA I N T I N G  
approaches which could not be assimilated into the disciplinary canons and 
approaches of academic history.69 
While Megill speaks from the disciplinary perspective of history, the critiques 
that he ﬁnds there against Foucault may be related to the attacks on Foucault’s 
historical method levelled by Jean-Paul Sartre and others immediately following 
the publication of Les Mots et les Choses. In 1966 Sartre wrote of Foucault: ‘A 
historian today cannot be a communist; but he knows that one cannot write of a 
serious history without putting at the forefront the material elements of the life 
of men, the connections with production, the superstructures that constitute 
relatively autonomous regions. . . . One cannot invent a new system that, in one 
way or another, does not mutilate this ensemble of conditioned conditions.’70 
Foucault countered in 1966 and 1967 by insisting that he operated as a historian; 
and second by insisting that the failure to recognize his form of history occurred 
because intellectuals could not see that history no longer functioned as ‘the ﬁnal 
refuge of the dialectical order’.71 Proclaiming periodization as the necessary ﬁrst 
step in a historical analysis gave Foucault license to see, as he put it, ‘a set of 
delicate problems . . . depending on the periodization that one provides, one will 
reach different levels [of events]. In this way one arrives at the complex metho­
dology of discontinuity.’72 These discontinuities, necessary to his archaeological 
method, mark Foucault’s essays on painting. Each of his four essays exempliﬁes a 
different sedimentation in the problem of visual representation. Foucault’s 
discontinuity, although ordered chronologically, goes against the telos of the 
traditional historical narrative and against a strictly Marxist history, as Sartre 
complained.73 In the series of interviews that took place in 1978 with Duccio 
Trombadori, Foucault responded again to both the attacks of the historians and 
the existentialists. He expressed a deep dissatisfaction with the results of tradi­
tional historical research, he insisted that he always ‘referred to and used many 
historical studies’, and he refused ‘an analysis based on changes of economic 
structure’ as being ‘in itself of explanatory value’.74 Although much of the 
criticism that I have outlined here concerns the book in which Foucault’s most 
famous discussion of painting occurred – the ﬁrst chapter on Diego Vela´zquez’s 
Las Meninas in The Order of Things – the chapter and the painting were barely 
mentioned. 
Turning now to recent philosophers on Foucault and painting, in his book on 
Foucault and Nietzsche Gary Shapiro gives an extensive summary of the points 
made by Foucault in the essay on Vela`zquez and also touches on the essays on 
Manet, Magritte and Fromanger.75 Shapiro ﬁnds Foucault’s writing on painting to 
be part of a broader theoretical interest in the signiﬁcance of language versus 
visual representations, or ‘seeing’ versus ‘saying’. Martin Jay’s earlier research on 
Foucault’s approach to visuality allows us to understand that Shapiro’s perspec­
tive derives from that of the philosopher Gilles Deleuze.76 Just after the death of 
Foucault, Deleuze argued that Foucault’s originality lay in a concept of knowl­
edge (the purview of the philosopher) that ‘is deﬁned by the combinations of 
visible and articulable that are unique to each stratum or historical formation’.77 
Deleuze does not go into the essays on painting; however, Jay was certainly correct 
in understanding that Deleuze has had considerable inﬂuence on later under­
standing of Foucault’s views about art as concerned with vision and the gaze, for 
this is the Foucault that has been taken up by visual studies. 
90 

M I C H E L  F O U C A U L T  A N D  T H E  P O I N T  O F  PA I N T I N G  
In this ﬁeld Foucault has emerged as an important presence. But, and 
signiﬁcantly for the points made in this essay, without painting. The conclusion 
of Roy Boyne in an essay on Foucault and art may serve as emblematic of the 
current state of the historiography: ‘Foucault’s writing on art is both interesting 
and symptomatic of some of his wider concerns. It is, however, his innovative and 
controversial histories of the body, of sexuality, of the self and, overarching all of 
this, his approach to the understanding of power, that probably hold most 
signiﬁcance for the ﬁeld of art.’78 A survey of the general introductory texts on 
visual studies published over the last ﬁfteen years reveals a consistent regard for 
Foucault’s work.79 However, visual studies emerged as a ﬁeld or, perhaps, an inter-
discipline, ten years after the death of Michel Foucault and it took from Foucault 
what it needed at that time.80 Visual studies engages with images and artefacts of 
all kinds, including high, low and global cultural objects; photography, moving, 
and digital images, and the cultural institutions that contain and address them, 
including museums, galleries, markets, festivals, ritual practices, and the 
internet. Foucault’s impact on this relatively new area of study can be understood 
as signiﬁcant because he sought through much of his work to address the issue of 
the construction of modern and contemporary subjects and subjectivities, which 
today may be increasingly understood as having emerged due to the effects of 
globalization as seen and constructed mainly through the mass media, including 
the internet. 
The present-day emphasis in scholarship on Foucault’s late lectures on politics 
and ethics reveals the value of his views for a contemporary critical politics. But it 
could be argued that at the heart of Foucault’s critique of the subject is painting. 
Foucault’s famous critique of the author underpins most approaches taken by 
visual studies towards the singular creator known as the artist: ‘The author 
function is therefore characteristic of the mode of existence, circulation and 
functioning of certain discourses within a society.’81 Visual studies as a discipline 
tends to relegate the artist to a low status, promoting instead observers and 
consumers as subjects and as subjectiﬁed by images and commodity culture. This 
kind of visual studies relies, therefore, on The Birth of the Clinic, Discipline and Punish, 
and Foucault’s books on sexuality for their understanding of the production of 
the modern and postmodern subject. 
Another strand of visual studies, most prominently identiﬁed with the 
writing of W. J. T. Mitchell, has tried to dislodge the Foucauldian concept of the 
subject and his insistence on a comparative historical method (or genealogy) in 
favour of a resuscitation of a form of iconology, as Keith Moxey has recently 
argued.82 In this approach the partially idealized object of study, or the image, as 
it is always called in this discourse, regains a centrality and maintains an inde­
pendence from its surroundings. In Picture Theory (1994), Mitchell called the image 
or the object ‘a ﬂoating instrument of power and expression unto itself’.83 While 
Foucault saw the author or singular creator in this light, such a characterization 
of painting, whether historical or contemporary, would have been unrecognizable 
to him. Foucault’s insistence on technique and the particularity of painting has 
been discussed above. In contrast, in his writing on representation, W. J. T. 
Mitchell speaks of images and pictures with a striking lack of speciﬁcity regarding 
the techniques and media in the history of art. However, Foucault clearly thought 
that the historical speciﬁcity of the medium with the techniques and methods he 
91 

M I C H E L  F O U C A U L T  A N D  T H E  P O I N T  O F  PA I N T I N G  
addresses in his four essays pertained to the meaning of representation itself and 
to its transformations over time. 
Jonathan Crary’s 1990 book, Techniques of the Observer: On Vision and Modernity in 
the Nineteenth Century, made a major contribution to the understanding of the 
periodization of new visual technologies by rewriting the story of the birth of 
photography and cinema. Crary’s argument divorced the account, and to a 
certain extent the theory, of the modern image medium, photography – and by 
extension, ﬁlm, video, and digital imagery – from the longer history of pictorial 
art. Crary’s immediate purpose was ‘to delineate an observing subject who was 
both a product of and at the same time constitutive of modernity in the nine­
teenth century’.84 Crary’s subtle approach to modernity through photographic 
images and technologies relied on the earlier work of Michel Foucault but 
without the latter’s history of painting.85 He offered an account reliant on the 
viewing subject, caught in the institutions of modernity through which the 
subject circulates, by which it is disciplined, and in which it becomes visualized. 
In a recent essay on the image, Crary writes: ‘many of the current meanings and 
effects associated with image have their origins in C19 modernity. But those 
origins have much less to do with reproductive techniques (photography, for 
example) than with the emergence of new institutional requirements and social 
imperatives through which many kinds of images merged with dominant 
economic networks and the industrialization of cultural production.’86 Here, the 
stress is on an institutional history and social pressures, rather than on a parti­
cular artistic medium. Yet, in the ﬁnal analysis, like the art historian Victor 
Stoichita, Crary appears to take from Foucault in The Order of Things a fascination 
with the qualities of representation that would later be identiﬁed with ‘the 
image’ in the form that visual studies used it, i.e. ‘framing’, the ‘mirroring’ of 
subjectivities, the ‘presentness’, of images, the auto-circulation of images.87 
While Crary’s exploration of the history of photography as subjective medium 
in Techniques of the Observer simultaneously delineates the concerns of mainstream 
visual studies and opposes the contemporary iconographers, this is not to say 
anything new. The transformation of the discipline of art history into visual 
studies has occurred more rapidly than most changes in the university, when it 
has occurred at all. Given the scholarly literature in the ﬁeld of visual studies this 
change from art history to visual studies in the academy may be due as much to 
the objects on which it chooses to focus and which it interprets, as it is to any 
innovative method or approach that it uses. For, the objects towards which visual 
studies has projected its critique have often been mass media images, television, 
ﬁlm, and digital media. Focusing on these objects and their mediatized images, 
visual studies has produced a critical literature that engages with the social issues 
and institutions found there: race, gender and sexuality, global art markets, and a 
cultural anthropology of the museum, among the most prominent topics. It 
also intersects easily in the contemporary university with the disciplines and 
ﬁeld in which these objects and topics are also found: sociology, cultural studies, 
women’s studies, ﬁlm studies, museum studies, performance studies and anthro­
pology. However, the focus on such objects has also determined a perception of 
the ‘currentness’ of visual studies as opposed to a more historically orientated art 
history. Even if more traditional media and other periods might have provided 
visual studies with the material necessary to thinking about the social issues and 
92 

M I C H E L  F O U C A U L T  A N D  T H E  P O I N T  O F  PA I N T I N G  
institutions through more historically and conceptually focused lenses, there is 
little acceptance of this point of view in visual studies. That is why Foucault’s 
essays on painting are so important to the concerns of both contemporary visual 
studies and art history. Many have spoken and written about the pervasiveness, 
functions, and products of what Susan Sontag once called ‘the image-world’.88 In 
visual studies it has been extolled by W. J. T. Mitchell and the new iconologers, at 
times at the expense of both the historiography of art history and philosophy’s 
complex analyses of painting in its history. Few speak any longer of the signiﬁ­
cance of painting as thought or philosophy, except in regard to particular 
historical artists. These are the intellectual consequences of the dimunition of 
painting’s inﬂuence. This last sentence should not be taken as a lament for a lost 
and ideal kind of art history, which never could have existed in any case; nor 
should it be taken as a criticism of the project of visual studies in the academy 
today, which I have endorsed in some ways for many years. Rather, I am speaking 
here of the value of Foucault’s history of painting for the present. Turning towards 
the image-world, to a greater or lesser degree, has meant a turning away from the 
lessons that painting from the early modern period to the present have been 
there to teach us about and concerning which Foucault’s work remains central. 
For, as much as Foucault’s essays on painting may be used to help us to 
understand his times, his intellectual biography, and his considerable inﬂuence, 
they also pertain to larger questions and issues in the history of art and visual 
culture, which I will term historiographical and conceptual. The essays on 
painting give us an explanation of how the formation of a great thinker both 
responds to his own moment and rests, in part, on the traditions of disciplines 
which over time he helped to revise, if not perhaps ultimately bring to an end. 
There remains a great deal to be learned from them, not least a more precise 
analysis of Deleuze’s assessment that Foucault established visual language as an 
essential component of the episteme for the modern and postmodern periods. 
Foucault dropped painting after 1975 and took up the history of sexuality. Since 
then, the ‘death of art’ has been predicted and asserted.89 The historiographical 
introduction to Foucault’s points about painting that I have undertaken here 
presents the very real possibility that the struggle over how to interpret the 
image, or how the image means, marks or distinguishes both the discipline of art 
history and its ‘kissing cousin’, visual studies, in particular ways related to 
techniques and to history. On the side of the recently ‘unseen’, Foucault’s essays 
on painting would seem to deserve another look. 
Notes 
This chapter forms part of a book in progress on the essays on painting by Michel 
Foucault. At present there exists no comprehensive and scholarly study of 
Foucault’s writing on painting. I am grateful to the editors of this Art History book 
for providing me with the opportunity to present my thoughts here. Preliminary 
versions of this essay were given at a conference on Foucault across the Disci­
plines, University of California, Santa Cruz, USA. on 1–2 March 2008 and in a 
lecture for the Department of Culture and Communication at So¨derto¨rn 
University College, Stockholm, Sweden, in September 2008. I am grateful to Colin 
Koopman, David and Jocelyn Hoy, Margaret Brose, and Hayden White in Santa 
93 

M I C H E L  F O U C A U L T  A N D  T H E  P O I N T  O F  PA I N T I N G  
Cruz and to Sara Danius, Dan Karlholm, and Margaretha Rossholm-Lagerlo¨f in 
Sweden for encouraging my work on this book. I thank the anonymous readers at 
Art History for their valuable comments and suggestions. 
1  ‘Let us begin by understanding that there is a 
tacit language, and that painting speaks in its 
own way.’ Maurice Merleau Ponty, ‘Indirect 
language and the voices of silence’, in The 
Merleau-Ponty Reader: Philosophy and Painting, ed. 
Galen Johnson, Evanston, IL, 1993, 84. Originally 
published as Maurice Merleau-Ponty, ‘Le langage 
indirect et les voix du silence’, in Signes, Paris, 
1960, 59. 
2  For a less speciﬁc study of Foucault on the related 
aspects of art and of seeing, see John Rajchman, 
‘Foucault’s art of seeing’, October, 44, Spring 1988, 
88–117. See Leo Steinberg, ‘Vela´squez ‘‘Las 
Meninas’’ ’, October, 19, Winter 1981, 45–54, for a 
useful consideration of the signiﬁcance of the 
concept of painting in Foucault’s essay. 
3  See the conclusion to Foucault’s 1972 essay 
‘Return to history’, in Michel Foucault, Aesthetics, 
Method and Epistemology, ed. James D. Faubion, 
trans. Robert Hurley and others,New York, 1998, 
431. 
4 Foucault, ‘Return to history’, 427–8. 
5 Hayden White has persuasively argued that 
chronology is the basis of historical representa­
tion, see his ‘The value of narrativity in the 
representation of reality’, in The Content of the 
Form: Narrative Discourse and Historical Representa­
tion, Baltimore, MD and London, 1987, 1–25. 
6  Foucault gave a course for the public on Italian 
quattrocento painting in Tunis in 1968 prior to his 
lecture(s) on Manet, see Maryvonne Saison, La 
Peinture de Manet, Paris, 2004, 21, n. 1. I am 
grateful to Professor Saison for her generosity in 
regard to my work on Foucault. 
7  Didier Eribon, Michel Foucault (1926–1984), Paris, 
1991, 66: ‘‘‘Il adorait la peinture, raconte 
Jacqueline Verdeaux, c’est lui qui m’a fait 
comprendre les fresques de Masaccio a` Flor­
ence.’’’ Verdeaux was Foucault’s friend and the 
translator in 1954 of Ludwig Binswanger’s Dream 
and Existence, for which Foucault wrote the 
introduction. 
8  Leon Battista Alberti, ‘Dedication of the Italian 
text to Filippo Brunelleschi’, in On Painting, trans. 
Cecil Grayson, London, 2004, 34. 
9  Michel Foucault, The Archaeology of Knowledge, 
trans. A. M. Sheridan Smith, London, 1972, 191. I 
draw here from the longer discussion of the 
episteme which leads to Foucault’s proposition 
that painting, among other subjects, could 
provide ‘a much wider application’ for an 
archaeology 
of 
knowledge 
than 
scientiﬁc 
discourses, see 192–5. 
10 Foucault, The Archaeology of Knowledge, 194. 
11 Roland Barthes, ‘Leaving the movie theater’, in 
The Rustle of Language, trans. Richard Howard, 
Berkeley and Los Angeles, CA, 348. 
12 Foucault, The Archaeology of Knowledge, 194. 
13 Leonardo da Vinci, Leonardo On Painting, trans. 
Martin Kemp and Margaret Walker, New Haven, 
CT and London, 1989, 46. 
14 On the importance to Foucault of the distinction 
between connaissance and savoir – a linguistic 
distinction which does not exist in English – see, 
in 
particular, 
his 
interviews 
immediately 
following the publication of Les Mots et les Choses: 
Michel Foucault, ‘The order of things’ (interview 
with Raymond Bellour published in Les Lettres 
Franc¸aises, 31 March 1966) and ‘The discourse of 
history’ 
(interview 
with 
Raymond 
Bellour 
pubished in Les Lettres Franc¸aises 15 June 1967), in 
Foucault Live (Interviews, 1961–1984), ed. Sylve`re 
Lotringer, trans. Lysa Hochroth and John John­
ston, New York, 1989, 13–18 and 19–32. 
15 I explored Vale´ry’s writing on Leonardo’s art 
theory in relation to Foucault’s analysis of Las 
Meninas in an earlier article, see Catherine M. 
Soussloff, ‘The trouble with painting, the image 
(less) text’, Journal of Visual Culture, 4, August 
2005, 191–236. I have signiﬁcantly revised some 
of that previous thinking here, but see also the 
essay revised in Editing the Image: Strategies in the 
Production and Reception of the Visual, ed. Mark A. 
Cheetham, Elizabeth Legge and Catherine M. 
Soussloff, Toronto, 2008, 67–92. 
16 Paul Vale´ry, ‘Le´onard et les philosophes’, in 
Introduction a` la Me´thode de Le´onard de Vinci, Paris, 
1957, 153: ‘Peindre, pour Le´onard, est une 
operation qui requiert toutes les connaissances, 
et presque toute les techniques: ge´ome´trie, 
dynamique, ge´ologie, physiologie.’ 
17 Vale´ry, ‘Le´onard 
et les philosophes’, 153: 
‘Le´onard est peintre: je dis qu’il a la peinture pour 
philosophie. En ve´rite´, c’est lui-meˆme qui le dit; et 
il parle peinture comme on parle philosophie: 
c’est dire qu’il y rapporte toute chose. Il se fait de 
cet art (qui paraıˆt si particulier au regard de la 
pense´e et  si e´loigne´ de pouvoir satisfaire toute 
l’intelligence) une ide´e excessive: il le regarde 
comme une ﬁn dernie`re de l’effort d’un esprit 
universel.’ Vale´ry’s understanding of Leonardo as 
philosopher who speaks knowledge (connaissance) 
resurrects a long discussion about the signiﬁ­
cance of Leonardo in French art theory, which 
began with the ﬁrst publication of the artist’s 
Treatise on Painting in Paris in 1651. The elevation 
of Leonardo to the status of philosopher began 
only when his theory and his art were presented 
together. In a recent article that examines the 
representation of Leonardo and his oeuvre in the 
Treatise on Painting I have argued that the 
94 

M I C H E L  F O U C A U L T  A N D  T H E  P O I N T  O F  PA I N T I N G  
conﬂation of art and theory around the artist 
resulted in the earliest mapping of style onto 
what I have called the social surface of the 
history of art, see Catherine M. Soussloff, 
‘Discourse/ﬁgure/love: the location of style in the 
early modern sources on Leonardo da Vinci’, in 
Leonardo da Vinci and the Ethics of Style, ed. Claire 
Farago, Manchester, 2008, 37–57. To understand 
art 
as 
knowledge 
(connaissance), 
whether 
produced by a theory of painting or in painting 
itself, requires a style that adheres to the ﬁgure 
of the artist, who may be then represented as a 
philosopher. This is how Vale´ry represents 
Leonardo in his essays on him. The reputation of 
Nicolas Poussin as philosopher is co-terminus 
with the publication of Leonardo’s Treatise and 
dependent upon it. On Poussin and philosophy, 
see Elizabeth Cropper and Charles Dempsey, 
Nicolas Poussin: Friendship and the Love of Painting, 
Princeton, NJ, 1996. Foucault moved away from 
the traditional understanding of the artist as 
philosopher and posited painting alone as 
knowledge (savoir). 
18 On this chronology see, Galen A. Johnson, 
‘Structures and painting: ‘‘Indirect language and 
the voices of silence’’’, in The Merleau-Ponty 
Aesthetics Reader: Philosophy and Painting, ed. Galen 
A. Johnson and Michael B. Smith, Evanston, IL, 
1993, 14–15. Foucault’s purported disavowal of 
structuralism, said to be also a rejection of 
Merleau-Ponty and Sartre, must be tempered 
with a close reading of Merleau-Ponty and 
Foucault on painting, which I can only begin to 
provide here. 
19 Maurice Merleau-Ponty, ‘Indirect language and 
the voices of silence’, in The Merleau-Ponty 
Aesthetics Reader, 76.  
20 Foucault, ‘The order of things’, in Foucault live, 16.  
21 Foucault, The Archaeology of Knowledge, 192. 
22 Merleau-Ponty, ‘Indirect language and the voices 
of silence’, 85. 
23 Merleau-Ponty, ‘Indirect language and the voices 
of silence’, 85. 
24 Given the importance of ‘the classic age’ to 
Foucault’s analysis of the painting of Las Meninas 
and to the history of art, it is perhaps useful here 
to remind ourselves of what his source, Merleau-
Ponty, intended by it: ‘Later, both [art and poetry] 
know a classic age which is the secularization of 
the sacred age; art is then the representation of a 
Nature that it can at best embellish – but 
according to formulas taught to it by Nature 
herself. As La Bruye`re would have it, speech has 
no other role than ﬁnding the exact expression 
assigned in advance to each thought by a 
language of things themselves; and this double 
recourse to an art before art, to a speech before 
speech, prescribes to the work a certain point of 
perfection, completeness, or fullness which 
makes all human beings assent to it as they 
assent to the things which fall under their 
senses’. (Merleau-Ponty, ‘Indirect language and 
the voices of silence’, 84). Compare with Michel 
Foucault, The Order of Things: An Archaeology of the 
Human Sciences, New York, 1970, 16: ‘Perhaps 
there exists, in this painting by Vela`zquez, the 
representation as it were, of Classical repre­
sentation, and the deﬁnition of the space it 
opens up to us. And, indeed, representation 
undertakes to represent itself here in all its 
elements, with its images, the eyes to which it is 
offered, the faces it makes visible, the gestures 
that call it into being. . . . and representation, 
freed ﬁnally from the relation that was impeding 
it, can offer itself as representation in its pure 
form.’ 
25 Merleau-Ponty, ‘Indirect language and the voices 
of silence’, 85–6. 
26 Foucault, The Order of Things, x.  
27 Foucault, The Order of Things, xi. 
28 Michel Foucault, ‘On the ways of writing history’ 
(Interview originally conducted by Raymond 
Bellours in Les Lettres Francaises, 1187, 15–21 June 
1967, 6–9) in Aesthetics, Method, and Epistemology, 
ed. James D. Faubion, trans. Robert Hurley, New 
York, 1998, 293. 
29 Foucault, ‘The discourse of history’, 30. 
30 Gary Shapiro’s recent book Archaeologies of Vision: 
Foucault and Nietzsche on Seeing and Saying, 
Chicago, IL, 2003, is an exception to this state­
ment in that he discusses all of the essays on 
painting, but in the context of an investigation 
of theories of vision and aesthetics from 
Nietzsche to Foucault. This approach does not 
presume nor investigate a speciﬁc historical 
integrity among Foucault’s essays on painting. 
On Shapiro see below. 
31 See the excellent publication of this lecture by 
Saison, La Peinture de Manet. Molly Nesbit has 
recently lectured in Buffalo and Moscow on 
Foucault’s 
writing 
on 
Manet, 
see 
http:// 
2nd.moscowbiennale.ru/en/light_in_buffalo. 
I 
am grateful to the anonymous reader for this 
reference. 
32 Michel Foucault, This is Not a Pipe, ed. and trans. 
James Harkness, Berkeley and Los Angeles, CA, 
1982. 
33 Michel Foucault, ‘Photogenic painting’, trans. 
Dafydd Roberts, in Gilles Deleuze and Michel 
Foucault, Ge´rard Fromanger, London, 1999, 83– 
104. This book contains an essay on Fromanger, 
Deleuze, and Foucault by Adrian Rifkin that I 
will discuss in my forthcoming book. 
34 For a recent reconsideration of Fromanger and 
his associations with artists and philosophers, 
see Jean-Paul Ameline and Be´ne´dicte Ajac, 
Figuration Narrative: Paris 1960–1972, Paris, 2008. 
35 The signiﬁcance of the missing eighteenth 
century in this historiography must be bracketed 
here for exploration in another place. 
36 See Linda Nochlin, Realism, Middlesex, 1971, 13: 
‘A basic cause of the confusion bedeviling the 
notion of Realism is its ambiguous relationship 
to the highly problematical concept of reality.’ 
See also, Gary Tinterow, ‘The triumph of Spanish 
95 

M I C H E L  F O U C A U L T  A N D  T H E  P O I N T  O F  PA I N T I N G  
painting in France’, in Gary Tinterow and Gene­
vie`ve Lacambre, Manet/Vela´zquez: The French Taste 
for Spanish Painting, New York and New Haven, CT, 
2003, 44, who uses the term ‘Realist ﬁgure 
painting’. The literature that intervenes between 
Nochlin and Tinterow on nineteenth-century 
French painting holds so many interpretations 
of the meaning of realism and reality for this 
period that I cite only those that are immediately 
useful for the purposes of my interpretation of 
Foucault’s essays here. 
37 Jean Hyppolite, Studies on Marx and Hegel, trans. 
John O’Neill, New York, 1969. The book was 
originally published in French in 1955. The book 
contains an excellent preface and introduction 
by the translator on the historiography of 
Hyppolite’s thinking. 
38 Hyppolite, Studies on Marx and Hegel, 182. 
39 Foucault, ‘Return to history’, 423. 
40 Hyppolite, Studies on Marx and Hegel, 182: ‘Essence 
is no longer the condition of reality but becomes 
its meaning and is identical with reality in so far 
as it is self-comprehension and no longer simply 
that which is understood.’ 
41 Erich Auerbach, Mimesis: The Representation of 
Reality in Western Litearture, trans. Willard R. 
Trask, Princeton, NJ, 1953, 457. To date I have not 
been able to establish the extent of Foucault’s 
views on realism in painting in relation to those 
of Auerbach on literature, but the analogies are 
extremely close and will be examined by me in 
my forthcoming book. Auerbach’s book was ﬁrst 
published in 1946 and would have been known 
to Foucault. 
42 Foucault, ‘Photogenic painting’, 84. 
43 Suzanne L. Stratton-Pruitt, ‘Introduction: a brief 
history of the literature on Vela`zquez’, in The 
Cambridge Companion to Vela´zquez, ed. Suzanne L. 
Stratton-Pruitt, Cambridge, 2002, 6. Foucault is 
mentioned brieﬂy in this essay on page 8: ‘Las 
Meninias has as well attracted the attentions of 
philosophers such as Jose´ Ortega y Gasset and 
Michel Foucault. The latter’s 1966 interpretation 
of Las Meninas as a classical representation has 
spawned a number of articles inﬂuenced by 
linguistcs and structuralism.’ 
44 See the informative essays in Tinterow and 
Lacambre, Manet/Vela´zquez. See also the chapter 
‘Vela´zquez’s resemblance to Manet’, in Svetlana 
Alpers, The Vexations of Art: Vela´zquez and Others, 
New Haven CT, and London, 2005, 219–62. 
Foucault is not mentioned in either of these two 
books, both of which deal with his central 
argument in Las Meninas and the content of his 
essay on Manet concerning the nature of modern 
representation. 
45 T. J. Clark, The Painting of Modern Life: Paris in the 
Art of Manet and His Followers, Princeton, NJ, 1984, 
10. 
46 Paul Lefort, Velazquez, Paris, n.d., 3. 
47 Lefort, Velazquez, 6.  
48 Lefort, Velazquez, 8: ‘Le caracte`re de cet oeuvre 
pre´sente, en effet, de telles afﬁnite´s et  de  si  
parfaites analogies avec les recherches d’exacti­
tude, de since´rite´ et de d’absolu, nague`re heur­
eusement inaugure´es par les paysagistes et 
poursuivies 
actuellement 
par 
notre 
ecole 
´
presque tout entie`re, que celle-ci rencontre 
assure´ment, en Velazquez, l’enseignement et les 
moyens d’expression qui re´pondent le mieux a` 
ses aspirations. Velazquez est donc pour elle 
comme un pre´curseur, un initiateur. Autant par 
son mode d’interpre´tation de la vie que par la 
justesse de son observation des lois de la 
lumie`re, observation qui a chez lui quelque 
chose de rigoureux, de scientiﬁque; autant par 
ses habituelles me´thodes d’exposition simple et 
claire d’un sujet, ou pris dans la vie re´elle, ou 
ramene´ a` la vie re´elle, que par ses pratiques si 
originales, si neuves encore, Velazquez marque 
une telle avance sur son temps qui’il paraıˆt 
plutoˆt appartenir au noˆtre.’ 
49 Foucault, The Order of Things, xxiii. See my 
discussion of the importance of this passage for 
establishing an idea of image theory in the 
postmodern era, Catherine M. Soussloff, ‘Image­
times, image-histories, image-thinking’, in Given 
World and Time: Temporalities in Context, ed. Tyrus 
Miller, Budapest, 2008, 145–70. 
50 Foucault, The Order of Things, xxiii.   
51 Gordon Baldwin, Looking at Photographs: A Guide to   
Technical Terms, Los Angeles, CA, 1991, 64. 
52 Foucault, ‘Photogenic painting’, 94–5. 
53 Alberti, On Painting, 60. 
54 Foucault quoted in Saison, La Peinture de Manet, 
13–14: ‘Ce qui me plaıˆt justement dans la pein­
ture, c’est qu’on est raiment oblige de regarder. 
Alors la`, c’est mon repos. C’est l’une des rares 
choses sur lesquelles j’e´crive avec plaisir et sans 
me batter avec qui que ce soit. Je crois n’avoir 
aucun rapport tactique or strate´gique avec la 
peinture.’ 
55 Michel Foucault, The Use of Pleasure[s], trans. 
Robert Hurley, New York, 1985, 10–11. 
56 Foucault, The Archaeology of Knowledge, 192. 
57 Foucault, The Archaeology of Knowledge, 193–4. 
Foucault’s ultimate decision not to pursue at 
length an investigation of painting, but rather to 
devote himself to the volumes on sexuality, has 
impacted many disciplines and the reputation of 
his essays on painting. See below. 
58 Foucault, The Archaeology of Knowledge, 193. 
59 Michel Foucault, ‘What is an author?’, in 
Language, Counter-Memory, Practice: Selected Essays 
and Interviews, ed. Donald Bouchard, trans. 
Donald Bouchard and Sherry Simon, Ithaca, NY, 
1977, 113–38. 
60 Foucault, The Archaeology of Knowledge, 194. 
61 See the excellent essay on Focillon by Walter 
Cahn, ‘Henri Focillon (1881–1943)’, in Medieval 
Scholarship: Biographical Studies on the Formation of 
a Discipline, Volume 3: Philosophy and the Arts, ed. 
96 

M I C H E L  F O U C A U L T  A N D  T H E  P O I N T  O F  PA I N T I N G  
Helen Damico, New York and London, 2000, 259– 
71. 
62 See in particular E´tienne Gilson (1884–1978), 
Re´alisme thomiste et critique de la connaissance, Paris, 
1939; Gilson, Le re´alisme me´thodique, Paris, 1948; 
Gilson, Painting and Reality, New York, 1957. The 
particulars of Gilson’s views in relation to 
Foucault’s remain to be explored, something I 
hope to do in my forthcoming book. 
63 Ernst Van Alphen, ‘Hubert Damisch’, in Key 
Writers on Art: The Twentieth Century, ed. Chris 
Murray, London and New York, 2003, 87. 
64 In an interview with Yve-Alain Bois, Denis Hollier 
and 
Rosalind 
Krauss, 
Damisch 
began 
by 
afﬁrming the inﬂuence of Merleau-Ponty: ‘It’s a 
ﬁeld with three poles and here my early training 
with Merleau-Ponty played a decisive part: the 
question of the unconscious; the question of 
history (which I would put in third place), and 
something I don’t know whether to call form or 
structure. Why art? Because I thought that art 
would be the medium through which I could 
simultaneiously connect these three poles. 
When I was studying with Merleau-Ponty, I 
wanted to work on Goya in relation to something 
I called ‘‘the perception of history’’. This inter­
ested Merleau-Ponty very much, It was the idea 
that there was a perception of history that 
connects to darkness in the sense in which you 
ﬁnd this in Lucien Febvre, or intitially in 
Michelet: ‘‘l’histoire noire’’. It was the idea that in 
the midst of a history that was narrative, 
discursive, something suddenly occurred in the 
work of Goya and especially in the ‘‘Black 
Paintings’’ of the Quinta del Sordo: a kind of 
silence. It would be, then, a matter not of 
narrativizing history but of seeing it. What 
would a phenomenology of the perception of 
history be?’ See, ‘A conversation with Hubert 
Damisch’, in October, 85, Summer 1998: 3–17. The 
important work of Hubert Damish on the 
concept of painting deserves much more atten­
tion than I can give it here. I hope to explore his 
work further in my forthcoming book. 
65 ‘A conversation with Hubert Damisch’, 8. 
66 Hubert Damisch, A Theory of/Cloud/: Toward a 
History of Painting, trans. Janet Lloyd, Stanford, 
CA, 2002, 13–14. 
67 I have cited studies of the separate essays in the 
notes to this chapter. To date, there exists no 
published study of all of the essays on painting, 
the topic of my forthcoming book. However, two 
additional citations should be made now: a 
dissertation by Matthew Barr, Foucault and Visual 
Art, 1954–1988, Courtauld Institute of Art, 2007 
and Joseph Tanke, ‘A specter of Manet: a contri­
bution to the archaeology of painting’, The 
Journal of Aesthetics and Art Criticism 66, Fall 2008, 
381–92. I am grateful to the reader of this 
chapter for the ﬁrst reference, which I have not 
yet had the opportunity to consult. At the 
conference on ‘Foucault Across the Disciplines’ 
at the University of California, Santa Cruz in 
March 2008, Joseph Tanke told me that he had 
written a dissertation on Foucault and art in the 
philosophy department at Boston College that he 
was planning to publish. I have not seen that 
dissertation. During a discussion in my under­
graduate seminar on Foucault to which Tanke 
was invited in Spring 2008 it became clear that 
our very different views of Foucault on painting 
were determined on the one hand by my histor­
iographical analysis of the essays and their rela­
tionship to the philosophy of Merleau-Ponty and 
on the other hand by his argument that the 
essay on Manet preﬁgures a self-construction by 
Foucault of the ethical philosopher as cynic and 
the interpretation of art as aske¯sis. For a very 
different view on the signiﬁcance of this essay 
see Nesbit cited above in note 31. I am also 
grateful to Foucault scholar, editor, and trans­
lator Arnold Davidson for discussing the orien­
tation of Foucault towards a philosophy of the 
self as historically situated at a later period in his 
life and work than the essays on painting. 
68 Allan Megill, ‘The reception of Foucault by 
historians’, Journal of the History of Ideas, 48, 
January - March 1987, 129. 
69 Megill, ‘The reception of Foucault by historians’, 
132–4. 
70 Jean-Paul Sartre, ‘Jean-Paul Sartre re´pond’, L’Arc, 
30, 1966 88: ‘Un historien, aujourd’hui, peut ne 
pas eˆtre communiste; mais il sait qu’on ne peut 
pas e´crire d’histoire se´rieuse sans mettre au 
premier plan les e´lements mate´riels de la vie des 
hommes, les rapports de production, la praxis, – 
meˆme s’il pense comme moi qu’au-dessus de ces 
rapports, les ‘super-structures’ constituent des 
re´gions relativement autonomes . . . On ne peut 
pas inventer un syste`me nouveau qui, d’une 
manie`re ou d’une autre, ne mutile cet ensemble 
de conditionnements conditionne´s.’ 
71 Foucault, ‘On the ways of writing history’, 280. 
72 Foucault, ‘On the ways of writing history’, 280. 
73 Foucault, ‘On the ways of writing history’, 280. 
74 Michel Foucault, Remarks on Marx: Conversations 
with Duccio Trombadori, trans. R. James Goldstein 
and James Cascaito, New York, 1991, 124–8. 
75 Shapiro, Archaeologies of Vision. 
76 Martin Jay, Downcast Eyes: The Denigration of Vision 
in Twentieth-Century French Thought, Berkeley and 
Los Angeles, CA, 1993, 381–434. 
77 Gilles Deleuze, Foucault, ed. and trans. Sea´n 
Hand, Minneapolis, MN, 1988, 51. 
78 Roy Boyne, ‘Foucault and art’, in A Companion to Art 
Theory, ed. Paul Smith and Carolyn Wilde, Oxford, 
2002, 347. Boyne’s discussion relies fundamentally 
on W. J. T. Mitchell, for which see below. 
79 This statement and what follows here rely on my 
research in the English language books that I 
have found are most often used as visual studies 
texts. See, Margaret Dikovitskaya, Visual Culture: 
The Study of the Visual after the Cultural Turn, 
Cambridge, MA, 2005; Nicholas Mirzoeff, An 
Introduction to Visual Culture, London and New 
97 

M I C H E L  F O U C A U L T  A N D  T H E  P O I N T  O F  PA I N T I N G  
York, 1999; Gillian Rose, Visual Methodologies, 
London, 2001; Marita Sturken and Lisa Cart­
wright, Practices of Looking, Oxford, 2001; Jessica 
Evans and Stuart Hall, eds, Visual Culture: The 
Reader, London, 1999; Michael Ann Holly and 
Keith Moxey, eds, Art History, Aesthetics, Visual 
Studies, Williamstown, MA, 2002. 
80 A good, if partial, and brief discussion of this 
history of visual studies and its relationship to 
other disciplines may be found in Michael F. 
Zimmerman, ‘Art history as anthropology: 
French and German traditions’, in The Art 
Historian: National Traditions and Institutional Prac­
tices, ed. Michael F. Zimmerman, Williamstown, 
MA, 2003, 166–88. For some useful, if anecdotal, 
accounts of the rise of visual studies in the US, 
see Dikovitskaya, Visual Culture. 
81 Foucault, ‘What is an author?’, 211. For the 
history of the relationship of theories of the 
author and theories of the artist, see Catherine 
M. Soussloff, The Absolute Artist: The Historiography 
of a Concept, Minneapolis, MN, 1997. See now the 
very interesting discussion of author, authorship 
and authority in regard to Foucault, Barthes, and 
Arendt in Albert Russell Ascoli, Dante and the 
Making of a Modern Author, Cambridge, 2008, 3–64. 
82 Keith Moxey, ‘Visual studies and the iconic turn’, 
Journal of Visual Culture, 7, 2008, 131–46. 
83 W. J. T. Mitchell, Picture Theory: Essays on Verbal and 
Visual Representation, Chicago, IL, 1994. Both 
Mitchell’s use and rejection of Foucault over 
many years and publications deserves further 
elaboration than I can provide here. 
84 Jonathan Crary, Techniques of the Observer: On Vision 
and 
Modernity 
in 
the 
Nineteenth 
Century, 
Cambridge, MA and London, 1990, 9. See now the 
essays in Margaretha Rossholm Lagerlo¨f and Dan 
Karlholm, eds, Subjectivity and Methodology in Art 
History, Stockholm, 2003. 
85 See   especially, Michel Foucault, Discipline and 
Punish: The Birth of the Prison, trans. Alan Sheridan, 
New York, 1979 and Foucault, The Order of Things. 
For further thoughts on Crary’s book and some 
of the issues raised here, see Catherine 
M. Soussloff, ‘Review article: the turn to visual 
culture’, Visual Anthropology Review, 12, Spring 
1996, 77–83. 
86 Jonathan Crary, ‘Image’, in New Keywords: A 
Revised Vocabulary of Culture and Society, ed. Tony 
Bennett, Lawrence Grossberg and Meaghan 
Morris, Oxford, 2005, 178. In this recent essay on 
the image Crary has moved closer to Foucault 
and further from phenomenology. 
87 Victor Stoichita, The Self-Aware Image: Insight into 
Early Modern Meta-Painting, trans. Anne-Marie 
Glasheen, Cambridge, 1997. I found this book 
extremely thought-provoking at the beginning 
of my work on Foucault and painting. 
88 Susan Sontag, ‘The image-world’, in On Photo­
graphy, New York, 1977, 153: ‘a widely agreed-on 
diagnosis: that a society becomes ‘‘modern’’ 
when one of its chief activities is producing and 
consuming images, when images that have 
extraordinary powers to determine our demands 
upon reality and are themselves covert substi­
tutes for ﬁrsthand experience become indis­
pensable to the health of the economy, the 
stability of the polity, and the pursuit of private 
happiness.’ For a much longer discussion of the 
issue of the image in modern and postmodern 
art history and visual culture see, Soussloff, 
‘Image-times, image-histories, image-thinking’, 
145–70. 
89 See here Hans Belting,  The End of the History of 
Art?, trans. Christopher Wood, Chicago, IL and 
London, 1987; Arthur Danto, ‘The end of art’, in 
The Philosophical Disenfranchisement of Art, New 
York, 1986, 81–115; Donald Preziosi, Rethinking 
Art History: Meditations on a Coy Science, New 
Haven, CT and London, 1989. There are more 
recent variations on this theme that remain to 
be explored in the context of Foucault. 
98 

6   
KARL MANNHEIM AND ALOIS RIEGL: FROM   
ART HISTORY TO THE SOCIOLOGY OF   
CULTURE   
J E R E M Y  T A N N E R  
INTRODUCT I ON 
Karl Mannheim is not much read today by art historians, or indeed by sociologists 
of art. At best he performs the role of midwife in the story of the development of 
such fundamental disciplinary paradigms as iconography and iconology.1 At 
worst, in the incarnation perhaps most familiar to art historians, he appears as 
one of the ‘enemies of Reason’ excoriated by Ernst Gombrich in emulation of his 
idol Karl Popper.2 That Mannheim’s work between the essay ‘On the interpreta­
tion of Weltanschauung’,3 which provided the foundations for Erwin Panofsky’s 
classic account of the iconological method, and his study of Man and Society in the 
Age of Reconstruction,4 the object of Popper’s venom, should be almost entirely 
unknown to contemporary art historians, is something of an anomaly. From 
Mannheim’s earliest publications in the 1920s through to his most famous 
monograph, Ideology and Utopia, Riegl and his successors in the critical tradition of 
German art history are a constant point of reference,5 as they were for 
Mannheim’s contemporary Walter Benjamin. Benjamin’s encounter with Riegl 
has been much celebrated in recent writing on the historiography of art. Riegl is 
seen as a major inﬂuence on Benjamin’s analytical style in German Tragic Drama, 
connecting close reading of seemingly insigniﬁcant motifs with broader cultural 
transformations.6 Yet Mannheim’s engagement with Riegl was certainly as 
sustained as that of Walter Benjamin, and, it could be argued, of more funda­
mental consequence for his own work. 
Like Benjamin, Karl Mannheim (1893–1947) had an interestingly ambivalent 
relationship to the Frankfurt School: he shared ofﬁce space (but according to 
Norbert Elias, not much else) with Max Horkheimer and the Institute of 
Social Research for a brief period after the Institute’s foundation and Mannheim’s 
own appointment as Professor of Sociology at Frankfurt in 1929.7 But it is 
the earlier background of Mannheim which is relevant to his encounter with 
Riegl and the Mannheim–Panofsky dialogue. Mannheim, born of a German 
mother and a Hungarian father, grew up and received his early education 
in Hungary.8 Already as an undergraduate, he entered into correspondence 
with the philosopher and cultural critic Georg Lukacs, and was accepted into 
99 

K A R L  M A N N H E I M  A N D  A L O I S  R I E G L  
the ‘Sunday Circle’ of intellectuals – including the poets Balazs and Lesznai, 
and art historians like Arnold Hauser and Frederick Antal – which met under 
the leadership of Lukacs. The discussions of this circle ranged widely in 
philosophy, literature and cultural criticism. One of their central concerns was 
with how, after aestheticism and modernism, autonomous art might re-engage 
with society and play a role in cultural renewal, in the face of the crisis of 
Western civilization which culminated in the 1914–18 war. In a lecture on 
‘The Soul and Form’, given in 1917 under the sponsorship of the Sunday 
Circle, Mannheim cites Riegl, along with Cezanne, Kierkegaard and Dostoevsky, 
as one of the sources of inspiration drawn on by members of the group.9 
In the aftermath of the world war, and the failure of a communist revolution 
in which Lukacs had played a prominent role, most members of the Sunday 
Circle had to leave Hungary to live in exile. Giving up the beginnings of a 
literary career in Budapest, Mannheim ultimately took up residence in Heidel­
berg, and sought to establish an academic career in sociology and philosophy, 
studying for a doctorate under the direction of Alfred Weber, the brother and 
successor of Max. 
The enthusiasm for Riegl amongst members of the Sunday Circle was 
certainly not restricted to Mannheim. Lukacs, in his seminal History and Class 
Consciousness (1922), had praised Riegl for noticing that ‘the essence of history lies 
precisely in the changes undergone by those structural forms which are the 
focal point of man’s interaction with his environment at any given moment 
and which determine the objective nature of both his outer and inner life.’10 
But it was for Mannheim that the ideas of Riegl were to have the most enduring 
signiﬁcance. As we shall see, concepts drawn from Riegl are central to 
Mannheim’s paradigm for the sociology of culture, best exempliﬁed in his classic 
study ‘Conservative thought’ (1927).11 Indeed it is the appropriation and 
reworking of Riegl’s concept of Kunstwollen which plays a large part in 
Mannheim’s ability to transcend the standard (but largely erroneous) textbook 
criticisms of his programme in the sociology of knowledge, namely self-destruc­
tive relativism, reductionism, and the reiﬁcation of collective mind.12 Yet social 
theorists have paid little attention to Riegl as a major inﬂuence on Mannheim’s 
thought, and sociologists of art have ignored the signiﬁcance of either Mannheim 
or Riegl for the social interpretation of art.13 At the end of this chapter, I will 
return to the question of how this dimension of Mannheim’s thought was 
forgotten. But my primary purpose is to explore the intellectual context of 
Mannheim’s encounter with Riegl. Why was Mannheim so fascinated with the 
work of Riegl? What did Riegl offer Mannheim, and what was Mannheim able to 
take from Riegl? How were Riegl’s ideas transformed in the context of the 
sociology of culture developed by Mannheim? Although Mannheim had 
encountered Riegl in the discussions of the Sunday Circle, we must start with the 
Mannheim–Panofsky dialogue, since it was in this context that Mannheim’s 
sustained interest in Riegl was awakened. Furthermore, the character and 
signiﬁcance of Mannheim’s appropriation of Riegl is best understood by contrast 
with Panofsky’s: as Christopher Wood has suggested, any evaluation of the 
signiﬁcance of the successors of Riegl, left marooned by the vicissitudes of history, 
necessarily takes place against the horizon of the alternative paradigm, that of 
Panofsky and Gombrich, which we inherited.14 
100 

K A R L  M A N N H E I M  A N D  A L O I S  R I E G L  
MA NN H EI M A N D PA N OF S KY:  DIA L O G U E  A N D  D IVE R GE N C E  
In this section, I consider the Panofsky–Mannheim dialogue, from the perspective 
not of the evolution of art history as a discipline,15 but from that of the sociology 
of culture that Mannheim was to develop during the same period as Panofsky 
codiﬁed the methodology of iconography and iconology. Both Panofsky and 
Mannheim start from, but seek to go beyond, Riegl’s concept of Kunstwollen in 
developing a theoretically coherent account of the relationship between cul­
tural objects and their larger contexts. The incipient sociological elements in 
Mannheim’s ‘Interpretation of Weltanschauung’ afforded Panofsky a more prac­
tical interpretative schema than that developed in his earlier account of the 
concept of Kunstwollen, but the social elements theoretically essential to 
Mannheim’s conceptualization remain a residual category in Panofsky’s inter­
pretive framework. It was only after ‘The Interpretation of Weltanschauung’, in 
his later essays (ignored by Panofsky), that Mannheim was able to characterize 
‘worldview’ in more systematically historical and sociological terms,16 largely by 
building on precisely the psychological and collective dimensions of the concept 
of Kunstwollen that Panofsky had rejected. 
In his essay on ‘The concept of artistic volition’,17 Panofsky sought to establish 
an ‘Archimedean point’ for the interpretation of individual works of art in 
intrinsic terms, rather than by reference to such extrinsic phenomena as devel­
opmental stylistic or typological series. In doing so he invoked Riegl’s concept of 
Kunstwollen. But he fundamentally revised the character of the concept, arguing 
that in Riegl’s work it had a psychological and hence subjective character on three 
counts: ﬁrst, it invoked artistic intention, reconstructed on a circular basis from 
the work of art such intention was used to explain; second, it hypostasized ﬁctive 
collective concepts such as ‘Gothic man’, as subjects of Kunstwollen; third, Riegl’s 
starting point was irremediably subjective, namely the artistic volition of the 
modern viewer, which, according to Panofsky, was irrelevant to the character of 
the historical artistic objects which the historian aimed to address. Instead, 
Panofsky sought to understand the immanent or intrinsic meaning of single 
works of art, through transcendental or a priori aesthetic concepts parallel to 
Riegl’s ‘haptic’ and ‘optic’, in terms of which the coherence of a work of art might 
be analysed. In doing so, he explicitly eschewed interest in temporal progression, 
historical causation and genetic methods. 
In his essay ‘On the interpretation of Weltanschauung’, Mannheim also 
sought to establish the cultural sciences, amongst them art history, on a sounder 
basis, seeking, as he put it, to transpose the ‘pretheoretical’ apprehension of 
meaning through the concept ‘worldview’ into ‘scientiﬁc and theoretical 
terms’.18 But in place of a Kantian epistemological critique (ultimately assuming 
the Newtonian natural sciences as the model of knowledge), which Panofsky 
pursued,19 Mannheim develops ‘a phenomenological analysis of the intentional 
acts directed towards cultural objects’, and constitutive of the cultural domain as 
fundamentally different than that explored by the natural sciences.20 Mannheim 
argued that, in response to the premature Hegelian synthesis in which philo­
sophy was the master code, the cultural sciences had been developed through 
perfectly legitimate acts of disciplinary abstraction, by means of which each ﬁeld 
deﬁned itself in terms of its own constitutive subject matter and method – style 
and style analysis in the case of art history. But any attempt to move beyond mere 
101 

K A R L  M A N N H E I M  A N D  A L O I S  R I E G L  
description of the cultural series produced by such analysis, in order to explain 
patterns of change for example, required some kind of reference to the larger 
cultural whole from which style had been abstracted. Here one needed to invoke 
some concept such as Kunstwollen and behind Kunstwollen ‘even more fundamental 
factors’ such as Weltanschauung, in order to bring ‘these various strata of 
cultural life in relation to each other, penetrating to the most fundamental 
totality in terms of which the interconnectedness of the various branches of 
cultural studies can be understood’.21 In determining Weltanschauung as an 
intentional object, Mannheim takes Husserl’s phenomenological philosophy in a 
different direction than had Panofsky. Mannheim distinguishes three levels of 
meaning characteristic of all cultural objects – objective, expressive, and docu­
mentary – which he illustrates with the example of giving alms to a beggar.22 In 
seeing his friend perform this act, Mannheim grasps the visual data in terms of 
the social category of ‘giving alms to a beggar’, a meaning grasped by virtue of an 
objective social conﬁguration, interpreted in terms of a shared social orientation, 
which allows the reconstruction of the ‘intention’ of the participants without any 
reference to their personal inner subjectivity. He contrasts this with ‘expressive 
meaning’, the act of giving performed as an intimation of sympathy to the beggar, 
of which full understanding requires reference to the ‘stream of experience’ of 
the subject. Both these levels form the basis of, and may be encapsulated in, a 
‘documentary meaning’, framed within a broader context of signiﬁcance, for 
example interpreting the friend’s act of charity as a document of hypocrisy, when 
it emerges that it was only performed for the beneﬁt of nearby journalists.23 
Mannheim then explores how this tripartite concept of meaning might be 
translated for use in the plastic arts, culminating in documentary meaning, 
grounded in the form and subject matter of a work of art, but not as such the 
consciously intentional product of the artist.24 
The search for documentary meaning requires scrutiny of a wide range of 
instances of cultural expression, whether to detect an individual’s hypocrisy, or the 
underlying meaning of a work of art, shared by all the works of an individual artist 
or the artistic production of a larger group and time. Mannheim cites Riegl’s use of 
the concept of Kunstwollen to draw formal analogies between late Roman sculpture, 
architecture and philosophy as an exemplary instance of documentary inter­
pretation, and suggests Weber’s ‘spirit’ of capitalism, Sombart’s ‘economic ethos’, 
Dilthey’s ‘Weltanschauung’ as parallel concepts.25 Having identiﬁed the legitimacy 
of the level of analysis represented by documentary meaning, Mannheim suggests 
that the difﬁculty from a scientiﬁc point of view lies in spelling out theoretically 
the links between different cultural ﬁelds which such concepts imply, and their 
imputation to social bearers (classes and races, the categories respectively of 
Marxist sociology and nationalist art history, are both rejected, but without satis­
factory alternatives being suggested). Mannheim canvasses a number of possibi­
lities for articulating the link: correspondence, function, reciprocity, causality. 
Riegl’s mode of synthesis is clearly that which engages Mannheim most deeply, but 
ultimately he rejects it for too radical a reduction of complex differentiated 
cultural meanings in variant spheres to a rather thin typology of initial ‘germinal’ 
patterns.26 Weber’s concept of mutual causal determination of different ﬁelds is 
also rejected, not because Mannheim rejects causal analysis per se, but rather 
because he limits it to explaining the conditions under which speciﬁc meanings 
102 

K A R L  M A N N H E I M  A N D  A L O I S  R I E G L  
are ‘actualized’, and rejects the causal-genetic explanation of (structures of) 
meaning as such. By a process of elimination, Mannheim was left to opt for the art-
historian Max Dvorak’s formulation of the linkage in terms of correspondence and 
parallelism, but with little conviction and no real justiﬁcation. 
It was this framework, in its still rather theoretically indeterminate and 
idealist state, that Panofsky appropriated as the basis of his methodological 
schema for iconography and iconology, developed in a series of papers starting 
with ‘On the relationship of art history to art theory’ in 1925, and ultimately 
codiﬁed in ‘Iconography and iconology’.27 As Joan Hart has shown,28 Mannheim’s 
beggar becomes Panofsky’s man tipping his hat, and the three levels of inter­
pretation are reworked as pre-iconographic description, iconographic analysis 
and iconological interpretation. With its correlation between levels of meaning 
(pre-iconographic, iconographic, iconological), relevant equipment for inter­
pretation (practical knowledge, knowledge of literary sources, synthetic intui­
tion), and controlling principles of interpretation (history of style, history of 
types, history of cultural symbols), Panofsky’s schema is a neat and deservedly 
inﬂuential methodological framework, even if he was increasingly ungenerous in 
his crediting of Mannheim for its lineaments.29 Theoretically, however, it is 
rather confused, as a number of commentators have pointed out, and represents 
in certain respects a step backwards from Mannheim’s IoW. First, limiting style to 
a controlling principle on the pre-iconographic level reintroduced the dichotomy 
between form and content which Riegl (and following him Mannheim) had 
sought to overcome.30 Second, the focus on single works of art, as the primary 
object of interpretation, abstracted from issues of artistic tradition and historical 
process, permitted connection to a larger historical context only through the 
invocation of ‘synthetic intuition’. This interpreted the work of art as a symptom 
of some larger mentality, thus returning in effect to the mystical linkage between 
work and context characteristic of Riegl’s Kunstwollen concept.31 Last, Panofsky’s 
schema is dependent on ideas of tradition and notions of collective meaning 
appropriated from Mannheim’s IoW but retained as unexplicated, residual, 
categories in Panofsky’s framework. The appeal to a history of types, to discri­
minate a woman with a sword carrying a head on a platter as Judith rather than 
Salome, presupposes the non-circular attribution of artistic intention on the basis 
of a sociological account of intersubjective meaning, which Mannheim had 
developed in part by placing some of the fundamental concepts and modes of 
analysis of Husserl’s phenomenology in the frame of a theory of social interac­
tion, much inﬂuenced by Simmel.32 Moreover, the integrity of that tradition of 
iconographic types is grounded in affect, exactly the kind of subjectivity which 
Panofsky’s avowed theoretical programme abhorred: it is the polarized charges 
attached to Salome, the ‘lascivious girl’, and the sword, the symbol of Christian 
martyrdom, which prevents their combination, whilst the imagery of the heroine 
Judith is easily fused with that of a head and a charger, which had become a 
relatively free-ﬂoating devotional image, disembedded from its original narrative 
context and charge.33 
MA NNHEIM’S RIEGL 
Mannheim’s subsequent theoretical development, like that of Panofsky, involved 
a return to Riegl, but in Mannheim’s case the return was not disavowed. On the 
103 

K A R L  M A N N H E I M  A N D  A L O I S  R I E G L  
contrary it involved a systematic integration of Rieglian thought into a compre­
hensive sociology of culture. Mannheim had clearly been extremely impressed by 
Riegl’s Late Roman Art Industry (LRAI) and spells out its qualities in some detail in 
IoW: the horizontal differentiation of the concept across media (architecture, 
painting, sculpture, decorative art), the ‘temporal differentiation of the Kunst­
wollen of successive periods’ (oriental, classical, late antique), and the correlation 
of these with contemporary philosophy and religion to produce a kind of ‘Welt­
wollen’ or ‘Kulturwollen’, all traced back to a set of ‘differentiated germinal forms’ 
of which the diverse Wollen are logically derivable ‘meaningful variations’.34 As he 
struggled with the problems left unresolved in IoW, he discovered further afﬁ­
nities between his own intellectual projects and those of Riegl, and ultimately 
Riegl’s Kunstwollen concept became the lynch-pin of Mannheim’s own theoretical 
apparatus. It is the nature of those afﬁnities, and the theoretical synthesis built 
on their basis, to which I now turn. 
Mannheim and Riegl shared a theory of knowledge that differed fundamen­
tally from Panofsky’s search for an Archimedean point. Where Panofsky saw 
contemporary artistic inclinations as potentially distorting our understanding of 
the art of the past, and sought to replace subjective concepts with transcendental 
categories, Riegl sees afﬁnities and tensions with the art of the past rooted in 
contemporary taste as being the very condition of productive engagement with 
the past.35 In LRAI, modern prejudice against the Constantinian reliefs of the 
Arch of Constantine offers the grounds for analysing the late antique Kunstwollen 
as ‘an entirely positive artistic intention’, formulated on the basis of principles 
which on one level parallel (optical), on another are the inverse of their modern 
counterparts: 
In this respect, the Constantinian Kunstwollen appears almost identical with the most modern; 
nevertheless its works arouse in us the absolute opposite of artistic satisfaction! What for 
modern taste is offensive lies in nothing other than the relationship to space observed in it. This 
harshly separates the visual forms from one another, rather than integrating them with each 
other in mutual interrelationship, as in general all modern art wishes to do. The ﬁgures and 
their constituent parts set themselves sharply apart from the dark space, whilst we demand 
from them that they should melt into their environment by means of transition into atmo­
sphere.36 
Similarly, in The Group Portraiture of Holland, Riegl starts from the group portrait to 
characterize the Dutch Kunstwollen on the basis that modern indifference to the 
group portrait indicates the genre as, by contrast with modern art, the best entry 
point into the speciﬁc character of the Dutch Kunstwollen.37 
Mannheim adopts a comparable stance in IoW, and develops its implications 
more fully in a series of theoretical and methodological essays, leading up to the 
publication of his ‘Conservative thought’ in 1927.38 Flatly contradicting the 
scientistic aspirations of Panofsky’s Kunstwollen essay, Mannheim asserts that 
the notion of an ‘objectively correct’ documentary interpretation is meaningless. 
On the contrary, in the cultural sciences, ‘to understand the ‘‘spirit’’ of an age, we 
have to fall back on the ‘‘spirit’’ of our own – it is only substance which 
comprehends substance.’39 Far from entailing a self-defeating ‘epistemological 
relativism’, such an ‘existential relativism’ is the condition of the development of 
104 

K A R L  M A N N H E I M  A N D  A L O I S  R I E G L  
new knowledge adequate to the changing character of cultural and historical 
reality.40 Echoing Wolfﬂin’s famous example in Principles of Art History, Mannheim 
discusses how a series of paintings of a single landscape will differ in their 
perspective and foreshortening, according to the standpoint from which each was 
made. Indeed it is ‘precisely by virtue of the fact that it is perspectivistic, [that] this 
location-bound image has its truth . . . If perspectivity disappears, the landscape 
disappears.’41 Notwithstanding that the paintings are different, the object which 
they grasp, the landscape, is ﬁxed: they are paintings of the landscape. The validity 
of each of the perspectives is grounded in the existential bond between it and the 
standpoint from which it is projected. Similarly, different perspectives on the same 
social or historical object may all be valid, in relationship to the social or historical 
standpoint from which they are produced. Correspondingly, the development of 
socio-cultural knowledge, of a period in history for example, does not take place 
through the accumulation of single univocal true facts which cancel previous 
falsehoods, but rather through the reorganization of ‘the entire image’ of an epoch 
or a historical ﬁgure around a ‘new centre of organization’ characteristic of a new 
period, realizing a new image which retains, but reconﬁgured and enriched, the 
facts and insights characteristic of the interpretation of an earlier generation.42 
It follows that, for Riegl and Mannheim, histories of both art and cultural-
historical knowledge are not simply accounts of the passive tracing of perceptions of 
the exterior world, but of the active volitions of subjects who had grasped or 
constituted the world from speciﬁc standpoints and with speciﬁc aspirations or 
commitments which shaped the character of their representation of the world.43 
Mannheim notes how the history of Western thought and art has been punctuated 
by  calls  to go ‘back  to nature’,  but ‘the return to nature’  is  always  to ‘a  new-formed  
representation’ of nature ‘since mankind never meets bare nature, unendowed with 
meanings’.44 Comparably, Riegl, perceiving the variety of ways in which nature 
could be ‘realistically’ represented, abandoned a concept of art as objective knowl­
edge in favour of one of art as fulﬁlment of subjective desire – ‘the artist wishes to 
present to us the natural objects only on the strength of what pleases us in them’.45 
In the two versions of his Historical Grammar of Visual Art, Riegl shifts from an 
emphasis on ‘truth to nature’ (Naturwahrheit), a static objectivist concept, to one on 
the more experiential and dynamic ‘truth to life’ (Lebenswahrheit).46 For both 
Mannheim and Riegl, how people represented the world was grounded in what they 
wanted from the world, in the desire to project a world consistent with their 
aspirations. As Riegl writes in the conclusion to LRAI: 
All human will is directed towards a satisfactory shaping of man’s relationship to the world, 
within and beyond the individual. The plastic Kunstwollen regulates man’s relationship to the 
sensory perceptible appearance of things. Art expresses the way man wants to see things shaped or 
coloured, just as the poetic Kunstwollen expresses the way man wants to imagine them. Man is not 
only a passive, sensory recipient, but also a desiring active being who wishes to interpret the world 
in such a way (varying from one people, region or epoch to another) that it most clearly and 
obligingly meets his desires. The character of this will is contained in what we call the worldview 
(again, in the broadest sense): in religion, philosophy, science, even statecraft and law . . . 47 
Correspondingly, Mannheim noted that modern sensitivity to ‘class’ and the 
development of concepts such as ‘capitalism’ was not simply a function of the 
105 

K A R L  M A N N H E I M  A N D  A L O I S  R I E G L  
increasingly dominant role of economic organization in shaping experience, it 
also, as developed in socialist thought, implied a volition, namely the transcen­
dence of class-based injustice and inequality.48 Perspectival insight into the world 
is characteristically linked with our wishes to transform it (utopia), or to preserve 
a world under threat (ideology), as we shall see in more detail in ‘Conservative 
thought’, where Mannheim follows Riegl’s lead in exploring the Denkwollen of 
eighteenth- and nineteenth-century German political and legal thought (see 
below). Existentially determined truths in cultural representation themselves 
return to life and mould epochs.49 
As a sociologist, Mannheim must also have been attracted by Riegl’s increasingly 
well-developed suggestions not only that social groups might be the bearers of 
distinctive artistic volitions, but also that the nature of their group life might 
explain the shape of such volitions. According to received criticism, Riegl is 
an extreme formalist whose characterization of periods is informed by the ‘meta­
physical postulate’ of a ‘synchronic unity of style’,50 and who  explained change in  
1 Jan Van Scorel, Portraits of Twelve Members of the Utrecht Jerusalem Brotherhood, after 1525. Oil on panel, 
terms of equally metaphysical hypostatizations, racial dispositions embedded in a 
unitary will to form.51 Certainly, Riegl regards periods as in some sense unities, but 
those unities are much more differentiated than critics like Gombrich allow, 
generally along tacitly sociological lines.52 He draws a distinction, for example, 
between the character of the optically oriented art of the Roman elite, continuing 
the tradition of Greek art, and the tactile character of popular art in Rome. The 
artistic impulse or Kunstwollen of the period allowed ‘room for numerous subjective 
forms of expression which seemed to contradict one another’.53 A turning point 
in the interrelation between these tendencies correlates with the crystallization 
of changes in political structure under the emperor Diocletian (284–305), giving 
rise in the fourth century to an ‘aesthetic Wollen’ which combined ‘different and 
even seemingly opposite phenonema’, paralleling the opposed ‘ethical volitions’ of 
paganism and Christianity.54 
This linking of artistic volitions and their transformation to social groups and 
social change plays a relatively small role in LRAI, but becomes absolutely central 
in Riegl’s study of The Group Portraiture of Holland.55 Here, the varying formal 
106 

K A R L  M A N N H E I M  A N D  A L O I S  R I E G L  
characteristics of group portraits are consistently interpreted in terms of differ­
ences and changes in the social organization of the corporations who were their 
sponsors, and the social commitments that underpinned those groups. The 
characteristic egalitarianism and individualism of Dutch religious confraternities 
is brought out by contrasting their group portraits with those of their Venetian 
counterparts. In the former, exempliﬁed by the paintings of Jan van Scorel (plate 
1), rows of single heads, coordinated through shared attributes of pilgrimage, but 
each individually oriented towards the space beyond the picture, gazing in 
various directions, systematically eschew the shared focus of action, and the 
subordination to distinct leaders, characteristic of Venetian merchant confrater­
nities (see plates 2a and 2b).56 It is only as the social character of such groups 
changes, from religious confraternities in which each individual is primarily 
oriented to his personal salvation, to civic guards in which fellow citizens acted 
together to defend their liberty against Catholic and imperial Spain, that the 
Dutch artistic volition became open to the Italian artistic volition. Italianate 
48  275.8 cm Utrecht: Collectie Centraal Museum (inv. no.2379). Photo: Centraal Museum Utrecht. 
stylistic tendencies emphasizing subordination permitted a clearer sense of a 
group engaged in common action, but in the work of Dirk Jacobsz such principles 
were transformed within a dominant ‘Hollandisch artistic volition’ (see plate 3). 
Italianate planimetric symmetry is softened, through a staggered composition of 
the ﬁgures in free space, such that the ‘dominant’ central ﬁgure, the captain, 
seems withdrawn into the centre, and to owe his position to his comrades. The 
latter, whilst acknowledging their leader with subtle hand-gestures, maintain 
their autonomous individuality in their bodily and facial orientations in rela­
tionship to each other, the space beyond the painting, and the viewer, the char­
acteristic subjective ‘attentiveness’ of the Dutch tradition.57 The whole story of 
the development of Dutch group-portraiture recounted by Riegl follows such a 
dialectical pattern as Italianate principles are appropriated to social and 
aesthetic-expressive purposes determined by the historically developing social 
structures of the civic guard units who commissioned the paintings, and those 
principles are refunctionalized in their new context, through synthesis with 
existing Dutch tendencies, to dramatize in the encounter with the viewer the 
107 

K A R L  M A N N H E I M  A N D  A L O I S  R I E G L  
2a and 2b Domenico Robusti, called Tintoretto, Group Portrait of the Confraternity of the 
Scuole dei Mercanti in Venice, after 1591. Oil on canvas, 330  194 cm each. Venice: 
Gallerie dell’Accademia (inv. nos. 973, 974). Photo: Alinari Archives, Florence. 
108 

K A R L  M A N N H E I M  A N D  A L O I S  R I E G L  
109 

K A R L  M A N N H E I M  A N D  A L O I S  R I E G L  
3 Dirk Jacobsz, A Group of Guardsmen, 1529. Oil on panel, 122  184 cm. Amsterdam: Rijks­
museum (inv. no. SK-C-402). Photo: Rijksmuseum. 
types of social commitments which underlay the character of those groups.58 
This type of ‘problem solving process’, as Riegl refers to it,59 was of course, 
engaged in by individual artists, whose own individual artistic volitions may 
stand in changing relations of harmony, or, most notably in the case of the later 
Rembrandt, contradiction to the dominant Kunstwollen of the time.60 
Riegl did not develop his ideas in a vacuum, and Mannheim drew on other 
sources for sometimes very similar ideas. Riegl’s hostility to neo-Kantian thought,61 
his emphasis on the historical character of knowledge, and on the knowing or 
artistic subjects as feeling and volitional as well as rational, are all characteristic 
features of the late nineteenth- and early twentieth-century German tradition of 
Lebensphilosophie.62 This tradition drew much of its inspiration from Schopenhauer 
and Nietzsche, but its most sophisticated representative at the time of Riegl’s acme 
and the beginning of Mannheim’s career was Wilhelm Dilthey.63 Whilst Dilthey’s 
empirical studies lack the extraordinary internal coherence and systematic rigour 
that so impressed Mannheim in the case of Riegl, Dilthey did much to develop a set 
of generalized concepts to inform the kind of cultural analysis exempliﬁed by Riegl’s 
work.64 Reacting against the emphasis on ‘abstract cultural ideals’ in the neo-
Kantian cultural sciences, Dilthey emphasized the whole man, developing through 
lived experience (Erlebnis) and self-expression through the course of life (Lebensver­
lauf ).65 In this course of life, the individual is the intersection (Kreuzpunkt) of various  
socio-cultural systems: structures of interaction, and social organizations, which 
bind people together into groups, and cultural systems, characterized as ‘Zweck­
zusammenh.ange’, systems of purposes. Any person encounters such systems as pre­
110 

K A R L  M A N N H E I M  A N D  A L O I S  R I E G L  
existent, but also activates them in the pursuit of his or her purposes, formed by 
and in turn shaping such systems. Each individual is characterized by an ‘acquired 
psychic nexus’ (erworbener seelischer Zusammenhang), developed through such 
encounters during the course of life. This nexus transcends the inner–outer 
polarity, forming the ground of ‘lived experience’ (Erlebnis – contrast passive 
Erfahrung), through which the individual actively projects a perspective on the 
world in encountering and engaging with that world, in its social, cultural and 
material dimensions. The culture systems of which a person is the bearer, and 
those which he encounters or activates in the course of his life, are brought into 
relationship with each other and further developed through processes of ‘articu­
lation’, regulated by the acquired psychic nexus.66 All engagement with our 
environment is imaginative, and involves varying combinations of feeling, willing, 
and representation, although ideal-typically science is characterized by a primacy 
of the representational, art the feelingful, and practical activity the volitional.67 
Thinking in terms of ‘articulation’ allowed Dilthey to characterize the poetic 
imagination in terms of its formative efﬁcacy (Wirkung). This is an alternative to 
interpreting art merely as an expression of pre-existing ideas (in which technique 
functions as a more or less adequately transparent material medium), through the 
atomistic conceptions of science, or the kind of synoptic synthetic judgement of 
Kantian aesthetics.68 Articulation mutually elaborates cultural systems – for 
example social ideas and systems of visual representation – in relation to each other: 
it is a creative ‘life-process’ in which social and aesthetic values ‘become more and 
more differentiated in relation to an original continuum’.69 Correspondingly, style 
is conceptualized as an active poetic and intrinsically temporal process, like Riegl’s 
Kunstwollen, ‘the inner form of a work from the initial process of extricating motifs 
from the material to the working out of tropes, ﬁgures, metre and language’.70 
Dilthey draws together these dimensions of social and cultural life through the 
integrative concept of Wirkungszusammenhang, ‘effective context’ or ‘dynamic 
system’.71 The order which characterizes human life is a function of the dynamic 
interrelationship of individuals, cultural systems, systems of social interaction and 
social organizations in the historical process of which they are the co-carriers. None 
of these levels – the individual, social, cultural – is self-subsistent, nor can any be 
simply derived from the others. The ‘individual’ as logical subject is just as much an 
abstraction as ‘culture’ or ‘society’. Each level is only realized in practice through its 
structural interrelationship with the others in the course of history, the totality of 
which the other elements are levels or abstracted dimensions.72 Notions like the 
‘Zeitgeist of the Enlightenment’ refer to ‘a general direction common to a set of 
dynamic systems, ‘‘not a unity which could be expressed in terms of a fundamental 
thought, but rather a coherence among tendencies of life’’’.73 This seems to be very 
much the kind of idea, somewhat more effectively conceptually explicated, that 
Riegl seeks to develop in his account of the Kunstwollen of late Roman art industry. 
In developing his own sociology of culture, Mannheim used Riegl’s emphasis 
on volition to ground Dilthey’s account of lived experience in social existence in a 
much more analytically differentiated and theoretically determinate fashion 
than Dilthey himself had achieved, without reducing culture to extrinsic social 
determinants in the way characteristic of much Marxist thought of the period. 
The importance of Riegl’s theoretical legacy to Mannheim is marked not only in 
the pivotal role played by concepts of volition in Mannheim’s new synthesis, but 
111 

K A R L  M A N N H E I M  A N D  A L O I S  R I E G L  
also in his explicit referencing of Riegl as his model at key moments in the devel­
opment of his argument.74 Starting from a concept of socio-cultural knowledge as 
‘conjunctive knowledge’, Mannheim gives a strong sociological foundation to 
Dilthey’s phenomenology by thinking in terms of ‘social contextures of experience’. 
He characterizes ‘Weltanschauungen’ as structurally linked contextures of experi­
ence, and uses concepts of volition to mediate the relationship between ‘inner’ and 
‘outer’ which were treated dualistically in positivistic and idealist thought.75 
Mannheim uses the concept of ‘conjunctive knowledge’ to characterize the 
distinctive subject–object relationship characteristic of socio-cultural knowledge 
by contrast with the abstract, quantifying and calculative orientation character­
istic of modern natural science, and of the capitalistic Weltwollen more generally. 
The existential ground of such knowledge has a sensorial foundation in the 
preconceptual ‘contagious’ awareness we have of another simply by virtue of 
their physical co-presence, as they enter into our space, for example walking into 
a room. Echoing Riegl, Mannheim suggests that even optical perception of others 
makes reference to a tactile sense, a kind of visual ‘palpation’ of the other with 
whom we share a common space. This is the ground of mutual awareness, of a 
shared experiential space, which can be further developed in the course of the 
common existence between two people.76 Language and other cultural media­
tions such as art play a role in the elaboration of such experiential spaces, their 
sharing amongst larger groups, and their conceptual uniﬁcation. But the tension 
toward the world, the volitional tendency, of such concepts is founded in their 
existential referent. The concepts of ‘polis’ and ‘polites’, for example, are existen­
tially anchored in the institutional frameworks of social and political life of the 
Greek polis. They cannot be easily translated as ‘state’ and ‘citizen’, concepts 
which whilst ultimately related to those of classical antiquity, through Roman 
and Italian Renaissance traditions, imply for the modern reader quite different 
frameworks of social life, forms of social organization, and rights and obligations 
than those characteristic of their ancient Greek counterparts. It is the conjunctive 
character of such concepts as ‘freedom’, ‘citizen’, ‘equality’ which accounts for 
the fact that speeches which originally played catalytic roles in the course of a 
revolution may seem bland and lifeless to their modern readers. The concepts 
survive, but the existential ground which animated them has shifted.77 
Our ability to respond appropriately to situations like that presented by the 
beggar of Mannheim’s example suggests that we are in practice intuitively 
attuned to this social functionality of the cultural representations we encounter 
in everyday life. Such an implicit attunement to social functionality, also, 
according to Mannheim, characterizes art-historical concepts of style. In the slide 
from ‘Gothic style’ to ‘Gothic spirit’ or in such concepts as ‘Impressionism’, the 
objective features of style, on which purely immanent analysis focuses, are 
implicitly connected to broader experiential contextures which are collective and 
which underlie the shared principles informing a common deﬁnition of, and 
solutions to, problems of pictorial representation. Immanent analysis in principle 
progresses straightforwardly to genetic analysis, with characterizations of 
impressionism as the self-dissolution of bourgeois individualism or classicism as 
the style of the rising bourgeoisie. Left at that, such phrases would simply 
reproduce the kind of reductive extrinsic analysis characteristic of certain strands 
of Marxism, which Mannheim had already criticized. Instead he argued that 
112 

K A R L  M A N N H E I M  A N D  A L O I S  R I E G L  
classes should also be seen as meaningful entities, communal contextures of 
experience. When we refer to the bourgeoisie, or the bourgeois class, we do not 
refer simply to a position in class structure (control of the means of production), 
but to ‘experiential contextures following from this position’, that is to say a 
certain vital tensioning to the world, a certain set of commitments or volitions,78 
existentially grounded in certain typical patterns of experience, constituting a 
‘life system’, characteristic of a particular position, whether that of the ‘citizen’ of 
a Greek polis, or member of the bourgeoisie of eighteenth-century France. 
The task of sociology is to spell out the structural interconnections between 
such phenomena as artistic styles, or styles of thought, and contextures of 
experience, existentially grounded in social positions and the systems of life to 
which they give rise. The concept of volition, elaborated from Riegl’s art-historical 
theory, plays a pivotal role in allowing Mannheim to mediate inner and outer, to 
anchor experience in social contextures, and to link those contextures in terms of 
parallel volitions: the different contextures dynamically interact with each other in 
the course of historical process to produce new cultural forms, and new contextures 
of experience, which can be analytically derived from, but are not reducible to, 
either their ideal (Hegelianism) or their social (Marxism) coordinates. Following 
Riegl’s example,79 Mannheim coins a proliferation of volitions characteristic of 
different experiential contextures and appropriate to different levels of analysis – 
Weltwollen or ‘world volition’ as a dynamic concept to replace ‘worldview’, Denk­
wollen, Erkenntniswollen, Gestaltungswollen (formative will manifested in artistic tech­
nique), Gesellschaftswollen (social volition), Wirtschaftswollen (economic volition), and 
even ‘Gesamtwollen’ (characterizing the overall tendency of a cultural formation).80 
The analytical fruitfulness of this dynamic conception of culture in action, 
Mannheim argues, can be illustrated particularly clearly in class-stratiﬁed, 
historically evolving complex societies. Here, the static conceptions of culture 
characteristic of both idealist philosophy (art or knowledge as a simple expression 
or unfolding of a germinal Weltanschauung) and Marxist analysis (culture as 
reﬂection of class structure or expression of objective class interest), and their 
methods of analysis, respectively intuitive and mechanical, are particularly at a 
loss. Such societies manifest not only class conﬂicts, but conﬂicts of cosmic 
projects (Weltwollungen) linked to the variety of experiential spaces (for example 
rural versus urban) and the range of social strata (with their varying standpoints, 
and contextures of experience) who face each other in such spaces.81 The voli­
tions which inform cultural production, whether of art or knowledge, although 
inﬂected by these Weltwollungen are not directly determined by them. On the 
contrary, which of the germinal possibilities of those world projects of the 
primary social strata are elaborated as speciﬁc artistic projects or intellectual 
projects is in turn dependent on the character of the cultural elites engaged in 
such activities, who have their own speciﬁc social position and social standpoint, 
and impart their own vital tension in elaborating the world projects of the social 
groups they might represent.82 The intellectual space within which such cultural 
production occurs is not a closed one. Culture-producing strata may activate 
cultural elements from an inherited tradition, as for example Renaissance artists 
drawing on classical motifs still embedded within late-medieval art, in the 
context of a dialectical process whereby the elements selected from tradition 
were determined by the developing Kunstwollen of Italian Renaissance artists, but 
113 

K A R L  M A N N H E I M  A N D  A L O I S  R I E G L  
the objective possibilities implicit in those elements in turn inﬂected the char­
acter of that Kunstwollen with their own volitional tendency.83 Similar processes 
can also occur in relation to foreign elements, which may be incorporated 
into the cultural space of indigenous intellectual strata, insofar as they meet 
the needs of those strata’s own cultural volitions, and in the process both the 
incorporated elements and the indigenous tradition are transformed.84 Such a 
process, characterized by Mannheim as the ‘change of function’ of a cultural 
form,85 is perhaps best exempliﬁed by Riegl’s account of the role played by 
the Italian Kunstwollen in the elaboration of speciﬁcally Dutch volitions during the 
course of the development of group portraiture in Holland. 
Performing such an analysis is by no means simple, but in large part by virtue 
of the concept of volition, Mannheim is able to integrate two forms of structural 
analysis, of stylistic cultural formations and of social structure, in a framework 
where each interacts with the other in the context of a dynamic historical process. 
Mannheim demonstrated how this analytical framework might be applied in 
practice in his classic study in the sociology of knowledge, ‘Conservative thought’. 
S T Y L E S  O F  T H O U G H T:  T H E  A RT- H I S T OR I C A L  FO U N D ATI O N S  O F    
M A N N H E I M’ S  S O C I O L O G Y  O F  CU LT U R E    
The introduction to ‘Conservative thought’,86 identiﬁes three levels of analysis: 
the morphological analysis of conservative systems of ideas on the model of style 
analysis in art history; the sociological analysis of political and economic ratio­
nalization in eighteenth- and nineteenth-century Europe, in particular Germany, 
to which conservative thought is a response; and a social-historical synthesis 
which explores the interaction between social structure and cultural morphology 
in shaping the historical development and changing character of conservatism as 
a cultural formation.87 The key concept articulating these different levels of 
analysis, and introduced by Mannheim in order to progress beyond the idealist 
formulations of IoW, is that of ‘fundamental design’ (Grundintention). This refers to 
basic orientations, which underlie not so much the speciﬁc ideational contents of 
systems of ideas, as their broader structural characteristics, enduring ways of 
formulating and organizing ideas which lie behind the changing contents of 
conservative thought and underpin its continuity in time through changing 
surface manifestations. As Mannheim notes, the concept is based on Riegl’s 
Kunstwollen, but while for Riegl this ‘principle of style, this Kunstwollen is some­
thing which needs no further explanation’, Mannheim regards it as ‘axiomatic’ 
that that such formal principles (Gestaltprinzip) are always ‘in themselves ‘‘in the 
making’’ . . . and that their history and fate is in many ways linked up with the 
fate of the groups which must be regarded as their social carriers’.88 
Any fundamental design articulates an existentially grounded formative 
attitude towards the world and experience. On one level that existential ground 
has an anthropological character, parallel to the tactile and optical bases of 
sensory experience which, in varying conﬁgurations, Riegl saw underlying all 
stylistic systems in the visual arts. In Mannheim’s case, the basic anthropological 
orientations are an intuitive-qualitative orientation to the world, and a rational-
calculative orientation. As with Riegl’s optical/tactile opposition, these modes of 
orientation to the world and experience are (anthropo)logical counterpoints, 
114 

K A R L  M A N N H E I M  A N D  A L O I S  R I E G L  
orientations which are both in principle always available to actors, not existing as 
pure essences, but found variably conﬁgured in relation to each other in the 
context of speciﬁc social and cultural systems. 
Translating the insights of Marx and Weber in terms of the logic of his own 
conceptual scheme, Mannheim characterizes the development of the modern world 
in terms of ‘social differentiation’, ‘reorganization of structures of thinking’ and 
‘transformation in the structures of experience’.89 What distinguishes the modern 
west from earlier eras or the world beyond the occident is not the presence of a 
rational-calculating orientation per se, since such an orientation is an anthro­
pological given. Rather, the ‘bourgeois capitalist consciousness is marked by the fact 
that it knows no principled limitation to such rationalisation’. The development of 
the analytic quantitative orientation of modern exact science, in contrast to the 
qualitatively oriented teleological Aristotelian conception of the world, may be 
understood as ‘nothing but a consistent elaboration of this basic intellectual 
design’. The ‘intellectual project’ (Denkwollen) of modern science is ‘directed towards 
a new conception of the world’, which grasps things not in terms of their particular 
nature, determined by an intrinsic teleological cause, but in terms of ‘universal 
causes and laws’, in which the world can be apprehended ‘as a composite of masses 
and forces’. This structure of thinking is embedded in a broader ‘abstract’ ‘psychic 
attitude’ and correspondingly ‘has its parallel’ in the modern economic system. In 
the feudal-patriarchal social order, production is qualitatively ordered towards 
needs, use value. Similarly, exchange and consumption are regulated in terms of 
particularistic and qualitative deﬁnitions of the needs and requirements appro­
priate to particular statuses, such as peasant and lord. In the modern economy, this 
is replaced by a ‘quantifying orientation . . . to exchange value, which considers 
goods merely in terms of their monetary equivalent’. This ‘‘‘abstract’’ mode of 
orientation’ towards ‘nature and the world of goods . . . gradually broadens into a 
universal form of experience’ and ‘also becomes the basic form for comprehending 
the alien subject’, as a quantiﬁable magnitude of labour power, purchasable as a 
commodity for a speciﬁc price. These novel orientations to the world and forms of 
experience are characteristic of the ‘world project’ (Weltwollen) of a newly emergent 
social stratum, the bourgeoisie, but they come to be shared by other social strata 
which are absorbed into the life-world and patterns of social relations characteristic 
of this expansive social and cultural process, in particular the Enlightened 
monarchs and bureaucrats of the developing absolutist states. 
But what of the ‘vital relationships and attitudes’ and ‘the forms of thinking 
corresponding to them’, the intuitive and the qualitative, that were displaced by 
rationalization? These were not eliminated but marginalized, surviving amongst 
groups which were not yet fully caught up in the processes of capitalistic ratio­
nalization – the nobility, the peasants, petit-bourgeois craftsmen – and in 
domains of bourgeois experience, such as the intimate sphere, which were 
disesteemed in comparison with rationalized public ofﬁcial life. These latent 
tendencies formed the basis of Romanticism, an ‘experiential reaction’ against 
and cultural antithesis to the Enlightenment, pitting community against society, 
‘family against contract’, intuition against rationality, inner experience against 
mechanistic science. Originally taken for granted as the insensible ‘substratum’ of 
life in traditional patriarchal-feudal society, these tendencies of thought were 
raised to the level of self-conscious reﬂection in Romanticism.90 
115 

K A R L  M A N N H E I M  A N D  A L O I S  R I E G L  
Conservatism, Mannheim argues, develops out of the use made of such 
tendencies of thought by strata either threatened or not engaged by political and 
economic rationalization to articulate their world-designs (Weltwollungen) as an  
explicit system of thought, and programme of action, intended to counter those 
characteristic of the bourgeois world-design.91 In calling conservatism a ‘style of 
thought’, Mannheim sharply distinguishes it from the universal ‘traditionalism’, 
according to which individuals whose ideal and material interests are threatened 
simply oppose changes to established ways of doing things. Conservatism, by 
contrast, is an ‘objective spiritual contexture’ (geistiger Zusammenhang), which in 
its historical duration transcends the individual. The speciﬁc character of such a 
‘historical-structural dynamic complex’ may change over time, according to the 
fortunes of the group or groups which are its bearers, but it retains a distinctive 
structural integrity, based upon its germinal core or ‘fundamental design’.92 
Morphological analysis of a wide range of instances of conservative thought 
reveals the structure of this ‘fundamental design’, characterized by an emphasis 
on the qualitative, the concrete and the particular, which had informed the 
modes of life and social values characteristic of both dominant and dominated 
strata in feudal-patriarchal society. This same design, characterized by Mannheim 
as a ‘Wollen des Konkreten’,93 underlies the formulation of conservative concepts of, 
for example, property and liberty. Hegel’s concept of property as not a mere 
commodity subserving creatural needs, but a vehicle of the will which ‘helps 
personality become something more than mere subjectivity’ is informed by the 
same concrete and personalistic attitude which animated the feudal concept of 
property, as explicated by the German jurist and social philosopher Justus Moser 
(1720–94), in his essay ‘Of Genuine Property’. Here Moser laments the passing of 
the vital relationship which bound proprietor and property, such that the origi­
nal privileges of a landowner – hunting, jury-membership – were not transferable 
to the new man who purchased such land, but remained attached to the original 
owner in virtue of his ‘personal nobility’.94 Revolutionary thought, seeking the 
emancipation of individuals from the status-based economic and political 
restrictions of guild and estate, developed an abstract and universalistic concept 
of freedom, based on a norm of equality, as formulated in ‘The Rights of Man’. 
Conversely, conservative thinkers like the literary and political theorist Adam 
M .uller (1787–1829) develop a concrete and qualitative concept of freedom. This 
insisted on the essential inequality of individuals, and attacked the Revolutionary 
norm of equality, as an infringement of personal freedom, the individual law of 
development, and of the ‘liberties’ – speciﬁc concrete privileges – of the estates.95 
Conservative thought is not simply an emanation of such a fundamental 
design (as styles may sometimes seem to be emanations of Kunstwollen in Riegl’s less 
satisfactory formulations), but is occasioned and further shaped by an additional 
array of largely social factors, in what is a fundamentally creative process. First, in 
being speciﬁed to articulate conservative concepts of time, property and liberty, the 
fundamental design is transformed into ‘mature theoretical constructions’ by 
thinkers seeking to address contemporary social and political problems generated 
by the processes of societal rationalization to which they respond.96 Second, the 
particular solutions to those problems are doubly determined on a cultural level, 
ﬁrst, positively, by the fundamental design itself, second, as we have already seen, 
negatively, by the ideas of ‘progressive’ thinkers, particularly natural law thought, 
116 

K A R L  M A N N H E I M  A N D  A L O I S  R I E G L  
against which conservatism is developed as a ‘counter-system’ in the competitive 
clash of ideas characteristic of modern ideological politics.97 
Further, the development of conservatism both as a style of thought with a 
characteristic design and as a process unfolding in time is shaped by the larger 
historical ‘life-space’ within which that process is set: the developing social 
structure of eighteenth- and nineteenth-century Germany; the social character 
and situation of the intellectuals who articulate the new style of thought, 
including the structure of the market or production system within which 
members of such groups engage in the production and dissemination of the texts 
which embody such ideas; the contingencies of history, according to which new 
intellectual positions from external sources may become available to be appro­
priated and redirected within the parameters of the life-space in question.98 
It is the varying conﬁguration and interaction of these several distinctive 
levels of analysis that distinguishes different national traditions of conservative 
thought and shapes the speciﬁc historical trajectory of the development of a style 
of thought in any one tradition, such as the German, which is Mannheim’s 
primary focus.99 As in France and England, the formation of conservative thought 
in Germany was inﬂected not only by general processes of economic and political 
rationalization, but also by the shock of a speciﬁc event, the French Revolution. 
But the response both to the event, and to the revolutionary and reactionary ideas 
which issued from it, was very different in Germany than in either France or 
England. In France, the availability of a ready-made ideology of reaction in 
Catholicism limited the intellectual space available for the development of 
conservative thought. In England, the openness of the landed elite to new wealth, 
and the mediation of sectional interests, including those of the third estate, 
through parliamentarism, softened the polarization of tendencies of thought 
characteristic of both France and Germany: practical incentives for political 
compromise reduced motivation to pursue intellectual differences in all their 
logical sharpness. The exceptionally systematic character of the development of 
conservative thought in Germany, by contrast, was promoted by two factors. First, 
in 1789, there was as yet no substantial third estate in Germany, which was only at 
a very early stage of transformation into a class society. The two ‘politically 
effective’ strata were the old feudal nobility and the new rationalizing bureau­
cracies of the enlightened monarchs. Further, in contrast to both England and 
France, there was no developed literary market-place. Educated members of the 
middle class, who were the primary articulators of novel styles of thought, were 
unable to establish an independent position or cause of their own. Their unat­
tached character rendered them sensitive to currents of thought with their ‘social 
vitality elsewhere’. Those who wished to earn a living through their writing found 
themselves drawn either into the developing state bureaucracies, or into the 
patronage of the feudal nobility, whose causes they adopted as their own.100 
In most of the major dimensions of his argumentation, Mannheim draws 
upon the concepts and analytical moves developed by Riegl in LRAI and GPH. Just 
as Riegl demonstrates the character of the late Roman Kunstwollen by showing 
structural parallels in the solution of problems of design which emerged in a 
number of traditions in late antique art (sculpture, architecture – the new 
problem of the congregational church, painting, minor arts – in particular the 
new body ornaments of the late Roman elite), so Mannheim does in the case of 
117 

K A R L  M A N N H E I M  A N D  A L O I S  R I E G L  
conservative thought, showing how the same fundamental design informs the 
solutions of conceptual problems and practical problems occasioned by political 
and economic rationalization: how to characterize property and freedom, how in 
a changing world to think through the exigencies of social reform – starting from 
the actual and preceding piecemeal, rather than structural transformation 
informed by an abstract norm as in progressive thought. The interplay between 
opposed volitions – Italian and Dutch – and the transformation of imported 
elements of Italian artistic volition in terms of Dutch artistic (and social) purposes 
in Riegl’s GPH, is echoed in Mannheim’s account of the dialectic between the 
rational-calculative will to the world of the bourgeoisie and the state bureau­
cracies, and the qualitative-intuitive orientation of the surviving strata from the 
old feudal estates order, the nobility, the petty-bourgeois remnants of the guilds. 
In both cases the process of stylistic development is driven by the articulation of 
differences of each volitional tendency against its counterpart, and the effecting 
of new syntheses between them, differentiations and syntheses shaped by ‘the 
experiential designs of socially distinct strata’ and their distinctive ‘locations 
within the stream of social happening’.101 Mannheim’s use of cross-national 
comparisons – with France and England – to bring out the distinctive character of 
the German development of conservative thought, and its social foundations, 
parallels Riegl’s use of the group-portraits of the Venetian merchant confrater­
nities as a comparative counterpoint to illuminate the characteristic Kunstwollen 
of early Dutch group portraiture, and their respective bases in the character of 
their group life. Mannheim, however, fundamentally transformed Riegl’s legacy 
by virtue of his detailed elaboration of the sociological components merely inti­
mated by the latter. In doing so, he made possible a cultural sociology which 
systematically relates both the material and the ideal dimensions, on a number of 
different analytical levels, in a coherent account of the development of a style of 
thought (or art) as a structured process articulated in historical time. 
E PI L O G U E :  A F T E R  MA N N H E I M  
‘Conservative thought’ represents the moment when Mannheim’s sociology and 
Riegl’s art history are most closely interwoven. Thereafter, the ideas which 
Mannheim had appropriated from Riegl were effectively embedded in Mannheim’s 
own theoretical thought, which continued to undergo development. Nevertheless, 
the Rieglian elements remained a visible and essential component of Mannheim’s 
thought as it developed, and art history remained for him an important point of 
reference both theoretically and empirically.102 
How then can we explain the collective amnesia of the history and sociology 
of art as disciplines in relation to the Mannheim-Riegl synthesis? One might 
propose two kinds of explanation. The ﬁrst, following the logic of Gombrich and 
Popper’s theories of knowledge, might suggest that Mannheim’s ideas were 
simply eliminated in competition by ideas of greater intellectual coherence and 
adequacy to reality – the survival of the ﬁttest. Alternatively, following the logic of 
Mannheim’s sociology of knowledge, we might argue that it was not purely 
intellectual factors that counted against the transmission and reproduction of 
Mannheim’s ideas, but a lack of afﬁnity between them and new intellectual 
volitions which emerged to dominance in the context of major social change and 
speciﬁc, generation forming, social and historical experiences. 
118 

K A R L  M A N N H E I M  A N D  A L O I S  R I E G L  
This is not the place for a systematic evaluation of the competitive value of 
Mannheim’s cultural sociology in relation to the whole range of paradigms in 
contemporary art history and sociology of culture. There are, however, some 
indicators that Mannheim’s synthesis of art history and sociology should be 
considered – as Mannheim commented of Riegl – ‘methodologically challenging 
even today’. One inﬂuential perspective in contemporary history and sociology 
of art, Bourdieu’s theory of practice, is in signiﬁcant part built on the foundations 
of Panofsky’s programme in iconography and iconology, itself of course indebted to 
Mannheim’s IoW, although Bourdieu shows no awareness of this. Panofsky’s account 
of art interpretation in ‘Iconography and iconology’ provided the foundations for 
Bourdieu’s sociology of art perception.103 Bourdieu further argued that the concept 
of habitus, as used by Panofsky to articulate the stylistic parallelisms between Gothic 
architecture and scholastic thought,104 could be used to ground social practices 
in strategies shaped by class-position.105 Bourdieu, however, treats all action as 
rational and calculative, omitting the intuitive-qualitative counterpoint which in 
Mannheim’s framework permits much more adequate analysis of the expressive and 
normative components of action. This explains the notoriously reductive character of 
Bourdieu’s sociology of art, which like his sociology in general, represents in certain 
respects the mirror reﬂection of the idealist art history he appropriated from 
Panofsky.106 As for Panofsky, so for Bourdieu, style is not formative. Interpreting art 
is a decoding exercise, and the different styles preferred by different viewers function 
merely to mark class difference, just as the stylistic choices of artists are simply 
strategies of distinction negatively deﬁned against the positions of competitors 
within the artistic ﬁeld, lacking positive meaningful content.107 Similarly the 
parallelisms of style between the manner of appropriation on the part of elite 
viewers and the characteristic features of the organization of displays in museums 
has no cultural content nor any substantive formative signiﬁcance for viewers 
beyond its function in excluding the culturally and socially dispossessed.108 
Amongst other post-structuralist cultural analysts, Mannheim’s concepts of 
Denkwollen and ‘fundamental intention’ make an interesting comparison with 
Foucault’s concept of ‘episteme’.109 Like Mannheim, Foucault developed his 
concepts and theory in reaction against traditional internalist history of ideas, 
seeking instead to show the connections between transformations in systems of 
thought and those in social institutions. Like Foucault’s, Mannheim’s concepts 
operate at the level of a deep structure, a set of formative principles, shaping a 
wide range of manifest cultural, intellectual and social practices. One primary 
difference is their treatment of time, where Mannheim’s account of the devel­
opment of styles of thought as historical processes animated by formative inter­
actions between cultural and social levels is perhaps more satisfactory than 
Foucault’s notorious epistemological breaks. 
Among art historians, it is perhaps Michael Baxandall whose work manifests 
the closest afﬁnities with Mannheim’s cultural sociology. Just as Mannheim 
showed how cultural concepts, such as that of ‘citizen’ or ‘freedom’ were anima­
ted by the existential ground – frameworks of social life, forms of social organi­
zation – which underlay them, so in Painting and Experience in Fifteenth Century Italy, 
Baxandall demonstrates how speciﬁc visual concepts of Italian Renaissance art 
were animated by the frameworks of social life and forms of social interac­
tion characteristic of Italian Renaissance cities. The groupings of ﬁgures in 
119 

K A R L  M A N N H E I M  A N D  A L O I S  R I E G L  
Botticelli’s Birth of Venus engage the sensibility of a viewer sensitive to the propri­
eties of advance and retreat required by partners engaged in the formally struc­
tured dance routines which played a central role in elite rituals of sociability.110 
The compositional techniques of the frescoes of Piero della Francesca – building 
complex represented objects out of simple geometrical forms such as cylinders or 
truncated cones – appealed to the visual skills of contemporary businessmen, 
trained to gauge and value the volumes of the variously shaped bales and boxes of 
commodities which they handled by means of similar intellectual operations.111 
Ostensibly iconographic in its method (looking for texts to elucidate the forms 
found in images), Baxandall’s study actually has more in common with 
Mannheim’s intellectual project than that of the iconography and iconology of the 
Warburg School from which it sprang. His characterization of the ideal Renais­
sance viewer as ‘a church going businessman with a taste for dancing’ might be 
taken to encapsulate the Weltwollen of the Florentine bourgeoisie.112 
But although the concept of ‘the period eye’ has been extremely inﬂuential in 
art history, neither Baxandall nor his followers have given much explicit consid­
eration to drawing out in any systematic way the sociological implications of their 
approach. The study by Mannheim’s friend Frederick Antal – Florentine Painting and 
its Social Background113 – suggests that the social context of Italian painting, and the 
volitions to which it gave rise, was both more differentiated and more system­
atically (class) structured than Baxandall allows. Painting and Experience is in some 
ways the most sociologically interesting of Baxandall’s books. Although his later 
work consistently opens up the possibility of situating art in its social context, this 
is never accomplished in a very convincing manner, largely because Baxandall 
insistently deploys an atomistic concept of social structure, in terms of individual 
artists pursuing the goal of registering their artistic individuality in the context of 
a market.114 In short, Baxandall never develops a very adequate theoretical or 
methodological formulation of the implicitly sociological principles which inform 
his studies. The result is a series of brilliant but (at least in their social aspects) not 
well interconnected insights. Consequently, the sense of a systematically struc­
tured dynamic historical process that characterizes Mannheim’s account of the 
formation and transformation of styles of thought is lacking in Baxandall’s work. 
An alternative explanation of the disappearance of Mannheim from the horizons 
of active awareness on the part of historians and sociologists of art may be articu­
lated in more Mannheimian terms, as the result of a conﬂict between world-volitions 
borne by members of groups with distinctively different social locations and 
trajectories. Many art historians ﬁrst come across Mannheim in Gombrich’s contri­
bution to the Popper Festschrift, ‘The logic of Vanity Fair: alternatives to historicism in 
the study of fashions, style and taste’. Mannheim is invoked as the common enemy of 
Gombrich and Popper, with ‘a foot in both camps of political utopianism and 
historical holism’, a purveyor of ‘Neo-Hegelian Geistesgeschichte and Neo-Marxist 
sociologism’.115 The affective and volitional underpinnings of Gombrich’s orienta­
tion to Mannheim and his fellow ‘enemies of reason’ is clearly manifested in the tone 
of Gombrich’s various tirades – ‘frankly, a bit of a rant’, as one recent commentator 
remarks.116 Perhaps it is also indicated by the almost unbelievable misquotation and 
distortion of Mannheim’s ideas in Popper’s The Poverty of Historicism.117 
In certain respects, Popper’s political programme may be seen as a (theoreti­
cally not very coherent) counter-synthesis to Mannheim’s sociological vision of a 
120 

K A R L  M A N N H E I M  A N D  A L O I S  R I E G L  
planned society, within a radically individualist Weltwollen. The differing characters 
of the thought styles of Gombrich, Panofsky, Popper and Mannheim should be seen 
in the context of their broader social and intellectual formation. Mannheim’s 
general intellectual orientations – a left-leaning political stance and a strong sense 
of the positive role of collectivities in cultural and social life – were shared by the 
group of Hungarian thinkers who composed the Sunday Circle focused on Georg 
Lukacs.118 These included the social historians of art Arnold Hauser and Frederick 
Antal, as well as Mannheim. As members of an assimilated Jewish upper-middle­
class urban intelligentsia, they were marginalized in three respects: from their 
Jewish background, by the anti-semitism characteristic of Hungarian nationalism, 
and as urban intellectuals in a country characterized by a still largely feudal-
patriarchal agrarian social order. This marginality stimulated discontent with the 
present and a ‘passionate investment in the future’, in addition to a broad 
sympathy with the similarly marginal working class in Hungary.119 As a student, 
Mannheim participated in the broadly social democratic Social Scientiﬁc Society, 
which, amongst other activities, organized Free Schools for worker education and 
popular enlightenment.120 These were the model for the in practice somewhat 
more exclusive Free School for Humanities, established in 1917 under the leader­
ship of Lukacs.121 Mannheim gave an introductory lecture to the second series of 
lectures organized under the auspices of the school, a series which included 
contributions by Hauser and Antal, amongst others. In this lecture, ‘Soul and 
Culture’, Mannheim characterized the school’s orientation as drawing on 
contemporary idealist philosophy and aesthetics (including Riegl) and the sociology 
of Marx. He articulates a very strong sense of generational and group identity, and a 
sense of cultural mission which shares a strong afﬁnity with the more strictly 
Marxist revolutionary culturalism subsequently developed by Lukacs.122 
This strong collective sensibility, and orientation to the future, distinguish 
this group from their Austro-German counterparts, like the Berliner Panofsky and 
the somewhat younger Popper and Gombrich, both Viennese, for whom the rise 
of fascism was the paramount formative political experience, and whose social 
identity as middle-class intellectuals was much more secure, their position less 
marginal than that of their Hungarian counterparts. These different ‘experiential 
contextures’ grounded distinctive ‘fundamental intentions’ that informed the 
character of their academic work, as well as their stances in relationship to the 
political challenges raised by the transformation of European states in the ﬁrst 
half of the twentieth century. 
Mannheim was no less liberal, in a broad sense, than his Viennese contem­
poraries. He was equally passionately concerned with the freedom of the indivi­
dual: the last two sections of Man and Society in an Age of Reconstruction are after all 
entitled ‘Planning for freedom’ and ‘Freedom at the level of planning’. Mannheim 
believed that the crisis of Europe in the 1930s arose out of the inadequacy of the 
traditional self-regulating mechanisms of liberal society, as the relatively auton­
omous domains of the economy, politics, and culture increasingly impinged on 
each other in the highly complex modern social order. The crisis had not only 
economic and political manifestations, but also psychological ones: levels of 
substantive rationality on the part of the population declined, disoriented and 
demoralized in the absence of adequate leadership on the part of established 
elites committed to now outdated liberal ideologies. Mannheim’s response to 
121 

K A R L  M A N N H E I M  A N D  A L O I S  R I E G L  
crisis was a much more politically engaged programme of theoretical and 
empirical research. He sought to establish a diagnostic sociology, through which 
it would be possible to identify the ‘principia media’, the interacting structural 
forces which shaped developmental tendencies within a social order. Such diag­
nostic analysis should make it possible to rationally select and promote the most 
desirable possibilities from the alternatives afforded by such tendencies.123 
By comparison with Mannheim’s engaged and progressive response to the 
cultural and political crises of the mid-twentieth century, Gombrich’s and 
Panofsky’s response followed a rather more conservative direction, characteristic 
of many of the Mandarin humanistic intelligentsia of the period, namely a retreat 
into Kultur, seeking to preserve the values of the past from the social and cultural 
decay of the present.124 In the 1930s, Panofsky regarded a return to classicism in 
art as a potential solution to the contemporary crises, and theoretically both his 
and Gombrich’s writing privileges the post-Renaissance tradition of classical 
naturalism against modernism, attributing to works in this tradition ‘redeeming 
universal or humanist content’.125 Formed against the horizon of the rise of 
fascism, this orientation to the world was reinforced and refunctionalized in the 
polarizing context of the cold war. The humanities could be held to embody the 
speciﬁc values that characterized ‘free society’ in opposition to communism, in 
art history an emphasis on the creative artist, the individual man, as opposed to 
man reduced to a type as a member of a class or mass of people in the social 
sciences or Marxist histories inspired by economic determinism.126 
C ON CL U SI O N S  
As I draft the ﬁnal revision of these concluding paragraphs, the United States 
Congress debates for the second time a rescue plan for the world’s ﬁnancial 
markets. Mannheim’s diagnosis of the crisis of Europe in the 1930s as a conse­
quence of the inadequacy of automatic self-regulatory mechanisms in increas­
ingly complex modern societies seems strikingly relevant today, as do his 
criticisms of the failure of leadership of elites committed to outdated (because 
reiﬁed) liberal concepts of ‘the free market’. Certainly his social democratic vision 
of rational planning seems more appealing now than the radical free-market 
ideology of the idol of Gombrich, Popper and the new right, Friedrich von Hayek. 
Who are the ‘enemies of reason’ now? 
So also Mannheim’s synthesis of sociology and art history can afford our 
discipline renewed intellectual challenge and stimulus today, in a political and 
intellectual environment for his reception which may be more favourable that that 
of the era of the hegemony of the Warburg School. Like other sociologists, 
Mannheim offers theoretical tools for a much more systematic analysis of the way 
in which both larger social structures and the social organization of cultural 
production may shape the character of cultural artefacts, whether political ideol­
ogies or artistic styles. Art historians, like Baxandall, have long been aware of the 
relevance of such factors to the understanding of art, but treat them merely as 
‘background’, unwilling to incorporate them systematically into their analysis. In 
part this hesitation is a function of the often reductive character of sociologists’ 
explanations of art. Formal interests of artists or the formal properties of art works 
are often treated as reducible to more fundamental social interests, whether, in the 
work of Bourdieu, strategies of distinction designed to maximize the symbolic 
122 

K A R L  M A N N H E I M  A N D  A L O I S  R I E G L  
proﬁts derivable from a speciﬁc position within a cultural ﬁeld, or, in the 
production of culture paradigm associated with Howard Becker, the interests of 
artists in the economic rewards associated with working in conventional and 
established styles.127 But where for Bourdieu or Becker, style is merely an epiphe­
nomenon of more real underlying social factors, for Mannheim, by virtue of his 
integration of Riegl’s dynamic formalism into a general sociology of culture, the 
social and the stylistic are two sides of the same coin. The social is not simply the 
background to or context of styles, but reaches deeply into the formation of styles. 
Social orders and the modes of social interaction to which they give rise have 
stylistic properties and are stylistically formed. Styles of social relating are part of 
the material substratum of art. Systems of artistic design in their turn operate on 
and transform these aspects of social order into speciﬁcally visual (Dutch group 
portraits) or literary-discursive (conservative thought) objectiﬁcations. The stylistic-
organizational properties of such cultural objectiﬁcations in turn shape social 
formation, whether as exemplary models for the articulation of social relationships 
(Dutch group portraits) or normative codes shaping the institutional deﬁnition of 
property rights and political freedoms (Conservative thought). Through his appro­
priation of Riegl, Mannheim developed what remains a compelling exemplar of 
cultural sociology. It seems long overdue that we should proﬁt by returning the 
compliment, and appropriate Mannheim as a model for the social analysis of art. 
Notes 
I am grateful to colleagues who have read, criticized, and materially improved 
this chapter, in particular: Dana Arnold, Jas Elsner, David Kettler, Victor Lidz, Fred 
Schwartz, and Helmut Staubmann, and also to Charles Ford for assistance with 
ﬁnding photographs. I am also grateful for the comments and suggestions of the 
participants in the sociology of culture round table at the meetings of the 
American Sociological Association in Boston in 2008. I alone am responsible for 
remaining shortcomings. 
1 
Joan 
Hart, 
‘Erwin 
Panofsky 
and 
Karl 
London, 1982, 205; Benjamin Binstock does not 
Mannheim: a dialogue on interpretation’, 
include Mannheim in his account of the 
Critical Inquiry, 19, 1993, 534–66. 
reception of Riegl, in his introduction to the 
2 
Ernst Gombrich, ‘The logic of Vanity Fair: 
translation of Riegl’s Historical Grammar of the 
alternatives to historicism in the study of 
Visual Arts, New York and London, 2004, 19–25. 
fashions, style and taste’, 1974, reprinted in 
Michael Gubser draws a distinction between 
Gombrich, Ideals and Idols: Essays on Values in 
theorists on whom Riegl  had an acknowledged  
History and in Art, London, 1979, 60. 
impact 
(including 
Panofsky, 
Feyerabend, 
3 
‘On the interpretation of Weltanschauung’, 
Benjamin), and those like Mannheim (no works 
1923, cited from Kurt H. Wolff, ed., From Karl 
mentioned) who merely cited Riegl’s work 
Mannheim, London, 1993, 136–86; hereafter 
favourably – 452 in ‘Time and history in Alois 
‘IoW’ and FKM; original publication ‘Beitr.age 
Riegl’s theory of perception’, Journal of the History 
zur Theorie der Weltanschauungs-interpreta­
of Ideas, 2005, 451–74. But note Frederic J. 
tion’, Jahrbuch f.ur Kunstgeschichte II, 1923, 7–44. 
Schwartz, The Werkbund: Design Theory and Mass 
4 
Karl Mannheim, Man and Society in the Age of 
Culture before the  First World  War, London, 1996, 21– 
Reconstruction, London, 1940. 
3, on the reception of Riegl by Lukacs, Simmel, 
5 
Very few of Riegl’s recent commentators show 
Max Weber and Mannheim as the sociological 
any ﬁrst-hand knowledge of Mannheim, or 
counterparts to the theorists of the Werkbund 
awareness of Riegl’s importance to him: 
with whom Schwartz is primarily concerned. 
Michael Podro confuses him with the younger 
6 
Most notably: Margaret Iversen, Alois Riegl: Art 
translator of Cassirer, Ralph Manheim, The 
History and Theory, Cambridge, 1993, 15, and 
Critical Historians of Art, New Haven, CT and 
Charles Rosen, ‘The ruins of Walter Benjamin’, 
123 

K A R L  M A N N H E I M  A N D  A L O I S  R I E G L  
in Gary Smith, ed., Walter Benjamin: Critical 
Essays and Recollections, London, 1988, 135 and 
158–69, with discussion also of Adorno’s criti­
cisms of the unmarxist character of Benjamin’s 
analysis. Woodﬁeld (‘Reading Riegl’s Kunstin­
dustrie’, 49–81 in R. Woodﬁeld, ed., Framing 
Formalism: Riegl’s Work, London, 2001, 66) and 
Peaker (‘Works that have lasted . . . : Walter 
Benjamin reading Alois Riegl’, 291–309 in 
Woodﬁeld, Framing, 294) celebrate Benjamin’s 
appropriation of Riegl’s approach to the 
historical conditioning of perception, both 
follow Adorno in criticizing Benjamin for 
failing to relate changes in perception to social 
change and class structure – exactly the 
purpose to which Mannheim put Riegl’s Kunst­
wollen concept! 
7  
Rolf Wiggershaus, The Frankfurt School: Its 
History, 
Theories 
and 
Political 
Signiﬁcance, 
Cambridge, 1994, 111–12; Martin Jay, The 
Dialectical Imagination: A History of the Frankfurt 
School and the Institute for Social Research, Boston, 
MA, 1973, 63–4. 
8  
My sketch of Mannheim’s early life and 
education, particularly in the context of the 
Sunday Circle, draws on: Mary Gluck, Georg 
Lukacs and his Generation 1900–1918, Cambridge, 
MA, 1985; David Kettler, ‘Culture and revolu­
tion: Lukacs in the Hungarian revolution of 
1918/19’, Telos, 10, 1971, 35–92; Kettler, ‘The 
romance of modernism’, Canadian Journal of 
Sociology, 1986–7, 433–55 – a review essay on 
Gluck’s monograph. 
9  
David Kettler, Volker Meja and Nico Stehr, Karl 
Mannheim, London, 1984, 77. 
10  
Georg Lukacs, History and Class Consciousness: 
Studies in Marxist Dialectics, trans. Rodney 
Livingstone, London, 1971, 153. 
11 
‘Das Konservative Denken’, Archiv f.ur Sozialwis­
senschaft und Sozialpolitik, 57, 1927, Heft 1–2: 68– 
142; revised and translated as ‘Conservative 
thought’, in Essays on Sociology and Social 
Psychology, London, 1953, 74–164; hereafter 
cited as CT. The original 1925 habilitation 
dissertation on which the essay was based has 
been published as Conservatism: A Contribution to 
the Sociology of Knowledge, ed. David Kettler, 
Volker Meja and Nico Stehr, London, 1986; 
hereafter cited as CCSK. 
12   On the erroneous character of such criticism: 
A. P. Simonds, Karl Mannheim’s Sociology of 
Knowledge, Oxford, 1978, 9. 
13   Riegl is famously commended by Mannheim’s 
teacher and mentor G. Lukacs in his classic 
History and Class Consciousness, 153. But neither 
Mannheim scholars nor sociologists of art have 
shown much interest in Riegl. Confused with 
Ernst Riegl in David Frisby, The Alienated Mind: The 
Sociology of Knowledge in Germany 1918–1933, 
London, 1983, 112, 281. None of the standard 
introductions to the sociology of art – Janet 
Wolff, Victoria Alexander, Vera Zolberg – 
mentions Riegl. Robert Witkin, an important 
but sadly not inﬂuential exception, in his Art and 
Social Structure, Cambridge, 1995, which draws on 
Riegl and others of The Critical Historians of Art, 
mediated through Podro’s study of the same. 
14 
Christopher S. Woods, ed., The Vienna School 
Reader, New York, 2000, 17–18. 
15 
The perspective of Hart’s important essay, 
‘Dialogue’. 
16 
Simonds, Karl Mannheim, 46 for this develop­
ment after IoW. 
17 
Original version 1920, trans. Kenneth J. Northcott 
and Joel Snyder, Critical Inquiry, 8, 1981, 17–33. 
Commentary: Hart, ‘Dialogue’, 542–5; Michael 
Ann Holly, Panofsky and the Foundations of Art 
History, London, 1984, 79–96; Margaret Iversen, 
Alois Riegl: Art History and Theory, London, 1993, 
149–56; Allister Neher, ‘‘‘The concept of Kunst­
wollen’’, neo-Kantianism and Erwin Panofsky’s 
early art theoretical essays’, Word and Image, 20, 1, 
2004, 41–51; Podro, Critical Historians, 179–85. 
18 
IoW, 136. 
19 
Neher, ‘Concept of Kunstwollen’, 42. 
20 
IoW, 145; Simonds, Karl Mannheim, 41–6. 
21 
IoW, 139. 
22 
Mannheim’s discussion of his examples is not 
unproblematic, though in ways not really 
relevant to the purpose of this chapter, but see 
Simonds, Karl Mannheim, 42–3. 
23 
IoW, 149–50. 
24 
IoW, 150–8. 
25 
IoW, 160–1. 
26 
Hart, ‘Dialogue’, 547, correctly suggests that 
Mannheim considered Riegl’s framework too 
rigid, and consequently rejected it; but Riegl was 
by no means (as Hart implies, 549) ﬁnished 
business for Mannheim, as he was (at least 
avowedly) for Panofsky. Hart’s summary of 
Mannheim’s characterization of Riegl’s theory as 
‘reductionist and unimaginative’ is belied both 
by the space attributed to discussion of Riegl 
(four pages alone as against just two between 
Weber and Dvorak), Mannheim’s characteriza­
tion of Riegl’s LRAI as ‘heroic’, ‘methodologically 
still challenging today’ (IoW, 179, 182), and of 
course by the subsequent course of the develop­
ment of Mannheim’s thought (see below). 
27 
On the details of the development of Panofsky’s 
thought in this series of papers: Holly, Panofsky, 
147–8, 158–93; Podro, Critical Historians, 183–5; 
Neher, ‘Concept of Kunstwollen’, 43–4; Hart, 
‘Dialogue’, 541–53. 
28 
Hart, ‘Dialogue’, 535–6. 
29 
By 1932, Mannheim’s contribution had been 
reduced to identiﬁcation of the third documen­
tary/iconological level of analysis. In the ﬁnal 
English version of the essay published in 1939, 
Mannheim’s work is nowhere mentioned: Hart, 
‘Dialogue’, 553. Ironically, Panofsky covered his 
tracks so well that although both Pierre Bourdieu 
and Robert Witkin use Panofsky’s ‘Iconography 
and iconology’ as the starting point for their 
sociologies of art (impressed by the incipiently 
sociological character of Panofsky’s interpretation 
of a man raising his hat, and seeing the iconolo­
gical level of analysis as a potential opening to 
sociology), neither seems aware that both 
124 

K A R L  M A N N H E I M  A N D  A L O I S  R I E G L  
Panofsky’s interpretive schema and the speciﬁc 
example (somewhat modiﬁed) are borrowed from 
Mannheim’s earlier essay IoW, or that Mannheim 
had already carried out a programme of theore­
tical research on exactly parallel lines in his 
essays on the sociology of culture. 
30 
Benjamin Binstock, ‘Foreword: Alois Riegl, 
monumental ruin’, in Alois Riegl, Historical 
Grammar of the Visual Arts, trans. Jacqueline E. 
Jung, New York, 2004, 19–23; David Summers, 
‘The ‘‘visual arts’’ and the problem of art 
historical description’, Art Journal, 1982, 302–3, 
on the emasculation of the concept of form in 
Panofsky. Mannheim’s discussion of style is, by 
contrast, both full and nuanced, insisting that 
style is only analytically separable from 
content, and must be considered an intrinsic 
component of artistic meaning even on the 
level of the formulation of iconographic 
contents (IoW, 150–9). 
31 
Elsner,‘Kunstwollen’, 762. 
32 
IoW, 146 n. 1, for the importance of Husserl’s 
phenomenology to Mannheim; see also Struc­
tures of Thinking, trans. Jeremy J. Shapiro and 
Shierry Weber Nicholsen, London, 1982, eds 
David Kettler, Volker Meja and Nico Stehr 
(hereafter ST), 107–8. 
33 
Panofsky, ‘Introductory: iconography and icono­
logy’, in Studies in Iconology: Humanistic Themes in 
the Art  of  the Renaissance, Oxford, 1939, 12–14. 
34 
IoW, 179–80. 
35 
Olin, Forms, 171–2; Iversen, Riegl, 7.  
36 
Alois Riegl, Late Roman Art Industry, trans.  Rolf  
Winkes, Rome,  1985, 56  (translation modiﬁed),  
hereafter cited as LRAI; see  also  Sp.atro¨mische 
Kunstindustrie, Vienna, 1927 (original version 1901), 
2–3; see also 6, 10, 46 (hereafter cited as SRKI). 
37 
Olin, Forms, 161.  
38 
Two of the most important essays – ‘The 
distinctive character of cultural sociological 
knowledge’, ‘A sociological theory of culture 
and its knowability (conjunctive and commu­
nicative thinking)’ – although written in the 
period 1921–3 were only published in 1980 
(English translation 1982); their argument, 
though more open and subtle, is broadly 
congruent with those of the published essays 
‘Historicism’ (1924), ‘Problems of the sociology 
of knowledge’ (1925) and ‘The ideological and 
the sociological interpretation of intellectual 
phenomena’ (1926). In what follows I treat this 
material as a unity, for reasons of simplicity 
and clarity of exposition, and in order to 
maintain a focus on the afﬁnities and links 
between Riegl and Mannheim. Mannheim’s 
essayistic style of writing permitted inconsis­
tencies and contradictions even within single 
essays, which he preferred to forcing the often 
discrepant traditions of thought on which he 
was drawing into a premature synthesis. 
Excellent explications of the complexities of 
the internal development of Mannheim’s 
thought can be found in the introductions to 
Mannheim’s Conservatism: A Contribution to the 
Sociology of Knowledge, trans. David Kettler and 
Volker Meja, London, 1986, and ST, and also in 
Anthony P. Simonds, Karl Mannheim’s Sociology of 
Knowledge, Oxford, 1978. 
39 
IoW, 164. 
40 
‘The problem of a sociology of knowledge’, 
FKM, 190  
41 
ST, 191–2. 
42 
IoW, 164–5. 
43 
IoW, 166; ‘Historicism’, in Karl Mannheim, 
Essays on the Sociology of Knowledge, ed. Paul 
Kecksmeti, London, 1952, 102–5. 
44 
ST, 152. 
45 
Olin, Forms, 120. 
46 
Olin, Forms, 94, 121, citing Riegl, Historische 
Grammatik der bildenden K.unste 31, 249. 
47 
Last chapter of LRAI, translated in Woods, The 
Vienna School, 94–5; see also Elsner, ‘Kunst­
wollen’, 752. 
48 
ST, 46–7, 270. 
49 
Mannheim, ‘Problems in the sociology of 
knowledge’, trans. and repr. In FKM, 187–243 
(hereafter PSK), 229–30; ST, 199. 
50 
Ernst Gombrich, The Sense of Order: a Study in the 
Psychology of Decorative Art, London, 1979, 195. 
51 
Gombrich, Art and Illusion: A Study in the 
Psychology of Pictorial Representation, London, 
1977 (3rd edn, originally published 1959), 16. 
52 
Riegl’s ethnic and racial categorizations of 
some styles seem not a little embarrassing 
today, but should perhaps be interpreted 
charitably. ‘The place of the Vapheio cups in 
the history of art’, original version 1900, 
translated in Woods, The Vienna School, 105–29, 
was prescient in its identiﬁcation of the Greek 
character of Mycenean culture. Further, in The 
Group Portraiture of Holland, trans. Evelyn M Kain 
and David Britt, Los Angeles (hereafter GPH), 
Riegl seems to be developing an account of 
national traditions which is far from essenti­
alist. On the contrary, it suggests that their 
character is socially constructed on the basis of 
the character of the institution of art in a 
particular country (functions and purposes of 
art, and the artistic problems to which that gives 
rise), and the vital intentions brought to such 
traditions by the social groups who are their 
bearers, changing of course with the changing 
character of social structure, and the vicissi­
tudes of history. Further, in the constant 
remaking of that tradition, it is open to inﬂu­
ences/appropriations from other traditions, 
reworked in turn of its own inner logic. On the 
role of particular social strata giving decisive 
inﬂection to the ‘national’ culture of a country, 
at particular conjunctures in history, see 
Mannheim’s discussion of Tocqueville: CT, 122–3. 
53 
LRAI, 74;  SRKI, 124. 
54 
LRAI, 94–5; SRKI, 162. 
55 
Iversen, Riegl, 93; Olin, Forms, 168 for the 
continuity with LRAI. 
56 
GPH, 87–99. 
57 
GPH, 107–11. 
58 
See also GPH 140–4 
processes in similar 
interplay 
between 
for analysis of similar 
terms in the 1550s – 
heightened 
Italianate 
125 

K A R L  M A N N H E I M  A N D  A L O I S  R I E G L  
subordination and counter stress on indivi­
duality and subjectivity; 173–4, 183–4, 191–5 on 
Riegl’s second period, 1580–1624. GPH 211–26, 
comparing the different inﬂection of this 
evolving artistic volition in Amsterdam and 
Harlem, the former more receptive to the use 
of subordination, the latter less so, not because 
the Harlem was socially more egalitarian but 
because the groups being portrayed were of a 
uniformly higher social status (ofﬁcers only), so 
there was less need than in Amsterdam to 
mark an internal group hierarchy. 
59   GPH, 144. Ironically, Riegl’s approach antici­
pates by some ﬁfty years Popper’s call for 
sociology to replace mystical concepts of spirit of 
an age with ‘something more sensible, such as 
an analysis of problems arising within a tradi­
tion . . . the logic of situations’. In his contri­
bution to Popper’s Festschrift, Gombrich 
(echoing Popper) dismisses Mannheim and 
Riegl as representatives of the ‘poverty of 
historicism’, purveyors of ‘Neo-Hegelian Geis­
tesgeschichte and neo-Marxist sociologism’, 
only to quote the same passage of Popper 
calling for an approach in terms of ‘problems 
arising in a tradition’, apparently unaware that 
Riegl had developed an approach formulated 
in exactly the same terms more than seventy 
years previously (‘Vanity Fair’, 61, citing ‘Art 
and Scholarship’ for his more comprehensive 
attack on Riegl’s neo-Hegelianism). Of course, 
by insisting on ‘methodological individualism’, 
despite constant reference to ‘social institu­
tions’ (an unexplicated residual category in 
both 
Popper 
and 
Gombrich), 
Gombrich’s 
analysis in ‘Vanity Fair’ never gets beyond rather 
trivial market-based fashions of conspicuous 
consumption driving forward a particular 
pattern of taste, paralleling the focus on indi­
vidual psychology in Art and Illusion. Riegl’s  
formulation of the development as ‘links in a 
larger chain of evolution’ characterized as a 
‘problem solving process common to artists 
working thoughout Holland’ occurs again and 
again – GPH 254, 281, etc.; Gombrich must have 
read this, and its repression, whether conscious 
or unconscious, seems highly political in the 
light of his criticisms of Riegl. 
60   GPH, 253–86 on Rembrandt; 254 ‘agent of the 
artistic volition of his nation and times’, 270 
Night Watch too far from the artistic volition of 
his fellow countrymen. As Binstock observes, 
this represents a fundamental contrast with 
Panofsky’s iconological model of analysis, 
which ‘allows for no conﬂict between the aims 
of the artist and his tradition, or his tradition 
and its time’ – Binstock, ‘Riegl’, 38. The exis­
tence of plural, asynchronous, articulations of 
a stylistic tradition at any one moment in time 
within a given space was explored in Wilhelm 
Pinder’s Das Problem der Generationen in der 
Kunstgeschichte Europas (Berlin, 1926), and later 
generalized and given coherent sociological 
foundations (as also the concept of Zeitgeist) in 
Mannheim’s ‘The problem of generations’ (1927; 
FKM, 351–98). Of course, not all traditions are 
characterized by such a pattern of contradiction 
and dialectical synthesis, as Binstock points out, 
and Riegl was well aware, citing the counter-case 
of the Catholic, Spanish controlled Southern 
Netherlands, where the corporations remained 
primarily religious organizations and group 
portraiture does not develop beyond the ﬁrst 
stage identiﬁed by Riegl for Dutch group 
portraiture (GPH, 61, 97, 173). The dynamism of 
the Dutch tradition is due to a very particular 
social conﬁguration, grounded in the develop­
ment of the social and political structures of the 
Netherlands, and in their relation to the broader 
international political system, most notably the 
struggle for independence from Spain. 
61 
Olin, Forms, 117.  
62 
For a good discussion on Schopenhauer and the 
importance of Lebensphilosophie to the develop­
ment of social theory, see Hans Joas, The Crea­
tivity of Action, Cambridge, 1996, 116–26, esp. 118 
on Schopenhauer and the experience of the will 
located in corporeality; 125 on Schopenhauer 
and Nietzsche’s metaphysics of the will, as 
opposed to locating the will in its inter-
subjective and objective contexts of action. On 
Schopenhauer and aesthetics: Charles Taylor, 
The Sources of the Self, Cambridge, 1989, 441–55. 
63 
On Dilthey and Lebensphilosophie, see H. P. 
Rickman, Wilhelm Dilthey: Pioneer of the Human 
Studies, London, 1979, 42–57, ‘The philosophy of 
life’. 
64 
I rely here on the deﬁnitive study of Rudolf A. 
Makkreel, Dilthey: Philosopher of the Human 
Studies, Princeton, NJ, 1975, to develop a 
reasonably brief sketch. 
65 
Makkreel, Dilthey, 44. 
66 
On the acquired psychic nexus (versus trans­
cendental logical conceptions of the subject), 
Makkreel, Dilthey, 108, 131. 
67 
Makkreel, Dilthey, 92, 100. 
68 
Makkreel, Dilthey, 184–5, 191–2: ‘The compo­
nents added to the image satisfy an inner 
demand. They are not synthetically added on, 
but articulated from the acquired psychic 
nexus, which constitutes the guiding frame­
work of imaginative metamorphosis.’ The two 
primary concepts of style against which 
Dilthey argues are identical to those which are 
ultimately used in Panofsky’s iconography and 
iconology schema: (1) style as technical 
medium of expression, knowledge of which is 
required as a controlling principle on the pre-
iconographic level, allowing us to recognize 
what in the real world motifs are supposed to 
represent, and (2) style as a dimension of 
intrinsic meaning apprehended, according to 
the Kantian model, by synthetic intuition, on 
the iconological level. Dilthey’s emphasis on 
the active unfolding of style, both in stylistic 
articulation of meaning and in our explicative 
interpretation 
of 
style, 
revives 
Herder’s 
expressivist anthropology, on which Joas, Crea­
tivity, 75–85, esp. 81. 
69 
Makkreel, Dilthey, 166–9, 185. 
70 
Makkreel, Dilthey, 196, quoting Dilthey, Gesam­
melte Schriften, VI, 228. 
126 

K A R L  M A N N H E I M  A N D  A L O I S  R I E G L  
71 
In terms of theoretical logic, this is the func­
tional equivalent of Panofsky’s concept of 
intrinsic meaning, but in place of the over-
uniﬁed static and idealist conceptualization of 
context of Panofsky, Dilthey offers a dynamic 
concept of context capable of grasping contra­
dictions and conﬂicts as part of an evolving 
historical process. 
72 
Makkreel, Dilthey, 308–13. 
73 
Makkreel, Dilthey, 397, quoting  Dilthey,  GS, VII, 185. 
74 
ST, 233 on Riegl’s concept of Kunstwollen as the 
model for Mannheim’s own formulations of the 
volitional character of culture; FKM (PSK), 239, 
Riegl as model for development of a concept of 
groups characterized by ‘world-postulates (Welt­
wollungen)’ and at a given time ‘committed to a 
certain style of economic activity and of theo­
retical thought’, as an alternative to the Marxian 
concept of classes, deﬁned only in terms of their 
place in the production process and character­
ized by objective ‘interests’. 
75 
On the role of the concept of volition in 
mediating inner and outer, and articulating 
the relationship between meaning and exis­
tence, see Colin Loader, The Intellectual Develop­
ment of Karl Mannheim: Culture, Politics and 
Planning, London, 1985, 71–3. 
76 
ST, 185–96. 
77 
ST, 197–8. 
78 
FKM (PSK), 236–7 on the distinction between 
the Marxist concept of ‘interest’, objectively 
given by economic position, and Mannheim’s 
concept of ‘commitment’ to characterize the 
conditionings of the psyche by social experi­
ence, engendering motivations not directly 
reducible to economic interest. As Mannheim 
points out, economic systems are always 
embedded in a particular cosmos, at least at 
their origin, ‘so that those who seek a certain 
economic order also seek the intellectual 
outlook correlated with it’. ‘Commitment’ is, 
therefore, the ‘most comprehensive category in 
the ﬁeld of the social conditioning of ideas’, 
and prior to ‘interest’. 
79 
For example, LRAI, 11  (SRKI, 11–12), where Riegl 
talks not only of Wollen as manifesting itself in 
art and also in other ﬁelds such as ‘govern­
ment, religion and scholarship’. 
80 
ST, 233 for Riegl’s Kunstwollen concept as the 
model for Mannheim’s own formulations of 
‘the communally conditioned will’ character­
istic of ‘each ﬁeld of culture’, economic voli­
tion, social volition, etc. 
81 
ST, 241–50; PSK, 238–43. 
82 
ST, 266; PSK, 238–9. 
83 
ST, 234. 
84 
ST, 242, 267. 
85 
FKM, 241.  
86 
In their introduction, and notes to CCSK, Kettler  
et al. discuss the differences between CT and 
CCSK, which I largely ignore since they are not 
important to the main theses of my chapter. 
87 
CT, 77–94; CSSK, 34–56; Kettler, Meja, Stehr, CCSK, 
‘Introduction: the design of Conservatism’, 2–3. 
88 
CT, 78.  
89 
CCSK, 59–63; CT, 85–8.  
90 
CCSK, 63–5; CT, 87–90.  
91 
CSSK, 66; CT, 90.  
92 
CSSK, 74–5; CT, 95–7.  
93 
CSSK, 100.  
94 
CT, 104–5; CSSK, 89–90.  
95 
CSSK, 91–5; CT, 105–110.  
96 
CSSK, 87.   
97 
CSSK, 83–4; CT, 99–101.  
98 
CSSK, 111–12.  
99 
See also CT, 83, CSSK, 114–15 for Mannheim’s  
suggestion that ‘national character’ and char­
acteristic ‘national’ traditions of thought can 
be linked to the social circumstances of the 
formation of fundamental attitudes and key 
ideas, on the parts of representative strata, at 
turning points in a national community’s 
historical development. 
100  CT, 120–9; CSSK, 112–25.  
101  Quotation – CSSK, 90.  
102  ‘The problem of generations’ (1927; FKM, 351–95)   
draws on Riegl’s account of formative principles 
in giving a more systematically sociological basis 
to the art historian Wilhelm Pinder’s reformu­
lation of the concept of ‘Spirit of the Age’ in 
generational terms. It is primarily through such 
formative (Gestalt) principles that Mannheim 
sees society as not merely inﬂuencing culture or 
individuals from without, but as being a 
dimension of life with ‘creative energy’, trans­
forming the individual and culture from within. 
The key eponymous concepts of Ideology and 
Utopia (IaU) are formulated in Rieglian terms as 
‘volitional impulses’, and, Mannheim traces the 
same formative principles in the art, if only 
brieﬂy, as well as the thought of the bearers of 
ideologies and utopias (IaU 5, 215–16, 221–2), as 
also in Man and Society in the Age of Reconstruction 
(with speciﬁc reference to Riegl, 87). 
103  P. Bourdieu, ‘Outline of a sociological theory of 
art perception’, International Social Science 
Journal, 20, 1968, 589–612. 
104  Erwin Panofsky, Gothic Architecture and Scholas­
ticism: An Inquiry into the Analogy of the Arts, 
Philosophy and Religion in the Middle Ages, New 
York, 1951. 
105  Pierre Bourdieu, ‘Postface’, in Erwin Panofsky, 
Architecture Gothique et Pense´e Scholastique, Paris, 
1967, 135–67; trans. 221–44 in Bruce Holsinger, 
The Premodern Condition: Medievalism and the 
Making of Theory, Chicago, IL, 2005. On Bour­
dieu’s appropriation of Panofsky, Jeremy 
Tanner, The Sociology of Art: A Reader, London, 
2003, 20–2; Holsinger, ‘Indigineity: Panofsky, 
Bourdieu and the archaeology of the Habitus’, 
Premodern Condition, 94–113. 
106  Jeffrey Alexander, ‘The reality of reduction: the 
failed synthesis of Pierre Bourdieu’, in Alex­
ander, Fin de Sie`cle Social Theory, London, 1995, 
128–217. 
107  Pierre Bourdieu, The Rules of Art: Genesis and 
Structure of the Literary Field, Cambridge, 1996, 
esp. 87–100; with Tanner, Sociology of Art, 20–2. 
127 

K A R L  M A N N H E I M  A N D  A L O I S  R I E G L  
108  Pierre Bourdieu and Alain Darbel, The Love of 
Art: 
European 
Museums 
and 
their 
Public, 
Cambridge, 1990, 37–70. 
109  Michel Foucault, The Archaeology of Knowledge, 
London, 1972. 
110  Michael Baxandall, Painting and Experience in 
Fifteenth Century Italy: A Primer in the Social 
History of Pictorial Style, Oxford, 1972, 77–81. 
111  Baxandall,Painting, 86–93. 
112  Baxandall,Painting, 109. 
113 Published in London in 1948, the year after 
Mannheim’s death. 
114 In Patterns of Intention, London,  1985, for  example,  
Baxandall recognizes that the direction of 
‘intentional visual interest’ may vary across 
social situations, but consistently deﬁnes the 
institutional contexts in which painters operate 
in modernizing terms, as ‘a speciﬁc view of past 
painting’ against which the painter seeks to 
register ‘his individuality’ (47–8). I have discussed 
this brieﬂy in Tanner, Sociology of Art, 17–19. 
115 ‘The logic of Vanity Fair’, 60. Originally 
published in Paul A. Schilpp, ed., The Philosophy 
of Karl Popper, London, 1974. Reprinted in and 
cited from Gombrich, Ideals and Idols: Essays on 
Values in History and Art, London, 1979, 60–92. 
116  Elsner, ‘Kunstwollen’, 763. 
117  Ostensibly quoting Mannheim’s own words 
from Man and Society in the Age of Reconstruction, 
Popper (The Poverty of Historicism) argues that 
Mannheim ‘as an advocate of holistic social 
engineering aims at ‘‘seizing the key positions’’ 
and ‘‘extending the power of the state . . . until 
the state becomes nearly identical with 
society’’’. On the pages referenced by Popper 
(337–8), Mannheim is actually advocating the 
development of democratic structures of 
control in order to ameliorate the threats 
created by the extending power of the state. 
The phrase about ‘seizing the key positions’ is 
simply added by Popper, on the basis of 
Mannheim’s discussions (never mentioning 
‘seizure’) of ‘key positions of control’ in other 
passages (269, 295, 320, 381). It is never made 
quite clear how Mannheim’s social planning 
and attention to who occupies positions of 
control would differ from Popper’s own insis­
tence that ‘Institutions must be well designed 
and properly manned’ (Poverty, 157). 
118  On the Sunday Circle, and for the following 
discussion of their location within Hungarian 
culture and society, see Mary Gluck, Georg 
Lukacs and his Generation 1900–1918, London, 
1985, esp. 8–21; David Kettler, ‘Culture and 
revolution: Lukacs in the Hungarian revolu­
tions of 1918/19’, Telos, 10, 1971, 35–92. Note 
also David Kettler’s review article ‘The romance 
of modernism’, Canadian Journal of Sociology, 
Winter 1986–7, 443–55 for some qualiﬁcations 
of Gluck’s arguments, and a more analytically 
differentiated account of the varying cultural 
and 
political 
commitments 
of 
different 
members of the Sunday Circle. 
119  Gluck, Lukacs, 8 on investment in future, 182–209 
on political activities of members of the Sunday 
Circle during the crises at the end of the 1914–18 
war, with the qualiﬁcations of Kettler, ‘Romance’. 
Mannheim and some other members of the 
Sunday school participated in the popular 
protests in support of the broadly leftish National 
Council of Michael Karolyi in 1918  –  Gluck,  Lukacs, 
197–9. Mannheim also, like many members of the 
Free School, received appointments as professors 
during Lukacs’ period as Comissar of Culture of 
the Soviet regime in Hungary in  1919. But  he  
never went so far as become a full-ﬂedged Marxist 
or  join  the Communist  party (Kettler,  ‘Culture  
and revolution’, 69–70). 
120  Kettler, ‘Culture and revolution’, 40–5, 55–69 
121  Kettler, ‘Culture and revolution’, 44–5 on the 
relationship between the Free School of Social 
Studies and the Workers’ Schools. 
122  Kettler, ‘Culture and revolution’, 66–7 on the 
appropriation of German idealism as a dialec­
tical response to the reductive Marxist formulas 
of the Hungarian social democratic party. 
123  For a sympathetic account of Mannheim’s later 
work, which they characterize as ‘diagnostic 
sociology’, see David Kettler, Volker Meja and 
Nico Stehr, Karl Mannheim, London, 1984, 80–128. 
124  On Gombrich’s characterization of art history 
not as a social science oriented towards 
systematic research and discovery, but a 
humanity serving to preserve universal values 
inherited from the past, see Jan Bakos, ‘The 
Vienna School’s hundred and sixty eighth 
graduate’, in R. Woodﬁeld, ed., Gombrich on Art 
and Psychology, Manchester, 1996, 234–57, esp. 
248 on Gombrich’s accounts of art history as 
scholarship, maintaining memory and preser­
ving values, not a science making discoveries 
and explaining phenomena. 
125  Woods, The Vienna School, 50–2, discussing 
Panofsky’s article co-written with Fritz Saxl on 
‘Classical mythology in medieval art’ (Metropo­
litan Museum Studies 4, 1932/3, 278), and 
Gombrich’s indifference to contemporary art. 
On Panofsky’s privileging of classical-Renais­
sance naturalism, see especially Iversen, Riegl, 
149–66 ‘Postscript on Panofsky: three early 
essays’. In this respect, Mannheim and the 
members of the Sunday Circle (like Riegl) make 
an interesting contrast with the conservative 
taste shared by Gombrich, Panofsky and (in 
more gothic vein) Sedelmayr; see Gluck, Lukacs, 
on the critical progressive orientation of the 
members of the Sunday Circle towards various 
modernist movements in early twentieth 
century art, esp. chapters 4–5. 
126  I draw here on Michael Orwicz’s discussion of 
the (non-)reception of Arnold Hauser’s Social 
History of Art, ‘Critical discourse in the forma­
tion of a social history of art: Anglo-American 
response to Arnold Hauser’, Oxford Art Journal, 
8, 2, 1985, 52–62. 
127  Howard Becker, Art Worlds, Berkeley, CA, 1982. 
128 

7 
ART FICTION 
H .  P E R R Y  C H A P M A N  
Fiction about artists and art reveals a parallel extra-academy, extra-museum art 
history. This chapter examines three recent novels that draw on and to varying 
degrees ﬁctionalize early modern Netherlandish painters and paintings. Tracy 
Chevalier’s Girl with a Pearl Earring is ‘art-historical ﬁction’ that uses real paintings 
to craft a ﬁctional Vermeer; Susan Vreeland’s Girl in Hyacinth Blue is ‘provenance 
ﬁction’ that brings to life the history of ownership of a ﬁctional painting by 
Vermeer; and Michael Frayn’s Headlong, a tale of a modern-day amateur art 
historian’s quixotic quest for a long lost picture by Pieter Bruegel, is ‘art-history 
ﬁction’. These novels centre on paintings of daily life, which they situate in 
commonplace domestic settings, whether home or studio (Vermeer’s studio was 
in his home). All rely on stylistic strategies of Dutch and Flemish genre painting to 
craft stories of ordinary lives that are made extraordinary by art. Held up as 
mirrors to our scholarly practices, each of these novels provides us with a 
glimmer of the gut-wrenching power of art; together they confront us with the 
popular ramiﬁcations of recent scholarly approaches to works of art and their 
makers. 
In recent decades art-historical ﬁction has thrived and art history has 
pervaded other ﬁction genres, especially detective and espionage novels. I have 
chosen to focus on these three novels, all published in 1999, because of the 
different ways in which they buy into, challenge or subvert some of the levelling 
tendencies of recent art history. In the face of the death of the artist and the 
commodiﬁcation of the work of art, they insist on art’s emotional hold and play 
on our fascination with the engaged creative individual. They expose what 
happens in the popular imagination when the art historian turns social historian 
and philosopher, challenges the canon, researches the art market, and examines 
objects through the lens of science. Art history, especially in the ﬁeld of Dutch 
and Flemish art, has been particularly focused on the art market and the 
economics of art, and the authors of these three novels have absorbed socio­
economic investigations into the production and consumption of Dutch art.1 
Each novel is driven, in part, by money; yet each reminds us that what is one 
person’s commodity is another’s passion. 
One outcome of the broader social history of art has been an (over)emphasis 
on art as the product of its culture rather than of an individual maker. This way of 
thinking has consequences for Chevalier’s novel. The rise of reception theories 
that emphasize the viewer’s response and thereby shift attention from artist to 
work of art is ﬁltered through the novels by Vreeland and Frayn. Post-modern 
visual culture and material culture studies have even more profoundly 
129 

A R T  F I C T I O N  
challenged the status of the artist and the work of art; the consequence is 
an I’m OK, You’re OK relativism that relegates the artist to a maker and treats the 
work of art as an object no different from, say, a chair.2 (Catherine Soussloff 
examines this phenomenon in this volume.) This chapter looks closely at how 
these three novels respond to, buy into, challenge, or mock – some more 
consciously than others – this levelling of artist and art by attending to the power 
of paintings, not in the Freedbergian sense but on ordinary people.3 Girl with a 
Pearl Earring, Girl in Hyacinth Blue, and  Headlong, to varying degrees, write the artist 
out of the picture, yet each concerns the passion for art and insists on art’s vital 
human impact. 
These novels all situate their pictures in people’s homes and their stories 
concern people’s domestic lives. It is no accident then that all three novels centre 
on and evoke sixteenth- and seventeenth-century Netherlandish paintings as 
strategies for imitating daily life and creating an effect of the real. Since the 
nineteenth century, realist novelists have been fascinated with and inspired by 
realist art. Ruth Bernard Yeazell, in Art of the Everyday: Dutch Painting and the Realist 
Novel, argues that seventeenth-century Dutch paintings were a crucial catalyst for 
nineteenth-century literary realism. Honore´ de Balzac, George Eliot, Thomas 
Hardy, and Marcel Proust were inspired by Dutch pictures of the everyday life of 
ordinary people in their creation of ﬁction that evoked real people and real life in 
unprecedented ways. In Proust’s A` la recherche du temps perdu (In Search of Lost Time, 
1913–27), Vermeer’s paintings stir memories and spark brief moments of aware­
ness that get at or bridge gaps between human uniqueness and connectedness. 
For its narrator, only through art do we gain access to ‘the uniqueness of the 
fashion in which the world appears to each one of us, a difference which, if there 
were no art, would remain for ever the secret of every individual’.4 For Proust, 
seventeenth-century Dutch paintings, most notably Vermeer’s View of Delft, 
provide openings into his characters’ inner desires for human bonds; they help 
forge psychological realism, a kind of interiority of the real.5 Yeazell goes so far as 
to call the works of Balzac, Eliot, Hardy, and Proust ‘novelistic versions of Dutch 
genre’,6 as if they are the literary-stylistic equivalents of the painting that had 
revolutionized art some two hundred years before. As literature, they were just as 
radically new even if, as Yeazell argues, their evocation of Dutch art was a back­
ward-looking, nostalgic strategy. 
The three novels discussed here conﬁrm that realist art is again stimulating 
the literary imagination. Each invites the reader to imagine speciﬁc paintings 
and, in different ways, each relies on our ability to conjure up a type of painting. 
Chevalier’s novel relies on our knowledge of the look of Vermeer’s paintings and 
Dutch genre painting more generally; Vreeland crafts a chapter that evokes 
French eighteenth-century paintings by Boucher and Fragonard; Headlong reads 
like a Bruegelesque farce updated to the twentieth-century English countryside. 
Though a relevant detail may be reproduced on the dust jacket or cover, these 
books are not illustrated and are read, presumably, without illustrations at hand 
(even if the reader is unfamiliar with the works in question). Indeed, the point is 
that we rely on our imagination, our mind’s eye, to conjure up the images and, 
more importantly, the passions they provoke. In so doing they ask us to examine 
our emotional responses to and satisfaction gained from works of art, our incli­
nation to impress our own stories on them, and our desire to possess and to hold 
130 

A R T  F I C T I O N  
them. Each also asks us to imagine an artist or, in Headlong’s case, a scholar as 
possessed as an artist. 
Tragically ﬂawed ﬁctional artists have been a mainstay of popular literature 
since Balzac, in Le Chef-d’œuvre inconnu (The Unknown Masterpiece, 1831), created 
Frenhofer as a tormented genius who spends ten years on a painting only to ﬁnd 
that he had produced not a masterpiece but a canvas meaninglessly daubed with 
paint. Fictionalizing, or sensationalizing, real artists also has a long history of 
appealing to readers’ fascination with the creative individual. The proliferation, 
in the past two decades, of ﬁctional accounts of real artists has coincided with a 
renewed scholarly interest in how early modern biographies – by Giorgio Vasari, 
Karel van Mander, Gian Pietro Bellori, Arnold Houbraken, to name just a few – 
crafted individual artistic identities and shaped an idea, some would say a myth, 
of the artist.7 The list of novels about seventeenth-century painters includes Peter 
Robb’s M: The Man Who Became Caravaggio (2000); two ﬁctional accounts of Arte­
misia Gentileschi, Artemisia: A Novel (2001) by Alexandra Lapierre and The Passion of 
Artemisia (2002) by Susan Vreeland;8 multiple ﬁctional accounts of Rembrandt, 
including Joseph Heller’s Picture This (1988) and Sylvie Matton’s Rembrandt’s Whore 
(2003); and Michael Kernan’s The Lost Diaries of Frans Hals: A Novel (1994). Most of 
these are coloured by, succumb to, or thwart an opening up of the canon and 
reassessment of the artist that, whatever its positive impact on the history of art, 
has come at the cost of a larger assault on the artist and on artistic agency. 
Broadly speaking, since the 1960s, post-modern ways of thinking have called into 
question the notion of the individual as a self-conscious, self-creating, free and 
autonomous agent. The metaphorical ‘death of the author’, from the title of 
Roland Barthes’ essay (1967), separated the text or work of art from its creator and 
gave the reception of the text the status of the text itself. Michel Foucault, in The 
Order of Things (1966), thought of ‘man as a recent invention’, as a cultural 
construct, as the product of outside institutional forces and of the structures of 
9
power. 
Consequently, none of the recent art-historical ﬁction fully buys into the 
gloriﬁcation of genius that epitomized Irving Stone’s mid-twentieth-century 
ﬁctional accounts of Michelangelo and Van Gogh. In The Agony and the Ecstasy: A 
Biographical Novel of Michelangelo (1961), Stone freely imagines the young Miche­
langelo’s engagement with drawing, disegno, as a kind of rapture.10 The physi­
cality of Michelangelo’s early working of the marble, which calls to mind Hans 
Namuth’s photographs of Jackson Pollock splattering paint from can to canvas, is 
explicitly sexualized in this scene of sculptural coitus interruptus: 
[Michelangelo] had removed the outer shell [of the block of marble]. Now he dug into the mass, 
entered in the Biblical sense. In this act of creation there was needed the thrust, the pene­
tration, the beating and pulsating upward to a mighty climax, the total possession. It was not 
merely an act of love; it was the act of love: the mating of his own inner patterns to the inherent 
forms of the marble; an insemination in which he planted seed, created the living work of art. 
Bertoldo entered the shop, saw Michelangelo at work, cried out, ‘No, no, that’s wrong. Stop! 
That’s the amateur way to carve.’11 
Art-historical ﬁction is like historical ﬁction in that it can illuminate the past 
or distort the past. It can be conventional and comfortable – we know the history 
131 

A R T  F I C T I O N  
or the story already. Or it can challenge accepted wisdom by reaching beyond the 
rules of evidence that conﬁne responsible historians.12 While Stone employed the 
device of historical ﬁction to get at the unique, unknowable subjectivity of a real 
artist, The Agony and the Ecstasy reveals more about mid-twentieth-century notions 
of genius than it reveals about its historical protagonist.13 (It also provides some 
perspective on subsequent reactions against the very idea of genius and claims 
that genius is a myth and an invention of romanticism.) The Agony and the Ecstasy 
serves as something of a benchmark and a standard by which to gauge more 
recent ﬁctional accounts of historical artists. It claims, through its subtitle, ‘a 
biographical novel’, and its profusion of historical detail, a high degree of accu­
racy. Indeed, Stone spent six years researching and had Michelangelo’s nearly ﬁve 
hundred letters translated into English ‘to create a solid base for the novel’.14 
G I R L  W I T H  A  P E A R L  E A R R I N G  
Tracy Chevalier makes no such claims for the accuracy of the Vermeer in Girl with 
a Pearl Earring (plate 1). Yet, while she steers admirably clear of giving Vermeer 
thoughts or even words, she works hard to set her story in an authentically 
crafted seventeenth-century Delft. Author and Professor of creative writing Mary 
Karr would have us accept that, ‘Distinguishing between ﬁction and non- isn’t 
nearly the taxing endeavor some would have us believe . . . . And here’s how 
readers know the difference: the label slapped on the jacket of the book.’15 Yet 
there is no doubt that readers confuse ﬁction with reality (and that their 
confusion is actively exploited by publishers). Witness the review quotes on the 
paperback cover of Chevalier’s novel: ‘History and ﬁction merge seamlessly’; 
‘Chevalier re-creates common life in Delft with fascinating authenticity’; 
‘Chevalier brings the real artist Vermeer and a ﬁctional muse to life.’ When HBO 
shows the 2003 ﬁlm, it is classiﬁed as ‘biography’.16 
But biography it is not. By combining a compelling, historically accurate setting 
with a ﬁctional story, Chevalier creatively imagines how Vermeer’s masterpiece 
came into being. She remains true both to research into seventeenth-century Dutch 
material, social, and religious life and to the limited documentary evidence about 
Vermeer. So little is known about Vermeer that it is impossible to ﬁctionalize him 
with any authenticity. Readers are invariably disappointed when apprised of the 
limited truth of Chevalier’s tale. The barest outlines of Vermeer’s life are accurate 
but the rest – every bit of the plot – is pure fabrication. For example, documents 
conﬁrm that the Vermeers had a maid; in seventeenth-century Holland, maids were 
stereotyped as threats to the stability of the family.17 Thus, Chevalier merges 
meagre fact with popular culture to create the novel’s protagonist and narrator, the 
teenaged maid Griet, who disrupts the Vermeer household. 
Evoking Vermeer’s paintings contributes to the novel’s atmosphere of 
authenticity. Griet’s arrival at the Vermeers’ house, on her ﬁrst day of work, 
brings to mind The Little Street (Amsterdam, Rijksmuseum).18 Just as Vermeer 
enhanced the naturalness of his images by painting precisely observed details, so, 
too, Chevalier uses the minutiae of daily living to bring the novel to life. Cred­
ibility comes with her description of laundering practices: collars are starched by 
being boiled in water with potato peelings. Details are accurate: Griet enters the 
house and sees eleven paintings in the front hall, precisely the number recorded 
in the inventory made at the time of Vermeer’s death.19 Aspects of Dutch culture 
132 

A R T  F I C T I O N  
1 Cover illustration for 
paperback edition of 
Tracy Chevalier, Girl with a 
Pearl Earring, London: 
HarperCollins Publishers, 
2006. 
are conveyed effectively: Griet’s father is a tile painter – the quintessential Delft 
trade – who can no longer work because he has been blinded by a kiln explosion. 
Hence, Griet ﬁnds employment with a painter of higher status. (Chevalier’s 
understanding of the intricacies of social class is based on Michael Montias’ Artists 
and Artisans in Delft.) Griet is Protestant and the Vermeers are Catholic, a differ­
ence that both sets the historical stage and builds a theme around the Protestant 
mistrust of images. 
Yet, the closer we get to Vermeer the person, the more historical reality and 
tone are distorted for the sake of the plot. Vermeer and his growing family 
(eventually there were eleven children) did live with, and were supported by, his 
mother-in-law, Maria Thins; but there is no evidence that Vermeer’s wife and 
mother-in-law were the clumsy dolt and monster of the novel. Likewise, a single 
client, Pieter Claes van Ruijven, acquired twenty-one of Vermeer’s paintings but 
the novel’s lecherous patron is pure ﬁction.20 
133 

A R T  F I C T I O N  
Much of the story takes place in Vermeer’s studio, which Griet cleans and 
where she becomes the painter’s living muse. Since the 1980s, technical art 
history – the study of the broader art-historical implications of scientiﬁc inves­
tigation into materials, techniques, processes and studio practices – in the ﬁeld of 
Dutch art has set new standards for the discipline as a whole.21 Chevalier 
masterfully draws on scientiﬁc investigations into Vermeer’s practice to construct 
a plot that revolves around the making of pictures in the workshop. Through 
Griet’s eyes, Chevalier brings technical art history to life, thereby engaging our 
longing for entre´e to the studio, our fascination with seeing the artist at work. 
Initially, Griet never sees Vermeer at work and the two barely speak. But one day 
she ﬁnds him with a curious box. The ﬁctional Vermeer explains that it ‘helps me 
to see in a different way . . . to see more of what is there’ (60), which is a concise 
explanation of the way that many art historians suppose the real Vermeer used 
the camera obscura.22 The Woman with a Pearl Necklace is the ﬁrst painting that 
Griet sees on Vermeer’s easel. Studying the picture, Griet notices that Vermeer 
had removed the large map hanging on the wall. Autoradiography shows that 
Vermeer had made this change, just as he simpliﬁed other compositions. To art 
historians it is exactly this kind of rethinking, revealed by looking beneath the 
painting’s surface, that gives us some sense of Vermeer’s way of composing a 
picture and, we like to think, some insight into Vermeer’s artistic personality, his 
creative imagination. Here, at the limits of our knowledge, the novel speculates 
about the artist’s motive. Griet likes the change: ‘the painting looked the better 
for it – simpler, the lines of the woman clearer’ (61). She dares to ask Vermeer, 
‘When you looked in the box, did it tell you to remove the map from the 
painting?’ ‘Yes, it did’, he replies. The ﬁlm revises Vermeer’s reaction to her odd 
question: bemused, he replies, ‘It helps’.23 
The paintings drive Chevalier’s plot. Van Ruijven and his family members 
pose for the pictures he has commissioned; his wife modelled for the Pearl Neck­
lace. Vermeer’s wife is put out because he never paints her. Increasingly, 
she resents Vermeer’s attention to Griet, for it drives home that Vermeer 
completely excludes Catharina from his art. With his next painting, the Woman 
with the Water Pitcher (New York, Metropolitan Museum of Art), Vermeer begins to 
employ Griet as his surreptitious assistant. He sends her to the apothecary to buy 
pigments, teaches her to mix paints, and lets her set out colours on his palette. 
Then, he asks her to pose in place of the baker’s daughter, who has fallen sick 
from standing by the open window. Griet’s posing is a turning point in the novel; 
it initiates her as muse and takes the pair to the edge of impropriety. After 
not painting from May to July, Vermeer next sets to work on the Lady Writing 
(Washington, National Gallery of Art). Van Ruijven has decided he wants a picture 
of his wife looking out at the painter, and Vermeer’s mother-in-law and wife 
will see to it that Vermeer complies, even though this is a pose he does not often 
paint. Painting extroversion is against Vermeer’s nature. Indeed, the previous 
instance, the Girl with a Wine Glass, resulted in scandal: van Ruijven impregnated 
the maid who posed with him for the picture. Though crucial to the plot, all of 
this posing makes Vermeer more of a slave to nature than he must have been and 
challenges us to consider the gap between the mystique of painting directly 
from life and the painstaking, elaborate, imaginative process of creating the 
look of the real. 
134 

A R T  F I C T I O N  
As the Lady Writing progresses, Griet becomes bolder and asserts her artistic 
judgement, falling victim to the muse’s fantasy that she can be a painter too. She 
sees that the still life on the table is ‘too neat’, but waits to see if Vermeer will 
notice. When he does not, she makes the change, rumpling the tablecloth. Later, 
she explains, ‘There needs to be some disorder in the scene . . . to contrast with her 
tranquillity’, to which Vermeer’s replies: ‘‘‘I had not thought I would learn 
something from a maid’’’ (135–6). So, the maid becomes Vermeer’s muse and his 
muse becomes his mind. Chevalier characterizes Vermeer through Griet’s eyes, 
tantalizing us with access to the artist. From the outset Vermeer is a quiet loner; 
his studio is ‘another place’, off-limits to his family, especially to his jealous wife, 
and vastly different from his home, from which it is separated by a locked door. 
When Griet ﬁrst sees the door, she is aware that ‘Behind it was a silence that I 
knew was him’ (20). Like many an art historian, Griet has a hard time reconciling 
Vermeer’s many children with his art: ‘It is Catharina who wants many children 
. . . He would rather be alone in his studio.’ The novel’s chaste Vermeer has roots in 
the art historian Lawrence Gowing’s notion of him as distant and removed – he 
hides from women behind his camera obscura.24 The ﬁlm, via an almost 
expressionless Colin Firth, turns him into a caricature of the lone genius. 
Yet, imagining Vermeer as solitary – intellectually solitary rather than 
emotionally solitary – is faithful to the period’s notion of the painter; witness 
Rembrandt’s exaggeration of aloneness in the Artist in His Studio (Boston, Museum 
of Fine Arts). The idea that the painter worked alone had been promoted since the 
Renaissance, if not antiquity. Michelangelo, with the help of Vasari, constructed 
himself as an artist who worked without assistants on the most unlikely of 
projects, the vast Sistine ceiling. In the seventeenth century, creative solitude was 
part of the mystique of the painter’s studio, which had its conceptual roots in the 
scholar’s study. It was also a practical necessity. The Amsterdam painter Gerard de 
Lairesse, writing in 1707, explained that inventing, which is the intellectual 
labour of art, works better without interruption ‘lest it slip out of memory’. ‘How 
often do we ﬁnd, that when we betake ourselves to thought, we are by some 
outward cause interrupted, and our project spoilt by the confusion of our sense; 
to obviate which, it is best to be alone.’ 25 
Chevalier’s ﬁctional Vermeer is in some ways a metaphor for the real Verm­
eer’s anonymity. He is a reminder of how little we know about Vermeer, who left 
no letters, no diary. Unlike most of his contemporaries, no one wrote his 
biography. Perhaps it is out of respect for the lack of historical evidence about 
Vermeer the person that Chevalier refrains from entering his mind and giving 
him thoughts. Or perhaps it is out of respect for the period’s notion that our 
access to the studio and the artist is limited. The result, however, is that the 
ﬁctional Vermeer is an artist of compromised artistic authority. 
Throughout the novel, circumstances dictate what Vermeer paints. The 
camera obscura tells him to remove the map from the Pearl Necklace. The Lady 
Writing looks out because that is what van Ruijven wants; the picture’s array of 
objects on the table gets its crucial natural disorder from Griet’s rumpling of the 
tablecloth. Van Ruijven has had his eyes on Griet and insists on posing for a 
picture with her. Vermeer’s mother-in-law (now turned procuress, as in the 
painting by Dirck van Baburen that she owned) presses Vermeer to comply. The 
Concert (Boston, Gardner Museum) comes about because Maria Thins has told him 
135 

A R T  F I C T I O N  
‘You must paint a larger painting, with more ﬁgures in it, as you used to. Not 
another woman alone with her thoughts. When van Ruijven comes to see his 
painting you must suggest another to him . . . We’re further in debt . . . We need 
the money’ (151–2). 
Nevertheless, Vermeer protects Griet from van Ruijven. When, at the book’s 
climax, he paints the Girl with a Pearl Earring it is not because he is inspired to. 
Rather, in order to keep Griet out of his client’s clutches, Vermeer paints her 
alone, in a separate picture, which he promises to van Ruijven. Griet wears the 
brilliant blue and yellow turban not because he has an idea of a stunningly 
original painting in his mind but because Griet is too modest to uncover her hair. 
Financial need may well explain much about the production of pictures in the 
seventeenth century. But recent scholarship has gone too far in attributing 
artistic motives to economics and in reducing paintings to commodities. Cheva­
lier, in following that line, has chosen to imagine an over-determined, materialist 
Vermeer. The ﬁlm, providing a corrective, points to the bankruptcy of reducing art 
to commodity status when, at story’s end, as everything unravels, the mercenary 
Maria Thins shrieks, ‘They’re just paintings – pictures for money! They mean 
nothing!’ 
And so, the inscrutable, ﬁctional Vermeer is robbed of his imagination, of his 
artistic authority, of love in the studio. As early as 1400, Cennino Cennini 
distinguished between ordinary craftsmen who worked for proﬁt and true artists 
who worked out of enthusiasm. In the Dutch art theory of Vermeer’s century – by 
Karl van Mander and Samuel van Hoogstraten – that enthusiasm was concep­
tualized as love.26 Some artists worked for money, others for fame, but the most 
exalted were driven by love of art. Those are the chosen few that have the talent, 
drive, and burning desire to achieve something that has never been accomplished 
before. The ﬁctional Vermeer is robbed of that kind of love. 
GIR L IN HYACIN TH BLUE 
In Girl in Hyacinth Blue, a unique example of ‘provenance ﬁction’, Susan Vreeland 
takes as her subject the history of ownership of a ﬁctional painting of a girl 
sewing at a window by Vermeer (plate 2). The picture’s imagined provenance, 
ordinarily a list virtually meaningless to the non-specialist, comes to life in a 
series of vignettes that work backwards from the present to Vermeer’s lifetime 
and the circumstances under which the picture was created. As the painting 
changes hands, its power over a succession of people, each of whom sees the girl 
in the picture differently, takes various forms. Each owner fantasizes about the 
girl’s identity and wonders what she is thinking. At novel’s end the reader learns 
that she is Vermeer’s daughter Magdalena and what is on her mind. 
The novel begins with the issue that has recently driven provenance research 
and brought it into the public eye, the Nazi looting of art in Jewish collections 
during the Holocaust. The picture’s present-day owner is Cornelis Engelbrecht, 
‘single, modest dresser in receding colors, mathematics teacher, sponsor of the 
chess club, mild-mannered acquaintance to all rather than a friend to any, a 
person anxious to become invisible’ (1).27 Engelbrecht’s self-effacement is 
‘invented’ to hide a ‘secret obsession’. He harbours a painting that he thinks is by 
Vermeer. Until today, when he summons Richard, a fellow teacher and this 
vignette’s narrator, he has shown the picture to no one; ‘I don’t want to rock the 
136 

A R T  F I C T I O N  
2 Cover illustration for 
paperback edition of Susan 
Vreeland, Girl in Hyacinth 
Blue, New York: Penguin 
Books, 2000. 
art world’, he maintains (9). In fact, he has been prevented from revealing the 
painting’s existence, and from deﬁnitively establishing its authenticity, by its 
terrible secret. In Amsterdam on Black Thursday, 6 August 1942, Engelbrecht’s 
father, a Nazi lieutenant, had looted the picture from the apartment of a Jewish 
family whom he had just ‘sent to the trains’ to Westerbork, the Dutch transit 
centre for Jews en route to extermination camps in eastern Europe. He had also 
stolen the picture from the F .uhrer, which Engelbrecht imagined his father as 
justifying thus: ‘All Jewish art collections had to be deposited with Lippman and 
Rosenthal, a holding company. But this was not a collection, only a single 
painting, blatantly displayed, or ignorantly’ (17–18). Vreeland thus poses in 
microcosm the problem that Walter Benjamin, in 1940, posed for the museum­
137 

A R T  F I C T I O N  
goer who is moved to tears by the beauty of art although ‘the cultural treasures he 
surveys have an origin which he cannot contemplate without horror’.28 Engel­
brecht’s memories of his father call into question the humanity that arises (only) 
in response to art. The soothing calm of the painting makes all the more jarring 
the violent history of the circumstances under which it was obtained; the father 
who is profoundly moved by the painting of a beautiful girl (and inﬁnitely kind to 
his own little boy) is thus rendered all the more monstrous in light of his violence 
against a Jewish child. 
The picture, tainted with the blood of the Holocaust, has clouded Engel­
brecht’s entire life. His obsession with it has ruined his marriage: ‘She left, saying 
he loved things rather than people’ (20). Wracked by guilt, he has tried to destroy 
it once; it is implied that he may now succeed. Engelbrecht has had to live alone 
with this object of exquisite beauty that makes him complicit in his father’s act. 
For once he shows the painting to someone. To his colleague Richard he describes 
the ‘longing’ in the girl’s expression (4). His own longing presumably, for later we 
learn that it was longing for someone, anyone with whom to enjoy the painting – 
longing to delight with another – that had prompted him to invite Richard, risk 
exposure, and ‘crack the eggshell of his scrupulously constructed self’ (28). 
Like Headlong, Girl in Hyacinth Blue raises the question of whether the ﬁctional 
painting by the famous painter is authentic or whether a mere fake has had such 
a destructive impact, making the folly of irrationally succumbing to art’s power 
all the more tragic. Richard explains Engelbrecht’s irrational attachment to the 
picture’s authenticity: ‘If the painting was real so was the atrocity of his father’s 
looting’ (19). The guilt has been transposed to the painting. Yet Richard recognizes 
that ‘If ever a man loved a work of art, it was Cornelius’ (32). By the end, Richard 
understands why he has been chosen to learn the secret: ‘It became clear to me 
why he picked me. He thought an artist might excuse, out of awe for the work, 
and if I excused, the painting could live.’ His response to Engelbrecht: ‘You know 
what they say, Cornelius. One good burning deserves another.’ But even Richard 
cannot deal with the idea that a real Vermeer could cause such irrationality. His 
ﬁnal verdict: ‘Poor fool, ruining his life for a piece of cloth smeared with mineral 
paste, for a fake, I had to tell myself, a mere curiosity’ (35). 
From Engelbrecht, the novel works backwards through history and through 
the picture’s changing attribution as Vermeer’s critical fortunes ebb and ﬂow. 
Vreeland imagines the picture’s impact on a succession of lives, shaping style and 
content to historical setting. The result is in part ﬁctionalized reception theory, in 
which the picture is seen through the eyes of different ﬁctional characters from 
the past. Chapter 2 is set in 1942, in the Amsterdam apartment from which 
Lieutenant Engelbrecht has taken the picture that should have gone to the 
F .uhrer. It has been decreed that Jews could not keep pigeons; a father is freeing 
his to ﬂy back to Antwerp with the message ‘Kill my pigeons . . . I can’t expect you 
to feed them for the duration’ (37). But they return. In these terrifying times, his 
daughter, who knows she must deal with the pigeons, ﬁnds solace in the painting: 
Hannah sat looking at the painting . . . It was of a girl her own age looking out a window while 
sewing. The way she leaned forward, intent on something, and the longing in her eyes cast a 
spell over her every time she looked. The girl wasn’t working . . . Her hands were lax . . . because 
what was going on in her mind was more important. Hannah understood that (40). 
138 

A R T  F I C T I O N  
Hannah was with her father when he had bought the painting at an auction of 
goods of poor Jews: ‘When this painting came up for bid, she gasped. The face 
of the painting of the girl in the painting almost glowed . . . She seemed more 
real than the people in the room’ (41). Brieﬂy the painting permits Hannah 
escape to an alternative reality inﬁnitely preferable to that of an Amsterdam Jew 
in 1942. 
The chapter ‘Adagia’ is a brief morality tale – an adage brought to life and set 
in the nineteenth-century Dutch equivalent of a Victorian middle-class milieu – in 
which the picture temporarily disrupts a marriage. A girl from Vreeland is about 
to be married to an Amsterdammer and her parents discuss a suitable wedding 
gift. The wife suggests the painting: ‘a touch of our home in theirs’ (65); ‘Our 
anniversary. Remember?’ (67). She believes her husband bought the picture for 
her, but he lets slip that he acquired it (attributed to Pieter de Hooch) to 
commemorate an important period in his life and so cannot bear to part with it. 
Through it he has been vicariously reliving the euphoria of a lost ﬁrst love. Ever 
truthful, he reveals too much, wounding his wife: ‘‘‘It reminded me of someone I 
knew once.’’’ He sees his own picture: ‘‘‘The way the girl is looking out the window 
. . . Waiting for someone. And her hand. Upturned, and so delicate. Inviting a 
kiss’’’ (67). ‘When he looked at the painting, he indulged in imagining Tanneke, 
and her braid of honey-colored hair, heavy in his hand when he unbraided it, and 
his life with her, what it might have been’ (76). The picture goes to Amsterdam 
with the newlyweds. 
The chapters ‘Hyacinth Blue’ and ‘Morningshine’ contrast high and 
low, international and local. ‘Hyacinth Blue’, capitalizing on the French presence 
in eighteenth-century Holland and the association of the Rococo with frivolity, 
puts the narration and the picture, now ‘by a minor artist, some Johannes 
van der Meer’ (85), in the hands of an elite French beauty, looking back 
on the discontent of her loveless, childless, marriage and her displacement 
to The Hague. She disdains everything Dutch, except for the painting of a young 
girl: 
She was looking out the window with such a sweet, naı¨ve expression on her face, though at ﬁrst 
I thought it a bit vacant. You see, the villagers are cut off from each other by water, always 
water. Such inbreeding that more than a few of the ladies are half-witted or decidedly curious 
in a bovine sort of way. Still, this child must have had parents who loved her, and that generated 
in me both tenderness and melancholy (84). 
However, the painting is too plain; she ‘made inquiries at the artists’ guild to have 
a string of pearls painted in around the poor girl’s naked neck’ (85). The painting, 
a gift from her husband, to conceal his inﬁdelity and assuage his guilt, becomes 
her ticket back to Paris. After her liaison with a ‘Monsieur le C’ is discovered she 
sneaks off with the painting, in which she now sees herself: ‘What I saw before as 
vacancy on her face seemed now an irretrievable innocence and deep calm that 
caused me a pang. It wasn’t just a feature of her youth, but of something ﬁner – an 
artless nature. I could see it in her eyes. This girl, when she became a woman, would 
risk all, sacriﬁce all, overlook and endure all in order to be one with her beloved’ 
(105). Having lost the documents identifying the picture as a van der Meer, she 
attempts to sell it as something better, a van Mieris. Without authenticating 
139 

A R T  F I C T I O N  
papers, she has to settle for twenty-four guilders, ‘barely enough for a hired coach 
and inns to Paris’ (106). 
Earlier in the century, in the aftermath of the St Nicholas ﬂood of 1717, 
the picture fetched an astounding seventy-ﬁve guilders, a fortune to a pro­
vincial Groningen farm couple whose life it would profoundly alter. In 
‘Morningshine’, the picture ﬂoats into the hands of a farmer’s wife, along 
with a foundling carrying the message, ‘Sell the painting. Feed the child’ (114). 
Saskia has hauled her children, all the household goods and possessions, 
and even the family cow up to the house’s second storey, out of harm’s way. They 
settle in for a long stay; the ﬂood waters cannot drain until the dikes are repaired. 
Though her husband tells her to sell the painting, Saskia intends to keep it. 
She sees it as a portrait of the infant’s mother; she wants it for the baby boy 
but also for herself. Saskia has married down and ‘didn’t have many beautiful 
things’ (122). 
To her, the picture is a thing of beauty. But Saskia is also an aspirational 
viewer, the kind of viewer that art historians imagine takes pleasure in visually 
possessing through pictures, especially still life paintings, the luxury goods they 
cannot hope to obtain and the trappings of status to which they can only aspire.29 
She sees, ‘The oriental tapestry on the table, the map on the wall, the engraved 
brass latch on the window – since Saskia couldn’t have these things in reality, 
then she wanted them all the more in the painting’ (123). But the food is running 
out. Saskia sees her husband’s fear: ‘The fear of having to abandon the farm and 
starve beside a canal in Amsterdam, the whole family inching forward their alms 
bowls in front of the poorhouse.’ Nonetheless, to keep the picture, she does the 
unthinkable; surreptitiously, she feeds the family the seed potatoes, needed for 
the spring’s crop. Caught, she has to sell the picture. To fetch a proper price for a 
Vermeer, she had been advised, take it to Amsterdam, to the dealers on the Rokin. 
There Hans van Uylenburgh offers her ﬁfty-ﬁve guilders, which she refuses. 
Mateus de Neff makes no effort to hide his excitement and gives her seventy­
ﬁve.30 
How the painting came to be with the foundling ﬂoating in a skiff in the 1717 
St Nicholas ﬂood is revealed in the next vignette, ‘From the Personal Papers of 
Adriaan Kuypers’, a recollection written on a wet St Nicholas’ Eve thirty years 
later, signed and dated, ‘December 5, 1747, Rain all day’. The infant turns out to be 
the offspring of a brief, illicit liaison between Aletta, who was hanged as a witch 
for murdering her infant’s twin, and the young Kuypers, a student from the 
College of Science and Philosophy at Groningen University, who has come to the 
village of Delfzijl to study windmill design. In Kuypers’ recollection, madwoman 
and rational intellectual see the picture completely differently and that differ­
ence becomes a metaphor for the shifting relation between science and art circa 
1700. The picture is in the countryhouse of Kuypers’ aunt, wife of a slaver, ‘an 
investor in ships doing Westindische trade, the Middle Passage of which everyone 
knew . . . was in bodies and souls’; unable to gain respectability in the eyes of God, 
she settles for its ‘sham substitute in the eyes of man’, spending well on charity 
and on decorating her townhouse ‘and now she was starting on her country-
house’ (158–9). 
Aletta, in a heap on the ﬂoor, cries before the painting for her mother, who 
died in childbirth. Kuypers sees in it the love and intimacy missing in Aletta’s life: 
140 

A R T  F I C T I O N  
‘In the painting, the girl’s mouth was slightly open, glistening at the corner, as if 
she’d just had a thought that intrigued her, an effect that made her astonishingly 
real. To me, she was the embodiment of Descartes’s principle, ‘‘I think, therefore I 
am.’’ She was everything Aletta wasn’t – peaceful, reﬁned, and contemplative’ 
(161). The ﬁery, wild-haired, reckless-eyed Aletta, who haunts the marshes 
following storks, beguiles the close-cropped, rational Kuypers, who is fascinated 
by the ‘ﬂat domesticated northland . . . [where] wind helped to manage the 
land scientiﬁcally – Descartes in action’ (163). The pair take to meeting surrepti­
tiously in the bell tower of the church. In the aunt’s house, the painting falls from 
the wall – an omen. In the bell tower, Aletta gives birth to twins, another omen, 
and kills the hare-lipped baby girl. From the bell tower, where he has been 
harbouring the baby boy, Kuypers watches the hanging: ‘ﬂood was on everyone’s 
mind, so no one came to see Aletta Pieters hang’ (183). As the dikes give way and 
ﬂoodwaters rise, he returns to his aunt (who had given Aletta up to the autho­
rities). She’s hauling her possessions up the stairs, ‘in one arm a Ceylon urn, in 
the other the painting of the girl, each one acquired by sending a soul to hell on 
earth in the Americas’ (191). Afraid for her reputation, even in the face of deluge, 
she asks, 
‘If I give you something, will you promise to take the child away?’ . . . ‘Take this.’ She held 
forward the painting. ‘Sell it in Amsterdam. I’ll give you the dealer’s paper. It was her favorite 
despite her tears.’ Her chin quivered. ‘I can’t enjoy it anymore’ (192). 
The ﬁnal two chapters take us back to Vermeer and the girl in the painting, 
his daughter Magdalena. Vreeland’s Vermeer is a wonderful contrast to Cheva­
lier’s. At the house of his patron Pieter van Ruijven, where Vermeer has 
come hoping to be alone with his own paintings, Van Ruijven, urging Vermeer 
to paint another picture, reminds Vermeer of his obligation: ‘‘‘I don’t mean 
the debt. I mean a deeper obligation. The obligation of talent.’’’ Vermeer’s 
response casts him as a domesticated version of Stone’s Michelangelo: ‘‘‘But the 
cost . . . ’’ And he didn’t mean the price he would set. The cost was to his house­
hold. The cost was to Catharina who never had him fully to herself. Any antici­
pated private moment with him was invaded by his intimacy with a painting’ 
(204–5). 
Vreeland’s Vermeer is a functioning melancholic. Currently in the down 
phase of the cycle, he is suffering from painter’s block. He is torn between his 
family and his art. He is a perfectionist who craves the quietness that seems 
beyond reach in the household full of children where he paints. He plays with his 
boys but is too busy for his daughter Magdalena; seeing her worn clogs sends him 
into ‘an abyss of despondency’ (209). In ‘the imminent maw of nonpainting’, he is 
plagued by self-doubt that scrapes ‘raw his need to be in the security and joy of 
the next painting’ (203–4). In response to van Ruijven’s urging, he smiles and 
thinks: 
No one but another painter could know the delicacy required to balance the complexities, to 
keep reality at bay in order to remain in the innermost center of his work, without which he 
knew he would only exist at the periphery of art, a mere provincial painter. Limited output and 
limited following (205). 
141 

A R T  F I C T I O N  
He has ‘plunged into the melancholy of being between paintings, and 
feverish with longing for the moment when the next would reveal itself to him’ 
(206). 
Torn, too, between the demands of his art and the need to make a living, he 
considers giving up painting to go into the cloth business with a cousin. His 
mother-in-law urges him to hire himself out to one of the potteries as a faience 
painter, which sends him into despair: ‘Plate after relentless plate. He imagined 
them stacked in a wall before him. His knees weakened’ (212). He then sees a shiny 
metal pitcher, which he wants to paint in a picture. Vermeer’s despair at the 
possibility of being reduced to a mere craftsman is based on distinctions between 
high and low status painting in seventeenth-century Delft. It is also Vreeland’s 
way of saying that, despite the rise of material culture studies, pitchers and 
pictures are not in the same category. 
The shiny pitcher has inspired him. Back in the studio, engrossed in ‘pulver­
izing a small block of ultramarine . . . loving the intensity of the blue . . . he heard 
a commotion in the main room’. It is Magdalena: ‘There was something in this 
girl he could never grasp, an inner life inscrutable to him. He was in awe 
of the child’s ﬂights of fancy, her insatiable passion always to be running off 
somewhere.’ He wants to ‘still it for a moment, long enough to paint’ it for 
eternity. ‘‘‘If you sit here, I will paint you, Magdalena. But only if you stop that 
shouting’’’ (222). She hears him say, ‘‘‘If you sit here mending, I will paint you, 
Magdalena’’’ (232). Boxed into her girl-world of mending and sewing, the 
inscrutable Magdalena, it turns out, wants more than anything to paint. Vermeer 
never teaches her and she never does.31 Poignantly, she comes ‘to understand that 
he looked at her with the same interest he gave to the glass of milk’ (234). The 
picture that so many would come to love is passed over by van Ruijven and hung 
without a frame in the Vermeer household’s ‘outer kitchen where the younger 
children slept’ (235). 
H E A D LO N G  
Headlong, by Michael Frayn, is ‘art history ﬁction’ (plate 3). Set in present-day 
England, it tells the story of a ﬁctional art historian’s tragic pursuit of a ﬁctional 
painting by a real sixteenth-century Flemish painter, Pieter Bruegel. Fiction 
appropriates real works of art for all kinds of reasons; whatever its function, the 
work is usually seen. In Alfred Hitchcock’s Psycho, just before the gory shower 
scene, the camera brieﬂy pans over a reproduction, hanging on the wall, of a 
baroque painting of the bathing Susanna as she is spied on by the Elders. The 
characters in Girl with a Pearl Earring and Girl in Hyacinth Blue are deeply engaged in 
looking at paintings; that Griet is never able to see the picture Vermeer painted of 
her makes her ﬁnal rupture with the Vermeer household all the more painful. In 
Headlong the ﬁctional painting is never within grasp or even really within sight of 
the novel’s protagonist. Headlong’s plot revolves around the pursuit of a lost 
painting. Once glimpsed, it seems to be increasingly elusive the harder it is 
sought. In this way the painting might be taken as an allegory of the artwork’s 
fundamental alterity (see Amanda Boetzkes’s chapter in this volume). 
Headlong capitalizes on art’s capacity to create desire. It is a tale of deception 
and bungled thievery told by an amateurish art historian who is obsessed with his 
142 

A R T  F I C T I O N  
3 Cover illustration for 
paperback edition of 
Michael Frayn, Headlong, 
New York: Picador, 2000. 
aristocratic neighbour’s painting, a large, ﬁlthy, unframed panel, which he has 
spied not over the mantel but covering the ﬁreplace to keep out the drafts. He is 
convinced that he has found the long-lost sixth painting in the series of Months 
that Pieter Bruegel painted in 1565 for the Antwerp merchant Niclaes Jongelinck. 
And he is so possessed by his ‘great scheme’ to separate the picture from its down-
at-heel owner that he cannot grasp the contradiction between his ploy to acquire 
a masterpiece for a few thousand pounds and his fantasy of making his mark as 
its discoverer. (In contrast to Vreeland’s Engelbrecht, Headlong’s protagonist hopes 
to rock the art world with his discovery.) Real art anchors both the ﬁctional 
painting and the ﬁction, especially for the savvy reader who can conjure up 
Bruegel’s Hunters in the Snow, Gloomy Day, Return of the Herd (Vienna), Hay Harvest 
(Prague) and Harvesters (New York). Indeed, even the lost painting is ‘real’ in that 
one picture, probably representing April and May, from Bruegel’s series is 
believed to have gone missing long ago. 
143 

A R T  F I C T I O N  
Headlong intersperses a riveting, hysterical pursuit of the painting in the 
countryside with a dull record of library research in London. Headlong’s tragi­
comic art historian is named Martin Clay – ‘clay’ is apt as there is something 
rather unformed about him. He has changed ﬁelds, dropping philosophy to write 
the deﬁnitive study of the Master of the Embroidered Foliage, an obscure minor 
painter of the Northern Renaissance. He is a man prone to whim and with 
sufﬁcient internal contradiction to be a convincing parody of the solitary scholar. 
He puts in his hours at the British Library, though. If Chevalier’s research shows 
through, Frayn shows research, in excruciating detail. Clay ploughs through the 
Bruegel literature by Fritz Grossmann, Max Friedl.ander, Walter Gibson, Wolfgang 
Stechow, Charles de Tolnay, Charles Cuttler, and Craig Harbison, only to conclude 
that Bruegel ‘is an absence, a ghost, which scholars characterize more or less 
however they choose’ (125–6). Next, he turns to historical context and John 
Lothrop Motley’s The Rise of the Dutch Republic (1855!). Though the reader learns a 
good bit of sixteenth-century history, whole chunks of Headlong read like a bad 
graduate student seminar paper that begins with a free-ﬂoating biography, 
throws in vaguely relevant historical background, quotes at length from 
secondary sources, gets no further than reporting the steps of the investigation, 
and seems to have missed the latest scholarship altogether. 
The effectiveness of this regurgitated information about Bruegel and 
sixteenth-century Flanders must vary. For the specialist it reinforces Clay’s 
buffoonishness; for the uninitiated reader it may provide an illusion of scholarly 
authenticity, which would make the narrator’s fanciful attribution of the 
painting seem plausible. In addition, it takes us behind the scenes to expose the 
intellectual labour of the scholar, which it casts as detective work: the blurb on 
the cover reads ‘Part detective story, part art history lesson, part cautionary tale, 
and entirely funny’. Headlong’s appeal might be compared to that of Jonathan 
Harr’s The Lost Painting: The Quest for a Caravaggio Masterpiece (2005), which brings 
non-ﬁction art history into the detective genre by transforming the real authen­
tication and conservation of Caravaggio’s Betrayal of Christ (National Gallery of 
Ireland) into a riveting tale of sleuthing and intrigue. The difference is that Clay’s 
library sleuthing is ultimately futile, as it cannot help him to authenticate a 
picture he cannot see. 
Martin Clay’s appeal lies in his enthusiasm and his tendency to imagine 
himself in Bruegel’s paintings. Coming home to his wife one day, he pictures their 
kiss as like that of Bruegel’s peasants in the Wedding Dance (Detroit). In his dogged 
pursuit of the painting, he has to contend with – and betray – the women from 
whom he wants to keep his ﬁnd and his scheme secret. In the face of his disap­
proving wife, a ‘comparative Christian iconographer’ who will become his 
enabler, he slinks off to the refuge of London libraries and bookstores. Back home, 
he thinks he can hide his pile of Bruegel books behind his laptop computer, even 
though he and his wife work across from each other at the kitchen table. He loves 
his wife and young daughter, but he is so much more in love with Bruegel that he 
is blind to the havoc he is creating in his life. Clay is not totally oblivious to the 
wiles of the neighbour’s wife; yet, when she gets him, half undressed, in her 
bedroom, he is only interested in measuring the painting. 
He has Bruegel on the brain. When his wife says, ‘Martin, listen to me. That 
picture isn’t a Bruegel. I’m sorry – I know how much you want it to be. But it’s not. 
144 

A R T  F I C T I O N  
It’s truly not’, he imagines himself ‘as isolated as Saul’, in the great Conversion of St 
Paul. ‘I’m lying at the side of the Damascus road, felled and blinded by the narrow 
laser beam from heaven that has sought out me and no one else . . . What none of 
them [meaning his wife and the rest of mankind] knows is that I shall arise as 
Paul, and my awkward little ﬁt will have changed the world’ (112). 
Then, prophetically, he rehearses in his mind the worst case: ‘I’m not Saul but 
Icarus . . . who has ﬂown too near the sun, and who has fallen headlong, . . . 
unnoticed by the world . . . to disappear ignominiously beneath the waves forever.’ 
The spectre of disastrous failure does not deter him. Unhinged and out of control, 
he forges on in his Bruegel fantasy world. 
Frayn’s art historian is a single-mindedly inept and remarkably out-of-touch 
scholar, whose momentary madness reveals his complete obliviousness to the real 
world and real art. Part of his scheme involves selling his neighbour’s other 
pictures. When it comes to the art market he has no clue, yet he ends up in 
central London, circling Christie’s with a large Italian baroque painting in a horse 
trailer. Too bookish for his task, he thinks the answer to his attribution problem 
lies in his library research into the picture’s subject matter and historical context; 
he never makes the trip to Vienna to look at other paintings in Bruegel’s series. 
Too afraid to show his hand, he never even gets a really good look at the mystery 
panel. Nor does he get its measurements, so he has no idea whether it is the same 
size as the others in the series of the months. We do not know if it is the same size. 
Here is where the novel succeeds: when, at the end, the panel goes up in ﬂames, 
the reader is left with excruciating uncertainty and despair. Was Clay deluded or 
on to a brilliant ﬁnd? Was the panel the right size? We never know. 
Treating the artist with ambivalence is nothing new; the nonconforming, crea­
tively engaged individual has long been simultaneously celebrated and suspect. 
That Chevalier, Vreeland, and Frayn cast their protagonists as home wreckers or, 
at the very least, deﬁcient on the domestic front may smack of 1950s concepts of 
what artists do and of contemporary conﬂicts between work and home life. Yet 
neglect of family was also a concern in seventeenth-century Holland, witness the 
pair portraits in which women distract their husbands from their scholarly 
work.32 Chevalier’s Vermeer heartlessly shuts his family out of his art: ‘‘‘You and 
the children are not a part of this world . . . You are not meant to be’’’ (214). 
Vreeland’s Vermeer is pained by his inattention to family: ‘Whenever he 
approached the completion of a painting he could sense a shameful dread of 
resuming contact with the realities of hearth and family. His family receded into 
vagueness when he was deeply at work on a painting, but, between paintings, it 
advanced into sharp responsibility’ (203). However much enabled by his wife, 
Frayn’s Martin Clay is wracked with guilt over the domestic crisis toward which 
his Bruegel obsession unavoidably hurtles him. 
All three novels exhibit a certain ambivalence toward the artist and the work 
of art, a reﬂection of the state of art history today. Each shifts attention from the 
artist, whether to the work of art or to the market, muse, viewer, or scholar; yet 
none of them can escape the lure of the creative, engaged person. Headlong’s 
hapless but impassioned art historian becomes a picture thief, yet he comes 
across as positively inspired; it is not without irony that Frayn imparts the mythic 
engagement of the creator to the destroyer of a Bruegel painting. Revenge for the 
145 

A R T  F I C T I O N  
4 Cover illustration for 
paperback edition of Iain 
Pears, The Portrait, New  
York: Riverhead Books, 
2006. 
displacement of power from artist to audience and market plays out in former art 
historian Iain Pears’ The Portrait (2005, plate 4), a short novel of suspense about a 
fatal encounter between a reclusive elderly English painter and his sitter, ‘the 
foremost critic in the land’, champion of Whistler, Gauguin, Cezanne, van Gogh, 
‘whose opinion has the weight of the divine behind it’(3). The painter, who has 
withdrawn to a desolate island off the Brittany coast, sees the visit from his long­
time ‘friend’ as 
An opportunity to renew the battle and ﬁght it to a conclusion. Who will emerge triumphant 
from this encounter of ours, do you think? The painter or the sitter? Will it be ‘portrait of a 
gentleman by Henry Morris MacAlpine’, or ‘portrait of William Nasmyth, by anon’. The 
National Gallery or the National Portrait Gallery? We shall see. It will be your fame against my 
abilities, and the results won’t be in until long after we’re both dead (4). 
For once, the artist is in control of the critic who has controlled his work and 
life. He does not let Nasmyth see the painting in progress: ‘And no you can’t see it. 
146 

A R T  F I C T I O N  
This isn’t a collaboration. I paint; you sit. When you are in that chair you are 
stripped of your expertise, of your taste and discernment . . . You are defenceless 
until I am ﬁnished’ (21). He transforms Nasmyth’s chair into a throne and gives 
him the pose of a pope, ‘as painted by Velazquez, to remind everyone of the power 
that people like you wield in our modern world . . . You change the way people 
think . . . A great power wielded without check . . . A despotism of the arts in which 
you are the high priest of the true and the beautiful’ (33). MacAlpine imagines his 
sitter’s smirking confession: ‘Of course I am a charlatan . . . That is my profession 
. . . I persuade people to love what they hate, buy what they do not want, despise 
what they love’ (54). And he imagines Nasmyth’s assessment of the artist: ‘The 
painter is merely the means by which the critic’s ideas take form’ (69). In response, 
he dismisses his sitter: ‘I can enter into your soul through the canvas and the 
paint, and make sense of you better if you are somewhere else . . . Having you here 
in person is a complete nuisance’ (82–3). The painter’s lifetime of rage let loose 
against his critic/mentor/friend, though set circa 1910, is art ﬁction for our times. 
Iain Pears was trained as an art historian. The author of The Discovery of 
Painting: The Growth of Interest in the Arts in England, 1680–1768 (1988), which is about 
the rise of the collector, connoisseur, and critic, he has been an active contributor 
to the art-historical shift from the work of art as artistic creation to art object as 
commodity, from art’s makers to its consumers.33 But Pears then opted for the 
creative side and became a novelist.34 The Portrait consciously plays out the 
precarious situation – and angered outrage – of the debunked (post-)modern 
artist whose position and artistic authority have been usurped by the critic. In the 
three novels discussed here, ﬁction, though blindfolded and with hands tied, 
ﬁghts back against the commodiﬁcation of art, debunking of the artist, and 
demystifying of the creative process, and lashes out against the constraints of 
scholarship. Girl with a Pearl Earring and Girl in Hyacinth Blue are, as their titles tell 
us, about paintings. For all that each narrative appears to buy into the levelling of 
the artist, each novel ultimately stands up for the emotional impact of the work. 
Frayn’s Headlong takes a more jaded, comic look at the power of art. Its title 
describes not a painting but the frenzy of its protagonist. Here the artist’s creative 
fury is displaced to the amateur art historian who, like Icarus, plays with ﬁre in 
his headlong pursuit of a painting. In 1999, it seems, the death of the artist had so 
thoroughly permeated the culture that ﬁction could resuscitate him only with a 
dose of delicious irony. 
Notes 
1 The socio-economic study of Dutch art was 
commission but on spec. Thanks to the economic 
pioneered by J. Michael Montias, Artists and Arti­
historian Montias (and others) we now have a 
sans in Delft: A Socio-Economic Study of the Seven-
much clearer idea of how exactly paintings were 
teenth Century, Princeton, NJ, 1982, and Vermeer 
sold in the varied venues – lotteries, dealers, 
and his Milieu: A Web of Social History, Princeton, NJ, 
1989. A distinctive aspect of the social history of 
Dutch art has been a focus on the economics of 
auctions, direct sales – that comprised the open 
market. However, economics and assumptions 
art. The Dutch in the seventeenth century 
invented new ﬁnancial systems and it was in 
about the mercantile motivations of the Dutch 
have also driven the interpretation of paintings, 
Holland that the open market for paintings ﬁrst 
entire genres of paintings, and artist careers to 
developed. Until recently, ‘open market’ meant 
the extent that the commodifying of Dutch art 
little more than that works were made not on 
and artists has become problematic. 
147 

A R T  F I C T I O N  
2   Thomas A. Harris MD, I’m OK, You’re OK, New York, 
1969, was a best-selling self-help book. Compare 
Raymond Boudon, The Poverty of Relativism, 
Oxford, 2005. 
3   David Freedberg, The Power of Images: Studies in the 
History and Theory of Response, Chicago, IL, 1989. 
4   Marcel Proust, Le temps retrouve´, 4, 474, quoted in 
Ruth Bernard Yeazell, Art of the Everyday: Dutch 
Painting and the Realist Novel, Princeton, NJ, 2008, 
192. 
5 Yeazell, Art of the Everyday, 192. 
6 Yeazell, Art of the Everyday, xvii. 
7 On van Mander, H. Miedema, ed., The Lives of the 
Illustrious Netherlandish and German Painters, from 
the First Edition of the Schilder-boeck (1603–1604), 
Doornspijk, 1994–96; on Caravaggio, P. Sohm, 
‘Caravaggio’s deaths’, Art Bulletin, 84, 2002, 449– 
68; for Jan Steen, H. P. Chapman, ‘Persona and 
myth in Houbraken’s life of Jan Steen’, Art 
Bulletin, 75, 1993, 135–50. Thirty years ago, it was 
still widely held that what little (if any) art 
theory there was in the seventeenth-century 
Netherlands was recycled from Italy. Investiga­
tions into the writings of van Mander (1604), 
Angel (1642), Hoogstraten (1678), and Houbraken 
(1718), by Miedema (‘Phillips Angel, Praise of 
Painting’, trans. M. Hoyle, Simiolus, 24, 1996, 227– 
49), W. Melion (Shaping the Netherlandish Canon: 
Karel van Mander’s Schilder-boeck, Chicago, IL, 1991), 
E. J. Sluijter (‘In praise of the art of painting: on 
paintings by Gerrit Dou and a treatise by Philips 
Angel of 1642’, in Seductress of Sight: Studies in 
Dutch Art of the Golden Age, Zwolle, 2000), C. 
Brusati (Artiﬁce and Illusion: The Art and Writing of 
Samuel van Hoogstraten, Chicago, IL, 1995), and T. 
Weststeijn (The Visible World: Samuel van Hoogstra­
ten’s Art Theory and the Legitimation of Painting in the 
Dutch Golden Age, Amsterdam, 2008), among 
others, have helped to identify a distinctly Dutch 
art theory and artistic self-consciousness. This 
comes, however, at a time when much scholar­
ship, following current theoretical trends, has 
written the artist and artistic agency out of the 
history of Dutch art. 
8   Richard E. Spear, ‘Artemisia Gentileschi: ten 
years of fact and ﬁction’, Art Bulletin, 82, 2000, 
568–79, examines these and other ﬁctional 
treatments of Artemisia Gentileschi. 
9  Stephen Greenblatt, Renaissance Self-Fashioning: 
More to Shakespeare, Chicago, IL, 1980; John 
Martin, 
‘Inventing 
sincerity, 
refashioning 
prudence: the discovery of the individual in 
Renaissance Europe’, American Historical Review, 
December 1997, 1309–42. In the New Historicism 
of Stephen Greenblatt’s Renaissance Self-Fash­
ioning, the assumption is that Renaissance 
people were so shaped by social, political, and 
cultural tensions that the self was not a self-
conscious, autonomous individual but a series of 
roles or masks that were generated by codes of 
culture and power. For a compelling critique of 
Greenblatt’s ‘view of the self as a cultural arti­
fact, a historical and ideological illusion’, see 
John Martin’s analysis of the early modern 
tendency ‘to view the self as an agent or subject 
in increasingly individualized terms’. 
10 Irving Stone, The Agony and the Ecstasy: A Biogra­
phical Novel of Michelangelo, New York, 1961, 30. 
11 Stone, Agony and Ecstasy, 115.  
12 Mark C. Carnes, ed., Novel History: Historians and 
Novelists Confront America’s Past (and Each Other), 
New York, 2001. 
13 Somerset Maugham’s The Moon and Sixpence (1919) 
bases its protagonist British stockbroker Charles 
Strickland, who escapes from his middle-class 
world to paint in Tahiti, on the French painter 
Paul Gauguin. This colonialist fantasy is a 
morality tale about the destructive swath of 
selﬁshness in the name of Art in which the 
genius’s magnum opus is ultimately destroyed. 
14 Stone, Agony and the Ecstasy, 759. Michelangelo’s 
letters, translated by Charles Speroni, were 
published as Irving and Jean Stone, eds, I, Miche­
langelo, Sculptor: An Autobiography through Letters, 
Garden City, New York, 1962. 
15 Mary Karr, ‘His so-called life’, New York Times, 15  
January 2006. 
16  Girl with a Pearl Earring, directed by Peter Webber, 
2003. 
17 For Vermeer, John Michael Montias, Vermeer and 
his Milieu, Princeton, NJ, 1989; on maids in 
seventeenth-century 
Holland, 
see 
Simon 
Schama, The Embarrassment of Riches: An Inter­
pretation of Dutch Culture in the Golden Age, New 
York, 1987. 
18 It is more satisfying to imagine the painting 
than to see the ﬁlm, which is so dark and dreary 
that it brings to mind not sparkling Delft but 
smoggy Pittsburgh. 
19 For the inventory, see Montias, Vermeer, 339–44. 
20 Montias, Vermeer, 134–5, 246–54, 260–2, was ﬁrst 
to propose that van Ruijven bought over twenty 
paintings by Vermeer, probably at the rate of one 
a year. See also Montias, ‘Recent archival 
research on Vermeer’, in Ivan Gaskell and 
Michiel Jonker, eds, Vermeer Studies (Studies in the 
History of Art 55), Washington, 1998, 93–9. 
21 For the interpretation of technical studies of 
Vermeer’s paintings, see Arthus K. Wheelock Jr, 
Vermeer and the Art of Painting, New Haven, CT, 
1995; E. Melanie Gifford, ‘Painting light: recent 
observations on Vermeer’s technique’, and 
Jrgen Wadum, ‘Contours of Vermeer’, both in 
Gaskell and Jonker, Vermeer Studies, 185–200 and 
201–19. For technical analysis of Rembrandt’s 
Paintings, David Bomford et al., Art in the Making: 
Rembrandt, London, 2006; and Ernst van de 
Wetering, 
Rembrandt: 
The Painter at 
Work, 
Amsterdam, 1997. Technical art history made 
such early and advanced strides in the Nether­
lands in part because of the Dutch government’s 
long-term funding of the Rembrandt Research 
Project, the work of which is published in the 
still incomplete A Corpus of Rembrandt Paintings, 4  
vols, The Hague, 1982– . 
148 

A R T  F I C T I O N  
22 Wheelock, Vermeer, and Walter A. Liedtke, 
Vermeer: The Complete Paintings, New York, 2008. 
Also Philip Steadman, Vermeer’s Camera: Unco­
vering the Truth Behind the Masterpieces, Oxford, 
2001. 
23 The ﬁlm provides other correctives. Whereas 
models pose for days on end in the novel, 
Vermeer uses a life-size wooden mannequin in 
the ﬁlm. See H. Perry Chapman, ‘The wooden 
body: representing the manikin in Dutch artists’ 
studios’, Nederlands Kunsthistorisch Jaarboek, 58, 
2008, 189–215. 
24 Lawrence Gowing, Vermeer, London, 1970. 
25 Gerard de Lairesse, Groot schilderboek: waar in de 
schilderkonst in al haar deelen grondig werd onder­
weezen, ook door redeneeringen en printverbeeldingen 
verklaard, Amsterdam 1712, trans. The art of 
painting: in all its branches, methodically demon­
strated by discourses and plates, and exempliﬁed by 
remarks on the paintings of the best masters; and their 
perfections and oversights laid open, trans. J. F. 
Fritsch, London, 1778, 24. 
26 See Joanna Woodall, ‘Love is in the air: amor as 
motivation and message in seventeenth-century 
Netherlandish painting’, Art History, 19, 1996, 
208–46. 
27 Perhaps it is no coincidence that this self-effa­
cing person evokes Vermeer as crafted by Lawr­
ence Gowing and to a certain extent by his own 
lack of self-portraits. 
28 Walter Benjamin, Illuminations, New York, 1969, 
256–7, 1940. 
29  ‘Aspirational viewer’ is my term; for the inter­
pretation of still life as commodity display, see J. 
B. Hoochstrasser, Still Life and Trade in the Dutch 
Golden Age, London, 2007. 
30 On the Uylenburgh family art business, see Friso 
Lammertse and Jaap van der Veen, Uylenburgh & 
Son: Art and Commerce from Rembrandt to De Lair-
esse, 1625–1675 (exh. cat. Rembrandthuis Museum 
and Dulwich Picture Gallery), Zwolle, 2006. 
31 Benjamin Binstock, Vermeer’s Family Secrets: Genius, 
Discovery and the Unknown Apprentice, New York, 
2009, posits that Vermeer’s eldest daughter 
Maria painted some of the pictures now attrib­
uted to Vermeer. 
32 For example, Jan de Bray’s Abraham Casteleyn and 
Margarieta van Bancken (Amsterdam, Rijksmu­
seum). 
33 Iain Pears, The Discovery of Painting: The Growth of 
Interest in the Arts in England, 1680–1768, New 
Haven, CT: Published for the Paul Mellon Centre 
for Studies in British Art by Yale University Press, 
1988. 
34 Pears is the author of An Instance of the Fingerpost, 
London, 1998, The Dream of Scipio, London, 2002, 
and the Jonathan Argyll series of art history 
mysteries: The Raphael Affair, London, 1991; The 
Titian Committee, London, 1992; The Bernini Bust, 
London, 1993; The Last Judgment, London, 1994; 
Giotto’s Hand, London, 1995; Death and Restoration, 
London, 1996; and The Immaculate Deception, 
London, 2000. 
149 

8   
DANCING YEARS,   
OR WRITING AS A WAY OUT   
A D R I A N  R I F K I N  
Spinoza ends up by deﬁning desire as ‘self conscious appetite’. But he puts it forward only as a 
nominal deﬁnition of desire, and that consciousness adds nothing to appetite (we do not reach/ 
lean towards a thing because we judge it good, but on the contrary, we judge that it is good 
because we reach/lean towards it).1 
Gilles Deleuze, 1981 
There is another happiness also, yes there is an other, I’ve seen it and you made me feel it. In the 
air you showed me its lustrous reﬂections, I have seen the hem of its ﬂoating garment sparkle 
in my gaze.2 
Gustave Flaubert, 1846 
Stranger than that we’re alive . . . 3 
The Incredible String Band, 1968 
For a philosopher the creation of a singular being is an ethical act.4 
Yve Lomax, 2000 
This chapter eventually concerns a piece of my own writing, but rather as if 
it had been written by someone else, a person to whom I have a privileged biogra­
phical and archival access. Thus it sets out to mimic the problematic of much 
cultural-historical or critical writing that arises from how we understand the 
tensions between the author and the text, but here by setting it up as if it were not 
the kind of problem that it has turned out to be. Or, more precisely as it has become 
– a doxa or a procedural and limiting trope of critical writing; a doxa, for example, 
concerning the end of the Cartesian subject. Here no longer a problem, but a play, in 
enunciation; somewhere, between reaching or leaning towards, and a vision of a 
happiness towards which, as was the case of Gustave Flaubert, we might fear to 
reach. 
Some years ago, when I began to realize that the archive, in the more limited 
and technical sense of being a series of organized historical records, more often 
than not, and too easily, gave me what I was looking for, I decided that it was an 
interesting departure to make things up. Either I had had a ‘nose’ for a good series 
of dossiers, or I was very thorough or I just had good luck – the box, found in the 
150 

D A N C I N G  Y E A R S ,  O R  W R I T I N G  A S  A  WAY  O U T  
Archives Nationales, on gay sailors in Toulon circa 1929, for Street Noises, was a case 
in point.5 It had to exist in one form or another for a major navy town in the 
period; that much one could predicate from ﬁction and reportage. And I needed it 
to authenticate what I felt it was already obvious to say about homosexuality and 
class difference, but which I wanted badly to ‘prove’. To the best of my knowledge, 
and only sometime after my examination of it, I realized that the dossier had 
possibly been consulted once before, but then merely plundered for some 
photographs and not referenced at all. So it was a ﬁnd. This is one of the processes 
that we call research, the well-tried model of ‘seek and you will ﬁnd . . . ’, the 
seeking comfortably pushed along by research questions – and its results duly 
revealed. Yet, some of my best discoveries, the ones that most satisﬁed my desire 
to underpin certain guesses, once satisﬁed, I kept to myself and never tried to 
publish even though this meant leaving some assertion in its speculative state. 
And perversely, in a research culture dominated by the commodity-notion of 
‘output’, their privacy is all the more treasured.6 
But clearly enough when ‘research questions’ – and this is one way of thinking 
about disciplinary development over the last three decades – come to be framed 
ﬁrst and foremost through a theoretically abstract take on what it is to ask a 
question and what it means to look, then the outcome, while nonetheless 
serendipitous, also questions the value of such empirical conﬁrmation, which 
itself is inextricable from a topology of knowledges. More often than not in the 
kind of historical work with which I was engaged the evidence is so complex, if it 
is taken to include textual reading in the post-Kristevan sense as well as infer­
ential criticism, a notion of diffe´rance in terms of any sign or set of signs, or of a 
dispositif, then the ﬁeld of speculation is wide open at each level of procedure 
rather than an outcome in itself;7 to speculate alone makes proper sense, to speak 
out of a grounding so protean in its densities as to carry forward their potential 
into the archive as the next form of a question rather than as a response, as 
something anyway made up or like a ready-made, a constellation perhaps. Or, as 
Gayatry Spivak made so compelling in her Rani of Sirmoor or her more compre­
hensive Critique of Postcolonial Reason, research and its theory are a reﬂexive prac­
tice of imbricated procedures and affective histories, political and sexual 
investments and so forth.8 Again we could take the exacerbated element of 
singularity in Jacques Rancie`re’s discoveries of being given to see in poetry or 
image or ﬁlm, in which the degree of singularity and theoretical acuity excite and 
defeat one another at the same time. Each act of theoretical perception is sui 
generis, yet sustains an argument that is itself nothing but a making visible of an 
aesthetic and political possibility of seeing, of enunciation, of liberty. 
These are combinations of relations that always imply some kind of undoing 
as their result, an un-proving or a dissolution, a looking away. Strange then that 
in contemporary research bids the speculative should be only one pathway, and 
then the exception, and required to be declared as such. After all it is nearly a 
century since the philosopher C. D. Broad wrote:9 
It seems to me that the main value of Speculative Philosophy lies, not in its conclusions, but in 
the collateral effects which it has, or ought to have, on the persons who pursue it. The spec­
ulative philosopher is forced to look at the world synoptically, and anyone who does not do this 
at some time in his life is bound to hold a very narrow and inadequate idea of Reality.10 
151 

D A N C I N G  Y E A R S ,  O R  W R I T I N G  A S  A  WAY  O U T  
And even this is far from being as ‘radical’ as Aby Warburg’s discipline, which, as 
we have become accustomed to say, ‘exists but without a name . . . ’; in which 
already, decades earlier, a form of unending inadequation had become the 
driving force of enquiry and reﬂection.11 (Better by far to think of this as a name 
with-out a discipline.) When I ﬁrst read the Serpent Ritual in its primitive, 1938 
version by Gertrud Bing, in the late 1960s, it seemed perfectly normal, given that 
the intellectual fervour of the moment was directed to the recent translation of 
Claude Le´vi-Strauss’s The Savage Mind.12 I can now see this conjunction served to 
efface the Serpent’s historical and enduring craziness as a non-disciplinary thing, 
teetering on the edges of Western self-consciousness.13 The clumsy hostility that 
Ernst Gombrich shows for the subject of his Aby Warburg, an Intellectual Biography, 
which turns his title itself into crudest oxymoron, only emphasized Warburg’s 
intoxication as the happier guide to action – an intoxication since dampened by 
the superior accuracy of the ‘authoritative’ edition of the piece. As Philippe-Alain 
Michaud suggests in his Aby Warburg et l’mage en mouvement, in Warburg’s writing, 
as I ﬁnd with Immanuel Kant in his discussion of the sublime, the amazement of 
the text is not its argument – but that it hacks its way from one point to another 
at all – again, the intoxication of our reading!14 
In such a culture of speculative writing, are the beliefs of Warburg and Freud 
analogous in respect of the returning or continual existence of affects and 
cultural forms of feeling as the grounds on which we build the ‘civilized’, but only 
on condition that thought still lives in the enigma of what we have repressed? 
One answer is obviously; they parallel one another. A second is that it is always 
too late to know this, to turn out to have read them, or any other texts, or to have 
seen or heard or connected things in the ‘right’ order: the proper text of the 
Serpent Ritual can never speak to me more or ‘better’ than did Bing’s.15 And in 
this sense it’s hard to ﬁnish with anything, least of all to let go that moment for 
which I was so unprepared. (Ironically Marxism, which was so much a part of the 
way we prepared to deal with the world, least of all encouraged us to be unpre­
pared. Little of that here; the tracings of this chapter are only fragments of the 
picture. But it is worth noting that the ultra-Hegelian side of intellectual Marxism 
was a happy match for the manoeuvrings of an Aby Warburg or an Edgar Wind, as 
much as a new Nietzschianism was to be soon after.) 
So speculation is little other than the natural value of the question. If luck or 
hard work turn out to have diminishing returns, then we are saved precisely by 
this collapse of question and the ﬁnding – the found is the form of a question not 
an outcome. ‘Find and you shall seek’ – to appropriate the famous formulation of 
Picasso and Lacan, so aptly elaborated by the latter in his critique of the very idea 
of research, his insistence that Freud did not look for the unconscious, but that he 
did anyway discover it. For Lacan it was as if to have found (which I take to derive 
an aspect of its meaning from the Latin reperire, and so to have something to do 
with a range of things, an address book or lists, sublime stupidity in the mode of 
Flaubert’s Bouvard et Pe´cuchet) is thought’s obligation.16 Reversing the normative 
axiom may seem slight enough, but even just to begin with it engrosses the 
immense difference between the inductive and the deductive, and in that alone 
comes to look like an antidote to the protocol of research questions and spec­
ulative quasi certainties that are the peer culture of our time. At the same time it 
also opens a space within histories of intellectual process that have become rather 
152 

D A N C I N G  Y E A R S ,  O R  W R I T I N G  A S  A  WAY  O U T  
a routine of difference between more or less radical models – such as connois­
seurship vs Wissenschaft.17 In privileging the more modest axis of naming and of 
inference over speculation, the ﬁnding merely adequate names for objects, we 
drift into a vaster dimension of invention, disclosing in this apparent loss a 
relative liberty. That is to say the purposeless aporetics of drift, the drift that, for 
example, came between Walter Benjamin and the ‘completion’ of his Passagen­
werk. After this we can see how it is that when his angel looks upon the ruins of 
history, it is us whom (s)he regards.18 
Moreover this work of trying to ﬁnd a name for some (possible) minimal level of 
material, for an only part-symptom, has the huge advantage of delivering us from 
the travails of the interdisciplinary – of the genre visual culture, for example. In 
taking any question from its inside before it has a title that predicts the combi­
nation of methodologies that in itself is a freezing up it leaves open the space of 
aporia rather than the answer, the time of deferred action rather than that of 
ﬁnality, the outside. You could say that this is the material practice of not having 
origin; only a starting point that will turn out to have been without a necessary 
signiﬁcance, from the beginning, other than what it had seemed to be as such; no 
point of return that can be valued as such. ‘What if’ I were to shape something, an 
object, and to call it this or that, especially if naming it causes it to fall apart 
through the dis-function of the name? What if – having found some thing – I were 
then to lose (forget) it? I have only to introduce the verb ‘to lose’ as a ‘research 
criterion’ and a poetics of research condenses on its protocols: the thetic cut, the 
murmur of the pre-semiotic, forgetfulness, ﬁx the searching gaze on the absence of 
its object. It’s difﬁcult to show what one has lost. Nonetheless I will proceed as if all 
were lost, but as if it is I who am found (remembered), procuring and procured 
(supine of reperire, repertum, or a gerundive). But I am not a seismograph, nor 
shaken; only found out, disclosed a little to myself. (Style victim.) The archive 
remains the next thing, not before, the spilled baggage of having found, and lost. 
While I have begun with an approach to some rather general reﬂections 
concerning argument and methodology in the history of art and some of the 
humanities, I want now to set them aside. I ﬁnd that by now they are, apart from 
the matter of losing, banal enough. They are part of a lingua franca, though no 
less difﬁcult for having become so, and all the more in need of re-thinking – a 
glance at the argument of Arnold Hauser’s The Philosophy of Art History (1959) or 
Herbert Read’s The Meaning of Art (1931) is enough to touch the longevity of this 
discourse in something like our generational time. Rather I want to set out anew 
from the notion of liking or a preference, of liking art or preferring one kind of 
art or work of art to another so much that one wants to write about art, to work 
on it or with it. I want to ﬁnd the beginnings of something I will call a freedom 
and even an equality of value in arriving at the moment of a desire to work rather 
than from a predictive theory. For, in our subject, it is as well to admit that when 
it all began, then it began with a leaning and, in particular, a leaning towards the 
most mytho-maniacally driven cultural form of a spectacle-society. Vicente 
Minelli’s Lust for Life came out when I was eleven, An American in Paris when I was 
six. Picasso was one of the most famous people in the world, even more so than 
Grace Kelly. When Mark Rothko killed himself in 1970 he was, according to Time, 
the richest artist who had ever lived – a record Picasso beat by several hundred per 
cent three years later. 
153 

D A N C I N G  Y E A R S ,  O R  W R I T I N G  A S  A  WAY  O U T  
1 Gerard David, The Judgment of Cambyses, 1498. Oil on wood, 202  172.8 cm, Bruges: Groeninge­
museum. Photo: Giraudon/The Bridgeman Art Library. 
So if I, for example, as an adolescent, much preferred looking at Flemish 
painting of the ﬁfteenth century to watching Wimbledon on the TV, this must 
have been a preference that was and remains necessarily a complex enunciation 
of whatever had been socially or sexually or politically possible.19 Constantly, I 
think, one sees before one is ready, and becomes ready at the price of forgetting 
what had been given to see; and there is no means of attributing a proper order to 
this processual effect, which has sometimes an instructive, analogical relation to 
trauma, and its ﬁguring and resolutions in the time of deferred action. Given to 
see – the writer of ﬁctions, Marcel Proust was in La prisonnie`re, and through the 
154 

D A N C I N G  Y E A R S ,  O R  W R I T I N G  A S  A  WAY  O U T  
2 Unknown photographer, Maria Bueno, c. 1962. 
eyes of the dying Bergotte, given to see and record the ‘petit pan de mur jaune’ in 
Vermeer’s View of Delft, something I myself have been unable to ﬁnd in the 
painting. This too is an involuntary complexity of art history, of how the visible is 
given, of the networks and surfaces where we ﬁnd ourselves, and the mismatching 
between what we know (see) and what we are supposed to see (know).20 
Nonetheless what was seen, or could have been seen, may be recovered by 
many means – diaries, archives, in web galleries or personal websites – and 
reduced to a matter of the record. The two images below are ones that I came 
across the one quite soon after the other, in this order, in 1962, and I could 
archivally demonstrate it; Gerard David, Easter in Bruges, Maria Bueno, 
155 

D A N C I N G  Y E A R S ,  O R  W R I T I N G  A S  A  WAY  O U T  
Wimbledon week in London – though then only on a black and white TV, and only 
in movement. What remains of these, as well as what may have become of me, 
I may never know, nor need to know. But it is waiting (supine) to know that 
activates the deferred time of what Warburg called the ‘pathos formula’, as 
distinct from being able to say that was indeed it, this image had that effect 
(studium/punctum – it was a mistake to have thought the studium and the 
punctum were concepts or even tools). Waiting (alive) rather than the speciﬁc 
survival of an affect-ﬁgure from an ancient culture or its intertwining with one 
from another, as with the snakes – the Pueblo cultures and Hermes, or the rag 
directing water in a Parisian gutter as with Georges Didi-Huberman.21 Well over a 
century after Warburg came across his notion – it belongs to the nineteenth 
century and an upper-class education gone astray in ethnography – the classical 
seems not only a lot further away but less than ever urgent in the current 
global economies of culture. If the classical survival becomes a ﬁgure of or for 
something now, a ﬂuttering or a moment of Orphic (Eurydicean) disappearance, 
then it is insofar as we can imagine it as a before, as an emptiness that lends a 
name to something now – in a restaging that can but be contingent and singular. 
And anyway, it is a mode of attachment to some past, not the haunting of one 
kind of past, that counts, even if that past is recent, or only imagined to have 
happened. 
So, what was there in these two images? The all-too caring and attentively 
administered torments of the victim in Gerard David’s Judgement of Cambyses 
remain very close to me (see plate 1). It has been one of my favourite paintings 
since I ﬁrst set eyes on it. And the lesser travails of Maria Bueno for her 
Wimbledon championship have all but vanished, although I watched most of her 
matches in charmed amazement (see plate 2). Anyway, this outcome is not bad 
running in a consumer society, I became an art historian, and never gave spec­
tator sport another thought. I can’t make a virtue of this, there are plenty of 
people who have done both, or who glimpsed an attainable happiness on the 
centre court; all I can insist is that this was a focused and an exclusive leaning, 
nominal. 
Moreover looking now for the ﬁrst time at these images, side by side, I can see 
that a possible irony in this exaggerated claim to have become a specialist is that 
in turning away from one, the tele-visual, towards the other – a painting then 
rather lost in a little-visited Belgian museum, I had also turned my back on the 
ﬂuttering of fabric of the surviving nymph, and so from the image-movement that 
it makes visible. Unaware, inevitably, that the hem caught in movement by the 
technology of time, would eventually become one major ﬁgure of a discipline in 
rethinking; even if this is more often than not a dark ﬁgure of anxiety and loss, 
rather than one of ‘another happiness’, which is a different model of anxiety. 
Bueno, trapped between her shadow and her own concentration on the unseen 
ball, in colour at least, belongs with the stills from Douglas Sirk’s The Imitation of 
Life that are disclosed by Laura Mulvey in her discussion of cinema’s iteration of 
death, another, ﬁlmic tissue of impossible survival.22 Goya’s print proffers 
mediation, though at the risk of carrying me into something more sombre, over­
charged with fatality for the path that I am uncovering here (plate 3). 
I share with Jacques Rancie`re, in his Destin des images, ‘intolerance’ of a 
contemporary discourse on art marked by its ‘inﬂated use of the notion of the 
156 

D A N C I N G  Y E A R S ,  O R  W R I T I N G  A S  A  WAY  O U T  
3 Franciso Goya, plate 20 from Tauromaquia, 1815. London: British Museum.Photo: r The Trustees 
of the British Museum. 
unrepresentable and a constellation of allied notions: the unpresentable, the 
unthinkable, the untreatable, the unredeemable . . . surrounding them all with 
the same aura of holy terror.’23 This is a phenomenon that I see as the natur­
alizing, in academic discourse, of a post-Heideggerian mode of feeling through a 
contemporary form of ‘purple prose’, a frustrated longing for anxiety that John 
Mowitt has also discussed in his essays on trauma, speaking of ‘the troubling 
contemporary tendency to displace the political with the ethical’.24 Evidently, 
then, one of the things I most dread in the writing of art history and criticism is 
the dithyramb, the clumsy athleticism of exalted prose, the rush of ontologically 
laden anxiety that more often than not asks of even the most complex or difﬁcult 
of images an order of response that no image need make; the projection of the 
writer’s actual or rhetorically assumed burden as a character of the image as 
other, or as ego ideal – either in an individual poesis or a wider ﬁeld of political or 
religious agency and argument which is a different kind of object. Of course this 
is one fate of art as the form of a relation, or as a symptom in the random 
precipitation of affect; and if it repels me, then that too is my problem, a 
symptom of my own and, anyway, I am not free from it, nor do I wish to be. 
The coming together of these three images suggests a cure, for it is an 
opening, nothing more; though it does open to a politics of thought that objec­
tiﬁes, in the best way, the idealized subjectivity that has shaped it as a fulcrum of 
reﬂection. 
At the same time, what was that ﬂuttering if it is not a movement of the self, a 
moment of its forming, a movement denied, half-felt, provisionally unnamed, for 
157 

D A N C I N G  Y E A R S ,  O R  W R I T I N G  A S  A  WAY  O U T  
which a theory might ﬁnd it a provisional name – a survival, an Orphic 
instability? In remaining with the David, am I in some way not lost in my ﬁdelity 
to that affect, the frozen loincloth that hardly ﬂutters nor dares to stir, stilled by 
the exquisite and patient butchery of the ﬂayers as well as Saint Augustine’s 
terror of the penis’s unruly movement in his City of God?25 In either image the 
event is frozen by the spectators, caught in their regard, and by the freezing 
power of strain and effort, the forked legs different forms of an abstraction of the 
processes that variously bring the images into vision.26 The being beside oneself 
of pain and effort, the disinterested and professional attention of the ﬂayers, the 
ﬂuttering of the high noon shadow and the red garment beneath the table, 
demand and offer a model for attention; the attention of the ﬂayers to the 
dynamics of skin, the eye to the unseen, moving ball; these between them can 
model a future history of art, while the space beside the self, the gap, should be of 
its undoing or critique. I would like to name this gap the feminine or the queer, 
for as long as these terms will stick, as long as they point to this critical potential 
of being beside oneself.27 
I would like to slip between these images, like one of Doris Lessing’s Canopean 
agents in her Shikasta space-ﬁction slips between his universal time and a human 
embryo, and so watch me from within the image. The shadow in Goya’s bullﬁght, 
merging man and beast into one new but transient and immaterial creature, does 
this, generating a series of outsides that belong to each other only here, contin­
gently, shading and unsettling the spectator in the brilliance of the sunlight. Two 
men in a video, Three Months (2004) by David Haines act out an Internet sex-chat as 
if the chat room were a material place, and material fakes the virtual. It is Lessing, 
Goya or Haines who undo my own speculation and its work, they who push me 
towards making something up. It was out of envy for such writing, as for art itself, 
that I ﬁnd an impulse to do some work, to make something up. I put what I most 
wanted to say behind a pseudonym or into a little fragment of ﬁction where the 
characters could speak as they wished, make mistakes, live in error without 
guilt.28 
Seen at such an angle there is, I guess, no other form of scholarship so 
undermined by its constitutive irrationality as this history of art, which embraces 
as if a sufﬁcient truth the substances of its self-invention; and in this respect the 
development of classiﬁcatory or hermeneutic systems from connoisseurship to 
the social history of art, psychoanalytic models or phenomenology might all be 
seen as attempts to establish a ‘public’ sphere of discourse, the translation of a 
leaning into a common cause or understanding. All of this is difﬁcult to 
negotiate, as taste or leaning is what precisely is disputed or repressed even as it is 
foundational.29 How can I entrust myself to the philosopher of my incipit – a 
philosopher who expects so much from an artist I frankly dislike? Deleuze on 
Francis Bacon neither convinces me of Bacon’s value nor of Deleuze as a philo­
sopher of art, though his essay on Ge´rard Fromanger I greatly admire. Or how can 
I sustain my affection for a friend who is moved by Bill Viola or admires Jeff Wall, 
but who cannot see that, on the contrary, Vicente Minelli’s Some Came Running 
(1958) is a great work of art, probably and precisely because neither critique nor 
emotion are its material nor its objective? To close the space between levels of 
philosophical signiﬁcance and the obsessions of the movie buff is at least to recall 
the disagreement out of which agreement thrives. 
158 

D A N C I N G  Y E A R S ,  O R  W R I T I N G  A S  A  WAY  O U T  
Then it is straightforward enough to see that much the same applies to the 
writing of art history as to art, to the leanings of the writer as of the reader; and 
that this implies a history of art-historical writing that is a part of more general 
literary history on the one hand, theoretically strung out perhaps between Michel 
Foucault, Roland Barthes and Erich Auerbach, and also speciﬁcally and consti­
tutively ﬁssured by the difference between ‘judging good because’ and ‘leaning 
towards’, reconciled through an agreement of ethical or political commonality a` 
la David Hume. Indeed the linking of Foucault, Barthes and Auerbach is useful in 
that it overlaps the critique of the author and the concept of a regime with the 
thinking of ﬁgural writing. If the latter might be understood as one aspect of both 
deferred action and of nachleben, of the waiting for a reoccurrence that is the form 
of a becoming new, the ﬁrst two draw us to a general theoretical and political 
understanding of the conditions out of which we effect this appropriation and 
reﬂect upon it. Now, for example, Warburg might stand in a relation to our future 
much as the prophet Isaiah had for the once uncharted future of Christianity 
after the Gospels and Saint Paul. In the recent thinking of Griselda Pollock, for 
example, I would suggest that it is through her understanding of Warburg as a 
form of the outside that we can recognize his writing as being inside the Kris­
tevan concept of the feminine, doubly disabused of the promises coming to be a 
subject; a concept of the feminine that she can now reinscribe within feminism 
itself as a ‘pure’ relation to the dominant. Warburg in a sense foretells the work of 
undoing that will have become the substance of feminist art history today and 
after our own time.30 The epistemological loss that is conjured from Warburg’s 
catastrophe, understood as its premonitory vector, is that of woman’s thought, 
restituted in the anachronistic act of overwriting him. Another important 
instance of such a process is Paul Vandenbroeck’s exhibition at the Palais de 
Beaux Arts in Brussels, Azetta, l’art des femme berbe`res (2000). Here the palimpsest of 
architecture, in Zaha Hadid’s design, Bracha Lichtenberg Ettinger’s psycho­
analytic thinking of the feminine, in part inscribed as ghostly slogans on the 
walls, and an astonishing scholarship of the objects, the Berber weavings, 
invented a new ﬁgure of interiority as if it were really visible in the museum 
space. 
Hypostatized as authors, we write on the surface that we call a discipline, and 
which persists as a history of art after all its upheavals and the emergence of so 
many interdisciplines. But this surface is a topology in which closeness and 
distance, presence and absence interchange, concealing and revealing the shifting 
relativities of difference, and the art of writing is its navigation. Arguably 
circumlocution, periphrasis and its semi-colons, moving around image, theory and 
modes of writing all at once – these are always more complex than the dithyr­
ambic.31 They draw out surfaces to which differing densities of connection, expli­
cation or commentary can hold and form as surface; surface on which parallel lines 
may be invisible the one to the other but which, in the oxymoron of mathematical 
possibilities, sometimes cross or touch; arguably this is the space of ﬁnding.32 
I take this particularity, singularity, arbitrariness, endlessness, as being a 
disciplinary strength. It is for all of this that art history is especially apt to poli­
tical appropriation, as we can see in its many contemporary conﬁgurations, and it 
is in part the urgency of such demands that has made it both a valuable and a 
contended ﬁeld of study. If the famed and thornily undecidable ‘autonomy of art’ 
159 

D A N C I N G  Y E A R S ,  O R  W R I T I N G  A S  A  WAY  O U T  
adds up to anything as a concept, in these days, then it is in part due to the way in 
which art is available to all of these appropriations – that it can be both addressed 
and made to speak. So why not make things up; to allow ﬁgures of urgency to 
emerge, spaces of liberty which regain these qualities from the suffocation of 
protocol? Yet the section of my book on Ingres that I did make up, the queer 
parable of The High Window, turned out, without my having noticed it, to contain 
something already made up, but not by me – a history of art that begins with 
Vasari and that I thought I had set aside in my invention, but was a reoccurrence 
on the surface that I completely overlooked. Yet it was before my eyes, and I guess 
that the overlooking happened because I was not trying to look, but rather to look 
reﬂexively at what we call the gaze, in this case a gay gaze, and to generate an 
anachronism that would disclose this gaze as a relation to the image rather than 
as an aspect of it. 
One function of parable is to deploy what is readily recognized in a narrative 
that has slid away from simple recognition (studium), so that you either get it or 
you don’t. It is not easy to quote from parable for it readily fragments into 
nonsense, and, according to the Robert historique, its Greek roots happily merge 
with an Indo-European syllable that also gave rise to ballare, to dance.33 All I had 
wanted to be understood from the parable I set out to write was that it is idle to 
expect too much of an image and, at the same time, this longed for excess may go 
unnoticed. As Paolo Berdini puts it, writing of painting that takes parable as its 
subject matter, ‘How do beholders recognise an image or ordinary life as a reli­
gious image?’ (62),34 and in The High Window I set out to substitute ‘theory’ or 
‘historiography’ for the word ‘religious’. The ‘excursus and parable’ is an everyday 
story of gay life, it even has an element of reportage, but it turns away from the 
idea that any image has a speciﬁcally and exclusively gay subject, a male nude, a 
young man with lipstick displaying grapes or bitten by a lizard, or whatever. 
Instead it pretends that if we don’t look, but only see or allow ourselves to be seen, 
the excess that touches us will be made out of interleaving affects that we cannot 
simply determine within the ﬁeld of the visible. 
The pathosformel is so thought as being something to do with the splitting of 
the subject in perception and in the gaze of the other, which can invade the 
substance of a work of art or of a set of social relations, and so bring them into 
being together in such a way that we can speculate on how they might interact; to 
imagine that, amongst other things, and at a certain moment, a gay singularity 
might be thought. This is not veriﬁable, for while it is derived from the 
exploration of substantial archives, these are of incommensurable qualities and 
essentially anachronous; but it is not in this much different from the vast body of 
art writing that uses the unit ‘it is’ more often than not to objectify a feeling, a 
supposition or the rigorous study of a theoretical model. I take it that catachresis 
is the very breath of our discourse. The two points of light in Ingres’ M Bertin 
(1832, Paris: Muse´e du Louvre) and the curious squinting of the cruising gaze 
touch one another as quite particular embodiments of an episteme of uncer­
tainty, and in this the everyday life of text is restored to a desiring body on the one 
hand and the aporetics of making an image as a material practice on the other. 
This I take as a perfectly if quixotically post-Warburgian move, the more so as 
it is animated by a desire for liberty, a freedom from the qualiﬁcations of the 
disciplinary procedures which we have invented and in which we enchain 
160 

D A N C I N G  Y E A R S ,  O R  W R I T I N G  A S  A  WAY  O U T  
ourselves within the institution. If then it was urgent to escape from philology or 
the connoisseur, here it is to evade alike social history as well as deconstruction, 
the critique of the Cartesian subject and the notion of the performative: a utopian 
fantasy. After all it is hard to argue that these mark the shape of a rising curve of 
civilization, unless they are assimilated, forgotten and turned into a common 
speech that enables them to be remembered as what might be said rather than 
what must. Also it may well be that, as is my case, a book like Berenson’s The Sense 
of Quality: Study and Criticism of Italian Art (1901) or some other piece of villainy, was 
once a text that served to animate desire – though I believe that I once found an 
art-historical collection truly without interest!35 We have learned that the rela­
tion between a political argument and its objective, for a form of equality, or 
against exploitation, depends upon the relative standing of a type of argument, 
on shifting tactical values and not on an essential quality. And if at some point, 
now for instance, the theory of the performative impedes the performance of 
contradictoriness, of critical contariety or of ﬁnding, then it becomes just another 
gloomy academic routine. It was because of these considerations that I came to 
see Ingres as an artist who, haunted by his own resistance to the proprieties he 
desired, acted out such scenarios; and then I became increasingly attached to his 
painting, resting with it all these years as a ground for thinking about more than 
art or its histories. To my surprise it returns to me the iterated shock of that hope 
for a critical dissolution of social norms that I guess we envisaged in the 1960s. 
And though enthralment has settled into leaning, I must resist making Ingres 
over into judgement. 
Anyway, if the parable concerned wanting too much, and set out to show that 
tiny details, two points of light, are signiﬁant in a way that the image as a social 
and a formal whole is not, and open out to more ﬁelds of knowing, then it was 
through one of these that Vasari returned. For the high window, the reﬂection in 
the arm of M. Bertin’s chair is, and we probably all know this, the same reﬂection 
as that in the pommel of Pope Leo X’s chair in Raphael’s portrait of him – on 
which Vasari commented with delight.36 It is the same reﬂection as the one 
Ingres had already included on the pommel of Napoleon’s throne in the coro­
nation portrait. At the exhibition ‘Citizens and Kings’, held at the Royal Academy 
in London in 2007, where Napoleon enthroned hung facing the entrance and M. 
Bertin in glory at the end, these two reﬂections in effect inaugurated and 
concluded our viewing; a display concerning state and civic relations in the 
eighteenth and nineteenth centuries was, whatever its objective, framed by a 
Vasarian concept of the history of art. My parable turned back on me as one that 
now intimated the problem of wanting too little of the image, or too much of the 
detail or the name. 
Ingres, it now seemed to me, in making this reﬂection twice, was living in a 
practice of painting for which light comes neither from a window nor from other 
paintings, but from the history of art, as a pure convention of transmission; it 
passes through him, he reﬂects and refracts it in the present, captures an after­
life; and in this sense the portrait of M. Bertin is a lightless painting, a blacker 
painting than either Kasimir Malevich or Ad Reinhardt were eventually to make, 
even though Ingres is historically stranded within the paradigm of representa­
tion.37 At the same time, for me, another anxiousness now transcended the 
question that had troubled me of the coexistence of different forms of light in 
161 

D A N C I N G  Y E A R S ,  O R  W R I T I N G  A S  A  WAY  O U T  
M. Bertin, the conventional and the natural, as if there were no difference 
between them and as if I had to resolve this oxymoron by writing it out, in 
transmitting it. This new feeling probably concerns the nature of compulsion and 
repetition as modes of ﬁnding. But if this is important, then incompletion returns 
as an objective for my work. 
Notes 
This chapter is the rather abstract version of a much larger project that tries to 
map the connections between seeing and leaning, so as to speak, almost as if their 
relations were as vast a topography as a structural anthropology of myth. It 
arrives at the end of a year and a half of being in Art Writing as a practice of 
teaching, and is enabled by the work of friends and colleagues who have already 
long since taken this direction, Yve Lomax, Irit Rogoff and Carol Mavor spring to 
mind, mapped onto half-forgotten readings of Tel Quel before I had any idea what 
it was. If it plays fast and loose with, amongst many thinkers, Deleuze and 
Rancie`re, it is not because I am not indebted to the immense scholarship that has 
come into being around their work, studies of the visible, of democracy, of 
singularity, of being beside oneself, for example. It is because I want to capture 
certain moments of thinking as if they were just points from where I might have 
set out. At the same time I wanted this work to be speciﬁcally art historical, and 
this required me to tighten its frame. Even then I wanted to start over again with 
the development of a new hybrid object made up out of a Breughel (The Massacre of 
the Innocents, Vienna, Kunsthistorisches Museum, 1565–67), Ingres (The Duke of Alba 
in St Gudule, Montauban, Muse´e Ingres, 1815) and the Master of the Saint Ursula 
Legend (Groeninge Museum, Brugge, 1475–85) as memories of the present, but that 
will come next. The point of the ﬁnal project is that the image will always be 
theory, and everything said will set out from an image. 
1 Gilles Deleuze in Spinoza, philosophie pratique, 
6 Mainly these have concerned the tension 
Paris, 1981(2004), 32 [my translation]. ‘Il arrive a` 
between the textual elucidation of a document 
Spinoza de de´ﬁnir le de´sir comme ‘‘l’appe´tit avec 
and its historical framing and my reluctance to 
conscience de lui-meˆme’’. Mais il pre´cise seule­
reveal an archival proof of a speculative reading 
ment qu’il s’agit d’une de´ﬁnition nominale du 
to colleagues who doubted or refused a textual 
de´sir, et que la conscience n’ajoute rien a` 
methodology in the ﬁrst instance. 
l’appe´tit (‘‘nous ne tendons pas vers une chose 
7 By this I refer to a ﬁeld of knowledges, but one to 
parce que nous la jugeons bonne, mais au 
which I have assimilated myself in a speciﬁc way. 
contraire nous jugeons qu’elle est bonne parce 
The processes of thinking and investigation that 
nous tendons vers elle’’).’ 
include Mikhail Bakhtin, Tzvetan Todorov and 
2 Gustave Flaubert, Correspondance, 1, 1830–1851, 
Julia Kristeva’s understanding of the dialogic, 
e´dition pre´sente´e, e´tablie et annote´e par Jean 
the textual, the intertextual and the choric, 
Bruneau, Paris, 1973, letter to Louise Colet of 13 
suppose an archive that is constantly inferred 
August 1846, 298 [my translation]. ‘Il y a aussi un 
anew with each interpretative move between 
autre bonheur, oui il y en a un autre, je l’ai vu, tu 
words and images, feeling and methodologies, 
me l’as fait sentir. Tu m’as montre´ dans l’air ses 
reactions and their unravelling, and their 
reﬂets illumine´s, j’ai vu chatoyer a` mes regards 
summation remains Kristeva’s La Re´volution du 
le bas de son veˆtement ﬂottant.’ 
langage poe´tique. L’avant-garde a` la ﬁn du XIXe sie`cle, 
3 The Incredible String Band, ‘Job’s Song’ in Wee 
Lautre`amont et Mallarme´, Paris, 1974 and her Poly-
Tam, Elektra, 1968. 
logue, Paris, 1977. Of course the whole adventure 
4 Yve Lomax, Writing the Image, London, 2000, 181. 
of that great journal Tel Quel into hyper-struc­
5 Adrian Rifkin, Street Noises: Parisian Pleasure 1900– 
turalism on the one hand and diffe´rance on the 
1940, Manchester, 1993, in Chapter 4, ‘Neigh­
other was crucial and the limit case of this 
bouring states, soldiers and sailors’. 
remains Jean Louis Schefer’s Scenographie d’un 
162 

D A N C I N G  Y E A R S ,  O R  W R I T I N G  A S  A  WAY  O U T  
tableau, Paris, 1967 as well as his subsequent 
renunciation of his book. For a discussion of this 
see my article ‘From structure to enigma, and 
back, perhaps’, The Journal of Visual Culture, 4, 3,  
December 2005, 365, note 381. 
8   Gayatry Chakravorty Spivak, ‘The Rani of Sirmur: 
an essay on reading the archives’, History and 
Theory: Studies in the Philosophy of History, 24, 3, 
1985, 247–2. A Critique of Postcolonial Reason: 
Toward 
a 
History of 
the 
Vanishing 
Present, 
Cambridge, MA and London, 1999. 
9   The terms of submission for grants from Arts 
and Humanities Research Council can be found 
on its website. The plight of practice-based 
research is especially dire, but, by implication so 
is that of other research, which is improperly 
constituted as if not a practice. For Broad see 
www.ditext.com/broad/bybroad.html. 
For 
Georges Didi-Huberman see his Ouvrir Ve´nus, 
Paris, 1999, 27. 
10  Contemporary British Philosophy: Personal Statements 
(First Series), ed. J. H. Muirhead, London, 1924, 
77–100. 
11 Didi-Huberman in his generally important book 
on Warburg, L’image survivante, histoire de l’art et 
temps des fantoˆmes selon Aby Warburg, Paris, 2002, 
is insistent on his own hero’s having preceded 
Freud and the Traumdeutung in his conception of 
image and time. But I see no point at all in this 
play of precedence in the context of deferred 
action as an historical time, as to do so under­
mines the very point. Nor can I feel happy with 
the excessive investment in the personality of 
Warburg as seismograph, ontologizing him as a 
symptom of his times in a way that collapses the 
life and the work as a single text. See also Giorgio 
Agamben, Image et me´moire, Paris, 1998, for his 
1984 text here entitled ‘Aby Warburg et le 
science san nom’, translated by Marco dell’ 
Omodarme. 
12 Aby Warburg, ‘A lecture on serpent ritual’, 
Journal of the Warburg Institute, 2, 4, April 1939, 
326–45 Claude Le´vi-Strauss, The Savage Mind, 
London, 1966. 
13 See Sigrid Weigel, ‘Aby Warburg’s schlangenri­
tual: reading culture and reading written texts’, 
trans. Jeremy Gaines and Rebecca Wallach New 
German Critique, 65, Spring-Summer 1995, 135–53. 
14 Philipp Alain Michaud, Aby warburg et l’image en 
movement, preface Georges Didi-Huberman, Paris, 
1998. E. H. Gombrich, Aby Warburg: An Intellectual 
Biography, Oxford, 1970. 
15 Aby Warburg, Images from the Region of the Pueblo 
Indians of North America, trans. Michael P. Stein­
berg, Ithaca, NY and London, 1997. 
16 In the opening passages of Jacques Lacan, Le 
se´minaire livre Xl, Les quatre concepts fondamentaux 
de la psychanalyse, Paris, 1973, 12. 
17 See Karen Lang’s ﬁne study, Chaos and Cosmos: On 
the Image in Aesthetics and Art History, Ithaca, NY 
and London, 2006. Her brief discussion of posi­
tivism, around pages 182–6 is useful here. Also 
Weigel et al.: ‘In turning to the hybrid book that 
was published as Schlangenritual, it is not my 
intention to bring together various isolated 
insights yielded by the different disciplines’ 
viewpoints of it mentioned above. Such an 
approach, 
adding 
up 
individual 
scholarly 
aspects, may be customary today. This approach 
likes to go by the name of ‘‘interdisciplinary 
research’’, particularly when addressing ﬁnan­
cial sponsors.’ See Weigel, ‘Aby Warburg’s 
schlangenritual’, 137. 
18 See O.K. Werckmeister, ‘Walter Benjamin’s angel 
of history, or the transﬁguration of the revolu­
tionary into historian’, Critical Inquiry, 22, 2, 
Winter 1996, 239–67 for an understanding gloss 
on this by now sadly exaggerated ﬁgure of 
cultural theory. 
19 For an earlier gloss on this in the development of 
my concerns see my essay on Jacques Rancie`re 
written for his Colloque de Cerisiy, May, 2004, ‘JR 
Cine´phile’, in La philosophie de´place´e, Autour de 
Jacques Rancie`re, Paris, 2006, 371–8, and available 
on my site, www.gai-savoir.net/now.html. A slightly 
adjusted version appears in Parallax, 52, 2009. 
20 Sigrid Weigel, ‘The symptomatology of a univer­
salized concept of trauma: on the failing of 
Freud’s reading of Tasso in the trauma of 
history’, trans. Georgina Paul, New German 
Critique, 90, Autumn 2003, 85–9. 
21 See Georges Didi-Huberman, Ninfa moderna: essai 
sur le drape´ tombe´, Paris, 2002. 
22 Laura Mulvey, Death 24  a Second: Stillness and 
the Moving Image, London, 2006. See Chapter 8, 
‘Delaying cinema’. 
23 Jacques Rancie`re, The Future of the Image, trans. 
Gregory Elliott, London and New York, 2007, 109 
[translation modiﬁed]. 
24 See above note 19 for my citation of Rancie`re and 
see also John Mowitt, ‘Trauma and its cultural 
aftereffects’, Cultural Critique, 46, Autumn 2000, 
272–97. 
25 See Monique Schneider, Ge´ne´alogie du masculin, 
Paris, 2000, 246. 
26 See Brett Rothstein’s ﬁne essay on this painting, 
‘Looking the part: ruminative viewing and the 
imagination of community in the early modern 
Low Countries’, Art History, 31, 1, 137–8. 
27 My interest in this intensely discussed notion of 
‘beside oneself’ which cuts across all kinds of 
theories of the subject from the religious to the 
psychoanalytic as well as anti-psychoanalytic 
aspects of Deleuze really came to me in 
wondering about the relation between the back 
and the front of some canvases by David Pearce 
and my thinking about this through St John of 
the Cross. It came rather differently from the 
occupation of generating hybrid images, in 
which the combination of a painting by Mattia 
Preti and a poem by Wilfred Owen sent me off on 
the track of an idea of the dejected-masculine. As 
becomes 
more 
common, 
the 
theoretical 
elaboration reappeared through the found or 
made-up object. The David Pearce essay, origin­
ally as ‘Putting-off, the painter’s tense & some 
163 

D A N C I N G  Y E A R S ,  O R  W R I T I N G  A S  A  WAY  O U T  
speculations on gay time’, parallax, 5, 1, 1999, 
103–19, is at gai-savoir.net/then.html – ‘Putting 
Off’. See also Schneider, Ge´ne´alogie. 
28 First there were a couple of pseudonyms who 
took their inspiration from Carol Duncan’s 
Cheryl Bernstein. There were Sister Mary McGill 
and then Davida Pendleton, who recently made a 
comeback in Christopher Bannerman, Joshua 
Sofaer and Jane Watt, eds, Navigating the Unknown 
– The Creative Process in the Performing Arts, Enﬁeld, 
2006, 120. There Davida, whom I believe to be my 
Jewish and once suburban self, encounters the 
alter ego of performance artist Richard Layzell, 
Tanya Koswycz, thus intensifying the exploration 
of ﬁctional practices and theories in the inter-
textual. Then followed my ‘porno-theories’ in 
which a group of gay men, led by David, commit 
theoretical errors as sex-acts. The ﬁnal chapter of 
my Ingres Then, and Now, London, 2001, is the 
outcome of one of these. The most recent and 
probably ﬁnal porno-theory is at www.gai­
savoir.net/now.html, Queer Matters. 
29 Between Hume’s Morals and Kant’s concept of 
taste – classic and inescapable topos of the 
aporetics of judgement. 
30 This is written after hearing her Slade Lectures of 
2008 in Cambridge, and particularly looking at 
the movement between her changing power point 
images, accumulating and transforming meaning 
in a complicated palimpsest with the spoken text, 
something that reminds me of Edgar Wind’s 
seminar slide technique, even if this involved only 
single, black and white 6  6 slides.  See  also  
Margaret Iversen, ‘Retrieving Warburg’s tradition’, 
in Donald Preziosi, ed., The Art of Art History: A 
Critical Anthology, Oxford, 1998, 215–25. 
31 My own attempt to push this almost too far is to 
be found in my article ‘Addressing Ekphrasis, or 
a prolegomena to the next’, The Journal of Classical 
Philology, 100, 2007, 72–82. 
32 That is to say, topological writing that opens up 
presents and histories to one another, if only in 
the moment of the next, the very next phrase. 
The work of Jean Louis Schefer, who deploys the 
notion of a surface, exempliﬁes, again and again, 
the difference of different works and arts, the 
uneven relations of the visible and how the 
split of the leaning and the knowing can be 
explored. While Rosalind Krauss in her atypical 
The Picasso Papers, Cambridge, MA, 1998, in her 
mimicry of Picasso’s palimpsests, derives a form 
of history from the details of a gesture. T. J. 
Clark’s in many ways beautiful and fascinating 
The Sight of Death, and Experiment in Art Writing, 
London, 2006, is successful rather because it is 
not an experiment than because it is one, as 
signalled in the title. It carves out a space 
between Schefer and Krauss, but this space is 
given by other experiments, by authors who did 
not see their writing as such; rather it is a 
departure. Another appealing interlocutor here 
is Jean-Claude Lebensztejn, Annexes – de l’oeuvre 
d’art, Paris, 1999. 
33  Le Robert Dictionnaire historique de la langue fran­
c¸aise, ed. Alain Rey, vol. 2, Paris, 1992, 1421. 
34 Paolo Berdini, The Religious Art of Jacopo Bassano: 
Painting as Visual Exegesis, Cambridge, 1997, 1–35, 
for his discussion of parable as method of exegesis. 
35 It is this, a pre-1914–18 war collection, Me´langes 
offertsa` M. Henry Lemonnier, par la Socie´te´ de l’histoire 
de l’art franc¸ais, ses amis et ses ´ele`ves, preface M. 
Ernest Lavisse, Paris, 1913. 
36 It was Pat Rubin in her Giorgio Vasari: Art and 
History, New Haven, CT and London, 1995, who 
brought me up against this ineluctable imma­
nence. I owe her thanks for setting me off in much 
of this rethink of Ingres. For a neat conjunction of 
image and text, see http://easyweb.easynet.co.uk/ 
giorgio.vasari/raphael/pic72.htm. 
37 I explored this in some detail at a lecture that 
Marcella Lista invited me to give at the Audi­
torium du Louvre in March 2006; an mpeg of the 
lecture is available on the home page of www.gai­
savoir.net. 
164 

INDEX   
Note: Page numbers for illustrations are in bold type. 
absolutist states 115 
Abstract Expressionism 26, 29, 63, 67 
masculinity of 25, 28 
post-painterly 65 
process-based thinking central to 62 
reaction to 71 
Acconci, Vito 70 
acrylics 23–4, 26 
advertising art/display 69 
aesthetics 63, 64, 75, 100 
ethical dimension in 4, 54 
Kantian 111 
Alberti, Leon Battista 79, 81, 88 
alla prima 87 
allegory 18, 26 
Alpers, Svetlana 86 
alterity 36, 41, 49, 52, 54 
Amsterdam 135, 137, 139, 140 
animal imagery 9 
Antal, Frederick 100, 120, 121 
anthropology 2, 115 
cultural 92 
anthropomorphism 43 
anti-art approach 64 
anti-semitism 121 
Antwerp 143 
Archer, Michael 70 
architecture 74, 89, 104, 159 
Archives Nationales 151 
Aristotelianism 115 
Art History (inaugural issue 1978) 9 
art-history ﬁction 129 
audience participation 62, 73 
Auerbach, Erich 85, 159 
Augustine, Saint 158 
Aurignacian men 9 
authenticity 1, 132, 137, 138, 139-40, 144, 151 
avant-garde art 26, 65, 74 
emphasis on surface in painting 23 
masculine metaphorics disrupted through 
parody 
28 
Bacon, Francis 28-9, 158 
Study for Head of George Dyer 27 
Bailey, Douglass 12 
Bala´zs, Be´la 100 
Baldessari, John 67, 70, 71 
Balzac, Honore´ de 130, 131 
Barney, Matthew 72, 73 
Barr, Alfred 62 
Barthes, Roland 67, 81, 131, 159 
Baudelaire, Charles 59, 60, 68, 74 
Baudrillard, Jean 67 
Baxandall, Michael 5, 119, 120, 122 
Beaumont, George 22, 23 
Becher, Bernd and Hilla 70 
Becker, Howard 123 
Being 37, 38, 44 
Belgium 156 
Bellori, Gian Pietro 131 
Benjamin, Walter 2, 5, 99, 137–8, 153 
Berber weavings 159 
Berdini, Paolo 160 
Berenson, Bernard 6, 161 
Bernard, E ´mile 23 
165 

I N D E X  
Beuys, Joseph 4, 45, 46, 62, 63-4, 66–7, 69, 70, 
71, 72, 73 
Coyote 66   
Felt Suit 45   
Bing, Gertrud 152 
biographies 1, 132, 135, 144 
Black Mountain College 70 
bodily experience see embodiment 
body art 63 
Botticelli, Sandro 120 
Boucher, Franc¸ois 130 
Bourdieu, Pierre 5, 119, 122–3 
bourgeoisie 112, 113, 115, 116, 118, 120 
Brancacci Chapel 79, 80 
Brass.ai 24 
Brentano, Franz von 42 
Broad, C. D. 151 
Brownmiller, Susan 25 
Bruegel, Pieter 5, 129, 142–5 
Bruges 155 
Brussels (Palais de Beaux Arts) 159 
Budapest 100 
Bueno, Maria 154 , 155–6 
Burckhardt, Jacob 1 
Buren, Daniel 70 
Butler, Judith 37, 38, 40, 47, 49, 52 
Butt, Gavin 26 
Cage, John 63, 70, 71 
Cai Guo-Qiang 71, 73 
Caravaggio, Michelangelo 13, 144 
Cartesian subject 150, 161 
Cartier-Bresson, Henri 67 
cartridge paper 21 
Casoni, Felice Antonio 18 
Catholicism 107, 117, 133 
Cavalieri, Tommaso de’ 14 
Cennini, Cennino 136 
Ce´zanne, Paul 100, 146 
chance 28 
chat rooms 158 
Chevalier, Tracy 5, 6, 129, 130, 132–6, 141, 142, 
144, 145 
Girl with a Pearl Earring 133 
chiasmic structure 37, 41, 43, 47, 49 
Chicago, Judy 71 
Christianity 106, 159 
Christie’s 145 
Christo 63 
chronology 4 
cinema see ﬁlm 
civic guards 107 
Claes van Ruijven, Pieter 133, 134, 135, 136, 
141, 142 
Clark, Kenneth 11 
Clark, T. J. 22, 23, 24, 25, 86 
class structure 113 
classicism 112, 122 
classiﬁcation problems 4 
Clemente, Francesco 64 
Collins, Desmond 9–10, 11 
communism 122 
computer technology 29, 70 
Conceptual Art 4, 62–73 
connaissance 80, 81, 85 
connoisseurship 153, 158, 161 
consciousness 44, 49, 83 
conservative thought 114, 117, 118, 123 
Constantinian reliefs 104 
Contemporary Art 4, 23, 53, 57-77, 99, 104, 
119 
installation art readily used to describe 47 
rootedness of technologies in textiles 29 
Corbett, David Peters 16–17 
Craig, William Marshall 17, 20 
Crary, Jonathan 48, 92 
culture 98–128 
Cuttler, Charles 144 
Dada 64 
Damisch, Hubert 5, 89 
David, Gerard 155, 158 
The Judgment of Cambyses 154 
deconstruction 3, 68, 75, 161 
De Kooning, Willem 25, 28 
De la Croix, Horst 62 
Deleuze, Gilles 84, 90, 93, 150, 158 
Delft 132, 133, 142 
Denkwollen 106, 113, 115, 119 
Derrida, Jacques 67 
Descartes, Rene´ 141 
see also Cartesian subject 
dialectical process 113, 118 
Dickie, George 59 
166 

I N D E X  
Didi-Huberman, Georges 156   
diffe´rance 26, 151   
digital technology 29, 72, 73, 74, 91, 92   
Dilthey, Wilhelm 5, 102, 110, 111, 112   
Diocletian 106   
distance 3   
hinge between proximity and 26   
dithyramb 157, 159   
documentary meaning 102   
Domenico Robusti 108–9   
Dostoevsky, Fyodor 100   
Duchamp, Marcel 67, 70   
Dutch art see Netherlandish paintings   
Dvorak, Max 103   
E´cole des Hautes-E ´tudes en Sciences Sociales  
89  
E´cole Normale Superieure 89  
egalitarianism 68, 107  
either/orism 25–30  
Elias, Norbert 99  
Eliasson, Olafur 47–8, 53  
Your colour memory 48  
Eliot, George 130   
embodied action   
intentional experience and 42–8   
perception of space through 50   
embodied perception 3–4   
reverse and obverse sides of 37   
embodiment 5, 9, 34, 35, 40, 41, 80, 81, 88   
linguistic dimension of 54   
phenomenology and 36, 54   
prerequisite for thinking outside oneself   
38   
sexual identity 29   
symbolic 19   
understood to refer to quasi-immersion in   
artwork 37   
embroidery 29   
Emin, Tracey 70, 73   
England 117, 118   
Enlightened monarchs 115   
´epater le bourgeois 65   
episteme 80, 82, 84, 88, 93   
Erfahrung 111   
Eribon, Didier 79   
Erkenntniswollen 113  
Erlebnis 110, 111  
eroticism 16  
daydreams 9  
nakedness taken to be a sign of 10  
objects created by men 11  
ethical dimension 4, 54  
ethics of interpretation 34, 42, 43  
reciprocity and 48–54  
ethnography 156  
Ettinger, Bracha Lichtenberg 159  
experiential spaces 112  
Expressionism 69  
see also Abstract Expressionism  
expressive meaning 102  
faculty of projection 10   
fantasy 9, 11, 16, 24, 135, 136, 143, 145   
solipsistic 47   
utopian 161   
fascism 121, 122   
fecundity 11   
female genitals 10   
femininity   
embroidery indelibly associated with 29   
ﬂuids traditionally aligned with 24   
hinge between masculinity and 26   
signiﬁer of 21   
watercolour allied to 23   
feminism/feminist art 2, 16, 19, 71, 72, 73,   
159   
conceptualism associated with activism 69   
later 67, 70   
second-wave 11   
supposed 68   
feudal society 115, 116, 118, 121   
ﬁction 3, 5, 6, 129–49, 151   
ﬁlm 62, 135, 151, 156   
popular genres 72   
Firth, Colin 135   
Flanders 144   
Flaubert, Gustave 150, 152   
Fleming, John 61, 63, 64, 69, 70, 73, 75   
Flemish painting 154   
ﬂesh ontology 35, 37, 40, 41, 47   
167 

I N D E X  
Fletcher, Adrian 80  
Florence 79  
bourgeoisie 120  
Fluxus 70, 71  
Focillon, Henri 89  
Fontana, Lavinia 18  
Foster, Hal 75  
Foucault, Michel 4-5, 13, 58, 62, 67, 78–98,  
119, 131, 159  
Fox Talbot, William Henry 86  
Fragonard, Jean H. 130  
France 117, 118  
18th-century bourgeoisie 113  
Frankenthaler, Helen 26  
Frankfurt 99  
Frayn, Michael 5, 6, 129, 130, 131, 142–5,  
147  
Headlong 143  
Free School for Humanities (Hungary) 121  
French Revolution 117  
frescoes 14, 15, 20, 79  
compositional techniques 120   
female painters 16–19   
see also Michelangelo   
Freud, Lucian 67  
Freud, Sigmund 152  
Fried, Michael 39, 43  
Friedl. ander, Max 144  
Fromanger, Ge´rard 78, 80, 84, 85, 87, 90, 158  
frozen images 158  
Gardner, Helen 60, 61, 62, 67, 68, 71-3, 74, 75  
Garrard, Mary D. 18, 19  
Gauguin, Paul 146  
gay issues 13–16, 151, 160  
gender 2, 13, 19–30, 34, 92  
assumptions about 10   
deeply held beliefs about 16   
deﬁned as a social construct 3   
particular vision of 11   
touch without 12   
genre 61, 62, 74, 104, 153  
debate about the function of 4  
stylistic strategies of 129  
see also ﬁction; ﬁlm  
Gentileschi, Artemisia 17–19, 131  
Self-Portrait 18  
geometrical forms 120  
Germany 63, 83, 106  
art history as academic discipline 2, 5  
development of conservative thought 118  
economic and political rationalization 114,  
117  
Nazi 5, 136, 137  
see also Denkwollen; Kunstwollen; 
Lebensphilosophie; Weltwollen  
Gesamtwollen 113  
Gestaltprinzip 114  
Gestaltungswollen 113  
gestures 36, 37, 40, 44, 49, 52, 54, 87  
breadth of 18   
expansive 19   
subtle 107   
Gibson, Walter 144  
Gilbert and George 69  
Gimbutas, Marija 11  
Giovanni da Pistoia 17, 19  
Girtin, Thomas 20, 21–2  
View of Pont Saint 20  
glamour models 9  
globalization 74, 91  
Goddard, Jean-Luc 84  
Gombrich, Ernst H. 5, 58, 61, 62–3, 67,  
74, 75, 99, 100, 106, 118, 120, 121,  
122, 152  
Gospels 156  
Gothic style/spirit 112  
Goya, Francisco de 84, 156, 158  
Tauromaquia 157  
Graham, Dan 70  
Greek art 106  
Greek myths 14  
Groningen 140  
Grossmann, Fritz 144  
Grosz, Elizabeth 12  
group portraiture 104, 106–7, 118, 123  
development of 114  
Grundintention 114  
Gu, Wenda 71, 73  
Guattari, Felix 84  
Guggenheim Museum 72  
Gutai group 70  
168 

I N D E X  
Haacke, Hans 66  
habitus 119  
Hadid, Zaha 159  
Haines, David 158  
Halley, Peter 67, 70  
Happenings 70  
Harbison, Craig 144  
Hard Edge 65  
Hardy, Thomas 130  
Harr, Jonathan 144  
Hart, Joan 103  
Hauser, Arnold 100, 121, 153  
Hayek, Friedrich von 122  
Hazlitt, William 22-3  
Heartney, Eleanor 57  
Hegel, G. W. F. 61, 63, 64, 68, 84–5, 116  
Hegelianism 1, 101, 113, 120, 152  
Heidegger, Martin 37, 38, 40  
Heidelberg 100  
Heidensohn, Frances 9  
Heller, Joseph 131  
Hermes 156  
Hibbard, Howard 13, 14  
Hill, David 21  
Hippolyte, Jean 84–5  
Hitchcock, Alfred 142  
Hockney, David 65, 67, 73  
Holland see Netherlandish paintings  
Holocaust 136  
homosexuality  
allegory of 26   
and class difference 151   
evidence of 16   
inherently oriented 14   
suppressed 13   
Honour, Hugh 61, 63, 64, 69, 70,  
73, 75  
Horkheimer, Max 99  
Horn, Rebecca 67, 73  
Houbraken, Arnold 131  
Hughes, Anthony 14, 16  
Hume, David 159  
humility 54  
primary 51, 52–3  
Hungary 100, 121  
Husserl, Edmund 42–3, 102, 103  
hypocrisy 102  
iconography/iconology 5, 99, 101, 103, 119,  
120  
ideologies 68, 69, 106  
free-market 122  
ready-made 117  
illustrations mania 85  
impasto 23–5, 28  
Impressionism 23, 78, 112  
Incredible String Band, The 150  
individualism 107, 121  
bourgeois 112  
information technology 74  
Information exhibition (1970) 70  
Ingres, Jean 160–2  
Installation Art 4, 47, 53, 62, 73  
mixed media 70  
rise of 36  
Institute of Social Research (Germany) 99  
intellectuals 121  
intentionality 4, 5, 36  
embodied action and 42–8  
Internet 72  
sex-chat 158  
interpretation 9, 11, 12, 14, 19, 21, 62  
assumptions about gender and sexuality  
10   
meaning and 6, 17, 81   
phenomenological 34, 37, 42, 51, 52   
resistance of art to 4   
solipsistic 35   
see also ethics of interpretation   
IoW (Mannheim’s Interpretation of 
Weltanschauung) 
99, 101–2, 103, 104, 112, 113, 114, 119  
Irigaray, Luce 41–2, 43, 44, 45  
Italian Renaissance 79, 84, 112, 113  
social interaction characteristic of cities  
119  
Italianate planimetric symmetry 107  
Jacobsz, Dirk 107  
A Group of Guardsmen 110  
Janson, Anthony F. 64, 67  
Janson, Horst Waldemar 61, 64, 67, 68, 71, 73,  
75  
Jay, Martin 90  
169 

I N D E X  
Jews 121, 138, 139 
Nazi looting of art collections 136, 137 
Johns, Jasper 26, 28, 29 
Jones, Amelia 57, 60 
Jongelinck, Niclaes 143 
Jordanova, Ludmilla 11 
Kant, Immanuel 36, 101, 110, 111, 152 
Kaprow, Allan 65, 67, 69 
Karr, Mary 132 
Kelly, Grace 153 
Kemeny, Zoltan 63 
Kernan, Michael 131 
Kiefer, Anselm 64, 66 
Kierkegaard, Sren 100 
Klein, Yves 63, 84 
Kleiner, Fred S. 71 
Kline, Franz 63 
Koons, Jeff 70 
Kosuth, Joseph 64, 67, 69, 70, 71, 72, 73 
One and Three Chairs 65 
Kounellis, Jannis 70 
Krauss, Rosalind 40, 49–50, 51, 52–3 
Kreuzpunkt 110 
Kriz, Kay Dian 20 
Kruger, Barbara 68, 70, 72 
Kugler, Franz 63 
Kultur 122 
Kunstwollen 5, 100–6, 110, 111, 113–14, 116, 117, 
118 
Lacan, Jacques 152 
Lairesse, Gerard de 135 
land art 63 
language 4, 38 
indirect 81, 89 
Lapierre, Alexandra 131 
Las Meninas (Vela´zquez) 78, 79, 80, 82, 83, 86, 
90 
Lauretis, Theresa de 11 
Lawler, Louise 67, 70 
Lebensphilosophie 110 
Lebensverlauf 110 
Lefort, Paul 86 
Leonardo da Vinci 81 
Les Temps Modernes (journal) 81 
Lessing, Doris 158 
Lesznai, Anna 100 
Le´vi-Strauss, Claude 152 
Levinas, Emmanuel 52 
Levine, Sherrie 67, 70 
LeWitt, Sol 63, 70, 73 
libidinal desire 34 
Lingis, Alphonso 52 
linguistics 81 
Lippard, Lucy 11 
Lomax, Yve 150 
Louvre (Galerie Espanole) 85–6 
lovemaking 9 
Lucie-Smith, Edward 57 
Lukacs, Georg 99, 100, 121 
‘machismotiﬁcs’ 26 
Magritte, Rene´ 78, 80, 84, 85, 90 
Maˆle, E ´mile 89 
Malevich, Kasimir 161 
Malraux, Andre´ 81 
Mandarin humanistic intelligentsia 122 
Manet, E ´douard 78, 80, 83–4, 85, 86, 87, 90 
Mangold, Sylvia Plimack 69 
Mannheim, Karl 5, 99–128 
maquillage 21 
Marini, Marino 63, 73 
Marx, Karl 84, 85, 115, 121 
Marxism 1, 90, 102, 113, 120, 122 
characteristics of 111, 112 
intellectual, ultra-Hegelian side of 152 
revolutionary culturalism 121 
Masaccio 79 
masculinity 19, 29 
abstract expressionist 25, 28 
hinge between femininity and 26 
metaphorics of 24 
oil allied to 23 
Matisse, Henri 24 
Matton, Sylvie 131 
McCoid, Catherine 11 
McDermott, LeRoy D. 11 
Megill, Allan 89-90 
Merleau-Ponty, Maurice 3, 5, 35, 36–44, 48, 
49, 51, 52, 78, 79, 81–3, 84, 89 
metaphors 24, 25, 28, 37, 131, 135, 140 
feminine body 41 
military 60 
170 

I N D E X  
passage of time and space 49  
postulates 106  
Michaud, Philippe-Alain 152  
Michelangelo (Buonarroti) 24, 131, 132, 141  
depictions of the feminine form 14  
gendering of oil painting 17  
homosexuality 13, 14, 16  
Sistine Chapel frescoes 14, 15, 16, 17, 19,   
135  
Milhazes, Beatriz 70, 73  
Minelli, Vicente 153, 158  
Minimalism 39, 62, 63, 65, 69, 70, 73  
reaction to 71  
Mitchell, W. J. T. 91  
Modernism 59, 63, 66, 67, 69, 70, 75, 100  
initial attack on 68  
late 60  
tradition of classical naturalism against  
122  
modes of confrontation 4, 36, 52, 54  
receptive 35  
Montias, Michael 133  
Morandi, G. 67  
Morris, Robert 39–40  
Untitled (L-beams) 39  
Moser, Justus 116  
Motley, John Lothrop 144  
movie buffs 158  
Mowitt, John 157  
M .uller, Adam 116  
multiculturalism 59, 68, 74  
multimedia 72  
Mulvey, Laura 156  
nakedness 11, 14, 40  
pornographic magazines 12  
taken to be a sign of eroticism 10  
Namuth, Hans 131  
natural sciences 101  
Nauman, Bruce 66, 70, 72, 73  
neither/norism see either/orism  
Nelson, Sarah M. 11  
Neo-Expressionism 68  
Neolithic ﬁgurines 11  
Netherlandish paintings 5, 129, 130  
see also group portraiture  
New York  
Museum of Modern Art 53  
school painters 26  
Nietzsche, Friedrich 64, 90, 110  
Nietzschianism 152  
novels 146, 147  
16th- and 17th-century artists 5, 129–42,  
145, 155  
object-viewer relationship 3  
OED (Oxford English Dictionary) 74  
Old Europe 11  
Oldenburg, Claes 46  
Floor Cake 46  
Onians, John 9–10, 11  
ontology of the ﬂesh see ﬂesh ontology  
op art 67  
Orpheus 156, 158  
Orton, Fred 26  
Owens, Laura 70  
paganism 106  
pain 158  
painting  
distinction between sculpture and 45  
female personiﬁcation/femininity of 18, 20  
ﬁgurative 25  
Foucault and 4–5, 78–98  
historical method and realism in 83-7  
postmodern 68  
Renaissance theories of 5  
sexual connotations of 23  
Panofsky, Erwin 2, 5, 99, 100, 101–3, 104, 119,  
120, 121  
parables 160, 161  
Paris 156  
Parker, Rozsika 19, 29  
parody 28, 29  
patriarchy 29, 115, 116, 121  
Paul, Saint 159  
Paul IV, Pope 16  
Pears, Iain 146-7  
The Portrait 146  
perception 34, 38, 40, 42, 43, 50, 74, 112  
Bourdieu’s sociology of art 119  
‘currentness’ of visual studies 92  
171 

I N D E X  
disarticulation between artwork and 54  
embodied 3–4, 37  
giving form to 82  
one’s own time 60  
physical difference 12  
realism’s contributions to modernity 86  
sensual experience conﬁned to limits of 48  
solipsism of 41, 48  
splitting of the subject in 160  
theoretical 151  
viewer’s attempt to stabilize 51  
Performance Art 62, 67, 63–4, 69, 72, 73, 84  
performative notion 161  
periodization 4, 74, 75, 90, 92  
perspectivity 105, 106  
petit-bourgeois 115, 118  
phalluses 11, 24  
phenomenology 3, 4, 5, 79, 101, 102, 103, 112,  
158  
and interpretation 34–55  
philosophy 2, 3, 4, 17, 81, 86, 100, 104  
complex analyses of painting 93  
idealist 113  
medieval 89  
see also under various names, e.g. Barthes;  
Baudrillard; Broad; Deleuze; Derrida;  
Descartes; Foucault; Guattari; Hegel;  
Heidegger; Hume; Husserl; Kant; Lacan;  
Marx;  
Merleau-Ponty; Moser; Nietzsche; Sartre;  
Schopenhauer; Spinoza; Vale´ry;  
Wittgenstein  
photogenic drawing 86  
photography 62, 67, 68, 69, 70, 85, 91, 131  
cameraless process 87  
history of 64  
montage 65  
new approach to 71  
projection 84  
rewriting the story of the birth of 92  
photo-realism 63  
physical desire 11  
Picasso, Pablo 152, 153  
Piero della Francesca 120  
Plant, Sadie 29  
Playboy 9  
poetry 151  
Pollock, Griselda 6, 19, 24, 159  
Pollock, Jackson 24, 25, 28, 29, 39, 63, 67, 131  
pop art 63, 67, 68  
Popper, Karl 5, 99, 118, 120–1, 122  
pornographic magazines 12, 72  
Post-Impressionists 23  
Postminimalism 39  
sculpture 36, 37  
Postmodernism 59, 62, 66–76, 81, 91, 93  
Potts, Alex 44–7  
preferences 154  
prehistory 9–12  
Preti, Mattia 13  
Pricasso 23  
Portrait of Ree 24  
process-based thinking 62, 63  
Proust, Marcel 130, 154  
provenance ﬁction 129  
psychical phenomena 42  
psychoanalysis 158, 159  
psychological realism 130  
Pueblo cultures 156  
queerness 13, 16, 26, 160  
race 34  
Rancie`re, Jacques 59, 151, 156–7  
Raphael (Sanzio) 161  
rational-calculative orientation 114, 115, 118,  
119  
Read, Herbert 6, 153  
reductionism 100  
Reinhardt, Ad 161  
relativism 35, 100  
epistemological 104  
existential 104  
I’m OK, You’re OK 130  
religious confraternities 107  
Rembrandt 110, 131, 135  
Renaissance 12, 16, 79, 87–9, 112, 113–14, 119,  
144  
High 17, 19  
ideal viewer characterization 120  
theories of painting 5  
Renoir, Pierre Auguste 23, 28  
172 

I N D E X  
reportage 151  
reversibility 38, 43, 44, 49  
Riegl, Alois 2, 5, 99–128  
Rifkin, Adrian 13  
Rist, Pipilotti 53–4  
Pour Your Body Out 53  
Robb, Peter 131  
Robert dictionnaire historique 160  
Romanticism 59, 132  
basis of 115  
Rothko, Mark 153  
Rowley, Alison 26  
Royal Academy (London) 161  
Rusha, Ed 70  
Santa Croce frescoes 79  
Santa Maria del Carmine 79  
Sartre, Jean-Paul 5, 79, 90  
Saslow, James M. 13–14  
Saussure, Ferdinand de 81–2  
savoir 81, 85, 88  
Schapiro, Miriam 72  
Schopenhauer, Arthur 110  
Schwitters, Kurt 63  
sculpture 46, 47, 49–50, 51, 53–4, 67, 68, 71,  
88, 104  
deﬁned 44–5  
medieval 89  
phenomenology as a means of thinking  
48  
postminimalist 36, 37  
seeing 26, 37, 41, 44  
aesthetic and political possibility of 151  
perception of physical difference 12  
reversibility of 38  
saying versus 90  
self-portraits 17–19, 70  
semen 23  
semiotics 68, 71, 89  
Serra, Richard 49–50, 51  
Strike 50  
sexual desire  
illicit 20  
presumed predominantly heterosexual 11  
sexual difference 26  
construction or deconstruction of 3  
means of articulating 28  
negated 41  
touch and 12, 13  
sexual hierarchy 24  
sexual psychology 13  
sexuality 14, 89, 91, 92  
archaeological descriptions of 88  
assumptions about 10  
explicit, shock value of 67  
growing interest in 3  
history of 88, 93  
political struggles related to 13  
preferences 14  
urges 9  
Shapiro, Gary 90  
she-male ﬁgures 19  
Sherman, Cindy 4, 62, 64, 67, 68, 69  
Untitled Film Still (#35) 56  
Sirk, Douglas 156  
Situationists 84  
Smith, Greg 22-3  
Smith, Tony 42, 43  
Die 43  
Smithson, Robert 71  
social change 106, 118  
social functionality 112  
social interaction 103, 111, 113, 119, 123  
Social Scientiﬁc Society (Hungary) 121  
sociology 2, 92  
Mannheim on art history and culture 5,  
99-128  
Marxist 102, 120, 121  
solipsism 47, 54  
charges of 35, 44  
concession to 48  
perception based on 41, 48  
solipsistic orientation 49, 51  
Sombart, Werner 102  
Sorbonne 89  
Sotheby’s 61  
Soulages, Pierre 63  
Spain 107  
Spanish School 86  
sperm 23, 24  
Spinoza, B. 150  
Spivak, Gayatry 151  
173 

I N D E X  
Stael, Nicolas de 63  
Stechow, Wolfgang 144  
Stendhal 83–4, 85  
Stoichita, Victor 92  
Stokes, Adrian 14  
Stokstad, Marilyn 61, 65, 70, 71, 73, 75  
Stone, Irving 131, 132, 141  
structuralism 2, 84  
subjectivity 102, 103, 104, 105, 106, 107, 116  
ethical quandaries surrounding 34  
idealized 157  
‘mirroring’ of 92  
unique, unknowable 132  
Sunday Circle 100, 121  
Surrealism 69, 78, 84, 85  
Sylvester, David 28  
systems theory 73  
Tansey, Mark 67, 70  
Tansey, Richard G. 62  
textiles 29  
pigment-soaked 28  
texture 12, 41, 47  
theatricality 39, 43  
Thins, Maria 133, 135-6  
Time 153  
Tinterow, Gary 86  
Tintoretto, Jacopo 79  
see also Domenico Robusti  
Tolnay, Charles de 144  
touch 13, 160  
erotics of 11-12  
feminine 29  
insistence on primacy of 36  
invited 46  
on the verge of 49  
vision and 26, 37, 38, 44  
Toulon 151  
transcendentalism 36, 51  
Trombadori, Duccio 90  
Tunis 84  
Turner, J. M. W. 20, 21–2, 23  
Norham Castle 22   
Warkworth Castle 21   
Turrell, James 53  
Tuymans, Luc 70  
United States 36, 122  
Upper Palaeolithic period 3, 9, 11  
utopianism 106, 120, 161  
Vale´ry, Paul 81  
Van Baburen, Dirck 135  
Van Gogh, Vincent 23, 131, 146  
Van Hoogstraten, Samuel 136  
Van Mander, Karel 131, 136  
Van Scorel, Jan 106–7  
Vandenbroeck, Paul 159  
Vasari, Giorgio 1, 17, 131, 135, 160, 161  
Vela´zquez Diego 78, 83, 86, 87, 90, 147  
Venice 79  
merchant confraternities 107, 108–9, 118   
Venus of Willendorf (Anon.) 3, 8, 9–10, 11, 16  
Verdeaux, Jacqueline 79  
Vermeer, Jan 5, 129, 130, 132–42, 145, 155  
Vermeer, Magdalena 136, 141, 142  
Vettriano, Jack 25  
Scarlet Ribbons 25  
Vietnam War era 73  
Viniziano, Sebastiano 17  
Viola, Bill 158  
visual studies 90, 91, 92–3  
one of the fathers of the ﬁeld 78  
volition 101, 107, 110, 112, 114, 120  
distinctive 106  
economic 113  
implied 105  
opposed 118  
Riegl’s emphasis on 111  
social 113  
Vreeland, Susan 5, 6, 129, 130, 131, 136–41,  
142, 143, 145  
Girl in Hyacinth Blue 137  
vulvas 11  
Wall, Jeff 158  
Warburg, Aby 2, 6, 152, 156, 159  
Warburg School 120, 122  
watercolour 17  
causing acrylics to bear similarities to 26  
femininity allied to 23  
gendering of 20  
importance assumed by gender in relation  
to 21–2  
174 

I N D E X  
oil paintings contaminated by 22  
weaving 29  
Weber, Alfred 100  
Weber, Max 100, 102, 115  
Wegman, William 66  
Weltanschauung see IoW 
Weltwollen 104, 112, 113, 115, 116, 120, 121  
Weltwollungen 113  
Westerbork 137  
Whatman paper 21  
Whistler, James McNeill 146  
Wikipedia 60  
Wimbledon 154, 156  
Winckelmann, Johann Joachim 1  
Wind, Edgar 152  
Wirkungszusammenhang 111  
Wirtschaftswollen 113  
Wissenschaft 61, 153  
Wittgenstein, Ludwig 70  
Wolfﬂin, Heinrich 105  
women  
achievements of artists 64  
men masquerading as 16  
prehistoric 9–11  
stereotyped 72, 132  
violence against 25  
see also femininity; feminism  
Wood, Christopher 100  
Yeazell, Ruth Bernard 130  
175 

