Wolkenkuckucksheim | Cloud-Cuckoo-Land | Воздушный замок
Lægring | 15
24 | 2019 | 38
The Performative Turn in Typological Thinking 
and its Post-Critical Instrumentalization
The Politics of Managerialism
Kasper Lægring
Prologue: The Return of Typology
The subject matter of this article is the return of typological thinking in the 
area where one would least expect it to happen, in the circle of post-critics. 
The most pronounced demonstration of this is Alejandro Zaera Polo’s essay 
The Politics of the Envelope: A Political Critique of Materialism, which is 
now ten years old. Here, Zaera Polo, of Foreign Office Architects fame, out-
lined a new theory of architecture anchored in the performative range of the 
building envelope and its ever-expanding technological sophistications. His 
classification of building envelopes according to their performative capaci-
ties is a case in point, being the most exhaustive post-critical manifesto in ex-
istence, yet Robert Somol and Sarah Whiting’s idealization of the Bentham 
Panopticon as a template for architectural operativity also deserves mention.
This article attempts to chart this new territory with a critical eye to the 
ethical and aesthetic consequences of the performative and post-critical turn 
in typological thinking. In what follows, the themes of instrumentality and 
managerialism play leading roles in parsing Zaera Polo’s reinterpretation of 
typology under the aegis of performativity. This takes us from a discussion of 
the roots of post-criticality in panopticism, via discussions of function, form, 
and organization in The Politics of the Envelope, to a consideration of the role 
of the city and the question of performativity in post-critical type formation.
But let us first briefly revisit the historical background for any contemporary 
discussion of typology in architecture.
Themes in Typological Discourse since the 1960s
Typological thinking has been one of the hallmarks of the discourse on archi-
tectural theory, history, and criticism as it has taken shape since the 1960s. 
Unlike the post-critics, who regard this intensification of architectural theo-
rization as a historical anomaly to be rectified, anyone acknowledging both 
the growing compartmentalization of knowledge since the Enlightenment 

1 Harries 2009: 87.
16 | Lægring
Wolkenkuckucksheim | Cloud-Cuckoo-Land | Воздушный замок
2 Winters 2007: 52.
3 Quatremère de Quincy 1977 [1832]: 148.
24 | 2019 | 38
and the transformative power of new technologies and media under moder-
nity would be inclined to accept the rise of theory as the logical counterpart 
to these drastic restructurings. This is no less so in the context of architec-
ture. When Karsten Harries comments that we should „ expect that works of 
architecture, too, as opposed to merely functional buildings, today need the 
aid of theory if they are to give us a full satisfaction, “ he summarizes this cru-
cial impact of modernity, the condition of which is somehow hubristically 
nullified by post-critics . 1 „ Art and architecture of the modern period have 
become intrinsically theoretical, “ Edward Winters comments, and this con-
dition is here to stay. 2
This vast theoretical field is well-traveled territory in terms of retrospec-
tive historiographical and critical travelogues, and therefore I will only pro-
vide a few historical points of orientation necessary for characterizing the 
performative turn in typological thinking brought about by the post-critics.
The importance of the concept of type came to the fore with Giulio Carlo Ar-
gan’s rediscovery of Quatremère de Quincy’s definition in the latter’s Diction-
naire Historique d'Architecture, contenant dans son plan les notions histo-
riques, descriptives, archaeologiques, biographiques, theoriques, didactiques 
et pratiques de cet art (1832):
„ The word ‘type’ presents less the image of a thing to copy or imitate 
completely than the idea of an element which ought itself to serve as a 
rule for the model. […] The model, as understood in the practical execu-
tion of the art, is an object that should be repeated as it is; the type, on 
the contrary, is an object after which each [artist] can conceive works of 
art that may have no resemblance. All is precise and given in the model; 
all is more or less vague in the type “. 3
While imitation of a model requires resemblance, Quatremère’s introduc-
tion of the novel idea of type allows for a more profound but also more open-
ended kind of imitative process, anteceding the possibility of the model and 
its precision. In Quatremère’s Dictionnaire, the new emphasis on type serves 
to bolster his belief that all architectural making ultimately plays out as met-
aphorical imitation of nature.
In Quatremère’s original context, ‘type’ has a decidedly idealistic char-
acter, typical of the search for givens and irreducible origins prevailing dur-
ing the Enlightenment:
„ At the same time, we see that the imitation of types is nothing that feel-
ing and intellect cannot recognize, and nothing that cannot be opposed 
by prejudice and ignorance. […] In every country, the art of regular 
building is born of a preexisting source. Everything must have an ante-
cedent. Nothing, in any genre, comes from nothing, and this must apply 
to all of the inventions of man. Also we see that all things, in spite of 
subsequent changes, have conserved, always visibly, always in a way that 

4 Quatremère de Quincy 1977 [1832]: 
148–149.
Wolkenkuckucksheim | Cloud-Cuckoo-Land | Воздушный замок
Lægring | 17
5 Moneo 1978: 36.
6 Argan 1996 [1963]: 243 (emphasis 
original).
7 Argan 1996 [1963]: 244.
8 Hays 2016: 209.
9 Argan 1996 [1963]: 243.
10 Argan 1996 [1963]: 244–245.
11 Forty 2000: 307–309.
24 | 2019 | 38
is evident to feeling and reason, this elementary principle, which is like a 
sort of nucleus about which are collected, and to which are coordinated 
in time, the developments and variations of forms to which the object is 
susceptible. Thus we have achieved a thousand things in each genre, and 
one of the principal occupations of science and philosophy, in order to 
understand the reasons for them, is to discover their origin and primi-
tive cause. This is what must be called ‘type’ in architecture, as in every 
other field of inventions and human institutions “. 4
In Argan’s 1962 reception of this classic text, such Neo-Platonist motives have 
been tempered, if not entirely replaced, by a more Kantian sentiment where 
the relevance of typology lies not in its ideality but in its capacity for variation. 5 
„ It is never formulated a priori but always deduced from a series of instances. 
[…] The birth of a ‘type’ is therefore dependent on the existence of a series of 
buildings having between them an obvious formal and functional analogy “. 6 
It would thus be appropriate to consider typology a cognitive schema emerg-
ing from the procedures of perception, imagination, and conceptualization 
alike. Typology „ is not just a classifying or statistical process. “. 7 When Rudolf 
Wittkower, confronting Palladio’s various rural villas in Veneto, “‘designs’ a 
schema that totalizes the villa type as the geometric-mathematical systemati-
zation of the ground plan,” he is engaged in type formation . 8
What Argan gains from this conclusion is that type „ has to be understood 
as the interior structure of a form or as a principle which contains the pos-
sibility of infinite formal variation and further structural modification of the 
‘type’ itself “. 9 Typology, then, is not static but a mode of operation adaptable 
to change and bifurcation. Neither is typology, according to Argan, chained 
by historical precedent:
„ Through this reduction of preceding works of art to a ‘type,’ the artist 
frees himself from being conditioned by a definite historical form, and 
neutralizes the past “. 10
Already at the time of Argan’s lecture, typology was becoming both an inter-
pretative tool and a defining theoretical focal point for a number of Italian the-
orists, notably Saverio Muratori, Carlo Aymonino, Vittorio Gregotti, and Aldo 
Rossi, whose contributions all embody the notion of continuità. 11 They are usu-
ally collectively referred to as La Tendenza. Rossi’s claims, in L’architettura 
della città (1966)—that architectural type formation is co-dependent on con-
text and urban morphology, and that a building’s type can outlast its function 
—catapulted typology to the forefront of architectural theorizing.
If we accept Anthony Vidler’s verdict, in his 1976 Oppositions editorial 
“The Third Typology,” the impact of the Italian Neo-Rationalism meant, re-
gardless of methodological variations between theorists, nothing less than the 
emergence of a new branch of typological thinking in architecture. For the 
first time in history, Vidler claimed, being sympathetic to the Italian move-

12 Vidler 1976: 1–2.
18 | Lægring
Wolkenkuckucksheim | Cloud-Cuckoo-Land | Воздушный замок
13 Moneo 1978: 36.
14 Moneo 1978: 37.
15 Tafuri 1976: 86, 96.
16 Moneo 1978: 39–40.
24 | 2019 | 38
ment, architectural typology was derived from a synchronous relationship 
with the city, not from external sources of legitimation, such as analogies to 
nature (the first typology, typical of Enlightenment rationalist reasoning), or 
to the machine (the second typology, typical of Modernist technological de-
terminism) “. 12
From Vidler’s theoretical vantage point, what is achieved with ‘the third 
typology’ of Neo-Rationalism is a form-centered „ ontology of the city” where 
architecture has attained autonomy and no longer renders services, symbolic 
or otherwise, to society or technology. Even functionality is secondary, because 
it is subjugated to the conditioning effects of type . 13 The appeal to Vidler of 
this ‘third’ view of type formation is understandable, since it neatly allows for 
both stability and variation. In giving up the Enlightenment rationalization 
of nature, which Vidler finds eminently expressed in the theory of the ‘prim-
itive hut’ of Abbé Laugier, another Enlightenment idea—the autonomization 
of architecture—is gained as compensation. In that sense architecture can fi-
nally find its place, joining the ranks of the other arts that have become ab-
stract, media-specific, and emancipated from representation, if one follows 
the train of thought of formalists such as Clement Greenberg.
Rossi’s theory of the architecture of the city causes both a materialist 
turn and a mnemonic turn, yet also carries the imprint of Enlightenment 
reason which is particularly identifiable in Rossi’s fascination with isomor-
phism between language and architecture. In the end, however, the ideas of 
‘critical reconstruction’ and the recovery of types (and of their intrinsic col-
lective memories) stand in the way of new type formation, hence, in his Au-
tobiografia scientifica (1981), Rossi abandoned his former belief in the mne-
monic programming of types. Rossi’s original idea of the city „ is one in which 
time seems to be frozen “. 14 When Rossi arrives at his typology at the expense 
of the urban lifeworld, which merely occupies his city of permanence tem-
porarily, he does so in direct opposition to the Modernist project of channel-
ing the very forces of urbanization and social dynamics into the design pro-
cess . 15 If for the avant-gardes of the 1920s, the type formation, if any, was to 
be guided by the immediate experience of modernity, such a search for im-
manence and topicality of form was entirely discredited by Rossi’s approach, 
only to return again in new disguises. This idea of making feedback from the 
urban lifeworld itself the subject matter of architecture reemerged in the 
1970s – in two competing versions – in the rival theories of Robert Venturi 
and Denise Scott Brown and Rem Koolhaas, respectively. In reality, though, 
in many built works by Venturi and Scott Brown, architecture became its own 
hermetic model, its ironizing results being only decipherable and apprecia-
ble by connoisseurs . 16 This retreat to the model was further radicalized in the 
diagrammatic practice of Peter Eisenman.
The Panoptical Birthplace of Post-Criticality
The shortcomings of Rossi’s theory, and of its architectural materializations, 
are exposed inadvertently when Vidler celebrates Rossi’s 1974 project for 

17 Vidler 1976: 3.
Wolkenkuckucksheim | Cloud-Cuckoo-Land | Воздушный замок
Lægring | 19
18 Somol and Whiting 2002: 75.
19 Foucault 1995 [1975]: 205.
24 | 2019 | 38
a new Regional Administration Building in Trieste for its invocation of an 
eighteenth-century prison. To Vidler, „ the dialectic is clear as a fable “ as the 
motivic hybridization of ‘prison’ and ‘town hall’ results in a metaphorical ef-
fect of oppositions, creating a double code. 17 Still, such ‘analogous architec-
ture’ easily becomes semantically hermetic, as for its oppositional effect to 
set in, one has to identify two historical building types and their confronta-
tion in the project.
The eighteenth-century prison again surfaces in the most unlikely of 
discourses, when Robert Somol and Sarah Whiting invoke the Benthamian 
Panopticon and Rem Koolhaas’s Downtown Athletic Club in Manhattan, ide-
alizing these types as the raw material for a disciplinary reorientation of ar-
chitecture toward the post-critical. 18 Both structures are, it should be noted, 
imaginary to varying degrees. Although the Downtown Athletic Club did cer-
tainly exist and was housed in a particular skyscraper in Manhattan, Kool-
haas’s reconstructive—and evocative—hedonistic narrative of a building re-
plete with stratified social life forms is nothing but a historical interpolation.
Somol and Whiting’s choice of the Panopticon, immortalized through 
Michel Foucault’s emblematizing use of this project as the very mode of op-
eration of disciplinary society, tells us even more about what the post-criti-
cal mindset’s reprogramming of typology entails. It is a bold move to ground 
a new movement in architectural thinking on a model mechanism for con-
finement, disciplining, and surveillance, even when this mechanism is fil-
tered through the notion of the diagram and the celebration of creativity. 
Foucault concludes:
„ But the Panopticon must not be understood as a dream building: it 
is the diagram of a mechanism of power reduced to its ideal form; its 
functioning, abstracted from any obstacle, resistance or friction, must 
be represented as a pure architectural and optical system: it is in fact a 
figure of political technology that may and must be detached from any 
specific use “. 19
Nonetheless, the Panopticon is actually a dream building. To begin with, its 
mode of existence was instructive and utopian, and it is thus not the prod-
uct of type formation in Argan’s sense or in Rossi’s sense, since the Panopti-
con neither has a material precedent, nor derives from the repository of ur-
ban form. It belongs to a genealogy of utopian projects, some of which have 
been actualized, some not; and it is the unsurpassed pedagogical value of 
the Panopticon that prompted Somol and Whiting to exemplify the diagram-
matic mode of operativity through Bentham’s original mind picture, and not 
via its particular offspring. Virtuality and instrumentality are the two recur-
ring themes in the program for post-criticality, and the Panopticon is an op-
timum visualization of both.
Partial to the vitalism still popular in architecture schools today, Somol 
and Whiting’s polemical piece pits practice and performance against history 

20 Vidler 1976: 3.
20 | Lægring
Wolkenkuckucksheim | Cloud-Cuckoo-Land | Воздушный замок
21 Zaera Polo 2008: 101.
22 Zaera Polo 2008: 76.
23 Semper 1989 [1851]
24 Zaera Polo 2008: 77.
24 | 2019 | 38
and theory, yet can only function with plentiful reference to history and the-
ory. For unlike the two authors’ de-historicizing treatment of the Panopti-
con, Bentham’s ingenious ‘Inspection House’ belongs squarely to a particular 
épistémè if we follow Foucault. In spite of its impact, few buildings were ac-
curately modeled after it, and Bentham’s Panopticon remains a prime candi-
date for being the most ideal, abstract, prescriptive, and virtual project imag-
inable. When a prescriptive model for a disciplinary society is reinterpreted 
as an ideal catalyst for architectural operativity, it should not come as a sur-
prise that at least some of the ethos of the original wears off on its architec-
tural instrumentalization. Unless one believes in the blankness and neutral-
ity of technology and its application, of course.
Typology Redux: The Politics of the Envelope
As we have seen, it is part and parcel of the post-critical incentive to value in-
strumentality above anything else. In Somol and Whiting’s framing of the dis-
cipline, nothing else remains but instrumentality. With Zaera Polo’s lengthier 
contribution, “The Politics of the Envelope: A Political Critique of Material-
ism,” politics takes center stage in defining a post-critical stance. Further-
more, typology explicitly reenters architectural discourse.
Such an explicit combination of typology and politics is not entirely new, 
however. In response to La Tendenza, Vidler maintained that
„ The distinguishing characteristic of the new ontology beyond the spe-
cifically formal aspect is that the city, as opposed to the single column, 
the hut-house, or the useful machine, is and always has been political 
in its essence. The fragmentation and re-composition of its spatial and 
institutional forms thereby can never be separated from the political im-
plications “. 20
Inspired by the holism of Bruno Latour’s Dingpolitik, Zaera Polo proposes „ a 
directed political ecology of architecture “ even, with an exegesis of the perfor-
mativity of the building envelope as the shortcut to such achievement. 21 Now 
ten years old, Zaera Polo’s manifesto for architecture remains captivating for 
several reasons, but the following inquiry is mainly devoted to the themes of 
performativity and managerialism in The Politics of the Envelope.
Advancing „ a new political critique of architecture “ 22 can be accomplished, 
Zaera Polo argues, by shifting focus from architecture’s criticality to its physi-
cality, and by abandoning a representational view of politics in favor of a per-
formative one. He singles out the building envelope as the privileged interface 
of architecture and politics, for the envelope has the potential of enabling rep-
resentational, environmental, and territorial operations alike.
Furthermore, the building envelope has the benefit of being an intuitive, 
basic, and archaic element on which a theory can be constructed, as demon-
strated by Gottfried Semper’s materialist account of the origin and develop-
ment of architecture, 23 which is also referenced by Zaera Polo. 24

25 Zaera Polo 2008: 81.
Wolkenkuckucksheim | Cloud-Cuckoo-Land | Воздушный замок
Lægring | 21
26 Zaera Polo 2008: 78.
27 Zaera Polo 2008: 81.
28 Koolhaas 1994 [1978].
24 | 2019 | 38
This is where typology enters the picture, as the building envelope is finally 
bestowed with a singular classification of its own after decennia of neglect. 
More precisely,
„ a general theory of the building envelope aims to draw a direct link 
between spatial typologies and political modalities or forms of political 
organization “. 25
Suggesting the four types of flat-horizontal, spherical, flat-vertical, and verti-
cal building envelopes as the cornerstones of his anti-formalist theory, Zaera 
Polo presents a new kind of typology in architecture: one derived from per-
formative properties. Still, just like the former typologies of architecture, Za-
era Polo’s taxonomy too is neither based on exactitude, nor on resemblance.
Yet typology, in the traditional sense, endures a series of decisive losses in 
order to better serve Zaera Polo’s political project. Here, however, I will deal 
only with the losses related to the internal workings of the building envelope, 
not with the losses bearing upon the relationship between building and city.
Typology Redux: The Politics of the Envelope
If we take Zaera Polo’s explanation for the genesis of the spherical type of en-
velope as a typical example of his style of reasoning, we can detect a promi-
nent functionalist tone:
„ The lower envelope ratio that bubble buildings produce in respect to 
buildings of comparative volume is an index of the rarefaction of the 
exterior surface, perhaps as a result of increased security and energy 
concerns “. 26
What is truly new in his typological reasoning is the notion that the strategic 
employment of certain material configurations in the envelope can causally 
trigger certain desired political effects. As Zaera Polo explains, his project is
„ based on the hypothesis that the political possibilities of the envelope 
are primarily related to its dimensions, and that every dimensional type 
can trigger specific technological, social and political effects “. 27
This strategizing of typology might have a forebear in Rossi’s initial proj-
ect of programming the city mnemonically and symbolically in order to re-
cover lost layers of meaning—a conviction still popular with New Urbanists 
—but in Zaera Polo’s fashioning, the instrumental impulse reaches new lev-
els. In such a theory, there is no room for happenstance or absurdity of the 
kind celebrated by Koolhaas in his tale of Delirious New York; for instance, 
the aforementioned Downtown Athletic Club as a hypothetical ‘social con-
denser.’ 28 Owing mainly to the pioneering contributions by Koolhaas, Ven-
turi, and Scott Brown, it was a major legacy of the theoretical debates and ex-

34 Zaera Polo 2005: 84.
22 | Lægring
Wolkenkuckucksheim | Cloud-Cuckoo-Land | Воздушный замок
29 “Despite superficial similarities, Venturi’s 
populist manipulation of identities is the 
complete opposite of this approach, as the 
two sides of the equation remain aseptically 
detached at the façade line in both the 
duck and the decorated shed.” Zaera Polo 
2005: 84.
30 Zaera Polo 2008: 78.
31 Somol and Whiting 2002: 74.
32 Somol 2004.
33 Zaera Polo 2009.
24 | 2019 | 38
changes of the 1970s to undermine the old notion of ‘honesty’ and linearity of 
expression between functional program (interior) and façade (exterior). This 
attack on ‘functional transparency,’ i.e. ‘form follows function,’ was perhaps 
the biggest blow to functionalism. Only seemingly does Zaera Polo embrace 
this conclusion, for he reinstates the linear connection between interior and 
exterior; variously discussing the envelope as sometimes the outcome of pro-
gram, sometimes the determinant of program. Either way, for Zaera Polo the 
envelope cannot be detached from the logic of program as it has a political 
role to fulfill, thus his objection to the Venturian solution. 29 Thus the outer 
shell a building has been recovered as the privileged place where the inner 
logic of the container is to appear, transformed:
„ It is a boundary which does not merely register the pressure of the inte-
rior, but resists it, transforming its energy into something else “. 30
This deterministic streak in Zaera Polo’s project provokes collateral implica-
tions. Form is now merely the byproduct of a self-sustaining envelope opti-
mized for maximum efficiency of means and materials, and thus a central aim 
of the post-critics has been achieved: to make the case for the self-explanatory, 
non-representational work of architecture whose properties can be accounted 
for in toto solely by reference to the work’s design rationale and process of cre-
ation. Post-critics have faith in „ the isomorphic remapping of life and art “. 31
Zaera Polo’s determinism deviates from the account by Somol, who clings 
to irony and to catchy pop cultural metaphors rather than to arguments proper, 
and to whom form has simply been superseded by shape. End of story. 32
Zaera Polo argues rather that the patterns, tessellations, textures, and 
other effects of contemporary building façades (or rather: envelopes) have 
evolved, both in a macroscopic and in a microscopic perspective, as logical 
responses to particular technological and societal needs. 33 He is searching for
„ a viable escape from the arbitrary deployment of shapes with neither 
binding relationships nor deliberate effects on the typological, organi-
zational, or constructive nature of a building, the condition to which a 
large part of ‘signature’ architecture has been reduced “. 34
Envelopes without Organization
Because of its exclusivity of focus, Zaera Polo’s typology has a hard time ac-
counting for the internal organization of buildings and its variations. Across 
his manifesto, ‘flow’ is one of the most commonly found words, but even if 
one accepts his typology as derived from the experience of globalization and 
its erasure of any contextuality, his theory is unable to capture both the dif-
ferences of spatial organization between buildings of the same sort, and the 
likenesses of spatial organization between buildings with entirely different 
building envelopes. Since Zaera Polo mostly stays ‘on the surface’ of the enve-
lope throughout his analyses, his rejection of critique as outdated becomes a 

41 “Projective Architecture: diagram of 
overlap of A (architecture) with P (politics), 
E (economics) and T (theory).” Somol and 
Whiting 2002: 75.
42 Speaks 2002a; 2002b; 2002c; 2006.
37 Foster 2011: 48.
38 Zaera Polo 2008: 91, 99.
39 Dovey 2008.
40 Venturi, Izenour, and Scott Brown 
1977: 9.
35 Zaera Polo 2008: 77.
36 Foster 2011: 48–49.
Wolkenkuckucksheim | Cloud-Cuckoo-Land | Воздушный замок
Lægring | 23
24 | 2019 | 38
self-fulfilling prophecy since critique can only emerge from a thorough anal-
ysis of organization. Zaera Polo plainly claims that contemporary architec-
ture no longer speaks through plans and sections. 35 
Other contemporary theorists of architecture have devoted considerable 
attention to the inner workings of buildings and to the strategically unbal-
anced appeal to the senses achieved through mechanisms such as transpar-
ency. This is the case in Hal Foster’s critical review of Lord Norman Foster’s 
architectural strategy, within which glass walls are often installed inside build-
ings as a barrier permitting penetration by sight, but not allowing for sub-
stantial human interaction. 36 Furthermore, the insight gained from Foster 
analyzing Foster, pertaining to the discussion here, is the fact that many of 
Foster’s buildings exert the same panoptical mode of operation, regardless 
of whether the client is a dictatorship or a democracy, and in spite of great 
variation of envelope design. 37 Such analysis is lacking in The Politics of the 
Envelope, and as to the panoptical principle, any mention of Foucault is cu-
riously missing from a text otherwise replete with references to theorists of 
power, globalization, and politics. Similarly, Zaera Polo’s theory goes amiss 
in failing to consider Office for Metropolitan Architecture’s CCTV Building 
in Beijing as anything else but a formal reinterpretation of skyscraper typol-
ogy on a monumental and maybe ‘dictatorial’ scale, when in fact the build-
ing’s oppressive functionality is less to be found in its appearance than in its 
sophisticated internal compartmentalization of public and private accessibil-
ity. 38 The key to understanding such projects is not a theory of the envelope 
and its statistical ‘flows’ but a theory of the post-political nature of manage-
ment that Zaera Polo seems to acknowledge.
Further critique of Zaera Polo’s typology, in terms of its disregard for func-
tional organization, could, for instance, proceed along the lines provided by 
Kim Dovey, in the latter’s diagramming of power distribution in buildings. 39 
Zaera Polo’s disdain for anything remotely reminiscent of hierarchy and rep-
resentation robs his theory of the capacity for organizational grasp. On the 
opening pages of Learning from Las Vegas, Venturi, Scott Brown, and Ize-
nour made the point, still valid, that it is impossible to navigate a modern air-
port by spatial indicators alone. Wayfinding needs support from signage. 40 
Such mixed situations, in part supported by space, in part by symbols, remain 
unaccounted for by a unitary theory of the envelope.
The Hegemony of Management and Instrumentality
A prelude to the delivery of architecture into the hands of managerialism can 
be found in Somol and Whiting’s foundational text, where the discipline of ar-
chitecture is part of a non-hierarchical cluster offering no guarantee that ar-
chitecture is not in fact subsumed by management. 41 Even more so, the fasci-
nation with management culture can be discerned in several polemical pieces 
by Michael Speaks where he recommends locating a replacement ethos for 
architecture in the world of business. 42

43 Le Texier 2012: 12.
44 “That is, in appreciating the work of the 
austere functionalists, for example, I am 
to consider the theoretical aspects of their 
work, not in terms of the truth of functio-
nalism, but in terms of the contribution of 
the theory to the visual experience the work 
affords.” Winters 2007: 55.
45 Weber 1978: 24–26.
46 Le Texier 2012: 11–12 (emphasis 
original).
47 Le Texier 2012: 12.
24 | Lægring
Wolkenkuckucksheim | Cloud-Cuckoo-Land | Воздушный замок
24 | 2019 | 38
In Zaera Polo’s work, we can find more substantial signs of a radical turn-
over in the value system of architecture. His theory causes a paradigm shift, 
not towards politics, but towards management. ‘Efficient,’ ‘effective,’ and ‘ef-
ficiency’ are some of the most commonly found words throughout his text, and 
they signal a reorientation that goes beyond mere rationalism. „ Efficiency is 
the first cardinal principle of managerial governmentality, “ Thibault Le Tex-
ier asserts. 43 The Modern Movement teemed with rationalist impulses and 
got its fair share of the technological determinism popular at the time, but 
the post-critical proposition differs from past rationalisms in its substitution 
of ‘information’ for ‘theory.’ Admittedly, the theories of the historical avant-
gardes strategically accompanying and supporting divergent modes of design 
can be considered neither the last word about these movements, nor the truth 
about architecture as such. Yet theory, although not holding truth value, has 
the potential to enhance our aesthetic appreciation and understanding of art 
and architecture. 44
In spite of its ambition to bypass theory in the ‘critical’ sense, Zaera Po-
lo’s ‘politics of the envelope’ is no less reliant on theory than any other dis-
cursive corollary to architecture, past and present. However, if Zaera Polo 
thinks that his protocol for the revival of architecture is of a political nature, 
I beg to differ. His notion of politics is far more post-political than ideolog-
ical, and the reason for this is that the purposiveness of architecture, which 
has historically been a matter of wide-ranging debate, is condensed into the 
single value of instrumental reason, or Zweckrationalität, to use sociologist 
Max Weber’s precise term. 45
In spite of a century of a ‘hermeneutics of suspicion,’ to paraphrase Paul 
Ricœur, management has only recently grown into an object worthy of criti-
cal study and analysis. Because management is neither ‘value,’ nor ‘ideology,’ 
nor ‘belief,’ it goes unacknowledged and requires a measure of its own. Even 
Foucault’s rich conceptual apparatus offers no path to confront the phenome-
non of management, but by drawing on Foucault’s intellectual legacy, Le Tex-
ier has recently opened a path of inquiry into managerial governmentality:
„ Management is not state administration, it is not discipline, it is not 
religious authority, nor is it the logic of the market; even if it draws from 
these ways of thinking, it is a genuine way of conceiving power and soci-
ety. Thus it asks for a specific understanding articulated around its own 
principles: not sovereignty, security, territory, population, or justice; not 
truth, faith, or salvation; not interest, profit, property, investment, or 
capital; but efficiency, organization, control, and knowledge “. 46
If elevated to a universal guideline, Le Texier explains, ‘efficiency’ tends to 
supplant other values. „ In this perspective, words, objects and people are es-
sentially the producers of effects “. 47 That is why all that remains in Zaera Po-
lo’s typology is the criterion of performativity itself. The next two fulcra of 
managerial governmentality, ‘organization’ and ‘control,’ form the common 

48 Bandini 1984.
49 Braham 2000: 3-4.
Wolkenkuckucksheim | Cloud-Cuckoo-Land | Воздушный замок
Lægring | 25
24 | 2019 | 38
denominator between cybernetic and managerial thought. The exercise of 
control is neither disciplining, nor commanding; instead, it is either the im-
position of standards to be obeyed, or the dynamics of accountability, arbi-
tration, negotiation, and compromise. Principally, managerialism counteracts 
the declaration and confrontation of value systems, as any possible value is 
supposedly able to be absorbed into a procedural mode of reflexivity. There-
fore, whenever one employs managerial logic, one engages, at varying degrees, 
with a particular suppression of values in the service of pure instrumentality.
Lastly, Le Texier mentions ‘knowledge’ as a vital component of manage-
ment. In a managerial setting, knowledge is always instrumental in nature. 
Likewise, it is mainly quantitative—statistical, informational, computational. 
In fact, ‘information’ might be a better word than knowledge for the raw ma-
terial of management. The proliferation of think tank offshoots of architec-
tural offices in recent years is driven by a need for information (but not the-
ory). Information is immediately tradable and exchangeable, theory is not. 
Theory entails a mode of reflexivity not activatable by mere informational 
circulation. When post-critics aim at replacing theory with information, they 
privilege practical (or instrumental) reason at the expense of value-oriented 
reason (Wertrationalität).
Apart from generalities, and except for environmentalism, the values driv-
ing the ‘politics’ of The Politics of the Envelope are never declared, for man-
agerial governmentality operates precisely by supplanting all previous value 
systems. Managerialism is not politically directable, let alone malleable, since 
it always already precludes non-instrumental modes of thinking, including 
political, ethical, and aesthetic ones. Therefore, if one’s aim is to recover a 
particularly architectural version of politics, then an architectural typology 
built upon managerial concepts is a self-defeating proposition.
Epilogue: A Not-So-Performative Typology of Architecture
In a historical perspective, typological thinking in architecture has always 
nurtured an instrumental frame of mind. But it has also always contained 
more than that. Today, diagrammatic, nonlinear, and emergent modes of de-
signing and projecting architecture hold the promise of a creativity capable 
of creating architecture ex novo, rather than merely reproducing what is al-
ready known. Supposedly, typology, being partial to the normative and the 
conventional, must yield to new methods of design. 48
„ But do dynamic systems models really guarantee the end of instrumen-
tal thinking? Only if their consequences are fully accepted, if every ele-
ment of the equation is understood to be interrelated and changeable, 
from buildings and their contexts to the designers and their practices as 
well “. 49
William Braham’s poignant question points the finger at what, in the context 
of this article, can be said to be the major shortcoming of Zaera Polo’s scheme, 

51 Le Corbusier 2007: 195.
52 Leatherbarrow 2005: 7.
53 Leatherbarrow 2005: 10 (emphasis 
original).
54 Leatherbarrow 2005: 12.
26 | Lægring
Wolkenkuckucksheim | Cloud-Cuckoo-Land | Воздушный замок
50 Zaera Polo 2008: 80.
24 | 2019 | 38
namely that it is saturated with instrumentality and betrays little influence 
from the dynamic systems ideals that Zaera Polo otherwise admires. His initial 
choice of subject matter, that of performance, filters out any other concerns 
than instrumental ones. Can ‘performance,’ then, even be discussed in rela-
tion to architecture without automatically leading to architecture’s exhaustive 
submission to instrumental rationality, and to the voiding of the discipline?
When looking at Zaera Polo’s diagram of the four basic types of enve-
lope, 50 it is hard not to be reminded of Le Corbusier’s ‘lesson of Rome’ where 
the monumental buildings of Rome have been abstracted into a typology of 
select Euclidean geometries. 51 Because of Zaera Polo’s retreat to the object and 
the surface, however performative they may be, it is reification and object-
hood, rather than performativity and relationality, that are foregrounded in 
his narrative. To Zaera Polo, performance is a matter of optimization, quantifi-
cation, measurement, and statistics, rather than anything remotely associated 
with symbolization, such as theatricality, representation, or relatedness. Per-
formance is merely regulating capacity, especially in an environmental sense, 
and this environment is exclusively the building’s own—it is not context, sur-
roundings, site, orientation, atmosphere, or topography. Of Semper’s original 
four elements of architecture, only one remains in Zaera Polo’s narrow reinter-
pretation; and of Semper’s regional sensibility, nothing in fact remains. This 
emphasis on the insular building’s self-governing, ‘autopoietic’ capacity, to-
gether with the myopic focus of security concerns, makes Zaera Polo’s ‘intel-
ligent’ envelope almost an heir to the panopticon so admired by post-critics.
As an alternative to Zaera Polo’s focus on a single architectural feature 
only, we might consider David Leatherbarrow’s more inclusive, less reifying 
approach to performative architecture where the aim—very much in attun-
ement with Semper’s—is to unravel „ how the building discloses itself through 
its operations “. In contrast to Zaera Polo, Leatherbarrow firmly rejects „ that 
the development of new instruments and methods of predicting the building’s 
structural or environmental behavior will radically redefine the discipline’s 
practice and theory “. 52 Zaera Polo would probably agree that “the building is 
its effects, and is known primarily through them, through its actions or per-
formances, “ but Leatherbarrow’s account of performativity is able to accom-
modate a wider range of relational qualities which are neither predictable by 
the architect, nor subjectable to instrumentality, 53 for „ to understand archi-
tecture’s performative character we cannot rely on transparent and objective 
description alone, or on techniques of quantification and measurement “. 54
As we have ascertained, post-critical typologies condense either into the 
panopticon or into the performative and responsive building envelope. Both 
are certainly ‘performative.’ Yet neither are equipped with the properties that 
can serve as an exhaustive foundation for architectural performance, for in the 
case of the panopticon, its disciplinary performativity—which asymmetrically 
reduces the citizen to the inmate—is only appropriate for a narrow range of 
institutional buildings; and in the case of the self-supporting building enve-
lope, its mode of operation mainly furthers managerial ends. Furthermore, 

55 Zaera Polo 2008: 77; Leatherbarrow 
2005: 8. See also Carl 2011.
Wolkenkuckucksheim | Cloud-Cuckoo-Land | Воздушный замок
Lægring | 27
24 | 2019 | 38
the envelope theory cannot adequately account for variability of socio-func-
tional program and spatial organization across exemplars of the same enve-
lope type; it can only explain basic and generic modes of control.
In both of these conceptualizations of architectural typology, aesthetics 
and collective memory atrophy. What matters is entirely efficiency of opera-
tion, whether of the disciplining or controlling sort. A further similarity unit-
ing these two instrumentalist understandings of ‘type’ is that both are sub-
stantially ‘autopoietic’ and inwardly oriented: both abandon the city as the 
locus of type formation. As a utopian and generic model, the panopticon can 
be reproduced anywhere and anytime, its effect being always the same; and as 
a loose principle for architectural design, the advanced building envelope can 
perform a variety of managerial functions, regardless of place and time. This 
is of course why the best examples of ‘intelligent’ building envelopes belong to 
the category of globalized architecture: airports, hotels, corporate headquar-
ters, administrative buildings, with a minority of advanced envelopes being 
utilized for spectacular architecture sheltering museums, stadiums, interna-
tional venues and expositions. Yet a lot of crucial urban infrastructure finds 
no place in the ‘politics of the envelope’—subway stations, public parks, cer-
tain types of megastructure, new types of landscape urbanism—because it has 
no use for an envelope, and oftentimes eludes objecthood.
As we recall, the first candidate for a post-critical type was Koolhaas’s vi-
sion of the multifunctional Downtown Athletic Club. Such stacking of func-
tional programs was neither dependent on the panoptical principle, being 
rather an escape from such mechanisms, nor was it a function of the choice 
of envelope. In a fashion antithetical to Zaera Polo, who compacts Aristotle’s 
Politics into the lesson of ‘the tragedy of the commons,’ Aristotle also sur-
faces in Leatherbarrow’s text, but here as the definition that „ architecture im-
itates human action and life,” and this wisdom „ may be ancient, but it is still 
largely true “. 55 If Zaera Polo’s proposal for a new typology seems to be un-
able to capture the Koolhaasian lifeworld, both in actuality and in spirit, it is 
precisely because its fixation with the envelope fails to register a large por-
tion of both architectural potential and human interference. This indicates 
that both emergent typologies in need of familiarization, and conventional 
ones with an established symbolic value require a more inclusive framework 
which can accommodate relations, contexts, and typographies beyond the 
straitjacket of the envelope.
Author
Kasper Lægring is an architectural theorist and currently a Ph.D. Fellow at the Royal 
Danish Academy of Fine Arts, School of Architecture, Copenhagen, as well as an Exter-
nal Lecturer at the University of Copenhagen. He holds research degrees in Architecture 
(M.S., University of Pennsylvania) and Art History (M.Phil., University of Copenhagen). 
He is the recipient of scholarships from the Fulbright Program, Thanks to Scandinavia, 
and the ZEIT-Stiftung Ebelin und Gerd Bucerius.

28 | Lægring
Wolkenkuckucksheim | Cloud-Cuckoo-Land | Воздушный замок
24 | 2019 | 38
Literature
Argan, Giulio Carlo (1996 [1963]): “On the Typology of Architecture,” trans. Joseph 
Rykwert, in: Kate Nesbitt (ed.): Theorizing a New Agenda for Architecture: An Anthology 
of Architectural Theory, 1965–1995, New York: Princeton Architectural Press, 242–246
Bandini, Micha (1984): “Typology as a Form of Convention,” AA Files, no. 6: 73–82
Braham, William (2000): “After Typology: The Suffering of Diagrams,” Departmental 
Papers (Architecture), no. 24: 1–5. In: Repository.upenn, http://repository.upenn.edu/
arch_papers/24 (August 15, 2018)
Carl, Peter (2011): “Type, Field, Culture, Praxis,” Architectural Design, vol, 81, no. 1: 
38–45
Dovey, Kim (2008): Framing Places: Mediating Power in Built Form, London: Rout-
ledge
Forty, Adrian (2000): Words and Buildings: A Vocabulary of Modern Architecture, 
London: Thames & Hudson
Foster, Hal (2011): The Art–Architecture Complex, London: Verso
Foucault, Michel (1995 [1975]): Discipline and Punish, trans. Alan Sheridan, New York: 
Vintage Books
Harries, Karsten (2009): “Theory as Ornament,” in: Aron Vinegar and Michael J. Golec 
(eds), Relearning from Las Vegas, Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 79–95
Hays, K. Michael (2016): “Architecture’s Appearance and the Practices of Imagination,” 
Log, no. 37: 205–213
Koolhaas, Rem (1994 [1978]): Delirious New York: A Retroactive Manifesto for Manhat-
tan, New York: Monacelli Press
Leatherbarrow, David (2005): “Architecture’s Unscripted Performance,” in: Branko 
Kolarevic and Ali M. Malkawi (eds), Performative Architecture: Beyond Instrumentality, 
New York: Spon Press, 6–19
Le Corbusier (2007 [1924]): Toward an Architecture, trans. John Goodman, Los Ange-
les: Getty Publications, 2007
Le Texier, Thibault (2012): “The Uses and Misuses of Foucault for Thinking Manage-
ment: A Case for a Theory of Managerial Governmentality,” in: Letexier, http://www.
letexier.org/IMG/pdf/LeTexier-Foucault.ManagerialGovernmentality_02.2012_.pdf 
(August 15, 2018)
Moneo, Rafael (1978): “On Typology,” Oppositions, no. 13: 22–43.
Quatremère de Quincy, Antoine-Chrysostome (1977 [1832]): “Type,” Oppositions, no. 8: 
148–150
Semper, Gottfried (1989 [1851)]: “The Four Elements of Architecture: A Contribution 
to the Comparative Study of Architecture,” in: The Four Elements of Architecture and 
Other Writings, trans. Harry Francis Mallgrave and Wolfgang Herrmann, Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 101-129
Somol, R. E. (2004): “12 Reasons to Get Back into Shape,” in: Rem Koolhaas and Bren-
dan McGetrick (eds), Content: Triumph of Realization, Cologne: Taschen, 86-87
Somol, Robert and Sarah Whiting (2002): “Notes on the Doppler Effect and Other 
Moods of Modernism,” Perspecta, no. 33: 72–77
Speaks, Michael (2002a): “Design Intelligence and the New Economy,” Architectural 
Record, vol. 190, no. 1: 72–79

Wolkenkuckucksheim | Cloud-Cuckoo-Land | Воздушный замок
Lægring | 29
24 | 2019 | 38
Speaks, Michael (2002b): “Design Intelligence Part 1: Introduction,” A+U, no. 387: 
10–18
Speaks, Michael (2002c): “Theory was interesting… but now we have work: No hope no 
fear,” Architectural Research Quarterly, vol. 6, no. 3: 209–212
Speaks, Michael (2006): “Intelligence After Theory,” Perspecta, no. 38: 101–106
Tafuri, Manfredo (1976 [1973]): Architecture and Utopia: Design and Capitalist Devel-
opment, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press
Vidler, Anthony (1976): “The Third Typology,” Oppositions, no. 7: 1–4
Weber, Max (1968 [1920]): Economy and Society: An Outline of Interpretative Sociology, 
ed. Guenther Roth and Claus Wittich, Berkeley: University of California Press
Winters, Edward (2007): Aesthetics & Architecture, London: Continuum
Zaera Polo, Alejandro (2005): “The Hokusai Wave,” Perspecta, no. 37: 78–85
Zaera Polo, Alejandro (2008): “The Politics of the Envelope: A Political Critique of Ma-
terialism,” Volume, no. 17: 76–105
Zaera Polo, Alejandro (2009): “Patterns, Fabrics, Prototypes, Tessellations,” Architec-
tural Design, vol. 79, no. 6: 18–27
Recommended Citation
Lægring, Kasper (2019): The Politics of Managerialism. The Performative Turn in 
Typological Thinking and its Post-Critical Instrumentalization. In: Ballestrem, Matthias 
von and Jörg H. Gleiter (ed.): Cloud-Cuckoo-Land, International Journal of Architec-
tural Theory. Vol. 24, no. 38, www.cloud-cuckoo.net/leadmin/issues_en/issue_38/
article_laegring.pdf (enquiry date): 13 –29.

