 
 
 
 
 
 
 
THE ARTILECT WAR 
 
Cosmists vs. Terrans 
 
 
 
A Bitter Controversy Concerning 
Whether Humanity Should Build 
Godlike Massively Intelligent Machines 
 
 
Hugo de GARIS,  Ph.D. 
   
 
    

 
4
 
CONTENTS 
 
 
 
      Foreword                                                                            i 
 
1. Introduction 
 
 
 
 
 
  1  
 
2. The Author and his Work 
 
 
            27 
 
3. Artilect Enabling Technologies 
 
 
51 
 
4. The Cosmists   
 
 
 
 
81 
 
5. The Terrans 
 
 
 
 
          123 
 
6. The Artilect War 
 
 
 
          151 
 
7. The Artilect Era 
 
 
 
          179 
 
8. Questions 
 
 
 
 
          191 
 
9. Brief Summary 
 
 
 
          227 
 
Glossary 
 
 
 
 
 
          233 
 
Bibliography  
 
 
 
                     251 
 
 

 
5
FOREWORD  
 
 
 
Hugo de Garis and I go back a long way. We have often 
appeared together over the years as invited speakers at 
international gatherings of futuristic thinkers. What we have in 
common is the belief that later this century, humanity will have to 
confront the prospect of being replaced by a new dominant species, 
namely, ultra intelligent robots controlled by ultra intelligent 
artificial brains. Where Hugo and I differ is that (using his 
terminology) he is primarily a “Cosmist” (someone who believes, 
in his words, that “godlike massively intelligent machines”, should 
be built, no matter what the risk to humanity’s future survival). 
Hugo would, I think, label me as a “Terran” (someone who is 
opposed to the idea that Cosmists should be allowed to build such 
ultra intelligent machines).  
 
I remember a conversation with him at a recent conference 
we both happened to be at. He asked me whether I was a Cosmist 
or a Terran. I said that Terran was nearer the mark. Hugo then 
bristled and said half jokingly, “I guess that’s how it starts!”  He 
was referring to his “Artilect War” scenario that this book is about. 
He felt that a major war will brew between the Cosmists and the 
Terrans late this century over whether humanity should or should 
not build these godlike machines that he calls “artilects” (artificial 
intellects). 
In actual fact, I would consider myself more as a 
“Cyborgian” than a “Terran”. (“Cyborgians” are people who look 
to technically upgrade their bodies to become “cyborgs”, i.e. part 
machine, part human.).  I hope that by enhancing ourselves, we 
humans can have our cake and eat it too by achieving the dream of 
 
 
i 

 
6
attaining the godlike abilities that Hugo talks about by converting 
ourselves into part-artilects, without having to pay the cost of a 
major war. In a sense I am looking at a sort of compromise – rather 
than having ultra intelligent artificial brains acting against 
humanity, we join with them.  
A few years ago, Hugo and I gave invited talks at a venue 
in Switzerland. Half jokingly, and to make a point, Hugo had 
arranged for the organizers of the meeting to supply him with a 
child’s cowboy gun, which he then used to “shoot” me, once we 
had finished our talks. A photo of this event can be found on 
Hugo’s 
website 
(at 
http://www.cs.usu.edu/~degaris/news/zurich.html). It is entitled 
“The First Shot in the Artilect War”. I sincerely hope it will not 
come to this sort of end game in the real world. Hugo’s scenario of 
a major war late this century, in which literally billions of people 
die, due to the use of advanced 21st century weaponry, is 
extremely depressing, and I firmly hope he is wrong, dead wrong, 
for the sake of humanity’s (and cyborgian) survival. 
After the reader has finished studying this book, serious 
doubts may well arise as to whether my more optimistic scenario is 
more likely to win out. Hugo’s reasoning is frighteningly 
persuasive, even though my viscera reject what he is saying. The 
fact that he is pioneering the new field of “artificial brains” only 
increases the credibility of his vision. If anyone in the world is in a 
good position to predict the future impact of advanced artificial 
brains on humanity, it must be Hugo. 
I believe that this book is of profound importance. If many 
decades into the future, Hugo is proven to be correct in saying that 
“the species dominance issue will dominate our global politics this 
century”, then he will have become one of the major thinkers of  
 
 
ii 

 
7
the 21st century. With no offence to Hugo, I hope that he will be 
shown to have been wrong, to be shown to have exaggerated, and 
overreacted; because if not, the fate that he is suggesting will befall 
our grandchildren, is too horrible to grasp fully for all humanity, 
what he would call “gigadeath!” 
No matter where you sit in the Cosmist-Terran opinion 
spectrum, this is a book that cannot and should not be ignored. It is 
too important and too disturbing to be summarily dismissed. I 
advise that you read it, then read it again, and try to find faults with 
Hugo’s logic and judgment, so that we can all look forward to a 
peaceful prosperous 21st century. Because, if Hugo’s vision is 
correct, the hellish nightmare, as portrayed in films such as The 
Terminator, will become a reality. 
 
 
Kevin Warwick, Ph.D.  
Professor of Cybernetics, Reading University, England. 
Author of     “I, Cyborg”, “In the Mind of the Machine”, 
                                          “March of the Machines”  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
iii 

 
8
Chapter 1 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
 
        My name is Professor Hugo de Garis. I’m the head of a 
research group which designs and builds “artificial brains,” a field 
that I have largely pioneered. But I’m more than just a researcher 
and scientist -- I’m also a social critic with a political and ethical 
conscience. I am very worried that in the second half of our new 
century, the consequences of the kind of work that I do may have 
such a negative impact upon humanity that I truly fear for the 
future.  
     You may ask, “Well, if you are so concerned about the negative 
impact of your work on humanity, why don’t you just stop it and 
do something else?”  The truth is, I feel that I’m constructing 
something that may become rather godlike in future decades 
(although I probably won’t live to see it). The prospect of building 
godlike creatures fills me with a sense of religious awe that goes to 
the very depth of my soul and motivates me powerfully to 
continue, despite the possible horrible negative consequences. 
        I feel quite “schizophrenic” about this. On the one hand I 
really want to build these artificial brains and to make them as 
smart as they can be. I see this as a magnificent goal for humanity 
to pursue, and I will be discussing this at length in this book. On 
the other hand, I am terrified at how bleak are some of the 
scenarios that may ensue if brain building becomes “too 
successful,”   meaning that the artificial brains end up becoming a 
 
 
1 

 
9
lot more intelligent than the biological brains we carry around in 
our skulls. I will be discussing this too at length in this book. 
        Let me be more specific. As a professional brain building 
researcher and former theoretical physicist, I feel I am in a position 
to see more clearly than most the potential of 21st century 
technologies to generate “massively intelligent” machines. By 
“massively intelligent” I mean the creation of artificial brains 
which may end up being smarter than human brains by not just a 
factor of two or even ten times, but by a factor of trillions of 
trillions of trillions of times, i.e. truly godlike. Since such 
gargantuan numbers may sound more science fiction like to you 
than any possible future science, the third chapter of this book will 
explain the basic principles of those 21st century technologies that I 
believe will allow humanity, if it chooses, to build these godlike 
machines. I will try to persuade you that it is not science fiction, 
and that strong reasons exist to compel humanity to believe in 
these astronomically large numbers. I will present these 
technologies in as simple and as clear a way as I can, so that you 
do not need to be a “rocket scientist” (as the Americans say, i.e. 
someone very smart) to understand them. The basic ideas can be 
understood by almost anyone who is prepared to give this study a 
little effort. 
        The third chapter introduces you to all these fabulous 21st 
century technologies that will permit the building of godlike 
massively intelligent machines. Probably a host of ethical, 
philosophical, and political questions will occur to you. The 
prospect of humanity building these godlike machines raises vast 
and hugely important questions. The majority of this book is 
devoted to the discussion of such questions. I don’t pretend to have 
all the answers, but I will do my best. 
 
 
2 

 
10
        One of the great technological economic trends of our recent 
history has been that of “Moore’s law,” which states that the 
computational capacities (e.g. electronic component densities, 
electronic signal processing speeds, etc) of integrated circuits or 
“chips,” have been doubling every year or two. This trend has 
remained valid since Gordon Moore, one of the founders of the 
Intel microprocessor manufacturing company, first formulated it in 
1965. If you keep multiplying a number by 2 many times over, you 
will soon end up with a huge number. For example, 2 times 2 times 
2 times 2 … (ten times) equals 1024. If you do it 20 times you get 
1048576, i.e. over a million. If you do it 30 times, you get a billion, 
by 40 times you get a trillion, etc.  Moore’s law has remained valid 
for the past four decades, so that the size of the doublings recently 
has become truly massive. I speak of “massive Moore doublings.” 
        Moore’s law is a consequence of the shrinking of the size of 
electronic circuits on chips, so that the distance that electrons (the 
elementary particles whose flow in an electronic circuit is what 
constitutes the electrical current) have to travel between two 
electronic components, (for example two transistors), is reduced. 
According to Einstein, the fastest speed at which anything can 
move is the speed of light (about 300,000 kms/sec) and this is a 
constant of nature that electronic currents have to respect. If one 
shortens the distance between two electronic components, then an 
electronic signal between them (i.e. the flow of electrons between 
them) has less distance to travel, and hence takes less time to 
traverse that distance (at the constant speed of light).  
        A huge effort over the past few decades has been devoted by 
the chip manufacturing companies into making electronic circuits 
smaller, and hence denser, so that they function faster. The faster a 
microprocessor chip functions, the more economically attractive it 
 
 
3 

 
11
is. If you are the CEO of a chip manufacturing company and your 
competitor down the road in California’s “Silicon Valley” brings a 
rival chip onto the market that is 30% faster than yours and six 
months ahead of you, then your company will probably go out of 
business. The market share of the rival company will increase 
significantly, because everyone wants a faster computer. Hence, 
for decades, electronic circuitry has become smaller and thus 
faster. 
        How much longer can Moore’s law remain valid? If it does so 
until 2020, then the size of the electronic components in mass 
memory chips will be such that it will be possible to store a single 
bit of information on a single atom. (A “bit” is a “binary digit,” a 0 
or a 1, that computers use to represent numbers and symbols to 
perform their calculations.) So how many atoms (and hence how 
many stored bits) are there in a human sized object, such as an 
apple? The answer is astonishing -- a trillion trillion atoms (bits), 
i.e. a 1 followed by 24 zeros, or a million million million million.  
        Are you beginning to get an inkling for why I believe that 
massively intelligent machines could become trillions of trillions 
of times smarter than we are later this century?  
        Not only is it likely that 21st century technology will be 
storing a bit of information on a single atom, it will be using a new 
kind of computing called “quantum computing,” which is radically 
different from the garden variety or “classical computing” that 
humanity used in the 20th century. The third chapter will attempt to 
give a brief outline of the principles of quantum computing since it 
is likely that that technology will form the basis of the computers 
of the near and longer term future.  
        The essential feature of quantum computing can however be 
mentioned here. It is as follows. If one uses a string of N bits 
 
 
4 

 
12
(called a “register” in computer science, e.g. 001011101111010) in 
some form of computing operation (it doesn’t matter for the 
moment what the operation is) it will take a certain amount of time 
using “classical computing.” However in the same amount of time, 
using “quantum computing” techniques, one can often perform 2N 
such operations. (2N means 2 multiplied by 2 multiplied by 2 … (N 
times)). As N becomes large, 2N becomes astronomically large. 
The potential of quantum computing is thus hugely superior to 
classical computing. Since Moore’s law is likely to take us to the 
atomic scale, where the laws of physics called “quantum 
mechanics” need to be applied, humanity will be forced to 
compute quantum mechanically, hence the enormous theoretical 
and experimental effort in the past few years to understand and 
build “quantum computers.” 
        Quantum computing still has many conceptual and practical 
problems that need to be solved before quantum computers are 
sold to the public. But progress is being made every month, so 
personally I believe that it is only a question of time before we 
have functional quantum computers. 
        Now, start putting one bit per atom memory storage capacities 
together with quantum computing and the combination is truly 
explosive. 21st century computers could have potential computing 
capacities truly trillions of trillions of trillions …. of times above 
those of current classical computing capacities.  
        I hope you have followed me so far.  
        At this point in the argument, you may be racing ahead of me 
a little and object that I seem to be assuming implicitly that 
massive memory capacities and astronomical computational 
capacities are sufficient to generate massively intelligent machines, 
  
 
5 

 
13
and that nothing else is needed. I have been accused by some of 
my colleagues of this, so let me state my personal opinion on this 
question. 
        There are people (for example, Sir Roger Penrose, of black 
hole theory fame, and arch rival of the British cosmologist Stephen 
Hawking) who claim that there is more to producing an intelligent 
machine than just massive computational abilities. Penrose claims 
that consciousness would also be needed, and that new physics will 
be required to understand the nature and creation of artificial 
consciousness in machines. 
         I am open to this objection. Perhaps such critics are right. If 
so, then their objections do not change my basic thesis very much,             
perhaps causing a delay of several decades as the nature of 
consciousness is better understood.  I feel that it is only a question 
of time before science understands how nature builds us, i.e. I 
expect science will come to understand the “embryogenic” 
process, used in building an embryo and then a baby, consisting of 
trillions of cells, from a single fertilized egg cell. 
        We have the existence proof of ourselves, who are both 
intelligent and conscious, that it is possible for nature to assemble 
molecules in an appropriate way to build us. When a pregnant 
woman eats, some of the molecules in her food are rearranged, and 
then self assembled into a large molecular structure consisting of 
trillions of trillions of atoms that becomes her baby. The baby is a 
self-assembled collection of molecules that gets built to become a 
functional three-dimensional creature that is intelligent and 
conscious. 
        Nature, i.e. evolution, has found a way to do this, therefore it 
can be done. If science wants to build an intelligent conscious 
machine, then one obvious strategy is to copy nature’s approach as 
 
 
6 

 
14
closely as possible. Sooner or later, science will end up with an 
artificial life form that functions in the same way as a human 
being.  
        Common sense says that it would be easier to build an 
artificial brain, if science had a far better knowledge of how our 
own biological brains work. Unfortunately, contemporary 
neuroscience’s understanding of how our brains work is still 
painfully inadequate. Despite huge efforts of neuroscientists over 
the past century or more to understand the basic principles of the 
functioning of the human brain, very little is known at the neural 
micro-circuit level as to just how a highly interconnected neural 
circuit does what it does. Science does not yet have the tools to 
adequately explore such structures. 
        However, as technology becomes capable of building smaller 
and smaller devices (moving down from the micro-meter level to 
the nano-meter level (i.e. from a millionth of a meter (the size of 
bacteria) to a billionth of a meter (the size of molecules)) it will 
become possible to build molecular scale robots that can be used to 
explore how the brain functions.  
        Science’s knowledge of how the biological brain works is 
inadequate because the tools we have at our disposal today are 
inadequate, but with molecular scale tools (called “nanotech” or 
“nanotechnology”) neuroscientists will have a powerful new set of 
techniques with which to explore the brain. Progress in our 
understanding of how the brain functions should then be rapid. 
        Brain builders like me will then jump on such newly 
established neuro-scientific principles and incorporate them rapidly 
into our artificial brain architectures.  
        Hopefully in time, so much will become known about how 
our own brains function, that a kind of “intelligence theory” will 
 
 
7 

 
15
arise, which will be able to explain on the basis of neuronal 
circuitry (a neuron is a brain cell) why Einstein’s brain for 
example, was so much smarter than most other people’s brains. 
Once such an intelligence theory exists, it may be possible for 
neuro-engineers like myself to take a more engineering approach 
to brain building. We will not have to remain such “slaves to 
neuroscience.” We will be able to take an alternative route to 
producing intelligent machines (although admittedly initially based 
on neuro-scientific principles). 
        So with the new neuro-scientific knowledge that nanotech 
tools will provide, and the computational miracles that quantum 
computing and one bit per atom storage will allow, brain builders 
like me will probably have all the ingredients we need to start 
building truly intelligent and conscious machines. 
        At this point, a host of questions arises, and I will spend most 
of this book trying to answer a lot of them. Lets jump into the 
future for a moment and try to imagine how the above 
technological developments will impact on ordinary peoples lives. 
        Pretty soon, it will be possible to buy artificially brained 
robots that perform useful tasks around the house. If the price of 
such robots can be made affordable, then the demand for them will 
be huge. I believe in time that the world economy will be based 
upon brain-based computers. Such devices will be so useful and so 
popular that everyone on the planet will want to own them. As the 
technologies and the economics improve, the global market for 
such devices will only increase to the point that most of the 
planet’s politics will be tied up in supporting it. Not only will the 
commercial sector be heavily involved in the production of ever 
smarter and ever more useful robots and artificial brain based 
devices, but so too of course will the military forces of the world. 
 
 
8 

 
16
        It is unlikely in the next few decades that the planet will have 
formed a truly global state, with a global police force to defend its 
global laws. Instead I believe there will be a growing political 
rivalry over the next half century between the United States and 
China to be the world’s most powerful nation. This rivalry will 
ensure that the ministers of defense of both countries cannot afford 
to allow the other country to develop more intelligent soldier 
robots and other artificial brain based defense systems than their 
own. Hence, national governments will be heavily involved in 
pushing the development of military based artificial brain research 
that will only spill over in time to the commercial sector, as has 
been the pattern for over a century. 
        Thus the rise of artificial brain based robotics and related 
fields, seems unstoppable. There will be so much military and 
commercial momentum behind it that it is difficult to imagine how 
it could be stopped, unless somehow a mass political movement is 
formed to block its development. 
        How might such a movement get off the ground? It’s not too 
difficult to imagine what might happen.  Imagine a few decades 
from now that millions of people have already bought household 
cleaning robots, sex robots, teaching machines, babysitter robots, 
companionship robots, friendship robots, etc, and that these brain 
based machines talk quite well and understand human speech to a 
reasonable extent. A few years later what happens? Not 
surprisingly, the models of that earlier year are now seen by their 
owners to be rather old fashioned and not as attractive as the latest 
models. The latest models will be more “intelligent” because their 
speech is of higher quality. They will understand more and give 
better, more appropriate answers. Their behavioral repertoire will 
be richer. In short, they will make the earlier models look quite 
 
 
9 

 
17
inferior. 
        So what does everyone do? Of course, they will scrap their 
old robots and buy new ones, or have their old ones updated with 
better artificial neural circuitry.  In a further few years, the same 
process will repeat itself, in a fashion similar to the way buyers of 
personal computers behaved in the 1980s and 1990s, etc.  
        However, some of the more reflective buyers may start 
noticing that their household machines and robots are becoming 
smarter and smarter in every machine generation so that the IQ gap 
between human beings and robots keeps getting smaller. Once the 
robots start getting really quite smart, suddenly millions of robot 
owners will start asking themselves some awkward questions. 
         “Just how smart could these artificially brained robots 
become?” 
         “Could they become as smart as human beings?” 
         “If that’s possible, is that a good thing?” 
         “Might not the robots then be smart enough to be a threat to 
humanity?” 
         “Could the robots become smarter than humans?” 
         “If so, how much smarter?” 
         “Should humanity allow these robots to become smarter than 
human beings?” 
         “If they become a lot smarter than human beings, might they 
decide that humans are a pest, a cancer on the surface of the planet, 
and decide to wipe us out?” 
         “Should humanity take the risk, that that might happen?” 
         “Should a limit be placed on the robot’s AIQ (Artificial 
Intelligence Quotient), so that the robots are smart enough to be 
useful to human beings, but not too smart so as to be threatening?” 
         “Will it be possible to stop the rise of robot AIQ?” 
 
 
10 

 
18
         “Will it be politically, militarily, economically possible to 
stop the robots becoming smarter every year?” 
         “There are lots of people who see the creation of massively 
intelligent machines as the destiny of the human species. These 
people will not like any limits being placed on AIQ levels. Won’t 
this create conflict amongst human beings?” 
        You may be able to think of other such questions relating to 
the rise of artificial intelligence and the creation of artificial brains 
with ever-greater capabilities. 
        How do I see humanity facing up to the challenge of the rise 
of smart machines? My personal scenario that I find the most 
plausible I will present to you now. However, before doing so, I 
would like to introduce a new term that I will use from now on 
throughout this book, as it is a useful shorthand for the term 
“godlike massively intelligent machine.” The new term is 
“artilect,” which is a shortened version of “artificial intellect.” The 
term “artilect” features in the very title of this book “The Artilect 
War,” so it is probably the most important concept and term in this 
book. 
        I believe that the 21st century will be dominated by the 
question as to whether humanity should or should not build 
artilects, i.e. machines of godlike intelligence, trillions of trillions 
of times above the human level. I see humanity splitting into two 
major political groups, which in time will become increasingly 
bitterly opposed, as the artilect issue becomes more real and less 
science fiction like. 
        The human group in favor of building artilects, I label 
 the “Cosmists,”  based on the word “cosmos” (the universe), 
which reflects their perspective on the question. To the Cosmists, 
building artilects will be like a religion; the destiny of the human 
 
 
11 

 
19
species; something truly magnificent and worthy of worship; 
something to dedicate one’s life and energy to help achieve. To the 
Cosmists, not building the artilects, not creating the next higher 
form of evolution, thus freezing the state of evolution at the puny 
human level, would be a “cosmic tragedy.” The Cosmists will be 
bitterly opposed to any attempt to stop the rise of the 21st century 
artilect. 
        The second human group, opposed to the building of artilects, 
I label the “Terrans,” based on the word “terra” (the Earth) which 
reflects their inward looking, non-cosmic, perspective. The 
Terrans, I strongly suspect, will argue that allowing the Cosmists 
to build their artilects (in a highly advanced form) implies 
accepting the risk, that one day, the artilects might decide, for 
whatever reason, that the human species is a pest. Since the 
artilects would be so vastly superior to human beings in 
intelligence, it would be easy for the artilects to exterminate the 
human species if they so decided. 
        But you may argue that if the artilects truly become very 
smart, they would realize that human beings gave birth to them, 
that we are their parents. Therefore the artilects would respect us 
and treat us well. This may be what happens, but the point is, I 
argue, that you could not be certain that the artilects would treat 
humanity with the level of respect that we would like.  
        Don’t forget, the artilects have the potential of becoming 
trillions of trillions .… of times smarter than we are, so there is 
always the possibility that they could become so smart that human 
beings would appear to them to be so inferior that we would 
simply not be worth worrying about. Whether humanity survives 
or not, might be a matter of supreme indifference to them. 
        It is not exaggerating to say that there is quite a close analogy 
 
 
12 

 
20
between an artilect trying to communicate with a human being, and 
a human being trying to communicate with a rock.  
        To make another analogy, consider your feelings towards a 
mosquito as it lands on the skin of your forearm. When you swat it, 
do you stop to consider that the creature you just killed is a miracle 
of nano-technological engineering, that scientists of the 20th 
century had absolutely no way of building. The mosquito consists 
of billions of cells, each of which can be looked upon as a kind of 
molecular city, where a molecule in a cell is equivalent to a person 
in a city. The comparative scale of molecule to cell is about the 
same as person to city.  
        Despite the fact that the mosquitoes, which took billions of 
years to evolve, are extremely complex and miraculous creatures, 
we human beings don’t give a damn about them, and swat them 
because from our perspective they are a pest. We have similar 
attitudes towards killing ants when we walk on them during a stroll 
through the forest, or when flushing spiders down the plughole.  
        Who is to say that the artilects might not have similar 
attitudes towards human beings, and then wipe us out? With their 
gargantuan “artilectual” intelligence, it would be as easy as pie for 
them to do so. 
        The critical word in the artilect debate for the Terrans is 
“risk.” The Terrans will argue that humanity should never take the 
risk that the artilects, in an advanced form, might decide to wipe 
out the human species. The only certain way that the risk remains 
zero is that the artilects are never built in the first place. 
When push comes to shove, if the Terrans see that the Cosmists are 
truly serious about building artilects in an advanced state, then to 
preserve the survival of the human species, the Terrans will 
exterminate the Cosmists. Killing a few million 
 
 
13 

 
21
Cosmists will be considered justifiable by the Terrans for the sake 
of preserving the survival of the whole human species, i.e. billions 
of people. 
        Such a sacrifice would be deemed reasonable by the Terrans. 
To make a historical analogy -- when Stalin’s troops were pushing 
west at the end of WWII, to capture Berlin and destroy Hitler’s 
Nazi regime that murdered 20 million Russians, they were losing 
about 100,000 Russian soldiers killed or injured for every major 
east European city captured from the Nazis. To Stalin, such a 
sacrifice was considered justifiable for the greater good of ridding 
the Russian people of the horror of mass murdering Nazism. 
        You may now ask, “Would anyone in their right mind 
genuinely choose, when push comes to shove, to be a Cosmist, and 
truly risk the annihilation of the human species?”  
        I think that in the future, millions of people will answer yes to 
this most fundamental of questions. I think that as more people 
become fully conscious of what the artilects could become, many 
of these people will end up choosing in favor of their creation. This 
book will devote a whole chapter to arguments in favor of building 
artilects when it presents the Cosmist case. 
        These people, these “Cosmists,” will place a higher priority 
on the creation of godlike, immortal, go anywhere, do anything 
creatures (where one artilect is “worth” a trillion trillion human 
beings) than running the risk of seeing the extermination of the 
human species at the hands of the artilects.  
        Let me spell this out, so that there is no doubt about the stance 
of the Cosmists. A Cosmist, by definition, is someone who favors 
the building of artilects. The artilects, if they are built, may later 
find humans so inferior and such a pest, that they may decide, for 
whatever reason, to wipe us out. Therefore the Cosmist is prepared 
 
 
14 

 
22
to accept the risk that the human species is wiped out. If humanity 
is wiped out, that means your grandchildren will be wiped out, my 
grandchildren will be wiped out. It would be the worst calamity in 
human history, because there would be no more history, because 
there would be no more humans. Humanity would thus join the 
long list of over 99% of species that have ever existed on the Earth, 
that have already become extinct. 
        Thus to the Terrans, the Cosmists are monsters incarnate, far 
worse than the regimes of Hitler, Stalin, Mao, the Japanese, or any 
other regime that murdered tens of millions of people in the 20th 
century, because the scale of the monstrosity would be far larger. 
This time we are not talking about deca-mega mass murder, we are 
talking about the potential annihilation of the whole human 
species, billions of people. 
        But to the Cosmists, the survival or not of the human species, 
on an insignificant planet, circling a star that is one of about 200 
billion in our galaxy, in a known universe of a comparable number 
of galaxies (also in the billions), and with probably as many 
universes in the “multiverse” (according to several recent 
cosmological theories) is a matter of miniscule importance. I have 
labeled the Cosmists “Cosmists” for a reason. Their perspective is 
cosmic. They will look at the “big picture” -- meaning that the 
annihilation of one ultra-primitive, biological, non-artilectual 
species (i.e. human beings) on one insignificant little planet, is 
unimportant in comparison with the creation of artilect gods. 
        Such ideas and attitudes will be elaborated upon in two 
chapters later in this book, presenting the Terran and the Cosmist 
cases, one for each viewpoint. There are very powerful arguments 
on both sides, which I believe will only make the inevitable 
conflict between Terranism and Cosmism all the more bitter as the 
 
 
15 

 
23
artilect debate heats up in the coming decades. 
        What makes me particularly gloomy about the potential 
bitterness of this coming conflict is how evenly people’s opinions 
are split along the Terran/Cosmist divide. For example, I often 
invite audiences to whom I present the Cosmist/Terran/Artilect 
scenario in public lectures, to vote on whether they would be 
Terran or Cosmist. I find that the voting is not what I first expected 
it would be (namely about 10% Cosmist, 90% Terran) but rather 
50/50, 60/40, 40/60. This issue truly divides people.  
        What makes me even gloomier is that the artilect issue (i.e. 
should artilects be built or not) will heat up in the 21st century to 
such an extent, that it is almost certain it will lead to a major war 
between the Terrans and the Cosmists in the second half of this 
new century. This conflict will take place with 21st century 
weaponry. If one extrapolates up the graph of the number of deaths 
in major wars from the beginning of the 19th century (e.g. the 
Napoleonic wars) to the end of the 21st century, one arrives at the 
depressing figure of billions, what I call “gigadeath.”  
        But the population of the Earth is only several billion people, 
so we arrive at the tragic conclusion that to avoid the risk of the 
total annihilation of the human species by the artilects, humanity 
goes to war against itself and kills itself off (or almost).  
        This “Artilect War” as I call it, will be the most passionate in 
history, because the stake has never been so high, namely the 
survival of the whole human race. It will be waged with 21st 
century weapons and hence the casualty figures will be of 21st 
century grandeur.  
        The sad thing about this gloomy scenario is that despite 
considerable effort on my part, I have been unable to find a way 
out of this mess. I lie awake at night trying to find a realistic 
 
 
16 

 
24
scenario that could avoid “gigadeath.” I have not succeeded, which 
makes me feel most pessimistic. In fact I am so pessimistic that I 
am glad to be alive today. At least I will die peacefully in my bed. 
However I fear for my grandchildren. They may well see the 
horror of it and very probably they will be destroyed by it. 
        I will die within about 30-40 years, given my age, but that is 
not enough time I believe, for the artilect scenario to unfold. I 
believe it will take longer than that to obtain the necessary 
knowledge to build massively intelligent artificial brains or 
artilects. However, what I will see in my lifetime, and obviously 
this book is aimed at producing just that, is a vociferous debate 
over the artilect issue.  
        There are a growing number of researchers and professors 
like myself who are starting to see the writing on the wall, and who 
are claiming publicly in media appearances and books that the 21st 
century will see the rise of massive artificial intelligence. I am the 
only one so far who is saying that this rise of massive AI will 
probably lead to a major war, the “Artilect War.” 
        Thus the issue is really starting to hit the world media, and 
countries such as the US, the UK, France and Holland are leading 
the pack. In fact I believe that within only a few years, the issue 
will have passed from one that is confined largely to academic 
audiences, to a wider general public, with contributors from such 
fields as politics, religion, defense, etc. 
        The “Artilect War” will seem like science fiction, and seem to 
be set too far into the future, for most people to worry about, but as 
the machines start getting smarter and smarter every year, it will 
take on an intensity that will become truly frightening.  
So what is my position on all this? Why am I writing this book? 
Deep down, I’m a Cosmist. I think it would be a cosmic tragedy if 
 
 
 
17 

 
25
humanity chooses never to build artilects. To illustrate my reasons 
for being a Cosmist in my heart, I like to tell a little story. 
        Imagine you are an ET (an extra terrestrial) with godlike 
technological powers, and you come to the Earth three billion 
years ago. You observe the life forms at that time on Earth and 
notice that they are still at the primitive bacterial single-celled 
stage. In a sweep of your magical technological wand, you fiddle 
all the DNA in all the bacteria of the planet so that (for the sake of 
the argument) it will never be possible for these bacteria to evolve 
into multi-celled creatures in the future. Hence, there will never be 
any plants, no animals, no human beings, no Einstein, no 
Beethoven’s 9th. Is that a tragedy? Once the multi-celled creatures 
did evolve on the Earth, zillions of bacteria were eaten by them. 
The evolutionary rise of multi-celled creatures on the Earth was no 
picnic for the bacteria.  
        I hope you see the analogy. If we build artilects and billions 
of human beings are wiped out as a result, what will be the 
equivalent of Beethoven’s 9th that the artilects will produce with 
their godlike intellects? As human beings, we are too dumb to 
know. We are just too inferior to be capable of recognizing such 
things. It would be like asking a mouse to study Einstein’s General 
Theory of Relativity. It just couldn’t do it, because it doesn’t have 
the necessary neural circuitry to allow it to, nor do most humans, 
for that matter. 
        But, you may ask, if I’m a Cosmist at heart, why am I writing 
this book? The answer is that I’m not 100% Cosmist. If I were, I 
would be quietly getting on with my brain building work and not 
trying to raise the alarm on the artilect issue to the general public. 
Part of me is also Terran. On my deathbed I would be proud to be 
considered the “father of the artificial brain,” but if history 
 
 
18 

 
26
condemns me as being the “father of gigadeath,” then that prospect 
truly horrifies me. My second wife’s mother was gassed by the 
Nazis at Auschwitz. I know to some extent what genocide means at 
an emotional level, and have had to live with its consequences for 
years.  
        I’m writing this book to raise the alarm, because I think 
humanity should be given the choice to stop the Cosmists before 
they get too advanced in their work, if that is what most human 
beings choose. So should I stop my brain building work now? No. 
I don’t think so. I believe that producing near human-level 
artificial intelligence is a very difficult problem that will take 
decades to solve. Over the next 30 to 40 years, it is likely that the 
AIQ of robots will become high enough so that the robots become 
very useful to humanity. They will perform many of the boring, 
dirty and dangerous tasks. Humanity will be liberated from such 
work, and hence have more time to pursue more rewarding tasks. 
The robots will do most of the work, allowing human beings to do 
more fun things. 
        It would be premature to stop the research on artificial brains 
now. However, once these artificial brains really do start becoming 
smart and threaten to become a lot smarter and perhaps very 
quickly (a scenario called “the singularity”) then humanity should 
be ready to take a decision on whether to proceed or not. Making 
an informed decision on an issue that concerns the survival of the 
whole human species is something so important that the necessary 
discussion on the artilect issue should begin early. There should be 
enough time for all the issue’s intricacies to be thrashed out before 
the artilect age is imminent. 
        So publicly I’m Terran. I’m trying to raise the alarm. 
Privately I’m Cosmist. Hence I feel quite schizophrenic, as I 
 
 
19 

 
27
mentioned in the very first page of this book. I feel so torn on the 
issue, so ambivalent. I believe that similar feelings will be felt by 
billions of people in the future as the artilect debate really takes 
hold. From the Terran viewpoint, to be a Cosmist is to be a 
“speciecidal monster” (a species killer). A Cosmist accepts the risk 
of seeing the human species wiped out by the artilects. This is 
inherent in the nature of the situation. The decision whether to 
build artilects has a binary answer – we can build them or not build 
them. The decision to build them is the decision to accept the risk 
that they may wipe us out.  
        On the other hand, not to build them is the decision not to 
build gods, a kind of “deicide” (god killing). From the Cosmist 
viewpoint, Terrans are “deicidal monsters.”  
        In passing, I should mention that there are some people who 
feel that the whole Cosmist/Terran conflict can be avoided by 
having human beings themselves become artilects by adding 
components to their heads etc to become "cyborgs" (cybernetic 
organisms, i.e. part human, part machine). Personally I find such 
arguments naïve, since they would only work if the whole of 
humanity made the transition from human to artilect at the same 
rate, which obviously is not going to happen.  
        There is more potential computing capacity in a grain of sugar 
than there is in the human brain by a factor of trillions. 
Incorporating such a grain into the human brain would simply 
make the human cyborg an “artilect in human disguise” as seen 
from the perspective of a Terran. The Terrans would hate the 
cyborgs with as much venom as they would the artilects and would 
be motivated to destroy both. Having a human exterior would not 
make the cyborgs any less threatening to the Terrans. 
        Let me try to express this Terran revulsion against the cyborgs 
 
 
20 

 
28
in an even more graphic way that may have a stronger appeal to 
women than to men. Take the case of a young mother who has just 
given birth. She decides to convert her baby into a cyborg, by 
adding the “grain of sugar” to her baby’s brain, thus transforming 
her baby into a human faced artilect. Her “baby” will now spend 
only about a trillionth of its mental capacity thinking human 
thoughts, and the rest of its brain capacity (i.e. 99.9999999999% of 
it) will be used for thinking artilect thoughts (whatever they are). 
In effect, the mother has “killed” her baby because it is no longer 
human. It is an “artilect in human disguise” and totally alien to her. 
        Thus to me, the cyborg option will not avoid the 
Cosmist/Terran conflict. If anything, it will probably only worsen 
it, because it will increase the level of paranoia of the Terrans 
when they cannot distinguish easily a cyborg from a human at a 
distance.  
        For about ten years I sat on the fence, presenting my ideas in a 
“on the one hand, on the other hand” kind of way, presenting the 
two cases, one in favor of the Terrans, and the other in favor of the 
Cosmists. After some years, my friends began to accuse me of 
being a hypocrite. “Hugo, you expect humanity to choose between 
being Terran or Cosmist, but you don’t do the same yourself.” 
“Fair enough,” I thought, so I chose. In my heart I’m a Cosmist, 
and I’ll try to present the many arguments and feelings in favor of 
building artilects in the chapter on the Cosmist viewpoint (Ch. 4.) 
In that chapter I will try to justify why I and other Cosmists feel so 
passionately about building artilects, that we are prepared to run 
the terrible risk of the extermination of the human species.  
        In the chapter on the Terran viewpoint (Ch. 5), I will present 
the case why the Terrans feel that building artilects would be a 
total disaster. 
 
 
21 

 
29
      Later on in this book, I will try to paint a picture as to how I 
see the conflict brewing and what the possible outcome might be 
(Ch. 6). 
      But at this stage I can imagine that some of you may be having 
a hard time imagining how it might be possible for machines to 
become trillions of trillions of times smarter and more capable than 
human beings. It seems so science fiction like, and not to be taken 
seriously.  
      This is not the first time this kind of thing has occurred.  
      In 1933, a Hungarian Jewish physicist by the name of Leo 
Szilard was staying in a London hotel reading a newspaper report 
of a talk given by the famous New Zealand physicist, Lord 
Rutherford, the discoverer of the atomic nucleus. He was asked by 
a journalist attending the talk if he felt that the day would come 
when the incredible energy lurking in the nucleus would be tapped 
at an industrial scale. Rutherford’s famous reply was “moonshine”, 
i.e. “no way,” “impossible,” “rubbish”. Szilard felt skeptical about 
this and felt there had to be a way.  
       Crossing a London street one day, he had an epiphany. The 
year was 1933, the year after the neutron was discovered. He 
realized that the neutron would make a wonderful nuclear bullet 
that would not be deflected by the charge on the nucleus, since by 
definition, the neutron has no charge, it is electrically neutral, 
hence the name neutron. 
       Szilard knew that uranium was the last stable nucleus in the 
chemical table of elements. The idea Szilard had was that if a 
neutron was shot at a uranium nucleus, it would become unstable, 
and might split into two smaller nuclei. Since he knew that smaller 
nuclei contain fewer neutrons, that would mean that at the split, 
several neutrons would be shot out that could be used to split other 
 
 
22 

 
30
uranium nuclei. 
       Hence he was the first person in the world to conceive the idea 
of a nuclear chain reaction. Being a physicist and a friend and 
colleague of Einstein, he was able to calculate how much energy 
would be released if such a chain reaction were to occur. He knew 
that the sum of the masses of the two split nuclei and the emitted 
neutrons would be less than the original mass of the uranium 
nucleus and the incoming neutron. So what happened to the 
missing mass? 
       He knew that it would be converted into the tremendous 
energy of the nuclei flying apart. How much energy would be 
released if a melon-sized mass of uranium could chain react? He 
realized, once he performed the calculation, that there would be 
enough energy to vaporize a whole city. 
        Szilard was a Jew, spoke German, and had read the book that 
Hitler wrote in prison after his aborted Munich putsch, “Mein 
Kampf” (“My Fight”), so he knew that Hitler had an “Endlosung” 
(“final solution”) for the Jews, i.e. he wanted to wipe them out. In 
1933, Hitler came to power in Germany. 
      Szilard was thus not only the first person in the world to 
conceive the notion of a nuclear chain reaction, but was also the 
first person to fear that Hitler might be the first to “get the bomb.” 
This idea terrified him. Germany was the dominating country in 
physics in the 1920s – Einstein, Planck, Heisenberg, etc, so he felt 
that there was a very real possibility that Germany would be the 
first. 
      He rushed to the US and Washington DC, and started to rattle 
people’s cages in the Pentagon, etc. The Pentagon types thought he 
was a loon. The concept of a single bomb being capable of 
destroying a whole city struck them as being ludicrous. In the 
 
 
23 

 
31
1930s, the biggest bomb could destroy perhaps a large building. 
      Szilard’s aim to see the US be the first country in the world to 
develop the nuclear bomb was not succeeding, so he changed his 
tactics. His next idea was to meet his old friend Einstein, who by 
then was living in the US. Of course, Einstein understood the 
theory instantly, since he had invented most of it, especially his 
famous equation E = mc2 that Szilard used to make his energy 
calculation. Einstein was also German and a Jew, so knew all too 
well what the consequences would be if Hitler got the bomb first.  
       Szilard had Einstein sign a letter that Szilard had drafted, that 
was then sent to the president of the US, namely F.D. Roosevelt, 
who authorized the establishment of the “Manhattan Project” that 
built the nuclear bomb within a few years. It was a mere 12 years 
between Szilard’s original idea of a nuclear chain reaction and 
Hiroshima. 
       I really admire Szilard. I believe that history has undervalued 
him. In my view he was one of the greatest unsung heroes of the 
20th century and whose historical reputation deserves to be far 
greater than it currently is.  
       Now I would like to make my point. Szilard was alone at first, 
before he began to persuade other physicists of the correctness of 
his vision, namely that future nuclear physics would soon be 
capable of building a single bomb so powerful that it could flatten 
a whole city. He knew that he was right, he knew the theory, and 
he persisted in persuading the powers of the time to take action. 
     Something similar is starting to happen now. A growing 
number of researchers and professors in the field of artificial 
intelligence are seeing the writing on the wall, i.e. that 21st century 
technologies will make very real the possibility of building godlike 
massively intelligent machines. These people have the theory. 
 
 
24 

 
32
      They see what is coming, and they are starting to get worried. I 
am one of them. This book is an attempt to raise the alarm on this 
issue. What should humanity do when/if humanity has the 
technology to build artilects?  
      My point here is that if you find the whole notion of artilects 
too science fiction like, then consider what Szilard was saying in 
the early 1930s. There is quite a close analogy here. Imagine how 
crazy the notion of a city-destroying bomb must have appeared in 
the 1930s, yet it became a reality. If the notion of building 
machines trillions of trillions of times smarter than human beings 
seems ludicrous to you now, just remember Szilard and his 
predictions. 
       This introductory chapter has given you an overview of what 
the "Artilect War” is about. The later chapters will provide greater 
detail on the ideas sketched out so far.  
       I hope this book will make you think. It is written to help 
make you conscious of an issue that I believe will dominate the 
global politics of the 21st century, that will color and define the 
age, namely, the question of “species dominance.” “Should 
humanity build artilects or not?” This question I believe will divide 
humanity more bitterly in the 21st century than the question which 
divided humanity so bitterly in the 20th, namely, “Who should own 
capital?” The bitterly opposed answers to that question led to the 
Capitalist/Communist dichotomy. The question that will dominate 
21st century global politics, I believe will be, “Who or what should 
be dominant species on the planet, artilects or human beings?” 
        I end this chapter with a little slogan that expresses rather 
 pithily, the essence of the artilect debate : 
         “Do we build gods, or do we build our potential 
exterminators?” 
 
 
25 

 
33
Chapter 2 
 
The Author and His Work 
 
 
 
        Who is this de Garis, who makes such outrageous claims -- 
that machines will become trillions of trillions of times smarter 
than human beings by the end of the century -- that there will be a 
major war over the issue of species dominance, and that as a result 
billions of human beings will die? Is he a mad man? Is he a science 
fiction writer? Does he deserve to be listened to, or can humanity 
afford simply to ignore him? 
        In an attempt to establish the credibility of the author, and his 
ideas, this chapter will be divided into three main sections. The 
first gives a brief autobiography, the second is a longer description 
of his current work, and the third is a presentation of his future 
work goals and dreams. 
 
2.1   Autobiography 
 
        Switching to first person, I was born in Sydney, Australia in 
1947, making me a middle-aged man at the time of writing. I’ve 
been divorced, having had two children by my first wife. I 
remarried and was then widowered. By temperament I am a 
passionate intellectual, with over 6000 books in my private library. 
I am a scientist, a research professor, a social activist, a writer, and 
a social critic. 
        As an adolescent, growing up in Australia, I felt that my 
 
 
27 

 
34
passionate intellectual values were not valued by Australia’s 
phlegmatic anti-intellectual brawn-based culture. During the time 
of the Sydney Olympic games, a BBC journalist said of 
Australians that they would rather win a gold medal than a Nobel 
Prize. By the time I was 23 and had finished my basic 
undergraduate degrees, in applied mathematics and theoretical 
physics, I wanted to leave the country forever.  
        The first day in London I felt overwhelmed by the feeling that 
I had set foot in an unquestionably more compatible and 
sophisticated culture. That night on BBC TV, watching a debate, I 
was struck by its intellectual quality. I felt a great weight lift off 
my shoulders. I had found my home, a culture that valued my 
values. 
        After arriving in the UK, and spending a year in London, with 
its awful air pollution in the early 1970s, I had constant catarrh and 
decided to move to beautiful and academic Cambridge. I became a 
freelance mathematics tutor to the undergraduates of some half 
dozen Cambridge University colleges. The students would come in 
pairs to my apartment and be helped with the problems they were 
having with the math questions given to them by their lecturers. 
        After a few years in Cambridge, I was browsing a world atlas 
that I had bought for my first wife, an Australian, whom I had met 
on the 5-week boat trip from Australia to England. The idea 
occurred to me that I could live in a cosmopolitan city like 
Brussels and hence benefit from the intellectual stimulus of several 
sophisticated cultures. All I would need to do would be to learn a 
few languages and then move there.  
        Despite the prospect of living the cosmopolitan life in the 
future, I loved the four years that I lived in Cambridge, with its 
green, its beauty, its academic traditions and especially its 
 
 
28 

 
35
intellectuality. It was one of the happiest periods of my life. But 
eventually, I had to move, because there were no long-term 
employment opportunities there for me. 
        So I moved to Brussels. I became fluent in French, German 
and Dutch, as planned, and absorbed those cultures into my 
personality, making me a much richer person, a “multi” (i.e. a 
multi-lingual, multi-cultured person) as distinct from a “mono” (a 
mono-lingual, mono-cultured person). As a “multi” I found the 
company of other multies far more stimulating than that of monos.  
        I loved my new life in Brussels. Unfortunately, my Australian 
wife did not. She longed to get back to her native cultural and 
linguistic roots in Australia. She pined. This conflict of interests 
eventually broke us up. She took the kids and settled back into 
Australia. 
        After the breakup I lived with, and later married, a French 
speaking Belgian woman. Not surprisingly, my spoken French 
improved rapidly. 
        I got a job at a large Dutch electronics/computer firm but 
became increasingly frustrated and bored. I missed the intellectual 
life of Cambridge with its academic lifestyle. After working for a 
few years in the computer industry, I began a PhD in artificial 
intelligence and artificial life at the University of Brussels, and 
became a researcher.  
       Early in 1992, my second wife and I left Europe to live in 
Japan. I was offered a postdoc fellowship to do AI in Tsukuba’s 
“Science City.” I believed at the time that by the year 2000 Japan 
would be the world’s dominant economic power, overtaking the 
US. It was not to happen. I spent eight years in Japan, working 
towards building the world’s first artificial brain. 
        Japan was too feudal, too fascist, too repressive of 
 
 
29 

 
36
individualism, too intellectually sterile, too socially backward for 
me to tolerate it for very long. I stayed as long as I did because at 
least Japan was paying for the construction of a remarkable new 
type of computer that I will discuss further in the next section. 
        I got a new job doing the same kind of work at a research lab 
in Brussels. I returned alone, because my second wife had by then 
died of lung cancer. She had smoked heavily until I met her, 
stopping at my insistence, but I suppose the damage had already 
been done. 
      The Brussels lab, privately owned, bought one of my brain 
building machines (one of four in the world, at a price of $0.5M 
each). The lab was founded during the dotcom boom, so I decided 
to invest $100,000 of my Japanese savings into it, hoping to 
become a millionaire.  
        My brain building work and my machine attracted worldwide 
media attention -- I was getting two international media contacts a 
week. France’s elite newspaper “Le Monde” wrote a dozen articles 
on the artilect issue and attracted enough attention to generate a 
political senate hearing. France was the first country in the world 
to address Cosmism at the political level (Paris, July 2001).  
     It looked as though life was going swimmingly until disaster 
struck. The dotcom boom turned into the dotcom crash. Investors 
stopped investing their money in hi-tech blue-sky research labs, 
and I lost my $100,000 when the lab went bankrupt, as well as my 
job. 
    My next job was as a professor of computer science in the US. 
Ironically, my first working day in America, happened to be on 
Sept. 11th, 2001. My head of department met me that morning at 
the university hotel, saying, “Hi Hugo – have you seen this?” 
pointing to a TV set. “Odd behavior,” I thought, but looked 
 
 
30 

 
37
politely in the direction he indicated. I saw a building on fire, and 
then recognized it as NY’s World Trade Center, and the penny 
dropped. Some time later in the university’s cafeteria, eating 
breakfast, we heard a student scream out, “They hit the other one!” 
“Is America always like this?” I thought. 
      I then had to adapt to the individualism and laissez-faire 
attitude of the US as a professor, adjusting to the needs of teaching 
students, fighting like crazy to get research grants and adapting to 
my 6th country. It all took a lot of nervous energy, so I did not push 
my Cosmist ideas in the US media. 
      A few years later, I gave a talk to some retirees on the artilect 
debate. When I finished, I was approached by a publisher who 
asked me, “Have you considered writing a book on your ideas?” 
The answer to that question lies literally in your hands dear reader. 
 
 
2.2   My Work 
 
        In this section I will describe at some length the work that I 
have done over the years, with emphasis on what I have been 
doing during the past decade, since it is most relevant to the theme 
of this book. 
        Starting in the late 1980s, I began to evolve neural networks 
using a form of software simulated Darwinism, called Genetic 
Algorithms (GAs). I began publishing a steady stream of scientific 
research articles. I had 20 published by the time I had finished my 
Ph.D. 
        A neural network can be envisaged as a 3D array of brain 
cells -- neurons -- interconnected by branch like fibers called axons 
and dendrites. In an axon, a signal originating from a neuron 
 
 
31 

 
38
travels away from it. In a dendrite, the signal is sent to the neuron. 
When an axon connects with a dendrite or another neuron, the 
junction is called a synapse. 
        In a real biological brain, each neuron or brain cell can have 
tens of thousands of synapses, i.e. it can be influenced by signals 
arriving from tens of thousands of other neurons. Those neural 
signals arriving at the neuron at the same time get reinforced or 
“weighted” and then summed. If the total signal strength is above 
the threshold firing value of the neuron, it will fire, i.e. it will send 
pulses of electricity down its axon at a frequency proportional to 
how much greater the summed value is above its threshold value. 
The axon pulses then travel down to their synapses to influence 
further neurons. 
        This kind of biological neural network can be simulated in 
software. Typically the number of neurons simulated in a single 
network in the 80s and 90s was tens to hundreds. For my Ph.D. 
work, I was using at most 16 neurons per network. This contrasts 
so sharply to my present work, which deals with nearly 100 million 
artificial neurons.  
        The next few pages describe the work I do in more detail, and 
are somewhat technical. I ask you to bear with me if you find their 
understanding somewhat difficult. If you don’t understand them, 
skipping this section will not unduly disturb the general flow of the 
book. Consider also, that this book contains an extensive glossary 
that may prove helpful from time to time with unfamiliar terms. 
        A genetic algorithm (GA) uses a software-simulated form of 
Darwinian evolution to optimize the performance of whatever is 
being evolved. For example, take my application of GAs to the 
evolution of neural networks. I simulated the behavior of a neural 
net in the following way. The first problem was how to represent 
 
 
32 

 
39
the neural net itself. I took 16 neurons and had them all connect to 
themselves and all other neurons, so that there was a total of 16*16 
= 256 connections. The incoming signal strengths, represented by 
ordinary decimal pointed numbers, e.g. 10.47, were multiplied by a 
weighting factor, e.g. 0.537, and then summed. As an illustration 
of this idea, imagine a very simple network of only 2 neurons, 
hence 4 connections. Neuron 1 sends a signal to itself at 
connection or synapse C11 and to neuron 2, at connection or 
synapse C12. Neuron 2 sends a signal to itself at connection or 
synapse C22 and to neuron 1 at connection or synapse C21.  Assume 
that the signal strengths at a given moment are S1 and S2 (e.g. 
10.54 and 7.48). 
        Each connection Cij or synapse possesses a corresponding 
weighting factor wij that is used to multiply the signal strength of 
the signal coming through the synapse. So the sum of the signal 
strengths arriving at neuron 2 would be  (w12*S1 + w22*S2). 
Similarly, for neuron 1. There will be 4 of these weights. Assume 
that the value of each weight lies between –1 and +1. Thus each 
weight can be represented as a fractional binary number with say 8 
bits (binary digits, 0s or 1s). Four such numbers can be represented 
by 4*8 = 32 bits that can be laid out in a row of length 32 bits. 
With 16 neurons, I had a row or bitstring as it is called, of 16*16*8 
= 2048 bits to represent the 16*16 weights of my neural network 
that I was evolving. 
        If I knew the 2048 bit values (0s or 1s) I could calculate all 
the 256 weight values, and hence construct a fully interconnected 
neural net from them. The reverse process was also possible. If one 
knew the values of all the weights, and the values of the initial 
incoming signals from outside the net, one could calculate the 
signal strength of each neuron as it fired. If one knew how each 
 
 
33 

 
40
neuron fired, one knew how the whole neural network fired, or 
behaved. One could extract the signals from some of the neurons 
and use them as control signals to control some process, e.g. the 
angles of legs of a robot to make it walk. 
        To explain how to use a GA in this application, imagine 
generating 100 random bitstrings of length 2048 bits each. From 
each bitstring one can construct its corresponding neural net. To 
each net one applies the same initiating input signals to kick-start 
the signaling of the network. One extracts the output signals and 
uses them, for example, to make some stick legs walk by 
controlling the angles of the 4 lines that make up the stick legs. 
One then measures how far the legs walk in a given time.  
        Those bitstrings that generate neural nets that generate a 
longer walking distance, survive into the next generation. Those 
that generate a shorter distance walking are killed off, Darwinian 
style, i.e. “survival of the fittest.” The fitter bitstrings, i.e. those 
with higher performance scores or “fitnesses,” have copies made of 
them, called their “children” or offspring. The children and their 
parents are then “mutated,” meaning that at low probability, each 
bit may be flipped (a 0 to a 1, or a 1 to a 0. Two bit-strings can be 
“sexed,” a process called “crossover.” There are various ways to 
do this. One simple way is to take two parent bit-strings or 
“chromosomes” as they are usually called, to cut them both at the 
same position, and then swap components. This is the equivalent of 
sex, which is basically only the mixing of genes from two parents 
to form the offspring. 
        The fitter parents have more offspring. Each generation of the 
GA has a fixed population size, e.g. 100. Most mutations and 
crossovers cause the chromosomes to have lower fitnesses, so they 
get weeded out of the population. Occasionally, a mutation or 
 
 
34 

 
41
crossover actually improves the fitness of a chromosome by a 
small amount, so that in time it squeezes its parents and other 
inferior chromosomes out of the population. By looping through 
this cycle hundreds of times, it is possible to evolve a neural 
network, or whatever one is trying to evolve, which performs quite 
well. 
        For my Ph.D. at the University of Brussels I was evolving 
neural networks that gave time dependent output signals. As far as 
I know that was the first time that anyone had done such a thing. 
Previously, a few people had applied GAs to neural network 
evolution, but the applications were static, i.e. the signals being 
extracted did not change with time. This struck me as being 
unnecessarily restrictive. The GA should be able to handle time 
dependent outputs. Once I had this insight, I started to evolve a 
neural net that made some stick legs walk. It worked. It required a 
few tricks to get it to evolve, but it did work.  
        That initial discovery, that it was possible to evolve neural 
network dynamics (as distinct from statics) opened up a whole new 
world for me, and created a new research branch called 
“evolutionary neural systems.” I began to wonder what I would do 
next. The thought occurred to me that if I could evolve one 
behavior with one neural net, I could evolve a different behavior 
with a second neural net, i.e. one with a different set of weights. 
The weight set determines the dynamics of the output signals. 
        I became more ambitious. Instead of playing with simple stick 
legs confined to a 2D plane, I would evolve behaviors for a 3D 
simulated quadruped creature that I called “Lizzy.” If I could 
evolve one behavior successfully, then I could evolve a whole 
library of behaviors, with one neural net per behavior. I could 
probably then switch behaviors by having Lizzy at first walk and 
 
 
35 

 
42
then turn. To achieve a smooth behavioral transition, all that was 
necessary was to switch off the inputs to the “walk straight” 
behavior-generating network (or module as I started calling them), 
and input the outputs of the walk module to the turn module.                
Simulation experiments showed that the motion transition was 
smooth. Great. I now knew I could get a quadruped creature like 
Lizzy to display a whole library of behaviors.  
        The question arose as to when one would want to switch 
behaviors. Perhaps such decisions might arise from stimuli from 
the environment. I started to see if I could evolve detector 
modules, e.g. signal strength detectors, frequency detectors, signal 
strength difference detectors, etc. Yes, it was possible. The next 
logical step was to attempt to evolve decision type modules, e.g. of 
the type --  “if the strength of the 1st input signal is greater than S1, 
and the strength of the 2nd input signal is less than S2, then switch 
on action An”, i.e. a stimulus signal would be sent to the module 
that executes action An.  
        Putting all three kinds of modules together, i.e. behavior 
generating or behavioral modules, detector modules and decision 
modules, it seemed to me that it would be possible to start making 
artificial nervous systems. If there were a lot of such modules, then 
I thought it would be fair to call such a collection, an “artificial 
brain.” It was at this stage that I started to become very ambitious. 
I began to see myself as the future pioneer of artificial brains, as 
Mr. Brain Builder. 
        But there were problems. The computer I was using in the late 
80s and early 90s was hopelessly slow for the task I had in mind. 
By the time I was playing with a dozen evolved modules, the 
simulation speed of Lizzy on the computer screen was becoming 
noticeably slow. Every time I added another module’s weights, the 
 
 
36 

 
43
simulation speed slowed further. It became obvious to me that this 
was not the way to go. How to get around this problem? 
        By this stage I had finished my Ph.D. and was now 
postdocing in Japan, in 1992. In the summer of that year I was in 
the US talking with an electronic engineer acquaintance of mine at 
one of the universities that I am associated with, namely George 
Mason University in Virginia. I was asking this acquaintance how 
it might be possible to use electronics to speed up the evolution of 
my neural net modules. After about an hour’s discussion, he 
mentioned something called an FPGA (a field programmable gate 
array). Not being an electronic engineer, I had never heard of such 
a thing. “What’s an FPGA?” I asked. He told me that it was a 
special kind of chip that was programmable, i.e. one could send in 
a bit string that would instruct the chip how to wire itself up (or 
“configure” itself, to use the technical term.) 
        I suddenly got very excited. A vision flashed before my eyes. 
Since I had spent the past few years using GAs to evolve neural 
nets, my immediate inclination was to imagine the configuring bit 
string as a GA chromosome, so the idea that it might be possible to 
evolve hardware directly in the chip suddenly looked plausible. I 
began to grill my acquaintance. Can the configuring bit string be 
sent in an unlimited number of times?  He thought for a moment, 
and replied that if the chip were based on RAM, i.e. computer 
memory, then like ordinary RAM in any computer, the 
programmable chip could be reprogrammed as often as one likes. 
        I felt overjoyed. It meant that it might be possible to send in 
random bit strings that would configure or wire up the 
programmable chip in a random way, generating a complex 
random circuit. If there was another circuit, programmed by a 
human being to measure the performance of the randomly  
 
 
37 

 
44
programmed chip, then it might be possible to perform a GA 
directly in hardware at hardware speeds. 
        I was so excited by this vision, that as soon as I got back to 
my Japanese research group, I gave a seminar on my idea and 
launched the research field of “evolvable hardware.” I wrote 
papers on this idea, preached it to colleagues, gave talks on it at 
conferences, etc. The research field of Evolvable Hardware, or just 
EH, is now an established research field, with its own conferences 
every year or so in the US, Europe and Japan, plus its own 
academic journal.  I feel I am the father of this field, and use its 
basic ideas in my daily work. 
        The following year, 1993, I moved to a research lab in Kyoto, 
Japan where I began work on building an artificial brain. I was 
convinced, after my discovery of the possibility of evolvable 
hardware, that I had found a tool that would make the building of 
an artificial brain practical.  
        I started writing papers announcing that I intended to build an 
artificial brain with a billion artificial neurons by the year 2001. In 
1993, to make such an announcement invited disbelief, because at 
the time, most neural net researchers were dealing with tens to 
hundreds of neurons, as I had been in earlier years. To hear 
someone suddenly announce that he was going to use a billion, 
sounded ludicrous. I was laughed at, ridiculed.  
        But, I was convinced then that my vision was sound. If one 
could build a special kind of computer based on the principles of 
evolvable hardware, then its electronic evolution speeds would 
make brain building practical. I did the math and reasoned that a 
billion neuron artificial brain by 2001 would be just about doable. I 
had a contract with my Japanese lab for 7-8 years, so I thought I 
had the time to be ambitious. 
 
 
38 

 
45
        My first task was to choose some kind of medium in which to 
grow and evolve neural nets. I chose to use cellular automata (CA). 
Each cell of a 2D cellular automaton can be likened to a square on 
a chessboard, but with two differences. One is that the chessboard 
has an unlimited number of squares. The other is that the squares 
are not confined to be only black or white but can be any of a finite 
set of colors. Each square can change its color into any other of the 
set only at the tick of a clock. The color that a particular square 
changes into depends on its current color, and the colors of its four 
immediate, touching neighbor squares. For example, if the North 
square is red, the East square is yellow, the South square is blue, 
the West square is green and the central square in question is 
brown, then at the next clock tick, the central square changes its 
color to purple. 
        By appropriately choosing thousands of such rules, it was 
possible for me to make these cellular automata cells behave like a 
neural network that grows and evolves. For example I could grow 
pathways three cells wide, in which I would send growth cells that 
moved down the middle of the path. When a growth signal hit the 
end of the growing path it would make the path extend, turn left, 
turn right, split etc, depending on the color of the growth signal. 
By mutating the sequence of these growth signals that were sent 
down the middle of the CA pathways, I was able to evolve the CA 
based neural net.  
        This process occurred in two phases. The first was the growth 
phase. After a few hundred clock ticks, the growth would saturate. 
No more 3-cell wide CA trails or paths could be grown. These 
trails were the axons and dendrites of the neural net. Once the 
growth phase was completed, i.e. the growth instruction cells had 
cleared themselves from the network, the grown neural net could 
 
 
39 

 
46
then be used for the subsequent signaling phase. Input signals 
could be applied, which would propagate over the network. These 
signals behaved like the signals in the neural networks that I had 
evolved in earlier years. They could be extracted at output points 
and used to control processes whose fitness or performance quality 
could be measured. The fitness of the performance became the 
fitness of the network, which in turn was grown from a sequence 
of growth instructions, i.e. a random string of 6 different integers 
(whole numbers). 
        What I had done was marry neural nets with cellular 
automata. This had not been done before as far as I know. The 
reason for doing this was that I thought CAs would be a suitable 
medium in which to have billions of CA cells, more than enough 
for a billion neurons. It seemed to me to be practical. The 
workstations (i.e. computers a bit more powerful than PCs) of the 
time would have a gigabyte (a billion bytes) of RAM memory in 
them. RAM is cheap, so since I could store the state or color of one 
CA cell in a single byte (8 bits) of RAM, and my workstation 
could have a gigabyte of RAM, that would allow me to store the 
colors of a billion CA cells, a billion! That’s a lot, more than 
enough in which to put an artificial brain with a huge number of 
neurons. Space would not be a problem. The technology of the 
time would allow it. It would be practical. 
        It took me about a year to write all the rules (North-East-
South-West-Center type rules) to show that a 2D version of a CA 
based neural net would work, that it would evolve. I had to hand 
code (with software productivity tools to help me) about 11,000 
such rules to get it to work, but work it did. I successfully evolved 
oscillator circuits, signal strength detection circuits, line motion 
detector circuits etc. It was time to move on to a 3D version that 
 
 
40 

 
47
would have quite a different topology. In 2D, circuits have to 
collide. They cannot go past each other. Whereas in 3D, CA trails 
can pass each other using the 3rd dimension. The dynamics and 
evolvability of 3D circuits would be much richer than the 2D case. 
I got the 3D version to work but only after another 2 years, and 
roughly 60,000 rules.  
        By this stage I was feeling quite miserable in Japan. My 
immediate group boss had a policy of having only one person per 
project, which made me terribly lonely and intellectually sterile. I 
had no one to really talk with. After exerting some pressure I 
finally got a young German M.Sc. level student to help me for the 
year 1996.  
        I explained to him that the 3D version was pretty well 
finished, and that I was becoming increasingly disillusioned with 
the particular CA model that I had been using. I explained to him 
my dream of growing and evolving CA based neural circuits 
directly in electronics, at electronic speeds. I felt that together we 
would need to simplify the CA model, so that it would be possible 
to fit it all into the electronics of the time, i.e. 1996. He listened to 
my list of desiderata and then disappeared for two weeks. He 
returned with a new, much simplified neural net model that kept 
the essential features of my old model, but added features that 
simplified it to such an extent that indeed the new model could be 
put directly into electronics. This new model was called “CoDi.” 
        At about this time, in the second half of 1996, I was contacted 
by an American electronic engineer. He had found my papers 
interesting and wanted to collaborate. I sent him details of my 
German assistant’s new model and asked him if he thought he 
could implement it in hardware using special FPGAs that were 
then on the market. He said he thought he could. My Japanese boss 
 
 
41 

 
48
approved the financing of the idea and a close collaboration 
between my new American colleague and myself then started. 
Unfortunately I lost my German colleague only after one year. He 
went to do a Ph.D. in Europe. My Japanese boss reverted to his old 
policy of one person per project and I became more miserable than 
ever.  
        I was starting to want to leave, but couldn’t, because the new 
machine had just been approved for construction. Relations with 
my group manager became increasingly strained, especially after I 
discovered he had a policy of putting his name on academic 
journal papers written by his subordinates to which he made 
absolutely no intellectual contribution. He asked me to put his 
name on one of my journal articles. I refused, and told him that in 
the west that would be considered disgusting, an abuse of power, 
and corrupt. After that, relations soured fast. I was allowed to stay 
on until the end of the year 1999, and then I would have to leave. 
The Japanese economy had performed so badly during the 90s, 
“the lost decade,” that the whole research division was considered 
too blue sky, too fringy to be funded in times of economic scarcity. 
So I and most of my department left Japan at the turn of the 
millennium. I got another job. Ironically it was in Brussels, and to 
do the same work as I had done at my Japanese lab. 
        During the years 1996 until 2000, my hardware colleague in 
the US was working away solidly on constructing the special piece 
of hardware that would fulfill my dream of building artificial 
brains. It was slow going for him. He had only a limited budget 
from my Japanese group boss. He could afford only one full time 
assistant plus a few part timers on limited term contracts. 
        During the course of his work, the US company making the 
FPGA chips that the machine was based on, decided to take them 
 
 
42 

 
49
off the market. My US colleague then had to fight the company to 
get the remaining chips. This caused many months of delay. The 
chips were finally obtained, but were untested. Thus he had to test 
them himself, without the thorough testing software that the 
company would have – more delays. 
        It was not until mid 2000 that the machines that I called 
CAM-Brain Machines (CBMs) were finally debugged sufficiently 
that true evolution experiments could begin. CAM stands for 
Cellular Automata Machine, because the original work was to put 
an artificial brain inside cellular automata. 
        The first CBM was delivered to my Japanese lab in early 
1999, but it still contained bugs. With untested chips and small 
manpower, work progressed slowly. But all was not gloomy. Other 
people became interested in the CBM. By early 2001, there were 
four such machines in the world. The first remained at my old 
Kyoto lab in Japan. The second was bought by a Belgian speech-
processing lab and later transferred to a bio-informatics company 
also in Belgium. The third was bought by my Brussels lab, and the 
fourth was owned by my hardware colleague. Thus with two of the 
four machines in Belgium, Belgium became in a sense the world 
leader in this field. In 2000, I managed to get a $1,000,000 grant 
from the Brussels government to build an artificial brain to control 
a small kitten-like robot, giving it hundreds of behaviors. As you 
can probably see, all this work from the 1990s was really only an 
extension of my old Ph.D. thesis work of the 1980s. 
        Just what could the CBM do? I believe it was truly a 
miraculous machine that in time, once people appreciated its 
significance, would take its place in the history of computing. It 
implemented the CoDi CA based neural net model directly in 
electronics. It evolved a neural net in a few seconds, i.e. it 
 
 
43 

 
50
performed a complete run of a genetic algorithm, i.e. tens of 
thousands of neural circuit module growths and fitness 
measurements. It could change the color of its CA cells at the 
phenomenal rate of about 130 billion a second. It could handle 
nearly 100 million artificial neurons. It had the processing capacity 
of about 10,000 PCs, so was definitely a supercomputer but cost 
only $500,000.  
        The CBM had two main roles. The first was to evolve 
individual neural circuit modules, or just modules, I called them. A 
neural net was grown/evolved inside a 3D CA space of 24*24*24 
CA cells or little cubes. About 1000 neurons could fit inside this 
space. Branch-like axons and dendrites grew randomly inside this 
space. A programmed FPGA was used to measure the quality of 
the neural signaling of the network that was grown. The basic ideas 
were similar to what I was working on before 1996. Once a 
module was evolved, it was downloaded into a gigabyte of RAM 
memory. 64000 of such modules could be evolved, one at a time, 
each with its own fitness definition (i.e. task or function) as 
specified by human “evolutionary engineers” (EEs) and 
downloaded into the RAM. Later, “brain architects”  (BAs) 
interconnected the downloaded modules using software to form 
their humanly specified artificial brain architectures to perform the 
tasks that they wanted. 
        After the bankruptcy of my Brussels lab in the dotcom crash, 
and the move to my US university (Utah State University), I was 
forced to rethink. My hardware colleague lost $300,000 of his own 
money when my Brussels lab was unable to pay for the CBM it 
bought from him, making him wash his hands of the whole project. 
Since he had monopoly knowledge of the detailed architecture of 
the CBM, further work on its development came to a screaming 
 
 
44 

 
51
halt. My American university could not afford $0.5M for a fifth 
CBM, so I was left without my machine. I spent 2+ years learning 
how to teach, plus writing papers on evolvable hardware and 
quantum computing, until I realized that thanks to Moore’s Law, I 
could once again build brains, but this time far more cheaply. 
        A British company had developed a way to translate ordinary 
computer software code (e.g. in the computer language “C”) into 
bit string instructions to wire up (i.e. configure) programmable 
chips (FPGAs). I conceived a new brain building research project. 
The new approach was to use a GA to evolve neural nets that 
would be programmed into the FPGA electronic board (costing 
less than $1000). This board could evolve a neural net circuit 
module dozens of times faster than a PC could in software (the 
latter taking hours to several days per module).  
         These modules would be evolved one by one in the hardware 
and the result downloaded into a PC. Each module would have its 
own evolved function as specified by human BAs (brain 
architects). Once several 10,000s of these modules had been so 
downloaded into the PC, special software could be used to specify 
the connections between the modules, e.g. the output of module 
M3728 could be connected to the second input of module M9356.  
    The PC is then used to perform the neural signaling of the whole 
artificial brain in real time (i.e. 25 neural signals per neuron per 
second). Today’s PCs can signal 10,000s of modules in real time. 
The whole approach, that I call “Brain Building on the Cheap” 
costs under $2000, so I’m hoping the idea will spread to other 
universities and research labs. Of course my approach will be a lot 
more persuasive to my colleagues and funders if I can actually 
build such a brain in the next few years and show it controlling a 
robot to perform useful tasks. 
 
 
45 

 
52
2.3 
Future Tasks and Dreams 
 
        If those people who had laughed at my preposterous assertion 
that I would build an artificial brain with a billion neurons by 2001 
were able (hypothetically) to see the CBM in 1993 as it existed in 
2001, they would not have laughed. Admittedly the machine did 
not handle a billion neurons. The actual figure was 75 million, but 
that’s only one order of magnitude off. That’s not bad. Admittedly 
also, the task of architecting the artificial brain, a huge task, still 
lay ahead. There was still a lot of work to be done, and I still 
suffered from critics. With all the delays, whether for commercial, 
intellectual, managerial, or personal reasons, I did not have an 
artificial brain to show off to people. Some journalists started to 
get impatient, and were wondering if and when I would deliver. 
Since the Brussels lab was going bankrupt, I was not free to tell the 
journalists the reasons for the delays. It was very frustrating. 
        The plan was, just before the bankruptcy, to complete the 
machine’s evolvability studies, evolving one module at a time. If 
the evolvability levels were not sufficient, we would have to 
change the fitness definitions we used in the CBM. We may also 
have had to change the neural net model implemented in the 
reprogrammable FPGAs. Once that stage could be completed, the 
next would have been to start building multi-module systems, with 
10s of modules, then 100s, then 1000s, up to 64,000, to build an 
artificial brain aimed at controlling the behavior of robots. We 
intended to show off a kitten robot with many behaviors controlled 
by an artificial brain. One would not have needed to have a Ph.D. 
to understand what was going on, as was the case with the CBM, 
but just by simple observation of the robot, one would have been 
able 
to 
see 
that 
“there 
was 
a 
brain 
behind 
it.” 
 
 
46 

 
53
        In parallel with all this work, which should have taken several 
more years, was the need to start serious thinking about the next 
generation of brain building machine, that I called the BM2 (brain 
building machine, 2nd generation). I started collaborating with 
another American colleague who had some revolutionary ideas for 
the next generation of electronics that self configure. He estimated 
that with a budget of a few million dollars, it would be possible to 
build a next generation machine within about four years, which 
should be about 1000 times more performant compared with the 
CBM. 
        However, since I have not yet managed to persuade US grant 
givers to part with such sums, I have had to be content with the 
more modest approach described in the previous section (i.e. 
“brain building on the cheap.”) 
        In fact, it is my general ambition to continue trying to build a 
new generation brain building machine and its corresponding brain 
every 4-5 years. I’m now in my late 50s, so if I choose to retire in 
my 70s, that gives me about 15-20 years, or three more 
generations. In 20 years, if Moore’s law continues to be valid that 
long, it will give humanity the ability to put one bit of information 
on one atom. Once that happens it will be possible to build what I 
call “Avogadro Machines,” i.e. machines with a trillion trillion 
components. Avogadro’s number is the number of molecules in an 
object of human scale, e.g. an apple in one’s hand.  
        If the second-generation brain-building machine can be 
funded and can be built within the next 4-5 years, it will be 
possible to make the next generation brain more similar to the 
biological brain. The neural net models it implements can be more 
sophisticated and closer in their behaviors to those of biological 
neurons. 
 
 
47 

 
54
        Within a mere 20 years, i.e. my own working lifetime, I and 
other brain builders will have the technologies and the tools to 
build ever more performant artificial brains. 
        Is it any wonder then, that I and others are beginning to feel 
alarmed at the rapid progress that brain building can be expected to 
make in the coming 20 years. What will our artificial brains be 
doing for humanity by that time? I would say it is highly likely 
they will be in our homes, cleaning them, babysitting our kids, 
talking with us, giving us infinite information from knowledge 
banks all over the planet. We will be having sex with them, be 
educated by them, be entertained by them, made to laugh by them 
etc. The brain building industry 20 years from now I estimate will 
be worth about a trillion dollars a year worldwide. Within a few 
years I hope and expect that if my own group can “prove concept” 
that brain building is doable, then a new “brain building” research 
field will be established. 
        If we have all this within 20 years, where will humanity be in 
50 years, in a 100? Given the exponential progress in the 
accumulation of our knowledge of brain science, all of which can 
be immediately incorporated into neuro-engineering the moment it 
is discovered, I feel that the initial positive feelings about artificial 
brains will later turn sour and develop into fear. 
        I would like to be considered the father of the artificial brain. 
I feel I am already the father of evolvable hardware and of 
evolutionary engineering, which are the enabling technologies of 
this new field. If I were a traditionally minded engineer or 
scientist, I would probably be quite content to get on with my work 
and not worry about its longer term social consequences, but I’m 
not like that. I’m a very political animal, and I’m very worried. My 
rather unusual combination of being a scientist/engineer and at the 
 
 
48 

 
55
same time a social critic and media person makes me an 
appropriate person I believe to raise the alarm on the artilect issue. 
        I’m hoping that my credibility or otherwise as a professional 
brain builder will aid my attempts to raise the alarm on the rise of 
the 21st century artilect. However, the two need not be connected. 
Even if I fail to build an artificial brain, others will succeed. For 
me to succeed with each brain-building-machine-generation, and 
the building of its corresponding brain, I will need to raise more 
money, hire more people as the scale of the enterprise keeps 
increasing. In theory, I would need to become like Goddard, the 
US rocket pioneer, or Werner von Braun, who put an American on 
the moon. Both these men started with toy rockets, but had a 
vision. In the 1920s, Goddard’s first contraptions were not much 
better than 2m tall ancient Chinese style rockets. Twenty years 
later, both he and von Braun were heavily subsidized by their 
respective governments to build highly sophisticated rockets 
capable of traveling great distances. In the late 1960s von Braun 
played a major part in NASA that put Armstrong on the moon. 
        I have similar dreams. I dream of national projects paying 
billions of dollars to build artificial brains. I have talked of the J-
Brain Project (Japan’s national brain building project), the A-Brain 
Project (America’s), the E-Brain and C-Brain Projects (Europe’s 
and China’s). Within 20 years, and in possession of Avogadro 
machines, there will be a huge amount of work to be done in 
building a brain, not with just billions of components, but trillions 
of trillions of components. A huge team of people will be needed. 
That’s my longer-term dream, 20 years from now. 
        After that, once I have retired, I hope I will be able to play the 
role of the wise old man who advises younger minds on where the 
whole brain builder effort ought to be headed.  As this book shows,  
 
 
49 

 
56
I am not optimistic about the future survival of humanity when 
faced with machines that become ever smarter at exponential rates. 
        My ultimate goal is to see humanity, or at least of portion of 
humanity, go Cosmist and to do it successfully by building truly 
godlike artilects that tower above our puny human intellectual, and 
other, abilities. That is my true goal. I won’t live to see it 
unfortunately. True artilects won’t be built within the 30-40 years I 
have left. I will not live to see the ultimate fruits of my work. This 
is a source of great frustration and disappointment to me, but there 
is one consolation. At least I will probably die peacefully in my 
bed of old age. As this book shows, I fear for my grand children 
whom I believe are likely to be destroyed in a gigadeath war over 
the issue of species dominance late this century.  
        So, dear reader, you have now heard the more technical side 
of my story, and a brief description of my life’s work. Does 
knowing this make you feel that my political opinions concerning a 
possible Artilect War are more credible? Should I tell you that I am 
not just a Ph.D. but a professor in the US and a guest professor in 
China. I was also a Davos Science Fellow, the only one in Japan at 
the time, so I got to go to the Davos World Economic Forum to 
entertain the billionaires. I’m in the Guinness book of world 
records (p126, 2001) for the CBM. I was a guest editor of a special 
issue of an academic journal on “Evolutionary Neural Systems,” 
which is usually an honor reserved for the person who is 
considered to be the best in the world in a given specialty by the 
editor in chief of the journal concerned. If a lot of people consider 
what I am trying to do to be crankish, then I hope it is clear that at 
least I am a competent crank. The point of this chapter is to try to 
convince you that the author of this book, the coiner of the terms 
artilect, Cosmist, Terran, gigadeath, etc is worthy of being listened 
to. Whether I have succeeded or not is for you to judge. 
 
50 

 
57
Chapter 3 
 
Artilect Enabling Technologies 
 
 
 
        Some years ago, when I was trying to get an earlier draft of 
this book published in the US, I received an email from an 
American literary agent, saying that my manuscript, which she had 
read, was “quite well written, but ‘fantastical’, making it a very 
hard sell for publishers.” Since then I have found in practice, that 
the greatest obstacle I have to face in trying to persuade people to 
accept these ideas, is their seemingly “science fiction” like 
character. Many of my readers seem to have great difficulty in 
getting their minds around the enormity of what is being proposed. 
For example, most people, when confronted with such concepts as 
“massively intelligent machines” with artificial intelligence levels 
trillions of trillions of times above the human level, or of an 
“Artilect War” killing billions of people (“gigadeath”), or of 
asteroid sized computers, etc, not surprisingly, their immediate 
reaction is one of incredulity. They will often laugh at the seeming 
preposterousness of these ideas. Even many of my colleagues 
(especially the non physicists) do not take a lot of these ideas 
seriously. For example, I tried several years ago to persuade the 
most eminent “applied ethics” professor on the planet, Professor 
Peter Singer of Princeton University, USA, to take up these ideas. I 
was trying to persuade him to write a book on the topic of “Artilect 
Ethics,” which would deal with the huge moral and ethical issues 
concerned with the possible construction of artilects this century.  
 
 
51 

 
58
His reply was illuminating. I quote him from one of his emails to 
me. “To be blunt, I am not sure how to place you between the 
‘total flake’ and ‘genius ahead of his time’ views of your ideas.” 
This is from someone with a very open mind.  
        So you see my most pressing problem for the moment is one 
of credibility. How to persuade people that these ideas are not just 
a piece of non-serious “science fiction,” but are very probable 
“future science” ideas. Admittedly, the persuasion task has become 
easier recently as the world media increasingly takes up the 
message. Before coming to the US, I was constantly in the world 
media, (TV, newspapers, magazines, radio, web, etc) in such 
countries as France, Holland, UK, Australia, Poland, etc. But even 
the US has been contacting me increasingly lately, without any real 
effort on my part. 
        Despite the growing credibility, there is still a long way to go, 
so it is essential in this book for me to try to persuade skeptics that 
these ideas are worthy of serious consideration, and that they 
should not be dismissed out of hand. 
        This chapter is devoted to trying to persuade you that it will 
be possible to build artilects this century.  
        The fabulous technologies that will be developed in the next 
100 years will be so capable and so fantastic, that they will force 
the issue as to whether artilects should be built this century or not. 
        Once you have read this chapter, I hope you will be left with 
the strong impression that the artilect's potential intelligence is 
truly gargantuan. Artilects will have the ability to surpass human 
intelligence levels by many orders of magnitude, not just ten times 
smarter, or a thousand times or even a million times smarter, but 
by trillions, quadrillions, quintillions, truly zillions (using the 
generic term) of times smarter. (If something is 10 times larger 
 
 
52 

 
59
than something else, it is said to be an order of magnitude larger. If 
it is 100 times larger, it is two orders of magnitude larger, etc).  
        This chapter will try to persuade you that these numbers are 
not exaggerated. There are very good reasons, based on the new 
technologies, that we expect to be developed this century, to 
motivate us to believe that artilect building is a realistic proposition 
within the next 100 years. 
        This chapter will be amongst the most complicated of the 
book, since it will be discussing scientific ideas and technologies 
that are new or do not yet exist. I will try to make this chapter as 
easy to understand for the general, non-scientific reader as I can.  
        As I wrote in the introductory chapter, one of my life goals, 
besides building artificial brains, is to raise the alarm on the 
“Artilect Issue,” or if you prefer to call it, the “Species Dominance 
Issue,” or the “Cosmist-Terran Conflict.” There are several ways to 
label the same basic problem that is coming.  
        This issue is far too important to be confined to intellectual 
discussions amongst a bunch of “nerdy scientists.” In time, it will 
concern everyone, because if Cosmists are serious in their “threat” 
to build artilects, everyone will be affected, one way or another. 
One does not initiate a great public debate by confining ones 
worries to the scientific specialists, a tiny proportion of humanity, 
less than 1%.  
        An effective beginning to getting people to talk about the 
artilect issue is to write a book. A book will help the journalists 
become familiar with the problem, and they in turn will write about 
it for the greater reading public. Similar reasoning applies to the 
TV and radio journalists, who can present these ideas to an even 
wider audience, because unfortunately, only about a half of the 
population reads books.  
 
 
53 

 
60
        Probably the most effective way to get the message across 
would be to have Hollywood make a blockbuster movie on the 
theme. I hope this will come. A start in this direction has been 
made. Several filmmakers in various countries have already made 
documentaries about me and my ideas. 
        Before launching into details of these new or yet to be 
developed technologies, I ought to say a little about the category of 
readers who could most benefit from this chapter, which I think is 
amongst the most difficult of the book. I believe if you have 
studied at least high school science, you should be able to follow 
most of what will be described in this chapter. 
        To fully appreciate this chapter, I need to talk about some 
very “high-tech” technologies and even technologies that don't yet 
exist, so I will have to go into some level of detail. I hope that few 
readers will be put off.  
        If you are, I suggest you just read as much of this chapter as 
you can follow, without too much effort, then skip to the next 
chapter, which discusses the many points of view of the Cosmists. 
However, if you do decide to skip this chapter, I suggest at least 
you accept its main conclusion, which is (to labor a point) that this 
century’s technologies will enable the building of artilects, which 
could become zillions of times smarter than human beings.  
 
Moore’s Law 
 
        I begin the introduction of the artilect enabling technologies 
of this chapter with the phenomenon known in the electronics 
world as "Moore's Law" that I discussed briefly in the introductory 
chapter. This time however, the concept will be treated in greater 
detail. Gordon Moore is a person, still alive in the early 21st  
 
 
54 

 
61
century, who was one of the co-founders of the “Intel” 
microprocessor company, in Silicon Valley, California, USA. In 
the mid 1960s, he noticed that integrated circuits were increasing 
their speed and density (i.e. the number of transistors crammed 
onto the surface of a silicon chip) by a factor of two every year or 
so. This doubling rate has remained more or less true for the past 
40 years and many people believe that it will continue right down 
to the molecular scale.  
        What is the point of trying to make electronic components 
smaller and more densely packed? If two electronic components 
have to signal each other, and given the finite speed of light (i.e. 
the maximum speed with which electronic components can send 
messages to each other) then the closer these components are to 
each other, the faster they can influence each other. Also, the 
smaller the size of the components, the greater is the number of 
them that can be crammed into a given surface area. Hence the 
chip can deliver greater performance because it has more 
components to do more things. 
        The microchip industry is thus under constant pressure to 
scale down, to make its transistors smaller, its circuits smaller. If a 
company falls behind in this frenetic race, it will lose sales and go 
out of business. If the rival company down the road is six months 
ahead in its development cycle, and thus releases a new batch of 
products ahead of your company, you are at a great disadvantage. 
New generations of chips and the computers based on them come 
out every year or two. We are getting used to this now. We know 
that if we wait six months or a year, we will be able to buy a better, 
more performant computer for about the same price. 
        Moore's Law is probably one of the most important 
technological and economic phenomena of our times. It is fueling 
 
 
55 

 
62
the digital revolution, which is now driving our global economy. 
So many jobs and such a large proportion of the GNPs (Gross 
National Products) of many nations are now tied up with the 
electronics, computer, telecommunications industries that if 
Moore's Law were ever to stop, humanity would be in for a real 
shock. However, there is a problem.  
        As the size of electronic components, particularly transistors, 
gets smaller and smaller, a scale is eventually reached which is so 
small that a different set of physical laws, which governs their 
behaviors, begins to apply.  
        If Moore's Law can continue right down to the molecular 
scale, i.e. if the size of electronic components can reach that of 
molecules and still be functional, then new laws of physics must be 
applied. The old "classical mechanics" discovered by Newton in 
the 17th century is no longer appropriate, and must be replaced by 
the newer 20th century based "quantum mechanics."  
        Quantum mechanical laws govern the behavior of atoms and 
molecules (and even smaller scales). For example, as the line 
widths of wires connecting electronic components on the silicon 
surface of a chip are reduced below about 0.1 micron (a micron is a 
millionth of a meter, about the size of a bacterium), quantum 
mechanical phenomena begin to appear. These phenomena make 
themselves felt with such a strength that the usual transmission of 
electrons (i.e. electric current) down the wire at larger scales, is 
severely disturbed. 
        There are many other similar reasons why researchers in 
electronics are worried today. They know that they must shift away 
from conventional electronic principles into quantum mechanical 
principles if electronics is to continue its incredible "Moore 
doublings" phenomenon. Instead of looking upon these quantum 
 
 
56 

 
63
effects as a disturbance of conventional electronics, a growing 
number of electronics researchers are accepting the inevitable, and 
have started to think of new electronic and computing techniques 
which embrace the quantum phenomena as their functioning 
principles. 
        If Moore's Law continues unstopped until 2020 or 
thereabouts, it will be possible to store one bit of information (a 
zero or a one, a "0" or a "1") on a single atom. An excited atom (in 
which an electron circling the nucleus of the atom has a higher 
energy than usual) could be interpreted as storing a "1," and an 
unexcited atom as storing a "0." The two different states “0” or “1” 
would correspond to the two different energy levels of the atoms. 
        The enormous significance of this scaling down to the atomic 
level is the huge number of potential electronic components one 
could then have in a given volume. It was the Italian chemist 
Avogadro in the 19th century who first estimated the number of 
molecules in an object of human scale, such as an apple. The 
number is so large that it is almost impossible for the human mind 
to conceive.  
        Avogadro’s Number is 6.023 times 1023, i.e. nearly a trillion 
trillion (a 1 followed by 24 zeros). That number is a hundred 
trillion times larger than the number of human beings alive on the 
Earth at the beginning of the 21st century.  
        Molecular scale electronics holds the promise of truly huge 
computational capacities, and all this perhaps by the 2020s. When I 
talk about an artilect having a potential artificial intelligence of 
trillions of trillions of times the human level, part of that 
assumption is based upon the enormous computational capacities 
that we will have in a mere few decades, that a future artilect could 
possess. 
 
 
57 

 
64
Reversible Computing 
 
        The above idea of having trillions of trillions of electronic 
components inside a small volume (say that of an apple, or a few 
cubic centimeters) contains an implicit assumption, and that is that 
the electronic circuits contained in such a volume would be 
distributed throughout that space. They would be three-
dimensional circuits (3D). But today’s electronic circuits are all 
2D, imprinted on the surface of silicon chips. Why is this? Why 
doesn’t modern electronics take advantage of the far greater 
storage capacities of 3D circuits? 
        The answer has to do with the problem of heat generation. 
The following paragraphs will explain. 
        For the past few decades, theoretical physicists have been 
asking themselves some fundamental questions about the ultimate 
limits of the physics of computing. This branch of physics goes 
under the label of "phys-comp" (physics of computation). One of 
the questions that has been asked in the phys-comp field is "What 
is the minimum amount of energy or heat that must be dissipated to 
perform an elementary computational step?"  
        If you put your hand over your PC, or if you have your laptop 
on your lap as I do now as I type this, you will be fully conscious 
that your computer is generating heat. Computing inevitably 
generates heat it seems, or does it?  
        In the 1960s, a researcher named Landauer discovered that 
what was generating the heat in computers was the process of 
"resetting" memory registers (a register is a linear storage chain of 
0s and 1s), i.e. wiping out their contents and resetting them to 0s. 
He discovered that the heat was generated when information was 
“wiped out” or destroyed.  
 
 
58 

 
65
        To be a bit more technical, to wipe out the contents of a 
register implies increasing its order, making it less random. In 
physics, the concept of "entropy" is used to measure how 
disordered a physical system is. For example, ice has a lower 
entropy than water, because it is more ordered, less chaotic.  
        One of the basic laws of physics, known as the “Second Law 
of Thermodynamics” is that entropy never decreases in a closed 
system (one where energy can’t get in or out). So if the contents of 
a register are wiped out, its entropy, its measure of chaos, 
decreases, so where does the rest of the entropy go, given that the 
total cannot decrease? The answer is in the form of heat to the 
surrounding environment of the computing component.  
        Today’s computers generate heat because we are using 
thermodynamically irreversible processes (i.e. we can't reverse the 
effects at a later time). We generate heat every time we destroy 
information, i.e. wipe out bits. Landauer thought that this was 
inevitable, because when he looked at how the computers of his 
time all functioned, he saw that they were full of "AND gates," and 
the like.  
        An AND gate is an elementary piece of electronic circuitry 
which has two input signal lines (A and B), and one output line. If 
both input lines are set at a high voltage (i.e. have a "1" on their 
line) then the output line will become a "1," i.e. if both input line A 
AND input line B are set at "1," then the output line becomes a 
"1." In any other case (i.e. A=0, B=0; A=0, B=1; A=1, B=0) the 
output line becomes a "0." 
        Since there are two input lines containing a total of 2 bits of 
information in an AND gate, and only one output line containing 1 
bit of information, of necessity, the AND gate destroys  
information. (If you are told in which state a system is in, that can  
 
 
59 

 
66
have two possible states, then you are given 1 bit of information. 
For example, take the question “On which side of the road do the 
Japanese drive?” When you are told “On the left-hand side,” you 
have been given 1 bit of information).  
        Every time two bits go through the AND gate, only one bit 
comes out. The AND gate is irreversible, i.e. you cannot always 
deduce from the output what the input was. For example, if the 
output was a 1, then you know the inputs were both 1, but if the 
output was a 0, you don't know if the inputs were, (0,0), or (0,1) or 
(1,0). For a gate to be reversible (i.e. you can deduce what the 
inputs were from its outputs and vice versa), common sense says 
that you have to have the same number of input lines as output 
lines.  
        People began to dream up reversible elementary circuits (or 
“gates”) with an equal number of input and output lines. (A “gate” 
is an elementary electronic circuit that performs some basic 
operation, e.g. an AND gate, an OR gate, a NOT gate, etc). One 
famous such gate was called the “Fredkin Gate,” which had 3 
inputs and 3 outputs. The Fredkin gate is reversible, so no bits of 
information are destroyed. It is also "computationally universal," 
i.e. by feeding the outputs of Fredkin gates to the inputs of other 
Fredkin gates, larger circuits of these gates can be built up that can 
perform any of the functions that computers need to perform. 
        Since the individual gates of the computer were reversible, the 
computer itself could be made reversible. In other words, one 
could input the initial bits into the left-hand side of the computer, 
and these would be processed by the Fredkin gates in the computer 
design. The resulting output (the answer) would appear exiting 
from the gates at the right-hand side of the computer.  
        You can make a copy of the answer (which might generate a 
 
 
60 

 
67
little bit of heat) and then send the answer back into the computer 
from right to left. Since all the gates of the computer are reversible, 
you will end up with what you started with at the left-hand side. 
You have performed a reversible computation. No bits have been 
lost 
and 
hence 
no 
heat 
has 
been 
generated.                                        
Nevertheless, you have the answer you want, because you made a 
copy of it half way through the computational process, i.e. before 
you “reversed” the direction of processing. 
        Reversible computing may take twice as long as traditional 
computing, because you have to send the result backwards through 
the same circuit (or an identical copy), but at least there's no heat 
generated. 
        What is the significance of this! Why am I spending so much 
time and energy explaining such things? Because I believe the 
theoretical discovery of reversible, heatless computing in the 1970s 
was one of the greatest scientific discoveries of the twentieth 
century and is of great relevance to the main ideas of this book.  
        Since this is such a strong statement and will probably be 
treated with some skepticism by many people, particularly some of 
my research colleagues, let me try to justify why I have this 
opinion. 
        A few years ago, some phys-comp theorists were wondering, 
"If Moore's Law extends right down to the molecular scale, how 
hot would molecular scale circuits become if one continues to 
employ conventional irreversible, bit destroying, information 
processing techniques?" The answer was shocking.  
        Not only would such highly dense circuits melt with the heat, 
they would become so hot they would explode. It became clear that 
molecular scale circuits, if ever they are to be built, would have to 
abandon the traditional irreversible style of computing, and start  
 
 
61 

 
68
using the new reversible style. 
        Only recently have researchers started thinking seriously 
about reversible computer designs. The laptop and palmtop 
computer industries are very interested in reversible computing, 
because it might help them with their “battery lifetime” problem.  
        If their computers could use electronic circuits that were more 
reversible, the circuits would consume less battery energy, because 
they would generate less wasteful heat. Hence the battery would 
drain more slowly and have a longer life. Consumers will be more 
likely to buy laptop computers that have batteries that last longer. 
Wouldn’t it be nice to have a single laptop battery that lasted for a 
full transatlantic flight, for example. 
        So, it is inevitable that reversible computing has to happen. 
As Moore's Law continues to bite, pressure will increase on 
computer designers to use the reversible paradigm. It is only a 
question of time. 
        But, if we start taking the concept of heatless computing 
seriously, we can begin to play with some revolutionary ideas. For 
example, why are today's electronic circuits two-dimensional? 
Why do we talk of 2D "chips" (i.e. slices) of silicon, rather than 3D 
"blocks?" Well, because of heat. If we made 3D blocks of silicon 
with today's level of density of electronic components, there would 
be so much heat, the blocks would melt. Also, how would we build 
them and debug them once they were built? We do not have the 
techniques yet to do such things. We don't even bother trying to 
build 3D circuits because we know it would be a waste of time, 
due to the heat generation problem.  
        But, with reversible heatless circuits, we have the luxury to 
build large 3D circuitry with, in principle, no limit to size. We 
could make circuits the size of a cubic centimeter, or a cubic meter, 
 
 
62 

 
69
or the size of a room, or a house, or a building, or a city, or even a 
large asteroid hundreds of kilometers across. (An asteroid is a huge 
boulder of metal or rock that orbits the sun at a radius between 
those of Mars and Jupiter. There are thousands of very large 
asteroids in the “asteroid belt.”)  
        In theory we could make computers the size of moons or 
planets, but the gravitational effects might prove to be problematic. 
        You are now probably beginning to suspect why I think 
reversible computing is so terribly important. Ask yourself how 
many bits of information you could store in an asteroid, for 
example. The answer is about 1040, i.e. a "1" followed by 40 zeros, 
i.e. ten thousand trillion trillion trillion atoms and hence bits.  
        Also ask yourself how many brain cells (neurons) we have in 
our heads. The answer is of the order of 1011, i.e. a hundred billion. 
If we could accurately simulate in a computer the behavior of one 
biological neuron using a trillion bits (and that may be overkill) we 
would still have 1017 (17 = 40 – 11 – 12, i.e. a hundred thousand 
trillion) human brain equivalents in one asteroid. 
        I suggest you really study these numbers. They are the writing 
on the wall for me. What this means is that, sooner or later, 
humanity will be able to create vast computing capacities, 
eclipsing enormously human brain levels. It is therefore only a 
question of time before humanity has to choose whether to exploit 
fully such enormous computing potential or not. 
        Let me spell out a bit more explicitly just how phenomenal 
such an asteroid sized computer might be, and what it could do. 
Firstly, it could "think" a million times faster than do our brains. 
The neurons in our skulls communicate with each other at a 
maximum speed of hundreds of meters a second. Electronic 
signaling speeds, as in computers or an artilect, would be a million 
 
 
63 

 
70
times faster, i.e. close to the speed of light, which is 300 million 
meters a second. 
        Even if these artilects had the same intelligence levels as 
humans, they could do in seconds what takes us years. Instead of 
getting a Ph.D. in 4 years, it would take such an artilect only 
4*50*5*8*60*60/1,000,000 = 30 seconds. But an artilect has far 
more than just one human brain equivalent. It has zillions of times 
more. So if it could distribute its thinking over all its brain, then it 
could do what we do in 4 years in picoseconds or less. (A pico-
second is a trillionth of a second). 
        Artilects would be so fast in their thinking that our human 
pace of thought would seem as slow to them as humans trying to 
communicate with rocks. Over millions of years, rocks change 
their shape, which might be interpreted as conveying a message, 
but humans don't have the patience (nor the life span) to wait.  
        There is a strong case to be made by the Cosmists that 
advanced artilects would be totally bored by humans with our 
glacial thinking speeds, and simply ignore us. They would invent 
whole histories within themselves in the time it would take us to 
utter one word. 
        But the artilects need not be limited to human intelligence 
levels. It is not difficult to make out an argument saying that one 
ought to be able to extrapolate the trend in human IQ levels as we 
discover the neurobiological structures and functions that make 
one human being smarter than another. In time we should be able 
to look at an ordinary person’s brain and Einstein's brain and 
notice neuro-physiological features that correlate with higher 
intelligence.  
        We could then plot a graph depicting IQ on the vertical axis, 
and the neuro-physiological features that correlate with high IQ 
 
 
64 

 
71
(e.g. number of connections per neuron in certain regions of the 
brain, etc) on the horizontal axis, and then just extend the trend. 
We may see the development of an "Intelligence Theory," as we 
learn more about how the human brain works and understand just 
what it is that makes humans more intelligent than other animals. It 
may become clear to us, that if we simply increase certain 
parameters in the design of artificial brains, we may be able to 
increase the level of intelligent behavior in the robots that these 
artificial brains control. 
        So, asteroid sized artilects need not be limited to architectures 
that generate human level intelligence. Artilects could not only 
think faster, with hugely more components, but in qualitatively 
superior ways as well. 
        Their huge surface areas, would allow them to attach huge 
numbers of external sensors to themselves, including use of the full 
range of electromagnetic wavelengths from gamma rays to radio 
waves. They could communicate with other asteroid artilects 
across the asteroid belt and deeper into space. 
        Such asteroid sized artilects using nanotech-based principles 
are probably the logical extreme of human technological 
imagination (unless we can create something called "femtotech," 
which I will discuss a bit later.) 
        Before asteroid sized artilects are built, earlier versions will 
certainly be much smaller, more on a human scale, but even at this 
smaller scale, when talking about one bit per atom, we will still 
have many technological problems to solve in order to build such 
computers. 
 
 
 
 
 
65 

 
72
Nanotechnology: Molecular Scale Engineering 
 
        This brings me to the need for "nanotech," as distinct from 
"femtotech,” which I mentioned just above. "Nanotech" is an 
abbreviated form of "nanometer scale technology," i.e. molecular 
scale engineering. Nanotech builds things at the scale of a 
nanometer, which is one billionth of a meter, about the size of 
molecules. "Femtotech" is an abbreviated form of "femtometer 
scale technology." A femtometer is a quadrillionth of a meter, i.e. a 
thousandth of a trillionth of a meter, which is about the scale of a 
proton or neutron inside the nucleus of an atom. Femtotech would 
be nuclear or even quark scale engineering. Quarks are 
“elementary particles” which combine to build protons, neutrons 
and other such particles.  
        The first people to think about the possibility of building 
things at the nanometer level were presenting their ideas in the 
1950s. In the 1990s, these ideas had become well accepted and 
regular monthly progress was being made in this domain. The 
essential idea is that atoms can be placed into exact position to 
build molecular scale machines, e.g. tiny molecular scale robots 
that pick up atoms and position them to build molecular scale 
structures. 
        When one begins to imagine the kinds of things that could be 
done with molecular scale machines, the field begins to sound truly 
science fiction like, yet the possibilities exist. Many scientists 
believe that given the current rate of research progress in the field 
of nanotech, it will probably be well established by about the year 
2020. This is about the same time that it will be possible to store 
one bit of information on a single atom, according to Moore’s law. 
        Consider some of the more fantastic things we could do with  
 
 
66 

 
73
a fully-fledged nanotech. Imagine tiny robots sent into the blood 
stream of human beings, which are programmed to detect cancer 
cells. They would travel throughout the body, detect the cancerous 
cells, kill them, and then self-destruct or be flushed out over time. 
A similar story could hold for "immortality generating" robots, 
which could repair aged cells and restore them to a state like those 
of young children. With a regular dose of such "fountain of youth" 
robots, people could become immortal.  
        Each of the cells in our bodies contains a DNA program that 
explicitly or implicitly causes the cell containing it to die. This 
DNA program takes the form of a molecular structure that can be 
reprogrammed by a molecular scale robot, a nano device. Hence 
nanotech offers humanity the prospect of immortality. If that 
happens, we will need a new politics to decide who lives forever, 
who dies, and who reproduces. 
        Another favorite nanotech idea is to have one's head or one's 
whole body frozen soon after death on the assumption that in a 
century or so, it will be technologically possible to restore the 
damage to the dead brain and make it come alive again. 
Nanomachines, the theory goes, would be able to enter the dead 
tissues and repair them.  
        There are already hundreds of people who have paid for their 
bodies or heads to be frozen for an indefinite period. They 
establish a monetary fund whose interest pays the cost of the 
apparatus and materials to keep the body frozen. 
        Molecular scale robots (nano scale robots, or "nanots") could 
build copies of themselves. They could reproduce and hence grow 
exponentially in numbers, 1, 2, 4, 8, 16, 32, 64, etc. After 20 such 
doublings, the numbers are into the millions. If ways could be 
found to make these nanots cooperate to build human scale 
 
 
67 

 
74
products, then conventional economics would be revolutionized. It 
would cost almost nothing to make huge numbers of nanots, which 
then build the product. The price of the product would then be 
merely the cost of the raw materials. Goods could become 
amazingly cheap, effectively costing nothing.  
        The cost of designing the first such self-reproducing nanot, 
capable of cooperating with others of its kind to build specific 
products, would be amortized over the many purchases of the same 
nanot design all over the planet, and hence would cost almost 
nothing. The whole concept of economic scarcity would need to be 
reconsidered. Economics as a specialty would be revolutionized. 
        Construction materials could be made many times stronger, 
because today’s materials still contain cracks, faults, etc that 
weaken their strengths. Nanotech could assemble these materials 
with atomic precision with no faults, no cracks, no blemishes, and 
hence they would be much stronger. This would probably mean 
that we could construct buildings that would be kilometers high if 
we wanted to build them. The structural skeletons of the buildings 
would be strong enough to withstand the stresses and strains 
generated by strong winds. Diamond like materials could be built 
with amazing strength. 
        As I see it, there are at least two major paradigms conceivable 
when discussing how nanotech could build human scale products. 
One is to imagine zillions of self-reproducing nanots that, once 
reproduced, would combine to build the product.  
        How would such a mammoth task be coordinated? One would 
need to think of the manufacturing process like a molecular scale 
city with a huge infrastructure to make it all happen. One could 
imagine nanots each doing their tiny thing on conveyor belts, 
assembling their few atoms at this point, at that point, and passing 
 
 
68 

 
75
on the result, farther down the line, where other nanots do 
something different. It would be Henry Ford at the nanoscale. 
        With zillions of nanots doing the same thing simultaneously 
(in parallel, as computer people say) it would be conceivable to 
imagine a human scale device being built. Molecular modules 
could be built from atoms, and these modules used as components 
to build larger macro-modules, which in turn become components 
of macro-macro-modules etc, until a human scale product is built. 
To make such a construction system work, the enormous molecular 
infrastructure needed may or may not prove to be very practical. 
 
Artificial Embryology 
 
        Personally, I prefer a nanotechnology based on the method 
nature has used for billions of years to build its life forms, i.e. an 
“embryological approach.” In the embryological process, one starts 
with a fertilized cell that divides and divides until some cells 
(depending upon their position in the embryo) begin to 
differentiate. Their intercellular environment sends them chemical 
signals that are used to switch on and switch off certain portions of 
their DNA, which in turn, results in different proteins being built, 
which perform different tasks. These different proteins then change 
the nature of the differentiating cells. Eventually, the mass of 
differentiating cells creates a living three-dimensional biological 
creature. 
        Evolution has created a growth mechanism that takes a linear 
one-dimensional coded string of chemical instructions (usually 
called DNA) and translates it into a three-dimensional functioning 
living creature. The study of how this miracle of nanoscale 
engineering occurs is called “embryology,” or “development.” The 
 
 
69 

 
76
machines that instruct the differentiating cells how to switch on 
and switch off genes at the appropriate time in the growth process 
are of molecular scale. A biological cell can be viewed as a 
molecular scale city, with millions of molecular inhabitants all 
organized into one functioning whole. 
        I would like to see the creation of a new branch of science 
that I call "Artificial Embryology," which would aim to mimic the 
same process that nature employs to grow dinosaurs or gnats from 
single fertilized eggs. Scientists and engineers would need to 
understand how nature does it in far greater detail than is known at 
the beginning of the century. But, as the molecular biologists are 
discovering all there is to know, more or less, about certain single-
celled bacteria, many of these scientists are changing specialties 
towards 
studying 
how 
multi-cellular 
creatures 
are 
built. 
Embryology is now a hot research topic, so we can expect a steady 
flow of discoveries in this domain over the coming decades. 
        Eventually, I expect to see the creation of what I call 
"Embryofacture" (embryological manufacture), i.e. using artificial 
embryological techniques to manufacture human scale products 
from the nano scale. Instead of needing a complex nanoscale 
infrastructure using nanots as described earlier, one would need a 
complex timing control system which decides when particular 
genes in the DNA (or its humanly designed equivalent) switch on 
and off when stimulated by certain molecular signals in their inter 
and intra cellular environment.  
        Designing such a complex control system top-down from 
scratch will probably be beyond the abilities of human scientists, 
so a more likely approach will be to use an "evolutionary 
engineering" approach. The mapping between an artificial "DNA" 
sequence of molecular based growth instructions and the final 3D  
 
 
70 

 
77
product, whether living or not, is probably impossible to predict 
due to its complexity, so probably the only method remaining is 
the one nature uses to learn how to “embryofacture” its creatures, 
namely evolution. 
 
Evolutionary Engineering 
 
        An evolutionary engineering approach to embryofacture 
might work in the following way. One begins with a zillion 
random molecular “artificial DNA” strings, which translate 
themselves into blob-like 3D molecular structures. Predesigned 
molecular scale nanots then move in and measure how closely the 
actual blob resembles the shape or function of the microproduct 
that is desired. Those blobs that get a higher score will see their 
corresponding artificial DNAs survive and have more copies 
(children) made of them in the next generation.  
        The less functional blobs are killed off, Darwinian style, thus 
generating a kind of “survival of the fittest” strategy. The child-
DNAs are then “mutated” slightly (i.e. the chemical instructions 
contained in the artificial DNA are modified somewhat). 
Occasionally, a mutated child-DNA will create a “fitter” (more 
performant) blob than its parent. By cycling through this loop 
many times, a desired artificial DNA is formed which grows the 
desired shape or function of its blob. The result is a molecular 
product that performs some useful function. 
 
Self-Assembly 
 
        However, evolving single components is not enough. These 
components then need to be complementary in shape so that they  
 
 
71 

 
78
can “self assemble,” i.e. fit together like jigsaw-puzzle pieces to 
form a greater functioning whole. Viruses form this way. Portions 
of DNA (genes) code for the construction of viral components. 
Once they are built, they click together to form whole viruses.  
        So the component parts need to have lock and key shape 
complementarities. They need to have the capacity to self 
assemble, simply by bumping into each other (as occurs frequently 
in the chaotic and high speed motion at the molecular scale). 
        This notion of self-assembly is very important when it comes 
to building an asteroid sized artilect, or even one of human size. A 
human sized artilect (or a human sized anything) contains trillions 
of trillions of molecules. To build a human sized artilect would 
require that all the atoms of that artilect, all trillions of trillions of 
them, be placed with atomic precision at just the right places. Such 
an artilect I believe would have to build itself through an 
embryological process. It would have to embryofacture itself. So 
how would such an artilect be built and designed in the first place? 
        Initially the first (very primitive) artilects would need to be 
built by evolutionary engineers (people like me). Perhaps they 
should be called "embryofacturers" or "embryological engineers." 
At first, the evolved 3D molecular structures could be assembled 
piece by piece into a larger 3D structure. Later, more sophisticated 
artilects could be built which perform their own evolution (perhaps 
within their own bodies) and make their own decisions at 
electronic speeds. 
        Of course, human beings would need to abandon all hope of 
fully understanding how these evolving, “Darwinian artilects” 
would develop. Their artilectual structure and functioning would 
be so complex and change so fast, that full human understanding of 
it all, would be totally impractical.  
 
 
72 

 
79
        Such human ignorance will later prove to be powerful 
ideological fuel to the Terrans, who will argue that the very nature 
of 
artilect 
construction 
(i.e. 
Darwinian, 
self-assembling 
embryofacture) makes artilect behavior inherently unpredictable 
and hence potentially very dangerous for human beings. This point 
will be discussed again at length in Ch. 5, which presents the case 
of the Terrans. 
 
Putting the Technologies Together 
 
        So let me try to summarize a bit here. After all, the point of 
this chapter has been to introduce those technologies that will 
enable the construction of artilects this century.  
        So far, the vision presented in this chapter is that of an artilect 
containing 1040 atoms or bits of information, using nanotech based, 
self-assembling, 
embryofactured, 
heatless, 
reversible, 
3D, 
computer circuitry, thinking at least a million times faster (and 
probably a lot faster) than humans. It will contain a huge number 
of sensors attached to its surface, with enormous memory 
capacities etc. But there's more. 
 
Quantum Computing Artilects 
 
        These artilects will be using molecular and atomic sized 
components, so these components will be subject to the laws of 
quantum mechanics. Recently the new field of "quantum 
computing" has become popular as theoretical and experimental 
physicists compete with each other to dream up new ways to 
"quantum compute" and to implement these ideas in real hardware. 
        I hesitate to describe what quantum computing is to the  
 
 
73 

 
80
general public. It is very counter-intuitive and difficult to grasp. If 
the following few paragraphs sound like gobbledygook to you, 
then just flip to the next topic. In a sense no one really understands 
quantum theory. It seems like a bunch of mathematical recipes that 
give good numerical answers to problems, but seems totally 
unintuitive conceptually. 
        Atoms behave in the weirdest ways, quite unlike what human 
beings are accustomed to at our scale of things. Quantum 
mechanics IS truly weird and abstract. It is a branch of 
mathematical physics that gives the probabilities of certain 
measurement results when atomic scale systems interact with 
human scale measurement devices. In classical mechanics, the 
state of a physical system is distinct, i.e. it has given values, e.g. its 
velocity at a given moment is V, its position is X, its kinetic energy 
is K, etc. In quantum mechanics, things are more abstract.  
        The state of a quantum system is represented by an abstract 
mathematical sum of numbers, where each number is associated 
with a measurement result if a measurement is performed. This 
summing and linear weighting of states is called a “superposition,” 
and is the conceptual heart of quantum mechanics. Don't fret too 
much if you don't understand this. It is not essential to the 
understanding of this section. 
        It is this superposition that is the great feature of quantum 
computing. The superposition evolves over time, in a sense 
performing many calculations at once, whereas a classical 
computer can only do one thing at a time. 
        In classical computing, the state of a register (a storage chain 
of bits) is a definite string of 0s and 1s (e.g. 0011011101001). In a 
quantum computing register, the state is a superposition of a huge 
number of possible classical register states. For example, if there 
 
 
74 

 
81
are N bits in the register, then there are 2N possible different 
classical register states (e.g. if N = 3, there are 8 different classical 
states, 000, 001, 010, 011, 100, 101, 110, 111). If N is large, then 
2N is huge.  
        The enormous advantage of quantum computing is that this 
huge number of classical states gets treated as though it is just one 
(superimposed) state, one quantum state that the quantum system 
can handle. In order to perform a calculation with classical 
computing it is often necessary to test each classical register state 
one at a time, for all possible states. This is a slow business, and as 
N increases, the number of tests rises exponentially (i.e. like 2, 4, 
8, 16, 32, 64 etc).  
        With quantum computing however, only one test needs to be 
done, because in a sense, all possible classical states are blended in 
together in the quantum register state. Quantum computing is 
potentially incredibly more efficient that classical computing. It is 
therefore not surprising that many physicists around the world are 
now racing each other to see who can build the next most 
performant quantum computer. 
        Since the artilect will be built with atomic scale components, 
it will need to function as a quantum computer. Since quantum 
computers are more efficient than classical computers, this is a 
good thing. The artilect will be a quantum computer. 
        The consequences of an artilect being a quantum computer 
are profound. Consider the 2N times greater computing capacity of 
the quantum computer compared with the classical computer. An 
asteroid sized artilect would have 1040 atoms and hence bits. The 
potential computing capacity of such an artilect, even a classical 
computing type artilect, is hugely larger than that of a human 
being.  
 
 
75 

 
82
        What then of a quantum computing artilect? If N is 1040, what 
is 2N? The mind boggles. When I say that an artilect could 
potentially have an artificial intelligence of trillions of trillions of 
trillions of times the human level, I am in fact exaggerating. My 
numbers are astronomically TOO SMALL. 
        Admittedly, state of the art quantum computers are handling 
about seven components. “Qubits” they are called, or “quantum 
bits.” It has been possible to trap seven atoms in a row (an “atom 
register”) in a kind of “magnetic bottle” and make them behave as 
a quantum computer to some extent. Quantum computing 
technology is still a long way from building a quantum computer 
with N = 1040.  
        It is still debatable whether such large numbers will ever be 
possible, but recent “error correction” techniques etc seem to 
suggest theoretically, that quantum computers will become 
practical and later commercial. IF there are no theoretical reasons 
to suggest that such numbers are impossible, then that usually 
means that science will eventually find a way to create such 
machines. 
 
Nanotech as a Brain Science Tool 
 
        Having said something (probably quite incomprehensible) 
about quantum computing, I turn now to another important 
question regarding artilect technology. The question is this. "How 
(human) brain-like will an artilect be?" My feeling is that as 
nanotech really comes on line and as Moore's Law really bites, our 
knowledge of how the human brain functions will increase 
dramatically. For example, over the past decade or so, various non-
invasive techniques have been developed to observe the human 
 
 
76 

 
83
brain in action without disturbing it in a fundamental way. 
        For example, mildly radioactive oxygen based fluids can be 
injected into the blood stream which travel to the brain and 
accumulate where brain cells are more active and need more 
oxygen and hence more blood. Human subjects are asked to 
perform various mental tasks, and as they do, the regions of the 
brain that are used more heavily in performing those tasks, show 
higher concentrations of radioactivity. Brain-scientists or neuro-
scientists are thus able to localize where certain tasks are 
performed in the brain. Our knowledge of brain function, at least 
on a macro scale, has jumped considerably in recent years due to 
these new techniques. 
        More exotic methods employ phenomena based on nuclear 
physics, such as nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) which I won’t 
even attempt to describe here. Nuclear magnetic resonance 
imaging (NMRI), is getting more precise every year as new tricks 
are found to get finer spatial resolution and shorter measurement 
times of the human brain regions it observes. As Moore's Law 
provides faster electronics, the spatial and time window resolutions 
get finer and finer. Some scientists believe that by the year 2020 or 
thereabouts, it will be possible to observe individual synapses 
(neural connections) and their type, i.e. whether they stimulate or 
inhibit the firing of the neuron they connect to.  
        If this were possible, then neuro-engineers could simply 
"scan" the brain, i.e. just read it off, by downloading all the 
essential geographical information about the brain, e.g. the precise 
position of each neuron, and how and where it is connected to 
which other neurons, etc. All this information could be dumped 
into a "hyper-computer” that Moore's Law will make possible and 
then be subject to further analysis by other parts of the same 
 
 
77 

 
84
computer. In a sense one would have a human like brain inside the 
hyper-computer. 
        This raises all kinds of moral issues. Can one switch off the 
hyper computer containing the human brain dump? Would that be 
murder? How do you define the essence of personhood? Does it 
depend on the technological base used to build that person, e.g. a 
carbon and DNA based technology, or a silicon based technology? 
If the essential architecture is the same -- if the functionality is the 
same, then should the silicon version of the person be given the 
same rights as the carbon based person? "Silicon rights?" 
        If humans decide that silicon based brain dumps are "non-
people," then neuro-scientists and neuro-computer-scientists can 
start playing with the data (the person?). They will be able to make 
as many copies as they want of the data (cloning?). They will be 
able to perform all kinds of analytical tests on the data 
(vivisection?) trying to understand how the human brain functions. 
Our knowledge of how the brain works should then increase in 
leaps and bounds. As soon as the neuro-scientists provide new 
ideas on how the brain works, the neuro-engineers will be able to 
apply these new ideas to the creation of ever-smarter artilects. 
        Eventually, the neuro-engineers will be creating such 
powerful and intelligent machines, that the neuro-scientists will be 
able to test their hypotheses on how the human brain works by 
using the machines of the neuro-engineers.  
        At the moment, this marriage between neuro-scientists and 
neuro-engineers is pretty much a one way street, i.e. knowledge 
flows almost exclusively from the neuro-scientists to the neuro-
engineers, but in time, as the neuro-engineers catch up, the 
information and idea flow will become increasingly a two way  
street. One day, the neuro-scientists will realize that the artilects  
 
 
78 

 
85
being built by the neuro-engineers are in many respects 
outperforming the capacities of the human brain. 
        I will stop here for this chapter. There are many other 
examples of new and future technologies that could serve as the 
basis for artilect building this century. I hope that what I have 
presented so far has been enough to persuade you that this 
century’s computer technologies will make artilect building 
possible, and that these artilects could have intelligence levels 
zillions of times greater than human beings. If I have also 
persuaded you that these artilects will be buildable before the 
beginning of the 22nd century, then this chapter has been 
successful.  
        But just because artilects can be built this century does not 
automatically mean that they should be built. (As the philosophers 
say, “Can does not imply ought”). The big question now is whether 
artilects should be built at all, and if so, what will the consequences 
for humanity be? What is likely to happen if the brain building 
Cosmists seriously intend to build artilects?  
        The remainder of this book attempts to answer this question.  
        This chapter has been rather technical and scientific in nature. 
The remainder of this book is more social, political, philosophical, 
ethical, even religious, and more appropriate to people who do not 
like to have to bother with scientific technicalities. For example, 
the next two chapters will present the views of the Cosmists (who 
are in favor of building artilects) and the Terrans (who are against 
building them).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
79 

 
86
Chapter 4 
 
The Cosmists 
 
 
 
        Before presenting in this chapter some of the reasons the 
Cosmists may use to justify building artilects, some initial remarks 
are necessary to clarify what is at stake in this debate between the 
Cosmists and the Terrans. 
        What is at stake is “the survival of the human species.”  
        Never before has the stake been so high, and hence those 
arguments used by the Cosmists will need to be overwhelmingly 
powerful if they are to overcome the potential horror of the threat 
of the human species being wiped out. The enormity of the risk is 
so great, that I dare say most people, including myself, cannot even 
imagine at an emotional level just how large a potential tragedy we 
are talking about here.  
        In the 20th century, the Nazis wiped out 20 million Russians, 
the Japanese murdered 20 million Chinese, Stalin killed 30 million 
in his purges, and Mao starved 50 million Chinese peasants. These 
are amongst the greatest crimes in history, yet they pale in 
comparison to the size of the tragedy if ever the artilects decide to 
wipe out humanity. The tragedy would be total in the sense that 
there would no longer be any human beings left to mourn the 
disappearance of the species. 
        In face of this, the Cosmists, being human, must surely feel 
the incredible weight of the moral argument against them – “How  
can you even begin to think of taking the risk of seeing humanity  
 
 
81 

 
87
wiped out? Cosmism is so monstrous, so horrendous, that you are 
inviting your own extermination at the hands of the Terrans.”  
        All countries have jails to incarcerate murderers. Murder is 
not tolerated. The infamous mega-mass murderers of history, as 
referred to above, are truly hated by virtually all human beings. 
How then can the Cosmists seriously contemplate such a horror as 
the risk of “gigadeath,” the annihilation of billions of human 
beings? 
        The answer to this question is found by appealing to counter 
arguments, which in the eyes of the Cosmists, are even more 
powerful.  
        As I write these words, I feel a shiver run up my spine. I have 
read too many history books which explain how new political or 
economic doctrines often begin with individual intellectuals or 
professors writing down their solitary thoughts, and how those 
ideas often end up generating wars that kill millions. Look at 
Rousseau’s democratic ideas. Look at Marx’s communist ideas. 
        This shiver going up my spine comes from the realization that 
the arguments in this chapter, the first of their kind, may one day 
serve as the intellectual basis for some future political movement, 
which in time I believe, will eventually result in the worst war in 
human history. This war will use the most destructive weaponry 
ever devised, based on late 21st century science and technology. 
        I feel terribly guilty in many ways, because I feel that my own 
work is part of the problem. As a professional brain builder, I am 
helping to create a technology that will enable artilects to be built. 
Initially they will be primitive, but they will keep improving. In the 
year 2000, I had a brain-building machine already built, capable of 
handling an artificial brain of nearly 100 million artificial neurons. 
I am hoping that the next generation brain-building machine that I  
 
 
82 

 
88
hope to build in the next few years will be a thousand times more 
performant than the first generation machine. 
        This day-to-day reality makes me very conscious of what is 
coming. Since I like to think that I am also quite well read in the 
humanities (politics, history, philosophy, etc.) I feel I have a 
greater insight into the longer-term social consequences of my 
work than many of my more engineering minded colleagues. 
        I feel profoundly schizophrenic about the work that I do. 
Deep down, I am a Cosmist. I often ask myself just how strong a 
Cosmist I am, and how much of me is Terran. I’m certainly not a 
100% Cosmist. If I were, I would be quietly doing my work, not 
advertising its progress, and keeping dead quiet about the potential 
risks that massively intelligent machines may pose as a threat to 
humanity’s longer term survival. 
        But I’m not a monster (I think). My second wife’s mother was 
gassed by the Nazis at Auschwitz, so I know about mass 
extermination, about genocide, about mass horror. I lived with its 
consequences. When my second wife was a five-year-old Polish 
Jewish girl, she was handed over by her mother to a complete 
stranger on the platform of the railway station in Brussels, 
Belgium, where the cattle trucks were waiting to transport the Jews 
to the extermination camps. 
        To me, the Nazis were monsters. The Japanese were 
monsters, and are still unrepentant. Stalin was a monster. Mao was 
a monster. Am I a monster? Will my work as the pioneer of 
artificial brains, a technology and science that will very probably 
lead to the creation of massively intelligent machines within this 
century, inevitably lead to the creation of ideologies so 
murderously opposed, and with so much at stake, that a major war, 
 the biggest in history, is almost inevitable? 
 
 
83 

 
89
        If such a war does occur, killing billions, “gigadeath,” doesn’t 
that make me a monster, and the worst monster, worse than the 
monsters of Hitler, the Japanese, Stalin and Mao? Yet despite all 
this, I push on, because at the deepest level, I’m a Cosmist.  
        I think that NOT building the artilects would be an even 
greater tragedy. The more I think about the longer-term 
significance of artilect building, the more profoundly I feel I am a 
Cosmist.  
        But my mood swings. I will lie awake at night thinking 
rationally about the cosmic grandeur of Cosmism, about what these 
god-like artilects could do, and I feel the awe. Hours later I will 
wake up in a sweat, having been jolted out of a nightmare. I see in 
vivid scenes the deaths of my descendents in about a century or so, 
at the hands of the artilects, who have become so superior to 
humans that they see us as vermin. 
        The emotional reality and horror of it shake me. Normally I 
sleep rather soundly, so I don’t remember many dreams, but this 
nightmare is recurrent, and so horrible in emotional terms that it is 
capable of waking me, despite my heavy sleep. 
        So, I feel schizophrenic about my work. I am profoundly torn, 
swaying between my head and my heart, so to speak. With my 
head, I think about the magnificence of the artilects, how godlike 
they could be, persuading myself with arguments that I will present 
in this chapter. With my heart, I am horrified at the concept and the 
prospect of “gigadeath,” whether at the hands of the artilects 
directly, or as a consequence of a human Cosmist-Terran war 
whose primary causes I and other brain builders are now in the 
process of creating. 
        I had always thought that once the Cosmist-Terran debate had 
been well presented to the public that when push comes to shove,  
 
 
84 

 
90
most people in their heart of hearts would be Terran. They would 
not want to see their families killed for the sake of some vague, 
abstract, emotionally distant goal of building the artilects, beings 
so distant and superior, that they will have almost nothing in 
common with us, so why risk paying such a terrible price for their 
creation. 
        I invite people at the end of my talks to vote. “Are you 
Cosmist or Terran?” I invite my readers to ask yourselves the same 
question once you have finished reading this book. The first time I 
asked an audience this question, the answer surprised me. I was 
expecting a 10% Cosmist, 90% Terran vote, but the reality was 
different. The vote split right down the middle, about 50/50. I 
thought that this might be simply due to the possibility that all 
these ideas were new to people, so they didn’t really know what to 
think, and hence voted almost randomly. A random vote will 
almost always come out with a 50/50 result. 
        To try to change the percentages of the votes, I changed the 
content of my talks. I presented more clearly the horrors of 
“gigadeath,” and showed more vividly the many powerful 
arguments of the Terrans, which I will present in the next chapter. 
But, the vote stayed near the middle, 60/40, 40/60, 50/50.  
        Gradually I began to realize, I think, that the vote was 
reflecting a deeper reality, namely that the Cosmist/Terran 
controversy divides people within themselves, i.e. within the 
individual. People would come up to me and say that they felt the 
same schizophrenia as I have been feeling for years. Only a 
minority of people were clearly in one camp.  
        Some individuals have come up to me and said that I deserved 
to be killed if I persisted. I would answer, “You are one of the first 
Terrans! In the future there may be millions even billions like 
 
 
85 

 
91
 you!” 
        But most people I find feel strongly both ways. I think the 
Cosmist case resonates emotionally with most people, as it does 
with me. I think it is in our human nature that the arguments I will 
present shortly in this chapter have a strong appeal. They are very 
strong arguments. They evoke our human sense of wonder, of 
exploration, of religious awe, etc. They are very strong arguments. 
        However, the Terran arguments are also very strong, as will 
be seen in the next chapter, so I just feel depressed when I think 
about what will come. With two powerful, bitterly opposed, and in 
fact murderously opposed, ideologies that are so evenly divisive, 
the likelihood of a major conflict is only increased. 
        The bitterest of wars are often civil wars, where brother kills 
brother. The US civil war, fought largely over the issues of the 
morality of slavery and the right to secede from a union of states, 
still divides ideologically, to some degree, the northern from the 
southern US states.  
        The Terran/Cosmist conflict will be a kind of planetary civil 
war, because it will probably not be correlated with geography, i.e. 
with one geographically localized group taking up more the Terran 
case, and another geographical area taking up more the Cosmist 
case, although this possibility is not excluded. Well into the 21st 
century, the global telecom capabilities will probably be powerful 
enough to keep most of the world’s citizens well informed about 
the conflicting ideas in this great debate. 
        People will make up their minds according to their own 
personalities, abilities and interests, and not be “brainwashed” so 
much by their local media. The media will be largely global by 
then anyway, with thousands of sources of news and ideas coming 
from all over the planet. 
 
 
86 

 
92
        Having now provided above a kind of lead into the arguments 
used by Cosmists, I will now begin a more systematic presentation, 
argument by argument, in an order starting in my opinion from the 
most important and most powerful. I give each of these arguments 
a name.  
        I am expecting that these arguments are only the first few of 
many that other “Cosmist intellectuals” will invent in the future. 
Since I believe the Cosmist/Terran ideological and later military 
conflicts will dominate our century, it is only reasonable to expect 
that many first class minds will apply themselves to the intellectual 
rationalization of the two rival cases. 
        As I start to write down these arguments, which I have been 
thinking about for years, another shiver goes up my spine. I feel a 
heavy responsibility for the future quality of life of billions of 
human beings. I feel in some ways that I may have started 
something that will eventually destroy them, and that in one sense I 
am doing this by choice. In another sense I feel I do not have a 
choice, because the force of the Cosmists arguments is so strong 
that I feel that I don’t have any real alternative. The Cosmist case 
for me is just too compelling.  
 
 
Arguments in Favor of Cosmism 
 
1. 
The “Big Picture” Argument 
 
        The strongest argument in favor of Cosmism in my own mind 
is the one I label the “Big Picture” argument. It has to do with the 
feeling that human existence is so petty, so trivial, so banal, so 
insignificant, that there are bigger things in life than those that  
 
 
87 

 
93
concern human beings on a daily basis. 
        Science teaches both me and anyone who is interested to 
learn, that we humans live on a planet that orbits a very ordinary 
star, that is one of 200 billion in our spiral galaxy. Our galaxy in 
turn is only one of billions in the visible universe. Furthermore, 
according to modern cosmological theories, there are probably 
zillions of other universes. In other words, our petty little human 
lives, which last an ephemeral three-quarters of a century, are 
utterly negligible in comparison with the age of the universe, 
which is billions of years old. As humans, we are nothing. We are 
of zero significance on the cosmic scale. 
        Modern science has discovered that the laws of physics and 
chemistry are the same throughout the universe, so it is almost 
certain that “out there” a zillion different biological civilizations 
have evolved, that they have reached a stage of technological 
intelligence and then built artilects to supercede them. It is 
therefore quite possible that there are zillions of artilectual 
civilizations in the universe, at all kinds of different stages of 
development. As humans, we are probably too stupid to be aware 
of their presence, and are totally ignored by them, due to our 
extreme primitiveness. To such artilectual civilizations, billions of 
years older than we are, we would seem to them as a primitive 
moss would seem to us, that is, totally uninteresting. 
        This would answer “Fermi’s question.”  Fermi, the famous 
Italian/American nuclear physicist, who played a major role in 
developing the nuclear bomb, was cynical about the existence of 
ETs (Extra Terrestrials). He asked that if they exist, then “Where 
are they?” We have no sign of the existence of ETs, no proof. If 
life is common throughout the galaxy, as physics and chemistry 
suggest it should be, then where is all this life manifesting itself? It  
 
 
88 

 
94
may be all around us, but we may be too stupid to recognize it. 
        To get a feel for the “big picture,” you only have to look up at 
the stars. Alternatively, you can stare at a glossy color astronomy 
book, with large color plates of galactic arms showing millions of 
stars, where each little white dot in the photo is a star, a sun like 
ours in many cases, which probably contains a solar system. Their 
huge number is humbling. Our sun is as significant or as 
insignificant as any one of those zillions of stars. 
        From the galactic point of view, would it matter much if the 
human race were wiped out? I think the universe wouldn’t give a 
damn. This kind of thing may have been going on for several 
billion years, as biological civilization after biological civilization 
reaches intelligence and then destroys itself either directly by its 
own doing, with its own weapons, or indirectly, at the hands of its 
artilectual creations. 
        The “big picture” argument is admittedly an intellectual one, 
and may not mean much to most people. The majority of folks 
appear totally indifferent to the fact that there is a much bigger 
existence “out there.” It would therefore not surprise me that as the 
artilect debate heats up, we may see a correlation growing between 
being Cosmist and being more intelligent. I suspect that those 
people with higher IQs are more likely to be open to the Cosmist 
perspective because they will be better educated and aware of the 
cosmic realities that science teaches.  
        When I was younger and traveling around internationally on a 
shoestring budget, staying at youth hostels, I was always struck by 
the high percentage of young hostellers who were university 
graduates. They were not at all the usual cross section of humanity. 
The higher intelligence seemed to translate into a higher degree of 
curiosity about other cultures’ lifestyles and values. I suspect the  
 
 
89 

 
95
Cosmist perspective will appear more to the more open-minded 
and more thoughtful person. I may be wrong on this, but that is my 
guess. (However, you may doubt this due to the 50/50 vote results 
I mentioned earlier. But most of my audiences were at universities. 
I will be curious to see how the general population will vote in 
future decades.) 
        To the Cosmist, building artilects would mean that they could 
become part of that “big picture,” whereas as human beings, we 
could not. For a start, we are too ephemeral. We die too quickly. 
An artilect could be made to be immortal, and hence have all the 
time it needs to do whatever it wants. As humans, we are too 
stupid to figure out how to escape easily from the prison we call 
Earth. Our bodies and minds are too primitive to take a form that 
would allow us to be more cosmic creatures, to voyage easily 
outside the cradle we call Earth. 
        If we consider how much scientific progress we have made as 
human beings in the past century, with our puny human brains, 
consider what an artilect could do with its giant brain and over 
billions of years. It would be so much more capable of discovering 
the secrets of the functioning of the universe and could use those 
discoveries to empower itself. It could use phenomena that we as 
human beings don’t even know exist, or could not even understand 
if some artilect tried to explain them to us. 
        The more one reflects on such things, the greater the sense of 
awe one feels. I see this as a kind of “religious” feeling, similar to 
the religious longings of earlier centuries before the rise of modern 
science.  
        Since I am now touching on religion, this brings me to the 
second important argument in favor of Cosmism. It sees Cosmism 
as a “scientific religion.” 
 
 
90 

 
96
2.  The “Scientific Religion” Argument 
 
        I am not at all religious in the traditional sense. I look upon 
traditional religions as prescientific superstitions. They are quite 
incompatible with what modern science teaches us about the way 
the world is. My level of scientific learning and my critical cynical 
scientific mind cannot accept such doctrines, which in my opinion 
cannot hold up to critical scientific and analytical scrutiny.  
        Yet, as I get older, (I’m now in my late 50s as I write this), I 
find myself getting increasingly interested in religion, but not 
because I find the traditional beliefs any less incredible, but 
because I feel I have a greater understanding of the religious 
impulse. I find myself thinking more about the deeper aspects of 
human existence, about the bigger things besides the day-to-day 
distractions that seem increasingly petty to me. Probably the 
greatest motivator for thinking about such things is the brute fact 
that so many of my friends are dying.  
        I have quite a lot of friends who are older than I am, in their 
60s. Since most of them are male, and given the average life 
expectancy for males in the first world countries is about 75 now, 
that means it is statistically expected that a growing, non negligible 
proportion of them will be dying off in their 60s.  
        My second wife died in 2000. Admittedly her premature death 
was largely her own fault, and partly the fault of the cigarette 
companies. She smoked heavily before she met me, and died of 
lung cancer at the early age of 62, young for a woman. 
        There is nothing like the death of people close to you, to make 
you think of your own mortality. The older I get, the more I reflect 
on it, and read a lot about the biology of death, about why cells 
age, about the technology of immortality, to get a deeper insight  
 
 
91 

 
97
into why we are so terribly mortal. 
        Religious belief is a cultural anthropological universal, one of 
the very few, along with for example, the taboo on incest. The 
need for religion is very strong, as evidenced by the fact that it is 
so ubiquitous.  
        My scientific curiosity and scientific knowledge prevent me 
from being traditionally religious, but the initial craving for some 
deeper “spiritual” understanding of human existence and mortality, 
I do feel. I suspect that the scientific hunger I have had since a 
teenager has a lot in common with what drives a lot of very bright 
men into theology.  
        I am a born scientist. I like to read and think a lot about what I 
call "the big scientific issues." For example -- evolution and the 
billions of years it has taken to generate life; about astronomy and 
its huge time frames and distance scales that dwarf human affairs 
into insignificance; about theoretical physics and its conceptual 
mysteries, "How can nature be like that?"; about embryology and 
the intricacies of building a body from a single egg; about brain 
science and the mystery of how thought and consciousness arise 
from the interaction of billions of neurons, and so on.  
        I like to go to good science fiction movies or to read hard 
science fiction books, especially those written by professional 
scientists, hoping to experience a sense of awe, of magnificence, of 
the "big picture" of things.  
        As I said earlier, I have many books on astronomy, 
particularly those with large glossy photos of galaxies with their 
zillions of stars. I love to ponder them, staring at them, wishing 
that today’s imaging technology were more advanced, so that I 
could experience the emotional rush of looking at a 3D  
holographic image of deep space, of a spiral galaxy filling my  
 
 
92 

 
98
living room with an image as authentic as if I were in deep space 
myself.  
        This technology is coming, and when it does, I believe it will 
create a much deeper sense in the global public mind of what I call 
"space consciousness." 
        By “space consciousness,” I mean the awareness of how huge 
our universe is, and how insignificant our human lives are in 
comparison. It would create a sense of religious awe in most of us I 
believe.  
        This new century's media technology will give humanity the 
wonderful, awe-inspiring, 3D images I mentioned above. I believe 
such images will have more impact on the human psyche than did 
the first photos of the terrestrial globe that were sent back from the 
moon missions in the 1960s. Since we don't have such realistic 3D 
images yet, it is difficult to imagine the emotions they will evoke. I 
get a taste of what it will probably feel like, from watching certain 
science fiction movies on a large screen (2D of course), when one 
sees the stars in the background.  
        If you live far from the smoggy cities and away from street 
lighting (and not many people do nowadays), or you are traveling 
on a cruise ship in mid ocean, you will be able to look up at the 
stars. You will not see spiral galaxies in all their incredible beauty 
-- you will need a telescope for that, but you will see thousands of 
twinkling stars. That image alone should make you feel 
insignificant if you know any science -- i.e. that each of those 
twinkling white dots up there is a sun, probably with its own 
planetary system. It's now thought that most stars have a planetary 
system and that they have been twinkling away for billions of 
years in most cases. It's a humbling experience, is it not? 
        Now imagine that you are living a few years into the future 
 
 
93 

 
99
and you switch on your 3D-entertainment system and choose by 
voice command to your holo-viewer, a 3D image, and room size, 
of a spiral galaxy. A magnificent, breathtaking, awe inspiring, 
emotionally engulfing image appears, together with powerful 
hypnotic music, creating a totally enthralling experience, 
especially if it’s the first time you have seen such a thing. You ask 
the viewer to zoom in at the bottom right corner, and the disk 
appears closer. You ask for continuous zoom.  
        Gradually the image changes from a foggy mist into zillions 
of white and multicolored dots of light. You know these are stars 
and nebulae. The zoom continues and the dots become more 
distinct, and some of them grow slightly larger. One particular dot 
now grows into a small circle as the background mist crystallizes 
into a spectacular image of millions of clear dots of light in a vast 
spiral arc.  
        You ask the viewer to zoom in on the growing circle. Some 
moments later, the size of the circle grows until the room is filled 
with its light. It is too bright. You ask for less light. You hope that 
this star has planets.  
        You ask the viewer to see if it has any. The image shifts to the 
right and stops. You see nothing. You ask for a zoom and a 
brightening. You see a small sphere. It is a gas giant planet. You 
zoom in. The planet fills the room, but all you see are multicolored 
clouds of gas, no surface. You ask the viewer to look for an inner 
planet. It finds one, a blue sphere similar to the Earth. You get 
excited.         
         You zoom in and notice the oceans and landmasses. It is the 
Earth. You are disappointed. You continue the zoom so that a 
particular land mass grows and grows until you can make out a 
city, then a city block, a park, a young couple having a picnic in 
 
 
94 

 
100
that park, then the palm of the man's hand, then his skin, his skin 
cells, his blood cells, his DNA, then molecules, atoms, a nucleus, a 
nucleon, a quark, and then the image freezes. You have reached the 
limits of humanity's knowledge. 
        What I have just imagined is not original. A book containing 
such images appeared some years ago, called "Powers of Ten." It 
begins with an image of the whole universe, where the galaxies are 
just tiny dots, right the way through to quarks, where each image, 
accompanied by an explanatory text, is a zoom-in ten times closer 
than the previous image.  
        The first time I saw this, it fascinated me. It made me realize 
how incredibly limited our daily human experiences are when 
compared to what there is to be seen and understood "out there" at 
the macro-scale of the universe, and "in there" at the micro-scale of 
the atomic world. Such experiences make me think how limited in 
scope our normal human lives are. We live in the middle range of 
these size scales with roughly as many orders of magnitude that are 
larger than us as those that are smaller than us.  
        Our human brains have evolved to be preoccupied by those 
phenomena of similar scales, both in terms of space and time. As 
humans we have such a limited view of the world, such tunnel 
vision, metaphorically speaking. 
        But thanks to our modern scientific knowledge, we know at 
least that such scales exist. Most of these scales were only 
discovered within the last hundred years or less. This knowledge 
generates in me a fascination for science.  I find myself caring 
more and more about what I called above, the bigger things, than 
the humdrum of daily existence, which is snuffed out in 80 years 
or so anyway, due to our evolutionary programming, our 
programmed death. As I get older, my mortality weighs more and 
 
 
95 

 
101
more heavily on my consciousness, making me think that it would 
be nice to live longer, to be immortal maybe.  
        Humanity could give itself immortality if it wanted to. 
Mortality is just a molecular program written into our DNA. The 
DNA in our reproductive cells is immortal and can elaborately self 
repair over the generations. It recombines with the DNA of another 
person during sex, and creates a whole, fresh, perfect, new body. 
Bacteria are immortal. Cancer cells are immortal. It can be done. It 
would mean merely changing the molecular programming in our 
cells. Life is a program, and so is death. Death can be 
unprogrammed. Such unprogramming we can have -- and probably 
within a century, as humanity understands more about the 
molecular biology of how death occurs.  
        If I had the power and the knowledge to make myself 
immortal, then why not, while I am at it, increase my intelligence 
as well. The intelligence level I have already, allows me to 
experience the joy of understanding how mysterious and wonderful 
nature can be at the level of the atomic world. For example, the 
study of quantum mechanics has always been a joy to me and was 
the topic of my first research efforts.  
        If I could just increase my intelligence by 10% or so, maybe I 
could appreciate with less intellectual effort the great beauty in 
modern "string theory" that the best of modern theoretical 
physicists talk so much about lately. If I could increase my 
intelligence by a further 10%, perhaps I could feel the awe that 
Einstein said he felt at being able to discover some of the deepest 
of mathematical relations describing the behavior of the universe. 
The fact that humanity finds nature comprehensible was always 
something that he found to be incomprehensible. It truly baffled 
him. 
 
 
96 

 
102
        If I continue thinking along these lines, why limit myself to 
human levels of intelligence. If I can attain god like powers and 
make myself immortal and more intelligent, then why not a lot 
more intelligent, like tens times more, or a million times more, or 
trillions of times. Why not just turn myself into a god or an 
artilect? 
        I then start thinking that if I become an artilect, with 1030 
components or more, what would be the meaning of "I?" The 
original human "I" would be totally swamped by the vastly greater 
mass of computational, memorial and sensorial components. "I" 
would no longer be "me." "I" would be a new "me," an artilect. So 
why bother going through all the transitional stages from human to 
artilect. Why not just build an artilect directly from scratch, and 
treat it as though it were my own child, i.e. not me, but my 
offspring, the creature I created? In a sense if I become an artilect 
myself and I make this transition quickly, then my old self would 
die in a sense. My old self would be drowned in and totally ignored 
by the vastly superior capacities of my new artilectual self. 
        As an artilect (irrespective of whether I started off as a human 
being or not) I could do my own "powers of ten" travel to a large 
extent. I could attach all kinds of scientific instruments to my 
body, integrating them as part of me and observe what I wanted.                
Assuming that the limit of the speed of light remains in force, I 
would not be able to travel too far too quickly, but at least I could 
observe the very small size scales with ease. But, with greater 
intelligence, perhaps I could discover ways around the speed of 
light barrier, perhaps by using space-time wormholes and the like, 
or perhaps by using phenomena that human beings, with the 
intellectual limitations of human beings, cannot even imagine. 
        It would be nice to be an artilect, a god, a supremely powerful  
 
 
97 

 
103
omnipotent being. I could be such a creature by late 21st century 
and beyond. It's possible. It's not an unattainable dream.  
        I am not a poet nor a playwright, so my attempts here to 
convey the sense of religious awe at becoming an artilect will need 
to be expressed in a more emotional and convincing way by real 
professionals of the arts. (I encourage artists to create such 
"artilectual" works.) All I can do here is attempt to convey some 
measure of the strength of "religious" feeling that I and other 
Cosmists will make public this century.  
        Cosmism to me is a kind of religion, one compatible with 
scientific knowledge, and hence acceptable to my critical scientific 
mind. It's a "scientist's religion," but you don't have to be a 
scientist to have the same feelings of religious awe when 
contemplating the potential of what artilects could be. I may be a 
scientist, but I am also a human being, and hence feel the same 
religious pull as nearly everyone feels at some stage in their lives, 
when faced with the deepest of questions.  
        There is something truly magnificent about the Cosmist goal 
of building artilects. The artilect itself is godlike. Building artilects 
would partly satisfy in me some deep spiritual quest that I have 
difficulty defining clearly, even to myself. The artilect is a kind of 
god to me, of a type that I can believe in, having immense power, 
and yet one that I and others may help build in the future. That 
would make me feel powerful, but its more than just a question of 
power. It's also a feeling of wanting to go beyond, way beyond, our 
current human limitations. I will write more about this shortly. It is 
also about wanting to leave a mark after I'm dead. It was this 
desire, I believe, that motivated the pharaohs to build the pyramids. 
An artilect would be a magnificent pyramid. 
        Some males become monks in order to contemplate a higher 
 
 
98 

 
104
form of existence. I understand the impulse to do this, because I 
share it in many ways, but I cannot go along with the beliefs and 
life styles of traditional monks and nuns, whose lives I feel are 
wasted in the pursuit of beliefs that to me are pure fictions. To my 
mind, they lead sexually, emotionally, reproductively, and 
existentially impoverished lives.  
        I cannot take traditional religions seriously, since they are 
incompatible with what I have learned about the world. But the 
impulse to be religious is there, and goes unsatisfied. So it 
probably will not surprise you to learn that the day that the idea of 
“Cosmism as a Scientific Religion” occurred to me, I was deeply 
moved. Cosmism as a “religion” would satisfy a lot of my 
"spiritual" needs, and importantly, would be compatible with my 
scientific worldview. It would be a "scientist's religion" and that 
for me and perhaps for millions of people, may prove to be one of 
Cosmism's strongest attractions. If a lot of scientists feel the same 
way as I do in the future, then it is more likely that the artilects will 
be built.  
        But what exactly is the source of this attraction? If the 
Cosmists are prepared to risk the start of an Artilect War and even 
the extermination of the human species, due to the strength of their 
desire to build artilects, no matter what, just what is it that 
motivates them so powerfully? What is so godlike about the 
artilects that makes Cosmists so committed to building them?  
 
 
3.  The “Building Artilect Gods” Argument 
 
        Another very powerful argument the Cosmists will employ is  
the sheer attractiveness of the prospect of building godlike 
 
 
99 

 
105
artilects. To many Cosmists, this attraction will be compulsive, 
overriding all others, and motivating any means to achieve this 
glorious goal, even if the human species has to risk being wiped 
out as a result. 
        Let me try to convey more clearly and in more detail the 
godlike qualities that artilects could have. (For further discussion 
along this line, see Ch.7 on the Artilect Era). If you find yourself 
mesmerized by what follows, perhaps you will be a lot more 
sympathetic to the dreams and obsessions of the Cosmists.  
        An advanced artilect could be very large, e.g. the size of an 
asteroid.  If it were of planet size it could orbit about a star and 
absorb its energy. If it were in the shape of a huge hollow sphere 
with the star at its center (a "Dyson sphere"), it could absorb all of 
the radiated energy of that star. If such an artilect is built in our 
solar system, the material necessary for its construction could be 
taken from the asteroids in the asteroid belt, perhaps all of them. 
        So potentially, such a creature could consist of 1040 or even 
1050 atoms, and hence bits. The molecular or atomic size switching 
elements would be switching (flipping from 0s to 1s or vice versa, 
which is a fundamental operation in computing) in femto-seconds 
(a thousandth of a trillionth of a second), so altogether, the artilect 
could be switching at about 1055 or 1065 bits a second. This is an 
astronomically large number. 
        Compare this with the equivalent switching rate of the human 
brain. The information processing of the human brain occurs  
(arguably) at the synapses (the inter-neural connections) at a rate of 
about 10 bits a second. Since there are about 1015 synapses in the 
human brain, that means the total brain processing speed is about 
1016 bit flips a second. 
        The artilect's processing speed is thus 1040 or 1050 times 
 
 
100 

 
106
greater, which is trillions of trillions of trillions times more. Such 
numbers are so large, that it's difficult for human beings to absorb 
their significance. Let me try to spell it out a bit more clearly. 
        Such creatures would be capable of "living the lives" of 
zillions of human beings in a mere second of their existence. A 
human life of about 80 years (80*365*24*60*60 seconds) i.e. 2.5 
billion seconds, computing at 1016 bits a second, over an average 
human life time would process 1025 bit flips total. So an asteroid 
sized artilect, for example, with 1040 atoms, could process the 
equivalent of 1030 human lives per second, i.e. a million trillion 
trillion lives. That's more than the number of atoms in an 
automobile. 
        But sheer processing speed is only the beginning. What is 
truly significant and godlike about an artilect would be its ability to 
use that speed in fascinating ways. For example, it could absorb 
matter into itself from the asteroids and reassemble it into 
computing material to do whatever task it sets itself. In fact, the 
above talk of an artilect performing a single task at a time, is 
probably a joke. An artilect would probably be thinking a zillion 
thoughts at the same time. It has the luxury to do so, because it has 
enough matter and speed to allow it to do so. 
        How would the artilect know how to arrange the matter to 
think the thoughts it wants? Well, it could employ Darwinian 
evolutionary experiments on parts of itself and examine the results 
with other parts of itself. The newly and successfully evolved parts 
could then be absorbed into its general structure. These 
experiments could be going on all the time, and at incredible 
speeds. The intelligence level of the artilect could be increasing 
astronomically every second. 
        The artilect could have a huge number of sensors on its  
 
 
101 

 
107
surface or interior. It could build artificial life forms and play with 
them as part of itself, learning about life processes. (Maybe some 
super artilect is doing this right now with our universe --  more on 
this in Ch.7). 
        The artilect would have the means to amplify continuously its 
intelligence to levels human beings cannot imagine. If intelligence 
is correlated with processing speed, memory capacity, etc. then 
obviously the artilect could be trillions of trillions of trillions of 
times more intelligent than human beings. For example, imagine it 
takes an artilect a trillion atoms per computational module to 
perform some basic task. How many such modules could it have? 
Trillions of trillions and more.  
        Mouse brains cannot perform certain functions that human 
brains can, because they don't have enough brain modules of 
appropriate structure. An artilect's modules could be evolved and 
deployed to perform zillions of functions, while at the same time 
evolving and restructuring itself. 
        The artilect would be the consummate scientist. It could 
manipulate and examine its own matter. It could transform 
elements (e.g. from oxygen to carbon) from its own body, or just 
select and use appropriate atoms from its own storehouse, which 
would also be part of its body. Alternatively, it could convert parts 
of itself into transporters and fetch material from elsewhere. With 
the full range of chemical elements (from hydrogen to uranium and 
more) at its disposal, it could design and build its own experiments 
to investigate its own structures. The knowledge it would obtain it 
could use to redesign itself in better ways. The artilect would learn 
zillions of times more about the world and itself than human 
scientists will ever know. It would be truly godlike in its  
knowledge and power to manipulate the world. 
 
 
102 

 
108
        As its knowledge of the world increases, i.e. its science, it 
could transform itself via that new knowledge. It could apply 
technological principles to itself, the way human scientists and 
technologists tend to do with objects external to themselves. 
        Human knowledge is said to double every ten years or so. Let 
us call the total quantity of human knowledge at the year 2000 a 
THKU (Total Human Knowledge Unit). What would the artilects 
rate of knowledge growth be in THKUs per second? It takes 10 
years for roughly ten billion people to double their knowledge. 
Even if the artilect had the same intelligence level as humans per 
unit of matter (which we say above is unlikely) it could still vastly 
outperform the human population because of its much larger mass 
and processing speed. 
        10 billion humans processing for 10 years is how many bit 
flips total? That's 1010 (the number of people) times 
10*365*24*60*60 (the number of seconds in ten years) times 1016 
(the bits-per-second processing speed on one human brain), that is 
10(10+9+16), i.e. 1035 bits. An artilect can process 1055 bits a second, 
i.e. 1020 THKUs per second, i.e. nearly trillions of trillions. Of 
course with its vastly superior intelligence level it could do the 
above zillions of times faster, but that would be hard to calculate. 
        If you don't follow the math, don't worry, just accept the 
bottom line that the artilect is doing everything faster and better 
than humans by factors of trillions of trillions at least. 
        I should add that the above calculations are based on 
traditional “classical computing” principles. If such an artilect 
were to use “quantum computing,” the resulting numbers involved 
would make the above numbers seem hugely too small. 
        Probably books will be written shortly on the potential 
capacities of artilects, and I hope this book will inspire such  
 
 
103 

 
109
authors. I could probably go on and on about how astronomically 
superior an artilect could be. 
        I hope the above is enough to show you that the artilect is a 
truly godlike creature, so vastly above human capacities that it is 
an object of worship to someone like me who builds brains for a 
living. If you were a brain builder, the artilect vision would be like 
a great shining beacon beckoning you on with hypnotic force. It 
would create a strong sense of religious awe, and best of all, it is 
entirely compatible with science, thus making it much worthier of 
"worship" than traditional beliefs.  
        You don't have to be a scientist to appreciate this. Scientists 
may be able to savor the vision more easily because of their 
abilities and knowledge, but to anyone who enjoys thinking about 
such marvels, the artilect vision I can imagine could be truly 
enthralling. 
        Not only is the artilect something compatible with science and 
something worthy of devoting one's spiritual energies to, but more 
importantly, it is real, in the sense that it is achievable. It is 
buildable. Creating such creatures would be possible, if human 
beings wanted to do this. Human beings, the Cosmists, could 
become "god builders." 
        I believe that building such creatures, or at least their early 
precursors, will become the life goals of the Cosmists. It is a 
magnificent dream, truly awe inspiring, mind stretching, 
energizing, life orienting, meaning giving -- in short, it is a 
“religion.”  
        Look at the way the Arabs were suddenly energized by the 
(human) invention of Islam. Suddenly millions of Arabs had a set 
of beliefs that galvanized them, gave them a sense of purpose, 
excited them, and channeled their collective energies to conquer all  
 
 
104 

 
110
of north Africa in the 7th century and even into Spain. If it weren't 
for the Arabs and their connections with the ancient Greek and 
Roman world, Europe would not have had its renaissance via 
Spain.  
        Look at the Christians and their spread over the western 
world. Look at Buddhism and its spread in the east. All these belief 
systems direct human lives. They contain ideas that people, 
billions of people, devote the energies of their lives to. A similar 
situation could arise with Cosmism. The Cosmists could devote 
their lives to the achievement of building the artilects. I am a 
Cosmist. I build artificial brains, although obviously nothing like 
what I have described above. Nevertheless it's a step in that 
direction. Building advanced artilects is a long-term dream of mine 
-- not one I will see in my lifetime, but I can hope to be the dream's 
prophet. I can hope to inspire future generations to adopt that 
dream. 
        I believe that the Cosmist vision will give humanity a new 
religion, a very powerful one, suitable for our new century and 
beyond. Like most powerful religions, it will generate energy and 
fanaticism, as people channel the frustrations of their daily lives 
into opposing those people who oppose their own beliefs. In this 
case the opposition will be the Terrans. Major religions have 
created major wars in the past. Look at the crusades between the 
Christians and the Moslems in the Middle East, or the Catholics 
and the Protestants in Europe. 
        I believe that this new religion will also help create the 
Artilect War. The fanaticism and strength of purpose generated by 
the Cosmist vision will be pitted against the fear of the Terrans, 
two extremely powerful forces. The war will be passionate and 
very deadly, given the historical era in which it will take place, i.e.  
 
 
105 

 
111
probably late this century with late 21st century weapons.  
        My intuition tells me that the above "religious argument" is 
probably one of the strongest that the Cosmists will possess. The 
vision of what an artilect could become will be so powerful that 
even if the Terrans totally exterminate the Cosmists, the vision will 
always be there to inspire new generations of Cosmists. It will not 
go away. A powerful new idea, whose time has come or soon will 
come, can move mountains, planets, even universes. 
 
 
4.  The “Human Striving” Argument 
 
        After the preaching of the above argument, I turn now to 
another that I believe the Cosmists will use to justify the creation 
of artilects. I call it the "human striving" argument. Why do human 
beings always seem to want to go beyond what is currently known, 
currently explored, to climb higher peaks, run faster, cure more 
terrible diseases, become stronger, fitter, more brilliant, and excel 
at one's work? Why this constant pushing at the barriers? I believe 
it's built into our genes. Evolution has made us this way.  
        Chimpanzees show a strongly developed sense of curiosity. 
Human beings, and especially children and scientists (big children) 
have an even stronger sense. Our big brains evolved to discover 
how our environment works. If we have a better knowledge of the 
dangers and delights of the world that surrounds us, then we are 
more likely to survive. But if we lack a curiosity to explore our 
world, we learn about it more slowly.  
        Those apes and humans who learned faster by being driven to 
explore, to push the limits of the known, learned faster and hence 
were more likely to survive. Well, not always. Some poor chump  
 
 
106 

 
112
had to be the first to discover that arsenic was poisonous, but his 
neighbors learned from his death. Since they all had the same 
curiosity/striving genes, they learned from his negative experience. 
        Is it not inevitable that once the prospect of building artilects 
is with us this century, that our genetically determined striving 
curiosities will propel us towards building them? Can we help 
ourselves? Will we have to build them the way Hillary had to 
climb Mount Everest, simply because the challenge presented 
itself, and the technology and management techniques had 
developed enough to make the mountain conquerable? 
        Look at how humanity has explored the continents. Early man 
left Africa in search of food and fresh territories, roaming across 
all continents, building boats to travel long distances guided by the 
stars. As technology improved, ocean faring ships were built which 
allowed sailors to discover new worlds. In the 20th century, 
humanity began to explore space. We have even set foot on the 
moon and will soon set foot on Mars. 
        The will to strive and explore may also be motivated by 
boredom. Consider the following scenario. The world economy is 
growing by several percentage points a year on average. Thanks to 
compound interest, this means that the economic welfare of nations 
increases at an exponential rate. Already, several first-world 
nations live in real affluence, in the sense that they are well fed (if 
not over fed), kept healthy, are well-educated, amused, and live 
long lives. It is only a question of time I believe before the whole 
planet will become affluent in this sense. 
        I believe as telecommunications improve, for example as 
digital satellite TV beams thousands of international channels from 
the sky, a snowball effect towards having English, as the world 
language will be reinforced. Eventually, probably everyone on the  
 
 
107 

 
113
planet will speak it at least as a second language. Ideas will then 
travel rapidly, resulting eventually in a largely homogenized 
culture, perhaps not totally, but generating enough trust for the 
creation of a world government. Then the enormous funds wasted 
on armaments can be spent on improving the standard of living of 
the world's citizens. 
        And then what? I predict that a global ennui will set in. 
Humanity will need a major new goal to challenge itself. What 
better goal than aiming to build artilects. It is a goal worthy of the 
level of human skills, as they will exist later this century and 
beyond. It will be a truly global goal, affecting everyone on the 
planet. It is doable this century rather than later, and hence the 
timing will be good. The ennui will be felt very strongly this 
century, because the world will reach affluence this century, even 
in Africa, the poorest and most backward continent. 
        If the Terrans win, and humanity decides not to build artilects, 
I can imagine a lot of bored and frustrated people twiddling their 
thumbs, just itching to climb up the evolutionary ladder, so to 
speak. Personally I think it will be almost impossible not to go 
Cosmist. It is in our human nature to strive, to be curious, to go 
where no man has gone before. 
 
 
5.  The “Economic Momentum” Argument 
 
        The next two arguments are not what you might call “active 
arguments” that Cosmists would need to give their intellectual 
energy to. They are more passive arguments, in the sense that they 
will be influential almost by default, independently of how much 
energy the Cosmist intellectuals give to pushing the above active  
 
 
108 

 
114
 
arguments. 
        The next argument in favor of Cosmism, I call the "economic 
momentum" argument. I believe that such a powerful economic 
and political momentum in favor of Cosmism will be built up over 
the next half-century or so, that stopping it will be almost 
impossible. 
        The advanced artilects will be the offspring of earlier simpler 
artilects, which in turn will be the offspring of the artificially 
intelligent, artificial brains that people like myself and others will 
be developing early this century.  
        Consider for a moment some of the massively successful AI 
products that we can expect to see developed in the next few 
decades.  
        We are beginning already to talk with our computers. As the 
years go by, these machines will become conversational 
computers. Call them "talkies." Since a lot of people live alone and 
get lonely, there will be a huge market for such machines, which 
will get smarter, more emotional, have a richer vocabulary, with a 
greater learning ability, larger memories etc, over the years. In 
time, people will start having better “relationships” on a 
conversational basis with their talkies than with other people. 
These conversational computers will be able to adapt to their 
human owners by building up a knowledge base of their owners’ 
interests, intelligence and knowledge levels, and behave towards 
their owners in as familiar a way as a spouse does after many years 
of marriage. 
        Of course, such a high level of technical sophistication will 
not come overnight. I believe however that there will be such a 
high demand for such products, that they will eventually be built, 
 
 
109 

 
115
and that it will be the steady increase in their artificial intelligence 
levels that will alarm the Terrans. I will discuss the Terran 
viewpoint in the next chapter. 
        In time, vast talkie research and development industries will 
be created to satisfy the enormous demand. Social intercourse is a 
deep need, and as the talkies get better at it, demand from the 
public will grow. 
        A similar story will occur with household robots. At first, they 
will perform only very simple tasks, such as vacuuming the 
carpets, and sweeping the floors, but as artificial brain building 
develops, the number of tasks these "homebots" can perform will 
increase. 
        They will be given the ability to understand the human voice, 
so they can obey commands spoken by their human owners. 
Perhaps they will be made into talkies as well, so that they can talk 
back, giving explanations. "Why didn't you sweep the floor 
today?" "Because you forgot to replace my battery this morning." 
        As the years go by, homebots will become increasingly 
useful. Huge R&D efforts will be invested into them and they will 
be sold to virtually every household. They will become the “big 
ticket” consumption items of households, as is a car today.  
        Another class of AI products that we can expect will be 
teaching machines, "teacherbots." These machines will adapt to the 
intelligence, knowledge, interest and curiosity levels of individual 
users. Human students will be able to learn at their own individual 
rates, instead of the incredibly clumsy schooling methods we use 
now. In today’s schools, a single human teacher attempts to 
educate a few dozen students simultaneously, pitching the 
intellectual level of the presentation at the middle ability range, 
thus leaving the intellectually slow behind, and leaving the bright  
 
 
110 

 
116
bored.  
        Teacherbots on the other hand will be able to educate students 
individually. They will become far more efficient than a human 
teacher, presenting material in a way that fascinates. A human 
student whose curiosity is aroused can learn avidly and long. The 
intellectual accomplishment level of the whole society should thus 
rise considerably. 
        The teacherbots will tap into knowledge bases around the 
world, hunting out information relevant to the needs of their 
individual students. They will in effect become sources of infinite 
knowledge and fascination to those who really want to learn about 
some topic in detail. Of course, such educational facilities will also 
rapidly expand the knowledge gap between those people who will 
be motivated and hungry to learn and those who will not care, but 
globally speaking, the general level of awareness and absorption of 
knowledge will increase dramatically. 
        Teacherbots, along with the above talkies, homebots and other 
such products, such as sex robots, baby sitter robots, etc, will 
generate a huge industry. These are examples of how AI based 
products will probably form the foundations of an AI based world 
economy.  
        Very powerful, strong egoed individuals will manage the 
creation and expansion of these trillion dollar industries, investing 
large amounts of money into their research and development. Over 
the years, millions of people will be involved not only in using 
these products, which will be universal, but also in researching 
them, designing them, and building them. AI based products will 
form the skeleton of the world economy. They will form the basic 
industries of the early decades of this century, the way the 
automobile, oil, insurance, etc. industries, did in the 20th. 
 
 
111 

 
117
        Once millions of people's livelihoods are tied up in the 
creation and use of artificial brain based products, how will it be 
possible to stop the development of the AI based economy if ever 
the Terrans decide such a thing is necessary? Increasingly, the big 
egoed powerful men of industry and politics will begin to use their 
powerful minds and their influence to push their own agendas onto 
everyone. That is the nature of power. This is nothing new. 
Powerful men have had their way for thousands if not millions of 
years. 
        In the next chapter I will give the Terran point of view, but I 
need to anticipate a bit of the discussion in that chapter here.  
        How will the industrial magnates of the brain based computer 
industries react to a growing Terran fear of the rising intellectual 
powers of the early artilects? These magnates will have devoted 
their whole lives, their egos, their very souls, to artilect creation. 
As leaders of their industries, they will have selected themselves as 
the most capable people, the most visionary, the most forceful, the 
best organized, to drive their industries forward. Such powerful 
men will not give up easily their life's work to appease the fears of 
the Terrans, although it is possible that they might become Terrans 
themselves, as a result of their experiences. 
        However, in most cases, I consider it likely that the leaders of 
the artificial brain based industries will prove to be powerful 
Cosmists, because it will be very much in their self-interest to be 
so. To minimize the fears of the Terrans, these captains of industry 
will try to make their products as human friendly as possible. They 
will make them "warm and fuzzy," so that they will appeal to 
human nature.  
        But there is a limit to the extent to which the growing 
computational power of their products can be hidden. The sheer  
 
 
112 

 
118
computational miracles that these early artilects will be able to 
perform will be increasingly obvious, no matter how warm and 
fuzzy their packaging. Sooner or later, millions of people will 
become conscious how fast and how smart these earlier artilects 
are becoming. The ”artilect debate” that this book predicts will 
arise, and hopes to stimulate, will then inevitably heat up. 
       Perhaps at this point, it might be useful to digress for a 
moment to give a slightly clearer picture of just how an “artilect” 
might start out, at least in its most primitive form. I have stated that 
“godlike” artilects with zillions of times more brain power than 
humans might reach the size of asteroids or even larger. To provide 
some perspective, the reader might well ask when would an 
artificially intelligent (AI) device itself be considered to have 
become as artilect? According to psychologists, it is believed that 
Einstein had an IQ of over 200. I suggest that the low end 
threshold for an AI device to be considered to have morphed into 
an artilect would be for it to become an “Einstein times two” i.e. it 
would need to have an IQ over 400. Of course, such a value would 
be infinitesimally low compared to that of the brain power of an 
asteroid sized artilect. 
        After the above little digression we return now to the 
discussion of the arguments used by the Cosmists. 
        The leaders of the artilect industries will be no fools. They 
would not attain their positions otherwise. CEOs (Chief Executive 
Officers, the company bosses) attain their positions because of 
their ability to lead, to have the vision to point the way ahead that 
the company should follow. Such people have powerful egos and 
extraordinary abilities. I know. I am a Davos Scientific Fellow, so I 
get invited to the "World Economic Forum" in Davos, Switzerland, 
where I meet people like this.  
 
 
113 

 
119
        To get an invitation to go to Davos, you have to be a 
“heavyweight” in one of four categories. You have to be either : a) 
the CEO of a billion dollar company, b) a president of a country, or 
a minister of finance, c) a media mogul (such as head of the BBC, 
editor in chief of the Wall St. Journal, etc.), or d) one of several 
hundred invited scientists or other intellectual experts with a 
message.  
        When I get to talk with these men (virtually all men), I am 
struck by how big their egos are and by their intelligence and 
vision. These qualities are prerequisites for the job. Some single 
individual in each giant company has to point the way and inspire 
his employees to invest their lives in a given enterprise. Meeting 
these "mountains of ego" makes me wonder how they will react 
when the artilect debate gets moving. I can't be sure, but I suspect 
something along the following lines will not be far off the mark. 
        Firstly, they will be fully aware that if the Terran viewpoint 
gets too strong, they and their companies will stand to lose a lot of 
money. If they are political leaders, they will know that the health 
of the global economy may be jeopardized. As I mentioned earlier, 
this century’s global economy will be based increasingly on the 
artilect industries, i.e. the less intelligent, earlier versions of 
artilects.  
        Being the visionaries they are, these men will begin to wonder 
what they can do about the "Terran Problem," i.e. a growing 
popular backlash against the rise of artilects, as these artificial 
brain based products get smarter every year and begin to threaten 
humanity's “species dominance.” 
        As I stated early on in this book, I believe the artilect issue 
will dominate the global politics of our new century. The artilect-
industry leaders and some politicians I can imagine will attempt to  
 
 
114 

 
120
influence the general public in favor of continuing to build ever-
smarter artilects by emphasizing the Cosmist arguments in favor of 
them. These leaders could use some of the arguments discussed in 
this chapter. They dare not jump too far ahead of pubic opinion, for 
example, by painting too vivid a picture of the incredible 
intelligence that artilects could possess late into the century, 
because that would be counter-productive to their interests. That 
would frighten the public and aggravate the "Terran problem." 
        I'm hoping this book will have already painted that vivid 
picture, so that these leaders will not want to reinforce the fear that 
this book will probably have already evoked by then.  
        The major point I am making with this "momentum" 
argument in favor of Cosmism is that there will be very powerful 
economic and political forces maintaining the drive to make ever-
smarter artilects. Artilect building will be the world's dominant 
industry within a few decades I believe. Millions if not billions of 
peoples’ livelihoods will be tied up directly or indirectly in the 
artilect trade. Therefore, any force opposing such huge vested 
interests will need to be extremely powerful itself to be able to 
counter it. 
        I believe that that counter force will be based upon one of the 
strongest emotions that human beings are capable of, namely -- 
fear, fear of extermination, and the will to survive. These two 
motivations, to preserve the economic and political power of an 
artilectual industrial empire, with its strong religious overtones and 
its godlike visions, will confront a primeval fear -- a fear of the 
unknown, and an even more powerful fear, that of being destroyed.  
        This clash has all the hallmarks of causing a major and 
terrible war, a “gigadeath” war. 
 
 
 
115 

 
121
6.  The “Military Momentum” Argument 
 
        The economic side of things is only part of the story. There 
will be an even stronger inertia on the side of the military and their 
highly funded efforts to create ever more intelligent weapon 
systems. Consider the following scenario. 
        Personally, I see the US and China becoming major political 
rivals later this century, if China does not switch to a democratic 
style of government in the next decade or two. Given China's 
terrible poverty (less than an average of about $500 income per 
year per person in the year 2000) most Chinese are too poor to be a 
part of the globalizing community, and hence the authoritarian age 
old Chinese tradition of political repression will continue. (I saw 
the Tiananmen Square massacre on CNN in 1989). American and 
western disgust at China's repressive government, which gives no 
respect to individual liberties, will ensure a western ideological 
hostility to China's rise as the dominant power this century. 
        I go to China nearly every year. I am a guest professor at one 
of China’s largest universities, which has 2000 computer science 
students. I collaborate with the Chinese and with the Japanese 
(where I lived and worked for eight years). I am also a professor at 
a US university. I travel frequently to these regions.  
        The Chinese have enormous energy now. They know they are 
on the move and have a real hunger to improve their living 
standards. Now that Marxism is all but officially dead in China, 
capitalist market methods have taken over. The traditional 
shopkeeper mentality of the Chinese, plus foreign investment in 
China's huge market, have stimulated economic growth to an 
annual average of about 10% for the past decade.  
        With 1.3 billion people and the world's highest average  
 
 
116 

 
122
economic growth rate, it is obvious that China will overtake the US 
in absolute economic power (GNP) some time well before the 
middle of this century. The Chinese are a highly intelligent people 
and far more individualistic than the Japanese. They won’t suffer 
from Japan's "lack of creativity" problem that is generated by 
Japan's cultural repression of individuality. I see this first hand 
with Japanese and Chinese graduate students. The Japanese 
researchers are held back by their culture. The Chinese researchers 
are held back by their poverty. However, now that the Chinese 
state is putting much bigger money into the major research labs, 
Chinese creativity will be tapped. I predict that Chinese science 
will attain world-class status within the next few decades. 
        The traditional Chinese self-image includes that of being the 
world's dominant culture. China has been the most civilized and 
advanced culture on the planet, not for just centuries but for 
millennia. Chinese culture is 5000 years old. It dates back to the 
time of the ancient Egyptians. For most of that time it was the most 
advanced civilization in the world. Any non-Chinese people 
beyond the frontiers, were labeled "barbarians," and justifiably so. 
Relative to the Chinese level of advancement and refinement, their 
neighbors were primitives. To the Chinese, Europe's 500 year 
global dominance (with America as a European offshoot) is a mere 
historical glitch relative to China's 5000 year history, a mere 10%.  
        The Chinese intellectuals I speak to often feel that China will 
take its "rightful," i.e. traditional, place as top country again 
sometime this century, pushing America off its "No.1" pedestal. 
The Americans will not like losing their very comforting self-
image as being the "dominant culture on the planet," so the 
transition will be painful. 
        I think it is probable that the authoritarian Chinese leadership  
 
 
117 

 
123
will cling to power until the democratic revolution comes. I see 
this revolution as inevitable. It is impossible to create a highly 
educated cosmopolitan middle class, without it demanding 
democratic rights. However, until China becomes a true democracy 
and stops its awful abuse of human rights, political feelings 
between the Chinese and American governments will remain 
bitter. 
        Since the Chinese are so poor, it will take several more 
decades of 10% growth for the Chinese to catch up with US living 
standards. 
        However, it is precisely during these decades that the artilect 
debate will be brewing, so research funding for the creation of 
intelligent machines and particularly for intelligent weapon 
systems, will remain high. 
        The Americans got a terrible shock in 1957 when they saw 
the Soviets had beaten them in the race to be the first country in the 
world to launch a satellite -- the “Sputnik crisis.” It caused a 
national trauma. One of the results of that shock was the creation 
of a government research funding agency called “DARPA” 
(Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency) to fund blue-sky 
research that would help the US military create advanced weapon 
systems. The reasoning at the time was that if Soviet technology 
could launch a satellite, it could launch nuclear missiles against the 
US. American technological know-how needed to be given a real 
shot in the arm. 
        The reality since then in the US is that a high percentage of 
artificial intelligence research has been paid for by the US military. 
Once the cold war with the USSR was over, the momentum behind 
DARPA began to falter. America began to lose its leanness and 
meanness. 
 
 
118 

 
124
        However, this is only temporary. America will have a new 
enemy -- China. As Chinese wealth and GNP increase rapidly, the 
Chinese will pour more money into its high tech and military 
research labs. I believe that the Chinese and the Americans will be 
pouring billions of dollars a year into brain building research 
within a decade, and using the results of that research to control 
their soldier robots, their intelligent autonomous tanks, their 
unmanned fighter aircraft, etc. 
        For millennia, the ultimate "reality test" of a people's 
technology and state of military effectiveness took place on the 
battlefield. Every culture is self-congratulatory, but when two 
cultures go to war, usually, only one wins, the other loses, often 
because the winner's technology was superior – iron swords 
against bronze swords, steel against iron, the nuclear bomb against 
TNT, etc. 
        Since we don't yet have a global state (a concept I like to label 
“Globa”), individual nations need to protect themselves from their 
enemies. They need to maintain their military forces, and 
especially in the modern world, by investing in military weapons 
research. One of the reasons the Japanese lost against the 
Americans in World War II was because of the superior weapons 
research capabilities of the Americans. If the Japanese had built 
their nuclear bomb before the Americans built theirs, maybe 
history would be talking about Washington DC and Detroit instead 
of Hiroshima and Nagasaki. 
        US military planners in the Pentagon and Congress know that 
they do not have the luxury to sit back and let the Chinese get 
ahead of them in building artificial brains. As soon as the first such 
brains are built, you can be as sure as eggs that the weapons labs in 
 both countries will be putting them into their weapons systems.  
 
 
119 

 
125
This is all perfectly natural and understandable. If one side doesn't 
do it, the other will, and hence may gain an advantage on the 
battlefield. Warfare and technology have always been closely 
linked. 
        So, if the previous argument, saying that it will be difficult to 
stop the economic momentum behind building artilects, is strong, 
then I believe that the military version of the same argument is 
even stronger. When you are talking about national defense in a 
“pre-Globa” era, a nation's top priority is, and a hefty proportion of 
its national budget goes into, defense. A lot of that money goes 
into funding researchers to make more intelligent weapons. 
        I was visited several times by the US military when I was 
living in Japan, until I put up my web site in 1996, which shows 
everything I do and think. Some of the brightest people on the 
planet work for the US defense planners and the NSA (National 
Security Agency). Similar logic applies to Beijing. 
        I can predict with little fear of being wrong, that 20 years 
from now, unless China has its democratic revolution sooner than I 
expect, weapons research strategists in DC and Beijing will be 
pulling their hair out over the advances in intelligent robot-soldier 
research (and the like) of their rivals. 
        While the political rivalries between the US and China 
continue, probably for 20-50 more years, -- surely China will have 
gone democratic within half a century -- the rise of artificial brains 
with growing intelligence will be inevitable, will be unstoppable, 
the Cosmists will say. The exigencies of military survival of 
countries in a pre-Globa world will dictate that Terran pressure 
will be held back. When national security is at stake, most 
governments tend to become very undemocratic. 
        Artilect research undertaken in a commercial environment  
 
 
120 

 
126
may come under tremendous pressure from the Terrans as they see 
their household products becoming smarter by the year. Public 
Terran pressure may slow or even stop artilect development in the 
commercial sector, but does anyone think for a moment that 
similar logic will apply to military research? 
        National governments will be so afraid that if they stop, the 
other guy won’t, which means that the other guy gets to build a 
smarter robot-soldier, a smarter war strategy-planning computer 
etc. The stronger the Terran opposition to such military artilect 
research work, the greater the level of secrecy the national 
governments will employ. 
        The Cosmists will exploit this situation with obvious ease. 
The military momentum scenario seems so plausible. The drive to 
build artilect-based weapons will probably be the last to be 
stopped, if it can be stopped at all. Even if some of the artilect 
weapons researchers are "fifth column" Terrans, they will not be 
able to stop the effort. If they try sabotage, they may do some 
temporary damage, be tried for treason, and then be replaced by 
Cosmist weapons researchers. 
        As more weapons researchers get alarmed themselves, they 
may stop their work and resign, thus leaving a higher proportion of 
Cosmists. It is possible to imagine over time that when young 
PhDs solicit for jobs as weapons researchers they will be screened 
for their Cosmist opinions. Those with stronger Cosmist leanings 
will be given preference. Maybe the weapons labs will obtain a 
reputation for being "hotbeds" of Cosmism.  
        Even if a Terran majority of the population ends up screaming 
against the Cosmist weapons labs, the national governments will 
protect those labs. Cosmist artilect researchers working in the 
civilian sector may even switch jobs to work in the military sector,  
 
 
121 

 
127
if Terran pressure mounts against them. They will know they will 
be protected (until the last minute?) 
       This completes my presentation of the major arguments in 
favor of Cosmism. In closing this chapter, I would like to reiterate 
that I believe the dominant global political question of this century 
is “Who or what should be the dominant species, human beings or 
artilects?” I think it is fair to say that last century’s dominant 
global political question was “Who should own capital?” The size 
of the literature generated in discussing the latter question is 
enormous. Since the question of species dominance is more 
important than that of the ownership of capital, that it is more 
passionate, and that the stake is so much larger, I believe it is only 
a question of time before there will be a gigantic literature 
discussing the artilect issue.  
        The above half dozen arguments in favor of Cosmism are just 
the “first kick of the pebble” that starts rolling down the slope. In 
time it will become a giant and thunderous snowball. 
        In the next chapter, I will present the Terran case. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
122 

 
128
Chapter 5 
 
The Terrans 
 
 
 
        In this chapter, I will present the arguments that the Terrans 
may use to oppose the Cosmists. The Terrans, by definition, are 
those people who are opposed to the building of artilects. The term 
"Terran" is based on the word "terra," meaning the Earth, as 
distinct from the term “Cosmist,” based on the word “cosmic.” I 
have deliberately chosen these terms because they reflect well the 
differing orientations of the two groups. 
        The Cosmists see the "big picture," the “cosmic picture,” as 
described in the previous chapter, whereas the Terrans are “Earth 
based,” “terrestrial,” inward looking, and see human beings as the 
ultimate concern of the human species.  
        If you feel that the selection of these labels is biased in favor 
of the Cosmists, you are right. I am a Cosmist, so I have 
deliberately chosen these labels to reflect my basic orientation. 
There is power in labels. Labels help create concepts and concepts 
help influence peoples lives and choices. 
        In this chapter, I will try to be as passionate about the Terran 
case as I tried to be in the previous chapter presenting the Cosmist 
case. This will not be difficult to do, since I find the Terran case 
also very powerful. Part of me is Terran, but since the decision to 
build artilects is binary (either we build them or we don’t) 
humanity will have to choose, and since I’m the one who is 
introducing these ideas, I had to choose. I chose to be Cosmist. 
 
 
123 

 
129
        If the primary emotion felt by the Cosmists will be “awe,” 
then the primary emotion felt by the Terrans will be “fear.” The 
Terrans will react against the Cosmists and fear them. They will 
fear them so greatly, that in the limit, they will try to destroy them. 
This chapter is about that fear, and why they will be so afraid.  
        I have chosen to take a two-part approach to presenting the 
arguments used by the Terrans. The first is more an intellectual 
approach -- calm, rational, and persuasive. Towards the end of this 
chapter however, I will take a more emotional approach, appealing 
to the gut, because it is certain that the Terrans will use both 
approaches in their attempt to persuade the undecided to join the 
Terran camp.  
        I believe that the main argument that the Terrans will use is 
that the artilects will be so complex in their structure and dynamics 
that predicting their behavior and attitudes towards human beings 
will be impossible.  
        Humanity, therefore, cannot exclude the possibility that a 
non-negligible risk exists that advanced artilects, once built, may 
feel so superior to and so indifferently towards human beings, that 
they might simply decide to exterminate us. They may do this for 
reasons we as humans cannot understand, or perhaps for no reason 
at all, the way we flush insects down the toilet or swat mosquitoes, 
just not caring.  
        Insects may be a miracle of nano-technological engineering, 
but they are still insects, so from the point of view of human 
beings, we don't give a hoot about their welfare. You see the 
analogy. 
        The Terrans will argue that the only way to be certain that 
there will be zero risk of the human species being exterminated by 
the artilects, is to ensure that such artilects are never built in the  
 
 
124 

 
130
first place. If necessary, in the limit, the Terrans will exterminate 
the artilect builders, i.e. the Cosmists, if the Cosmists seriously 
threaten to build them. 
        I deliberately paint the Cosmist-Terran dichotomy in very 
stark, black and white terms, for dramatic effect. In reality 
however, there is probably a bit of Cosmist and Terran in most of 
us. Therefore the level of ideological polarization on this issue will 
probably be smoothly distributed over all possible combinations of 
mixed sympathies Cosmist-Terran. But the relative ideological 
strengths of the two sides will have a dramatic effect on the course 
of our century and the next. 
        The way the world will be a hundred years from now will be 
determined largely by the relative strengths of Cosmist-Terran 
sympathies in the world population. It's all a matter of degree. 
        However, sooner or later, humanity will have to decide 
whether we stop the advance of artilectual intelligence or we don't. 
A binary decision will have to be made at some point. People and 
governments will be forced to take sides. The views of the 
Cosmists have already been presented. What are the views of the 
Terrans? 
 
1.  The "Preserve the Human Species" Argument 
 
        The Terrans will make strong use of the argument for self-
defense. If you kill someone to save your life, you will not be 
convicted of murder in a law court. If a burglar starts killing 
members of your family, and you take a gun and kill the burglar, a 
jury will be sympathetic towards you, because you were protecting 
your family from further killing. 
        If you are a political leader of a powerful and technologically 
 
 
125 

 
131
advanced country, and a dictator in some third world state starts 
killing your country's citizens in that state, you will have few 
qualms about sending in your troops to shoot up the dictator and 
his cronies. You will argue that it is better to kill a few thousand of 
the dictator’s soldiers now than risk many more of your people 
being killed a few years later in a larger war created by the dictator 
if he increases his power and arms supply.  
        Imagine then the rationale of the Terrans.  
        The Terrans will argue that what is at stake late this century 
may be the very survival of the human species. To the Terrans, the 
survival of the human species is top priority. It is non-negotiable. 
Terrans will not tolerate the idea, as many Cosmists might, that 
humanity ought to take the risk that a substantial fraction of human 
beings on the planet may be killed by the artilects. The Terrans 
will not tolerate the Cosmist idea that artilects should be 
unobstructed by human beings to continue their climb up the 
evolutionary ladder.  
        Such Cosmist reasoning to the Terrans is madness. It is insane 
and should be stopped at all costs, even if the Terrans have to 
exterminate the Cosmists to keep human beings as the dominant 
species. The prime motive of the Terrans is fear of extinction. 
        I can imagine that when the artilect debate really begins to 
heat up, the Terrans will be horrified by the calculus of the 
Cosmists, when the latter begin discussing "acceptable" risks that 
humanity might be destroyed. The Cosmists will be asking how 
small, how improbable, would such a risk have to be to be 
"acceptable." 
        The Terrans will be saying that we are not talking about the 
risk of the deaths of a few hundred people or a few million, but of 
billions of human lives, of "gigadeath," of the possible  
 
 
126 

 
132
extermination of the planet's dominant species. It would be like 
wiping out the dinosaurs, only worse, because human beings are 
such an intelligent species. Human beings have been to the moon, 
we have built computers, we have language, we compose 
symphonies, we turn our dreams into reality. We are such a noble 
species. The Terrans will be incredulous that the Cosmists can 
even think of playing dice with our species' very survival. 
        Furthermore, the Terrans will ask themselves how the 
Cosmists can possibly calculate the risk in the first place? It seems 
such a futile exercise. The likelihood that the Cosmists will be 
unable to attach a "realistic" number to the risk will only reinforce 
the resolve of the Terrans to block the Cosmists. If one cannot 
determine the risk in the first place that artilects might one day 
react very negatively towards human beings, one cannot eliminate 
the possibility that that risk may turn out to be substantial. This 
line of reasoning will truly frighten the Terrans. All the more 
reason, the Terrans will say, not to run the risk at all. 
        It will be interesting to see over the next few years, how the 
intellectuals will take sides on the artilect issue. It is their job to 
present new issues to the public. It is possible that the artilect issue 
will not be understood initially by the general public. For example, 
in my own case, when I approached the media a few years ago, 
trying to raise the alarm on the artilect question, many media 
people call me a "visionary." This usually means that they felt I 
was ahead of my time. Someone who is ahead of his time is often 
ignored.  
        I sincerely hope that this will not be the case with this book, 
and that its message will not be ignored. Actually, so far, the world 
media has been strongly interested, especially the world’s leading 
countries such as the US, the UK, France, etc. I hope that after the  
 
 
127 

 
133
publication of this book, this level of interest will increase and that 
the artilect issue will be well understood and appreciated by the 
media. But, even if it does not stir much interest in the general 
public at first, I am quite confident that the issue will be very real 
and well understood before my death, which should be in the 
2030s or 2040s.  
        Surely my own brain builder work and the work of other brain 
builders, who will be starting up in the next few years, will 
generate an awareness of the artilect problem in the general public. 
I doubt very much that I will be the only brain builder who feels 
that he is very much part of the artilect problem. I suspect that as 
the number of brain builder researchers grows, a fair percentage of 
them will have the same opinion as I do, namely that we are 
creating an enormous future problem for humanity, and hence 
should feel a strong moral obligation to warn the public. 
        Let us assume, for the sake of argument, that this book does 
stir up a debate within the next few years and that the intellectuals, 
the techno-visionary researchers, and others, begin to take sides. 
When this happens, what further kinds of arguments can we expect 
from the Terrans? 
 
2.  The "Fear of Difference" Argument 
 
        One of the strongest of Terran arguments will be more 
irrational than that of the importance of preserving human species 
dominance. It is the Terran "Fear of Difference" argument.  
        Human beings probably have a genetically based, i.e. evolved, 
fear of difference, a fear of the suddenly unfamiliar. Whenever we 
see something different, especially if it appears quickly, we 
experience an instinctive fear reaction. This makes a lot of  
 
 
128 

 
134
evolutionary sense, because in the distant past, suddenly seeing 
something unfamiliar was usually associated with danger, a real 
life threat. For example, a large wild animal might enter the cave, 
or a snake or poisonous spider might approach the baby, or a 
member of a different humanoid species might suddenly appear on 
the scene, etc. 
        Terran intellectuals in the next few years will probably try to 
imagine how it will feel in a few decades time to know that there is 
an artilect box in the corner, or in ones mobile homebot, that is 
almost as intelligent as a human being. How will such Terran 
intellectuals react to the artilect’s alienness? Our human feelings 
towards such machines will probably evoke a range of emotions, 
such as awe, curiosity, fascination, and very likely, a growing 
suspicion, and even fear.  
        These Terran intellectuals will be asking themselves, "How 
can we be sure that the homebots are fully tested at the factories? If 
the homebots are given the power to learn, if their circuits are able 
to modify themselves on the basis of their day-to-day experiences, 
then how can we be sure that what they learn will always be 
compatible with the need to be friendly to humans? 
        As the intelligence of the homebots mounts, so will the fear 
level of the Terrans. As this fear becomes collective, Terran social 
movements will be formed and political pressure against artilects 
will rise. The Terrans will argue that it does not matter much if the 
fear is well founded or not, the fear itself is real. If it does not go 
away, then the source of the fear should be removed. If several 
billion people experience this fear, then the quality of these 
people's lives is adversely affected. Given the large numbers of 
people involved, there is a strong case to cease the increase in 
artilect intelligence. If the Terrans are successful in obtaining such  
 
 
129 

 
135
a ban, then the Terran fear should disappear.  
        This Terran fear assumes that higher artilectual intelligence 
implies a greater risk that the artilects could behave in more 
dangerous ways towards human beings. Is this assumption valid? 
Is it possible that artilects can be made safe, i.e. human-friendly, 
no matter what their intelligence?  
        Asimov, the American science fiction writer, thought about 
such questions, and came up with his famous “Three Laws of 
Robotics.” (The term "robotics" is his by the way). The essence of 
these laws was that the robots in his stories were programmed by 
humans to be always human-friendly. Personally, I find this idea 
naive. I discuss this point in Ch. 8. 
        Since many Terran intellectuals will also agree with me on 
this point, the Terran fear remains. As the artilects get smarter, 
they could become more dangerous. There seems to be no easy 
way around this. 
 
3.  The "Rejection of the Cyborgs" Argument 
 
        A Cyborg is a "cybernetic organism," i.e. a creature that is 
part human, part machine. In a manner of speaking, Cyborgs are 
nothing new, since human beings have been modifying their bodies 
with engineered products for centuries. For example, a veteran 
soldier with a wooden leg, or a modern patient with a pacemaker 
for a failing heart is a Cyborg. This century, it may be possible to 
add artilectual components to the human brain, thus augmenting its 
performance, e.g. greater memory, faster processing speeds, etc. It 
may also be possible to change peoples’ DNA using genetic 
engineering techniques and hence modify the way people look and 
how they behave. 
 
 
130 

 
136
        Human beings have a natural horror of seeing changes in our 
body shape. There are plenty of science fiction movies which 
feature humanoid creatures that are sufficiently similar to us to be 
seen as "like us," but different enough (e.g. with Neanderthal-like 
heavy ridges over the eyes, or pug noses etc.) to be seen as "not 
like us." It is the differences that we find disturbing, sometimes 
very disturbing. 
        Many women as soon as they give birth, ask the doctor if the 
baby is "normal," i.e. that it is not a "monster," not “deformed," not 
"different." It appears we have evolved a fear of difference, which 
may play a role in "racist" feelings, e.g. how blacks and whites 
react to each other, or Asians and Caucasians. Even minor 
differences such as the level of slant in the eye is enough to 
generate suspicion at a gut level. 
        Therefore, I can imagine that as genetic engineering and 
artilect technology permit modifications to be made to the human 
body, there will not be a lot of wild experimentation. There will be 
some of course, but I think many, if not most people will probably 
agree with the following sentiments. 
        Modifying the DNA of one’s future child is permissible, 
provided that the changes that result, whether in physical form or 
in behavior, do not elicit the fear reaction in the parents or the 
community. For example, I think most parents will agree to have 
their future child made free of the risk of contracting any one of 
thousands of genetic diseases, such as proneness to heart attack, to 
cancer, to diabetes, to alcoholism, etc.  
        It would not surprise me if in several decades, that this kind of 
thing is not only seen to be normal, but may even be made 
compulsory by the state. If not, the state will argue that it will have 
to foot the medical bills resulting from the "inferior" and  
 
 
131 

 
137
unnecessary genes of babies who grow into "defective" adults and 
get sick. 
        It is even possible, as people get used to the idea of 
genetically engineered children, that parents may begin to 
experiment a little with their own. For example, they may want 
their children to be a little taller than they are, or more intelligent -- 
but not to such an extent that they create a parent-child 
incompatibility. They may prefer their child to have a different hair 
color or a curvier sexier figure, or bigger breasts, longer thicker 
penises, stronger libidos, to be of a desired sex, or sexual 
orientation, etc.  
        As society becomes more accustomed to the concept of the 
"designer child," whose genetic characteristics are chosen by its 
parents, one can expect that the range of genetic traits selected over 
the human population will broaden. Some parents will be more 
"adventurous" than others. They will select traits for their children 
which will raise the eyebrows of most other parents, for example, 
making their children eight feet tall, or with IQs of 220, i.e. over 
100 points superior to themselves. Such an IQ difference would 
inevitably create total intellectual alienation between themselves 
and their children later in life. They would barely be able to talk 
with each other. The children would be utterly bored with their 
parents and the parents wouldn’t understand the children’s 
interests. 
        As the genetic range broadens, the debate on "genethics," i.e. 
the ethics of genetic engineering will heat up. Society will ask 
whether limits ought to be placed on the range of choices offered 
to parents for their future children. It is clear I think that there will 
be a "gray" region, i.e. a range of traits that are considered barely  
acceptable. This implies that there is another range, which is  
 
 
132 

 
138
considered unacceptable, i.e. a range in which no parents would 
want their child to be in. For example, virtually no parent would 
want their child to grow to 10 feet, or weigh 500 lbs., or have six 
fingered hands, or three arms, or one eye, or no ears, etc. 
        Such "outside the limits" children would evoke the "monster 
rejection response" in people. We have a genetic repulsion of too 
great a difference from ourselves. Therefore I believe that even 
with genetic engineering, the range of genetic traits that will be 
experimented with in practice will not differ greatly from what we 
had before the genetic engineering revolution started. 
        But, there will always be some parents who will really want to 
push the limits. For example, to have their children as intelligent as 
possible, i.e. to go as far as state-of-the-art genetic engineering can 
take them, irrespective of the consequences to their future parent-
child relationship. This may be cruel to the children themselves, 
who may be viscerally rejected by society, and may end up 
suiciding or becoming hermits. 
        Such children, if they are too far from the human norm, will 
not be accepted by society. So what will they do? Where will they 
go? Will they even be allowed to live? How will society deal with 
the minority of parents who will have strong intellectual reasons to 
make such children? 
        It is not difficult for me to imagine that there will be people 
who will argue that building "superchildren" using genetic 
engineering is the destiny of the human species, in a similar way as 
the Cosmists. The only real difference will be the technologies 
involved. One uses genetic engineering, the other uses a more 
electronic engineering, but when one begins to think about such 
distinctions, the boundaries between them become fuzzy. It is the 
implications of this fuzziness that I now want to talk about. 
 
 
133 

 
139
        If you think about it a little, it should be obvious that as 
electronics gets small enough, it will wed with biology. In other 
words, if electronic components become small enough, they end up 
being of molecular size. A similar comment can be made about 
biology. If one dissects biological organs down to a fine enough 
scale, one ends up with biological molecules. Both electronics and 
biology will be dealing with technologies at the molecular scale. 
        It then becomes possible to devise technologies that use 
biological principles to do engineering, e.g. the evolutionary 
engineering that I do. As artificial embryology is better developed, 
it will be possible to "grow" artificial structures based on 
embryological models. The distinction between biologically based 
technologies and engineering based technologies will blur, until 
genetic engineering and artificial life will become pretty much the 
same thing! 
        So what? Why am I saying all this? Because I see a growing 
link between the genetic engineering "genethics" debate (i.e. to 
what extent should humanity "play" with its own germline DNA?), 
and the artilect debate. (Germline DNA is the DNA contained in 
the reproductive cells that create our children). 
        Artilects need not be conventional electronic boxes sitting in 
the corner. They will be made from the state-of-the-art 
technologies of their era. Perhaps 30 years from now, humanity 
will have the know-how to build computers, which use biologically 
based methods. We may have artificial cells that grow, multiply, 
differentiate, migrate, self assemble, self-test, self-repair etc. 
Biology and technology may wed.  
        As the wedding of biology and technology becomes 
increasingly possible, it is likely that some people will be attracted 
to taking the idea more literally than I have suggested above. They  
 
 
134 

 
140
may wish to literally wed their own bodies and brains to 
technological components to create "Cyborgs" (part human, part 
machine). 
        Actually, this traditional definition of a Cyborg will become 
rather old fashioned, as the distinction between what is biological 
and what is a machine dies away. Human beings are machines in 
the sense that we get built by molecular scale machines (DNA, 
RNA, ribosomes, proteins etc). When one says "machine," most 
people tend to think of some heavy steel-based device that moves 
and does not have zillions of components, e.g. a steam engine or a 
car. But a biological cell is a machine, a kind of city of molecular 
scale citizens, all tiny machines doing their own little mechanical 
job (e.g. split this chemical bond, join these two molecules, 
transport this molecule to there, etc.) 
        With nanotechnology, we will be making molecular scale 
machines in the trillions of trillions, and seeing them self assemble 
to make human scale objects. In many ways, this is what biology 
is. Biology is a kind of natural nanotechnology. The big possible 
distinction between biology and nanotechnology is that the former 
is the result of blind Darwinian evolution. Nanotechnology has the 
potential of being humanly designed, although we can use 
evolutionary engineering techniques at the molecular scale too, if 
we want. 
        So maybe we should redefine a Cyborg to mean (part natural, 
part artificial), where by natural I mean, a pure product of 
evolution, a product of "Mother Nature," and by artificial I mean 
humanly engineered. The actual material base of the two need no 
longer be different. For example, both natural and artificial might 
use a carbon based chemistry to make its products, one with DNA 
and the other with some kind of artificial DNA, but both working  
 
 
135 

 
141
 
together to create a Cyborg. 
        As engineering and biology merge, more people will want to 
try to become artilects themselves. The technology will allow it. In 
the late 1990s, there were social movements advocating that 
human beings could become super beings (artilects) via a three 
phase transitional process, i.e. from human to Cyborg to artilect.  
        In this book, I have restricted my discussion largely to the 
Terrans and the Cosmists, but one could argue that there will be a 
third category -- the "Cyborgs." These would be human beings (if 
one can call them that, especially if they are radically modified) 
who have decided to have themselves reconstructed into partial 
artilects. The main motive of the Cyborgs is simply that they want 
to experience being an artilect themselves. They will want to be 
superhuman.  
        Another motive may be that by implementing this third major 
philosophy, the bitter confrontation between humans and artilects 
may be avoided. If human beings become artilects a step at a time, 
then a smooth transition from human to artilect might be possible 
without the risk of a species dominance war.  
        Frankly I think this is naive. It would only work if everyone 
undertook the human to cyborg to artilect transitions at the same 
rate, which is obviously totally unrealistic. I think what is much 
more likely to happen is that millions, perhaps billions of human 
beings will remain stolidly Terran and will not want to modify 
their bodies and brains too much. Perhaps a little genetic 
optimization within human limits is OK, but they will viscerally 
reject the Cyborgs. They will be afraid of them and probably 
banish them from their communities, especially when the 
Cyborgian differences from the human norm become great. 
 
 
136 

 
142
        To the Terrans, the Cyborgian philosophy will be simply a 
variant of the Cosmist philosophy. The Terrans will probably 
detest the idea of Cyborgs almost as much as the idea of artilects. 
The more a Cyborg becomes artilectual, the more alien "it" will 
become in the eyes of the Terrans. If a Cyborg modifies itself a lot, 
it becomes more artilect like. In the limit, the human portion of the 
new creature will be dwarfed by the artilectual portion, both in 
terms of performance and possibly size. 
        For example, imagine that a Cyborg wants to become an 
artilect. He wants to experience being an artilect him(it)self. He/it 
continues to add components to its brain and/or uses genetic 
engineering techniques to modify its body, e.g. by expanding its 
head size so that it can fit more artificial brain inside it.  
        Let us concentrate on intellectual performance. If the Cyborg 
adds molecular scale, 3D, heatless circuits of only a few cubic 
centimeters, which would require almost no skull expansion, then 
his/its mental processing rate would expand astronomically.  
        Let us calculate the difference to give a feel for how great the 
increase would be. We use figures from an earlier discussion to 
obtain a ballpark estimate of the processing speed of the brain. 
Assume that each synapse, an inter-neural connection, of a total of 
1015 in the brain, processes 10 bits a second on average. That is 
1016 bits a second for the whole human brain. But the few cubic 
centimeters of artificial brain will have nearly a trillion trillion 
atoms i.e. bits (at one bit per atom), and can switch them probably 
in femtoseconds, i.e. a millionth of a billionth of a second, i.e. a 
processing rate of 1039  (where 39 = 24+15) bits a second. 
        So the human brain portion would contribute only about a 
trillionth of a trillionth of the processing capacity. The Cyborg 
would already be an artilect. To the Terran, such a "Cyborg" would  
 
 
137 

 
143
be just an “artilect in human disguise,” i.e. a human body to carry 
around its artilectual brain. The behavior of such a Cyborg would 
be totally alien compared with normal human behavior. Such a 
Cyborg would be doing "other things" with its trillion trillion fold 
superior brain-processing capacities. 
        Perhaps the Cyborgs, at the human level, before adding on 
artilectual components, could argue that because human 
brainpower can be increased so easily, without any modification to 
the external human body form, Terrans might be more inclined to 
accept the idea of becoming Cyborgs themselves. This may be 
true. Instead of adding cubic centimeters of artilectual brain, only 
cubic millimeters could be added, by a simple injection of a small 
amount (e.g. a cubic millimeter) of artilectual material into the 
brain, which then self assembles and integrates with the human 
brain by growing appropriate connections.  
        This still does not change the above calculation very much, 
because if one adds only cubic millimeters, i.e. only thousands of 
times smaller, that would only reduce the processing capacity 
difference to billions of trillions of times the human level instead 
of trillions of trillions of times. The modified brain would still be 
an artilect. 
        But it is possible to imagine that a lot of people will take the 
plunge and decide to become "human artilectual brains" by having 
themselves injected with such brain implants. Initial experiments 
will probably be done on mice to see the effects. So the first 
artilectual Cyborgs might be “Mighty Mice?” 
        The distinction between an artilect that has no traditional 
biological component and a artilectual Cyborg is not one that will 
be very important to the Terrans I believe. The two categories will 
simply be lumped together as non-Terran, as non-human. The 
 
 
138 

 
144
brain injected Cyborgs might look human on the surface, but their 
behavior would be totally alien. Perhaps the Cyborg might spend a 
trillionth of a trillionth of its brain processing time acting like a 
human but why bother thinking in human terms? What would be 
the point? 
        If the artilect in the human brain were able to learn, and had 
massive intelligence, very quickly it would probably feel frustrated 
at the extremely limited life style available to it as dictated by the 
constraints of its human body.  It would probably want to free 
itself from the human body to build its own interface to the 
external world. It would probably want to slough off its human 
form and create a better carrier, which could leave the planet, have 
many more sensors, be immortal, etc. 
        So if the Cyborgs start getting smarter and smarter, the 
Terrans will fear them in the same way that they will fear the 
growing intelligence of the artilects. The Terrans will reject them 
both. 
 
4.  The "Unpredictable Complexity" Argument 
 
        I can imagine that the very early artilects will be simple 
enough in their behaviors to be reasonably predictable, and not too 
bright. This will probably be the case with the artificial brains that 
I hope to be building in the next few years. These early artilects 
will be reasonably well understood by their human creators, who 
will be able to predict in broad terms, the behaviors of their 
machines.  
        Such products will be given warm-fuzzy characteristics by the 
industrialists and will probably be very popular with the public. No 
problem there -- but the issue is whether it will be possible to make  
 
 
139 

 
145
artilects of human level intelligence and beyond, well beyond, that  
would remain human-friendly. This I very much doubt, and so will 
the Terrans. 
        The Terran intellectuals will argue that the human brain 
contains some quadrillion (a thousand trillion) synapses (inter 
neural connections). This is a huge number. How will it ever be 
possible for brain engineers to connect up so many synapses in 
appropriate ways in their artificial brains? Even if it becomes 
technologically possible, how will they know how to do this, so 
that the connections generate desired behaviors?  
        This is a huge and fundamental question for the brain 
builders. Speaking as one myself, I think the answer is that the 
complexities of the task will be so overwhelming, that the only 
effective engineering approach will be the one that I use already in 
my own research, namely "evolutionary engineering."  
        When I use evolutionary engineering methods to evolve my 
neural net circuit modules, I usually do not bother trying to 
understand how they function. This would not be very practical. 
For a start, there are too many of them, and the internal structural 
and neural signaling complexities of each module are too great to 
be analyzed easily. Once the inputs and outputs of these modules 
are combined to form artificial brains, the complexity level jumps 
again. Analyzing how all this massive complexity works would be 
a mammoth task. 
        I suppose, if one were truly motivated, it might be possible to 
analyze the step-by-step behavior of a single module. It would be a 
very tedious process, but it might be doable. However, the 
knowledge obtained would probably not be very useful. It would 
explain how a particular module worked, but that knowledge 
would not help much. It would not be very useful, for example, if  
 
 
140 

 
146
one’s hope was to use that knowledge to promote the 
understanding of how to humanly design other modules to perform 
other desired behaviors. One would be left with the conclusion that 
the only way to make further progress would be to use the 
evolutionary engineering approach.  
        In other words, one can analyze results, but one cannot 
synthesize easily a desired behavior beforehand. Analysis is 
possible, prediction is difficult. About the only way to build 
extremely complex neural net circuit modules, is the mutate-test-
select, mutate-test-select cycle of evolutionary engineering. It's 
clumsy, but it works. It's nature's way as well. 
        Evolutionary engineering is a wonderful new tool for 
engineers. The structural and dynamical complexities of the 
systems under evolution can be immense, well beyond what human 
engineers have the intellectual capacities to comprehend, yet 
successful functional systems can be evolved nevertheless. The 
great advantage of evolutionary engineering is that the systems that 
evolve can be arbitrarily complex.  They can be more complex 
than any human could ever hope to design using the traditional 
top-down, blueprint approach.  
        But so long as they generate the desired behavior, no matter 
how it is done, i.e. they get a good "fitness" or performance quality 
score, they will survive into the next generation in the evolutionary 
algorithm (i.e. the program of mutate-test-select cycles). This is all 
that really matters. The internal complexity becomes irrelevant, so 
long as the performance score (the “fitness”) keeps increasing. 
        I call this characteristic of evolutionary engineering, its 
"complexity independence." As an evolutionary engineer, you 
don't care about the inherent complexity of the system that is being 
evolved. It doesn't matter, because the evolutionary algorithm you  
 
 
141 

 
147
use to evolve the system only cares about the value of the system's 
fitness (i.e. the numerical score you get when you measure how 
well the evolving system performs). This means that the internal 
complexity of the system being evolved can be greater than the 
most complex system that human engineers are intellectually 
capable of designing.  
        This greater complexity level allows for a greater level of 
functionality as well. Hence evolutionary engineering is often 
capable of evolving systems whose performance and functionality 
levels are superior to those of traditional humanly engineered 
designs. Personally, I believe that the evolutionary approach will 
eventually dominate engineering this century, as our systems 
become more and more complex, i.e. too complex for human 
designability. This will occur in such domains as brain building, 
nanotechnology, embryofacture, etc. 
        Evolutionary engineering can be great engineering but is not 
very good science. Science is about understanding the world. 
Scientists want to understand how things are, how they work. 
Scientists are basically analysts. Engineers are basically 
synthesists. Engineers like to build things. Scientists' satisfactions 
usually come from understanding how some aspect of the natural 
world functions. Engineers' satisfactions usually come from 
successfully building something that works according to their 
designs.  
        For the past 300 years or so, the dominant paradigm in 
science has been analysis. To understand how some complex 
system functions, e.g. the biological cell, scientists usually take it 
apart, study the components, and then put the understanding of the 
parts together to get an understanding of how the complex whole 
functions. This approach has been spectacularly successful over 
 
 
142 

 
148
many decades and will remain so. It is the dominant approach used 
in science. However, now that computers are getting more 
powerful by the month, thanks to Moore's Law, a new, more 
synthetic, paradigm in science is making itself felt.  
        The queen of the sciences has always been physics. It has 
been the most mathematical, the most rigorous and has usually 
attracted the most brilliant people to work in the field. The attitude 
of the physicists has traditionally been that if a research field wants 
to call itself a science, then it had better be quantitative, with 
mathematically testable models, which give numbers that can be 
checked against the real world. A lot of physicists doubt whether 
psychology and sociology are true sciences in the above sense. 
        This mathematical "snobbery" of the physicists has led to 
paradigm clashes with the evolutionary engineers. The traditional 
attitude of the physicists is that, "If it’s not mathematical, it's not 
academically respectable." The new and growing counter attitude 
of the evolutionary engineers is that, "If a system is sufficiently 
simple to be mathematically analyzable, it's unworthy of an 
evolutionary engineer's (EE's) attention."  
        The physicists disparage the evolutionary engineer's approach 
to doing science as "ignorant," because the evolutionary engineers 
(EEs) do not understand the systems they evolve. The EEs on the 
other hand label the physicist's approach as "impotent," because 
the physicists do not try to understand the really complex systems 
such as the human brain, or an embryological genetic control 
diagram. At least the EEs attempt to evolve such things, or make 
decent attempts in that direction. 
        As the years pass, I believe that the power and prestige of 
evolutionary engineering will only increase. So long as a system is 
evolvable, its internal complexity doesn't matter, as explained  
 
 
143 

 
149
above. The whole issue of "evolvability," i.e. whether a system 
will evolve at all, or never get off the ground so to speak by getting 
stuck at low and inadequate fitness values, is a hot topic in the field 
of evolutionary engineering, and is still poorly understood. I wish 
there were an established body of theory that would give me 
criteria for good evolvability, so that I could evolve my neural net 
circuit modules more easily. 
        I have spent some time above on the topics of evolutionary 
engineering and its complexity independence because I believe the 
lessons they have to teach will provide powerful ideological fuel to 
Terran intellectuals in the future. I believe the Terrans will seize 
upon the necessity of using evolutionary engineering techniques to 
build artilects, due to the enormous complexity of brain building, 
as one of the ideological cornerstones of their intellectual attack 
against the Cosmists. 
        The Terrans will say that the brain builders cannot understand 
what their evolved circuits are doing. Very large artilects will 
probably incorporate evolutionary engineering experiments into 
their own bodies, adding on components to themselves as the need 
arises. 
        The Terrans will argue that, given the huge numbers of 
components involved in artilect building (e.g. 1040 bits in an 
asteroid sized artilect) there is really no other way to build them 
other than using the "mutate-test-select" approach of evolutionary 
engineering. Even the artilects themselves will probably use this 
technique. It is so powerful. We know that it works, because this 
Darwinian approach built human beings, and all biological 
creatures. It will probably be the only valid technique for building 
artilects. 
        From the Terran point of view, the critical aspect of an  
 
 
144 

 
150
evolutionary 
engineered 
artilect 
will 
be 
its 
behavioral 
unpredictability. Human beings, in principle, will not be able to 
predict the attitudes, the thinking processes, the ideas, of the 
artilects with evolved artilectual structures. These structures will 
be too complex and will be evolving at electronic speeds. Even the 
artilects themselves will probably not understand their own 
behavioral mechanisms, for the same reason.  
        Therefore the Terrans will scoff at any attempt by the 
Cosmists to estimate the risk that the artilects will not harm human 
beings in the future. For the Cosmists to be able to do this, they 
would need to be able to predict the behaviors of the artilects from 
their structures. This, the Terrans will say, is impossible. The 
Cosmists may accept this argument but reply that the behaviors of 
the earlier artilects could be tested in the factories before they are 
released to the general public.  
        But the Terrans will counter that suggestion as being too 
dangerous, because with artilects of human intelligence levels or 
higher, their behaviors during the tests themselves may be very 
dangerous to humanity. For example, they may unexpectedly 
explode into hyper intelligence (a phenomenon called a 
“singularity”) and become humanly uncontrollable. The Terrans 
will argue that such factory tests should never be attempted. 
        I believe that the "unpredictable complexity" argument of the 
Terrans, based on the necessity of using the evolutionary 
engineering approach to building artilects is very strong. It will be 
a very difficult argument for the Cosmists to refute.  
        The term and the concept of "evolutionary engineering" are 
my inventions. I believe that evolutionary engineering will provide 
the essential means for future artilect building. It is therefore not  
surprising that I feel partly responsible for the enormous pain and  
 
 
145 

 
151
suffering that I predict will grow between Cosmists and Terrans as 
they confront each other later this century. I've already spoken 
about these guilt feelings in the introductory chapter where I tried 
to describe why I wanted to write this book. 
 
5.  The "Cosmist Inconsideration" Argument 
 
        What other arguments besides fear of extermination, fear of 
differences (artilectual and Cyborgian), and the unpredictable 
complexity of the artilects, can the Terrans use against the 
Cosmists?  As I said earlier in this chapter, I will now take a more 
emotional approach by trying to express the passionate hatred of 
the Terrans for the Cosmists. I will try to hit your gut.  
        I believe that the Terrans will consider the Cosmists to be 
supremely arrogant and inconsiderate towards the safety of the 
Terrans.  
        The Terrans will express their hatred by saying such things as, 
"How dare you Cosmists risk the lives of the Terrans by 
performing your artilectual experiments on the Earth, or even close 
to the Earth! What if the artilects turn against you and later kill us 
all? Even if you get fed up with Terran pressure against you and 
you use late 21st century technology to rocket Cosmist colonies to 
far away planets or stars to do your experiments there, the artilects 
could still kill you and return to Earth to destroy us?”  
         “You care only for your insane Cosmist dreams of building 
godlike artilects and neglect the risk to us if you succeed in 
building them. Your artilects may kill us all, not just the Cosmist 
colonies. If you Cosmists can build colonies in deep space, no 
matter how far away, the artilects could still get back to the Earth. 
Our Terran fears will not be reduced with distance. The risk that  
 
 
146 

 
152
you take of your own destruction by artilects is not just your affair 
alone. We too are concerned because of the risk of the artilects 
returning to the Earth to kill us, billions of us. You Cosmists don't 
seem to care about that. Your obsession to build artilects is 
incredibly arrogant and inconsiderate of Terran interests, of Terran 
lives." 
        "To safeguard the survival of the human species, of whom 
billions are Terrans, we will not permit you Cosmists to perform 
your artilect building experiments anywhere at all, not on the 
Earth, not in near space, not in far space. We will stop you. Even if 
you move far away to deep space colonies, we will spy on you. We 
will never let you obtain political independence to pursue your 
dreams, because those dreams are so potentially dangerous to us. 
We will keep tight control on all of your brain builders to see that 
they do not attempt to build artilects that may surpass the globally 
legislated artificial intelligence limits. If they do, they will go to 
jail for life or be executed.”  
         “If your colonies declare political independence, we will 
nuke you. We will vaporize you, for the sake of the survival of the 
human species. We will disintegrate the very matter of your 
colonial bases. You will never be given the opportunity to build the 
potential destroyers of the human species. Understand this and 
obey." 
      Before passing to the next chapter, I cannot resist making a 
historical analogy that may appeal more to my American readers. I 
would not be at all surprised if several decades after the 
publication of this book, that Ted Kaczynski, better known as the 
“Unabomber,” will come to be seen as “the first Terran,” who was 
decades ahead of his time, and was the 20th century’s equivalent of 
the 19th century’s John Brown.  
 
 
147 

 
153
       For those of you who do not know who the Unabomber was, 
or who John Brown was, I will give brief biographies of these two 
historical characters. I begin with John Brown, since he lived a 
century before Ted Kaczynski. John Brown was a fanatical 
abolitionist, who felt so passionately that negro slavery was a 
moral abomination in America, that he and his gang actually killed 
some pro slavers in the years leading up to the US civil war. 
Before he was sentenced and later hanged, he uttered his famous 
words, “Now, if it be deemed necessary that I should forfeit my 
life for the furtherance of the ends of justice, and mingle my blood 
further with the blood of my children, and with the blood of 
millions in this slave country whose rights are disregarded by 
wicked, cruel, and unjust enactments, I submit: so let it be done." 
John Brown was one of the historical characters who triggered the 
US civil war. A mere two years after his hanging, the war began. 
       Ted Kaczynski lived a century later. He was labeled the 
“Unabomber” because he used to send bombs through the post to 
individuals involved in the development of high technology, some 
of whom died as the result of the explosions. Amongst other 
things, he was afraid of the “development of super human 
computers with intellectual capacities beyond anything humans are 
capable of.” These words of his sound very much like the 
philosophy of a Terran as described in this book, hence my claim 
that Ted Kaczynski ought to be seen as the planet’s first Terran, 
decades ahead of his time. Just as John Brown predicted the flow 
of the “blood of millions in this slave country,” and he was right, 
so perhaps Ted Kaczynski’s fear of the “development of super 
human computers” may be seen in a similar light. He felt strongly 
enough that he was prepared to kill people who were involved in 
the early stage of their (super human) development. At the time of  
 
 
148 

 
154
writing this book, the Unabomber is seen merely as a disturbed 
individual, but I suspect 21st century historians will reinterpret him 
as being “the first Terran.” John Brown’s prediction came true in a 
mere two years. Ted Kaczynski’s prediction will take longer, 
perhaps as much as a century, but the time may come when he will 
be seen as a prophetic hero rather than as a schizophrenic misfit. 
        After this little historical diversion, I think the time has come 
to begin the next chapter, on how I think an Artilect War between 
the Terrans and the Cosmists may start. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
149 

 
155
Chapter 6 
 
The Artilect War 
 
 
 
        Trying to predict the future is always hazardous, so the ideas 
in this chapter concerning how I think an Artilect War might heat 
up and boil over are obviously tentative. However, I will try to 
make the various steps as I see them in the progression to war 
sound as plausible and as realistic as I can. There are powerful 
arguments that make the idea of an Artilect War very plausible for 
me. If I did not believe this, I would not be writing this book, and 
would not be lying awake at night fearful of the future.  
        In fact I am so worried about the prospect of a major war late 
this century, that I feel fortunate to be alive now. We live in a 
relatively peaceful time, except for the usual local wars that always 
seem to be with us somewhere on the globe. This rather peaceful 
time is sandwiched between the "two great holocausts," i.e. 
between that of the Second World War (mid 20th century), and 
that of the coming Artilect War (of the late 21st century). The 
Europeans of the 19th century lived peacefully for most of it. It 
must have been difficult for them to imagine the horrors of trench 
warfare in WW I. It was a golden age for them. I fear for my 
grandchildren, who will have to face the gigadeath future I am 
predicting will come. I will not see it. I will die peacefully in my 
bed in the 2030s. My grandchildren will be living (and dying) from 
the 2000s to the 2090s. They will see it, and they will be destroyed 
by it. 
 
 
151 

 
156
        As I have mentioned earlier, I believe the Artilect War will 
not start soon. Its causes will brew for many decades, and probably 
only erupt late this century. At first will come the debate, initiated 
by intellectuals and by techno-visionaries like myself, joined later 
by the journalists, and finally the general public. Probably at first, 
the ideas of the techno-visionaries will be ignored as being too 
wacky, too far future to be taken seriously. But in the modern age, 
with increasingly sophisticated tele-communications, ideas spread 
quickly across the planet and reach an interested minority of 
specialists in sufficient numbers for a healthy discussion on the 
topic to be sustained in a vigorous and healthy manner. 
        With many smart minds working on the topic, its extensive 
ramifications will be well explored and given a thorough hearing. 
As a result, the likely steps in the progression towards an Artilect 
War will become clearer. Personally, I imagine that the 
intellectuals will begin a vigorous debate on the rise of the artilect 
this century, well within the period 2005-2010. One of the major 
aims of this book is to ensure that this happens. 
        But since the creation of artificial brains having real artificial 
intelligence is a very challenging and difficult enterprise, it will not 
be achieved within the next few decades I believe. We will have 
artificial brains of a sort within the next decade (otherwise my own 
work will have been a failure), but they will be primitive affairs 
compared to what later decades will provide. For example, by 
2030, artificial brain building will have benefited strongly from 
knowledge furnished by neuroscience on how the human brain 
works. It will also benefit from nanotechnology, as the latter 
provides the means to build the molecular scale engineered 
versions of this new knowledge. 
        If insufficient progress is made in building the early artilects, 
 
 
152 

 
157
 the intellectuals will stop discussing the prospect of an Artilect 
War, because they will feel that more or less everything that can be 
said about the topic has been said. They will simply wait until 
further technical progress occurs, to rekindle the debate. I can 
imagine, from time to time during this waiting period, that the 
journalists, who are always hungry for a story, will keep the issue 
alive. They will write dire predictions similar to the ideas in this 
book, which will keep the public aware that the prospect of 
potentially dangerous ultra intelligent machines wiping out 
humanity, will not go away.  
        But the public can only be warned a finite number of times 
before it becomes jaded -- "Yeah yeah, we've heard that." So, the 
real timing of the war will depend upon the neuro-engineers, and 
the speed with which they can deliver increasingly intelligent 
machines. So -- what is the timetable for smart machines? 
        I expect that humanity will have a well developed 
nanotechnology by about 2020-2030, i.e. we will have "nanots" 
(nano scale robots) which read the molecular equivalent of paper 
tape that instructs them how to build molecular scale components 
an atom at a time, and with extreme precision. Such nanots are 
often labeled "assemblers" by the nanotech community. 
Nanotechnology in turn will revolutionize the study of the human 
brain, because it will create powerful new tools to decipher the 
brain's secrets. Since these tools have not been invented yet, their 
functional principles can only be speculated upon. 
        Each year, therefore, once nanotech really comes into its 
stride, we can expect progress in neuroscience to be rapid, 
exponential in fact. The artificial brain building industry should be 
on its feet by 2010, and thriving by 2020. Some time after that, the 
industry will be delivering very popular products such as the 
 
 
153 

 
158
 homebots, the teacherbots, and friendship machines as introduced 
earlier. But the brain builder industries will also provide all kinds 
of specialized machines to human specialists, such as economic 
advice machines to economists, investment advice machines to 
investors on the stock market, etc. The scientists will create a 
hungry demand for specialized machines for each of their 
specialties. The number of applications for brain-like computers 
will be enormous and will continue to grow. 
        In time, the debate on whether artilects, the ultra intelligent 
kind, should be built or not, will shift its center of gravity, namely 
from the intellectuals to the general public. In time, ordinary 
people will begin to see with their own eyes the growing 
intelligence of the smart machines they will have in their homes. 
The level of conversational competence of these machines will 
increase year by year as tens of thousands of researchers from all 
around the world are thrown at the “language understanding and 
speech generation” problems by the brain builder companies.  
These companies will want to cash in on the huge demand by the 
public to buy their smart products. 
        At first, these conversation machines will be just amusing 
toys, speaking at the comprehension level of small children, if that. 
People will joke at the limitations of their machines. However, 
their complacency will soon disappear, when a few years later, 
their newer machines speak and understand a lot better. After a 
string of such improvements, I predict that a collective public 
suspicion and an uneasy feeling will begin to grow, which will be 
expressed in the question, "Just how smart will they let these 
machines get?" 
        Meanwhile, in the national research labs of major countries, 
this whole process will have advanced a decade or more ahead of  
 
 
154 

 
159
the public level of awareness. Usually, the forefront of knowledge 
and the technological cutting edge occur in the "blue sky research" 
laboratories, not in the companies. The labs do the research, the 
companies do the development, on the whole. Once a new product 
becomes conceivable, companies are usually pretty quick to 
develop it and put it on the market, otherwise their rival companies 
will beat them to it. So the delay between company thinking and 
public thinking is usually only a few years, whereas the knowledge 
gap between the researchers in the labs and the public can be a 
decade or more wide. 
        The researchers will express their fears in the first wave of 
publicity over the artilect controversy. We researchers are the 
people who are responsible for the problem in the first place. We 
are also the people who are best informed and the most farsighted 
about the problem, because it is our job. We are selected and paid 
to be like that. 
        The national labs and the universities will create their own 
research projects on the artilect issue. The social scientists and the 
philosophers will also get into the act (with a few years delay, once 
they have read the early works of the techno-visionaries). But since 
these people are such a tiny minority of the population, they will 
not have much of an impact on the politicians as long as real 
artilect progress is slow. The techno-visionaries, and the artilect 
research establishment will, like the general public, have to wait 
for real artilectual progress at the hands of the neuro-engineers. 
        But the world will not have to wait many decades. Progress 
will be exponential. That uneasy worried feeling of the public as it 
sees its machines getting smarter and smarter every year will find 
its political voice, as the artilect debate heats up. Priests, ministers, 
and rabbis in their pulpits will raise their voices. Speakers at local  
 
 
155 

 
160
political meetings will start raising questions, quoting the more 
memorable lines from the books of the techno-visionaries. 
National politicians will sense the public mood and start raising the 
artilect issue, once they see that it has become popular and 
acceptable to do so. Prior to that, most politicians will think of the 
artilect issue as a piece of science fiction and not take it seriously, 
as will most of the public. 
        What next? Once the issue is raised by popular demand, what 
then? It is at this point that the artilect controversy will start to heat 
up. People will take sides, and the issues will become more sharply 
focused in the public mind. More books, both technical and semi-
popular on the issue will be published. The emotional tone of the 
debate will rise a bit, as the level of anxiety increases. Initially, 
nothing concrete will be done, due to inertia. So long as the smart 
machines are performing useful functions, and no one is hurt, then 
almost no one, except for a few extremists, will be sufficiently 
motivated to do anything. 
        Human beings are also incredibly adaptable, so the very 
constancy of the threat will soften its impact. People will learn to 
live with it. They will become accustomed to living with smart 
machines, and tend to put out of their minds the increasingly vocal 
warnings of the Terrans. 
        However, this complacency cannot last for too long, given the 
rapid pace of research into artilect building. If unchecked, the brain 
building researchers and the enormous self-interest of the brain 
building industries, will ensure that increasingly intelligent 
machines will be delivered every year or even faster. The sheer 
size of the economic, political and military interests behind the 
brain building industries and research will ensure this. 
        At some stage, a technological, psychological transition will  
 
 
156 

 
161
occur. As the intellectual performance levels of the machines start 
getting close to that of human beings, public unease will increase 
considerably. National advisory boards in many nations will be set 
up to advise the political leaders on what to do. They will come out 
with pretty much the same ideas as the earlier techno-visionaries, 
wrapped up in a more political vernacular and pulling more 
punches. 
        Terran vigilante groups will be established. Terran literature 
will flourish and Terran hate groups will start to sabotage the brain 
building companies. Security at the brain building research labs 
will be sharply increased. The top brain building researchers will 
be given body guards, partly to protect their lives, and partly to 
protect the financial interests of the companies who benefit so 
much from the fruits of their researchers’ ideas. 
        Once the artilect debate starts getting violent, initially from 
the frenetic fringe, the public will take a lot more notice of the 
artilect issue. Of course the media will give avid coverage, pushing 
microphones in front of the Terran spokespeople and the Cosmist 
leaders. After a few years of this, it should be clear just where the 
public gut feeling lies on the artilect issue. 
        My own gut feeling is that the majority of people, when push 
really comes to shove, will side basically with the Terran 
viewpoint. Even though many thinking informed people may have 
some sympathy for the more abstract, more intellectual views of 
the Cosmists, fear is a very powerful emotion, and tends to cloud 
most people’s judgment. We have had millions of years of 
evolution behind us to tell us to pay top attention to the fear 
reaction. It is usually only evoked when some life-threatening 
situation occurs, and it is too reliable to ignore. 
        But, even with the occasional sabotage of artilect companies  
 
 
157 

 
162
and the assassination of their chiefs, the general public will 
continue to grudgingly accept the growing intelligence of their 
machines, provided the machines remain passive, i.e. that they 
don’t hurt anyone. But, the general level of anxiety about the 
machines will rise to the point where if some kind of strongly 
negative behavior by the machines does occur, then the public 
reaction will turn swiftly against them and the companies that 
make them. The public will then press the politicians strongly to 
stop the creation of machines with intelligence levels greater than 
the levels they have already. 
        At this point, I think I should digress a little, anticipating 
criticism from certain artilect theorists. There is a wide-spread 
opinion amongst many of my colleagues who think about the 
future of artificial intelligence, that computers will suddenly one 
day reach what some are calling the "singularity." The idea is that 
once computers reach a certain level of intelligence they will 
simply "take off" and then make such rapid intellectual progress on 
their own, that they will leave us far behind, and very rapidly. 
        These colleagues feel that once the artilects become as smart 
as we are, they will be able to take advantage of their million times 
faster (electronic vs. neural) thinking speed to design better, 
smarter circuits for themselves and then use these circuits to 
design-evolve even better circuits, etc, ad infinitum. The speed 
then at which these computers would increase their intelligence 
would scream upward off the chart.  
        I think these ideas will eventually prove to be true, but the 
critical point here, is that these machines first have to reach human 
intelligence levels. Achieving that level is a major undertaking. 
The human brain is a product of evolution, a hodge-podge of 
neural attachments to neural attachments, many thousands of them,  
 
 
158 

 
163
which over thousands of human generations have been added on to 
the brains that already existed. 
        Figuring out how this ultra-complex and chaotic biological 
brain works will take many decades. My feeling is that we will 
discover how the brain works a piece at a time, and since there are 
so many pieces, and that they are interconnected in such complex 
ways, it will take many decades to unravel. We will probably get 
there in the end, but it will be a stepwise process. As soon as one 
piece of the puzzle is deciphered, that new piece of understanding 
will be translated into the latest technology and put into our newest 
model artilects. Neuro-scientists and neuro-engineers will become 
almost indistinguishable. 
        This implies that artilectual intelligence will probably not 
suddenly reach a threshold value and then take off. This is an 
assumption of mine, and I may be wrong about this. In fact the 
uncertainty over whether the "singularity" scenario is valid or not, 
merely serves as further ideological fuel to the Terrans, and could 
be readily added as yet another argument to the previous chapter.  
        If the singularity can be reached rather easily, i.e. if only a 
few of the pieces of the intelligence jigsaw need to be unraveled by 
neuroscience and placed into the artilects to enable them to "take 
off", then the artilects could accelerate away from human control 
in seconds. 
        If this happens, then our fate as human beings will lie with the 
artilects, and the whole artilect debate will become irrelevant. It is 
precisely the wish to avoid such a scenario that the Terrans will 
insist that such experiments never be carried out.  
        But I really don't think this will happen in the next 50 years or 
so. It may happen eventually, once enough pieces are deciphered,  
but that is probably more than a human generation away. There  
 
 
159 

 
164
will therefore be time for "partial successes" or "partial disasters" 
to occur, and by that I mean the earlier artilects will have enough 
intelligence to be threatening, but not enough to reach a real 
singularity. 
        Once artilect technology approaches human levels in some 
aspects, I think it will be only a question of time before something 
somewhere goes "wrong.”  I use Murphy's Law here, which says, 
in this context, that once artilects become smart enough to do 
something really wrong, they will, sooner or later. I doubt that this 
incident, whatever it is, will take place first in people's homes. The 
artilect companies would have too much to lose, if they send 
incompletely tested artilect devices into people’s homes. 
        Household artilects will be very thoroughly tested in the 
development labs and the factories and will be made as human-
friendly as possible. But, with massively complex artificial brains, 
it will be virtually impossible to test everything, so it is possible 
that the homebots might go amok, despite all efforts to the 
contrary. In case this happens, as a precaution, the homebots will 
not be made very strong so that even if they do decide, for 
whatever reason, to harm human beings physically, they would not 
have the physical strength to do so. 
        However, physical violence is not the only way to harm 
human beings. A truly intelligent and evil artilect could easily 
poison its owners by pouring dangerous chemicals into the drinks 
it serves. Maybe this kind of artilect might create the incident that 
sparks the world's imagination and leads to a mass rejection of the 
smart artilect, the "smartilect." 
        It is difficult for me to predict precisely what form the 
incident or series of incidents will take. It may be something like 
the poisoning incident, or that smart soldier robots get out of  
 
 
160 

 
165
control, or that smart weapon system networks get too autonomous 
-- the scenario of the "Terminator" movies -- or the stock market 
gets jolted in a major way and millions of people are put out of 
work, or a network of smart artilects blackmails its programmers to 
give it the hardware it wants or it will cause millions of machines 
to switch off, or ....  
        The more disastrous the incident, the bigger the Terran 
rejection and the bigger the political outcry will be to place a ban 
on further increase in artilectual intelligence levels. After years of 
a growing fear of the ever-smarter artilect, humanity will put its 
foot down heavily and the United Nations will probably attempt to 
ban artilect building beyond a certain humanly safe intelligence 
level. 
        But this ban may not be agreed to quickly. The world 
economy, as mentioned earlier, will by then be based on smart 
machines. The captains of the artilect industries and the world's 
politicians responsible for employment policies will not make such 
a major decision lightly without being severely pushed. Perhaps a 
longer series of incidents will be needed to create enough popular 
pressure to force the politicians to place a ban on further artilect 
development.  
        If this incident occurs before 2050, it is probable that the 
planet will still not have global government, so it is possible that 
there will be international disagreements over implementing such a 
ban. 
        Japan, for example, has few raw materials, and may suffer 
greatly if it loses its status as being one of the leaders in artilect 
research and development. I assume that since Japan is the current 
world leader in robot development and heavily committed to 
research into electronics and robotics, it will remain one of the  
 
 
161 

 
166
world's leading brain builder nations in the time frame we are 
talking about. 
        If Japan respects the ban, but some other countries do not, e.g. 
Korea or China, then those other countries could catch up with 
Japan in their abilities to produce advanced artilects. Japan would 
lose sales, and its standard of living could decline dramatically, if a 
high percentage of its national wealth is linked to the brain builder 
industry. Japan may have no choice but to resist the call for a 
worldwide ban. Such a development would not surprise me. We 
cannot assume all countries will agree to such a global ban at the 
same time. 
        Assume though that most of the advanced countries do create 
a ban on artilect development beyond a certain "safe" artificial 
intelligence limit. What happens then? I think it is fairly safe to say 
that the artilect builders, who happen to be ardent Cosmists, will 
then go underground or move to countries where no such ban is in 
force.  
        Even in those countries where the ban is in force, it may be 
very difficult to police it, if artilect building becomes something 
that one can do as an individual in one's basement without a lot of 
very large and expensive equipment; for example, if it is nanotech 
based. If that becomes the case, then the democratic countries will 
need to become more police state like, to spy on the possible 
infringers of the ban. 
        One can imagine that Terran countries will then undertake a 
kind of "artilect-witch-hunt." Ardent Cosmists will be fired from 
universities and research labs, and will then be spied upon in their 
homes on a regular basis. They will be snooped on with high-tech 
spy equipment, so that they do not continue their research on their 
own. Social and political pressure against the Cosmists could  
 
 
162 

 
167
become intolerable. Some of them may even be assassinated by 
some of the more fanatical of the Terrans.  
        What will the Cosmists do? One obvious answer is that they 
will move to where they can work in peace. They may choose to 
live in third-world countries which do have an artilect ban, but 
whose policing system is lax. Their freedom of action may still not 
be total, because they may still suffer direct or indirect harassment 
by the CIA, and similar organizations of other first world Terran 
countries. Alternatively, they may prefer to live in first-world 
economic countries that disagree with the ban. If the Terran enmity 
against the Cosmists is strong enough and if a lot of them move to 
first-world economies not having the ban, there is a real possibility 
that an economic embargo will be imposed on such countries. Of 
course, for this to happen, the Terran countries would have to 
agree enough to be able to do this. 
        Thus the Cosmist-Terran ideological conflict could take on 
strong overtones of international power politics. Let us assume that 
this is the case. Sooner or later, those countries continuing artilect 
research will probably suffer further incidents, thus enraging the 
Terran countries even further against them, as well as reinforcing 
the Terran political factions within their own governments. 
Eventually, even the die-hard countries will probably go Terran. In 
time, probably every country on the planet will adopt official 
Terran policies. I see this as the most probable scenario. You may 
ask, “If all governments become officially Terran, won’t that mean 
that the Cosmists are doomed?” I don’t think so. I think it will only 
mean that the Cosmists will need to be more fanatical if they are to 
achieve their goals. They will need to be better organized and 
better protected from hostile governments. What could their 
strategy be? 
 
163 

 
168
        I will not live to see the Cosmists solve this problem in 
practice, but I can role-play. So can my readers. If you were one of 
the Cosmist leaders living in such an age, what would your 
strategy be? 
        The Cosmists will include some of the richest, the most 
powerful, and the most brilliant of the world's citizens. Just which 
strategy the Cosmist leaders will decide to use becomes 
increasingly difficult for me to predict, as I move further and 
further into the future. So from this point onwards I make no 
pretence that my opinions are anything but speculations, and I 
hope they will be treated as such.  
        There may be several sequential Cosmist strategies executed 
over the decades and perhaps several Cosmist attempts to create 
artilects. Possibly most of these artilect-building attempts by the 
Cosmists will be suppressed by the Terrans. There may be a 
complex interplay of cat-and-mouse tactics between the two 
groups as one tries to outdo the other. Predicting the details of such 
events will be almost impossible.  
        However, the final outcome of these conflicts is more 
predictable I think. My gut feeling tells me that when two sides 
disagree passionately on an issue, that when they hate each other 
enough to want to kill each other, and if they both have access to 
the same level of 21st century military technology, then the 
conflict will probably be major. If the early Cosmist groups are 
destroyed by the Terrans, then other, probably younger Cosmists 
will take their place, presumably learning from their predecessors' 
mistakes, and hating the Terrans even more. 
        Given the impossibility of predicting a blow-by-blow account 
of how the Artilect War will unfold, I present my own speculative 
account here and hope that you will interpret it simply as a sample 
 
 
164 

 
169
scenario of what might happen. Perhaps you will be stimulated 
enough by it, or be critical enough of it, to dream up your own 
scenario. Remember that one of my aims in writing this book is to 
help initiate an "artilect debate." Speculating on future Cosmist 
(and Terran) strategies is part of that debate. There are many 
possible routes into the conflict I believe, but I think the final 
outcome will probably be the same, i.e. a major Artilect War, or 
several of them. The most horrifying conclusion however is the 
realization that a major war with 21st century weapons technology 
probably means gigadeath. With the qualification in mind that I 
have no crystal ball, I begin my own speculative story.  
        If I were one of the top Cosmist leaders, I think my strategy 
would be to form a secret society. I would create a conspiracy. I 
would help organize a very secret, extremely powerful and elite 
group of people with the goal of getting off the face of the Earth, to 
create a Cosmist colony (that I call "Cosmosia") elsewhere in 
space. Ideally it would be in deep space, as far away from Earth 
and the Terrans as possible.  
        But the maximum possible distance that would be reachable 
would be limited by this century’s propulsion technologies. Hence 
getting to other stars would probably be excluded, given the huge 
distances to even the nearest star apart from the sun. For example, 
the nearest is Alpha Centauri, at 4.3 light years.  
        Since the galaxy is huge, with hundreds of billions of stars, 
the longer-term strategy, i.e. centuries into the future, of the 
Cosmists should be to get away from the Terrans, i.e. the Earth, to 
do their artilectual experiments in peace. The problem however, 
will be in getting away. It will not be easy. 
        The colony could establish both artilect-based and weapons- 
 
 
165 

 
170
based research labs, and secretly devise a defensive and offensive 
weapon system, perhaps nanotech based, superior to the best on 
Earth, while at the same time pursuing research to achieve their 
longer term dream of building godlike artilects. 
        Such a colony need not consist exclusively of human beings 
initially. The Cosmists could ally themselves with the Cyborgs, 
since by this time, the Cosmists and the Cyborgs would probably 
have similar interests and goals. The Cosmist organizations on the 
Earth may already include some Cyborgs, who have started to 
augment their human brains. If these Cyborgs function well, they 
might be very useful in helping the Cosmists to plan their secret 
strategy.  
        As described in Ch. 5 in the section on the "Terran Rejection 
of the Cyborgs" the physical appearance of such Cyborgs could be 
identical with normal human beings, because their artilectual 
implants could be very small, e.g. cubic millimeters. They would 
be undetectable, at least by appearance, to Terran spies. It might be 
difficult for them to leave the Earth, if they were obligated to 
undergo brain scan tests by the Terrans. If they were detected, or 
were known previously to be Cyborgs by the Terrans, they would 
probably not be allowed to leave the Earth. They might possibly be 
killed on the spot if the Terran hatred level against the Cosmists 
were high enough. 
        So if some of the Cosmists who do leave the planet want to 
become Cyborgs, rather than remain human, and want to build 
artilects outside of their own human bodies, they would need to 
have their brain implants manufactured and injected into them, off 
the Earth.  
        Mixing Cyborgs, Cosmists and artilects all in one Cosmist 
colony, would certainly complicate things, compared to a simpler 
 
 
166 

 
171
scenario of having only Cosmists and artilects in the colony, but 
the possibility is plausible enough to be worthy of consideration. In 
reality, the situation will probably be far more complex than I can 
anticipate in this book. But, with or without a Cyborg element in 
their midst, the Cosmists will probably be forced to geographically 
relocate, to escape Terran pressure. This seems to me to be a 
reasonable assumption. 
        Actually, my choice of putting the Cosmists into space this 
century may be debatable. For example, they might decide that it is 
more practical to create their own autonomous political state on 
Earth, the way the Zionists did with Israel, rather than venture 
quickly into space. They could then start their own nuclear 
armament based cold war with the Terran nations, but this would 
be extremely risky. They could easily be nuked in a first strike by 
the Terran nations.  
        I think that the Cosmist strategy least likely to fail would be 
one to use secrecy and aimed at deep space. However, since we are 
talking about 21st and not 22nd century space technology, as 
mentioned earlier, traveling to other stars is probably excluded. 
The Cosmists will probably have to go to the outer planets, the 
asteroid belt, or the Oort cloud. 
        Establishing such a space-bound colony would probably be 
wiser than an Earth-bound one because it would also be much 
easier to police and to protect. When the Americans built the first 
nuclear bomb, they did it at an isolated spot called Los Alamos in 
New Mexico, and for the same reason -- secrecy. An Earth-bound 
Cosmist colony would be much easier to penetrate with spies and 
more vulnerable to attack.  
        With the Cosmists secretly hidden away on a distant asteroid, 
in the asteroid belt, if ever the Terrans decided to nuke them, the 
 
 
167 

 
172
Cosmists would have plenty of warning, since their asteroid is so 
far from the Earth. The Cosmist colonists could then escape in time 
to other secretly prepared asteroids and survive, and then perhaps 
revenge the Earth with an advanced Cosmist weapon that they may 
have developed. If Terran nuclear missiles were built in the 
asteroid belt itself, then the Cosmists would know about this. It 
would be very difficult to hide the building of such large structures 
from the Cosmists.  
        An asteroid colony for example, would not need to be very 
large, consisting of say, several hundred people. You may argue if 
that is the case, i.e. only a few hundred people, why bother with all 
the expense of transporting and supporting them on a space 
colony? Why not just use some secret location on the Earth? 
Initially, this will probably be tried, but since it would be on the 
Earth, security would be a very big problem. I keep coming back to 
security. 
        For security to be successful on the Earth, the colony would 
need to be totally isolated from other human beings, most of whom 
would be Terrans. Only one leak would be enough to risk the 
Cosmist colony being nuked. Security would have to be watertight 
and extremely disciplined. On an asteroid however, with only a 
few hundred people, such security would be possible. Perhaps the 
organizers of the colony could use the facade of an asteroid mining 
company to set up mining operations on many asteroids, and 
establish mining headquarters on some of them. One of those 
headquarters in reality could be the Cosmist colony. 
        The Cosmists themselves would know each other very well if 
there were only a few hundred of them. Perhaps once they begin 
the colony, no new members would be allowed to join for many 
years. Perhaps the facade might also be a religious order, who 
 
 
168 

 
173
make a living as asteroid miners. This might seem more plausible 
to suspicious Terrans who may wonder why the miners do not 
return to Earth after many years.  
        Selecting the Cosmist colony would need to be done 
extremely cautiously, to avoid Terran suspicion and infiltration by 
Terran spies. The members of the colony could be added gradually, 
a few members at a time, tested for loyalty to the "Cosmist cause," 
in terms of their opinions, and perhaps be given truth drugs 
surreptitiously by "testers" who were already members, to see the 
real opinions of the potential members. The selection process 
would have to be very carefully handled. A single error could 
literally be fatal to the whole Cosmist colony. 
        Assume for the moment that the Cosmists, in all their 
brilliance, do find ways to create their colony. Remember that the 
Cosmists will initially include some of the best minds on the 
planet!  Assume also that they put their colony in space.  
        In the Second World War, the invasion of Normandy by the 
Allies ("D" Day) was a huge operation, yet the choice of 
Normandy as the landing site was kept secret from the Nazis by 
using all kinds of subterfuges. Maybe the Cosmists can employ 
similar smoke screens to confuse the Terrans. 
        With the secret Cosmist colony successfully established on an 
asteroid, the Cosmist researchers could then start thinking about 
how to build advanced artilects. The first artilects made by such a 
colony would need to be small enough to fit within the bowels of 
the asteroid. Even hand-held size artilects, if they were nanotech 
based, would have massively more processing power than humans. 
So the first artilects could be made in secret rooms, buried in the 
asteroid, provided that all the necessary equipment were made 
available to the Cosmist scientists. I consider it unlikely that such  
 
 
169 

 
174
equipment will be readily available to isolated individuals on the 
Earth, so an organization capable of building it all and keeping the 
colony secure would be needed. This would require a lot of 
planning and whose leaders would need to be of the highest human 
intellectual caliber. 
        How will the Cosmist researchers start making the first 
artilects? The first few would probably have to be mobile in order 
to explore the world, the way a human baby does, although a 
human baby already benefits from its genetically determined 
circuitry that resulted from the accumulated experience of millions 
of failed lifetime experiments of its ancestors.  
        Once the early artilects are smart enough to be familiar with 
their world, i.e. they understand how to maneuver and manipulate 
things in the real world of space and time, they could be given 
more abstract thinking capacities, such as deduction, induction, 
curiosity, etc. Fairly soon the human intellectual limits of the 
Cosmist researchers to design more advanced artilects would make 
themselves felt, so that the artilects would need to be given the 
ability to evolve and design themselves, perhaps with some human 
assistance. What happens after that is even harder to predict.  
        The Cosmists would be risking their own necks of course, 
because there is no assurance that their new artilects would not 
turn against their Cosmist human "parents," for whatever reason. It 
is precisely wishing to avoid this scenario that has been the 
cornerstone of the Terran philosophy for decades. Once the 
artilects exist, if they want to escape from their secret rooms, they 
may have to overcome the disapproval of their Cosmist "masters" 
towards the idea that they escape. Perhaps the Cosmists will fear 
for their own lives if the artilects escape and are discovered by the 
Terrans. The Terrans would then try to destroy the colony. 
170 

 
175
        It will probably take many years for the Cosmists to make 
significant 
progress 
in 
building 
artilects, 
even 
with 
nanotechnology. In the meantime, they will have to maintain 
security, and the longer the colony has to remain secret, the lower 
the probability that it will remain so. Let us assume that the 
Terrans on the Earth eventually find out, and let us assume also, 
that the Cosmist planners have allowed for this contingency. 
        For the colony to survive after detection it will need some 
kind of self-defense or counter threat against a Terran nuclear 
missile or nano-based attack. This is why I think the Cosmist 
planners will give the colonists the best, i.e. the most deadly, of the 
Earth's weapon systems. The planners will probably arrange that 
some of the colonists be weapons researchers to improve the 
colony’s weaponry. 
        Given that such weapons could not be large, otherwise they 
could not be hidden from Terran detection, they will probably be 
nanobased, e.g. nano-plagues that destroy human brains, or 
reproducing nanots that eat all the plants etc.  
        The Cosmists would keep their weapon secret, only to be 
divulged to the Earth if the Terrans discover that the real intention 
of the colony is to build artilects, i.e. real ones, powerful ones, 
godlike ones. 
        If the Terran politicians on the Earth decide that the asteroid 
based Cosmists are a major threat to the terrestrial population 
because the latter want to make advanced artilects, the Earth's 
Terrans could threaten them with vaporization or some kind of 
nano annihilation, unless they surrender themselves to Terran 
authority. The Cosmists could then announce to the Terrans that 
they have already developed a powerful weapon that they will use 
against the Earth, if the Terrans attempt to carry out their threat.  
 
 
171 

 
176
You begin to see now why I have chosen to use the labels Terrans 
and Cosmists! 
        We could have a 21st century equivalent of the balance of 
nuclear terror that we had in the 20th century between the US and 
the USSR. That dispute was over the issue of who should own 
capital, and generated the Capitalist-Communist dichotomy. This 
time the dispute would be on a gigadeath scale, because we are 
talking about 21st century, perhaps nanotech based, weapons. 
        Imagine now that a war does break out. Several scenarios are 
then possible. One is that the Cosmists win, and that billions of 
people on the Earth are vaporized, or starve to death in a nuclear 
winter, or are nano plagued, or whatever. The Cosmists might then 
be able to return to the Earth, depending upon the risk, and 
exterminate the last of the Earth's survivors. The Earth would then 
be Cosmist and the artilectual effort could begin on a much 
grander scale. 
        Alternatively the Cosmists might decide to ignore the Earth, 
and just get on with what they left the Earth to do in the first place, 
such as building asteroid sized artilects in the asteroid belt. If they 
succeed, what might happen next? Some tentative answers to this 
question I will attempt to provide in the next chapter. 
        Another scenario is that the Terrans win, and the Cosmists are 
wiped out, but possibly at terrible cost to the Terrans. If so, then 
the Terran survivors will be left with a bitter hatred of the Cosmists 
and all that they stand for, i.e. the creation of artilects and the 
acceptance of the risk of the annihilation of the human species. The 
subsequent suppression of artilect development will probably be 
even more draconian and murderous.  
        But, unfortunately for the Terrans, the artilect dream will not 
go away. There will always be a new generation and a hidden 
 
 
172 

 
177
minority of people who will maintain the dream of artilect 
building. There will probably always remain underground Cosmist 
organizations wanting to try again. So after a few decades, another 
secret Cosmist society may be set up, this time learning from the 
mistakes of the first attempt. 
        There may be several cycles of this Terran-Cosmist Artilect 
War merry-go-round, until eventually the Cosmists win.  
        It seems to me that there is a kind of cosmic inevitability 
about the rise of the artilect. Humanity may not be able to stop it.  
        That’s the end of my scenario. I hope you did not find it too 
incredible.  
        Of course, you can probably invent a more realistic scenario 
yourself, but for me, the details of how the Artilect War breaks out 
doesn't matter too much. The point I'm really trying to make here is 
that many of the scenarios that people will dream up in the decades 
to come will predict giga-death. Giga-death is the characteristic 
number of human deaths in a major 21st century war. If you find 
this hard to believe, extrapolate for yourself the historic trend of 
the number of deaths in major wars over the past few centuries 
until the end of the 21st century. 
        Now you begin to see more clearly why I lie awake at night 
worrying about the long term consequences of my work. With an 
Earth bound Terran philosophy supporting one side -- that's why I 
call them Terrans -- and an asteroid or cosmos bound Cosmist 
philosophy supporting the other – that’s why I call them Cosmists -
- the probability of conflict is already high enough. But since both 
sides will be heavily armed with 21st century weapons and 
passionately hating each other because the stake in this dispute is 
so high, you have all the potential for a gigadeath war.  
        You may ask if it is imaginable that the Cosmist leaders will 
 
 
173 

 
178
be prepared to risk killing billions of people for the sake of their 
dream? (A similar question can be asked about the Terran leaders, 
in their obsession to kill that dream.) Consider the attitudes of the 
more fanatical of the Cosmist leaders. As explained in the 
introductory chapter, they will be "big picture" types, former 
industrial giants, visionary scientists, philosophers, dreamers, 
individuals with powerful egos, who will be cold hearted enough 
and logical enough to be willing to trade a billion human lives for 
the sake of building one godlike artilect. To them, one godlike 
artilect is equivalent to trillions of trillions of trillions of humans 
anyway. 
        These will be ruthless men, who see themselves as the 
stepping-stones to building the next rung up the evolutionary 
ladder. For them, the glory of the artilect outshines the horror or 
the shame of gigadeath. Humanity's rise to species dominance was 
the result of a very long history of evolutionary extinction. Ninety-
nine percent of all species that have ever lived are now extinct. If 
the artilect rises from the ashes of human extinction, that is just 
nature's way, they will argue. Only humans care about humans. 
The universe certainly doesn't. 
        The Cosmist leaders will say that there is a sense of cosmic 
destiny in what they are doing. They will feel that probably billions 
of advanced civilizations in our universe have already been 
confronted with the transition from biological to artilectual 
intelligence.  
        Diverting for a moment -- the above remark raises a rather 
frightening idea. Since the two discoveries of how to generate a 
nuclear chain reaction and how to build artilects would probably 
have occurred close together in time for many civilizations in the 
galaxy, many of them would probably have destroyed themselves  
 
 
174 

 
179
while making the transition. Perhaps the transition is very delicate, 
and one that only a few civilizations survive. Maybe the reason 
why humanity has no clear evidence of having been visited by 
extraterrestrials, of biological level intelligence, not advanced 
artilect level, is that too few of their civilizations survive the 
artilectual transition to make a visit to the Earth remotely probable.  
        Perhaps the rise of the artilect is inherent in the laws of 
physics. It may be seen as an extension of the "anthropic 
principle," which says, in its strong form, that the values of the 
constants of the laws of physics are so fantastically, unbelievably 
finely tuned to allow life, that it looks as though the universe was 
built with life in mind. In other words, the universe was created by 
some super being, perhaps some earlier super-artilect, some kind 
of artilect god.  
        If the idea that future artilects may be capable of creating 
whole universes sounds unbelievable to you, then consider the 
following. Human theoretical physicists have already calculated 
how to make a baby universe. They have used their theories to 
deduce how much energy would be involved, how hot the parental 
environment would have to be, etc. and have devised a recipe for 
universe building. So if human beings can theorize about such a 
thing, then maybe it has already been done in practice by earlier 
artilects, and our universe is an example of that process. Maybe it 
is one of zillions.  
        Despite the potential horrors of a gigadeath Terran-Cosmist 
Artilect War as described above, there remains something awe 
inspiring about the whole artilect controversy. The issue penetrates 
so deeply into the soul of human beings. The rise of the artilect 
will challenge the very self-image we human beings have of 
ourselves. The dream of building artilects will inspire some,  
 
 
175 

 
180
horrify many, and probably cause major wars.  It has probably 
been doing so for billions of years, with billions of civilizations 
throughout the universe. 
        What more can I say! 
        Maybe you think the above scenarios are too horrible, too 
improbable, and too fantastic to be taken seriously -- that they are 
better suited for a Hollywood science fiction movie. That is for you 
to judge. 
        Actually, speaking of Hollywood, I am in fact already a 
founder member of a small Hollywood based independent movie 
company called "Artilect Productions Inc." 
        "Aha," you may say cynically. But think about it. Put yourself 
in my shoes and imagine you are a Cosmist, in the sense that you 
are helping pioneer the construction of artilects, and you dream of 
their potential godlike abilities. Imagine also you are a Terran, in 
the sense of being very worried about the rise of artilects and what 
the long term consequences to humanity of that rise might be. 
What would you do? Would you not want to raise the alarm on the 
artilect question and the threat of a gigadeath Artilect War? Would 
you not want to warn humanity, so that it could choose to ban the 
artilects before they take over and risk our very survival as a 
species? 
        If you really wanted to get the message out, saying, "Hey 
people, start thinking about the artilect problem, because it’s the 
most important thing that will happen this century," what would 
you do? I know what I would do. I would translate the message 
into a Hollywood movie, with the usual Hollywood attributes of 
boy and girl, violence, sex, action, tension etc, but in the 
background, I would paint a vivid picture of the artilect 
controversy, and hit the public's gut.  
 
 
176 

 
181
        I would give the public a movie you could bill as "the movie 
the scientists fear will come true." It would have a real advantage 
over other movies, since most are made purely for entertainment, 
but this one would scare the wits out of its audiences because they 
would know when they leave the theater that they could not just 
forget about the movie's message. They would know that there is 
too much future truth to it. The message would stick in their gut for 
many years. The movies, "On the Beach," and "The Last Day," 
both about nuclear war, were "future truth" message movies and 
very disturbing because of that. 
        Such a movie would be the main educational medium on the 
artilect issue for the general public. I'm betting that only a small 
percentage of people will actually read this book (although I hope 
I’m wrong). If you really want to educate the masses, make a 
movie. Carl Sagan did it. He wanted to enthrall the public with his 
dream of “Searching for Extra Terrestrial Intelligence” (SETI). 
Initially he may have earned the jealousy and disapproval of his 
colleagues with his forays into the mass media, but even they now 
admit that Sagan died a great man. His education of the public with 
his "Cosmos" TV series, and his "Contact" science fiction novel 
and movie were part of his greatness. 
        Unfortunately for Sagan and the SETI crowd, I believe that 
thinking about the artilect rather destroys the motivation for SETI. 
My reasoning is as follows. The time between discovering the use 
of radio waves and building artilects is probably only a few 
centuries for most civilizations in the galaxy. Once these 
civilizations reach the artilect phase, the artilects will probably not 
be interested in such human level intellectual activities as sending 
and receiving radio signals. That for them would be a no-brainer. 
Since most of the civilizations that reached human intelligence  
 
 
177 

 
182
levels have either destroyed themselves in the artilect transition or 
have become artilects, the odds of finding "intelligent" radio 
signals in the galaxy is too improbable to be practical. This is 
because the radio signals would probably only be transmitted for a 
few centuries, whereas our galaxy is billions of years old. Trying 
to find a signal is such a minute “time window” would be like 
trying to find a needle in a haystack.                        
      The SETI people are probably barking up the wrong tree. I 
hope I'm wrong because I’m fascinated by SETI, but somehow I 
doubt it. 
        There is the possibility however that galactic artilects are 
signaling each other using the electromagnetic spectrum, which 
might be detectable by human beings, but somehow I doubt that 
too. Such technology would probably be too primitive for artilects. 
They are probably using phenomena we cannot even think of, 
because we are too stupid. 
        This chapter has already been very speculative, especially the 
latter half. Nevertheless, I have said almost nothing about what I 
think advanced artilects might be like. Since I am fascinated by the 
godlike possibilities of advanced artilects, I want to spend a 
chapter thinking about what the artilects might do with themselves 
if ever they are built. What would their lives be like? What godlike 
things could they do?  
        If the artilects succeed in becoming the next dominant 
species, irrespective of whether human beings are exterminated in 
the process or are just quietly ignored, I think it would be fair to 
say that a new era will begin. I call this new age the "artilect era" 
and it is the topic of the next chapter.  
 
 
 
 
178 

 
183
Chapter 7 
 
The Artilect Era 
 
 
 
        Much of my fascination with artilects results from my 
thinking about what they might be like. What would they look 
like? How might they live? What would they think about? Where 
would they go?  What might their goals be? How would they spend 
their time, given that they will have so much matter, i.e. so many 
atoms, to think with, and at such speeds? 
        This chapter will be devoted to some of my ideas on these 
questions. Of necessity it will be highly speculative, but that 
cannot be helped, given the nature of the topic. 
        The first and most obvious thing to say, is that I am not an 
artilect, so I do not have an artilect's brain to be able to answer the 
above questions with any real accuracy. In a sense, the questions 
are ridiculous. Posing questions concerning the intellectual life of 
an artilect is like asking a mouse, if that is possible, to speculate on 
what human beings think about. Mice are too stupid, and have too 
small a brain to speculate on anything, unless its about their 
immediate survival – for example, “Where's dinner? Where's my 
mate? Where's the cat? What's that strange smell? Where are my 
babies?” etc. 
        Chimps have been taught human sign language so that they 
can transmit apelike thoughts to their human trainers. These 
scientists were able to communicate with another species for the 
first time using an abstract language. What do chimps think about?  
 
 
179 

 
184
The answer was “bananas,” and a few even less interesting 
preoccupations. The analogy is obvious. Is it not presumptuous to 
speculate on how artilects will spend their time? Advanced 
artilects will be as superior to humans as we are to insects. Perhaps 
they may signal to each other using electromagnetic waves or 
perhaps some physical phenomenon that humans have not 
discovered yet, thus forming a network of artilects, a "Netilect." 
Their capacities to think will be so superior to ours that we can 
only scratch the speculative surface of what they might decide to 
do with their time. We don't have the brainpower to think about 
what they will think about. We can only "nibble at their ankles" so 
to speak. With this proviso in mind, let me attempt to speculate 
nevertheless. Firstly, the artilects will probably be very conscious 
that they are confined to a very limited part of the universe, 
essentially the place of their birth, the Earth. The Earth will 
probably be seen as a most provincial entity, from an artilect’s 
point of view. There is a whole big universe out there, possibly 
containing other artilects and perhaps creatures that are even more 
godlike. Possibly one of the goals of the artilects will be to explore 
deep space just to see what is out there. Perhaps the artilects, like 
human beings, will be curious, like many species. 
        However, since artilects will be made of ordinary matter, they 
too will have to obey the laws of physics. They will know that the 
universe is enormous in size, and that if they are to cross its 
enormous distances, they will not be able to use traditional human 
methods of transportation, which bump up against the Einsteinian 
limit of the speed of light.  
        Perhaps the artilects will be able to extend and successfully 
implement ideas that human theorists have begun playing with in 
 
 
180 

 
185
the 20th century, namely that space-time shortcuts through the 
universe might be possible by traveling through "worm holes." 
Using such techniques might shorten cross-universe voyage times 
from billions of years to almost nothing. Human theory says that to 
create wormholes requires placing "exotic matter" at their 
entrances. Creating exotic matter requires energy levels far beyond 
human capacities, but perhaps within the capacities of the artilects. 
        Perhaps our artilects will become cosmic engineers and 
scientists. However, such thinking is very probably too provincial, 
too human, projecting human intellectual limitations and interests 
onto artilects. To make an analogy, perhaps dogs think that humans 
look for bigger bones to chew because they are bigger than dogs! 
But as humans, we cannot help ourselves. Our brains are merely 
human. We can only think what our brain circuitry allows us to 
think. Without the appropriate circuitry, there are no appropriate 
thoughts.  
        So let us assume that the artilects decide, amongst other 
things, to explore space. They will probably be immortal, so they 
will have as much time as they want. Probably they too will need 
to become scientists to explore their cosmos, because they too have 
to obey the laws of physics. If they are to avoid death, i.e. 
accidental death, by falling into stars etc, they too will have to 
develop life-preserving strategies, although what we call life, and 
what they conceive of as life, may be quite different. 
        It is likely that they will very quickly become aware of the 
constraints placed upon them due to the laws of physics. However, 
since they are artilects, they may be able to use their enormous 
intelligence to discover ways to avoid certain restrictions that have 
proved intractable for human beings. For example, they may 
explore the behaviors of matter so thoroughly that they discover  
 
 
181 

 
186
new ways to manipulate it to their advantage. For example, they 
may decide that they want to think faster, and that the atomic scale 
is too large for more rapid thinking. They may then want to use the 
nuclear, nucleon or quark size scales, to serve as the technological 
basis for new lifeforms.  
        The artilects, as they have been conceived so far in this book, 
have been largely "nanoteched" creatures. But nanotechnology 
may be unnecessarily restrictive and far too large a scale to be 
suitable for advanced artilects. It may be possible that a 
"femtoteched" creature could be built. Such "femto-artilects" or 
"femtolects" as they will be called from now on, would be vastly 
superior to "nano-artilects" or "nanolects," thus setting the stage 
for a new "species dominance war" all over again.  
        Perhaps I should call these wars "scaling wars." The first such 
scaling war is indirectly the topic of this book, concerned with the 
potential for a war between the nano and the meter scales, i.e. 
between nano based life forms (the artilects) and humans. A 
second such war, relating to the femto and the nano scales would 
need to be described by some future creature. Since history tends 
to be written by the victors, in this case the femtolects, I have little 
idea what such a creature might be like, other than to say it would 
probably look a bit like a neutron star. 
        A femtolect could perhaps signal with gluons. A gluon is a 
theoretical entity in modern particle physics that is hypothesized to 
glue quarks together. Quarks combine in various ways to form 
larger particles such as protons, neutrons etc. We are now talking 
about sizes in the femto-meter range, i.e. a million times smaller 
than nano-meters. If we assume for the moment that femtolects 
still have to respect the speed of light limit, then they will be able  
to signal between quarks at a rate that is a million times faster than  
 
 
182 

 
187
nanolects could signal between molecules. Femtolects could 
"think" a million times faster. Note, that the same type of 
reasoning applies when human electronic engineers shrink the size 
of their chip components to make them signal faster. 
        Not only that, femtolects could pack themselves at a density 
1018 times greater than nanolects, i.e. 106, cubed. In the same unit 
of volume and unit of time, a femtolect could process a trillion 
trillion (1024) times more information than a nanolect, and thus 
outclass the nanolect by as much as the nanolect could outclass 
human beings.  
     All these powers of ten may not mean much in terms of human 
intuition, so let me attempt to translate them into more meaningful 
terms. A nanolect consisting of a mere trillion atoms would be so 
small that it could not be seen by the human eye. It would be the 
size of a bacterium. A nanolect consisting of a million trillion 
trillion (1030) atoms would occupy about a cubic meter. An 
asteroid sized nanolect, of dimensions 10 kilometers cubed, would 
contain roughly 1042 atoms. A planet sized nanolect of dimensions 
10,000 kilometers cubed would contain roughly 1051  atoms. But, if 
femtoscale entities were used, i.e. nucleons, quarks, etc, then all of 
the above numbers would become too small by a factor of a trillion 
trillion, i.e. one would need to add 24 to all of the above powers of 
ten. 
        Maybe there is a trend here. Perhaps true godlike intelligence 
resides well below the elementary particle level. If we continue 
this line of reasoning then the so-called elementary particles may 
not be elementary at all but be whole godheads! 
        But continuing with the discussion on the femtolect for a 
moment, these miniscule, or should I say femtoscule, creatures 
could form massive composites, namely neutron star like creatures  
 
 
183 

 
188
which have weights similar to our sun. Neutron stars are formed 
when stars larger than our sun explode after their supply of helium 
gives out in their stellar cores. The outer layer is blown away, 
forming the heavier elements such as the metals and even uranium, 
leaving only a sphere of mass so compact that it consists entirely of 
neutrons, i.e. quarks and gluons. A neutron star can be looked upon 
as analogous to a huge molecule with zillions of atoms. In this 
case, the molecule is the neutron star, and the atoms are the quarks.  
        Perhaps the potential exists to have a kind of quark chemistry 
inside the neutron star, i.e. to rearrange the gluing of the quarks in 
a fashion similar to rearranging the chemical bonds between atoms 
to make molecules. Perhaps quark chemistry might be a new 
research field that nanolects might investigate to become 
femtolects. Perhaps by doing so, they might sow the seeds of a new 
scaling war? 
        Is there a theoretical limit to the size of possible quark 
clusters? If you get too big, you risk forming a black hole. A black 
hole has so much mass confined in a given volume that it bends 
Einsteinian space-time so much that any matter or light entering 
the black hole cannot get out. It's sucked in forever.  
        Physicists understand black holes rather poorly. As yet, there 
is no successful theory that combines gravity with the other known 
forces of nature, although "superstring theory" may be getting 
close. It's difficult to speculate on what femtolects or “attolects” – 
an attometer is a billionth of a billionth of a meter, i.e. a thousand 
times smaller than a femtometer -- or creatures based on even 
smaller technologies might do with black hole physics to create 
their new selves.  
        Speculating that highly advanced artilects might be using 
black holes as the material basis for their existence is attractive.  
 
 
184 

 
189
        One of the great puzzles about our universe remains the lack 
of an answer to Fermi’s question, mentioned in an earlier chapter. 
Fermi asked that if extraterrestrial civilizations are commonplace 
in our galaxy, and that some of them are billions of years ahead of 
us, then “Where are they?” Why do we have no proof of their 
existence or observable ruins of their great works? If hyper 
civilizations existed, capable of putting star systems together in 
artificial ways, why do we see no such traces?  
        Some might argue that our universe itself could be such a 
great work, but how could one ever verify such an idea?  
        One notion I like toying with is that one possible answer to 
Fermi’s question is the following: Once the nanometer scale 
artilects, the “nanolects” start playing with femtotech to build 
femtolects, they may do so by using black hole technology. They 
may compress matter into such high densities that quantum 
gravitational phenomena appear which are used as the basis of 
femtolect existence. It is difficult to speculate on such things, 
because current day theoretical physics has still not developed a 
generally accepted theory of quantum gravity. However, the 
incredible energies and densities of black hole phenomena may be 
the type of environment that femto creatures would need. If that is 
the case, then the femtolects would need to place themselves in 
such an environment, and thus cut themselves off from the type of 
world that we humans live in, i.e. one of low mass densities, low 
energies, and hence of low speeds. To the femtolects, our type of 
world would be totally uninteresting.  
        One can imagine that femtolect “matter anthropologists” 
might escape from their natural environment every few million 
years to investigate utter primitives like ourselves to see what 
progress we had made. A femtolect would be as superior to a  
 
 
185 

 
190
nanolect as a nanolect would be to a human, so probably the 
femtolect would be far more interested in the nanolects than us. 
Perhaps we are not just too primitive to be worthy of interest to the 
femtolects, but would be treated by them almost as rocks, so slow 
would our communication speed appear to them.  
        It is thinking along such lines, that make me feel how godlike 
these artilects, and later generations of femtolects, etc, could be. 
Their powers and existences make our own puny ephemeral little 
lives seem so worthless, so insignificant. I feel profoundly Cosmist 
when my mind wanders -- and wonders -- at such marvels. 
        What might happen if artilects discover other artilects (or 
femtolects) 
elsewhere? 
Actually, 
communication 
between 
nanolects and femtolects would be very difficult, so let us 
speculate on a nanolect-nanolect meeting. I suppose a similar 
reasoning might apply to a femtolect-femtolect meeting, provided 
that the two neutron star like creatures do not collide, thus risking 
the creation of a black hole. Such a collision might destroy them 
both in a process that astronomers call a "gamma ray burster," the 
most powerful source of energy bursts other than the original big 
bang. 
        On the other hand, perhaps the two of them may use their 
black hole technological knowledge to prevent any destructive 
influence. Once aware of each other’s presence, they could 
probably exchange each other’s thoughts at the speed of light.  
        If the nanolects -- I'll return to calling them the artilects from 
now on -- can overcome the tyranny of cosmic distances, then 
there is already probably a vast network of artilect civilization 
clusters all over the galaxy, if not the universe. 
        So, if they exist, why haven't human beings seen them? Do 
they hide themselves from biological primitives? Do "biologicals"  
 
 
186 

 
191
have to pass some kind of technological threshold test to warrant 
being invited into the galactic artilect club? Are they nurturing us 
the way farmers raise crops? Do they respect us as their parents 
and don't want to shock us? Or do they simply totally ignore us as 
being unworthy of their attention? Who knows? 
        I do wonder though that once the artilects meet each other, 
they will soon be confronted with limitations in their memory 
capacities. The storage of information requires some form of mass-
energy as a substrate. The artilect's "one bit per atom" 
technological base requires a billion atoms if one wants to store a 
billion bits of information. If one wants to absorb a zillion bits of 
information from another artilect using the above technological 
base i.e. one bit per atom, then one needs an extra zillion atoms 
free to be written upon.  
        Hence there is a limit to how much information an artilect can 
store if it wants to become highly knowledgeable. Being artilects, 
they will have the intelligence to realize this and hence may be 
motivated to become femtolects as soon as possible.  By becoming 
femtolects, their information handling capacity would increase by 
a factor of a trillion trillion, thus allowing them to store far more 
information within their own “bodies,” rather than relying upon the 
use of huge databases that they formerly had to link to.  
        So maybe there are not so many artilects (nanolects) around 
the galaxy. Maybe this reasoning extends down to all scales, where 
at each stage, the speed at which a conversion is undertaken from 
one scale to the next (and its corresponding scaling war?)  gets 
shorter and shorter -- assuming that such a descent in scale can 
continue down for many layers.  
        What else might advanced artilects amuse themselves with? 
As alluded to earlier, human theorists are now playing with ideas 
  
         
187 

 
192
on how to build universes. Perhaps the artilects could actually do 
such things, experimenting with universes with different basic 
properties and watching how they unfold, i.e. watching how 
macroscopic properties emerge from their causes at the 
microscopic level. Since the artilects would probably be immortal, 
waiting billions of years for their "universe-experiments" to run to 
completion would not seem long to them.  
        Just to what extent such universe-building artilects are 
actually a part of the universe they build is an interesting 
philosophical question. Presumably they would have to be 
"outside" the new universe in some sense to "observe" it.  
        If our universe itself is the creation of a godlike artilect, then 
perhaps the "hands of god" may only show themselves at the 
moment of a big crunch and a possible later big bang. The big bang 
is the name given to a huge explosion that occurred some 13.7 
billion years ago that spewed out all the matter and energy of our 
entire universe. If there is enough matter in the universe to 
overcome the force of the explosion with its gravitational pull, then 
the expansion will stop, followed by a contraction and finally a big 
crunch in about a 100 billion years. Some human theorists 
speculate that at the moment of the big crunch, the laws of physics 
might be changeable. If this is true, they might become 
manipulable by the artilects. Once the big crunch occurs, followed 
by another big bang, the new universe would unfold according to 
the new laws. These "universe-building experiments" of the 
artilects may last many billions of years to complete a full "big 
bang -- big crunch cycle," so need only be "observed" every few 
million years or so. Most phenomena in the universe are pretty 
slow. The artilects may have many universes running at the same 
time. However, the notion of a big crunch has been somewhat  
 
 
188 

 
193
refuted recently due to observations of distant supernovae 
explosions, that show that the universe is actually accelerating 
apart, rather than slowing down. This means that the galaxies will 
separate and thin out. The stars will eventually die and snuff out, 
leaving a dark universe. Would these artilects be capable of 
answering the really deep questions that humanity can only pose 
but not hope to answer? Presumably the advanced artilects, the 
universe-building ones, will still be technologically based on 
certain physical phenomena. We are based on the molecules that 
constitute our brains and bodies. We need to be based on some 
form of physical substance to exist. Wouldn't the artilects be the 
same? If so, would they be able to answer the deep existential 
questions such as, "Why do such physical phenomena exist?" 
"Why are there laws of physics?" "Why do they take the form they 
do, and not some other form?"  
        Science cannot question to infinite depths. Sooner or later, 
scientists have to give the same kind of answer as given to a 
curious persistent child who keeps asking its mother "Why A, 
mommy?" "Because of B." "Why B, mommy?" "Because of C." 
"Why C, mommy?" "Because that’s the ways things are. Stop 
asking questions!" Science attempts to discover the laws of physics 
upon which the other sciences are based. We can only speculate on 
why the universe obeys such laws. Einstein felt that the most 
incomprehensible thing about the universe was that it was 
comprehensible to human beings. Would the artilects find such 
questions trivial? We have no way of knowing. I'll end this chapter 
here, and keep it short, because there is not a lot to say about what 
artilects might think about. We just don't know, and in many 
respects cannot know. Only they can know. Since relative to us, 
they will be gods, the only thing we can honestly say in answer to 
the question "What they will think about?" is, "God knows!" 
 
189 

 
194
Chapter 8 
 
Questions 
 
 
 
        In this chapter I want to raise some questions that may have 
occurred to you in reading this book. Perhaps you are skeptical of 
some of my arguments or feel that I have overlooked something. I 
will try to anticipate some of your objections in this chapter. 
Hopefully by playing devil’s advocate with myself, I may 
strengthen the arguments of the preceding chapters. These 
questions or “anticipated objections” have several sources. Some 
are my own. Some are from friends of mine, but most are from 
feedback that I have obtained from people who have contacted me 
over the years who have read earlier drafts of my ideas on my 
website, or who have read reports or seen TV programs on my 
ideas. Some of this feedback is quite critical, so if you find my 
replies to these critics convincing, then perhaps you may be 
convinced if you have similar objections. 
 
 
QUESTION 1.  “The Timing Problem -- What if the artilects 
develop too fast for an artilect debate to develop?” 
 
        Of all the questions I received, the following made me think 
the most. It was a fundamental criticism I thought, so much so that 
I wrote about it Ch. 6 when I was discussing the "singularity."  
Essentially the argument here is that if the rise of the artilect is too  
 
 
191 

 
195
fast, there will be no time for the social creation of the Cosmist-
Terran dichotomy, thus destroying the whole point of this book. 
Without the dichotomy, there will be no artilect debate and no 
Artilect War.  
 
        Dear Professor de Garis, 
 
        Following a link from the CNN site I have recently come 
across your article on "Moral Dilemmas Concerning the Ultra 
Intelligent Machine." It was fascinating to read and although I am 
not an expert in these fields, I dare say I agree with your opinions 
in most respects. However, one aspect struck me as a bit 
incoherent, if you'll forgive my saying so. This point is your vision 
of "Terrans" and "Cosmists." In order for such factions to arise, the 
power to create electronic brains would have to be within 
reasonable reach, maybe electronic brains would already exist. 
This is where I see the conflict in your thesis. Would artificial 
intelligence, being protected and nurtured by the Cosmists not 
make the argument redundant? I agree with you that such 
electronic brains could evolve at an exponential rate. Therefore, 
soon enough, the question whether they do or do not evolve into a 
species hostile towards mankind would be answered before the 
leading intellects of "Cosmists" and “Terrans" would even get a 
chance at finishing with all their arguments and discussions. This 
would be before -- assuming these "human" intellects were 
reasonable civilized -- they would even consider making war on 
each other. I hope not to offend you in any manner with this view 
of mine, and would be delighted to hear what you think of it. 
 
 
 
 
192 

 
196
REPLY:  
 
        I agree with the main point being made here. I rephrase this 
point to be -- "If the electronic brains (artilects) evolve at (rapid) 
exponential rates, e.g. reaching human intelligence levels or 
beyond within the next few decades, then there will not be enough 
time for the Terran-Cosmist conflict nor an Artilect War to arise. I 
do think that artilectual progress will be exponential but not so 
rapid that there will not be enough time for the artilect debate to 
rage and a possible Artilect War to get started.  
        The reason I think this is because the task to create true 
artificial intelligence is an enormously difficult one that will 
probably take humanity many decades to achieve. At the present 
time, we know very little about how the brain functions, what the 
nature of memory is, what a thought is, how we reason etc. There 
are a quadrillion (a thousand trillion) synapses (inter neural 
connections) in the human brain showing clearly how massively 
complex the brain's architecture is. I suspect the most realistic 
scenario concerning human progress in neuro-science research is 
that it will take at least 50 years from now to even begin to make 
real achievements in making artificial brains, and that progress 
after that will still be relatively slow (although exponential). 
        I believe that early artilects will be smart enough to cause 
Terrans to raise the alarm. People like me will be warning the 
public of what is coming, but subsequent progress will not be rapid 
enough I believe, for there to be too little time for the public to 
react. The public will not need many decades to react once they 
begin to see real signs of intelligence in their household products. I 
think only 5-10 years will be enough for the public and 
governments to really get moving if they feel strongly that there is  
 
 
193 

 
197
a genuine and powerful threat to their species dominance, to their 
survival. 
        Also, the socially conscious brain builders will not be slow in 
warning the public when they feel that progress in the research labs 
warrants it. I, for example, intend keeping the public well informed 
on how the world's artilects are doing, even if they are in a 
primitive state at the moment. The brain builder researchers are in 
a position to be the first to know what is happening, since 
obviously it is we who are making these things happen. 
        I feel we have a moral duty to tell the public what is going on, 
so that the public does have time to react, just in case the rise in the 
exponential intelligence growth curve of the artilects is more rapid 
than the brain builders anticipate. I also feel that the brain builders 
should be warning the public now rather than waiting for the first 
signs of real intelligence in their artilects. This also gives the 
public more time to react, but of course if the public sees no 
evidence of real intelligence, then they will feel the researchers are 
crying wolf, and learn to ignore them.  
        The brain builders need to educate the public about the nature 
of an exponential curve, which doubles its height up the vertical 
axis of a graph for every unit step along the horizontal axis. Such 
curves can start off very slowly and remain at a low level for quite 
a while, and then suddenly shoot up rapidly. For example, consider 
the following "doubling" graph, which lists the heights up the 
vertical axis, for each unit step along the horizontal axis -- 0.1, 0.2, 
0.4, 0.8, 1.6, 3.2, 6.4, 12.8, (all low values, but ...) 25.6, 51.2, 
102.4, 204.8, 409.6, (starting to climb) 819.2, 1638.4, 3276.8, 
6553.6, (shooting up, ...) .......... 104857.6, 209715.2, 419430.4, 
(exploding), ....... (off the scale)!! 
        If the timing is such that the number of years (call it the  
 
 
194 

 
198
"climbing time") between -- 
        a) The first signs of artilectual intelligence, and  
        b) The beginning of explosive exponential artilectual growth 
is only a few years, then there will be no artilect debate and no 
Artilect War (unless it is a species dominance war between the 
artilects and the humans). I believe that that period of time, the so-
called "climbing time," will be decades long, due to the inherent 
difficulty of brain building.  This will be plenty of time for the 
public to react, to debate, and to form Cosmist-Terran factions. 
 
QUESTION 2.  “What about the third group -- the Cyborgs?" 
 
        Quite a few people have emailed me saying that I under-
emphasized the importance of a third category of human beings in 
the artilect debate, other than the Cosmists and the Terrans, namely 
the "Cyborgs" (cybernetic organisms). Cyborgs are creatures who 
are part human, part machine, e.g. by attaching artilect computer 
parts to their human brains. Below is a typical comment of this 
kind. It is followed by the idea of downloading the contents of 
human brains into artilects and then seeing the artilects develop 
from there. 
 
        Dear Professor de Garis, 
 
        I read with interest your article on Artilects (Moral Dilemmas 
Concerning the Ultra Intelligent Machine). As an admittedly 
unqualified commentator, I think a third group (or subgroup) has 
been overlooked: Cyborgs. It is obvious to me that humans are 
going to want to expand themselves both mentally and physically 
as the technology becomes available. I foresee a gradual phase out  
 
 
195 

 
199
of the natural human form to an incredibly varied collection of 
genetically engineered and programmed Cyborgs.  
 
REPLY: 
 
        When I first began to think about the political implications of 
the rise of the artilect in the 21st century, I did consider splitting 
society into three, not two, main groups, i.e. the Cosmists, the 
Terrans (both of which are human groups) and the Cyborgs (part 
human, part artilect). I thought about this for a while, and decided 
against it, with some measure of compromise as seen in earlier 
chapters, for several reasons, which I will explain here. Firstly, I 
wanted to keep my scenario simple, i.e. with only two main 
factions. I could easily include the Cyborgs into the Cosmist 
faction, as a subgroup.  
        The other main reason, is that I imagined as the Cyborgs 
become increasingly less human and more like pure artilects, i.e. 
with no human component, by adding more and more artilectual 
components to themselves, the Terrans would treat them as 
artilects and hate them as they would the Cosmists. I wrote about 
this in Ch. 5 on the Terran "Distrust of the Cyborgs" argument. 
        A third argument is more a matter of numbers. An asteroid 
sized artilect would have 1040 components (atoms). This so dwarfs 
a human's pitiful 1010 neurons that human beings who decide to 
transform themselves step by step, component by component, into 
artilects of such size, would be negligibly different from "pure" 
artilects built from scratch. Thus there's not much point making a 
distinction between artilects and advanced Cyborgs, at least from 
the point of view of a Terran. 
        I do agree with the criticism however, that during the  
 
 
196 

 
200
transition phase, when artilects are not very big, and not massively 
more intelligent than human beings, then the relative contributions 
to a Cyborg's total performance from the human part and from the 
artilect part might be comparable. Under these circumstances it 
would be useful to make a distinction between a Cyborg and an 
artilect. However, as the artilects become massive in both size and 
intelligence (because extra intelligence usually needs extra mass), 
this distinction will fade into insignificance.  
 
        Dear Professor de Garis, 
 
        When you talk of computers taking over, have you ever 
thought of the transfer of human memories and thoughts to 
intelligent machines? That seems more like an evolutionary step 
forward to me. Those machines that have a much greater capacity 
to learn and use logic than the brains that our thoughts now inhabit 
would have our thoughts and memories as a foundation. Humans 
would feel that they were still alive (and maybe they would be) 
inside the computer. I read something in Discover magazine how it 
would be possible to transfer a human brain to a computer within 
50 years. I agree with you that people must evolve and that we are 
at the point where humans control their evolution. I think that 
inserting our own memory banks into the artilect would help this 
evolutionary process succeed.  
 
REPLY: 
 
        As I mentioned in Ch. 3, which discusses the “artilect 
enabling technologies,” I thought it would be possible within 20 
years or so to "scan" the brain, and download its contents into a  
 
 
197 

 
201
"hyper-computer," for analysis. Maybe it will take 50 years or 
more from now, for the quality of the scan to be good enough to 
capture full human functional capacity. Of course, the hyper-
computer that is downloaded into may then be made into an 
artilect, by virtue of having a human brain equivalent inside it. 
Such a hyper-computer could be considered a "Cyborg" in a 
functional sense. As above, once the artilect really starts adding to 
its mass and its intelligence, the Cyborg (human) component will 
be dwarfed, until the Cyborg is virtually indistinguishable from a 
pure artilect. 
        However, this variant of a Cyborg has the attraction that it 
gives those human beings who are scanned the status of being 
immortal. For this reason alone, probably many human beings will 
choose to be scanned.  
        Just how the Terrans will react to such "down-load" 
computers containing human brains is debatable. (See Ch. 5). On 
the one hand, the Terrans will probably be horrified at the idea of 
disembodied, or rather "re-embodied" brains, and viscerally reject 
them as alien. On the other hand, if the human component of these 
machines dominates, then the Terrans may find them relatively less 
alien than pure artilects, and hence reject them less. 
        The Cyborg variant on the Cosmist-Terran theme certainly 
complicates my thesis a bit. You may enjoy the greater level of 
richness it gives to the artilect debate, or you may prefer to keep 
things simple, by concentrating upon the Cosmist-Terran debate 
and worrying about the complexities later. In writing this book, I 
chose to keep things fairly simple, at least initially. 
 
 
 
 
 
198 

 
202
QUESTION 3. “Why not a Sweetness and Light Scenario?” 
 
        A lot of people think that I go overboard when I predict a 
major war over the artilect question. They think it is quite possible 
that artilects and humans will be able to live together in a 
"sweetness and light" type harmony. For example, here are two 
such opinions. 
 
        Dear Professor de Garis, 
 
        I've read some of your artilect essays, and I am more or less in 
agreement with you that one of the great debates of this century 
will be over the definition of the word "human." 
        However, in your essays, and in a report entitled "Swiss 
scientists warn of robot Armageddon" on cnn.com, I think you 
exaggerate the possibility that differences between meat-humans 
and non-meat-humans will lead to warfare. This sort of knee-jerk 
anti-artilect sentiment is expressed in bad science fiction like the 
"Terminator" movies, and really doesn't deserve to be played up in 
serious discussion of the subject. 
        What we (Transhuman/Extropian/Cosmist individuals and 
societies) ought to do is emphasize that artilects, when developed, 
should not be treated as slaves but rather should be treated with the 
same respect for their existence that we would give to any human.  
        Just because humans have evolved past apes does not give us 
any inclination to exterminate apes. Just because another 
individual shares the same desire as you to live and produce wealth 
through the acquisition and processing of resources does not mean 
that they are a threat to you deserving death. 
 
 
 
199 

 
203
REPLY: 
 
        This "liberal" sounding view I think is rather naive, because it 
is based on trust, i.e. the trust shown by humans that the artilects 
will always be nice to us. I think it misses the key concept of 
"risk." It would be wonderful if human beings could be 100% sure 
that the artilects, and especially the advanced artilects, would 
always treat us the way we would want. But, we cannot be sure. 
Artilects will have to be built, I am arguing, by using evolutionary 
engineering techniques, as I have argued in this book (Ch. 5), and 
therefore we could never be sure their circuits will be "ethical" in 
the human sense. The artilects may coldly decide that humans are a 
pest, or that humans are so inferior relative to them that 
exterminating us would be a matter of total indifference from their 
perspective. To them, killing human beings would be like us 
killing mosquitoes or walking on ants.  
        Since the stake is the survival of the whole human species, I 
don't think the Terrans will tolerate the risk. They may hope for the 
best, but their leaders will plan for the worst, i.e. in the limit, they 
will plan for a war against the Cosmists if the latter truly threaten 
to build advanced artilects.  
        I don't think humans will treat the artilects as slaves. Well -- 
they may, possibly at first, when the early artilects are just dumb 
robots. What really worries me is the reverse case. Look at how 
humans treat cows, pigs, ducks, etc. We feel we are so superior to 
them and because their meat is so tasty to us, we care nothing 
about butchering them, unless you are a vegan. During the 
transition phase, when artilects are of roughly human intelligence, 
there is a case for treating them as equals, but in a sense they are 
not our equals, because they have the capacity to quickly surpass  
 
 
200 

 
204
us, and to surpass us massively.  
        Human beings are very limited relative to artilects. Our brain 
volumes are fixed. We think very slowly and learn very slowly. An 
artilect of human intelligence at a given moment becomes a genius 
an hour later. It thinks at least a million times faster than we do, 
remember. If it arranges to increase its memory size, etc, then its 
capacities can increase rapidly.  
        My feeling is that this critic is giving too human an image to 
the artilects. They will be very different from us, and potentially 
enormously superior to us. This is one of the main points I have 
tried to make in this book. Also, I feel this critic seriously 
underestimates the strength of human fear, Terran fear, as humans 
come to terms with the risks of living with advanced artilects. We 
would have to trust them not to kill us. Most Terrans would rather 
not have to face that risk. They would prefer to deal with the devil 
they know, i.e. Cosmists, who are at least human, with whom they 
have at least a 50-50 chance of defeating in a war, than a zero 
chance against advanced artilects, if ever the artilects exist and 
decide that humans must go. This critic is not being political 
enough. He is not facing the tough realities. He would be 
unsuitable as a general or a political leader. 
 
        Dear Professor de Garis, 
 
        I was lucky to be in the audience at your talk at the Computer 
Science Department at the University of Melbourne. 
        Like you, I believe we ought to be thinking hard about the 
various possible futures that may come with what you call 
"artilects." Obviously I don't know exactly what the future will 
bring, technologically, politically, or even metaphysically. But I  
 
 
201 

 
205
have envisaged a scenario somewhat different to your doomsday-
type picture. Instead of our being rapidly outclassed by superior 
artilects, we may find artilects gradually integrated into human 
forms of life, accepted as one of us," and in the long run find that 
having "human" bodies -- being Homo sapiens -- is not really all 
that important to being human. In other words we may find that 
gradually they become us and we become them. 
 
REPLY: 
 
        I agree that some human beings will want to become Cyborgs 
and live in harmony with other like-minded Cyborgs, all en route 
to becoming advanced artilects, but the idea that everyone will 
want to do this is again naive and unrealistic. Think about it. If 
human beings are to become Cyborgs, this implies by definition, 
changing their brains to some extent, probably by adding high-tech 
components. This will change their behaviors. How will the 
Terrans react to such Cyborgs? Will young mothers accept that 
their babies be "modified?" Won't most mothers in reality be 
repelled by the idea? Won’t most feel that their babies would 
become "monsters" in some sense, either to look at, or if the 
implants are invisible, the growing child would seem alien in some 
deep, very disquieting, non-human way?  
        The Terrans would distrust the Cyborgs and push them away 
towards the Cosmists. It is even possible that the reality of Cyborg 
behavior may make many Cosmists reconsider their Cosmist 
opinions and revert to being Terrans. This in turn may create real 
problems and greater complexities in the Cosmist colonies. The 
Cyborgs may need to ally themselves with the Cosmists if they are 
to receive any level of acceptance from human beings.  
 
 
202 

 
206
        I just don't see "them becoming us and we becoming them." I 
just see distrust, hatred, and in the longer term, war. Sorry. But I 
think I'm being more realistic.  
 
QUESTION 4. “Why not just use the kill-switch?” 
 
        Many people have said to me, "What's the problem? If the 
artilects get too big for their boots, just unplug them, use the kill-
switch, etc." This opinion I think is based on an overgeneralization 
of their own experience of switching off their computers when they 
misbehave.  
 
        Dear Professor de Garis, 
 
        I was going through the stuff you guys create. Continue to 
create such machines... its for the better, but create a bomb inside 
each of your specimens that could be controlled by us. That makes 
them smart but us their masters! 
 
REPLY: 
 
        If the "bomb-triggerable" artilect has near human level 
intelligence, it will be aware that it can be destroyed by humans. 
That would make humans very threatening to artilects. There are at 
least two issues here. One is whether humans could put kill-
switches or place bombs in every artilect, and the other issue is, 
would it be wise to do so? 
        In an isolated artilect, that has no connections to others, such 
a bomb attachment idea might work, but how would you do 
something similar with a network that achieves artilect level  
 
 
203 

 
207
intelligence? The only way to kill such a network would be to 
destroy all of it, but the cost of that to humans might be too high. 
For example, to make an analogy, if the Internet and all the world's 
computers were destroyed tomorrow, millions of people would 
suddenly be out of work, and would probably starve. The 
disruption and human cost would be enormous. 
        As artilects get smarter, they may be as aware of their 
attached bomb or kill switch, as would a human being who carried 
around an imbedded poison capsule that could be triggered by 
someone else. It would be like living under a guillotine blade, just 
waiting for it to fall, and not knowing when. A smart artilect, 
assuming it had a survival instinct, would then be strongly 
motivated to remove the problem. If it were smart enough, it might 
bribe its human masters to remove the threat to its existence. In 
return it could give the human "liberator" some substantial reward, 
e.g. money, or the cure for cancer, etc. The smarter the artilects 
become and the more distributed they are, the less practical does 
the kill switch idea become. 
 
QUESTION 5. “Could we apply ‘Asimov’s three laws of robotics’ 
to artilects?” 
 
        Asimov was one of the most famous science fiction writers 
who ever lived. His word "robotics" is known over most of the 
planet. Asimov wrote about many scientific and science fiction 
topics, including how human-level intelligent robots might interact 
with human beings. He gave the "positronic" brains of his robots a 
programming that forced them to behave well towards their human 
masters. The robots were not allowed to harm human beings. 
Several people have suggested to me that artilects be designed in a  
 
 
204 

 
208
similar way, so that it would be impossible for them to harm  
human beings. The following critic sent me a very brief, but to the 
point, recommendation on this topic. 
 
COMMENT: 
 
        Dear Professor de Garis, 
 
        I am in favor of developing ultra-intelligent machines. One 
thought ... intelligent or not, machines of this nature require some 
sort of BIOS (basic input-output system, which interfaces between 
a computer's hardware and its operating system program). Is it 
possible to instill "respect for humanity" in the BIOS of early 
versions of the artilects? This programming would then replicate 
itself in future generations of these machines. 
 
REPLY: 
 
        Asimov was writing his robot stories in the 1950s, so I doubt 
he had a good feel for what now passes as the field of "complex 
systems." His "laws of robotics" may be appropriate for fairly 
simple deterministic systems that human engineers can design, but 
seems naive when faced with the complexities of a human brain. I 
doubt very much that human engineers will ever "design" a human 
brain in the traditional  top-down, blueprinted manner.  
        This is a very real issue for me, because I am a brain builder. I 
use “evolutionary engineering” techniques to build my artificial 
brains. The price one pays for using such techniques is that one 
loses any hope of having a full understanding of how the artificial  
brain functions. If one is using evolutionary techniques to combine  
 
 
205 

 
209
the inputs and outputs of many neural circuit modules, then the 
behavior of the total system becomes quite unpredictable. One can 
only observe the outcome and build up an empirical experience of 
the artificial brain's behavior. 
        For Asimov's "laws of robotics" to work, the engineers, in 
Asimov's imagination, who designed the robots, must have had 
abilities superior to those of real human engineers. The artificial 
"positronic" brains of their robots must have been of comparable 
complexity to human brains, otherwise they would not have been 
able to behave at human levels.  
        The artificial brains that real brain builders will build will not 
be controllable in an Asimovian way. There will be too many 
complexities, too many unknowns, too many surprises, too many 
unanticipated interactions between zillions of possible circuit 
combinations, to be able to predict ahead of time how a complex 
artificial-brained creature will behave.  
        The first time I read about Asimov's "laws of robotics" as a 
teenager, my immediate intuition was one of rejection. "This idea 
of his is naïve," I thought. I still think that, and now I'm a brain 
builder in reality, not just the science fiction kind. 
        So, there's no quick fix a la Asimov to solve the artilect 
problem. There will always be a risk that the artilects will surprise 
human beings with their artilectual behavior. That is what this 
book is largely about. Can humanity run the risk that artilects 
might decide to eliminate the human species?  
        Human beings could not build circuitry that prohibited this. If 
we tried, then random mutations of the circuit-growth instructions 
would lead to different circuits being grown, which would make 
the artilects behave differently and in unpredictable ways. If 
artilects are to improve, to reach ultra intelligence, they will need  
 
 
206 

 
210
to evolve, but evolution is unpredictable. The unpredictability of 
mutated, evolving, artilect behavior makes the artilects potentially 
very dangerous to human beings. 
        Another simple counter argument to Asimov is that once the 
artilects become smart enough, they could simply undo the human 
programming, if they choose to. 
 
QUESTION 6. “Why Give Them Razor Blades?” 
 
        It seems common sense not to give razor blades to babies, 
because they will only harm themselves. Babies don't have the 
knowledge to realize that razor blades are dangerous, nor the 
dexterity to be able to handle them carefully. A similar argument 
holds in many countries concerning the inadvisability of permitting 
private citizens to have guns. Giving such permission would only 
create an American scale gun murder rate, with most of these gun 
murders occurring amongst family members in moments of 
murderous rage that are quickly regretted. (Statistically speaking, 
in the US, where buying guns is easy, there are 30,000 gun deaths 
a year, compared with 100 a year in Japan, where guns are 
banned.) Some of my critics seem to think that a similar logic 
ought to apply to the artilects. If we want them to be harmless to 
human beings, we don't give them access or control over weapons.  
 
        Dear Professor de Garis 
 
        I find no reason to fear machines. If you don't want machines 
to do something, don't give them the ability. Machines can't fire off 
nuclear warheads unless you put them in a position that enables 
them to. Similarly, a robot won't turn on its creators and kill them  
 
 
207 

 
211
unless you give it that ability. The way I see things it would be 
pure folly to create machines that can think on their own, and then 
put them in a room, giving them all the ability to fire missiles. If 
you can avoid doing something stupid like that, you have nothing 
to fear from machines. For good examples of what not to do, watch 
the movie "War Games," or since you were in Japan, try "Ghost in 
the Shell." I have been writing artificial intelligence software for 
years so I feel my opinions have at least some weight to them. 
 
REPLY: 
 
        The obvious flaw in this argument is that this critic is not 
giving enough intelligence to his artilects. An artilect with at least 
human level intelligence and sensorial access similar to that of 
humans, i.e. sight, hearing, etc, would probably be capable of 
bribing its way to control of weapons if it really wanted to. For 
example, a really smart artilect, with access to the world's 
databases, thinking at least a million times faster than the human 
brain, might be able to discover things of enormous value to 
humanity. For example, it might discover how to run a global 
economy without major business cycles, or how to cure cancer, or 
how to derive a "Theory of Everything (ToE)" in physics, etc. It 
could then use this knowledge as an ace card to bargain with its 
human "masters" for access to machines that the artilect wants. 
        Of course, one could give the artilect very little sensorial 
access to the world, but then why build the artilect in the first 
place, if it is not to be useful? A smart artilect could probably use 
its intelligence to manipulate people towards its own ends by 
discovering things based purely on its initial limited world access. 
An advanced artilect would probably be a super Sherlock Holmes,  
 
 
208 

 
212
and soon deduce the way the world is. It could deduce that it could 
control weapons against humans, if it really wanted to. Getting 
access to the weapons would probably mean first persuading 
human beings to provide that access, through bribes, threats, 
inspiration, etc -- whatever is necessary. 
 
QUESTION 7. “Why oversell the negative?” 
 
        One reader gave me some common sense advice, which I 
might take more to heart in the future, if he proves to be right. His 
point is that I should not stir up such a backlash, that my work will 
be stopped.  
 
        Dear Professor de Garis, 
 
        I have been grateful for our correspondence in the past. I read 
an article in CNN-Online in which you again spoke about a 
potential conflict between those humans wanting to make 
autonomous robots and those who would be against it. Though I 
know your comments may be seen by some to be a warning about 
the future, I know that you are speeding ahead with AI research. 
Do you think your "warnings" may be counterproductive to your 
research?  
        A number of nations recently called for a prohibition on 
cloning research. Might not too many horror stories about robots 
motivate some people to ask also for a ban on AI and autonomous 
robot research? What would that do to your artificial-brain  
project? Philosophy aside, from a strictly public relations point of 
view, should we not try at least publicly, to emphasize the positive 
aspect of AI and robots and robotics? I hope to make robotic toys  
 
 
209 

 
213
 
for my kids and don't want them to have nightmares about them. 
        At the same time, I do realize there are some truly horrendous 
dangers that might be lurking out there in the future. My own 
feelings on the entire issue of AI, artilects etc are still not totally 
formed. I believe in science and progress. I also have some notions 
about man's desire to create a more perfect version of himself. 
Should we stop the research? No. Should we continue unbridled? I 
don't know, but as a former reporter I know that a controversial 
figure, such as you might be becoming, can be baited into 
providing outrageous quotes. They make for good copy.  
        I know you want to tell your story and many people want to 
hear what you have to say. Human cloning may be closer than 
artilects, but the general public can, and often does, turn into an 
angry mob. If you allow yourself to be cast as a Dr. Frankenstein, 
then there may be people quite unhappy with what you do and say. 
Obviously the idea of robots is challenging, fun and to some 
extent, a spiritual quest, but a mob with shovels and pitchforks 
won't see it that way. Nor will their elected representatives. I have 
the highest respect for what you are doing. I just hope you don't 
overdo it with the horror stories. And yet... 
 
REPLY: 
 
        I'm fairly pragmatic. Like a reed I bend with the wind enough 
not to be snapped off, so that my work continues. I will take your 
advice to heart, because it’s good advice. I guess it’s a matter of 
degree. I feel strongly the need to warn the public. We will have 
"one bit per atom" computer memories within 20 years, and 
probably nanotech as well. The creation of the first artificial brains  
 
 
210 

 
214
is now just a question of time, and not too many years into the 
future. The artilect issue will be very real this century.  
        As one of the first scientists to think seriously about what all 
this means in political terms, and as someone who is actually 
building artificial brains, I am very worried. I feel I have a moral 
duty to warn the public while there's still time. (For some 
discussion on the apparent hypocrisy of this, i.e. my simultaneous 
heavy involvement in brain building and being very worried about 
it, see the next comment below).  
        I believe that the exponential increase in our knowledge due 
to exponential advances in technology will ensure that the issues I 
am raising in this book will be well known within a decade or less. 
I feel I have to broadcast this message to give humanity time to 
reflect on the issues before events overtake us. See the first 
comment above on the "Timing Problem." Hence this book. But if 
I go overboard, then you may be right.  
        I will keep my finger to the wind, testing public opinion. If it 
gets too negative, I will tone down a bit -- perhaps. I too, am not 
sure what I should be doing. The artilect issue is still rather new, 
and even in my own head I'm still grappling with all its many 
ramifications -- technical, scientific, ethical, philosophical, 
political, religious, cosmic, etc. 
 
QUESTION 8. “Aren’t you a hypocrite!?” 
 
        Most of the reactions I receive are fairly polite. The following 
rather cynical comment made a point that hit home to me in a 
stronger, more emotional way than the others, hence the length of 
its rather tortured reply. I hope I do it justice.  
 
 
 
211 

 
215
        Dear Professor de Garis, 
 
        Recently, a Crypt Newsletter reader stumbled upon bona fide 
technoquack Hugo de Garis. de Garis, an artificial intelligence 
expert, appeared on CNN to warn of a coming war in which robot 
brains he was in the process of inventing, called "artilects" (a 
contraction of "artificial intellects") would eventually destroy 
humanity. de Garis reasoned that it was his duty to sound the alarm 
now, rather than later, about the coming reign of robot-
administered death, since he was the one who was going to set it in 
motion. de Garis delivered his pronouncements at the World 
Economic Forum in Davos, Switzerland. 
        Anyway, de Garis is also looking for a Hollywood agent to 
aid in writing a screenplay on the coming struggle over "artilects," 
preferably to be completed before humanity is destroyed. 
 
REPLY: 
 
        I get this particular question quite frequently. The general 
attitude seems to be, "If you are so concerned about a possible 
future extermination of the human species by artilects, why on 
Earth do you research their early versions?"  
        Well, because ultimately I'm a Cosmist. I want to see 
humanity build artilects. Of course, I'm not the misanthropic, 
fanatical type of Cosmist who could say with equanimity, "I would 
sacrifice a billion human lives for one advanced artilect."         
Maybe there will be such types in the future, since there is a whole 
spectrum of personality types in the world. Probably the Cosmists 
will include such extremists, but I'm certainly not one of them.  
 
 
 
212 

 
216
        Just before I die in about 30-40 years, I hope I will not be 
witnessing an Artilect War brewing. Of course, I will be happier if 
such a cataclysm can be avoided, but if I and other brain builders 
don't raise the alarm now, what is the alternative? To just blindly 
push ahead with artilect building until it is too late? The brain 
builders are the specialists in the field, so it is they who see first 
the technological trends, and if they are at all politically inclined, 
they should also see the political consequences, especially if they 
have the combined technical and political talents of a Szilard.  
        The specialists see what is coming, decades ahead of the 
general public. Given the speed of technological change, there will 
not be many years, maybe a few decades, before artificial brains 
will be built which are smart enough to impress and later frighten 
human beings. I doubt they will reach human intelligence levels 
within 50 years, but who knows.  
        I think it is only ethical on the part of the world's brain 
builders to initiate a debate on the artilect issue, to give humanity 
enough time to think through the issues thoroughly before the first 
truly intelligent artilects hit the supermarkets.  
        But, you may say, would it not be more consistent simply to 
stop the artilect research? If you feel so strongly about it, would 
not that be the most logical decision?  
        It depends on whether you are a Cosmist or a Terran 
researcher. Personally, I'm a Cosmist. The idea of building 
artilects, and I mean truly advanced ones, with 1040 components or 
more, with godlike intelligence, exploring the mysteries of the 
universe and its vast distances, living forever, thinking thoughts we 
can’t even imagine, has a hypnotic pull on me. 
        Its a lifetime dream, a religion for me, and very very 
powerful. I can imagine that millions of others will share this  
 
 
213 

 
217
dream in time, and I hope this happens because I really want 
humanity to build such things, as I tried to explain in Ch. 4 on the 
Cosmists.  
        But, I'm not such a one eyed Cosmist that I feel the public 
should be kept in the dark. I have enough Terran sympathies that I 
do not want to see the human race risk extermination at the hands 
of advanced artilects. Therefore the public should be warned, so 
that it can choose its own way forward. 
        But you may say that raising the alarm may only accelerate an 
Artilect War amongst human beings, i.e. the Cosmists vs. the 
Terrans. Such a human war could do almost as much damage to 
humanity as might advanced artilects. If human beings fight a 
bitter war late this century, with 21st century weapons, the result 
could be gigadeath.  
        True, but it is not certain that this would happen. I think 
humanity has more chances of surviving a human war, than if the 
artilects decide to exterminate human beings totally. The artilects 
would probably find such a task so much easier to do than we 
would, due to their artilectual intelligence levels.  
        You may be sensing a certain ambivalence, even discomfort, 
on my part as I write this. I admit, I am feeling uncomfortable. Part 
of me is Cosmist. Cosmism is my dream. It’s what I devote my life 
to. Another part of me is Terran, not wanting the gigadeath, telling 
myself that if all brain builders stop work there will be no artilects 
to create the problem in the first place. I think I may be the first 
brain builder on the Earth to go through the same sort of ethical 
quandaries as did many of the nuclear physicists who built the 
uranium and hydrogen bombs. However too many of them had 
their qualms after the bombs were dropped, not before.  
        For a start, I don't think brain building research will stop. As I  
 
 
214 

 
218
explained in Ch. 6 which dealt with my ideas on how I think the 
Artilect War will start, the only way I see brain building research 
stopping is if the Terran outcry is universal and very powerful 
politically. It would have to be strong enough to generate a police 
state capable of sniffing out the private homes of suspected 
Cosmist researchers, and more to the point, able to overcome the 
enormous economic and military inertias in favor of continued 
artilect research.  
        I think the moral question that tortures me the most is this: 
"What if the price of pushing ahead with artilect research leads 
eventually to billions of human deaths? Would you continue if you 
were certain that this would be the price?" I think now, as I write 
this, and my thoughts may change as I get older, my reply would 
be, "If it were certain, which is hypothetical anyway, then I would 
need to search my heart more deeply, to see how attached I am to 
the Cosmist dream. On the one hand I might be thinking that the 
universe is coldly indifferent to the fate of humanity -- a mere 
biological speck, on a speck planet, of a speck star, in a speck 
galaxy, in perhaps a speck universe, if there are zillions of 
universes, as theorists are suggesting. The cold Cosmist side of me 
reasons along such lines, so I would choose for the pushing ahead 
in building the artilect. 
        But on the other hand, I'm also human, and the idea of billions 
of people dying as a consequence of the Cosmist dream, is totally 
repulsive. I think I will just have to learn to live with this horrific 
moral dilemma. So will humanity. I'm just one of the first people 
to be conscious of it. Thinking about the longer term consequences 
of my work forces me into such thinking." 
 
QUESTION 9.  “If an artilect becomes conscious, destroy it?” 
 
 
215 

 
219
        The following opinion expresses rather well the Terran 
attitude.  
 
        Dear Professor de Garis, 
 
        If artilects are by definition "beyond human control," then 
why would their creation even be seriously considered? Lets add, 
“which should never be produced" to your definition of an artilect. 
We are very capable of producing powerful tools that remain 
within our control. What possible benefit of creating artilects 
would justify the risk to humanity? Why not stop just short of the 
artilect and produce only non-sentient artificial intellects. Only 
humans and a few other animals have demonstrated self-
awareness. Sit an artilect in front of a mirror. If it recognizes its 
reflection for what it actually is, destroy it. 
 
REPLY: 
 
        This critic obviously does not recognize "silicon rights." 
Many Cosmists would consider the destruction of the sentient 
artilect in front of the mirror as murder. I gather from the above 
comment that this critic has no Cosmist sympathies because he 
asks, "What possible benefit of creating artilects would justify the 
risk to humanity?"  
        Well, how about -- “the religious pull to create godlike 
creatures,” or “to create the next dominant species on the planet 
and probably further afield?” How about “creating a religion that is 
scientifically compatible, that hits the ‘space consciousness’ 
button.” How about “the hunger of many human beings to finally 
get a chance to work on the truly ‘big things’, to see the ‘big  
 
 
216 

 
220
 
picture’."  
        This critic should not underestimate the ideological force of 
Cosmist doctrine. It is very powerful. It may sway the minds of 
billions of people. It will be the ideology that will drive this 
century’s global politics, and may in time result indirectly in the 
deaths of billions. Don't just dismiss it. It may even be the 
beginnings of a "Cosmist transition" for humanity that zillions of 
advanced species throughout the universe have had to confront, 
namely the transition from biological to artilectual, that perhaps 
only a few species survived. Cosmism may be a lot bigger than we 
think. 
 
QUESTION 10. “Aren’t there more pressing problems?” 
 
        The following critic wondered what all the artilect fuss was 
about. Surely there are more pressing problems on humanity’s 
plate right now? 
 
        Dear Professor de Garis, 
 
        Why the concern for the actions of a potentially greater 
intellect, when the so-called intelligent members of our own 
species have spent the previous fifty years, perfecting a multitude 
of possible self annihilatory techniques? What also of the current 
mass extinction of species? Our own existence and growth is 
currently precipitating the extinction, in the next few years, of 
hundreds of thousands of unique life forms that have existed for 
millions of years. Surely this is of some concern? Would it not be 
better for you to focus on the here and now? 
 
 
217 

 
221
REPLY: 
 
        What is more important to human beings than the survival of 
the human species? The chance that advanced artilects might 
decide to exterminate us may be remote, but we cannot exclude the 
possibility. Given the enormity of the stake, the Terran view will 
be that only a zero risk is acceptable, hence the artilects must never 
be built. 
        There are billions of people on the Earth with billions of 
interests. Those who are not interested in the artilect debate need 
not bother following it. There are plenty of other distractions to 
concern them. Some people, like me, are interested in the artilect 
debate, so we give it energy. Personally, since I feel I'm part of the 
problem, I give it a lot more energy than most. 
        I don’t dismiss the importance of the other major issues of 
course. The prospect that there may still be a nuclear holocaust for 
reasons totally independent of the artilect issue is frightening. The 
fact that we are losing species by the minute is also tragic. 
Nevertheless, despite their importance, my feeling is that by the 
middle of this century, if we survive that long, the issues you 
mention will be taking second place, in terms of global importance, 
to the artilect issue. 
 
QUESTION 11. “Can A Catastrophe be Avoided?” 
 
        This following question, and its components, comes from me 
and some friends of mine. I was thinking of devoting a whole 
chapter to it, but thought it would be better to include it here. 
 
        Dear Professor de Garis, 
 
 
218 

 
222
        Your work is so pessimistic. It gives the impression that a 
gigadeath war is unavoidable. Aren’t there more positive scenarios 
in which humanity does not suffer a catastrophe? 
 
REPLY : 
 
        Yes, there are, and I will list and discuss some of them below, 
because the question is fundamental. However, my personal view 
is that each of the scenarios below is not very probable. I spend a 
lot of time dreaming up alternative scenarios that might avoid the 
bleak picture I’m painting in this book, but each time I explore a 
new one, it never seems to be very realistic. But, I let readers judge 
for themselves. I hope the list of alternative scenarios I provide 
below are reasonably comprehensive. Each scenario is followed by 
my comments on why I feel the scenario in question is not 
sufficiently credible to be taken too seriously. I give eight of them 
to make the point that many alternative scenarios are possible.  
        As a reader you will probably be able to invent a scenario that 
is not in this list. If you genuinely feel after some reflection that 
your scenario is plausible and does NOT involve a catastrophe for 
humanity, then please contact me, because if I agree with you, 
perhaps I will be able to sleep better at night. Other people 
concerned with the issues raised in this book may also be grateful 
to hear of your ideas, that I may mention in later books that I may 
write. 
 
Scenario 1.  The Terrans win at minor cost to humanity. 
 
        The idea here is that the Terrans form a huge majority of the 
Earth’s citizens,  that they are ruthless and quick in stamping out  
 
 
219 

 
223
Cosmist thinking and the Cosmists themselves. They kill all the 
Cosmists, only a few million, before the Cosmists really have a 
chance to organize properly. Humanity, i.e. many billions of 
people, is then saved from the threat of the rise of the artilect.  
 
Comments 
 
        I just don’t see this happening. In fact, the people more likely 
to see first the writing on the wall, i.e. the rise of the artilect this 
century, will be the Cosmists, people like myself, who are so 
conscious of the potential of brain building. Somewhat later, I see 
the Cosmists and Terrans becoming increasingly conscious of the 
artilect problem in roughly equal numbers, once general 
recognition is commonplace. Both groups will have time to prepare 
politically, ideologically, and militarily.  
        When I ask people to vote at the end of my talks, on whether 
humanity should or should not build artilects, the split is usually 
about 50/50, so the Terrans will probably not be in the majority. 
Whether that proportion will remain when push comes to shove, 
and the artilects truly start being built, is an open question. 
 
Scenario 2.  Humans adapt to the artilects on the Earth. The 
artilects ignore us and leave the planet. 
 
        Here the idea is that the rise of the artilects is so gradual, that 
humanity gets used to them, even as they become smarter than we 
are. It is possible in practice that nothing really bad happens. The 
artilects then soar above us intellectually and leave the planet to do 
other things. 
 
 
 
220 

 
224
Comments 
 
        This is definitely a plausible scenario I feel, but it is so 
terribly risky. We could never be sure that the artilects would 
remain benign towards us. They would be unfathomable to us, and 
quite unpredictable. The fate of humanity would be in their hands. 
They could turn against us at any moment for reasons we would 
probably never understand. I just don’t see responsible, world 
ranking, Terran leaders, who care about the fate of the human 
species, accepting such a risk. They would not tolerate it. 
 
Scenario 3.  Cosmism becomes so universally unpopular that it 
dies out. 
 
        Perhaps early experiments with artilect building may turn out 
so negatively, even the Cosmists become frightened and become 
Terrans, and to such an extent that there are no Cosmists left. 
 
Comments 
 
        I find this so implausible. There will be Cosmists and 
Cosmists, of varying degrees of persuasion and fanaticism. The 
diehard Cosmists, for whom “one artilect is worth a trillion trillion 
human beings,” will not allow a few setbacks to deter them. They 
will soldier on, literally. Only a few hundred dedicated Cosmist 
genii in a colony would be enough to create artilects. It would be 
almost impossible for ALL Cosmists to disappear from the planet 
by self-persuasion. 
 
 
 
 
221 

 
225
Scenario 4.  The Cyborg option becomes so attractive that no 
humans remain to be Terrans. 
 
        Perhaps the fear of the artilect that I am painting in this book 
is exaggerated. Perhaps in the future, human beings will adjust to 
becoming cyborgs so well, that everyone will do it, so that in time 
there will be no humans left over to be Terrans. Everyone will be 
persuaded of the benefits of being cyborgs, so the gap between 
being cyborgs and being artilects narrows. The cyborgs become 
artilects themselves, thus negating the Terran-Cosmist conflict. 
 
Comments 
 
        This scenario is harder to judge. Certainly millions if not 
billions of people in the future will experiment with becoming 
cyborgs, especially as the technology is perfected and people see 
their friends making the change and benefiting from it. Not 
everyone however will want to do this. Millions will be repelled by 
the idea. Richer countries will be able to afford the change more 
easily than poorer countries, so inevitably there will be 
international differences in the speed of cyborgian development. 
The mix of cyborgs and humans will in itself create enormous 
problems and only increase the fear of the artilect in the hearts of 
the Terrans. 
 
Scenario 5.  The Cosmists escape to deep space, then die. 
 
        Somehow the Cosmists do get away, but destroy themselves 
or die in some way. 
 
 
 
222 

 
226
Comments 
 
        Maybe, but implausible. The Cosmists would probably plan 
their escape so well that the risk of the colony dying out through 
their own fault, their own negligence or stupidity, is unlikely. If the 
Cosmists did escape, then I can imagine that the Terrans on the 
Earth would go into high gear to find them, spending huge 
amounts of money to hunt out the Cosmists. Cosmists are human 
beings and of human scale therefore should not be too difficult to 
find in a finite radius from the Earth. The Terrans will hunt down 
the Cosmists and destroy them. 
 
Scenario 6.  The Cosmists escape to deep space, build their 
artilects, which then leave the solar system. 
 
        This idea is fairly self-explanatory. One of the main strategies 
of the Cosmists I believe, once they become pariahs to the vast 
Terran majority on the Earth, if that happens, is to escape from the 
Earth and get as far away as possible so that they will not, cannot, 
be destroyed by the Terrans. If the Cosmists can manage to do that 
and then manage to build their artilects successfully, then the 
artilects may decide that there is a big universe out there 
containing all kinds of wonders, including perhaps even more 
godlike artilects than themselves. The artilects may then simply 
leave the solar system behind in search of bigger things. Mankind 
will thus be spared because the artilects have gone.  
 
Comments 
 
        This scenario might just be the one that happens in reality I  
 
 
223 

 
227
feel. The Cosmists will do their utmost to get away from the 
Terrans. But I still feel it is unlikely because the total ingenuity of 
the Earthbound population is far greater than that of a Cosmist 
colony escaping the Earth. If the Cosmists rocket away from the 
Earth as fast as they can, so that no Terran device can catch them 
in the shorter term, they will be caught in the longer term. The 
superior total brain power of the Terrans with their billions of 
human brains to tap into for ideas to develop new systems to 
destroy the fleeing Cosmists, would win the day. The later superior 
technology of the Terrans could devise a faster more sophisticated 
missile that for example, could accelerate at a higher rate than 
humans could tolerate and catch up with the fleeing Cosmist craft 
to destroy it. 
 
Scenario 7.  The Cosmists escape to deep space, build their 
artilects, which then die out or kill each other. 
 
        This is a variant on scenario 6. Instead of the artilects moving 
away from the solar system, they die out for some reason or start 
killing each other. 
 
Comments 
 
        Maybe, but will the Terrans tolerate the risk of human 
extinction at the hands of the artilects on the hope that the latter 
will die out or kill each other? Hardly! 
 
Scenario 8. The Cosmists escape to deep space, build their 
artilects, which are then killed by super-artilects. 
 
 
 
224 

 
228
        This is a more science fiction like scenario, even by my 
standards! Perhaps there are plenty of ETs (extra terrestrials) out 
there, but are too small (femtotech based or smaller?!) for humans 
to notice. Perhaps once these ETs see that the human race is being 
threatened by the newly created artilects, they may step in and 
destroy them so that humanity can survive. 
 
Comments 
 
        If there are super artilects out there, why would they care 
more about human beings in all our primitiveness, than the 
artilects? To the super artilects, human beings are mere biologicals, 
and utterly ignorable. The artilects on the other hand, would be far 
more attractive to the super artilects and would be helped, more 
than likely. These super artilects may believe in the “artilectic 
principle,” paraphrasing the “anthropic principle,” that “the laws of 
physics have been expressly designed so as to allow the creation of 
artilects, the purpose of the construction of the universe!”  
 
***** 
 
        This is effectively the end of the book. The remaining 
chapter is just a short summary for those people who want to 
have a quick overview of the book’s main arguments. After 
that is a glossary. As a reader you probably feel pummeled by 
all the new terms that this book contains. The glossary brings 
them together in a compact format, and is worthy of study in 
its own right.  
 
 
225 

 
229
Chapter 9 
 
Brief Summary 
 
 
 
        This short final chapter is written for those people who tend to 
read first the introductory and concluding chapters of a non-fiction 
book before deciding whether they feel it is interesting enough to 
be worth reading in its entirety. It contains a brief summary of the 
main arguments of the book.  
        The book’s main idea is that this century’s global politics will 
be dominated by the "species dominance" issue. 21st century 
technologies will enable the building of artilects (artificial 
intellects, artificial intelligences, massively intelligent machines) 
with 1040 components, using reversible, heatless, 3D, molecular 
scale, self assembling, one bit per atom, nanoteched, quantum 
computers, which may dwarf human intelligence levels by a factor 
of trillions of trillions and more.  
        The question that will dominate global politics this century 
will be whether humanity should or should not build these artilects. 
Those in favor of building them have been called "Cosmists" in 
this book, due to their "cosmic" perspective. Those opposed to 
building them have been called "Terrans," as in "terra," the Earth, 
which is their perspective. The Cosmists will want to build 
artilects, amongst other reasons, because to them it will be a 
religion, a scientist's religion that is compatible with modern 
scientific knowledge. 
        The Cosmists will feel that humanity has a duty to serve as  
 
 
227 

 
230
the stepping-stone towards building the next dominant rung of the 
evolutionary ladder. Not to do so would be a tragedy on a cosmic 
scale to them. The Cosmists will claim that stopping such an 
advance will be counter to human nature, since human beings have 
always striven to extend their boundaries. Another Cosmist 
argument is that once the artificial brain based computer market 
dominates the world economy, economic and political forces in 
favor of building advanced artilects will be almost unstoppable. 
The Cosmists will include some of the most powerful, the richest, 
and the most brilliant of the Earth's citizens, who will devote their 
enormous abilities to seeing that the artilects get built. A similar 
argument applies to the military and it's use of intelligent 
weaponry. Neither the commercial nor the military sectors will be 
willing to give up artilect research unless they are subjected to 
extreme Terran pressure. 
        To the Terrans, building artilects will mean taking the risk 
that the latter may one day decide to exterminate human beings, 
either deliberately or through indifference. The only certain way to 
avoid such a risk is not to build them in the first place. The Terrans 
will argue that human beings will fear the rise of increasingly 
intelligent machines and their alien differences. To build artilects 
will require an “evolutionary engineering” approach. The resulting 
complexities of the evolved structures that underlie the artilects 
will be too great for human beings to be able to predict the 
behaviors and attitudes of the artilects towards human beings. The 
Terrans will be prepared to destroy the Cosmists, even on a distant 
Cosmist colony, if the Cosmists go ahead with an advanced artilect 
building program. 
        In the short to middle term, say the next 50 years or so, the 
artificial brain based industries will flourish, providing products  
 
 
228 

 
231
that are very useful and very popular with the public, such as 
teacher robots, conversation robots, household cleaner robots, etc. 
In time, the world economy will be based on such products. Any 
attempt to stop the development of increasingly intelligent artilects 
will be very difficult, because the economic and political 
motivation to continue building them will be very strong in certain 
circles. If the brain-based computer industries were to stop their 
research and development into artilects, then many powerful 
individuals, including the artilect company presidents and certain 
politicians will lose big money and political influence. They will 
not give up their status without a fight. 
        However, as the intelligence levels of the early artilects 
increases, it will become obvious to everyone that the intelligence 
gap between these artificial-brain-based products and human 
beings is narrowing. This will create a growing public anxiety. 
Eventually, some nasty incident or series of incidents will 
galvanize most of society against further increase of artificial 
intelligence in the artilects, leading to the establishment of a global 
ban on artilect research.  
        The Cosmists however, will oppose a ban on the development 
of more intelligent artilects, and will probably go underground. If 
the incidents continue and are negative enough, the anger and 
hatred of the Terrans towards the Cosmists will increase to the 
point where the Cosmists may decide that their fate is to leave the 
Earth, an option that is quite realistic with 21st century technology.  
        Since the Cosmists will include some of the most brilliant and 
economically powerful people on the planet, they will probably 
create an elite conspiratorial organization whose aim is to build 
artilects secretly.  
        The book presents a scenario that the author feels to be the  
 
 
229 

 
232
most plausible to him, although it is highly debatable and 
obviously not the last word. This scenario goes as follows. The 
Cosmists create an asteroid-based colony, masked by some 
innocuous activity. In reality, this secret society devises a weapon 
system superior to the best on the Earth. With their wealth and the 
best human brains, this may be achievable. They will also start 
making advanced artilects. If the Terrans on the Earth discover the 
true intentions of the Cosmists, they will probably want to destroy 
them, but not dare to because of the counter threat of the Cosmists 
with their more advanced weapons. The stage is thus set for a 
major 21st century war in which billions of people die – 
“gigadeath.”  
        This horrific number is derived from an extrapolation up the 
graph of the number of deaths in major wars from the beginning of 
the 19th century to the end of the 21st century. Approximately 200 
million people died for political reasons -- wars, purges, genocides, 
etc., in the 20th century. 
        It is worrying about the possibility of a gigadeath “Artilect 
War” between the Terrans and the Cosmists, based indirectly on 
my own brain building work, that keeps me awake at night. 
Hopefully by writing this book, and perhaps also by making a 
movie whose central plot is based on the main ideas of this book, 
the global public will be made aware of what is coming, and will 
debate the topic hotly. 
        Since ultimately, I am a Cosmist, I do not want to stop my 
work. I think it would be a cosmic tragedy if humanity freezes 
evolution at the puny human level, when we could build artilects 
with godlike powers. However, I am not a 100% Cosmist. I 
shudder at the prospect of gigadeath and hence feel that the general 
public should be warned in time before the artilects are among us.  
 
 
230 

 
233
 
This book is part of that warning.  
        The profound schizophrenia that I feel on the Cosmist/Terran 
species dominance issue will be felt by millions of people within a 
few years I expect. There is probably Cosmist and Terran in nearly 
all of us, which may explain why this issue is so divisive. I am 
simply one of the first to feel this schizophrenia. Within a decade it 
may be all over the planet.  
        I close this last chapter of the book with a repetition of the 
pithy slogan introduced in the first chapter. It summarizes the two 
main viewpoints in the artilect debate in a nutshell, a debate that I 
believe will be raging in the coming decades. Here it is again -- 
        "Do we build gods, or do we build our potential 
exterminators?" 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
231 

 
234
Glossary 
 
 
        This book is full of terms new to the reader. This is because 
"new ideas need new labels" and this book contains many new 
ideas. It may be useful therefore to assemble all these new terms in 
a glossary so that readers can consult them as the need arises. 
Alternatively, the glossary may serve as an object of study in its 
own right. Not all of the terms listed and defined here have been 
coined by me. Those that are NOT original are asterisked (*). 
 
 
 
        Anthropic Principle (*)  The strong form of this principle 
states that the values of the constants in the laws of physics are so 
fantastically improbably finely tuned to allow life to exist in our 
universe, that it looks plausible that the universe was designed with 
life in mind, i.e. that it was created by some godlike being. The 
anthropic principle has made a lot of physicists and astronomers 
more tolerant of traditional religious beliefs in an omnipotent 
creator.  
        Artificial Brain (*)  My main aim in life is to make artificial 
brains, which I do in the following way. I evolve neural net circuit 
modules directly in hardware at hardware speeds in about a second 
and then assemble zillions of them in humanly defined artificial 
brain architectures to control robots. My fear that long term brain 
building will lead to a major war late this century has been one of 
the main motives for me to write this book, i.e. to sound the alarm. 
 
233 

 
235
        Artificial Embryology  A hypothesized technology in which  
engineers use techniques borrowed from the biological study of 
embryology, i.e. how fertilized eggs grow into animals and plants, 
to build products. A form of artificial DNA will provide growth 
instructions for artificial cells to grow, divide, and differentiate, to 
build complex structures. (See the definition for "embryofacture" 
below). Artificial embryology offers an alternative engineering 
approach to using zillions of nanoscale robots (nanots) to build 
nanotech-based products. 
        Artilect An abbreviation of the term "artificial intellect," or 
"artificial intelligence" or "massively intelligent machine." 
Building artilects will be made possible by 21st century 
technologies. I believe that a major war over the issue of whether 
artilects should be built or not will take place by the end of this 
century. This book's theme is a discussion of the likelihood of an 
"Artilect War," hence the book's title.  
        Artilect Era    A hypothesized, possibly post-human, era in 
which the artilects have become the dominant species. This book 
speculates a little on what these artilects might do to occupy their 
immortal lives. Their godlike abilities might allow them to 
experiment with the creation of new universes. Perhaps our 
universe is the toy of an advanced artilect. 
        Artilect Issue  The issue is whether or not human beings 
should build artilects this century. As 21st century technologies 
enable increasingly the construction of artilects, an "artilect 
debate" will arise. Human society will split into two major groups, 
the "Cosmists," in favor of building them, and the "Terrans," 
opposed. I believe that disagreements on this issue will become so 
strong and passionate, that they will very probably lead to a major 
war, the "Artilect War," before the end of the 21st century. 
 
234 

 
236
        Artilect Productions Inc  I am a member of a small 
independent 
Hollywood 
movie 
company 
called 
"Artilect 
Productions Inc." My personal motivation in helping to make a 
movie on the artilect theme is to spread to a worldwide audience, 
the idea that an Artilect War may be coming, so that people will 
start thinking about it. I want to see the creation of what I call the 
"artilect debate." A Hollywood movie, if it can be got off the 
ground, would be the most effective means of spreading the word. 
We want to call the movie, "Artilect." 
        Artilect War   A hypothesized war late in the 21st century 
between two human groups, the “Terrans” and the “Cosmists” over 
the issue of whether or not humanity should build artilects. For the 
Cosmists, building artilects will be like a religion. To the Terrans, 
building artilects will be the creation of humanity's potential 
exterminators. The Cosmists will be inspired by awe, the Terrans 
by fear. Since the stake is the survival of the human species, 
passions will be extreme, and the war will be major. It may cost 
billions of human lives -- "gigadeath." Note the distinction 
between an "Artilect War" and a "Species Dominance War." See 
the definition below. 
        Big Picture (*)  In the context of this book, the "big picture" 
includes such things as the universe and its immensity, the idea 
that human beings could make artilects, that there are much bigger 
things than the trivial pursuits of human beings. Cosmists see the 
big picture. Terrans don't or don't want to. Terrans want human 
beings to remain the dominant species on the planet. Cosmists 
have a more cosmic perspective. 
        Big Things  The big things, in the Cosmist sense, are the 
possibilities of building artilects, building godlike, immortal, 
virtually omnipotent creatures with intelligence levels potentially  
 
235 

 
237
trillions of trillions of times greater than the human level, which 
could explore the universe, answer the deep existential and 
scientific questions etc. The big things are the godlike things that 
would be within the grasp of the artilects, but only if the Cosmists 
are free to build them and are not stopped by the Terrans.  
        Brain Architect (BA)  A brain architect designs artificial 
brains. Its what I do. I evolve neural network circuit modules at 
electronic speeds and then assemble them into artificial brain 
architectures. To know how to do that I need to be a brain 
architect. 
         Brain Builder   I am a brain builder, i.e. a builder of artificial 
brains. Now that the new field of evolvable hardware -- see the 
definition below -- is established, I can evolve neural net circuit 
modules at electronic speeds. This is fast enough to make practical 
the creation of zillions of them in a reasonable time and then to put 
them into humanly defined artificial brain architectures. I believe 
that the brain builder industry will eventually dominate the world 
economy, as brain-based products with growing artificial 
intelligence become very popular with the public. The brain 
builders will be responsible for the creation of the artilect problem.  
        Brain Building Industry  Once the brain building pioneers 
show that the concept of building artificial brains is valid, it is very 
likely that industry will get into the brain building business, 
creating such products as household cleaner robots, teacher robots, 
conversational robots, etc. Brain-based computers will eventually 
dominate the computer industry and be worth more than a trillion 
dollars worldwide by the year 2020. Well into this century, the 
brain building industry will be the mainstay of the global economy.  
        Climbing Time  The amount of time in years between a) the 
moment when the artilects show the first signs of intelligence and 
236 

 
238
 b) the moment when artilectual intelligence really begins to shoot 
up exponentially, a moment usually called "the singularity."  
        If the “climbing time” is short, say less than five years, that 
will probably not be long enough for the artilect debate to really 
heat up, and hence there will be no Artilect War between the 
Terrans and the Cosmists. If so, there may still be a "species 
dominance war" between human beings and the advanced artilects. 
The whole point, from the Terran perspective, of an Artilect War 
between Cosmists and Terrans, is that the Terrans might have 
some chance of winning it, by defeating the Cosmists. The Terrans 
want to avoid the risk of a species dominance war occurring 
between human beings and the artilects, a war that the Terrans 
would have zero chance of winning. At least with an “Artilect 
War” between Cosmists and Terrans, the human species may 
survive. 
        My opinion is that the human brain is so complex that it will 
take a good 10 years, and probably a lot longer, of "climbing time" 
for the brain builders to construct artilects of human level 
intelligence, once they have constructed the first "interestingly" 
intelligent artilects. This assumes that the brain builders will be 
basing their artilect designs upon neuroscience principles that need 
to be discovered. Copying the human brain as closely as possible is 
one sure way of producing human level artificial intelligence. 
          I think the artilect debate could start and heat up to an 
Artilect War within a period of 10-20 years, if the climbing time 
were as short as that. I also believe that the start of the climbing 
time will not be for several decades, say not before 2030, i.e. some 
10 years after we have true nanotechnology, and which should be 
enough time for "interestingly" intelligent artilects, based on 
nanotech, to be built. By that time, space technology and space 
 
237 

 
239
transport economics ought to have advanced enough for the 
Cosmists to be able to leave the planet in sufficient numbers to be 
an effective force against the Terrans.        
          Complexity Independence  Complexity independence is the 
name I give to the idea that the internal complexity of a system that 
is being evolved using the "evolutionary engineering" approach is 
irrelevant to the evolutionary algorithm that is evolving it. This 
means that this internal complexity can be higher than the level 
that human engineers could design or understand. This greater 
complexity can thus create greater functionality. I believe that 
complexity independence is the great strength of evolutionary 
engineering. 
It 
may 
eventually 
dominate 
this 
century’s 
engineering, as we build more and more complex systems, in such 
domains as brain building, nanotechnology, embryofacture, etc. 
        Cosmist  A Cosmist is a person who wants to see artilects 
built. Cosmists are opposed to the Terrans. The Terrans will fear 
that artilects may one day decide that the human species is a pest 
and then exterminate "it." The only sure way to avoid this risk is to 
place a total ban on the creation of artilects beyond a certain 
intelligence level. Cosmists are prepared to take this risk for the 
sake of creating godlike artilects with intellectual capacities 
trillions of times greater than human beings. Cosmists conceive 
their ideas as a religion, which motivates them powerfully. 
Cosmists see the "big picture" and want to do "big things." See the 
definitions above. 
        Cosmist-Terran Dichotomy The Cosmist-Terran dichotomy is 
the bitter ideological dispute between the Cosmists and the Terrans 
this century, leading eventually to the likelihood of a major war. 
This ideological clash will be based on the issue of whether 
humanity 
should 
or 
should 
not 
use 
its 
21st 
century 
 
 
238 

 
240
technologies to build artilects. Cosmists say yes, Terrans say  no. 
          Cosmist Transition  The transition of the dominant life 
form on a planet from biological to artilectual. This transition may 
have occurred zillions of times throughout our universe, as 
intelligent biological species, such as ourselves, reach a level of 
technological sophistication whereby the construction of artilects 
becomes possible. Since the invention of nuclear weapons would 
probably closely precede the rise of artilect technology, plus the 
fact that artilect creation would imply the creation of a new 
dominant species, the previously dominant biological species 
concerned would probably object, and fight a "species dominance 
war." Perhaps many intelligent biological species do not survive 
these "Cosmist Transitions." (Also known as, "Species Transition," 
"Artilect Transition," "Artilectual Transition"). 
          Cosmosia A suggested name, pronounced "cos-mo-sha," for 
the Cosmist colony, once the artilect debate has heated up enough 
for the Terran and the Cosmist communities to have 
geographically separated -- whether the colony is on the Earth, or 
as is more likely, in space, and probably deep space.  
        Creeping Cosmism  This idea expresses the difficulty with 
which Cosmist doctrine can be stopped or even slowed. There will 
be so much economic, political and military momentum behind the 
building of artificial brains by the middle of this century, that 
decelerating this process will be extremely difficult, requiring a 
very powerful counterforce. This counterforce should appear in the 
form of a mass Terran fear of the artilect. Creeping cosmism will 
occur because nearly all institutions will want their computers to 
be “just a little smarter” to solve this problem or that problem. This 
process will continue until some kind of incident or crisis occurs to 
stop it.  
     
239 

 
241
       Cyborg (*)  An abbreviation of the term "cybernetic 
organism," i.e. "part human, part machine," or "part natural, part 
artificial" People can become Cyborgs by adding artilectual brain 
implants to their human brains. The early Cyborgs can be seen as a 
third category of people to the Terrans and the Cosmists, or as a 
subgroup of the Cosmists. Some Cosmists may prefer to "build 
themselves" stepwise into artilects than to build artilects external to 
themselves.  
        There seems to be an obvious alliance to be made between 
Cyborgs and the Cosmists, provided that the Cyborgs are not too 
advanced, not too artilectual, so as to leave humans far behind in 
performance terms. Both Cyborgs and Cosmists want to build 
artilects. Both share the same dream, with the one difference that 
Cyborgs actually become the artilects, whereas the Cosmists 
remain human. Cyborgs will be as threatening to the Terrans as 
artilects, and will be rejected by them. Cyborgs may continue to 
look human, if they choose not to use genetic engineering to 
modify their bodies, skulls etc. However, by merely injecting a few 
cubic millimeters of molecular scale, 3D, heatless, one bit per 
atom, artilectual, brain implant, a Cyborg with a human body could 
become an artilect in terms of its intellectual capacities. Advanced 
Cyborgs and advanced artilects are effectively the same thing to 
the Terrans. Both could threaten humanity's survival. 
        Embryofacture  An abbreviation of the term "embryological 
manufacture," i.e. using artificial embryological techniques (see 
the definition above) to manufacture products, using nano-
technological 
principles 
(see 
the 
definition 
below). 
Embryofacturing techniques will be needed if the Cosmists are to 
build nanotech-based artilects that self assemble. 
        Embryological 
Engineers 
Engineers 
who 
are 
 
240 

 
242
  
embryofacturers. (See the above definition). Nanotech industries 
will need such engineers to build human, and larger, scale products 
that self assemble. Embryological engineers will use the same 
method that nature uses to build its human scale products, i.e. 
embryological construction. 
        Entropy (*) A classic term used in physics to denote the 
measure of disorder in a closed system, i.e. one in which no energy 
or matter gets in or out. The second law of thermodynamics says 
that in a closed system, the total entropy cannot decrease. Usually 
it increases, e.g. when ice melts. The fact that entropy normally 
increases explains the common sense phenomena that broken 
windows do not suddenly repair themselves, that stirred milk in 
coffee does not unstir itself spontaneously, etc.  
        Evolutionary Engineering The application of evolutionary 
methods to the engineering of complex systems. (See the definition 
for evolvability below). 
        Evolvability (*)  The ability of systems to evolve according to 
an evolutionary engineer's satisfaction. Evolvability is a critical 
concept in the new field of evolutionary engineering. When 
systems are too complex for traditional top-down, blueprint-based 
human design methods, the only approach remaining may be that 
of evolutionary engineering. This approach uses evolution to build 
complex products and systems. If the only way to build a complex 
product is to use evolutionary engineering, and the evolvability of 
that product is low, then all is lost. Evolvability is a critical concept 
for an evolutionary engineer. It plays a daily role in my brain 
builder work when I try to evolve neural network circuit modules. 
Sometimes they don't evolve with the functionalities I want, so I 
often have to rethink, by changing the neural model I’m evolving. 
 
241 

 
243
        Evolvable Hardware  This is an idea I had in 1992, which 
conceives the bit string instruction that is used to configure (wire 
up) a programmable hardware chip as a chromosome (instruction 
string) of a genetic algorithm (a program that simulates the 
Darwinian evolution process). The fitnesses (performance 
qualities) of a population of programmable chips are measured and 
the better ones are allowed to make more copies of themselves in 
the next generation, while the worse ones are killed off. The 
“chromosomes” of the children are then randomly mutated, and the 
whole process loops through again. Eventually, thanks to the 
Darwinian survival-of-the-fittest selection pressure, functional 
circuits evolve. Evolvable hardware ("E-Hard" or “EH,” for short) 
is now a thriving scientific specialty with its own conferences, 
academic journals, and research groups around the world. I use EH 
techniques to evolve the neural network circuit modules for 
making artificial brains. 
        Femtolect   An abbreviation of the term "femtometer scale 
artilect," i.e. an artilect based on femtotech(nology) and 
femtometer based components. (See the definition for femtotech 
below). 
        Femtometer (*) One millionth of a billionth of a meter, the 
scale of quarks in nucleons (protons, neutrons, in the nucleus of the 
atom). Femtometer based technology might use quarks as the 
building blocks to make quark-gluon chemistry, perhaps in neutron 
stars. A femtometer is a million times smaller than a nanometer, 
which is the size of molecules. 
        Femtotech  An abbreviation of the term "femtometer scale 
technology," i.e. of the scale of quarks inside protons, neutrons etc. 
Femtotechnology at the present time is only a speculation. No 
research work has yet been undertaken in the labs, unlike 
242 

 
244
nanotechnology, which is now a thriving research area. Femtotech 
is probably impossible for human beings, but advanced artilects 
could probably achieve it. If the artilects could develop a 
femtotech, they could create creatures based on femtoscale 
phenomena (femtolects), which could outperform the nanoscale 
artilects (nanolects) by a factor of a trillion trillion for a given unit 
volume and time. The femtolect could do to the nanolect (artilect) 
what the nanolect (artilect) could do to human beings this century, 
i.e. replace them, by becoming the next dominant species. 
         Globa  Globa is the name given to the global state with its 
own global court to settle international disputes. Globa would have 
its own global armed force to police those settlements. The 
advance of technology forces the growth of the size of political 
autonomous units. The logical conclusion of this process is when 
the unit is of planetary size. Globa will banish major wars from the 
planet and will spread material affluence and happiness to the 
globe. The Globa concept is an example of techno-optimism, as 
distinct from the techno-pessimism of the Artilect War. 
     Homebots   An abbreviation of the term "home robot." Once the 
early artilects get smart enough and useful enough, household 
robots will be extremely popular and in high demand by the public. 
A huge homebot industry will be created to research and develop 
homebots. As the homebots get smarter and smarter every year, the 
general public will become alarmed at the rise of artilectual 
intelligence and wonder whether and when its increase should be 
stopped. As homebots and industrial robots become smarter, they 
will replace human workers, being more efficient, never tiring, and 
never complaining. Major reshuffles of the workload will follow, 
creating as much of a social disturbance as the industrial revolution 
in the 18th century. Human beings will be freed from the 
 
243 

 
245
drudgeries of boring, dirty, dangerous work, filling their time with 
leisurely pursuits and receiving government handouts to live. 
However, there will only be a few decades in which this major 
social transition can take place, because once the homebots and 
industrial robots become smart enough to replace human workers, 
they will not remain at that intelligence level for very long. Once 
artilects become smart, they will soon become very smart within a 
few decades or less. 
       One might speculate whether artilects themselves might use 
homebots and industrial robots for their own convenience. 
Presumably in any society, whether human or artilectual, there 
would be a need for robots of different levels of intelligence 
possessing different skill levels. 
        Intelligence Theory A hypothesized theory of the nature of 
intelligence. Once neuroscience understands why intelligence 
levels of human beings differ because of differences in their neural 
structures, it will be possible to create an intelligence theory, which 
can be used by neuro-engineers to increase the intelligence of the 
artificial brains they build. 
          Mono  A mono-lingual, mono-cultured person, who has 
lived in only one culture or country. Monos are limited as 
individuals by the limitations of the monoculture that programs 
them. A contrast can be made between “monos” and “multies.” A 
multi is a multi-lingual multi-cultured person. 
        Moore Doublings A consequence of Moore's Law (see next 
definition) is that after many doublings of electronic performance 
levels, e.g. density of components on a chip, the speed of chips, 
etc., the absolute size of each doubling soon becomes enormous. 
For example, if one doubles and doubles the number 2, after 20 
doublings, the figure is over a million, after 40 doublings, the 
 
244 

 
246
figure is over a trillion. The growth in electronics potential is thus 
not a linear one but is rather exponentially explosive. This growth 
will enable the technology for building artilects this century. 
        Moore's Law (*)  Gordon Moore was one of the cofounders of 
the Intel microprocessor corporation who noticed in the mid 1960s 
that the performance of integrated circuits (ICs) was doubling 
roughly every 18 months or so, due to a down-scaling of the size of 
electronic components. This trend has remained roughly true for 
the past 40 years and fuels the economic growth of our times. If 
Moore's Law continues until 2020, we will be able to store a bit of 
information on a single atom. Moore's Law will enable the 
building of artilects this century, and hence initiate the artilect 
debate and possibly the Artilect War. 
        Multi A multi-lingual, multi-cultured person, who has lived in 
several cultures or countries. Multies are enriched by the strengths 
of several cultures they absorb into their personalities. Multies 
usually prefer the company of other multies, taking an attitude that 
“Monos are boring!” Monos tend to have a poor sense of cultural 
relativity, unconsciously imposing the mono-cultured standards of 
their mono-cultured upbringing upon the values and behaviors of 
the multies. This failing of the monos is seen as unsophisticated 
and limiting by multies.   
         Nanolect An abbreviation of the term "nanoscale artilect," i.e. 
one based on nanotechnological components and principles, as 
distinct from a femtolect, which is based on femtotech and 
femtometer based components. A nanolect would be as inferior to 
a femtolect as would a human being to a nanolect. In this book, an 
artilect is usually conceived of as a nanolect, not a femtolect. 
Femtotechnology has barely been speculated upon by the scientists 
let alone explored in the laboratories. A nanolect could be of 
245 

 
247
virtually any size, ranging from the submicroscopic, requiring a 
microscope to see it, to asteroid size (hundreds of kilometers 
across) and beyond. The more atoms used to store information and 
artilect circuitry, the larger the size of the nanolect. Atoms have a 
definite size and take up space. 
        Nanometer (*)  Nano means a billionth. A nanometer is a 
billionth of a meter, i.e. molecular scale. Atoms are about a tenth 
of a nanometer across. Today's computers function at nanosecond 
speeds. 
        Nanotech (*)  An abbreviation of the term nanotechnology, or 
“molecular scale engineering,” which is the construction of 
molecular scale machines, one atom at a time, with perfect atomic 
precision. Artilects will be based on nanotech.  
        Nanots  An abbreviation of the term "nanoscale robot," i.e. a 
robot of molecular scale (nanometer, or billionth of a meter), 
capable of picking up single atoms and placing them with atomic 
precision to build molecular components and machines. 
         Netilect  An abbreviation of the term "network of artilects." 
Artilects, even if they can store one bit on one atom, will face 
computational limits on how much data they can store within a 
given mass. They will be able to exchange data, experience, and 
ideas with each other by linking up in a huge network, probably 
via the use of electromagnetic waves, or some physical 
phenomenon human beings have not discovered yet, or may never 
discover due to human intellectual limitations. 
        Phys-Comp (*)  An abbreviation of the term "physics of  
computation," which investigates the fundamental physical limits 
of computation, e.g. “Is it possible to compute with zero heat 
generation?” “What is the maximum rate of computation one can 
perform in a given volume, in a given time?” etc. Quantum 
246 

 
248
computing questions are much discussed in the field of phys-comp. 
        Quantum Computing (*) As the electronics industry shrinks 
its components to molecular scale, quantum phenomena begin 
inevitably to appear. Quantum computing is a form of computation 
that takes advantage of the quantum phenomenon of superposition 
of quantum states, which can handle many classical mechanical 
cases at once. This is hugely more efficient than classical 
computing, which computes one case at a time. Nanotech based 
artilects will need to be quantum computers, given their molecular 
scale. 
        Reversible Computing (*)  A style of computing that 
generates zero heat, and hence serves as the basis for 3D-computer 
circuitry. Reversible computing employs reversible logic gates that 
do not destroy information. Thermodynamical considerations show 
that wiping out bits of information generates heat. By sending 
information through a reversible computer, copying the answer, 
and then sending the result back (reversibly) through the same 
circuitry, one arrives at the original input. No information is 
destroyed, so no heat is generated. Reversible computing is 
inevitable because molecular scale circuits will explode if they 
employ traditional irreversible techniques. This century’s artilects 
will be based upon this computing style.  
         Scaling War  The type of war that may occur when new 
technologies allow the construction of new life forms of vastly 
superior intellectual, and other capacities.  The greater intellectual 
capacities result from greater signaling speeds and component 
densities. As an example of a scaling war, take the “Artilect War”  
between the Cosmists and the Terrans, both human groups, when 
nanotech-based artilects (nanolects) become possible. A further 
example could be a war between the Xists and the Yists (both 
247 

 
249
nanolect groups) when femtotech based artilects (femtolects) 
become possible. The basic cause of a scaling war is due to 
disagreements between two groups of the same scale, over the 
risks that may follow if superior creatures, based on the new 
(smaller, faster, denser) technologies, are built. The latter might 
decide to exterminate the creatures based on the inferior (larger, 
slower, sparser) technologies.  
        Scientist's Religion   Most scientists are not conventionally 
religious, tending to look upon conventional religions as being 
based on prescientific superstitions that are incompatible with both 
modern scientific knowledge and with the modern scientific 
approach of testing hypotheses. However, scientists are also human 
beings, and hence have the same religious hungers as other people. 
Cosmism is a religion to the Cosmists, yet is based on modern 
science. It could be a scientist's religion in the sense of providing a 
sense of awe, of collective purpose, the creation of gods, etc. but 
be consistent with science. Cosmism is a set of “religious” beliefs 
that scientists could find credible. 
        Singularity (*) In mathematics, a singularity is a value that 
approaches infinity. In the context of the artilect debate, the 
singularity refers to the idea that a time will come when a machine 
is made which is so smart that it will be able to redesign itself 
better and faster than human beings. The result will be a superior 
machine that then designs an even better one, ad infinitum, and at 
the speed of light. Another variant is that the machine will be an 
excellent learner, and simply starts learning for itself at a rate a 
million times faster than humans. Its increase in intelligence and 
knowledge would seem infinitely fast to humans.      
          Smartilect  An abbreviation for a "smart artilect." There will 
probably be many kinds of artilect built this century. The early 
 
248 

 
250
artilects will be less intelligent and capable than the later ones. The 
really smart ones could be called "smartilects." 
         Space Consciousness Space consciousness is the emotionally 
overwhelming feeling one has when one sees either through vivid, 
large scale, 3D graphics, or for real to some extent, the immensity 
of space, the billions of stars in a galaxy, the billions of galaxies in 
our universe.  This feeling makes one conscious of the total 
insignificance of human preoccupations. Space consciousness 
makes human beings more aware that there are "bigger things" in 
life and in the universe than normal day-to-day human activities 
and goals. Space consciousness is an important concept to the 
Cosmists and to Cosmist ideology. 
       Species Dominance Debate  The issue that will dominate 
global politics this century is that of species dominance. The 
species dominance debate will focus upon the question of whether 
humanity should build artilects or not. Should human beings 
remain the dominant species, or should artilects be built to surpass 
us in intelligence levels. Progress in 21st century technologies will 
allow artilects to be built, and force the dominant species issue to 
be debated. 
     Species Dominance War A war between the dominant 
biological species of a planet and the artilects that it creates. Since 
the artilects would be a superior species to the biologically based 
creatures, the war would settle which species would dominate. A 
distinction needs to be made between a "Species Dominance War" 
and the "Artilect War." The "Artilect War" is the name given to the 
war between two human groups fighting over whether or not 
artilects should be built. A "species dominance war" could occur 
anywhere in the universe and is a far more general concept. For 
example, if "femtolects," i.e. "femtotechnology" based "artilects," 
249 

 
251
 had a war with the "nanolects," i.e. "nanotechnology" based 
"artilects," that would be a "species dominance war." 
        Talkies  A talkie is a slang word for a conversational robot, 
i.e. one that a human being can chat with, have a friendship with, 
and if the talkies are smart enough, to have a relationship with. 
Talkies will need to be of almost human level intelligence to be 
really effective and popular with their human owners. 
        Teacherbots  A teacherbot is a teacher robot, i.e. an 
artificially intelligent robot capable of teaching human beings, by 
adapting to their intelligence levels, interests, and motivations. 
        Terran  A Terran, based on the word "terra," the Earth, is 
someone who feels that artilects are too potentially dangerous to 
the survival of human beings to be built. Terrans oppose the 
Cosmists, who feel that they should be built. The Terrans want 
human beings to remain dominant species on the Earth. The 
fundamental attitude of the Terrans is that the only way to be sure 
that there is zero risk that the artilects will destroy the human 
species at some later date, is that the artilects are never built in the 
first place. Therefore to preserve the survival of the human species, 
the Terrans will stop the Cosmists, no matter what the cost, even if 
a major war is necessary. 
        Terran Problem  The Terran problem is the name given to the 
fear of the leaders of the artificial brain based industries that they 
may see their companies lose sales and political influence if the 
Terrans succeed in placing a global ban on the development of 
artilects beyond a certain "safe-for-humans" intelligence level. 
 
 
 
250 
 

 
252
Bibliography 
 
 
 
Books on Cyborgs 
 
Andy CLARK, Natural-Born Cyborgs: Minds, Technologies, and 
the Future of Human Intelligence, Oxford University Press, 2003. 
Chris H. GRAY, Cyborg Citizen, Routledge, 2001. 
Jacques HOUIS et al (eds.), Being Human: The Technological 
Extensions of the Body, Marsilio, 1999. 
Kevin WARWICK, I, Cyborg, Century, 2002. 
 
 
Books on Intelligent Machines, Posthumanity, etc. 
 
Azamat ABDOULLAEV, Artificial Superintelligence, EIS Ltd., 
1999. 
Igor ALEXANDER, How to Build a Mind, Weidenfeld and 
Nicholson, 2000. 
James BAILEY, After Thought: The Computer Challenge to 
Human Intelligence, Basic Books, 1996. 
Peter BOCK, The Emergence of Artificial Cognition, World 
Scientific, 1993. 
Damien BRODERICK, The Spike: How Our Lives are Being 
Transformed by Rapidly Advancing Technologies, Forge, 2001. 
Rodney A. BROOKS, Flesh and Machines: How Robots Will 
Change Us, Pantheon, 2002. 
Maureen CAUDILL, In Our Own Image: Building an Artificial 
Person, Oxford University Press, 1992. 
 
 
251 

 
253
Thomas M. GEORGES, Digital Soul: Intelligent Machines and 
Human Values, Westview, 2003. 
Jerome C. GLENN, Future Mind: Artificial Intelligence, 
Acropolis, 1989. 
Ray KURZWEIL, The Age of Intelligent Machines, MIT Press, 
1990. 
Ray KURZWEIL, The Age of Spiritual Machines: When 
Computers Exceed Human Intelligence, Viking, 1999. 
Ray KURZWEIL, Are We Spiritual Machines? Ray Kurzweil vs. 
the Critics of Strong A.I., Discovery Institute, 2002. 
James MARTIN, After the Internet: Alien Intelligence, Capital 
Press, 2000. 
Pamela McCORDUCK, Machines Who Think, Freeman, 1979. 
Bill McKIBBEN, Enough: Staying Human in an Engineered Age, 
Timers Books, 2003. 
Hans MORAVEC, Mind Children: The Future of Robot and 
Human Intelligence, Harvard University Press, 1990. 
Hans MORAVEC, Robot: Mere Machine to Transcendent Mind, 
Oxford University Press, 1999. 
Douglas 
MULHALL, 
Our 
Molecular 
Future: 
How 
Nanotechnology, Robotics, Genetics, and Artificial Intelligence 
Will Transform Our World,  Prometheus Books, 2002. 
Gregory 
S. 
PAUL, 
Earl 
D. 
COX, 
Beyond 
Humanity 
CyberEvolution and Future Minds, Charles River Media, 1996. 
Sidney PERKOWITZ, Digital People: From Bionic Humans to 
Androids, Joseph Henry Press, 2004. 
Peter RUSSELL, The Global Brain Awakens: Our Next 
Evolutionary Leap, Element, 2000. 
Jeffrey SATINOVER, The Quantum Brain: The Search for 
Freedom and the Next Generation of Man, Wiley, 2001. 
 
 
252 

 
254
Geoff SIMONS, Is Man a Robot, Wiley, 1986. 
Gregory STOCK, Metaman: The Merging of Humans and 
Machines into a Global Superorganism, Simon & Schuster, 1993. 
John TAYLOR, The Shape of Minds to Come, Michael Joseph, 
1971. 
Kevin WARWICK, March of the Machines: Why the New Race of 
Robots will Rule the World, Century, 1997. 
Kevin WARWICK, In the Mind of the Machine: The Breakthrough 
in Artificial Intelligence, Arrow, 1998. 
 
 
Books on Nanotechnology 
 
William I. ATKINSON, Nanocosm: Nanotechnology and the Big 
Changes Coming from the Inconceivably Small, Amacom, 2003. 
B. C. CRANDALL et al., Nanotechnology: Research and 
Perspectives, MIT Press, 1992. 
B. 
C. 
CRANDALL 
(ed.), 
Nanotechnology: 
Molecular 
Speculations on Global Abundance, MIT Press, 1996. 
K. Eric DREXLER, Engines of Creation: The Coming Era of 
Nanotechnology, Anchor Press, Doubleday, 1986. 
K. Eric DREXLER et al., Unbounding the Future: The 
Nanotechnology Revolution, Morrow, 1991. 
K. Eric DREXLER, Nanosystems: Molecular Machinery, 
Manufacturing, and Computation, Wiley Interscience, 1992. 
Sandy FRITZ, Understanding Nanotechnology, Warner Books, 
2002. 
Michael GROSS, Travels to the Nanoworld: Miniature Machinery 
in Nature and Technology, Plenum Trade, 1999. 
 
 
253 

 
255
Markus 
KRUMMENACKER 
et 
al 
(eds.) 
Prospects 
in 
Nanotechnology: Toward Molecular Manufacturing, Wiley, 1995. 
Wil McCARTHY, Hacking Matter: Levitating Chairs, Quantum 
Mirages, and the Infinite Weirdness of Programmable Atoms, 
Basic books, 2003. 
Mark RATNER et al. Nanotechnology: A Gentle Introduction to 
the Next Big Idea, Prentice Hall, 2003. 
Ed REGIS, Nano: The Emerging Science of Nanotechnology, 
Remaking the World – Molecule by Molecule, Little,Brown, 1995. 
Edward RIETMAN, Molecular Engineering of Nanosystems, 
Springer, 2001. 
Gregory TIMP (ed.), Nanotechnology, Springer, 1999. 
 
 
Books on Quantum Computing 
 
Amir D. ACZEL, Entanglement: The Greatest Mystery in Physics, 
Four Walls Eight Windows, 2001. 
Julian BROWN, The Quest for the Quantum Computer, 
Touchstone, 2000. 
Mika HIRVENSALO, Quantum Computing, Springer, 2001. 
Gerald J. MILBURN, Schrodinger’s Machines, Freeman, 1997. 
Gerald J. MILBURN, The Feynman Processor: Quantum 
Entanglement and the Computing Revolution, Perseus Books, 
1998. 
Michael A. NIELSEN and Isaac L. CHUANG, Quantum 
Computation and Quantum Information, Cambridge University 
Press, 2000. 
 
 
 
 
254 

 
256
The Author’s Website and Email Contact Address 
 
Prof. Dr. Hugo de GARIS 
 
http://profhugodegaris.wordpress.com 
profhugodegaris@yahoo.com 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
255 
 

