
YEREVAN STATE UNIVERSITY 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ASTROPHYSICS, GRAVITATION  
AND QUANTUM PHYSICS 
 
 
 
 
A VOLUME IN HONOUR OF PROFESSOR  
EDVARD CUBARYAN 
ON HIS 75TH BIRTHDAY 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
YEREVAN 
YSU PUBLISHING HOUSE 
2012 



 
   


 	
 	  
 



 
 
 
   
  
  
  

        !"    #$ ! #
$ %   &'(&)''*+#

 ",- ./	*0        !"   
 1
- 
-    2
-/ /	-,3
4 - , 	 - -5*$ !  -    	 5  
   /5 -  	  !  2 * --5  -
6 7/
  2 89: 	 3 ",;   5
          
/ "     

   .-/	  <=    - > -  !  
///-	     / - 	 3

Editor Dr. Phys. Math. Sciences, 
Prof. A. A. Saharian 
 
Astrophysics, gravitation and quantum physics. Yerevan. YSU Publishing 
House, 2012, 300 pages. 

The book includes the contributions to to the conference “Astrophysics, 
Gravitation and Quantum Physics” in honour of Professor Edvard 
Chubaryan on his 75th birthday organized by the Department of Physics of 
the Yerevan State University (20 – 21 May, 2011). It will be useful for 
physicists working in astrophysics, gravity and quantum physics and also 
for students specializing in these directions. 

 
   
ISBN  
? $ %     >//&'(&
? YSU Publishing House, 2012
 
 

 
 
Professor Edvard Chubaryan 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Contents 
 
Preface…………………………………………………………….. 
R. M. Avagyan, Edvard Chubaryan ………………………………. 
V. N. Melnikov, Gravity and Cosmology in Arbitrary Dimensions 
and Fundamental Constants………………………………………… 
E. Chubaryan, R. Avagyan, G. Harutunyan, A. Piloyan, Tensor-
Scalar Theories of Gravity in the Context of Modern Cosmology…. 
R. M. Avagyan, G. Harutunyan, Modified Cosmological 
Mmodels in JBD Theory……………………………………………. 
E. R. Bezerra de Mello, Induced Self-Interactions in the Spacetime 
of a Global Monopole with Ffinite Core………………………….. 
A. A. Saharian, Quantum Vacuum in de Sitter Spacetime………… 
D. M. Sedrakian, Generation of a Toroidal Mmagnetic Field in 
Rotating Neutron Stars……………………………………………… 
E. E. Khachikyan, Physical Peculiarities of UV Galaxies………… 
M. G. Abrahamyan, Tornado Mechanism of Astrophysical Jets 
Generation………………………………………………………….. 
A. P. Mahtessian, Dependence of Galaxy Luminosity Function on 
the Morphological Type and on Surrounding Medium…………….. 
G. A. Ohanian, Formation and Evolution of Galaxies: Two 
Different Approaches………………………………………………. 
H. M. Khudaverdian, Th. Th. Voronov, Second Order Operators 
on the Algebra of Densities and a Groupoid of Connections……… 
L. A. Hovhannisyan, G. Muradyan, A. Zh. Muradyan, Quantum 
Superpositional Beam-Splitter for a Two-Bunch Atom 
Interferometer………………………………………………………. 
E. M. Khazaryan, H. A. Sarkisyan, Adiabatic Description of 
Ring-Like Nanostructures………………………………………….. 
  6 
 
  7 
 
 
  9 
 
 35 
 
 
 48 
 
 55 
 76 
 
 
102 
107 
 
 
122 
 
139 
 
178 
 
 
188 
 
 
223 
 
 
231 
 

T. V. Gevorgyan and G. Yu. Kryuchkyan, Pulsed ”Three-
Photon” Light………………………………………………………. 
A. E. Allahverdyan and K. V. Hovhannisyan, Work Extraction 
from Microcanonical Bath………………………………………….. 
M. Samsonyan, M theory on AdS7  S4 and AdS4  S7=Zk………… 
A. S. Kotanjyan, A. A. Saharian, V. M. Bardeghyan, Casimir-
Polder Forces in the Geometry of Cosmic String…………………... 
V. M. Mekhitarian, In Response to Edward Chubaryan’s Beloved 
History on the Abandoned Paper by S. Goudsmit and G. 
Uhlenbeck about the Spin…………………………………………... 
 
244 
 
258 
 
271 
 
283 
 
 
 
292 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Preface 
 
      On May 5, 2011 Professor Edvard Chubaryan, a world-known Armenian 
scientist in the area of theoretical physics and astrophysics, celebrated his 
75th birthday. This volume consists of the contributions to the conference 
“Astrophysics, Gravitation and Quantum Physics” in honour of Professor 
Edvard Chubaryan on his 75th birthday hosted by the Department of Physics 
of the Yerevan State University (20 – 21 May, 2011). The research activity 
by Edvard Chubaryan is very wide and covers various topics of gravity, 
astrophysics and quantum physics. The volume includes the papers in all 
these directions and will be interesting for physicists working in these 
topics. The contributors present this book to Professor Edvard Chubaryan as 
a gift on his 75th anniversary. All of them, together with researchers of the 
Department of Physics of the Yerevan State University wish him excellent 
health for many years and even more brilliant scientific achievements. 
 
Editor Professor A. A. Saharian (Yerevan State University) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Edvard Chubaryan 
 
R. M. Avagyan 
Department of Physics, Yerevan State University 
1 Alex Manoogian Street, 0025 Yerevan, Armenia 

        Edvard Chubaryan, theoretical physicist, one of the founders of the Armenian 
school of physics of superdense celestial bodies, Honored Scientist, Academician 
of NAS of Armenia, Doctor of Physical and Mathematical Sciences, Professor, 
Head of the Theoretical Physics Department of Yerevan State University, 
celebrated his 75th anniversary. 
        Professor Edvard Chubaryan was born on May 5, 1936. In 1953 he left school 
 20 named after Dzerzhinsky with honors and gold medal. In the same year he 
entered the Department of Physics of Faculty of Physics and Mathematics of 
Yerevan State University. Still a student he was actively engaged in research work. 
His first scientific paper, which became his thesis was devoted to the question of 
parity violation in the processes of β -decay - a very topical issue in the 1950s. 
After graduating from the University, in 1958-1961 E. Chubaryan continued his 
postgraduate studies at the Department of Theoretical Physics. After defending his 
PhD dissertation in 1964 he began working at the same department, first as a senior 
lecturer, from 1967 - as an Associate professor and since the defense of his 
doctorial dissertation in 1972 he is a professor of the Department of Theoretical 
Physics. 
       Edvard Chubaryan’s scientific research is devoted to thermodynamics of 
degenerate superdense matter and the theory of superdense celestial bodies, whose 
bases in the early 1960s were laid by academicians Victor Hambartsumyan and 
Gurgen Sahakian. For his research work in this field in 1970 Edvard Chubaryan 
together with Davit Sedrakyan and Vladimir Papoyan was awarded the  Prize of 
Lenin Komsomol. 
       In subsequent years Edvard Chubaryan together with the staff members of the 
Department of Theoretical Physics carried out a series of works devoted to the 
theory of pulsars, rotating magnetized neutron stars. 
      There is every reason to believe that in the case of extremely strong 
gravitational fields, Einstein's general theory of relativity needs substantial 
clarification. On this basis there have been a number of attempts at the Department 
of Theoretical Physics to study alternative theories of gravitation. In this respect 
Edvard Chubaryan’s input into the development of bimetric  gravitational theory, 
Kaluza-Klein’s  projective theory and others is very important. 
      A number of significant problems were solved within the framework of 
bimetric theory of gravitation. In particular, it has been shown how to self-
consistently determine the background and a curved metrics. With prof. 
Chubaryan’s direct participation models of static spherical as well as those of 
stationary rotating stellar configurations were built, their integral parameters –  
 
7 

 weight, size, quadrupole moments, etc. – were calculated in the framework of  
bimetric gravitational theory. The analytic vacuum solution of the field equations 
of the bimetric gravitational theory has been found, which is unique in scientific 
literature.  
       Edvard. Chubaryan is the author of over 140 scientific papers published in 
national and international journals. They were presented at many conferences, 
symposia, and received recognition of the scientific community. 
       E. Chubaryan is one of the authors (with G. Sahakian) of the textbook 
"Quantum Mechanics" in Russian and Armenian languages, co-author of Collected 
Problems in Theoretical Physics, as well as of the Collected Problems in Physics 
for University entrants. 
       E.Chubaryan plays a major role in the education of qualified physicists. He 
teaches a course in "Quantum Mechanics", as well as special courses in theoretical 
physics at the Faculty of Physics. Six PhD theses were defended under his 
supervision. From 1991 to 2006, Professor E. Chubaryan, being the vice-rector of 
Yerevan State University for Natural Sciences, devoted much attention to the 
organization of educational process and actively participated in the reform of 
university education. 
        One cannot but mention his significant role in the formation and development 
of the Ijevan branch of Yerevan State University. The school education has not 
been left unattended either. E. Chubaryan was chairman of the educational-
methodical council in physics of the USSR Ministry of Education, the chairman of 
the jury of Republican school Olympiads in physics, and in 1984 the chairman of 
All-Union School Olympiad jury. On his initiative in secondary schools, 
particularly in schools with physical and mathematical bias, extensive work was 
carried out to identify the gifted students. 
       Professor Chubaryan’s role in building up and strengthening the scientific 
links between the Joint Institute for Nuclear Research (Dubna, Russia) and the 
Physics Department of Yerevan State University is also noteworthy. Up to now 
graduates of the Faculty of Physics, Yerevan State University, specialists in 
Nuclear and Theoretical Physics, work at this Institute. 
      In addition to the fruitful scientific and pedagogical activity E. Chubaryan takes 
an active part in public activities. He is a board member of the Problem-solving 
Council in Physics of NAS of Armenia, a member of specialized councils for 
defense of doctoral dissertations, a member of the Academic Councils of Yerevan 
State University and of the Faculty of Physics. 
      Edvard Chubaryan, an honest, direct and humble scientific worker, enjoys the 
confidence and affection of his students and colleagues. The hero of the day is full 
of strength, vigour and willingness to work actively. This is evidenced by the fact 
that during the last two years he substantially revised and republished the textbook 
"Quantum Mechanics" and "Problems in quantum mechanics." 
       Our congratulations to Professor Chubaryan. We wish him health, longevity 
and success in all his future endeavors. 
 
 
 
8 

Gravity and cosmology in arbitrary dimensions
and fundamental constants
V. N. Melnikov
Center for Gravitation and Fundamental Metrology, VNIIMS
and
Institute of Gravitation and Cosmology
Peoples’ Friendship University of Russia
46 Ozernaya Str., Moscow, 119361, Russia
Abstract
Integrable multidimensional models of gravitation and cosmology make up
one of the proper approaches to study basic issues and strong ﬁeld objects, the
Early and present Universe and black hole physics in particular [1, 2, 3]. Our
main results within this approach are described both for cosmology and for BH
physics. Problems of the absolute G measurements and its possible time and
range variations are reﬂections of the uniﬁcation problem.
The choice, nature, classiﬁcation and precision of determination of funda-
mental physical constants and also their role in expected transfer to new def-
initions of main units of SI , supposed to be based on fundamental physical
constants and stable quantum phenomena are described. The problem of tem-
poral variations of constants is also discussed, temporal and range variations of
G in particular. A need for further absolute measurements of G, its possible
range and time variations is pointed out. The multipurpose space project SEE
is shortly described, aimed for measuring G and its stability in space and time
3-4 orders better than at present. It may answer many important questions
posed by gravitation, cosmology and uniﬁed theories. Laboratory experiment
project to test possible deviations from the Newton Law is presented also.
1. Introduction
Gravitation as a fundamental interaction that governs all phenomena at large
and very small scales, but still not well understood at a quantum level, is a missing
cardinal link to uniﬁcation of all physical interactions.Discovery of present accel-
eration of the Universe, dark matter and dark energy problems are also a great
challenge to modern physics, which may bring to a new revolution in it. Studies in
the previous century in the ﬁeld of gravitation were devoted mainly to theoretical
investigations and experimental veriﬁcation of general relativity and alternative the-
ories of gravitation with a strong stress on relations between macro and microworld
phenomena or, in other words, between classical gravitation and quantum physics.
9

As a motivation there were: singularities in cosmology and black hole physics, role
of gravity at large and very small (planckian) scales, attempts to create a quantum
theory of gravity as for other physical ﬁelds, problem of possible variations of fun-
damental physical constants etc. A lot of work was done in our group [4] along such
topics as :
- exact solutions with diﬀerent ﬁelds as sources in GR,
- particle-like solutions with a gravitational ﬁeld,
- quantum theory of ﬁelds in a classical gravitational background,
- quantum cosmology with ﬁelds like a scalar one, with the cosmological constant
etc.,
- self-consistent treatment of quantum eﬀects in cosmology,
- development of alternative theories of gravitation: scalar-tensor, with extra
dimensions etc.,
- possible variations of fundamental physical constants [5, 6, 7, 8, 9].
As our main results of this period one may mention [4] the ﬁrst quantum cos-
mological model with a cosmological constant (creation from nothing) (1972); ﬁrst
classical models for conformal scalar ﬁeld (1968) and quantum cosmological mod-
els with minimal and conformal scalar ﬁelds (1971), ﬁrst nonsingular cosmological
model with spontaneous symmetry breaking (1978-79) of the nonlinear conformal
scalar ﬁeld, exact solutions for nonlinear electrodynamics, including Born-Infeld one,
ﬁrst exact solution for dilaton-type interaction with electro-magnetic ﬁeld in GR.
First non-singular ﬁeld particle-like solution with gravitational ﬁeld (1979). Also,
the conclusion that only G may vary with respect to atomic system of measurements
in Brans-Dicke frame (1978).
As all attempts to quantize general relativity in a usual manner failed and it was
proved that it is not renormalizable, it became clear that the promising trend is along
the lines of uniﬁcation of all physical interactions which started in the 70’s. About
this time the experimental investigation of gravity in strong ﬁelds and gravitational
waves started giving a powerful speed up in theoretical studies of such objects as
pulsars, black holes, QSO’s, AGN’s, early Universe etc., which continues now.
In experimental activities some crucial next generation gravitational experiments
verifying predictions of uniﬁed schemes will be important. Among them are: STEP
- testing the corner stone Equivalence Principle, SEE - testing the inverse square
law (or new non-Newtonian interactions), EP, possible variations of the newtonian
constant G with time, measurements of the absolute value of G with unprecedented
accuracy [10, 11]. Of course, gravitational waves problem, veriﬁcation of torsional,
rotational, 2nd order and strong ﬁeld eﬀects remain important also.
Other very important feature, which may be envisaged, is an increasing role of
fundamental physics studies, gravitation, cosmology and astrophysics in particular,
in space experiments [12]. Unique microgravity environments and modern technol-
ogy outbreak give nearly ideal place for gravitational experiments which suﬀer a
lot on Earth from its relatively strong gravitational ﬁeld and gravitational ﬁelds of
nearby objects due to the fact that there is no ways of screening gravity.
In the development of relativistic gravitation and dynamical cosmology we may
10

notice three distinct stages: ﬁrst, investigation of models with matter sources in the
form of a perfect ﬂuid, as was originally done by Einstein and Friedmann. Second,
studies of models with sources as diﬀerent physical ﬁelds, starting from electromag-
netic and scalar ones, both in classical and quantum cases (see [4]). And third, which
is really topical now, application of ideas and results of uniﬁed models for treating
fundamental problems of cosmology, black hole and wormholes physics, especially in
high energy regimes and for explanation of the present acceleration of the Universe,
dark matter and dark energy problems. Multidimensional gravitational models play
an essential role in the latter approach.
The necessity of studying multidimensional models of gravitation and cosmology
[1, 2] is motivated by several reasons.
First, the main trend of modern physics
is the uniﬁcation of all known fundamental physical interactions: electromagnetic,
weak, strong and gravitational ones. During the recent decades there has been a
signiﬁcant progress in unifying weak and electromagnetic interactions, some more
modest achievements in GUT, supersymmetric, string and superstring theories.
Now, theories with membranes, p-branes and M-theory are being created and
studied. Having no deﬁnite successful theory of uniﬁcation now, it is desirable to
study the common features of these theories and their applications to solving basic
problems of modern gravity and cosmology. Second, multidimensional gravitational
models, as well as scalar-tensor theories of gravity, are theoretical frameworks for
describing possible temporal and range variations of fundamental physical constants
[4, 5, 6, 7]. The possible discovery of the ﬁne structure constant variations and its
anisotropy is now at a critical further investigation.
Lastly, applying multidimensional gravitational models to basic problems of mod-
ern cosmology and black hole physics, we hope to ﬁnd answers to such long-standing
problems as singular or nonsingular initial states, creation of the Universe, cre-
ation of matter and its entropy,cosmological constant, coincidence problem, origin
of inﬂation and speciﬁc scalar ﬁelds which may be necessary for its realization,
isotropization and graceful exit problems, stability and nature of fundamental con-
stants [5, 12, 13], possible number of extra dimensions, their stable compactiﬁcation,
new data on present acceleration of the Universe, dark matter and dark energy etc.
Multidimensional gravitational models are certain generalizations of GR which
is tested reliably for weak ﬁelds up to 0.0001 and partially in strong ﬁelds (binary
pulsars), so it is quite natural to inquire about their possible observational or ex-
perimental windows. From what we already know, among these windows are:
– possible deviations from the Newton and Coulomb laws, or new interactions,
– possible variations of the eﬀective gravitational constant with a time rate
smaller than the Hubble one,
– possible existence of monopole modes in gravitational waves,
– diﬀerent behaviour of strong ﬁeld objects, such as multidimensional black holes,
wormholes and AGN,
– standard cosmological tests,
– possible non-conservation of energy in strong ﬁeld objects and accelerators, if
braneworld or similar ideas about gravity in the bulk turn out to be true, etc.
11

Since modern cosmology has already become a unique laboratory for testing
standard uniﬁed models of physical interactions at energies that are far beyond
the level of existing and future man-made accelerators, there exists a possibility of
using cosmological and astrophysical data for discriminating between future uniﬁed
schemes. Data on possible time variations or possible deviations from the Newton
law should also contribute to the uniﬁed theory choice.
As no accepted uniﬁed model exists, in our approach [1, 2, 14, 15] we adopted
models, based on multidimensional Einstein equations with or without sources of
diﬀerent nature as: cosmological constant, perfect and viscous ﬂuids, scalar and
electromagnetic ﬁelds and their possible interactions, dilaton and moduli ﬁelds, ﬁelds
of antisymmetric forms (related to p-branes) etc.
Our program’s main objective was and is to obtain exact self-consistent solu-
tions (integrable models) for these models and then to analyze them in cosmologi-
cal, spherically and axially symmetric cases. It is done mainly within Riemannian
geometry. In many cases we tried to single out models, which do not contradict
available experimental or observational data on variations of G.
As our model [1, 2] we use n Einstein spaces of constant curvature with sources
as (m+1)-component perfect ﬂuid, (or ﬁelds or form-ﬁelds,), cosmological or spher-
ically symmetric metric, manifold as a direct product of factor-spaces of arbitrary
dimensions. Then in harmonic time gauge we show that Einstein multidimensional
equations are equivalent to Lagrange equations with non-diagonal in general min-
isuperspace metric and some exponential potential. After diagonalization of this
metric we perform reduction to sigma-model and Toda-like systems, further to Li-
ouville, Abel, generalized Emden-Fowler Eqs. etc. and try to ﬁnd exact solutions.
We suppose that behavior of extra spaces is the following: they are constant, or
dynamically compactiﬁed, or like torus, or large, but with barriers, walls etc.
So, we realized the program in arbitrary dimensions (from 1988) [1, 2, 3, 14, 15]
in cosmology obtaining exact general solutions of multidimensional Einstein
equations with sources:
- Λ , Λ + scalar ﬁeld (singled out nonsingular, dynamically compactiﬁed, inﬂa-
tionary, 1994);
- perfect ﬂuid, PF + scalar ﬁeld (e.g. nonsingular, inﬂationary solutions);
- viscous ﬂuid (e.g. nonsingular, generation of mass and entropy, quintessence
and coincidence in 2-component model);
- stochastic behavior near the singularity, billiards in Lobachevsky space, D=11
is critical, ϕ destroys billiards (1994);
- for all above cases Ricci-ﬂat solutions above were obtained for any n, also with
curvature in one factor-space; with curvatures in 2 factor-spaces only for total N=10,
11;
- ﬁelds: scalar, dilatons, forms of arbitrary rank (1998) - inﬂationary, Λ genera-
tion by forms (p-branes) [16];
- ﬁrst billiards for dilaton-forms (p-branes) interaction (1999);
- quantum variants (solutions of WDW-equation [17]) for all above cases where
classical solutions were obtained;
12

- dilatonic ﬁelds with potentials [18, 19], billiard behavior for them also.
For many of these integrable models we calculated also the variation with time
of the eﬀective gravitational constant and comparison with present experimental
bounds allowed to choose particular models or single out some classes of solutions.
Solutions depending on r in any dimensions:
- generalized Schwarzchild, generalized Tangerlini (BH’s are singled out), also
with minimal scalar ﬁeld (no BH’s);
- generalized Reissner-Nordstrom (BH’s also are singled out), the same plus ϕ
(no BH’s);
- multi-temporal;
- for dilaton-like interaction of ϕ and e.-m. ﬁelds (BH’s exist only for a special
case);
- stability studies (stable solutions only for BH case above);
- the same for dilaton-forms (p-branes) interaction, stability found only in some
cases, e.g. for one form in particular.
PPN parameters for most of the models were calculated.
2. Multidimensional Models
The history of the multidimensional approach begins with the well-known papers
of T.K. Kaluza and O. Klein on 5-dimensional theories which opened an interest to
investigations in multidimensional gravity. A revival of ideas of many dimensions
started in the 70’s and continues now. Now, it is heated by expectations connected
with the overall M-theory. In all these theories, 4-dimensional gravitational models
with extra ﬁelds were obtained from some multidimensional model by dimensional
reduction based on the decomposition of the manifold
M = M4 × Mint,
(1)
where M4 is our 4-dimensional manifold and Mint is some internal manifold (mostly
considered to be compact).
The earlier papers on multidimensional gravity and cosmology dealt with multi-
dimensional Einstein equations and with a block-diagonal cosmological or spherically
symmetric metric deﬁned on the manifold M = R × M0 × · · · × Mn of the form
g = −dt ⊗dt +
n
X
r=0
a2
r(t)gr
(2)
where (Mr, gr) are Einstein spaces, r = 0, . . . , n. In some of them a cosmological
constant and simple scalar ﬁelds were also used [17].
Such models are usually reduced to pseudo-Euclidean Toda-like systems with the
Lagrangian
L = 1
2Gij ˙xi ˙xj −
m
X
k=1
Akeuk
i xi
(3)
13

and the zero-energy constraint E = 0.
It should be noted that pseudo-Euclidean Toda-like systems are not well-studied
yet. There exists a special class of equations of state that gives rise to Euclidean
Toda models [20].
Cosmological solutions are closely related to solutions with spherical symmetry
[21]. Moreover, the scheme of obtaining the latter is very similar to the cosmological
approach [1, 22]. In [23] the Schwarzschild solution was generalized to the case of
n internal Ricci-ﬂat spaces and it was shown that a black hole conﬁguration takes
place when the scale factors of internal spaces are constants. It was shown there
also that a minimally coupled scalar ﬁeld is incompatible with the existence of black
holes. In [24] an analogous generalization of the Tangherlini solution was obtained,
and an investigation of singularities was performed in [25]. These solutions were
also generalized to the electrovacuum case with and without a scalar ﬁeld [26, 27,
28]. Here, it was also proved that BH’s exist only when a scalar ﬁeld is switched
oﬀ. Deviations from the Newton and Coulomb laws were obtained depending on
mass, charge and number of dimensions. In [28] spherically symmetric solutions
were obtained for a system of scalar and electromagnetic ﬁelds with a dilaton-type
interaction and also deviations from the Coulomb law were calculated depending
on charge, mass, number of dimensions and dilaton coupling.
Multidimensional
dilatonic black holes were singled out. A theorem was proved in [28] that “cuts” all
non-black-hole conﬁgurations as being unstable under even monopole perturbations.
In [29] the extremely charged dilatonic black hole solution was generalized to a multi-
center (Majumdar-Papapetrou) case when the cosmological constant is non-zero.
We note that for D = 4 the pioneering Majumdar-Papapetrou solutions with a
conformal scalar ﬁeld and an electromagnetic ﬁeld were considered in [30].
At present there exists a special interest to the so-called M- and F-theories
etc. These theories are “super-membrane” analogues of the superstring models in
D = 11, 12 etc. The low-energy limit of these theories leads to multidimensional
models with p-branes.
Exact solutions with ”branes”
In our papers several classes of the exact solutions for the multidimensional
gravitational model governed by the Lagrangian
L = R[g] −2Λ −hαβgMN∂Mϕα∂Nϕβ −
X
a
1
na! exp(2λaαϕα)(F a)2,
(4)
were considered. Here g is metric, F a = dAa are forms of ranks na and ϕα are scalar
ﬁelds and Λ is a cosmological constant (the matrix hαβ is invertible).
It was proposed earlier that IIB string may have its origin in a 12-dimensional
theory, known as F-theory (Vafa). A low energy eﬀective (bosonic) Lagrangian for
F-theory was also suggested. The ﬁeld content of this 12-dimensional ﬁeld model is
the following one: metric, one scalar ﬁeld (with negative kinetic term), 4-form and
5-form. In our work [31] a chain of so-called BD-models in dimensions D = 11, 12, . . .
was suggested. BD-model contains l = D −11 scalar ﬁelds with negative kinetic
terms (i.e. scalar ﬁelds are so-called ”phantom” ﬁelds) coupled to (l + 1) diﬀerent
14

forms of ranks 4, . . . , 4+l. These models were constructed using p-brane intersection
rules that will be discussed below. For D = 11 (l = 0) BD-model coincides with
the truncated bosonic sector of D = 11 supergravity.
For D = 12 (l = 1) it
coincides with truncated D = 12 model.
It was conjectured by us in [31] that
these BD-models for D > 12 may correspond to low energy limits of some unknown
FD-theories (analogues of M−and F-theories).
Description of the models.
In [15] certain classes of p-brane solutions to ﬁeld equations corresponding to the
Lagrangian (4), obtained by us earlier, were presented.
These solutions have a block-diagonal metrics deﬁned on D-dimensional product
manifold, i.e.
g = e2γg0 +
n
X
i=1
e2φigi,
M0 × M1 × . . . × Mn,
(5)
where g0 is a metric on M0 (our space) and gi are ﬁxed Ricci-ﬂat (or Einstein)
metrics on Mi (internal space, i > 0). The moduli γ, φi and scalar ﬁelds ϕα are
functions on M0 and ﬁelds of forms are also governed by several scalar functions
on M0.
Any F a is supposed to be a sum of monoms, corresponding to electric
or magnetic p-branes (p-dimensional analogues of membranes), i.e.
the so-called
composite p-brane ansatz is considered [32, 33].
(In non-composite case we have no more than one monom for each F a.) p = 0
corresponds to a particle, p = 1 to a string, p = 2 to a membrane etc. The p-brane
world-volume (world-line for p = 0, world-surface for p = 1 etc.) is isomorphic to
some product of internal manifolds: MI = Mi1 × . . . × Mik where 1 ≤i1 < . . . <
ik ≤n and has dimension p + 1 = di1 + . . . + dik = d(I), where I = {i1, . . . , ik}
is a multi-index describing the location of p-brane and di = dimMi. Any p-brane
is described by the triplet (p-brane index) s = (a, v, I), where a is the color index
labelling the form F a, v = e(lectric), m(agnetic). For the electric and magnetic
branes corresponding to form F a the world-volume dimensions are d(I) = na −1
and d(I) = D−na−1, respectively. The sum of this dimensions is D−2. For D = 11
supergravity we get d(I) = 3 and d(I) = 6, corresponding to electric M2-brane and
magnetic M5-brane.
Sigma model representation.
In [34] the model under consideration was reduced to gravitating self-interacting
sigma-model with certain constraints imposed. The sigma-model representation for
non-composite electric case was obtained earlier in [32, 33], for electric composite
case see also [35]).
The σ-model Lagrangian, obtained from (2.4), has the form [34]
Lσ = R[g0] −ˆGABg0µν∂µσA∂νσB −
X
s
εs exp(−2Us)g0µν∂µΦs∂νΦs −2V,
(6)
where (σA) = (φi, ϕα), V is a potential, ( ˆGAB) are components of (truncated) target
15

space metric, εs = ±1,
Us = Us
AσA =
X
i∈Is
diφi −χsλasαϕα
are linear functions, Φs are scalar functions on M0 (corresponding to forms), and
s = (as, vs, Is). Here parameter χs = +1 for the electric brane (vs = e) and χs = −1
for the magnetic one (vs = m).
A pure gravitational sector of the sigma-model was considered earlier in our
paper [21].
For p-brane applications g0 is Euclidean, ( ˆGAB) is positive deﬁnite
(for d0 > 2) and εs = −1, if pseudo-Euclidean (electric and magnetic) p-branes in
a pseudo-Euclidean space-time are considered. The sigma-model (6) may be also
considered for the pseudo-Euclidean metric g0 of signature (−, +, . . . , +) (e.g. in
investigations of gravitational waves).
In this case for a positive deﬁnite matrix
( ˆGAB) and εs = 1 we get a non-negative kinetic energy terms.
The co-vectors Us play a key role in studying the integrability of the ﬁeld equa-
tions [34, 37] and possible existence of stochastic behavior near the singularity, see
our paper [36]. An important mathematical characteristic here is the matrix of scalar
products (Us, Us′) = ˆGABUs
AUs′
B , where ( ˆGAB) = ( ˆGAB)−1. The scalar products for
co-vectors Us were calculated in [34] (for electric case see [32, 33, 35] )
(Us, Us′) = d(Is ∩Is′) + d(Is)d(Is′)
2 −D
+ χsχs′λasαλas′βhαβ,
where (hαβ) = (hαβ)−1; s = (as, vs, Is), s′ = (as′, vs′, Is′). They depend upon
brane intersections (ﬁrst term), dimensions of brane world-volumes and total di-
mension D (second term), scalar products of dilatonic coupling vectors and electro-
magnetic types of branes (third term). As will be shown below the so-called “in-
tersections rules”(i.e.
relations for d(Is ∩Is′)) are deﬁned by scalar products of
Us-vectors.
Cosmological and spherically symmetric solutions.
A family of general cosmological type p-brane solutions with n Ricci-ﬂat internal
spaces was considered, where also a generalization to the case of n −1 Ricci-ﬂat
spaces and one Einstein space of non-zero curvature (say M1) was obtained. These
solutions are deﬁned up to solutions to Toda-type equations and may be obtained
using the Lagrange dynamics following from our sigma-model approach [31]. The
solutions contain a subclass of spherically symmetric solutions (for M1 = Sd1). Spe-
cial solutions with orthogonal and block-orthogonal sets of U-vectors were considered
earlier in our works [31] and [14], respectively. (For non-composite case, see [39, 40])
and references therein.)
Toda solutions.
In [31] the reduction of p-brane cosmological type solutions to Toda-like sys-
tems was ﬁrst performed. General classes of p-brane solutions (cosmological and
spherically symmetric ones) related to Euclidean Toda lattices associated with Lie
algebras (mainly Am, Cm ones) were obtained in [41, 43, 44, 46, 47].
16

A class of space-like brane (S-brane) solutions (related to Toda-type systems)
with product of Ricci-ﬂat internal spaces and S-brane solutions with special orthog-
onal intersection rules were considered in [55, 56] and solutions with accelerated
expansion (e.g. with power-law and exponential behavior of scale factors) were sin-
gled out.
Black brane solutions.
In [46, 47] a family of spherically-symmetric solutions was investigated and a
subclass of black-hole conﬁgurations related to Toda-type equations with certain
asymptotical conditions imposed was singled out. These black hole solutions are
governed by functions Hs(z) > 0, deﬁned on the interval (0, (2µ)−1), where µ > 0
is the extremality parameter, and obey a set of diﬀerential equations (equivalent to
Toda-type ones)
d
dz
µ(1 −2µz)
Hs
d
dz Hs
¶
= ¯Bs
Y
s′
H−Ass′
s′
,
with the following boundary conditions imposed: (i)
Hs((2µ)−1 −0) = Hs0 ∈
(0, +∞); (ii)
Hs(+0) = 1, s ∈S.
Here ¯Bs ̸= 0 and (Ass′) is a quasi-Cartan
matrix.
In refs. [45, 46, 47] the following hypothesis was suggested: the functions Hs are
polynomials when intersection rules
1.12d(Is ∩Is′) = d(Is)d(Is′)
D −2
−χsχs′λasαλas′βhαβ + 1
2(Us′, Us′)Ass′,
s ̸= s′.
(7)
correspond to semi-simple Lie algebras, i.e. when (Ass′) is a Cartan matrix.
Here
(Ass′) ≡
Ã
2(Us, Us′)
(Us′, Us′)
!
,
s, s′ ∈S, is a quasi-Cartan matrix.
This hypothesis was veriﬁed for Lie algebras: Am, Cm+1, m = 1, 2, . . ., in
[46, 47]. It was also conﬁrmed by special black-hole ”block orthogonal” solutions
considered earlier in [14, 42].
In [45, 46, 47] explicit formulas for the solution corresponding to the algebra A2
are presented. These formulas are illustrated by two examples of A2-dyon solutions:
a dyon in D = 11 supergravity (with M2 and M5 branes intersecting at a point) and
Kaluza-Klein dyon. Extremal conﬁgurations (e.g. with multi-black-hole extension)
were also obtained.
We note, that special black hole solutions with orthogonal U-vectors were con-
sidered in [38] (for non-composite case) and [31]. These solutions have analogous in
models with multicomponent perfect ﬂuid [49, 51, 52].
The black brane solution, corresponding to Lie algebras C2 and A3 where ob-
tained in [50].
17

In [38] some propositions related to i) interconnection between the Hawking
temperature and the singularity behavior, and ii) multitemporal conﬁgurations were
proved.
It should be noted that polynomial structure was found also for the so-called ﬂux
brane solutions, that occur as generalizations of the well-known Melvin solution.
Cosmological models in diverse dimensions
Scalar ﬁelds play an essential role in modern cosmology. They are attributed to
inﬂation models of the hypothetical early universe and the models describing the
present stage of the accelerated expansion as well. There is no unique candidate for
the potential of the minimally coupled scalar ﬁeld. Typically a potential is a sum
of exponents. Such potentials appear quite generically in a large class of theories:
multidimensional, Kaluza-Klein models, supergravity and string/M - theories.
Single exponential potential was extensively studied within Friedmann-Robertson-
Walker (FRW) 4D-model containing both a minimally coupled scalar ﬁeld and a
perfect ﬂuid with the linear barotropic equation of state . The attention was mainly
focussed on the qualitative behavior of solutions, stability of the exceptional solu-
tions to curvature and shear perturbations and their possible applications within the
known cosmological scenario such as inﬂation and scaling (”tracking”) . In particu-
lar, it was found by a phase plane analysis that for ”ﬂat” positive potentials there
exists an unique late-time attractor in the form of the scalar dominated solution. It
is stable within homogeneous and isotropic models with non-zero spatial curvature
with respect to spatial curvature perturbations and provides the power-law inﬂation.
For ”intermediate” positive potentials an unique late-time attractor is the scaling
solution, where the scalar ﬁeld ”mimics” the perfect ﬂuid, adopting its equation of
state. The energy-density of the scalar ﬁeld scales with that of the perfect ﬂuid.
Using our methods for multidimensional cosmology the problem of integrability by
quadratures of the model in 4-dimensions was also studied. Four classes of general
solutions, when the parameter characterizing the steepness of the potential and the
barotropic parameter obey some relations, were found [60]. For the case of multi-
ple exponential potential of the scalar ﬁeld and dust integrable model in 4D was
obtained in [61].
As to scalar ﬁelds with the multiple exponential potential in any dimensions,
a wide class of exact solutions was obtained in [18, 19]. In [54] a behavior of this
system near the singularity was studied using a billiard approach suggested earlier
in [53, 36]. A number of S-brane solutions may be found in [55, 56].
Details for 2-component D-dimensional integrable models see in [63, 58, 59].
Quite diﬀerent model with dilaton, branes and cosmological constant and static
internal spaces was investigated in [16], where possible generation of the eﬀective
cosmological constant by branes was demonstrated. Model with variable equations
of state see in [62] with acceleration of our space and compactiﬁcation of internal
spaces.
Cosmological models with time variations of G.
As we mentioned before cosmological models in scalar-tensor and multidimen-
sional theories are the framework for describing possible variations of fundamental
18

physical constants with time due to scalar ﬁelds present explicitly in STT or gener-
ated by extra dimensions in multidimensional approach. In [66] we obtained solu-
tions for the system of conformal scalar and gravitational ﬁelds in 4D and calculated
the present possible relative variation of G at the level of less than 5 x 10−13year−1.
Later, in the frames of a multidimensional model with a perfect ﬂuid and 2 factor
spaces (our 3D space of Friedmann open, closed and ﬂat models) and internal 6D
Ricci-ﬂat one, we obtained the same limit for such variation of G [9].
We estimated also the possible variations of the gravitational constant G in the
framework of a generalized (Bergmann-Wagoner-Nordtvedt) scalar-tensor theory of
gravity on the basis of the ﬁeld equations, without using their special solutions.
Speciﬁc estimates were essentially related to the values of other cosmological pa-
rameters (the Hubble and acceleration parameters, the dark matter density etc.),
but the values of G-dot/G compatible with modern observations do not exceeded 5
x 10−13 per year [74].
In [73] we continued the studies of models in arbitrary dimensions and obtained
the relations for G-dot in multidimensional model with Ricci-ﬂat internal space and
multicomponent perfect ﬂuid.
A two-component example: dust + 5-brane, was
considered. It was shown that G-dot/G is less than 5 10−13year−1. Expressions for
G-dot were considered also in a multidimensional model with an Einstein internal
space and a multicomponent perfect ﬂuid [76]. In the case of two factor-spaces with
non-zero curvatures without matter, a mechanism for prediction of small G-dot was
suggested.
The result was compared with exact (1+3+6)-dimensional solutions,
obtained by us earlier [75, 76].
Multidimensional cosmological model describing the dynamics of n+1 Ricci-ﬂat
factor-spaces Mi in the presence of a one-component anisotropic ﬂuid was considered
in [82]. The pressures in all spaces were supposed to be proportional to the density:
pi = wiρ, i = 0,...,n. Solutions with accelerated power-law expansion of our 3-space
M0 and small enough variation of the gravitational constant G were found. These
solutions exist for two branches of the parameter w0. The ﬁrst branch describes the
super-stiﬀmatter with w0 > 1, the second one may contain a phantom matter with
w0 < −1, e.g., when G grows with time, so this branch may describe not present,
but earlier stages only.
Similar exact solutions, but nonsingular and with an exponential behaviour of
the scale factors were considered in [83] for the same multidimensional cosmological
model describing the dynamics of n + 1 Ricci-ﬂat factor spaces Mi in the presence
of a one-component perfect ﬂuid. Solutions with accelerated exponential expansion
of our 3-space M0 and small variation of the gravitational constant G were found
also.
Exact S-brane solutions with 2 electric branes and 2 phantom scalar ﬁelds in the
manifold
M = (0, +∞) × R × M2 × M3 × M4 × M5.
(8)
were obtained and studied in [84]. We got the asymptotic accelerated expansion
19

of our 3-dimensional factor space and variations obeying the present experimental
constraints of G-dot/G equal or less than 5 10−13year−1.
Spherically-symmetric solutions, black holes and PPN parameters.
In [34] it was shown that, after dimensional reduction on the manifold M0×M1×
· · ·×Mn and when the composite p-brane ansatz is considered, the problem is reduced
to the gravitating self-interacting σ-model with certain constraints. For electric p-
branes see also [33, 35] (in [35] the composite electric case was considered). This
representation may be considered as a powerful tool for obtaining diﬀerent solutions
with intersecting p-branes. In [34, 37] Majumdar-Papapetrou type solutions were
obtained (for the non-composite electric case see [33] and for the composite electric
case see [35]). These solutions correspond to Ricci-ﬂat (Mi, gi), i = 1, . . . , n and were
generalized to the case of Einstein internal spaces [34]. The obtained solutions take
place when certain orthogonality relations (on couplings parameters, dimensions of
“branes”, total dimension) are imposed. In this situation a class of cosmological and
spherically symmetric solutions was obtained [31]. Solutions with a horizon (black
branes) were considered in detail in [38, 31].
It should be noted that multidimensional and multitemporal generalizations of
the Schwarzschild and Tangherlini solutions were considered in [27, 64], where the
generalized Newton formulas in a multitemporal case were obtained.
We also calculated the Post-Newtonian Parameters β and γ (Eddington param-
eters) for general spherically symmetric solutions and black holes in particular [14].
These parameters depending on p-brane charges, their worldvolume dimensions,
dilaton couplings and number of dimensions may be useful for possible physical
applications.
Some speciﬁc models in classical and quantum multidimensional cases with p-
branes were analysed. Exact solutions for the system of scalar ﬁelds and ﬁelds of
forms with a dilatinic type interactions for generalized intersection rules were studied
in [46], where the PPN parameters were also calculated. Other problems connected
with observations and general properties of BH’s were studied in a braneworld in
[57].
Also, a stability analysis for solutions with p-branes was carried out [48, 71].
It was shown there that for some simple p-brane systems multidimensional black
branes are stable under monopole perturbations while other (non-BH) sperically
symmetric solutions turned out to be unstable.
Below we dwell mainly upon some problems of fundamental physical constants,
the gravitational constant in particular, upon the SEE and laboratory projects to
measure G and its possible variations shortly and on some theoretical models with
variations of the eﬀective gravitational constant.
3. Fundamental physical constants
In any physical theory we meet with constants which characterize the stability
properties of diﬀerent types of matter: of objects, processes, classes of processes and
20

so on. These constants are important because they arise independently in diﬀerent
situations and have the same value, at any rate within accuracies we have gained
nowadays. That is why they are called fundamental physical constants (FPC) [4, 12].
It is impossible to deﬁne strictly this notion. It is because the constants, mainly
dimensional, are present in deﬁnite physical theories. In the process of scientiﬁc
progress some theories are replaced by more general ones with their own constants,
some relations between old and new constants arise. So, we may talk not about an
absolute choice of FPC, but only about a choice corresponding to the present state
of physical sciences.
Really, before the creation of the electroweak interaction theory and some Grand
Uniﬁcation Models, this choice was considered as follows:
c, ℏ, α, GF , gs, mp (or me), G, H, ρ, Λ, k, I,
(9)
where α, GF , gs and G are constants of electromagnetic, weak, strong and gravita-
tional interactions, H, ρ and Λ are cosmological parameters (the Hubble constant,
mean density of the Universe and cosmological constant), k and I are the Boltzmann
constant and the mechanical equivalent of heat which play the role of conversion
factors between temperature on the one hand, energy and mechanical units on the
other. After adoption in 1983 of a new deﬁnition of the meter (λ = ct or ℓ= ct) this
role is partially played also by the speed of light c. It is now also a conversion factor
between units of time (frequency) and length, it is deﬁned with the absolute (null)
accuracy. With the new suggested deﬁnitions of basic units of the International
System of Units (SI) such a role may play also ℏand NA, where NA is the Avogadro
number.
Now, when the theory of electroweak interactions has a ﬁrm experimental basis
and we have some good models of strong interactions, a more prefarable choice is as
follows:
ℏ, (c), e, me, θw, GF , θc, ΛQCD, G, H, ρ, Λ, k, I
(10)
and, possibly, three angles of Kobayashi-Maskawa — θ2, θ3 and δ.
Here θw is
the Weinberg angle, θc is the Cabibbo angle and ΛQCD is a cut-oﬀparameter of
quantum chromodynamics. Of course, if a theory of four known now interactions
will be created (M-, F-or other), then we will probably have another choice. As
we see, the macro constants remain the same, though in some uniﬁed models, i.e.
in multidimensional ones, they may be related in some manner (see below). From
the point of view of these uniﬁed models the above mentioned ones are low energy
constants.
All these constants are known with diﬀerent accuracies.
The most precisely
deﬁned constant was and remain the speed of light c: its accuracy was 10−10 and
now it is deﬁned with the null accuracy. Atomic constants, e, ℏ, m and others are
determined with errors 10−6 ÷ 10−8, G up to 10−4 or even worse, θw — up to 10−3;
the accuracy of H is about several percents. Other cosmological parameters (FPC):
mean density estimations vary also within 2 percent; for Λ we have now data that
its corresponding energy density exceeds the matter density (0.7 and 0.3 of the total
universe mass correspondingly).
21

As to the nature of the FPC, we may mention several approaches. One of the
ﬁrst hypotheses belongs to J.A. Wheeler: in each cycle of the Universe evolution
the FPC arise anew along with physical laws which govern this evolution. Thus, the
nature of the FPC and physical laws are connected with the origin and evolution of
our Universe.
A less global approach to the nature of dimensional constants suggests that
they are needed to make physical relations dimensionless or they are measures of
asymptotic states. Really, the speed of light appears in relativistic theories in factors
like v/c, at the same time velocities of usual bodies are smaller than c, so it plays
also the role of an asymptotic limit. The same sense have some other FPC: ℏis the
minimal quantum of action, e is the minimal observable charge (if we do not take
into account quarks which are not observable in a free state) etc.
Finally, FPC or their combinations may be considered as natural scales determin-
ing the basic units. While the earlier basic units were chosen more or less arbitrarily,
i.e., the second, meter and kilogram, now the ﬁrst two are based on stable (quantum)
phenomena. Their stability is believed to be ensured by the physical laws which in-
clude FPC. There appeared similar suggestions for a new reproducible realization
of a kg, ﬁxing values of NA or other constants, e.g. ℏ[91].
An exact knowledge of FPC and precision measurements are necessary for testing
main physical theories, extension of our knowledge of nature and, in the long run,
for practical applications of fundamental theories.
Within this, such theoretical
problems arise:
1) development of models for confrontation of theory with experiment in critical
situations (i.e. for veriﬁcation of GR, QED, QCD, GUT or other uniﬁed models);
2) setting limits for spacial and temporal variations of FPC. It is becoming
especially important now with the idea to introduce new basic units of International
System of Units (SI), based completely on FPC.
As to a classiﬁcation of FPC, we may set them now into four groups according
to their generality:
1) Universal constants such as ℏ, which divides all phenomena into quantum
and non-quantum ones (micro- and macro-worlds) and to a certain extent c, which
divides all motions into relativistic and non-relativistic ones;
2) constants of interactions like α, θw, ΛQCD and G;
3) constants of elementary constituencies of matter like me, mw, mx, etc., and
4) transformation multipliers such as k, I and partially c (conversion from the
second to the meter). Soon there may be more after modernization of SI - values of
ℏ, e, k and NA may be ﬁxed with zero uncertainty.
Of course, this division into classes is not absolute. Many constants move from
one class to another. Some of the constants ceased to be fundamental (i.e. densities,
magnetic moments, etc.) as they are calculated via other FPC.
As to the number of FPC, there are two opposite tendencies: the number of
“old” FPC is usually diminishing when a new, more general theory is created, but
at the same time new ﬁelds of science arise, new processes are discovered in which
new constants appear. So, in the long run we may come to some minimal choice
22

which is characterized by one or several FPC, maybe connected with the so-called
Planck parameters — combinations of c, ℏand G (natural, or Planck system of units
[12, 13]):
L =
µℏG
c3
¶1/2
∼10−33 cm,
mL = (cℏ/2G)1/2 ∼10−5 g,
τL = L/c∼10−43 s.
(11)
The role of these parameters is important since mL characterizes the energy of
uniﬁcation of four known fundamental interactions: strong, weak, electromagnetic
and gravitational ones, and L is a scale where the classical notions of space-time
loose their meaning. There are other ideas about the ﬁnal number of FPC (2, 1, or
none). Of course, all will depend on a future uniﬁed theory.
The problem of the gravitational constant G measurement and its stability is a
part of a rapidly developing ﬁeld, called gravitational-relativistic metrology (GRM).
It has appeared due to the growth of measurement technology precision, spread of
measurements over large scales and a tendency to the uniﬁcation of fundamental
physical interaction [7], where main problems arise and are concentrated on the
gravitational interaction.
The main subjects of GRM are:
- general relativistic models for diﬀerent astronomical scales: Earth, Solar Sys-
tem, galaxes, cluster of galaxies, cosmology;
- time transfer, VLBI, space dynamics, relativistic astrometry etc.(pioneering
works were done in Russia by Arifov and Kadyev, Brumberg in 60’s);
- development of generalized gravitational theories and uniﬁed models for testing
their eﬀects in experiments;
- fundamental physical constants, G in particular, and their stability in space
and time; projects µSCOPE, STEP, SEE...
- fundamental cosmological parameters as FPC: cosmological models studies
(quintessence, k-essence, phantom, multidimensional ones), measurements and ob-
servations; WMAP, PLANCK, ...
- gravitational waves (3d generations of detectors, study of sources...); LIGO,
VIRGO, TAMA, LISA, RADIOASTRON,...
- basic standards (clocks) and other modern precision devices (atomic and neu-
tron interferometry, atomic force spectroscopy etc.) in fundamental gravitational
experiments, especially in space for testing GR and other theories : rotational, tor-
sional and second order eﬀects (need uncertainty 10−6), e.g.
LAGEOS, Gravity
Probe B, ASTROD, LATOR etc.
We are now on the level 2.3 · 10−5 in measuring PPN-parameter γ and 5 · 10−4
- for β, Brans-Dicke parameter ω > 40000. Proposed several future missions aimed
to increase the accuracy of γ.
23

There are three problems related to G, which origin lies mainly in uniﬁed models
predictions: 1) absolute G measurements, 2) possible time variations of G, 3) possible
range variations of G – non-Newtonian, or new interactions.
Absolute measurements of G. There are many laboratory determinations of G
with errors of the order 10−3 and some are on the level of 10−4 .
The most recent and precise G measurements do not agree with each other and
some diﬀer from the CODATA value of 2010:
G = 6.67384(80) · 10−11 · m3 · kg−1 · s−2
(12)
with relative standard uncertainty 1.2 · 10−4.
So, we see that we are not too far (about two orders) from Cavendish, who
obtained value of G 2 centuries ago at the level 10−2. The situation with the mea-
surement of the absolute value of G is really diﬀerent from atomic constants values
and their uncertainties (10−8). This means that either the limit of terrestrial ac-
curacies of deﬁning G has been reached or we have some new physics entering the
measurement procedure [7]. The ﬁrst means that, maybe we should turn to space
experiments to measure G [12, 11], and the second means that a more thorough
study of theories, generalizing GR, or uniﬁed theories is necessary.
There exist also some satellite determinations of G (namely G · MEarth) on the
level of 10−9 (so, should we know G much better, our knowledge of masses of the
Earth and other planets will be much better and consequently their models).
The precise knowledge of G is necessary, ﬁrst of all, as it is a FPC; next, for the
evaluation of mass of the Earth, planets, their mean density and, ﬁnally, for con-
struction of Earth models; for transition from mechanical to electromagnetic units
and back; for evaluation of other constants through relations between them given
by uniﬁed theories; for ﬁnding new possible types of interactions and geophysical
eﬀects; for some practical applications like increasing of gradiometers precision, as
they demand a calibration by a gravitational ﬁeld of a standard body depending on
G: high accuracy of their calibration (10−5 - 10−6) requires the same accuracy of G.
The knowledge of constants values has not only a fundamental meaning but also a
metrological one. The modern system of standards is based mainly on stable physical
phenomena. So, the stability of constants plays a crucial role. As all physical laws
were established and tested during the last 2-3 centuries in experiments on the Earth
and in the near space, i.e. at a rather short space and time intervals in comparison
with the radius and age of the Universe, the possibility of slow variations of constants
(i.e. with the rate of the evolution of the Universe or slower) cannot be excluded a
priori.
So, the assumption of absolute stability of constants is an extrapolation and each
time we must test it.
Time Variations of G. The problem of FPC variations arose with the attempts
to explain the relations between micro- and macro-world phenomena. Dirac was the
ﬁrst to introduce (1937) the so-called “Large Numbers Hypothesis” which relates
some known very big (or very small) numbers with the dimensionless age of the
24

Universe T ∼1040 (age of the Universe is 1017 s, divided by the characteristic
elementary particle time 10−23 s). He suggested that the ratio of the gravitational
to strong interaction strengths, Gm2
p/ℏc ∼10−40, is inversely proportional to the
age of the Universe: Gm2
p/ℏc ∼T −1. Then, as the age varies, some constants or
their combinations must vary as well. Atomic constants seemed to Dirac to be more
stable, so he chose the variation of G as T −1.
After the original Dirac hypothesis some new ones appeared (Gamov, Teller,
Landau, Terazawa, Staniukovich etc., see [4, 12]) and also some generalized theories
of gravitation admitting the variations of an eﬀective gravitational coupling. We
may single out three stages in the development of this ﬁeld:
1. Study of theories and hypotheses with variations of FPC, their predictions
and confrontation with experiments (1937-1977).
2. Creation of theories admitting variations of an eﬀective gravitational constant
in a particular system of units, analyses of experimental and observational data
within these theories [65, 4] (1977-present).
3. Analyses of FPC variations within uniﬁed models [7, 5, 1] (present).
Within the development of the ﬁrst stage from the analysis of the whole set of
existed astronomical, astrophysical, geophysical and laboratory data, a conclusion
was made [65, 66] that variations of atomic constants are excluded, but variation of
the eﬀective gravitational constant in the atomic system of units does not contradict
the available experimental data on the level 10−12 ÷ 10−13year−1.
Moreover, in
[65, 66] the conception was worked out that variations of constants are not absolute
but depend on the system of measurements (choice of standards, units and devices
using this or that fundamental interaction). Each fundamental interaction through
dynamics, described by the corresponding theory, deﬁnes the system of units and the
corresponding system of basic standards, e.g. atomic and gravitational (ephemeris)
seconds.
There are diﬀerent astronomical, geophysical and laboratory data on possible
variations of FPC [12].
But the most strict present data on variations of strong, electromagnetic, gravi-
tational and week interaction constants are the following:
| ˙Gs/Gs| < 5 · 10−19 year−1,
| ˙α/α| < 10−17 year−1,
(13)
| ˙G/G| < 5 · 10−13 year−1,
| ˙GF /GF | < 2 · 10−12 year−1.
Some studies of strong interaction constant and its dependance on transferred
momenta may be found in [81]. The recent review on variations of α see in [90].
There appeared some data on a possible variation of α on the level of 10−16
at some z [79]. Other groups do not support these results. Also appeared data
on possible violation of me/mp (Varshalovich et al.)
The problem may be that
even if they are correct, all these results are mean values of variations at some
epoch of the evolution of the Universe (certain z interval ). In essence variations
25

may be diﬀerent at diﬀerent epochs (if they exist at all) and at the next stage
observational data should be analyzed with the account of evolution of corresponding
(”true”)cosmological models.
Now we still have no uniﬁed theory of all four interactions. So it is possible to
construct systems of measurements based on any of these four interactions. But
practically it is done now on the basis of the mostly worked out theory — on elec-
trodynamics (more precisely on QED). Of course, it may be done also on the basis
of the gravitational interaction (as it was partially earlier). Then, diﬀerent units of
basic physical quantities arise based on dynamics of the given interaction, i.e. the
atomic (electromagnetic) second, deﬁned via frequency of atomic transitions or the
gravitational second deﬁned by the mean Earth motion around the Sun (ephemeris
time).
It does not follow from anything that these two seconds are always synchronized
in time and space.
So, in principal they may evolve relative to each other, for
example at the rate of the evolution of the Universe or at some slower rate.
That is why, in general, variations of the gravitational constant are possible
in the atomic system of units (c, ℏ, m are constant, Jordan frame) and masses
of all particles — in the gravitational system of units (G, ℏ, c are constant by
deﬁnition, Einstein frame). Practically we can test only the ﬁrst variant since the
modern basic standards are deﬁned in the atomic system of measurements. Possible
variations of FPC must be tested experimentally but for this it is necessary to have
the corresponding theories admitting such variations and their certain eﬀects.
Mathematically these systems of measurement may be realized as conformally
related metric forms. Arbitrary conformal transformations give us a transition to
an arbitrary system of measurements.
We know that scalar-tensor and multidimensional theories are corresponding
frameworks for these variations. So, one of the ways to describe variable gravita-
tional coupling is the introduction of a scalar ﬁeld as an additional variable of the
gravitational interaction. It may be done by diﬀerent means (e.g. Jordan, Brans-
Dicke, Canuto and others). We have suggested a variant of gravitational theory with
a conformal scalar ﬁeld (Higgs-type ﬁeld [67, 4]) where Einstein’s general relativ-
ity may be considered as a result of spontaneous symmetry breaking of conformal
symmetry (Domokos, 1976) [4]. In our variant spontaneous symmetry breaking of
the global gauge invariance leads to a nonsingular cosmology [68]. Besides, we may
get variations of the eﬀective gravitational constant in the atomic system of units
when m, c, ℏare constant and variations of all masses in the gravitational system
of units (G, c, ℏare constant). It is done on the basis of approximate [69] and exact
cosmological solutions with local inhomogeneity [70].
As to other experimental or observational data, the results are of diﬀerent quality.
The most reliable ones are based on lunar laser ranging (Nordtvedt, 2003; Turyshev,
2008) and Pitjeva’s result (2006, 2010) on radar ranging and optical observations.
They are less than 5 10−1 per year. Here, once more we see that there is a need for
corresponding theoretical and experimental studies. Probably, future space missions
like Earth SEE-satellite [10, 11, 12, 13] or missions to other planets and lunar laser
26

ranging will be a decisive step in solving the problem of temporal variations of G and
determining the fates of diﬀerent theories which predict them, since the greater is
the time interval between successive measurements and, of course, the more precise
they are, the more stringent results will be obtained.
As was shown in [5, 72, 1] temporal variations of FPC are connected with each
other in multidimensional models of uniﬁcation of interactions. So, experimental
tests on ˙α/α may at the same time be used for estimation of ˙G/G and vice versa.
Moreover, variations of G are related also to the cosmological parameters ρ, Ωand
q which gives opportunities of raising the precision of their determination.
As variations of FPC are closely connected with the behavior of internal scale
factors [8], it is a direct probe of properties of extra dimensions and the corresponding
uniﬁed theories [8, 9, 1]. From this point of view it is an additional test of not only
gravity and cosmology, but uniﬁed theories of physical interactions as well.
Non-Newtonian interactions, or range variations of G. Nearly all modiﬁed theories
of gravity and uniﬁed theories predict also some deviations from the Newton law
(inverse square law, ISL) or composition-dependent violations of the Equivalence
Principle (EP) due to appearance of new possible massive particles (partners) [5].
Experimental data exclude the existence of these particles on a very good level at
nearly all ranges except less than micrometer and also at meters and hundreds of
meters ranges. Our recent analysis of experimental bounds and new limits on possi-
ble ISL violation using the new method and modern precession data from satellites,
planets, binary pulsar and LLR data were obtained in [77].
In the Einstein theory G is a true constant. But, if we think that G may vary
with time, then, from a relativistic point of view, it may vary with distance as well.
In GR massless gravitons are mediators of the gravitational interaction, they obey
second-order diﬀerential equations and interact with matter with a constant strength
G. If any of these requirements is violated, we come in general to deviations from
the Newton law with range (or to generalization of GR).
In [6] we analyzed several classes of such theories:
1. Theories with massive gravitons like bimetric ones or theories with a Λ-term.
2. Theories with an eﬀective gravitational constant like the general scalar-tensor
ones.
3. Theories with torsion.
4. Theories with higher derivatives (4th-order equations etc.), where massive
modes appear leading to short-range additional forces.
5. More elaborated theories with other mediators besides gravitons (partners),
like supergravity, superstrings, M-theory etc.
6.
Theories with nonlinearities induced by any known physical interactions
(Born-Infeld etc.)
7. Phenomenological models where the detailed mechanism of deviation is not
known (ﬁfth or other force).
8. Modiﬁcations of the Newton law at large ranges (MOND etc.), small acceler-
ation at a > a0 (Pioneer anomaly, etc.)
27

In all these theories some eﬀective or real masses appear leading to Yukawa-type
(or power-law) deviations from the Newton law, characterized by strength α and
range λ.
There exist some model-dependant estimations of these forces.
Some p-brane models (ADD, branewolds) also predict non-Newtonian additional
interactions of both Yukawa or power-law, in particular in the less than 10nm range,
what is intensively discussed nowadays [13, 78]. About PPN parameters for multi-
dimensional models with p-branes see above, section 2.
More serious evidence on a possible violation of Newton’s Law has come to us
from space, namely, from data processing on the motion of the spacecrafts Pioneer
10 and 11, referring to length ranges of the order of or exceeding the size of the Solar
system. The discovered anomalous (additional) acceleration is (8.60 ± 1.34) ·10−8
cm/s2. It acts on the spacecrafts and is directed towards the Sun. This acceleration
is not explained yet completely by known eﬀects, bodies or inﬂuences related to the
design of the spacecrafts themselves (leakage etc.), as was conﬁrmed by independent
calculations.
Many diﬀerent approaches have been analyzed both in the framework of standard
theories and invoking new physics, but none of them now seems to be suﬃciently
convincing and generally accepted.
This Pioneer anomaly has caused new proposals of space missions with more
precise experiments and a wide spectrum of research at the Solar system length
range and beyond:
— Cosmic Vision 2015-2025, suggested by the European Space Agency, and
— Pioneer Anomaly Explorer, suggested by NASA. So, we hope they contribute a
lot to our knowledge of gravity and uniﬁed models.
SEE - Project. We saw that there are three problems connected with G. There is
a promising new multi-purpose space experiment SEE - Satellite Energy Exchange
[10, 11], which addresses all these problems and may be more eﬀective in solving
them than other laboratory or space experiments.
This experiment is based on a limited 3-body problem of celestial mechanics:
small and large masses in a drag-free satellite and the Earth. Unique horse-shoe
orbits, which are eﬀectively one-dimensional, are used in it.
The aims of the SEE-project are to measure: Inverse Square law (ISL) and
Equivalence Principle (EP) at ranges of meters and the Earth radius, G-dot and the
absolute value of G with unprecedented accuracies.
We studied many aspects of the SEE-project [11, 12] and the general conclusion
is that realization of the SEE-project may improve our knowledge of G, G-dot and
G(r) by 3-4 orders.
Another laboratory variant was suggested in our paper [80] to test possible range
variations of G. It is the experiment on possible detection of new forces, or test
of the inverse square law, parameterized by Yukawa-type potential with strength
α and range λ.
The installation comprises a ball with a spherical cavity whose
28

center is shifted with respect to the ball center. The ball is placed on a turn-table
being rotated uniformly. Torsion balance as a sensitive element is inside the cavity.
Uniform gravitational ﬁeld created inside the ball do not inﬂuence the balance,
but any non-gravitational forces create a torque, which acts periodically during
the rotation of the ball. The spectrum of harmonics was calculated. It is shown
that preferable to use the ﬁrst harmonic in the measurements. Sensitivity of the
method was evaluated, which is limited by uncertainties due to manufacturing of
elements and temperature ﬂuctuations of the sensitive element. It was shown that
the sensitivity of the method suggested may be on the level of α - 10−10 in the range
of λ - (0.1 −107)m in the space of Yukawa parameters (α, λ).
Our recent results on theoretical models with variations of G, FPC, billiards,
solutions with branes and black branes as well as transition to new SI units see also
in [85, 87], [86], [88], [89, 92] and [91, 93] correspondingly.
Acknowledgments
The work was supported in part by the RFBR grants 09-02-00677a, 11-02-91155-
GFENa and by the FTsP “Nauchnie i nauchno-pedagogicheskie kadry innovatsion-
noy Rossii” for 2009-2013.
References
[1] V.N. Melnikov, “Multidimensional Classical and Quantum Cosmology and
Gravitation. Exact Solutions and Variations of Constants.” CBPF-NF-051/93,
Rio de Janeiro, 1993;
V.N. Melnikov, in: “Cosmology and Gravitation”, ed. M. Novello, Editions
Frontieres, Singapore, 1994, p. 147.
[2] V.N. Melnikov, “Multidimensional Cosmology and Gravitation”, CBPF-MO-
002/95, Rio de Janeiro, 1995, 210 pp.;
V.N. Melnikov. In: Cosmology and Gravitation. II, ed. M. Novello, Editions
Frontieres, Singapore, 1996, p. 465.
[3] V.N.Melnikov. ”Exact Solutions in Multidimensional Gravity and Cosmology
III.” CBPF-MO-03/02, Rio de Janeiro, 2002, 297 pp.
[4] K.P. Staniukovich and V.N. Melnikov, “Hydrodynamics, Fields and Constants
in the Theory of Gravitation”, Energoatomizdat, Moscow, 1983, 256 pp. (in
Russian). See English translation of ﬁrst 5 sections in:
V.N. Melnikov, Fields and Constraints in the Theory of Gravitation, CBPF
MO-02/02, Rio de Janeiro, 2002, 145 pp.
[5] V.N. Melnikov, Int. J. Theor. Phys. 33, 1569 (1994).
[6] V. de Sabbata, V.N. Melnikov and P.I. Pronin, Prog. Theor. Phys. 88, 623
(1992).
29

[7] V.N. Melnikov. In: “Gravitational Measurements, Fundamental Metrology and
Constants”, eds. V. de Sabbata and V.N. Melnikov, Kluwer Academic Publ.,
Dordtrecht, 1988, p. 283.
[8] V.D. Ivashchuk and V.N. Melnikov, Nuovo Cimento B 102, 131 (1988).
[9] K.A. Bronnikov, V.D. Ivashchuk and V.N. Melnikov, Nuovo Cimento B 102,
209 (1988).
[10] A. Sanders and W. Deeds. Phys. Rev. D 46, 480 (1992).
[11] A.D. Alexeev, K.A. Bronnikov, N.I. Kolosnitsyn, M.Yu. Konstantinov, V.N.
Melnikov and A.G. Radynov. Izmeritelnaya tekhnika, 1993, N 8, p.6; N 9, p.3;
N 10, p.6; 1994, N1, p.3; Int. J. Mod. Phys. D 3, 773 (1994).
P.N. Antonyuk, K.A. Bronnikov and V.N. Melnikov. Astron. Lett. 20, 59
(1994); Grav. Cosm. 3, N 4(12) (1997).
K.A. Bronnikov, M.Yu. Konstantinov and V.N. Melnikov, Grav. Cosm. 2, 361
(1996); Izmerit. Tekhnika, N 5, p.3 (1996).
A.D. Alexeev, V.N. Melnikov et al. Ibid., N 10, p.3 (1997); Grav. Cosm. 5, 67
(1999).
A.J. Sanders, V.N. Melnikov et al. Ibid, 3, 287 (1997); Meas. Sci. Technol. 10,
514 (1999); Class. Quant. Grav. 17, N 1 (2000).
V.N. Melnikov. Science in Russia, N 6, p.3 (2000).
[12] V.N. Melnikov. Gravity as a Key Problem of the Millennium. Proc.2000
NASA/JPL Conference on Fundamental Physics in Microgravity, NASA Doc-
ument D-21522, 2001, p.4.1-4.17, Solvang, CA, USA.
[13] S.A. Kononogov and V.N. Melnikov, The Fundamental Physical Constants, the
Gravitational Constant, and the SEE Space Experiment Project. Izm. Tekhnika
6, 1 (2005) - in Russian; English translation: Measurement Techniques 48, 6,
521 (2005).
[14] V.D. Ivashchuk and V.N. Melnikov. Multidimensional cosmological and spher-
ically symmetric solutions with intersecting p-branes. In Lecture Notes in
Physics, Vol. 537, ”Mathematical and Quantum Aspects of Relativity and Cos-
mology Proceedings of the Second Samos Meeting on Cosmology, Geometry
and Relativity held at Pythagoreon, Samos, Greece, 1998, eds: S. Cotsakis,
G.W. Gibbons., Berlin, Springer, 2000.
[15] V.D. Ivashchuk and V.N. Melnikov, Class. Quantum Grav. 18, R82-R157
(2001); hep-th/0110274.
[16] M.A. Grebeniuk, V.D. Ivashchuk and V.N. Melnikov, Grav. Cosmol. 4, 145
(1998).
30

[17] U. Bleyer, V.D. Ivashchuk, V.N. Melnikov and A.I. Zhuk, Nucl. Phys. B 429,
117 (1994).
[18] V.D. Ivashchuk, V.N. Melnikov and A.B. Selivanov, JHEP 0309 (2003) 059.
[19] J.-M. Alimi, V.D. Ivashchuk and V.N. Melnikov, Grav. Cosmol. 11, 111 (2005).
[20] V.R. Gavrilov, V.D. Ivashchuk and V.N. Melnikov, J. Math. Phys. 36, 5829
(1995).
[21] V.D. Ivashchuk and V.N. Melnikov, Grav. Cosmol. 2, 177 (1996).
[22] V.D. Ivashchuk and V.N. Melnikov, Int. J. Mod. Phys. D 3, 795 (1994).
[23] K.A. Bronnikov and V.D. Ivashchuk. In: Abstr. 8th Sov. Grav. Conf., Erevan,
EGU, 1988, p.156.
[24] S.B. Fadeev, V.D. Ivashchuk and V.N. Melnikov, Phys. Lett. A 161, 98 (1991).
[25] V.D. Ivashchuk and V.N. Melnikov, Grav. Cosmol. 1, 204 (1996).
[26] S.B. Fadeev, V.D. Ivashchuk and V.N. Melnikov, Chinese Phys. Lett. 8, 439
(1991).
[27] V.D. Ivashchuk and V.N. Melnikov, Class. Quantum Grav. 11, 1793 (1994).
[28] K.A. Bronnikov and V.N. Melnikov, Annals of Physics 239, 40 (1995).
[29] V.D. Ivashchuk and V.N. Melnikov, Phys. Lett. B 384, 58 (1996).
[30] N.M. Bocharova, K.A. Bronnikov and V.N. Melnikov, Vestnik MGU (Moscow
Univ.), 6, 706 (1970)(in Russian, English transl.: Moscow Univ. Phys. Bull.,
25, 6, 80 (1970)) — the ﬁrst MP-type solution with a conformal scalar ﬁeld;
K.A. Bronnikov and V.N. Melnikov, in Problems of Theory of Gravitation and
Elementary Particles, 5, 80 (1974) (in Russian) — the ﬁrst MP-type solution
with conformal scalar and electromagnetic ﬁelds.
[31] V.D. Ivashchuk and V.N. Melnikov, J. Math. Phys. 39, 2866 (1998).
[32] V.D. Ivashchuk and V.N. Melnikov, Grav. Cosmol. 2, 297 (1996).
[33] V.D. Ivashchuk and V.N. Melnikov, Phys. Lett. B 403, 23 (1997).
[34] V.D. Ivashchuk and V.N. Melnikov, Class. Quantum Grav. 14, 3001 (1997);
Corrigenda ibid. 15 , 3941 (1998).
[35] V.D. Ivashchuk, V.N. Melnikov and M. Rainer, Gravit. Cosmol. 4, 73 (1998).
[36] V.D. Ivashchuk and V.N. Melnikov, J. Math. Phys. 41, 6341 (2000).
31

[37] V.D. Ivashchuk and V.N. Melnikov, Class. Quantum Grav. 16, 849 (1999).
bibitemIMJ1 V.D.Ivashchuk and V.N.Melnikov., J. Math. Phys. 40, 6558
(1999).
[38] K.A. Bronnikov, V.D. Ivashchuk and V.N. Melnikov, Grav. Cosmol. 3, 203
(1997).
[39] M.A. Grebeniuk, V.D. Ivashchuk and V.N. Melnikov, Grav. Cosmol. 3, 243
(1997).
[40] K.A. Bronnikov, M.A. Grebeniuk, V.D. Ivashchuk and V.N. Melnikov, Grav.
and Cosmol. 3, 105 (1997).
[41] V.R. Gavrilov and V.N. Melnikov, Toda Chains with Type Am Lie Algebra for
Multidimensional Classical Cosmology with Intersecting p-branes, In : Proceed-
ings of the International seminar ”Curent topics in mathematical cosmology”,
(Potsdam, Germany , 30 March - 4 April 1998), Eds. M. Rainer and H.-J.
Schmidt, World Scientiﬁc, 1998, p. 310.
[42] S. Cotsakis, V.D. Ivashchuk and V.N. Melnikov, Grav. and Cosmol. 5, 52
(1999).
[43] V.R. Gavrilov and V.N. Melnikov, Theor. Math. Phys. 123, 374 (2000).
[44] S. Cotsakis, V.R. Gavrilov and V.N. Melnikov, Grav. and Cosmol. 6, 66 (2000).
[45] V.D.Ivashchuk and V.N.Melnikov, Grav. and Cosmol. 5, 313 (1999).
[46] V.D. Ivashchuk and V.N. Melnikov, Grav. and Cosmol. 6, 27 (2000).
[47] V.D. Ivashchuk and V.N. Melnikov, Class. Quantum Gravity 17, 2073 (2000).
[48] K.A. Bronnikov and V.N. Melnikov, Nucl. Phys. B 584, 436 (2000).
[49] V.D. Ivashchuk, V.N. Melnikov and A.B. Selivanov, Grav. Cosmol. 7, 308
(2001).
[50] M.A. Grebeniuk, V.D. Ivashchuk and V.N. Melnikov Phys. Lett. B 543, 98
(2002).
[51] V.D. Ivashchuk, V.N. Melnikov and A.B. Selivanov, Grav. Cosmol. 9, 50 (2003).
[52] H. Dehnen, V.D. Ivashchuk and V.N. Melnikov, Grav. Cosmol. 9, 153 (2003).
[53] V.D. Ivashchuk and V.N. Melnikov, Clas. Quantum Grav. 12, 809 (1995).
[54] H. Dehnen, V.D. Ivashchuk and V.N. Melnikov, Gen. Rel. Gravit. 36, 1563
(2004).
32

[55] V.D. Ivashchuk, V.N. Melnikov and A.B. Selivanov, Gen. Rel. Gravit. 36, 1593
(2004).
[56] V.D. Ivashchuk, V.N. Melnikov and S.-W. Kim, Grav. Cosm. 10, 141 (2004).
[57] K.A. Bronnikov, H. Dehnen and V.N. Melnikov, Phys. Rev. D 68 024025 (2003).
[58] V.R. Gavrilov and V.N. Melnikov, Grav. Cosmol. 7, 301 (2001).
[59] V.R. Gavrilov and V.N. Melnikov, Modern trends in multidimensional gravity
and cosmology, In: Advances in the Interplay Between Quantum and Gravity
Physics, P.G. Bergmann and V. de Sabbata (eds.), Kluwer Academic Publishers,
2002, p. 285-315.
[60] H. Dehnen, V.R. Gavrilov and V.N. Melnikov, Grav. Cosmol. 8, 189 (2003).
[61] V.R. Gavrilov, V.N. Melnikov and S.T. Abdyrakhmanov, Gen. Rel. Gravit. 36
1579 (2004).
[62] J.-M. Alimi, V. R. Gavrilov and V. N. Melnikov, Multicomponent perfect ﬂuid
with variable parameters in n Ricci-ﬂat spaces, Proceedings of ICGA6, 6-9
October 2003, Seoul, Korea J. Korean Phys. Soc. 2004, v.44, p. S148.
[63] V.N. Melnikov and V.R. Gavrilov, 2-component cosmological models with per-
fect ﬂuid: exact solutions. In: The Gravitational Constant: Generalized Gravi-
tational Theories and Experiments, V. de Sabbata, G.Gillies and V.N. Melnikov
eds., 2004, Kluwer Academic Publishers, p. 247-268.
[64] V.D. Ivashchuk and V.N. Melnikov, Int. J. Mod. Phys. D 4, 167 (1995).
[65] V.N. Melnikov and K.P. Staniukovich. In: “Problems of Gravitation and El-
ementary Particle Theory (PGEPT)”, Atomizdat, Moscow, 1978, v.9, p.3 (in
Russian).
[66] N.A. Zaitsev and V.N. Melnikov. In: PGEPT, 1979, v.10, p.131.
[67] K.A. Bronnikov, V.N. Melnikov and K.P. Staniukovich. ITP-68-69, Kiev, 1968.
[68] V.N. Melnikov. Dokl. Acad. Nauk 246, N 6, 1351 (1979);
V.N. Melnikov and S.V. Orlov, Phys.Lett. A 70, 263 (1979).
[69] V.N. Melnikov and A.G. Radynov. In: PGEPT, 1984, v.14, p.73.
[70] V.N. Melnikov and A.G. Radynov. In: “On Relativity Theory”, Singapore, WS,
1985, v.2, p.196.
[71] K.A. Bronnikov and V.N. Melnikov. Grav. Cosmol. 5, 306 (1999).
[72] V.N. Melnikov. In: “Results of Science and Technology. Gravitation and Cos-
mology”. Ed.: V.N. Melnikov, 1991, v.1, p.49 (in Russian).
33

[73] V.D. Ivashchuk and V.N. Melnikov. Problems of G and Multidimensional Mod-
els. In Proc. JGRG11, Eds. J. Koga et al., Waseda Univ., Tokyo, 2002, pp.
405-409.
[74] K.A. Bronnikov, V.N. Melnikov and M. Novello, Gravit. Cosmol. 8, 18 (2002).
[75] V.N. Melnikov. Time Variations of G in Diﬀerent Models. Proc. 5 Int. Fried-
mann Seminar, Joao Pessoa, Brazil. Int. J.Mod. Phys. A 17, 4325 (2002).
[76] H. Dehnen, V.D. Ivashchuk, S.A.Kononogov and V.N. Melnikov, Grav. Cosmol.
11, N4.
[77] N.I. Kolosnitsyn and V.N.Melnikov, Gen. Rel. Gravit. 36, 1619 (2004).
[78] K.A. Bronnikov, S.A. Kononogov, V.N. Melnikov, Gen. Rel. Gravit. 38, 1215
(2006).
[79] J. Webb et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 87, 091301 (2001).
[80] N.I. Kolosnitsyn, S.A. Kononogov, V.N. Melnikov, Izmeritelnaya Technika,
2007, N4.
[81] V.V. Khruschev, S.A. Kononogov, V.N. Melnikov. Izmeritelnaya Technika,
2007, N3.
[82] J.-M. Alimi, V.D. Ivashchuk, S.A. Kononogov, V.N. Melnikov. Grav. Cosmol.
12, 173 (2006).
[83] V.D. Ivashchuk, S.A. Kononogov, V.N. Melnikov, M.Novello, Grav. Cosmol.
12, 273 (2006).
[84] J.-M. Alimi, V.D. Ivashchuk, V.N. Melnikov, Grav. Cosmol. 13 (2007).
[85] V.N. Melnikov, Progr. Theor. Phys., Suppl., Japan, N 172, (2008) 182-191.
[86] V.N. Melnikov, Int. J. Mod. Phys. A 24, 1473 (2009).
[87] V.N. Melnikov, Frontiers of Physics 4, 75 (2009).
[88] V.D. Ivashchuk, V.N. Melnikov, Grav. Cosmol. 15, 49 (2009).
[89] V.D. Ivashchuk and V.N. Melnikov, SIGMA 5, 070 (2009).
[90] K.A. Bronnikov and V.N. Melnikov, Izmerit. Tekhn. N11 3 (2010).
[91] V.N. Melnikov, Int. J. Mod. Phys. A 26, 3788 (2011).
[92] V. D. Ivashchuk and V. N. Melnikov, Grav. Cosmol. 17, 7 (2011).
[93] V.N. Melnikov,
Fundamental Physics and Fundamental Metrology. Mir
Izmereniy N1 (2011) 7-19.
34

Tensor-scalar theories of gravitation in the context of 
modern cosmology 
 
E. Chubaryan, R. Avagyan,  G.Harutunyan, A. Piloyan 
Department of Physics, Yerevan State University 
1 Alex Manoogian Street, 0025 Yerevan, Armenia 
 
Recently discovered accelerated expansion of the Universe is of 
current interest in theoretical research on the evolution of the Universe. The 
cause of this behavior is presumably the presence of dark energy, which has 
been estimated to form up to 70% of the universe and generates a “repulsive 
gravitational force”. In this paper we present the approach based on tensor-
scalar theories. After the discussion of the action for Tensor-scalar (TS) 
theories, we will describe conformal correspondence between JBD and 
Einstein theories. Cosmological models are considered in the framework of the 
Jordan-Brans-Dicke (JBD) theory in the Einstein frame. The cases of scalar 
field, the cosmological constant and the matter, being described by the 
equation of state P= (P is the pressure,  is the energy density), are 
separately discussed. The analysis of obtained results is carried out in the light 
of modern observational data. It is shown that, in the case of q=-1/2 (q is the 
“deceleration” parameter), the contributions of the scalar field and the 
cosmological constant  (>0) compensate each other, thus leading to 
Einstein’s theory. 
 
 
      1. Introduction 
 
      In the present paper, first we will briefly speak about the problems of the 
modern cosmology raised after new observational data, and then we will mention 
approaches and theories created to solve these problems, and finally we will pick 
up from these theories tensor-scalar one and discuss it in detail. 
      What are the most exiting points in cosmology?  Of course, we can point out at 
least 4 problems related with the words Dark Matter, Dark Energy, Large scale 
structure, and Inflation[1-7]. In the Fig. 1 the universe evolution is shown as a 
result of recent cosmological observational data and theory. One can see in the first 
stage of the universe evolution the inflation, exponential expansion of the universe, 
the existence of which is demanded by observations and theory, then another 
accelerating expanding stage of the universe evolution in the late epoch takes 
place. These both stages need to be explained by new theories, introducing a new 
type of field or by changing the action of General Relativity (GR).   
 
 
 
 
 
35 

      From Fig. 2, we can see how the observed rotational curves for stars far from 
the Galaxy center differ from those predicted by Newtonian gravity. The dark 
matter or alternative theories of gravity are coming to help somehow explain this 
behavior [8-13].  
 
 
Figure 1: Schematic view of the Universe evolution. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2:  Rotational Curve of M33 Galaxy. 
 
36 

      Modern cosmological observations of the large scale structure (LSS), Ia type 
supernova and cosmic microwave background (CMB) voted about current 
acceleration of the Universe expansion. As an illustration, in the Fig. 3 we present 
the data coming from Ia type supernova observations. One of the most popular 
theoretical explanations of the accelerated expansion is related with the 
consideration of a non-gravitational source (dark energy) for which +3P<0 ( is 
the energy density and P is the pressure). The positive cosmological constant is the 
simplest source of this type.  
     An alternative approach for the explanation of the accelerated expansion is 
based on the use of theories of gravity different from GR. Among the most popular 
alternatives are tensor-scalar (TS) theories. There are several motivations for this. 
In particular, superstring theories lead to TS theories in the low-energy limit. TS 
theories also provide a solution for the graceful exit problem from the inflationary 
stage to the radiation dominated phase. 
     In the first part of the present paper we will give a general introduction to TS 
theories. The conformal relation between GR and Jordan-Brans-Dicke (JBD) 
theory is discussed. The remained part of the paper is devoted to the investigation 
of cosmological models considered in the Einstein frame of JBD theory, in the 
phase dominated by a scalar field, and also in the presence of the cosmological 
constant and the matter described by the barotropic equation of state P=. The 
analysis of the obtained results is done by comparing with the modern 
observational data. It is shown that for q=1/2 (q is the deceleration parameter) the 
contributions of the scalar field and the -term (>0) compensate each other and 
the situation becomes similar to that for the GR.  
 
 
 
Figure 3: Ia Type Supernova observational data showing the late time 
acceleration of the Universe expansion. 
 
37 

      2. Conformal correspondence of the JBD and GR theories 
   
       Let suppose that in the same manyfold two conformally related Reimann 
structures are given:  
2
2
2
2
2
2
( )
( )
,
( )
,
( )
ds
ds
x
x
g
dx dx
g
x
g
g
x
g
µ
ν
µν
µν
µν
µν
µν
σ
σ
σ
σ −
=
=
⋅
⋅
=
⋅
=
⋅
  (2.1) 
Besides the mathematical content we try to give a physical interpretation to 
conformal transformation (2.1) by relating it with the scale transformation of units 
of measurements.   
The idea of relationship between different systems of units for physical 
quantities and the local conformal transformations goes back to Weil [14], 
Eddington [15], Dicke [16]. It is natural to assume that the universal constants such 
as the speed of light and the Planck constant are invariant under conformal 
transformations:  
                                                  


=
=
,
c
c
.                                     (2.2) 
We also assume that those 1-forms in the definition of which does not appear the 
metric tensor are unchanged under the transformations (2.1), for example 
µ
µ
A
A =
 
for the potential of the electromagnetic field. On the other hand, the components of 
the 4-velocity are transformed according to 
,
1
µ
σ
µ
σ
µ
µ
u
u
s
d
dx
ds
dx
=
=
=
−
       
=
⋅
=
ν
µν
µ
u
g
u
µ
σ u
1
−
 
(relation 
1
=
⋅
µ
µ u
u
 in the space  conserves its form: 
1
=
⋅
µ
µ u
u
, as it should be). 
It is easy to establish the relationship between physical quantities of different units 
on the base of (2.2). For example, for distance 
,l
l
⋅
= σ
 for time 
t
t
⋅
= σ
, for 
mass 
m
m
⋅
=
−1
σ
, 
for 
energy 
density 
ε
σ
ε
⋅
=
−4
 
and 
so 
on. 
It is pertinent to note that if we postulate the conformal invariance of 
electrodynamics, then such a requirement would be the conservation of the speed 
of light, the size of the elementary charge 
e
e =
 and the vector potential 
µ
Α  for 
the electromagnetic field with respect to the conformal transformation.  
 Let us suppose that the metric tensor obeys the equations of TS theory of 
gravity, which are obtained as a result of the variations of the action 
                     
( )
( )
4
2
1
dx
L
g
R
F
g
W
m





+
Φ
+
−
−
=
ν
µ
µν
φ
φ
φ
φ
               (2.3) 
with respect to 
µν
g
and φ . In (2.3), 
m
L  is the Lagrangian for the matter and non-
gravitational fields, φ  is the gravitational scalar, and 
α
α
x
f
f
∂
∂
=
/
,
. We consider 
the conformal transformation  
µν
µν
φ
g
F
F
g
⋅
=
0
)
(
 ,            
const
F =
0
. 
The action takes the form  
 
38 

                                    
4
0
2
1
dx
L
g
R
F
g
W
m





+
+
−
−
=
ν
µ
µν
ψ
ψ
 
        (2.4) 
where 
                                      
,
3
0
2
2
0
F
F
F
F
F
Φ
+
′
=
α
α
φ
ψ
       
.
φ
∂
∂
=
′
F
F
 
 
The corresponding equations have the form: 
),
(
2
1
0
s
m
T
T
F
G
αβ
αβ
αβ
+
=
       
,0
=
∇
β
α
αβ
ψ
g
     
.
2
1
ν
µ
µν
αβ
β
α
αβ
ψ
ψ
ψ
ψ
g
g
T s
−
=
   
If we take 
3
0
0
1 2
16
F
k
c
G
π
=
=
, then the conformally transformed action 
corresponds to the GR action with  minimally coupled scalar field ψ . The latter 
satisfies the homogenous wave equation.  
 
      3. Cosmological Scalar in the Jordan-Brans-Dicke theory  
 
      In this section the cosmological problem in the proper representation of the 
JBD theory is considered in presence of a non-minimally coupled scalar field. As it 
will be shown the introduction of the cosmological scalar provides a possibility for 
the transition from the decelerated expansion of the Universe to the accelerated 
one. It was noted in [17-23] that the modern conceptions of the Universe give rise 
to the introduction of the cosmological constant in the GR, therefore it is worth to 
introduce a similar quantity in the JBD theory. Having assumed that the field 
corresponding to this quantity should be scalar but cannot be dynamical (its 
changes should be controlled by the gravitational scalar
(
)
µ
x
y
y =
), we introduce 
the cosmological scalar 
( )
y
ϕ
ϕ =
 in the JBD theory action similar to the 
introduction of the cosmological constant in the GR action: 
        
( )
4
2
1
2
,
2
m
g
y y
y
W
R
y
L
gd x
c
y
µν
µ
ν
ϕ
ζ
χ

	




=
−
+
−
+
−













4
8
,
c
π
χ =
    (3.1) 
Here, ς  is a dimensionless coupling constant of the JBD theory. The presence of 
the cosmological scalar means that in addition to the kinetic term the potential one 
is also considered for the scalar field.  
      We consider the conformal transformation 
                                       
0
y
g
g
y
µν
µν
=
⋅

,
0
2(2
) :
(3
2 )
y
G
ζ
ζ
+
=
+
                              (3.2) 
,
0
,
(3
2 )
:
2
y
y
y
α
α
ζ
φ
χ
+
=
 
The field equations in the conformally transformed frame take the form  
                        
39 

                        
,
0,
gαβ
α
β
ψ
∇
=


 
0
(
)
G
g
T
y
αβ
αβ
αβ
αβ
χ
τ
−Λ
=
+




,                          (3.3) 
where 
                                     
,
,
,
,
1
,
2 g
g µν
αβ
α
β
αβ
µ
ν
τ
ψ ψ
ψ ψ
=
−



                                   (3.4) 
For the action one finds 
                  
(
)
4
0
,
,
1
2
,
2
2
m
y
W
g
R
g
L
dx
αβ
α
β
ψ ψ
χ


=
−
−
+ Λ +
+









                 (3.5) 
So we can see how due to the conformal transformation we got the action with a 
constant coefficient for the Ricci scalar. 
       It is well-known that the large scale properties of the Universe are described by 
the Friedmann-Robertson-Walker (FRW) metric. Eqs. (3.3) for the scale factor 
)
(t
a
 and the scalar field take the form (units with c = 1 are used) 
                              
(
)
,
,0
3
0
1
3






=
Φ
=
Φ
a
a
c
a
dt
d


     
 
       (3.6) 
                              
2
2
2
2
1
3
8
,
2
a
k
G
a
a
π
ε




+
=
+
Φ
+ Λ










 
                    (3.7) 
                              
2
2
2
2
1
2
8
,
2
a
a
k
G
a
a
a
π
αε


⋅
+
+
= −
+
Φ
+ Λ







                     (3.8) 
                               ( )
(
)
0
0
,
3 1
,
n
a
t
n
a
ε
ε
α


=
=
+




                                      (3.9) 
                               
( )
( )
P t
t
αε
=
,       
1
1, 0,
,1,
3
α = −
                                 (3.10) 
where the dot denotes the derivative with respect to the time, 
0a  is the scale factor 
( )
a t  in a fixed moment of time 0t , and  
                            
(
)
(
)
2
2
o
2
o
o
1
2
3
2
1
1
8
8
3
o
o
o
m
H
H
c
q
q
G
G
ε
π
π


=
−
−
=
−
−Ω




.  
In GR one has 
2
/
1
0
−
=
q
 and 
1
=
Ωm

 and 
0
1 =
c
.  
       Eqs. (3.6)-(3.10) are written in a more compact form, by using the Hubble 
constant 
a
a
H
/

≡
 and the ratio 
( )
c
t
ε
ε
Ω
≡
, where 
2
3
8
c
H
G
ε
π
≡
, is introduced by 
analogy with the critical energy density
G
H
c
π
ε
8
3
2
0
0
=
 in GR. Eq. (3.8) is presented 
as: 
40 

               
2
2
2
2
2
2
8
8
1
3
3
2
3
k
G
G
a H
H
H
H
π
π
ε
Φ
Λ
+
=
+
+

,1
ck
k
c
c
c
c
ε
ε
ε
ε
ε
ε
ε
ε
Λ
=
+
+
−
,    (3.11) 
 
where 
6
0
1
1
2
ck
a
c
a
ε


=




,
8 G
ε
π
Λ
Λ
=
,
2
3
8
k
k
Ga
ε
π
=
 are respectively the energy 
densities for the scalar field, for the Λ -term and generatd by the spatial curvature. 
Introducing also the so-called “deceleration” parameter 
2
/
q
aa a
= 
 , we get 
                               
c
k
c
c
ck
c
q
ε
ε
ε
ε
ε
ε
ε
ε
α
−
+
−
−
=
+
Λ
3
3
3
1
2
. 
 
     (3.12) 
Finally, we obtain the following set of equations: 
             
1
m
ck
k
Λ
Ω+ Ω
+ Ω= + Ω, 2
1
3
3
3
m
ck
k
q
α
Λ
+ = −
Ω−Ω
+ Ω−Ω,      (3.13) 
with the notations 
/
m
c
ε ε
Ω≡
,
/
ck
ck
c
ε
ε
Ω
≡
,
/
c
ε
ε
Λ
Λ
Ω≡
,
/
k
k
c
ε
ε
Ω≡
. Eq. 
(3.13)  can also be written in the form: 
                                  
2
3
1
1
2
3
m
ck
k
H
H
α
Λ
+ = −Ω−Ω
+ Ω−
Ω

, 
 
     (3.14) 
from which it follows that when the contributions of the scalar field, 
ck
Ω, 
and  the cosmological constant, 
Λ
Ω, compensate each other, the dynamics 
of the changing of H  with time becomes similar to that in GR. As a result 
we obtain 
                                      
(
) 2
3
1
2
m
ck
q
Ω
+
−
Ω
−
Ω
=
Λ
α
,                                (3.15) 
  
from which it follows that 
1
m
Ω=
-2Ω , for 
2
/
1
−
=
q
. Thus, within the 
framework of the considered model during the certain period of time, when 
ck
Λ
Ω
= Ω occurs, the Universe expands with deceleration, similar to that in GR. 
Then the situation changes in a way that q becomes positive [24]. It is natural to 
assume that at some intermediate moment of time, q becomes zero. According to 
our estimations it occurs when 
0.52
Λ
Ω≈
 and 
0.18
ck
Ω
≈
, when 
0.3
m
Ω≈
 as 
estimated in the set of works [25]. 
 
       Let us try to find the dynamical picture for the time variation of the scale factor 
a(t). In Ref. [26] exact analytical expressions for a(t) are obtained for some cases 
of the equation of state. We rewrite these relations using the above-mentioned 
notations. For the function q(t) it is convenient to use the formula 
                                         
(
)
3
1
2
2
ck
q
Λ
=
Ω−Ω
−
. 
                              (3.16) 
The scale factor a(t) for the Universe with the dust takes the following forms: 
 
41 

)  
0.
Λ >
 If the condition
2
o
o
o
 4
  
ck
m
Λ


Ω
Ω>
Ω




 is satisfied, then  
                     
Λ
+
Λ
+
Ω
Ω
−
+
−
Ω
=






ο
ο
ο
δ
m
t
t
H
sh
b
a
a
2
1
]
)
(
3
[
0
0
3
0
.      
     (3.17) 
In the case of 
2
o
o
o
 4
  
ck
m
Λ


Ω
Ω<
Ω




, 
                           
Λ
−
Λ
−
Ω
Ω
−
+
−
Ω
=






ο
ο
ο
δ
m
t
t
H
ch
b
a
a
2
1
]
)
(
3
[
0
0
3
0
.               (3.18) 
For both cases, the symbol "o" denotes the values corresponding to the fixed 
moment of time to. The constants have the following forms 
                                        (
)
2
2
1
4
m
m
b
ο
ο
ο
ο
+
Λ
Λ


Ω
Ω


=
−


Ω
Ω


,                                         (3.19) 
 
                                        (
)
2
2
1
4
m
m
b
ο
ο
ο
ο
−
Λ
Λ


Ω
Ω


=
−


Ω
Ω


,                                        (3.20) 
 
                                       
2
o
o
2
o
o
1
1
1
1
2
2
m
m
b
e
b
δ ±
±
Λ
Λ
±


Ω
Ω


+
+
+
+


Ω
Ω


=
.              (3.21) 
 
b) 
0.
Λ <
 General solutions for a(t) follow in this case from the equation 
 
          
2
3
0
2
0
3
0
2
1
4
1
3












Ω
Ω
−






−








Ω
Ω
+
Ω
Ω
Ω
=






Λ
Λ
Λ
Λ
ο
ο
ο
ο
ο
ο
ο
m
m
ck
a
a
H
a
a
dt
d
 ,  (3.22) 
where the expression under the square root must be positive, i.e. only one of the 
possibilities for the Universe expansion can be realized. 
                              
2
3
0
4
1
2
1








Ω
Ω
+
Ω
Ω
+
Ω
Ω
>






Λ
Λ
Λ
ο
ο
ο
ο
ο
ο
m
ck
m
a
a
.                           (3.23) 
42 

The solution of (3.22) has the form 
                       
Λ
Λ
Λ
Λ
Ω
Ω
Ω








Ω
Ω
+
Ω
Ω
=






ο
ο
ο
ο
ο
ο
ο
m
m
ck
t
H
a
a
2
1
)
3
sin(
4
1
0
2
3
0
.           (3.24) 
         Now we can estimate the age of the Universe. For the light coming from a 
stellar object, the redshift is typical, which is due to the expansion of the Universe. 
The wavelength increases linearly proportional to the scale factor a(t). This effect 
can be described by introducing the redshift z:  
                                                
0
0
1
a
z
a
λ
λ
+
=
=
.                                                (3.25)  
where the index "o" corresponds to the moment of observation. From Eq. (3.25) it 
follows that 
                                                
(
)
1
z
H
z
= −
+

,                                                (3.26) 
which makes it possible to evaluate the age of the Universe 
                                         


∞
+
=
=
∆
0
0
)
1(
0
z
H
dz
dt
t
t
u
.                                       (3.27) 
From Eqs. (3.15) and (3.27) we get 
   

∞
Λ
Ω
+
+
Ω
−
+
Ω
+
+
Ω
+
=
∆
0
2
3
6
0
)
1(
)
1(
)
1(
)
1(
1




z
z
z
z
dz
H
t
k
m
ck
u
.  (3.28) 
Introducing a new integration variable 
3
)
1(
−
+
=
z
y
, this result is presented in the 
form  
                                   

Λ
Ω
+
Ω
+
Ω
=
∆
1
0
2
0
3
1
y
y
dz
H
t
m
ck
u



.                      (3.29) 
For 
o
o
0,
0,
1
ck
m
Λ
Ω=
Ω
=
Ω=
, Eq. (3.29) gives the Einsteinian estimate for the 
age of the Universe                      
                                        
Gyr
 
10
8
3
2
1
0
÷
≈
=
∆
−
H
t r
B
,                              (3.30) 
where we used the value of the Hubble constant according to the Hubble Space 
Telescope Key Project  
1
1
9.77
,
o
H
h
Gyr
−
−
=
⋅
 0.64
0.8
h
<
<
. The obtained 
estimate for the age disagrees with the estimates of stellar lifetimes, giving the 
lifetimes larger than 
12
11÷
 Gyr. Thus in GR there exist the problem of age. 
         In our case, the integral (3.27) is equal to  
 
43 

                          
.
2
2
2
ln
       
2
2
2
ln
3
1
3
0










Ω
+
Ω
Ω
Ω
+
Ω
+
Ω
Ω
∆
=










Ω
+
Ω
Ω
Ω
+
Ω
+
Ω
Ω
=
∆
Λ
Λ
Λ
Λ
Λ
Λ
Λ
Λ
m
ck
m
B
m
ck
m
u
t
H
t














                    (3.31)   
In the case ΩΛ=Ω, the age of the Universe is close to that in GR:  
                                           
Λ
Λ
Ω
Ω
+
∆
=
∆


2
)
2
1
ln(
e
u
u
t
t
.                                   (3.32) 
The standard cosmological model is investigated within the framework of the 
Einstein frame of JBD theory, from the viewpoint of the contribution of different 
components’ energy densities. It is shown that for the value q =-1/2 (estimated by 
the WMAP experiment [27]) contributions of the energies due to the scalar field 
and Λ-term, compensate each other and the expansion occurs by the scheme similar 
to that in GR. In the future, when this condition is violated, the parameter q  
becomes zero for the values 
0.3
m
Ω≈
,
0.52
Λ
Ω=
, 
0.18
ck
Ω
=
, after which it 
becomes positive.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4: The black points are the observational data from Ia type Supernovae. The 
green line is the theoretical curve for the case 
65
.0
=
ΩΛ
. The red is the 
theoretical curve for the case 
5.0
=
ΩΛ
. The vertical axis corresponds to the 
effective stellar magnitude 
25
)
/
(
log
5
10
+
=
−
Mpc
d
M
m
L
. 
 
As a result of this work, it is worthwhile to present the time dependences of a(t) 
and H (t) in order to qualitatively describe the dynamics of the Universe evolution  
44 

 in the limited case of minimally-coupled scalar and tensor fields. As can be seen in 
Fig. 4, where the dependence of effective stellar magnitude on the redshift is 
depicted, the theoretical curve is closer to the observational data in the case of 
bigger values of 
o
Λ
Ω. Here we used the observational data for Ia type supernovae 
[28,29]. For a more complete picture of the Universe evolution, in Fig. 3, we also 
present the dependence on time for the different contributions. The red curve 
represents the 
( )
ck t
Ω
, the green curve represents the 
( )
m t
Ω
, and the blue curve 
represents the 
( )t
Λ
Ω
. From this figure, the growth of 
( )t
Λ
Ω
 is obvious. According 
to our cosmological model, the transition of the Universe expansion from a 
decelerating to an accelerating one can be realized as shown in Fig. 6. One can also 
see the behavior of the Hubble rate.  
 
Fig. 5. Red/green/blue curves correspond to 
( )
ck t
Ω
/
( )
m t
Ω
/
( )t
Λ
Ω
.  The time on the 
horizontal axis is measured in units of  
0
3
(4
5)
o
o
H
Λ
Λ
Ω
≈
÷
ΩGyr, and the zero point 
corresponds to the moment of the observation. 
 
 
Figure 6. Left plot is the theoretical curve for the Hubble rate and the right one is 
the theoretical curve for the "deceleration" parameter. For both cases, the time is  
45 

measured in units of 
0
3
(4
5)
o
o
H
Λ
Λ
Ω
≈
÷
ΩGyr, and the zero point corresponds to the 
moment of observation. 
 
        4. Conclusion 
 
        In the first part of this work the cosmological model with non-minimally 
coupled scalar field is considered in the presence of a cosmological scalar =y/y0 
in the proper frame of the JBD theory. The cosmological scalar is chosen similar to 
that in the Einstein frame, where it becomes a cosmological constant. It is shown 
that in this case, a phase with an accelerated expansion appears in the scale of 
cosmological times. 
        The corresponding action has the form (2.3) and we have considered a special 
case of the function 
0
/
)
(
y
y
y
Λ
=
φ
. With this choice the gravitational part of the 
JBD action in the Eisntein frame coincides with that in GR and the cosmological 
expansion in the Jordan frame is always decelerated. When the cosmological scalar 
is present in the case of non-minimally coupled scalar field, the Universe with 
transition from the phase of the decelerated expansion to the accelerated expansion 
phase is realized. At late stages we have an exponential expansion and the scalar 
field tends to a constant value. In the case of minimally coupled scalar field the 
situation is basically the same. In the second part, a cosmological model of the 
Universe is considered in the Einstein frame of JBD theory in the presence of the 
cosmological constant. The obtained analytical results are in agreement with 
modern observational data about the expansion of the Universe. From the presented 
results we can see the change of the sign for the “deceleration” parameter which 
describes the transition from the decelerated expansion to the to accelerated one 
near the present time. 
 
     References 
 
[1] P.J.E. Peebles and B. Ratra,  Rev. Mod. Phys. 75,  559 (2003). 
[2] A.R. Liddle and D.H. Lyth, Cosmological Inflation and Large Scale structure 
(Cambgridge University Press, Cambridge, 2000). 
[3] V. Mukhanov, Physical Foundations of Cosmology (Cambgridge University 
Press, Cambridge, 2005).  
[4] E. Kolb and E. Turner, The Early Universe (Westview Press, 1988).  
[5] K. Sato,  Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 195,  467 (1981). 
[6] N.G. Tyson and D. Goldsmith, Origins: Fourteen Billion Years of Cosmic 
Evolution (W. W. Norton & Co., pp. 84-5, 2004). 
[7] A. Guth, Phase transitions in the very early universe, in The Very Early 
Universe, Editors G.W. Gibbons and S.W. Hawking (Cambgridge University 
Press, Cambridge, 1983). 
[8] W. J. G. de Blok and S. McGaugh, Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 290, 533 (1997). 
[9] M.A. Zwaan, J. M. van der Hulst, W. J. G. de Blok, and S. McGaugh, Mon. 
Not. R. Astron. Soc. 273, L35 (1995). 
[10] W. J. G. de Blok and A. Bosma, Astronomy & Astrophysics 385 (3), (2002). 

[11] M. Milgrom, Astrophys. J.  270, 365 (1983).  
[12] M. Milgrom, M. "MD or DM? Modified dynamics at low accelerations for 
dark matter". Proceedings of Scienc.(2010). 
[13] J.D. Bekenstein, Contemp. Phys. 47, 387 (2006). 
[14] H. Weyl, Raum, Zeit, Materie (Berlin, 1923). 
[15] A. Eddington, Fundamental Theory (Cambridge Univ. Press, 1948). 
[16] R. Dicke, Phys. Rev. 125, 2163 (1963). 
[17] R. M. Avagyan, G. G. Harutyunyan, and V. V. Papoyan, Astrophysica 51, 
653 (2005). 
[18] J. Garriga and V.F. Mukhanov, Phys. Lett. B 458, 219 (1999). 
[19] N.Panagia, Nuovo Cim. B 120, 667 (2005). 
[20] Y.Fujii and K. Maeda, The Scalar Tensor Theory of Gravitation (Cambridge 
University Press, Cambridge , 2003).  
[21] S. Weinberg, Gravitation and Cosmology (John Wiley and Sons, New Jork, 
1972). 
[22] R. J. Scherrer, Phys. Rev. Lett. 93, 011301 (2004). 
[23] R. M. Avagyan, and G. Harutunyan, Astrophysica 48, 633 (2005).  
[24] N. Brown, Nuovo Gim. B 120, 667 (2005). 
[25] E.T. Copeland, M. Sami, and S. Tsujikawa, Int.J.Mod.Phys. D 15, 1753 
(2006).  
[26] R.M. Avagyan, and G. Harutunyan, Astrophysica 48, 455 (2005). 
[27] G. Bennet et al., arxiv:astro-ph/0302207 (2003). 
[28] Moncy V. Jonn, Astrophys. J. 614, 1 (2004). 
[29] V. Sahni, and A. A. Starobinsky, Int. J. Mod. Phys. D 9, 373 (2000). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
47 

Modified cosmological models  
in Jordan-Brans-Dicke theory 
 
 
R.M. Avagyan, G.H. Harutunyan  
Department of Physics, Yerevan State University 
1 Alex Manoogian Street, 0025 Yerevan, Armenia 
 
 
This paper is based on the modified Jordan-Brans-Dicke (JBD) tensor-
scalar theory. By taking into account the importance of vacuum effects in recent 
cosmology, we consider cosmological models with a scalar field and the vacuum 
energy in various conformal frames of the JBD theory.  
 
 
       1. Introduction 
 
       Recent observational data on the expansion of the universe raised a number of 
problems for cosmological investigations. The observations of supernovae and 
cosmic microwave background [1-4] indicate that the universe is accelerating. 
Within the framework of General Relativity this requires a special type of the 
energy source for this expansion with the equation of state close to the one for 
cosmological constant. Other classes of models are based on slowly varying scalar 
fields dominating at large scales. In the present paper we consider cosmological 
models within the framework of so called Einstein frame for Jordan tensor-scalar 
theory [5], when the scalar field is minimally coupled to the tensor field, and in the 
proper frame of this theory with self-consistent scalar field [6]. In the first case the 
cosmological constant Λ is responsible for the effects related to the vacuum 
energy. In the second case, in analogy with Λ , we introduce a cosmological scalar 
)
(y
ϕ
, which as a result of special conformal transformation goes to Λ  in the 
Einstein frame.  It is well-known that quantum vacuum effects may be responsible 
for the cosmological constant Λ . In the early de Sitter stage of the cosmological 
expansion 
4
~ H
Λ
 with H  being the Hubble constant, whereas the vacuum 
energy, induced by the QCD condensate at late stages of the evolution, is of the 
order ~ H  [7-9].  
 
In accordance with the abovementioned, at the first step it makes sense to 
ignore a possible contribution from other forms of energy and to consider the role 
of  Λ  in the Einstein frame and the role of a cosmological scalar in the modified 
version of JBD theory. 
 
       2. Dominating scalar field in presence of the vacuum energy 
 
We consider the Friedmann-Robertson-Walker line element with flat spatial 
sections 
48 

              
(
)
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
( )
sin
dS
dt
a
t
dr
r
d
d
θ
θ ϕ


=
−
+
+

                             (1) 
The field equations of the Jordan theory have the form  
(
)
3
0,
d
a
dt Φ
=

  
 
 
 
 
 
 
(2) 
2
2
2
3
8
,
2
a
G
a
π
Φ
=
+ Λ


  
 
 
 
 
 
(3) 
2
2
2
2
1
8
2
a
a
G
a
a
π
+
= −
Φ + Λ



 
 
 
 
 
 
(4) 
 
with the energy density 
2
8
2
G
ε
π
Φ
= Λ +

 and the pressure 
2
8
2
P
G
π
Φ
= −Λ +

. 
Equations (2)-(4) are obtained by the variation of the action [10].                          
In analogy with the Einsteinian critical energy density,  
                                               
2
0
3
8
co
H
G
ε
π
=
 
 (
0
H  is the Hubble constant), we may introduce 
2
3
8
c
H
G
ε
π
=
 [11]. In terms of the 
latter, the field  equations (2)-(4)  are written in a physically transparent form. 
Equation (3) is written as  
1
ck
ck
c
c
ε
ε
ε
ε
Λ
Λ
=
+
= Ω
+ Ω 
 
 
 
 
(6) 
where 
2
,
,
,
.
2
8
ck
ck
ck
c
c
G
ε
ε
ε
ε
π
ε
ε
Λ
Λ
Λ
Φ
Λ
=
=
Ω
=
Ω=

 Hence, the sum of the 
contributions from the energy of the scalar field, 
ck
Ω
, and from the energy 
generated by Λ is equal to unity. 
 
In a similar way, (4) takes the form 
2
1
3
3
ck
q
Λ
+ = −Ω
+ Ω , 
 
 
 
 
(7) 
where 
2
aa
q
a
= 

 is the dimensionless deceleration parameter, or in a more 
convenient form  
2
2
1
3
ck
H
H
Λ
+ = −Ω
+ Ω

. 
 
 
 
 
(8) 
 
 
 
49 

From relations (7) (or (8)) it follows that under the compensation of the 
contributions from scalar and vacuum fields and also in the absence of them one 
has 
1
2
q = −
,  similar to the case of General Relativity. 
 
Eliminating 
Λ
Ω from (6)  (8), one has 
2
2
2
8
3
2 3
ck
H
G
H
H
π
Φ
= −Ω
= −


 ,  
 
 
 
(9) 
from which, making a natural assumption 
( )
H
H
=
Φ ,  we find 
2
8
H
G
π
′
Φ = −

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(10) 
and the equation (3) takes the form 
2
2
2
3
8
H
H
G
π
′
=
+ Λ . 
 
 
 
 
 
(11) 
From (11) we have 
(
)
2
8
3
2
dH
G
H
d
π
=
−Λ
Φ
 
 
 
 
 
(12) 
and after the integration  
 
                                      
(
)
0
38
3
2
H
ch
G
π


Λ
=
Φ −Φ


	

, 
for 
0
Λ >
 
                  (13) 
                                                
(
)
0
38
3
2
H
sh
G
π


Λ
=
Φ −Φ


	

, 
for 
0
Λ <
 
 
       (14) 
Then, from (10) we get  
(
)
(
)
0
0
3
3
H
cth
t
t
Λ
Λ >

=
Λ
−
, 
 
 
(15) 
(
)
(
)
0
0
3
3
H
tg
t
t
Λ
Λ <

=
Λ +
−
.  
 
(16) 
The deceleration parameter q  is determined from (7), by taking into account (6), 
2
3
1
1
3 1
3
ck
q
H
Λ


= −Ω
+ = −
−


	

. 
 
 
 
(17) 
By taking into account (13) and (14), we have  
(
)
(
)
2
0
3
0
2
3
q
cth
t
t
Λ >

= −+
Λ
−
 , 
 
(18) 
 
50 

(
)
(
)
0
3
0
2
3
q
tg
t
t
Λ <

= −−
Λ
−
, 
 
 
(19) 
from which it follows that 
1
q → for t →∞, and hence the accelerated expansion 
is possible only in the case 
0
Λ >
. 
 
Therefore, for sufficiently large t  (t →∞) for the behavior of 
a
H
a
=   to 
the leading order one has 
3
H
Λ
=
. From here we see that, Λ , which in the 
present problem plays the role of the vacuum energy density, at late stages of the 
universe expansion is proportional to 
2
2
(
3
)
H
H
Λ =
. 
 
In order to clarify the role of the cosmological scalar in the proper frame of 
the Jordan theory, as in the previous problem, we ignore the contribution from all 
types of the matter, keeping only the scalar field and the vacuum effects induced by 
this field, determined by    ( )
y
ϕ
. 
 
The equations for the traditional cosmological problem, corresponding to 
the modified action of the JBD theory  [6] 
( )
4
2
1
2
2
y y
y
W
R
y
g
gd x
c
k
y
µ
ν
µν
ϕ
ς






=
−
+
−
−











,  
 
(20) 
have the form 
( )
2
3
1
2
2
y
y
y R
y
y
y R
y
ϕ
ϕ
ς
ϕ


+
=
−


+
	






, 
 
 
 
(21) 
( )
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
R
R
y
R y
y
y
R
R
y
R y
y
ς
ϕ
+
= −
−
−
+






, 
 
 
(22) 
( )
2
2
2
2
3
1
3
2
R
y
R y
y
R
y
R y
ς
ϕ
=
−
+




 . 
 
 
 
(23) 
As it was noted before, the investigations on the quantum level evidence about the 
proportionality of the vacuum energy density to 
n
H  with H  being the Hubble 
parameter and n  takes different values at different stages of the cosmological 
expansion. 
 
On the base of the results obtained in the case of a minimally coupled 
scalar field at late stages of the universe evolution 
2
(
3
)
H
Λ =
, we may assume 
that in an analog problem where the cosmological scalar 
( )
y
ϕ
 plays the role of 
the vacuum energy density one has 
( )
2
y
H
ϕ
α
=
 , 
 
 
 
 
 
(24) 
where α  is a dimensionless constant. 
 
51 

 
Introducing the notations 
,
y
R
H
y
R
ψ =
=


, the set of field equations 
takes the form  
2
2
2
2
3
1
3
2
H
H
H
H
α
ψ
ψ
ψ
ς
ψ


+
+
=
−


+
	



,  
 
 
(25) 
(
)
2
2
2
2
3
1
2
2
H
H
H
H
ς
ψ
ψ
ψ
α
+
= −
−
+
−
+


, 
 
(26) 
2
2
2
1
3
3
2
H
H
H
ςψ
ψ
α
=
−
+
 . 
 
 
 
(27) 
From (27) it follows that 
(
)
3
9
2
3
H
ς
α
ψ
γ
ς
±
+
−
=
≡
, 
 
 
 
(28) 
From which we get  
9
3
2
α
ς
≤
+
. 
By taking into account (28) and (26), we obtain  
(
)
(
)
2
1
1
2
H
A
H
γ
γ
ς
γ
−
+
=
≡−
+

.  
 
 
 
(29) 
From here one finds  
(
)
0
0
0
,
1
H
H
AH
t
t
=
+
−
  
 
 
 
 
(30) 
(
)
(
)
1
0
0
0
1
-
A
a
AH
t t
a =
+
, 
 
 
 
 
(31) 
(
)
(
)
0
0
0
0
1
A
y
a
AH
t
t
y
a
γ
γ


=
=
+
−


	

, 
 
 
 
(32) 
1
Q
A
= −
. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(33) 
 
 Estimating γ  and A  for large positive values of ς  (which follow from the 
observational data within the framework of solar system [6] ), we have  
(
)
(
)
2 3
,
3
A
α
γ
α
ς
−
≈±
≈
−
 
 
 
 
 
Negative values for γ  are excluded from the consideration as 
0
0
a
H
a


>
>


	


 for 
the expanding universe. Positive q  is obtained for 
1
A <
, which corresponds to 
2
α >
, and from (28) one has the estimate 
3
α <
. From here it follows that within 
the framework of the given model the expanding universe is obtained for the  
52 

vacuum energy density  
2
H
ϕ
α
=
 or for 2
3
α
<
<
.   
 
         3. Conclusion 
 
In the present paper we have tried to construct classical cosmological 
models by taking into account the vacuum energy. It is based on considerations 
related to that at the quantum field-theoretical level the vacuum energy is 
responsible for the cosmological constant   in the classical theory of gravity [14] 
and   can be taken proportional to the power of the Hubble parameter, 
n
H (the 
exponent n  depends on the stage of evolution under consideration). 
We have considered various variants of cosmological models within the 
framework of Jordan’s modified tensor-scalar theory. It is assumed that the 
cosmological scalar 
( )
y
ϕ
 in the Lagrangian is related to vacuum effects. The 
cases of dominating scalar field are considered by taking into account the vacuum 
energy for FRW models with flat space. First, the problem is presented within the 
framework of the Einstein frame for the Jordan theory, in which  ( )
y
ϕ
 transforms 
to the usual cosmological constant  . In this frame, the minimally coupled scalar 
field allows to write the field equations through the quantities which play the role 
of contributions of densities for various types of energy [15]. As a result, the 
interpretation of the obtained results becomes simpler and is reduced to that, first, 
the accelerated expansion is possible only for and, second, at late stages of the 
evolution the Hubble constant H  is related to   in the form  

3
H =
. Further, 
the analog problem is considered in the proper frame of the modified variant for 
Jordan’s theory. Here, on the base of the relation obtained before for H  and   , 
we have taken the cosmological scalar in the form 
( )
2
y
H
ϕ
α
=
. As a result, the 
accelerated expansion is realized if 2
3
α
<
<
. 
 
 
          References 
 
 
1. N.Brown, High redshift Supernovae: Cosmological implications, Nuovo 
Cim. B 120, 667 (2005). 
2. E.T.Copeland, M.Sami, S.Tsujikawa, “Dynamics of Dark Energy” Int. J. 
Mod. Phys. D 15, 1753 (2006). 
3. V.Sahni, A.A.Starobinsky. Int. J. Mod. Phys. D 9, 273 (2000). 
4. E.G .Aman, M.A Markov, Theor. Math. Phys. 58, 163 (1994). 
5. R.M.Avagyan, G.G.Harutunyan, Astrophisica 48, 633 (2005). 
6. R.M.Avagyan, G.G.Harutunyan, V.V.Papoyan, Astrophisica  48, 455 
(2005). 
7. S. Carneiro, Int. J. Mod. Phys. D 15,  2241 (2006). 
8. R. Schutzhold, Phys. Rev. Lett. 89, 081302 (2002). 

9. A.A.Starobinsky, Phys. Rev. Lett. D 91, 99 (1980). 
10. G.G.Harutunyan , V.V. Papoyan,  Astrophisica  44,  483 (2001). 
11. R.M.Avagyan, G.G.Harutunyan, A.V.Hovsepyan, Astrophisica  53,  317 
(2010). 
12. S.Weinderg, Gravitation and Cosmology (John Wiley and Sons, Nev York, 
1972). 
13. R.M.Avagyan, G.G. Harutunyan, Astrophisica  51,  151 (2008). 
14. A.A.Starobinsky, Phys.Lett., B 117, 175 (1982). 
15. E.V.Chubaryan, R.V.Avagyan, G.G.Harutunyan, A.S.Piloyan, “Universe 
evolution in the Einstein frame of  Jordan-Brans -Dicke  theory” 
Proccedings of YSU, 49-58, 2010. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
54 

Induced self-interactions in the spacetime of a global
monopole with ﬁnite core
E. R. Bezerra de Mello∗
Departamento de F´ısica-CCEN, Universidade Federal da Para´ıba
58.059-970, C. Postal 5.008, J. Pessoa, PB, Brazil
Abstract
In this paper we analyze induced self-interactions for point-like particles with
electric and scalar charges placed at rest in the spacetime of a global monopole
admitting a general spherically symmetric inner structure to it. In order to
develop this analysis we calculate the three-dimensional Green function asso-
ciated with the physical system under consideration. As we shall see for the
charged particle outside the monopole core, the corresponding Green functions
are composed by two distinct contributions, the ﬁrsts ones are induced by the
non-trivial topology of the global monopole considered as a point-like defect
and the seconds are corrections induced by the non-vanishing inner structure
attributed to it. For both cases, the self-energies present a similar structure,
having also two distinct contributions as well. For a speciﬁc model considered
for region inside the monopole, named ﬂower-pot, we shall see that the particle
with electric charge will be always subject to a repulsive self-force with respect
to the monopole core’s boundary, on the other scalar charged particle exhibits
peculiar behavior. Depending on the curvature coupling the self-force can be
repulsive or attractive with respect to the core’s boundary. Moreover, the con-
tribution due to the point-like global monopole vanishes for massless particle
conformally coupled with three dimensional space section of the manifold, and
the only contribution comes from the core-induced part.
1. Introduction
It is well known that diﬀerent types of topological objects may have been formed
by the vacuum phase transition in the early Universe after Planck time [1, 2]. These
include domain walls, cosmic strings and monopoles. Global monopoles are heavy
spherically symmetric topological objects which may have been formed by the vac-
uum phase transition in the early Universe after Planck time. Although the global
monopole was ﬁrst introduced by Sokolov and Starobinsky in [3], its gravitational
eﬀects has been analyzed by Barriola and Vilenkin [4]. In the latter it is shown that
∗E-mail: emello@ﬁsica.ufpb.br
55

for points far away from the monopole’s center, the geometry of the spacetime can
be given by the line element below:
ds2 = −dt2 + dr2 + α2r2(dθ2 + sin2 θdϕ2) .
(1)
In (1) the parameter α2, which is smaller than unity, depends on the energy scale η
where the phase transition spontaneously occur. This spacetime has a non-vanishing
scalar curvature, R = 2(1−α2)
α2r2
and presents a solid angle deﬁcit δΩ= 4π2(1 −α2).
Although the geometric properties of the spacetime outside the monopole are
very well understood, there are no explicit expressions for the components of the
metric tensor in the region inside. Consequently many interesting investigations of
physical eﬀects associated with global monopole consider this object as a point-like
defect. Adopting this simpliﬁed model, many calculations of vacuum polarization ef-
fects associated with bosonic [5] and fermionic quantum ﬁelds [6], in four-dimensional
global monopole spacetime, present divergence on the monopole’s core.
A very well known phenomenon that occur with an electric charged test par-
ticle placed at rest in a curved spacetime, is that it may become subjected to an
electrostatic self-interactions. The origin of this induced self-interaction resides on
the non-local structure of the ﬁeld caused by the spacetime curvature and/or non-
trivial topology. This phenomenon has been analyzed in an idealized cosmic string
spacetime by Linet [7] and Smith [8], independently, and also in the spacetime of
a global monopole considered as a point-like defect in [9]. In these analysis, the
corresponding self-forces are always repulsive; moreover they present divergences
on the respective defects’ core. A possible way to avoid the divergence problem is
to consider these defects as having a non-vanishing radius, and attributing for the
region inside a structure. For the cosmic string, two diﬀerent models have been
adopted to describe the geometry inside it: the ballpoint-pen model proposed in-
dependently by Gott and Hiscock [10], replaces the conical singularity at the string
axis by a constant curvature spacetime in the interior region, and ﬂower-pot model
[11], presents the curvature concentrated on a ring with the spacetime inside the
string been ﬂat. Khusnutdinov and Bezerra in [12], revisited the induced electro-
static self-energy problem considering the Hiscock and Gott model for the region
inside the string. As to the global monopole the electrostatic self-energies problem
have been analyzed considering for the region inside, the ﬂower-pot model in [13]
and ballpoint pen in [14]. In both analysis it was observed that the corresponding
self-forces are ﬁnite at the monopole’s core center.
In the context of self-interactions the induced self-energy on scalar charged point-
like particles on a curved spacetime reveals peculiarities [15, 16] due to the non-
minimal curvature coupling with the geometry.
In the case of of Schwarzschild
spacetime, the self-force on a scalar charged particle at rest vanishes for minimal
coupling [17]. The self-energy on scalar particle on the global monopole spacetime
considering a non-trivial inner structure been developed recently in [18].
In this present paper, mainly supported by two previous publications, [13, 18], we
shall analyze the self-interaction problems associate with electric and scalar charged
56

particles placed at rest in the global monopole spacetime, considering a non-trivial
structure for the region inside to it. This paper is organized as follows: In section 2
we present the model to consider the geometry of the global in the whole space and
the relevant ﬁeld equations associated with the electric and scalar charged particles
placed at rest in this background. We calculate the eﬀective three-dimensional Green
functions for points outside and inside the monopole’s core. As a consequence, we
provide a general expression for the electrostatic and scalar self-energies and their
related self-forces. In section 3 we calculate explicit expressions for the self-energies
considering, as application of previous formalism, the ﬂower-pot model for the region
inside the monopole.
Finally in section 4, we present our conclusions and more
relevant remarks.
2. The system
Many investigations concerning physical eﬀects around a global monopole are
developed considering it as idealized point-like defect. In this way the geometry of
the spacetime is described by line element (1) for all values of the radial coordinate.
However, a realistic model for a global monopole should present a non-vanishing
characteristic core radius. For example, considering the model proposed by Barriola
and Vilenkin [4], the line element given by (1) is attained for the radial coordinate
much lager than its characteristic core radius, which depends on the inverse of the
energy scale where the global O(3) symmetry is spontaneously broken to U(1).
Explicit expressions for the components of the metric tensor in whole space have
not yet been found. Here, in this paper we shall not go into the details about this
calculation. Instead, we shall consider a spherically symmetric model for describing
the metric tensor for the region inside the shell of radius a. In the exterior region
corresponding to r > a, the line element is given by (1), while in the interior region,
r < a, the geometry is described by the static spherically symmetric line element
ds2 = −dt2 + v2(r)dr2 + w2(r)(dθ2 + sin2 θdϕ2) .
(2)
Because the metric tensor must be continuous at the boundary of the core, the
functions v(r) and w(r) must satisfy the conditions
v(a) = 1 and w(a) = αa .
(3)
2.1. Self-interactions
In this subsection we shall develop a general formalism to analysis self-interactions
associated with electric and scalar charged particles in global monopole spacetime.
2.1.1. Electrostatic self-interaction
Here we investigate the electrostatic self-energy and the self-force for a point-like
charged particle at rest, induced by the spacetime geometry associated with a global
57

monopole with the core of ﬁnite radius. We shall assume that in the region inside
the monopole core the geometry is described by line element (2), and in the exterior
region we have the standard line element (1). From the Maxwell equations, the
covariant components of the electromagnetic four-vector potential, Aµ, obey the
equation below,
∂λ
h√−ggµνgλσ (∂νAσ −∂σAν)
i
= −4π√−gjµ,
(4)
where jµ is the four-vector electric current density.
For a point-like particle at
rest with coordinates ⃗r0 = (r0, θ0, ϕ0), in the coordinate system corresponding to
the line element (2), the static four-vector current and potential are expressed by:
jµ = (j0, 0, 0, 0) and Aσ = (A0, 0, 0, 0). The only nontrivial equation of (4) is µ = 0
with
j0(x) = qδ(3)(⃗r −⃗r0)
√−g
,
(5)
where q is the electric charge of the particle. In the spherically symmetric spacetime
deﬁned by (2), the diﬀerential equation obeyed by A0 is:
·
∂r
µw2
uv ∂r
¶
−v
u
⃗L2
¸
A0 = −4πq
sin θδ(⃗r −⃗r0) ,
(6)
with ⃗L being the operator orbital angular momentum. The solution of this equa-
tion can be written in terms of the Green function associated with the diﬀerential
operator deﬁned by the left-hand side, as follows:
A0(⃗r) = 4πqG(⃗r,⃗r0) ,
(7)
with the equation for the Green function
·
∂r
µw2
uv ∂r
¶
−v
u
⃗L2
¸
G(⃗r,⃗r0) = −δ(r −r0)
sin θ
δ(θ −θ0)δ(ϕ −ϕ0) .
(8)
Having the electrostatic self-potential for the charge we can evaluate the corre-
sponding self-force by using the standard formula
fi
el(⃗r0) = −qgikFkmum = −qgik
u ∂kA0|⃗r=⃗r0 = −4πq2 gik
u
lim
⃗r→⃗r0 [∂kG(⃗r,⃗r0)] .
(9)
An alternative way to obtain the self-force is to consider ﬁrst the electrostatic self-
energy given by [7, 8]
Uel(⃗r0) = qA0(⃗r0)/2 = 2πq2 lim
⃗r→⃗r0 G(⃗r,⃗r0) ,
(10)
and then to derive the force on the base of the formula
fi
el(⃗r0) = −gik
u ∂kUel(⃗r0) .
(11)
58

In (9) and (10) the limit provides a divergent result. To obtain a ﬁnite and well
deﬁned result for the self-force, we should apply some renormalization procedure
for the Green function. The procedure that we shall adopt is the standard one: we
subtract from the Green function the terms in the corresponding DeWitt-Schwinger
adiabatic expansion which are divergent in the coincidence limit. So, we deﬁne the
renormalized Green function as
Gren(⃗r,⃗r0) = G(⃗r,⃗r0) −GSing(⃗r,⃗r0) .
(12)
In this way the renormalized self-energy, Uel,ren(⃗r0), and self-force, fi
el,ren(⃗r0), are
obtained by the formulas (9) and (10) substituting G(⃗r,⃗r0) by Gren(⃗r,⃗r0). Note
that here the subtraction of the divergent part of the Green function corresponds to
the renormalization of the particle mass.
Taking into account the spherical symmetry of the problem, we may express the
Green function by the ansatz below,
G(⃗r,⃗r0) =
∞
X
l=0
l
X
m=−l
gl(r, r0)Y m
l (θ, ϕ)Y m∗
l
(θ0, ϕ0) ,
(13)
with Y m
l (θ, ϕ) being the ordinary spherical harmonics. Substituting (13) into (8)
and using the well known addition theorem for the spherical harmonics, we arrive
at the diﬀerential equation for the unknown radial function:
· d
dr
µw2
uv
d
dr
¶
−v
ul(l + 1)
¸
gl(r, r0) = −δ(r −r0) .
(14)
As the functions u(r), v(r) and w(r) are continuous at r = a, from (14) it follows that
the function gl(r, r0) and its ﬁrst radial derivative are also continuous at this point.
The function gl(r, r0) is also continuous at r = r0. The discontinuity condition of
the ﬁrst radial derivative at r = r0 is obtained by the integration of (14) about this
point. It reads,
dgl(r, r0)
dr
|r=r0+ −dgl(r, r0)
dr
|r=r0−= −u(r0)v(r0)
w2(r0)
.
(15)
Let us denote by R1l(r) and R2l(r) the two linearly independent solutions of the
homogeneous equation corresponding to (14) in the region inside the monopole’s
core. We shall assume that the function R1l(r) is regular at the core center r = rc
and that the solutions are normalized by the Wronskian relation
R1l(r)R′
2l(r) −R′
1l(r)R2l(r) = −u(r)v(r)
w2(r)
.
(16)
In the region outside the core the linearly independent solutions to the corresponding
homogeneous equation are the functions rλ1 and rλ2, where
λ1,2 = −1
2 ± 1
2α
p
α2 + 4l(l + 1) .
(17)
59

Now, we can write gl(r, r0) as a function of the radial coordinate r in the sepa-
rate regions [rc, min(r0, a)), (min(r0, a), max(r0, a)), and (max(r0, a), ∞) as a linear
combination of the above mentioned solutions with arbitrary coeﬃcients. The re-
quirement of the regularity at the core center and at the inﬁnity reduces the number
of these coeﬃcients to four. They are determined by the continuity condition at the
monopole’s core boundary and by the matching conditions at r = r0. In this way
we ﬁnd the following expressions
gl(r, r0)
=
(ar0)λ1R1l(r)
α2 £
aR′
1l(a) −λ2R1l(a)
¤ , for r ⩽a ,
(18)
gl(r, r0)
=
rλ1
< rλ2
>
α2(λ1 −λ2)
"
1 −
µ a
r<
¶λ1−λ2
D1l(a)
#
, for r ⩾a ,
(19)
in the case r0 > a, and
gl(r, r0)
=
R1l(r<)R2l(r>) −R1l(r0)R1l(r)D2l(a) , for r ⩽a ,
(20)
gl(r, r0)
=
aλ1rλ2R1l(r0)
α2 £
aR′
1l(a) −λ2R1l(a)
¤ , for r ⩾a ,
(21)
in the case r0 < a. In these formulas, r< = min(r, r0) and r> = max(r, r0), and we
have used the notation
Djl(a) =
aR′
jl(a) −λjRjl(a)
aR′
1l(a) −λ2R1l(a) , j = 1, 2 .
(22)
First let us consider the case when the charge is outside the monopole’s core
(r0 > a).
Substituting the function (19) into (13), we observe that the Green
function is presented in the form of the sum of two terms
G(⃗r,⃗r0) = Gm(⃗r,⃗r0) + Gc(⃗r,⃗r0) ,
(23)
where
Gm(⃗r,⃗r0) =
1
4παr>
∞
X
l=0
2l + 1
p
α2 + 4l(l + 1)
rλ1
<
rλ1
>
Pl(cos γ) ,
(24)
is the Green function associated with the geometry of a point-like global monopole,
and the term
Gc(⃗r,⃗r0) = −1
4πα
∞
X
l=0
(2l + 1)D1l(a)
p
α2 + 4l(l + 1)
(rr0)λ2Pl(cos γ) ,
(25)
is induced by non-trivial structure of the core. In formulas (24) and (25), the γ is the
angle between the directions (θ, ϕ) and (θ0, ϕ0), and Pl(x) represents the Legendre
polynomials. As we can see, the contribution (25) depends on the structure of the
core through the radial function R1l(r).
60

As we have already mentioned, the induced self-energy is obtained from the
renormalized Green function taking the coincidence limit. We can observe that for
points with r > a, the core-induced term (25) is ﬁnite in the coincidence limit and
the divergence appears in the point-like monopole part only. So, in order to provide a
ﬁnite and well deﬁned value to (10), we have to renormalize Green function Gm(⃗r,⃗r0)
only:
Gren(r0, r0) = Gm,ren(r0, r0) + Gc(r0, r0) .
(26)
As explained before, to obtain Gm,ren(r0, r0), we subtract from (24) the terms in
the corresponding DeWitt-Schwinger adiabatic expansion which are divergent in the
coincidence limit:
Gm,ren(r0, r0) = lim
⃗r→⃗r0 [Gm(⃗r,⃗r0) −GSing(⃗r,⃗r0)] .
(27)
The part GSing(⃗r,⃗r0) is found from the general formula given, for instance, in [19].
For simplicity, taking the separation of the points along the radial direction only
(γ = 0), we ﬁnd
GSing(r, r0) =
1
4π|r −r0| .
(28)
Now, by using formulas (24) and (28), one obtains
Gm,ren(r0, r0) =
1
4πr0
lim
t→1
"
1
α
∞
X
l=0
2l + 1
p
α2 + 4l(l + 1)
tλ1 −
1
1 −t
#
,
(29)
where t = r</r>. To evaluate the limit on the right, we note that
lim
t→1
Ã
1
α
∞
X
l=0
tl/α+1/2α−1/2 −
1
1 −t
!
= 0 .
(30)
On the basis of this relation, replacing 1/(1 −t) in (29) by the ﬁrst term in the
brackets in (30), we ﬁnd
Gm,ren(r0, r0) = S(α)
4πr0
,
(31)
where we have introduced the notation
S(α) = 1
α
∞
X
l=0
"
2l + 1
p
α2 + 4l(l + 1)
−1
#
.
(32)
The function S(α) is positive (negative) for α < 1 (α > 1) and, hence, the corre-
sponding self-force is repulsive (attractive).
Combining formulas (10), (25) and (31), for the renormalized electrostatic self-
energy we obtain
Uel,ren(r0) = q2S(α)
2r0
−
q2
2αr0
∞
X
l=0
(2l + 1)D1l(a)
p
α2 + 4l(l + 1)
µ a
r0
¶√
1+4l(l+1)/α2
.
(33)
61

As we can see, the second term of the renormalized self-energy provides a convergent
series for r0 > a. Moreover, the dependence of the self-energy on the core structure
is present in the function D1l(a). For large distances from the core, r0 ≫a, the
main contribution into the core-induced part comes from the term l = 0 and one
has
Uel,ren(r0) ≈q2
2r0
·
S(α) −aD10(a)
α2r0
¸
.
(34)
The self-force is obtained from (33) by using formula (11):
⃗fel,ren(⃗r0) = Uel,ren(r0)⃗r0
r2
0
−q2⃗r0
2α2r3
0
∞
X
l=0
(2l + 1)D1l(a)
µ a
r0
¶√
1+4l(l+1)/α2
.
(35)
According to the symmetry of the problem, the self-force has only a radial compo-
nent.
Now let us study the case when the charge is inside the core, r0 < a.
The
corresponding Green function is obtained from (20) and is written in the form
G(⃗r,⃗r0) = G0(⃗r,⃗r0) + Gα(⃗r,⃗r0) ,
(36)
where
G0(⃗r,⃗r0) = 1
4π
∞
X
l=0
(2l + 1)R1l(r<)R2l(r>)Pl(cos γ) ,
(37)
is the Green function for the background geometry described by the line element (2)
for all values rc ⩽r < ∞, and the term
Gα(⃗r,⃗r0) = −1
4π
∞
X
l=0
(2l + 1)R1l(r0)R1l(r)D2l(a)Pl(cos γ) ,
(38)
is due to the global monopole geometry in the region r > a. For the points away
from the core boundary the latter is ﬁnite in the coincidence limit. The self-energy
for the charge inside the core is written in the form
Uel,ren(r0) = 2πq2G0,ren(r0, r0) −q2
2
∞
X
l=0
(2l + 1)D2l(a)R2
1l(r0) ,
(39)
where
G0,ren(r0, r0) = lim
⃗r→⃗r0 [G0(⃗r,⃗r0) −GSing(⃗r,⃗r0)] .
(40)
The only contribution in the divergent part of the Green function comes from the
ﬁrst term of the DeWitt-Schwinger expansion. Note that near the center of the core
one has R1l(r0) ∝(r0 −rc)l and the main contribution into the second term on the
right of (39) comes from the term with l = 0. Substituting the self-energy given by
(39) into formula (11), we obtain the self-force for the charge inside the monopole
core.
62

2.1.2. Scalar self-interaction
The action associated with a charged massive scalar ﬁeld, φ, coupled with a charge
density, ρ, in a curved background spacetime reads
S = −1
2
Z
d4x √−g
¡
gµν∇µφ∇νφ + ξRφ2 + m2φ2¢
+
Z
d4x √−g ρ φ ,
(41)
where the ﬁrst part contains the Klein-Gordon action admitting an arbitrary cur-
vature coupling, ξ, and the second part contains the interaction term. In the above
equation R represents the scalar curvature. The ﬁeld equation can be obtained by
varying the action with respect to the ﬁeld. This provides
¡
□−ξR −m2¢
φ = −ρ .
(42)
The physical system that we shall analyze corresponds to a particle at rest;
so, there is no time dependence on the ﬁeld. Moreover, because the metric tensor
under consideration is also time-independent, the equation of motion above reduces
eﬀectively to a three-dimensional one:
¡
∇2 −ξR −m2¢
φ = −ρ .
(43)
The energy-momentum tensor associated with this system is obtained by taking
the variation of (41) with respect to the metric tensor. It reads
Tµν
=
ρ φ gµν + ∇µφ∇νφ −1
2gµν
³
gλχ∇λφ∇χφ + m2φ2´
+
ξ
¡
Gµνφ2 + gµν□φ2 −∇µ∇µφ2¢
,
(44)
Gµν being the Einstein tensor.
The energy for the scalar particle is obtained as shown below,
E = −
Z
d3x √−g T 0
0 .
(45)
For static ﬁelds conﬁgurations and by using the motion equation (43), we have:
E = −1
2
Z
d3x √−g ρ φ .
(46)
By using the three-dimensional Green function deﬁned by the diﬀerential operator
in (43),
¡
∇2 −ξR −m2¢
G(⃗x, ⃗x′) = −δ3(⃗x −⃗x′)
√−g
,
(47)
the energy given by (46) can be written as
E = −1
2
Z Z
d3x
p
−g(x) d3x′p
−g(x′) ρ(⃗x)G(⃗x, ⃗x′) ρ(⃗x′) .
(48)
63

Considering now a point-like scalar charge at rest at the point ⃗r0, the charge
density takes the form,
ρ(⃗r) =
q
√−gδ3(⃗r −⃗r0) .
(49)
Finally substituting (49) into (48), we obtain for the energy the following ex-
pression:
E = −q2
2 G(⃗r0,⃗r0) .
(50)
Here also, the evaluation of the Green function that we need for the calculation
of the energy is divergent at the coincidence limit. In order to obtain a ﬁnite and well
deﬁned result for the energy we subtract from the Green function the corresponding
DeWitt-Schwinger asymptotic expansion. Following the general procedure given in
[19], the singular behavior of the three-dimensional Green function associated with
a massive scalar ﬁeld reads:
GSing(x, x′) = 1
4π
·
1
√
2σ −m
¸
+ O(σ) .
(51)
Adopting the above mentioned renormalization approach, the scalar self-energy is
given by
ERen
=
−q2
2 GRen(⃗r0,⃗r0) ,
=
−q2
2 lim
⃗r→⃗r0[G(⃗r,⃗r0) −GSing(⃗r,⃗r0)] .
(52)
Once more, taking into account the spherical symmetry of the problem, the
scalar Green function can be expressed by the ansatz below,
G(⃗r,⃗r0) =
∞
X
l=0
l
X
m=−l
gl(r, r0)Y m
l (θ, ϕ)Y m∗
l
(θ0, ϕ0) .
(53)
Substituting (53) into (47), we arrive at the following diﬀerential equation for the
unknown radial function gl(r, r′):
· d
dr
µw2
v
d
dr
¶
−l(l + 1)v −ξRvw2 −m2vw2
¸
gl = −δ(r −r0) ,
(54)
with the Ricci scalar being given by
R = 2
w2 + 4v′w′
wv3 −4w′′
wv2 −2(w′)2
w2v2 .
(55)
For ξ = 0 and m = 0 the diﬀerential equation above is similar to the previous one
found in the analysis of electrostatic self-energy, Eq.
(14).
Moreover; as to the
solution of (54) the junctions conditions are obtained as explain below:
64

• Because the function v(r) and w(r) are continuous at r = a, it follows that
gl(r, r′) should be continuous at this point; however, due to the second radial
derivative of the function w(r) in the Ricci scalar, a Dirac-delta function con-
tribution on the Ricci scalar takes place if the ﬁrst derivative of this function
is not continuous at the boundary.1 Naming by ˇR = ¯Rδ(r −a) the Dirac-delta
contribution of the Ricci scalar, the junction condition on the boundary is:
dgl(r)
dr
|r=a+ −dgl(r)
dr
|r=a−= ξ ¯R gl(a) .
(56)
• The function gl(r) is continuous at r = r0, however by integrating (54) about
this point, the ﬁrst radial derivative of this function obeys the junction condi-
tion below:
dgl(r)
dr
|r=r+
0 −dgl(r)
dr
|r=r−
0 = −v(r0)
w2(r0) .
(57)
Now after this general discussion, let us analyze the solutions of the homoge-
neous diﬀerential equation associated with (54) for regions inside and outside the
monopole’s core. Let us denote by R1l(r) and R2l(r) the two linearly independent
solutions of the equation in the region inside with R1l(r) been the regular one at the
core center r = rc; moreover, we shall assume that solutions are normalized by the
Wronskian relation (16).
In the region outside, the two linearly independent solution are:
1
√rIνl(mr) and
1
√rKνl(mr) ,
(58)
where Iν and Kν are the modiﬁed Bessel functions of order
νl = 1
2α
p
(2l + 1)2 + (1 −α2)(8ξ −1) .
(59)
Now we can write the function gl(r) as a linear combination of the above solutions
with arbitrary coeﬃcients for the regions (rc, min(r0, a)), (min(r0, a), max(r0, a)),
and (max(r0, a), ∞). The requirement of the regularity at the core center and at
the inﬁnity reduces the number of these coeﬃcients to four. These constants are
determined by the continuity condition at the monopole’s core boundary and at the
point r = r0 by the junctions conditions given in (56) and (57), respectively. In this
way we ﬁnd the following expressions:
gl(r, r0)
=
Kνl(mr0)R1l(r)
α2√ar0
1
aR(1)
l
(a)Kνl(ma) −R1l(a) ˜Kνl(ma)
,
r ≤a ,(60)
gl(r, r0)
=
Iνl(mr<)Kνl(mr>)
α2√rr0
−D(+)
l
(a)Kνl(mr)Kνl(mr0)
α2√rr0
,
r ≥a ,
(61)
1For the ﬂower-pot model this fact occur and has been considered in [13].
65

in the case of the charged particle is outside the monopole, r0 > a , and
gl(r, r0)
=
R1l(r<)[R2l(r>) −D(−)
l
(a)R1l(r>)],
r ≤a ,
(62)
gl(r, r0)
=
R1l(r0)Kνl(mr)
α2√ar
1
aR(1)
l
(a)Kνl(ma) −R1l(a) ˜Kνl(ma)
,
r ≥a ,(63)
in the case of the charged particle is inside the monopole, r0 < a. In these formulas,
r< = min(r, r′) and r> = max(r, r′), and we have used the notations:
D(+)
l
(a)
=
aR(1)
l
(a)Iνl(ma) −R1l(a)˜Iνl(ma)
aR(1)
l
(a)Kνl(ma) −R1l(a) ˜Kνl(ma)
,
(64)
D(−)
l
(a)
=
aR(2)
l
(a)Kνl(ma) −R2l(a) ˜Kνl(ma)
aR(1)
l
(a)Kνl(ma) −R1l(a) ˜Kνl(ma)
.
(65)
For a given function F(z), we use the notation
˜F(z) = zF ′(z) −1
2F(z)
(66)
and for a solution Rjl(r), with j = 1, 2,
R(j)
l (a) = R′
jl(a) + ξ ¯RRjl(a) .
(67)
In the above deﬁnition R′
jl(a) = dRjl(r)
dr
|r=a.
Before to go for a speciﬁc model, let us still continue the investigation of the
self-energy for this general spherically symmetric spacetime. First we shall consider
the case where the charge is outside the monopole’s core. Substituting (61) into (53)
we see that the Green function is expressed in terms of two contributions:
G(⃗r,⃗r0) = Ggm(⃗r,⃗r0) + Gc(⃗r,⃗r0) ,
(68)
where
Ggm(⃗r,⃗r0) =
1
4πα2√rr0
∞
X
l=0
(2l + 1)Iνl(mr<)Kνl(mr>)Pl(cos γ)
(69)
and
Gc(⃗r,⃗r0) = −
1
4πα2√rr0
∞
X
l=0
(2l + 1)D(+)
l
(a)Kνl(mr0)Kνl(mr)Pl(cos γ) .
(70)
The ﬁrst part corresponds to the Green function for the geometry of a point-like
global monopole and the second is induced by the non-trivial structure of its core.
In the formulas above, γ is the angle between both directions (θ, ϕ) and (θ0, ϕ0)
and Pl(x) represents the Legendre polynomials of degree l.
66

The induced scalar self-energy is obtained by taking the coincidence limit in the
renormalized Green function. We can observe that for points with r > a, the core-
induced term (70) is ﬁnite and the divergence appears in the point-like monopole
part only. So, in order to provide a ﬁnite and well deﬁned result for (52), we have
to renormalize the Green function Ggm(⃗r,⃗r0) only. Let us ﬁrst take γ = 0 in the
above expressions. The renormalized Green function is expressed by:
GRen(r0, r0) = Ggm,ren(r0, r0) + Gc(r0, r0) ,
(71)
where
Ggm,ren(r0, r0) = lim
r→r0[Ggm(r, r0) −GSing(r, r0)] .
(72)
For points outside the core, the radial one-half of geodesic distance becomes |r−r0|/2,
we have
GSing(r, r0) = 1
4π
·
1
|r −r0| −m
¸
.
(73)
Now, by using Gm(r0, r) given in (69), we have:
Ggm,ren(r0, r) =
1
4πr0
lim
r→r0
"
1
α2
∞
X
l=0
(2l + 1)Iνl(mr<)Kνl(mr>) −
1
1 −t
#
+ m
4π, (74)
where t = r</r>. In order to evaluate the limit on the right hand side of the above
equation, we take the identity (30). So, as consequence of this relation and replacing
in (74) the expression 1/(1 −t) by the ﬁrst term in the brackets of that identity, we
ﬁnd
Ggm,ren(r′, r′) = S(α)(mr′)
4παr
+ m
4π ,
(75)
with
S(α)(mr′) =
∞
X
l=0
·(2l + 1)
α
Iνl(mr′)Kνl(mr′) −1
¸
.
(76)
Two special situations deserve to be analyzed:
• For the case where ξ = 0, we have νl =
1
2α
p
4l(l + 1) + α2. Taking the limit
m →0 in (76), using [20, 21] we get a position independent expression named
Sα:
Sα =
∞
X
l=0
"
2l + 1
p
4l(l + 1) + α2 −1
#
.
(77)
Up to a factor 1/α this expression coincides with the similar one obtained in
the previous analysis of the electrostatic self-energy, Eq (32).
• For ξ = 1/8 we have νl =
1
2α(2l + 1). Taking the limit m →0 in (76) we see
that the term inside the bracket vanishes, consequently Ggm,ren(r′, r′) = 0 and
the only contribution to the scalar self-energy comes from the core-induced
part (70). In fact under these circumstance, the diﬀerential equation obeyed
67

by the Green function in the region outside the monopole is conformally related
with the corresponding one in a ﬂat space due to the conformal ﬂatness of the
space section of this metric tensor:
d⃗l2 = dr2 + α2r2dΩ(2) = ρλ(dρ2 + ρ2dΩ(2)) ,
(78)
with ρ = (αr)1/α being λ = 2(α −1). Moreover, by explicit calculation we can
show that Ggm(⃗r,⃗r′) = ρ−λ/4GM(⃗ρ, ⃗ρ′)ρ′−λ/4.
Finally the complete expression for scalar self-energy reads
ERen = −
q2
8παrp
S(α)(mrp) −q2m
8π +
q2
8πα2rp
∞
X
l=0
(2l + 1)D(+)
l
(a) (Kνl(mrp))2 . (79)
The self-force on a static test particle can be calculated by taking the negative
gradient of the corresponding self-energy [15],
⃗f = ⃗∇ERen .
(80)
Considering ⃗f = frˆr, the radial component of this force reads:
fr
=
q2
8παr2p
S(α)(mrp) −
q2m
8πα2rp
∞
X
l=0
(2l + 1)
·µ
Iνl+1(mrp) + νlIνl+1(mrp)
mrp
¶
×Kνl(mrp) −Iνl(mrp)
µ
Kνl+1(mrp) −νlKνl(mrp)
mrp
¶¸
−
q2
8πα2r2p
∞
X
l=0
(2l + 1)D(+)
l
(a)K2
νl(mrp) −
q2m
4πα2rp
∞
X
l=0
(2l + 1)D(+)
l
(a)
×Kνl(mrp)
µ
Kνl+1(mrp) −νlKνl(mrp)
mrp
¶
.
(81)
The second analysis that can be formally developed here, is related with the
case when the charge is inside the core. The corresponding Green function can be
written in the form
G(⃗r,⃗r0) = G0(⃗r,⃗r0) + Gα(⃗r,⃗r0) ,
(82)
where
G0(⃗r,⃗r0) = 1
4π
∞
X
l=0
(2l + 1)R1l(r<)R2l(r>)Pl(cos γ) ,
(83)
is the Green function for the background geometry described by the line element (2)
and the term
Gα(⃗r,⃗r0) = −1
4π
∞
X
l=0
(2l + 1)D(−)
l
(a)R1l(r)R1l(r0)Pl(cos γ) ,
(84)
68

is due to the global monopole geometry in the region r > a. For the points away
from the core boundary the latter is ﬁnite in the coincidence limit. The renormalized
scalar self-energy for the charge inside is written in the form
ERen = −q2
2 G0,Ren(⃗r0,⃗r0) + q2
8π
∞
X
l=0
(2l + 1)D(−)
l
(a)(R1l(r0))2,
(85)
where the renormalized Green function is given by
G0,Ren(⃗r0,⃗r0) = lim
⃗r→⃗rp [G0(⃗r,⃗r0) −GSing(⃗r,⃗r0)] .
(86)
Because the divergent part of the Green function should have the same structure as
(51), the above expression provides a ﬁnite result; moreover, notice that near the
center of the core one has R1l(r) ≈
Il+1/2(m(r−rc))
√r−rc
and the main contribution into
the second term on the right of (85) comes from the term with l = 0. Finally we
can say that the self-force is again obtained by taking the negative gradient of (85).
3. Flower-pot model
As we have mentioned before, there is no closed expression for the metric tensor
in the region inside the global monopole. However, adopting the ﬂower-pot model for
this region, the calculations of vacuum polarization eﬀects associated with massive
scalar and fermionic ﬁelds have been developed in [22, 23], respectively. So, motived
by these result we decided, as an illustration of the general procedure described
before, to consider the ﬂower-pot model in the present analysis of the induced elec-
trostatic and scalar self-interactions. For this model the interior line element has
the form [13]
ds2 = −dt2 + dr2 + [r + (α −1)a]2 (d2θ + sin2 θd2ϕ) .
(87)
In terms of the radial coordinate r the origin is located at r = rc = (1 −α)a.
Deﬁning ˜r = r + (α −1)a, the line element takes the standard Minkowskian form.
As we have mentioned before, from the Israel matching conditions for the metric
tensors corresponding to (1) and (87), we ﬁnd the singular contribution for the scalar
curvature located on the bounding surface r = a [22]:
¯R = 4(1 −α)
αa
.
(88)
In what follows, we shall consider, separately, the analysis of electrostatic and
scalar self-interactions.
3.1. Electrostatic self-interaction
Now we can express the renormalized Green function in the region outside the
monopole core by taking into account that in the interior region we have two linearly
69

independent solutions of the homogeneous equation corresponding to (14):
R1l(r) = ˜rl , and R2l(r) = ˜r−l−1/(2l + 1) .
(89)
So, from formula (33), the self-energy in the exterior region reads
Uel,ren(r0)
=
q2S(α)
2r0
+ 2q2(1 −α)
αr0
∞
X
l=0
l(2l + 1)
p
α2 + 4l(l + 1)
×
(a/r0)
√
1+4l(l+1)/α2
hp
α2 + 4l(l + 1) + α + 2l
i2 .
(90)
The second term on the right of this formula is positive for α < 1 and negative for
α > 1. Combining this with the properties of the function S(α) discussed in the
previous section, we conclude that the electrostatic self-energy is positive for α < 1
and negative for α > 1. The corresponding self-force is directly found from (35)
and is repulsive in the ﬁrst case and attractive in the second one. The core-induced
part in (90) diverges at the core boundary, r0 = a. Noting that for points near the
boundary the main contribution into (90) comes from large values l, to the leading
order we ﬁnd
Uel,ren(r0) ≈q2 (α −1)
8αa
ln
h
1 −(a/r0)1/αi
,
(91)
and the self-energy is dominated by the core-induced part.
Now we turn to the investigation of the self-energy for the particle inside the
monopole core. Substituting the functions (89) into formulas (37) and (38), for the
corresponding Green functions in the interior region one ﬁnds
G0(r, r0)
=
1
4π|r −r0| ,
(92)
Gα(r, r0)
=
1
4παa
∞
X
l=0
2l + 2 −α −
p
α2 + 4l(l + 1)
2l + α +
p
α2 + 4l(l + 1)
(˜r0˜r)l
(αa)2l Pl(cos γ) ,
(93)
Because in the ﬂower-pot model the geometry in the region inside the monopole is
a Minkowski one, we have Gsing(⃗r,⃗r0) = G0(⃗r,⃗r0) and, hence, G0,ren(r0, r0) = 0.
Finally, the electrostatic self-energy in the region inside the monopole core reads:
Uel,ren(r0) = 2πq2Gren(r0, r0) = q2
2αa
∞
X
l=0
2l + 2 −α −
p
α2 + 4l(l + 1)
2l + α +
p
α2 + 4l(l + 1)
µ ˜r0
αa
¶2l
.
(94)
As in the case of the exterior region, this self-energy is positive for α < 1 and
negative for α > 1. The corresponding self-force is easily found from relation (11)
and is repulsive with respect to the boundary of the monopole core in the ﬁrst case
and attractive in the second case. Near the core center the main contribution into
the self-energy comes from the lowest modes and one has
Uel,ren(r0) ≈q2
2αa
"
1 −α
α
+ 4 −α −
√
α2 + 8
2 + α +
√
α2 + 8
µ ˜r0
αa
¶2#
.
(95)
70

3.2. Scalar self-interaction
In the region inside the global monopole the two linearly independent solutions
for the homogeneous radial equation corresponding to (54) are:
R1l(r) = Il+1/2(m˜r)
√
˜r
and R2l(r) = Kl+1/2(m˜r)
√
˜r
.
(96)
Having obtained the above solutions, the expressions for the Green functions in
both, inside and outside regions, can be explicitly constructed, consequently the
corresponding self-energies. These expressions depend on the coeﬃcients D(+)
l
(a)
and D(−)
l
(a), which can be explicitly provided as shown below:
D(+)
l
(a) = n(+)
l
(a)
dl(a)
and D(−)
l
(a) = n(−)
l
(a)
dl(a)
,
(97)
with
n(+)
l
(a)
=
Iνl(ma)Il+1/2(mαa)
·(l + 4ξ(1 −α))
α
−νl + 1
2
¸
+
ma
£
Iνl(ma)Il+3/2(mαa) −Il+1/2(mαa)Iνl+1(ma)
¤
,
(98)
n(−)
l
(a)
=
Kνl(ma)Kl+1/2(mαa)
·(l + 4ξ(1 −α))
α
−νl + 1
2
¸
−
ma
£
Kνl(ma)Kl+3/2(mαa) −Kl+1/2(mαa)Kνl+1(ma)
¤
(99)
and
dl(a)
=
Kνl(ma)Il+1/2(mαa)
·(l + 4ξ(1 −α))
α
−νl + 1
2
¸
+
ma
£
Kνl(ma)Il+3/2(mαa) + Il+1/2(mαa)Kνl+1(ma)
¤
.
(100)
As in the ﬁrst analyze, let us consider the core-induced part of the self-energy
for the region outside, Eq. (79), adopting speciﬁc values for the parameter ξ and
mass of the particle. Taking ξ = 0, and by using [21] to obtain the behavior of all
functions contained in the coeﬃcient deﬁned in (97), (98) and (100), in the limit
m →0, we have:
D(+)
l
(a) ≈2
νl
³ma
2
´2νl
(α + 2l −2ανl)
(2ανl + α + 2l)(Γ(νl))2 .
(101)
So the general term inside the summation of the core-induced part reads,
α(2l + 1)
√
4l2 + 4l + α2
4l(α −1)
(
√
4l2 + 4l + α2 + 2l + α)2
³a
r
´√
1+4l(l+1)/α2
.
(102)
Which coincides with the result obtained for the electrostatic case.
71

We can see that the core-induced part in (79) is divergent near the boundary
r = a.
In order to verify this fact, we should analyze the general term in the
summation for large value of l. Taking again the uniform asymptotic expansion
for large orders of the modiﬁed Bessel functions in D(+)(a) and the same for the
Macdonald function, Kνl(mr), we get,
−[α −2ανl + 2l + 8ξ(1 −α)]
[α + 2ανl + 2l + 8ξ(1 −α)]
³a
r
´2νl .
(103)
At this point we want to mention that the contribution proportional to the curvature
coupling, ξ, in the above expression is consequence of the delta-Dirac contribution
in the Ricci scalar, given by ξR, present in (67).
For large value of l we have 2ανl ≈(2l + 1) + (1−α2)(8ξ−1)
2(2l+1)
+ O
³
1
(2l+1)2
´
. Substi-
tuting this expansion into (103), for the leading term in 1/l, we obtain
−α(1 −α)(1 −8ξ)
4l
³a
r
´2l/α
.
(104)
Finally, after some intermediate steps we ﬁnd:
ERen ≈q2 (1 −α)(1 −8ξ)
32παa
ln
h
1 −(a/r0)1/αi
.
(105)
We can see that the above result does not depend on the mass of the particle. In
fact this happens because the leading order term in the expansions of the coeﬃcient
D(+)(a) there appear a power factor (ma)2νl, as to the square of the Macdonald
function Kνl(mr), the leading power factor in the mass is (mr)−2νl. Moreover we
can see from the above result that for ξ = 1/8 there is no divergent contribution in
the core-induced part, and that for ξ > 1/8 this contribution becomes negative.
Now let us turn our investigation of the self-energy for the region inside the
monopole. Substituting the functions (96) into the formulas (83) and (84) for the
corresponding Green function in the interior region one ﬁnds [21],
G0(⃗r,⃗r′) = 1
4π
e−mR
R
,
(106)
with R =
p
(˜r′)2 + (˜r)2 −2˜r˜r′ cos γ, being γ the angle between the two directions
deﬁned by the unit vectors ˆ˜r′ and ˆ˜r. Taking γ = 0 we get R = |r −r′|. Because in
the ﬂower-pot model the geometry in the region inside the monopole is a Minkowski
one, we have G0(⃗r,⃗r′) = GSing(⃗r,⃗r′), consequently G0,Ren(⃗r0,⃗r0) = 0. The scalar
self-energy in this region is given only by the core-induced part:
ERen =
q2
8π˜rp
∞
X
l=0
(2l + 1)D(−)
l
(a)
¡
Il+1/2(m˜r0)
¢2 ,
(107)
being ˜r0 = r0 + (α −1)a. Near the core’s center, ˜r0 ≈0,
Il+1/2(m˜r0) ≈
µm˜r0
2
¶l+1/2
1
Γ(l + 3/2) ,
(108)
72

so the main contribution into the self-energy comes from the lowest mode, l = 0,
resulting in
ERen ≈q2mD(−)
0
(a)
4π2
.
(109)
Taking the expression for the coeﬃcient D(−)
l
(a), for l = 0, and considering ξ = 0,
after some steps we ﬁnd
D(−)
0
(a) = 1
2
πe−mαa(α −1)
sinh(mαa)(α + αam −1) + αam cosh(mαa) .
(110)
Finally substituting the above expression into (109), and taking the limit m →0 we
obtain
ERen(r) ≈q2(α −1)
8πα2a
.
(111)
Also we can calculate the core-induced contribution on the scalar self-energy near
the boundary. Again, adopting a similar procedure as in the previous corresponding
analysis, we can verify after some intermediate steps that the leading term inside
the summation in (107) behaves as,
1
4l
(1 −α)(8ξ −1)
αa
µ ˜r
αa
¶2l
.
(112)
Finally, taking this expression back into (107) we obtain,
ERen ≈q2 (1 −α)(1 −8ξ)
32παa
ln
µ
1 −˜r0
αa
¶
.
(113)
Once more we can see that this divergent contribution vanishes for ξ = 1/8.
Before to ﬁnish this application we want to cal attention that (105) and (113),
for ξ = 0, coincide, up the numerical factor 4π, with the corresponding core-induced
electrostatic self-energies derived in [13].
4. Concluding remarks
In this paper we have analyzed induced self-energies associated with particle with
electric and scalar charges place at rest in the global monopole spacetime, consid-
ering a inner structure to it. These two distinct situations have been investigated
separately along this paper.
As we could see, both investigations depend on the corresponding three-dimensiona
Green functions. For the general spherically symmetric static model of the core with
ﬁnite thickness we have constructed the corresponding Green functions in both exte-
rior and interior regions. In the region outside the core these functions are presented
as a sum of two distinct contributions. The ﬁrsts ones corresponds to the Green
functions for the geometry of a point-like global monopole and the seconds ones are
73

induced by the non-trivial structure of the monopole core. A similar structure is
also presented by the Green functions for the region inside the monopole.
The self-energies are formally expressed in terms of the evaluation of the re-
spective Green functions in the coincidence limit; however, because the results are
divergent, we had to apply some renormalization procedure in order to obtain ﬁnite
and well deﬁned values. Here we used the point-splitting procedure. We analyze the
divergent contributions associated with the Green functions at the coincidence limit,
and extract all of them. In fact we did this in a manifest form by subtracting from
the Green functions the DeWit-Schwinger adiabatic expansions which are divergent
in the coincidence limit.
As an application of the general results, in section 3 we have considered a simple
core model with a ﬂat spacetime, the so called ﬂower-pot model.
For the electrostatic case, the corresponding self-forces are repulsive with respect
to the core boundary in the case α < 1 and attractive for α > 1. In particular, for
the ﬁrst case, the charge placed at the core center is in a stable equilibrium position.
Although in the ﬂower-pot model, we have found a ﬁnite value of the self-energy
at the monopole’s center, it presents a logarithmic singular behavior at the core
boundary.
As to the scalar charged particle the main conclusions found in this work, three
deserves to be mentioned.
They are:
i) The renormalized self-energy depends
strongly on the value adopted for the curvature coupling constant ξ.
For spe-
ciﬁc values of this constant, the self-energy may provide repulsive, or attractive
self-forces with respect to the boundary. ii) The self-energy presents a ﬁnite value
at the monopole’s core center, and iii) for confomally coupled massless ﬁeld, the
self-energy only depends on the core-iduced part.
Acknowledgment
The author thanks CNPq. for partial ﬁnancial.
References
[1] T. W. Kibble, J. Phys. A. 9, 1387 (1976).
[2] A. Vilenkin and E. P. S. Shellard, Cosmic Strings and Other Topological Defects
(Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, England, 1994).
[3] D. D. Sokolov and A. A. Starobinsky, Dokl. Akad. Nauk USSR. 234, 1043
(1977) [Sov. Phys. - Doklady 22, 312 (1977)].
[4] M. Barriola and A. Vilenkin, Phys. Rev. Lett. 63, 341 (1989).
[5] F. D. Mazzitelli and C. O. Lousto, Phys. Rev. D 43, 468 (1991).
74

[6] E. R. Bezerra de Mello, V. B. Bezerra and N. R. Khusnutdinov, Phys. Rev. D
60, 063506 (1999).
[7] B. Linet, Phys. Rev. D 33, 1833 (1986).
[8] A. G. Smith, in The Formation and Evolution of Cosmic Strings, Proceedings of
the Cambridge Workshop, Cambridge, England, 1989, edited by G.W. Gibbons,
S.W. Hawking, and T. Vachaspati (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,
England, 1990).
[9] E. R. Bezerra de Mello and C. Furtado, Phys. Rev. D 56, 1345 (1997).
[10] J. R. Gott, Astrophys J. 288, 422 (1985); W. A. Hiscock, Phys. Rev. D 31,
3288 (1985).
[11] B. Allen and A. C. Ottewill, Phys. Rev. D 42, 2669 (1990).
[12] N. R. Khusnutdinov and V.B. Bezerra, Phys. Rev. D 64, 083506 (2001).
[13] E. R. Bezerra de Mello and A. A. Saharian, Class. Quantum Grav. 24, 2389
(2007).
[14] D. Barbosa, J. Spinelly and E. R. Bezerra de Mello, Int. J. Mod. Phys. D 18,
1085 (2009).
[15] Lior M. Burko, Class. Quantum Grav. 17, 227 (2000).
[16] Alan G. Wiseman, Phys. Rev. D 61, 084014 (2000).
[17] A. I. Zelnikov and V. P. Frolov, Zh. Eksp. Teor. Fiz. 82, 31 (1982) [Sov. Phys.
JETP 51, 191 (1982)].
[18] D. Barbosa, U de Freitas and E. R. Bezerra de Mello, Class. Quantum Grav.
28, 065009 (2011).
[19] M. Christenssen, Phys. Rev. D 17, 946 (1978).
[20] I. S. Gradshteyn and I. M. Ryzhik, Table of Integrals, Series and Products
(Academic Press, New York, 1980).
[21] M. Abramowitz and I. A. Stegun, Handbook of Mathematical Functions (Na-
tional Bureau of Standards, Washington DC, 1964).
[22] E. R. Bezerra de Mello and A. A. Saharian, JHEP 610, 049 (2006).
[23] E. R. Bezerra de Mello and A. A. Saharian, Phys. Rev. D 75, 065019 (2007).
75

Quantum vacuum in de Sitter spacetime
A. A. Saharian
Department of Physics, Yerevan State University
1 Alex Manoogian Street, 0025 Yerevan, Armenia
Abstract
Local properties of the Bunch-Davies vacuum state are investigated for a
massive scalar ﬁeld with general curvature coupling parameter in background
of D+1-dimensional de Sitter spacetime. The inﬂuence of the non-trivial topol-
ogy of spatial dimensions and of the presence of boundaries on these properties
are studied. Both the topological and boundary-induced parts in the vacuum
energy-momentum tensor are time-dependent and they violate the local de Sit-
ter symmetry.
1. Introduction
De Sitter (dS) spacetime is one of the simplest and most interesting spacetimes
allowed by general relativity. Quantum ﬁeld theory in this background has been
extensively studied during the past two decades. Much of early interest to dS space-
time was motivated by the questions related to the quantization of ﬁelds propagating
on curved backgrounds (for a review see [1]). This spacetime has a high degree of
symmetry and numerous physical problems are exactly solvable on this background.
The importance of this theoretical work increased by the appearance of the inﬂa-
tionary cosmology scenario [2]. In most inﬂationary models an approximately dS
spacetime is employed to solve a number of problems in standard cosmology. During
an inﬂationary epoch quantum ﬂuctuations in the inﬂaton ﬁeld introduce inhomo-
geneities and may aﬀect the transition toward the true vacuum. These ﬂuctuations
play a central role in the generation of cosmic structures from inﬂation. More re-
cently astronomical observations of high redshift supernovae, galaxy clusters and
cosmic microwave background [3] indicate that at the present epoch the Universe
is accelerating and can be well approximated by a world with a positive cosmologi-
cal constant. If the Universe would accelerate indeﬁnitely, the standard cosmology
would lead to an asymptotic dS universe. Hence, the investigation of physical ef-
fects in dS spacetime is important for understanding both the early Universe and
its future. In addition to the above, an interesting topic which has received increas-
ing attention is related to string-theoretical models of dS spacetime and inﬂation.
Recently a number of constructions of metastable dS vacua within the framework
of string theory are discussed (see, for instance, [4, 5] and references therein).
76

In the present paper we discuss the quantization of a massive scalar ﬁeld with
general curvature coupling parameter on background of dS spacetime. A common
problem in formulating quantum ﬁeld theory on a curved background is ambiguity
in the choice of vacuum. In de Sitter space there is a one-parameter family of vacua
invariant under the de Sitter group, which have been dubbed the α vacua [6]. It has
long been suggested that the only physically sensible vacuum is the Bunch-Davies
(Euclidean) vacuum. One reason for this choice is that the free propagators in the
Bunch-Davies exhibit a Hadamard singularity, which matches with what is expected
in the ﬂat space limit. We will describe the local properties of the Bunch-Davies
vacuum state. Among the most important quantities describing these properties
are the vacuum expectation values (VEVs) of the ﬁeld squared and the energy-
momentum tensor. In addition, the VEV of the energy–momentum tensor acts as
a source of gravity in the Einstein equations and, hence, plays an important role
in modelling self-consistent dynamics involving the gravitational ﬁeld. The VEV
of the ﬁeld squared for the inﬂaton ﬁeld is the central quantity in discussing the
generation of inhomogeneities during the inﬂationary expansion which are sources of
large scale structure in the universe. For a scalar ﬁeld on background of dS spacetime
the renormalized vacuum expectation values of the ﬁeld square and the energy-
momentum tensor are investigated in Refs. [7]-[10] by using various regularization
schemes. The corresponding eﬀects upon phase transitions in an expanding universe
are discussed in [11]. The non-trivial properties of the vacuum state in quantum ﬁeld
theory are manifested in its response to external inﬂuences. As simple models of
the latter we consider boundary conditions imposed on the ﬁeld operator due to the
non-trivial topology of the background space or related to the presence of boundaries.
The paper is organized as follows. In the next section we consider the quantiza-
tion of a massive scalar ﬁeld with general curvature coupling parameter in classical
dS background with trivial topology. dS-invariant vacuum states are discussed. By
using the direct modes summation technique the Wightman function, the renormal-
ized VEVs of the ﬁeld squared and the energy-momentum tensor are evaluated for
the Bunch-Davies vacuum state. The VEV of the energy-momentum tensor for dS
spacetime with toroidally compactiﬁed spatial dimensions are considered in section
3. The VEV of the energy-momentum tensor and the Casimir forces for the geom-
etry of two parallel plates in dS spacetime are discussed in section 4. The main
results are summarized in section 5.
2. Scalar ﬁeld in dS spacetime
As a background geometry we consider the (D + 1)-dimensional de Sitter space-
time (dSD+1) generated by a positive cosmological constant Λ.
dSD+1 may be
realized as the hyperboloid
ηµνZµZν = −α2, µ, ν = 0, 1, . . . , D + 1,
(1)
77

in (D+2)-dimensional Minkowski spacetime with the line element ds2
D+2 = ηµνdZµdZν
with ηµν being the standard Minkowskian metric.
In (1), the parameter α =
p
D(D −1)/(2Λ) is called the dS radius. With this embedding the O(D + 1, 1)
symmetry, which is the isometry group of dSD+1, is manifest. Diﬀerent coordinate
systems can be used on the hyperboloid. In this paper we employ the, so called,
planar or inﬂationary coordinates, (t, z1, . . . , zD), which are most appropriate for
cosmological applications. These coordinates are related to the coordinates Zµ by
the expressions
Z0
=
α sinh(t/α) + et/α
2α
D
X
l=1
(zl)2,
Zl
=
zlet/α, l = 1, . . . , D,
ZD+1
=
α cosh(t/α) −et/α
2α
D
X
l=1
(zl)2.
(2)
They cover the half of hyperboloid (1) with Z0 + ZD+1 > 0.
In planar coordinates the dS line element takes the form
ds2 = dt2 −e2t/α
D
X
l=1
(dzl)2.
(3)
In what follows, in addition to the synchronous time coordinate, t, we will also use
the conformal time, τ, deﬁned as τ = −αe−t/α, −∞< τ < 0. In terms of this
coordinate the line element takes the conformally ﬂat form:
ds2 = α2τ −2
"
dτ 2 −
D
X
l=1
(dzl)2
#
.
(4)
Note that the line element (4) with 0 < τ < ∞covers the remained half of the
hyperboloid (1). First we discuss the case of boundary-free geometry with trivial
spatial topology. In this case we have −∞< zl < ∞for l = 1, 2, . . . D.
We consider a scalar ﬁeld ϕ(x) with curvature coupling parameter ξ in back-
ground of dSD+1. The corresponding ﬁeld equation has the form
³
∇l∇l + m2 + ξR
´
ϕ = 0,
(5)
where ∇l is the covariant derivative operator and R = D(D + 1)/α2 is the Ricci
scalar for the background spacetime. The most important special cases correspond to
minimally and conformally coupled scalar ﬁelds with ξ = 0 and ξ = ξD ≡(D−1)/4D,
respectively.
The quantization of the ﬁeld ϕ(x) in dS spacetime is done by the standard
methods of quantum ﬁeld theory on curved backgrounds (for a review see [1]). Let
78

{ϕσ(x), ϕ∗
σ(x)} be a complete set of solutions to the ﬁeld equation (5) speciﬁed by
a collective index σ and normalized by the condition
Z
Σ
dΣµ[ϕσ(x)∂µϕ∗
σ′(x) −ϕ∗
σ′(x)∂µϕσ(x)] = iδσσ′.
(6)
where Σ is a spacelike slice. Here and in what follows, δσσ′ is understood as Dirac
delta-function for continuous components of the collective index σ and as Kronecker
delta for discrete ones. We expand the ﬁeld operator in terms of the mode functions
as
ϕ(x) =
X
σ
[aσϕσ(x) + a+
σ ϕ∗
σ(x)],
(7)
where aσ and a+
σ are the annihilation and creation operators with the standard
commutation relations [aσ, a+
σ′] = δσσ′, [aσ, aσ′] = [a+
σ , a+
σ′] = 0.
For continuous
components of the collective index σ the summation in (7) is understood as an
integration with an appropriate measure. Further, we deﬁne the vacuum state as
follows: aσ |0⟩= 0. The multiparticle Fock states are constructed in the standard
way acting by the creation operators on the vacuum state. In particular, a one-
particle state is deﬁned as |1σ⟩= a+
σ |0⟩.
Note that, in general, the notion of the vacuum state depends on the choice of
the mode functions. If { ¯ϕρ(x), ¯ϕ∗
ρ(x)} is another set of mode functions with the
corresponding vacuum state |¯0⟩, then this state contains P
ρ |βρσ|2 particles in the
ϕσ(x) mode, where βρσ = −( ¯ϕρ(x), ϕ∗
σ(x)) is the Bogoliubov coeﬃcients. The two
vacuum states, |¯0⟩and |0⟩, coincide only in the case βρσ = 0.
In dS spacetime described by the inﬂationary coordinates, Eq. (3), the spatial
coordinate dependence of the mode functions can be taken in the form eik·z with
z = (z1, . . . , zD) and k = (k1, . . . , kD). For dS spactime with trivial topology one has
−∞< kl < +∞and the collective index is speciﬁed as σ = (k1, . . . , kD). From (5)
we get the equation for the time-dependent part of the mode functions. The latter
is solved in terms of the cylindrical functions and the mode functions are presented
as
ϕσ(x) = ηD/2 X
j=1,2
cjH(j)
ν (kη)eik·z, η = |τ|,
(8)
where k = |k|, H(j)
ν (z), j = 1, 2, are the Hankel functions with the order
ν =
£
D2/4 −D(D + 1)ξ −m2α2¤1/2 .
(9)
Note that the latter can be either real or imaginary in dependence of the curvature
coupling parameter and the mass. From the normalization condition (6) we obtain
the following relation between the coeﬃcients cj:
|c1|2 −ei(ν−ν∗)π|c2|2 = ei(ν−ν∗)π/2
8(2πα)D−1 .
(10)
Diﬀerent choices of one of the coeﬃcients cj correspond to diﬀerent choices of the
vacuum state in dS spacetime. The choice of the vacuum state is among the most
79

important steps in construction of a quantum ﬁeld theory in a ﬁxed classical gravi-
tational background. dS spacetime is a maximally symmetric space and it is natural
to choose a vacuum state having the same symmetry. In fact, there exists a one-
parameter family of maximally symmetric quantum states [6] which are called α
vacua. In inﬂationary coordinates these states are realized by the mode functions
(8) with the coeﬃcients cj being independent of k.
In the discussion below we
will assume that the ﬁeld is prepared in the dS-invariant Bunch-Davies vacuum
state (otherwise known as the Euclidean vacuum) [10] for which c2 = 0. As we
have already mentioned before, among the set of dS-invariant quantum states the
Bunch-Davies vacuum is the only one for which the short distance singularities of
the two-point functions are of the Hadamard form. For a general α vacuum, the
subtractions in the renormalization procedure include nonlocal contributions to the
eﬀective action. In [12] it is shown that, except for the Bunch-Davies vacuum, α
vacua states are unphysical when gravitational interactions are included. This ob-
servation is applied to the quantum state of the inﬂaton, and it is found that strong
ﬁne tuning is required for states other than the Bunch-Davies vacuum to lead to
observable features in the cosmic microwave background radiation anisotropy. In
[13] it is proved that for an arbitrary homogeneous and isotropic physical initial
state in de Sitter spacetime he expectation value of the energy-momentum tensor
for a scalar ﬁeld approaches the Bunch-Davies value at late times, independently of
the initial state.
Hence, for the mode functions realizing the Bunch-Davies vacuum state one has
ϕσ(x) = c1ηD/2H(1)
ν (kη)eik·z,
(11)
where the constant c1 is directly obtained from (10):
|c1|2 = ei(ν−ν∗)π/2
8(2πα)D−1 .
(12)
The free ﬁeld theory may be deﬁned in terms of its two-point functions.
In
particular, the information on the properties of the vacuum state is contained in these
functions. Here we consider the Wightman function, WdS(x, x′) = ⟨0|ϕ(x)ϕ(x′)|0⟩,
where |0⟩stands for the Bunch-Davies vacuum state. Our choice of the Wightman
function is related to that, in addition to the VEVs of various physical observables,
this function also determines the response of the Unruh-DeWitt particle detector at
a given state of motion. Having the mode functions, the Wightman function may
be evaluated by making use of the mode sum formula
WdS(x, x′) =
X
σ
ϕσ(x)ϕ∗
σ(x′).
(13)
Substituting the mode functions (11) and by taking into account (12), we ﬁnd the
following expression
WdS(x, x′) = ei(ν−ν∗)π/2(ηη′)D
8(2πα)D−1
Z
dDk H(1)
ν (kη)[H(1)
ν (kη′)]∗eik·∆z,
(14)
80

where ∆z = z −z′. For the further transformation of this expression, ﬁrst we use
the formula
Z
dDkeik·∆zF(k) = (2π)D/2
Z ∞
0
dk kD−1F(k)JD/2−1(k|∆z|)
(k|∆z|)D/2−1 ,
(15)
for a given function F(k), where Jµ(x) is the Bessel function. This yield the formula
WdS(x, x′)
=
ei(ν−ν∗)π/2(ηη′)D
8(2π)D/2−1αD−1|∆z|D/2−1
Z ∞
0
dk kD/2
×H(1)
ν (kη)[H(1)
ν (kη′)]∗JD/2−1(k|∆z|).
(16)
As the next step, we write the product of the Hankel functions in terms of the
Macdonald function:
ei(ν−ν∗)π/2H(1)
ν (kη)[H(1)
ν (kη′)]∗= 4
π2 Kν(−ikη)Kν(ikη′),
(17)
and use the integral representation [14]
Kν(Z)Kν(z) = 1
4
Z +∞
−∞
dy
Z ∞
0
dw
w e−νy−Zzw−1 cosh y exp
µ
−w
2 −Z2 + z2
2w
¶
(18)
for the product of the Macdonald functions. Substituting this into (16) and changing
the order of integration, the integral over k is evaluated with the help of the formula
Z ∞
0
dk kν+1e−αk2Jν(βx) = βνe−β2/4α
(2α)ν+1 .
(19)
The remained integral over w is expressed in terms of the gamma function and one
gets the expression
WdS(x, x′) =
Γ(D/2)
4πD/2+1αD−1
Z ∞
0
dz
zD/2−ν−1
[z2 −2u(x, x′)z + 1]D/2 ,
(20)
where we have deﬁned
u(x, x′) = 1 + (∆η)2 −|∆z|2
2ηη′
.
(21)
In deriving Eq.
(20) we have assumed that |u| < 1.
The integral in Eq. (20)
is expressed in terms of the associated Legendre function P (1−D)/2
ν−1/2
(u(x, x′)) (see
Ref. [15]).
Expressing this function through the hypergeometric function, after
some transformations, we get the ﬁnal expression for the Wightman function in
dS spacetime (for two-point functions in boundary-free dS spacetime see Ref. [7]):
WdS(x, x′)
=
α1−D
(4π)(D+1)/2
Γ(D/2 + ν)Γ(D/2 −ν)
Γ((D + 1)/2)
× 2F1
µD
2 + ν, D
2 −v; D + 1
2
; 1 + u(x, x′)
2
¶
.
(22)
81

Note that, in terms of the coordinates Zµ in the higher-dimensional embedding
space for dS spacetime, then one can write u(x, x′) = 1 + [Z(x) −Z(x′)]2/(2α2).
The property that the Wightman function depends on spacetime points through
[Z(x) −Z(x′)]2 is related to the maximal symmetry of the Bunch-Davies vacuum
state.
The Wightman function (22) is divergent in the coincidence limit and can not
be directly used for the evaluation of the VEVs of the ﬁeld squared and the energy-
momentum tensor. In order to ﬁnd the renormalized VEVs we can subtract from
the Wightman function the corresponding DeWitt-Schwinger expansion truncated
at the adiabatic order D + 1. After this subtraction the coincidence limit is ﬁnite.
In this way, for the renormalized VEV of the ﬁeld squared in the case D = 3 one
ﬁnds [7, 9, 10]
⟨ϕ2⟩0,ren
=
1
8π2α2
½µm2α2
2
+ 6ξ −1
¶ ·
ψ
µ3
2 + ν
¶
+ ψ
µ3
2 −ν
¶
−ln
¡
m2α2¢¸
−(6ξ −1)2
m2α2
+
1
30m2α2 −6ξ + 2
3
)
,
(23)
where ψ(x) is the logarithmic derivative of the gamma-function. Due to the maximal
symmetry of the dS spacetime this VEV does not depend on the spacetime point.
In a similar way, the renormalized VEV of the energy-momentum tensor takes the
form [7, 9, 10] (see also [1])
⟨T k
l ⟩0,ren
=
δk
l
32π2α4 {m2α2 ¡
m2α2/2 + 6ξ −1
¢
[ψ (3/2 + ν) + ψ (3/2 −ν)
−ln
¡
m2α2¢
] −(6ξ −1)2 + 1/30 + (2/3 −6ξ)m2α2}.
(24)
By using the asymptotic expansion of the function ψ(x) for large values of the
argument it can be seen that for large values of the parameter mα from (24) one
has
⟨T k
l ⟩0,ren ≈
δk
l
32π2m2α6
µ 7
12 −58ξ
5
+ 72ξ2 −144ξ3
¶
, mα ≫1.
(25)
For a conformally coupled scalar ﬁeld the coeﬃcient in braces is equal −1/60. The
energy-momentum tensor (24) is a gravitational source of the cosmological constant
type. Due to the problem symmetry this will be the case for general values D. As a
result, in combination with the initial cosmological constant Λ, the one-loop eﬀects
lead to the eﬀective cosmological constant
Λeﬀ= D(D −1)/2α2 + 8πG⟨T 0
0 ⟩0,ren,
(26)
where G is the Newton gravitational constant.
In ﬁgure 1 we have plotted the renormalized vacuum energy density in the un-
compactiﬁed dS spacetime as a function of the parameter mα for D = 3 minimally
and conformally coupled scalar ﬁelds. As it is seen from the plots, the one-loop
correction to the cosmological constant for a minimally coupled scalar ﬁeld is always
positive, whereas for a conformally coupled scalar it can be also negative.
82

0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
mΑ
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
Η Α D+1<T0
0>0,ren
Ξ =0
Ξ =16
Figure 1: Renormalized vacuum energy density in uncompactiﬁed dS spacetime,
ηαD+1 ­
T 0
0
®
ren as a function of mα for minimally and conformally coupled scalar
ﬁelds in D = 3. The scaling coeﬃcient η = 103(104) for minimally (conformally)
coupled scalar ﬁelds.
3. dS spacetime with toroidally compact dimensions
3.1. Mode functions
In recent years much attention has been paid to the possibility that a universe
could have non-trivial topology [16, 17]. Many of high energy theories of funda-
mental physics are formulated in higher dimensional spacetimes and it is commonly
assumed that the extra dimensions are compactiﬁed. In particular, the idea of com-
pactiﬁed dimensions has been extensively used in supergravity and superstring the-
ories. From an inﬂationary point of view universes with compact spatial dimensions,
under certain conditions, should be considered a rule rather than an exception [18].
The models of a compact universe with non-trivial topology may play an important
role by providing proper initial conditions for inﬂation (for physical motivations of
considering compact universes see also [19]).
There has been a large activity to
search for signatures of non-trivial topology by identifying ghost images of galaxies,
clusters or quasars. Recent progress in observations of the cosmic microwave back-
ground provides an alternative way to observe the topology of the universe [17]. If
the scale of periodicity is close to the particle horizon scale then the changed ap-
pearance of the microwave background sky pattern oﬀers a sensitive probe of the
topology.
The compactiﬁcation of spatial dimensions leads to a number of interesting quan-
tum ﬁeld theoretical eﬀects which include instabilities in interacting ﬁeld theories,
topological mass generation, symmetry breaking. In the case of non-trivial topology
83

the boundary conditions imposed on ﬁelds give rise to the modiﬁcation of the spec-
trum for vacuum ﬂuctuations and, as a result, to the Casimir-type contributions in
the vacuum expectation values of physical observables (for the topological Casimir
eﬀect and its role in cosmology see [20] and references therein). Compactiﬁcation of
extra dimensions have moduli parameters which parametrize the size and the shape
of the extra dimensions and the Casimir eﬀect has been used to stabilize these mod-
uli. The topological Casimir energy can also serve as a model for dark energy needed
for the explanation of the present accelerated expansion of the universe. The eﬀects
of the toroidal compactiﬁcation of spatial dimensions in dS spacetime on the proper-
ties of quantum vacuum for a scalar ﬁeld with general curvature coupling parameter
are investigated in Refs. [21, 22]. The one-loop quantum eﬀects for a fermionic ﬁeld
on background of dS spacetime are studied in [23, 24].
In this section we consider a general class of compactiﬁcations of dS spacetime
having the spatial topology Rp × (S1)q, p + q = D. This geometry can be used to
describe two types of models. For the ﬁrst one p = 3, q ⩾1, and which corresponds
to the universe with Kaluza-Klein type extra dimensions. The presence of extra
dimensions generates an additional gravitational source in the cosmological equa-
tions which is of barotropic type (gravitational source with a constant equation of
state parameter) at late stages of the cosmological evolution. For the second model
D = 3 and the results given below describe how the properties of the universe with
dS geometry are changed by one-loop quantum eﬀects induced by the compactness
of spatial dimensions.
We assume that the spatial coordinate zl, l = p + 1, . . . , D, is compactiﬁed to S1
of the length Ll: 0 ⩽zl ⩽Ll, and for the other coordinates we have −∞< zl < +∞,
l = 1, . . . , p. Let zp = (z1, . . . , zp) and zq = (zp+1, . . . , zD) be the position vectors
along the uncompactiﬁed and compactiﬁed dimensions respectively. We impose the
following boundary conditions along the compactiﬁed dimensions
ϕ(t, zp, zq + Llel) = ±ϕ(t, zp, zq),
(27)
where l = p + 1, . . . , D, upper/lower sign corresponds to untwisted/twisted scalar
ﬁeld, and el is the unit vector along the direction of the coordinate zl.
As before, for the evaluation of the VEVs will use the direct mode-summation
procedure assuming that the ﬁeld is prepared in the Bunch-Davies vacuum state.
The corresponding mode functions have the form
ϕσ(x) =
"
ei(ν−ν∗)π/2ηD
2p+2πp−1VqαD−1
#1/2
H(1)
ν (kη)eikp·zp+ikq·zq,
(28)
where Vq = Lp+1 · · · LD is the volume of the compactiﬁed subspace, and
kp
=
(k1, . . . , kp), kq = (kp+1, . . . , kD), k =
q
k2p + k2q,
kl
=
2π(nl + gl)/Ll, nl = 0, ±1, ±2, . . . , l = p + 1, . . . , D.
(29)
In (29), gl = 0 for untwisted scalar and gl = 1/2 for twisted scalar ﬁeld.
84

3.2. Vacuum Energy-Momentum Tensor
Having the complete set of eigenfunctions we can evaluate the VEV of the energy-
momentum tensor by using the mode-sum formula
⟨Tik⟩p,q =
X
σ
Tik{ϕσ(x), ϕ∗
σ(x)},
(30)
where the bilinear form Tik{f, g} is determined by the form of the classical energy-
momentum tensor for a scalar ﬁeld. We implicitly assume the presence of a cutoﬀ
function in (30) which makes the sum ﬁnite. In the problem under consideration
the set of quantum numbers σ is speciﬁed to (kp, nq) with nq = (np+1, . . . , nD).
Substituting the eigenfunctions (28) into mode-sum (30) and applying to the series
over np+1 the Abel-Plana summation formula (see, for example, Refs. [25]), we ﬁnd
the following recurrence relation for the VEV of the energy-momentum tensor
⟨T k
i ⟩p,q = ⟨T k
i ⟩p+1,q−1 + ∆p+1⟨T k
i ⟩p,q.
(31)
Here ⟨T k
i ⟩p+1,q−1 is the part corresponding to dS spacetime with p+1 uncompactiﬁed
and q −1 toroidally compactiﬁed dimensions and ∆p+1⟨T k
i ⟩p,q is induced by the
compactness along the zp+1 - direction. For the corresponding energy density one
has
∆p+1⟨T 0
0 ⟩p,q
=
2ηDLp+1
(2π)(p+3)/2VqαD+1
∞
X
n=1
(±1)n
+∞
X
nq−1=−∞
Z ∞
0
dx
× xF (0)
ν (xη)
(nLp+1)p−1 f(p−1)/2(nLp+1
q
x2 + k2nq−1),
(32)
with the notations nq−1 = (np+2, . . . , nD), fµ(y) = yµKµ(y), and
F (0)
ν (y)
=
y2 £
I′
−ν(y) + I′
ν(y)
¤
K′
ν(y) + D(1/2 −2ξ)y [(I−ν(y) + Iν(y))Kν(y)]′
+ [I−ν(y) + Iν(y)] Kν(y)
¡
ν2 + 2m2α2 −y2¢
.
(33)
In Eq. (32), the upper/lower sign corresponds to untwisted/twisted scalar ﬁeld. The
vacuum stresses are presented in the form (no summation over i)
∆p+1⟨T i
i ⟩p,q
=
Ap,q −
4ηD+2Lp+1
(2π)(p+3)/2VqαD+1
∞
X
n=1
(±1)n
+∞
X
nq−1=−∞
Z ∞
0
dx xKν(xη)
×I−ν(xη) + Iν(xη)
(nLp+1)p+1
f(i)
p (nLp+1
q
x2 + k2nq−1),
(34)
where we have introduced the notations
f(i)
p (y)
=
f(p+1)/2(y), i = 1, . . . , p,
f(p+1)
p
(y)
=
−y2f(p−1)/2(y) −pf(p+1)/2(y),
(35)
f(i)
p (y)
=
(nLp+1ki)2f(p−1)/2(y), i = p + 2, . . . , D.
85

The ﬁrst term on the right of Eq. (34) is given by
Ap,q
=
2ηDLp+1
(2π)(p+3)/2VqαD+1
∞
X
n=1
(±1)n
+∞
X
nq−1=−∞
Z ∞
0
dx
xFν(xη)
(nLp+1)p−1
×f(p−1)/2(nLp+1
q
x2 + k2nq−1),
(36)
with the notation
Fν(y)
=
[2(D + 1)ξ −D/2] y([I−ν(y) + Iν(y)] Kν(y))′ + (4ξ −1) y2K′
ν(y)
×
£
I′
−ν(y) + I′
ν(y)
¤
+ [I−ν(y) + Iν(y)] Kν(y)
£
(4ξ −1)
¡
y2 + ν2¢¤
.(37)
As it is seen from the obtained formulae, the topological parts in the VEVs are
time-dependent and, hence, the local dS symmetry is broken by them. By taking
into account the relation between the conformal and synchronous time coordinates,
we see that the VEV of the energy-momentum tensor is a function of the combina-
tions Ll/η = Llet/α/α, which is the comoving length of the compactiﬁed dimension
measured in units of the dS curvature scale.
The recurring application of formula (31) allows us to write the VEV in the form
⟨T k
i ⟩p,q = ⟨T k
i ⟩dS + ⟨T k
i ⟩c, ⟨T k
i ⟩c =
q
X
l=1
∆D−l+1⟨T k
i ⟩D−l,l,
(38)
where the part corresponding to uncompactiﬁed dS spacetime, ⟨T k
i ⟩dS, is explicitly
decomposed. The part ⟨T k
i ⟩c is induced by the compactness of the q-dimensional
subspace. This part is ﬁnite and the renormalization is needed for the uncompactiﬁed
dS part only. We could expect this result, since the local geometry is not changed
by the toroidal compactiﬁcation.
For a conformally coupled massless scalar ﬁeld ν = 1/2 and, by using the formu-
lae for I±1/2(x) and K1/2(x), after the integration over x from formulae (32), (34)
we ﬁnd (no summation over i)
∆p+1⟨T i
i ⟩p,q = −
2(η/α)D+1
(2π)p/2+1Vq−1
∞
X
n=1
(±1)n
+∞
X
nq−1=−∞
g(i)
p (nLp+1knq−1)
(nLp+1)p+2
,
(39)
with the notations
g(0)
p (y)
=
g(i)
p (y) = fp/2+1(y), i = 1, . . . , p,
g(p+1)
p
(y)
=
−(p + 1)fp/2+1(y) −y2fp/2(y),
(40)
g(i)
p (y)
=
(nLp+1ki)2fp/2(y), i = p + 2, . . . , D.
In this case the topological part in the VEV of the energy-momentum tensor is
traceless and the trace anomaly is contained in the uncompactiﬁed dS part only.
Formula (39) could be obtained from the corresponding result in (D+1)-dimensional
86

Minkowski spacetime with spatial topology Rp × (S1)q, taking into account that
two problems are conformally related: ∆p+1⟨T k
i ⟩p,q = ∆p+1⟨T k
i ⟩(M)
p,q /aD+1(η), where
a(η) = α/η is the scale factor. This relation is valid for any conformally ﬂat bulk.
The similar formula takes place for the total topological part ⟨T k
i ⟩c. Note that, in this
case the expressions for ∆p+1⟨T k
i ⟩p,q are obtained from the formulae for ∆p+1⟨T k
i ⟩(M)
p,q
replacing the lengths Ll of the compactiﬁed dimensions by the comoving lengths
αLl/η, l = p, . . . , D.
Now we turn to the investigation of the topological part in the VEV of the
energy-momentum tensor in the asymptotic regions of the ratio Lp+1/η. For small
values of this ratio, Lp+1/η ≪1, to the leading order ∆p+1⟨T k
i ⟩p,q coincides with
the corresponding result for a conformally coupled massless ﬁeld, given by (39).
For ﬁxed value of the ratio Lp+1/α, this limit corresponds to t →−∞and the
topological part ⟨T k
i ⟩c behaves like exp[−(D + 1)t/α]. By taking into account that
the part ⟨T k
i ⟩dS is time independent, from here we conclude that in the early stages
of the cosmological expansion the topological part dominates in the VEV of the
energy-momentum tensor. In particular, in this limit the total energy density is
negative.
For small values of the ratio η/Lp+1, we introduce a new integration variable
y = Lp+1x and expand the integrand by using the formulae for the modiﬁed Bessel
functions for small arguments. For real values of the parameter ν we ﬁnd
∆p+1⟨T 0
0 ⟩p,q
≈
2νD [D/2 −ν + 2ξ (2ν −D −1)]
(2π)(p+3)/2L−q
p+1VqαD+1
Γ(ν)
µ
η
Lp+1
¶D−2ν
×
∞
X
n=1
(±1)n
+∞
X
nq−1=−∞
f(p+1)/2−ν(nLp+1knq−1)
n(p+1)/2−ν
.
(41)
In particular, this quantity is positive for a minimally coupled scalar ﬁeld and for a
conformally coupled massive scalar ﬁeld. For a conformally coupled massless scalar
the coeﬃcient in (41) vanishes. For the vacuum stresses the second term on the
right of formula (34) is suppressed with respect to the ﬁrst term given by (36) by
the factor (η/Lp+1)2 for i = 1, . . . , p+1, and by the factor (ηki)2 for i = p+2, . . . , D.
As a result, to the leading order we have the relation (no summation over i)
∆p+1⟨T i
i ⟩p,q ≈(2ν/D)∆p+1⟨T 0
0 ⟩p,q, η/Lp+1 ≪1,
(42)
between the energy density and stresses, i = 1, . . . , D. The coeﬃcient in this relation
does not depend on p and, hence, it takes place for the total topological part of the
VEV as well. Hence, in the limit under consideration the topological parts in the
vacuum stresses are isotropic. Note that this limit corresponds to late times in terms
of synchronous time coordinate t, (α/Lp+1)e−t/α ≪1, and the topological part in
the VEV is suppressed by the factor exp[−(D −2ν)t/α]. For a conformally coupled
massless scalar ﬁeld the coeﬃcient of the leading term vanishes and the topological
parts are suppressed by the factor exp[−(D +1)t/α]. As the uncompactiﬁed dS part
87

is constant, it dominates the topological part at the late stages of the cosmological
evolution.
For small values of the ratio η/Lp+1 and for purely imaginary ν, the energy
density behaves like
∆p+1⟨T 0
0 ⟩p,q ≈
4De−Dt/αB
(2π)(p+3)/2αLp
p+1Vq
sin[2|ν|t/α + 2|ν| ln(Lp+1/α) + φ0],
(43)
where the parameters B and φ0 are deﬁned by the relation
Beiφ0
=
2i|ν|[|ν|(1/2 −2ξ) + i(D/4 −(D + 1)ξ)]Γ(i|ν|)
×
∞
X
n=1
(±1)n
+∞
X
nq−1=−∞
n2i|ν|−p−1f(p+1)/2−i|ν|(nLp+1knq−1).
(44)
In the same limit, the main contribution into the vacuum stresses comes from the
term Ap,q in (36) and one has (no summation over i)
∆p+1⟨T i
i ⟩p,q ≈
8|ν|e−Dt/αB
(2π)(p+3)/2αLp+1
p+1Vq−1
cos[2|ν|t/α + 2|ν| ln(Lp+1/α) + φ0].
(45)
Hence, in the case under consideration at late stages of the cosmological evolution
the topological part is suppressed by the factor exp(−Dt/α) and the damping of the
corresponding VEV has an oscillatory nature.
In the special case of topology RD−1 × S1 with the length of the compactiﬁed
dimension Lp+1 = L, for the topological part in the energy density we have
⟨T 0
0 ⟩c =
2(η/L)D−2
(2π)D/2+1αD+1
∞
X
n=1
(±1)n
nD−2
Z ∞
0
dx xF (0)
ν (x)fD/2−1(nxL/η).
(46)
We recall that the quantity L/η is the comoving length of the compactiﬁed dimension
measured in units of the dS curvature scale α. Note that the corresponding quantity
in the Minkowski spacetime with topology RD−1 × S1 has the form
⟨T 0
0 ⟩(M)
c
= −
2
(2π)(D+1)/2LD+1
∞
X
n=1
(±1)n
nD+1 f(D+1)/2(nLm),
(47)
and is always negative for an untwisted scalar ﬁeld. In order to illustrate the oscil-
latory behavior, in ﬁgure 2 by the full curve we have plotted the topological part
in the VEV of the energy density for an untwisted scalar ﬁeld in dS5 with topology
R3 × S1 as a function of the comoving length of the compactiﬁed dimension in units
of α: Lc = L/η for the value of the parameter αm = 4. This topology corresponds
to the original Kaluza-Klein model. The dashed curve presents the corresponding
quantity in Minkowski spacetime with topology R3×S1 (formula (47) with D = 4) as
a function of the length of the compactiﬁed dimension in the same units: Lc = L/α.
88

2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
4.0
4.5
5.0
-6
-4
-2
0
2
4
Lc
107Α D+1<T0
0>c
Figure 2: Topological part of the vacuum energy density, αD+1⟨T 0
0 ⟩c, in dS5 with
topology R3 ×S1 as a function of the comoving length of the compactiﬁed dimension
in units of α, Lc = L/η, for the value of the parameter αm = 4.
The dashed
curve presents the corresponding quantity in Minkowski spacetime with topology
R3 × S1 as a function of the length of the compactiﬁed dimension in the same units:
Lc = L/α.
4. Casimir densities in dS spacetime
4.1. Boundary conditions and mode functions
The Casimir eﬀect is now known to be common to systems of very diﬀerent kind,
involving ﬂuctuating quantities on which external boundary conditions are imposed.
It can have important implications on all scales, from subnuclear to cosmological.
Imposing boundary conditions on a quantum ﬁeld leads to a modiﬁcation of the
spectrum of zero-point ﬂuctuations and results in the shifting in the vacuum ex-
pectation values for physical quantities, such as the energy density and stresses.
In particular, the conﬁnement of quantum ﬂuctuations induces forces that act on
the constraining boundaries. The particular features of the resulting vacuum forces
depend on the nature of the quantum ﬁeld, on the type of the spacetime manifold,
the geometry of the boundaries, and on the speciﬁc boundary conditions imposed
on the ﬁeld.
An interesting topic in the investigation of the Casimir eﬀect is its explicit de-
pendence on the geometry of the background spacetime.
As usual, the relevant
information is encoded in the vacuum ﬂuctuations spectrum and, not surprisingly,
analytic solutions can be found for highly symmetric geometries only. The Casimir
eﬀect on the background of dS spacetime described in planar coordinates was investi-
gated in Refs. [26] for a conformally coupled massless scalar ﬁeld. In this last case the
problem is conformally related to the corresponding problem in Minkowski space-
89

time and the vacuum characteristics are generated from those for the Minkowski
counterpart, just by multiplying with the conformal factor. In particular, for the
geometry of a single plate, the vacuum expectation value of the energy-momentum
tensor vanishes. The Casimir densities induced by a single and two parallel plates
for a massive scalar ﬁeld with an arbitrary curvature coupling parameter has been
considered in [27, 28]. The Casimir eﬀect for a spherical boundary in dS spacetime
was investigated in [29].
In this section, our main interest are the VEV of the energy-momentum tensor
and the Casimir forces in the geometry of two inﬁnite, parallel plates located at
zD = aj, j = 1, 2. On the plates the ﬁeld obeys Robin boundary conditions (BCs)
(1 + βjnl∇l)ϕ(x) = 0,
zD = aj,
(48)
with constant coeﬃcients βj and with nl being the normal to the boundary. For
the region between the plates one has nl = (−1)j−1δl
D. Dirichlet and Neumann BCs
correspond to special cases βj = 0 and βj = ∞, respectively. The imposition of BCs
leads to a modiﬁcation of the VEVs for physical quantities, as compared with those in
the situation without boundaries. Among the most important characteristics of the
vacuum state is the VEV of the energy-momentum tensor. In addition to describing
the physical structure of the quantum ﬁeld at a given point, the energy-momentum
tensor acts as the source in the Einstein equations and therefore plays an important
role in modelling a self-consistent dynamics involving the gravitational ﬁeld. The
VEV is expressed as the mode-sum (30), where {ϕσ(x), ϕ∗
σ(x)} is a complete set of
solutions to the classical ﬁeld equation satisfying the boundary conditions (48).
In the region between the plates, a1 < zD < a2, the eigenfunctions realizing the
Bunch-Davies vacuum state and satisfying the BC on the plate at zD = a1, have
the form
ϕσ(x) = CσηD/2H(1)
ν (ηK) cos[kD(zD −a1) + α1(kD)]eik·z,
(49)
with the notations K =
q
k2 + k2
D and e2iα1(x) = (iβ1x−1)/(iβ1x+1). In Eq. (49),
z = (z1, . . . , zD−1) is the position vector along the dimensions parallel to the plates
and k = (k1, . . . , kD−1). For a conformally coupled massless ﬁeld one has ν = 1/2.
From the boundary condition on the plate zD = a2 it follows that the eigenvalues
for kD are solutions of the equation
(1 −b1b2y2) sin y −(b1 + b2)y cos y = 0, y = kDa,
(50)
where bj = βj/a and a = a2 −a1. In the discussion below we will assume that all
zeros are real. In particular, this is the case for the conditions bj ⩽0 (see Ref. [30]).
The positive solutions of Eq. (50) will be denoted by y = λn, n = 1, 2, . . ., and
for the eigenvalues of kD one has kD = λn/a. Consequently, the eigenfunctions are
speciﬁed by the set σ = (k, n). The coeﬃcient Cσ in (49) is determined from the
normalization condition and is given by the expression
C2
σ =
(2π)2−Dα1−Dei(ν−ν∗)π/2
4a {1 + cos[λn + 2α1(λn/a)] sin(λn)/λn},
(51)
90

the star meaning complex conjugate.
It is well known that in dS spacetime without boundaries the Bunch–Davies vac-
uum state is not a physically realizable state for Re ν ⩾D/2. The corresponding
two-point functions contain infrared divergences. In the presence of boundaries, the
BCs on the quantized ﬁeld may exclude long wavelength modes and the Bunch-
Davies vacuum becomes a realizable state. An example of this type of situation is
provided by the geometry of two parallel plates described above. In the region be-
tween the plates and for BCs with βj ⩽0, βj ̸= ∞, there is a maximum wavelength,
2πa/λ1, and the two-point functions contain no infrared divergences. Mathemat-
ically, this situation corresponds to the one where in the argument of the Hankel
function we have K ⩾λ1/a.
4.2. VEV of the energy-momentum tensor
Combining Eqs. (30),(28),(51), for the VEV of the energy-momentum tensor
in the region between the plates we ﬁnd the expression which contains series over
λn.
For the summation of this series we apply the Abel-Plana type summation
formula from Refs. [30, 25]. This allows us to write the diagonal components in the
decomposed form (no summation over l)
⟨T l
l ⟩
=
⟨T l
l ⟩j + AD
αD+1
Z ∞
0
dy y1−D
Z ∞
y
dx H(x, y)
×
£
g(βjx/η, |zD −aj|x/η)Gl(y) + 2Glx2Fν(y)
¤
,
(52)
where
AD = 4(4π)−(D+1)/2
Γ((D −1)/2) , H(x, y) =
(x2 −y2)(D−3)/2
c1(x/η)c2(x/η)e2ax/η −1,
g(βju, yu) = cj(u)e2uy + e−2uy/cj(u) + 2, cj(u) = βju −1
βju + 1,
(53)
and
Fν(y) = yD [Iν(y) + I−ν(y)] Kν(y),
(54)
with Iν(y) and Kν(y) being the modiﬁed Bessel functions. In (52), we have intro-
duced the notations
G0(y)
=
·y2
4 ∂2
y −D(ξ + ξD)y∂y + D2ξ + m2α2 −y2 + (1 −4ξ) x2
¸
Fν(y),
GD(y)
=
½µ
ξ −1
4
¶
y2∂2
y +
·
ξ(2 −D) + D −1
4
¸
y∂y −ξD
¾
Fν(y),
(55)
Gl(y)
=
GD(y) +
·y2 −x2
D −1 + (1 −4ξ) x2
¸
Fν(y), l = 1, . . . , D −1,
and GD = 1, Gl = 4ξ −1 for l = 0, 1, . . . , D −1. In Eq. (52) (no summation over l),
⟨T l
l ⟩j = ⟨T l
l ⟩dS + AD
αD+1
Z ∞
0
dy y1−D
Z ∞
y
dx (x2 −y2)
D−3
2
e−2x|zD−aj|/η
cj(x/η)
Gl(y), (56)
91

is the VEV for the geometry of a single plate at zD = aj when the second plate is ab-
sent [27] and ⟨T l
l ⟩dS is the corresponding renormalized VEV in dS spacetime without
boundaries discussed in section 2. For points away from the plates, renormalization
is required for the latter part only. The last term on the right hand side of Eq. (52)
is induced by the presence of the second plate. Note that in the formulas given
above, |zD −aj|/η is the proper distance of the observation point from the plate at
zD = aj, measured in units of the dS curvature radius α. The VEVs depend on time
through the combinations |zD −aj|/η and βj/η. This property is a consequence of
the maximal symmetry of dS spacetime and of Bunch–Davies vacuum.
For the non-zero oﬀ-diagonal component, we have
⟨T D
0 ⟩
=
⟨T D
0 ⟩j −sgn(zD −aj)
AD
2αD+1
Z ∞
0
dyy1−DG0D(y)
×
Z ∞
y
dx xH(x, y)
h
cj(x/η)e2x|zD−aj|/η −e−2x|zD−aj|/η/cj(x/η)
i
,(57)
where the part corresponding to the geometry of a single plate is given by
⟨T D
0 ⟩j
=
sgn(zD −aj) 2AD
αD+1
Z ∞
0
dyy1−DG0D(y)
×
Z ∞
y
dx x(x2 −y2)
D−3
2
e−2x|zD−aj|/η
cj(x/η)
.
(58)
In these formulas we have deﬁned the function
G0D(y) = [(4ξ −1)y∂y + 4ξ] Fν(y).
(59)
The oﬀ-diagonal component (57) corresponds to the energy ﬂux along the direction
perpendicular to the plates.
Depending on the values of the coeﬃcients in the
boundary conditions and of the ﬁeld mass this ﬂux can be positive or negative. In the
case when β1 = β2, the oﬀ-diagonal component ⟨T D
0 ⟩vanishes at zD = (a1 + a2)/2.
This property is a direct consequence of the problem symmetry.
For a conformally coupled massless scalar ﬁeld (ξ = ξD, m = 0) the single
plate part in the VEV of the energy-momentum tensor vanishes and one ﬁnds (no
summation over l)
⟨T l
k⟩= ⟨T l
k⟩dS −
(η/α)D+1Blδk
l
(4π)D/2Γ(D/2 + 1)
Z ∞
0
dx
xD
c1(x)c2(x)e2ax −1 ,
(60)
where Bl = 1 for
l = 0, . . . , D −1 and BD = −D. The boundary induced part
in this formula could have been obtained from the corresponding result for the
Casimir eﬀect in Minkowski spacetime, by using the fact that the two problems are
conformally related. Note that the boundary induced part in Eq. (60) is traceless
and the trace anomaly is contained in the boundary-free part only.
In the region zD < a1 (zD > a2) the VEV of the energy-momentum tensor
coincides with the corresponding VEV for a single plate located at zD = a1 (zD = a2)
92

and is given by the expressions (56) and (58), with j = 1 (j = 2). The results
obtained in the present paper can be applied to a more general problem where the
cosmological constant is diﬀerent in separate regions zD < a1, a1 < zD < a2, and
zD > a2. In this case the plate can be considered as a simple model of a thin domain
wall separating the regions with diﬀerent dS vacua.
4.3. Casimir Forces
Having the VEV of the energy-momentum tensor, we can evaluate the forces
acting on the plates.
The vacuum force acting per unit surface of the plate at
zD = aj is determined by the D
D-component of the vacuum energy-momentum tensor
evaluated at this point. For the region between the plates, the corresponding eﬀective
pressures can be written as p(j) = p(j)
1
+ p(j)
(int), j = 1, 2.
The term p(j)
1
is the
pressure for a single plate at zD = aj, when the second plate is absent.
This
term is divergent due to the surface divergences in the subtracted VEVs and needs
additional renormalization. The term p(j)
(int) is the pressure induced by the second
plate, and can be termed as an interaction force. This contribution is ﬁnite for all
nonzero distances between the plates. In the regions zD < a1 and zD > a2 we have
p(j) = p(j)
1 . As a result, the contributions to the vacuum force coming from the term
p(j)
1
are the same from the left and from the right sides of the plate, so that there is
no net contribution to the eﬀective force.
The interaction force on the plate at zD = aj is obtained from the last term on
the right hand side of Eq. (52) for ⟨T D
D ⟩(with minus sign) taking zD = aj:
p(j)
(int) = −2AD
αD+1
Z ∞
0
dy y1−D
Z ∞
y
dx x2H(x, y)
"
2 (βj/η)2 GD(y)
(βjx/η)2 −1
+ Fν(y)
#
,
(61)
where H(x, y) is deﬁned by Eq. (53). The time dependence of the forces appears in
the form a/η and βj/η. Note that the ratio a/η is the proper distance between the
plates measured in units of dS curvature radius α. The eﬀective pressures (61) can be
either positive or negative, leading to repulsive or to attractive forces, respectively.
For β1 ̸= β2 the Casimir forces acting on the left and on the right plates are diﬀerent.
For large values of α, to leading order, the corresponding result for the geometry of
two parallel plates in Minkowski spacetime is obtained:
p(j)
(int) ≈p(j)
(M) = −2(4π)−D/2
Γ(D/2)
Z ∞
m
dx x2(x2 −m2)D/2−1
c1(x)c2(x)e2ax −1.
(62)
Note that in the Minkowski spacetime the force is the same for both plates with
independence of the values for the coeﬃcients βj and this force does not depend on
the curvature coupling parameter.
93

In the special cases of Dirichlet and of Neumann boundary conditions one ﬁnds:
p(D)
(int)
=
−4α−D−1
(2π)
D
2 +1
∞
X
n=1
Z ∞
0
dy yFν(y)
h
(D −1)f D
2 (yun) + f D
2 −1(yun)
i
, (63)
p(N)
(int)
=
p(D)
(int) −8α−D−1
(2π)
D
2 +1
∞
X
n=1
Z ∞
0
dy GD(y)
y
f D
2 −1(yun), un = 2na/η,
(64)
where fµ(x) = Kµ(x)/xµ. For 0 ⩽ν < 1 the integrand in the expression for p(D)
(int) is
positive which corresponds to an attractive force for all separations.
Now we turn to the investigation of the asymptotic behavior for the vacuum
forces in the general case of Robin BC. In the limit of small proper distances between
the plates, a/η ≪1, to leading order we ﬁnd
p(j)
(int) ≈−
2(η/α)D+1
(4π)D/2Γ(D/2)
Z ∞
0
dx
xD
c1(x)c2(x)e2ax −1.
(65)
If, in addition, |βj|/a ≫1, one has
p(j)
(int) ≈−DΓ((D + 1)/2)ζR(D + 1)
(4π)(D+1)/2(αa/η)D+1
,
(66)
and the corresponding force is attractive. In (66), ζR(x) is the Riemann zeta func-
tion. The same result is obtained for Dirichlet BCs on both plates. In the case of
Dirichlet BC on one plate and non-Dirichlet one on the other, the leading term is
obtained from Eq. (66) with an additional factor (2−D −1). In this case the vacuum
force is repulsive at small distances.
In considering the large distance asymptotics, corresponding to a/η ≫1, the
cases of real and imaginary ν must be studied separately. For positive values of ν,
one has
p(j)
(int) ≈−
2α−D−1g(j)
ν Γ(ν)
πD/2+1(2a/η)D−2ν+2 ,
(67)
for non-Neumann BCs on the plate at zD = aj (|βj| < ∞) and
p(j)
(int) ≈−α−D−1gN(j)
ν
Γ(ν)
πD/2+1(2a/η)D−2ν ,
(68)
for Neumann BC (βj = ∞). Here the notations are as follows:
g(j)
ν
=
µD + 1
2
−ν
¶
Γ(D/2 −ν + 1)
"
1 −2
µβj
η
¶2
fD
# ∞
X
n=1
(δ1δ2)n
nD−2ν+2 , (69)
gN(j)
ν
=
Γ(D/2 −ν)fD
∞
X
n=1
(δ1δ2)n
nD−2ν ,
94

with fD = −2ν [ξ + (ξ −1/4) (D −2ν)] and δj = cj(0).
Note that δj = −1 for
non-Neumann BC, while δj = 1 if the BC is Neumann. In the case of non-Neumann
BCs we have assumed that |βj|/a ≪1.
As it is seen from (68), for positive values of ν and when fD ̸= 0, at large
distances the ratio of the Casimir forces acting on the plate with Neumann and non-
Neumann BCs is of the order (a/η)2. Note that in neither of these cases does the
force depend on the speciﬁc value of Robin coeﬃcient in the BC on the second plate.
For Dirichlet BC on the plate at zD = aj (βj = 0), at large separations the Casimir
force acting on that plate is repulsive (attractive) for Neumann (non-Neumann) BCs
on the other plate. The nature of the force acting on the plate with Neumann BC
depends on the sign of fD and can be either repulsive or attractive, in function of the
curvature coupling parameter and of the ﬁeld mass. For minimally and conformally
coupled massive scalar ﬁelds one has fD = ν(D/2 −ν) and fD = ν(1/2 −ν)/D,
respectively, and this parameter is positive. The corresponding force is attractive
(repulsive) for Neumann (non-Neumann) BC on the second plate. Note that for
the geometry of parallel plates in the Minkowski bulk the Casimir forces at large
distances are repulsive for Neumann BC on one plate and for non-Neumann BC on
the other plate. For all other cases of BCs the forces are attractive.
For imaginary ν, the leading order terms at large separations between the plates
are in the form
p(j)
(int)
≈
−
4α−D−1|g(j)
ν |
πD/2+1(2a/η)D+2 cos[2|ν| ln(2a/η) + φ(j)], |βj| < ∞,
p(j)
(int)
≈
−2α−D−1|gN(j)
ν
|
πD/2+1(2a/η)D cos[2|ν| ln(2a/η) + φN
(j)], βj = ∞,
(70)
where the phases are deﬁned in accordance with g(j)
ν
= |g(j)
ν |eiφ(j) and gN(j)
ν
=
|gN(j)
ν
|eiφN
(j). In this case the decay of the vacuum forces is oscillatory.
In Fig. 3, we have plotted the Casimir force for a D = 3 scalar ﬁeld with Dirichlet
BC, minimally coupled to gravity, as a function of the proper distance between the
plates, measured in units of the dS curvature scale α. The ﬁgures near the curves
correspond to the values of the parameter mα. Values are taken in a way so to have
both possibilities, with positive and purely imaginary values of the parameter ν.
In Fig. 4 the dependence of the Casimir force on the parameter mα is depicted
for a given separation corresponding to a/η = 4. Conformally coupled scalar ﬁelds
with Dirichlet and Neumann BCs are considered. For a massless ﬁeld the force is
the same for Dirichlet and Neumann BCs.
From the discussion given above it follows that for proper distances between
the plates larger than the curvature radius of the dS spacetime, αa/η ≳α, the
gravitational ﬁeld essentially changes the behavior of the Casimir forces compared
with the case of the plates in Minkowski spacetime. The forces may become repulsive
at large separations between the plates.
In particular, for real values ν and for
Neumann BC on both plates, Casimir forces are repulsive at large separations, in
the range of parameters for which fD < 0. Recall that, for the geometry of parallel
95

2
3/2
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
-0.5
-0.4
-0.3
-0.2
-0.1
0.0
aΗ
104Α 4pHintL
H jL
2
3/2
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
-15
-10
-5
0
5
aΗ
104Α 4pHintL
H jL
Figure 3: Interaction forces between the plates for a D = 3 minimally coupled scalar
ﬁeld with Dirichlet (left plot) and Neumann (right plot) BCs. The ﬁgures near the
curves are the values of the parameter αm.
N
D
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
-0.8
-0.6
-0.4
-0.2
0.0
0.2
mΑ
104Α 4 pHintL
H jL
Figure 4: Interaction force between the plates for a/η = 4 as a function of the ﬁeld
mass, for a D = 3 conformally coupled scalar ﬁeld with Dirichlet and Neumann BCs.
96

plates on the background of Minkowski spacetime, the only case with repulsive
Casimir forces at large distances corresponds to Neumann BC on one plate and non-
Neumann BC on the other. A remarkable feature of the inﬂuence of the gravitational
ﬁeld is the oscillatory behavior of the Casimir forces at large distances, which appears
in the case of imaginary ν. In this case, the values of the plate distance yielding zero
Casimir force correspond to equilibrium positions. Among them, the positions with
negative derivative of the force with respect to the distance are locally stable. As it
follows from asymptotic formulas (67), (68), and (70), at large separations between
the plates the decay of the Casimir forces as functions of the distance is power-law
for both cases of massive and massless ﬁelds. Recall that, in Minkowski spacetime
the corresponding Casimir forces decay as 1/aD+1 for a massless ﬁeld and they are
exponentially suppressed by the factor exp(−2ma) for a massive ﬁled.
It is also of interest to compare the features for the Casimir force in dS spacetime
with the behavior of the Casimir forces for parallel plates in AdS spacetime. In
Poincar´e coordinates the corresponding line element is given by the expression
ds2
AdS = e−2λyηikdxidxk −dy2,
(71)
where ηik =diag(1, −1, . . . , −1) is the metric tensor for D-dimensional Minkowski
spacetime. For the corresponding Ricci scalar one has R = −D(D + 1)λ2 and the
AdS curvature radius is given by 1/λ. For the general case of Robin BCs on two
parallel plates, located at y = yj, j = 1, 2, the interaction forces between the plates
are investigated in Ref. [31] (see also Refs. [32] for the case where an extra compact
subspace is present). At large distances between the plates, as compared with the
AdS curvature radius, λ(y2−y1) ≫1, the vacuum interaction forces per unit surface,
p(j)
(int), are exponentially suppressed by the factor exp[2νAdSλ(y1 −y2)] for the plate
at y = y1 and by the factor exp[(2νAdS +D)λ(y1 −y2)] for the plate at y = y2, where
νAdS =
£
D2/4 −D(D + 1)ξ + m2/λ2¤1/2. Note that in AdS spacetime the ground
state becomes unstable for imaginary values of νAdS.[33] Hence, in AdS spacetime
the Casimir forces are exponentially suppressed for both massive and massless ﬁelds.
5. Conclusion
The natural appearance of dS spacetime in a variety of situations has stimu-
lated considerable interest in the behavior of quantum ﬁelds propagating in this
background. In the present paper we have discussed the properties of the quan-
tum vacuum for a massive scalar ﬁeld with general curvature coupling parameter.
Among the most important local characteristics of the vacuum state are the VEVs
of the ﬁeld squared and the energy-momentum tensor. First we have considered dS
spacetime with trivial topology described in ﬂat coordinates. Unlike to the case of
Minkowski spacetime, where the Poincar´e invariance determines a unique vacuum
state, in dS spacetime the symmetries do not determine the vacuum state completely.
There are a set of vacuum states parametrized by a single complex parameter and
97

known as α vacua. Among them only the Bunch-Davies vacuum state smoothly
patches onto the Poincar´e invariant Minkowski vacuum in the adiabatic limit. In
free ﬁeld theories (interacting only with background gravitational ﬁeld), all proper-
ties of the quantum vacuum are encoded in two-point functions. For the evaluation
of the Wightman function in dS spacetime with trivial topology, in section 2 we
have employed the direct mode summation technique. The mode functions realizing
the Bunch-Davies vacuum state are given by (11) and the Wightman function is
expressed in terms of the hypergeometric function, Eq. (22). Having the Wightman
function, the renormalized VEVs of the ﬁeld squared and the energy-momentum
tensor are found subtracting the corresponding DeWitt-Schwinger expansion trun-
cated at the adiabatic order D + 1 and taking the coincidence limit. Due to the
maximal symmetry of the Bunch-Davies vacuum state these VEVs do not depend
on the spacetime point. In the special case D = 3 they are given by the expressions
(23) and (24).
The eﬀects of non-trivial spatial topology on properties of the Bunch-Davies
vacuum state were discussed in section 3. We have considered (D + 1)-dimensional
dS spacetime having the spatial topology Rp × (S1)q. Both cases of the periodicity
and antiperiodicity conditions along the compactiﬁed dimensions are discussed. A
recurrence relation is derived which presents the vacuum energy-momentum tensor
for the dSD+1 with topology Rp × (S1)q in the form of the sum of the energy-
momentum tensor for the topology Rp+1 × (S1)q−1 and the additional part induced
by the compactness of the (p + 1)th spatial dimension. The repeated application
of the recurrence formula allows us to present the VEV of the energy-momentum
tensor as the sum of the uncompactiﬁed dS and topological parts. Since the toroidal
compactiﬁcation does not change the local geometry, in this way the renormalization
of the energy-momentum tensor is reduced to that for uncompactifeid dSD+1.
At early stages of the cosmological expansion, corresponding to t →−∞, the
vacuum energy-momentum tensor coincides with the corresponding quantity for a
conformally coupled massless ﬁeld and the topological part behaves like e−(D+1)t/α.
In this limit the topological part dominates in the VEV. At late stages of the cos-
mological expansion, t →+∞, the behavior of the topological part depends on the
value of ν. For real values of this parameter the leading term in the corresponding
asymptotic expansion is given by formula (41) and the vacuum stresses are isotropic.
In this limit the topological part is suppressed by the factor e−(D−2ν)t/α. In the same
limit and for pure imaginary values of the parameter ν the asymptotic behavior of
the topological part in the VEV of the energy-momentum tensor is described by
formulae (43), (45) and the topological terms oscillate with the amplitude going to
the zero as e−Dt/α for t →+∞.
In section 4, we have studied the VEV of the energy-momentum tensor and
the Casimir forces for a scalar ﬁeld with an arbitrary curvature coupling parameter
satisfying Robin boundary conditions on two parallel plates in dS spacetime. In the
region between the plates, the VEV is decomposed into a boundary-free dS, a single
plate-induced and an interference contributions, respectively. The vacuum energy-
momentum tensor is non-diagonal, with the oﬀ-diagonal component corresponding
98

to the energy ﬂux along the direction normal to the plates. Depending on the values
of the coeﬃcients in the boundary conditions and of the ﬁeld mass this ﬂux can be
positive or negative. In the case of a conformally coupled massless ﬁeld, the single
plate contribution to the VEV of the energy-momentum tensor vanishes and the
interference part is obtained from the corresponding result for the Minkowski bulk,
by standard conformal transformation.
The vacuum forces acting on the plates are determined by the D
D-component of
the stress. The normal stresses on the plates are presented as sums of single plate
and interaction contributions. The contributions to the vacuum force coming from
the single plate terms are the same from the left and from the right sides of the plate
and thus give no contribution to the eﬀective force. The interaction forces per unit
surface are determined by formula (61) for general Robin BCs and by Eqs. (63),(64)
in the special cases of Dirichlet and Neumann BCs. At small distances between the
plates the vacuum forces are attractive, except for the case of Dirichlet BC on one
plate and non-Dirichlet on the other, in which case the force turns out to be repulsive.
At large separations and for positive values of ν, the force acting on the plate decays
monotonically as 1/(2a/η)D−2ν+2, for non-Neumann BCs, and as 1/(2a/η)D−2ν, in
the case of Neumann BCs [see Eqs. (68)]. For imaginary values of ν the behavior of
the vacuum forces is damping oscillatory, in the leading order described by Eqs. (70).
From the analysis carried out above, it follows that the curvature of the background
spacetime decisively inﬂuences the behavior of the Casimir forces at distances larger
than the curvature scale. As we have seen, in dS spacetime the decay of the forces
at large separations between the plates is power-law. This is quite remarkable and
clearly in contrast with the corresponding features of the same problem in Minkowski
and AdS spacetimes.
References
[1] N. D. Birrell and P. C.W. Davies, Quantum Fields in Curved Space (Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge, 1982).
[2] A.D. Linde, Particle Physics and Inﬂationary Cosmology (Harwood Academic
Publishers, Chur, Switzerland 1990).
[3] A.G. Riess et al., Astrophys. J. 659, 98 (2007); D.N. Spergel et al., Astrophys.
J. Suppl. Ser. 170, 377 (2007); U. Seljak, A. Slosar, and P. McDonald, JCAP
0610, 014 (2006); E. Komatsu et al., arXiv:0803.0547.
[4] S. Kachru, R. Kallosh, A. Linde, and S.P. Trivedi, Phys. Rev. D 68, 046005
(2003).
[5] E. Silverstein, arXiv:0712.1196.
[6] N. A. Chernikov and E. A. Tagirov, Ann. Poincare Phys. Theor. A 9, 109 (1968);
E. A. Tagirov, Ann. Phys. 76, 561 (1973); C. Schomblond and P. Spindel, Ann.
99

Inst. Henri Poincare A 25, 67 (1976); E. Mottola, Phys. Rev. D 31, 754 (1985);
B. Allen, Phys. Rev. D 32, 3136 (1985).
[7] P. Candelas and D.J. Raine, Phys. Rev. D 12, 965 (1975).
[8] J.S. Dowker and R. Critchley, Phys. Rev. D 13, 224 (1976).
[9] J.S. Dowker and R. Critchley, Phys. Rev. D 13, 3224 (1976).
[10] T.S. Bunch and P.C.W. Davies, Proc. R. Soc. London, Ser. A 360, 117 (1978).
[11] A. Vilenkin and L.H. Ford, Phys. Rev. D 26, 1231 (1982).
[12] N. Kaloper, M. Kleban, A. Lawrence, S. Shenker, and L. Susskind, JHEP 11
(2002) 037.
[13] P.R. Anderson, W. Eaker, S. Habib, C. Molina-Par´ıs, and E. Mottola, Phys.
Rev. D 62, 124019 (2000).
[14] G.N. Watson, A Treatise on the Theory of Bessel Function (Cambridge Uni-
versity Press, Cambridge, 1995).
[15] I.S. Gradshteyn and I.M. Ryzhik, Table of Integrals, Series and Products (Aca-
demic, New York, 1980).
[16] M. Lachi`eze-Rey and J.-P. Luminet, Phys. Rep. 254, 135 (1995).
[17] J. Levin, Phys. Rep. 365, 251 (2002); N.J. Cornish, D.N. Spergel, G.D. Stark-
man, and E. Komatsu, Phys. Rev. Lett. 92, 201302 (2004).
[18] A. Linde, JCAP 0410, 004 (2004).
[19] G.D. Starkman, Class. Quantum Grav. 15, 2529 (1998); N.J. Cornish, D.N.
Spergel, and G.D. Starkman, Class. Quantum Grav. 15, 2657 (1998).
[20] V.M. Mostepanenko and N.N. Trunov, The Casimir Eﬀect and Its Applications
(Clarendon, Oxford, 1997); M. Bordag, U. Mohidden, and V.M. Mostepanenko,
Phys. Rept. 353, 1 (2001); E. Elizalde, S.D. Odintsov, A. Romeo, A.A. Byt-
senko and S. Zerbini, Zeta regularization techniques with applications (World
Scientiﬁc, Singapore, 1994).
[21] A.A. Saharian and M.R. Setare, Phys. Lett. B 659, 367 (2008).
[22] S. Bellucci and A.A. Saharian, Phys. Rev. D 77, 124010 (2008).
[23] A.A. Saharian, Class. Quantum Grav. 25, 165012 (2008).
[24] E. R. Bezerra de Mello and A. A. Saharian, J. High Energy Phys. 12, 081
(2008).
100

[25] A.A. Saharian, The Generalized Abel-Plana Formula with Applications to Bessel
Functions and Casimir Eﬀect (Yerevan State University Publishing House,
Yerevan, 2008); Preprint ICTP/2007/082; arXiv:0708.1187.
[26] M. R. Setare and R. Mansouri, Class. Quantum Grav. 18, 2659 (2001); M.R.
Setare, Phys. Lett. B 637, 1 (2006).
[27] A. A. Saharian and T. A. Vardanyan, Class. Quantum Grav. 26, 195004 (2009).
[28] E. Elizalde, A. A. Saharian, and T. A. Vardanyan, Phys. Rev. D 81, 124003
(2010).
[29] K. Milton and A. A. Saharian, Phys. Rev. D 85, 064005 (2012).
[30] A. Romeo and A. A. Saharian, J. Phys. A: Math. Gen. 35, 1297 (2002).
[31] A. A. Saharian, Nucl. Phys. B 712, 196 (2005).
[32] A. A. Saharian, Phys. Rev. D 73, 044012 (2006); A. A. Saharian, Phys. Rev.
D 73, 064019 (2006).
[33] P. Breitenlohner and D. Z. Freedman, Ann. Phys. 144, 249 (1982).
101

Generation of a toroidal magnetic field 
in rotating neutron stars  
 
D. M. Sedrakian 
Department of Physics, Yerevan State University 
1 Alex Manoogian Street, 0025 Yerevan, Armenia 
 
     The electromagnetic properties of neutron stars (pulsars) are studied. It is 
shown that taking the presence of two angular rotation velocities of the 
components of neutron stars and the first corrections to the general theory of 
relativity into account in the equations of hydrodynamic equilibrium for the 
plasma and in Maxwell’s equations, toroidal magnetic fields are generated.  
 
 
     1. Introdution 
 
 
     The possibility of field generation in neutron stars was considered in Ref. [1]. It was 
shown there that taking the general theory of relativity into account in the equations of 
hydrodynamic equilibrium for the plasma and in Maxwell’s equations for the 
electromagnetic fields to the generation of toroidal magnetic fields. The following 
equation was obtained for the time derivative of the magnetic field: 
( )
( )
2
2
0
sin
cos
,
Gu R
mc
T
e
c R
ϑ
ϑ
∂
=
Ω
∂
B
                                                (1) 
were
,
R ϑ , and ϕ  are spherical coordinates, ( )
u R  is the accumulated mass of a radius 
R , m  and e  are the mass and charge of the proton, G and c  are the gravitational 
constant and the speed of light, Ω is the star’s angular velocity, and   is the unit 
vector in the ϕ  direction. The equation was obtained for an initial time, when the 
electric current and magnetic field are zero. This result, however, was not correct, for 
the four-dimensional current as [1]   
0
00
,
i
i
enc dx
j
dx
g
=
                                                                    (2) 
while the correct definition of this is  
,
i
i
j
enu
=
                                                                        (3) 
where 
iu  is the four-dimensional velocity. With this definition of the four-dimensional 
current the time derivative of the magnetic field goes to zero and no toroidal magnetic 
field is generated. Note that in Ref. [1] it was also assumed that in the “pre-” phase of a 
neutron star, all three particle species, neutrons, protons, and electrons, are normal. 
102 

However, it is well known [2] that at the temperatures 
8
10
Τ ≤
 of neutron star cores,  
neutrons and protons are more likely to be superfluid, while the electrons are normal. 
This means that during rotation of a neutron star its nuclear components (the neutrons 
and protons) will rotate with the superfluid angular velocity 
s
Ω, while the normal 
component (and, therefore, the electrons, as well) will have an angular velocity
c
Ω. In 
general, the super fluid angular velocity 
s
Ω and the normal angular velocity 
c
Ωare 
not equal.  
    The purpose of this paper is to show that for 
0
≠
Ω
−
Ω
=
∆Ω
c
s
, a toroidal 
magnetic field can be generated and the rate of increase in the magnetic field is given 
by the right hand side of Eq.(1) times (
)
2
2
1
/
c
s
−Ω
Ω
. If we assume that 
c
s
Ω<< Ωduring the lifetime of a pulsar, as occurs in several scenarios for the 
evolution of pulsars, then this factor may be of the order of unity [3]. 
 
 
     2. The electric field of a “pre-” plasma with super fluid neutrons   
 
     The hydrodynamics equations for an individual charged component of plasma with 
angular velocity Ω have the form [1] 
0
2
1
0,
i
i
P
P
Inu
F j
x
c
x
c
α
α
α
ρ
∂
∂


−
+
−
=


∂
∂


                                           (4) 
were 
1,2,3
α =
, 
1/ 2
2
0
00
03
33
2
,
2
,
i
i
j
enu
u
g
g
g
c
c
−


Ω
Ω
=
=
+
+




                                    (5) 
iu  is the four-dimensional velocity of the plasma, ρ  and P are the energy density and 
pressure of the plasma, 
ij  is the  four-dimensional current, and Fα  is the 
electromagnetic field tensor. Here n is the particle number density of the plasma, while  
ρ  and P are functions of n . Note that here, as opposed to Ref. [1], in Eq. (5) we have 
introduced the correct definition of the four dimensional current 
ij  ant the expression 
for 
0
u  was obtained from the equation
1
i
i
u u =
. 
In simple model of a neutron star its central part consists of superfluid neutrons and 
protons and normal electrons. The protons and electrons form an insignificant part, of 
the order of a few percent, of the star’s core compared to the neutrons. Thus, the bulk 
of the core, the neutrons, forms a superfluid nuclear liquid. This type of core is 
surrounded by a solid shell made up of atomic nuclei and electrons.  The dimensions of 
103 

the core of a neutron star are of the order of 10 km, and those for the shell are an order 
of magnitude smaller. As the neutron star rotates, the shell and the electrons in the core 
rotate as a normal fluid at angular velocity 
c
Ω, while the bulk of the core (neutrons 
and protons) rotate as superfluid with angular velocity 
s
Ω. 
     Writing Eq. (4) separately for the mixture of nuclear matter, consisting of neutrons 
and protons and the electrons, we obtain two equations that determine the electric field 
E and 
(
)
s
s
P n
∇

, where 
(
)
s
s
P n
 is the neutron pressure, which is equivalent of the 
pressure of the nuclear matter when the protons (1% of the nuclear matter) are 
neglected: 
2
0
s
s
s
P
mc n
Inu
∇
= −
∇


                                                             (6)  
and  
0
1
e
e
e
P
en
n
∇
= −
E

,                                                                (7)  
where 
1/2
2
0
00
03
33
2
1/2
2
0
00
03
33
2
2
,
2
,
s
s
s
c
c
e
u
g
g
g
c
c
u
g
g
g
c
c
−
−


Ω
Ω
=
+
+






Ω
Ω
=
+
+




  
 
 
 
(8) 
and  
eP  and 
en  are the electron pressure and the number density. Equations (6 ) and 
(7) for E  and 
sP
∇

 have been derived assuming that there is no initial electron current 
jα . Given that the neutrons form a nonrelativistic  Fermi gas at the particle densities 
characteristic for neutron star cores (
)
38
3
10 1/
n
cm
≈
 and that electrons form an 
ultrarelativistic Fermi gas, it can be shown that 
s
e
s
e
P
P
n
n
∇
∇
=


. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(9) 
Using Eq. (9),  from Eqs. (6) and (7) we finally obtain 
2
0
0
,
s
e
mc
Inu
e
n
∇
=
E

 
 
 
 
 
 
(10) 
where m  and e are the proton mass and charge and c  is the velocity of light.  
      
 
 
104 

3. Magnetic field generation effect 
 
 
     In a stationary gravitational field, the Maxwell equation relating the rate of change 
of the field, 
/ t
∂
∂
B
, to electric field has the form [4]   
 
00
1
,
[
].
rot
c
t
g
∂
= −
=
+
∂
B
H
E
B
gE   
 
 
 
(11) 
Here ( )
0
00
/
g
g
α
α = −
g
 and  
(
)
1
,
2
E
E
rot
e
x
x
α
γ
β
αβγ
β
γ
γ
∂
∂


=
−


∂
∂


E
  
 
 
 
(12) 
where 
00
g
g g g
αβ
αβ
α
β
γ
= −
+
 is the three-dimensional spatial metric and eαβγ  is the 
unit antisymmetric tensor with 
123
123
1
e
e
= . Equation (11) shows that a magnetic field 
can be generated in the core of a neutron star if the curl of Eq. (10) is nonzero. In order 
to estimate the curl of the electric field and, therefore 
t
∂
∂
B
, the gas of nuclear 
particles can be treated as almost nonrelativistic and just  those corrections that are 
linear in 
2c
ϕ
can be included in the components of the metric tensor [4]: 
2
00
0
2
2
1
2
,
1
,
0.
g
c
g
g
c
α
α
β
β
α
ϕ
ϕ
δ


= +
=
−
=




  
 
 
(13) 
Here it should be noted that in a rotating neutron star 
03
g
 is proportional to 
2c
r c
ϕ
⋅Ω
, where r  is the distance from the axis of rotation. For these models of a 
neutron star the maximum value of 
r c
Ω
 is no greater than 0.1, so we can assume 
that 
03
g
 is everywhere equal to zero. Then we can write the time component of the 
four dimensional velocity 
0
u  in the from  
1/ 2
2
2
2
0
00
03
33
2
2
2
2
1
.
2
r
u
g
g
g
c
c
c
c
ϕ
−


Ω
Ω
Ω
=
+
+
≈−
+




 
Further, it is easy to see that 
(
)
0
2
2
1
ln
.
u
c
ϕ
∇
= −
∇
−Ωr


 
 
 
 
 
(14) 
Substituting Eq. (14) in Eq. (10), and taking Eqs. (11), (12) and (13) into account, we 
obtain  
(
)[
]
2
2
1
,
s
c
m
t
ec R
R
ϕ
∂
∂
=
Ω−Ω
∂
∂
B
r,R
 
 
 
 
(15) 
 
105 

where R  and r  are the spherical and cylindrical radius vectors. Here we note again 
that Eq. (15) has been derived for an initial time when the electric currents 
0
jα =
 and 
there is no magnetic field, i.e. 
0
=
B
. Expanding the vector product on the right of Eq. 
(15) and substituting 
( )
2
d
dR
Gu R
R
ϕ
=
 ( ( )
u R  is the accumulated mass in a 
sphere of radius R ), we finally obtain 
( )
2
2
2
2
0
( )
1
sin
cos
.
c
s
s
mc
Gu R
t
e
c R
ϑ
ϑ
∂


Ω
=
Ω
−


∂
Ω


B
   
 
(16) 
Note that 
( )
0
t
∂
∂
B
 is nonzero, since as the angular velocity of a neutron star (pulsar) 
decreases there is always a nonzero, stationary difference between the angular 
velocities of the superfluid and normal motions, i.e. 
0
s
c
∆Ω= Ω−Ω≠
. The value of 
∆Ω depends on the pinning of neutron vortices and, as observations of the jump in the 
angular velocity of the Vela pulsar show, this difference can be of the order of 
4
10
~
/
−
Ω
∆Ω
, where 
s
c
∆Ω= Ω−Ω. However, in some scenarios for the evolution 
of neutron stars the factor (
)
2
2
1
c
s
−Ω
Ω
 can be of the order of unity [3]. 
     Therefore, from Eq. (16) it follows that a toroidal field develops in a slowing-down 
neutron stars and increases with time. The existence of the superfluid rotation of the 
nuclear component of the neutron star and taking the corrections to the Einstein theory 
into account mean that the electric field becomes rotational and depends on z . This, in 
turn, leads to the development of convection electric currents and the generation of  a 
toroidal magnetic field [5]. 
 
      References 
 
[1] D. M. Sedrakian, Astrofizika 6, 615 (1970). 
[2] D. M. Sedrakian and K. M. Shakhabasyan, Usp. Fiz. Nauk 161, 3 (1991). 
[3] A. M. Sedrakian and D. M. Sedrakian, Dokl. Akad. Nauk Armenii 96, 45 
(1996). 
[4] L. D. Landau and E. M. Lifshitz, Field Theory (Nauka, Moscow, 1972, in 
Russian). 
[5] J. W. Roxbourgh and P. A.  Stritmatter, Mon. Notic. Roy. Astron. Soc. 133, 1 
(1966). 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                 106 

 	

 -
 
 	
 
, , 	 
  
    !"    # "   
$ % 
& 
' ( 
 %&. 
)*! 
+, -! ! . ' &  +! & *- % ' 
*  " . % (-' ) .  .* .' 
+/  %&" ( .  0  #(   - %& %! 
 %!  !,  %!, . &,  %,  .* .' 
' +/.    .%   . *, ,+ 
& .0.*+%,   .%*  $- +%  - & , 
.%*  *,#"  1 & &.*&,  1  +, -!  !. 
      
       1.   
 
       0  .%2'  #  +!    *#  
+!" +/   2(  . 2-  $ $ !" ' -
'  &%&  %&& .++& +!  %! ! ! 
' ,  %! & +! $%! . " 2&* *. 
, .  &* 2&* *  '  &3 * -  
"  + ". 0 -(2& !-,   *, %- 
 ' " '%  %  " $ %- + -.  .%!&  
*# *, %- %  1,$ '  +%  0.&%$*&.   
$ %*  % 2%  ' &%'  % 
.(3: « 
   %&  +*  '  %$ -,   
(  -  ( %*3  % ' ,  .%!&,   ,  
#% '% %3   1 ( %#$, +! &+%$*&». 
0..&+%$*& 
%  
 &, 
  
+ 
3!& ' 
 %! & ( ()   $.$ +    % ' , 
 % +! .%3 & # + & .  &*    +! 
3  1958 '*    -(( %$  '. -3.[1]. 
, (  -,   '-+,    " 
$-( & 
* 
4 , 1   0.. +! $  %,$ .%' 
&2 +.  
        
 !& 
' & 
   
(%  
' , 
5' , '   . BL Lac ( . BL 6#%$!),  '  
(7%%  % ' ),  %!. 0   
& "% %*,  & %",  %%2!",    
.%#!" 1&!" (  . %. %' " * 
"   .%" 1043- 10471%'/. 
  +, -' 
& %, .*'  %*.(2" . "  % .", 
107 

&+%$*& . *,# %&!    '  [2]: 
1. %3 '( & %   3   +  +  
% -,         ! &/  (5.1). 
 
 
                                             5.1:  Virgo A (Messier 87)  
                                            
2. 
.%%!   .  %  "  $  %*'" 
' , .%#"  $! !" 1%'(,  %*-    %' 
%*' % &3   %&% - %' - Cygnus A (+- A).( 5.2). 
        
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                       
                                     52.  Cygnus A (+- A) 
3. %*. ! !+%! $ %%( %  ( .&! 
NGC5128 (Centaurus A)  %.   (5.3). 
 
108 

 
                                                       5.3.  Centaurus A 
  4. %*. ! !+%! '( & % .+ 782. 
 
                                                            5.4. 782 
5. 0!+%! &. !" '*+!" $(  +, ( ( 
.% %!" '   (NGC3561-Ambartsumian Knot, IC1182). 0 1 & 
* &3  3    %    + %&!" . -
 &. , $%*,#" %&% % !" ' .  (55). 
109 

 
                        5.5:  NGC3561-Ambartsumian’s Knot   
      (,   ( +,  "  +!   %& 
  .    (    %    - “Ambartsumians knot”   
 %  !  &  % *  % .%   5.5.  "%2 
  %*  '  NGC3561B !+%2 .%   '  
+% '*#,  % - '*+' $ .  
 
      &+%$*&   - * . !, !"  !" '  
'*+' $ , & +  “Ambartsumians knot”  * * 
&+%$*& .%* 7%%*  %*,  %!   . 
'   &- '*+!& $ &. )%!(  " +%*31500 
+/  
 
*- % !& 
+! & 
(-' ) 
()%!( 
	,%( +% (FBS) [3]),   %( - + 700 -' , [4]. +# 
 -'   ,  .%&% 5%   +#'  '  
. [3]. 
      0  # %& +   *   & 
 - '   . 7%%  %. )1 &* &! % $ 
%& %& %*-  !  1 " '   .2&  .%+&!, 
2   1 " %+ . 
.&&,     - '  
+/!  * '%*..*  *   " . %"  +! . 
          # %&  ! '  &,  *,  - 
' " %+ ,  &'   ,  +  &! 
 ",  , ,   .% %! &  !" '  +! 0 % 
&+%$*&.     #  %& .   3(2  0.. 
. %3,   %   1.%& -.  ,   
!2 &!" 3(2" ( +    ' ,  +  
.%% *"/%!" '   '   3(  %* *%(  " 
$ %-!"  + ",   *( (&. .*  5).  
110 

      2. 	
  	  - 
      )%! 3 +, . % '   . 7%% [3]  
% .[4],   1  '  ,  &  &!"  !" 
  !" ' . 	  ',  70 '  .%' .  7%% 
&-  - (% & ' &,  ,#& 2%& 
1&!& &  . %, 2%  %!" '  '  100-
150 8.  '   No 9  10 . %%*,  (% " 
'  !*,  & -, .2*, .%+ &3* %&-!& 
'' & ' &  %&.    3 . No102  . 
% - &( ( (% ( ' (  &!& 
+& %&(QSO)  %!& &#& z=0.135. 0' 3  1 ' 
%& +!   & 10 (% " ' !  
       . %!  -'  . *  -  ,  %*'   %*', 
 . , 1&!" (,    . " 2%    . 0 
"  & +,,  %  2% 1&!  
	-&%( % %, ', .%#!  %, %!, 
, 
  
 
%*'". 
. %! 
 
-'  
.%! 
+! 
$%!  [5]. ),# +-2  -'  &,  
1&!( . % (85%) [6,7], %  %!" (% " '  
.% 10% [8,9]. 
           +! &  ,  &-   .$-!& 
&%'&  .& ' : % " &,   ++  .! 
' , '  9  %. " % &2 %2 % 
  ~ 0.002 o ~ 0.2.  '  7%132  %!& &#& z = 1.75 
  &  %(2"  QSO     MV ~ - 28.    +, ! 
! !  '    +! & 3    % &3*  7=-
13  7 = - 28. 10% -'  ,  *%!& ' & [10-12].  
*  +  &  -     ,    . '    +! & +! 
,! +/ !,  %!,  -,   ,  ' &  
%& ' ,  %"$$&  $ %-!" + (  "  
!" .%!" ' . 0.%!  %&  %.& +! .,   
M%94   	,  %"$$(  .%-( 
'   .%&!(   III Zw 0834 + 51[13](5.6). :   " '  
- %"$$( +! +%*3!  ."  - ' [14]. 
 
 
 
 
111 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
        
                               
                    
                    
            5.6  '% 7%.6, .*  6&.  . 5                
       
)%& - '    +! &   &  " * -!" 
( .        ' $.$ &%$*&, (  %&    
'  ,  1%*. ! !+%!  '( & %  " %, 
  ' +,  & . % ( ' . ( 
!+%  % (% ( '   %'  . Sy2 7%.6 .%! 
+,     .%&3*   %& ,.%3 - -, '  
 ' [15]. 0 %*-    ' !+% * %!" 1&!" 
( .- 2% 1&! &. !, &#!  
% *,  - . %.  &#     %  
!+% .% 3000 &/ [15] (5.6a). 
, 24 , 2009' . % 
7%6 +! +,  6&  .  (5.6b).    5.6b 
% - !+% *&-2-  .%&% 2500 &/ ! +*3 1 ' 
  +*  .% 3. 0 %(  ( !+% +,  1994 '* * 
'  c  +! &  163 [16].      
 
 
 
 
 
112 

 
   
 
 5 6: 5' %$ . % 7%6  +  H;: 5 :+% 1967'. (%"( 
&), 27 6%  1967'. (3( &). 
       7! .%  %! !,    .! "% %   
+, -! !  . %" '    %!" +/ , 
&,#"  +! .  .%- %/& 2 .&  $* 1 " 
-&  %'*,#" !"    % " ( .%%!. 
113 

 
         3.  
   
        0 " !2.%!" %&"    -'  *, 
%- '%   +!   .%%!& . %,  %!(  +/   "  
* '%*..*. ,+( +/  .% ,+(  &.% *% *  .%%!!( 
. %,   &    +  *- % , ' * ). ) 
!%3& « +!   *- % » .%.' ,   .%%!!( 
. %  1 ( +  .%"  .     ( .% * 
. * ).  )% 1 & +!    +    &3  
+, -,  * !.  . * ).    
  .%: 	  	 	  
, 
 %!( +%*3 * " +/ ?   1   *+ $?     
!&  3(2& .%&   -' ,  %!(, . 
    %2!&. 
       
 %!  !2 .%!" +, -!" !", !"  
& *- % ' *,  3  %+*,  ' 
+. 5& %&  %!  ". 
       ).  -  %"$$( () - %  !" 
'  [14] (7%59, 7%94  %. &. 57).    ,  &,  
  .   0,  %! *,  ' * )   &,   
+! .  -, %&   " &  (-   ,  
114 

   !(   +! .   +,,  %!   
&3' & .% % ,      .%.3 -,    
,  (  %&    ' . 
       +).   - ' ,  ,# .  * +-2( .%$    
+#'  '  (.%5%),  &  &, %&%*,   % * 
(!  ' + 3!  &!.  & &, .%&%,  7%305  
7%306,  ,# (*,  &* (5.8)[17], 7! .$- 
! 1 * & *,   &*, . &*    -  ,  . 
& &  &%'& + &: 7%305   
+%!& +/ &, + " + 1&!" (  . %,    
%& 
 
7%306 
*% 
.%- 
'  
 
%& 
1&!& &  . % [18] (58).  & &,   . 7%%* 
(%  . 2+) .%  .% .3 . . % 1 " 
' . & 3  && ,  7%261  7%262,   .65  66, 
.49  50, .135  136  &' %*'. 
       ). 
	-2( 
.%$  
-'  
(.% 
10%), 
.!,  
*%*,  %* *%* (7%212, 7%266, 7%739,) [10-12],   %! 
'   $ %-!" + " &,  &'&. *,  %* *%* 
7%7, 7%8, 5 [19-21]. 7"& +% *%!"  
&'&. !"  $ %-!" + " '   $  !. 
 +%*,    %?  ( &"& +% 1 " 
%?  
       0  # %& %& %,   - % ! & . 1 ( 
.%+&: 
       )    - %-& %, #    +   
(5-!( .*  %&!    &+%$*&); 
       b)     % *"  + &!" ' , 
  "  +.%'  3  &3' & .% % . 
(0 
 # 
%& 
& 
&'" 
 %, 
& 
 
. %3).     
       &,  &'! +, -!  ! . %3,# 
.%- - 5-' .*  %&!    0. &+%$*&. )%&  
.%&%. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
115 

                      
  
. 7: 
&%  %*"    *,  &%& -'   ." 
7%%.  
 
 
                                
 
                                                          5. 8 
116 

0 .%*, %- *  .%  - -  %*,  &* 
' " +/   +   '  7%261  7%262, 
 ,#", . ( %  ,   *,  &*  
+-2&  +/& .% %&% 2( '  (z=0.03)[22,23]. 
 
5.9 .%  '% 1 ( + , .*   .%& * 
5&. )&%'  . (4 ). 
                                    
 
           5. 9:  '% .*  .%& * 5&  . 4 . 
 %& 7%.261  262  %* +! +/ ! “a”, “b”, “c”, “d”, “e” 
 “f”. 
 .%&!"  '%" “a”  “b” !'    2 ! 
.%&% 18 &( ( !. . %! 1 " "" +! 
.*!  5&  . 4   6&  . 5. 5*-   +! 
3!(: -,   1   !,  '  +/ ! 
(z=0.03)  %& 1&!& &. )%& . %! -  
 (  .  !&,    .*  "+/ !-
+$!"[22]. 
 %2 * -!& - +%*3 &3* 
1 & -   %.3!& +/ & # *" +/   (“c”  
“d”), . %!  %!", .*!"  6&  . 5, - 
%2  !&   - &3* +(,     . %&  “a”  
“b”  (5.10a, 10b). 0!-  3,   +/  ""   
' &, (!& ("1","2") ,   ' . % +,,    3 
1&! ,     " .%!*#" +/ " "a", "b", "c"   
"d"[24] (5.10). 
 
 
117 

  
5. 10a: 5' %'%&&  . % +/  «» (%"( %!( . %)  
“b”  (3( '*+( . %)(6&  . 5).                     
 
5. 10b: 5' %'%&& . % +/  "c" (%!(  3( . %)»   
“d ” ('*+( %"( . %)(6&  . 5).                     
118 

 
5. 10: 5' %'%&& . % +/  "1"  (%!( 3(  . %)  
“2” ('*+( %"( . %)(6&  . 5). 
                     
%2 ,   %  - +%  (  &! '   
 !& 
1&!& 
. %& 
.% 
*(& 
3 
&!" +/   3 &. & 3  && -'  
,  7%7  7%8,  #  .  '*#(  %& 
1&!& &  . %[19-21].  
        *3 '- !2, (  %&    '    
!+%!  %  '( & %   3   +. 	-2( 
 % .% ,  '   3 &, .%& & &'*  +! -  
%! (7%423),  *%! (7%273),  &'%! (7%773, 
.5)  ' .  & +"&!& +%  - + &  
' * 
7% 
273(53)[17,25]. 

 
& 
& 
.%  
 '% ' , .*  &&  . «++». 
+#( %&% '  . -     .%&%  70 *'!" *. 
%2  3 , "#(  ,3' % '   &,#( * 
.%&% 45 *'!" *. 3 *' *    *  
.%&% 70 ..  - %  % 1 ( '   .%   
.%& %*. 0'  .%&%  5*'!" *" .  < %.3!  
 % % ' :  ,3   %!"! )%& %  &3* 
%!& %& (( %)  + 70.! 
  &,   1  
 & .%   +( * ' *  3!& %&  3 &. 
119 
 

        	, 
 	   
    , 	   
,   ,  , 
 ,   .. 
        .%%   1 '  *- % ' +!  
   '(. : ! 1 ' &, . 2&* &,, 
 %+*,  !   % ,    +, -! . 
 
                                                           5    5  
1. Ambartsumian V.A., XI Solvay Conference Report, p.241, 1958 
2. Ambartsumian V.A., Transaction IAU, XIB, p.145, 1962. 
3. 	..7%%,  %, 3, 55,1967; 5, 443,1969; 5,581,1969. 
4. 7..%,  %, 15, 5, 1979; 15,193,1979; 16, 17, 1980. 
5. E.Ye.Khachikian, Astron.Journal, 73, 891,1968.  
6. .., :.0&,  %, 4, 587, 1968. 
7. .., :.0&,  %, 5, 113, 1969. 
8. E.Ye.Khachikian, D.Weedman, Bull.American Astron.Soc., March 1971. 
9. .., :.0&,  %, 7, 389, 1071. 
10. .) %, ., ..,  %, 14, 69, 1978. 
11. .) %, ., ..,  %a, 15, 209, 1979. 
12. .) %, ., ..,  %a, 15, 373, 1979. 
13. .., .%.,  %a, 10, 173, 1974. 
14. .., .,  %a, 11, 207, 1975. 
15. E.Ye.Khachikian, D.Weedman, Ap.J., 164, L 109, 1971. 
16. 7..%,  %, 37,1, 1994. 
17. E.Ye.Khachikian, Proceed. IAU Symp. No121, Edited by E.Khachikian,    
 K.Fricke, J.Melnick,  Byurakan, Armenia, p.65, 1987. 
      18. .., .) %, 7.*% ,   %a, 24, 5, 1986, 
      19. ..,  %, 8, 529, 1972. 
      20. .
.	*%, ..,  %, 32. 245, 1990. 
 21. E.Ye.Khachikian, et al. Mon. Notice. Roy. Astron. Soc., 368, 461, 2006. 
      22. .%., .., :3.(&,  %, 10, 7, 1974. 

      23. .., .%,  %, 48, 503, 2005. 
      24. ..,  %, 53,5, 2010. 
      25. J.H.Knapen, S.,Laine, J.A.Yates, A.Robinson, A.M.Richards, R.Doyyon,.     
            D.Nadeau, Ap.J.490, Letters 29-32, 1998.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
121 

Tornado mechanism of astrophysical jets generation, 
acceleration and collimation  
 
M. G. Abrahamyan 
Department of Physics, Yerevan State University 
1 Alex Manoogian Street, 0025 Yerevan, Armenia 
 
1. Introduction 
 
Jet eruptions are a universal phenomenon in the universe. This phenomenon 
encompasses a wide range of astrophysical objects, from active galactic nuclei 
(AGN) to young stellar objects (YSO) within our galaxy. Supersonic outflows with 
less collimation are observed in massive hot stars, such as bright blue variables, as 
well as in low-mass stars, such as protoplanetary clouds (Gonzalez et al., 2004, 
Soker, 2004). These are all observed in the final evolutionary stages of these 
objects. 
Recent extraterrestrial observations of the sun have shown that the solar corona 
is full of jets and flares. Although the total energy of the solar jets and flares is 
much less than in cosmic jets, the spectra and variability of the electromagnetic 
waves emitted from solar jets and flares are similar to those from cosmic flares 
(Shibta and Aoki, 2004) 
Despite the enormous difference in their sizes and powers (AGN jets have 
typical sizes of ~106 pc, with core velocities on the order of the speed of light, and 
source masses of ~ 106-9, while the typical sizes of YSO jets are ~1 pc, with 
node velocities of ~10-3c, and masses of ~ . Most of the outflows are 
morphologically similar and apparently have a common physical origin. There is 
proof of the existence of an accretion disk surrounding the central sources (Königl, 
1986, Dal Pino, 1995, Bridle, 1998, Reipurth & Bally, 2001). 
Rotation with the velocity on the order of ~10km/s of many jets from YSOs 
has been established (Coffey et al., 2008, 2010, Chrysostomou, 2008). In some 
cases jets "swing" with increasing amplitude from side to side (e.g., HH83 and the 
jets of HH110 (Reipurth, 1989), jet of AGN object 1803+784 (Matveenko et.al, 
2007), rather than appearing as chains of nodes. 
The temperature of the jets from YSOs is slightly greater than ~104 K, and the 
corresponding sound speeds are on the order of ~10 km/s (Bacciotti & Eislöffel, 
1999). The YSO jets have radii Rj ~31015 cm, average hydrogen density          
~104-5 cm-3 (Morse et al., 1992). Observations yield a somewhat uncertain value for 
122 

the ratio of the densities of the jet and surrounding medium on the order of  j/s ~ 
20 (Perlman et al., 1999). 
The origin of the jets and the mechanisms for their formation are not fully 
understood. Since the erupting matter is partially ionized, the strong collimation of 
jets is associated with magnetic fields (Bisnovatyi-Kogan, Komberg, Fridman, 
1969). The magnetic field determines the direction of the jet and an axial current 
may stabilize the elongated shape of a jet at large distances from its source 
(Bisnovatyi-Kogan, 2004, 2007). 
In this paper a vortical mechanism for the generation, acceleration, and 
collimation of astrophysical jets is proposed on the basis of exact vortical solutions 
of the hydrodynamic equations.  
 
 
2. Equilibrium state of the source 
 
Consider a rotating protostar formation of mass M and polar radius R in an 
incompressible fluid model. The equilibrium state of the rotating gravitating mass 
is determined by Mc’Lauren spheroid (Chandrasekhar, 1969). The equilibrium of 
an axial cylindrical region with a lower base at depth H from the pole of the 
spheroid (Fig. 1) in a cylindrical coordinate system rotating with angular velocity 
 is described by the equations  
     
),
(
)
,
(
   
,
)
(
)
,
(
2
0
0
2
2
0
0
z
H
R
B
r
r
z
r
P
r
r
r
z
r
P
+
−
Ω
−
=
∂
∂
Ω
−
Ω
−
=
∂
∂
        (1) 
where  
                 
A
A
B
e
e
e
e
A
pGrA
−
=
−
−
=
=
Ω
1
   
,
arcsin
1
2
2
   
,
2
3
2
2
2
0
. 
(R-H) is the distance from the center of the spheroid to the lower base of this 
region, which is taken as the origin for the coordinate z, and r is the radial 
cylindrical coordinate. Integrating Eq. (1) subject to the condition H  R, we find 
the equilibrium pressure to be1 
                        
]
2
)
1(
2
[
)
,
(
2
2
2
2
0
0
z
Rz
r
e
RH
B
r
z
r
P
−
−
−
−
Ω
≅
                   (1a) 
where we have set 
                                           
)]
1(
2
1[
2
2
0
2
e
B
−
−
Ω
=
Ω
.                                        (2) 
                                                
1 Here and in the following we neglect H2 compared to R2. 
123 

These equations describe a Mc’Lauren spheroid with polar semiaxis R and 
eccentricity e in the meridional cross section rotating with an angular velocity Ω. 
The isobaric surfaces are obviously spheroids, while the equation for the isobar 
intersecting the z = 0 plane in the chosen coordinate system along a circle of radius 
r0 at depth H from the pole of the cloud is 
                            
2
2
2
2
0
2
(1
)(
)
0.
z
Rz
e
r
r
+
-
-
-
=
   
                         (3) 
The pressure at the lower base z = 0 is equal to 
                               
(
)
(
)(
)
0
2
2
2
2
0
s
,0
 
1
 
P
r
B
e
r
r
ρ
= Ω
−
−
.   
           (3a) 
Equation (1a) implies that the z = 0 plane intersects the outer boundary of the 
protostar at a distance rs from the axis of rotation (Fig. 1) given by 
                                           
2
s
2
2RH .
1
r
e
=
−
 
 
 
                        (1b) 
 
3. Development of a no stationary vortex 
 
Let us consider the nonlinear dynamics of vortical perturbations of a protostar. 
At time t = 0 let the selected cylindrical region be subject to a vortical perturbation 
with an azimuthal velocity profile of the form 
                             



>
≤
=
,
   
,
/
)
(
,
   
,
)
(
)
(
0
2
0
0
r
r
r
r
t
r
r
r
t
r
v
e
in
j
ω
ω
                                        (4) 
which describes rigid-body rotation in the region r < r0 of the trunk and a 
differential rotation outside the trunk. The structure given by Eq. (4) is known as a 
Rankine vortex (Rankine, 1870, Meleshko & Konstantinov, 1993, Kundu, 1990, 
Pashitskii, Malnev, Naryshkin, 2007, Abrahamyan, 2008). In writing Eq. (4), we 
have taken into account the fact that the angular velocity of the vortex can vary 
with time, while the time dependence of (t) can be different in different regions of 
the vortex. 
Let us write2 in the Navier-Stokes equation concerning inertial system of frame 
(Landau & Lifshitz, 1986)  
                               P = P0(r,z) + p(r,z,t),  V = r + v, 
 
 
(5) 
                                                
2 Perturbations under consideration do not change the spheroid geometry. The 
change of gravitational potential can be caused by the mass loss. In need we can 
include this, considering mass of a protostar slowly decreasing. Within the 
framework of given approach Eqs. (6) - (9) are exact. 
124 

and including Eqs. (1) and (2), we will receive the equations for an axially 
symmetric flow of viscous incompressible fluid in a coordinate system rotating 
with angular velocity  in the form  
          





	
+
∂
∂
∂
∂
+
Ω
+
∂
∂
−
=
−
∂
∂
+
∂
∂
r
v
r
v
r
n
v
r
p
r
r
v
r
v
v
t
v
r
r
j
j
r
r
r
2
1
2
,   
 
           
(6) 
          





	
+
∂
∂
∂
∂
+
Ω
−
=





	
+
∂
∂
+
∂
∂
r
v
r
v
r
n
v
r
v
r
v
v
t
v
j
j
r
j
j
r
j
2
 ,                           
(7)
 
    
2
2
1
z
v
n
z
p
r
z
v
v
t
v
z
z
z
z
∂
∂
+
∂
∂
−
=
∂
∂
+
∂
∂
,                                                         
(8)
 
    
0
=
∂
∂
+
+
∂
∂
z
v
r
v
r
v
z
r
r
, 
     (9) 
where p is the perturbation in the pressure owing to the vortical motion, 
r
v , ϕ
v  
are the radial and rotational components of the relative velocity,  is the kinematic 
viscosity, and ρ  is the uniform mass density of the protostar. Note that, because of 
the axial symmetry of the problem, in these equations we have omitted the terms 
containing derivatives with respect to the azimuthal coordinate ϕ  and with respect 
to z (except for the pressure and z
v ), and we have taken 
)
,
(
t
z
v
v
z
z =
. 
Assuming that vr = vz = 0 at time t = 0, from Eqs. (6) and (7) we obtain 
             





	
+
∂
∂
∂
∂
=
∂
∂
Ω
+
=
∂
∂
r
v
r
v
r
n
t
v
v
r
r
v
r
r
p
j
j
j
j
j
   
,
2
2
.                         (10) 
Given Eq. (4), the solution of the first of Eqs. (10) can be written in the form 
                    





>
Ω
+
−
≤
Ω
+
+
=
,
   
],
ln
2
)
1(
2
[
,
   
,2
/
)
2
(
0
2
2
2
2
0
2
2
0
0
2
2
r
r
r
r
r
r
r
r
rr
r
r
r
r
p
p
s
e
s
e
in
in
c
ω
ω
ω
ω
                     (11) 
where it is assumed that the perturbation in the gas-kinetic pressure goes to zero at 
a distance rs >> r0 from the cylinder axis, and pc is the pressure drop along the axis 
of the vortex. The requirement that the pressure perturbation be continuous at the 
surface of the vortex trunk yields 
                        
]
ln
4
2
[
2
0
2
2
2
0
r
r
r
r
p
s
e
e
in
in
c
ω
ω
ω
ω
Ω
+
+
Ω
+
−
=
.                    (12) 
Because of the pressure drop, a longitudinal flow of matter develops through 
the lower base of the vortex. We write its velocity in the form 
125 

                                   



>
≤
+
=
,
    
,0
,
   
,
0
0
0
r
r
r
r
az
v
v
z
z
                                         (13) 
where vz0 and a  can, in general, be functions of time. The parameter 1/ has the 
dimensions of time and characterizes the velocity gradient along the vortex trunk. 
In the following we shall assume a  = const. 
Given Eq. (13), the continuity equation (9) yields 
                               



>
≤
−
=
.
   
,
/
,
   
,
2
0
2
0
0
r
r
r
r
r
r
r
a
vr
                                             (14) 
Thus, because of the pressure drop on the axis of the vortex, a suction effect 
creates, the longitudinal flow (13) develops; it creates the converging radial flow of 
matter (14), which, in turn, transports angular momentum and energy from outer 
regions into the region of the vortex trunk. 
Regardless of the functional form of r
v , Eq. (7) with Eq. (4) implies that in the 
region of the trunk (r < r0) the convective and Coriolis accelerations add up, while 
outside the trunk (r > r0) they compensate one another. Given Eqs. (4) and Eq. (14) 
in Eq. (7), we find 
                                   



>
Ω
≤
Ω
+
=
.
    
,
,
   
),
(
0
0
r
r
a
r
r
a
dt
d
ω
ω
                                       (15) 
that is, because of the transport of angular momentum by the converging radial 
flow (14), the angular velocity of the trunk increases with time, with different rates 
of change of ω  in the region of the vortex trunk (r < r0) and outside it (r > r0). Eq. 
(15) for the time dependence of the angular velocity of the vortex gives 
                              





>
Ω
+
≤
Ω
−
Ω
+
=
,
   
,
,
   
,
)
(
)
(
0
0
0
0
r
r
t
a
r
r
e
t
e
in
at
εω
ω
εω
ω
ω
                            (16) 
where 
0
ω is the angular velocity of the trunk at the time the vortex is formed. 
Thus, in Eqs. (4), (11), and (12) it is necessary to assume a linear variation in 
the angular velocity e in the outer region of the vortex and an exponential 
variation in in the trunk; this has been done in the formulas given here. 
The velocities (4), (13), and (14) drive the viscous terms in Eqs. (6) - (8) 
identically to zero, while the diagonal components of the viscous stress tensor are 
nonzero. This yields the following power for the dissipation of the kinetic energy 
per unit length of the vortex: 
                        
)
2
2
/
3
(
4
2
2
2
0
e
e
k
a
pnrr
dt
dE
ω
ω
Ω
+
+
−
≅
.                         (17) 
Note that a rapid increase in the angular velocity only occurs in the region of the 
126 

trunk, r<r0, where the angular velocity increases exponentially with time, while the  
angular velocity increases linearly in the outside region r > r0. Thus, at the 
boundary r = r0 there is discontinuity in the rotational velocity which, 
simultaneously with the pressure drop (12) on the vortex axis, increases 
exponentially with time. The increase in the energy dissipation (17) proceeds much 
more slowly. Thus, in this vortical motion the dissipation remains small, in spite of 
a rapid rise in the angular velocity of the vortex trunk. 
The tangential discontinuity in the rotational velocity at the boundary of the 
vortex trunk is 
      
at
r
e
r
r
t
t
V
v
at
e
in
j
0
0
0
0
)1
)(
(
)]
(
)
(
[
]
[
Ω
−
−
Ω
+
=
−
=
=
ω
ω
ω
,        (18) 
while the discontinuity in the longitudinal velocity determined by Eq. (13) is 
                                            
az
z
U
v
z
z
+
=
0
]
[
ε
.                                              (18a) 
 
4. The structure of the vortex 
 
Using Eqs. (13) and (14), Eqs. (6) and (8) can be written in the form 
                





>
Ω
+
+
≤
Ω
−
−
−
=
∂
∂
,
   
,
2
)
4
1
(
,
   
,
)
2
4
/
(
0
2
0
2
2
3
4
0
0
2
2
r
r
r
r
a
r
r
r
r
r
a
r
r
p
e
e
in
in
ω
ω
ω
ω
                    (19) 
                 



>
≤
+
+
−
=
∂
∂
.
   
,0
,
   
,
)
(
0
0
0
0
r
r
r
r
v
az
v
a
r
z
p
z
z

                                   (19a) 
Note that the first derivatives of the pressure perturbation have a discontinuity at
the trunk surface. On the other hand, the pressure must be continuous at the trunk
surface. 
Using Eqs. (19) and (19a), for the pressure perturbation we obtain 







>
Ω
+
+
−
−
≤
+
+
+
−
Ω
−
−
−
=
,
   
,
]
ln
4
)
4
1
)(
[(
2
,
   
,
]
2
/
)
[(
      
          
2
/
)
2
4
/
(
)
,
,
(
0
2
0
2
2
2
2
0
2
2
0
0
2
2
0
0
3
2
2
r
r
r
r
r
a
r
r
r
r
r
r
r
C
z
a
z
av
v
r
r
a
p
t
z
r
p
s
e
e
s
z
z
in
in
c
ω
ω
ω
ω

  (20) 
where C(t) is determined from the requirement that the isobaric surface be 
continuous at the trunk boundary r = r0. Given Eqs. (5), (1a), and (20), for the total 
pressure in the region r > r0 we find 
 
127 

                    
,
ln
4
)
4
1
)(
(
2
         
]
2
)
)(
1
[(
2
2
2
2
0
2
2
0
2
0
2
2
2
2
2
0








Ω
+
+
−
−
−
−
−
−
Ω
=
r
r
a
r
r
r
r
r
z
Rz
r
r
e
B
r
P
s
e
e
s
s
e
ω
ω
                 (21) 
and in the region r <r0 of the vortex trunk, 
(22)
       
          
.
2
)
(
)
(
8
          
2
)
ln
4
(
2
)
2
(
)
)(
1(
2
2
2
0
0
0
2
0
2
2
2
0
0
2
2
2
0
2
2
2
2
2
0
r
C
z
a
B
z
av
v
BR
r
a
r
r
r
r
r
r
r
e
B
r
P
z
z
s
e
e
in
in
s
in
+
+
Ω
−
+
+
Ω
−
−
Ω
+
−
−
Ω
+
−
−
−
Ω
=

ω
ω
ω
ω
The equation for the isobaric surface corresponding to a given value of P = P0(r,0) 
at the initially spheroidal surface (3) can be obtained from Eqs. (21) and (22): 
(23)
       
          
          
          
          
          
          
          
,0
)
(
)
(
2
     
)
/
ln(
4
2
)
(
)
1(
     
4
/
2
)
(
2
2
2
0
2
0
2
2
0
0
2
2
2
2
2
2
0
2
2
0
2
2
2
0
2
2
2
2
0
2
0
0
2
=
+
Ω
−
+
Ω
Ω
+
+
Ω
+
+
−
+
Ω
−
Ω
−
+
Ω
−
Ω
+
−
+
Ω
−
+
+
+
a
B
r
t
C
r
a
B
r
r
r
r
a
B
e
B
r
a
B
a
a
B
R
a
av
v
R
z
z
s
e
e
in
in
s
in
in
z
z
ω
ω
ω
ω
ω
ω

 
with the unknown function C(t), while in the outer region r > r0 this isobaric 
surface is described by 
                     
.0
ln
4
     
)
(
4
/
)
)(
1(
2
2
0
2
0
2
4
0
2
4
0
2
0
2
2
2
2
2
2
=
Ω
Ω
+
−
Ω
+
+
−
−
−
+
r
r
r
B
r
r
r
r
B
a
r
r
e
Rz
z
s
e
s
e
s
ω
ω
        (24) 
Assuming that the size of the vortex is small compared to the protostar and 
requiring that the isobaric surface be continuous at the vortex trunk boundary r = 
r0, we obtain the unknown function C(t) and from Eq. (23) we obtain the final form 
of the equation for the isobar in the region r < r0 of the vortex trunk: 
.
2
)
/
ln(
4
4
/
)
(
2
1
   
          
)
(
)
(
2
)
1(
4
/
2
)
,
(
2
0
2
0
0
2
2
2
0
2
2
2
2
0
2
0
0
0
2
2
0
2
2
r
BR
r
r
a
r
r
R
e
r
r
BR
av
v
e
B
a
t
r
z
s
e
e
s
z
z
in
in
in
Ω
Ω
+
+
−
−
−
+
−
Ω
+
+
−
Ω
−
−
Ω
+
−
=
ω
ω
ω
ω

          (25) 
128 

The continuation of the isobar in the outer region of the vortex is given by the 
solution (24): 
  
r
r
r
BR
r
r
r
r
r
BR
a
r
r
R
e
t
r
z
s
e
s
s
e
s
e
ln
2
2
4
/
)
(
2
1
)
,
(
2
0
2
0
4
0
2
2
2
2
2
0
2
2
2
2
2
Ω
Ω
−
−
Ω
+
−
−
−
=
ω
ω
.  (26) 
In deriving Eqs. (25) and (26) we have expanded the square roots in the solutions 
of Eqs. (23) and (24) in series, assuming that in
2r0
2 	 cs
2 << 0
2R2,  where cs is the 
sound speed (see below). 
It is evident from (23) and (24) that the problem allows the particular solution 
            
0
0
(
)
0
z
z
v
v
R
a
a
-
-
=

,  
                                    (27) 
which, with the initial condition vz(0) = 0, yields  
             
0( )
(1
).
t
zv
t
R
e a
a
-
=
-
  
 
                       (28) 
Equations (25) and (26) show that the position of the intersection of the isobar 
with the vortex trunk surface r = r0 moves over time toward negative values of z 
because of the linear dependence of e(t), i.e. 






Ω
+
+
Ω
−
=
=
0
2
2
2
0
2
0
0
0
ln
)
(
4
)
(
4
1
2
)
,
(
)
,
(
r
r
t
t
a
R
r
H
t
r
z
t
r
z
s
e
e
in
e
ω
ω
.   (29) 
The isobar described by Eqs. (25) and (26) has a funnel shape which becomes 
deeper with time. Here the wide part of the funnel (28), which corresponds to the 
outer region of the vortex, develops slowly owing to the linear dependence of (t). 
In the region of the vortex trunk, on the other hand, the isobar funnel (25) develops 
much more rapidly, and moves into the depth of the protostar in accordance with 
an exponential law (Fig. 1). The bottom of the funnel lies on the axis r = 0 of the 
vortex and its position changes with time as 
)
,
(
)
(
2
)
1(
4
/
)
(
2
)
(
)
,0
(
0
2
0
2
0
0
0
2
2
0
2
2
t
r
z
r
BR
av
v
e
B
a
t
t
t
z
z
z
in
in
in
+
Ω
+
+
−
Ω
−
−
Ω
+
−
=

ω
ω
,   (30) 
where the term in parentheses in the denominator equals vz0 + 0
2R - for  vz0 = 
const, and (2 + 0
2)R - for the particular solution (27). 
In the initial stage of the development of the power-law instability, t <<1/2, 
for r0 << R the coordinate of the bottom of the funnel varies linearly with time: 
at
R
r
B
r
r
BR
av
v
R
t
z
s
z
z
2
0
2
0
0
2
0
2
0
0
0
2
0
)
/
ln(
2
)
(
~
)
,0
(








Ω
Ω
+
Ω
+
Ω
+
+
+
Ω
−
ω
ω

,        (31) 
and at times t >1/ 2 the vortex deepens exponentially as 
                                 
2
)
(
~
)
,0
(
2
0
2
0
0
0
2
2
0
r
BR
av
v
e
t
z
z
z
at
Ω
+
+
+
Ω
−

ω
.                               (32) 
129 

 
5. Instability of the tangential velocity discontinuity at the trunk    
    boundary and the saturation of the vortex 
 
Surfaces with a tangential velocity discontinuity are known (Landau & 
Lifshits, 1986) to be unstable to surface perturbations. Let us consider a two-
dimensional flow of an incompressible medium with velocity discontinuities (18) 
and (18a) in the XZ plane (a part of the surface of the trunk with the Z axis parallel 
to the jet axis). 
We shall study a local instability of a tangential velocity distribution; i.e., we 
assume that the dimensions of the segment of the surface being studied are much 
smaller than the corresponding dimensions of the trunk, and that the periods and 
reciprocal growth rates for the perturbations are much shorter than the 
characteristic times for growth of the angular velocity of the vortex. 
In the chosen coordinate system, small perturbations of the surface of 
discontinuity in a coordinate system moving with the cloud are given by 
           
.0
   
,
]
[2
=
+
Ω
+
−
=
∂
∂
+
∂
∂
+
∂
∂
v
C
v
nD
v
r
P
C
z
v
U
x
v
V
t
v









                   (33) 
Applying the operator ∇ to both sides of the first equation, we find, using the 
second equation, that the perturbed pressure obeys a Laplace equation, 
P/ = 0. 
Thus, we write 
                                P/ ~ e-k|y| exp{i(kxx + kzz – t)}.  
 
          (34) 
where k is the wave number and  is the frequency of the perturbations, and the Y 
axis is directed along the normal to the surface of discontinuity toward the vortex 
trunk. 
Let (x,z,t) be the displacement, in the Y direction, of the particles in the plane 
of the discontinuity. Then, assuming vx, vy and  ~ exp{i(kxx + kzz – t)} we obtain  
130 
Fig. 1. The approximate evolution of an isobaric 
funnel in the region of a vortex through equal time 
steps (scale lengths are not maintained). 

a dispersion relation for the perturbations of the tangential discontinuity surface: 
        
s
ink
s
k
k
ink
s
w
k
s
ink
w
k
s
k
k
ink
w
k
s
x
x
)
(
2
4
)
(
)
(
)
(
2
4
)
(
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
+
+
Ω
Ω
−
+
=
−
+
−
−
Ω
Ω
−
+
−






.         (35) 
We now examine the stability in two limiting cases: short and long wavelength 
perturbations. 
Short wavelength - these are perturbations with a wavelength that is much 
shorter than the trunk radius (kr0 >>1) and are typical of perturbations that 
propagate along the azimuth (x - perturbations). Taking kz = 0 for simplicity, from 
Eq. (35) we obtain3 
          ( – kV)(  – kV+2) +  ( - 2) + i	k2(2  – kV) = 0.  
           (36) 
The solution of this dispersion relation is 
      0(k) =Re  = kV/2,   
(k) = Im  = [ (k2V2+	2k4- 4kV)1/2 – 	k2]/2.       (37) 
We note first that the expression under the square root in Eq. (37) becomes 
positive for perturbations with wave numbers 
                        
3
4
2
4
2
108
1
1
2







	
Ω
+
+
Ω
=
>
n
V
n
V
k
k
cr
                            (38) 
and the perturbations with still larger wave numbers grow. The rotation stabilizes 
long wavelength perturbations of the trunk boundary; thus, short wavelength 
perturbations which also lie in our approximation of local instability turn out to be 
unstable. Equation (37) for the growth rate of the perturbations implies that the 
maximum value is reached as k  , i.e. 
                                                     
m = V2/4	.                                                (39) 
Using Eqs. (16) and (37), for the time dependence of the amplitude of the 
surface perturbations in the y = 0 plane, in the initial stage of development of the 
instability over a time interval t <<1/, for a vortex with a power law evolution of 
the instability, we obtain 
                     







	
≈
3
2
2
0
2
0
0
)
(
0
2
exp
~
)
(
t
r
e
t
t
x
ν
α
ω
ζ
ζ
ζ
γ
,                             (40) 
i.e., during the initial stage of the development of the instability the maximum 
growth in the amplitude with time follows (t) ~ 0exp (t3) dependence. 
In an inviscid fluid ( = 0) surface perturbations with a tangential velocity 
discontinuity develop during the initial stage as 
                                                
3  Instead of kx we shall use the notation k. 
131 
 

                                   
)
2
/
exp(
)
(
2
0
0
0
kt
r
t
α
ω
ζ
ζ
≅
.                                  (41) 
The maximum growth rate for the perturbations in a layer is known to be 
attained for wavelengths on the order of its thickness l, i.e., with km ~1/l . In the 
case of surface waves, the layer thickness is  2(t), so that km 1/2(t). Using this 
in Eq. (43), we obtain 
                                       
)
(
2
)
(
ln
2
0
0
0
t
t
r
t
ζ
αω
ζ
ζ
≅
,                                              (42) 
which implies that (t) varies with time roughly as t2/ ln t. Thus, a turbulent 
transition layer of thickness 2(t) develops on the surface of the vortex trunk with 
an effective turbulent viscosity which, in the initial stage of the development of the 
instability, can be estimated using the formula 
                                  
t
t
t
t
t
|)
(
|
2
1
)
(
)
(
)
(
0
2
*
ζ
αν
γ
ζ
ν
≅
≅
.                            (43) 
The turbulent viscosity increases very rapidly with time (~t3) and can reach 
large values (~*). This leads to intense nonlinear dissipation of the growing 
turbulent perturbations in this layer and to a transition into a saturated state. 
The turbulent perturbations saturate when the rise in the kinetic energy of the 
surface waves per unit time owing to instability in the tangential velocity 
discontinuity, 
v2/2, approaches, in order of magnitude, the power of the turbulent 
energy dissipation per unit volume, v3/ (Landau & Lifshits, 1986). In the 
estimates given above, v ~ d|(t)|/dt is the velocity of the turbulent fluctuations,  ~ 
| (t)| is their characteristic scale length, and 
 ~ V/|  | is the maximum growth 
rate for the instabilities. This implies that the velocity of the turbulent fluctuations 
is essentially the same as the discontinuity in the tangential velocity, i.e., v(t)  
V(t). 
On the other hand, the angular acceleration in the rotation of the vortex trunk 
ceases when the discontinuity V(t) in the tangential velocity approaches the sound 
speed cs. The characteristic time ts for this process is given by Eq. (18) (See Eq. 
(53)). 
Thus, Vm  cs  
m  cs/m, where m  is given by Eq. (42): 
                                       
m
s
m
t
r
ζ
αω
ζ
ζ
2
ln
2
0
0
0
≅
.                                               (44) 
Long wavelength-- these are perturbations with a long wavelength exceeding 
the transverse dimension of the trunk, i.e., kr0 << 1. Clearly, they can arise only in 
longitudinal z-perturbations, 
                         
)
exp(
)
,
(
0
0
t
i
z
ik
e
z
t
z
z
t
z
σ
ζ
γ
−
=
,                                   (45) 
132 

caused by the discontinuity in the longitudinal flow velocity of the material (18a). 
Taking kx = 0 in Eq. (35), we obtain a dispersion relation for the longitudinal 
perturbations of the form4 
 
               
.0
)
(
]
4
)
[(
        
)
)(
](
4
)
[(
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
=
+
Ω
−
+
+
+
−
Ω
−
+
−
k
i
k
i
k
i
Uk
k
i
kU
ν
σ
σ
ν
σ
ν
σ
σ
ν
σ
                      (35b) 
Of course, the effect of viscosity on the long wavelength perturbations can be 
neglected. Then Eq. (35b) becomes much simpler: 
                              
0
)
)(
4
2
/
(
2
2
2
2
=
−
Ω
−
+
−
Uk
k
U
Uk
σ
σ
σ
,                    (46) 
and has the solutions 
                     
2
2
2
3,2
1
4
4
/
2
/
   
,
Ω
−
=
=
k
U
i
Uk
Uk

σ
σ
.                          (47) 
Only the third mode, which describes oscillations with frequency 0 = ½Uk, 
yields perturbations (45) that increase in time. Here the perturbations increase only 
within the wavelength interval 
                
)
4
4
1(
   
2
2
0
0
0
0
0
z
v
r
U
r
kr
U
r
z
α
π
λ
π
+
Ω
=
Ω
>
>>
Ω
<
<<
,                 (48) 
with a growth rate 
                                             z = 0
2- 42.                                                  (49) 
Given that, in the initial stage (the instability in the longitudinal perturbations 
sets in at a time t > 4/2kR0 of the development of the vortex in the region z 	0, 
we have U 	 2R0 (using Eq. (26)), we obtain the following for the amplitude of the 
particle oscillations in the long wavelength perturbations of the surface of the 
vortex trunk: 
                               
)
2
/
exp(
~
2
0
2
0
0
t
R
k
e
z
t
z
α
ζ
ζ
γ
.                               (50) 
The comparison of Eqs. (50) and (41) shows that the longitudinal long 
wavelength perturbations develop much more slowly than the short wavelength 
perturbations. Thus, saturation of the vortical motion (i.e., termination of the 
exponential growth in the angular velocity of the trunk and in the pressure drop on 
its axis) occurs when the discontinuity in the azimuthal velocity reaches the sound 
speed. 
The time ts for the vortex to saturate is determined from the equation 
                                                
4 Instead of kz here we also use k. 
133 

                                  
0
0
0
)
(
r
c
at
e
s
s
at s
Ω
+
=
Ω
+
Ω
−
ω
ω
.                                  (51) 
Over this time the bottom of the isobaric funnel moves downward by a distance 
                                   
)
(
2
)
(
2
0
0
0
2
0
0
BR
v
v
t
r
c
z
z
z
s
s
s
Ω
+
+
Ω
+
≈
α
α

                                 (52) 
and, in the case of the particular solution (28), vz0 increases to 
                               




Ω
+
Ω
+
−
=
s
s
s
z
at
r
c
r
aR
t
v
0
0
0
0
)
(
1
)
(
ω
.                                 (53) 
Equation (13) can be used to estimate the velocity of the vertical flow of matter 
(the jet) at the protostar's surface. If the lower base of the vortex lay at a depth H 
from the cloud surface at the time it was formed, then at the time the vortex 
saturates on emerging from the cloud, the velocity of the jet would be equal to 
            



−
=
+
+
=
+
+
≈
−
).
1(
    
),
(
)
(
,
const
    
),
(
0
0
0
0
t
z
s
s
z
z
s
z
j
e
R
v
H
z
t
v
v
H
z
v
v
α
α
α
α
                     (54) 
The mass lost by the protostar in a year is 
                                               dM/dt = r0
2vj.                                               (55) 
 
6. Generation of astrophysical jets by a vortex 
 
The appearance of a Rankine vortex in the surface axial layer of a gravitating 
body, therefore, produces a longitudinal flow of matter (13) and a flow of matter 
which converges toward the vortex trunk (14). These flows provide for an 
exponential growth in the rotational velocity of the trunk and in the pressure drop 
on its axis. The power law increases in the angular rotation velocity and in the 
pressure drop cease and the vortical motion enters a state of saturation when the 
discontinuity in the azimuthal velocity at the surface of the trunk (as we have seen, 
the growth of the long wavelength perturbations proceeds much more slowly) 
reaches the sound speed. This takes place over a time ts (given by Eq. (51)) 
following the appearance of the vortex within which the vortical motion extends to 
ever deeper layers of the cloud, covering a distance given by Eq. (52). On the other 
hand, the longitudinal velocity of the flow along the vortex trunk reaches the value 
given by Eq. (53) during this time, causing mass to flow out through the surface of 
the protostar in the form of a jet with velocity vj (see Eq. (54)). 
As an illustration of the results obtained here, let us consider a spheroidal 
protostar of mass ~ 2 , polar radius 10 a.u., and eccentricity 3/4. For the mass 
density of the protostar we obtain  = 3  (1-e2)/2R0
3 	 10-11g/cm3 and, using Eq. 
134 

(2), we find its angular rotation velocity to be  	 1.810-9s-1 and 0 	 210-9s-1. 
Let a vortex (4) which appears at time t = 0 in the surface polar layer of the 
protostar have a thickness H = 0.2 a.u., trunk radius r0 	 0,5 a.u., and azimuthal 
velocity v0 = 0r0 	 0.3 km/s at its surface. Taking the velocity of the radial flow 
(14) at the surface of the trunk to be vr 	 0.5 km/s, (corresponding to  	 1.310-8s-
1) and the sound speed be cs 	10km/s, with Eq. (51) we find the saturation time for 
the vortex to be ts 	 2.4108s 	 8 years. During this time the low pressure vortical 
funnel spans ever deeper layers of the protostar, forming an essentially stationary 
cylindrical vortex of length 	1.8 a.u. The longitudinal flow velocity at the z = 0 
level turns out to be vz0(ts) 	 19.2 km/s, and at the surface of the protostar, vj 	 20 
km/s, while the parabolic velocity at the protostar's surface is 	12 km/s. The rate of 
loss of mass by the protostar is then 	10-6  /year. 
The jet velocity at the surface of the protostar can also be estimated using 
energy conservation arguments. In fact, equating the total work by the pressure and 
gravitational forces to the kinetic energy of the trunk at the surface of the protostar, 
i.e., taking the Bernoulli integral for the lower and upper bases of the vortex trunk, 
we obtain the same estimate for vj. 
We now estimate the thickness m of the transition turbulent layer. To do this 
we assume that the displacement 0 is on the order of the mean free path for the 
particles, i.e., 0  mH /aH
2 	 104 cm, where mH is the mass of a hydrogen atom 
and aH is its Bohr radius. Then Eq. (44) gives m 	 1.5107 cm. The maximum value 
for the coefficient of turbulent viscosity in the transition layer is then 
                            
s
m
m
t
v ζ
α
ν
0
*
2
1
≅
.~ 21012 sm2/s.  
                       (56) 
while the ordinary kinematic viscosity of the gas is much smaller, at  
                                    	 vH/3 ~ 3109 cm2/s,                                                (57) 
where vH is the thermal speed of the atoms and l is their mean free path. Thus, at 
the surface of a vortex trunk of radius r0 rotating at almost the sound speed vm = 
v0exp(
m ts) ~ cs, , turbulence creates a layer of thickness max 2m with an 
anomalously high viscosity 	max >> 	. 
The lifetime of the resulting vortex can be estimated by dividing the kinetic 
energy per unit length of the vortex in its saturated state by the energy dissipated 
per unit length (17): 
                               
]
/[
10
8.1
7 ν
×
≈
vortex
t
year,                                         (58) 
where the viscosity is expressed in units of 1012 cm2/s. The molecular viscosity 
gives an estimate in Eq. (58) of ~3·109 years, while the turbulent viscosity yields 
~5·106 years for the lifetime of the vortex. Thus, these vortices are substantially 
dissipation-less, even when an anomalously high turbulent viscosity is assumed. 
 
135 

7. Concluding remarks 
 
The vortical mechanism proposed in this paper for the generation of 
astrophysical jets is a unique way of converting gravitational energy of a source 
into the kinetic energy of an erupting jet. This mechanism can also provide for the 
acceleration and collimation of jet flows beyond the confines of a source, both in 
slowing-down regions and in inertial outflows. 
The formation of a turbulent transition layer at the surface of a vortex trunk 
leads to more than the saturation of the vortex. It drives a number of hydrodynamic 
and physicochemical processes which merit detailed study. 
As the vortex trunk emerges from the compact formation, it enters a rarefied 
environment and begins to expand. The following scenario for expansion of the jet 
can be imagined: radial distension of the jet as a whole and expansion of the 
surface layers into the rarefied surrounddings5. Radial distension converts the jet 
from a dense, rapidly rotating state into a less dense, more slowly rotating state 
while conserving its angular momentum. At the same time, matter flows out from 
the jet surface: initially the layers adjacent to the boundary come into motion, and 
ever deeper regions away from the boundary are gradually brought into motion. A 
rarefaction wave develops and propagates radially into the depth of the jet, creating 
a "sheath" of no uniform density with a differential rotation around the jet. This 
leads to the recovery of equilibrium at the boundary of a uniform trunk at some 
radius R of the trunk. After this, the rapid expansion processes cease and a 
quasistationary pattern consisting of two regions is established in the jet: a core 
region that is uniform in density and rotates rigidly and a sheath region with a no 
uniform density, differential rotation, and a converging radial flow of matter. Thus, 
self generation of a vortex from a bare trunk in a jet is possible (Abrahamyan, 
2009). A vortex of this sort will accelerate and simultaneously collimate the core 
region of a jet. The result is a fast, more collimated jet inside a slow jet. "Two-
velocity" CO outflows of this type have been observed in a number of molecular 
jet flows (so-called "molecular bullets"), such as HH211 in IC348 (Gueth & 
Guilloteau, 1999), L1448 (Nisini, et al., 2000, Masson et al.,1990), HH7-11 (Koo, 
1990, Bachiller et al., 1998), and HH111 (Cernicharo & Reipurth, 1999, Hatchell et 
al., 1999). 
 
                                                
5 Here is significant the presences of an accreting disc component round the 
protostar, which can enrich angular momentum of the jet, accelerate and collimate 
it at the long distance from the source. 
136 

References 
 
Abrahamyan M.G., 2008, Astrofizika, 51, 617, [in Russian]. 
Abrahamyan M.G., 2009, Astrofizika, 52, 136, [in Russian]. 
Bacciotti F., Eislöffel J, 1999, Astron. Astrophys. 342, 717. 
Bachiller R., Martin-Pintado J., et al.,  1990, Astron. Astrophys. 231, 174. 
Bachiller R., Guilloteau S., et al., 1998, Astron. Astrophys. 339, L49. 
Bisnovatyi-Kogan G.S., Komberg B.V., Fridman A.M., 1969, Astron. Zh. 46, 465. 
Bisnovatyi-Kogan G.S., 2004, Astrophys. 47, 404. 
Bisnovatyi-Kogan G.S., 2007, Mon. Not. Roy. Astron. Soc. 376, 457. 
Bridle A., 1998, in: Physics of AGN Jets (http://www.cv. nrao. edu/ ~abridle 
/bgctalk). 
Cernicharo J. and B. Reipurth Bo, 1996, Astrophys. J. 460, L57 
Chandrasekhar S., 1969, Ellipsoidal Figures of Equilibrium. Yale Univ. press, 288 
p. 
Chrysostomou A., Bacciotti F., Nisini B., Ray T.P., Eisl¨offel P., Davis C.J., 
Takami M., 2008, arXiv:0802.1881. 
Coffey S.D., Bacciotti F., Chrysostomou A., Nisini B., Davis C., 2010, 
arXiv:1011.6619. 
Coffey S.D., Bacciotti F., Ray T.P., Eisl¨offel J., Woitas J., 2008, Astron. 
Astrophys. 
Dal Pino E.M.G., 1995, in: Plasma Physics and Controlled Fusion, AIP Procs. 345, 
427.  
Gonzalez R., Dal Pino E.M.G., Raga A., Velazquez P., 2004, Astrophys. J. 600, 
L59. 
Gueth F., Guilloteau S., 1999, Astron. Astrophys. 343, 571. 
Hatchell J., Fuller G. A., Lada E. F., 1999, Astron. Astrophys. 346, 278. 
Königl A, 1986, Can. J. Phys. 64, 362. 
Koo B.C., 1990, Astrophys. J. 361, 145. 
Kundu P.K., 1990, Liquid Mechanics. Academic Press Inc., p. 638. 
Landau L.D., Lifshitz E.M., 1986, Hydrodynamics [in Russian], Nauka, Moscow, 
736 p. 
Matveenko L.I., Sivakon S., Ershtad S.G., Marsher A.P., 2010, Pisma Astron. J., 
36, 163. 
Masson C. R., Mundi L. G., Keene J., 1990, Astrophys. J. 357, L25. 
Meleshko V.V., Konstantinov M.Yu., 1993, Dynamics of Vortical Structures [in 
Russian], Naukova Dumka, Kiev, 282 pp. 
Morse J.A., Hartigan P., Cecil G., Raymond J.C., Heathcote S., 1992, Astrophys. J. 
339, 231. 
137 

Nisini B., Benedettini M., et al., 2000,  Astron. Astrophys. 360, 297. 
Pashitskii E.A., Malnev E.A., Naryshkin R.A., 2007, arXiv:physics/0702229.  
Rankine W.J.M., 1870, Phil. Mag. Ser. 4, 39, 211. 
Reipurth Bo & Bally J., 2001, Ann. Rev. Astron. Astrophys. 39, 403. 
Reipurth Bo, 1989, Nature 340, 42. 
Shibta K. and Aoki S., 2004, astro-ph/0303253. 
Soker N., 2004, Astron. Astrophys. 414, 943 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
138 

ЗАВИСИМОСТЬ ФУНКЦИИ СВЕТИМОСТИ ГАЛАКТИК 
ОТ ИХ МОРФОЛОГИЧЕСКОГО ТИПА И ОТ 
ОКРУЖАЮЩЕЙ СРЕДЫ 
 
А. П. Магтесян 
Бюраканская Астрофизическая Обсерватория, Бюракан, Армения 
 
 
     1. Введение 
 
     Функция светимости (ФС) галактик имеет очень большое значение для 
исследования и понимания происхождения и эволюции галактик, для 
проверки 
космологических 
моделей 
и 
многих 
других 
проблем 
внегалактической астрономии. 
     Взаимодействия между галактиками играют важную роль в их эволюции. 
Они могут способствовать или подавлять звездообразование в галактиках. 
Эти взаимодействия в разных системах могут отличаться друг от друга. 
Например, группы галактик по сравнению со скоплениями имеют малые 
дисперсии лучевых скоростей, малые плотности и температуру газа, поэтому 
в этих окружениях эффективны такие механизмы как слияния (Toomre, 
Toomre 1972, White 1979), потери газа спиральными галактиками, 
обусловленной гравитационным взаимодействием с другими членами 
скопления (Spitzer, Baade 1951) или разрушения спиральных ветвей 
приливным обдиранием (Negroponte, White 1983). В скоплениях галактик, где 
дисперсия скоростей довольно высокая, эффективен механизм выметания 
газа из галактик лобовым давлением межгалактического газа скопления 
(Gunn, Gott 1972). Одиночные галактики находятся в совершенно другой 
ситуации. Можно предположить, что эволюция этих галактик связана с 
процессами, происходящими внутри их самих. 
     Эти механизмы могут изменить светимость галактик, и поэтому ожидается 
зависимость функции светимости галактик от окружающей среды. 
Важно понять, как меняется ФС галактик в зависимости от их 
морфологического типа, а также, как влияет окружающая среда на ФС. 
 
ФС галактик обычно представляется функцией Шехтера (Schechter 
1976), которая в яркой части светимостей имеет экспоненциальную форму, а 
при слабых светимостях имеет степенную форму. 
                         
)
10
exp(
10
)
(
4.0
)
1
)(
(
4.0
*
*
*
M
M
M
M
−
+
−
−
=
Φ
α
φ
,                                   (1) 
где 
*φ  - коэффициент нормализации, 
*
M  и α  определяют форму кривой. 
Параметр α  представляет логарифмический наклон в слабом конце 
светимостей.   
      Если α  меньше, чем -1, то ФС в слабом конце возрастающая, а при 
1
−
>
α
она убывающая. Граничное значение 
1
−
=
α
 соответствует плоскому 
концу ФС.  
*
M  показывает место изменения поведения ФС. При значениях 
намного меньших 
*
M , ФС становится экспоненциальной. ФС галактик в 

скоплениях, группах и в общем поле изучены во многих работах (Oemler 
1974; Schechter 1976; Felten 1977; Dressler 1978a; Sandage et al. 1985; Oegerle 
et al. 1986; Lugger 1986; Oegerle et al. 1987; Binggeli et al. 1988; Colless 1989; 
Willmer et al. 1990; Gudehus & Hegyi 1991; Garilli et al. 1991; Ferguson & 
Sandage 1991; Garilli et al. 1992; Loveday et al. 1992; Marzke et al. 1994; Ribeiro 
et al. 1994; Driver et al. 1994; Lopez-Cruz & Yee 1995; Barrientos et al. 1996; Lin 
et al. 1996; Andreon и др. 1997; Gaidos 1997; Jerjen & Tamman 1997; Lopez-
Cruz et al. 1997; Lumsden et al.  1997; Trentham 1997; Valotto et al. 1997; Zepf et 
al. 1997; Andreon 1998; Bromley et al. 1998; Muriel et al. 1998; Rauzy et al. 1998; 
Garilli et al. 1999; Marinoni et al. 1999; Ramella et al.  1999; Zabludoff  & 
Mulchaey 2000; Paolillo et al. 2001; de Propis et al. 2002; Goto et al. 2002; 
Trentham & Hodgkin 2002; Cuesta-Bolao  & Serna 2003). В этих работах 
предметом серьезного изучения являлся вопрос об универсальности ФС. 
     В первых результатах было получено, что ФС галактик в скоплениях и в 
общем поле не отличаются друг от друга (например, Felten (1977)). В 
дальнейшем некоторые авторы (Loveday et al. (1992); Marzke et al. (1994); Lin 
et al. (1996)) для ФС галактик поля, представляя ее функцией Шехтера (1976), 
получили большие различия для величины
*
M , но для наклона ФС в слабом 
конце получили подобные результаты: 
1
−
≈
α
. 
     В некоторых работах, касающихся скоплений галактик, для слабого конца 
ФС, также был получен плоский наклон (см. например, Garilli et al. 1999; 
Paolillo et al. 2001; Goto et al. 2002). Во многих других работах (Schechter 
1976; Dressler 1978a; Sandage et al. 1985; Ferguson & Sandage 1991; Lugger 
1986; Colless 1989; Lumsden et al. 1997; Trentham 1997; Valotto et al. 1997; 
Rauzy et al. 1998; Garilli et al. 1999; Paolillo et al. 2001; de Propis et al. 2002; 
Goto et al. 2002; Cuesta-Bolao & Serna 2003) для слабого конца ФС получены 
довольно большие наклоны (
2.1
5.1
−
≤
≤
−
α
). Для слабого конца ФС 
получается довольно большой наклон (
2
−
<
α
), когда рассматриваются 
очень слабые галактики скопления (Trentham, Hodgkin 2002). В работах 
Lopez-Cruz, Yee (1995) и Lopez-Cruz et al. (1997) изучены 45 скоплений Эйбла 
с красным смещением z<0.14 и получено, что 39 из них показывают 
увеличение относительного числа слабых галактик. Только 7 из них 
представляются ФС Шехтера с 
1
−
≈
α
. Оказалось, что они имеют в своем 
составе cD галактики и в среднем более массивны и богаты газом.  
     Результаты изучения ФС галактик групп разными авторами довольно 
сильно отличаются друг от друга. В некоторых работах, относящихся к 
близким группам галактик, получены согласующиеся результаты (Ferguson 
and Sandage 1991; Muriel et al. 1998):  т. е., получена плоская ФС, похожая на 
ФС галактик поля. Изучение же компактных групп (Ribeiro et al. 1994; Zepf et 
al. 1997) также привело к плоской или слабо понижающей ФС  в слабом 
конце светимостей. В противовес этому в работе Zabludoff and Mulchaey 
(2000) было показано, что в группах ФС галактик в слабом конце имеет 
большой логарифмический наклон. В Cuesta-Bolao, Serna (2003) показано, что 
как малые, так и относительно большие группы в слабом конце ФС имеют 
слабо понижающийся наклон подобно результату Ribeiro et al. (1994). 

     Известно, что существует зависимость плотность - морфологическое 
содержание (Dressler 1980). Согласно этой зависимости в областях высоких 
плотностей относительное число эллиптических и линзовидных галактик 
выше, чем в областях малых плотностей. Известно также, что каждый 
хаббловский тип галактик имеет свою характерную ФС (например, Binggeli et 
al. 1988). Поэтому ожидается, что суммарная ФС галактик должна быть 
зависима от окружения. 
     Представляется также важным выяснить: универсальна ли ФС для данного 
хаббловского типа галактик, или она зависит от окружения? В Binggeli et al. 
(1988), изучая ФС галактик в поле, в группах и в бедных скоплениях, было 
показано, что ФС галактик отдельного хаббловского типа является 
универсальной. Другие авторы подтвердили этот результат (например, 
Andreon et al. 1997; Jerjen and Tamman 1997; Andreon 1998). Они получили, 
что ФС галактик E, L, S не зависят от плотности окружающей среды. В 
противовес этому в работах (Valotto et al. 1997; Bromley et al. 1998; Marinoni 
et al. 1999; Ramella et al. 1999; Cuesta-Bolao, Serna 2003) получена значимая 
зависимость ФС галактик данного морфологического типа от плотности 
окружающей среды. 
     Такая несогласованность результатов, возможно, связана с недостаточно 
уверенным разделением близких и далеких фоновых галактик от галактик 
скопления, а для малых групп - неуверенной идентификацией их членов. 
Поскольку число членов групп мало, то ошибочное присоединение к данной 
группе одной или нескольких ложных галактик, или неприсоединение 
истинных членов, может значимо влиять на определение ФС.  
     Есть еще одна причина, которая может повлиять на достоверность 
результатов. Она заключается в том, что авторы часто представляют ФС 
функцией Шехтера во всей изучаемой области светимостей. Но изучение 
многих работ показывает, что эта функция довольно плохо представляет ФС 
как в ярком, так и в слабом конце светимостей.   
     Таким образом, вопрос о зависимости ФС галактик от окружающей среды, 
а также вопрос об универсальности ФС галактик разных морфологических 
типов пока остается открытым, особенно для малых групп. Этот вопрос очень 
важен для правильного понимания процессов происхождения и эволюции 
галактик. 
 
 
2. Новый метод определения функции светимости галактик  
 
Классический метод определения ФС (Binggeli et al. 1987) основывается 
на предположении, что галактики равномерно распределены в пространстве. 
Чтобы 
вычислить 
ФС 
без 
любого 
предположения 
относительно 
пространственного распределения галактик, были предложены другие 
непараметрические методы (например, Lynden-Bell 1971, Choloniewski 1987) 
или методы, основанные на методе максимального правдоподобия (Nicoll & 
Segal 1983; Efstathiou et al. 1988). Для учета зависимости плотности числа 
галактик от расстояния, мы обобщили  
max
/
1 V
метод Шмидта (1968).  

Галактика с абсолютной  звездной величиной 
i
M будет видна в объеме, 
на границе которой она будет иметь предельную звездную величину выборки 
(в данном случае 
5
.
15
lim
m
m
=
). Поскольку наша выборка ограничена 
расстоянием снизу и сверху, то пространственную плотность галактики с 
абсолютной величиной 
i
M  мы должны оценить в объеме 
min
V
V i
m −
, когда 
min
max
M
M
M
i ≥
≥
 и в объеме 
min
max
V
V
−
, когда 
min
M
M i <
. Где  
3
3
⎟⎟
⎠
⎞
⎜⎜
⎝
⎛
Ω
=
H
cz
V
i
m
i
m
это тот объем, на границе которого галактика с абсолютной 
звездной величиной 
i
M будет иметь предельную видимую звездную 
величину выборки 
lim
m
, 
3
min
min
3
⎟
⎠
⎞
⎜
⎝
⎛
Ω
=
H
cz
V
это близкий объем, исключенный 
из 
рассмотрения, 
а 
3
max
max
3
⎟
⎠
⎞
⎜
⎝
⎛
Ω
=
H
cz
V
 
есть 
максимальный 
объем, 
находящиеся дальше которого галактики также не рассматриваются. Ω  - 
объемный угол выборки, и в нашем случае равен 4.3 ср. 
      Если предположить, что галактики в пространстве распределены 
равномерно, то следуя Schmidt (1968) и Huchra, Sargent (1973): 
 
⎪
⎪
⎩
⎪⎪
⎨
⎧
<
−
Δ
≥
≥
−
Δ
=
Φ
∑
∑
Δ
±
Δ
±
j
M
M
i
j
M
M
i
j
m
i
obs
i
i
M
M
V
V
M
M
M
M
V
V
M
M
,2
/
min
min
max
,2
/
min
max
min
,
1
)
(
1
,
)
(
1
1
)
(
                (2) 
 
Поскольку 
галактики 
не 
распределены 
равномерно, 
и 
средняя 
пространственная плотность галактик, по крайней мере, в близкой 
Вселенной, зависит от расстояния (особенно в северном полушарии), то 
определение ФС, таким образом, приведет к повышенной оценке плотности 
абсолютно слабых галактик. Поэтому мы должны учитывать эту зависимость 
и приводить средние плотности галактик к наибольшему объему 
max
V
. 
Вследствие этого, уравнение (2) примет следующий вид:  
 
  
⎪
⎪
⎩
⎪
⎪
⎨
⎧
<
−
Δ
≥
≥
−
Δ
=
Φ
∑
∑
Δ
±
Δ
±
j
M
M
i
j
M
M
i
j
m
j
m
i
obs
i
i
M
M
V
V
r
D
M
M
M
M
V
V
r
D
M
M
,2
/
min
min
max
max
,2
/
min
max
min
(3)
       
,
,
1
)
(
)
(
1
,
)
()
(
1
1
)
(
 

где 
3
/
1
3
⎟⎟
⎠
⎞
⎜⎜
⎝
⎛
Ω
=
=
i
m
i
m
i
m
V
H
cz
r
 - расстояние соответствующее объему 
i
m
V . 
Фактически 
)
(
i
mr
D
 - это плотность галактик, нормированная на объем 
max
V
: 
1
)
( max =
r
D
. Расчеты сделаны при 
2.0
=
ΔM
. 
 
     Такое определение предполагает независимость ФС от пространственных 
координат. Мы также пренебрегаем локальными повышениями плотности в 
виде групп галактик, поскольку речь идет о средних плотностях галактик, в 
объемах намного превышающих объем групп галактик.  
     Среднеквадратичное 
отклонение 
)
(
i
obs M
Φ
 
оцениваем 
следующим 
образом: 
 
            
2
/
1
2
/
1
min
1
)
(
   
          
          
1
)
()
(
1
))
(
(
⎥⎦
⎤
⎢⎣
⎡
⎟
⎠
⎞
⎜
⎝
⎛−
Φ
=
⎥⎦
⎤
⎢⎣
⎡
⎟
⎠
⎞
⎜
⎝
⎛−
−
Δ
=
Φ
N
n
n
n
M
N
n
n
V
V
r
D
M
M
i
i
i
i
obs
i
i
i
m
i
m
i
obs
σ
,              (4) 
 
где 
in - число галактик в интервале 
2
/
M
M i
Δ
±
, N - общее число галактик в 
выборке. 
 
      В этих отношениях видимые звездные величины исправлены за 
галактическое поглощение (Sandage 1973, см. (3.3)) и за К - ослабление 
(Efstathiou et. al 1988, см. (3.4)): 
K
A
m
−
−
=
Δ
. Лучевые скорости галактик 
исправлены за вращение Галактики и за движение Местной системы галактик 
в направлении скопления в Деве (см. (2.17)-(2.19)).  
 
                                    
),
/
log(
5
25
H
cz
m
M
i
i
i
−
−
=
 
                                    
),
/
log(
5
25
lim
H
cz
m
M
i
m
i
−
−
=
 
                                 
),
/
log(
5
25
max
lim
min
H
cz
m
M
−
−
=
 
                                 
),
/
log(
5
25
min
lim
max
H
cz
m
M
−
−
=
 
 
1
1
100
−
−⋅
⋅
=
Мпк
с
км
H
 - постоянная Хаббла, m  - видимая звездная 
величина галактики. Как отметили выше, 
min
cz
= 500 км/с, 
max
cz
 = 20000 км/с, 
5
.
15
lim
m
m
=
. Поэтому 
0
.
13
max
m
M
−
=
,  
0
.
21
min
m
M
−
=
. 
 
      Уравнение (3) можно также написать следующим образом: 
 
 

⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎩
⎪⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎨
⎧
<
×
−
Ω
Δ
≥
≥
−
×
Ω
Δ
=
Φ
∑
∑
Δ
±
−
−
−
−
−
−
Δ
±
−
−
−
−
−
−
−
−
(5)
       
          
          
          
          
,
,
1
)1
10
(
10
3
1
 ,
)
10
(
)1
10
(
10
3
1
)
(
min
,2
/
1
)
(
6.0
)
25
(
6.0
,2
/
min
max
)
25
(
2.0
1
)
(
6.0
)
25
(
6.0
max
min
max
lim
lim
max
max
lim
M
M
M
M
M
M
D
M
M
i
j
M
M
M
M
M
m
j
M
M
i
M
m
M
M
M
m
i
obs
i
i
j
j
      Эти уравнения дадут истинную плотность числа галактик только в том 
случае, когда имеем дело с полной выборкой. Когда выборка неполная, и 
фактор полноты не зависит от абсолютной звездной величины, мы можем 
точно оценить только нормированную ФС галактик (например, Neyman, Scott 
1974; Теребиж 1980).   
                               
∑Φ
Φ
=
Ψ
j
j
obs
i
obs
i
M
M
M
)
(
)
(
)
(
.                                           (6) 
     Истинная плотность числа галактик с абсолютной величиной 
i
M  будет: 
                  
)
(
)
(
)
(
1
lim
i
obs
i
M
m
P
M
Φ
=
Φ
−
,                                             (7) 
а среднеквадратичное отклонение будет: 
          
))
(
(
)
(
))
(
(
1
lim
i
obs
i
M
m
P
M
Φ
=
Φ
−σ
σ
                                           (8) 
где 
)
(
lim
m
P
 - фактор полноты. 
       Для изучения полноты выборки, ограниченной звездной величиной, 
широко используется 
m
V
V /
 метод (Schmidt 1968), где V  - объем 
пространства, на краю которого находится галактика, а 
m
V  - есть 
максимальный объем пространства, на краю которого галактика будет иметь 
видимую звездную величину, равную предельной звездной величине 
выборки. 
Если 
в 
Евклидовом 
пространстве 
объекты 
распределены 
равномерно, то среднее значение величины 
>
<
m
V
V /
 должно быть равно 
0.5. При данном пространстве распределение величины 
>
<
m
V
V /
 строго 
эквивалентно распределению видимых величин (Теребиж 1980), которое при 
равномерном распределении объектов будет вида 
m
m
N
6.0
10
~
)
(
. Мы 
предполагаем, что плотность галактик зависит от расстояния, и поэтому 
данные методы используем для приближенной оценки полноты выборок.  
   
           3. Зависимость плотности галактик от расстояния  
 
      Зависимость плотности галактик от расстояния можно построить при 
помощи полных (по видимой и по абсолютной звездной величине) выборок. 
Для этого мы создали три подвыборки галактик по абсолютным величинам:  

а. Выборка с 
m
M
21
−
≤
, которая полна по абсолютной звездной 
величине во всем изученном объеме. По этой выборке определена искомая 
зависимость при красных смещениях от 7000 км/с до 20000 км/с. При малых 
расстояниях эта выборка непригодна по причине малочисленности галактик. 
б. Выборка с 
m
M
20
−
≤
. Эта выборка полна до красного смещения 
12600 км/с. По этой выборке определена искомая зависимость при красных 
смещениях от 1700 км/с до 12600 км/с. 
в. Выборка с 
m
M
8.
17
−
≤
. По этой выборке определена искомая 
зависимость при красных смещениях от 500 км/с до 5000 км/с. 
      Эти зависимости сшиты по общим участкам и нормированы на красное 
смещение 20000 км/с. Полученная кривая приведена на рис. 1. Для удобства 
при вычислениях разные участки  кривой представлены полиномами первого 
или второго порядка. 
 
Рис. 1: Зависимость относительной плотности числа галактик от красного 
смещения. 
 
           4. ФС галактик поля разных морфологических типов 
 
      На рис. 2 представлена нормализованная логарифмическая функция 
светимости (ЛФС, 
)
(M
LogΨ
) галактик поля. Под названием “галактики 
поля” мы подразумеваем все галактики, расположенные в изучаемом объеме, 
независимо от того, входят они в группы или являются одиночными 
галактиками. Использован CfA2 каталог красных смещений. Выборка 
ограничена 
красным 
смещением 
с
км
cz
с
км
/
20000
/
500
≤
≤
 
и 
галактической широтой 
o
II
b
20
≥
. 
     На этом и на следующих рис. 3 – 6 среднеквадратичное отклонение 
посчитано следующим образом: 
                    
2
/
1
1
)
(
))
(
(
⎥⎦
⎤
⎢⎣
⎡
⎟
⎠
⎞
⎜
⎝
⎛−
Ψ
=
Ψ
N
n
n
n
M
M
i
i
i
i
i
σ
                                           (9) 

     Из рис. 2 видно, что ФС галактик поля можно представить функцией 
Шехтера с параметрами 
30
.
19
*
−
=
M
 и 
90
.0
−
=
α
 только в ограниченном 
участке светимостей: 
6.
17
0.
21
−
≤
≤
−
M
. Левее от этой области ЛФС 
можно представить квадратным многочленом, а правее, при слабых 
светимостях ЛФС можно представить линейной функцией.  
        На 
рис. 
3 
представлена 
ЛФС 
галактик 
поля 
с 
известными 
морфологическими типами. Видно, что она почти не отличается от ЛФС всех 
галактик (рис. 2).  
 
Рис. 2. ЛФС галактик поля в области 
20000
500
≤
≤V
 км/с и 
o
bII
20
≥
. 
 
Рис. 3. ЛФС галактик поля с 
известными 
морфологическими 
типами 
в 
области 
20000
500
≤
≤V
 
км/с 
и 
o
bII
20
≥
. 
Рис. 
4. 
ЛФС 
эллиптических 
и 
линзовидных 
галактик 
поля 
в 
области 
20000
500
≤
≤V
 км/с и 
o
bII
20
≥
. 
 
Рис. 
5. 
ЛФС 
спиральных 
и 
иррегулярных галактик поля в 
области 
20000
500
≤
≤V
 км/с и 
o
bII
20
≥
. 
       
На рис. 4 представлена ЛФС эллиптических и линзовидных галактик. Из рис. 
4 видно, что для эллиптических и линзовидных  галактик, как и для всех 
галактик, функцией Шехтера возможно представить только часть ФС. По 
параметру α  они не отличаются, а по параметру 
*
M  отличаются мало. 

 
 
 
 
Рис. 6: ЛФС галактик поля для разных морфологических типов в области 
20000
500
≤
≤V
 км/с и 
o
bII
20
≥
. 

     На рис. 5 представлена ЛФС спиральных и иррегулярных галактик. Из 
рисунка видно, что ФС спиральных и иррегулярных галактик хорошо 
представляется функцией Шехтера с параметрами 
4.
19
*
−
=
M
 и 
25
.1
−
=
α
 
почти во всей изученной области светимостей: 
5.
21
−
≥
M
. 
     Значительное число галактик с известным морфологическим типом 
позволяют нам более подробно изучать зависимость ФС галактик от 
морфологии галактик. Результаты представлены на рис. 6. Из рис. 6 видно, 
что поведение ФС галактик типов E и L подобно поведению ФС всех 
галактик, т.е. не во всем диапазоне абсолютных звездных величин ФС можно 
представить функцией Шехтера. Данная функция для эллиптических 
галактик применима только в диапазоне 
8.
17
2.
21
−
≤
≤
−
M
, а для 
линзовидных галактик – в диапазоне  
5.
16
2.
21
−
≤
≤
−
M
.  
     ФС спиральных галактик можно представить функцией Шехтера в 
довольно широком диапазоне абсолютных звездных величин. Параметром 
*
M  они слабо отличаются. При переходе от ранних спиралей к поздним 
спиралям происходит уменьшение параметра α  в функции Шехтера, т. е. 
увеличивается относительное число слабых галактик. 
     На последнем изображении рис. 6 приведена ЛФС спиралей без 
неправильных спиральных и иррегулярных галактик. Из рисунка видно, что 
ЛФС “чистых спиралей” в слабом конце довольно плоская и в диапазоне 
0.
14
5.
21
−
≤
≤
−
M
 можно представить функцией Шехтера с параметрами 
2.
19
*
−
=
M
 и 
0.1
−
=
α
.  
 
      
5. Средняя плотность числа галактик разных морфологических типов 
 
     Если фактор полноты не зависит от абсолютной звездной величины,  то 
нормированная ФС галактик не зависит от полноты выборки по видимой 
звездной величине (см., например, Neyman, Scott 1974, Теребиж 1980). То 
есть, когда выполняется это условие, то нормированную ФС галактик можно 
построить также по неполной выборке. Иное положение, когда оценивается 
средняя плотность числа галактик. Для этого надо оценить полноту 
изучаемых выборок. 
     На рис. 7 для нашей выборки представлена зависимость величин 
m
V
V /
 от 
абсолютной звездной величины галактики. Рис. 7 не показывает какую-либо 
зависимость между обсуждаемыми величинами, т.е фактор полноты не 
зависит от абсолютной звездной величины.  
     Полноту CfA2 выборки можем приблизительно оценить по 
>
<
m
V
V /
 
тесту Шмидта (Schmidt 1968), поскольку этот тест требует равномерного 
распределения галактик в пространстве.  
В табл. 1 представлены величины 
2
/
1
)
12
(
/
−
±
>
<
n
V
V
m
 в зависимости от 
видимой звездной величины, как для всех галактик, так и для галактик с 
известными морфологическими типами. Из таблицы видно, что выборку всех 
галактик можно считать полной, а выборки галактик с известными 

морфологическими типами можно считать полными до видимой звездной 
величины m=14.0 - 14.5. 
 
 
 
 
-24
-22
-20
-18
-16
-14
-12
M
0,0
0,2
0,4
0,6
0,8
1,0
V/Vm
 
 
             Рис. 7: Зависимость величин 
m
V
V /
 от абсолютной звездной   
                         величины галактики.  
 
 
 
      
На рис. 8 представлены распределения видимых звездных величин галактик 
разных морфологических типов. Из рисунка видно, что распределения 
видимых звездных величин для галактик разных морфологических типов 
похожи друг на друга и заметно отличаются от аналогичного распределения 
для всех галактик в слабом конце, начиная с m=14. Можно сказать, что 
нехватка морфологических типов проявляется после m=14-14.5. Причем, эти 
пропуски незначимо зависят от морфологического типа, и в первом 
приближении мы приняли, что выборки для разных морфологических типов 
полны до m=14.2. Также можем принять, что вся выборка безотносительно к 
известности морфологического типа, является полной. 
 
 
 

Таблица 1. Величины 
>
<
m
V
V /
 в зависимости от видимой звездной 
величины для всех галактик и для галактик с известными морфологическими 
типами. 
 
m 
10.0 
10.5 
11.0 
11.5 
12.0 
12.5 
>
<
m
V
V /
  
все галактики 
0.49± 
0.077 
0.54± 
0.051 
0.44± 
0.040 
0.49± 
0.027 
0.44± 
0.021 
0.45± 
0.016 
n 
14 
32 
52 
113 
189 
337 
>
<
m
V
V /
  
Галактики 
с 
морфологичес-
кими типами  
0.49± 
0.077 
0.54± 
0.051 
0.44± 
0.040 
0.49± 
0.027 
0.44± 
0.021 
0.45± 
0.016 
n 
14 
32 
52 
113 
188 
336 
 
 
Таблица 1 (продолжение)  
 
m 
13.0 
13.5 
14.0 
14.5 
15.0 
15.5 
>
<
m
V
V /
  
все галактики 
0.47± 
0.012 
0.46± 
0.009 
0.46± 
0.007 
0.48± 
0.005 
0.53± 
0.003 
0.50± 
0.002 
n 
611 
1089 
1872 
3496 
7773 
16291 
>
<
m
V
V /
  
Галактики 
с 
морфологичес-
кими типами  
0.46± 
0.012 
0.45± 
0.009 
0.45± 
0.007 
0.46± 
0.005 
0.44± 
0.004 
0.39± 
0.003 
n 
597 
1044 
1763 
3164 
5338 
8273 
 
      
Для галактик конкретных морфологических типов фактор полноты оценили 
двумя способами:  
 
а. По формуле, предложенной Теребижом (1980), которая, строго 
говоря, требует равномерного распределения галактик в пространстве. 
 
      
lim
1
1
1
lim
)
(
6.0
lim
,
)
(
)
(
)
(
10
ln
6.0
1
10
)
(
1
lim
m
m
m
n
m
N
m
N
m
P
m
m
≤
⎥⎦
⎤
⎢⎣
⎡
−
+
=
−
−
,         (10) 
 
где 
)
(
lim
m
P
 - фактор полноты, 
1
m  - видимая величина, до которой выборку 
можно принять полной, 
)
(
1
m
N
 - число объектов, имеющих звездные 
величины меньше 
1
m , 
)
(
1
m
n
- пространственная плотность числа галактик 
при 
1
m (или число галактик в интервалe 
5.0
1 ±
m
), 
)
(
lim
m
N
 - число объектов, 

 
 
 
Рис. 8. Распределения видимых звездных величин галактик разных 
морфологических типов. 
 
видимые величины которых меньше предельной звездной величины выборки 
lim
m
. 
 
б. Предположим, что фактор полноты для галактик отдельных 
морфологических типов один и тот же.  Тогда фактор полноты будет 
равняться отношению плотности, полученной для галактик с известными 
морфологическими типами, без учета этого фактора, к плотности всех 
галактик безотносительно к морфологическим типам. Она равняется 0.69. 
Ясно, что такой подход также приближенный. 
 
Таблица 2. Факторы полноты и средние пространственные плотности числа 
для галактик разных морфологических типов 
 
 
T 
All 
E,L,S,I
E,L 
S,I 
S0/a-
Sd 
E 
а способ 
)
(
lim
m
P
  
1 
0.69 
0.60 
0.73 
0.73 
0.56 
б способ 
)
(
lim
m
P
 
1 
0.69 
0.69 
0.69 
0.69 
0.69 
а способ 
)
(
3
−
Mpc
ρ
 0.127 
0.126 
0.022
0.101
0.035
0.012 
б способ 
)
(
3
−
Mpc
ρ
 0.127 
0.127 
0.019
0.108
0.037
0.010 
 
n 
16291
8273 
2247 
6026 
5488 
746 
 

 
Таблица 2 (продолжение) 
 
T 
L 
S0/a-
Sab 
Sb/Sbc 
Sc 
Scd/Sd 
Sdm/Irr 
а 
способ 
)
(
lim
m
P
  
0.62 
0.72 
0.75 
0.73 
0.70 
0.74 
б 
способ 
)
(
lim
m
P
 
0.69 
0.69 
0.69 
0.69 
0.69 
0.69 
а 
способ 
)
(
3
−
Mpc
ρ
 0.010 0.007 0.008 
0.011 0.011 
0.065 
б 
способ 
)
(
3
−
Mpc
ρ
 0.009 0.007 0.008 
0.011 0.011 
0.071 
 
n 
1501 
1704 
2027 
1282 
475 
538 
 
     Факторы полноты 
)
(
lim
m
P
 и средние пространственные плотности числа 
               
∑Φ
=
−
i
i
obs M
m
P
)
(
)
(
lim
1
ρ
,                                                (11) 
для галактик разных морфологических типов и для обоих способов 
вычисления, приведены в табл. 2. Видно, что разница пространственных 
плотностей числа галактик разных морфологических типов, вычисленных 
разными способами, не отличается больше чем на 20%. 
     Исходя из поведения ФС эллиптических и линзовидных галактик, средние 
абсолютные величины галактик приведем для двух интервалов абсолютных 
величин,
8.
17
23
−
≤
≤
−
M
 и 
0.
14
23
−
≤
≤
−
M
.  
     Результаты приведены в табл.3, откуда видно, что при переходе от 
эллиптических галактик к линзовидным галактикам, к ранним спиральным 
галактикам, и далее, к поздним спиральным галактикам наблюдается 
уменьшение средней светимости ярких галактик (
8.
17
23
−
≤
≤
−
M
). 
Таблица 3 Средние абсолютные величины галактик разных морфологических 
типов 
 
8.
17
23
−
≤
≤
−
M
 
0.
14
23
−
≤
≤
−
M
 
Тип 
M  
)
(M
σ
 
n  
M  
)
(M
σ
 
n  
Все 
-18.74 
0.006 
14646 
-15.93 
0.013 
16269 
E,L,S,I 
-18.68 
0.008 
7154 
-15.75 
0.017 
8257 
E,L 
-18.81 
0.016 
2027 
-15.83 
0.034 
2245 
S,I 
-18.66 
0.009 
5127 
-15.73 
0.020 
6012 
S0/a-Sd 
-18.67 
0.010 
4917 
-16.44 
0.022 
5485 
E 
-18.92 
0.030 
650 
-15.36 
0.051 
745 
L 
-18.78 
0.019 
1377 
-16.35 
0.042 
1500 
S0/a-Sab 
-18.78 
0.017 
1586 
-16.82 
0.042 
1704 
Sb/Sbc 
-18.76 
0.016 
1897 
-17.27 
0.033 
2026 
Sc 
-18.55 
0.019 
1090 
-16.14 
0.044 
1282 
Scd/Sd 
-18.42 
0.031 
344 
-15.85 
0.066 
473 
Sdm/Irr 
-18.29 
0.037 
210 
-15.03 
0.043 
527 

 
       
 
 
      6. Влияние окружения на функцию светимости галактик 
 
     Для изучения ФС галактик в разных окружениях используем список групп 
галактик Магтесяна и Мовсесяна (2010). Для построения ФС галактик 
используем выше предложенный метод. 
 
     В §4 мы рассмотрели 
зависимость ФС галактик поля от их 
морфологического типа. Для оценки абсолютной величины галактик поля 
нами использованы собственные лучевые скорости галактик. Поскольку 
часть галактик поля входят в системы, то возникает вопрос, насколько 
изменится результат, если для оценки абсолютной величины галактик систем 
использовать средние лучевые скорости системы.  
 
     На рис. 9а приведена нормализованная ЛФС галактик поля, а на рис. 9б – 
галактик систем с числом членов от 1 до 337 для разных морфологических 
типов, в диапазоне лучевых скоростей 
с
км
V
с
км
/
15000
/
1000
≤
≤
. Эти 
выборки состоят из одних и тех же галактик. Разница заключается только в 
определении абсолютной величины галактик.  
 
     Из рис. 9а и 9б видно, что ФС галактик разных морфологических типов, 
всех галактик с известными морфологическими типами, всех галактик без 
отношения 
к 
известности 
морфологических 
типов 
существенно 
не 
отличаются, 
когда 
абсолютная 
светимость 
галактик 
оценивается 
индивидуальными лучевыми скоростями галактик или средними лучевыми 
скоростями галактик системы. Возможно, что для эллиптических и 
линзовидных галактик имеется некоторая несогласованность в слабом конце 
при M>-15.5. 
 
      На рис. 10 приведена нормализованная ЛФС галактик разных 
морфологических типов в разных окружениях (в системах разных 
кратностей). В группах абсолютные величины галактик рассчитаны по 
средним лучевым скоростям группы. 
 
Из рис. 10а и 10б видно, что ФС для всех галактик, безотносительно к 
известности морфологических типов, и для галактик с известными 
морфологическими типами, не отличаются друг от друга во всех системах. 
Что касается зависимости ФС галактик от кратности групп, то она 
существенно отличается только в самых богатых группах (в скоплениях), 
имеющих, по крайней мере, 60 видимых членов. В этих группах ФС 
невозможно представить функцией Шехтера. Разные участки ЛФС можно 
представить линейными функциями.  
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Рис. 9а. ЛФС галактик поля (каждая галактика считается индивидуальным 
объектом) в диапазоне лучевых скоростей 
с
км
V
с
км
/
15000
/
1000
≤
≤
. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
Рис. 9б. ЛФС галактик систем (одиночные галактики считаются системы с 
числом членов равной 1). 
 
 
 
 
 
Рис. 10а. ЛФС всех галактик, безотносительно к морфологическим типам, для 
систем разных кратностей. 

 
 
 
 
Рис. 10б. ЛФС галактик с известными морфологическими типами для систем 
разных кратностей. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                 Рис. 10в. ЛФС E и L галактик для систем разных кратностей. 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      Рис. 10г: ЛФС спиральных и иррегулярных галактик для систем разных  
                      кратностей. 
 
      
 
 
Наблюдается также крутой наклон в слабой части светимостей, т.е. 
скопления галактик отличаются большим относительным числом слабых 
галактик.  
 
     Сказанное 
относится 
также 
отдельно 
к 
галактикам 
разных 
морфологических типов (рис. 10в-10и). Возможно, что в группах имеющих 
два видимых члена есть нехватка слабых галактик по сравнению с 
остальными группами.  
 
     Таким образом, ФС всех галактик и галактик разных морфологических 
типов в одиночных галактиках и в малых группах (k<35) существенно не 
отличаются друг от друга. Что касается ФС скоплений галактик, то они 
сильно отличаются от аналогичной функции других систем. В скоплениях 
наблюдается большое относительное число слабых галактик. 
  
     На рис. 11 и 12 приведены функции светимости отдельно для скоплений в 
Деве и в Волосах Вероники. Как видно ЛФС этих скоплений можно 
представить линейной функцией для всех морфологических типов. 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Рис. 10д: ЛФС спиральных галактик для систем разных кратностей. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
          Рис. 10е: ЛФС эллиптических галактик для систем разных кратностей. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
         Рис. 10ж: ЛФС линзовидных галактик для систем разных кратностей. 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
             Рис. 10з: ЛФС S0/a-Sb галактик для систем разных кратностей. 
 

 
 
 
            
              Рис. 10и: ЛФС Sbc-Irr галактик для систем разных кратностей. 
 
 
 
    Рис. 11. ЛФС галактик разных морфологических типов скопления в Деве. 

 
 
Рис. 12. ЛФС галактик разных морфологических типов скопления в Волосах 
Вероники. 
 
       В табл. 4 приведены средние абсолютные величины галактик в системах 
разных 
кратностей 
в 
двух 
интервалах 
абсолютных 
величин 
(
18
23
−
≤
≤
−
M
,
16
23
−
≤
≤
−
M
). В таблице, где не приводится эти 
величины для случая 
16
23
−
≤
≤
−
M
, означает, что нет данных до величины 
16
−
=
M
. Из таблицы видно, что средние абсолютные величины галактик в 
малых системах значительно не отличаются. В скоплениях же средняя 
абсолютная светимость галактик несколько ниже в двух изученных 
диапазонах абсолютных величин. Это означает, что в скоплениях галактик не 
работают механизмы, которые могут со временем увеличить светимость 
ярких галактик. Скорее происходит обратный процесс или распределение 
масс галактик в скоплениях (а также в малых системах) определяется 
начальными условиями при формировании систем. 
        Из табл. 4 также видно, что при переходе от эллиптических галактик к 
линзовидным галактикам, а далее к ранним и к поздним спиральным 
галактикам средняя абсолютная светимость галактик уменьшается, как в 
одиночных галактиках, так и в группах.  
 
 
        7. Средняя плотность числа галактик в системах  
            разных кратностей 
 
        На рис. 12, соответственно, приведены распределения видимой звездной 
величины для галактик поля, для галактик групп и для одиночных галактик. 
Из этих рисунков видно, что во всех этих системах неполнота галактик по 
видимой звездной величине, с известными морфологическими типами, 
начинается около m=14m. Считаем, что в изученных системах выборки всех 
галактик, безотносительно к известности морфологических типов, полны. 
Полноту выборок галактик разных морфологических типов оценим по 
второму методу, предложенному выше (раздел 5). То есть, фактор полноты 
будет равняться отношению плотности, полученной для всех галактик данной 
системы с известными морфологическими типами, без учета этого фактора, к 
плотности всех галактик безотносительно к морфологическим типам. 
Считаем также, что полнота выборок не зависит от морфологического типа и 
от абсолютной величины галактик (см. раздел 5).  

)
(
)
,
(
)
(
)
(
)
,
(
,
,
,
,
,
,
,
,
,
lim
k
k
M
k
k
k
m
P
i
I
S
L
E
i
obs
I
S
L
E
obs
I
S
L
E
ρ
ρ
ρ
∑Φ
=
=
                     (12)   
Таблица 4. Средние абсолютные величины галактик в двух диапазонах 
абсолютных величин в группах разных кратностей. 
 
k 
1 
2 
3,4 
5-10 
11-34 
63-337  2-337 
 
M≤   
-18 
-18.78 
0.008 
7925 
-
18.88 
0.015 
2294 
-
18.83 
0.019 
1562 
-
18.72 
0.019 
1280 
-
18.78 
0.026 
568 
-18.62 
0.027 
450 
-
18.79 
0.009 
6154 
среднее 
ст. откл. 
n 
 
 
 
All 
M≤   
-16 
-18.46 
0.013 
8679 
-
17.86 
0.026 
2400 
-
17.97 
0.028 
1638 
-
17.56 
0.031 
1396 
-
17.38 
0.047 
626 
-16.48 
0.031 
673 
-
17.26 
0.015 
6733 
среднее 
ст. откл. 
n 
M≤   
-18 
 
 
-18.71 
0.011 
3484 
-
18.81 
0.021 
1153 
-
18.82 
0.026 
825 
-
18.77 
0.026 
789 
-
18.81 
0.036 
354 
-18.64 
0.032 
369 
-
18.78 
0.012 
3490 
среднее 
ст. откл. 
n 
E,L, 
S,I 
M≤   
-16 
 
 
-17.29 
0.018 
3962 
-
17.86 
0.035 
1212 
-
17.88 
868 
0.040 
-
17.47 
0.040 
871 
-
17.25 
0.059 
397 
-16.51 
0.035 
545 
-
17.14 
0.019 
3893 
среднее 
ст. откл. 
n 
M≤   
-18 
 
 
-18.88 
0.025 
768 
-
18.97 
0.041 
321 
-
18.92 
0.050 
260 
-
18.90 
0.048 
288 
-
18.90 
0.058 
153 
-18.73 
0.049 
183 
-
18.89 
0.022 
1205 
среднее 
ст. откл. 
n 
E,L 
M≤   
-16 
 
 
-17.66 
0.043 
819 
- 
- 
-
17.83 
0.066 
311 
-
17.73 
0.097 
164 
-16.47 
0.050 
264 
-
17.06 
0.034 
1334 
среднее 
ст. откл. 
n 
M≤   
-18 
 
 
-18.67 
0.012 
2716 
-
18.77 
0.024 
832 
-
18.78 
0.031 
565 
-
18.72 
0.031 
501 
-
18.75 
0.045 
201 
-18.57 
0.041 
186 
-
18.74 
0.014 
2285 
среднее 
ст. откл. 
n 
S,I 
M≤   
-16 
 
 
-17.24 
0.019 
3143 
-
17.73 
0.041 
882 
-
17.77 
0.047 
603 
-
17.35 
0.049 
560 
-
17.08 
0.072 
233 
-16.54 
0.049 
281 
-
17.19 
0.023 
2559 
среднее 
ст. откл. 
n 
M≤   
-18 
 
 
-
18.70 
0.013 
2606 
-
18.77 
0.024 
806 
-
18.81
0.032 
536 
-
18.73
0.032 
490 
-
18.7
7 
0.04
5 
192 
-
18.58 
0.044 
175 
-
18.75 
0.015 
2199 
среднее 
ст. откл. 
n 
S 
M≤   
-16 
 
 
-17.46 
0.021 
2913 
-
17.93 
0.040 
843 
-
17.85 
0.049 
568 
-
17.63 
0.050 
532 
-
17.19 
0.076 
218 
-16.72 
0.062 
233 
-
17.43 
0.025 
2394 
среднее 
ст. откл. 
n 

 
 
 
 
Таблица 4 (продолжение) 
 
k 
1 
2 
3,4 
5-10 
11-34 
63-
337 
2-337 
 
M≤   
-18 
 
 
-18.98 
0.049 
218 
-19.17 
0.073 
95 
-18.88 
0.089 
100 
-19.20 
0.090 
101 
-18.93 
0.105 
62 
-18.75 
0.102 
54 
-18.99 
0.042 
412 
среднее 
ст. 
откл. 
n 
E 
 
M≤   
-16 
 
 
-16.70 
0.102 
234 
- 
- 
- 
- 
-16.23 
0.054 
105 
-16.62 
0.050 
475 
среднее 
ст. 
откл. 
n 
M≤   
-18 
-18.85 
0.030 
550 
-18.91 
0.048 
226 
-18.94 
0.059 
160 
-18.80 
0.055 
187 
-18.89 
0.068 
91 
-18.72 
0.055 
129 
-18.85 
0.025 
793 
среднее 
ст. 
откл. 
n 
L 
M≤   
-16 
-17.65 
0.050 
588 
- 
- 
-17.75 
0.078 
205 
-17.64 
0.128 
98 
-16.96 
0.081 
159 
-17.54 
0.042 
859 
среднее 
ст. 
откл. 
n 
M≤   
-18 
 
 
-18.81 
0.018 
1473 
-18.88 
0.031 
501 
-18.88 
0.040 
337 
-18.84 
0.043 
288 
-18.74 
0.056 
119 
-18.57 
0.054 
121 
-18.82 
0.019 
1366 
среднее 
ст. 
откл. 
n 
S0/a-
Sb 
M≤   
-16 
 
 
-17.72 
0.031 
1568 
-18.25 
0.051 
513 
-18.10 
0.062 
350 
-17.69 
0.068 
309 
-17.69 
0.096 
129 
-17.13 
0.089 
144 
-17.77 
0.031 
1445 
среднее 
ст. 
откл. 
n 
M≤   
-18 
 
 
-18.56 
0.017 
1243 
-18.64 
0.035 
331 
-18.67 
0.046 
228 
-18.60 
0.045 
213 
-18.76 
0.074 
82 
-18.58 
0.063 
65 
-18.64 
0.022 
919 
среднее 
ст. 
откл. 
n 
Sbc-
Irr 
M≤   
-16 
 
 
-17.06 
0.024 
1575 
-17.42 
0.059 
369 
-17.53 
0.069 
253 
-17.14 
0.068 
251 
-16.78 
0.096 
104 
-16.37 
0.055 
137 
-16.91 
0.031 
1114 
среднее 
ст. 
откл. 
n 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
Рис. 12: Распределение видимых звездных величин галактик поля, групп и 
одиночных 
галактик 
в 
диапазоне 
лучевых 
скоростей 
с
км
V
с
км
/
15000
/
1000
≤
≤
. 
      
Данные приведены в табл. 5. 
 
         Таблица 5. 
         Плотность числа всех галактик и наблюдаемая плотность галактик    
         (Мпс-3) с известными морфологическими типами и фактор полноты в  
          системах разных кратностей в диапазоне абсолютных звездных величин  
          
5.
14
−
≤
М
. 
 
k  
1 
2 
3,4 
5-10 
11-34 
All 
)
(k
ρ
 
n  
0.0369 
8790 
0.00486 
2412 
0.00316 
1644 
0.00509 
1416 
0.00352 
642 
E,L,S,I 
)
(k
obs
ρ
 
n  
0.0220 
4023 
0.00250 
1218 
0.00187 
872 
0.00314 
885 
0.00214 
405 
 
)
(
lim
m
P
 0.596 
0.514 
0.592 
0.617 
0.608 
 
                   Таблица 5 (продолжение) 
 
k  
63-337 
2-337 
1-337 
field 
All 
)
(k
ρ
 
n  
0.00665 
673 
0.0233 
6787 
0.0602 
15577 
0.0702 
15577 
E,L,S,I 
)
(k
obs
ρ
 
n  
0.00508 
545 
0.0147 
3925 
0.0367 
7948 
0.0460 
7948 
 
)
(
lim
m
P
0.764 
0.631 
0.610 
0.655 
 
 
В табл. 6 приведена средняя плотность галактик разных морфологических 
типов в группах разной кратности в пределах 
5.
14
−
≤
M
, рассчитанной в 
объеме с пределами лучевых скоростей 
с
км
V
с
км
/
15000
/
1000
≤
≤
. 
      Оценим плотность галактик разных морфологических типов внутри 
групп. Объем произвольной группы оценим следующим образом: 

                                               
i
i
R
Vol
max
3
4π
=
                                                     (13) 
 
где 
i
Rmax  - радиус группы (наибольшее расстояние членов группы от ее 
центра). Тогда суммарная плотность групп с данной кратностью будет: 
 
                                           
∑
=
i
i k
Vol
k
Vol
)
(
)
(
                                                 (14) 
 
А плотность галактик внутри группы можно оценить следующим образом: 
 
                                      
)
(
)
(
)
(
min
max
k
Vol
V
V
k
k
гр
−
= ρ
ρ
 .                                           (15) 
 
 
 
   Таблица 6. Средняя плотность галактик (
)
(k
ρ
, Мпк-3) разных   
    морфологических типов в группах разной кратности в диапазоне  
    абсолютных звездных величин 
5.
14
−
≤
М
.  
 
 
k  
1 
2 
3,4 
5-10 
11-34 
All 
)
(k
ρ
 
n  
3.69 10-2 
8790 
4.86 10-3 
2412 
3.16 10-3 
1644 
5.09 10-3 
1416 
3.52 10-3 
642 
E,L,S,I 
)
(k
ρ
 
n  
3.69 10-2 
4023 
4.86 10-3 
1218 
3.16 10-3 
872 
5.09 10-3 
885 
3.52 10-3 
405 
E,L 
)
(k
ρ
 
n  
6.27 10-3 
831 
9.23 10-4 
331 
8.99 10-4 
266 
9.21 10-4 
312 
4.93 10-4 
164 
S,I 
)
(k
ρ
 
n  
3.05 10-2 
3192 
3.93 10-3 
887 
2.26 10-3 
606 
4.17 10-3 
573 
3.03 10-3 
241 
S 
)
(k
ρ
 
n  
1.56 10-2 
2931 
2.80 10-3 
844 
1.64 10-3 
568 
2.32 10-3 
536 
1.45 10-3 
220 
E 
 
)
(k
ρ
 
n  
2.68 10-3 
235 
1.61 10-4 
97 
1.37 10-4 
101 
1.88 10-4 
106 
1.72 10-4 
66 
L 
)
(k
ρ
 
n  
3.61 10-3 
596 
7.62 10-4 
234 
7.62 10-4 
165 
7.33 10-4 
206 
3.21 10-4 
98 
S0/a-
Sb 
)
(k
ρ
 
n  
5.28 10-3 
1571 
1.21 10-3 
513 
7.91 10-4 
350 
1.29 10-3 
312 
5.71 10-4 
130 
Sbc-Irr 
)
(k
ρ
 
n  
2.53 10-2 
1621 
2.72 10-3 
374 
1.47 10-3 
256 
2.87 10-3 
261 
2.45 10-3 
111 
 
                                                                                       

 
 
       Таблица 6 (продолжение) 
 
k  
63-337 
2-337 
1-337  
field 
All 
)
(k
ρ
 
n  
6.65 10-3 
673 
2.33 10-2 
6787 
6.02 10-2 
15577 
7.02 10-2 
15577 
E,L,S,I 
)
(k
ρ
 
n  
6.65 10-3 
545 
2.33 10-2 
3925 
6.02 10-2 
7948 
7.02 10-2 
7948 
E,L 
)
(k
ρ
 
n  
3.18 10-3 
264 
6.82 10-3 
1337 
1.31 10-2 
2168 
2.32 10-2 
2168 
S,I 
)
(k
ρ
 
n  
3.47 10-3 
281 
1.65 10-2 
2588 
4.70 10-2 
5780 
4.70 10-2 
5780 
S 
)
(k
ρ
 
n  
2.07 10-3 
233 
9.99 10-3 
2401 
2.56 10-2 
5332 
2.43 10-2 
5332 
E 
 
)
(k
ρ
 
n  
2.16 10-3 
105 
3.23 10-3 
475 
5.91 10-3 
710 
7.20 10-3 
710 
L 
)
(k
ρ
 
n  
1.02 10-3 
159 
3.60 10-3 
862 
7.21 10-3 
1458 
1.60 10-2 
1458 
S0/a-
Sb 
)
(k
ρ
 
n  
7.68 10-4 
144 
4.47 10-3 
1449 
9.75 10-3 
3020 
9.23 10-3 
3020 
Sbc-Irr 
)
(k
ρ
 
n  
2.70 10-3 
137 
1.20 10-2 
1139 
3.73 10-2 
2760 
3.77 10-2 
2760 
 
     Данные для групп с разным числом членов приведены в табл. 7. Как видно 
плотность числа галактик внутри групп с разным числом членов несколько 
тысяч раз больше, чем средняя плотность галактик в объеме 
)
(
min
max
V
V
−
.  
Плотность числа галактик внутри групп с числом членов больше 3 составляет 
44 Мпк-3.  
      Коэффициенты 
)
(
/)
(
min
max
k
Vol
V
V
−
 можно использовать также для 
оценки плотности внутри групп для галактик разных морфологических 
типов.  
 
   Таблица 7 
k  
)
(k
Vol
 
Мпк3 
)
(
min
max
k
Vol
V
V
−
 
)
(k
ρ
 
Мпк-3 
)
(k
гр
ρ
 
Мпк-3 
3,4 
600.48 
8053.7 
0.0032 
25.77 
5-10 
735.14 
6578.4 
0.0051 
33.55 
11-34 
728.40 
6639.3 
0.0035 
23.24 
63-337 
509.87 
9484.9 
0.0067 
63.55 
3-337 
2573.89 
1879.9 
0.0233 
43.78 
 
 

      
 
         8. Зависимость ФС галактик от плотности и дисперсии     
             скоростей галактик в группах 
      
         Исследование зависимости ФС галактик от плотности и от дисперсии 
лучевых скоростей галактик в группе выполнено для групп с числом членов 
от 5 до 34. В качестве меры для плотности будем использовать среднее 
парное расстояние между галактиками группы:  
                               
)1
(
2
1
1
−
= ∑∑
<
−
=
k
k
r
R
k
i
j
k
i
ij
p
 ,                                                        (16) 
 где 
)
2
/
sin(
)
/
(
2
ij
ij
d
H
V
r
>
<
=
, a 
ij
d - угловое расстояние между  i - ым и j  - ым   
членами группы, k –число членов в группе.  
По этому параметру группы разделим на две части: 
Мпк
Rp
5.0
≤
 и 
Мпк
Rp
5.0
>
. По дисперсии лучевых скоростей  
                    
2
/
1
1
2
V
)
(
1
1
⎥⎦
⎤
⎢⎣
⎡
>
<
−
−
=
∑
=
k
i
i
V
V
k
σ
                                          (17) 
(где   
iV  - лучевая скорость i  - ого члена данной группы, k –число членов в группе, 
>
<V
- средняя лучевая скорость группы) также группы разделим на две части: 
с
км
V
/
200
≤
σ
 и 
с
км
V
/
200
>
σ
. 
 
 
Рис. 13: ЛФС галактик групп с числом членов от 5 до 34 для двух диапазонов 
средних парных расстояний между галактиками.  
 
      На рис. 13 приведена ЛФС галактик для групп с средними парными 
расстояниями между галактиками 
Мпк
Rp
5.0
≤
 и 
Мпк
Rp
5.0
>
. Из рисунка 
видно, что в плотных группах  (
Мпк
Rp
5.0
≤
) наблюдается относительно 

 много слабых и мало ярких галактик, чем в разреженных группах 
(
Мпк
Rp
5.0
>
). Средняя абсолютная величина галактик в диапазоне 
абсолютных 
величин 
18
−
≤
M
, 
соответственно, 
равна 
024
.0
58
.
18
±
−
>=
< M
 
для 
групп 
с 
Мпк
Rp
5.0
≤
 
и 
020
.0
87
.
18
±
−
>=
< M
 для групп с 
Мпк
Rp
5.0
>
.  
На рис. 14 приведена ЛФС галактик для групп с дисперсией лучевых 
скоростей 
с
км
V
/
200
≤
σ
 и 
с
км
V
/
200
>
σ
. Из рис. 14 видно, что в группах 
с меньшими дисперсиями лучевых скоростей, как и в плотных группах, 
наблюдается большой наклон в слабом конце ЛФС, т. е. имеется 
относительно много слабых галактик. Средняя абсолютная величина 
галактик в диапазоне абсолютных величин 
18
−
≤
M
, соответственно, равна 
022
.0
64
.
18
±
−
>=
< M
 
для 
групп 
с 
с
км
V
/
200
≤
σ
 
и 
022
.0
86
.
18
±
−
>=
< M
 для групп с 
с
км
V
/
200
>
σ
.  
 
Рис. 14: ЛФС галактик групп с числом членов от 5 до 34 для двух диапазонов 
дисперсии лучевых скоростей галактик: 
с
км
V
/
200
≤
σ
 и 
с
км
V
/
200
>
σ
.  
 
      На рис. 15 группы галактик разделены как по средним парным 
расстоянием, так и по лучевым скоростям галактик. Из рис. 15 видно, что 
плотные группы с малыми дисперсиями лучевых скоростей (
Мпк
Rp
5.0
≤
 и 
с
км
V
/
200
≤
σ
) своими ФС довольно сильно отличаются от групп имеющие 
малую плотность и большую дисперсию скоростей (
Мпк
Rp
5.0
>
 и 
с
км
V
/
200
>
σ
). В группах с 
с
км
V
/
200
>
σ
 и 
Мпк
Rp
5.0
>
 наблюдается 
сильный дефицит слабых галактик, а также много ярких галактик по 
сравнению с группами с 
Мпк
Rp
5.0
≤
 и 
с
км
V
/
200
≤
σ
. ФС  галактик групп 
с 
с
км
V
/
200
>
σ
 и 
Мпк
Rp
5.0
>
 невозможно представить функцией 
Шехтера.  
 

      Таким образом, группы с малыми дисперсиями лучевых скоростей и с 
малыми средними парными расстояниями между членами содержат в себе 
относительно много слабых галактик и относительно мало ярких галактик, по 
сравнению с группами имеющие большие дисперсии лучевых скоростей и 
большие средние парные расстояния между членами. 
Рис. 15: ЛФС галактик в зависимости от среднего парного расстояния между 
галактиками и дисперсии лучевых скоростей галактик в группах с числом 
членов k=5-34. 
 
     Обсудим 
этот 
вопрос 
для 
галактик 
обоих 
морфологических 
подразделений: галактики E+L и галактики S+I. Результаты приведены на 
рис. 16 и 17. Эти рисунки показывают, что вышесказанное повторяется как 
для эллиптических и линзовидных галактик, так и для спиральных и 
иррегулярных галактик.   
     Обсудим аналогичный вопрос для групп имеющие два видимые члена. Эти 
группы разделим по разности лучевых скоростей и по расстоянию галактик 
на небесной сфере. Результат представлен на рис. 18. Как видно из рисунка 
получен аналогичный результат, как и для групп с числом членов от 5 до 34. 
Результат повторяется также для галактик разных морфологических 
подразделений (рис. 19).  
 

Рис. 16. То же, что и на рис. 15 для E+L галактик. 
 
Рис. 17. То же, что и на рис. 15 для S+I галактик. 
 

Рис. 18: ЛФС галактик в зависимости от расстояния между галактиками и 
разницы лучевых скоростей галактик в группах с числом членов k=2. 
 
 
 
Рис. 19: ЛФС E+L и S+I галактик в зависимости от расстояния между 
галактиками и разницы лучевых скоростей галактик в группах с числом 
членов k=2. 

 
       9. Заключение 
 
       В данной работе предложен новый метод для определения функции 
светимости (ФС) галактик. По сути, обобщен метод Шмидта (Schmidt 1968) с 
учетом зависимости плотности галактик от расстояния в близкой Вселенной. 
Изучена ФС галактик поля и ее связь с морфологическими типами галактик. 
Получены следующие результаты: 
1. ФС галактик поля можно представить функцией Шехтера 
(Schechter 1976) с параметрами 
30
.
19
*
−
=
M
 и 
90
.0
−
=
α
 только в 
ограниченном участке светимостей: 
6.
17
0.
21
−
≤
≤
−
M
. Левее от этой 
области ЛФС можно представить квадратным многочленом, а правее, при 
слабых светимостях - линейной функцией. ЛФС галактик поля с известными 
морфологическими типами почти не отличается от ЛФС всех галактик. 
2. Для эллиптических и линзовидных  галактик поля, как и для всех 
галактик, функцией Шехтера можно представить только часть ФС. Причем, 
по параметру α  они не отличаются, а по параметру 
*
M  отличаются мало. 
3. ФС спиральных и иррегулярных галактик поля хорошо 
представляется функцией Шехтера с параметрами 
4.
19
*
−
=
M
 и 
25
.1
−
=
α
 
почти во всей изученной области светимостей: 
5.
21
−
≥
M
. 
4.Поведение ФС галактик типов E и L подобно поведению ФС всех 
галактик, т.е. не во всем диапазоне абсолютных звездных величин ФС можно 
представить функцией Шехтера. Данная функция для эллиптических 
галактик применима только в диапазоне 
8.
17
2.
21
−
≤
≤
−
M
, а для 
линзовидных галактик – в диапазоне  
5.
16
2.
21
−
≤
≤
−
M
.  
5. ФС спиральных галактик можно представить функцией Шехтера в 
довольно широком диапазоне абсолютных звездных величин. При переходе 
от ранних спиралей к поздним спиралям происходит уменьшение параметра 
α  в функции Шехтера, т. е. увеличивается относительное число слабых 
галактик. Параметром 
*
M  они слабо отличаются. 
6. Оценена полнота и средняя плотность выборок галактик поля 
разных морфологических типов. Средняя плотность числа всех галактик в 
диапазоне 
13
23
−
≤
≤
−
M
 равна 0.126 Мпс-3. 
7. Оценены средние абсолютные звездные величины галактик поля 
разных морфологических типов в двух интервалах абсолютной звездной 
величины: 
8.
17
23
−
≤
≤
−
M
 и 
0.
14
23
−
≤
≤
−
M
. При переходе от 
эллиптических галактик к линзовидным, к ранним и к поздним спиралям в 
яркой части абсолютных звездных величин (
8.
17
23
−
≤
≤
−
M
) наблюдается 
уменьшение средних светимостей. 
8. ФС всех галактик и галактик разных морфологических типов в 
одиночных галактиках и в малых группах (k<35) существенно не отличаются 
друг от друга. Что касается ФС скоплений галактик, то они сильно 
отличаются от аналогичной функции других систем. В скоплениях 
наблюдается большое относительное число слабых галактик. 

9. ЛФС скоплений в Деве и в Волосах Вероники можно представить 
линейной функцией для всех морфологических типов. 
10. Средние абсолютные величины галактик в малых системах 
особенно не отличаются. В скоплениях же средние абсолютные светимости 
галактик несколько ниже в двух изученных диапазонах абсолютной 
величины (M≤-18 и  M≤-16). 
 
11. При переходе от эллиптических галактик к линзовидным 
галактикам, к ранним и к поздним спиральным галактикам абсолютная 
светимость галактик уменьшается, как в одиночных галактиках, так и в 
группах (см. пункт 7). 
12. Группы с малыми дисперсиями лучевых скоростей и с малыми 
средними парными расстояниями между членами содержат в себе 
относительно много слабых галактик и относительно мало ярких галактик, по 
сравнению с группами имеющие большие дисперсии лучевых скоростей и 
большие средние парные расстояния между членами. Сказанное относится 
как к эллиптическим и линзовидным галактикам, так и к спиральным и 
иррегулярным галактикам.  
      Поведение ФС галактик в скоплениях наводит на мысль, что возможно в 
этих системах в эволюции галактик важную роль может играть механизм 
выметания газа из галактик лобовым давлением межгалактического газа 
скопления, а в бедных скоплениях или в группах - приливные 
взаимодействия между галактиками. Но есть одна причина, которая ставит 
под сомнения этих механизмов. Это то, что ФС как эллиптических, так и 
спиральных галактик имеют подобные зависимости от окружения. 
      Более 
вероятно, 
что 
распределение 
масс 
галактик 
в 
системах 
определяется начальными условиями при их формировании. 
 
 
ЛИТЕРАТУРА 
 
Andreon, S. 1998, A&A, 336, 98 
Andreon, S., Davoust, E., & Heim, T. 1997, A&A, 323, 337 
Arakelian M. A., Kalloglian A. T., 1969, Astron. Let., 46, 1215 
Barrientos, L. F., Schade, D., & Lopez-Cruz, O. 1996, ApJ, 460, L89 
Binggeli, B., Sandage, A., & Tammann, G. A. 1988, ARA&A, 26, 509 
Bromley, B. C., Press, W. H., Lin, H., & Kirshner, R. P. 1998, ApJ, 505, 25 
Choloniewski J, 1987, MNRAS, 226, 273 
Colless, M. M. 1989, MNRAS, 237, 799 
Cuesta-Bolao M. J. & Serna A. 2003, A&A, 405, 917 
de Propis, R., Colless, M., Driver, S., et al. 2002, preprint [astro-ph/0212562] 
Dressler, A. 1978, ApJ, 223, 765 
Dressler, A. 1980, ApJ, 236, 351 
Driver, S. P., Phillipps, S., Davies, J. I., Morgan, I., & Disney, M. J. 1995, 
MNRAS, 268, 393 
Efstathiou, G., Ellis, R. S., & Peterson, B. A., 1988, MNRAS, 232, 431 
Huchra J., Sargent W. L. W., 1973, ApJ, 186, 433 

Felten, J. E. 1977, AJ, 82, 861 
Ferguson, H. C., & Sandage, A. 1991, AJ, 101, 765 
Gaidos, E. 1997, AJ, 113, 117 
Garilli, B., Bottini, D., Maccagni, D., Vettolani, G., & Maccacaro, T. 1992, AJ, 
104, 1290 
Garilli, B. M., Maccagni, D., & Andreon, S. 1999, A&A, 342, 408 
Garilli, B., Maccagni, D., & Vettolani, G. 1991, AJ, 101, 795 
Goto, T., Okamura, S., McKay, T., et al. 2002, PASJ, 54, 515 
Gudehus, D. H., & Hegyi, D. J. 1991, AJ, 101, 18 
Gunn J.E., Gott J.R., Astrophys. J., 1972, 176, 1-19. 
Jerjen, H., & Tamman, G. 1997, A&A, 321, 713 
Lin, H., Kirshner, R. P., Shectman, S. A., Landy, S. D., Oemler, A., Tucker, D. L., 
& Schechter, P. L. 1996, ApJ, 464, 60 
Lopez-Cruz, O., & Yee, H. K. C. 1995, ASP Conf. Ser. 86, Fresh Views of 
Elliptical Galaxies, ed. A. Buzzoni, A. Renzini, & A. Serrano (San    Francisco: 
ASP), 279 
Lopez-Cruz, O., Yee, H. K. C., Brown, J. P., Jones, C., & Forman, W. 1997, ApJ, 
475, 97 
Loveday, J., Peterson, B. A., Efstathiou, G., & Maddox, S. J. 1992, ApJ, 390, 338 
Lugger, P. M. 1986, ApJ, 303, 535 
Lumsden, S. L., Collins, C. A., Nichol, R. C., Eke, V. R., & Guzzo, L. 1997, 
MNRAS, 290, 119 
Lynden-Bell, D., 1971, MNRAS, 155, 95 
Mahtessian, A. P. 1997, Astrofizika, 40, 45 
Mahtessian, A. P., Movsessian V. H. 2010, Astrofizika, 53, 83 
Marinoni, C., Monaco, P., Giuricin, G., & Costantini, B. 1999, ApJ, 521, 50 
Marzke, R. O., Geller, M. J., Huchra, J. P., & Corwin, H. G. 1994, AJ, 108, 437 
Muriel, H., Valotto C. A. & Lambas D. G. 1998, ApJ, 506, 540 
Negroponte J., White S.D.M., MNRAS, 1983, 205, 1009-1029 
Neyman, J., Scott, E. L. 1974, Confrontation of Cosmological Theories with 
Observational Data, IAUS No. 63, Ed. by Longair, 129 
Nicol, J. F., & Segal, I. E. 1983, A&A, 118, 180 
Oegerle, W. R., Hoessel, J. G., & Ernst, R. M. 1986, AJ, 91, 697 
Oegerle, W. R., Hoessel, J. G., & Jewison, M. S. 1987, AJ, 93, 519 
Oemler, A., Jr. 1974, ApJ, 194, 1 
Paolillo, M., Andreon, S., Longo, G., et al. 2001, A&A, 367, 59 
Ramella, M., Zamorani, G., Zucca, E., et al. 1999, A&A, 342, 1 
Rayzy, S., Adami, C., & Mazure, A. 1998, A&A, 337, 31 
Ribeiro, A. L. B., de Carvalho, R. R., & Zepf, S. E. 1994, MNRAS, 267, L13 
Sandage A., ApJ, 183, 711, 1973 
Sandage, A., Binggeli, B., & Tammann, G. A. 1985, AJ, 90, 1759 
Schechter, P. 1976, ApJ, 203, 297 
Schmidt, M. 1968, ApJ, 151, 393 
Spitzer L., Baade W., ApJ, 1951, 113, 413-418. 
Terebizh V. Yu. 1980, Astrofizika, 16, 45 
Toomre A., Toomre J., ApJ, 1972, 178, 623-666. 

Trentham, N. 1997, MNRAS, 290, 334 
Trentham, N., & Hodgkin, S. 2002, MNRAS, 333, 423 
Valotto, C. A., Nicotra, M. A., Muriel, H., & Lambas, D. G. 1997, ApJ, 479, 90 
White S.D.M., MNRAS, 1979, 189, 831-852 
Willmer, C. N. A., Focardi, P., Chan, R., Pellegrini, P. S., & da Costa, L. N. 1991, 
AJ, 101, 57 
Zabludoff, A. I., & Mulchaey, J. S. 2000, ApJ, 539, 136 
Zepf, S. E., de Carvalho, R. R., & Ribeiro, A. L. B. 1997, ApJ, 488, L11 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Second order operators on the algebra of densities
and a groupoid of connections
H. M. Khudaverdian1∗,
Th. Th. Voronov2†
1Max-Planck-Institut f¨ur Mathematik, Vivatsgasse 7, 53111 Bonn, Germany
On leave of absence of School of Mathematics, University of Manchester
Oxford Road, Manchester M13 9PL, UK
2School of Mathematics, University of Manchester
Oxford Road, Manchester M13 9PL, UK
Abstract
We consider the geometry of second order linear operators acting on the
commutative algebra of densities on a (super)manifold introduced in our pre-
vious work. In the conventional language, operators on the algebra of densities
correspond to operator pencils.
This algebra has a natural invariant scalar
product. We consider self-adjoint operators on the algebra of densities and an-
alyze the corresponding “canonical operator pencils” passing through a given
operator on densities of a particular weight. There are singular values for the
pencil parameters. This leads to an interesting geometrical picture. In particu-
lar we obtain operators that depend on equivalence classes of connections and
we study a groupoid of connections such that the orbits of this groupoid are
these equivalence classes. Based on this point of view we analyze two exam-
ples: the second order canonical operator on an odd symplectic supermanifold
appearing in the Batalin-Vilkovisky geometry and the Sturm-Liouville operator
on the line related with classical constructions of projective geometry. We also
consider a canonical second order semidensity arising on odd symplectic super-
manifolds, which has some resemblance with mean curvature in Riemannian
geometry.
1. Introduction
Second order linear operators appear in various problems in mathematical physics.
A condition that an operator respects the geometrical structure of a problem under
consideration usually ﬁxes this operator almost uniquely or at least provides a great
deal of information about it. For example the standard Laplacian
∂2
∂x2 + ∂2
∂y2 + ∂2
∂z2
∗E-mail: khudian@mpim-bonn.mpg.de; khudian@manchester.ac.uk
†E-mail:theodore.voronov@manchester.ac.uk
188

in Euclidean space E3 is deﬁned uniquely (up to a constant) by the condition that
it is invariant with respect to isometries of E3. Consider an arbitrary second order
operator
∆= 1
2
³
Sab∂a∂b + T a∂a + R
´
(1)
acting on functions on manifold M. It deﬁnes on M symmetric contravariant tensor
Sab (its principal symbol). For example for a Riemannian manifold one can take
a principal symbol Sab = gab, where gab is the metric tensor (with upper indices).
Then one can ﬁx the scalar R = 0 in (1) by the natural condition ∆1 = 0. What
about the ﬁrst order term T a∂a in the operator (1)? One can see that Riemannian
structure ﬁxes this term also. Indeed consider on M a divergence operator
divρρρX =
1
ρ(x)
∂
∂xa (ρ(x)Xa) ,
(2)
where ρρρ = ρ(x)|D(x)| is an arbitrary volume form and choose a volume form ρρρ =
ρρρg = √det g|D(x)|. On Riemannian manifold this volume form is deﬁned uniquely
(up to a constant factor) by covariance condition. Thus we come to second order
operator ∆g such that for an arbitrary function f
∆gf
=
1
2divρρρg grad f = 1
2
1
ρ(x)
∂
∂xa
µ
ρg(x)gab ∂f(x)
∂xb
¶
=
1
2
³
∂a
³
gab∂bf
´
+ ∂a log ρg(x)gab∂bf(x)
´
=
1
2
³
gab∂a∂bf + ∂agab∂bf + ∂a log
p
det ggab∂bf(x)
´
.
(3)
We see that Riemannian structure on manifold naturally deﬁnes a unique (up to a
constant factor) second order operator on functions (the Laplace-Beltrami operator
on Riemannian manifold M).
For this operator the terms with ﬁrst derivatives
contain a connection ∇on volume forms. This connection is deﬁned by the condition
that for an arbitrary volume form ρρρ = ρ(x)|D(x)|, ∇Xρρρ = ∂X
³
ρρρ
ρρρg
´
ρρρg:
∇Xρρρ
=
Xa (∂a + γa) ρ(x)|D(x)| = Xa∂a
µ ρρρ
ρρρg
¶
ρρρg
=
Xa∂a
µ ρ(x)
√det g
¶ p
det g|D(x)|
=
Xa ³
∂aρ(x) −∂a log
³p
det g
´´
|D(x)| .
(4)
(Here the symbol of connection γa = −∂a(ρg(x)) = −∂a log √det g.)
Consider another example: Let Sab(x) be an arbitrary symmetric tensor ﬁeld (not
necessarily non-degenerate) on manifold M equipped with aﬃne structure with the
connection on vector ﬁelds ∇: ∇a∂b = Γc
ab∂c. The aﬃne structure deﬁnes the second
order operator Sab∇a∇b = Sab∂a∂b + . . . . Principal symbol of this operator is the
189

tensor ﬁeld Sab(x). The aﬃne connection induces a connection ∇on volume forms
by the relation γa = −Γb
ab. In the case of a Riemannian manifold the tensor Sab can
be ﬁxed by Riemannian metric, Sab = gab, and the Levi-Civita Theorem provides
a unique symmetric aﬃne connection which preserves the Riemannian structure.
Thus we arrive again to the Beltrami-Laplace operator (3).
Often it is important to consider diﬀerential operators on densities of arbitrary
weight λ. For example a density of weight λ = 0 is an ordinary function, a volume
form is a density of weight λ = 1. Wave function in Quantum Mechanics can be
naturally considered as a half-density, i.e. a density of weight λ = 1/2.
Analysis of diﬀerential operators on densities of arbitrary weights leads to beau-
tiful geometric constructions. ( See e.g. the works [7, 8, 16] and the book [18].)
For example consider Diﬀ(M)–modules which appear when we study operators on
densities. Namely let Dλ(M) be a space of second order linear operators acting on
densities of weight λ. This space has a natural structure of Diﬀ(M)-module. In the
work [8] Duval and Ovsienko classiﬁed these modules for all values of λ. In particular
they wrote down explicit expressions for Dλ(M)-isomorphisms ϕλ,µ between modules
Dλ(M) and Dµ(M) for λ, µ ̸= 0, 1
2, 1. These isomorphisms have the following ap-
pearance: If an operator ∆λ ∈Dλ(M) is given in local coordinates by the expression
∆λ = Aij(x)∂i∂j + Ai(x)∂i + A(x) then its image ϕλ,µ(∆λ) = ∆µ ∈Dµ(M) is given
in the same local coordinates by the expression ∆µ = Bij(x)∂i∂j + Bi(x)∂i + B(x)
where





Bij
= Aij ,
Bi
= 2µ−1
2λ−1Ai + 2(λ−µ)
2λ−1 ∂jAji ,
B
= µ(µ−1)
λ(λ−1)A +
µ(λ−µ)
(2λ−1)(λ−1)
¡
∂jAj −∂i∂jAij¢
.
(5)
At the exceptional cases λ, µ = 0, 1/2, 1, non-isomorphic modules occur.
In work [15] it was suggested the new approach to consider the commutative
algebra F(M) of densities of all weights on a manifold M. This algebra possesses
a canonical invariant scalar product. One can study diﬀerential operators on the
algebra F(M). Due to the existence of the canonical scalar product it is possible to
consider the notion of self-adjoint and antiself-adjoint diﬀerential operators on this
algebra. Operators on the algebra F(M) can be identiﬁed with pencils of operators
acting between the spaces of densities of various weights. Self-adjoint operators of
second order on F(M) correspond to certain canonical pencils of operators with the
same principal symbol and associated with connection on volume forms on M. This
approach was suggested and developed in [15] for studying and classifying second
order odd operators on odd symplectic manifolds (arising in the Batalin-Vilkovisky
formalism) and on odd Poisson manifolds.
The canonical pencils of second order operators have the “universality” property:
there is a unique such a pencil passing through an arbitrary second order operator
acting on densities of arbitrary weight except for three singular cases. For example
consider the operator ∆of weight 0 acting on densities of weight λ, ∆∈Dλ(M),
∆= Sab∂a∂b +. . . , where Sab is a symmetric contravariant tensor ﬁeld. Then for an
arbitrary weight λ except for the singular cases λ = 0, 1
2, 1 there exists a canonical
190

pencil of operators which passes through the operator ∆. These exceptional weights
have deep geometrical and physical meaning. E.g. the failure to construct maps
ϕλ, µ in equation (5) for singular cases is related with existence of non-equivalent
Diﬀ(M) modules (see for detail [8]).
The space D1/2(M) of operators on half-
densities is drastically diﬀerent from all other spaces Dλ(M), since for second order
operators on half-densities there is a natural notion of a self-adjoint operator. This
fact is of great importance for the Batalin-Vilkovisky geometry (see [12, 14]).
Applying the approach of the work [15] we study canonical pencils of second
order operators of an arbitrary weight δ and analyze in detail the exceptional case
when these operators act on densities of weight λ = 1−δ
2 . (An operator has weight
δ if it maps densities of weight λ into the densities of weight µ = λ + δ.) Such
an operator pencil can be deﬁned by a symmetric contravariant tensor density S =
|D(x)|δSab∂a ⊗∂b (this ﬁeld deﬁnes the principal symbol) and a connection ∇on
volume forms. Specialising the pencil to the exceptional value of weight λ = 1−δ
2
we
come to an operator which depends only on a equivalence class of connections. We
assign to every ﬁeld S the certain groupoid of connections CS. For the exceptional
weight λ = 1−δ
2
the operator with the principal symbol S depends on an orbit of
this groupoid.
This is particularly interesting in the case of odd symplectic structures.
For
symplectic structures (even or odd) there is no distinguished connection. On the
other hand, if a symplectic structure is odd, then the Poisson tensor is symmetric
and it deﬁnes the principal symbol S of an operator pencil of weight δ = 0. It turns
out that in spite of the absence of a distinguished connection, there exists a canonical
class of connections on volume forms such that for them γa (∇a = ∂a + γa) vanishes
in some Darboux coordinates. Connections of this canonical class belong to an orbit
of the groupoid CS and the corresponding operator on half-densities is the canonical
operator introduced in [12]. This operator seems to be the correct clariﬁcation of the
Batalin-Vilkovisky “odd Laplacian” [3]. (See for detail [14].) This approach may be
used also in the case of Riemannian geometry where S is deﬁned by a Riemannian
metric. However in this case there exists a distinguished connection (Levi-Civita
connection). We would like to mention article [2] where an interesting attempt to
compare second order operators for even Riemannian and odd symplectic structures
was made.
Another important case is a canonical pencil of operators of weight δ = 2 on
the line. By considering exceptional weights we come in particular to Schwarzian
derivative.
The plan of the paper is as follows.
In the next section we consider second order operators on the algebra of functions.
We come in this “naive” approach to preliminary relations between second order
operators and connections on volume forms.
In the third section we consider ﬁrst and second order operators on the algebra
F(M) of all densities on a manifold M. First we deﬁne an invariant canonical scalar
product on the algebra F(M).
This algebra can be interpreted as a subalgebra
of functions on an auxiliary manifold c
M. We consider derivations (which can be
191

identiﬁed with vector ﬁelds on c
M) and ﬁrst order operators on the algebra F(M).
The canonical scalar product on F(M) leads to the canonical divergence of vector
ﬁelds on c
M. We come in particular to the interpretation of Lie derivatives of densities
as divergence-free vector ﬁelds on c
M.
After that we consider second order operators on the algebra F(M). We intro-
duce our main construction: the self-adjoint second order operators on the algebra
F(M), and consider the corresponding operator pencils. These considerations are
due to the paper [15].
In the fourth section we consider operators of weight δ acting on densities of
exceptional weight λ = 1−δ
2 . For an arbitrary contravariant symmetric tensor density
S of weight δ we consider groupoid CS. The orbits of the groupoid CS are classes
of connections such that operators with the principal symbol S acting on densities
of the exceptional weight λ = 1−δ
2
depend only on these classes. This groupoid was
ﬁrst considered in [14, 15] for the Batalin-Vilkovisky geometry. We also give explicit
description for corresponding Lie algebroids.
Then we consider various examples where these operators occur. We consider
the example of operators of weight δ = 0 acting on half-densities on a Riemannian
manifold and on an odd symplectic supermanifold, and the example of operators of
weight δ = 2 acting on densities of weight λ = −1
2 on the line. In all these examples
the operators depend on classes of connections on volume forms which vanish in
special coordinates (such as Darboux coordinates for symplectic case and projective
coordinates for the line).
Finally we consider the example of the canonical odd invariant half-density intro-
duced in [13]. We show that this density depends on the class of aﬃne connections
which vanish in Darboux coordinates.
By diﬀerential operators throughout this text we mean only linear diﬀerential
operators.
For standard material from supermathematics see [5], [17] and [20].
2. Second order operators on functions
In what follows M is a smooth manifold or supermanifold.
Let L = T a(x) ∂
∂xa + R(x) be a ﬁrst order operator on functions on a manifold
M. Under change of local coordinates xa = xa(xa′) L transforms as follows:
L = T a(x) ∂
∂xa + R(x) = T a ¡
x
¡
x′¢¢
xa′
a
∂
∂xa′ + R(x),
Ã
xa′
a = ∂xa′
∂xa
!
.
We see that T a(x) ∂
∂xa is a vector ﬁeld and R(x) scalar ﬁeld.
Now return to the second order operator (1) on a manifold M. Under a change
of local coordinates xa = xa(xa′)
∆= 1
2
³
Sab(x)∂a∂b + T a(x)∂a + R(x)
´
= 1
2 xa′
a Sabxb′
b
|
{z
}
Sa′b′
∂a′∂b′ + . . .
(6)
192

Top component of operator ∆, 1
2Sab∂a ⊗∂b deﬁnes symmetric contravariant tensor
of rank 2 on M (the principal symbol of the operator ∆= 1
2
¡
Sab(x)∂a∂b + . . .
¢
).
If tensor S = 0 then ∆becomes ﬁrst order operator and T a∂a is a vector ﬁeld.
What about a geometrical meaning of the operator (6) in the case if principal symbol
S ̸= 0? To answer this question we introduce a scalar product ⟨, ⟩in the space of
functions on M and consider the diﬀerence of two second order operators ∆+ −∆,
where ∆+ is an operator adjoint to ∆with respect to the scalar product. A scalar
product ⟨, ⟩on the space of functions is deﬁned by the following construction: an
arbitrary volume form ρρρ = ρ(x)|D(x)| on M is chosen and
⟨f, g⟩ρρρ =
Z
M
f(x)g(x)ρ(x)|D(x)| .
(7)
If x′ are new local coordinates xa = xa (x′) then in new coordinates the volume form
ρρρ has appearance ρ′(x′)D(x′) = ρ(x)|D(x)|:
ρρρ
=
ρ(x)|D(x)| = ρ(x(x′))
¯¯¯¯
D(x)
D(x′)
¯¯¯¯ D(x′)
= ρ(x(x′)) det
µ ∂xa
∂xa′
¶
D(x′) = ρ′(x′)|D(x′)| ,
i.e.
ρ′(x′) = ρ(x(x′)) det
µ ∂xa
∂xa′
¶
.
In what follows we suppose that scalar product is well-deﬁned: we suppose that M is
compact orientable manifold and the oriented atlas of local coordinates is chosen (all
local coordinates transformations have positive Jacobian:
¯¯ ∂x
∂x′
¯¯ = det
¡ ∂x
∂x′
¢
> 0)) 1.
Now return to the operators ∆and the adjoint operator ∆+. For operator ∆
the operator ∆+ is deﬁned by relation ⟨∆f, g⟩ρρρ = ⟨f, ∆+g⟩ρρρ. Integrating by parts
we have
⟨∆f, g⟩ρρρ =
Z
M
1
2
³
Sab(x)∂a∂bf + T a(x)∂af + R(x)f
´
|
{z
}
∆f
g(x)ρ(x)|D(x)| =
Z
M
f(x)
µ 1
2ρ∂a
³
∂b
³
Sabρg
´´
−1
2ρ∂a (T aρg) + 1
2Rg
¶
|
{z
}
∆+g
ρ(x)|D(x)| = ⟨f, ∆+g⟩ρρρ.
Principal symbols of operators ∆and ∆+ coincide. Thus the diﬀerence ∆+ −∆is
a ﬁrst order operator:
∆+ −∆=
³
∂bSab −T a + Sab∂b log ρ
´
∂a
|
{z
}
vector ﬁeld
+scalar terms .
(8)
1Coordinate volume form |D(x)| is usually denoted by dx1dx2 . . . dxn. We prefer our notation
|D(x)| having in mind further considerations for supermanifolds.
193

Introducing the scalar product via chosen volume form ρρρ we come to the fact that
for an operator ∆=
1
2
¡
Sab∂a∂b + T a∂a + R
¢
, and for an arbitrary volume form
ρρρ = ρ(x)|D(x)| the expression
¡
∂bSab −T a + Sab∂b log ρ
¢
∂a is a vector ﬁeld.
Claim : For an operator ∆= 1
2
¡
Sab∂a∂b + T a∂a + R
¢
the expression
γa = ∂bSab −T a
(9)
is an upper connection on volume forms.
Before proving the claim we give two words about connections on the space of
volume forms.
Connection ∇on the space of volume forms deﬁnes the covariant derivative of volume forms
with respect to vector ﬁelds. It obeys natural linearity properties and Leibnitz rule:
•
∇X (ρρρ1 + ρρρ2) = ∇X (ρρρ1) + ∇X (ρρρ2) ,
• for arbitrary functions f, g
∇fX+gY (ρρρ) = f∇X (ρρρ) + g∇Y (ρρρ) ,
• and the Leibnitz rule:
∇X (f(x)ρρρ) = ∂Xf(x) (ρρρ) + f(x)∇X (ρρρ) ,
(10)
(∂X is the directional derivative of functions along vector ﬁeld X: ∂Xf = Xa ∂f
∂xa ).
Denote by ∇a covariant derivative with respect to vector ﬁeld
∂
∂xa . Due to axioms (10)
∇a(ρ(x)|D(x)|) = (∂aρ(x) + γaρ(x)) |D(x)|,
where γa|D(x)| = ∇a(|D(x)|) ,

∂a =
∂
∂xa

.
Under changing of local coordinates xa = xa(xa′) the symbol γa transforms in the following
way:
γa|D(x)| = ∇a (|D(x)|) = xa′
a ∇a′

det ∂x
∂x′ |D(x′)|

= xa′
a

∂a′

log det ∂x
∂x′

+ γa′

|D(x)| , (11)
i.e.
γa = xa′
a

γa′ + ∂a′ log det
 ∂x
∂x′

= xa′
a γa′ −xb
b′xb′
ba .
(We use the standard formula that δ log det M = Tr (M −1δM). We use also short notations for
derivatives: xa′
a = ∂xa′ (x)
∂xa
, xa′
bc =
∂xa′
∂xb∂xc . The summation over repeated indices is assumed.)
Let Sab be a contravariant tensor ﬁeld. One can assign to this tensor ﬁeld an upper connection
i.e. a contravariant derivative
S∇
S∇a (ρ|D(x)|) =

Sab∂b + γa
ρ|D(x)| .
(12)
Remark 1 Given a contravariant tensor ﬁeld Sab(x) an arbitrary connection ∇(covariant deriva-
tive) induces the upper connection (contravariant derivative)
S∇:
S∇a = Sab∇b. In the case where
tensor ﬁeld Sab is non-degenerate, the converse implication is true also. A non-degenerate con-
travariant tensor ﬁeld Sab(x) induces one-one correspondence between upper connections and usual
connections. (Compare with the example 5 below where upper connection in general does not deﬁne
the connection.)
194

Under changing of coordinates a symbol γa of upper connection (12) transforms in the following
way:
γa′ = xa′
a

γa + Sab∂b log det
 ∂x′/∂x

.
(13)
Remark 2 From now on we refer to genuine connections (covariant derivatives) simply as con-
nections. With some abuse of language we identify the connection ∇with its symbol γγγ = {γa}:
γa = ∇a|D(x)|.
Remark 3 It is worth noting that the diﬀerence of two connections is a covector ﬁeld, the diﬀerence
of two upper connections is a vector ﬁeld.
In other words the space of all connections (upper
connections) is aﬃne space associated with linear space of covector (vector) ﬁelds.
Consider two important examples of connections on volume forms.
Example 1 An arbitrary volume form ρρρ deﬁnes a connection γγγρρρ due to the formula (4): γγγρρρ : γρρρ
a =
−∂a log ρ(x). This is a ﬂat connection: its curvature vanishes: Fab = ∂aγb −∂aγa = 0. (Connection
∇considered in the formula (4) is a ﬂat connection deﬁned by the volume form ρρρg.)
Example 2 Let ∇be aﬃne connection on vector ﬁelds on manifold M. It deﬁnes connection on
volume forms ∇→−Tr ∇with γa = −Γb
ab where Γa
bc are Christoﬀel symbols of aﬃne connection.
It is easy to see that connection and upper connection deﬁne the covariant and respectively
contravariant derivative of the densities of an arbitrary weight: for s = s(x)|D(x)|λ ∈Fλ
∇as = (∂as(x) + λγas(x)) |D(x)|λ .
Respectively for upper connection
∇as =

Sab∂bs(x) + λγas(x)

|D(x)|λ .
(14)
Sometimes we will use the concept of connection of the weight δ. This is a linear operation that
transforms densities of weight λ to the densities of weight µ = λ + δ: for s = s(x)|D(x)|λ ∈Fλ
∇as = (∂as(x) + λγas(x)) |D(x)|λ+δ, ∇a|D(x)| = γa|D(x)|δ+1 .
Respectively for upper connection
∇as =

Sab∂bs(x) + λγas(x)

|D(x)|λ+δ,
∇a|D(x)| = γa|D(x)|δ+1
Proof of the claim (9): Consider a ﬂat connection γγγρρρ : γρρρ
a = −∂a log ρ deﬁned by
the volume form ρρρ = ρ(x)dx (see Example 1 above). Since the expression
Y =
¡
∂bSyab −T a + Sab∂b log ρ
¢
∂a in (8) is a vector ﬁeld (the principal symbol of
the ﬁrst order operator ∆+ −∆) and Sabγρρρ
b = −Sab∂b log ρ is an upper connection
then the sum Y a + Sabγρρρ
b is also upper connection:
Sabγﬂat
b
+ Y a = −Sab∂b log ρ +
³
∂bSab −T a + Sab∂b log ρ
´
∂a = ∂bSab −T a .
Thus we have proved the claim.
Having in mind the result of the claim we can rewrite the operator ∆on functions
in a more convenient form:
∆f = 1
2
³
Sab∂a∂b + T a∂a + R
´
f = 1
2
³
∂aSab∂b + La∂a + R
´
f,
with La = T a −∂bSab. We come to Proposition
195

Proposition 1 For an arbitrary second order operator on functions on manifold
M:
∆= 1
2
³
Sab∂a∂b + T a∂a + R
´
= 1
2
³
∂a
³
Sab∂b . . .
´
+ La∂a + R
´
,
the principal symbol
1
2Sab is symmetric contravariant tensor ﬁeld of rank 2, the
symbol γa = −La = ∂bSba −T a deﬁnes an upper connection and the function R =
2∆1 is a scalar:
∆f = 1
2∂a

Sab
|{z}
tensor
∂bf

−1
2
γa
|{z}
connection
∂af + 1
2R
|{z}
scalar
f.
Second order operators on functions are fully characterised by symmetric contravari-
ant tensors of rank 2 (principal symbol), upper connections and scalar ﬁelds. In the
case if principal symbol is non-degenerate (det Sab ̸= 0 upper connection deﬁnes a
usual connection on volume forms: γa = S−1
ab γb.
3. Algebra of densities and second order operators on algebra of
densities
3.1. Algebra of densities F(M). Canonical scalar product
We consider now the space of densities.
As usual we suppose that M is a compact orientable manifold with a chosen
oriented atlas.
We say that s = s(x)|D(x)|λ is a density of weight λ if under changing of local
coordinates it is multiplied on the λ-th power of the Jacobian of the coordinate
transformation:
s = s(x)|D(x)|σ = s
¡
x
¡
x′¢¢ ¯¯¯¯
Dx
Dx′
¯¯¯¯
λ
|D(x′)|λ = s
¡
x
¡
x′¢¢ µ
det
µ Dx
Dx′
¶¶λ
|D(x′)|λ .
(Density of weight λ = 0 is a usual function, density of weight λ = 1 is a volume
form.)
Denote by Fλ = Fλ(M) the space of densities of weight λ on the manifold M.
Denote by F = F(M) the space of all densities on the manifold M.
The space Fλ of densities of the weight λ is a vector space. It is the module
over the ring of functions on M.
The space F of all densities is an algebra: If
s1 = s1(x)|D(x)|λ1 ∈Fλ1 and s2 = s2(x)|D(x)|λ2 ∈Fλ2 then their product is the
density s1 · s2 = s1(x)2(x)Dxλ1+λ2 ∈Fλ1+λ2.
On the algebra F(M) of all densities on M one can consider the canonical scalar
product ⟨, ⟩deﬁned by the following formula: if s1 = s1(x)|D(x)|λ1 and s2 =
196

s2(x)|D(x)|λ2 then
⟨s1, s2⟩=





R
M s1(x)s2(x)|D(x)| ,
if λ1 + λ2 = 1 ,
0 if
if λ1 + λ2 ̸= 1 .
(15)
(Compare this scalar product with a volume form depending scalar product ⟨, ⟩ρρρ
on algebra of functions introduced in formula (7).)
The canonical scalar product (15) was considered and intensively used in the
work [15]. Brieﬂy recall the constructions of this work.
Elements of the algebra F(M) are ﬁnite combinations of densities of diﬀerent
weights.
It is convenient to use a formal variable t in a place of coordinate volume form
|D(x)|.
An arbitrary density F ∋s = s1(x)|D(x)|λ1 +· · ·+sk(x)|D(x)|λk can be written
as a function polynomial on a variable t:
s = s(x, t) = s1(x)tλ1 + · · · + sk(x)tλk .
(16)
E.g. the density s1(x) + s2(x)|D(x)|1/2 + s3(x)|D(x)| can be rewritten as s(x, t) =
s1(x) +
√
ts2(x) + ts3(x). In what follows we often will use this notation.
Remark 4 With some abuse of language we say that a function f(x, t) is a function
polynomial over t if it is a sum of ﬁnite number of monoms of arbitrary real degree
over t, f(x, t) = P
λ fλ(x)tλ, λ ∈R.
What is a global meaning of the variable t? The relation (16) means that an
arbitrary density on M can be identiﬁed with a polynomial function on the extended
manifold c
M = det(TM)\M which is the frame bundle of determinant bundle of M.
The natural local coordinates on c
M induced by local coordinates xa on M are (xa, t)
where t is a coordinate which is in a place of volume form |D(x)|. Let xa, xa′ be two
local coordinates on M. If (xa, t) and (xa′, t′) are local coordinates on c
M induced
by local coordinates xa and xa′ respectively then
xa′ = xa′(xa) and t′ = det
µ∂x′
∂x
¶
t .
(17)
If a function is a polynomial with respect to local variable t, then it is a polynomial
with respect to local variable t′ also. (As it was mentioned before we consider only
oriented atlas, i.e. all changing of coordinates have positive determinant.)
It has to be emphasized that algebra F(M) of all densities on M can be identiﬁed
with an algebra of functions on extended manifold c
M which are polynomial on t.
We do not consider arbitrary functions on t.
197

3.2. Derivations of algebra of densities (=vector ﬁelds on the extended
manifold)
Consider diﬀerential operators on the algebra F. (We repeat that we consider
only linear operators.)
Let X be a derivation of the algebra F, Then for two arbitrary densities s1, s2
X (s1 · s2) = (Xs1) · s2 + s1 · (Xs2) ,
(Leibnitz rule).
The derivations of the algebra F(M) are vector ﬁelds on the extended manifold c
M,
where coeﬃcients are polynomials over t:
X = Xa(x, t) ∂
∂xa + X0(x, t)bλ =
X
δ
tδ
µ
Xa
(δ)(x) ∂
∂xa + X0
(δ)(x)bλ
¶
.
(18)
We introduced in this formula the Euler operator
bλ = t ∂
∂t
which is globally deﬁned vector ﬁeld on c
M (see transformation law (17)). Euler
operator bλ measures a weight λ of density: bλ
¡
s(x)tλ¢
= λs(x)tλ.
There is a natural gradation in the space of vector ﬁelds. The vector ﬁeld
X = tδ ³
Xa(x)∂a + X0(x)bλ
´
(19)
is the vector ﬁeld of the weight δ. It transforms a density of weight λ to the density
of weight λ + δ.
Remark 5 From now on considering vector ﬁelds on extended manifold c
M we sup-
pose by default that coeﬃcients of these vector ﬁelds are polynomial on t (see equation
(18)).
Our next step is to consider adjoint operators with respect to canonical scalar
product (15) on the algebra F: operator ˆL+ is adjoint to the operator L if for
arbitrary densities s1, s2, ⟨ˆLs1, s2⟩= ⟨s1, ˆL+s2⟩. One can see that
x+ = x,
µ ∂
∂x
¶+
= −∂
∂x, and
bλ+ = 1 −bλ .
Check the last relation. Let s1 be a density of the weight λ1 and s2 be a density
of the weight λ2. Then ⟨bλs1, s2⟩= λ1⟨s1, s2⟩and ⟨s1, bλ+s2⟩= ⟨s1, (1 −bλ)s2⟩=
(1 −λ2)⟨s1, s2⟩. In the case if λ1 + λ2 = 1 these scalar products are equal since
λ1 = 1 −λ2. In the case if λ1 + λ2 ̸= 1 these scalar products both vanish.
198

Example 3 Consider vector ﬁeld on c
M ( derivation of algebra of densities): X
: Xs =
³
Xa(x, t)∂a + X0(x, t)bλ
´
s(x, t). Then its adjoint operator is:
X+ :
X+s =
h³
Xa(x, t)∂a + X0(x, t)bλ
´i+
s
= −∂a (Xa(x, t)s)) + (1 −ˆλ)
¡
X0(x, t)s
¢
,
X+ = −∂aXa(x, t) −Xa(x, t)∂a −X0(x, t)ˆλ +
³
1 −bλ
´
X0(x, t) .
Deﬁnition 1 (Canonical divergence). Divergence of vector ﬁeld X on c
M is deﬁned
by the formula
div X = −(X + X+) = ∂aXa +
³
bλ −1
´
X0(x, t) .
(20)
In particular for vector ﬁeld X of the weight δ, X = tδ ³
Xa∂a + X0bλ
´
(see equa-
tion(19))
div X = tδ ¡
∂aXa + (δ −1)X0¢
.
Divergence of vector ﬁeld on F vanishes iﬀthis vector ﬁeld is anti-self-adjoint
(with respect to canonical scalar product (15)): X = −X+ ⇔div X = 0.
Example 4 Divergence-less (=antiself-adjoint) vector ﬁelds of weight δ = 0 act on
densities as Lie derivatives. Indeed consider vector ﬁeld X = Xa∂a + X0bλ of the
weight δ = 0. The condition div X = ∂aXa −X0 = 0 means that X0 = ∂aXa, i.e.
X = Xa∂a +∂aXabλ. Hence for every λ,
X
¯¯
Fλ = Xa∂a +λ∂aXa. This means that
the action of divergence-free vector ﬁeld X of weight δ = 0 on an arbitrary density
is the Lie derivative of this density: for s ∈Fλ
Xs = (Xa∂a + bλ∂aXa)s = LXs = (Xa∂as(x) + λ∂aXas(x)) |D(x)|λ .
(21)
If X is divergence-free vector ﬁeld on c
M of arbitrary weight then divX = 0 ⇔X =
tδ ³
Xa∂a + ∂aXa
bλ
1−δ
´
. We come to generalised Lie derivative: if δ ̸= 1 then for
s ∈Fλ
LXs = |D(x)|δ
Ã
Xa∂a + ∂aXa
bλ
1 −δ
!
s =
µ
Xa∂as(x) + λ∂aXas
1 −δ
¶
|D(x)|λ+δ .
(22)
One can consider a canonical projection p of vector ﬁelds on c
M ( derivation
of algebra F(M)) on vector densities on M. It is deﬁned by the formula p(X) =
X
¯¯
F0=C∞(M). In coordinates p: X = Xa(x, t)∂a + X0(x, t)bλ 7→Xa(x, t)∂a.
We say that vector ﬁeld is vertical if pX = 0, i.e. if X = X0(x, t)bλ. Divergence
of vertical vector ﬁeld X = X0(x, t)bλ equals to div X = (bλ −1)X0(x, t).
199

Proposition 2 Let Π be a projection of vector ﬁelds onto vertical vector ﬁelds such
that div X = div (ΠX), We have that
Π:
X = tδ ³
Xa∂a + X0bλ
´
7→ΠX = tδ
µ∂aXa
δ −1 + X0
¶
bλ .
Every vector ﬁeld X of weight δ ̸= 1 can be uniquely decomposed as the sum of a
vertical vector ﬁeld and divergence-free vector ﬁeld, generalised Lie derivative (22))
with respect to vector ﬁeld pX:
X = ΠX + (X −ΠX) = ΠX + LpX .
One can check the statements of this Proposition by straightforward applications
of the formulae above.
What relations exist between the canonical divergence (20) of vector ﬁelds on extended manifold
c
M and a divergence of vector ﬁelds on a manifold M ? Let ∇be an arbitrary connection on volume
forms. It assigns to the vector ﬁeld X on M a vector ﬁeld Xγγγ on the extended manifold c
M by
the formula Xγγγ = Xa 
∂
∂xa + bλγa

, where γγγ = {γa} is a symbol of connection ∇in coordinates x,
(∇a|D(x)| = γa|D(x)|). Connection ∇deﬁnes the divergence of vector ﬁelds on M via the canonical
divergence (20): for every vector ﬁeld X on manifold M:
div γγγX = div Xγγγ =
∂Xa
∂xa −γaXa

.
(23)
A volume form ρρρ = ρ(x)|D(x)| deﬁnes ﬂat connection γρρρ
a = −∂a log ρ (see equation (4) and example
1). The formula (23) implies the well-known formula (see also equation (2))) for divergence of vector
ﬁeld on manifold equipped with a volume form
div ρρρX = div Xγγγρρρ =
∂Xa
∂xa + Xa∂a log ρ

= 1
ρ
∂
∂xa (ρXa) .
(24)
Considering a connection corresponding to an aﬃne connection (see Example 2) we come to
div ∇X = ∇aXa = (∂aXa + XaΓb
ab).
On Riemannian manifold M Riemannian metric deﬁnes
connection on volume forms γa = −∂a log √det g (via Levi-Civita connection or via invariant vol-
ume form ρρρg). We come to
div gX =
∂Xa
∂xa + Xa∂a log
p
det g

=
1
√det g
∂
∂xa
p
det gXa
.
3.3. Second order operators on the algebra F(M)
We will study now operators of order ⩽2 on the algebra F(M) of densities on
manifold M.
First of all general remark about n-th order operators. 0-th order operator on
the algebra F(M) is just multiplication operator on non-zero density. L is n-th order
operator on the algebra F(M) (n ⩾1) if for an arbitrary s ∈F(M) the commutator
[L, s] = L ◦s −s ◦L is (n −1)-th order operator.
One can see that if L is an n-th order diﬀerential operator on F(M), then
L + (−1)nL+ is n-th order operator and L −(−1)nL+ is an operator of the order
⩽n −1. We have:
200

Proposition 3 An arbitrary n-th order operator can be canonically decomposed on
the sum of self adjoint and antiself-adjoint operators:
L = 1
2
¡
L + (−1)nL+¢
|
{z
}
n-th order operator
+
1
2
¡
L −(−1)nL+¢
|
{z
}
operator of the order ⩽n −1
.
An operator of the even order n = 2k is a sum of self-adjoint operator of the order 2k
and antiself-adjoint operator of the order ⩽2k −1, and an operator of the odd order
n = 2k + 1 is a sum of antiself-adjoint operator of the order 2k + 1 and self-adjoint
operator of the order ⩽2k.
Operators of the order 0 are evidently self-adjoint.
Let L = X + B be ﬁrst order antiself-adjoint operator, where X is a vector ﬁeld
on c
M and B is a scalar term (density). We have L + L+ = 0 = X + X+ + 2B = 0.
Hence L = X + 1
2div X.
Now study self-adjoint second order operators on F(M). Let ∆be second order
operator of the weight δ on algebra F(M) of densities. In local coordinates
∆= tδ
2


Sab(x)∂a∂b + bλBa(x)∂a + bλ2C(x)
|
{z
}
second order derivatives
+
Da(x)∂a + bλE(x)
|
{z
}
ﬁrst order derivatives
+F(x)


.
(25)
Put normalisation condition
∆(1) = 0
(26)
i.e. density F|D(x)|δ
2
in (25) vanishes (F = 0).
The operator ∆+ adjoint to ∆equals to
∆+
=
1
2
³
∂b∂a
³
Sabtδ . . .
´
−∂a
³
Babλ+tδ . . .
´
+
³
C(bλ+)2tδ . . .
´
−∂a
³
Datδ . . .
´
+
³
Ebλ+tδ . . .
´´
= tδ
2
³
Sab∂a∂b + 2∂bSba∂a + ∂a∂bSba´
+ tδ
2
³³
bλ + δ −1
´ ³
Ba∂a + ∂bBb´
+
³
bλ + δ −1
´2
C −
³
bλ + δ −1
´
E −Da∂a −∂bDb
¶
.
Comparing this operator with operator (25) we see that the condition ∆+ = ∆
implies that
∆
=
tδ
2
³
Sab(x)∂a∂b + ∂bSba∂a +
³
2bλ + δ −1
´
γa(x)∂a
+bλ∂aγa(x) + bλ
³
bλ + δ −1
´
θ(x)
´
.
(27)
Here for convenience we denote γa = 2Ba and θ = C. Studying how coeﬃcients of
the operator change under changing of coordinates we come to
201

Theorem 1 (See [15].) Let ∆be an arbitrary linear second order self-adjoint op-
erator (∆+ = ∆) on the algebra F(M) of densities such that its weight equals δ and
∆(1) = 0. Then in local coordinates this operator has the appearance (27). The
coeﬃcients of this operator have the following geometrical meaning
• S = tδSab(x) = Sab(x)|D(x)|δ is symmetric contravariant tensor ﬁeld-density
of the weight δ. Under changing of local coordinates xa′ = xa′(xa) it transforms
in the following way:
Sa′b′ = J−δxa′
a xb′
b Sab ,
• γa is a symbol of upper connection-density of weight δ (see (13) above). Under
changing of local coordinates xa′ = xa′(xa) it transforms in the following way:
γa′ = J−δxa′
a
³
γa + Sab∂b log J
´
,
• and θ transforms in the following way:
θ′ = J−δ ³
θ + 2γa∂a log J + ∂a log J Sab∂b log J
´
Here J = det
³
∂x′
∂x
´
, and xa′
a are short notations for derivatives: xa′
a = ∂axa′(x) =
∂xa′(x)
∂xa .
The object θ(x)|D(x)|δ is called Brans-Dicke function 2.
Remark 6 Let ∆be self-adjoint operator (27) and γγγ′ = {γ′
a} be an arbitrary con-
nection on volume forms (∇|D(x)| = γ′
a|D(x)|). Then for the upper connection-
density in the equation (27) the diﬀerence (γa −Sabγ′
b)|D(x)|δ is a vector density of
the weight δ. Respectively for Brans-Dicke function θ, the diﬀerence θ −γ′
aSabγ′
b is
a density of the weight δ. (One can easy deduce this recalling the fact that the space
of genuine connections as well as the space of upper connections is an aﬃne space:
if ∇and ∇′ are two diﬀerent connections then their diﬀerence is (co)vector ﬁeld:
∇′ −∇= γ′
a −γa = Xa.)
Corollary 1 Given principal symbol S = Sab|D(x)|δ of the weight δ and connection
γγγ on volume forms canonically deﬁne the second order self-adjoint operator (27)
with upper connection γa = Sabγb and Brans-Dicke function θ(x) = γaSabγb. We
denote this operator ∆(S,γγγ).
The inverse implication is valid in the case if S = Sab|D(x)|δ is non-degenerate:
Second order self-adjoint operator ∆of weight δ which obeys normalisation condition
(26) with non-degenerate principal symbol S uniquely deﬁnes connection γγγ such that
∆= ∆(S,γγγ) + ˆλ(ˆλ + δ −1)F, where F is a density of weight δ, and Brans-Dicke
function θ equals to θ = γaγa + F = γaSabγb + F.
2Its transformation is similar to transformation of Brans-Dicke ”scalar”, in Kaluza-Klein reduc-
tion of 5- dimensional gravity to gravity+electromagnetism.
202

Consider examples.
First consider the example of operator (27) with degenerate principal symbol
Sab|D(x)|δ.
Example 5 Let X = Xa ∂
∂xa and Y = Y a ∂
∂xa be two vector ﬁelds on manifold M.
Recall the operator of Lie derivative (see equation (21) LX = Xa∂a + bλ∂aXa and
consider the operator
∆= 1
2 (LXLY + LY LX) = 1
2
³
Xa∂a + bλ∂aXa´ ³
Y a∂a + bλ∂aY a´
+ (X ↔Y) .
It is self-adjoint operator since Lie derivatvie is antiself-adjoint operator. Calculat-
ing this operator and comparing it with the expression (27) we come to
Sab = XaY b + Y bXa, γa =
³
∂bXb´
Y a +
³
∂bY b´
Xa, θ = (∂aXa)
³
∂bY b´
.
We see that in the general case (if dimension n of manifold is greater than 2) this op-
erator has degenerate principal symbol and upper connection does not deﬁne uniquely
genuine connection.
3.4. Canonical pencil of operators
Note that an operator L on the algebra F(M) of densities deﬁnes the pencil {Lλ}
of operators on spaces Fλ: Lλ = L
¯¯
Fλ. The self-adjoint operator ∆on the algebra
of densities (see equation (27)) deﬁnes the canonical operator pencil {∆λ}, λ ∈R,
where
∆λ = ∆
¯¯
Fλ =
= tδ
2
³
Sab(x)∂a∂b + ∂bSba∂a + (2λ + δ −1) γa(x)∂a + λ∂aγa(x) + λ (λ + δ −1) θ(x)
´
(28)
It is canonical pencil deﬁned by symmetric tensor density S = Sab(x)|D(x)|δ, upper
connection γa and Brans-Dicke function θ(x).
Respectively self-adjoint operator
∆(S,γγγ) on the algebra of densities deﬁned by tensor ﬁeld-density S = Sab(x)|D(x)|δ
and genuine connection γγγ (see Corollary 1) deﬁnes the operator pencil ∆λ(S,γγγ) with
Brans-Dicke function θ(x) = γaSabγb.
Operator ∆λ of the weight δ maps density of weight λ to densities of weight
λ+δ. Its adjoint operator ∆+
λ maps density of weight 1−δ −λ to densities of weight
1 −λ. The condition ∆= ∆+ of self-adjointness of operator ∆is equivalent to the
condition
∆+
λ = ∆1−λ−δ .
(29)
Example 6 Let ρρρ = ρ(x)|D(x)| be a volume form on the Riemannian manifold
M. We can consider an operator ∆on functions such that ∆f = div ρρρgrad f =
1
2
1
ρ(x)
∂
∂xa
³
ρ(x)gab ∂f(x)
∂xb
´
(see equations (2) and (24) (In the case if ρρρ = √det g|D(x)|
203

this is just the Laplace-Beltrami operator (3).)
Using this operator consider the
pencil
∆λ = ρρρλ ◦∆◦1
ρρρλ :
µ
for s ∈Fλ, ∆λs = ρρρλdivρρρ grad
µ s
ρρρλ
¶¶
.
One can see that this pencil corresponds to self-adjoint operator (see relation (29)).
It coincides with the canonical pencil (28) of weight δ = 0 in the case if principal
symbol is deﬁned by Riemannian metric Sab = gab, connection is a ﬂat connection
deﬁned by the volume form (see formula (4) and Example 1): γa = −gab∂b log ρ,
and θ = γaγa.
The canonical pencil (28) has many interesting properties (see for detail [15]).
In particular it has the following “universality” property:
Corollary 2 Let ∆be an arbitrary (linear) second order operator of weight δ acting
on the space Fλ of densities of weight λ, ∆: Fλ →Fµ (µ = λ + δ). In the case
if λ ̸= 0, µ ̸= 1 and λ + µ ̸= 1 there exists a unique canonical pencil which passes
through the operator ∆.
If the operator ∆is given by the expression ∆= Aab∂a∂b +Aa∂a +A(x) then the
relations





1
2Sab
= Aab ,
1
2
¡
(2λ + δ −1)γa + ∂bSba¢
= Aa ,
1
2 (λ∂aγa + λ(λ + δ −1)θ)
= A ,
(λ ̸= 0, λ + µ ̸= 1, µ ̸= 1) .
uniquely deﬁne principal symbol, upper connection and Brans-Dicke ﬁeld. Hence
they uniquely deﬁne canonical pencil (28).
The “universality” property provides a beautiful interpretation of canonical map
ϕλ,µ in the relation (5). Indeed due to this Corollary we ”draw” the pencil through
an arbitrary operator ∆λ = Aij(x)∂i∂j +Ai(x)∂i+A(x) acting on densities of weight
λ. Then the image of this operator, operator ∆µ = ϕλ,µ (∆λ) is the operator of this
pencil acting on densities of weight µ.
4. Operators depending on a class of connections
In this section we will return to second order diﬀerential operators on manifold
M. We consider second order operators acting on densities of a specially chosen
given weight.
4.1. Operators of weight δ acting on densities of weight 1−δ
2
The Corollary 2 states that for a second order operator ∆: Fλ →Fµ for all values
of weights except the cases λ = 0, µ = 1 or λ + µ = 1 there is a unique canonical
204

pencil (28) which passes through the operator ∆. Consider now an exceptional case
when operator ∆: Fλ →Fµ is such that it has weight δ and λ + µ = 1, i.e. it acts
on densities of weight λ = 1−δ
2
and transforms them to densities of weight µ = 1+δ
2 .
Let ∆sing be such an operator which belongs to the canonical pencil (28):
∆sing = (∆λ)
¯¯
λ= 1−δ
2
= tδ
2
³
Sab(x)∂a∂b + ∂bSba∂a + λ∂aγa(x) + λ (λ + δ −1) θ(x)
´
= |D(x)|δ
2
µ
Sab(x)∂a∂b + ∂bSba∂a + 1 −δ
2
µ
∂aγa(x) + δ −1
2
θ(x)
¶¶
.
(30)
On the other hand let ∆be an arbitrary second order diﬀerential operator of
weight δ which acts on densities of weight 1−δ
2 , ∆: F 1−δ
2
→F 1+δ
2 . Compare this
operator with the operator ∆sing . The operator ∆+ which is adjoint to the operator
∆also acts from the space F 1−δ
2
into the space F 1+δ
2 , since λ + µ = 1−δ
2
+ 1+δ
2
= 1
(compare with formula (29)). Hence an operator ∆can be canonically decomposed
on the sum of second order self-adjoint operator and antiself-adjoint operator of the
order ⩽1. Antiself-adjoint operator is just generalised Lie derivative (22):
∆+ −∆= LX
¯¯
F 1−δ
2
= |D(x)|δ
µ
Xa∂a + 1
2∂aXa
¶
.
Operator ∆sing in formula (30) belongs to canonical pencil, it is self-adjoint operator:
∆+
sing = ∆sing . Diﬀerence of two self-adjoint operators of second order with the same
principal symbol is self-adjoint operator of order ⩽1. Hence it is the zeroth order
operator of multiplication on the density. These considerations imply the following
statement:
Corollary 3 Let ∆be an arbitrary second order operator of weight δ acting on the
space of densities of weight 1−δ
2 .
Let S = Sab|D(x)|δ be a principal symbol of the operator ∆. Let ∆sing be an
operator belonging to an arbitrary canonical pencil (28) with the same weight δ and
with the same principal symbol S = Sab|D(x)|δ.
Then the diﬀerence ∆−∆sing is an operator of order ⩽1. It equals to gen-
eralised Lie derivative (22) with respect to a vector ﬁeld +zeroth order operator of
multiplication on a density:
∆= ∆sing + LX + F(x)|D(x)|δ .
In the case if operator ∆is self-adjoint, ∆+ = ∆, then Lie derivative vanishes
(X = 0).
It follows from this Corollary that if the operator ∆: F 1−δ
2
→F 1+δ
2
is self-adjoint
operator then it is given in local coordinates by the expression
∆= 1
2
³
Sab(x)∂a∂b + ∂bSba(x)∂a + US(x)
´
|D(x)|δ ,
205

where
US(x)|D(x)|δ = 1 −δ
2
µ
∂aγa(x) + δ −1
2
θ(x)
¶
|D(x)|δ + F(x)|D(x)|δ .
Here γa, θ are upper connection and Brans-Dicke ﬁeld deﬁning the pencil (28), and
F(x)|D(x)|δ is a density. In particular the self-adjoint operator ∆: F 1−δ
2
→F 1+δ
2
belongs to the canonical pencil deﬁned by the same principal symbol S, and upper
connection γa but diﬀerent θ′ = θ −
4F
(δ−1)2 . It may belong to many other pencils
with diﬀerent upper connections. Self-adjoint operator ∆acting on densities of the
exceptional weight λ = 1−δ
2
does not deﬁne uniquely the canonical pencil. Thus we
come to
4.2. Groupoid of connections
We deﬁne now a groupoid CS of connections associated with contravariant tensor
ﬁeld-density S = Sab|D(x)|δ of weight δ.
Consider a space A of all connections on volume forms (covariant derivatives of
volume forms) on manifold M. This is an aﬃne space associated to the vector space
of covector ﬁelds on M: diﬀerence of two connections ∇and ∇′ is covector ﬁeld
(diﬀerential 1-form):
∇−∇′ = γγγ −γγγ′ = X = Xadxa , where Xa = γa −γ′
a .
Deﬁne a set of arrows as a set {γγγ X
−→γγγ′} such that γγγ,γγγ′ ∈A and γγγ′ = γγγ + X,
where X, diﬀerence of connections is a covector ﬁeld. We come to trivial groupoid
of connections:
−
³
γγγ
X
−→γγγ′´
= γγγ′ −X
−→γγγ ,
³
γγγ1
X
−→γγγ2
´
+
³
γγγ2
Y
−→γγγ3
´
= γ1
X+Y
−→γ3 .
(31)
Pick an arbitrary contravariant symmetric tensor ﬁeld-density of the weight δ:
S(x) = Sab(x)|D(x)|δ. The tensor ﬁeld-density S and an arbitrary connection γγγ
deﬁne the self-adjoint operator ∆(S,γγγ) on the algebra of densities. It is the oper-
ator deﬁned in the equation (27) with principal symbol S, with upper connection
γa = Sabγb and Brans-Dicke function θ = γaγa (see the Corollary 1). Consider cor-
responding pencil of operators and the operator ∆sing (S,γγγ) which belongs to this
pencil and acts on densities of weight 1−δ
2 :
∆sing (S,γγγ) = ∆(S,γγγ)
¯¯
F 1−δ
2
=
= |D(x)|δ
2
µ
Sab(x)∂a∂b + ∂bSba∂a + 1 −δ
2
µ
∂aγa(x) + δ −1
2
γaγa(x)
¶¶
.
(32)
Thus an arbitrary contravariant symmetric tensor ﬁeld-density S = Sab(x)|D(x)|δ of
the weight δ and an arbitrary connection γγγ deﬁnes self-adjoint operator ∆sing (S,γγγ)
206

by the relation (32). “Pseudoscalar” part of this operator is equal to
US,γγγ(x)|D(x)|δ =
µ1 −δ
2
¶ µ
∂aγa(x) + δ −1
2
γaγa(x)
¶ |D(x)|δ
2
.
(33)
Let γγγ and γγγ′ be two diﬀerent connections. Diﬀerence of two operators ∆sing (S,γγγ)
and ∆sing (S,γγγ′) with the same principal symbol S = Sab(x)|D(x)|δ is the scalar
density of the weight δ. Calculate this density. If γγγ′ = γγγ + X then
∆sing (S,γγγ′) −∆sing (S,γγγ) = US,γγγ′(x)|D(x)|δ −US,γγγ(x)|D(x)|δ =
µ1 −δ
4
¶ µ
∂aγ′a(x) + δ −1
2
γ′
aγ′a(x) −∂aγa(x) −δ −1
2
γaγa(x)
¶
|D(x)|δ =
µ1 −δ
4
¶ µ
∂a(SabXb) + (δ −1)γa(SabXb) + δ −1
2
XaSabXb
¶
|D(x)|δ =
1 −δ
4
µ
div γγγX + δ −1
2
X2
¶
.
(34)
Here div γγγX is the divergence of vector density X on M with respect to connection
γγγ (see (23)). With some abuse of notation we denote the covector ﬁeld Xadxa and
vector density of the weight δ, Xa|D(x)|δ = SabXb|D(x)|δ by the same letter X.
Deﬁnition 2 Let S = Sab(x)|D(x)|δ be contravariant symmetric tensor ﬁeld-density
of the weight δ.
The groupoid CS is a subgroupoid of arrows γγγ
X
−→γγγ′ of trivial
groupoid (31) such that the operators ∆sing (S,γγγ) and ∆sing (S,γγγ′) deﬁned by the
formula (32) coincide:
CS = {Groupoid of arrows γγγ X
−→γγγ′such that ∆sing (S,γγγ′) = ∆sing (S,γγγ)}.
(35)
Using the formula (34) for diﬀerence of operators ∆sing (S,γγγ′) and ∆sing (S,γγγ)
rewrite the deﬁnition (35) of groupoid CS in the following way:
CS = {Groupoid of arrows γγγ
X
−→γγγ′ such that div γγγX + δ −1
2
X2 = 0} .
In other words the arrow γγγ
X
−→γγγ′ belongs to the groupoid CS if two canonical
pencils ∆λ(S,γγγ) and ∆λ(S,γγγ′) intersect at the operator ∆sing (S,γγγ).
We consider the case δ ̸= 1, The case δ = 1 is trivial 3.
Denote by [γγγ] the orbit of a connection γγγ in the groupoid CS
[γγγ] = {γγγ′ :
γγγ
X
−→γγγ′ ∈CS} .
3In this case all the operators ∆sing (S,γγγ) do not depend on connection γγγ. Principal symbol
S = Sab|D(x)| deﬁnes the canonical operator ∆(S): F0 →F1 such that in local coordinates ∆(s)f =
∂a
 Sab∂bf

|D(x)|. The groupoid CS is the trivial groupoid of all connections.
207

Proposition 4 An arbitrary contravariant symmetric tensor ﬁeld S = Sab(x)|D(x)|δ
of the weight δ deﬁnes the groupoid of connections CS and the family of second order
diﬀerential operators of the order δ and acting on densities of the weight 1−δ
2 :
∆([γγγ]) = ∆sing (S,γγγ): F 1−δ
2
→F 1+δ
2 .
Operators of this family have the same principal symbol and they depend on equiva-
lence classes of connections which are orbits in the groupoid CS.
Remark 7 Let γγγ1,γγγ2 and γγγ3 be three arbitrary connections. Consider correspond-
ing arrows γγγ1
X
−→γγγ2, γγγ2
Y
−→γγγ3 and γγγ1
X+Y
−→γγγ3. We have that γγγ1
X
−→γγγ2 + γγγ2
Y
−→γγγ3 =
γγγ1
X+Y
−→γγγ3. This means that for non-linear diﬀerential equation div γγγX + δ−1
2 X2 = 0
the following property holds:
(
div γγγ1X + δ−1
2 X2 = 0
div γγγ2Y + δ−1
2 Y2 = 0
⇒div γγγ1(X + Y) + δ −1
2
(X + Y)2 = 0 .
It follows from (34) the cocycle condition that the sum of left-hand side of ﬁrst two
equations is equal to the left hand-sight of the third equation.
Remark 8 Let ρρρ be an arbitrary volume form. Using the operator ∆([γγγ]) = ∆sing (S,γγγ
one can consider second order operator
∆: ∆f = ρρρ−1+δ
2 ∆([γγγ])
³
ρρρ
1−δ
2 f(x)
´
on functions depending on volume form ρρρ. Calculating one comes to
∆f = 1
2
µ
Sab∂a∂b + ∂bSba∂a + (δ −1)γa
ρρρ∂a + 1
tδ (US,γγγ −US,γγγρρρ)
¶
f
Here γγγρρρ : γa = −∂a log ρ is a ﬂat connection deﬁned by the volume form ρρρ =
ρ(x)|D(x)|, γa = Sabγb and US,γγγ/tδ is a ”pseudoscalar” part (33) of the opera-
tor (32). The diﬀerence US,γγγ −US,γγγρρρ is a density of weight δ (see Corollary 3 and
equation (34)).
We consider now examples of groupoids and corresponding operators ∆sing (S,γγγ).
4.3. Groupoid CS for a Riemannian manifold
Let M be Riemannian manifold equipped with Riemannian metric G. (As always
we suppose that M is orientable compact manifold with a chosen oriented atlas).
Riemannian metric deﬁnes principal symbol S = G−1. In local coordinates Sab = gab
(G = gabdxadxb). It is principal symbol of operator of weight δ = 0.
208

Let γγγ be an arbitrary connection on volume forms. The diﬀerential operator
∆= ∆sing (G−1,γγγ) with weight δ = 0 transforms half-densities to half-densities.
Due to the formulae (32), (33) this operator equals to
∆sing (G−1,γγγ):
F 1
2 →F 1
2 ,
∆sing (G−1,γγγ)
=
1
2
µ
gab∂a∂b + ∂bgba∂a + 1
2∂aγa −1
4γaγa
¶
.
We come to the groupoid
CG =
½
Groupoid of arrows γγγ
X
−→γγγ′ such that div γγγX −1
2X2 = 0
¾
and to the operator on half-densities depending on the class of connections
∆([γγγ]) = 1
2
µ
gab∂a∂b + ∂bgba∂a + 1
2∂aγa −1
4γaγa
¶
.
On Riemannian manifold one can consider distinguished Levi-Civita connection
on vector ﬁelds. This connection deﬁnes the connection γγγG on volume forms, such
that γG
a = −Γb
ab = −∂a log √det g, where Γa
bc are Christoﬀel symbols of Levi-Civita
connection.
(We also call this connection on volume forms, Levi-Civita connec-
tion.) Consider the orbit, equivalence classes [γγγG] in the groupoid CG of Levi-Civita
connection γγγG. This orbit deﬁnes the distinguished operator on half-densities on
Riemannian manifold:
∆= ∆G
¡
[γγγG]
¢
.
One can always choose special local coordinates (xa) such that in these coordinates
det g = 1. In these local coordinates γG
a = 0 and the distinguished operator ∆on
half-densities has the appearance:
∆
=
1
2
³
gab∂a∂b + ∂bgba∂a
´
,
for s = s(x)|D(x)|
1
2 ,
∆s
=
1
2
³
∂b
³
gba∂as(x)
´´
|D(x)|
1
2 .
The diﬀerential equation
div γγγX −1
2X2 = 0
deﬁning groupoid CG has the following appearance in these coordinates:
∂Xa(x)
∂xa
−1
2Xa(x)Xa(x) = 0 .
All connections γγγ such that they have appearance γa(x) = Xa(x) in these special
coordinates, where Xa(x) is a solution of this diﬀerential equation, belong to the
orbit [γγγG].
209

The operator ∆
¡
[γγγG]
¢
belongs in particular to the canonical pencil associated
with the Beltrami-Laplace operator (see the example 6).
On the other hand let γγγ be an arbitrary connection and let ρρρ be an arbitrary
volume form on the Riemannian manifold M. One can assign to volume form ρρρ the
ﬂat connection γγγρρρ : γρρρ
a = −∂a log ρ. Consider operator
1
√ρρρ∆([γγγ]) √ρρρ on functions
(see Remark 8.) We come to scalar operator on functions
∆f = 1
2
³
∂a
³
gab∂bf
´
−γρρρa∂a + R
´
where scalar function R equals to
R = UG,γγγ −UG,γγγρρρ = 1
2divX −1
4X2 .
Here vector ﬁeld X is deﬁned by the diﬀerence of the connections: X = γγγ −γγγρρρ.
It is interesting to compare formulae of this subsection with constructions in the
paper [2] for a case of Riemannian structure.
Our next example is a groupoid on odd symplectic supermanifold. Before dis-
cussing it sketch shortly what happens if we consider supermanifolds instead mani-
folds.
4.4. Supermanifold case
Let M be n|m-dimensional supermanifold. Denote local coordinates of super-
manifold by zA = (xa, θα) (a = 1, . . . , n; α = 1, . . . , m). Here xa are even coordinates
and θα odd coordinates: zAzB = (−1)p(A)p(B)zBzA, where p(zA), or shortly p(A) is
a parity of coordinate zA; (p(xa) = 0, p(θα) = 1).
We would like to study second order linear diﬀerential operators ∆= SAB∂A∂B+
. . . . Principal symbol of this operator is supersymmetric contravariant tensor ﬁeld
S = SAB. This ﬁeld may be even or odd:
SAB = (−1)p(A)p(B)SBA, p(SAB) = p(S) + p(A) + p(B) .
The analysis of second order operators can be performed in supercase in a way
similar to usual case. We have just to worry about sign rules. E.g. the formula (28)
for canonical pencil of operators has to be rewritten in the following way
∆λ = tδ
2
³
SAB(x)∂B∂A + (−1)p(A)p(S+1)∂BSBA∂A
´
+
+tδ
2
³
(2λ + δ −1) γA(x)∂A + (−1)p(A)p(S+1)λ∂AγA(x) + λ (λ + δ −1) θ(x)
´
. (36)
Here ∆is even (odd ) operator if principal symbol S is even (odd) tensor ﬁeld (see
for detail [15]).
In the case if S is an even tensor ﬁeld and it is non-degenerate then it deﬁnes
Riemannian structure on (super)manifold M. We come to groupoid CS in a same
210

way as in a case of usual Riemannian manifold considered in the previous subsection.
(We just must worry about signs arising in calculations.)
In particular for even
Riemannian supermanifold there exists distinguished Levi-Civita connection which
canonically induces the unique connection on volume forms. This connection is a
ﬂat connection of the canonical volume form:
ρρρg =
p
Ber gAB|D(z)| , γA = −∂A log ρ(z) = −(−1)BΓB
BA .
(37)
Here gAB is a covariant tensor deﬁning Riemannian structure, (SAB = gAB) and
ΓA
BC are Christoﬀel symbols of Levi-Civita connection of this Riemannian structure.
Ber gAB is Berezinian (superdeteriminant) of the matrix gAB. It is super analog of
determinant. The matrix gAB is n|m × n|m even matrix and its Berezinian is given
by the formula
Ber gAB = Ber
µgab
gaβ
gαb
gαβ
¶
= det
µgab −gaγgγδgδb
det gαβ
¶
.
(38)
(Here as usual gγδ stands for the matrix inverse to the matrix gγδ.)
The situation is essentially diﬀerent in the case if S = SAB is an odd super-
symmetric contravariant tensor ﬁeld and respectively ∆= SAB∂A∂B + . . . is an
odd operator. In this case one comes naturally to the odd Poisson structure on
supermanifold M if tensor S obeys additional conditions.
Namely, consider cotangent bundle T ∗M to supermanifold M with local coor-
dinates (zA, pB) where pA are coordinates in ﬁbres dual to coordinates zA (pA ∼
∂
∂zA ). Supersymmetric contravariant tensor ﬁeld S = SAB deﬁnes quadratic master-
Hamiltonian, odd function HS =
1
2SABpApB on cotangent bundle T ∗M.
This
quadratic master-Hamiltonian deﬁnes the odd bracket on the functions on M as
a derived bracket:
{f, g} = ((f, HS) , g)),
p ({f, g}) = p(f) + p(g) + 1 .
(39)
Here ( , ) is canonical Poisson bracket on the cotangent bundle T ∗M.
The odd
derived bracket is anti-commutative with respect to shifted parity and it obeys
Leibnitz rule:
{f, g} = −(−1)(p(f)+1)(p(g)+1){g, f},
{f, gh} = {f, g}h + (−1)p(g)p(h){f, h}g .
This odd derived bracket becomes an odd Poisson bracket in the case if it obeys
Jacobi identity
(−1)p((f)+1)p((h)+1){{f, g}, h} + (−1)p((g)+1)p((f)+1){{g, h}, f}
+(−1)p((h)+1)p((g)+1){{h, f}, g} = 0 .
(40)
It is a beautiful fact that the condition that derived bracket (39) obeys Jacobi identity
can be formulated as a quadratic condition (H, H) = 0 for the master-Hamiltonian:
(HS, HS) = 0 ⇔Jacobi identity for the derived bracket { , } holds.
(41)
211

(See for detail [14]). In the case if S is an even ﬁeld (Riemannian geometry) master-
Hamiltonian H is even function and Jacobi identity is trivial (see for detail [14] and
[15].)
From now on suppose that tensor ﬁeld S is odd and it deﬁnes an odd Poisson
bracket on the supermanifold M, i.e. the relation (41) holds. This odd Poisson
bracket corresponds to an odd symplectic structure in the case if the bracket is
non-degenerate, i.e.
the odd tensor ﬁeld S is non-degenerate tensor ﬁeld.
The
condition of non-degeneracy means that there exists inverse covariant tensor ﬁeld
SBC: SABSBC = δB
C . Since the matrix SAB is an odd matrix (p(SAB) = p(A) +
p(B)+1) this implies that matrix SAB has equal number of even and odd dimensions.
We come to conclusion that for an odd symplectic supermanifold even and odd
dimensions have to coincide. It is necessarily n|n-dimensional.
The basic example of an odd symplectic supermanifold is the following: for an
arbitrary usual manifold M consider its cotangent bundle T ∗M and change parity
of the ﬁbres in this bundle. We come to an odd symplectic supermanifold ΠT ∗M.
To arbitrary local coordinates xa on M one can associate local coordinates (xa, θa)
in ΠT ∗M, where odd coordinates θa transform as ∂a:
xa′ = xa′(xa) ,
θa′ = ∂xa
∂xa′ θa .
(42)
In these local coordinates the non-degenerate odd Poisson bracket is well-deﬁned by
the relations
{xa, θb} = δa
b , {xa, xb} = 0, {θa, θb} = 0 .
(43)
(These relations are invariant with respect to coordinate transformations (42).)
Remark 9 An arbitrary odd symplectic supermanifold E is symplectomorphic to
cotangent bundle of a usual manifold M.
One may take M as even Lagrangian
surface in M. (See for detail [12].) One can consider instead supermanifold E the
cotangent bundle ΠT ∗M for usual manifold M. The diﬀerence between cotangent
bundle to M with changed parity of ﬁbres and supermanifold ΠT ∗M is that in the
supermanifold ΠT ∗M one may consider arbitrary parity preserving coordinate trans-
formations of local coordinates x and θ which may destroy vector bundle structure,
not only the transformations (42) which preserve the structure of vector bundle.
4.5. Groupoid CS for an odd symplectic supermanifold
Let E be (n|n)-dimensional odd symplectic supermanifold, where an odd sym-
plectic structure and respectively odd non-degenerate Poisson structure are deﬁned
by contravariant supersymmetric non-degenerate odd tensor ﬁeld S = SAB such that
Jacobi identities (40) hold. We study second order odd operators ∆= 1
2SAB + . . .
of weight δ = 04.
4The following construction of groupoid is obviously valid in the general Poisson case, but in
this subsection we are mainly interested in the odd symplectic case
212

Let γγγ be an arbitrary connection on volume forms. The diﬀerential operator
∆= ∆sing (S,γγγ) of weight δ = 0 with principal symbol S deﬁned by equation (32)
transforms half-densities to half-densities. Due to the formulae (32), (33) and (36)
this operator equals to
∆sing (S,γγγ):
F 1
2 →F 1
2 ,
∆sing (S,γγγ)
=
1
2
µ
SAB∂B∂A + ∂BgBA∂a + 1
2∂AγA −1
4γAγA
¶
.
(44)
We come to the groupoid
CS =
½
Groupoid of arrows γγγ
X
−→γγγ′ such that div γγγX −1
2X2 = 0
¾
and to the operator on half-densities depending on the class of connections
∆([γγγ]) = 1
2
¡
SAB∂B∂A + ∂BgBA∂a + US ([γγγ])
¢
, where US ([γγγ]) = 1
2∂AγA−1
4γAγA .
(45)
It is here where a similarity with Riemannian case ﬁnishes. On Riemannian manifold
one can consider canonical volume form and distinguished Levi-Civita connection
which induces canonical ﬂat connection γγγ (see equation (37)). On an odd symplectic
supermanifold there is no canonical volume form 5 and there is no distinguished
connection on vector ﬁelds. On the other hand it turns out that in this case one can
construct the class of distinguished connections which belong to an orbit of groupoid
CS. Namely study the equation
div γγγX −1
2X2 = 0 ,
(46)
which deﬁnes the groupoid CS. According to equations (34), (44) and (45) we see
that for operators ∆([γγγ]) acting on half-densities we have that
∆
¡
[γγγ′]
¢
−∆([γγγ]) = ∆sing (S,γγγ′) −∆sing (S,γγγ) = 1
4
µ
div γγγX −1
2X2
¶
.
(47)
We call the equation (46) Batalin-Vilkovisky equation. Study this equation.
It is convenient to work in Darboux coordinates. Local coordinates zA = (xa, θb)
on supermanifold E are called Darboux coordinates if non-degenerate odd Poisson
bracket has the appearance (43) in these coordinates.
We say that connection γγγ is Darboux ﬂat if it vanishes in some Darboux coordi-
nates.
Lemma 1 Let γγγ,γγγ′ be two connections such that both connection γγγ and γγγ′ are Dar-
boux ﬂat. Then the arrow γγγ
X
−→γγγ′ belongs to the groupoid CS. i.e. the Batalin-
Vilkovisky equation div γγγX −1
2X2 = 0 holds for covector ﬁeld X = γγγ′ −γγγ.
5Naive generalisation of formulae (37) and (38) does not work since in particular SAB is not an
even matrix
213

We will prove this lemma later.
Remark 10 In fact lemma implies that a class of locally deﬁned Darboux ﬂat connections de-
ﬁnes globally the pseudoscalar function US in (44). Let {zA
(α)} be an arbitrary atlas of Darboux
coordinates on E. We say that the collection of local connections {γγγ(α)} is adjusted to Darboux
atlas {zA
(α)} if every local connection γγγ(a) (deﬁned in the chart zA
(α)) vanishes in these local Darboux
coordinates zA
(α). Let {γγγ(α)} and {γγγ′
(α′)} be two families of local connections adjusted to Darboux
atlases {zA
(α)} and {zA′
(α′)} respectively. Then due to Lemma all arrows γγγ(α)
X
−→γγγ(α′) γγγ′
(α)
X
−→γγγ′
(α′)
and γγγ(α)
X
−→γγγ′
(α′) belong to local groupoid CS (if charts (zA
(α)), (zA
(α′)), (zA′
(α)) and (zA′
(α′)) intersect).
This means that in spite of the fact that the family {γα} does not deﬁne the global connection, still
equations (46) hold locally and operator ∆= ∆(S,γγγα) globally exists. (These considerations for
locally deﬁned groupoid can be performed for arbitrary case. One can consider the family of locally
deﬁned connections {γγγa} such that they deﬁne global operator (32).) On the other hand in a case of
an odd symplectic supermanifold there exists a global Darboux ﬂat connection, i.e. the connection γγγ
such in a vicinity of an arbitrary point this connection vanishes in some Darboux coordinates. Show
it.
Without loss of generality suppose that E = ΠT ∗M (see Remark (9).) Let σ be an arbitrary
volume form on M (we suppose that M is orientable). Choose an atlas {xa
(α)} of local coordinates
on M such that σ is the coordinate volume form, i.e. σ = dx1
(α) ∧. . . dxn
(α). Then consider asso-
ciated atlas {xa
(α), θa(α)} in supermanifold ΠT ∗M which is an atlas of Darboux coordinates. For
this atlas as well as for the atlas {xa
(α)} Jacobians of coordinate transformations are equal to 1.
Thus we constructed atlas of special Darboux coordinates in which all the Jacobians of coordinate
transformations are equal to 1. The coordinate volume form ρ = D(x, θ) is globally deﬁned. The
ﬂat connection deﬁned by this volume form vanishes. We deﬁned globally Darboux ﬂat connection.
We come to Proposition
Proposition 5 In an odd symplectic supermanifold there exists a canonical orbit of
connections. It is the class [γγγ] in the groupoid CS, where γγγ is an arbitrary Darboux
ﬂat connection. We will call this canonical class of connections “the class of Darboux
ﬂat connections”.
For any connection belonging to the canonical orbit of connections, the pseu-
doscalar function US in (45) vanishes in arbitrary Darboux coordinates6. The op-
erator ∆= ∆[γγγ] on half-densities corresponding to this class of connections has the
following appearance in arbitrary Darboux coordinates zA = (xa, θb):
∆=
∂2
∂xa∂θa
.
(48)
(This canonical operator on half-densities was introduced in [12].)
Now prove Lemma 1.
For an arbitrary volume form ρρρ consider an operator
∆ρρρf = 1
2div ρρρgrad f .
(49)
6This function vanishes not only for globally deﬁned Darboux ﬂat connection but for a family
of connections adjusted to an arbitrary Darboux atlas (see Remark 10)
214

Here grad f is Hamiltonian vector ﬁeld {f, zA} ∂
∂zA corresponding to the function
f. (Compare with (2).) This is the famous Batalin-Vilkovisky odd Laplacian on
functions. In the case if zA = (xa, θa) are Darboux coordinates and a volume form
ρρρ is the coordinate volume form, i.e. ρρρ = D(x, θ), then odd Laplacian in these
Darboux coordinates has the appearance
∆=
∂2
∂xa∂θa
.
(50)
(This is the initial form of the Batalin-Vilkovisky operator in [3].
(Geometrical
meaning of BV operator, and how formulae (49) and (50) are related with canonical
operator (48) on semidensities see in [10, 19, 12].)
The equation (46) characterising the groupoid (the Batalin-Vilkovisky equation)
is related with the Batalin-Vilkovisky operator by the following identity:
−e
F
2 ∆ρρρe
−F
2 = 1
4div γγγX −1
8X2 ,
(51)
where connection γγγ is a ﬂat connection induced by volume form (γa = −∂a log ρ )
and vector ﬁeld X is Hamiltonian vector ﬁeld of the function F.
We use this identity to prove the lemma. Let connection γγγ vanishes in Dar-
boux coordinates zA = (xa, θa) and connection γγγ′ vanishes in Darboux coordinates
zA′ = (xa′, θa′). Then (compare with equation (11)) connection γγγ′ has in Darboux
coordinates zA = (xa, θa) the following appearance
γ′
A = ∂zA′(zA)
∂zA
(γA′ + ∂A′ log J) ,
where J is Jacobian of Darboux coordinates transformation J = Ber J = Ber ∂(x,θ)
∂(x′,θ′)
(see also the formula (38))
Hence for the arrow γγγ
X
−→γγγ′ the covector ﬁeld X equals to
XA = −∂
∂za log Ber ∂(x′, θ′)
∂(x, θ) .
Apply identity (51) where γa = 0, ρρρ = D(x, θ) is coordinate volume form and
F = −log Ber ∂(x′,θ′)
∂(x,θ) . Using (49) and (50) we arrive at
1
4div γγγX−1
8X2 = −e
F
2 ∆ρρρe
−F
2 = −
Ãs
Ber ∂(x, θ)
∂(x′, θ′)
!
∂2
∂xa∂θa
Ãs
Ber ∂(x′, θ′)
∂(x, θ)
!
= 0 .
The last identity is the famous Batalin-Vilkovisky identity [4] which stands in the
core of the geometry of Batalin-Vilkovisky operator.
Lemma is proved.
215

Remark 11 The canonical operator (48) assigns to every even non-zero half density
s and to every volume form ρρρ the functions σs and σρρρ:
σ(s) = ∆s
s ,
σ(ρρρ) = ∆√ρρρ
ρρρ
(see [12]). In the articles [1, 2] Batalin and Bering considered geometrical proper-
ties of the canonical operator (48) on semidensities. In these considerations they
used the formula for expressing the canonical operator (48) in arbitrary coordinates.
This formula was suggested by Bering in [6].
Clarifying geometrical meaning of
this formula and analysing the geometrical meaning of the scalar function σ(ρρρ) they
come to beautiful result: if ∇is an arbitrary torsion-free aﬃne connection in an odd
symplectic supermanifold which is compatible with volume form ρρρ, then the scalar
curvature of this connection equals (up to a coeﬃcient) to the function σρρρ.
Remark 12 In work [14] we have considered in particular the following “Batalin-
Vilkovisky groupoid” of volume forms on an odd Poisson manifold:
the arrows
ρρρ J
−→ρρρ′, where J = ρρρ′
ρρρ , are deﬁned by the Batalin-Vilkovisky equation ∆ρρρ
√
J = 0.
The operator ∆ρρρ is deﬁned by equation (49). Assign to each arrow ρρρ J
−→ρρρ′ the arrow
γγγ
X
−→γγγ′ of the groupoid CS such that the connections γγγ,γγγ′ are deﬁned by volume
forms ρρρ,ρρρ′ respectively (γa = −∂a log ρ and γ′
a = −∂a log ρ′). Then it follows from
equation (51) that the groupoid of volume forms is a subgroupoid of the groupoid CS.
Both the Batalin–Vilkovisky groupoid and the groupoid of connections CS consid-
ered here can be regarded as Lie groupoids over inﬁnite-dimensional manifolds, which
are the space Vol×(M) of the non-degenerate volume forms and the space Conx(M)
of the connections on densities on a manifold M respectively. The corresponding
Lie algebroids can be described as follows.
For the Batalin–Vilkovisky groupoid, the Lie algebroid is the vector bundle over
the (inﬁnite-dimensional) manifold Vol×(M) whose the ﬁber over the point ρ is the
vector space of all solutions of the equation ∆F = 0 where F ∈C∞(M). The
anchor is tautological: it sends a function F to the inﬁnitesimal shift ρ 7→ρ + ερF.
A section of this bundle is a functional F[ρ] of a volume form with values in functions
on M such that for each ρ, the above equation is satisﬁed. The Lie bracket is the
restriction of the canonical commutator of vector ﬁelds on Vol×(M) and can be
expressed by an explicit formula
[F, G][ρ; x] =
Z
M
Dy ρ(y)
µ
F[ρ; y]δG[ρ; x]
δρ(y)
−G[ρ; y]δF[ρ; x]
δρ(y)
¶
.
Here we write F[ρ; x] for the value of F[ρρρ] ∈C∞(M) at x ∈M.
For the groupoid of connections (with a ﬁxed tensor density Sab of weight δ), the
Lie algebroid is the vector bundle over Conx(M) whose ﬁber over γ ∈Conx(M) is
the vector space of all solutions of the equation divγγγX = 0. A section is a functional
of a connection taking values in these vector spaces. The anchor is tautological: it
216

sends a covector ﬁeld Xa to the inﬁnitesimal shift of the connection γa 7→γa + εXa.
The Lie bracket can be expressed by the formula
[X, Y ]a[γ; x] =
Z
M
Dy
µ
Xb[γ; y]δYa[γ; x]
δγb(y)
−Yb[γ; y]δXa[γ; x]
δγb(y)
¶
.
(For supermanifolds the formulas for the brackets contain extra signs.) Note that
since the groupoids in question are subgroupoids of the trivial (pair) groupoids, these
Lie algebroids are subalgebroids of the respective tangent bundles.
4.6. Groupoid CS for the line
We return here to simplest possible manifold—real line. The symmetric tensor
ﬁeld S of rank 2 and of weight δ on real line R is a density of the weight δ −2:
S = S∂2
x|D(x)|δ ∼S|D(x)|δ−2. Consider on R the canonical vector density |D(x)|∂x
which is invariant with respect to change of coordinates. Its square deﬁnes canonical
tensor density SR = |D(x)|2(∂x)2 of weight δ = 2.
We see that on the line there is a canonical pencil of second order operators of the
weight δ = 2: |D(x)|2 ¡
∂2
x + . . .
¢
with canonical principal symbol SR = |D(x)|2(∂x)2.
The operator (32) belonging to this pencil acts on densities of weight 1−δ
2
= −1
2 and
transforms them into densities of weight 1+δ
2
= 3
2. According to (32) It has the
following appearance:
∆(γγγ):
Ψ(x)|Dx|−1
2 7→Φ(x)|D(x)|
3
2 = 1
2
µ∂2Ψ(x)
∂x2
+ U(x)Ψ(x)
¶
|Dx|
3
2 ,
where according to the equation (33)
Uγγγ(x) = −1
4
µ
γx + 1
2γ2
¶
|D(x)|2.
(52)
This is Sturm-Lioville operator recognisable by speciaialists in projective geometry
and integrable systems7 (see e.g. [9] or the book [18]).
We see that in this case the diﬀerence of operators is
∆(γγγ′) −∆(γγγ) = −1
4
µ
γ′
x + 1
4
¡
γ′¢2
¶
|D(x)|2 + 1
4
µ
γx + 1
2 (γ)2
¶
|D(x)|2 =
−1
4
µ
div X + 1
2X2
¶
.
Here X = (γ′ −γ)|D(x)|2∂x is vector density of the weight δ = 2. (compare with
formulae(34) and (47)).
7The operator ∆corresponds to a curve t 7→[u1(t) : u2(t)], R →RP 1 in projective line deﬁned
by the solutions of equation ∆u = 0.
217

Using formulae (35) we come to the following canonical groupoid CR on the line:
CR = {Groupoid of arrows γγγ X
−→γγγ′such that ∆(γγγ′) = ∆(γγγ), i.e. Uγγγ′ = Uγγγ} =
= {Groupoid of arrows γγγ
X
−→γγγ′ such that div γγγX + 1
2X2 = 0} ,
where ∆(γγγ) is the Sturm-Lioville operator (52). It depends on the orbit of connection
γγγ, the class [γγγ].
Analyse the equation div X + 1
2X2 = 0 deﬁning the canonical groupoid CR and
compare it with the cocycle related with the operator.
If covector ﬁeld equals to γγγ′ −γγγ = a(x)dx, then the vector density equals
to SR(a(x)dx) = a(x)|D(x)|2∂x.
Hence X2 = a2(x)|D(x)|2 and div X = (ax +
γa)|D(x)|2. We come to the equation:
div X + 1
2X2 =
µ
ax + γa + 1
2a2
¶
|D(x)|2 = 0 .
Solve this diﬀerential equation.
Choose coordinate such that γ vanishes in this
coordinate. Then
X =
2dx
C + x,
where C is a constant .
(53)
On the other hand analyze the action of diﬀeomorphisms on the connection γγγ and
the Sturm-Lioville operator (52). Let f = f(x) be a diﬀeomorphism of R. (We
consider compactiﬁed R ∼S1 and diﬀeomorphisms preserving orientation.) The new
connection γγγ(f) equals to yx
³
γγγ
¯¯
y(x) + (log xy)x
´
dx and the covector ﬁeld γγγ(f) −γγγ
equals to
X(f) = γγγ(f) −γγγ = γ(y(x))dy + (log xy)y dy −γ(x)dx .
We come to cocycle on group of diﬀeomorphisms:
cγγγ(f) = ∆f(γγγ) −∆(γγγ) = ∆(γγγf) −∆(γγγ) = 1
4
¡
Uγγγf −Uγγγ
¢
=
−1
4
µ
div X(f) + 1
2
³
X(f)´2¶
.
(54)
In coordinate such that γ = 0, X(f) = (log xy)y dy. Combining with a solution
(53) we come to equation (log xy)x =
2
C+x. Solving this equation we see that
div X(f) + 1
2
³
X(f)´2
= 0 ⇔y = ax + b
cx + d is a projective transformation .
The cocycle (54) is coboundary in the space of second order operators and it is a
non-trivial cocycle in the space of densities of the weight 2. This cocycle vanishes
218

on projective transformations. This is well-known cocycle related with Schwarzian
derivative (see the book [18] and citations there):
cγγγ(f)
=
∆f(γγγ) −∆(γγγ) = ∆(γγγf) −∆(γγγ)
=
1
2
¡
Uγγγf −Uγγγ
¢
= −1
4
µ
div X(f) + 1
2
³
X(f)´2¶
=
−1
4
¡
Uγγγ(y)|D(y)|2 + S (x(y)) |D(y)|2 −Uγγγ(x)|D(x)|2¢
,
where
S(x(y)) = xyyy
xy
−3
2
µxyy
xy
¶2
.
is Schwarzian of the transformation x = x(y).
If γ = 0 in coordinate x then
c(f) = S(x(y))|D(y)|2.
4.7. Invariant densities on 1|1-codimension submanifolds in an odd
symplectic supermanifold and mean curvature
In the previous examples we considered second order operators which depend
on a class of connections on volume forms.
In particular we considered for odd
symplectic supermanifold the canonical class of Darboux ﬂat connections (see the
Proposition 5) and with use of this class redeﬁned the canonical operator (48).
Now we consider an example of geometrical constructions which depend on sec-
ond order derivatives and on a class of Darboux ﬂat aﬃne connections.
Let E be an odd symplectic supermanifold equipped with volume form ρρρ. Let
C be a non-degenerate submanifold of codimension (1|1) in E (induced Poisson
structure on C is non-degenerate). We call such a submanifold ”hypersurface”.
For an arbitrary aﬃne connection ∇and arbitrary vector ﬁeld Ψ consider the
following object:
A(∇, Ψ) = Tr (Π (∇Ψ)) −div ρΨ ,
(55)
where Π is the projector on (1|1)-dimensional planes which are symplectoorthogonal
to hypersurface C at points of this hypersurface.
(We deﬁne these objects in a
vicinity of C.)
Let vector ﬁeld Ψ be symplectoorthogonal to the hypersurface C at points of C.
Then one can see that at points of C
A(∇, fΨ) = fA(∇, Ψ)
(56)
for an arbitrary function f. Thus A(∇, Ψ) is well-deﬁned on C in the case if Ψ is
a vector ﬁeld deﬁned only at C and Ψ is symplectoorthogonal to C. This object is
interesting since it is related with canonical vector valued half-density and canonical
scalar half-density on the manifold C (see for detail [11].)
Namely let Ψ be a vector ﬁeld on hypersurface C symplectoorthogonal to C.
From now on we suppose that it also obeys to following additional conditions
219

• it is an odd vector ﬁeld p(Ψ = ΨA∂A) = p(ΨA) + p(A) = 1,
• it is non-degenerate, i.e. at least one of components is not-nilpotent,
• ω(Ψ, Ψ) = 0, where ω is the symplectic form in E, deﬁning its symplectic
structure.
One can see that these conditions uniquely deﬁne vector ﬁeld Ψ at every point of
C up to a multiplier function. Consider now a following volume form ρΨ on C: Let
H be an even vector ﬁeld on hypersurface C such that it is symplectoorthogonal to
C and ω(H, Ψ) = 1. Deﬁne an half-density ρρρΨ by the condition that for an arbitrary
basis {e1, . . . en−1; f1, . . . , fn−1} of surface C
ρρρΨ (e1, . . . en−1; f1, . . . , fn−1) = ρρρ (e1, . . . en−1, H; f1, . . . , fn−1, Ψ) .
(Here e1, . . . en−1 are even basis vectors and f1, . . . , fn−1 are odd basis vectors.)
Using formula (38) for Berezinian and relation (56) one can see that for an arbitrary
function f,
ρρρfψ = ρρρΨ
f2 .
We come to conclusion that vector valued half-density Ψ√ρρρΨ is well-deﬁned odd
half-density on hypersurface C. Applying equation (55) we come to well-deﬁned
half-density on hypersurface C: sC(∇) = A(∇, Ψ)√ρρρΨ. This half-density depends
only on aﬃne connection ∇.
We say that aﬃne supersymmetric connection ∇on E with Christoﬀel symbols
ΓC
AB is Darboux ﬂat aﬃne if there exist Darboux coordinates zA = (xa, θb) such
that in these Darboux coordinates the Chrsitoﬀel symbols of the connection vanish:
∇A∂B = 0. (Darboux ﬂat aﬃne connection on E induces Darboux ﬂat connection
γγγ : γA = (−1)BΓB
AB on volume forms.)
Proposition 6 The half-density sC(∇) does not depend on a connection in the class
of Darboux ﬂat connections: sC(∇) = sC(∇′) for two arbitrary Darboux ﬂat aﬃne
onnections ∇and ∇′.
This statement in not explicit way in fact was used in the work [11] where the
half-density was constructed in Darboux coordinates.
The Proposition implies the existence of canonical half-density on hyperLsurfaces
in odd symplectic supermanifold. This semidensity was ﬁrst calculated straightfor-
wardly in [13]
On one hand the invariant semindensity in odd symplectic supermanifold is an
analogue of Poincare-Cartan integral invariants. On the other hand the construc-
tions above are related with mean curvature of hypersurfaces (surfaces of codimen-
sion 1) in the even Riemannian case: if C is surface of codimension (1|0) in Rieman-
nian manifold M then one can consider the canonical Levi-Civita connection and
canonical volume form. Applying constructions above we come to mean curvature.
220

In the odd symplectic case there is no preferred aﬃne connection compatible with
the symplectic structure(see for detail [11]).
Acknowledgment We are grateful to O.Little for useful discussions which were
helpful for understanding the relation of formula (55) with invariant half-density.
Khudaverdian is very happy to acknowledge the wonderful environment of the MPI
which facilitates the working on this paper.
References
[1] I. A. Batalin, K. Bering, J. Math. Phys. 49, 033515 (2008).
[2] I. A.Batalin, K. Bering, J. Math. Phys. 50, 073504 (2009).
[3] I. A. Batalin, G. A. Vilkovisky, Phys. Lett. B 102, 27 (1981).
[4] I. A. Batalin, G. A. Vilkovisky, Nucl.Phys. B 234, 106 (1984).
[5] F. A. Berezin, Introduction in superanalysis. Expanded translation from the
Russian: Introduction to analysis with anticommuting variables. A. A. Kirillov
(Editor), Moscow State Univerisity, Moscow (1983). Translation edited by D.
A. Leites, D. Reidel, Dordrecht (1987).
[6] K. Bering, J. Math. Phys. 47, 123513 (2006).
[7] P. Cohen, Y. Manin, D. Zagier. Automorphic pseudodiﬀerential operators. Al-
gebraic aspects of Integrable systems., A. S. Fokas and I. M. Gelfand (Editors).
Boston, Burkhauser, (1997), pp.17-47.
[8] C. Duval, V. Yu. Ovisenko, Advances in Mathematics 132, 316 (1997).
[9] N. J. Hitchin, G. B. Segal and R. S. Ward Integrable systems. The Clarendon
Press, Oxford Univ. Press, New-York (1999).
[10] O. M. (H. M.) Khudaverdian, J. Math. Phys. 32, 1934 (1991).
[11] O. M. (H. M.) Khudaverdian, Comm. Math. Phys. 198, 591 (1998).
[12] H. M. Khudaverdian, Comm. Math. Phys. 247, 353 (2004).
[13] O. M. (H. M.) Khudaverdian, R. L. Mkrtchian, Lett. Math. Phys. 18, 229
(1989).
[14] H. M. Khudaverdian, T. Voronov, Lett. Math. Phys. 62, 127 (2002).
[15] H. M. Khudaverdian, T. Voronov, In Amer. Math. Soc. Transl.(2), Vol.212,
179 (2004).
221

[16] P. Lecomte Classiﬁcation projective des espaces d’operateurs diﬀerentiells agis-
sant sur les densities. C. R. Acad. Sci. Paris.–Ser.1 Math. (1999), 328. 4,
pp.287–290.
[17] D. A. Leites, The theory of Supermanifolds. Karelskij Filial AN SSSR (in
Russian) (1983). Seminar on Supermanifolds, D. Leites (Editor). Reports of
Stockholm University, 1986 V1990. V. 1 V35. ca 2000 pp.
[18] V. Ovsienko, S. Tabachnikov Projective Diﬀerential Geometry Old and New
From Schwarzian Derivative to the Cohomology of Diﬀeomorphism Groups.
Cambridge University Press (2005).
[19] A. S. Schwarz, Comm. Math. Phys. 155, 249 (1993).
[20] T. Voronov Geometric integration theory on supermanifolds. Sov. Sci. Rev. C,
Math. 9, 1 (1992).
222

Quantum superpositional beam-splitter  
for two-bunch atom interferometer  
 
 Lilit A.  Hovhannisyan, Gevorg Muradyan, Atom Zh. Muradyan 
Department of Physics, Yerevan State University 
1 Alex Manoogian Street, 0025 Yerevan, Armenia 
 
Abstract 
The problem of Kapitza - Dirac diffraction is solved in Raman-Nath approximation 
without  imitations on resonance detuning. A formula for the scattering amplitude in a 
definite integral form is obtained. It shows that in case of initial superposition state of 
discrete Gaussian form the scattering spectrum has a new regularity, more usable  for the 
atomic optics. 
 
 
1. Introduction 
 
Interaction of atoms with electromagnetic field has a double nature: it changes 
the population of energy levels and a momentum exchange takes place between the 
field and the atom, as a result of which the speed of atoms changes [1]. The mean 
power, which has an effect on the atom, has a resonance nature and changes the 
sign when crossing the resonance [2]. 
The problem of motion of scattering atoms in the field of counterpropagating 
waves, attracts a constant attention in atomic optics and atomic interferometry 
[3,4]. The mechanism of atom scattering in this case is the re-emission of photons 
of one wave into the other counterpropagating wave, when due to each reemitted 
photon the atom acquires recoil momentum 2 k
 , where k -is the wave vector [5,6]. 
As an unknown for each process of scattering, stand the scattering  probability 
amplitudes
n
 , corresponding to the number n of the re-emitted photons for t  
interaction time [7]. Analytical results for the scattering amplitudes, outside of 
Bragg regime, is possible to obtain only for short times of interaction, when the 
operator of kinetic energy of the atom can be neglected. This is mathematically 
equivalent to the Raman–Nath approximation. By this approximation the scattering 
amplitude with an accuracy of a phase factor are given by the n -order Bessel 
function 
 
( )
(
),
m
m
Rabi
a
t
J
t
=
Ω
                                                            (1) 
where the argument is a product of the Rabi frequency of the optical transition 
between the energy levels of the atom during interaction with the 
counterpropagating waves field [8].  
The characteristic form of the temporal development of the diffraction of 
atomic wave according to the formula (1) for high Rabi frequencies is shown in 
Fig.1. The development is described by two charcteristics: first, the momentum 
spectrum  is symmetrical and monotonic and second, the maximum scattering 
223 

amplitudes always remain grouped on the boundaries of distribution. For later 
discussion is important that formula (1) nevertheless is related to the case of zero or 
large resonance detuning
0
ω
ω
∆=
−
 , where ω  is the field frequency and 
0
ω  is the 
atomic transition frequency. In the presented paper the expression for scattering 
amplitude, derived without limitations for ∆, will have a form of a definite integral, 
which in the limit of small and large ∆ passes into a Bessel function. Thus it can 
be viewed as the generalized form of a Bessel function. 
Detailed comparison with formula (1) shows, that differences have 
quantitative nature only if the atom before interaction has a definite momentum. 
But if the moving atom is in the superposition state of many momentum states the 
evolution of atom acquires a qualitatively new content compared to the case of 
zero or asymptotically large detunings. In particular a periodic oscilliation of 
atomic beam direction from the initial one is possible too. 
 
 
 
Figure 1: Temporal evolution of the atomic diffraction probability in the field 
of  two counterpropagating optical waves, in case of the high 
intensitiestransitions. 
 
 
 
2. Scattering amplitudes 
 
The two-level atom interacts with the field of counterpropaating  waves. 
The electric field is  
                             
(
)
( )
(
)
( )
(
)
1
2
,
. ,
i k z
t
i k z
t
E z t
E
t e
E
t e
c c
ω
ω
−
−
−
=
+
+
                           (2)    
where k
c
ω
=
, z  is the atomic center of mass coordinate  and for amplitudes 
( )
1
E t   
( )
2
E t  is taken a simple law of instantaneous turn-on. Limiting with  dipole 
approximation, for the interacting atom  Hamiltonian we will have 
224 

 
(
)
2
2
0
2
ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
,
,
2
H
H
d E z t
M
z
∂
= −
+
−
∂

                                                           (3) 
where ˆ
0
H  is  the Hamiltonian of  free and immovable atom, M is  atomic mass, 
and d  – operator of dipole moment. The atomic wavefunction can be written in the 
following form:  
 
(
)
(
)
( )
(
)
( )
1
2
-
1
2
, ,
,
,
t
t
i
i
i
t
h
h
z
t
a z t
e
b z t
e
ε
ε
ψ
ψ
ψ
−
−∆
=
+
r
r
r
,                   (4) 
where 
(
)
,
a z t  and 
(
)
,
b z t  are the sought probability amplitudes of the atom being 
in ground and excited states, respectively, 
1ε , 
2
ε  and 
( )
1
ψ
r ,
( )
2
ψ
r are 
eigenvalues and eigenfunctions of the free atoms Hamiltonian, r  – the radius-
vector of optical electron relative to the center of mass. 
The  Raman – Nath approximation  assumes that the atomic displacement 
during interaction is considerably smaller than the light wavelength. Hence it 
proves to be possible to neglect the kinetic energy operator, after which equation 
for the probability amplitudes substantially simplifies and takes the following form: 
 
(
)
(
)
*
*
1
2
,
,
i k z
i k z
i
a z t
d E e
E e
b z t
t
−
∂


= −
+


∂



 ,                                        (5) 
 
(
)
(
)
(
)
*
1
2
,
,
.
i k z
i k z
i
b z t
d
E e
E e
a z t
t
−


∂−
∆
= −
+


∂




                            (6) 
Since the right side coefficient of equation (5) does not depend on time, the 
equation for the amplitude of the ground state
(
)
,
a z t can be obtained from it by 
simply acting from the left side with operator i
t
∂−
∆
∂


, and using equation  (6). 
This will bring to 
 
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
2
2
2
1
2
1
2
2
,
2
cos 2
,
d
i
a z t
E
E
E E
k z
a z t
t
t


∂
∂
+ ∆
= −
+
+


∂
∂



.                           (7) 
The solution of this equation we can present in the form of Fourier- transformation 
in terms of dimensionless space coordinate 2 k z : 
 
(
)
( )
2
,
i n k z
n
n
a z t
a
t e
∞
= −∞
= 
,                                                                  (8) 
where the unknown amplitude 
( )
na
t  will be sought in the form of a definite 
integral 
 
( )
( )
(
)
0
1
cos
i
t
na
t
e
n
d
π
λ ϕ
ϕ
ϕ
π
=

                                                    (9) 
with unknown function 
( )
λ ϕ . Substitution of (8) and (9) into (7) gives two 
possible expressions for ( )
λ ϕ : 
 
( )
( )
1
,
2
2
i
i
λ ϕ
ξ ϕ
∆
∆
= −
±
+
                                                    (10) 
where  ( )
( )
1
2
1
2
2
cos
ξ ϕ
ξ
ξ
ξ ξ
ϕ
≡
+
+
 and 
2
2
2
2
1,2
1,2
4
/
.
d E
ξ
=
∆

 
225 

The general solution, as usually, is presented as a superposition of two 
linearly independent solutions  
       
( )
( )
(
)
(
)
( )
(
)
(
)
1
1
2
2
0
0
exp
cos
exp
cos
.
na
t
C
i
t
n
d
C
i
t
n
d
π
π
λ
ϕ
ϕ
ϕ
λ
ϕ
ϕ
ϕ
=
+


         (11) 
The coefficients 
1
C  and 
2
C  are determined from initial conditions. If, for example, 
before interaction the atom resided on the ground state and was in rest, then 
 
1
1
2
1
4
1
[ ]
2
1
4 1
sign
C
F
ξ ξ
ξ
ξ
−




∆

=
+






+
+




,
1
1
2
1
4
1
[ ]
2
1
4 1
sign
C
F
ξ ξ
ξ
ξ
−




∆

=
−






+
+




,        (12)
where 
( )
F x is the elliptic integral of the first kind. The obtained solution (11) with 
coefficients (12) and integrands (10) is the generalization of known formula (1) in 
the case of arbitrary resonance detuning.  
 
 
        3. Numerical calculations 
 
        As shows the more detailed analysis of the situation, the biggest differences 
from the Bessel regularities are obtained, when the initial state of the atom is a 
superpositional one. For example, when at the beginning it has the following 
discrete Gaussian distribution [9]: 
                                                  (
)
2
,
0
i n k z
n
n
a z t
s e
∞
= −∞
=
= 
,                                    (13) 
 
   
(
)
2
2
4
1
1
,
n
i
i
n
ns
e
e
ν
αν
α
σ
π
σ
−
−
−
=
                                 (14) 
where s  is the distribution FWHM and a is the initial phase of each scattering 
component   n
0,
1,
2,....
=
±
±
Then for the scattering amplitudes instead of (11) we 
will have the following, more general expression 
 
( )
( )
(
)
(
)
( )
(
)
(
)
4
2
1
0
2
2
0
1
1
exp
1
exp
cos
2
2
2
exp
1
exp
cos
2
2
2
(
),
i
n
na
t

t
n
t
C
i
i
i
d
t
n
t
C
i
i
i
d
α
π
ν
π
ν
π
σ
ν
ξ ϕ
αν
ν ϕ
ϕ
σ
ν
ξ ϕ
αν
ν ϕ
ϕ
σ
∞
= −∞
∞
=−∞
=



∆

−
∆


−
+
+
−
−
+











∆

−
∆


+
−
−
+
−
−












(15) 
with the same coefficients 
1
C , 
2
C  that appear in (12). 
      For illustrating the new regularities, we will limit the discussion to the cases 
0
α =
 and 
2
α
π
=
. In the case 
0
α =
, for example was obtained9 that if we 
proceed from the Bessel approximation for the scattering amplitudes, then initial 
Gaussian distribution in the course of interaction monotonically increases its width 
and only. Calculations according to the formula (15) give a qualitatively different 
result: the distributions are split into two identical peaks, which preserving the 
form, symmetrically move away from the distribution center. Fig.2 illustrates this   
226 

 picture at  
6
18 10
t =
×
(here and afterwards t  is given in 
1
−
∆ units.  
                                       
 
Figure 2: Picture of the momentum distribution for a moving atom scattering 
in the field of counterpropagating waves  at 
7
59 10
t =
×
. Initial distribution had 
a Gaussian form (14) with the phase parameter
0
α = , with half-width
10
σ =
. 
 
Qualitative differences are present also for 
2
α
π
=
. Within the framework of 
the Bessel approximation the initial Gaussian distribution is monotonically moving 
to one side with a weak change of the form. Formula (15) gives a new, oscillatory 
behavior: in the beginning the Gaussian peak, as in  Bessel approximation case, is 
moving in one direction, but soon in symmetrically opposite direction gradually 
appears a new peak, the growth of whichis accompanied by the decrease of the first 
one, before it totally disappears as in Fig.3. Subsequently the reverse process 
occurs, and two peaks, oscillating in  reversed phase, monotonically are moving 
away from the distribution center(Fig.4(a) and Fig.4(b)).  It is evident  that the 
atomic wave packet evolution preserves the Gaussian form. 
 
Figure 3: Appearance of a new peak in the momentum distribution of atom, 
when scattering in the field of intense counterpropagating waves for 
2
α
π
=
, 
10
σ =
, 
7
6 10
t = ×
. 
227 

                        
 
Figure 4a: Appearance of a new peak in the momentum distribution of atom, 
when scattering in the field of intense counterpropagating waves for 
2
α
π
=
, 
10
σ =
, 
7
6.07 10
t =
×
. 
 
            
                        
 
Figure 4b: Appearance of a new peak in the momentum distribution of atom, 
whenscattering in the field of intense counterpropagating waves 
2
α
π
=
, 
10
σ =
, 
7
6.12 10
t =
×
. 
 
Not less interesting, especially for applied optics, appears the case α
π
=
. In this 
case it proves to be possible to obtain a table-shaped form of momentum 
distribution, which is the base form for high resolutionspectroscopy [10]. Such a 
distribution is shown in Fig.5. 
228 
 

              
Figure 5: Form “of the table” of the momentum distribution for a movingatom 
in the Raman - Nath approximation. α
π
=
, 
10
σ =
, 
6
17.8
10
t =
×
. 
 
 
 
4. Coclusion 
 
The problem of resonance Kapitza-Dirac scattering of atom in the laser field 
of counterpropagating waves is solved in Raman-Nath approximation without the 
limitations put on the resonance detuning. The obtained formulas somewhat 
generalize 
the known Bessel 
functions 
expression 
for 
the 
scattering 
amplitudes. More valuable is the fact that the refinement of formula allows to 
obtain table-like momentum distribution forms, desirable in applied atomic optics 
and interferometry.  
 
 
 
      References 
 
[1] S. Stenholm, Basics of  laser spectroscopy (Mir, Moscow, 1987); V.G. 
Minogin,  V.S. Letokhov, Pressure of  laser radiation on the atoms (Nauka, 
Moscow, 1986); A.P. Kazantsev, G.I. Surdutovich, V.P. Yakovlev, Mechanical 
action of  light on atoms (Nauka, Moscow, 1991).  
[2] G.A. Askaryan, JETP 42, 1567 (1962). 
[3] E. Arimodo, H. Lew, T. Oka, Phys. Rev. Lett. 43, 753 (1979); W.D. Phillips, 
J.V. Prodan, H.J. Metcalf, J. Opt. Soc. Am. B 2, 1751 (1985).   
[4] H.J. Metcalf, P. van der Straten, Laser cooling and trapping (Springer, New 
York, 1999); Ch.J. Foot, Atomic Physics (Oxford University Press, New York, 
2005); Y. Castin, arXiv:cond-mat/0105058 (2001).  
[5] J.K. Pachos, P.L. Knight, Phys. Rev. Lett. 91, 107902 (2003); I. Bloch , Nature 
Physics 1, 23 (2005); J.K. Chin, D.F. Miller, Y. Liu, C. Stan, W. Setiavan, C. 
Sanner, K. Xu, W. Ketterle, Phys. Rev. Lett., Nature 443, 961 (2006); S.P. 
Papp, J.M. Pino, R.J. Wild, S. Ronen, C.E. Wieman, D.E. Jin, E.A. Cornell, 
Phys. Rev. Lett. 101, 135301 (2008).  

[6] P. Berman, Atom Interferometry (Acad. Press, New York, 1997); A.D. Cronir, 
J. Schmiedmayer, D.E. Pritchard, arXiv:0712.3703 (2007); J.M. Hogen, 
D.M.S. Johnson, M.A. Kasevich, arXiv:0806:3261 (2008).  
[7] A.Zh. Muradyan, Proceedings of AN ARM. SSR, Physics 10, 361 (1975). 
[8] V.M. Arutyunyan, A.Zh. Muradyan, Reports to AN ARM. SSR 60, 275 
(1975); R.J. Cook, A.F. Bernhardt, Phys. Rev. A 18, 2533 (1978); P.J. Martin, 
P.L. Gould, B.J. Oldaker, A.H. Miklich, D.E. Pritchard, Phys.Rev.A 36, 2495 
(1987).  
[9] A.M. Ishkhanyan, Phys.Rev.A 61, 063611 (2000). 
[10] 
J. Ye, S.T. Cundiff, Femtosecond Optical Frequency Comb Technology 
(Springer, New York, 2005).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
230 

	
 
 	

  

	 
.. 1, 	.	. 
1,2 
1-	
 (
)   
0051 .	 123, , 	
 
2  ,  
0025 . 
 1, , 	
 
 
       
 
 
 
 
 
 
        . ! 
       , 
    "      
     ,  #    
,   $        
 . %        
         . &  
 $    "     ,  # 
  
 
'' 
	-( 
  . 
)$ $       InSb   
  . %,   #  
        
      #"   . 
 
      1.  
       %$  *    
  $   #   , 
#"  ,      
       -  
 [1, 2]. !   ,    
 
 
", 
 
$, 
 $,   ,  
   ..,    $ 
 $,  #,    # 
   *, * #    
    [3–6]. +,   
 
$ 
 
 
' 
, 
#"  ,   "  
         . 
%,   "   *  
  , $   
 #      [7, 
8]. 
          $    
231 

 
  ",    , 
        ('' 
, ) (., . [1]).       
    ''    ",  
$  ' * "   
,    $ " . 
       
$ 
 
'' 
 
  , ,   ,   # 
$,  $ $ "     
 ,  (. ., [9–11]). -   
     , "  
 - ,    $ * 
  [4, 9].         ,  
 ,  , $ *   
* 
 
 
 
 
[12] 
 
$ 
#"     ' [13, 
14]. 
       
  ,   *    
'' 
 
 
 
 
 
 $.      
       
  ' . !    
  (-) #     
  "  . %  ,  
 
 
 
- 
 
'' 
     $ “ ”. 
 
        
         2.  ! "#$%  &!#'( )( 
 
 
        
      $  
      : “” 
 
“”, 
 
 
 
“” 
 
"    $# “” [7]. % , 
     $   
 ' ', : 
• 
" 
 
'' 
, 
#" 
“#”  “#”  ($ (-
)); 
• 
 
" 
 
 
 
 
 
  ''     (  
 ); 
• 
 "     
 (   ); 
232 

• 
   *  (     
   ). 
              *  
    *. .    “” 
 # ,   ''  
 $     *  
 [15]. 
        /     ,  
  "        
''  [16]. !,    ''  
 
 * 
, 
 
 
  
$ 
   $# “” . 
        /  ' * ,    ,  
,         
  ( 1012 0) #  # '. % 
         
  # .    $  , 
    #   * $  
   .   $  * 
 
$ 
 
 
 
 
$# 
''   [1]. 
    
 
        3. * + , ""#  !-! "#$%.   
            &!#'( ) 
 
       )  $     
        $  
   " “#”  “#” #" 
$  , , , # 
 *    ,   $   
   
(
)
1
2
ˆ
,
H x x
       
 
(
)
1
1
ˆH
x
,     
(
)
2
2
ˆH
x
  
   
(
)
1
2
ˆ
,
V x x
: 
                            
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
1
2
1
1
2
2
1
2
ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
,
,
H x x
H
x
H
x
V x x
=
+
+
.                            (1) 
1 ,    ' 
(
)
1
2
,
x x
Ψ
   
    
(
)
1
2
ˆ
,
H x x
   E    [7]: 
                                  
(
)
(
)
(
)
1
2
1
2
ˆ
,
,
0
H x x
E
x x
−
Ψ
=
.                                         (2) 

  ,    1-    * 
  2-,      
233 

   $ $   *#  
,  
 
  
 
. 
2 , 
 
'   “”  
2x , ,   
(
)
1
1
2
;
n
x x
Φ
  
(
)
1
2
n
E
x
  '    
 
                                   
(
)
(
)
(
)
1
2
1
1
1
2
ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
;
,
f
H
x x
H
x
V x x
=
+
,                                    (3) 
  #, #" 
(
)
1
1
2
;
n
x x
Φ
  
(
)
1
2
n
E
x
: 
                 
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
1
1
1
1
1
1
2
1
2
2
1
2
ˆ
ˆ
,
;
;
n
n
n
H
x
V x x
x x
E
x
x x


+
Φ
=
Φ


,                 (4) 
         
' 
(
)
(
)
(
)
1
2
1
2
2
1
,
n
x
x x
F
L
x
Φ
∈
Ω
:
     
 
                          (
)
(
)
(
)
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
2
1
2
1
,
,
;
;
n
n
n
n
n n
x x
x x
dx
δ
∗
′
′
′
Φ
Φ
=
Φ
Φ
=

.                    (5) 
2,  # # '#  
(
)
1
2
,
x x
Ψ
  
$  
                                       
(
)
(
)
(
)
1
1
2
1
2
1
2
,
2
,
;
n
n n
x x
x x
x
χ
Ψ
≈Φ
.                              (6) 

  (6)  
          (
)
)
(
)
;
(
  
          
          
          
)
(
)
;
(
 )
(
ˆ
)
,
(ˆ
)
(
ˆ
2
,
2
1
,
2
,
2
1
2
2
2
1
1
1
2
1
1
2
1
2
1
1
x
x
x
E
x
x
x
x
H
x
x
V
x
H
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
χ
χ
Φ
=
=
Φ
+
+
                   (7) 
 $    
(
)
1
1
2
;
n
x x
∗
Φ
    
 
1x ,       
$# 
                      
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
1
1
2
1
2
1
2
2
2
2
,
2
,
,
2
ˆ
n
n n
n n
n n
H
x
E
x
x
E
x
χ
χ
+
=
.                       (8) 
% , #   
(
)
2
2
ˆH
x
  # 
2x , 
"#  
(
)
1
1
2
,
n
x x
Ψ
,  , #,    
$ : 
          
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
1
1
2
1
1
2
2
2
1
2
,
2
1
2
2
2
,
2
ˆ
ˆ
,
,
n
n n
n
n n
H
x
x x
x
x x
H
x
x
χ
χ
Φ
≈Φ
.            (9) 
      /  (9) ,    
(
)
1
2
n
E
x
,  
     , #   '' 
    “” . - ,  
  *# #"  ,    
,   $     
“” ,  "   
2x  
“” . 3*  (8),  #" $ 
234 

 
(
)
1
2
n
E
x
   -       
 ,  $# (-) [17]. 
      
  ,   $ $   
#  ''     
 -, #"   . % , 
  $        
 
 
* 
 
 
* 
      . - 
,  -     $   
     . 
/ ,    $      
 “ ”. (" # 
 “ ”     
 [8],          
         
#   . 
      
  *#  ,      
#" : 
(
)
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
0,
1
,
,
1
x
y
a
b
V x y
x
y
a
b

+
≤

= 
∞
+
>
	
, 
 
 
 
 
(10) 
 a   b     *  . %  
 
b
a
>>
,  
 
 
 
 
 
(11) 
 ,  “”  $    oX ,  
“” –    oY . %  # * 
,  $   oX ,  '   
y ,       * 
( )
2
2
2
1
/
a y
a
y
b
=
−
.  
 
 
 
 
(12) 
- ,   '    “” 
 $  : 
(
)
( )
(
)
( )
(
)
( )
1
1
1
/ 2
2
,
sin
n
n
x
a y
x y
a y
a y
π
+
+
Φ
=
,  
 
 
(13) 
( )
(
)
( )
1
2
2
2
1
2
1
2
n
n
E
y
a
y
π
µ
+
=

, 
 
 
 
 
(14) 
 µ − . 
      1 * (8) #,  $     
oY    
 
235 

                             ( )
( )
(
)
(
)
1
2
2
2
1
2
2
2
1
,
,
8
1
/
,
.
n
n
E
y
y
b
a
y
b
V y
y
b
π
µ

+
=
<

−
= 
∞
>
	

  
(15) 
)  ,    (15)   *. 
 
  $  ,       
 #         
  . / ,    y
b
<<
, 
   (15) $ $    - 
( )
(
)
(
)
2
2
2
2
2
2
1
1
2
2
2
2
1
1
8
8
n
n
V y
y
a
a b
π
π
µ
µ
+
+
≈
+


. 
 
 
 
(16) 
2 “”     
   
(
)
1
1
1
2
n
n
ab
π
ω
µ
+
=

. 
 
 
 
 
(17) 
- ,      '  
  $   
           
,...
2,1,0
   
),
2
/
1
(
8
)1
(
8
)1
(
2,1
2
2
1
2
2
2
2
1
2
2
2
1
=
+
+
+
+
=
n
n
ab
n
a
n
E
n
n
µ
π
µ
π


 
          






+
+
×














−
=
)
(
)
2
/)
(
)(
1
(
sin
)
(
2
 
          
          
)!
2
(
)]
2
/(
exp[
)
,
(
1
0
2
/
1
2
0
2
0
2
,
2
2
2
1
y
a
y
a
x
n
y
a
y
y
H
n
y
y
y
y
x
n
n
n
n
π
π
ψ
 ,                     (18) 
 
(
)
0
1
2
1
ab
y
n
π
=
+
. 
 
 
         
       4. 	!$/&!#)'  !' !  
 
                  
    - '    
[18-24]. /#  $    ,  #  , 
  $ #    '' 	-
(   .  ,  '',  #" 
 ,  ,      
      .   
  A
r
  ϕ  # ' #    
#   #    .  
236 

2 ,   
                                               
t
A
c
E
∂
∂
+
∇
−
=



1
ϕ
                                                 (19) 
 
                                                       
A
rot
H


 
=
                                                     (20) 
   , , ,   A

   
f
A
A
∇
+
=



'
 ( 
f −  '),     
                                                           
0
)
( 
=
∇f
rot

                                             (21) 
 
                                                
H
A
rot
A
rot



=
′
=
 
 
.                                            (22) 

  ,    '    
' # E

  H

,     A

  A′

  
    '#   .   
        p  
  "   P

,  * 
                                                        
A
c
e
p
P



−
=
,                                               (23) 
 e − , c −  . %   0  
   #" : 
                                          
)
(
2
1
ˆ
2
r
U
A
c
e
p
H



+






−
=
µ
.                                  (24) 
   (24),   A

    '  
$  ˆH .  
 ,    
    ' ,     
      $   
# 
' 
''. 
 
 
 
     1949   '  
 

, 
 
 
  
$# 
  
    '.   * 	 
 (          
 .      *  ,   
 ,   "   H

,  
$"  ,  
0
≠
A

,   ,    
 ,  $      . 
- 
, 
 
 
  
 
 $     . 
!    $ $   
   , "   . ), 
$     ,    *. 
237 

3 #"   
)
(r
A 

    Γ : 
                                                 
I
ld
A
=

Γ


.                                                         (25) 

  
, 
                                      
Φ
=
=
=



Γ
S
S
S
d
H
S
d
A
rot
ld
A






 
,                              (26) 
 Φ −     "  S . &   
$   $  R     H

, , 
    Γ    $    Φ , $ 
  
                                                                 
2
R H
π
Φ =
.                                        (27) 
  ,     "  Γ   
        
                                                         
0
  ,0
 
≠
=
A
A
rot


,                                      (28) 
$ $ ,  $      . 
),    $,    Γ   
 A

   # '' "   
 "#"  ( )  #   
 . 
 2000   "     
    [18]. !   
         
 InGaAs . %   -      
,  $ $     
 ,     
   #"    0  12T. )    
 #        
   ,       OZ. 
3    ",   ,   # 
      , "  $  
  . / ,     
  " ,     $ $ 
 ,        . 
  
, ,          
 
                                                      
1
2
2
R
R
R
+
=
,                                                 (29) 
 
1(2)
R
− (*) ,   *    
     .  –  
 
                                                       
2
/]
[ r
H
A



=
,                                                 (30) 
238 

    $   
                               
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
ˆ
2
2
8
d
ieH d
e H
H
d
c d
c
ϕ
µ
ϕ
µ
= −
+
+
Ι
Ι
h
,                                  (31) 
 
2
R
µ
Ι =
−   . ( ,  
     
                                                     ˆ
z
i
z
∂
= −
∂
l
h
,                                                   (32) 
    (31),  $  # 
#     ', $   : 
                              
( )
(
)
1
0; 1;
2;...
2
im
m
e
m
ϕ
φ
ϕ
π
=
=
±
±
.                              (33) 
% (33)  (31)  "   , : 
                                              
2
2
0
2
m
E
m


Φ
=
−


Ι
Φ


h
,                                           (34) 
 
2
R H
π
Φ =
−  * (. ' (54))  , 
#"   ,  
0
2
c
e
π
Φ =
h , "  
$ (34),        
    $ , #    
 . 
 *# (34),    
        # 
    
0
m =
,    H

 * # 
  
1
m = −,  – 
2
m = −  .. - , 
#   -   
,   .1. ),  , #" 
  
 
 
 
, 
 
#,   #  ,       $-
  m   #  .  
        ,    #    
,   $      
'' 	-(    . 2 ,  
  #,  $ ,  , 
   ,    $  
   #,         
  ' (34),         
      $,    
  #"   . +,   
* 
0
Φ
Φ
  ,  #"    
     ,  #  
239 

#  . )     * 
   . 
   
,   ,    #   
   , #" # . 
 
 
/        
    " . )   
    InSb ,       
         , 
  #"   
2
2
2
4
2
E
p s
s
s
µ
µ
=
+
−
, 
 
 
 
 
(35) 
 
8
~ 10
s
/ –     . 
&,    "     . 2  
$  ',    ,   InSb  
0.18
g
E =
, ,     ,   
$  . 
 
   ,      
   (35), #    -
0,         
  # *  [8]. &     
 
 
 
 
InSb , 
 
 
$ 
        
  $    " #     R . 
)    $  ,     
     ,  #  ,  
   (35). 
,      
    ,    * L   
240 
3. 1. 	-   .
m=0
m = 0
m = −2
m = −3
m = −1
0
2
4
1
2
3
2
2
/(2
)
E
R
µ

0
2 /
H
R
π
Φ  

  '  $,  $ $    , 
oZ  $   [23]: 
                                                 
( )
1
,
2
im
m
e
ϕ
φ
ϕ
π
=
                                           (36) 
 $ 
             
( )
sin
,
2
2
(
1,2,3,...)
cos
,
2
1
n
n z
n
k
L
z
k
L
n z
n
k
L
π
χ
π



=





=
=




=
+





	
,                      (37) 
 n − , #"     OZ. 
 *  $ (36)  (37), $     
   #     [23]: 
                     
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
4
,
2
0
2
2
2
m n
n

s
m
s
L
π
µ
µ
µ




Φ


=
−
+
+




Ι
Φ




	

h
h
,                   (38) 
 
 
 
 
 
$ 
 
#, 
"#   OZ.  ,   
    ,  * 
2
0
m


Φ
−


Φ


  
$      ,      
       . 
 
           
           5.  $0 
 
           - ,    $ $ 
"     '  -  
  ,     $  
    '    , 
    * . +,    
$     '    
   '   : 
'' $   ",  
   .. %,  #  ,    
   '   , ,  
 ,   $   () 
   ,     
#    . 
 
 
 
241 

#1# 
 
1. 4.2. 4, &.. 4'*, 
 	, 

 

, .: !, 1989. 
2. G. Bastard, Wave mechanics applied to semiconductor heterostructures, 
Halsted, New York, 1988. 
3. 0. , . 
, 
 	 	  	  	
 
	. .: 5, 1960. 
4. P.A. Braun, Discrete semiclassical methods in the theory of Rydberg atoms 
in external fields. Rev. Mod. Phys. 65, 115 (1993).  
5. . 2, 0.. &',     
  . 6	+ 26, 651 (1995).  
6. R.G. Nazmitdinov. Hidden symmetries of two-electron quantum dots in a 
magnetic field. Phys. Rev. B 67, 041305 (2003). 
7. 	.(. , .%. ,   	  
	. .: !, 1966. 
8. .. 0, (.. , ./. , !" #  
	. .: !, 1981. 
9. A. Corella-Madueno et al., Hydrogenic impurities in spherical quantum 
dots in a magnetic field. J. Appl. Phys. 90, 2333 (2001).  
10. A.Kh. Manaselyan, A.A. Kirakosyan. Effect of the dielectric-constant 
mismatch and magnetic field on the binding energy of hydrogenic 
impurities in a spherical quantum dot. Phisica E 22, 825 (2004).  
11. K.G. Dvoyan, E.M. Kazaryan. Impurity states in a weakly prolate (oblate) 
ellipsoidal microcrystal placed in a magnetic field. Phys. Status Sol. B 288, 
695 (2001). 
12. M.S. Kaschiev, S.I. Vinitsky, F.R. Vukajlovic, Hydrogen atom H and H2+ 
in strong magnetic fields. Phys. Rev. A. 22, 557 (1980). 
13. L.B. Zhao, P.C. Stancil, Hydrogen photoionazation cross sections for 
strong-field magnetic white dwarfs. Phys. Rev. A 74, 055401 (2006). 
14. C.V. Clark, K.T. Lu, A.F. Starace, Effects of magnetic and electric fields 
on highly excited atoms. Progress on atomic spectroscopy Part C. Ed. H.G. 
Beyer. New-York: Plenum. 1984. P. 247-320. 
15. 	./. 	 . $  % ##. .: !. 1978. 
16. 5. (, 2$. % %,  

  
#" #   . .: !. 1982. 
17. M. Born, R. Oppenheimer, Zur quantentheorie der molekeln. Annalen der 
Physic. 84, 457 (1927). 
18. A. Lorke et al. Spectroscopy of nanoscopic semiconductor rings. Phys. 
Rev. Lett. 22, 860 (2000). 
19. T. Chakraborty, P.Pietilainen, Electron-electron interaction and the 
persistent current in a quantum ring, Phys. Rev. B 50, 8460 (1994). 
20. V.A. Harutyunyan, K.S. Aramyan, H.Sh. Petrosyan, G.H. Demirjian, 
Optical transitions in spherical quantized layer under the presence of radial 
electrical field, Physica E 24, 173 (2004). 

21.  V.A. Harutyunyan, E. . azaryan, 	. 	. ostanyan, H. A. Sarkisyan, 
Interband transitions in cylindrical layer quantum dot: influence of 
magnetic and electric fields, Physica E 36, 114 (2007). 
22. E.M. Kazaryan, A.A. Kostanyan, H.A. Sarkisyan, Interband transitions in a 
spherical quantum layer in the presence of an electric field: spherical 
rotator model, Journal of Contemporary Physics 42, 145 (2007). 
23. M. Zuhair, A.Kh. Manaselyan, H.A. Sarkisyan, Magneto- and 
electroabsorption in narrow-gap InSb cylindrical layer quantum dot, 
Physica E 41, 1583 (2009).  
24. A.K. Atayan, E.M. Kazaryan, A.V. Meliksetyan, H.A. Sarkisyan, 
Interband 
magnetoabsorption 
in 
cylindrical 
quantum 
layer 
with 
Smorodinsky-Winternitz confinement potential, Journal of Computational 
and Theoretical Nanoscience 7, N6 (2010). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
243 

Pulsed ”three-photon” light
T. V. Gevorgyan1, G. Yu. Kryuchkyan1,2
1Institute for Physical Research, National Academy of Sciences
Ashtarak-2, 0203, Armenia
2Department of Physics, Yerevan State University
1 Alex Manoogian Street, 0025 Yerevan, Armenia
Abstract
Generating multi-photon entangled states is a primary task for applications
of quantum information processing. We investigate production of photon-triplet
in a regime of light ampliﬁcation in second-order nonlinear media under action
of a pulsed laser beam.
For this goal the process of cascaded three-photon
splitting in an optical cavity driven by a sequence of laser pulses with Gaussian
time-dependent envelopes is investigated. Considering production of photon-
triplet for short-time regime and in the cascaded three-wave collinear conﬁgura-
tion we shortly analyze preparation of polarization-non-product states looking
further applications of these results in the cascaded optical parametric oscilla-
tor. It is also demonststed the nonclassical characteritics of the photon-triplet
in phase-space on the base of the Wigner function. Calculating the normal-
ized third-order correlation functions below-and at the generation threshold
of cascaded optical parametric oscillator, we demonstrate that in the pulsed
regime, depending on the duration of pulses and the time-interval separations
between them, the degree of three-photon-number correlation essentially exceed
the analogous one for the case of continuous pumping.
1. Introduction
Multiphoton entangled states have attracted a great interest in probing the foun-
dations of quantum theory and constitute a powerful quantum resource with promis-
ing potential for various applications in quantum information technologies. Recently,
experimental eﬀorts in the direct production of multiphoton joint states, particu-
larly, three- or four-photon states have paved a new stage for the study of multi-
partite entanglement [1]. Indeed, the simultaneous generation of three photons is at
the origin of intrinsic three-particle quantum properties such as Greenberger-Horne-
Zeilinger (GHZ) -class and W-class quantum entanglement [2] - [5]. Up to now,
several physical systems have been proposed for the generation of photon triplet
including third-order nonlinear medium [6] and cascaded spontaneous parametric
down-conversion (PDC) [7, 8]. Experimentally, three-photon down-conversion was
244

studied in third-order nonlinear media [9] - [11] and also by using cascaded second-
order nonlinear parametric processes [12]. Direct generation of photon triplets using
cascaded photon-pairs has been demonstrated in periodically poled lithium niobate
crystals [1]. The distinction of three-photon GHZ and W states entangled in time
and space has been also reported [13, 14]. It was also shown that intracavity three-
photon down-conversion can be eﬀectively realized in cascaded optical parametric
oscillator (OPO) [15]. This scheme that involves cascading second-order nonlinear-
ities is based on the parametric processes of splitting and summing in which the
frequencies between the pump and two subharmonics frequencies are in the ratio of
3 : 2 : 1. Experimental realization of cascaded OPO by using the dual-grid method
of quasi-phase matching (QPM) has been done in Ref. [16]. Most recently, joint
quantum states of three-photons with arbitrary spectral characteristics have been
studied on the base of optical superlattices [17] for the cascaded conﬁguration pro-
posed in [15]. Two cascaded conﬁgurations have been considered in [17] that lead to
production of spontaneous photon triplet in cascaded PDC and generation of high
intensity mode due to cascaded three-photon splitting in optical cavity.
In this paper we continue the investigation of cascaded three-photon splitting
in an optical cavity following the paper [17]. Our goal is twofold. In one part of
the present paper we extend our previous results regarding three-photon splitting in
optical cavity for an experimentally available scheme that is a cascaded parametric
oscillator pumped by a sequence of Gaussian laser pulses (see, Sects. II and III).
The other part of the paper is devoted to studies of quantum properties of ”three-
photon” mode. We discuss preparation of non-product states that are superposition
of three-photon polarization states, however, without any consideration of cavity
eﬀects (see, Sec. IV). We also calculate the Wigner function of the subharmonic,
i.e. ”three-photon mode” showing the negativity in phase-space (see, Sec. V). Our
analysis includes calculation of third-order correlation function of photon numbers
for various operational regimes of pulsed OPO(see, Sec. VI). It is known, that it is
possible to control the behavior of quantum dissipative system by a train of pulses.
In this paper, we use this approach for suppression of dissipation and cavity induced
feedback in cascaded OPO that leads to increasing the level of three-photon-number
correlation.
2. Periodically pulsed cascaded OPO: Generation threshold
In this section we brieﬂy describe the cascaded optical parametric oscillator
(OPO) with a triply resonant optical ring cavity driven by a sequence of laser pulses.
The semiclassical and quantum theories of this device for the monochromatic pump
ﬁeld were developed in Refs. [15, 17] and here we only add some important details re-
garding cascaded OPO under laser pulses with Gaussian time-dependent envelopes.
This cascaded conﬁguration involves the fundamental mode driven by an external
pump ﬁeld at the central frequency ω0 with an amplitude EL and two subharmonic
modes at the frequencies ω1 = ω0
3 and ω2 = 2ω0
3 . Due to intracavity parametric type-
245

I three-wave interactions pump ﬁeld is converted to the subharmonics throughout
two cascaded processes: ω0 →ω1 + ω2 and ω2 →ω1 + ω1. Subharmonic modes have
the same plane polarizations and are all propagating in the same direction. The
pump ﬁeld consists from the sequence of Gaussian laser pulses with the amplitude
E(t, z) = ELf(t)e−i(ω0t−kLz),
(1)
f(t) =
∞
X
n=0
e−(t−t0−nτ)2/T 2,
(2)
where T is the duration of pulses that are separated by time intervals τ.
The
cascaded OPO is dissipative, because the modes suﬀer from losses due to partially
transmission of light through the mirrors of the cavity. We consider below the case
of high cavity losses for the pump mode (γ0 ≫γ, γ1 = γ2 = γ), when the pump
mode is eliminated adiabatically in non-depletion approximation. In this case, the
eﬀective interaction Hamiltonian in the rotating wave approximation reads as
Hint = iℏχ1E0f(t)
¡
a+
1 a+
2 −a1a2
¢
+ iℏχ2
¡
a+2
1 a2 −a2
1a+
2
¢
,
(3)
where E0 = EL/γ0, ai (i=1,2) are the operators of the modes at the frequencies
ω1 = ω0
3 and ω2 = 2ω0
3
and the coupling constants between the modes are expressed
through the Fourier spectra of the second-order susceptibilities of nonlinear crystals
of the length L
χ1 =
Z L
0
dzχ(2)(z)ei∆k1(z)z,
(4)
χ2 =
Z L
0
dzχ(2)(z)ei∆k2(z)z.
(5)
We assume collinear, one-dimensional on z quasi-phase-matching with the phase
mismatch vectors
∆k1(z) = kL(ω0, z) −k1(ω1, z) −k2(ω2, z),
(6)
∆k2(z) = k2(ω2, z) −2k1(ω1, z)
(7)
analyzed in the details [17].
In this regime, the stochastic equations of motion for the complex c-number
variables α1,2 and β1,2 corresponding to the operators a1,2 and a+
1,2, have the following
form
dα1
dt = −γ1α1 + E0f(t)χ1β2 + 2χ2α2β1 + Wα1(t),
(8)
dβ1
dt = −γ1β1 + E0f(t)χ1α2 + 2χ2β2α1 + Wβ1(t).
(9)
246

The equations for α2, β2 are obtained from (8), (9) by exchanging the subscripts
(1) ⇌(2). Our derivation is based on the Ito stochastic calculus, and the nonzero
stochastic correlators are:
⟨Wα1(t)Wα2(t
′)⟩= χ1
ELf(t)
γ0
δ(t −t
′),
(10)
⟨Wα1(t)Wα1(t
′)⟩= 2χ2α2δ(t −t
′),
(11)
⟨Wβ1(t)Wβ1(t
′)⟩= 2χ2β2δ(t −t
′),
(12)
⟨Wα2(t)Wα2(t
′)⟩= 2χ2α1δ(t −t
′).
(13)
The Eqs. (8), (9) and the correlation functions modiﬁes the analogous ones derived
for OPO with monochromatic pumping [15] on the case of non-stationary pump
ﬁeld.
In accordance with the cited paper, for the monochromatic driven cascaded
OPO, zero-amplitude solutions α1 = α2 = 0 of Eqs. (8), (9) with f(t) = 1 are
stable, if EL < Eth =
γ0
χ1
√γ1γ2, while steady-state photon numbers n1 and n2
displays histeresis-cycle behavior in a small domain 2
√
2
3
< EL/Eth < 1.
Thus,
remarkable feature of OPO under monochromatic pump is comparatively low gen-
eration threshold in comparison with the scheme of direct intracavity three-photon
down-conversion, where the pump power threshold is determined by third-order
susceptibility [9].
Below, we derive the threshold value for OPO driven by trains of Gaussian pulses.
The analysis of stochastic equations shows that similar to the standard OPO with
monochromatic pump ﬁeld amplitude, the periodically pulsed OPO also exhibits
threshold behavior, which is easily described through the period averaged pump
ﬁeld amplitude f(t) = 1
τ
R τ
0 f(t)dt. We demonstrate this statement analyzing the
stability of zero-amplitude solutions of α1 = α2 = 0 of Eqs. (8), (9) for both modes
below threshold and for γ1 = γ2 = γ. To check the stability we turn to the linearized
on the small deviations δαi, δβi the equations in the semicalssical approach without
noise terms. These equations can be rewriten in the following form:
d
dtδX± = (−γ ± EL
γ0
χ1f(t))δX±,
(14)
d
dtδY± = (−γ ± EL
γ0
χ1f(t))δY±,
(15)
through the quadrature ﬁeld variables deﬁned as δα± = δα1 ± δα2 and δX± =
1
2(δα± + δα∗
±), δY± = 1
2i(δα± −δα∗
±). In these variables the time evolution has the
simple form
δX±(t) = Λ±(t, t0)δX±(t0),
(16)
247

δY±(t) = Λ∓(t, t0)δY±(t0),
(17)
Λ±(t, t0) = exp(±ELχ1
γ0
Z t
0
f(t
′)dt
′ −γ(t −t0)).
(18)
Analyzing semiclassical equations and operational regimes we choose the switch-
ing time in inﬁnity, i.e.
t0 →−∞, and add in (2) terms with negative n.
In
this case, the function f(t) is periodic on time f(t + τ) = f(t) and the analysis is
simpliﬁed. Since the function f(t) is periodic on time, we can obtain the general
formula
R t
t0 f(t)dt = f(t)(t −t0) + F(t) −F(t0), where F(t) is a periodic function,
F(t + τ) = F(t). Therefore, we see from (16), (17), (18) that the solution αi = 0
below-threshold is stable if EL < γ0γ
χ1 f(t). It is easy to check also that due to noted
periodicity of the amplitude the following formula takes place (see, for example [18])
Z τ
0
dt
∞
X
n=−∞
e−(t−nτ)2/T 2 =
Z ∞
−∞
dte−t2/T 2.
(19)
This formula allows us to calculate the averaged value of the amplitude f(t). On the
whole, we arrive to the result that for the case of Gaussian pulses above threshold
regime is realized if
EL ≥Eth =
τ
T√πEth =
τ
T√π
γ0γ
χ1
.
(20)
The important peculiarity of the system proposed is that the threshold value Eth de-
pends on the coupling constant χ1 which is related to the second-order susceptibility
as well as depends on the characteristics of laser pulses.
3. Numerical simulation of dissipation and decoherence
The cascaded OPO is dissipative, because the modes suﬀer from losses due to
partial transmission of light through the mirrors of the cavity and due to quantum
ﬂuctuations. We analyse dissipative and decoherence eﬀects on the base of master
equation for the density operator of the cavity modes in the Limbland form
∂ρ
∂t = 1
iℏ[Hint, ρ] +
X
i=1,2
γi
¡
2aiρa+
i −a+
i aiρ −ρa+
i ai
¢
.
(21)
We calculate the quantities of interest (the photon number distributions, Wigner
functions, etc.) mainly for the subharmonic mode (1) by using the reduced density
operator ρ1(t) which is constructed from the density operator ρ(t) of both modes
by tracing over the mode (2), ρ1(t) = Tr2(ρ).
We analyze the master equation
numerically using quantum state diﬀusion method (QSD) [19]. According to this
method, the reduced density operator is calculated as the ensemble mean
ρ(t) = M(|ψξ(t)⟩⟨ψξ(t)|) = lim
N→∞
1
N
N
X
ξ
|ψξ(t)⟩⟨ψξ(t)|
(22)
248

over the stochastic pure states |ψξ(t)⟩describing evolution along a quantum trajec-
tory. The stochastic equation for the state |ψξ(t)⟩involves Hamiltonian described by
Eq. (3) and the Linblad operators described by noise terms in the master equation
(21). We calculate the density operator using an expansion of the state vector |ψξ⟩
in a truncated basis of Fock’s number states of modes of the subharmonics (1) and
(2)
|ψξ(t)⟩=
X
n
aξ
n1,n2(t)|n1⟩1|n2⟩2.
(23)
Details of analogous calculations for an anharmonic oscillator in time-modulated
ﬁeld can be found in [20]). The numerical simulations are performed in the trun-
cated Fock basis of the subharmonic modes that are limited by 500 photons. This
approximation is valid for the case of strong nonlinear couplings χ1 and χ2 with
respect to the dissipation parameters.
4. Production of polarization, non-product states of photon triplet
in collinear conﬁguration
Three-photon correlations allow the creation of tripartite entangled states such
as the GHZ state.
For cascaded SPDC in noncollinear conﬁguration spatially-
polarization GHZ states has been considered in [17]. Below we apply the results ob-
tained for preparation of three-photon polarization states in collinear conﬁguration
of interacting waves. Recently, a simple but highly eﬃcient source of polarization-
entangled photon pairs at nondegenerate wavelengths and in collinear conﬁguration
has been demonstrated [21]. We consider the production of polarization-entangled
photon triplet. It is possible for the case when cascaded processes involve polarized
photons.
Thus, we modify the above results considering three-wave interaction with the
indexes of polarization states. Looking further applications of above results for in-
tracavity three-photon down-conversion in collinear conﬁguration of cascading pro-
cesses we concentrate on consideration of non-product states that are entangled
only on polarization degree of freedom but not on spatial variables. Thus, including
into consideration the polarization states of the photons we assume that the type-II
process ω0 →ω1 + ω2 create the pair of photons with a vertical V, (a1(V ), (a2(V ))
and horizontal H, (a1(H), (a2(H)) polarizations in collinear conﬁguration.
If the
pump ﬁeld is oriented at 45◦to the horizontal and vertical axes two processes
ω0 →ω1(V ) + ω2(H) and ω0 →ω1(H) + ω2(V ) take place in the ﬁrst crystal.
The next process is considered as the type-I parametric process. In type-I conver-
sion, photon pairs are created with the same polarization state, but ortogonal to the
input mode. Therefore, the second, type-I crystal is arranged in the manner that
the following process: ω2(H) →ω1(V )+ω1(V ) and ω2(V ) →ω1(H)+ω1(H) should
be realized.
For simplicity, we restrict our attention considering frequency-uncorrelated three-
photon states and assume that the process under photons with (V ) and (H) polar-
249

izations are described by the equal coupling constants. Thus, we assume that photon
pairs in three-wave processes : ω0 →ω1 +ω2, ω2 →ω
′
1 +ω”
1 have correlations on the
polarization, but not on the spectral lines. In analogy with Eq.(3), we model the sum
of the corresponding parametric interactions by the following eﬀective Hamiltonian
H = H1 + H2,
(24)
H1 = iℏχE0f(t)(a+
1 (V )a+
2 (H) + a+
1 (H)a+
2 (V )) + h.c.,
(25)
H2 = iℏk[(a2(V )(a+
1 (H))2 + a2(H)(a+
1 (V ))2)] + h.c..
(26)
Here, a1(V ) and a2(V ) are the annihilation operators of modes (1) and (2) at ver-
tical polarizations, while the operators a1(H), a2(H) corresponds to the horizontal
polarized photons of the frequencies ω1 and ω2, respectively.
We focus on analysing the generation of non-product states for one-passing con-
ﬁguration of cascaded parametric spontaneous processes without consideration of
cavity dynamics and feedback eﬀects.
This approach is valid for short interac-
tion time intervals much shorter than the characteristics relaxation time. In this
case time-evolution of the vector state of the system is described by the second-
order term of the perturbation theory. Choosing the initial state as a vacuum state
|ψin⟩= |0⟩a1(H)|0⟩a2(H)|0⟩a1(V )|0⟩a2(V ) for all modes we derive the ﬁnal state during
time evaluation in the following form
|ψ(t)⟩=
µ
−i
ℏ
¶2
t2H2H1|ψ⟩in =
¯χ¯kE0(|V ⟩|V ⟩|V ⟩+ |H⟩|H⟩|H⟩)|0⟩a2(H)|0⟩a2(V ),
(27)
where ¯χ = χt and ¯k = kt are the coupling constants and the states |V ⟩= a+
1 (V )|0⟩a1(V )
|H⟩= a+
1 (H)|0⟩a1(H) present the vertical and horizontal polarization states of pho-
tons at the frequency ω1 = ω0
3 . Thus, we demonstrate that in this collinear, one-
dimensional cascaded scheme triple photons can constitutes the polarization entan-
gled (non-product) states of light. It should be noted that under cavity feedback
eﬀects the non-product quantum state cannot be described by this simple expres-
sion and we should include the higher-order terms of the perturbation expansion
into consideration.
5. Photon triplet in phase-space: Wigner functions and photon
number distributions in the pulsed regime
Quantum interference signature of three-photon states in phase-space has been
demonstrated for the direct three-photon down-conversion in third-order nonlinear
medium [6, 9] as well as in the cascaded scheme [17] for the case of monochromatic
pumping. We demonstrate now this eﬀect for the pulsed regime of cascaded OPO.
We illustrate these eﬀects numerically on the base of the master equation, however,
250

in the regimes when the dissipation in the cavity is unessential and the dynamic of
modes is almost unitary. For the cavity conﬁguration presented, the validity of such
approximation is guaranteed by consideration of short interaction time for which
the duration of pulses are much shorter than the characteristics relaxation time,
1/(χ1E0), 1/χ2 << t << 1/γ1,2 , provided that the nonlinear coupling constants
exceed the dumping rates for the modes.
Below, we present the results on the photon-number distributions and Wigner
functions for three-photon mode. The photon number distribution for ω1 = ω0
3 mode
is calculated as the diagonal element P1(n) = ⟨n|ρ|n⟩of photonic Fock states while
calculations of the Wigner function for the this mode are performed by using its
standard formula in a Fock space:
W1(ρ, θ) =
X
m,n
ρ1,mnWmn(ρ, θ)
(28)
.
Here, ρ, θ are the polar coordinates in the complex phase space which is deter-
mined by the position and the momentum of quadratures x = (a + a+)/
√
2, y =
(a −a+)/
√
2i, respectively, while the coeﬃcients Wmn(ρ, θ) are the Fourier trans-
forms of the matrix elements of the Wigner characteristic function.
Three-photon structure of the mode is shown on photon-number distributions in
Figs. 1 (a, d). As we see, for short time-intervals, the most probable values of pho-
ton numbers are separated by three photons. In Figs.1 (b, e) we present results on
the Wigner functions that clearly exhibit phase-space quantum interfringes. These
results describe the case of cascaded OPO under two consecutive pulses with the
duration Tγ = 1 ∗10−3 separated by the interval τγ = 6 ∗10−3. Fig.1(b) shows the
Wigner function evolved for a time interval t = t0+6.2∗10−3γ−1 that corresponds to
maximal photon number nmax of the ﬁrst pulse; Fig.1 (e) shows the Wigner function
at t = t0 + 6.2 ∗10−2γ−1 corresponding to nmax of the second pulse. The Wigner
function shows three phase components with an interference pattern in the regions
between them. We show the regions of quantum interference in the contour plots
(see, Figs.1 (c, f)) depicting negative regions of the interference terms in black. Note
that threefold symmetry of the Wigner function and interference pattern has been
demonstrated for the direct three-photon down-conversion in χ(3) media [6, 9]. How-
ever, we note that the results presented here for the pulsed cascaded conﬁguration
are also diﬀerent in details from the analogous calculation of the Wigner function
for the case of monochromatic pump ﬁeld [17].
6. Photon-number correlation in the pulsed regime
The experimental veriﬁcation of time-dependent correlation between photons in
triplet has been demonstrated for one-passing conﬁguration of cascaded SPDC [1].
Considering production of photon triplet in a cavity, it seems that the correlation
251

-3
-2
-1
0
1
2
3
-3
-2
-1
0
1
2
3
-3
-2
-1
0
1
2
3
-3
-2
-1
0
1
2
3
-3
-2
-1
0
1
2
3
-3
-2
-1
0
1
2
3
-3
-2
-1
0
1
2
3
-3
-2
-1
0
1
2
3
Y
X 
0
3
6
9
12
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
(f)
(e)
(c)
(b)
P(n)
n
(a)
Y 
X 
0
3
6
9
12
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
(d)
P(n)
n
Y
X 
Y 
X 
Figure 1: The photon number distributions (a, d), the Wigner functions (b, e) and its
contour plots (c, f) for ω1-mode and for diﬀerent time intervals: t = t0+6.2∗10−3γ−1
(a, b, c); t = t0 + 6.2 ∗10−2γ−1 (d, e, f). The other parameters are: χ1/γ1 = 200,
χ2/γ1 = 100, γ2 = γ1 = γ, Tγ = 1 ∗10−3, τγ = 6 ∗10−3 .
252

between photons can be evidently displayed for short interaction time intervals much
shorter than the relaxation time. Nevertheless, the three-photon number correla-
tion exceeding the coherent level, (that means the normalized third-order correlation
function g(3) > 1), has been demonstrated for cascaded OPO driven by monochro-
matic pumping, in over transient regime for modes generated below the threshold
[17]. This eﬀect decreases if the system moves to the range of the generation thresh-
old. At the threshold, the typical value for the normalized third-order correlation
function for zero delay-time, g(3) = 1.2, has been obtained.
In this Secion, we demonstrate the new regimes of strong three-photon correla-
tion for the pulsed cascaded OPO. We concentrate on numerical simulation of both
the mean photon number of subharmonics as well as the third-order correlation func-
tion. Let us now discuss photon-number correlation in the time domain, considering
output twin light beams from the pulsed cascaded OPO on the base of normalized
third-order photon-numbers correlation function g(3) for the mode (1)
g(3)(t) = Tr(a+3
1 a3
1ρ1(t))/n3(t).
(29)
Here, n(t) = Tr(a+
1 a1ρ1(t)) is the mean photon number. Considering three-photon
number correlation for the intensive cavity mode in the presence of dissipation and
cavity induced feedback, we control quantum dynamics of dissipative systems by
a train of pulses. Here, we use this approach for controlling quantum statistics of
mode, particularly for increasing the level of three-photon-number correlation. We
analyze the cases in which Tγ ≤1 and τγ ≥1, for over transient time-intervals,
t ≫γ−1, considering the operational regimes below-and at the generation threshold.
Typical results for the mean photon numbers and the correlation function g(3) for two
diﬀerent parameters of the Gaussian pulses : T = γ−1, τ = 10γ−1 and T = γ−1, τ =
5γ−1 are presented in Figs. (2) and (4).
As we see from these ﬁgures, the time-
dependence of these quantities repeat the periodicity of the pump laser over transient
time intervals. We also conclude that the maxima of the three-photon correlation are
realized for the deﬁnite time intervals for which the mean photon number of mode
(1) is in the ranges between its maxima and minima. As shown our calculations,
such strong photon correlations take place in nonstationary regime of cascaded OPO
when duration of pulses is close to a characteristic dissipation time. In Figs. (2) we
analyze the mean photon number (Fig. 2(a)) and the correlation function (Fig.2(b))
in the operational regimes of OPO at the generation threshold. In the regime below
the generation threshold, at E/Eth = 0.5 the correlation function display two-peak
structure (see, curve (2)). The lower peak corresponds to the time intervals for which
the mean photon number is between its minimal and maximal values. More correctly,
for the period trains of intervals t = t0 + m11.6γ−1, (m = 1, 2, ...), the mean photon
number n = 50 and the correlation function g(3) = 8.9. The other peaks correspond
to the minimal values of the mean photon number. At the threshold (see, curves (1))
the eﬀect of photon correlation is decreased, although the level of correlation exceeds
the coherent level, g(3) > 1, particularly, we get g(3) = 3.4 for the mean photon
number n=251. Thus, we found a remarkable result that the degree of three-photon
number correlation for the pulsed regime of OPO surpass the analogous result for
253

5
10
15
20
25
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
5
10
15
20
25
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
(b)
(a)
(2)
(1)
(2)
t
n(t)
t
(1)
 
g
(3)
(t)
Figure 2: The mean photon number (a) and the third-order correlation function
(b) versus tγ at the threshold EL/Eth = 1, curves (1) and below the threshold
El/Eth = 0.5, curves (2). The parameters are: χ1/γ = 0.2, χ2/γ = 0.1, γ2 = γ1 = γ,
τγ = 10, Tγ = 1.
OPO with continuous pumping for the same mean photon numbers. Indeed, this
conclusion is illustrated in Figs. (2) and (3), where the comparison of the results on
pulsed regime with the calculations based on the Hamiltonian (3) with f = 1 is done.
Note, that the ideal limit of continuous pumping is realized if T →0, τ →∞for the
case of inﬁnity numbers of pulses. We present on the Figs. (3) the results for OPO
with continuous pumping at the threshold EL = Eth, in which the mean photon
number n = 52 in the steady state regime (curve (2), Fig. 2(a)) approximately
equals to the maximal value of the photon number in the pulsed regime. However,
as we see, the level of the maximal correlation, g(3) = 9 in this case exceeds the
analogous one for the case of continuous pumping, g(3) = 1.2.
It is natural to explain such improvement of three-photon correlation by control
the behavior of a quantum system by an external time-dependent force. The presence
of these eﬀects in the cascaded OPO, particularly, can been seen from the noise-
correlation functions. Indeed, the equation (10) describes a multiplicative noise-
term, where the level of noise is determined by the amplitude of pulsed driving ﬁeld
ELf(t) leading to the control of dissipation. In this spirit, we emphasize that the
idea of controlling the dynamics of a quantum system in the presence of dissipation
and decoherence by an external periodic driving was exploited by many authors
(see, for example, [22] and the references therein). In one of the standard techniques
control of the optical quantum system is achieved through the application of suitable
tailored, synchronized laser pulses [23].
In this way, it is interesting to analyze
254

0
10
20
0
20
40
60
0
5
10
15
20
0
4
8
12
16
(b)
n(t)
(a)
t
g
(3)
(t)
t
Figure 3: Mean photon number (a) and the correlation function (b) for continuously
pumped OPO at the threshold EL/Eth = 1.
The parameters are: χ1/γ = 0.2,
χ2/γ = 0.1, γ2 = γ1 = γ.
the three-photon correlation function in dependence of the time-separation between
pulses, i.e. for the other parameters of driving pulses in additional to the parameters
considered in Figs. 2. The results are presented in Figs. 4 in the regime below the
threshold where strong three-photon correlations are realized. As we see, in this case
the correlation function reach to g(3) = 75 for n = 1.1 (curves (1)) for time-intervals
between pulses, τ = 10γ−1. Decreasing of the time-separation between pulses leads
to decreasing of the correlation function (see, curves (2), where τ = 5γ−1).
7. Conclusion
In conclusion, we have studied quantum properties of photon triplet cardinally
diﬀerent from those of twin photons. Because photon-triplet originates from a single
laser photon, the quantum correlations take place between all three photons allowing
the creation of entangled, non-product states. The production of photon-triplets in
the presence of stimulation radiative processes, cavity feed-back eﬀects and dissipa-
tion have been investigated. We have demonstrated the possibility to create polar-
ization, non-product states of photon-triplet for one-passing, collinear conﬁguration
of cascaded parametric spontaneous processes. We have also illustrated three-photon
structure of sub-harmonic mode on the base of both the photon-number distribution
and the Wigner function. We have demonstrated the operational regimes depending
on the durations of pulses and the intervals between them that guarantees strong
255

10
20
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
0
10
20
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
(b)
(1)
(2)
t
(2)
(1)
g
(3)
(t)
t
(a)
 
n(t)
Figure 4:
The correlation functions (a) and the mean photon numbers (b) at
EL/Eth = 0.2 for time-separation between pulses: τγ = 10, curves (1) ; τγ = 5,
curves (2). The parameters are: χ1/γ = 0.2, χ2/γ = 0.1, γ2 = γ1 = γ, Tγ = 1.
three-photon-number correlations .
This eﬀect of strong correlation takes place
for the deﬁnite time intervals corresponding to generation of high intensity ”three-
photon mode” in over transient regime and for wide ranges of the system parameters.
We hope that these results could be of interest in areas of quantum communications
and photonic quantum computing.
References
[1] H. Hubel et al, Nature Photonics Lett. 466, 09175 (2010).
[2] D.M. Greenberger, M.A. Horne, and A. Zeilinger, in Bell’s Theorem, Quantum
Theory, and Conceptions of the Universe, M. Kafatos, ed. (Kluwer, 1989).
[3] D. Bouwmeester et al, Phys. Rev. Lett. 82, 1345 (1999); J.-W. Pan et al, Nature
(London) 403, 515 (2000).
[4] M. Eibl, N. Kiesel, M. Bourennane, C. Kurtsiefer, and H. Weinfurter, Phys.
Rev. Lett. 92, 077901 (1998).
[5] W.D¨ur, G. Vidal, and J. I. Cirac, Phys. Rev. A 62, 062314 (2000).
[6] K.Banaszek and P.Knight, Phys. Rev. A 55, 2368 (1997).
256

[7] D.M. Greenberger, M.A. Horne, A. Shimony, and A. Zellinger, Am. J. Phys.
58, 1131 (1990).
[8] T.E. Keller, M.H. Rubin, Y. Shih, and L.A. Wu, Phys. Rev. A 57, 2076 (1998).
[9] T. Felbinger, S. Schiller, and J. Mlynek, Phys. Rev. Lett. 80, 492 (1998).
[10] J. Douady, and B. Boulanger, Opt. Lett. 29, 2794 (2004).
[11] K. Bencheikh, F. Gravier, J. Douady, J.A. Levenson, and B. Boulanger, C.R.
Phys. 8, 206 (2007).
[12] H.C. Guo, Y.Q. Qin, and S.H. Tang, Appl. Phys. Lett. 87, 161101 (2005).
[13] J.M. Wen and M. H. Rubin, Phys. Rev. A 79, 025802 (2009).
[14] J. Wen, E. Oh, and Sh. Du, J. Opt. Soc. Am. B 27, (6), A11 (2010).
[15] G.Yu. Kryuchkyan, N.T. Muradyan, Phys. Lett. A 286, 113 (2001); G.Yu.
Kryuchkyan, L.A. Manukyan and N.T. Muradyan, Opt. Comm. 190, 245
(2001).
[16] J.J. Zondy, A. Tallet, E. Ressayre, and M. LeBerre, Phys. Rev. A 63, 023814
(2001).
[17] D.A. Antonosyan, T.V. Gevorgyan, and G.Yu. Kryuchkyan, Phys. Rev. A 83,
043807 (2011).
[18] N.H. Adamyan, H.H. Adamyan, and G.Yu. Kryuchkyan, Phys. Rev. A 77,
023820 (2008).
[19] N. Gisin and I.C. Percival, J. Phys. A 25, 5677 (1992); I.C. Percival, Quantum
State Diﬀusion (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 2002).
[20] H.H. Adamyan, S.B. Manvelyan and G.Yu. Kryuchkyan, Phys. Rev. A 63
022102 (2001); S.B. Manvelyan and G.Yu. Kryuchkyan, Phys. Rev. Lett. 88
094101 (2002); T. V. Gevorgyan, A.R. Shahinyan, G.Yu. Kryuchkyan, Phys.
Rev. A 79 094101 (2009).
[21] P. Trojek and H. Weinfurter, Appl. Phys. Lett. 92, 211103 (2008).
[22] L. Viola, E. Knill, and S. Lloyd, Phys. Rev. Lett. 82 2414 (1999); L. Viola and
E. Knill, Phys. Rev. Lett. 90, 037901 (2003).
[23] G.J. Milburn et al Rev. Mod. Phys. 79, 135 (2007).
257

Magnetic properties, classical and quantum phase
transitions in anti-ferromagnetic models
N.S. Ananikian
A.I. Alikhanyan National Science Laboratory
2 Alikhanyan Brothers Street, 0036 Yerevan, Armenia
Abstract
The magnetization plateaus, biﬀurcation points and chaos are playing the
greate role in the classical and quantum phase transitions. We obtained three-
cycle windows of antiferromagnetic Potts and magnetization plateaus of anti-
ferromagnetic Ising model with multisite interactions. Using Gibbs-Bogolubov
inequality the quantum entanglement (concurrence) of antiferromagnetic spin-
1/2 Ising-Heisenberg model on the triangulated kagome and two dimentional
kagome (ﬂuid 3He) lattices are investigated.
1. Introduction
Entanglement is considered to play a key role for the understanding of strongly
correlated quantum systems, quantum phase transitions and collective quantum
phenomena in particular many-body spin and fermionic lattice models [1]. One can
introduce the fundamental connection between quantum transitions in d dimensions
and certain well studied ﬁnite temperature phase transitions in classical statistical
mechanics in d+1 dimension [2]. The magnetization plateaus have played a great role
in understanding of a large family of nontrivial quantum phenomena of spin systems
[3]. The experimental [4] and theoretical [5] studies suggest that three-site exchanges
are dominant in solid 3He atoms, which have 1/2 spin [6]. One can obtain magneti-
zation plateaus with multiple-spin exchange using the dynamical and transfer matrix
methods [7]. In this paper I would pay attention to the researching of classical phase
transitions, magnetisation plateaus, stable cycles of Potts antiferromagnetic model
and quantum entanglement of spin-1/2 Ising-Heisenberg model on the triangulated
kagome lattice, solid and ﬂuid 3He models with multi spin-exchanges.
2. Bifurcation points and chaos
The Potts and Ising models played an important role in the theories of phase
transitions and critical phenomena [8]. The aim of this section is to analyze the
cyclic period-3 window for rational mappings describing the antiferromagnetic Q-
state Potts model on the Bethe lattice (Q < 2) and the antiferromagnetic Ising model
with three-site interaction on the Husimi cactus (tree). This window is represented
240

by the laminar phase with an incorporated chaotic behavior. The transition from the
chaotic regime to the period-3 regime occurring through tangent bifurcation (type-I
intermittency) [9], as well as subsequence doubling of the period through the type-II
intermittency (doubling bifurcation), is considered.
In the presence of external magnetic ﬁeld, the Q-site Potts model on the Bethe
lattice is speciﬁed by the Hamiltonian
H = −J
X
(i,j)
δ(σi, σj) −H
X
i
δ(σi, Q),
(1)
where σi = 1, 2, . . . , Q; and δ(x, y) is the Kronecker delta; the ﬁrst and second sums
are taken over all of the edges and sites of the lattice, respectively; and J < 0
corresponds to antiferromagnetic pairing. The partition function and magnetization
at the central site can be represented as
Z =
X
{σ}
e−
H
kBT ,
M = ⟨δ(σ0, Q)⟩= Z−1 X
{σ}
δ(σ0, Q)e−
H
kBT ,
(2)
where kB is the Boltzmann constant (below, we set kB = 1). Cutting the Bethe
lattice at the central site into γ identical branches (γ is the coordination num ber),
we represent the partition function in the form
Z =
X
{σ0}
exp{H
T · δ(σ0, Q)}[gn(σ0)]γ,
(3)
where σ0 is the central spin and gn(σ0) is the contribution of each of the identical
branches. Following a known procedure described in [10], we obtain
xn = f1(xn−1),
f1(x) = e
H
T + (e
J
T + Q −2)xγ−1
e
H+J
T
+ (Q −1)xγ−1
,
where xn = gn(σ ̸= Q)/gn(σ = Q). Using these equations, one can express magne-
tization via x.
We study the transition from the chaotic regime to the cyclic period-3 regime
through tangent bifurcation. Certain values of the temperature T and magnetic ﬁeld
H specify a curve separating the chaotic and period-3 regimes (the mapping in the
latter regime has three stable stationary points). In this curve, tangent bifurcation
occurs under the condition
(
f(3)
i
(x) = x
(f(3)
i
(x))′ = 1, (i = 1, 2).
(4)
where f(3)(x) = f{f[f(x)]}. Subsequent bifurcations, responsible for the appearance
of a stable cycle with a period of 3 × 2n(n = 2, 3, . . . ), correspond to the doubling
of the period.
When an H = const line intersects only the upper curve (corresponding to Eq. (4)
with i = 1), the boundaries of the cyclic window are strictly distinguished (tangent
241

0.30
0.35
0.40
0.45
0.50
0.55
0
5
10
15
T
M
0.38
0.40
0.42
0.44
0.46
0.48
0.50
0.10
0.12
0.14
0.16
0.18
0.20
0.22
0.24
T
M
0.38
0.40
0.42
0.44
0.46
0.48
0.50
1.000
1.002
1.004
1.006
1.008
1.010
T
M
0.40
0.42
0.44
0.46
0.48
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
H
M
Figure 1: Magnetization in the cyclic period-3 window for the Potts model at Q =
1.1, J = 1, and γ = 3 (a) versus the temperature for H = 1.24 (inset shows the
details of the modulated period-six phase) and (b) versus the magnetic ﬁeld for
T = 1.
bifurcation occurs at both edges).
This window is represented only by the 3M0
phase (a stable period-3 cycle) (see Fig. 1a). The phase transition between the 3M0
and 3M1 phases, accompanied by a change in symmetry, occurs at the bifurcation
points. With a further decrease in the ﬁeld, new bubbles corresponding to modulated
phases with larger periods will appear on bifurcation diagrams. Finally, the chaotic
regime, which is localized inside the cyclic period-3 window, will be reached. At the
same time, when the magnetization is considered as a function of the temperature
T at a ﬁxed value H < 0.1 or as a function of the magnetic ﬁeld H at any ﬁxed
temperature, tangent bifurcation occurs only at one edge of the cyclic window [11].
A crisis [12, 13], i.e., the collision of the chaotic attractor with the independent
unstable stationary point with a period of 3, occurs at the other edge (see Fig. 1b).
In this case, modulated phases with a period of 3 × 2n are not localized inside the
window (similarity with logistic mapping).
3. Magnetization plateaus and frustrated systems
In this section the dynamical (recursive) approach was used to study magnetic
properties of a kagome chain. The magnetization plateaus were found at low tem-
peratures and moreover, the kagome chain was separated into four sublattices with
diﬀerent magnetizations. Two of these exhibited plateaus, whereas the others did
not. The stability of the system is described by Lyapunov exponents [15] by means
of which the exponential rate is measured, at which the adjacent orbits converge or
diverge [14, 15]. It is interesting to check whether the maximum Lyapunov exponent
has plateaus that coincide with the magnetization one. According to [7] the multiple
spin exchanges Hamiltonian can be written as
Hex = J2
X
Pairs
P2 −J3
X
Triangles
¡
P3 + P −1
3
¢
+J6
X
Hexagons
¡
P6 + P −1
6
¢
,
(5)
where P2 is the pair transposition operator, P3 (P6) is the operator making a cyclic
rearrangement in the triangle (hexagon). The explicit expression of pair transposi-
242

Figure 2: Sublattices on the kagome chain.
tion operator Pij was been given by Dirac
P2 ≡Pij = 1
2 (1 + σiσj) ,
(6)
where σi is the Pauli matrix, acting on the spin at the i-th site. The expressions for
P3, P4, . . . can be calculated using (6). By using these expressions one can rewrite
the Heisenberg Hamiltonian in terms of Pauli matrices. By taking into account that
in a strong external magnetic ﬁeld directed along the z-axis the contribution from
x and y spin component will be negligible and the only relevant contribution will
come from the z component (which can eﬀectively take values sz = ±1), we may
consider an Ising model instead of Heisenberg one. By using expressions for P3, and
P6 and by substituting the Pauli matrix with sz we get the Ising approximation of
the Heisenberg Hamiltonian:
H = J2
2
X
Pairs
sisj−J3
2
X
Triangles
(sisj + sjsk + sksi) + J6
2
X
Hexagons
H(6) −h
X
i
si, (7)
where H(6) represents the six particle exchange term in each hexagon:
H(6) = 1
8

X
µ<ν
sµsν +
X
µ<ν<λ<ρ
sµsνsλsρ + s1s2s5s6s9s10


(8)
where the ﬁrst sum goes over all pairs in the hexagon, and the second one goes over
all quartets in the hexagon.
To obtain recursion relations for the partition function one can separate the
kagome ladder into two identical parts (branches) and ﬁrstly perform a summation
over all spin conﬁgurations on each branch, and secondly sum over the central spin
variable (see Fig. 2). The summation on each branch yields the same result and
such a term only depends on the value of central spin:
Z =
X
s0
e
h
T s0g2
n(s0) = e
h
T g2
n(+) + e−h
T g2
n(−),
(9)
where gn(s0) denotes the contribution of each branch. The expression for gn(s0) can
be written (s1 . . . s11, see Fig. 2) in the form:
gn(s0) =
X
s1,s3...s11
ek(s0,...s11)gn−1(s11),
(10)
243

Figure 3:
Magnetization curves for J2 = 2mK, J3 = 1.5mK, J6 = 2mK, T =
0.04mK for a) sublattice A, B, C, D b) Average magnetization of all sublattices.
where and n is the number of generations and the expression for k(s0, ...s11) has the
following form:
k(s0, ...s11)
=
−J2
2T
X
18 pairs
sisj + J3
2T
X
6 triangles
(sisj + sjsk + sksi) −
−
J6
2T · H(6) + h
T
11
X
i=1
si.
(11)
The recursion relation is obtained by introducing a new variable xn = gn(+)/gn(−):
xn = K(+, +)xn−1 + K(+, −)
K(−, +)xn−1 + K(−, −).
(12)
where
K(s1, s12) =
X
s2,s3...s11
ek(s0,...s11).
(13)
By using this equations one can write for the magnetization of the central vertex
m = e
h
T g2
n(+) −e−h
T g2
n(−)
e
h
T g2n(+) + e−h
T g2n(−)
= e
2h
T x2
n −1
e
2h
T x2n + 1
.
(14)
At the same way one can obtain the magnetizations of the non-central vertexes.
Because of the symmetry of the Hamiltonian, the values of magnetization for some
spins are equal: we have in general (See Fig. 2),
m(s3) = m(s4) = m(s7) = m(s8)
−
A
m(s1) = m(s2) = m(s9) = m(s10)
−
B
m(s5) = m(s6)
−
C
m(s0) = m(s11)
−
D
(15)
In Figure 3a magnetization curves are plotted for diﬀerent sites. As it can be seen
from the ﬁgures, the magnetization functions have plateaus only for the sublattices
B and C. In magnetisation curves there are regions with unusual nonmonotonous
244

Figure 4: The kagome chain.
magnetisation behaviour.
In Figure 3b plotted the average magnetization of all
sublattices and the ﬁgure show that the curve is smooth and monotonous as it
should be.
It is interesting to calculate the Lyapunov exponent near plateaus but one cannot
use recurrent function (12) because it is related to s1 site. To obtain the recursion
relation for the partition function that is related to s2 site one can separate the
kagome chain into two identical parts as shown in Figure 4:
Z =
X
s1,s2, p1,p2
Ns1,s2
p1,p2 · gn(s1, s2) · gn(p1, p2),
(16)
where
Ns1,s2
p1,p2 =
X
s0
e
n
h
T (s1+s2+s0+p1+p2)+ J3−J2
2T
(H(2,3)(s0,s1,s2)+H(2,3)(s0,p1,p2))−J6
2T H(6)o
(17)
and the contribution of each branch is denoted by gn(s1, s2). The recursion relations
for gn can be obtained by performing eleven (s3 . . . s13, see Fig. 4) summations in
the kagome chain:
gn(s1, s2) =
X
s12,s13
Ks1, s2
s12,s13 · gn−1(s12, s13),
(18)
where Ks1, s2
s12,s13 is as follows
Ks1, s2
s12,s13 =
X
s3···s11
e
J3−J2
2T
P
6 T riangle
H(2,3)−J6
2T H(6)+ h
T
13
P
i=3
si
.
(19)
Since Ks1, s2
s12,s13 = Ks2, s1
s12,s13, Ks1, s2
s12,s13 = Ks1, s2
s13,s12 one can show that gn(+, −) = gn(−, +)
and, hance,the recurrence relations are two-dimensional.
By introducing xn =
gn(+, +)/gn(−, −) and yn = gn(+, −)/gn(−, −) the recursion relations may be writ-
ten in the following form:
xn = Φ(xn−1, yn−1), Φ(x, y)
=
K+,+
+,+x + 2K+,+
+,−y + K+,+
−,−
K−,−
+,+x + 2K−,−
+,−y + K−,−
−,−
,
yn = Ψ(xn−1, yn−1), Ψ(x, y)
=
K+,−
+,+x + 2K+,−
+,−y + K+,−
−,−
K−,−
+,+x + 2K−,−
+,−y + K−,−
−,−
.
(20)
245

The magnetization can be expressed in terms of xn, yn with due regard for (16) and
(17)
Relations (20) permit the calculation of Lyapunov exponents near the plateaus.
At ﬁrst we shall give deﬁnition of Lyapunov exponent for an one-dimensional case.
For display xn+1 = f(xn) Lyapunov exponent characterizes exponential divergence
of two next points after n iterations [14, 15]. By deﬁnition in the two-dimensional
space Lyapunov exponent deﬁned as
λ1,2 = lim
N→∞
1
N ln (eigenvalues{Λ(x1, y1) · Λ(x2, y2) · · · Λ(xN, yN)}) ,
(21)
where Λ(xi, yi) is Jacobian matrix evaluated at the (xi, yi) point
Λ(xi, xi) =
Ã ∂Φ
∂x
∂Φ
∂y
∂Ψ
∂x
∂Ψ
∂y
!¯¯¯¯¯
xi,yi
.
(22)
One of the basic features of chaos is the sensitive dependence on initial conditions
and the Lyapunov exponents provide quantitative measures of response sensitivity
of a dynamical system to small changes in initial conditions. For a chaotic orbit at
least one Lyapunov exponents is positive, implying exponential divergence of nearby
orbits, while in the case of regular orbits all Lyapunov exponents are zero. There-
fore, the presence of positive Lyapunov exponent is a signature of chaotic behavior.
Usually the computation of only the maximal Lyapunov exponent is suﬃcient for
determining the nature of an orbit, because it guarantees that the orbit is chaotic.
The results of calculation are shown in Fig. 5 with the corresponding magnetiza-
tion function: it is seen in the ﬁgures that the maximum Lyapunov exponent also
exhibits plateaus. Moreover, for the maximum Lyapunov exponent the location of
magnetization plateaus coincide with those of magnetization curves.
Figure 5: Coincidence of magnetization plateaus and the maximum of Lyapunov
exponent.
246

4. Thermal entanglement on a triangulated
Kagome lattice
The eﬀorts aimed at better understanding of the aforementioned phenomena
stimulated an intensive search of two-dimensional geometrically frustrated topolo-
gies. From this perspective, the most interesting geometrically frustrated topologies
are the magnetic materials in form of two-dimensional isostructural polymeric coor-
dination compounds Cu9X2(cpa)6 · nH2O (X = F, Cl, Br and cpa=carboxypentonic
acid) [16].
We consider the spin-1
2 Ising-Heisenberg model on triangulated kagome lattice
(TKL) (Fig. 6) consisting of two types of sites (a and b). Since the exchange cou-
pling between Cu2+ ions are almost isotropic, the application of the XXX Heisen-
berg model is more appropriate. There is a strong Heisenberg Jaa exchange coupling
between trimeric sites of a type and weaker Ising-type one (Jab) between trimeric a
and monomeric b ones. Thus, the kagome lattice of the Ising spins (monomers) con-
tains inside of each triangle unit a smaller triangle of the Heisenberg spins (trimer).
The Hamiltonian can be written as follows:
H = Jaa
X
(i,j)
Sa
i Sa
j −Jab
X
(k,l)
(Sz)a
k · (Sz)b
l −H
2N
3
X
i=1
3[(Sz)a
j + 1
2(Sz)b
j],
(23)
where Sa = {Sa
x, Sa
y, Sa
z } is the Heisenberg spin-1
2 operator, Sb is the Ising spin.
Jaa > 0 corresponds to antiferromagnetic Heisenberg coupling and Jab > 0 to ferro-
magnetic Ising-Heisenberg one. The ﬁrst two summations run over a −a and a −b
nearest neighbors respectively and the last sum incorporates the eﬀect of uniform
magnetic ﬁeld (we have assumed that the total number of sites is 3N).
S
Sk2
b
k1
b
Sk3
b
Sk2
a
Sk1
a
Sk3
a
Jaa
Jab
Figure 6: A cross-section of TKL structure. Solid lines represent the intra-trimer
Heisenberg interactions Jaa, while the broken ones label monomer-trimer Ising in-
teractions Jab. The circle marks k-th cluster (Heisenberg trimer). Sa
ki presents the
Heisenberg and Sb
ki the Ising spins.
Using Gibbs-Bogoliubov inequality [17]
F ≤F0 + ⟨H −H0⟩0,
(24)
247

where H is the real Hamiltonian which describes the system and H0 is the trial one.
F and F0 are free energies corresponding to H and H0 respectively and ⟨...⟩0 denotes
the thermal average over the ensemble deﬁned by H0. Following [18] we introduce
the trial Hamiltonian in the following form:
H0
=
X
k∈trimers
Hc0,
(25)
Hc0
=
λaa
¡
Sa
k1Sa
k2 + Sa
k2Sa
k3 + Sa
k1Sa
k3
¢
−
3
X
i=1
h
γa(Sz)a
ki + γb
2 (Sz)b
ki
i
.
(26)
Using the fact that in terms of (26) Sa and Sb are statistically independent, one
obtains ⟨Sa · Sb⟩0 = ⟨Sa⟩0 · ⟨Sb⟩0. Besides, taking into account that ⟨(Sz)a⟩0 = ma
(single a-site magnetization), ⟨(Sz)b⟩0 = mb (single b-site magnetization), we obtain
the following expression:
f ≤
f0 + (Jaa −λaa)⟨Sa
k1Sa
k2 + Sa
k2Sa
k3 + Sa
k1Sa
k3⟩0
−6Jabmamb −3Hma −3Hmb
2
+ 3γama + 3γbmb
2
.
(27)
Minimizing the RHS of (27) in order to γa, γb and λaa and using the fact, that
∂f0
∂γa = −3ma,
∂f0
∂γb = −3/2mb,
∂f0
∂λaa = ⟨Sa
k1Sa
k2 + Sa
k2Sa
k3 + Sa
k1Sa
k3⟩0, we obtain
the following values for the variational parameters: λaa = Jaa, γa = 2Jabmb + H,
γb = 4Jabma + H. Parameters γa and γb, which have a meaning of a magnetic ﬁeld,
are interconnected, which is the consequence of its‘ apparent self-consistency.
As for deﬁned above a- and b-single site magnetizations we obtain:
ma
=
−1
3
∂f0a
∂γa
= 1
6
3 sinh
³
3γa
2T
´
+ 2e
3λaa
2T sinh
¡ γa
2T
¢
+ sinh
¡ γa
2T
¢
cosh
³
3γa
2T
´
+ 2e
3λaa
2T cosh
¡ γa
2T
¢
+ cosh
¡ γa
2T
¢ ,
(28)
mb
=
−∂f0b
∂γb
= 1
2 tanh
³ γb
2T
´
.
(29)
We study concurrence C(ρ), to quantify pairwise entanglement [19], deﬁned as
C(ρ) = max{λ1 −λ2 −λ3 −λ4, 0},
(30)
where λi are the square roots of the eigenvalues of the corresponding operator for
the density matrix
˜ρ = ρ12(σy
1 ⊗σy
2)ρ∗
12(σy
1 ⊗σy
2)
(31)
in descending order. Since we consider pairwise entanglement, we use reduced den-
sity matrix ρ12 = Tr3ρ. We can calculate the concurrence for each of them on cluster
level individually in eﬀective magnetic ﬁeld. In our case the density matrix has the
following form
ρ =
1
Z0a
8
X
k=1
exp(−Ek/T)|ψk⟩⟨ψk|,
(32)
Ek, |ψk⟩and Z0a are taken from equations (7), (8) and (9) respectively. The con-
struction process of matrix (31) does not depend whether γa is eﬀective or real
248

magnetic ﬁeld, although the presence of eﬀective ﬁeld γa plays crucial role for the
self-consistent solution. Here we skip the speciﬁc details and provide the result of
ﬁnal calculations of the matrix ρ12, taking into account that the Hamiltonian Hc0 is
translationary invariant with a symmetry [Sz, Hc0] = 0 (Sz = P3
k=1(Sz)a
ki). Hence
ρ12 =




u
0
0
0
0
w
y
0
0
y∗
w
0
0
0
0
v



,
(33)
where u, v, w and y are some functions of γa, λaa and T. The concurrence C(ρ) of
such a density matrix has the following form:
C(ρ) = 2
Z max(|y| −√uv, 0).
(34)
Finally, we consider transcendental equations (28) and (29) by taking into account
the values of variational parameters: λaa = Jaa, γa = 2Jabmb +H, γb = 4Jabma +H,
and, therefore, one can use these parameters to calculate C(ρ). First, we study the
behavior of C(ρ) at H = 0. The temperature dependence of C(ρ) is shown in ﬁgure
7a.
0.000
0.005
0.010
0.015
0.020
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
0.30
T
C HΡL
-2
0
2
H
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
T
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
C HΡL
a)
b)
Figure 7: a) Concurrence C(ρ) versus temperature ﬁeld for Jaa = 1, α = 0.025 and H = 0,
b) Concurrence C(ρ) versus temperature T and external magnetic ﬁeld H for Jaa = 1,
α = 0.025.
Another important observation is that threshold temperature at which entan-
glement C(ρ) disappear is identical to the critical temperature Tc of second order
phase transition between ordered and disordered phases. This implies that the con-
currence vanishes precisely at Tc, the same temperature of speciﬁc heat discontinuity.
This is the consequence of the fact that at Tc the system undergoes order-disorder
phase transition and the second term in γa vanishes, too (mb = 0, when H = 0 and
T ≥Tc). This factor implies the strong relationship between magnetic and entan-
glement properties of the system. In ﬁgure 7b we present the three dimensional plot
of the concurrence as a function of the temperature and external magnetic ﬁeld.
249

Figure 8: Kagome lattice.
5. Magnetic properties and concurrence for 3He
In the present section mean-ﬁeld like approach, based on the Gibbs-Bogoliubov
inequality (24), was used to study entanglement and magnetic properties of a two
dimensional kagome lattice. The key result of the section is concentrated on the
comparison of speciﬁc (peaks and plateaus) features in magnetization, susceptibility
and thermal entanglement properties in the above mentioned model using variational
mean-ﬁeld like Gibbs-Bogoliubov inequality.
According [6] the third layer of 3He system is kagome lattice (see Fig 8) and
Hamiltonian for kagome lattice can be written in the following form:
H =
X
Triangles
·J2 −J3
2
(σiσj + σjσk + σkσi) −h
2(σz
i + σz
j + σz
k)
¸
.
(35)
We introduce the trial Hamiltonian H0 as a set of noninteracting clusters (tri-
angles) on two sublattices in diﬀerent external self-consistent ﬁelds:
H0 =
X
∆i
H(i)
0 ,
(36)
where
H(i)
0
= λ ×
¡
σi
1σi
2 + σi
2σi
3 + σi
3σi
1
¢
−γυ ×
£
(σi
1)z + (σi
2)z + (σi
3)z¤
,
where λ and γυ variational parameters, and the index of summation ∆i labels dif-
ferent non-interacting rectangles (see Fig. 8 ) and
γυ = γa
for sublattice (a),
γυ = γb
for sublattice (b).
It should be emphasized that in trial Hamiltonian spins σi
k of the ∆i-th triangle do
not interact with the spins σj
k of the ∆j triangle if i ̸= j, therefore these spins are
250

statistically independent. The real Hamiltonian H (35) can be represented in the
following form
H =
X
∆i
H(i),
(37)
where H(i) is the contribution of spins on the single triangle in real Hamiltonian
H and index of summation ∆i runs over the diﬀerent triangles (see Fig. 8, grey
triangles). Terms of real Hamiltonian σi
1σi
2 +σi
2σi
3 +σi
3σi
1 must be included in H(i),
but terms like σi
aσj
b (see Fig. 8 tick lines) should be included both in H(i) and H(j).
Consequently, H(i) has the following form:
H(i) = J2 −J3
2

α(i) +
X
a=2,3
σi
1σj
a
2
+
X
a=1,3
σi
2σk
a
2
+
X
a=1,2
σi
3σl
a
2

−h
3
X
a=1
(σi
a)z, (38)
where
α(i) = σi
1σi
2 + σi
2σi
3 + σi
3σi
1.
(39)
One can rewrite Gibbs-Bogoliubov inequality for each sublattice as follows:
fυ
≤
(f0)υ +
µJ2 −J3
2
−λ
¶
⟨α⟩0 + J2 −J3
4
6(2ma2mb) −(h −γυ) 6mυ.
γa = h −(J2 −J3)mb,
γb = h −(J2 −J3)ma.
(40)
Minimizing the right hand side of (40) in order to γa, γb and λ and using the fact,
that ∂f0
∂λ = ⟨α⟩0 and ∂f0
∂γυ
= −6mυ we obtain the following values for the variational
parameters:
λ
=
J2 −J3
2
; γa = h −(J2 −J3)mb;
γb = h −(J2 −J3)ma.
(41)
According to (41) the Hamiltonian of sublattice (a) depends on mb through γa and
vice versa. For deﬁned above magnetization we obtain the following expression:
ma = 1
6 ·
3 sinh
³
3γa
T
´
+ sinh
¡ γa
T
¢
+ 2e( 6λ
T )sinh
¡γa
T
¢
cosh
³
3γa
T
´
+ cosh
¡γa
T
¢
+ 2e( 6λ
T )cosh
¡γa
T
¢, and γa = h −(J2 −J3)mb.
(42)
The dependance of magnetization ma from external magnetic ﬁeld h can be found
by solving the this recursive equation for each value of magnetic ﬁeld h. At relatively
high temperatures the recursive equation has one stable solution and therefore mag-
netization curves of sublattices (a) and (b) coincide (see Fig. 9(a)). With decreasing
temperature the solution of recursive equation ceases to be stable and, therefore, the
magnetization of diﬀerent sublattices are no longer equal. The partially saturated
phase emerges in form of the magnetization plateaus (see Fig. 9(b) for T = 0.01 mK,
J2 = 3 mK, J3 = 2.5 mK), which can be associated with a staggered magnetization
or short range antiferromagnetism (AF) in frustrated kagome geometry. Indeed, the
appearance of plateaus in magnetization curve at m = ±1/6 can be explained as sta-
bility of trimeric states in available (↑↑↓, ↑↓↑, ↓↑↑) and (↑↓↓, ↓↑↓, ↑↓↓) conﬁgurations.
251

-2
-1
0
1
2
-0.4
-0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
h
m
-2
-1
0
1
2
-0.4
-0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
h
m
a)
b)
Figure 9: Magnetization ma versus external magnetic ﬁeld h for J2 = 3 mK, J3 =
2.5 mK. at a) T=0.15 mK b) T=0.01 mK.
It is curious to discuss some similarities of statistical and quantum characteristics
of our system. We consider magnetization as a statistical characteristic. In ﬁgure
10(a) plotted the magnetization as a function of the coupling constant J2 (for ﬁxed
value of J3 = 2.5 mK) and the external ﬁeld h, at a relatively high temperature
T = 0.2 mK. As a quantum characteristic we consider entanglement (concurrence
C(ρ)).
In ﬁgure 10(b) the concurrence as a function of the J2 (J3 = 2.5 mK)
is shown for the same value of temperature. Our calculations show that the mag-
netic characteristics is similar to that of bipartite entanglement. Indeed, comparison
of ﬁgures 10(a) and 10(b) shows that regions corresponding to the magnetization
plateaus, coincide with the plateaus on concurrence plot.
a)
b)
Figure 10: Dependence for (a) magnetization m and (b) concurrence C(ρ) versus
the magnetic ﬁeld h and the coupling constant J2 at J3 = 2.5 mK and T = 0.2 mK.
252

6. Conclusions
A cyclic period-3 window has been studied in the antiferromagnetic Potts model
on the Bethe lattice. We have analyzed the mechanism of the transition from the
chaotic regime to the cyclic period-3 window through tangent bifurcation followed
by the doubling cascade 3 × 2n(n = 2, 3, . . . ). In the present paper the theory
of dynamical systems has been used to study magnetization on the kagome chain.
Exact recursion relations have been derived for the partition function. The magne-
tization curves for diﬀerent temperatures and exchange parameters were obtained
and the kagome chain was observed to split into four sublattices with diﬀerent mag-
netizations. A multidimensional mapping was deduced to study the maximum Lya-
punov exponent near the plateaus and it was shown that the location of plateaus
on the maximal Lyapunov exponent and for magnetization was the same. We found
strong correlations between magnetic properties and quantum entanglement in spin-
1
2 Ising-Heisenberg model on triangulated kagome lattice, which has been proposed
to understand a frustrated magnetism of the series of Cu9X2(cpa)6 · nH2O polymeric
coordination compounds. We also ﬁnd strong correlations between magnetic prop-
erties and quantum entanglement in the Heisenberg model with two-, and three-site
exchange interactions in strong magnetic ﬁeld on the kagome lattice, which corre-
spond to the third layer of ﬂuid 3He absorbed on the surface of graphite. We adopted
variational mean-ﬁeld-like treatment (based on the Gibbs-Bogoliubov inequality) of
separate clusters in eﬀective magnetic ﬁelds and studied magnetic properties and
concurrence as a measure of pairwise thermal entanglement. We have found, that in
the antiferromagnetic region behavior of the concurrence coincides with the magne-
tization one. The comparison of magnetization and concurrence shows that regions
corresponding to the magnetization plateaus, coincide with the plateaus on concur-
rence plot.
References
[1] L. Amico, R. Fazio, A. Osterloh, V. Vedral, Rev. Mod. Phys. 80, 517 (2008);
R. Horodecki, P. Horodecki, M. Horodecki, K. Horodecki, Rev. Mod. Phys. 81,
865 (2009); O. G¨uhne and G. T´oth, Phys. Rep. 474, 1 (2009).
[2] M. Suzuki, Prog. Theor. Phys. 46, 1337 (1971); M. Suzuki, Prog. Theor. Phys.
56, 1454 (1976); M.Suzuki, Phys. Rev. B 31, 2957 (1985); M. Suzuki, Commun.
Math. Phys. 51, 183 (1976); 57, 193 (1977); N.S. Ananikian, S.S. Poghosyan,
Statphys 23 (2007, Genova, Italy), Programme and Abstract, p. 71.
[3] K. Kubo and T. Momoi, Z. Phys. B: Condens. Matter 103, 485 (1997); K. Hida,
J. Phys. Soc. Jpn. 63, 2359 (1994); K. Okamoto T. Tonegawa, T. Nakao, and
M. Kaburagi, J. Phys. Soc. Jpn. 65, 3317 (1996); K. Totsuka, Phys. Rev. B 57,
3454 (1998); T. Sakai and M. Takahashi, ibid. 57, R3201 (1998); F. Mila, Eur.
Phys. J. B 6, 201 (1998).
[4] M. Siqueira, J. Nyeki, B. Cowan, and J. Saunders, Phys. Rev. Lett. 76, 1884
(1996); K. Ishida, M. Morishita, K. Yawata, and H. Fukuyama, Phys. Rev.
253

Lett. 79, 3451 (1997); M. Roger, C. Ba¨uerle, Yu.M. Bunkov, A.-S. Chen, and
H. Godfrin, Phys. Rev. Lett. 80, 1308 (1998).
[5] J. Delrieu, M. Roger, and J.H. Hetherington, J. Low Temp. Phys. 40, 71 (1980);
M. Roger, Phys. Rev. B 30, 6432 (1984); B. Bernu, D. Ceperley, and C. Lhuil-
lier, J. Low Temp. Phys. 89, 589 (1992).
[6] M. Roger, J. H. Hetherington, J. M. Delrieu, Magnetism in solid 3He, Rev.
Mod. Phys. 55, 1 (1983).
[7] A. Arakelyan, V. R. Ohanyan, L. N. Ananikyan N. S. Ananikian and M. Roger,
Phys. Rev. B 67 024424 (2003); V. V. Hovhannisyan, L. N. Ananikyan, and
N. S. Ananikian, Int. J. of Mod. Phys. B 21, 3567 (2007); V. V. Hovhannisyan
and N. S. Ananikian, Phys. Lett. A 372, 3363(2008).
[8] R. J. Baxter, Exactly Solved Models in Statistical Mechanics (Academic Press,
New York, 1982; Mir, Moscow, 1985); F. Y. Wu, Rev. Mod. Phys. 54, 235
(1982); N. S. Ananikyan and A. Z. Akheyan, Sov. Phys. JETP 80, 105 (1995).
[9] P. Manneville and Y. Pomeau, Phys. Lett. A 75, 1 (1979); Physica D 1, 219
(1980); A. E. Hramov, A. A. Koronovskii, and M. K. Kurovskayaet, Phys. Rev.
E 76, 2 (2007).
[10] L. N. Ananikyan, Int. J. Mod. Phys. B 21, 755 (2007).
[11] L. N. Ananikyan, N. S. Ananikian, and L. A. Chakhmakhchyan, Fractals 18,
371 (2010).
[12] C. Grebogi, E. Ott, and J. A. Yorke, Physica D 7, 181 (1983).
[13] S. Zambrano, I. P. Marino, and M. A. F. Sanjun, New J. Phys. 11, 023025
(2009).
[14] V. I. Oseledec, A multiplicative ergodic theorem,Trans. Moskow Math. Soc.
19, 197 (1968); J. P. Eckmann and D. Ruelle, Ergodic theory of chaos and
strange attractors, Rev. Mod. Phys. 57, 617 (1985); ˙I. Birol and A. Hacinliyan,
Approximately conserved quantity in the He’non-Heiles problem, Phys. Rev. E
52, 4750 (1995).
[15] G. Casati, B. V. Chirikov, Quantum chaos: between order and disorder (Cam-
bridge University Press, 1995).
[16] R. E. Norman, N. J. Rose and R. E. Stenkamp, J. Chem. Soc.: Dalton Trans.
2905 (1987); M. Gonzalez, F. Cervantes-Lee and L. W. Haar, Mol. Cryst. Liq.
Cryst. 233, 317 (1993); S. Maruti and L. W. ter Haar, J. Appl. Phys. 75, 5949
(1994); S. Ateca, S. Maruti, and L. W. ter Haar, J. Magn. Magn. Mater. 147,
398 (1995).
[17] N.N. Bogoliubov J. Phys. (USSR) 11, 23 (1947); R. P. Feynman , Phys. Rev.
97, 660 (1955).
254

[18] J. Streˇcka, J. Magn. Magn. Mater. 316, e346 (2007).
[19] S. Hill and W. K. Wootters, Phys. Rev. Lett. 78, 5022 (1997); W. K. Wootters,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 80, 2245 (1998).
255

Work extraction from microcanonical bath
Armen E. Allahverdyan 1,2 and Karen V. Hovhannisyan 1
1Yerevan Physics Institute,
Alikhanian Brothers Street 2, 0036 Yerevan, Armenia
2Laboratoire de Physique Statistique et Syst`emes Complexes, ISMANS,
44 ave. Bartholdi, 72000 Le Mans, France
Abstract
We determine the maximal work extractable via a cyclic Hamiltonian pro-
cess from a positive-temperature (T > 0) microcanonical state of a N ≫1 spin
bath. The work is much smaller than the total energy of the bath, but can
be still much larger than the energy of a single bath spin, e.g. it can scale as
O(
√
N ln N). Qualitatively same results are obtained for those cases, where the
canonical state is unstable (e.g., due to a negative speciﬁc heat) and the micro-
canonical state is the only description of equilibrium. For a system coupled to
a microcanonical bath the concept of free energy does not generally apply, since
such a system—starting from the canonical equilibrium density matrix ρT at the
bath temperature T—can enhance the work exracted from the microcanonical
bath without changing its state ρT . This is impossible for any system coupled
to a canonical thermal bath due to the relation betweem the maximal work and
free energy. But the concept of free energy still applies for a suﬃciently large
T. Here we ﬁnd a compact expression for the microcanonical free-energy and
show that in contrast to the canonical case it contains a linear entropy instead
of the von Neumann entropy.
1. Introduction
How much work can be extracted from a state of a physical system via cyclic
processes? This question governs our understanding of energy conversion and stor-
age, and hence is central for thermodynamics [1]–[8]. The basic answer, known as
the Thomson’s formulation of the second law, is that an equilibrium state cannot
yield work. This formulation is an axiom in thermodynamics, but its ﬁrst-principle
derivations were given in literature for a canonical (Gibbsian) equilibrium state [2].
The main consequence of the Thomson’s formulation is that only non-equilibrium
states can be sources of work. The maximal work extractable from such states via
a cyclic process was studied both for macroscopic [1] and ﬁnite systems [4, 5, 6].
One instance of the maximal work is especially well-known, because it provides
the physical meaning of free energy [1]. Consider a quantum system with Hamil-
258

tonian H and initial density matrix ρ. This system is in contact with a canonical
thermal bath at temperature T. External ﬁelds act cyclically on the system + bath.
Assuming no system-bath coupling both initially and ﬁnally, the maximal work ex-
tracted by the ﬁelds reads [1, 9]
Wmax = F[ρ] −F[ρeq],
F[ρ] = tr(ρH) + Ttr(ρ ln ρ),
(1)
where F[ρ] is the free energy and ρeq = e−H/T /tr[e−H/T ] is the canonical equilibrium
state of the system, which is its ﬁnal state after work-extraction [1]. The maximal
work is determined by the deviation of ρ from its canonical equilibrium value ρeq as
quantiﬁed by the free energy (1).
One notes however that all above results refer to a speciﬁc notion of equilibrium,
viz.
the canonical state.
Another concept of equilibrium is given by the micro-
canonical state, which describes an isolated system equilibrated due to its internal
mechanism [10], or an open system coupled weakly to its environment (so weak that
no energy is exchanged) [8, 11]. This is a more fundamental notion of equilibrium: (i)
under certain conditions the canonical state can be derived from it for a weakly cou-
pled subsystem [1]. (ii) In contrast to the canonical state, whose preparation refers
to an external thermal bath, the microcanonical state can be applied to a closed
few-body system provided that it satisﬁes certain chaoticity features [12, 13]. (iii)
Since local stability conditions of the canonical state are more demanding—a fact
closely related to the no work-extraction feature[1]—there are situations, where the
equilibrium can be described by the microcanonical state only, since the canonical
state for them is unstable [14]. For such systems, frequently realized via long-range
interactions, the entropy is a non-concave function of energy, and hence the notori-
ous macroscopic equivalence between canonical and microcanonical state is broken
[14]. Even if this macroscopic equivalence holds, it is by no means obvious that
in the argument around (1) one can substitute the canonical state of the thermal
bath by the microcanonical state [with the same temperature], because in general
the work (1) is not a macroscopic quantity, i.e. it does not scale with the number of
bath particles. This is however widely done in literature, e.g., when introducing the
free energy as in (1) one basically never speciﬁes the equilibrium state of the bath;
see, e.g. [1, 7].
We revisit the maximal work-extraction problem for a thermal bath in a quan-
tum microcanonical state. It was noted already some work can be extracted via a
cyclic Hamiltonian process from a few-particle microcanonical system [3]. Recent
papers studied to which extent the extraction of work from one-particle classical mi-
crocanonical system can be carried out by physically realistic Hamiltonians [15, 16].
Our purposes here are diﬀerent:
• We focus on ﬁnding the maximal amount of work extractable from a macro-
scopic microcanonical state of N ≫1 particle thermal bath.
• We also determine the work extracted via a system coupled to a microcanonical
thermal bath, and check whether the reasoning (1) generalizes at least qualitatively,
i.e. whether the concept of free energy applies to the microcanonical situation.
259

The subject of work extraction via a system coupled to a thermal bath is an active
research topic. Refs. [16, 17, 18, 19, 20] discuss various set-ups for this problem:
quantum, classical, with or without state-dependent feedback etc. Recall that (1) is
at the core of relations between statistical thermodynamics and information theory
[7]. The term tr([ρ−ρeq]H) in the right-hand-side of (1) is the energy extracted from
the system, while the remaining (entropic) part comes from the bath. If tr([ρ−ρeq]H)
is negligible (e.g., because H contains only few almost degenerate energy levels), the
work is extracted from the bath due to the diﬀerence between the initial entropy and
its canonical equilibrium value. This relation between the entropy and work is the
essential part of information driven engines (e.g., Szilard’s engine) [7]. In contrast,
various forms of fuel operate due to the initial non-equilibrium energy, i.e. the term
tr([ρ −ρeq]H) in (1).
2. Microcanonical thermal bath
The microcanonical state is characterized by two parameters: energy E and
width σ [1]. The corresponding density matrix is diagonal in the energy represen-
tation, all energies within the interval [E, E −σ] have equal probabilities, all other
energies have probability zero. For a N ≫1-particle system the number d(E, σ) of
energy levels within the interval [E, E −σ] deﬁnes the microcanonical entropy [1]:
S(E) = ln d(E, σ) = O(N),
(2)
where the choice of σ should not inﬂuence the leading O(N) behavior of S(E).
Eq. (2) is the von Neumann entropy for the microcanonical density matrix (6);
see also [21]. For clarity we want to work with a speciﬁc model of a macroscopic
microcanonical system (bath). This is the basic model of the ﬁeld: N ≫1 uncoupled
two-level spins; each spin has energies 0 and δ > 0 [8]. Some of our results extend
to more general bath models, as seen below.
The bath Hamiltonian reads (diag[. . .] means diagonal matrix in the energy rep-
resentation)
H = diag[0, δ, 2δ . . . , δN],
(3)
where each element δk is repeated dk times,
dk ≡
N!
k!(N −k)!.
(4)
Hence every energy shell δk is dk–degenerate. Denote
ek = (1, . . . , 1),
0k = (0, . . . , 0),
Dk ≡
Xk
m=0dm,
(5)
where ek (0k) is the vector of k 1’s (0’s).
For the present model of bath the microcanonical state is easy to deﬁne: all
energies δM have equal probability
1
dM ; all other energies have zero probability.
260

Thus we put σ →0, the minimal thermodynamically consistent width for this
model. Note that the degenerace of the energy levels is convenient, since it allows
to set σ →0. It is however not essential: an eﬀective degeneracy will be anyhow
regained for a small but ﬁnite σ > 0, since the energy levels of a macroscopic system
are located very densely [1]. The bath initial state reads in representation (3)
Ωi =
1
dM
diag[ 0DM−1, edM , 0DN−DM ].
(6)
For N ≫1 this microcanonical state does have desired features expected from ther-
modynamics, e.g. macroscopic equivalence with the canonical state, equilibration
of a small subsystem, third law [8]. The density matrix of a single bath spin is
Gibbsian ∝diag[1, e−δ/T ] with [8]
e−δ/T = m/(1 −m),
m = M/N.
(7)
The same T is recovered as microcanonical temperature [1]
1/T = ∂S(E)/∂E,
E = δM,
S(E) = ln dM,
(8)
where S(E) is the microcanonical entropy (2). This equivalence can be shown via
formula (17) that is proven below.
Note that although the spins are uncoupled, the microcanonical state does not
reduce to the tensor product of the separate spin states (otherwise it would amount
to the canonical state). It contains inter-spin correlations. Ultimately, this is the
reason why, as seen below, a microcanonical bath can yield work in a cyclic process.
We restrict ourselves with M/N ≤1/2, i.e. positive temperatures. The case with
M/N > 1/2 is deﬁnitely less interesting, because now each spin of the bath is in a
state with a negative temperature. Such states are trivially active, i.e. they yield
work in a cyclic process.
3. Work extraction
At some initial time t = 0 the bath Hamiltonian H(t) becomes time-dependent
due to interaction with sources of work. Consider a cyclic process
H(0) = H(τ) = H,
(9)
where τ is the ﬁnal time.
The work extracted in this thermally isolated cyclic
Hamiltonian process is
W = tr(H[Ωi −Ωf]) = δM −tr(HΩf), Ωf = UΩiU†,
(10)
where Ωf is the ﬁnal state of the bath, and U = T e−(i/ℏ)
R τ
0 dsH(s); T means chronolo-
gization. Conversely, for a given unitary U one can construct a class of Hamiltonians
that generate U and satisﬁes (9) [5].
261

Condition (9) is necessary for the system to be an autonomous carrier of energy
that should deliver work to another system (e.g., to a work-source) via an interaction
which switches on and oﬀat well-deﬁned times. Hence this is a cyclic Hamiltonian
process.
We now maximize the work W—or minimize the ﬁnal energy tr(HΩf)—over all
cyclic Hamiltonians, i.e. over unitary operators U. Note from (10) that
tr(HΩf) =
X2N
a,b=1EaCab⟨b|Ωi|b⟩,
Cab ≡|⟨b|U|a⟩|2,
(11)
Cab ≥0,
X2N
a=1Cab =
X2N
b=1Cab = 1,
(12)
where {Ea}2N
a=1 and {|a⟩}2N
a=1 are, respecitively, the eigenvalues and eigenvectors of
H [see (3)], and the elements {⟨b|Ωi|b⟩}2N
b=1 are deﬁned in (6).
Three conditions
in (12) mean that the matrix Cab is double-stochastic [22]. Conversely, every such
matrix can be represented as Cab ≡|⟨b|U|a⟩|2 for some unitary U [22]. Every double-
stochastic matrix equals to a convex sum of permutation matrices Π[α] (Birkhoﬀ’s
theorem [22]): C = P
αλαΠ[α], P
αλα = 1, λα ≥0, where each matrix Π[α] acting
on a column-vector x amounts to permuting (in a certain way) the elements of x.
Eq. (11) shows that tr(HΩf) is a linear function of the matrix C = {Cab}. Hence its
minimum over the unitary operators U, that is its minimum over double-stochastic
matrices Cab, is reached for Cab equal to some permutation matrix eΠ. It is clear from
(11) that eΠ, when acting on the vector ⟨b|Ωi|b⟩permutes its elements such that all
its non-zero [equal to each other] elements concentrate at lowest energies {Ea}2N
a=1
[5]. For the ﬁnal state we have ⟨a|Ωf|a⟩= P
beΠab⟨b|Ωi|b⟩. Hence the lowest-energy
ﬁnal state compatible with Ωi reads
Ωf =
1
dM
diag[ edM, 0DN−dM ].
(13)
Once eΠ is found we can employ the standard procedure of constructing the cor-
responding unitary operator U and the cyclic Hamiltonian [5]. Note that eΠ does
depend on the energy of the initial state Ωi: eΠ applied on a microcanonical state
with a diﬀerent energy will not lead to the maximal work-extraction. This does not
diﬀer from (say) the ordinary Carnot cycle, whose implementation also demands
knowing the initial state of the working body.
The maximal work Wmax reads from (13, 10): Wmax = δM −
δ
dM [PM−ℓ
k=0 k dk +
(M −ℓ+ 1)(dM −PM−ℓ
k=0 dk)]. After summation by parts,
Wmax = δ
·
ℓ−1 + 1
dM
XM−ℓ
k=0 Dk
¸
,
(14)
where Dk is deﬁned in (5), and where integer ℓ= ℓ(M) is found from
XM−ℓ+1
k=0
dk > dM ≥
XM−ℓ
k=0 dk.
(15)
262

Eq. (14, 15) hold for any microcanonical state (3, 6); the speciﬁc form (4) is not
necessary.
We shall now calculate Wmax for two limits: T →∞and a ﬁnite N, and then
N →∞and a ﬁnite T.
4. Doubly maximized work
We set the number of spins N to a large, but a ﬁnite number, and maximize
Wmax(T) over all positive temperatures of the N-spin bath. The maximum is reached
for T = ∞(or M = N/2 as (7) shows) and provides an upper bound for the
work extractable from the positive temperature bath. We now calculate Wmax(∞).
Consider the sumP N
2 −ℓ
k=0 dk = P N
2
m=ℓd N
2 −m in (15). The dominant summation region
is m ∼ℓ. We shall see below that ℓ≪N. Hence for (4) we use the Gaussian
approximation d N
2 −m = 2
N
2 e−m2
N/2 [23], change the sum to integral, and ﬁnd ℓfrom
1 =
R ∞
ℓ
dx e−
x2
(N/2) : ℓ=
r
N
4 ln
h
N
4 ln(N/4)
i
+ N
4 O
h
ln ln(N/4)
ln(N/4)
i
. The second term under
square root is negligible if ln N is large. Eq. (14) then implies (for N ≫1):
Wmax = δ
Z ∞
ℓ
dx xe−
x2
(N/2) = δℓ≈δ
2
√
N ln N.
(16)
This is a reachable upper bound for the work extractable from the N-spin micro-
canonical bath.
5. Finite temperatures and thermodynamic limit
We employ (4) and assume the standard thermodynamic limit: m = M/N < 1/2
(and hence T > 0) in (7) is a ﬁxed ﬁnite number for M, N →∞. We note from (4)
and (7) that for any ﬁxed ﬁnite numbers m, ℓand N →∞,
dNm−ℓ
dNm
= e−ℓδ/T [ 1 + O( 1
N ) ].
(17)
Since the sums in (14, 15) are dominated by their largest terms, using (17) (with
m < 1 and integer ℓ) amounts to calculating these sums via geometrical progression,
e.g.,
1
dM
PM−ℓ+1
k=0
dk = P∞
k=ℓ−1 e−δk/T . We get for ℓand Wmax
Wmax(T) = δ
h
ℓ−1 + vℓ(1 −v)−2i
,
(18)
v ≡e−δ/T ,
ℓ=
»ln(1 −v)
ln v
¼
,
(19)
where ⌈x⌉is the ceiling (upper) integer part of x, e.g., ⌈0.99⌉= 1, ⌈−0.99⌉= 0.
According to (19), ℓgrows to inﬁnity with T: ℓ= 1 for e−δ/T ≤
1
2, ℓ= 2 for
2
1+
√
5 ≥e−δ/T ≥1
2, ℓ= 3 for 0.68232 ≥e−δ/T ≥
2
1+
√
5 etc.
263

Wmax(T) is a continuous function of T, but dWmax
dT
has jumps at the temperatures,
where ℓchanges, and one energy shell in the ﬁnal density matrix (13) is completely
ﬁlled; see (15) and Fig. 1. Hence
Wmax(T) = O(δ) for N ≫1 and T = O(δ).
(20)
The situation is symmetric with respect to diﬀerent spins of the bath. Hence after the
work-extraction the initial energy of each bath spin changes negligibly = O( 1
N ). The
ﬁnal state of each spin is diagonal in the energy representation and thus after work-
extraction it has a well-deﬁned temperature that diﬀers from the initial temperature
by O( 1
N ). Recall that the Gibbsian state as such cannot yield work in a cyclic process
(9) [2]. Hence the work is extracted due to inter-spin correlations present initially
in the microcanonical state.
Eq. (18) shows that Wmax(T) increases faster than T:
Wmax(T) = T
·
ln
µT
δ
¶
+ 1
¸
for T ≫δ,
(21)
where we used
l
ln(1−v)
ln v
m
≈ln(1−v)
ln v
. Eq. (21) is practically good already for T > 1.5 δ.
Now Wmax can be much larger than the energy of a single bath spin. In the limit
T ≫δ this energy is equal to δ/2; see (7).
6. Microcanonical states not equivalent to the canonical one
Eq. (20) does not depend on the concrete form (4) of dk. What is needed for (20)
is that the sum PM
k=0dk is dominated by its last term dM. Then (15) implies ℓ=
O(1), and (14) leads to (20). Hence (20) generalizes the Thomson’s formulation of
the second law to the microcanonical situation. In particular, (20) holds for those dk,
where the macroscopic equivalence between microcanonical and canonical states is
violated. As an example consider (3, 6) with dM = eN(M/N)2. This spectrum satisﬁes
all above conditions and leads to (20). Now the entropy ln dM is a convex function
of energy δM. Hence the speciﬁc heat C = [
dT
d(δM)]−1 calculated from (8) is negative,
and the macroscopic equivalence between canonical and microcanonical states is
clearly violated, because C > 0 is an automatic consequence of the canonical state
[1]. Such convex-entropy spectra are realized in macroscopic long-range interacting
systems [14].
Another example of convex entropy and canonical-microcanonical non-equivalence
where still (20) holds, is the ﬁrst-order microcanonical phase transition [1, 14], where
in the vicinity of some critical energy Ec, dS(E)
dE
has a jump:
dS(E)
dE |E→Ec+ =
1
Th ,
dS(E)
dE |E→Ec−= 1
Tl . This describes coexistence of two phases with diﬀerent temper-
atures. Since a more stable phase should have a larger entropy, we get Th < Tl
[1]. The above non-equivalence is seen here, because at a canonical ﬁrst-order phase
transition diﬀerent phases have the same temperature [1]. Even though two phases
at diﬀerent temperatures do co-exist, the extracted work has the same order of
magnitude (20) as for a homogeneous-temperature microcanonical state.
264

7. System coupled to the bath
An important instance of the maximal work problem is the amount of work
extractable from a thermal bath in the presence of a smaller system coupled to it;
see (1). How much work can be extracted from a combined state of a two level system
with energies 0 and ϵ > 0 and the microcanonical thermal bath? Answering this
question will alow us to understand to which extent the concept of the free energy
applies to the microcanonical situation. Before starting the analysis we should like
to stress again that so far the statistical physics literature does not distinguish
between canonical and microcanonical situations when introducing and applying
the free energy concept; see e.g. [1].
Let the initial density matrix of the two-level system be ρi; its eigenvalus are
π0 > π1. The spectrum of the overall initial state Ri ≡ρi ⊗Ωi reads [see (6, 5)]
Spec[Ri] =
1
dM
[ π0edM, π1edM, 02DN−2dM ], π0 > π1.
(22)
Both initially and ﬁnally the two-level system and bath do not interact. Hence the
overall Hamiltonian H reads
H
=
H(τ) = HS ⊗1 + 1 ⊗H
(23)
=
diag[0, δ, 2δ . . . , δN, ϵ, ϵ + δ, . . . , ϵ + δN],
(24)
where H is given by (3), and HS is the two-level Hamiltonian with energies 0 and
ϵ. We recall that each symbol kδ (or ϵ + kδ) in (24) is repeated dk times. Once
we consider unitary work-extraction processes, the ﬁnal state of the overall system
will have the same eigenvalues (22). Recalling our discussion between (11) and (13)
it should be clear that the minimal ﬁnal energy for the overall system is achieved
for the unitary operator that forces Rf to have the same eigenvectors as H and
permutes the eigenvalues (22) such that the largest eigenvalue is matched with the
smallest energy, next to the largest eigenvalue with the next to the smallest energy
and so on. Note that Spec[Ri] is already ordered in a non-increasing way. It remains
to order (24) in a non-decreasing way and write the lowest ﬁnal average energy as
scalar product of two vectors
tr(HRf) = Spec[Ri] · [ 0, δ, . . . , αδ, ϵ,
(25)
(α + 1)δ, ϵ + δ, . . . , δN, ϵ + δ(N −α), . . . , ϵ + δN ],
where α = ⌊ϵ
δ⌋, and ⌊x⌋is the ﬂoor (lower) integer part of x, e.g., ⌊0.99⌋= 0,
⌊−0.99⌋= −1.
Consider the work extracted from the overall system that is maximized over all
unitary dynamic operators. Since the system and bath do not interact both initially
and ﬁnally, this work separates into two parts coming, respectively, from the system
and bath [see (10, 14)]:
tr(H[Ri −Rf]) = Wmax + Wsur + tr(HS[ρi −ρf]),
(26)
265

where tr(HS[ρi −ρf]) is the energy change of the two-level system. Wmax + Wsur
is the work coming from the bath. Here Wmax is given by (14) (the maximal work
extracted from the bath alone) and we deﬁned the surplus work Wsur (work extracted
from the bath, but due to the system).
Obviously, Wsur+tr(HS[ρi−ρf]) ≥0, since tr(H[Ri−Rf]) results from optimizing
over a larger set of parameters than Wmax. Note that tr(HS[ρi −ρf]) appears also in
the right-hand-side of (1), and there is some analogy between Wsur and the entropy
diﬀerence T(tr[−ρeq ln ρeq + ρ ln ρ]) in (1), which is the work extracted from the
canonical bath.
There the work Wmax extracted from the canonical equilibrium
bath alone (without the system) is zero.
Scalar product (25) is calculated straightforwardly; for clarity we focus on the
thermodynamic limit regime (17):
Wmax + Wsur
=
δ[π1F2 + (π0 −π1)F1],
(27)
tr(HSρf)
=
ϵ[π1P2 + (π0 −π1)P1],
(28)
where Wmax is given by (18) and we deﬁned for k = 1, 2:
Fk ≡k(ℓ1k −1) + vℓ1k 1 + vα
1 −v
·
1
1 −v +
αvα
1 + vα
¸
+α sign(ℓ1k −ℓ2k)
·
k −vℓ2k(1 + v1+α)
1 −v
¸
,
(29)
Pk ≡vℓ1k+α
1 −v + sign(ℓ1k −ℓ2k)
·
k −vℓ2k(1 + v1+α)
1 −v
¸
,
ℓ1k ≡


ln
³
k(1−v)
1+vα
´
ln v


,
ℓ2k ≡


ln
³
k(1−v)
1+v1+α
´
ln v


.
(30)
Recall that sign(0) = 0, α = ⌊ϵ
δ⌋, and that ⌊x⌋and ⌈x⌉are deﬁned after (25) and
(18), respectively.
The ﬁnal state ρf of the two-level system is diagonal in its energy representation.
The eigenvalues of ρf are read-oﬀfrom (28). The excited state of ρf is less populated
than the ground-state; otherwise it can still provide work via a cyclic process. In this
speciﬁc sense the two-level system partially equilibrates; recall that ρi is arbitrary.
Fig. 1 displays Wmax(T) and Wsur(T) for a representative range of parameters.
It is seen that for α = 0, Wsur ≥0 and both Wmax and Wsur monotonically increase
with T. For α > 0 the positivity of Wsur is recovered only for a suﬃciently high T
provided that π0 ̸= π1; see Fig. 1. For π0 = π1, we always get Wsur < 0.
Consider now ϵ < δ [i.e.
α = 0 in (25)] and assume v ≡e−δ/T ≤1/3 for
simplicity. Eqs. (27–30) produce
Wsur
=
vδ(2π0 −1) (1 −v)−2,
(31)
tr(HSρf)
=
ϵ[ v π0 + (1 −3v)π1 ] (1 −v)−1.
(32)
266

0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
-0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
T
Wmax , Wsur
Figure 1: Thick curve: Wmax given by (14) as a function of temperature T for δ = 1.
Normal curves show Wsur given by (27) as a function of T for δ = 1, π1 = 0.3 and
(from top to bottom): α = ⌊ϵ
δ⌋= 0, 1, 2.
Eq. (31) shows that, in addition to Wsur + tr(HS[ρi −ρf]) ≥0, the work extracted
from the bath is enhanced, Wsur > 0, for any state of the two-level system besides
the completely mixed one, where π0 = π1 = 1
2.
The energy diﬀerence tr(HS[ρi −ρf]) can be positive or negative. Hence parame-
ters can be tuned such that it is zero, e.g., from (32) and for ϵ = T ln 2 < T ln 3 < δ
we get that initially canonical equilibrium two-level system, π0 = 1 −π1 = (1 +
e−ϵ/T )−1 =
2
3, enhances the work extracted from the bath without changing its
marginal state: tr(HSρf) = 0. Hence for enhancing the work extracted from the
microcanonical bath one needs that the system is ordered: its state should not be
completely mixed, while the maximal enhancing is achieved for a pure state. But
the state of the system need not change.
A non-equilibrium system coupled to canonical equilibrium bath can enhance
the work extracted from the bath only at the cost of changing (towards equilibrium)
its initially non-equilibrium state; see (1). The free energy measures this change.
For the microcanonical bath, the work can be enhanced already by an equilibrium
two-state system without changing its marginal state. We conclude that the concept
of the free energy does not generally apply to a system coupled to a microcanonical
bath.
But this concept applies in the high-temperature limit. For T ≫δ, ϵ we get from
(27–30) and from (21):
Wsur = (1 −2π1)T ln 2,
(33)
tr(HSρf) = ϵ/2.
(34)
Eq. (34) means that the ﬁnal state of the two-level system is completely mixed, which
for the present high-temperature case coincides with the canonical equilibrium state.
Eq. (33) predicts work-enhancement only if initially the two-level system was out
267

of equilibrium [recall that 1
2 ≥π1]. Hence for T ≫δ, ϵ we recover the logics of
the canonical-bath situation, but not its letter, because for a canonical bath Wsur
reduces to the diﬀerence between two von Neumann entropies that are logarithmic
functions of the initial eigenvalues π0 and π1; cf. our remark after (26).
We shall show elsewhere that a for a µ-level system in a state (density matrix)
ρ with eigenvalues ordered as π0 ≥π1 ≥... ≥πµ−1, we can deﬁne the linear entropy
as
L[ρ] =
Xµ−1
k=1 πk[(k + 1) ln(k + 1) −k ln k].
(35)
Generalizing (33), the surplus work Wsur extracted from a high-temperature mi-
crocanonical bath in contact with this system is then Wsur = T(ln µ −L[ρ]) =
T(L[ ˆ1
µ] −L[ρ]), where ˆ1
µ is the maximally mixed state of the µ-level system. For
the canonical situation this expression involves the von Neumann entropy −tr[ρ ln ρ]
instead of L[ρ]. Note that ln µ ≥L[ρ] ≥0: the upper (lower) limit is reached for the
maximally mixed (pure) ρ.
Hence for a system in initial state ρ and Hamiltonian HS coupled to the high-
temperature microcanonical bath one can deﬁne the microcanonical free energy
F[ρ] = tr(HSρ) −TL[ρ], whose diﬀerence F[ρ] −F[ρeq] (after adding to Wmax
extracted from the bath alone) deﬁnes the maximal work extracted from the sys-
tem+bath.
8. Summary
We reformulated the Thomson’s formulation of the second law for a N ≫1
particle equilibrium bath in a microcanonical state: if the bath temperature T is
ﬁnite, the maximal work extractable from the bath via a cyclic Hamiltonian process
is ≳δ, where δ is the energy of a single bath particle. The maximal work tends to
δ
√
N ln N if N is large but ﬁxed and T →∞. The reformulation applies equally
well to both ordinary microcanonical states, which are macroscopically equivalent to
canonical states, and convex-entropy microcanonical states for which no canonical
state can be deﬁned, e.g., because of a negative speciﬁc heat [14]. The existence of
such states demonstrates that a viewpoint on a microcanonical state as emerging
from measuring the energy of the canonical state is not generally valid. Thermody-
namics of such systems can have peculiarities [24], but we saw that they satisfy the
same generalized Thomson’s formulation much in the same way as ordinary micro-
canonical states. The work extraction is possible, since the microcanonic state of
the bath is not Gibbsian, though each its constituent can be in a Gibbsian state.
It is widely known that only a non-equilibrium system can lead—at expense of
changing its state towards equilibration—to work extraction from a canonical bath
[1]. This work is given by the free energy diﬀerence (1). In contrast, a canonical
equilibrium system (having the same temperature as the bath) can enhance the work
extracted from the microcanonical bath without changing its marginal state. Hence
268

the concept of free energy, in the sense of the maximal work, does not generally
apply to the microcanonical situation. The application of the concept is recovered
for T ≫δ, but the canonical expression of the free energy is not restored, instead it
should be formulated via the linear entropy (35).
Acknowledgements
We thank our colleagues Guenter Mahler, Dominik Janzing and Roger Balian for
discussions that motivated this work. We were supported by Volkswagenstiftung.
References
[1] L.D. Landau and E.M. Lifshitz, Statistical Physics, I, (Pergamon Press Oxford,
1978).
[2] A. Lenard, J. Stat. Phys. 19, 575 (1978).
I.M. Bassett, Phys. Rev. A 18, 2356 (1978).
[3] A. E. Allahverdyan and Th. M. Nieuwenhuizen, Physica A 305, 542 (2002).
[4] G.N. Hatsopoulos and E.P. Gyftopoulos, Found. Phys. 6, 127 (1976).
[5] A.E. Allahverdyan, R. Balian and Th.M. Nieuwenhuizen, Europhys. Lett. 67,
565 (2004).
[6] D. Janzing, J. Stat. Phys. 112, 3, 531 (2006).
[7] K. Maruyama, F. Nori and V. Vedral, Rev. Mod. Phys. 81, 1 (2009).
[8] J. Gemmer, M. Michel and G. Mahler, Quantum Thermodynamics (Springer,
NY, 2004).
[9] The maximization of work is carried out over all cyclic and time-dependent (in
the sense of (9)) Hamiltonians acting on the system+bath [1]; for more details
see, e.g., Appendix E of [26]. One can show that the work (1) can be achieved for
a Hamiltonian, where external ﬁelds act only on the system and on its coupling
to the bath [25, 26]. This set-up is local (advantage), but it has to be slow
(drawback).
[10] A. Polkovnikov et al., arXiv:1007.5331.
[11] L. van Hove in Fundamental Problems in Statistical Mechanics, edited by
E.D.G. Cohen (North Holland, Amsterdam, 1962), p. 157; N.G. van Kampen,
ibid., p. 173. M. Bander, arXiv:cond-mat/9609218.
269

[12] V. L. Berdichevsky, Thermodynamics of Chaos and Order (Addison Wesley
Longman, Essex, England, 1997).
[13] F. Borgonovi and F. M. Izrailev, Phys. Rev. E 62, 6475 (2000).
[14] A. Campa et al., Phys. Rep. 480, 57 (2009).
[15] R. Marathe and J.M.R. Parrondo, Phys. Rev. Lett. 104, 245704 (2010).
[16] S. Vaikuntanathan and C. Jarzynski, arXiv:1105.1744
[17] A.E. Allahverdyan and D.B. Saakian, EPL, 81, 30003 (2008).
[18] D. Abreu and U. Seifert, EPL, 94, 10001 (2011).
[19] Th.M. Nieuwenhuizen and A.E. Allahverdyan, Phys. Rev. E, 66, 036102, (2002).
[20] T. Sagawa and M. Ueda, Phys. Rev. Lett. 100, 080403 (2008).
[21] Eq. (2) is one of two standard deﬁnitions of the microcanonic entropy [1]. An-
other deﬁnition is ln tr[ρPE,E0], where E0 is the lowest energy and PE,E0 is the
projector on the subspace [E, E0]. For macroscopic systems both deﬁnitions typ-
ically agree with each other within the order O(N), where N ≫1 is the number
of particles. For ﬁnite systems the second deﬁnition is preferable [12, 17].
[22] A.W. Marshall and I. Olkin, Inequalities: Theory of Majorization (Academic
Press, New York, 1979).
[23] It is derived from (4) via the Stirling’s formula N! ≃(N/e)N and expanding
over m.
[24] A. Ramirez-Hernandez et al., Phys. Rev. E 78, 061133 (2008). D.H.E.Gross
and J.F.Kenney, J. Chem. Phys. 122, 224111 (2005). J. Oppenheim, Phys. Rev.
E 68, 016108 (2003).
[25] R. Alicki et al., Open Syst. Inf. Dyn. 11, 205 (2004).
[26] A.E. Allahverdyan, R. S. Johal and G. Mahler, Phys. Rev. E 77, 041118 (2008).
270

M theory on AdS4 × S7 and AdS4 × S7/Zk
Marine Samsonyan
Yerevan Physics Institute
Alikhanian Brothers Street 2, 0036 Yerevan, Armenia
Abstract
We revisit Kaluza-Klein compactiﬁcation of 11-d supergravity on S7 and
go to S7/Zk using group theory techniques. We show that there is no Higgs
mechanism responsible for the supersymmetry breaking. We analyze Kaluza-
Klein towers and compute their partition functions.
1. Some generalities on Superstring Theory
A theory of fundamental one-dimensional objects, strings, arose in the late 1960s
in an attepmt to understand the strong nuclear force [1]. String theory contains
open and closed strings. Open strings can end on a (p+1) dimensional hypersurface
called Dp-brane. In this theory speciﬁc particles correspond to speciﬁc oscillation
modes (or quantum states) of the string. One of the most important features of
string theory is that it contains general relativity. The graviton is in the spectrum
of closed string. Bosonic string theories are inconsistent. The consistency of the
theory requires supersymmetry. There ara ﬁve superstring theories- Type IIA, Type
IIB, Type I, Heterotic SO(32) and Heterotic E8 × E8. They predict the spacetime
dimension in which they live to be ten. This means that the six dimensions must
be compactiﬁed on an internal manifold with the size of Planck lenght.
String
theories are related via dualities. T-duality implies that in many cases two diﬀerent
geometries for the extra dimensions are physically equivalent. It relates the two
Type II and the two Heterotic theories. Therefeore the Type IIA and Type IIB
theories (also the two Heterotic theories) should be regarded as a single theory. The
S-duality relates the string coupling constant to its inverse. This duality connects
the Type I theory to the SO(32) Heterotic string theory and the Type IIB theory
to itself. Thus knowing the behaviour of these theories at small coupling limit, we
learn how they behave at strong coupling limit. This means that we know how Type
I, Type IIB and Heterotic SO(32) theories behave at strong coupling limit. At this
limit in the Type IIA and Heterotic E8 ×E8 theories arises an eleventh dimension of
size gℓ(ℓis the string length, g is the coupling constant). This dimension is a circle
in the Type IIA case and a line interval in the Heterotic theory. When it is large
a new type of quantum theory in eleven dimensions arises. This is called M-theoy.
The low energy limit of this theory is 11-dimensional supergravity.
271

Besides that string theories are related to each other, they are related also to
gauge theories via gauge theory/string theory duality.
This important discovery
was made in the late 1990s [2], which gives a duality between conformally invariant
quantum ﬁeld theories (CFT) and superstring theories or M-theory in special space-
time geometries. A collection of coincident branes produces a spacetime geometry
with a horizon. In the vicinity of the horizon, this geometry can be approximated by
an anti-de Sitter (AdS) space times a sphere. Gauge theory/String theory duality
states that string theory or M-theory in the near-horizon geometry of a collection of
coincident D-branes or M-branes is equivalent to the low energy worldvolume theory
of the corresponding branes, which is a conformal ﬁeld theory. This duality is also
called AdS/CFT duality. In the duality when one description is weakly coupled, the
dual descripiton is strongly coupled. Using an information in the weakly coupled
theory allows to learn non trivial facts about strongly coupled dual theory. There are
three basic examples of AdS/CFT duality. They all have maximal supersymmetry
(32 supercharges). The three basic examples are the following:
• Superconformal ﬁeld theory on the worldvolume of N parallel D3-branes cor-
responds to the type IIB theory on AdS5 × S5.
• M-theory on AdS7×S4 is dual to superconformal ﬁeld theory on N M5-branes.
• M-theory on AdS4 ×S7 corresponds to superconformal ﬁeld theory which lives
on the worldvolume of N parallel M2-branes.
In each case the sphere surrounds the branes. Each of these branes has one unit of the
appropriate type of charge. Thus, the background has nonvanishing antisymmetric
tensor gauge ﬁeld with N units of ﬂux. Gauss’s law requires that these ﬂuxes pass
through the sphere.
2. Aspects of AdS4 × S7
A stack of M2-branes has AdS4 × S7 near-horizon geometry.
M-theory on
AdS4 × S7 is dual to three dimensional superconformal ﬁeld theory. M-theory does
not contain a dilaton ﬁeld, which means that there is no weak-coupling limit. Hence
the dual ﬁeld theory is strongly coupled and as a result does not need to have a clas-
sical Lagrangian descripiton. One can think about this three dimensional conformal
ﬁeld theory in the following way. Remember that the low energy eﬀective theory
on the world-volume of N coincident D2-branes of type IIA superstring theory is a
maximally supersymmetric three dimensional Yang- Mills theory with gauge group
U(N). Yang-Mills coupling in three dimensions is dimensionful and introduces a
scale. This means this theory is not conformal. From the other side type IIA cou-
pling constant is proportional to the radius of a circle on which eleventh dimension
is compactiﬁed. When this coupling constant becomes large the gauge theory cou-
pling constant also increases. This corresponds to going to the infrared in the gauge
theory. Also the circular eleventh dimension is increasing. In the limit where the
272

coupling constant becomes inﬁnite one reaches the conformally invariant ﬁxed-point
theory describing a stack of coincident M2-branes in 11 dimensions. This theory
has SO(8) R-symmetry which corresponds to the rotations in the eight dimensions
transverse to the M2-branes in 11 dimensions. The isometry group of AdS4 × S7
metric is SO(3, 2)×SO(8) ≈Sp(4)×Spin(8). SO(3, 2) is the symmetry of AdS4 and
in the dual theory it corresponds to the conformal symmetry group. The isometry
group SO(8) of S7 corresponds to the R-symmetry of the dual gauge theory. There
are 32 conserved supercharges (maximal supersymmetry). In the dual gauge theory
16 of these supersymmetries are realized linearly and the other 16 are conformal
supersymmetries. The isometry superalgebra becomes OSp(8|4) once these super-
symmetries are included.
The 32 fermionic generators transform as (8, 4) under
Spin(8) × Sp(4).
The ABJM model:
Aharony, Bergman, Jaﬀeris and Maldacena have conjec-
tured that 11-d supergravity on AdS4 × S7/Zk, corresponding to the near horizon
geometry of N M2-branes at a C4/Zk singularity, be dual to N = 6 Chern-Simons
(CS) theory in d = 3 with gauge group U(N)k ×U(N)−k and opposite CS couplings
k1 = k = −k2 [5]. The metric reads
ds2
11 = 1
4L2ds2
AdS + L2ds2
S7
(1)
for later use, note that LAdS = L/2 with L the radius of S7 and henceforth the
metrics of the subspaces are for unit curvature radii.
The Type IIA solution which corresponds to the ABJM model reads
ds2
IIA = 4 ρ2
L2 dx · dx + 4 L2
4ρ2 dρ2 + L2ds2
CP3 = 1
4L2ds2
AdS + L2ds2
CP3
(2)
where L =
³
32π2N
k
´1/4
is the curvature radius in string units. The string coupling,
related to the VEV of the dilaton, is given by gs = L/k =
³
32π2N
k5
´1/4
. Thus the
perturbative Type IIA description should be valid for L >> 1 and gs << 1 i.e. for
N1/5 << k << N. λ = N/k is the ’t Hooft coupling of the boundary CS theory.
When one goes from Type IIA on AdS4×CP3 to M-theory on AdS4×S7 an uplift
to 11 dimensions occur, the CP3 becomes the base of a Hopf ﬁbration S7 = CP3⋉S1
whose metric reads
ds2
S7 = ds2
CP3 + (dτ + A)2
(3)
with dA = 2JCP3, the K¨ahler form on CP3 normalized so that dV (CP3) = J ∧J ∧
J /6 and V (CP3) = π3/6. There are R-R ﬂuxes
gsF2 = 2LJ
,
gsF4 = 6L3dV (AdS4)
,
gsF6 = 6L5dV (CP3).
(4)
In the ABJM model B2 = 0. When there are also fractional M2-branes one
has the ABJ model. In that case the boundary theory is N = 6 CS theory with
273

U(N)k × U(N + k −l)−k gauge group [6]. In this model B2 = J l/k, with l =
1, ..., k −1.
The 11-d supergravity approximation should be valid in the double-scaling limit
k →∞, N →∞with λ = N/k ﬁxed and large. The CFT description should instead
be valid when λ << 1, i.e. k >> N. As λ →0 higher spin symmetry enhancement
takes place [3], [4].
N = 6 d = 3 boundary CS theory:
Three dimensional N = 6 CS theories are
constructed from CS theories with N = 3 supersymmetry. These N = 3 theories
come from the N = 4 case in three dimensions which in turn are obtained from
N = 2 in d = 3. d = 3 theories with N = 2 supersymmetry are the dimensional
reductions of N = 1 theories in four dimensions. The chain connecting these theories
is the following:
N = 6(d=3) ←N = 3(d=3) ←N = 4(d=3) ←N = 2(d=3) ←N = 1(d=4)
(5)
The ﬁeld contents of the theories are the following:
d = 4, N = 1
VN=1 = (Aµ, χ, D) ∈Adj
Qi = (φi, ψi) ∈Ri
d = 3, N = 2
VN=2 = (Am, χ, D, σ) ∈Adj
Qi = (φi, ψi) ∈Ri
(6)
d = 3, N = 4
VN=4 = VN=2 + Φ ∈Adj
Qi ∈Ri, ˜Qi ∈¯Ri
The vector multiplet of N = 4 theory consists of an N = 2 vector multiplet
plus one chiral multiplet in the adjoint representation Φ = Φata and there are
hypermultiplets Q and ˜Q in the real (reducible) representations.
Adding to the
N = 4 superpotential W = ˜QΦQ the CS term, giving a mass m = g2
Y M
k
4π to
the vectors, and a CS superpotential W = −k
8πTrΦ2 breaks N = 4 to N = 3.
Integrating out Φ yields the superpotential
W = 4π
k ( ˜QtaQ)( ˜QtaQ).
(7)
The resulting N = 3 theory has SO(3) ≈SU(2) R-symmetry group.
The case of N = 6 is special. It comes from thex N = 3 theory when one takes
the guage group to be G = U(N)k × U(N)−k and and 2 hypermultiplets in the
bifundamental representation Hi = Qi + ˜Qi, i = 1, 2. The chiral superﬁels Qi =
(A1, A2) are in the bifundamental representation (N, N∗) and ˜Qi = (B1, B2) are in
the anti- bifundamental representation (N∗, N). In this case the superpotential (7)
becomes:
W = 2π
k tr(AiBiAjBj −BiAiBjAj) = 4π
k tr(A1B1A2B2 −A1B2A2B1).
(8)
This can be written in a more compact way:
W = 2π
k ϵabϵ˙a˙btr(AaB˙aAbB˙b).
(9)
274

The N = 3 CS theory has a SU(2) × U(1) ﬂavour symmetry. This SU(2) rotates
A’s and B’s together. (9) has a symmetry under SU(2)×SU(2)×U(1)B which acts
on A’s and B’s separately. This symmetry does not commute with R-symmetry
SO(3) ≈SU(2) under which A and B form doublets. Hence the N = 3 CS theory
in this speciﬁc case has a larger SU(4) ≈SO(6) symmetry. This is the R-symmetry
group of N = 6.
Compactiﬁcation on S7:
For the later use let us brieﬂy review the mass spec-
trum of the Freund-Rubin solution of d = 11 supergravity on S7 [8–10]. The grav-
itino ﬁeld as well as all the fermions are set to zero, the AdS4 Riemann tensor and
the three-form ﬁeld strength are given by:
Rµνρσ = −4(gµρ(x)gνσ(x) −gµσ(x)gνρ(x))
(10)
Fµνρσ = 3
√
2
q
−det gµν(x)εµνρσ
(11)
where ε0123 = −1. The metric and the three form ﬁeld with mixed indices vanish:
gµα = Fµνρα = Fµναβ = Fµαβγ = 0
(12)
and also
Fαβγδ(y) = 0
(13)
Rαβ = −6gαβ(y)
(14)
µ, ν, ρ = 0, ..., 3 are d = 4 indices, α, β, γ = 1, ..., 7 are internal indices.
Then one considers ﬂuctuations around the Freund-Rubin solution.
The lin-
earized ﬁeld equations are obtained by replacing the background ﬁelds in the d = 11
ﬁeld equations by background ﬁelds plus arbitrary ﬂuctuations. An elegant and quite
general method to determine the complete mass spectrum on any coset manifold re-
lies on generalized harmonic expansion. In our case, one expands the ﬂuctuations in
a complete set of spherical harmonics of S7 = SO(8)/SO(7). The coeﬃcient func-
tions of the spherical harmonics correspond to the physical ﬁelds in d = 4. In order
to diagonalize the linearized equations it turns out to be convenient to parameterize
the ﬂuctuations as follows:
gµν(x, y) = gµν(x) + hµν(x, y)
(15)
hµν(x, y) = h′
µν(x, y) −1
2gµν(x)h α
α (x, y)
(16)
gαβ(x, y) = gαβ(x) + hαβ(x, y)
(17)
gµα(x, y) = hµα(x, y)
(18)
Aµνρ(x, y) = Aµνρ(x) + aµνρ(x, y)
(19)
In particular the Weyl rescaled spacetime metric appears in (16) so as to put the
d = 4 Einstein action in the canonical form. The spherical harmonic expansions of
275

Spin
Field
SO(7)
SO(8)
4(ML)2
∆
ℓ
2+
h′
(µν)
N1
(ℓ, 0, 0, 0)
ℓ(ℓ+ 6)
∆= ℓ
2 + 3
ℓ≥0
1−
1
hµα
N7
(ℓ, 1, 0, 0)
ℓ(ℓ+ 2)
∆= ℓ
2 + 2
ℓ≥0
1−
2
Aµνα
N7
(ℓ−2, 1, 0, 0)
(ℓ+ 6)(ℓ+ 4)
∆= ℓ
2 + 4
ℓ≥2
1+
Aµαβ
N21
(ℓ−1, 0, 1, 1)
(ℓ+ 2)(ℓ+ 4)
∆= ℓ
2 + 3
ℓ≥1
0+
1
Aµνρ
N1
(ℓ+ 2, 0, 0, 0)∗
(ℓ+ 2)(ℓ−4)
∆= ℓ
2 + 1
ℓ≥0
0+
2
hαα, h′
λλ
N1
(ℓ−2, 0, 0, 0)
(ℓ+ 10)(ℓ+ 4)
∆= ℓ
2 + 5
ℓ≥2
0+
3
h(αβ)
N27
(ℓ−2, 2, 0, 0)
ℓ(ℓ+ 6)
∆= ℓ
2 + 3
ℓ≥2
0−
1
Aαβγ
N35
(ℓ, 0, 2, 0)
(ℓ−2)(ℓ+ 4)
∆= ℓ
2 + 2
ℓ≥0
0−
2
Aαβγ
N35
(ℓ−2, 0, 0, 2)
(ℓ+ 8)(ℓ+ 2)
∆= ℓ
2 + 4
ℓ≥2
Table 1: Bosonic KK towers after compactiﬁcation on S7
the ﬂuctuations of the metric and of the antisymmetric tensor ﬁelds are given by:
h′
(µν)(x, y) =
X
HN1
µν (x)Y N1(y)
hµα(x, y) =
X
BN7
µ (x)Y N7
α (y) + BN1
µ (x)DαY N1(y)
h(αβ)(x, y) =
X
φN27(x)Y N27
(αβ)(y) + φN7(x)D(αY N7
β) (y) + φN1(x)D(αDβ)Y N1(y)
h α
α (x, y) =
X
πN1(x)Y N1(y)
Aµνρ(x, y) =
X
aN1
µνρ(x)Y N1(y)
Aµνα(x, y) =
X
aN7
µν (x)Y N7
α (y) + aN1
µν (x)DαY N1(y)
Aµαβ(x, y) =
X
aN21
µ
(x)Y N21
αβ (y) + aN7
µ (x)D[αY N7
β]
Aαβγ(x, y) =
X
aN35(x)Y N35
αβγ (y) + aN21(x)D[αY N21
βγ] (y)
(20)
All superscripts Nr (r = 1, 7, 21, 27, 35) have inﬁnite range, since they should pro-
vide a basis for arbitrary ﬁelds on the 7-sphere. The index r speciﬁes the SO(7)
representation of the corresponding spherical harmonic. For example, Y N35
αβγ is in the
third rank totally antisymmetric representation of SO(7) with dimension 35, while
Y N27
(αβ) is in the symmetric traceless 27-dimensional representation. Derivatives of Y ’s
appear in the expansions since any tensor can be decomposed into its transverse
and longitudinal parts. Then one has to ﬁx all local symmeties and substitute the
resulting expansions into the d = 11 ﬁeld equations. The coeﬃcients of each inde-
pendent spherical harmonic will yield the d = 4 ﬁeld equations. After diagonalizing
the bosonic ﬁeld equations one obtains the mass spectrum summarized in Table 1.
The resulting bosonic spectrum includes the massless graviton, 28 massless vectors
of SO(8), corresponding to a combination of Bµ (in hµα) and Cµ (in Aµνα), 35v
scalars (∆= 1) and 35s (∆= 2) pseudoscalars with (MLAdS)2 = −2.
In the
supergravity literature [8–10] masses of scalars are often shifted by −R/6 so that
(MLAdS)2 →( ˜
MLAdS)2 = (MLAdS)2 + 2. The 70 (pseudo)scalars in the N = 8 su-
276

Spin
SO(8)
4(ML)2
∆
ℓ
( 3
2)1
(ℓ, 0, 0, 1)
(ℓ+ 2)2
∆= ℓ
2 + 5
2
ℓ≥0
( 3
2)2
(ℓ−1, 0, 1, 0)
(ℓ+ 4)2
∆= ℓ
2 + 7
2
ℓ≥1
( 1
2)1
(ℓ+ 1, 0, 1, 0)∗
ℓ2
∆= ℓ
2 + 3
2
ℓ≥0
( 1
2)2
(ℓ−1, 1, 1, 0)
(ℓ+ 2)2
∆= ℓ
2 + 5
2
ℓ≥1
( 1
2)3
(ℓ−2, 1, 0, 1)
(ℓ+ 4)2
∆= ℓ
2 + 7
2
ℓ≥2
( 1
2)4
(ℓ−2, 0, 0, 1)
(ℓ+ 6)2
∆= ℓ
2 + 9
2
ℓ≥2
Table 2: Fermionic KK towers after compactiﬁcation on S7
pergravity multiplet are massless in the sense that ( ˜
MLAdS)2 = 0. Moreover, there
are three families of scalars and two families of pseudoscalar excitations. Three of
them (0+
2 , 0+
3 and 0−
2 ) contain only states with positive mass square and correspond
to irrelevant operators in the dual CFT. The remaining families 0+
1 and 0−
1 contain
states with positive, zero and negative mass squared corresponding to irrelevant,
marginal and relevant operators, respectively.
A similar analysis can be performed for fermionic ﬂuctuations. In Table 2 we
summarize the fermionic mass spectrum.
The KK spectrum does not include the states with ∗for ℓ= −1, since they
do not propagate in the bulk but live on the conformal boundary of AdS4. They
correspond to the singleton representation of Osp(8|4) that consists of 8v bosons Xi
with ∆= 1
2, (ML)2 = −5
4 and 8c fermions ψ ˙a with ∆= 1, ML = 1
2, both at the
unitary bound.
3. From S7 to S7/Zk and CP3 ⋉S1
S7 is a U(1) bundle over CP3. The CP3 solution of the d = 10 theory can be
obtained from the S7 solution of the d = 11 theory by Hopf ﬁbration, i.e. keeping
only U(1) invariant states [7]. The compactiﬁcation on CP3 of the d = 10 theory
yields a four dimensional theory with N = 6 supersymmetry and with gauge group
SO(6) × SO(2). In order to decompose KK harmonics on S7 = SO(8)/SO(7) into
KK harmonics on CP3 = U(4)/U(3) × U(1), we constructed an arbitrary represen-
tations of SO(8) in the space of polynomials of 12 variables. The latter are the
coordinates of the subgroup ZSO(8)
+
generated by the raising operators of SO(8).
Then we developed a technique which allows to identify which of the above polyno-
mials correspond to highest weight states of representations of U(4) ⊂SO(8). In
this case the number of variables reduces to 6 and in this case the polynomials will
depend on these six variables. The method we used is quite standard in represen-
tation theory of Lie groups (see e.g. Chapter 16 of [11]). The details can be found
in the original paper [3] or in the [4]. We just give the indicator system one has to
277

solve for the highest weight states:
(a23∂a13 + a24∂a14)ℓ1+1 f(a) = 0
(a13∂a12 + a34∂a24)ℓ2+1 f(a) = 0
(a14∂a13 + a24∂a23)ℓ3+1 f(a) = 0
(∂a34)ℓ4+1 f(a) = 0.
(21)
Solving these equations one can fully decompose KK harmonics on S7 into KK
harmonics of CP3 × S1 which is our next task.
In the following we will give only a couple of examples how KK towers of S7
decompose into KK towers of S7/Zk. For the decomposition of all towers see [3], [4].
For scalar spherical harmonics with Dynkin labels (ℓ, 0, 0, 0) one ﬁnds as independent
polynomials {am
14 | m = 0, ..., ℓ}. Thus the following decomposition holds:
(ℓ, 0, 0, 0) →⊕[0, ℓ−m, m]ℓ−2m
(22)
where the subscript is the SO(2) charge Q of the appropriate representation.
For vector spherical harmonics with SO(8) Dynkin labels (ℓ−2, 1, 0, 0) one gets
{a12am
14, a24am
14, (a13a24 −a14a23)am
14, am
14 | m = 0, ..., ℓ} as independent polynomials.
The SO(8) representation decomposes into SO(6) representations as:
(ℓ, 1, 0, 0) →
⊕[0, ℓ−m, m]ℓ−2m ⊕[0, ℓ−m + 1, m + 1]ℓ−2m
⊕[1, ℓ−m, m]ℓ−2m−2 ⊕[1, ℓ−m, m]ℓ−2m+2
(23)
The zero charge spectrum i.e. the states which constitute the KK spectrum of Type
IIA supergravity on CP3 can be easily identiﬁed in the decompositions.
The Zk orbifold projection on S7 gives S7/Zk ≈CP3 ⋉S1. In this way the
supersymmetry breaks. It appears not to be spontaneous supersymmetry breaking.
Massless scalars, corresponding to marginal operators with ∆= 3 on the boundary,
only appear in higher KK multiplets, i.e. in the 840vc = (2, 0, 2, 0) and 1386 =
(6, 0, 0, 0).
None of these can play the role of St¨uckelberg ﬁeld for the 12 coset
vectors in the 6+2 + 6−2 of SO(8)/SO(6) × SO(2).
Indeed, using the group theory techniques described in Section 3 the decompo-
sition of 840vc = (2, 0, 2, 0) under SO(8) →SO(6) × SO(2) reads
840vc(2, 0, 2, 0) →
84+4[0, 2, 2] + 70+2[0, 3, 1] + 70+2[0, 1, 3] + 64+2[1, 1, 1]
+840[0, 2, 2] + 450[1, 2, 0] + 450[1, 0, 2]
(24)
+350[0, 4, 0] + 350[0, 0, 4] + 20′
0[2, 0, 0]
+84−4[0, 2, 2] + 70−2[0, 3, 1] + 70−2[0, 1, 3] + 64−2[1, 1, 1]
This means that the massless scalars in the 840vc(2, 0, 2, 0) cannot account for the
needed St¨uckelberg ﬁelds in the 6+2 + 6−2.
One can recognize massless scalars
neutral under SO(2) that survive in k →∞limit and transform non-trivially under
SO(6).
278

The same applies to the other massless scalars in the 1386(6, 0, 0, 0). The de-
composition reads
1386(6, 0, 0, 0) →
84+6[0, 6, 0] + 189+4[0, 5, 1] + 270+2[0, 4, 2]
+3000[0, 3, 3]
+84−6[0, 0, 6] + 189−4[0, 1, 5] + 270−2[0, 2, 4]
(25)
It is obvious that there are no 6+2 + 6−2. In this case, neutral ﬁelds appear in the
300 representation of SO(6). Thus, we see that there is no Higgs mechanism for
the breaking of SO(8) to SO(6) × SO(2).
One observes that in the large k limit only SO(2) singlets survive. Only states
with ℓeven on S7 give rise to neutral states. This means that the parent theory could
be either a compactiﬁcation on S7 or on RP7 = S7/Z2. Indeed both lead to SO(8)
gauged supergravity with the massless multiplet {gµν, 8ψµ, 28Aµ, 56λ, 35+ + 35−ϕ}.
4. KK towers
Let us now focus on the KK excitations. One can write the single-particle par-
tition function on S7, decompose it into super-characters and identify the SO(2)
charge sectors, relevant for the subsequent Zk projection i.e. compactiﬁcation on
CP3.
Introducing a chemical potential for the charge Q (tQ), the super-character of
an ultra-short 1/2 BPS representation of Osp(8|4) reads:
X 1/2BPS
ℓ
(q, t) =
t−2−ℓq2+ℓ
6 (1 −t2)5 (1 + q)3
h
ℓ3 ¡
−1 + t2¢2 (−1 + q)3
×
³
t6+2ℓ¡
t2 −q
¢2 −
¡
−1 + t2q
¢2´
−6ℓ2 ¡
−1 + t2¢
(−1 + q)2
×
³
t6+2ℓ¡
t2 −q
¢2 ¡
−3 + 2t2 + q
¢
+
¡
2 + t2(−3 + q)
¢ ¡
−1 + t2q
¢2´
+6t6+2ℓ¡
t2 −q
¢2 ¡
−35 + q(35 + (−9 + q)q) + 2t4 ¡
−5 + q2¢
+t2(35 + q(−13 + (−7 + q)q))
¢
−
¡
2
¡
−5 + q2¢
(26)
+t4(−35 + q(35 + (−9 + q)q)) + t2(35 + q(−13 + (−7 + q)q))
¢
×6
¡
−1 + t2q
¢2 −ℓ(−1 + q)
³
t6+2ℓ¡
t2 −q
¢2 (−107 + (70 −11q)q
+t4(−47 + (−2 + q)q) −2t2(−71 + q(22 + q))
¢
+
¡
−1 + t2q
¢2
×
¡
47 −(−2 + q)q + 2t2(−71 + q(22 + q)) + t4(107 + q(−70 + 11q))
¢¢¤
.
For ℓ= 0, corresponding to the gauged supergravity multiplet, there is further
shortening (null descendants) due to the presence of conserved ‘currents’ i.e. stress-
tensor, SO(8) vector currents and 8s supercurrents. Taking this into account one
279

ﬁnds the following super-character
X 1/2BPS
ℓ=0
(q) =
1
(1 −q2)3
[(10t2 + 15 + 10t−2)q2 −
2(15t2 + 10 + 6 + 10 + 15t−2)q3 +
(10t2 + 15 + 10t−2 + 3(6t2 + 15 + 1 + 6t−2))q4 −
4(t2 + 6 + t−2)q5 −(6t2 + 15 + 1 −5 + 6t−2)q6 +
2(t2 + 6 + t−2)q7 −3q8].
(27)
The denominator takes into account derivatives (descendants). Quite remarkably
this formula coincides with the previous one when ℓ= 0.
After some algebra, putting t = 1 (i.e. not keeping the track of SO(2) charge),
one ﬁnds
X 1/2BPS
ℓ=0
(q) = q2(3q3 −7q2 −7q + 35)
(1 + q)3
.
(28)
A factor (1 −q)2 cancels between numerator and denominator meaning that not
only the number of bosons equals to the number of fermions and the sum with ∆1
vanishes but also the sum with ∆2 should vanish. This should be related to the
absence of quantum corrections to the negative vacuum energy, i.e. cosmological
constant in the bulk.
The 1/2 BPS partition function is given by
ZN=8
1/2BPS =
X
ℓ
X 1/2BPS
ℓ
=
35q2
(1 −q2)2 .
(29)
The simplicity of the result is due to miraculous cancellations between bosonic and
fermionic operators with the same scaling dimensions in diﬀerent KK multiplets
i.e. with diﬀerent ℓ’s.
In order to perform the Zk projection it is useful to decompose into SO(2) charge
sectors according to
ZN=8→N=6
1/2BPS
(q, t) = q2[(1 + q6)P2(t) −(q + q5)P3(t) + (q2 + q4)P4(t) −q3P5(t)]
(1 −qt)4(1 −qt−1)4(1 + q)2
,
(30)
where
P2(t) = 10t+2 + 15 + 10t−2
P3(t) = 20t+3 + 10t+2 + 64t+1 + 22 + 64t−1 + 10t−2 + 20t−3
P4(t) = 15t+4 + 8t+3 + 104t+2 + 48t+1 + 175 + 48t−1 + 104t−2 + 8t−3 + 15t−4
P5(t) = 4t+5 + 2t+4 + 64t+3 + 40t+2 + 196t+1 + 88 +
+196t−1 + 40t−2 + 64t−3 + 2t−4 + 4t−5.
(31)
Depending on the choice of k one can recognize the surviving 1/2 BPS states
as those with Q = kn. In formulae one has to replace t with ωr and sum over
r = 0, ..., k −1.
280

5. Conclusions
We have re-analyzed the KK spectrum of 11 dimensional supergravity on AdS4×
S7 which is the low energy limit of M-theory on AdS4 × S7. A compactiﬁcation on
AdS4×S7/Zk with k →∞corresponds to the low energy limit of Type IIA theory on
AdS4 × CP3. We presented group theoretical method showing how the R-symmetry
group of the theory on AdS4 × CP3 is embedded into the R-symmetry group of the
theory on AdS4 × S7. This gives a very nice way to decompose the KK towers of
S7 into those of S7/Zk. Going from M-theory on AdS4 × S7 to Type IIA theory
on AdS4 × CP3 the supersymmetry breaks.
We show that this breaking is not
spontaneous. Massless scalars, corresponding to marginal operators with ∆= 3 on
the boundary, only appear in higher KK multiplets, i.e. in the 840vc = (2, 0, 2, 0)
and 1386 = (6, 0, 0, 0). We have shown that none of these can play the role of
St¨uckelberg ﬁeld for the 12 coset vectors in the 6+2 +6−2 of SO(8)/SO(6)×SO(2).
In the last section we discussed KK excitations in details computing diﬀerent super-
characters and partition functions.
References
[1] M.B. Green, J.H. Schwarz and E. Witten, Superstring Theory ( Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge, 1988); J.Polchinski, String Theory (Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge, 1998); K. Becker, M. Becker, J.H. Schwarz String
Theory and M-Theory (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 2007); E. Kir-
itsis String Theory in a Nutshell (Princeton University Press, Princeton, 2007).
[2] J. M. Maldacena, Adv. Theor. Math. Phys. 2 (1998) 231 [Int. J. Theor. Phys.
38 (1999) 1113] [arXiv:hep-th/9711200].
[3] M. Bianchi, R. Poghossian and M. Samsonyan, JHEP 1010, 021 (2010)
[arXiv:1005.5307].
[4] M. Samsonyan, arXiv:1102.1357.
[5] O. Aharony, O. Bergman, D. L. Jaﬀeris and J. Maldacena, JHEP 0810, 091
(2008) [arXiv:0806.1218].
[6] O. Aharony, O. Bergman and D. L. Jaﬀeris, JHEP 0811, 043 (2008)
[arXiv:0807.4924].
[7] B. E. W. Nilsson and C. N. Pope, Class. Quant. Grav. 1, 499 (1984).
[8] L. Castellani, R. D’Auria, P. Fre, K. Pilch and P. van Nieuwenhuizen, Class.
Quant. Grav. 1, 339 (1984).
[9] P. Van Nieuwenhuizen, In *Les Houches 1983, Proceedings, Relativity, Groups
and Topology, Ii*, 823-932
281

[10] E. Sezgin, Phys. Lett. B 138, 57 (1984).
[11] D. P. Zhelobenko “Compact Lie groups and their representations”. Translations
of mathematical monographs, V. 40, AMS (1973).
282

Casimir-Polder forces in the geometry of cosmic string
A. S. Kotanjyan, A. A. Saharian, V. M. Bardeghyan
Department of Physics, Yerevan State University
1 Alex Manoogian Street, 0025 Yerevan, Armenia
Abstract
Combined eﬀects on the Casimir-Polder potential due to a cosmic string
and coaxial metallic cylindrical shell are investigated.
For the both regions
inside and outside the shell, the potential is decomposed into pure string and
shell-induced parts. In a special case of an isotropic polarizability tensor, the
Casimir-Polder force in the interior region is attractive with respect to the shell.
In the exterior region the force is attractive near the shell and repulsive at large
distances from the shell.
1. Introduction
The Casimir-Polder (CP) forces have attracted a great deal of attention because
of their important role in many areas of science, including material sciences, physical
chemistry, nanotechnology, and atom optics (for reviews see Refs. [1, 2]). In this
paper we present the results of the investigation of the CP forces due to the non-
trivial topology induced by a straight cosmic string and boundaries. Cosmic strings
are among the most interesting classes of topological defects which could arise as a
result of symmetry breaking phase transitions during the evolution of the early uni-
verse [3]. They are candidates for the generation of a variety of interesting physical
eﬀects, including gravitational lensing, anisotropies in the cosmic microwave back-
ground radiation, the generation of gravitational waves, high-energy cosmic rays,
and gamma ray bursts.
The nontrivial topology of the cosmic string spacetime results in the distortion
of the zero-point vacuum ﬂuctuations of quantized ﬁelds and induces non-zero vac-
uum expectation values for physical observables. Combined eﬀects of topology and
boundaries on the quantum vacuum in the geometry of a cosmic string have been
investigated for scalar [4], vector [5, 6] and fermionic ﬁelds [7, 8], with boundary con-
ditions on cylindrical surfaces. The vacuum energy for massless scalar ﬁelds subject
to Dirichlet, Neumann and hybrid boundary conditions in the setting of the conical
piston has been analyzed in Ref. [9]. The vacuum polarization eﬀects in a cosmic
string spacetime induced by a scalar ﬁeld obeying Dirichlet or Neumann boundary
conditions on a ﬂat boundary orthogonal to the string are considered in Ref. [10].
Here we consider the eﬀects of cosmic string and coaxial metallic cylindrical shell on
283

the CP force. The CP interaction potential of a microparticle with an ideal metal
cylindrical shell in background of Minkowski spacetime has been investigated in a
number of papers (see references in Ref. [11]). Recently, the exact potential for a
microparticle outside a cylindrical shell has been found in Ref. [11] using the Hamil-
tonian approach. The CP potential for both regions inside and outside an ideal
metal cylindrical shell is investigated in Ref. [12] using the Green function method.
The paper is based on Refs. [13, 14, 15] and is organized as follows. In the
next section the CP potential is investigated for a polarizable microparticle in a
boundary-free cosmic string geometry. The part in the CP potential induced by a
metallic cylindrical shell is studied in Sec. 3 for both interior and exterior regions.
The main results are summarized in Sec. 4.
2. Casimir-Polder potential in boundary-free
cosmic string geometry
For an inﬁnitely long straight cosmic string the line element has the form
ds2 = dt2 −dr2 −r2dφ2 −dz2,
(1)
where 0 ⩽r < ∞, −∞< z < +∞, 0 ⩽φ ⩽φ0 and the spatial points (r, φ, z)
and (r, φ + φ0, z) are to be identiﬁed.
For an inﬁnite straight cosmic string the
line element (1) has been derived in Ref. [16] in the weak-ﬁeld approximation. In
this approximation the planar angle deﬁcit is small and it is related to the mass µ0
per unit length of the string by 2π −φ0 = 8πGµ0, with G being the gravitational
constant.
The validity of the line element (1) has been extended beyond linear
perturbation theory by several authors [17] (see also Ref.
[3]).
In this case the
planar angle deﬁcit need not to be small. An interesting limiting case with φ0 ≪2π
has been discussed in Ref. [3].
First we consider the CP potential for a microparticle with the polarizability
tensor αjl(ω) in the boundary-free cosmic string geometry. For a microparticle at a
point r, the potential is given by the expression [2]
U0(r) = 1
2π
Z ∞
0
dξ αjl(iξ)G(s)
jl (r, r; iξ),
(2)
where summation is understood over the indices j, l = 1, 2, 3,
G(s)
jl (r, r′; ω) =
Z +∞
−∞
dτ
h
G(0)
jl (x, x′) −G(M)
jl (x, x′)
i
eiωτ,
(3)
and x = (t, r), x′ = (t′, r′), τ = t−t′. In (3), G(0)
jl (x, x′) is the retarded Green tensor
for the electromagnetic ﬁeld in the geometry of the cosmic string and G(M)
jl (x, x′)
is the corresponding tensor in the Minkowski spacetime. Outside the string core
the spacetime is ﬂat and the renormalization is reduced to the subtraction of the
Minkowskian part.
284

In the problem under consideration the oﬀ-diagonal components, G(s)
jl (r, r; iξ),
j ̸= l, vanish and for the diagonal components we have the expression:
G(s)
ll (r, r; iξ) = 2ξ3
· [q/2]
X
k=1
fl(2ξrsk, sk) −q
π sin(qπ)
Z ∞
0
dyfl(2ξr cosh y, cosh y)
cosh(2qy) −cos(qπ)
¸
, (4)
where q = 2π/φ0, [q/2] stands for the integer part of q/2 and
sk = sin(πk/q).
(5)
In (6), the function fl(u, v) is deﬁned as
fl(u, v) = e−u
3
X
p=1
blp(v)up−4, blp(v) = b(0)
lp + b(1)
lp v2,
(6)
with the coeﬃcients matrices
b(0)
lp =


1
1
1
−2
−2
0
1
1
1

, b(1)
lp =


1
1
−1
1
1
−1
0
0
0

.
(7)
The CP potential is evaluated by using the formula (2). By taking into account
(4) and introducing the notation
hlp(y) =
Z ∞
0
dx xp−1e−xαll(ix/y),
(8)
the potential is expressed as
U0(r)
=
r−4
16π
3
X
l,p=1
· [q/2]
X
k=1
blp(sk)
s4
k
hlp(2rsk) −q
π sin(qπ)
×
Z ∞
0
dy
hlp(2r cosh y)
cosh(2qy) −cos(qπ)
blp(cosh y)
cosh4 y
¸
.
(9)
The corresponding force is perpendicular to the string and is directed along the
radial direction. Expression (9) is simpliﬁed for integer values of the parameter q:
U0(r) = r−4
32π
q−1
X
k=1
3
X
l,p=1
blp(sk)
s4
k
hlp(2rsk).
(10)
In (24), αll(iξ) are the (physical) components of the polarizability tensor in the
cylindrical coordinates xl = (r, φ, z). These components depend on the orientation of
the polarizability tensor principal axes. As a consequence, the CP potential depends
on the distance of the microparticle from the string and on the angles determining
the orientation of the principal axes. Let us introduce Cartesian coordinates x′l =
285

(x′, y′, z′) with the z′-axis along the string and with the particle location at (r, 0, 0)
and let βln be the cosine of the angle between x′l and the n-th principal axis of
the polarizability tensor.
One has P3
n=1 β2
ln = 1.
Now we can write αll(ω) =
P3
n=1 β2
lnαn(ω), where αn(ω) are the principal values of the polarizability tensor.
The coeﬃcients βln can be expressed in terms of the Euler angles determining the
orientation of the principal axes with respect to the coordinate system x′l. In the
isotropic case αn(ω) ≡α(ω) and we have αll(ω) = α(ω).
At large distances from the string to the leading order one ﬁnds
U0(r) ≈
¡
q2 −1
¢ ¡
q2 + 11
¢
360πr4
[α11(0) −α22(0) + α33(0)] .
(11)
with αll(0) being the static polarizability of a particle. The force corresponding to
(11) can be either attractive or repulsive.
For an isotropic polarizability tensor, αjl(ω) = δjlα(ω), we can explicitly sum
over l and the expression for the CP potential is obtained from (9) by making the
replacement
3
X
l=1
blp(v)hlp(2rv) →bp(v)hp(2rv),
(12)
where we have deﬁned hp(y) =
R ∞
0 dx xp−1e−xα(ix/y) and
b1(v) = b2(v) = 2v2, b3(v) = 2 −2v2.
(13)
For the further transformation of the general expression (9) for the CP poten-
tial we need to specify the functional form of the polarizability tensor.
For the
corresponding principal values we use the anisotropic oscillator model with
αn(iξ) =
X
j
g(n)
j
ω(n)2
j
+ ξ2 ,
(14)
and with ω(n)
j
and g(n)
j
being the oscillator frequencies and strengths, respectively.
This model for the dynamic polarizability works well over a wide range of separa-
tions. Now for the function (8) one gets
hlp(y) = y2
3
X
n=1
X
j
g(n)
j
β2
lnBp(yω(n)
j
).
(15)
with
Bp(z) =
Z ∞
0
dxxp−1e−x
x2 + z2 .
(16)
The integral in (16) is expressed in terms of the functions Si(x) and Ci(x). As a
286

result, for the CP potential in the oscillator model we ﬁnd the following expression
U0(r)
=
1
4πr2
3
X
l,n,p=1
X
j
g(n)
j
β2
ln
· [q/2]
X
k=1
blp(sk)
s2
k
Bp(2rω(n)
j
sk)
−q
π sin(qπ)
Z ∞
0
dy
Bp(2rω(n)
j
cosh y)
cosh(2qy) −cos(qπ)
blp(cosh y)
cosh2 y
¸
.
(17)
The corresponding formula for the isotropic case is obtained from (17) by the re-
placement
3
X
l,n=1
β2
lnblp(v)Bp(2rvω(n)
j
) →bp(v)Bp(2rvωj).
(18)
The corresponding force is repulsive.
At small distances from the string, r ≪1/ω(n)
j
, the dominant contribution in
(17) comes from the term with p = 1 in the leading order and to the leading order
we get
U0(r) ≈
1
16r3
3
X
l,n=1
X
j
η(n)
j
β2
ln[b(0)
l1 g3(q) + b(1)
l1 g1(q)],
(19)
where η(n)
j
= g(n)
j
/ω(n)
j
and
b(0)
l1 = (1, −2, 1), b(1)
l1 = (1, 1, 0).
(20)
In (19) we have deﬁned the function
gn(q) =
[q/2]
X
k=1
s−n
k
−q
π sin(qπ)
Z ∞
0
dy
cosh−n(y)
cosh(2qy) −cos(qπ).
(21)
With dependence of the orientation of the polarizability tensor principal axes and
on the values of η(m)
j
, the corresponding force can be either repulsive or attractive.
In the isotropic case the asymptotic expression at large distance takes the from
U0(r) ≈g1(q)
8r3
X
j
gj
ωj
,
(22)
and the corresponding force is repulsive.
The dependence of the CP potential on the orientation of the polarizability tensor
principal axes with respect to the string will also lead to the moment of force acting
on the particle. As a consequence, the inﬂuence of the cosmic string on the system
of particles with anisotropic polarizability results in the macroscopic polarization.
287

3. Casimir-Polder potential for a metallic cylinder in cosmic string
spacetime
In this section we consider the CP potential for a microparticle inside and outside
a metallic cylindrical shell with radius a.
The CP potential is presented in the
decomposed form (details will be presented in Ref. [15])
U(r) = U0(r) + Ub(r),
(23)
where the term
Ub(r)
=
−2q
π2
∞
X′
m=0
X
λ=0,1
3
X
l=1
Z ∞
0
dξ αll(iξ)(−ξ2)λ
Z ∞
ξ
dγ γ
×
¡
γ2 −ξ2¢1−λ
p
γ2 −ξ2
K(λ)
qm(aγ)
I(λ)
qm(aγ)
|i(λ)
l
(γr, γ/
p
γ2 −ξ2)|2,
(24)
is induced by the presence of the cylindrical shell. In (24), Iν(x), Kν(x) are the
modiﬁed Bessel functions and the functions i(λ)
l
(x, y) are deﬁned as
i(0)
1 (x, y)
=
I′
q|m|(x), i(0)
2 (x, y) = iqm
x Iq|m|(x), i(0)
3 (x, y) = iyIq|m|(x),
i(1)
1 (x, y)
=
qm
x Iq|m|(x), i(1)
2 (x, y) = −iI′
q|m|(x), i(1)
3 (x, y) = 0,
(25)
and the prime on the summations sign means that the term m = 0 should be
taken with the coeﬃcient 1/2. In the absence of the string we have q = 1 and the
formula (24) is reduced to the expression for the CP potential for a cylindrical shell
in Minkowski spacetime derived in Ref. [12].
For the isotropic polarizability tensor the general expression (24) for the boundary-
induced part in the CP potential takes the form
Ub(r) = −2q
π2
∞
X′
m=0
Z ∞
0
dξ α(iξ)
Z ∞
ξ
γdγ
p
γ2 −ξ2
×
½Kqm(aγ)
Iqm(aγ)
£¡
γ2 −ξ2¢
Fqm(γr) + γ2I2
qm(γr)
¤
−ξ2 K′
qm(aγ)
I′qm(aγ) Fqm(γr)
¾
.(26)
with the notation Fqm(x) = I′2
qm(x)+(qm/x)2I2
qm(x). The boundary-induced part of
the potential diverges on the cylindrical shell. The leading term in the corresponding
asymptotic expansion over the distance from the boundary coincides with the CP
potential for a metallic plate in Minkowski spacetime.
For the anisotropic oscillator model, Eq. (14), the expression for the potential
takes the from
Ub(r)
=
−q
π
∞
X′
m=0
3
X
n=1
X
j
g(n)
j
X
λ=0,1
Z ∞
0
dγ γ K(λ)
qm(aγ)
I(λ)
qm(aγ)
×[
q
1 + γ2/ω(n)2
j
−1]fλ,qm(γr,
q
1 + γ2/ω(n)2
j
),
(27)
288

where we have introduced the notations
f0,qm(x, y)
=
β2
1nI′2
qm(x) + β2
2n
³qm
x
´2
I2
qm(x) +
µ
1 + 1
y
¶
β2
3nI2
qm(x),
f1,qm(x, y)
=
−1
y
·
β2
1n
³qm
x
´2
I2
qm(x) + β2
2nI′2
qm(x)
¸
.
(28)
In the isotropic case we have
Ub(r)
=
q
π
∞
X′
m=0
X
j
gj
ω2
j
Z ∞
0
dγ γ3
½K′
qm(aγ)
I′qm(aγ)
Fqm(γr)
sj(γ)[sj(γ) + 1]
−Kqm(aγ)
Iqm(aγ)
"
Fqm(γr)
sj(γ) + 1 + I2
qm(γr)
sj(γ)
#)
,
(29)
with the notation
sj(γ) =
q
1 + γ2/ω2
j .
(30)
For the boundary-induced part in the CP force we have Fb = Fb,rnr, where nr is
the unit vector along the radial coordinate r and Fb,r = −∂rUb(r). In the isotropic
case one has Fb,r > 0 and the boundary-induced part in the CP force inside the
cylindrical shell is directed toward the shell. The pure string part of the force has
the same direction and the total force in the isotropic case is repulsive with respect
to the string and attractive with respect to the shell.
Similar to the interior case, the CP potential for the exterior region is presented
in the decomposed form (23).
The formulas for the boundary-induced part are
obtained from expressions (24), (26) and (29) by the interchange Iqm ⇄Kqm. At
large distances from the shell, to the leading order we ﬁnd
Ub(r) ≈−
qα11(0)
6πr4 ln(r/a) .
(31)
At large distances the CP potential is dominated by the pure string part and the
corresponding force in the isotropic case is repulsive.
In ﬁgure 1 we display the total CP potential U(r) (full curve) for both interior and
exterior regions as a function of r/a for q = 2 and a/λ0 = 1, with λ0 = 2π/ω0. The
dot-dashed and dashed curves correspond to the pure string (U0(r)) and boundary-
induced (Ub(r)) parts in the potential, respectively. In the numerical evaluation the
single oscillator model is used with isotropic polarizability and with the parameters
gj = g0 and ωj = ω0. The potential is dominated by boundary-induced part near
the cylindrical shell and by the pure string part for points near the string and at
large distances from the cylindrical shell.
4. Conclusion
We have presented the results of the investigation of the CP potential for a
microparticle with anisotropic polarizability tensor in the geometry of a straight
289

4
5
6
7
8
-1.0
-0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
107UHg0Ω0
2L
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
-2
-1
0
1
2
ra
102UHg0Ω0
2L
Figure 1: CP potential as a function of r/a for a/λ0 = 1 and q = 2.
cosmic string with coaxial metallic cylindrical shell.
For the both exterior and
interior regions of the shell the potential is decomposed into the boundary-free and
shell-induced part. The former dominates for points near the string and at large
distances from the shell, whereas the shell-induced part is dominant near the shell.
The potential depends on the distance of the microparticle from the string and on
the angles determining the orientation of the principal axes. In the anisotropic case,
with dependence of orientation, the corresponding forces can be either attractive or
repulsive. As a model for a polarizability tensor we have taken anisotropic oscillator
model which works well over a wide range of separations. Within this model, for
an isotropic polarizability tensor the boundary-free part of the CP force is repulsive
with respect to the cosmic staring for all distances and the shell-induced part is
attractive with respect to the shell.
At large distances from the shell (retarded
regime), the dominant contribution to the CP potential comes from low frequencies
and it scales as 1/r4.
At large distances from the shell, the shell-induced part
behaves as 1/[r4 ln(r/a)]. At distances from the string smaller than the relevant
transition wavelengths the potential behaves as 1/r3 power law.
In the case of
anisotropic polarizability, the dependence of the CP potential on the orientation of
the polarizability tensor principal axes will also lead to the moment of force acting
on the particle.
References
[1] V.A. Parsegian, Van der Waals forces: A Handbook for Biologists, Chemists,
Engineers, and Physicists (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 2005).
290

[2] S.Y. Buhmann, D.-G. Welsch, Prog. Quantum Electron. 31, 51 (2007).
[3] A. Vilenkin and E.P.S. Shellard, Cosmic Strings and Other Topological Defects
(Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, England, 1994).
[4] E.R. Bezerra de Mello, V.B. Bezerra, A.A. Saharian and A.S. Tarloyan, Phys.
Rev. D 74, 025017 (2006).
[5] I. Brevik and T. Toverud, Class. Quantum Grav. 12, 1229 (1995).
[6] E.R. Bezerra de Mello, V.B. Bezerra and A.A. Saharian, Phys. Lett. B 645,
245 (2007).
[7] E.R. Bezerra de Mello, V.B. Bezerra, A.A. Saharian and A.S. Tarloyan, Phys.
Rev. D 78, 105007 (2008).
[8] E.R. Bezerra de Mello, V.B. Bezerra, A.A. Saharian and V.M. Bardeghyan,
Phys. Rev. D 82, 085033 (2010); S. Bellucci, E.R. Bezerra de Mello and A.A.
Saharian, Phys. Rev. D 83, 085017 (2011).
[9] G. Fucci and K. Kirsten, JHEP 03, 016 (2011); G. Fucci and K. Kirsten, J.
Phys. A 44, 295403 (2011).
[10] E.R. Bezerra de Mello and A.A. Saharian, Class. Quantum Grav. 28, 145008
(2011).
[11] C. Eberlein and R. Zietal, Phys. Rev. A 80, 012504 (2009).
[12] V.B. Bezerra, E.R. Bezerra de Mello, G.L. Klimchitskaya, V.M. Mostepanenko
and A.A. Saharian, Eur. Phys. J. C 71, 1614 (2011).
[13] V.M. Bardeghyan and A.A. Saharian, J. Contemp. Phys. 45, 1 (2010).
[14] A.A. Saharian and A.S. Kotanjyan, Eur. Phys. J. C 71, 1765 (2011).
[15] A.A. Saharian and A.S. Kotanjyan, arXiv:1201.0135.
[16] A. Vilenkin, Phys. Rev. D 23, 852 (1981).
[17] J. R. Gott III, Astrophys. J. 288, 422 (1985); W. Hiscock, Phys. Rev. D 31,
3288 (1985); B. Linet, Gen. Relativ. Gravit. 17, 1109 (1985); D. Garﬁnkle,
Phys. Rev. D 32, 1323 (1985).
291

 
290
В ответ на любимую историю Э. Чубаряна 
о несостоявшейся статье С. Гаудсмита и 
Дж. Уленбека о спине 
 
В. М. Мыхитарян1 
Институт физических исследований НАН Армении, Аштарак 
 
А история, которую любил рассказывать уважаемый юбиляр, следующая: 
В октябре 1925 года Сэмюэл Гаудсмит 
(Samuel Goudsmit) и Джордж Уленбек (George 
Uhlenbeck), молодые сотрудники Паула Эрен-
феста (Paul Ehrenfest), ввели в физику концеп-
цию спина. Они предложили рассматривать 
электрон как «вращающийся волчок», обла-
дающий собственным механическим момен-
том, равным ħ/2, и собственным магнитным 
моментом, равным магнетону Бора. Они со-
общили о своей гипотезе Эренфесту, кото-
рому она понравилась. Он предложил своим 
ученикам написать небольшую заметку для 
журнала Die Naturwissenschaften и показать ее Хендрику Лоренцу. 
Лоренц произвел ряд вычислений электромагнитных свойств вращающегося 
электрона и продемонстрировал нелепость выводов, к которым приводит эта ги-
потеза. Согласно расчетам, основанным на классических подходах, скорость на по-
верхности электрона должна превышать скорость света. Уленбек и Гаудсмит по-
считали за лучшее не публиковать свою статью, однако было поздно: Эренфест 
уже отослал ее в печать2. 
По этому поводу Эренфест заметил: "Вы оба достаточно молоды, чтобы по-
зволить себе сделать одну глупость!". 
Мы повторим "глупость" молодых, но сделаем расчет в рамках релятиви-
стских подходов. Предположим, что вращению электрона можно сопоставить 
твердое вращение заряженной сферы с угловой скоростью Ω, у которого уда-
ленная относительно оси вращения точка поверхности движется со скоро-
стью света.  
Одна из особенностей группы представления (преобразования) Пуанкаре 
в том, что представляемое пространство не только меняет метрические свой-
ства, но и может оказаться ограниченным в размерах. Преобразования указы-
вают не только на изменении метрики, но и на то, что при вращении простра-
нство (где описывается физический объект) само ограничено размерами. Т.е. 
в общем случае они осуществляют отображение бесконечного, неограничен-
ного в размерах импульсного пространства в ограниченную в размерах про-
странственную область. Таким образом, всякое вращение описывается предс-
тавлением импульсного пространства в координатном пространстве как огра-
ниченную область. 
                                                 
1 Email: vm@ipr.sci.am 
2 Uhlenbeck G. Ε., Goudsmit S.— Naturwissenchaften, 1925, Hf. 47, S. 953. 
 
Джордж Уленбек (слева)  и  
Сэмюэл Гаудсмит (справа) 

 
291
Это особенно наглядно на примере собственного вращения физического 
объекта или вращающейся системы отсчета с угловой скоростью Ω вокруг 
оси z. В этом случае скорость в точке ρ можно представить как [Ω×ρ] и обоб-
щенный импульс dP элемента объема dv в точке ρ с энергией покоя dε и им-
пульсом dp представится в виде 
          
[
]
[
]
[
]
[
]
0 ||
0
2
2
2
2
1
,
1
1
d
d
d
d
c
c
d
d
c
c
ε
ε
⊥
⎛
⎞
+
×
⋅
+
×
⎜
⎟
=
+
⎜
⎟
−
×
−
×
⎜
⎟
⎝
⎠
Ω
ρ
p
p
Ω
ρ
P
p
Ω
ρ
Ω
ρ
, 
где ε0 и p0, соответственно, энергия и импульс без вращения. Как видим, им-
пульсное пространство отображено в ограниченной области координатного 
пространства размером ρc = с/Ω на плоскости (x, y). Соответственно, при вра-
щении пространство описания частицы ограничено преобразованием в об-
ласть ρ ≤ ρc = c/Ω. Т.е. вращение представляется как отображение в ограни-
ченное пространство – ограниченное преобразованием пространство и есть 
вращающаяся частица, физический объект, описываемая система. 
По сути, вращение это переход в другую систему отсчета, где пространст-
во описания частицы уже имеет другие размеры отображения и соответст-
вующую метрику. При этом частица всегда одна и та же, но отображено (упа-
ковано) в пространстве иных размеров. 
Рассмотрим сначала вопрос об энергии собственного вращения частицы. 
Если частица не вращается и имеет бесконечные размеры (например, элект-
рон), то в состоянии вращения она (или вращающаяся часть) будет упакована 
в конечных размерах. Т.е. при вращении область вовлечения равна ρc = c/Ω и 
количество вовлеченной массы равно m0. Конкретно, рассмотрим твердое 
вращение частицы с энергией покоя ε0 = m0c, которая при вращении упако-
вана в сферу радиусом ρc = c/Ω. Энергия dε в элементе объема dv в точке ρ 
выражается в виде 
               
2
0
2
2
2
2
3
2
2
2
2
3
sin
2
1
sin
1
sin
c
dm
d d
d
c
c
c
ρ
θ θ ρ
ε
ε
ρ
θ
ρ
ρ
θ
=
=
Ω
Ω
−
−
. 
Сделав замену переменной и интегрируя, имеем 
.
2
3
2
3
sin
1
sin
2
3
   
/
sin
1
sin
2
3
2
2
0
0
2
2
3
2
0
1
0
0
2
2
2
2
3
2
0
0
0
mc
c
m
x
dx
d
x
c
d
d
c
c
c
=
=
=
−
=
Ω
−
=
∫
∫
∫
∫
ε
θ
ρ
θ
θ
ε
θ
ρ
ρ
ρ
θ
θ
ρ
ε
ε
π
π
ρ
 
Результат весьма неожиданный, так как энергия собственного вращения 
релятивистской частицы оказалось не зависящим от угловой скорости враще-
ния, а относительно покоя отличается постоянным коэффициентом 3/2. Если 
рассматривать частицу с более сложным распределением плотности массы, 
все равно бы имели аналогичный результат с какой-то средней плотностью и 

 
292
с другим постоянным коэффициентом. Это обусловлено характером выраже-
ния интеграла энергии, где после замены переменной интегрирования исчеза-
ет зависимость от угловой скорости и получается постоянное число. 
Таким образом, релятивистская энергия собственного вращения простра-
нственной частицы отличается от энергии покоя на постоянное число, вне за-
висимости от скорости вращения. Это фундаментальное свойство можно вы-
разить следующим образом – энергия собственного вращения частицы имеет 
только два дискретных значения и описывает всего лишь качество состояния 
– вращается или не вращается, обладает спином или нет. 
Из постоянства и дискретности энергии собственного вращения следует 
весьма существенный вывод – непрерывный переход во вращательное состо-
яние не возможен, так как вращательная энергия может иметь относительно 
покоя только определенную, не зависящую от состояния собственного враще-
ния, энергию. Это свойство можно сформулировать и как инвариантность 
энергии собственного вращения – в любой (и вращательной) системе отсчета 
энергия собственного вращения постоянна. 
Конечно, размеры области представления и скорость вращения частицы 
соответственно меняются. Но при преобразованиях группы Пуанкаре разме-
ры и скорость вращения частицы преобразуются таким образом, что энергия 
собственного вращения остается постоянным. Когда скорость вращения увел-
ичивается, то, соответственно, размеры частицы и момент инерции уменьша-
ются, поэтому и энергия собственного вращения остается неизменной. Воз-
можность релятивистской частицы при постоянной энергии иметь различные 
скорости вращения является фундаментальным для понимания независимо-
сти энергии частицы от состояния собственного вращения – спина. 
Для момента импульса собственного вращения частицы имеем 
                                
[
]
[
]
3
0
3
2
2
0
3
4
1
c
c
d
c
c
ρ
ε
π ρ
⎡
⎤
×
×
⎣
⎦
=
−
×
∫
ρ
Ω
ρ
s
ρ
Ω
ρ
. 
Так как направление момента s совпадает с направлением вращения Ω, то 
умножая выражение для s на единичный вектор Ω/Ω, получим 
[
]
[
]
2
3
0
3
2
2
0
2
3
2
2
0
0
1
3
4
1
sin
.
2
2
1
sin
c
c
s
d
c
c
c
x
c
E
dx
d
x
π
ρ
ε
π
ρ
ε
θ
ε
θ
θ
×
=
=
Ω
−
×
=
=
Ω
Ω
Ω
−
∫
∫∫
Ω
ρ
ρ
Ω
ρ
 
Если представить энергию E в виде энергии ротатора ħΩ, то получим 
;
;
2
2
c
m
E
c
s
mc
ρ
ε
=
=
=
=
=
=
Ω
Ω
=
=
=

 
где 
m

 – длина волны де Бройла для частицы с массой m. 
Как видим, все как то неожиданно, но уже не так глупо, как казалось в 
1925 г. 

