More chapters of this eBook on: Talking Electronics.com
For any enquiries email Colin Mitchell
BASIC ELECTRONICS 
(this is the Basic Electronics section i.e. Page 1)
(Chapters 1 and 3 are available as .pdf )
Quick Quiz - to see how much you know 
Encyclopedia of Components - this is excellent !!!
Page 1: Basic Electronics (this page) -
.pdf (1.2MB) or .zip
                  The capacitor - how it works
                  The Diode - how the diode works
                  Circuit Symbols - EVERY Circuit Symbol
                 Soldering - videos
Page 2: The Transistor
             - PNP or NPN Transistor TEST
Page 2a: The 555 IC
                The 555 - 1
                The 555 - 2
                The 555 - 3
                The 555 TEST
Page 3: The Power Supply  download as .pdf (900kB)
               3a: - Constant Current
               3b: - Voltage Regulator
               3c: - Capacitor-fed Power Supply
Page 4: Digital  Electronics
               4a: - Gates Touch Switch Gating
               4b: - The DELAY CIRCUIT
Page 5: Oscillators

Page 6: Test - Basic Electronics (50 Questions)
Page 7: The Multimeter - using the Multimeter
Page  8: Constructing a Project 
Remember: the animations do not work in .pdf 
                the site is being constantly updated
INDEX
Active HIGH
AND Gate
Battery
Battery - Internal Resistance 
Battery Boost
Battery Booster - for a flat battery
Battery Current
Blocking Diode
Breadboard
Bypass Diode 
Capacitors
Capacitors in Parallel
Capacitors in Series
Cell
Charging A Capacitor
Capacitor Charging
Capacitor Charging - more details 
Capacitors on Volume Control
Capacitor - values
Characteristic Voltage drop - LED
Chassis
Circuit
Circuit - Drawing 
Component - Symbols  more
Current  - milliamp 
Current Divider Circuit
Cutoff and Saturation
Damage A LED
DC Current
DC Voltage
Digital States
Diode
Diode - how a diode works
Drawing A Circuit
Earth Rail  Earth Rail 
Earth Return
Electret Microphone
Electrolytics
Energy in a cell
Flashing LED Flashing LED
Forward Voltage Drop
Gates with Diodes
Globe
Ground
NAND Gate
Negative Voltage
NOR Gate
NOT Gate
Ohm's Law
Passive Components
Piezo
Plant Watering Circuit
PNP Transistor
Power and Energy
Power Rail
Potentiometer
Protection Diode
Questions
Regeneration
Resistance - Multimeter
Resistor Colours
Resistors In Parallel
Resistors in Series
Resistor Wattage
Robot Man
Robot Man Animation
Schematic
Slide Switch
Short Circuit
Soldering
Soldering Iron
Speaker
Supply Rail 
Switch
Symbols more - components
Tap A Piezo
Test A Cell
Testing A LED
Time Delay
Time Delay Animation
Toggle Switch
Tolerance - resistors
Transformer Feedback
3 - Transistor Circuit
Transistor NPN and PNP
Transistor - how it works
Transistor Tester
Turning ON a Transistor

How a Transistor turns ON
How to Solder
LED
LED flat spot (cathode)
LEDs in Parallel
LEDs in Series
LED Resistors
LED Voltages
Light Dependent Resistor
Load Resistor
Memory Cell
Microphone - Electret
Milliamp - current
Multimeters
Variable Capacitors
Variable resistor - potentiometer
Voltage
Voltage - Analogue Multimeter
Voltage - Digital Multimeter
Voltage Divider Circuit
Wattage of a Resistor
White LED Voltage
Wire
50 Questions 
KIT OF PARTS
Talking Electronics supplies a kit of parts that can be used to build the majority of the circuits in 
this eBook.
The kit costs $15.00 plus postage.
Kit for Transistor Circuits -
$15.00
A kit of components to make many of the circuits described in this 
eBook is available for $15.00 plus $7.00 post.
Or email Colin Mitchell:  talking@tpg.com.au
The kit contains the following components:
(plus extra 30 resistors and 10 capacitors for
experimenting), plus:
3 - 47R
5 - 220R
5 - 470R
5 - 1k
5 - 4k7
5 - 10k
2 - 33k
4- 100k
4 - 1M
1 - 10k mini pot
1 - 100k mini pot
2 - 10n
2 - 100n
5 - 10u electrolytics
5- 100u electrolytics

5 - 1N4148 signal diodes
6 - BC547 transistors - NPN - 100mA
2 - BC557 transistors - PNP - 100mA
1 - BC338 transistor - NPN - 800mA
3 - BD679 Darlington transistors - NPN - 4amp
5 - red LEDs
5 - green LEDs
5 - orange LEDs
2 - super-bright WHITE LEDs - 20,000mcd
1 - 3mm flashing LED
1 - mini 8R speaker
1 - mini piezo
1 - LDR (Light Dependent Resistor)
1 - electret microphone
1m - 0.25mm wire
1m - 0.5mm wire
1 - 10mH inductor
1 - push button
5 - tactile push buttons
1 - Experimenter Board (will take 8, 14 and 16 pin chips)
5 - mini Matrix Boards:  7 x 11 hole,
11 x 15 hole, 6 x 40 hole, surface-mount 6 x 40 hole board and 
others.
Photo of kit of components. 
Each batch is slightly different:
There are more components than you think. . . plus an extra bag of 
approx 30 components. The 8 little components are switches and 
the LDR and flashing LED is hiding. 
In many cases, a resistor or capacitor not in the kit, can be created 
by putting two resistors or capacitors in series or parallel or the 
next higher or lower value can be used.

BEFORE WE START
Too many text books start with the physics of the atom and have equations and mathematics 
to show how smart the author is. 
Don't worry, we wont have any physics or equations. 
The reason  . . .
This is not a physics course. It is a practical electronics course to teach the basics as quickly 
as possible. There are no equations because most transistor circuits cannot be worked out 
mathematically as the gain of a transistor changes according to the current-flow and these 
gain-values are never provided. So the mathematics is worthless. 
To get an answer, all you have to do its build the circuit and measure the values with a 
multimeter.
Also lots of discussions in text books will never be used in your next 40 years of electronics, 
so this course doesn't have any unnecessary material and is much-more concentrated than 
anything you have read before. 
Every frame contains important points - especially the animations - as they show you how a 
circuit works in slow-motion - something that has NEVER been done before.
ELECTRONICS BLOCKS
Here is an idea from Instructables to produce blocks with screws, containing a single component and 
they can be connected with jumper leads (alligator clips). 
Use a slotted head for the negative screw and a philips head for the positive screw. 
Learn electronics from the beginning . . . 
START HERE:  

Fig 1 The wire in a circuit diagram
All electrical and electronic components need wire 
to connect them to the circuit. 
In a diagram called a CIRCUIT DIAGRAM, the 
wires are drawn as lines. 
When the wires (or lines) cross, they may be joined 
or just passing. 
It is VERY IMPORTANT to show the difference 
between lines that are JOINED and lines that are 
NOT JOINED. 
When the lines are joined, it is best to place a dot 
on the connection to PROVE the lines are joined. 
When the lines are just crossing, a gap should be 
made so it is obvious that one wire goes under the 
other and does not touch.
Lines should be "across the page" or "up and 
down." Very few lines should be at 45°.
You can make a line thicker to indicate a power rail 
or a wire that will be thick in reality.
                                   to Index
Fig 2 A single Cell and many Cells
Next we need a battery. A battery consists of two 
or more cells. The positive terminal of a battery is 
the long line in the diagram and you must add the 
voltage (of the cell or battery) to the symbol as a 
single cells can be 1.2v, 1.5v, 2.2v or up to 3.6v. 
The symbol does not let you know the voltage. 
The positive is always at the top and is the longest 
line on the battery symbol.
                                   to Index
Fig 3: A Globe
Next we need a globe. A globe has two connections (a fine 
wire inside a glass bulb glows when the globe is connected to 
a battery). 
                                   to Index
Fig 4: A Circuit
With a globe, battery and wire we have produced a CIRCUIT. 
A CIRCUIT is a complete path and we say the "electricity" the 
CURRENT emerges from the positive of the battery, moves 
through the globe and returns to the battery via the wire. 
If the globe is a "3v GLOBE" it will glow when connected to a 
3v battery. 
The globe can be connected either way around. 
The circuit we have shown is called a SCHEMATIC and 
consists of symbols: a globe symbol and a battery symbol. 
The line connecting the two components is called WIRE. 
                                  to Index

Fig 5:Adding a SWITCH
To turn the globe ON and OFF we need a SWITCH. 
The switch may be a push button, a toggle switch (a "click" action) or a slide switch. You could 
twist the wires together and untwist them. The result is the same. We say the circuit is 
"broken" or "open" via the switch and the lamp does not glow.  Closing the switch turns ON 
the globe. 
                                   to Index
Fig 6: Naming the RAILS
The top rail of the CIRCUIT DIAGRAM is called the 
SUPPLY RAIL or POWER RAIL. 
The lower rail is called the 0v Rail or EARTH RAIL.
Do not connect the Supply rail (+12v) to the 0v rail as 
this will cause a high current to flow and is called a 
SHORT CIRCUIT:
                                   to Index
Fig 7: The EARTH RAIL
The lower rail is also called the Chassis. 
This comes from the "old days" when electronics 
constructors build radios on a metal chassis (metal 
box) and it was connected via wire to a pipe in the 
ground to  the radio pick up distant radio stations. 
The term also comes from car and truck wiring 
where one side of each globe is connected to the 
frame or chassis so that only one wire is needed to 
each globe and the return "path" is via the 
chassis.   
                                   to Index

Fig 7a: Ground
Some circuits identify the "Ground Lead" or 
"Ground Wire" of a project to show where 
all the signals have been "referenced to." In 
other words, all the signals rise and fall above 
and below this "Ground wire" or "Ground 
Lead." This lead may not be at earth 
potential as the project may be in a plastic 
box but it identifies where the earth lead of a 
Cathode Ray Oscilloscope or the negative 
lead of a multimeter is connected. 
On some printed circuit boards, the negative 
terminal of the battery (the 0v wire or 
terminal) is connected to a very large area of 
copper and this is called the EARTH PLANE 
or GROUND PLANE. It is designed to 
prevent signals travelling along the tracks 
(called traces) being radiated and also 
prevents outside interference upsetting the 
project. It also "tightens-up" the earth rail.
                                   to Index
Fig 8: EARTH Return
The circuit shows a 12v globe connected 
to a 12v battery and the circuit appears to 
be "broken" (not continuous). 
But the current returns via the earth 
connection. 
We talk about the CURRENT 
RETURNING. We don't say: the voltage 
returning. 
The voltage of the globe must be the 
same as the battery voltage, otherwise it 
will not glow fully or it will burn out if it is 
say a 6v globe.
                                   to Index
Fig 9: Connecting a Motor
The circuit shows a 12v Motor. 
It is turned ON when the push-switch is 
pressed.
                                   to Index

Fig 10: Reversing a Motor
If the wires are connected to the motor 
"around the other way," the motor will 
reverse direction. 
                                   to Index
VOLTAGE AND CURRENT 
What is voltage and what is current?
Here is a very simple description. 
A battery produces a voltage called DC. (This is a very confusing name because the letter 
actually refer to Direct Current, so we just say DC Voltage).
A battery also produces current called DC - Direct Current. We say DC current.
VOLTAGE
Voltage is a value produced by an electrical 
component called a battery or cell. 
A single cell produces one and a half volts. 
(1.5v) and although this is not a high voltage, 
when cells are connected together we get higher 
voltages. 
If 6 cells are connected in series we get 9v. 
Here is a 9v battery:
Touch the two terminals with your tongue. You 
get a tingle. This is a 9v tingle. Now you have 
"felt" electricity. This is a 9v tingle. 
CURRENT
You cannot feel current with your tongue so 
we have to carry out another experiment:
Place a 22 ohm or 47 ohm resistor across 
the terminals of the battery and hold your 
fingers on the resistor. It will get hot. This is 
the result of current flowing through the 
resistor and heating it up. The current will 
be about half an amp and the voltage is 9v, 
so the wattage will be about 2 to 4 watts. 
Feel the heat produced. 
Milli - milli means  1/1,000th (one thousandth) - such as one milliamp or one millivolt. 
In other words one thousand milliamps is equal to 1 amp. 
One volts is not a very large value as a battery produces 9v and a cell produces 1.5v to 3.6v 
(depending on the type of cell. 
But 1 amp is a large quality when talking about electronic circuits involving LEDs, motors and 
transistors. 
The globe used in the experiments above requires about 300mA.  (1,000mA = 1 amp)
The 3v motor used in the experiments requires about 250mA
The LEDs used in the experiments require about 20mA. 

Transistor
s can 
pass 
about 
100mA to 
800mA via 
the 
collector-
emitter.
In most 
cases 
current-
flow in the 
circuits we will be discussing will be less than 1 
amp and will be shown as 25mA, 100mA, 
350mA etc. 
WATTAGE and CAPACITY
A 9v battery has 6 very small cells and they will 
not last very long. 
A "AAA" cell is larger and a "D" cell is much larger. 
A large cell is said to have a LARGE CAPACITY. This means it will deliver a larger current for 
a longer period of time. 
The WATTAGE of a cell is the multiplication of the voltage x current. The answer is milliwatts 
or watts. 
The CAPACITY of a cell is the wattage x hours. The answer is milliwatt-hours or watt-hours. 
This is also called watt-hours.
You can determine the capacity of a cell (such as a rechargeable cell) by connecting it to a 
clock-mechanism that has a 4R7 connected across the terminals. The resistor will take a 
considerable current and deplete the cell in a few hours. The clock will let you know exactly 
how long the cell delivered the current. You can then compare other cells.
The simplest electrical circuit consists of a battery and resistor. The current flowing through 
the 
circuit will depend on the voltage of the battery and the resistance of the resistor R. 
The formula connecting these three quantities is:
This is called Ohm's Law. Suppose you have a 12v battery and the resistor is 3 ohms. The 
current flowing through the resistor will be 4 amps. 
Increasing the resistance will decrease the current if the voltage remains fixed. 
All the above circuits are called ELECTRICAL CIRCUITS because they contain electrical 
components (such as a motor, globe, relay, switch). 
When the circuit contains an ELECTRONIC component such as a diode, transistor, LED, it is 
called an ELECTRONIC CIRCUIT or ELECTRONIC SCHEMATIC. 
                                   to Index
POWER and ENERGY
Here's an easy way to remember the difference between POWER and ENERGY:
A 9v alkaline battery has enough ENERGY to start a car. But it does not have enough 
POWER (strength).

Energy is effectively the strength of the battery (and this is the voltage and the current it can 
deliver) multiplied by the time it can deliver this energy. When the answer is obtained, it 
consists of three factors ((3 quantities) VOLTS, AMPS and TIME. 
This results in an answer called   xxxx WATT-HOURS. 
For a 9v battery the quantities are: 9 volts, 500mA and the battery will deliver this 9x0.5 = 
4.5watts for about 1 hour.  This is equal to 4.5 x 60 x 60 = 16,200 watt-seconds. 
To start a car requires 250 amps from a 12v battery for 5 seconds. 
This is: 12 x 250 x 5 = 15,000 watt-seconds. 
This means the energy stored in a 9v battery could start a car if all the energy could be 
delivered in 5 seconds. 
This is not possible however the FACT is this: A 9v battery has enough stored energy to 
START A CAR.
                                   to Index
BATTERY 
BOOSTER
One of the 
simplest things 
we can do is 
start a car with 
a flat battery 
with the 
assistance of a 
BATTERY 
BOOSTER. 
This consists 
of a 12v 
rechargeable 
battery in a 
handy case 
with leads to 
connect to the 
flat battery in 
your car. 
This simple 
operation puts 
two 12v 
batteries in 
parallel, but 
no-one has 
actually 
described 
what happens 
and why. 
That's 
because the 
explanation is 
very complex.
We have 
included it 
here to show 
that a simple 
explanation 
involves a lot 
of technical 
terms and you 
will understand 
more after 
reading the 
course.   
The flat battery in the car is not fully charged but it has some percentage of charge and when it sits for a 

period of time in a non-fully charged condition, the voltage drops from 12.6v to less than 12v as the 
battery gradually self-discharges due to the potential at the top of the cell being different to that at the 
bottom of the cell and the specific gravity of the electrolyte being different at the top and bottom. This 
causes an internal current to flow within the cell and slowly discharge the cell. But if you try to start the 
car, the voltage drops to less than 7v because the electrolyte cannot carry the high current and a slight 
potential is developed across the liquid. The result is the starter-motor does not crank the car. 
The reason is this: When the battery is fully charged, the current taken by the starter motor is about 300 
amps. This is about 11v x 300 amps = 3300 watts = 4.4Horsepower. 
But when the voltage drops to 7v, the current will drop to 190 amps to deliver 1336 watts = 1.8HP.
This is only 40% of normal and that's why the car does not start. The engine needs 4HP to overcome the 
pressure in the cylinders due to the compression of the air during the "firing stroke."
Let's put it this way. If we have a brand new 7v battery, the car will not start. The starter-motor will 
only accept 190 amps when the supply is 7v. 
So, we have to increase the voltage. 
We do this by placing a 12v battery across the flat battery. The voltage of the flat battery will 
immediately rise to 12.6v.  It might take 2 minutes but the flat battery will take a small current (1 to 
10amps) from the battery in the "booster" and the output of the combination will be 12.6v. The current-
carrying capacity of the electrolyte will improve very quickly and you have effectively given the "flat 
battery" a very quick charge. 
The starter-motor will now accept 300 amps from the combination and SURPRISINGLY the cells of 
the "flat battery" will deliver about 200 amps and the booster battery will deliver about 100 amps. The 
actual sharing of current will depend on the two batteries but the secret behind the success is the 
increase in voltage we call TERMINAL VOLTAGE.  The voltage on the terminals (the alligator 
clips). 
The capacity of the booster battery is not important. It can be from 7AHr to 40AHr. We are just using a 
very small amount of its capacity to start the car and nearly all batteries will provide 200 Amps for a 
short period of time. 
The voltage of the car battery is very important. The Horsepower taken by the starter-motor is defined 
by the formula: Pwatts = V2/R  Since the resistance remains constant, a voltage of 7 volts will produce 
7x7=49 units and a voltage of 11v will produce 121units. This gives the ratio of 40% to 100% as 
explained above. 
                                   to Index
BATTERY BOOST
Continuing from the previous frame where we showed the effect of placing a weak 
battery in parallel with a good battery, we can show what happens when a weak 
cell is placed IN SERIES with a good cell. 
This also applies when you have 5 good cells and one weak cell.
Basically, the weak cell will reduce the current. In other words, if the 5 cells are 
driving a motor and supplying 250mA, the 5 cells and 1 weak cell will deliver 
200mA or less, depending if it is weak or very weak. The current flowing through 
the weak cell will have the effect of giving it a small charge - in other words, you 
will be charging the weak cell from the good cells when the motor is operating. 
BUT . . . .
There is a way to use weak cells. If you have say 6 weak cells driving a motor and 
the RPM is reducing, you can add 2 more weak cells to increase the RPM.
The effect is this:  The voltage from the 8 cells will be higher than from 6 cells and 
this will allow a higher current to flow. Sometimes the cells will provide this 
higher current and thus more of the energy will be delivered and you will get the 
last of the energy from the cells.  
                                   to Index

INTERNAL RESISTANCE
All batteries and also all individual cells have a "secret, hidden" value of 
resistance inside each cell due to the resistance of the chemicals. This resistance is 
very small when the cell is new but it increases as the cell gets older. 
It is very easy to measure this value. Simply put an ammeter directly across the 
cell and measure the current. Use Ohm's law to work out the resistance.
But this not always a wise thing to do as some cells will deliver 10 amps and 
some will deliver 100 amps and damage the meter.
The diagram opposite shows a large internal resistance for the weak cell and a 
small internal resistance for the good cell.
If a cell did not have any INTERNAL RESISTANCE it would deliver thousands 
of amps. It's the Internal Resistance that limits the current.
In most cases we neglect (do not consider) the value of internal resistance when 
making tests and when using a battery in a project. 
But when a battery gets old, it cannot deliver a high current and the internal 
resistance gets so high that the output voltage drops from say 9v to 7v, even when 
the battery is not connected to a circuit. 
This is the result of the INTERNAL RESISTANCE of the chemicals increasing to 
a point where they become noticeable and what we call "poisoning" of the 
chemicals due to the cell "aging" and new chemicals being produced in the cell 
that have a high resistance.   Some of the terms we use are: "drying out and 
sulphating. Some cells produce spikes or needles that completely short-circuit the 
cell and make it totally useless.
                                   to Index
This resistor is dissipating 48 
watts. 
As a comparison, a soldering 
iron is dissipating about 10 to 
20 watts.
RESISTOR WATTAGE
Resistor Wattage means two things. 
1. The physical size of a resistor tells you number of watts it is 
capable of dissipating. This is called RESISTOR WATTAGE. It is 
really RESISTOR-SIZE or RESISTOR-CAPABILITY.
2. The multiplication of the voltage across a resistor and the current 
flowing though it will produce a value called WATTAGE. 
This is also called RESISTOR-WATTAGE or RESISTOR-LOSS or 
RESISTOR-DISSIPATION or HEAT-LOSS. 
In the circuit shown, the wattage being lost in the resistor is:
12 x 4 = 48 watts. 
Most of the resistors we will be using in our projects are 0.25watts.
This means they will dissipate 250milliwatts, however the actual 
wattage being dissipated may be only 70 milliwatts and the resistor 
will not get hot.
0.25watts is the maximum wattage it can dissipate without 
overheating. 
If it is dissipating 400milliwatts, it will be VERY HOT. 
The wattage it is dissipating (the heat it is getting rid of) will 
depend on the supply voltage and the value of the surrounding 
components.
                                   to Index
Fig 11.  The LED
This simple ELECTRONIC CIRCUIT contains a 
LIGHT EMITTING DIODE (LED), RESISTOR and 
battery. 
The circuit is classified as electronic because the 
LED is not an electrical item (such as a globe) but 
more-complex, as it produces light when current 
flows through a crystal and the crystal produces the 
colour.
                                   to Index

Fig 12.  The Resistor
A RESISTOR must be included in the circuit to 
prevent the LED being damaged. 
The resistor in this circuit must be 220 ohms. 
This is shown by the colours on the resistor. The 
colours for 220 ohms: red - red - brown. The 4th 
band is gold - indicating a tolerance of 5%. 
A resistor has RESISTANCE. 
It reduces the current from the battery to a required 
amount to prevent the LED glowing too bright. 
A resistor is just like putting your foot on a hose. 
The water trickles out the end. The resistor 
"resists" the high current-flow that the battery is 
able to deliver. 
                                   to Index
       
Fig 12a.  The Resistor Colours
There are hundreds of different resistors because 
the resistance-values need to cover the range one 
ohm to 10 million ohms. 
There are also small, medium and large resistors. 
The resistors on the left are just a few in the range. 
(See the full range below). They show colour bands 
for 1 ohm to 8.2 ohms and 1 million ohms to 8.2 
million ohms. All the other values are shown below.
An electronics engineer does not have the room to 
store 10 million different resistors so they make 
each resistor 5% or 10% higher than the previous. 
This reduces the number to about 100 to 200. 
TOLERANCE
The first 3 bands indicate the value of the resistor 
and the 4th band indicates either 5% or 10% 
tolerance. 
All modern resistors are 5% or 2% or 1%. The "old" 
10% resistors are no longer made.  
Gold = 5%
Silver = 10%
                                   to Index
Fig 13.  The Resistor and LED
The LIGHT EMITTING DIODE is called an 
electronic component (mainly because it is more 
complex than a globe and it produces light by a 
more-complex means than heating a wire).
A LED must be connected around the correct way. 
It will not illuminate if connected around the wrong 
way. 
All LEDs have one lead longer than the other. The 
SHORT lead is called the CATHODE (k).
All LEDs have a flat on one side and this is the 
CATHODE lead. 
The arrows on the diagram indicate light is "given 
off" (emitted - produced). 
                                   to Index

Fig 14.  The  LED - showing the flat spot
A close-up of a red LED. The cathode lead is the short lead and next to a flat side on the LED. 
DO NOT show "+" or "-" on a diagram. Only show the letter "k" to indicate cathode. 
The symbols "+" and "-" are used when a component produces a voltage or is connected 
directly to "+" and 
"-"  A LED is connected via a resistor. 
                                   to Index
Fig 15.   LED VOLTAGES
When a LED is connected to a circuit, (and the 
correct-value resistor is included), a voltage will be 
develop across the LED called the 
CHARACTERISTIC VOLTAGE DROP. 
This voltage is due to the colour of the LED and the 
crystal inside the LED that produces the colour. 
The diagram on the left shows the approximate 
voltage developed for each LED. 
The voltage does not change for small, medium, 
surface-mount, or large LEDs.  
                                   to Index

Fig 16.    LED VOLTAGES
When a LED is 
connected to 3v 
battery, the following 
CHARACTERISTIC 
VOLTAGE DROPs 
will develop across 
each LED. 
You will notice we 
have not changed
the value of the 
resistor. It is 220R.
The LED creates the 
voltage and if the 
value of resistance is 
decreased, the LED 
will illuminate 
BRIGHTER. 
If the LED illuminates 
too bright it will be 
DAMAGED. 
                                   to Index
Fig 17.    WHITE LED VOLTAGE
If we connect a WHITE LED to 3v supply, it will not 
illuminate because it needs a supply higher than 
3.6v. 
The resistor in series with the LED is called a 
CURRENT LIMITING RESISTOR. 
In this circuit no current flows because the supply 
is not high enough. 
                                   to Index
Fig 18.    WHITE LED VOLTAGE
When the supply is increased to 4.5v, the 220R 
resistor will allow a current to flow through the 
white LED and it will develop a CHARACTERISTIC 
VOLTAGE DROP of 3.6v across it. 
The supply (the voltage of the battery) must be 
higher than the CHARACTERISTIC VOLTAGE 
DROP of the LED so the resistor will allow the 
correct amount of current to flow. 
The ideal current for a LED is 20mA, however 
some LEDs will work when 1mA flows, so you have 
to know what you are doing. 
                                   to Index

Fig 19.   Testing A LED
Now connect either the 1k, 470R or 220R and determine the brightness you need. 
As the brightness increases, the current will be higher. 
You can use 3v supply for all LEDs except blue and white.  
HOW TO TEST A LED
Some clear LEDs produce red or orange and some LEDs do not have the cathode lead clearly 
identified. 
Here's how to find the colour, cathode lead and the current.   
You need a 6v battery, 10k resistor, 1k resistor, 470R resistor and 220R resistor. 
Connect the 6v battery and 10k resistor to the LED and it will only illuminate when the cathode 
is connected to the negative of the battery. This is the short lead. 
                                   to Index
Fig 20.    Damage a LED
Do not connect a 3v battery directly across a LED. 
It will be DAMAGED. You MUST include a resistor.
                                   to Index
A LED IS CURRENT DRIVEN 

You may have seen this statement and tried to work out what it means.
Basically it means an increase in current will make the LED brighter. 
But a LED needs 2 things:
It needs a voltage that is EXACTLY the voltage required to produce illumination. And this 
voltage depends on the colour of the LED. 
As soon as you supply the exact voltage, the crystal will begin to glow and as you increase the 
current, the illumination will increase.
But doing this is VERY VERY difficult. 
It is very easy to supply an exact voltage such as 1.7v or 3.4v, but delivering a current such as 
10mA or 20mA at the same time is very difficult. You cannot get a 1.7v battery and deliver 
10mA to a LED. 
As we have shown above, you need a simple components such as a resistor between the 
battery and LED to achieve the desired result.
A LED is CURRENT DRIVEN but firstly you need to provide a VOLTAGE that is exactly the 
connect value for the colour of the LED and then the current can be increased. 
                                   to Index
Fig 21.    All the resistor values
Here are all the colours and values for the resistors you will using in this course. Just match-up 
the colours on your resistor with the resistors above and you will find the value. 
                                   to Index
Resistor values are always OHM values.  One ohm is a small value. It might be the resistance 
of a length of wire 3 metres long. 

When a switch is open the resistance is infinite - millions and millions of ohms. 
The resistance of your body from one hand to the other will be about 70,000 ohms. 
The resistance between two wires dipped in water will be about 1,000 to 100,000 ohms 
(depending on the dissolved-salts in the water - pure water has a very high resistance) 
The resistance of the filament of a 3v globe will be about 30 ohms. 
The resistance of the winding of a 3v motor will be about 3 ohms.
Resistors are made with values from less than one ohm to more than 10 million ohms by 
adding carbon to the mixture inside the resistor (and cutting a track around the outside of the 
resistor) then connecting a lead to each end. Adding more carbon reduces the value of 
resistance. Carbon has a low resistance. 
Resistance-values are measured with the RESISTANCE settings on a MULTIMETER. 
This is called the "Ohms Range." Sometimes with the symbol: 
A Multimeter will have 2, 3 4 or more scales to cover the range one ohm to 10 million ohms. 
Low value resistors (from 1 ohm to 999 ohms) are written as 1R, 220R, 470R, 999R. with the 
letter "R" indicating Resistance (ohms). You can also use the symbol "omega" (
For values above 1,000 ohms to 99,999 ohms, they are written as: 1k, 2k2, 4k7, 10k, 100k, 
220k, 470k, with the letter "k" indicating "kilo" (thousand).
1M = 1,000,000 - one million ohms   1M2, 2M2, 4M7, 10M. 
The letters "R, k and M"  are placed so they take the place of the decimal point. This prevents 
any mistake, as a decimal point can be missing in a poor photocopy.
                                   to Index
MULTIMETERS 
There are two types of MULTIMETER. The top two are called DIGITAL MULTIMETERS
(DMM) and show numbers on a display.
The lower two meters are called ANALOGUE MULTIMETERS and have a pointer and scale.
All meters come with a set of red and black leads. 
The red lead is always connected to the positive of the battery or the positive on a project and 
the black lead is connected to the negative or earth or chassis. 
When making a resistance measurement, the leads can be around either way. 
Resistance measurements are always made with the power removed from a circuit. Any 
voltage on a circuit will upset the resistance reading. 
                                   to Index

Fig 22.    Resistance Measurement 
with Analogue Multimeter
The resistance of a resistor is measured by 
placing the leads of the multimeter on the 
ends of a resistor and turning the dial on the 
analogue multimeter to the resistance scale 
to make the pointer move to about the 
centre of the scale. 
The resistance scale is marked with a high 
value on the left and 0 ohm on the right. 
This is opposite to all the other scales. 
You must get the pointer to move to the 
middle of the scale as it is not accurate at 
left-end. 
Analogue multimeters are only suitable for 
reading values from 1 ohm to 100,000 
ohms. The scale is too hard to read above 
100k. 
To find the value of a resistor, you can 
compare the colours with the table above.  
                                   to Index
Fig 23.    Resistance Measurement 
with
                  a DMM
A digital multimeter produces a more-
accurate reading of resistance. 
It is accurate from 1 ohm to 10M ohms. 
Select the scale that provides a reading. 
                                   to Index

Fig 24. Connecting LEDs in series
LEDs can be placed in series provided the total CHARACTERISTIC VOLTAGE DROP across 
the LEDs is LESS than the supply voltage. 
In this case the voltage across the LEDs is 1.7v + 1.7v + 1.7v = 5.1v
The supply is 6v and this allows 0.9v for the CURRENT LIMITING RESISTOR. 
The LEDs will not be very bright with 220R. 
Change the resistor to 47R
If you connect 4 LEDs in series, the total CHARACTERISTIC VOLTAGE DROP will be 6.8v 
and no LEDs will illuminate because the total is higher than the 6v supply. 
                                   to Index
Fig 25. Connecting LEDs in series
Different-colour LEDs can be connected in series. 
Add up the total Characteristic Voltage for the 5 
LEDs and see if it is less than 12v. 
The 220R resistor will have to be reduced to 47R to 
make the LEDs bright. 
                                   to Index

Fig 26. Connecting LEDs in parallel
LEDs can be connected in parallel if they are the 
same colour. 
In the diagram a red LED drops a 
CHARACTERISTIC VOLTAGE of 1.7v and if they 
are from the same manufacturer or the same 
batch, they will work ok. 
Although we say the characteristic voltage for a red 
LED is 1.7v, this can change slightly from different 
manufacturers and one LED may glow brightly 
while the other is dull.
You have to build the circuit and see the result. 
                                   to Index
Fig 27. Connecting LEDs in parallel
Different colour LEDs cannot be connected in 
parallel. The voltage across a red LED is 1.7v. 
This becomes the "Supply Voltage" for the 
green LED and it is too low. The green LED 
needs a supply of 2.1v to 2.3v.
Only the red LED will illuminate.
                                   to Index
Fig 28. Connecting Resistors in Series
Suppose you don't have a 220 ohm resistor. 
You can make a 220 ohm resistor with two 
resistors in series. The total resistance will be 200 
ohms, but resistors are not accurate and the result 
will be very close to 220R. 
Electronic circuits are not very critical. You will not 
be able to see the difference in brightness between 
200 ohms and 220 ohms. 
When resistors are connected in series, 
the total resistance is found by adding 
the resistance of each resistor. 
                                   to Index
Fig 29. Connecting Resistors in 
Parallel
You can create a 220 ohm resistor by connecting 
two resistors in Parallel.
When two equal-value resistors are connected in 
Parallel, the total resistance across the 
combination is HALF. 
470R in parallel with 470R produces 235R. 
This is very close to 220R. 
We are not going into the formula as it is very 
complex. 
Three equal-value resistors in parallel produce a 
total of one-third. 
Simply get two resistors and connect them in 
parallel and measure them with a multimeter. 

                                   to Index
Fig 30. Flashing LED
There are some special LEDs that can be 
connected to 3v to 9v and they flash or 
produce a range of colours. 
These LEDs have a chip and resistor inside 
the body of the LED to produce the effect and 
allow the LED to operate on a voltage without 
the need for a current limiting resistor.
                                   to Index
Fig 31.  These diagrams show the resistor needed to produce 1mA to 25mA current 
through
                  a single LED on 3v, 5v, 9v and 12v supply.
                                   to Index

Fig 31a.  Voltage Divider 
Circuit.
THE VOLTAGE DIVIDER
In the circuits above, the resistor and LED are 
forming a VOLTAGE DIVIDER. 
A red LED is dropping 1.7v across it and the 
resistor is dropping the remaining voltage. 
Whenever two (or more) components are placed 
across a battery, they form a VOLTAGE DIVIDER. 
Sometimes we want a 6v supply and only have 12v. 
We can produce the 6v supply by putting two equal-
value resistors across the 12v as shown in the 
circuit opposite. 
We are not going into the mathematics because the 
selection of the correct value is very complex and 
the circuit is very wasteful. 
                                   to Index
Fig 31b. Current Divider 
Circuit.
THE CURRENT DIVIDER
The CURRENT DIVIDER CIRCUIT is actually a 
LOAD SHARING CIRCUIT. 
Suppose you are testing a Power Supply and need a 10 
watt LOAD. But you only have 5 watt resistors. 
Placing two 5watt resistors in parallel across the output 
of the power supply will allow half the current to flow 
though each resistor. This is called CURRENT 
SHARING or LOAD SHARING and the current is 
divided (or passed) through each resistor according to 
the value of resistance.
                                   to Index
Fig 32.  The DIODE
THE DIODE
The next simple electronic component is the 
DIODE. 
It only works when connected correctly. 
A DIODE allows current to flow through it when it is 
connected as shown in the diagram. 
A Diode is similar to a one-way water valve. 
When the diode is "facing down," the motor spins. 
When it is "facing up" the motor does not spin. 
The diagram shows the "current path" around the 
circuit. The current is measured in AMPS and we 
discuss current as CONVENTIONAL CURRENT. 
This is the way current was thought to flow when 
electricity was born and they said it flows out the 
POSITIVE TERMINAL of the battery, around the 
circuit and into the NEGATIVE TERMINAL. 
The arrow on the diode shows the current will flow 
through the diode and allow the motor to spin. 
The diode is said to be FORWARD BIASED. 

There is no flow of current because the diode 
prevents any current-flow when connected as 
shown. 
The motor DOES NOT WORK. 
The diode is said to be REVERSE BIASED. 
                                   to Index
Fig 33.  A Signal diode and a Power
                 diode
There are hundreds of different types of 
diodes. 
Power diodes, signal diodes, low voltage 
diodes, high voltage diodes, high-speed 
diodes and many other types. 
They all do one thing. 
They pass current in one direction and if 
turned around, they do not pass any current. 
                                   to Index
Fig 34. A Protection diode 
Diodes perform 
many function in 
electrical and 
electronic circuits. 
Here is an 
application as a 
PROTECTION 
DIODE.
It protects the 
amplifier. If the 12v 
battery is 
connected around 
the wrong way, no 
current will flow. 
                                   to Index

Fig 35. Diode "Voltage Drop"
When a diode is placed in a circuit (and current is 
flowing), a small voltage develops across the 
diode. This voltage is called the FORWARD 
VOLTAGE DROP. 
This voltage is approximately 0.6v. 
This is due to a junction inside the diode where two 
different materials are joined. 
Normally, this voltage is not important because it is 
only small, but sometimes you need to take it into 
account. 
For the circuit above, the amplifier only gets 11.4v
                                   to Index
Fig 36. Measuring Voltage with a Digital
              Multimeter
Voltage is measured with a 
VOLTMETER. 
Multimeters have 2 or 3 
voltage ranges so you can 
measure low voltage (0v to 
20v), medium voltages (0v to 
200v and high voltages (0v to 
500v). 
A voltmeter is placed across 
the component being tested, 
as shown in the diagram.
The Digital Multimeter is 
detecting 11.4v across the 
amplifier.
.                                  to Index
Fig 37. Measuring Voltage with a Digital Multimeter
If you place the 
probes of a digital 
multimeter around the 
wrong way on a 
component, the 
display will show a "-" 
The meter will not be 
damaged. 
                                   to Index

Fig 38. Measuring Voltage with an Analogue 
Multimeter
An analogue Multimeter must 
be connected around the 
correct way to make the 
pointer move "up scale."
Select the range that will allow 
the pointer to show 
somewhere in the middle of 
the scale. 
                                   to Index
Fig 39. Measuring Current with an Analogue
              Multimeter
Current is measured by 
"breaking into the circuit" 
and inserting the leads so 
the positive probe is 
closest to the positive of 
the battery. 
If you connect the leads 
around the other way, the 
needle will not move but it 
will hit the "end stop" and 
you may have to "bump" 
the meter to get the pointer 
to move from its jammed 
position. 
                                   to Index
Fig 39a. The Solar Panel and the 
Blocking Diode 
A DIODE is also used with a solar panel 
to prevent the battery discharging into the 
solar panel when the sun is not shining. 
When the solar panel is not receiving any 
light it becomes a resistor with a large 
value and a small current can flow 
through it from the battery. The diode 
prevents this current-flow. The diode is 
called a BLOCKING DIODE.
                                   to Index

Fig 39b. The Solar Panel with diodes 
called BLOCKING DIODES and 
BYPASS DIODES. 
Diodes are given different names, according 
to their function. They all perform the same 
job by passing current in one direction and 
prevent current-flow in the opposite 
direction. 
When the top solar panel is shaded by a 
cloud, it generates less current and this will 
reduce the current into the battery.
By placing a diode across the panel, the diode 
will pass the current produced by the lower 
panel to the battery. 
These diodes are called BYPASS DIODES.  
                                   to Index
Fig 40. Capacitors and symbol
The next component we cover is 
the CAPACITOR.
There are thousands of different 
types of capacitor. 
Each value of capacitor can have a 
low voltage rating, medium voltage 
or high voltage. 
Capacitors can be very small in 
size and shape or very stable with 
temperature-rise or simply very 
cheap to make. 
A capacitor consists of two thin 
sheets of metal such as aluminium 
with a thin sheet of plastic 
between. 
The sheets may be rolled up in a 
cylinder or laid on top of each 
other. 
The fact is this: the top sheet of 
metal does not touch the bottom 
sheet. This is shown in the symbol. 
The resistance between the two 
terminals is INFINITE.
The 6th capacitor in the top row is 
called a MONOBLOCK.
                                   to Index

Fig 41. Electrolytic Capacitor
A capacitor gets bigger as its value 
increases. 
It also gets bigger when the voltage-
rating increases. 
The basic unit of capacitance is the 
FARAD. A one-farad capacitor would be 
the size of a house. To make the 
capacitor smaller the sheets are etched 
to increase the surface-area and different 
insulating materials are used between 
the sheets. 
The result is a capacitor called an 
ELECTROLYTIC. It is a bit like a 
rechargeable battery. It stores a lot of 
energy in a small space.  
The negative lead is shorter and has a 
black stripe on the side of the electrolytic. 
                                   to Index
One FARAD is too big to handle. We use smaller values. 
The middle of the range is one microfarad. This is written as 1u. (sometimes you see uF)
This is one-millionth of a FARAD.
The smallest value of capacitance is one picofarad. This is one millionth of a microfarad. 
It is written as 1p.
Capacitors are broadly separated into two groups.  1p to 1u  and  1u to 100,000u
Capacitors 1p to 1u are ceramic, polyester, air, styroseal, monoblock and other names. 
Capacitors 1u to 100,000u are electrolytic or tantalum.  A tantalum is the same as an 
electrolytic - for testing purposes - it is a more-compact electrolytic.
1 microfarad is one millionth of 1 farad.
1 microfarad is divided into smaller parts called nanofarad.
1,000 nanofarad = 1 microfarad
Nanofarad is divided into small parts called picofarad
1,000 picofarad = 1 nanofarad.
Recapping:
1p = 1 picofarad.   1,000p = 1n ( 1 nanofarad)        1,000,000p = 1u
1,000n = 1u (1 microfarad)
1,000u = 1millifarad
1,000,000u = 1 FARAD.
Examples:
All ceramic capacitors are marked in "p" (puff")
A ceramic with 22 is 22p = 22 picofarad
A ceramic with 47 is 47p = 47 picofarad
A ceramic with 470 is 470p = 470 picofarad
A ceramic with 471 is 470p = 470 picofarad
A ceramic with 101 is 100p  (it can also be 100) 
A ceramic with 102 is 1,000p = 1n
A ceramic with 223 is 22,000p = 22n
A ceramic with 104 is 100,000p = 100n  = 0.1u   A common 100n is called a MONOBLOCK.
A ceramic with 105 is 1u
TYPES OF CAPACITOR
For testing purposes, there are two types of capacitor.
Capacitors from 1p to 100n are non-polar and can be inserted into a circuit around either way.
Capacitors from 1u to 100,000u are electrolytics (or tantalum) and are polarised. They must 
be fitted so the positive lead goes to the supply voltage and the negative lead goes to ground 
(or earth).
                                   to Index

Fig 42. Charging a Capacitor
Here is an experiment to show how much 
(little) energy is stored in a 100u 
electrolytic. 
When the slide-switch is in position "B", the 
100u is charged by the 6v battery. 
When the slide switch is moved to position 
"A" the electrolytic supplies energy to 
illuminate the red LED via the 220R 
resistor. It will illuminate for a short period 
of time. 
By moving the switch back and forth, you 
can keep the LED illuminated. 
                                   to Index
Fig 43. Capacitors in Series
Capacitors can be connected in Series or 
Parallel to obtain a value of capacitance you 
may not have available. 
They are also connected in series to 
increase the effective VOLTAGE RATING. 
However when two equal-value capacitors 
are connected in series, the final value is 
HALF, and thus you need two with double 
the final-value to get a value with an 
increased voltage-rating.
When two equal-value capacitors are 
connected in series, the result is HALF. 
(This is the opposite to connecting resistors)
                                   to Index
Fig 44. Capacitors in Parallel
Capacitors can be 
connected in Parallel to 
obtain a value of 
capacitance you may 
not have available. 
(This does not change 
the VOLTAGE 
RATING.) 
When two equal-value 
capacitors are 
connected in parallel, 
the result is DOUBLE. 
(This is the opposite to 
connecting resistors).
If one electrolytic is 25v 
and the other 63v, the 
answer is the LOWER 
VOLTAGE = 25v. 

                                   to Index
Fig 45. Variable Capacitors and Resistors
The value of a capacitor or resistor 
may need to be increased or 
decreased in a circuit to tune in 
radio stations or increase and 
decrease the volume of a speaker. 
The symbol for these components 
have an arrow to show they can be 
adjusted. 
The resistance of a potentiometer 
can be from 1 ohm to 5M 
They come in many different 
shapes and sizes to suit the PC 
board or front-panel layout.
The "T" represents a trimmer 
capacitor and this can be from 1p 
to about 120p.
A variable capacitor will be from 
about 10p to 415p. 
                                   to Index
Fig 46. Simple Circuits
Simple CIRCUITS
We have covered enough 
symbols and components 
to create a number of 
simple circuits. 
These circuits will show
how to connect a motor, a 
LED, (how to make it 
bright or dull) and how to 
connect 4 cells to make a 
battery. 
Note: The flashing LED 
does not need a resistor 
because a resistor and 
chip are inside the LED, 
to make it flash and 
control the current.
Connect all the 
components around the 
correct way and then 
connect them around the 
wrong way to see what 
happens.
Connect the flashing LED 
in series with a red LED 
and see what happens. 
                                   to Index
QUESTIONS
1. Explain why the Flashing LED circuit has no external resistor. 

2. How many 1.5v cells are needed to produce a 6v battery 
3. Explain what happens when you reverse the leads to a motor.
4. Identify the positive terminal:
    
5. Can 3 green LEDs be connected in series to a 6v supply?
6. A variable resistor is also called:  ___________________
7. The combined resistance of two 1k resistors in series is: _____________
8. The combined resistance of two 1k resistors in parallel is: _____________
9. Name the short lead on a LED
10. Name the type of multimeter with a pointer and scale:  ___________________
11. The total capacitance of two 100u electrolytics in series is:   ____________
12. The total capacitance of two 100u electrolytics in series is:   ____________ 
13. Write these values in words:
                 22R     _________
                 4k7     _________
                 1n   ___________
                 100u  ___________
14. How many 1.5v cells in a 9v battery?
15. The red probe is: _______________         (positive/negative)
16. Conventional current flows from: _________       (positive to negative / negative to 
positive)
17. Make a 470u electrolytic with two electrolytics:
18. What is the voltage drop across a diode?
19. Name the component that only allows current to flow in one direction: ____________
20. Name this symbol:
    
21. When resistors are connected in series, the resistance of the combination: _________
       (increases / decreases)
22. When two capacitors are connected in parallel, the voltage-rating of the combination: 
          _______________ (increases / equal to the capacitor with the lowest voltage-rating) 
23.  Draw two 2k2 resistors in parallel.
24. Which is larger:  470R or 22k
25. What is the value of this combination:
  
26. What is the name of the resistor in series with a LED: ____________________
27. What is the voltage across the amplifier:  _________
28.  Identify the fault with these circuits:

                                   to Index
Fig 47. Passive Components
Passive Components
All the components shown 
on the left are called 
PASSIVE COMPONENTS. 
This means they do not 
amplify. 
Write the name beside 
each symbol. 
                                   to Index
Fig 47a. The Potentiometer in action
The Potentiometer is a variable 
resistor.
It consists of a curved carbon track 
with a wiper that touches the track 
and can be turned via a screwdriver 
or knob. 
The wiper is the middle wire on the 
circuit symbol and it moves up and 
down as shown in the animation. 
When the three leads are connected 
the symbol is called a potentiometer. 
When two leads are connected it is a 
variable resistor. 
When the resistance increases, less 
current flows through the pot. 
                                   to Index

Fig 47b. The Variable Resistor 
and Potentiometer
There is a difference in operation between a 
Variable Resistor and a Potentiometer. 
Both will increase or decrease the sound level as a 
volume control or the speed of a motor or the 
brightness of a globe, but a Potentiometer will 
guarantee zero volume or zero brightness when 
the pot is turned fully anticlockwise (as shown in 
the animation). 
This is because the output will be zero volts, but 
the variable resistor may still deliver some "energy" 
(voltage and current) to the circuit when turned fully 
anticlockwise.  
                                   to Index
Potentiometers come in values from 100 ohms to 5 Meg ohms (500R, 1k, 2k, 5k, 10k, 50k, 
100k, 200k, 250k, 500k, 1M are most popular).
They come as linear, or logarithmic where the resistance of the track (per mm) is higher at 
one end. Because our hearing is not linear, these pots can be used as volume controls to 
produce a gradual (very nearly linear) increase in volume. 
Selecting the correct value of resistance for a circuit is VERY complex. If the value is not 
correct, the volume will not be loud or it will drop to zero before the pot is turned fully 
anticlockwise. Or the motor will drop to zero at mid-turn of the pot or it will not reduce in RPM 
to the desired amount.
The simple answer is to copy a circuit. 
Or you can try the whole range of pots and you will find one value is the best. 
A Potentiometer can be used in hundreds of different circuits to produce hundreds of different 
effects, but the actual "thing" that flows between the input and output is a percentage of the 
voltage. At the same time the current will also be passed to the output at a reduced value.  A 
pot actually delivers BOTH reduced values at the same time and the receiving circuit will be 
designed to "look for" the change in voltage or current. If the supply voltage is not rising or 
falling, the "values" are called DC values.
The voltage can also be in the form of a signal (volume). This is called an AC signal. 
                                   to Indexx
Fig 48. The TRANSISTOR
The TRANSISTOR
A TRANSISTOR is an ACTIVE 
device. It AMPLIFIES. 
There are many types of transistor 
(over 20,000 different types) from 
hundreds of manufacturers and 
they have many different names. 
We are going to study the simplest. 
It has the technical name 
BIPOLAR JUNCTION 
TRANSISTOR (BJT) but we are 
going to call it a TRANSISTOR. 
There are two types in this group: 
PNP and NPN. 
The type we will study is also 
called a SMALL-SIGNAL 
TRANSISTOR.
You cannot tell an NPN transistor 
from PNP by looking at it. You 
must test it in a circuit. 
In Fig 65 you will make a 
Transistor Tester project, but first 
some basic facts: 
                                   to Index

Fig 49. The NPN TRANSISTOR in a Circuit
The first type of transistor we are 
going to study is the NPN. 
A transistor has three leads:
BASE,  COLLECTOR and
EMITTER
Basically, a small current enters the 
base and a large current flows 
through the collector-emitter leads as 
shown in the diagram. 
The resistor in the collector lead is 
called the LOAD Resistor. 
Sometimes the load is a speaker. 
                                   to Index
Fig 50. The Water TRANSISTOR 
The transistor is similar to 
the diagram opposite. A 
small drop of water entering 
the base is amplified to 
produce a loud DRIP from 
the speaker.  
                                   to Index
In this experiment we will 
construct a ONE TRANSISTOR 
circuit similar to the WATER 
TRANSISTOR above and observe 
the results. 
Make sure the two leads DO NOT 
TOUCH. If they touch, the 
transistor will be DESTROYED. 
The transistor is amplifying the 
current through your finger via the 
two leads and it will be very dim. 
ANIMATION 
The lower diagram shows the 
transistor turning ON when a 
finger is pressed against the two 
wires. 

Fig 51. One Transistor Circuit
The finger produces a resistance 
that turns the transistor ON and 
this turns the transistor into a 
smaller and smaller resistor. 
That's how more and more current 
flows through the LED and it gets 
brighter and brighter.
                                   to Index
Fig 52. Two Transistor Circuit 
By adding another 
transistor we amplify the 
current through the finger 
about 200 times and now 
the LED will glow bright. 
Make sure the bare wires 
do not touch each other 
as this will destroy BOTH 
transistors. 
ANIMATION 
The lower diagram shows 
both transistors turning 
ON when a finger is 
pressed against the two 
wires. 
They both becomes 
smaller and smaller 
resistors. 
The first transistor allows 
more current to flow into 
the base of the second 
transistor and this is how 
the second transistor 
turns on more and more. 
This allows more current 
to flow through the LED 
and it gets brighter and 
brighter.
                                   to Index

Fig 53. Three Transistors
This circuit has 
enormous gain. 
Each transistor has a 
gain or more than 200 
and the final gain will 
be more than:
200 x 200 x 200 =
8,000,000
8 MILLION!
The circuit is very
sensitive to static 
voltages in the air or
electrical waves such 
as the waveform 
produced by the 
electrical wiring in a 
house. 
Move the project 
around a room and 
detect all the electrical 
signals.
                                   to Index
You can see the effect of one transistor. It does not do much.
The two transistor circuit allows the resistance of your finger to deliver current into the base of 
the first transistor and this transistor delivers more current into the base of the second 
transistor. The result is more collector-emitter current and the LED illuminates. 
The three transistor circuit produce an ENORMOUS effect. 
It will pick up STATIC ELECTRICITY and all forms of electro-magnetic energy (radiation) and 
illuminate the LED. 
                                   to Index
By adding a piezo 
diaphragm to the 
output you will be able 
to hear the hum of the 
mains. 
This is the frequency 
of the supply into your 
house. It will be either 
50 cycles per second 
or 60 cycles per 
second. 
The term: "cycles per 
second" is given the 
name HERTZ after 
Heinrich Rudolf 
Hertz, who was the 
first to prove the 
existence of 
electromagnetic 

Fig 54. Adding a PIEZO
waves.
                                   to Index
Fig 55.  The Piezo
The Piezo diaphragm is held around 
the outer edge inside a plastic case 
and when a voltage is applied to the 
two leads, the thin plate curves very 
slightly. 
When the voltage is removed, the 
plate returns to its flat shape. 
If the voltage is reversed, the plate 
curves in the opposite direction. 
The curving is due to a thin layer of 
ceramic material under the plate and 
then a film of metal is deposited onto 
the ceramic so a lead can be soldered. 
There is infinite resistance between 
the two leads as the ceramic material 
is an INSULATOR. 
The capacitance between the two 
leads is approx 22n. 
The Piezo is a passive device. It 
needs a pulse or frequency for it to 
produce an output. 
                                   to Index
Fig 56.  Plant Needs Water
The ONE 
TRANSISTOR 
CIRCUIT above 
can be turned 
into a detector to 
show when a 
plant needs 
water. 
Place the two 
probes into the 
soil and water 
the plant. The 
LED will turn off. 
As the water 
evaporates the 
LED will turn ON
to let you know 
the plant needs 
watering. 
                                   to Index

Fig 57.   Tap the Piezo
This experiment produces a pulse from the piezo 
when it is tapped and the LED illuminates briefly.
The LED can be connected either way around. 
This proves the diaphragm flexes when a voltage is 
applied and also in the reverse situation. A voltage 
is produces when the diaphragm is tapped.
                                   to Index
Fig 58.   Flashing LED and White LED
A flashing LED is not very bright. 
It can be connected to a transistor 
and the transistor will drive a very 
bright white LED. 
The transistor is an amplifier. 
It is amplifying the current flowing 
through the flashing LED and 
supplying a higher current for the 
white LED. 
We cannot discuss any further 
details of the circuit at the moment 
because the actual operation of 
the circuit is quite complex. 
At the moment we just need to 
experiment with simple transistor 
circuits. 
                                   to Index
Fig 59.  Soldering Iron
We now come to the point of ING YOU WITH CONSTRUCTION.
We have already shown you 6 different circuits and there are many ways to build them. 
You can:
1. Solder them.
2. Build them on an Experimenter Board
3. Connect the components with clips or twist the leads together. 
It does not matter how you build the circuits. 
The fact is this: YOU MUST START BUILDING.
The best soldering iron for a beginner is a CONSTANT TEMPERATURE soldering iron. 
It has a dial that can be turned to set the desired temperature. 
An ordinary soldering iron GETS TOO HOT. It is not suitable for soldering electronic circuits. 
This is something that no-one has mentioned before. An ordinary soldering iron will melt the 
solder TOO QUICKLY and burn the resin inside the solder and make soldering very difficult 
for a beginner. 
Soldering must be done slowly so the resin in the middle of the solder gets hot and cleans the 
leads of the components so the solder will "stick." 
That's why you must apply the solder to the leads you are soldering  and allow the resin to 

"attack" the leads and clean them. 
The cheapest TEMPERATURE CONTROLLED soldering Iron is available on eBay for les 
than $10.00 (post FREE). 
You will also need a small roll of solder (0.9mm) and a soldering Iron stand. 
Email Colin Mitchell for links to eBay.  (talking@tpg.com.au)
A whole book could be written on the ART OF SOLDERING. 
Look on the web for articles and videos on SOLDERING. 
                                   to Index
SOLDERING 
1. Soldering is very easy and very simple. You just need a Temperature Controlled 
Soldering Iron, Fine solder and clean components. 
2. Remember this: It is NOT the solder you need for a joint, but the FLUX. And the flux lasts 
for only 2 seconds. When the flux is HOT it attacks and cleans the joint so that the solder will 
stick. 
3. Turn ON the Temperature Controlled Soldering Iron to a low temperature. Put solder on the 
tip. It will not melt. Turn up the temperature slightly. Try more solder. As soon as the solder 
starts to melt, this is your starting point. Turn up the temperature slightly MORE and this is the 
correct temperature for small, delicate, fine soldering. 
4. Place a component through a hole and bend the lead slightly so the component does not 
move. Turn the board over and touch the iron on the component and bring the solder FROM 
THE OTHER SIDE so the solder melts and flows towards the iron. 
From start-to-finish, count one-two-three and remove the solder. Count four-five and remove 
the iron. You will have a perfect joint. 
If you are soldering thick leads or large pads on a circuit board, you will need to turn the 
temperature UP slightly. 
You must add enough solder to make the joint "bulge" slightly.
Fine solder (1mm or 0.9mm or 0.8mm) makes the best joint because it is easier to use.
Use a wet sponge to clean the tip or a ball of "Steel Wool." Steel wool is the best. 
Here is the steel wool, bending the leads and some examples of poor joints due to insufficient 
solder: 
Steel wool cleans the tip 
beautifully
Bend the leads before soldering
The joints do not have enough solder and 
that's why they fractured. 
Called a DRY JOINT. 
More "Dry Joints."

This is the cheapest and 
simplest soldering iron stand.
This stand is very messy as 
the spring grabs the iron and 
makes it difficult to remove 
from the stand. 
Test the stand before buying. 
You will se why not to buy 
this type of soldering stand. 
Get one with a "wide mouth" 
and a heavy stand is best as it 
does not move.
This photo clearly shows how to hold a 
soldering iron and solder.
This is NOT a temperature-controlled 
soldering iron and you can see it is too 
hot as it is burning off the flux too 
quickly. 
Temperature Controlled Soldering 
Irons are now cheaper than the JUNK 
soldering iron shown in the photo. See 
eBay for prices. 
                                   to Index
Photo shows a number of components 
fitted to the breadboard.
BREADBOARD
The term BREADBOARD refers to any 
piece of wood or plastic containing pins 
or pegs or clips or holes where you can 
build a circuit. 
The components can be soldered, 
twisted clipped or fitted into holes. 
Breadboard also means the circuit can 
be easily pulled apart. 
Some breadboards do not have two 
rows for the positive and negative rails. 
Connections under the board for the 
positive rail is shown with a black line in 
the photo. Connections on the main 
section of the board are shown with blue 
lines. Your breadboard MUST look 
exactly like the photo opposite. 
Other breadboards are quite useless.
The breadboard in the photo can be 
purchased on eBay for less than $5.00 
(post FREE).

Fig 60.  BREADBOARD and 
Components
                                   to Index
Fig 61.  Jumpers
The components on the 
BREADBOARD are fitted 
down the holes and metal 
strips under the board join 
each column of 5 holes. If you 
want to join one hole with 
another, you can use 0.5mm 
tinned copper wire or 
JUMPERS. See photo 
opposite.  Jumpers can be 
purchased on eBay for less 
than $3.00 posted.
Email Colin Mitchell for links to 
eBay.  (talking@tpg.com.au)
                                   to Index
Fig 62.  Breadboard with Nails
If you don't have a soldering iron or experimental breadboard, you can make your own board 
with nails. See the photo above. It is a multivibrator circuit and we will be presenting this circuit 
in a moment. The components can be twisted around the nails and bare wire used to join 
some of the nails to complete the circuit.
Another method of connecting the components is called BIRD-NESTING. This involves 
soldering the components "in the air" as shown in the 27MHz transmitter circuit below:

Another way to connect the component( if you don't have a soldering iron), is to wind 6 turns 
of  bare wire around each connection and leaving all the components "in the air." The bare 
wire can be obtained from hook-up flex. This is plastic coated "wire" containing up to 15 fine 
strands of wire. Use a single strand for the connections. None of the components will touch 
each other BY MISTAKE and the circuit will work perfectly. Bird-nesting is a good way to build 
a quick circuit and test its performance. It might look messy but you can easily change any 
component. 
                                   to Index
Fig 63.  Wiring the 3-Transistor Circuit using BC547 Transistors
The diagram shows how to connect 3 x BC 547 transistors. 
The leads of a transistor can be collector-base-emitter OR 
emitter-base-collector and that's why we have provided 2 different wiring diagrams.
                                   to Index

Fig 64.  Wiring the 3-Transistor Circuit using 2N2222 Transistors
The diagram shows how to connect 3 x 2N2222 transistors. 
                                   to Index

Fig 65. Transistor Tester
This handy transistor and LED tester can be built to test LEDs and both PNP and NPN 
transistors. 
The project consists of two identical circuits, one for NPN and one for PNP. 
You can build just the NPN section and then build the PNP section later. 
LED VOLTAGE
We have shown a LED needs at least 1.7v supply for it to operate. 
This circuit works on 1.5v and thus the action of the transistor and coil (called a Transformer) 
MUST be increasing the voltage for the LED to illuminate. 
This circuit works on two "actions."
1. Transistor ACTION - this is the action of a transistor providing gain to make the circuit 
oscillate. 
2. Transformer ACTION - this is the action of a coil of wire producing a voltage higher than the 
supply voltage when it is turned off. 
This circuit is very technical and very complex. 
We will be explaining it in a very simple way because this is a Basic Electronics Course.
THE TRANSFORMER - the two coils of wire on the left and the two coils of wire on the 
right. 
When the voltage (actually the current) is switched off, the 40 turn coil in either of the circuits in 
this project; the voltage across the coil rises to more than the 1.5v supply and is in the opposite 
direction to the voltage of the supply. 
The circuit looks to be very simple but it uses an air-cored transformer to produce the voltage 
needed to illuminate the LED indicators and the circuit only works when the transistor is 
connected correctly. There are two separate circuits, one for NPN transistors and one for PNP 
transistors. We will cover the NPN section:
The circuit turns ON when the NPN transistor is fitted and the current through the 30 turn coil 
and 1k5 resistor turns ON the transistor and produces expanding flux in the 40 turn coil. This 
flux cuts the turns of the 30 turn coil and produces a voltage in the coil that adds to the supply 
voltage and increases the current into the base. This turns the NPN transistor ON more. This 
action continues until the transistor is fully turned ON. At this point the current in the 40 turn 
coil is a maximum but it is not expanding flux and the 30 turn coil ceases to see the extra 
voltage. Thus the current into the base reduces and this turns the transistor OFF slightly. The 
flux produced by the 40 turn coil now becomes collapsing (or reducing ) flux and it produces a 
voltage in the opposite direction to greatly reduce the current into the base. In a very short 
period of time the transistor becomes TURNED OFF and it is effectively removed from the 
circuit. The flux in the 40 turn coil collapses quickly and it produces a voltage in the 40 turn coil 
that is higher than the supply voltage and is in the opposite direction. This means the voltage 
produced by the 40 turns ADDS to the supply voltage and is delivered to the LEDs to illuminate 
them. 
The NPN circuit has two LEDs in series so that a LED of any colour (including white) can be 
connected to the TEST LED terminals and it will illuminate. You can use any colour LED for 
any of the LEDs, however it is best to use either green or yellow or white for the single LED. 
The two "coils" are wound on a 10mm dia pen with 0.1mm wire (very fine wire). The loops of 
tinned copper wire holding the coils on the board are connected to separate lands under the 
board and MUST NOT produce a complete loop as this will create a “Shorted Turn” and the 
circuit WILL NOT WORK. 
If the LEDs do not illuminate, simply reverse the wires to the 30 turn coil. 
The circuit does not need an ON/OFF switch because the LEDs require a voltage of over 2v to 
illuminate (the orange LED) and the supply is only 1.5v. A red LED needs about 1.5v to 1.7v to 

operate but when it is in series with a green LED, this voltage is over 3.5v. 
All the components fit on a small matrix board 5 holes x 18 holes. A kit of parts for the project 
is available for $4.00 plus $3.00 postage and ordering details can be obtained by emailing 
Colin Mitchell.  (talking@tpg.com.au)
Build the circuit and test your transistors and LEDs. 
We will be covering more on the action of a transistor and the action of a transformer in the 
discussion below, but it is important to build the circuit and see it working. 
It is your first piece of TEST EQUIPMENT. 
Questions
1. Identify the letters "c"  "b" and "e"
2. What type of transistor is tested in the first set of hollow pins?
3. Put a PNP transistor into the first set of hollow pins and try all positions. Does the red and 
green LEDs illuminate?
4. When both the red and green LEDs illuminate, what is the approximate voltage across the 
pair?
5. When you fit a red LED to the test-socket, what is the approximate voltage across it?
6. When you fit a red LED to the test-socket, why does the red LED and green LED on the PC 
board turn off?
7. Why doesn't the project need an on/off switch?
8. The two coils for the circuit on the left is called a TRANSFORMER. Do the connections of 
the windings have to be connected to the circuit around a particular way?
                                   to Index
Fig 66. ROBOT MAN
The ASTABLE MULTIVIBRATOR or "free-
running" multivibrator. 
ROBOT MAN
This multivibrator circuit will flash 
the Robot Man's eyes as shown 
in the photo. The kit of 
components is available from 
Talking Electronics for $8.50 plus 
postage. Send an email to find 
out the cost of postage:
talking@tpg.com.au
The photo shows the LEDs 
flashing. 
The circuit is called an ASTABLE 
MULTIVIBRATOR and this 
means it is not stable but keeps 
switching from one transistor to 
the other. 
It is also called a FLIP FLOP
circuit. 
                                   to Index

Fig 67.   The TIME DELAY
The TIME DELAY circuit consists of a Resistor 
R and Capacitor C in SERIES. 
When the switch is closed, the electrolytic (called 
the CAPACITOR) charges slowly because the 
resistor only allows a small amount of current to 
flow. 
It's just like charging your mobile phone. The 
battery takes time to charge because there is a 
resistor in the circuit to limit the current. If we 
remove the resistor in the mobile phone, the 
battery will get too hot when it is being charged but 
in the TIME DELAY circuit, we want the capacitor 
to charge slowly, because we want a TIME 
DELAY. . 
                                   to Index
Fig 68. The charging of a 
capacitor is the same as 
building a brick wall. 
CHARGING A CAPACITOR
The capacitor in Fig 67 charges via the resistor R. 
But the voltage on the capacitor does not rise at a 
constant rate. 
It starts off charging very quickly and as the voltage 
across it get higher, the voltage increases at a slower 
and slower rate.
In the photo I am building a brick wall. 
I am working at a constant rate. 
When I started building the brick wall, I laid 5 rows of 
bricks (5 courses) in the first hour. 
As the wall increased in height, I had to climb the 
ladder and I could only lay 3 courses an hour and 
finally the wall was so high I could only lay 1 course 
per hour. 
This is exactly the same as a capacitor charging. 
When the capacitor is uncharged, the supply voltage 
allows a high current to pass through the resistor R
and the energy quickly fills the capacitor. This results 
in a rapidly increasing voltage on the capacitor. But 
as the voltage on the capacitor increases, the 
difference in voltage between that on the capacitor 
and the supply is very small and only a small current 
will pass through the resistor. This means the voltage 
on the capacitor increases at a slower rate.
                                   to Index
It really does not matter how fast or slow 
or uneven a capacitor charges because 
most circuits detect a voltage on a 
capacitor and the time taken to reach this 
voltage is called the TIME DELAY. 
But to prevent you thinking the capacitor 
charges "smoothly" we have to explain 
what actually happens. 
The graph on the left shows the capacitor 
charging. You can see it charges quickly 
at the beginning and then charges slowly 
and then very slowly. 
You can see the first part of the graph is 
fairly "straight" (constant charging) - NOT 
"straight up and down" but a straight line -
and this applies to a voltage of about 63%.
The time taken to reach this voltage is 
called ONE TIME UNIT - also called ONE 
TIME CONSTANT. The graph continues 
for another 4 "time units" (time-constants) 
and the final voltage is very nearly 100%.  

Fig 69.  Time Units
(It never reaches 100%.)
                                   to Index
Fig 70.  Time Delay Circuit
A TIME DELAY circuit needs three things:
1. A Resistor (R)
2. A Capacitor (C)
3. A "Detection Point." 
When the switch is pressed, capacitor (C) 
takes time to charge via resistor (R) and after 
a short period of time the voltage at the 
DETECTION POINT is 0.6v and the 
transistor is TURNED ON. The LED 
illuminates. 
Build the circuit with 100u and 100k and see 
how long it takes before the LED illuminates. 
                                   to Index
Fig 71.  The "TIME DELAY" in the ROBOT MAN
                Project
In the ROBOT MAN project 
you can see the "TIME 
DELAY" circuit made up of 
the 100u, 10k resistor and 
the base of the transistor. 
This is one of the most 
important BUILDING 
BLOCKS in electronics. 
It is the basis of all oscillators 
and will be discussed below, 
after we explain a few more 
details. 
                                   to Index
Fig 72.  Turning A Transistor ON
We will use the TIME DELAY circuit to turn 
the transistor ON.
Make sure the 100u is uncharged by touching 
both leads (both ends of the capacitor) at the 
same time with a JUMPER - this is a piece of 
wire shown in Fig 61. 
Push the switch and noting happens. After a 
short period of time the LED starts to glow 
and then comes on fully. 
This shows two things:
1. The transistor is not turned ON when the 
base voltage is zero. 
2. The base voltage must be 0.6v for the 
transistor to start to turn ON and when the 
voltage is 0.65v the transistor is turned ON 
FULLY.
                                   to Index

Fig 73.  How the LED turns ON 
Here is an explanation of how the LED turns 
ON. 
When the circuit is first assembled and the 
switch is not pressed, the transistor is not 
turned on and it is just like the diagram 
opposite. The LED is not connected to the 
transistor. 
                                   to Index
Fig 74.  The LED turned ON 
When the switch is pushed, the transistor 
turns ON (after a few seconds) and it pulls 
the lower lead of the LED down towards the 
0v rail and this action turns the LED ON. 
                                   to Index
Fig 75.  The LED fully turned ON
When the LED is fully turned ON, the lower 
lead of the LED is almost directly connected 
to the 0v rail. 
In other words:
When the transistor is FULLY TURNED ON, 
the lower lead of the LED is almost directly 
connected to the 0v rail. 
The voltage between the lead of the LED and 
0v rail is 0.2v. This is the characteristic 
voltage across the collector-emitter terminals 
of a transistor when it is TURNED ON. 
                                   to Index
In the three diagrams above you can see the LED is changed from an OFF condition to an ON
condition by the action of the transistor. 
The transistor is acting LIKE A SWITCH. 
This action is one of the most important actions in electronics.

It is called: "The Transistor as a SWITCH"
It is the basis to ALL Digital Circuits. 
It is the basis because of these two facts:
1. When the transistor is OFF, the circuit is taking no current and no power is being lost or 
wasted. 
2. When the transistor is ON, the LED is almost at 0v and no resistor is in the lower lead to 
waste any power. 
Thus we can turn things ON and OFF without wasting and power. 
This is the basis to DIGITAL ELECTRONICS.
                                   to Index
DIGITAL ELECTRONICS revolves around circuits that are either FULLY ON or FULLY 
OFF. This means they take almost no power and we can combines lots of circuits and still 
take almost no power. 
This means they do not get hot and it also means they will last a long time. 
You may not think turning a transistor ON and OFF will achieve any worthwhile outcome but a 
circuit can be designed to use two transistors (similar to the ROBOT MAN above). The circuit 
does not Flip-Flop but requires a switch and when the switch is pressed, the circuit changes 
state. The two transistors are connected together and it takes two presses of the switch to 
make the output of the second transistor change state ONCE. 
The circuit is a divider. It is called a: divide-by-two and is the basis of all counting in a 
computer. 
By adding more "divide-by-two" circuits we can get "divide by 4, divide by 8" etc. Two 
transistors don't do much but when you combine millions of transistors we have a 
COMPUTER. 
                                   to Index
Fig 76.  The "MEMORY CELL"
When Switch A is pressed, the voltage on the base is 
removed and transistor A turns OFF. 
Transistor B turns ON via resistors R1 and R2 and the LED 
is turned ON.
When the switch is released, the voltage on the collector of 
transistor B  is less than 0.6v and the two transistors 
remain in this state.
Pressing switch B  turns the LED OFF. (transistor A turns 
ON via  R3, R4 and the LED - very little current flows 
through the LED and you can hardly see it glowing). The 
voltage on the collector of transistor A is less than 0.6v and 
the two transistors remain in this state. 
Two transistors can do one 
more thing. They can 
"REMEMBER."
Here is a manual circuit. 
Pressing Switch A turns the 
LED ON and pressing switch B
turns the LED OFF. 
The circuit "remembers" or 
remains in each state called a 
stable state.  
The technical name for this 
circuit is:
BISTABLE MULTIVIBRATOR
or BISTABLE SWITCH or 
BISTABLE LATCH.
This is the basis to all the 
memory in a computer. 
                                   to Index
In electronics, we talk about the DIGITAL TRANSISTOR and ANALOGUE TRANSISTOR. 
This is just an ordinary transistor (called a Bipolar Junction Transistor) in a DIGITAL CIRCUIT
or ANALOGUE CIRCUIT. 
We are now discussing the DIGITAL CIRCUIT - The Multivibrator - Astable Multivibrator and 

Bistable Multivibrator (Memory Circuit).
The DIGITAL CIRCUIT has 2 STATES. 
The ON STATE and the OFF STATE. 
It is conducting in the ON STATE and the LED is 
illuminated. 
In the OFF STATE, the LED is not illuminated. 
In the ON STATE the transistor is said to be 
CONDUCTING or BOTTOMED. 
In the OFF STATE the transistor is said to be 
"CUT OFF or "OFF."
These two states are reliable and guaranteed. 
They are not "half on" or "quarter on" or "75% 
off."
These states are easy to transmit "down a wire." 
The ON STATE is transmitted as "1" (voltage 
present) and the OFF STATE is transmitted as 
"0" (voltage not present).
These are the two DIGITAL STATES.
The ROBOT MAN is a DIGITAL CIRCUIT. 
Each LED is ON or OFF. 
The waveform on the output of each transistor is called a DIGITAL SIGNAL.
The waveform is said to be DIGITAL or SQUARE WAVE. 
The top line of the graph represents the LED OFF. 
The bottom line of the graph represents the LED ON. The LED is ON when the collector 
voltage is LOW because we are pulling the lead of the LED to the 0v rail as shown above. 
The circuit changes from one state to the other very quickly and this is called the RISE TIME.
                                   to Index
Fig 77. The two Digital States
Going over the two 
DIGITAL STATES for a 
transistor. 
In the first diagram the 
switch is not pressed and 
the base does not see a 
voltage to turn the 
transistor on. The transistor 
is "OFF" (not conducting) 
and it is not "grabbing" the 
LED. The LED is not 
illuminated. 
In the second diagram the 
base of the transistor sees 
a voltage via the switch and 
it is TURNED on. The LED 
is illuminated.  
                                   to Index

Fig 78.  ROBOT MAN Animation
This animation shows how a transistor grabs a LED and pulls it towards the 0v rail to turn it 
ON. 
                                   to Index
Fig 79.  TIME DELAY Animation
The animation in Fig 78 shows the two transistors turning the LEDs ON and OFF in a FLIP 
FLOP circuit. 
We know the 10k and 100u components form a TIME DELAY to create the time for each LED 
to be illuminated. The timing for one LED plus the other LED creates a CYCLE and this is the 
FREQUENCY OF OPERATION for the circuit.  It is measured in cycles per second - Hertz -
Hz. 
We will now go into more detail of how the TIMING COMPONENTS create the TIME DELAY
for each LED.
The circuit is more-complex than you think. 
The 100u is already charged from a previous cycle and we show how it gets discharged via 
the 10k and charged in the opposite direction by the 10k to create a TIME DELAY. 
                                   to Index

THE CAPACITOR
The capacitor can perform many different functions and 
produce many different effects, depending on its value 
and the surrounding components. 
In this circuit the capacitors on the input and output 
prevent DC on the volume control creating "scratchy 
sounds" when the volume is altered. 
This is called "DC blocking."
The AC (the signal) passes through the capacitors but 
the DC voltage on the input is blocked.
                                   to Index
CHARGING A CAPACITOR Part II
It is easy to see how a capacitor charges via a resistor in the TIMING CIRCUIT (Delay Circuit) 
above but many capacitors are not connected to the 0v rail. 
They are connected as show in the animation below and their "job" is to pass a waveform. 
When they pass the waveform they CHARGE and DISCHARGE. 
The waveform is called an AC SIGNAL and the output is smaller than the input. 
The circuit is taken from the circuit above, but the same effect applies to all capacitors that 
"pass a signal." 
Here's why:
The capacitor charges slightly during the rise of the signal and the right-plate of the capacitor 
does not rise as high as the left-plate. That's why the output signal is not as large as the input 
signal. 
If the capacitor did not charge, the output would be as large as the input. If you use a 
capacitor with a large value, it will not charge and thus the output will be as large as the input. 
That's why you use a large capacitor !!!!
                                   to Index
CHARGING A CAPACITOR 
Part III
Here is another CAPACITOR in action. 
The animation shows a capacitor charging (via a 
resistor). The initial current is LARGE and this turns the 
transistor FULLY ON and the globe illuminates. As the 
capacitor charges, the base current reduces and the 
transistor starts to turn OFF. Eventually the capacitor is 
fully charged and the voltage on the base falls to 0v, 
turning the transistor OFF.
This animation shows three features:
1. The initial charging current is HIGH. 
2. It gradually falls to zero. 
3.The voltage on the base drops below 0.6v and the 
transistor turns OFF. 
                                   to Index

NEGATIVE VOLTAGE 
You will be surprised to learn that many circuits produce a negative voltage or negative spike 
at some point (when doing circuit-analysis, each location or point or join of components is 
called a NODE) on the circuit. In other words the voltage will be LESS than the 0v rail of the 
circuit. 
This is due to the presence of a capacitor and the animation shows how a capacitor can 
produce a negative voltage:
When a charged capacitor is "lowered from one position in a circuit" the positive lead may be 
lowered by say 3v. This means the other lead will be lowered by 3v. We are assuming the 
capacitor can be lowered and is not directly connected to the 0v rail.
You can see the electrolytic produces a NEGATIVE VOLTAGE on the base in the following 
animation, when the two transistors change states:
                                   to Index

The Electret Microphone
The most common type of microphone is the 
ELECTRET MICROPHONE. 
It is incorrectly termed the "Capacitor Microphone" or 
Condenser Microphone." "Capacitor Microphone" 
descriptions make no mention of a FET as the 
amplifying device and a polarized diaphragm to detect 
the audio, so they are something different. 
The electret microphone consists of a FET (transistor) 
inside an aluminium case with a very thin Mylar film at 
the front. This is charged and when it moves (due to 
the audio it receives via a small hole in the front of the 
case), it vibrates and sends a very small voltage to 
the GATE lead of the Field Effect Transistor. This 
transistor amplifies the signal and produces a 
waveform of about 2mV to 20mV at the output.
The electret microphone requires about 0.5mA and 
will operate from 1.5v supply with 4k7 LOAD 
RESISTOR. 
For 3v supply, the Load Resistor can be 22k to 47k. 
For higher supply voltages the resistor will be 68k or 
higher. 
Electret microphones are extremely sensitive and will 
detect a pin-drop at 3 metres. 
Most electret microphones have two leads. One lead 
is connected to the case and this lead goes to the 0v 
rail. The other lead goes to a LOAD RESISTOR (4k7 
to 68k - depending on the voltage of the project). 
Reducing the value of the load resistor will increase 
the sensitivity until the background noise is very 
noticeable. 
They are used in Hearing Aids and are more-sensitive 
than the human ear. 
They are very small, low-cost and very sensitive. 
                                   to Index

The Speaker
The most common speaker is about 
30mm to 60mm diameter and 8 ohm 
impedance. This means the voice coil is 
about 8 ohms resistance. 
The two leads can be connected either 
way to a circuit. 
The speaker shown is 32mm diameter and has a realistic wattage 
of 100mW (NOT 1watt).
These speakers have a Mylar cone and the magnet is a "super 
magnet" and very small. That's why it is so flat. 
A speaker can be used as a microphone (called a Dynamic 
Microphone) and a circuit to connect the speaker (mic) to an 
amplifier can be found on Talking Electronics website. It is not as 
sensitive as an electret microphone and does not
Speaker Symbol    produce the same output amplitude, but 
it is an emergency microphone.
                                   to Index
LDR and Light Alarm Circuit 
Light Dependent 
Resistor
(LDR)
Also called PHOTOCELL or PHOTO 
RESISTOR
A Light Dependent Resistor is a 2-leaded 
component containing a layer of semiconductor 
material. 
The top contains two interleaving combs of 
conducting wires with a path of semiconductor 
material between. When light falls on the 
component, the resistance of the semiconductor 
material decreases. 
In darkness the LDR will be about 300k. In very 
bright light the resistance will be about 200 
ohms. 
But if the light changes only a very small 
amount, the resistance CHANGE is VERY 
SMALL. For a large change, see Photo 
Transistor. 
The Light Alarm circuit will produce a squeal 
when light falls on the LDR.
                                   to Index

The FPT-100 Darlington Photo Transistor is available 
from Talking Electronics for $1.00 each plus postage.
Photo Transistor
The Photo Transistor is very 
sensitive to changes in 
illumination. It is about 100 times 
more sensitive than the LDR. 
The Photo Transistor is also
available as a DARLINGTON.
The Darlington Photo-transistor
is 100 x 100 times (10,000) more 
sensitive than the LDR. 
The Photo Transistor and Photo 
Darlington Transistor are 
connected just like a normal 
transistor but the base lead is not 
connected. If the value of the 
LOAD RESISTOR is large, the 
transistor will not be very 
sensitive. 
                                   to Index

The emerging magnetic lines of force from an inductor 
produce the NORTH POLE - this is just "convention," a 
simple way to explain things - to get the explanation 
started.
When two or more coils are wound near each other, the 
inductor is called a TRANSFORMER (but not the 
armature above).
The Inductor
Also called "coil," or "Choke." 
An Inductor consists of one to 
many turns of wire wrapped 
around a former (tube of 
cardboard). The wire can be 
jumble-wound or wound in layers. 
The result is the same. This is 
called an air-cored coil or air-
cored inductor. 
The centre can be filled with a 
metal such as iron or laminations 
(thin sheets of metal) or a ferrite 
material. 
Different cores operate at higher 
frequencies. 
The core can be circular 
(doughnut) or rectangular and it 
is called a MAGNETIC CIRCUIT
(when it is a closed loop). 
Additional turns or increasing the 
diameter of the turns will increase 
the inductance. 
A coil with a magnetic core can 
be used to pick up nails and 
metal items. It is called an 
electromagnet. It can be 
operated on AC or DC. 
When the metal core is loose and 
gets pulled into the coil it is called 
a SOLENOID or ACTUATOR or 
LINEAR ACTUATOR.  It can be 
operated on AC or DC. 
The way an inductor works is 
very complex but we can say it 
resists any rise or fall in voltage 
by turning the rise or fall into 
magnetic flux. 
If the applied voltage is suddenly 
turned off, the inductor produces 
a very high voltage of opposite 
polarity (these are the two most 
important things for you to 
remember). 
                                   to Index

The Antenna
The first time you will need an antenna is when making an 
FM transmitter. 
The antenna is usually a length of wire equal to half the 
wavelength of the transmitter. The frequency is about 
100MHz and the wavelength is 3 metres. 
A half-wave antenna is 1.5metres. 
The length is important but the height is more important. 
The wire should be as high as possible and "up-and-
down" if the antenna on the radio is vertical, to get the 
maximum range. 
This is called an end-fed half-wave antenna or half-
wave Monopole.
The transmitting circuit should have a good ground-plane 
such as connection to large batteries so the signal can be 
pushed and pulled into and out of the antenna. 
This signal is then radiated as electromagnetic radiation to 
the surroundings.
                                   to Index
A single contact consists of 2 pins -called SPST (single-
pole single-throw). 
Or a single pair of contacts can consist of 3 pins - called 
change-over or SPDT (single-pole double-throw).
A double set of contacts consists of 6 pins, called DPDT 
(double-pole, double-throw). This is also called a 
CHANGE-OVER RELAY or REVERSING RELAY (when 
connected to a motor).
The RELAY
The word Relay comes from the 
days of Morse Code where a coil 
of wire (an electromagnet) 
closed a switch to allow the 
Morse code to travel further 
down the telegraph line. 
It would "relay" or "pass-on" the 
information. 
A relay allows a "weak circuit" 
(one with low current) to operate 
a LOAD that needs a large 
current. It also separates the two 
circuits electrically and prevents 
a voltage such as 240v 
connecting to a 12v circuit. The 
coil is separated from the 
contacts and this gives the two 
circuits isolation. 
A double-pole double-throw 
relay can be used to reverse a 
motor as shown here:
                                   to Index

Driving A 
Relay
The armature is drawn towards the 
coil when a current flows through 
the coil. 
Driving A Relay
(Powering A Relay)
The first thing you must decide is the voltage 
of the relay. 
This will depend on the voltage(s) available. 
The relay will be driven (activated) by a 
transistor and the base of the transistor only 
needs a signal (less than about 1v). This 
means the project can be operated on a 
voltage from 3v to 12v and the relay can be 
connected to a 5v to 12v supply. 
Next you need to know the current-rating of 
the contacts. This will depend on the current 
taken by the LOAD. The rating of most relays 
is: 1 amp, 5 amp or 10 amp. 
Finally you need to know how many contacts 
are required. 
For a single circuit you will need 2 pins and 
for two circuits you will need 4 pins (but relays 
only come with 6 pins).
You can get relays that need a very small 
current for activation. These are called CMOS 
relays. But most relays need about 100mA. 
To protect the driving-transistor from spikes 
when the relay is turned off, you will need a 
diode across the coil. 
The top animation shows a "single set of 
change-over contacts." 
The lower animation shows the ARMATURE 
being drawn to the electromagnet. The 
electromagnet is the coil with a core of 
magnetic material that becomes a magnet (an 
electromagnet) when a current flows through 
the coil. 
When the circuit is turned ON, the voltage across the 2,200u electrolytic is zero and it gradually 
charges. When the voltage is about 8v, the coil has enough voltage across it to pull the armature and 
open the contacts. The electrolytic supplies voltage to the coil for about 1 second and then the 
electromagnet does not have sufficient magnetism to hold the armature and it returns to close the 
contacts.
                                   to Index

GATES
Animations of GATES and more details of their operation is covered in DIGITAL 
ELECTRONICS chapter.
                                   to Index
Fig 80. The "AND" GATE and 
"OR" GATE with switches
The next BUILDING BLOCK we will cover is 
called the GATE.
In its simplest form it is an electrical circuit 
consisting of switches. 
Its just two or more switches connected in series 
or parallel. 
We give each circuit a name so we can talk about 
it and explain its action with a single word. 
Later we will cover the electronic version and 
show how diodes and a transistor are needed to 
perform a GATING FUNCTION. 
The type of GATE we are talking about is a 
LOGIC GATE. 
The circuit performs an operation called a 
LOGICAL OPERATION on an input or a number 
of inputs and creates a single output - called a 
LOGICAL OUTPUT. 
LOGICAL means "understandable" or "correct" 
and in this case it means DIGITAL - the signal will 
rise to full rail voltage or fall to zero voltage. The 
output will not be half rail or quarter-rail voltage. 
The diagram show an "AND" GATE and "OR" 
GATE with switches.
For the AND GATE close switch A AND switch B 
for the lamp to illuminate. 
For the OR GATE close switch A OR switch B for 
the lamp to illuminate. 
                                   to Index
Fig 81. The "NAND" GATE and "NOR" 
GATE with switches and a transistor
INVERSION 
Inversion produces the opposite effect to 
the results above. 
Suppose we want to turn OFF a lamp 
when one or two switches are pressed. 
We need a transistor. 
The technical word for Inversion is NOT. 
It is simplified to the letter "N."
For the NAND GATE close switch A 
PLUS switch B for the lamp to turn OFF. 
For the NOR GATE close switch A OR
switch B for the lamp to turn OFF. 
These gates are only demonstration-
gates to show how one or two switches 
will turn a lamp OFF.  
                                   to Index

Fig 82. The "NOT" GATE
NOT GATE
A single switch and transistor produces a 
NOT GATE. 
This is simply an INVERSION.
The resistor turns the transistor ON and 
the lamp illuminates. The switch removes 
the voltage on the base and the 
transistor turns OFF. 
This is only a demonstration circuit to 
show how a switch can turn a lamp OFF. 
                                   to Index
The 5 gates above form the basis to turning a circuit ON and OFF. We will discuss these 
gates later in the digital section. 
                                   to Index
Fig 83. "AND and "OR" gate with diodes
The next building block is the 
GATING DIODE.
We have shown a diode allows 
current to flow when the diode is 
correctly placed in a circuit and 
blocks current when it is reversed.
The 5 gates above are electrical 
circuits but an electronic circuit works 
in a slightly different way. 
The electronic circuit will be covered 
later in the DIGITAL section. 
For the moment we will explain how 
a diode can be used to create a 
GATE. 
In other words it creates a ONE-
WAY PATH to allows signals to pass 
from one stage to another and 
prevents signals passing in the 
opposite direction. 
In the AND GATE circuit, both inputs 
are LOW and current flows through 
the resistor (it will get HOT). When 
one input is taken HIGH, current still 
flows through the other diode and the 
lamp does not illuminate. 
When BOTH inputs are HIGH, 
current flows through the resistor to 
illuminate the lamp. No current flows 
through the diodes. 
In the OR GATE, when one input is 
taken HIGH, current flows through 
the diode to illuminate the lamp. 
This can be done with EITHER input. 
                                   to Index

Fig 84. "NAND" and "NOR" gate with diodes and a 
transistor.
A NAND and NOR gate 
can be made with 
diodes and a transistor.
This time we the output 
is either HIGH or LOW.
We are gradually 
producing circuits that 
are electronic, rather 
than electrical circuits. 
In the NAND GATE
circuit, taking one of the 
inputs HIGH will still 
allow the other input to 
prevent the transistor 
turning ON. 
When BOTH inputs are 
HIGH, the transistor 
turns on via resistor R 
and the output is LOW.
In the NOR GATE
circuit, taking one of the 
inputs HIGH will turn the 
transistor ON and the 
output will be LOW.
                                   to Index
Drawing A Circuit 
A circuit must be drawn according to simple 
rules so it can be instantly recognised. 
An electronics engineer can "see a circuit 
working" when it is drawn correctly and 
can see if it is drawn correctly; if the parts-
values are correct and can use the circuit to 
assist in diagnosing a problem with a faulty 
circuit.  
The top circuit on is very difficult to 
visualise because it is not drawn in the 
normal way. 
All the components have to be "turned 
around in your mind," to see what the 
circuit is doing. 
   

QUICK QUIZ - to see how much you know 
Answer the following 50 questions  .   .   .  JavaScript is required!
This test will see how much you have learnt.       
1. What does LED stand for?
Light Emitting Display
Low Energy Display
Light Emitting Diode
Light Emitting Detector           
2. Name the three leads of a common transistor
Collector Bias Omitter
Base Collector Case
Emitter Collector Bias
Collector Base Emitter          
3. Connecting a lead from the negative to the positive of
      a battery will produce:
A high resistance circuit
A short circuit
A low current path
An open circuit           
4. What is the approximate characteristic voltage that develops
   across a red LED?
1.7v
3.4v
0.6v
5v           
5. If two resistors are placed in series, is the final resistance:
Higher
Lower
The same
Cannot be determined            
6. Which is not a "common" value of resistance: 
2k7
1M8

330R
4k4            
7. Which value of resistance, placed across a 9v battery
   will get hot:
22k
22R
220k            
8. If the voltage on the base of a transistor increases, does it:
Turn on
Turn off
Not enough information
Remain the same            
9. The resistor identified in brown is called the:
     
Base Bias Resistor
Load Resistor
Emitter Feedback Resistor
Bypass Resistor
            
10. The first three colour bands on a resistor are:
       yellow - purple - orange 
47k
4k7
470k
4R7            
11. A resistor with colour bands: red-red-red-gold, has the value:
22k   5%
2k2   5%
220R   5%
22R   5%             
12. The lead marked with the arrow is:

The Collector
The Base
The Emitter
The case            
13. A 10k resistor in parallel with 10k produces:
10k
5k
20k
Cannot be determined            
14. The symbol is:
NPN Transistor
PNP Transistor
Photo Transistor
Field Effect Transistor            
15. Two 3v batteries are connected as shown.
      The output voltage is:
3v
0v
6v           
16. 4 resistors in ascending order are:
22R   270k   2k2   1M
4k7   10k   47R   330k
3R3   4R7   22R   5k6
100R   10k   1M   3k3           
17. The closest value for this combination is:
4k7
2k3
9k4           
18. Which LED will illuminate:
     
Green
Both

RED
None
19. The four symbols are:
Capacitor, Microphone, Potentiometer, Electrolytic
Electrolytic, Microphone, Resistor, Capacitor
Capacitor, Piezo, Resistor, Electrolytic
Electrolytic, Coil, Resistor, Capacitor            
20. The closest value of the combination is:
10k
2k3
2k5
21. Which motor will work:
     
A
B
A and B
22. A resistor and capacitor in series is called a:
Pulse Circuit
Timing Circuit/Time Delay Circuit
Oscillator Circuit/Frequency Circuit
Schmitt Circuit            
23. A red-red-red-gold resistor in series with an
      orange-orange-orange-gold resistor produces:
5k5
35,200 ohms

55k
None of the above            
24. Name the 4 components:
Photo transistor, switch, capacitor, coil
Transistor, mercury switch, piezo, inductor
Photo transistor, reed switch, piezo, coil
Photo Darlington transistor, switch, piezo, inductor              
25. To obtain a higher value of resistance, resistors are
      connected in:
Reverse
Forward
Parallel
Series             
26. Which LED will illuminate:
A
B
Both
None
27. Name the component that detects light:
     
mini trim pot
Light Dependent Resistor

piezo
speaker              
28. What is 1,000p?
0.01n
0.0001u
0.1n
1n              
29. The current in a circuit is 45mA. This is:
0.045Amp
0.00045A
0.0045A
0.45A             
30. A 100n capacitor can be expressed as:
0.1u    u = microfarad
0.01u
0.001u
none of the above              
31. 1mA is equal to:
0.001A
0.00001A
0.01A
0.1A             
32. 1,200mV is equal to:
12v
1.2v
0.12v
0.0012v            
33. The approximate current for a toy 3v motor is:
10mA
100mA to 300mA
1 amp
34. What is the resistance of this resistor:

47k
4k7
4R7
35. Identify the correctly connected LED:
A
B
C
D             
36. Identify the correct statement:
     
The cathode lead is longer. It goes to the negative rail
The cathode lead is shorter. It goes to the negative rail
The cathode lead is shorter. It goes to the positive rail
The cathode lead is longer. It goes to the positive rail             
37. The current requirement of a LED is:
1.7mA
25mA
Between 3 and 35mA
65mA             
38. The multimeter is measuring . . .
     

Voltage
Current
Resistance 
39. The purpose of the two capacitors:
To pass AC from the input to the output
To allow the signal to oscillate
To pass DC from the input to the output
To amplify the signal             
40. The direction of conduction for a diode is:
A
B
C             
41. A DC voltage . . .
rises and falls
is a sinewave
remains constant
is an audio waveform             
42. Arrange these in ascending order:  k, R, M
(as applied to resistor values)
R, k, M
M, R, k
k, M, R
M, k, R             
43. A battery produces AC current:
true
false
44. The tolerance bands:   gold,  silver, represent:
5%,   10%  
10%,   5%             
45. 223 on a capacitor represents:

0.022u    u = microfarad
22n          n = nanofarad
22,000p    p = picofarad
All of the above             
46. Arrange these in ascending order:  n, p, u
   (as applied to capacitor values)
p, u, n,
n, u, p
p, n, u             
47. What is the resistance of this resistor:
100k
1k
1M
100R
48. The number "104" on a capacitor indicates:
0.1u
100n
1n
10n             
49. What is the multimeter detecting:
Voltage
Current
Resistance

50. For the LEDs, what is the characteristic voltage for the red and white LEDs:
3.6v,  1.7v
2.4v, 3.3v
1.7v, 3.6v
Cannot be determined
                                to Index

