
 
 
Bayes' Theorem:
A Visual Introduction for Beginners
 
Dan Morris

Bayes' Theorem: A Visual Introduction for
Beginners by Dan Morris
Published by Blue Windmill Media © 2016 Blue Windmill Media All rights
reserved. No portion of this book may be reproduced in any form without
permission from the publisher, except as permitted by Canadian copyright law.
For permissions contact: matthew@bluewindmill.co Cover by Blue Windmill
Media

Contents
Front-Matter: Don't Skip!
1.Bayes Everyday
2.Don’t Waste Your Time
3.Welcome To This Guide
4.Bayes' Theorem Explained: 4 Ways
5.Visual Aids
6.Booklet Structure
7.A Visual Intro: Part 1
8.Basic Definitions
9.A Visual Intro: Part 2

Examples
10.Example Section 1: Solving For One Possible Outcome With All Data
Provided
11.How To Understand Scenarios
12.Example Section 2: Solving for One Possible Outcome With No P(B)
Provided
13.Example Section 3: Solving For Two Possible Outcomes With All Probability
Data Provided
Bonus Stuff You'll Like 14.History and Stories
15.Thinking Like A Bayesian Everyday
16.Reference: Definitions, Notations, and Proof
17.Recommended In-Depth Reading
18.Bibliography

Bayes Everyday
If you’ve recently searched for something on Google, Bayes' Theorem was used
to display your search results.
The same is true for those recommendations on Netflix.
Hedge funds? Self-driving cars? Search and rescue?
Bayes' Theorem is used in all of the above and more.
At its core, Bayes' Theorem is a simple mathematical formula that has
revolutionized how we understand and deal with uncertainty. If life is seen as
black and white, Bayes' Theorem helps us think about the gray areas. When new
evidence comes our way, it helps us update our beliefs and create a new belief.
Ready to dig in and visually explore the basics? Let’s go.

Don’t Waste Your Time
A few points to help you make the most of this booklet:
1. CHANGE YOUR SETTINGS. If you are reading on a Kindle E-reader,
change your settings! It will make reading this booklet MUCH EASIER.
For spacing, select the mid-range option (on Kindle Paperwhite, the middle
option). For margins, select the widest option. For orientation, select
portrait. For font, select Bookerly, and font size select the third smallest
option (at least on the Kindle Paperwhite).
 
2. This booklet is designed as a visual introduction to Bayes' Theorem. It is for
BEGINNERS. If you already have a general understanding of the Theorem,
you might not get much out of this book.
 
3. You don’t need to read front to back! Skip around to what you find the most
helpful.

Welcome To This Guide
Welcome to Bayes' Theorem: A Visual Introduction for Beginners. This booklet
is packed with examples and visual aids to help clarify what Bayes' Theorem is
and how it works. At its core, Bayes' Theorem is very simple and built on
elementary mathematics.
Before we dig into different definitions, it needs to be stated that Bayes'
Theorem is often called Bayes' Rule or Bayes' Formula. So, don’t be confused -
they are the same, and we will be using both theorem and formula throughout
this booklet. Second, we need to make it clear that Bayes' Theorem is a law of
probability theory. It helps us work with, revise, and understand probabilities
when we are presented with new evidence.
Practically speaking, the theorem helps us quantify or put a number on our
skepticism and make more informed, rational choices. It helps us answer the
following:
When we encounter new evidence, how much should it
change our confidence in a belief?

Here are a few examples:
You just had a test for cancer and it came back positive. What is the
probability that you have cancer if the test is positive?
Your friend has a new dog and when you visit she slobbers all over you, but
does that mean the dog likes you? What is the probability that the dog likes
you given that she licks you?
Your friend claims that stock prices will decrease if interest rates increase.
What is the probability stock prices will decrease if interest rates increase?
You were just pulled over by the police and given a breathalyzer test. It
came back positive. What is the probability you are truly drunk, given that
the test is positive?

Bayes' Theorem Explained: 4 Ways
Here are a few ways Bayes' Theorem can be explained:
1. Bayes' Theorem helps us update a belief based on new evidence by creating
a new belief.
2. Bayes' Theorem helps us revise a probability when given new evidence.
3. Bayes' Theorem helps us change our beliefs about a probability based on
new evidence.
4. Bayes' Theorem helps us update a hypothesis based on new evidence.
The only problem? Applying the theorem is not intuitive, at least not for most
people. This is where visualizing a problem that entails using Bayes' Theorem
can be a BIG HELP.

Visual Aids
When working with small amounts of data there are a few different visual aids
you can use:
Venn diagrams
Decision trees
Letters (e.g., H, T, T, T for head/tail coin flips)
Physical Objects (e.g., real coins)
In this booklet, we’ll be using Venn diagrams and decision trees. Venn diagrams
are an excellent way to help us visually understand problems.


On the other hand, decision trees are a great tool that can help us solve problems
where probabilities are not provided and must be discovered.
They are a fantastic visual aid that, for many students of probability, can help
unblock areas of frustration and confusion.

Booklet Structure
Here is how we have structured this booklet:
 
1. There are two Problem and Answer sections and a bonus section. Each
section deals with a popular way Bayes' Theorem is typically presented in
introductory textbooks. *All numbers provided in each problem are
hypothetical. Some are pegged close to realistic statistics, but for the sake
of clarity and ease we have adjusted each number.
 
2. Each Problem and Answer section has three scenarios. To help you fully
understand each question type, we will work through 3 scenarios. The idea
behind this to help drive the problem-solving process home. The scenarios
include the flu, breathalyzer test, and peacekeeping.
 
3. And for those who are interested, we have included a few additional
sections on understanding scenarios, the history of Bayes' Theorem,
fascinating stories and uses, and even a few tips on how to think like a
Bayesian in real life.
 
4. We have also included an extended definitions section, which includes a
Proof for Bayes' Theorem.
 
5. To round out this booklet, we have included a list of recommended
readings for those looking to dive deeper into the Theorem and learn more
about its fascinating uses and history.

A Visual Intro: Part 1
If you are confused with the concept of Bayes' Theorem, this is a fantastic place
to start. Before we dive into Example Section 1, let’s take a look at Bayes'
Theorem without using the formula. This visual introduction is an expanded
version of this excellent video.
To begin, let’s draw a rectangle. Don’t get hung up on the shape - it could be any
shape, but a rectangle is easy to work with. The area inside the rectangle
represents all possible outcomes for our experiment. For example, if there are

two possible outcomes that are equally probable, we would divide the rectangle
into two equal halves. This means that each outcome has a 50% likelihood of
occurring. Or, if there are three possible outcomes that are all equally probable,
we would divide the rectangle into equal thirds. This would mean that each
outcome has a 33.33% chance of occurring.
For this example, we are going to stick with two equal outcomes and title each
outcome A and B, respectively.

Now, imagine that each probability represents a small cardboard box. Box A is
filled with 10 chocolate chip cookies. There is nothing else in Box A except
home baked, warm, mouth-watering chocolate chip cookies. To demonstrate this,
we will shade in Box A. In Box B there are also cookies, but there are two
different types. There is an even mix of 5 peanut butter cookies and 5 chocolate
chip cookies.
To demonstrate this, we will draw a line and cut the box in half, and then shade
in the chocolate chip cookies in the bottom half of the rectangle. We will leave
the top half blank.

Let’s step back and look at the rectangle. Can you see the chocolate chip cookies
in the shape of an L? Those areas represent all of our chocolate chip cookies in
both boxes, while the white area represents the peanut butter cookies.
Now, what if you were to close your eyes and have both boxes shuffled, and then
reach and select a cookie from one of them - and it was chocolate chip?
If you had to guess what box the cookie came from, what box would you select?
Many people would select Box A, and we’ll take a hunch that you are one of
them. But let’s take a closer look at why this is. Both Box A and B have
chocolate chip cookies, but Box A has exactly double the amount of chocolate
chip cookies than Box B. Within a split second your brain assessed this and
came away with the conclusion that Box A has a greater probability of being
selected than Box B.
Here’s the magic! This calculation is a very basic, natural use of Bayes'
Theorem. Given evidence (the amount and type of cookies in each box), you
were able to quickly come to the conclusion that Box A has a greater probability
of being selected than Box B.

Now, let’s step back once more. When your hand selected a chocolate chip
cookie, something disappeared: the probability of selecting a peanut butter
cookie is now gone. So, to visualize this, let’s wipe away the portion of Box B
that represents the peanut butter cookies.
 
Our boxes are now in the shape of an L, and we can also see that there are
double the amount of cookies in Box A than Box B. In fact, if we were to break
the Boxes apart into equal sections, we would have 3 areas: 2 sections in Box A,
and 1 section in Box B.

By looking at this, we can see that Box B has a probability of ⅓ , or 33% of
being selected. Box A has a probability of ⅔, 66% of being selected. This
difference in probability is what your brain roughly calculated before and the
whole reason why you selected Box A. Your Brain looked at 33% vs 66% and
selected the highest percentage, which comes from Box A. * The ~ symbol
means approximately.
What we have just done is demonstrate the concept of Bayes' Theorem and solve
a problem all without using the formula. Now, before we solve this same

problem with the formula, it might be helpful to define the formula and its
components.

The Bayes' Theorem Formula: A Basic Overview
The formula for Bayes' Theorem is shown below. As you can see, there are three
components to it. We find it helpful to call these components ingredients and
think of the answer as all of the ingredients combined.
For every question you come across, you’ll need to find each ingredient and plug
it into the formula.


Basic Definitions To Get You Started
For a more thorough explanation and additional terms, take a look at the back
of this booklet.
The vertical bar | stands for given that.
P stands for Probability.
A & B are Events.
P(A) and P(B) are the probabilities of events A and B. Each event is
separate from the other and does not impact the other.
P(A|B) is the probability of event A being true given that event B is true.
P(B|A) is the probability of event B being true given that event A is true.

Using the definitions from the previous page, the entire formula can be read as
follows: 
The formula as a whole is built using basic algebra. It might look complicated
but it is actually quite user-friendly. Every time you use the formula all you need
to do is remember the three ingredients, find them, and then plug them into the
formula to solve. You will then have an updated probability based on new
information; you’ll have P(A|B), which is technically called the Posterior
Probability and is a normalized weighted average.

A Visual Intro: Part 2
In Part 1 of the Visual Introduction, Bayes' Theorem was demonstrated visually
without using its formula. Now, in Part 2 we’ll see how we can derive the same
numbers using the formula. To refresh your memory, we had two boxes of
cookies in front of us. One box was filled with 10 chocolate chip cookies. The
other box had 5 chocolate chip and 5 peanut butter cookies. We then closed our
eyes and picked a cookie out of a box, and when we opened them back up we
had selected a chocolate chip cookie.

After doing this we discovered the following:
There is a ~66% probability we chose the cookie from Box A.
There is a ~33% probability we chose the cookie from Box B.
This time, let’s follow 4 steps to find the answer using Bayes' formula. We will
find the answer for Box A first, and then deduce from this to find the answer for
Box B.
Step 1: To start, we always need to determine what we
are wanting to find.
We want to know the probability of Box A given that we selected a chocolate
chip cookie.
Step 2: Write what you want to find as a formula.


Step 3: Find each ingredient. Then, plug it in.
P(Box A) = .5 * To answer this we ask the following: What is the
probability of drawing from Box A? Remember, this probability is
independent of all other events. Since there are only two boxes and the
probability of selecting from either is equal, the answer is .5
P(CC Cookie) = .75 * To answer this we ask the following: What is the
probability that we will select a chocolate chip cookie? Remember, this
probability is independent of all other events. There are 20 cookies total in
both boxes, and 15 of them are chocolate chip. So, 15/20 is .75
P(CC Cookie | Box A) = 1* To answer this question, we ask the following:
What is the probability of selecting a chocolate chip cookie given that we
have selected from Box A? Since there are only chocolate chip cookies in
Box A, the probability is 1. * A probability of 1 represents a 100%
probability of something occurring.

Now, 
we 
can 
plug 
each 
ingredient 
into 
the 
formula: 
Answer: We now know that there is a ~66% probability that we selected from
Box A given that we have a chocolate chip cookie. To find the probability of
selecting Box B, we can follow steps 1-3 again by replacing the term Box A with
Box B. Or, we can simply deduce from our answer that if there is a ~66%
probability Box A was selected, there must be a 33% chance Box B was selected.
Since all probability adds up to 1, we can discover this by doing the following:
1-.66 = .33, or 33%.

Example Section 1: Solving For One
Possible Outcome With All Data Provided
In this section, we use Venn diagrams to visualize our
problems so that they are easier to understand and solve.
If reading the term Venn diagram makes you shudder,
Wikipedia provides a good overview to get you up to
speed. This article at Stanford University is also helpful,
but you really don’t need to worry. We explain everything
step-by-step.

Introduction
When searching for a probability we are sometimes given all of the components
or ingredients, and simply need to A) Identify each one B) Label each one, and
C) Plug each one into Bayes' formula. Hands down these are the easiest
questions to apply Bayes' formula to. In this section we will be dealing with
these types of probabilities using Venn diagrams. Venn diagrams work great for
these by helping us visually understand the question.
Here are a few tips as you approach each question:
Try not to get overwhelmed or lost in the question. Always begin by writing
down what you want to discover.
Try not to confuse P(A|B) with P(B|A). Always double check your
numbers! This is a common error (technically called a Base Rate Fallacy).
Remember to take your time. There is no need to rush.

Scenario 1: The Flu
Let’s say that you are at work one day and have just finished lunch. You
suddenly feel horrible and find yourself lying down. Wasn’t your friend at work
recently sick with the flu? What if you have it? Will you have to cancel your big
trip next week?
You have a headache and sore throat, and you know that people with the flu have
the same symptoms roughly 90% of the time. In other words, 90% of people
with the flu have the same symptoms you currently have. Does this mean you
have the flu?
Wanting to gain a little more information you roll over, grab your phone and
search Google. You find a reputable article that says that only 5% of the
population will get the flu in a given year. Ok. So, the probability of having the
flu, in general, is only 5%.
You then spot one more statistic that says 20% of the population in a given year
will have a headache and sore throat at any given time.
Do you have the flu? What should you do?

Pulling The Scenario Apart
First, let’s remember what Bayes' Theorem does: it helps us update a hypothesis
based on new evidence.
In this scenario, your hypothesis is that you have the flu and your headache and
sore throat are your evidence. Now, after seeing that 90% of people with the flu
have your symptoms, many of us would stop and conclude that we have the flu.
We would look at the 90% statistic and sigh, resolved to the fact that we likely
have the flu. This reaction is very common and called Base Rate Fallacy or Base
Rate Neglect. The CIA has a nifty article on this, and it explains how people
often gravitate towards the easiest information available when making decisions.
So, we are left wondering. Is our assumption based on the 90% statistic right?
This is where Bayes' Theorem comes in and helps us have a clearer picture. By
using the theorem, we are forced to look at all data and update our hypothesis
with new evidence. In the scenario we are given two additional pieces of
information that can help us come to a more precise probability of having the flu
given our symptoms.
Let’s review all the information we do have before moving on.
1. We know people with the flu have a headache and sore throat roughly 90%
of the time.
2. We know the probability of having the flu, in general, is only 5%.
3. We know that 20% of the population in a given year will have a headache
and sore throat at any given time.

To begin solving this problem, we always need to
determine what we are wanting to find.
We want to know what the probability is of having the flu given our current
symptoms.
Now that we know what we are solving for, we are going to tackle this problem
two ways. Depending on how you learn you may prefer one over the other, and
that is ok. People learn differently, and that is why we included both options.
Feel free to read through each or skip back and forth.
1. Visualize the Problem: we will visualize the above flu problem by using a
Venn diagram.
 
2. Plugging Into Bayes' Formula and Solving: we will solve the above flu
problem by plugging our numbers into Bayes' formula.

Scenario 1.1 Visualize The Problem
To visualize the problem, we’ll draw two circles and merge them into a Venn
diagram.
Circle #1: The area inside this circle represents all possible outcomes. In this
example, the area represents all people who could get sick with the flu. The
shaded circle labeled “A” represents the 5% of the population who have the flu.
Within the circle is the entire population, and there are two possible outcomes
for the population: people can have the flu, or not have the flu.“A” is an event,
and its probability is 5%. This probability is represented in our formula as P(A).


Circle #2: The area inside this circle also represents all possible outcomes. In
this instance it represents all people who could have your symptoms (headache
and sore throat). The shaded circle labeled “B” represents the 20% of the
population that does have the symptoms. What this means is that within the
entire circle there are two possible outcomes: people have the symptoms or do
not have the symptoms. “B” is an event, and its probability is 20%. This
probability is represented in our formula as P(B).

Circle #3: In this circle, we have combined both events “A” and “B” - and this is
where the magic happens!
Here is a quick breakdown of how you can read this:
The white area inside this circle represents people who do not have either
the flu or the symptoms.
The area where only Circle A covers shows us people who only have the
flu.
The area where only Circle B covers shows us people who only have the
symptoms.
Now, take a look at Circle B and see where it overlaps with Circle A. This
is what we are really interested in! This is our question from Step 1 in
visual form. We want to know the probability P(A|B) of having the flu
given our symptoms. This probability is found where both events occur
together and is called an intersection. Another way to look at it is like this:
if we are in area B, what is the probability we are also in area AB (where A
and B overlap)?

With both circles now merged, we can visually see our question and what we are
trying to solve for. Although we won’t be solving the question with a Venn
diagram, the diagram does help us visualize what we are trying to understand.
If P(A) is the probability of you having the flu, and P(B) is the probability of you
having your symptoms, what is the probability of you having both? While we
don’t yet know the actual answer, we can clearly see what we are trying to solve
for.

Scenario 1.2 Plugging Into Bayes' Formula And
Solving
Now let’s solve the problem by using Bayes' formula. For the sake of ease, we’ll
begin by restating what we want to find.
Step 1: Determine what you want to find.
Again, we are solving for the same thing we did above with the Venn diagram
but are restating this for clarity. We want to know what the probability is of
having the flu given our current symptoms.
Step 2: Write the above as a formula.
Let’s translate what we are solving for into the formula. In other words, we’ll
bring the language of Step #1 above into the formula.

Here is Bayes' formula:
Now, let’s translate with what we are solving for.


Step 3: Find each ingredient and label it.
From the scenario we know the following: *We have changed the ingredients
provided in the scenario from percents into decimals. We will do this every time
before we begin to plug the ingredients into the formula.
P(A) - In our formula, this ingredient is represented as P(Flu) and answers
the question: What is the probability of you having the flu? This number is
.05
P(B|A) - In our formula, this ingredient is represented as P(Symptoms |
Flu). This number is .9
P(B) - In our formula, this ingredient is represented as P(Symptoms) and
answers the question: What is the probability of you having the symptoms?
This number is .2.

Step 4: Plug each ingredient into the formula and
solve.
Conclusion:
So, after plugging each ingredient into the formula our answer is 22.5%. We can
conclude from this that if you have a sore throat and headache you only have a
22.5% probability of having the flu. Wow! Now, remember what Bayes'
Theorem does: it helps us update a hypothesis based on new evidence.

Originally, we thought that the probability of having the flu was as high as 90%!
This belief was based on our latching on to P(B|A). However, our answer P(A|B)
is very different! The 22.5% we ended with is more accurate than the 90%
probability we started with.
This problem is a fantastic illustration of the power that Bayes' Theorem can
give us when facing tough uncertainties. It is also a tweaked example of a
questionnaire given to 1000 gynecologists. In the study, only 21% of
gynecologists chose the correct answer while almost 50% chose the equivalent
of our 90%! If you’d like to read more on this, Cornell University has a fantastic
article.
Next time you are sick, remember Bayes!

Scenario 2: Breathalyzer
You are a police officer in Baltimore and it’s New Year's eve. As usual,
roadblocks are set-up at various points throughout the city to combat drunk
driving.
Throughout the evening you and your fellow officer are giving breathalyzer tests
to random drivers. Around 2 am you randomly pull over a vehicle and have the
driver take a breathalyzer test, and the result is positive. You assume the test is
accurate and think nothing of it as you process the driver.
After your shift ends early that morning you are talking with your partner. She
doesn’t believe that the breathalyzer tests are anywhere near accurate. You ask
her why and she tells you some stats: it is true that the breathalyzer always
detects a truly drunk person, but only 1 in 1000 drivers are typically drunk.
What’s more, the probability of the test being positive is only 8%.
You shake your head while you try to put together what she has said. You’ve
never questioned the test before but now you are. What should you believe?

Pulling The Scenario Apart
In this breathalyzer scenario, your hypothesis is that the person is drunk and your
evidence is a positive breathalyzer test. Originally, you never questioned the
accuracy of the test. You thought it was accurate since it has a 100% success rate
of always detecting a truly drunk person. But after listening to your partner you
are now questioning this belief.
As in our flu example above, this is where Bayes' Theorem comes in and helps
us have a better understanding of probability. In this scenario we are given two
additional pieces of information that can help us come to a more precise
probability. Let’s review those quickly before we move on.
1. We know that 100% of the time the breathalyzer test will give a positive
result for a truly drunk driver. By truly drunk we mean that a blood test
would confirm that the person is over the blood alcohol limit.
2. We know that 1 in 1000 drivers drives drunk, so the probability of any
driver being drunk is 0.1%* (we calculated this by dividing 1/1000 and then
multiplying by 100).
3. We also know that the breathalyzer test will give a positive result 8% of the
time regardless if it is accurate or not.
To begin solving the question, we always need to
determine what we are wanting to find.
We want to know the probability of someone actually being drunk given that the
breathalyzer test is positive.
Perfect. We now know what we are solving for, so let’s move on and tackle it in

a few ways.
We are going to look at this problem through two different lenses.
1. Visualize the Problem: we will visualize the problem by using a Venn
diagram.
 
1. Plugging Into Bayes' formula and Solving: we will solve the problem by
plugging our numbers into Bayes' formula.

Scenario 2.1 Visualize the Problem
Let’s visualize with a Venn diagram.
Circle #1: The area inside this circle represents all possible outcomes. In this
scenario, it represents all people who could be drunk while driving. The small
circle labeled “A” represents the .1% of drivers who actually are drunk. “A” is
an event, and its probability is .1%. This probability is represented in our
formula as P(A).

Circle #2: The area inside this circle represents all possible outcomes. In this
scenario, it represents all possibilities for the breathalyzer test. The small circle
labeled “B” represents the 8% of the tests that are positive.“B” is an event, and
its probability is 8%. This probability is represented in our formula as P(B).

Circle #3: This is where all the pieces come together. In this circle we have
combined both events “A” and “B”.
Here is how the entire visual can be understood:
The white area inside this circle represents people who are not drunk
drivers and breathalyzer tests that are negative.
The area where only Circle A covers shows us people who are drunk while
driving.
The area where only Circle B covers shows us the total amount of
breathalyzer tests that are positive.
Boom! Take a look at the dark area where the two circles overlap. This is
what we are really interested in! This is our question that we want to be
answered, but in visual form. We want to know the probability P(A|B) of a
driver being drunk given that the breathalyzer test is positive. This
probability is found where both events occur together and is called an
intersection.

With both circles now merged, we can visually see our question and what we are
trying to solve for. Although we won’t be solving the question with a Venn
diagram, the diagram does help us visualize what we are trying to understand.
If P(A) is the probability a driver driving drunk, and P(B) is the probability a
breathalyzer test being positive, what is the probability of both?

Scenario 2.2 Plugging Into Bayes' Formula And
Solving
Let’s follow our four steps again. To make things clear, we’ll clarify what we
want to find.
Step 1: Determine what you want to find.
We want to know the probability of someone being truly drunk given that the
breathalyzer test is positive.
Step 2: Write the above as a formula.
Let’s translate what we are solving for into the formula. In other words, we’ll
bring the language of Step #1 above into the formula.

Here is Bayes' formula:
Now, let’s translate with what we are solving for.


Step 3: Find each ingredient and label it.
From the scenario we know the following:
P(A) - In our formula, this ingredient is represented as P(Drunk) and
answers the question: What is the probability of a driver being drunk? This
number is .001
P(B|A) - In our formula, this ingredient is represented as P(Positive|Drunk).
This number is 1, not .1, but 1 as in 100%.
P(B) - In our formula, this ingredient is represented as P(Positive) and
answers the question: What is the probability of a breathalyzer test being
positive? This number is .08

Step 4: Plug each ingredient into the formula and
solve.
Conclusion:
So, after all the work and plugging each ingredient into the formula our answer
is 1.25%. We can conclude from this that the probability of a driver having a
positive test and actually being drunk is 1.25%. In other words, for every 1000
drivers being tested we have the following:
We have 1 truly drunk driver who tested positive with the breathalyzer.
We have roughly 79 other drivers who also tested positive with the
breathalyzer but are not drunk.
In total we have 80 drivers testing positive, and the probability of one of
them testing positive and truly being drunk is around 1.25%.

That’s an eye opener! Remember what Bayes' Theorem does: it can help us
quantify skepticism and enable us to have a clearer understanding. Originally, we
thought the probability of the driver being drunk was quite high, but now we see
it is only around 1.25%.
In this scenario, the police officer would now take a very different view of
breathalyzer tests and would likely be much more skeptical of their accuracy.
*As a side note, there are other complexities to situations like this, such as the
test actually being random, etc. Did the police officer pull the vehicle over
because of how the driver was driving? Did the officer provide a breathalyzer
test because of how they were acting? Responding? New information such as
this would impact the entire equation. For sake of ease and teaching we have
kept the problem very basic.

Scenario 3: Peacekeeping - A Surprise Attack
You are a soldier and have recently shipped out across the Atlantic on your
fourth peacekeeping tour. A few weeks into your mission you are on patrol and
see an injured family across the road from you.
You are about to go to them when suddenly there is a surprise attack and you
find yourself pigeonholed against a burnt out vehicle. You stop to listen and are
suddenly filled with horror as you see a truck turning the corner. There is no
doubt it is an enemy vehicle, but you didn’t have time to see if the truck was
rigged with a gunner on the back - and if there is you don’t want to be caught in
the open.
You quickly do some mental calculations and recall what you learned in your
debrief. The rebels have roughly 54 dilapidated trucks and 22 of them are rigged
with guns in the back. Rebels in a truck are one thing, but rebels in a truck
rigged with a gun on the back? You don’t want to be caught in the open with
that.
You pop your head out to get a better look and a wave of bullets hits the vehicle
in front of you. The rebel truck is now about 150 yards away, but you are still
uncertain if the shots came from the truck or somewhere else. If the truck is
rigged with a gun, the chance of it having fired at you is pretty high, maybe at
80%.
You continue to think. Considering how heavy the firepower was and the
environment you are in, you peg the possibility of being shot at 50%. What
should you do? Should you risk crossing the street to help the family?

Pulling The Scenario Apart
As in our other scenarios, let’s break this scenario apart to see exactly what we
are dealing with.
In this scenario, your hypothesis is that the truck is rigged with a gun and your
evidence is the wave of bullets. Your initial assumption is that the truck is likely
rigged with a gun since there is an 80% chance it would have fired at you if it
was rigged. But is that right? Are you making an accurate conclusion?
Again, this is where Bayes' Theorem can help us better understand the situation
and make a more informed decision. In the scenario we are given two additional
pieces of information that can help us come to a more precise probability of the
truck being rigged with a gun given the intense wave of bullets. Let’s take a
moment to review:
1. We know that the probability of the truck firing at you if it is rigged with a
gun is 80%.
2. We know the probability of the truck being rigged with a gun is 40%* (we
calculated this by dividing 22 rigged trucks by 54 total trucks. 22/54 =
~40%.)
3. We know that the probability of a rebel having heavy firepower is 50%.
To start, we always need to determine what we are
wanting to find.
We want to know the probability of the truck being rigged with a gun given that
we were just fired at with heavy firepower.

Let’s move on and solve this problem.
1. Visualize the Problem: we will visualize the problem by using a Venn
diagram.
 
2. Plugging Into Bayes' formula and Solving: we will solve the problem by
plugging our numbers into Bayes' formula.

Scenario 3.1 Visualize The Problem
Let’s visualize with a Venn diagram.
Circle #1: The area inside this circle represents all possible outcomes. In this
example, the area represents all rebel trucks. The shaded circle labeled “A”
represents the 40% of all rebel trucks that are rigged with a gun. * To get this
number we simply divide the number of rigged trucks (22) by the number of
total trucks (54). The answer is ~40%. “A” is an event, and its probability is
40%. This probability is represented in our formula as P(A).


Circle #2: The area inside this circle also represents all possible outcomes. In
this instance it represents firepower. The shaded circle labeled “B” represents the
50% of rebels who could shoot you with very heavy firepower. What this means
is that within the entire circle there are two possible outcomes: rebels either have
heavy firepower or do not have heavy firepower. “B” is an event, and its
probability is 50%. This probability is represented in our formula as P(B).

Circle #3: Alright. Let’s take a look at how these two events combine. This is
where the magic happens!
Here is a quick breakdown of how you can understand the entire diagram:
The white area inside this circle represents rebel trucks that are not rigged
with a gun and rebels who do not have heavy firepower.
The area covered by Circle A shows us the total amount of rebel trucks that
are rigged with a gun.
The area covered by Circle B shows us rebels who have heavy firepower
capability.
Now, move your eyes to the dark area where the two circles overlap. This is
what we are really interested in! This is our original question in visual form.
We want to know the probability P(A|B) of a rebel truck being rigged with a
gun given heavy firepower. In other words, if we are in Circle B, what is the
probability of being in A as well? This probability is found where both
events occur together and is called an intersection.

With both circles now merged, we can visually see our question and what we are
trying to solve for. If P(A) is the probability of a rebel truck being rigged with a
gun, and P(B) is the probability of heavy firepower, what is the probability of
you being where they overlap - and both events occurring at the same time?

Scenario 3.2 Plugging Into Bayes' Formula And
Solving
To solve by using Bayes' Theorem we’ll follow four steps. For sake of ease,
we’ll begin by re-stating what we are wanting to find.
Step 1: Determine what you want to find.
We want to know the probability of the truck being rigged with a gun given that
we were just fired at with heavy firepower.
Step 2: Write the above as a formula.
Let’s translate what we are solving for into the formula. In other words, we’ll
bring the language of Step #1 above into the formula.

Here is Bayes' formula:
Now, let’s translate with what we are solving for.

Step 3: Find each ingredient and label it.
From the scenario we know the following:
P(A) - In our formula, this ingredient is represented as P(Rigged) and
answers the question: What is the probability of a rebel truck being rigged
with a gun? This number is .4
P(B|A) 
- 
In 
our 
formula, 
this 
ingredient 
is 
represented 
as
P(Firepower|Rigged). This number is .8
P(B) - In our formula, this ingredient is represented as P(Firepower) and
answers the question: What is the probability of a rebel having heavy
firepower? This number is .5

Step 4: Plug each ingredient into the formula and
solve.
Conclusion:
Once we’ve plugged all of our ingredients into the formula we arrive at 64%.
Based on this, we can conclude that the probability of the truck being rigged
with a gun given that heavy firepower came our way is 64%. We originally
thought the probability was higher around the 80% mark, but now we can see it
hovers about 15 % lower.
If your original instinct was to stay behind the burnt out vehicle, knowing this
probably won’t change that. A difference of 15% is not that great. But, if the
result (posterior probability) had been lower around 20% or 30% instead of 64%,
that might have changed your actions.
We chose this last scenario to contrast the first two and demonstrate that using

Bayes Theorem does not always provide a clear answer. Sometimes a probability
only slightly changes.

How To Understand Scenarios
Before we jump into Example Section 2 and are forced to
discover P(B), it might be helpful to know how to read
and understand scenarios. If you feel confident with this,
please skip this section and move on to Example Section
2. However, basic skills in this area are often overlooked
and not taught properly. So, if you are keen to brush up
on how to understand scenarios, keep reading!

Discovering What You Are Looking For: P(A|B)
This is the first and most important step you’ll take when solving a question.
Before you can solve a question, you need to know what you are solving for.
Here are three steps that can help you do this:
Step 1: Ignore all the extra filler provided in the question and always begin by
writing down each statistic given. Doing this will help you focus on what matters
most and disregard the rest. Be sure to give each statistic a label. For example:
100% - positive breathalyzer tests for truly drunk drivers.
.1% - number of drivers who drive drunk.
8% - positive results given by the breathalyzer.
Step 2: Look at what you’ve collected in the list above. For the majority of
scenarios, you will have two or three numbers that are provided. Use these to
help you brainstorm questions. Some great questions to ask are:
What probability am I wanting to know?
What belief is being questioned?
Again, ignore all the extra filler in the question (by filler we mean the backstory
and other details that don’t have anything to do with the numbers above).
Step 3: Working with Step 2, begin to write down what you think you are trying
to solve for. Remember, you can write your question out rough and then refine it
(as in our example below). And always remember to include the terms
probability and given that. Doing this will help you define each ingredient with
confidence.

Version 1: If a breathalyzer is positive, what are the chances someone is
drunk?
Version 2: What is the probability of someone being drunk if the
breathalyzer is positive?
Final Version: What is the probability of a driver being drunk given that
their breathalyzer test is positive?

Defining P(B), P(A) P(B|A)
Once we know what we are looking for, defining the various ingredients is
straightforward. It is also much easier if you have used the terms probability and
given that in Step 3 above. Here’s how to do it:
Step 1: Write out what you are searching for. For example:
What is the probability of a driver being drunk given that their breathalyzer
test is positive?
Step 2: Label each ingredient:
Event “A” is always found between probability and given. In this case, it is
Driver Being Drunk. The probability of this is P(A).
Event “B” is always found after given that. In this case, it is Breathalyzer
Test is Positive. The probability of this is P(B).
P(B|A) is a combination of the above. In this case, P(B|A) is: The
probability of a breathalyzer test being positive, given that a driver is drunk.
P(A|B) is also a combination of the above. In this case, P(A|B) is: The
probability of a driver being drunk given that their breathalyzer test is
positive.
Once you understand what you are looking for and have defined your
ingredients, you are on your way to solving the question. That’s all there is too
it!

Example Section 2: Solving for One
Possible Outcome With No P(B) Provided
In this section we use decision trees to visualize and solve
our problems. Decision trees are quite straightforward,
but if you need a refresher Wikipedia provides a great
overview. This short lesson from Penn State is also
helpful. However, just like Venn diagrams we approach
decision trees with small steps. Plus, we are not going to
be using any complex terminology. You don’t need to
worry!

Introduction
In Example Section 1 we used Venn diagrams to visually understand our
questions and were provided with all the ingredients to solve. In this section, we
are only provided with two of the three ingredients and must discover the third.
Here is what this looks like using Venn diagrams:
In real life this is typically the case and often requires us to discover one or more
of the ingredients. P(B) is often the culprit, and so in this section we will focus

on discovering this ingredient. We will be using the same scenarios as in Section
1, but we have tweaked them because we are now solving for P(B).
This time around we will be using two techniques to solve each scenario:
Decision trees
A classic approach using Bayes' formula
Decision trees are a fantastic and powerful tool that can be used to quickly find
P(B) and give you a clear understanding of how it is discovered. They are a great
visual aid for helping you grapple with and comprehend probability questions.
For each scenario in this section we will also solve the question by using a
traditional Bayes' formula approach. Let’s dig in!

Scenario 1: The Flu
The Scenario: (Expanded from Example Section 1)
Let’s say that you are at work one day and have just finished lunch. You
suddenly feel horrible and find yourself lying down. The first thing that passes
through your mind is food poisoning, but you don’t think that is the case. You
then remember that your co-worker was recently off for a few days with the flu.
Could you have the flu? Will you have to cancel your big trip next week?
You grab your phone and search for some answers. Google tells you that 5% of
the population will get the flu each year. A few minutes pass by and you
remember that you just downloaded a new app that predicts illness. Why not see
what it says?
You open it and input your symptoms, and within a few seconds the app predicts
that you have the flu. It also displays the following:
It correctly predicts people having the flu 75% of the time.
20% of the time it predicts that people have the flu when they do not have
the flu.
You throw the phone onto the seat beside you. What do you make of this?
To begin solving this question, we always need to
determine what we are wanting to find.
We want to know the probability of having the flu given that the app predicted
that you have the flu.
Great. Now that we know our goal, we can move forward and begin to solve by
using a decision tree.

Scenario 1.1 Solve Using A Decision Tree
To start, we are going to solve this problem by using a decision tree. We will
point out connections to Bayes' formula throughout this process.
Step 1.
Begin by drawing two lines that connect at a single dot. These lines represent the
possibility of you having the flu or not having the flu. We’ll add in the number
we know (.05), and then subtract from 1 to get our second number (.95). Notice
that both branches add up to 1.


Step 2.
Next, we will add two more branches to each initial branch. Each pair of
branches represents the possibility of the app predicting yes or no. In other
words, if it will predict that you have the flu or do not have the flu. We’ll add in
our numbers from the scenario. Notice that each pair of branches adds up to 1.

Step 3.
Now we will label each pathway and compute its value. Each pathway begins
with either having or not having the flu, and ends with either a yes or no
prediction.
There are a total of 4 pathways:
Path 1: Yes Flu to Predict Yes
Label YY
Compute: .05 x .75 = .0375
Path 2: Yes Flu to Predict No
Label YN
Compute: .05 x .25 = .0125
How did we find .25 ? Since the probability of both branches together is
100%, or 1, we subtracted .75 from 1. 1-.75 = .25.
Path 3: No Flu to Predict Yes
Label NY
Compute: .95 x .20 = .19
Path 4: No Flu to Predict No
Label NN
Compute: .95 x .80 = .76

How did we find .80 ? Since the probability of both branches together is
100%, or 1, we subtracted .80 from 1. 1-.20 = .80.

Step 4.
Once we have our numbers, we need to sum Path 1 and Path 3. Here is why we
are doing this:
The sum of Path 1 and Path 3 gives us P(B). In other words, it tells us the
probability of the app predicting yes. This is our missing ingredient.
When we sum Path 1 and Path 3 we are adding both ways the app can
predict yes. Path 1 represents the app predicting yes when you do have the
flu. Path 3 represents the app predicting yes when you do not have the flu.
When we add these paths together, we find P(B).


Step 5.
Now, we will divide Path 1 by the number we arrived at in Step 4 above. The
end result will be our updated probability, which is P(A|B).
Path 1 represents the probability of the app predicting yes when you do have the
flu. It is the equivalent of when we multiply P(B|A) with P(A).
Conclusion:
The probability that you have the flu given that the app predicted you do is only

16.5%. Now, let’s move on and solve this same problem using Bayes' formula.
We’ll expand on our conclusion once we’ve done that.

Scenario 1.2 Solve Using Bayes' Formula
Let’s solve the same problem but now we’ll use Bayes' formula.
Step 1: Determine what you want to find.
We want to know the probability of having the flu given that the app predicted
that you have the flu.
Step 2: Write the above as a formula.

Step 3: Find each ingredient and label it.
From the scenario we know the following:
P(A) - In our formula, this ingredient is represented as P(Flu) and answers
the question: What is the probability of you having the flu? This number is
.05
P(B|A) - In our formula, this ingredient is represented as P(Yes | Flu) This
number is .75
The only ingredient we are missing is:
P(B)
Now, what is P(B)? How do we define what event “B” is so we can try to find it?
To find our answers, let’s go back to what we are trying to figure out, which we
defined in Step 1. Step 1 can be broken into two parts, and P(B) is tucked into
the second part.
The two parts of Step 1 are:
1. Probability of having the flu. This is P(A).
2. Probability of the app predicting yes “B” given that you have the flu “A” is
.75. This is P(B|A), which contains both events “A” and “B”. This tells us
that the definition of event “B” is the app predicting yes.
Excellent. Now we know the definition of event “B”. But what about its
probability P(B)? We were given a third number in the scenario (20%), but this
is not P(B). It is a part of P(B). To figure out where it fits and how to solve for
P(B) we need to do the following:

Let’s think for a moment. How many ways can the app arrive at a yes (positive)
prediction? There are only 2 ways:
1. It can predict a positive prediction that is correct.
2. It can predict positive prediction that is false.
All we need to do is multiply the numbers of each yes path and then add the
answers together.
Now, the 20% from the scenario comes into play when the app predicts yes but
the individual is not sick. If you look back at the paths we traced above (FY and
NY), you can see the 20% in Path NY.


Step 4: Plug each ingredient into the formula and
solve.
Now we have all three ingredients and can plug them into Bayes' formula!
P(A) = P(Having Flu) = .05
P(B|A) = P(Positive prediction given that you have the Flu) = .75

P(B) = P(Positive Prediction) = .2275

Let’s plug them in and solve.
Conclusion:
We arrived at the same answer as before. The probability of having the flu given
that the app predicted you do is 16.5%. Practically speaking what does this
mean? How does it impact you?
Well, 16.5% is not very high, which means the probability of you having the flu

is quite low. Since it is not anywhere near 50%, you decide to remain at work
and not take a half sick day. At the end of the day you’ll reassess your symptoms
again.

Scenario 2: Breathalyzer
The Scenario: (Expanded from Example Section 1)
You are a police officer in Baltimore and it’s the night after new year's eve. Even
though new year's has passed, there are still a few drunk driving roadblocks
across the city. You are on duty with the same partner as the night before, and
you can’t get your previous conversation with her out of your head. The fact is,
you are now much more skeptical about the accuracy of breathalyzer tests. In
fact, you almost outright do not trust them at all.
About half way through your shift your partner brings the subject of the tests up.
She says that she did some more research last night and you might be interested
in what she found. You nod your head as she continues. This is what she
discovered:
Approximately 3 out of every 1000 drivers will drive while drunk. This is
.3%.
The breathalyzer test does not always detect a drunk person. This is not
100% like you both previously thought, but 98%.
4% of the time breathalyzer tests give a positive result for someone who is
not drunk. This is called a false positive.
You shake your head and take a deep breath. You are now really confused. What
should you believe?
To start, we always need to determine what we are
wanting to find.
We want to know the probability of someone actually being drunk given that the
breathalyzer test is positive.

Perfect. Now let’s move on and tackle the question with a decision tree.

Scenario 2.1 Solve Using A Decision Tree.
Step 1.
Begin by drawing two lines that connect at a single dot. These lines represent the
possibility a driver being drunk and not being drunk. We’ll add in the number we
know (.003), and then subtract from 1 to get our second number (.997). Both
branches add up to 1.

Step 2.
Next, we will add two more branches to each initial branch. Each pair of
branches represents the possibility of the breathalyzer test indicating a positive
or negative result. Notice each pair of branches adds up to 1.
How often does the test give a positive result that someone is drunk? Or a
negative result stating that they are not drunk? We’ll add in our numbers from
the scenario.


Step 3.
Now we will label each pathway and compute its value. Each pathway begins
with either being drunk or not being drunk, and ends at either a positive or
negative (yes or no) breathalyzer result. There are a total of 4 pathways:
Path 1: Drunk - Yes Result
Label DY
Compute: .003 x .98 = .00294
Path 2: Drunk - No Result
Label DN
Compute: .003 x .02 = .00006
* How did we find .02 ? Since the probability of both branches together is
100%, or 1, we subtracted .98 from 1. 1-.98 = .02

Path 3: Not Drunk - Yes Result
Label NDY
Compute: .997 x .04 = .03988
Path 4: Not Drunk - No Result
Label NDN
Compute: .997 x .96 = .95712
* How did we find .96 ? Since the probability of both branches together is
100%, or 1, we subtracted .04 from 1. 1-.04 = .96


Step 4.
Once we have our numbers, we need to sum Path 1 and Path 3. Here is why we
are doing this:
The sum of Path 1 and Path 3 tells us the probability of the breathalyzer test
having a positive (yes) result. In other words it tells us P(B), which is our
missing ingredient.
When we sum Path 1 and Path 3 we are adding both ways the breathalyzer
can come to a positive (yes) result. Path 1 represents the breathalyzer
having a positive result when the driver is truly drunk. Path 3 represents the
breathalyzer having a positive result when the driver is not drunk. When we
add these paths together, we find P(B).


Step 5.
Now, we will divide Path 1 by the number we arrived at in Step 4 above. The
result will be our updated probability, which is P(A|B).
Path 1 represents the probability of the breathalyzer having a positive result
when the driver is truly drunk. It is the equivalent of when we multiply
P(B|A) with P(A).
Conclusion:

The probability of the driver truly being drunk given that the breathalyzer tests
positive is roughly 7%. That’s low, but it is almost 6x higher than before! We’ll
look at this a bit more after we solve using Bayes' formula.

Scenario 2.2 Solve Using Bayes' Formula
Let’s solve the same problem but now we’ll use Bayes' formula.
Step 1: Determine what you want to find.
We want to know the probability of someone actually being drunk given that the
breathalyzer test is positive.
Step 2: Write the above as a formula.

Step 3: Find each ingredient and label it.
From the scenario we know the following:
P(A) - In our formula, this ingredient is represented as P(Drunk) and
answers the question: What is the probability of a driver being drunk? This
number is .003
P(B|A) - In our formula, this ingredient is represented as P(Positive |
Drunk). This number is .98
The only ingredient we are missing is:
P(B)
Now, what is P(B)? How do we define what event “B” is so we can try to find it?
To find our answers, let’s go back to what we are trying to figure out, which we
defined in Step 1. Step 1 can be broken into two parts, and P(B) is tucked into
the second part.
The two parts of Step 1 are:
1. Probability of a driver being drunk is .003. This is P(A).
2. Probability of the breathalyzer predicting yes P(B) given that the driver is
truly drunk P(A) is .98. This is P(B|A), which contains both events “A” and
“B”. Therefore, event “B” is the breathalyzer test predicting yes.
Fantastic. Now we know the definition of event “B”, but what about its
probability P(B)? We were given a third number in the scenario (4%), but this is

not P(B). It is a part of P(B). To figure out where it fits and how to solve for
P(B) we need to do the following: Let’s think for a moment. How many ways
can the breathalyzer arrive at a yes (positive) result? There are only 2 ways:
1. It can produce a positive result that is correct.
2. It can produce a positive result that is false.
All we need to do is multiply the numbers of each yes path and then add the
answers together. When we do that, we’ll have P(B).

Now, the 4% from the scenario comes into play when the breathalyzer has a yes
result but the driver is not truly drunk. If you look back at the paths we traced
above (DY and NDY), you can see the 4% in Path NDY.

Step 4: Plug each ingredient into the formula and
solve.
We now have all three ingredients and we can plug them into Bayes' formula!
Here’s the formula:

Now, let’s plug our numbers into the formula.
Conclusion:
Based on our calculations, the probability that a driver is truly drunk given that
the breathalyzer has a positive result is roughly 7%. That is extremely low, but it
is higher than the 1.25% we came to in the previous breathalyzer scenario.
Knowing this, you will still likely be extremely cautious and skeptical of the test,
but not as cautious as you were before.

Scenario 3: Peacekeeping
The Scenario: (Expanded from Example Section 1)
Your are a soldier on a peacekeeping mission overseas and were recently caught
in a surprise attack, pigeonholing you on a narrow street. A rebel truck had
appeared and was making its way towards you, but after a few tense seconds it
suddenly turned and disappeared.
Now with the threat gone, you begin to walk down the dusty street and turn a
corner, only to quickly turn back. Five men are 100 yards down the street and
holding rifles. You peek your head around the corner once more to get a better
look.
Are they rebels, or are they part of the coalition? You radio HQ and are told
based off of local intelligence (Intel) that the men are likely rebels.
You crouch against the wall as you think about what to do.
There are roughly 100 rebels in the city and 75 coalition troops.
Local Intel is not always reliable. In your experience it correctly predicts
rebels 65% of the time.
Intel has been sketchy lately and has incorrectly predicted men as rebels
when they are not rebels 15% of the time.
To start, we always need to determine what we are
wanting to find.
We want to know the probability that the soldiers are rebels given that Intel says
they are.

Excellent. Now, we can move on to solving the problem by using a decision tree.

Scenario 3.1 Solve Using a Decision Tree
Step 1.
Begin by drawing two lines that connect at a single dot. These lines represent the
possibility of someone being a rebel and not being a rebel. We’ll add in the
number we know (.57), and then subtract from 1 to get our second number (.43).
Both branches add up to 1.

Step 2.
Next, we will add two more branches to each initial branch. Each pair of
branches represents the possibility of Intel being correct or incorrect.We’ll add
in our numbers from the scenario. Notice each pair of branches adds up to 1.

Step 3.
Now we will label each pathway and compute its value. Each pathway begins
with someone being a rebel or not a rebel, and ends with either a yes or no Intel
prediction. There are a total of 4 pathways:
Path 1: Yes Rebel - Predict Yes
Label YY
Compute: .57 x .65 = 0.3705
How did we find .57 ? There are 100 rebel troops and 75 coalition troops,
for a total of 175 troops. If we divide the total rebel troops by all troops, we
get our answer. 100/175 = .57.
Path 2: Yes Rebel - Predict No
Label YN
Compute: .57 x .35 = 0.1995
How did we find .35 ? Since the probability of both branches together is
100%, or 1, we subtracted .65 from 1. 1-.65 = .35, or 35%.
Path 3: No Rebel - Predict Yes
Label NY
Compute: .43 x .15 = 0.0645
How did we find .43 ? There are 100 rebel troops and 75 coalition troops,
for a total of 175 troops. If we divide the total coalition troops by all troops,
we get our answer. 75/175 = .43
Path 4: No Rebel - Predict No
Label NN

Compute: .43 x .85 = 0.3655
** How did we find .85 ? Since the probability of both branches together is
100%, or 1, we subtracted .15 from 1. 1-.15 = .85

Step 4.
Once we have our numbers, we need to sum Path 1 and Path 3. Here is why we
are doing this:
The sum of Path 1 and Path 3 tells us the probability of Intel having a
positive (yes) prediction. In other words it tells us P(B), which is our
missing ingredient.
When we sum Path 1 and Path 3 we are adding both ways Intel can come to
a positive (yes) prediction. Path 1 represents Intel predicting “yes” when the
soldier is a rebel. Path 3 represents Intel predicting “yes” when the soldier
is not a rebel.When we add these paths together, we find P(B)


Step 5.
Now, we will divide Path 1 by the number we arrived at in Step 4 above. The
end result will be our updated probability, which is P(A|B).
Path 1 represents the probability of Intel predicting a yes result when the soldier
is a rebel. It is the equivalent of when we multiply P(B|A) with P(A).
Conclusion:
Once we calculate the numbers, we see that the probability the soldiers are rebels
given that Intel says they are is 85%. Let’s now solve this problem using Bayes',
and we will expand on the conclusion once we have done that.

Scenario 3.2 Solve Using Bayes' Formula
Let’s solve the same problem but now we’ll use Bayes' formula.
Step 1: Determine what you want to find.
We want to know the probability that the soldiers are rebels given that Intel says
they are.
Step 2: Write the above as a formula.

Step 3: Find each ingredient and label it.
From the scenario we know the following:
P(A) - In our formula, this ingredient is represented as P(Rebel) and
answers the question: What is the probability of the soldiers being rebels?
This number is .57
P(B|A) - In our formula, this ingredient is represented as P(Yes Predict |
Rebel). This number is .65
The only ingredient we are missing is:
P(B)
Now, what is P(B)? How do we define what event “B” is so we can try to find it?
To find our answers, let’s go back to what we are trying to figure out, which we
defined in Step 1. Step 1 can be broken into two parts, and P(B) is tucked into
the second part.
The two parts of Step 1 are:
1. Probability of a soldier being a rebel is .57. This is P(A).
2. Probability of Intel predicting that a soldier is a rebel P(B) given that the
soldier is a rebel P(A) is .65. This is P(B|A), which contains both event “A”
and “B”. Therefore, event “B” is Intel predicting yes.
Fantastic. Now we know the definition of “B”, but what about its probability
P(B)? We were given a third number in the scenario (15%), but this is not P(B).
It is a part of P(B). To figure out where it fits and how to solve for P(B) we need

to do the following:
Let’s think for a moment. How many ways can Intel arrive at a yes (positive)
prediction? There are only 2 ways:
 
1. It can produce a positive result that is correct.
 
2. It can produce a positive result that is false.
All we need to do is multiply the numbers of each yes path and then add the
answers together. When we do that, we’ll have P(B).

The 15% from the scenario comes into play when Intel predicts a yes result but
the soldier is not a rebel. It is a false prediction. If you look back at the paths we
traced above (YY and NY), you can see the 15% in Path NY.

Step 4: Plug each ingredient into the formula and
solve.
Now we have all three ingredients and we can plug them into Bayes' formula.
Here’s the formula:

Now, let’s plug our numbers into the formula.
Conclusion:
At first you had minimal confidence in what Intel told you, but now you see that
the probability of the soldiers being rebels given that Intel says they are is 85%.
This completely changes your outlook and forces you to turn back and wait for
the remainder of your team to arrive. If the group are rebels, you don’t want to

approach them alone.

Example Section 3: Solving For Two
Possible Outcomes With All Probability
Data Provided
Sometimes we are presented with two possibilities and we
want know which is greater. For example, say you are
sneezing and coughing. Is it an allergy or cold? Given the
information you have (your symptoms), which has the
greater probability?
This section will be the same as Example Section 1,
except that for each problem we will be using Bayes'
Formula twice, and then comparing each posterior
probability to find the answer. Basically, we’ll be
applying Bayes' Formula to both possibilities, and then
comparing our answers to find which is the greatest.

Scenario 1: The Flu or Food Poisoning
The Scenario (Continued from Example Section 1)
It’s just after lunch and you are feeling sick. You need some space, so you
quickly make your way to the parking lot and lie down in your car. Your mind
begins to race with what you could have.
Your friend at work recently had the flu, so that’s a possibility. You also just had
fish at a new restaurant for lunch. Could you have food poisoning? You grab
your phone and search for some information. Your hunch is that it’s just the flu,
but you are not sure. This is what you find:
You have a slight headache and sore throat, and you see that people with the
flu have the same symptoms as you 90% of the time. People with food
poisoning have the same symptoms 75% of the time.
You see that the probability of having the flu is 5%, while the probability of
having food poisoning is 16%.
You then spot one more statistic that says 20% of the population in a given
year will have a headache and sore throat at any given time.
After reading this you are just more confused. What probability is higher? Do
you have a greater probability of having the flu or food poisoning?
To solve this problem we need to apply Bayes' Theorem to each possibility.
Then, we will compare the two to find which is higher, and therefore has a
greater probability.
Let’s start with the flu. And since we’ve already pulled this scenario apart in
Section 1, we’ll skip right to visualizing with a Venn diagram.

Possibility #1: The Flu
The first possibility is that you have the flu. To figure out the probability, we will
begin by defining what we are wanting to find. Then, we will visualize the
problem before solving it using Bayes' formula.
Step 1: Determine what you are wanting to find.
We want to know what the probability is of having the flu given our current
symptoms.
Scenario 1.1 Visualize The Problem
To visualize the problem, we’ll draw two circles and merge them into a Venn
diagram.
Circle #1: The area inside this circle represents all possible outcomes. In this
example, the area represents all people who could get sick with the flu - in other
words, the entire population. The shaded circle labeled “A” represents the 5% of
the population who have the flu.
Let’s step back now. What does this exactly mean? Within the circle is the entire
population, and there are two possible outcomes for the population: people can
have the flu, or not have the flu. “A” is an event, and its probability is 5%. This
probability is represented in our formula as P(A).


Circle #2: The area inside this circle also represents all possible outcomes. In
this instance it represents all people who could have the symptoms - this is the
entire population. The shaded circle labeled “B” represents the 20% of the
population that does have the symptoms. What this means is that within the
entire circle there are two possible outcomes: people have the symptoms or do
not have the symptoms. “B” is an event, and its probability is 20%. This
probability is represented in our formula as P(B).

Circle #3: In this circle we have combined both events “A” and “B”, and this is
where the magic happens!
Here is a quick breakdown of how you can read this:
The white area inside this circle represents people who do not have either
the flu or the symptoms.
The area where only Circle A covers shows us people who only have the
flu.
The area where only Circle B covers shows us people who only have the
symptoms.
Now, take a look at Circle B and see where it overlaps with Circle A. This is
what we are really interested in! This is our question from Step 1 in visual form.
We want to know the probability P(A|B) of having the flu given our symptoms.
This probability is found where both events occur together and is called an
intersection. Another way to look at it is like this: if we are in area B, what is the
probability we are also in area AB (where A and B overlap)?
 

With both circles now merged, we can visually see our question and what we are
trying to solve for. Although we won’t be solving the question with a Venn
diagram, the diagram does help us visualize what we are trying to understand.
If P(A) is the probability of you having the flu, and P(B) is the probability of you
having your symptoms, what is the probability of you having both? While we
don’t yet know the actual answer we can clearly visualize what we are trying to
solve for.

Scenario 1.2 Plugging Into Bayes' Formula And
Solving
Now let’s solve the problem by using Bayes' formula. For the sake of ease, we’ll
begin by re-stating what we are wanting to find.
Step 1: Determine what you want to find.
We want to know what the probability is of having the flu given our current
symptoms.
Step 2: Write the above as a formula.
Let’s translate what we are solving for into the formula. In other words, we’ll
bring the language of Step #1 above into the formula.

Here is Bayes' formula:
Now, let’s translate with what we are solving for.


Step 3: Find each ingredient and label it.
From the scenario we know the following: *We have changed the ingredients
provided in the scenario from percents into decimals. We will do this every time
before we begin to plug the ingredients into the formula.
P(A) - In our formula, this ingredient is represented as P(Flu) and answers
the question: What is the probability of you having the flu? This number is
.05
P(B|A) - In our formula, this ingredient is represented as P(Symptoms| Flu).
This number is .9
P(B) - In our formula, this ingredient is represented as P(Symptoms) and
answers the question: What is the probability of you having the symptoms?
This number is .2.

Step 4: Plug each ingredient into the formula and
solve.
Conclusion:
So, after all the work and plugging each ingredient into the formula, our answer
is 22.5%. Now, let’s move on and look at food poisoning. Once we have
calculated the probability of food poisoning, we'll be able to stack each
probability side by side to see which is greatest.

Possibility #2: Food Poisoning
The second possibility is that you have food poisoning. To figure out the
probability, we will begin by defining what we are wanting to find. Then, we
will visualize the problem before solving it using Bayes' Formula.
Step 1: Determine what you are wanting to find.
We want to know the probability of having food poisoning given our current
symptoms.
Scenario 2.1 Visualize The Problem
To visualize the problem, we’ll draw two circles and merge them into a Venn
diagram.
Circle #1: The area inside this circle represents all possible outcomes. In this
example, the area represents all people who could have food poisoning - in other
words, the entire population. The shaded circle labeled “A” represents the 16%
of the population who do have food poisoning.
Let’s step back now. What does this exactly mean? Within the circle is the entire
population, and there are two possible outcomes for the population: people can
have food poisoning, or not have food poisoning. “A” is an event, and its
probability is 16%. This probability is represented in our formula as P(A).


Circle #2: The area inside this circle also represents all possible outcomes. In
this instance it represents all people who could have the symptoms - this is the
entire population. The shaded circle labeled “B” represents the 20% of the
population that does have the symptoms. What this means is that within the
entire circle there are two possible outcomes: people have the symptoms or do
not have the symptoms. “B” is an event, and its probability is 20%. This
probability is represented in our formula as P(B).

Circle #3: In this circle we have combined both events “A” and “B”, and this is
where we want to look!
Here is a quick breakdown of how you can read this:
The white area inside this circle represents people who do not have either
food poisoning or the symptoms.
 
The area where only Circle A covers shows us people who only have food
poisoning.
 
The area where only Circle B covers shows us people who only have the
symptoms.
 
Now, take a look at Circle B and see where it overlaps with Circle A. This
is what we are really interested in! This is our question from Step 1 in
visual form. We want to know the probability of having the flu P(A) given
our symptoms P(B). This probability is found where both events occur
together and is called an intersection.
 

With both circles now merged, we can visually see our question and what we are
trying to solve for. If P(A) is the probability of you having food poisoning, and
P(B) is the probability of you having your symptoms, what is the probability of
you being where they overlap - and having both?

Scenario 2.2 Solve Traditionally With Bayes'
Formula
To solve by using Bayes' Formula we’ll follow four steps. To make things easy,
we’ll begin by re-stating what we are wanting to find.
Step 1: Determine what you want to find.
We want to know the probability of having food poisoning given our symptoms.
Step 2: Write the above as a formula.
Let’s translate what we are solving for into the formula. In other words, we’ll
bring the language of Step #1 above into the formula.
Here is Bayes' formula:

Now, let’s translate with what we are solving for.


Step 3: Find each ingredient and label it.
From the scenario we know the following: *We have changed the ingredients
provided in the scenario from percents into decimals. We will do this every time
before we begin to plug the ingredients into the formula.
P(A) - In our formula, this ingredient is represented as P(Poisoning) and
answers the question: What is the probability of you having food
poisoning? This number is .16
 
P(B|A) - In our formula, this ingredient is represented as P(Symptoms |
Poisoning). This number is .75
 
P(B) - In our formula, this ingredient is represented as P(Symptoms) and
answers the question: What is the probability of you having the symptoms?
This number is .2

Step 4: Plug each ingredient into the formula and
solve.
Conclusion:
The probability that you have food poisoning is ~60%. This is almost 3x the
probability of you having the flu at 22.5%! Based on this, you probably want to
head to a clinic to have a doctor check you over. If it was the flu, you would
likely head home and rest. But if you have food poisoning you might need
antibiotics to recover.
This problem is a great example of how Bayes’ formula can help us in everyday
life. We all face sickness at some point, and when we do many of us typically
jump to the easiest conclusions. Using Bayes’ formula' can help us look past the
easy answer and assess all the data.
Once we’ve done that, we can have a better understanding of the uncertainties
we face. In our scenario, doing this helped us realize that we should leave work

and head to the nearest doctor.

History and Stories
Bayes' Theorem has a spectacular 200-year history, and there are a number of
fantastic books that delve deeply into it. There are also many interesting stories
about how Bayes is used in real life. In this section, we'll take a brief look at
both, beginning with the history of Bayes' Theorem.
The Discovery Of Bayes’ Theorem
1740’s, Edinburgh, Scotland
Thomas Bayes was born in London, England in 1702. Bayes studied logic and
theology at the University of Edinburgh and served as a minister at a
Presbyterian church in Tunbridge, Wells (35 miles from London). He retired in
1752 and passed away in 1762.
Apart from his faith, Bayes had a deep love and interest in mathematics and was
considered an amateur mathematician. In his later years, he became fascinated
with probability, specifically inverse probability. No one knows why for sure,
but one thing is clear: Bayes became consumed with figuring out ...the
approximate probability of a future event he knew nothing about except its past,
that is, the number of times it had occurred or failed to occur1.
Sometime in the 1740’s Bayes figured out a solution that can be summed up as
follows: An Initial Belief + New Evidence = A New, Updated Belief. But, for
reasons unknown he never did anything with it and instead it sat on the solution
until his death in 1762. After he passed away his friend Richard Price discovered
the theorem, saw its importance, and for two years worked on it. Price then
submitted it to The Royal Society and it was published a year later.
Across the English Channel in 1774, a French mathematician named Pierre-
Simon Laplace recreated Bayes’ solution. At the time he was completely
unaware of Bayes’ discovery, and had come to it on his own merit. For almost 40
years he worked on the theorem, and sometime between 1810 and 1814 he put
the final touches on it, eventually (more or less) creating the formula that is
known today as Bayes' Theorem. Laplace did most of the work, but Bayes name

stuck with theorem for some reason.
However, Bayes' Theorem was generally not accepted and had few advocates
until recently in modern history. From Laplace’s final touches on the theorem
until the mid 1960’s, Bayes' Theorem was criticized as being subjective due to
the formula’s prior. Most mathematicians considered the formula taboo and
would not touch it.
During World War 2 it was used by Alan Turing (a brilliant mathematician and
played by Benedict Cumberbatch in The Imitation Game) to break the German’s
Enigma Code, but that information was classified for a long time after the war. It
wasn’t until the 1980’s and the introduction of personal computing that Bayes’
Theorem became widely accepted. It is now used across many sectors and likely
touches your life on a daily basis.

Real Life: Search and Rescue
What if you were lost at sea? How could search and rescue find you?
In 2014 a missing fisherman was discovered using Bayes' Theorem. It is a
fascinating story that The New York Times reported on here and here, but we’ll
sum it up for you below. Plus, we’ll also include an idea of how the theorem
could have been used to find the missing individual.
Here’s the story:
John Aldridge is a fisherman who has fished for almost two decades. In 2006
Aldridge and his business partner Anthony Sosinski purchased their own boat
and by 2014 had a successful crab and lobster operation. On July 24th of 2014
the partners were 40 miles off the coast of Long Island catching lobster.
During the night while Sosinksi was sleeping, Aldridge was working and fell
into the Atlantic. Using his rubber boots as pontoons, he managed to stay afloat
in the 72 degree water until he was found almost 12 hours later by the Coast
Guard.
To find Aldridge, the Coast Guard used a piece of software called SAROPS
(Search and Rescue Optimal Planning System). SAROPS creates a probability
map that displays potential areas where survivors could be located based on
input information.
This map is then continually updated to reflect changes, additional clues, and
areas where no survivors have been found. In Aldridge’s case, the Coast Guard
only had two pieces of initial information to work with: a rough location and
timeframe (he fell off his boat sometime during the evening of July 24th).
Once this data had been uploaded into SAROPS, it was continually updated with
ocean currents, new data from Sosinksi, clues and additional wind patterns.
A very simple form of how Bayes' Theorem could be used in this situation is as
follows. Please note that this is greatly simplified to demonstrate the possibility
of using the theorem. In this example we have abbreviated the text:

P. Found = Person Found
Un. Search = Unsuccessful Search.
Again, the above is only a guess of how Bayesian Inference could be used in the
search and rescue process. For more information, you can read more on
SAROPS here. Wikipedia’s article on Bayesian Search Theory and this blog post
are also helpful.
Bayes' Theorem has been used in many search and rescue operations, including
finding the USS Scorpion in 1968 and Air France Flight 447 in 2009.

Real Life: Spam Filtering
If you hate spam, you love Bayes' Theorem.
Yep. It’s true, even if you don’t have a clue about what Bayes' Theorem is.
Spam filtering has really improved over the last decade to the point where most
of us don’t think about spam anymore. This is a fantastic and welcomed change
from not too long ago. But how did spam filtering progress and become much
more effective? After all, it wasn’t too long ago when we were regularly
inundated with lots of junk mail.
In 1998 Microsoft applied for a spam filter patent that used a Bayesian filter, and
in doing so ignited a new war on spam - Bayesian style. Other competitors soon
joined in and Bayes' Theorem quickly became the backbone of spam filtering.
Bayesian filters determine if an email is spam or not based on the email’s
content. When an email is received, each word is read and the filter determines
the probability of it being spam or legitimate (often defined as spam or ham).
What sets Bayesian filters apart from other email filters though is that they learn
and adapt to each individual email user. And that, in a nutshell, is why they are
so effective.
Here’s how it works:
Spam filters built on a Bayesian network are typically pre-populated with a list
of potential words and characteristics that spam contains. This list is usually
derived from feeding the filter copious amounts of both spam and legitimate
emails, which the filter uses to learn what constitutes spam. Take a moment and
think of spam you’ve seen. What words pop up?
Usually anything to do with sex
Ink
Deals

Secret
This list could on and on...
Where does the filter look for these words and phrases? The filter analyzes:
Words in the body of the message.
Words in the header.
Words in the meta data.
This list is continually updated as each email is received and the filter learns
more and more about what to look for. The filter learns in two different ways:
Based off its own decisions.
Based off the user's decisions (For example, you check an email as spam).
For example, if the word sports often appears in your email, the filter might
conclude that the word sports has a very low probability of being spam (on a
scale of 0-1, maybe a .1). However, if you never include deals with the word
sports, the filter might conclude that an email with this phrase has a high
probability of being spam ( on a scale of 0-1, .65).
So, how exactly could Bayes' Theorem be used in detecting spam? Here is a
simplified version. *Again, please note this is very simplified to demonstrate the
concept of using Bayes' Theorem with spam filtering. There are many more
complexities that are involved, e.g., calculating priors, etc.
In this example we have abbreviated the text: C. Word = Certain Word

If you are interested in learning more, we would recommend Wikipedia’s article,
and Microsoft's paper on Junk Filters.

 
Real Life: Driverless Cars
Many people believe that not too far into the future our driving experience will
change for the better. Proponents of driverless vehicles believe that cars will
eventually drive themselves and offer a much safer experience.
From Tesla to Google and Ford, driverless cars are being developed and tested.
They are even being deployed, with Uber recently launching its first selfdriving
fleet in Pittsburgh this past August, 2016.
Google is an early pioneer in the driverless car field, and in 2009 began its first
tests with a Toyota Prius on the highways of California. Google’s cars have
currently (Sep 2016) driven more than 1.5 million miles all over the nation from
Arizona to Washington, Texas and California.
Sebastian Thrun is a former VP at Google who helped launch Google’s
driverless car project, Google Glass, and the Loon project. He currently is a
research professor at Stanford and the founder/CEO of Udacity. According to an
article on Stanford’s website, Google’s driverless cars use a form of Bayesian
modeling to help the vehicle know its location. It’s all quite complicated, but
here is a quote from the Stanford article.
For localization, the underlying model is generally some form of Bayesian model
similar to a hidden markov model where the state space of the the unknown
"location" variables are continuous. At each time point t there are two variables:
an unknown variable which is the location of the car, x(t), and observations
about the car's location based on the sensor inputs at that given time, y(t). The
model assumes that x(t) is generated from x(t - 1) with some unknown
distribution and that y(t) is generated from x(t) with some unknown distribution.
For more in-depth information, be sure to visit Google’s selfdriving page and
read Time Magazine's fascinating article.

Thinking Like a Bayesian
Let's Get Real.
If you are like many people, you are probably excited about Bayes' Theorem but
deep down you doubt it’s useful in real life. Bayes' Theorem might seem
interesting in a textbook, but what about beyond that? The fact is, it’s often
taught with examples that include rolling dice, gambling, cancer screenings, and
game shows. Really? What can we do with that?
Most people don’t have cancer screenings or go on game shows on a regular
basis. Some people might gamble often, but the average person probably
doesn’t. So, after learning Bayes' Theorem we are left with the question of what
to do with it.
Is Bayes' Theorem useful in everyday life? Is it practical? Can you take what
you’ve learned in this book and actually use it? And if even if you can, will you
benefit from it?
The answer to these questions is a resounding yes, and here is why:
First, thinking like a Bayesian can be applied to almost any area of life.
Second, thinking like a Bayesian can help you make better decisions and
feel more confident about the decisions you’ve made.
In this section we’ll offer some practical advice on how to use Bayesian thinking
as you work, play, and live life. The ideas we present in this section are based off
a phenomenal video by Julia Galef which you can find on YouTube.

Don’t Panic:
If you are panicking and thinking yeah right, I’m not going to write the formula
out...well, you are in luck. By using Bayes' Theorem we don’t mean writing out
the formula all the time on whatever scrap of paper you can find.
That isn’t practical. And it isn’t enjoyable either. The key to using Bayes'
Theorem in everyday decision making is to make rough calculations quickly in
your mind that will help you discover the odds of an event, not the probability.
That is really the only way the theorem can be used quickly on a daily basis.
If you want to discover probability, you’ll need to make use of the formula and
pull out a pen and paper. BUT if you are okay with finding the odds of
something, then you can likely do everything in your head. No pen or paper
required. And you know what? Most people intuitively understand odds better
than percentage. It’s true! You can read more about this via an article in the CIA
Library.
To find the posterior odds, you’ll need to become familiar enough with Bayes'
formula and its ingredients so that you know what to ask and look for. Then you
can literally use this any time to help you make better decisions. And by
anytime, we literally mean anytime. You could be in a meeting, in a classroom,
exercising, or at the mechanics.
If it helps, you can visualize problems as you work through them in your mind.
We’ve included visuals for each example in this section to help you get a start.

Scenario 1: Dating
Maybe you are currently dating someone. Maybe you wish you were. Or maybe
you are living a happy life with your partner. Regardless, dating is an activity
most of us can relate to.
So, here’s one way of how Bayes' Theorem can be applied to dating.
You are dressed in your finest and on a date one Friday night. You’ve just
finished having dinner at a restaurant and your date has excused herself to use
the restroom. Now that you’ve got some time alone your heart begins to race.
Does she like you? Is she into you? You then think through what happened
during the meal and want to curl up into a ball. You almost choked on your pasta
and kept on mumbling.
As your date makes her way back to the table you can feel your pulse
quickening. There’s no way she likes you. You could barely talk and almost
choked. Your face begins to turn red as you force a smile.
Ten minutes later your cheeks are no longer burning, and you're in the middle of
a really good conversation. She’s even laughed and seemed to be flirting with
you.
Fifteen minutes later you walk out the restaurant door and your head is spinning.
You are more confused than ever. She’s been laughing and flirting with you.
Does she like you?
We’ll approach this two ways:
1. Non-Visual Approach
 
2. Visual Approach

Non-Visual Approach
What we are going to do is find four numbers and quickly compute them.
Remember, all numbers are rough beliefs that you are quickly putting together in
your mind. We’ll keep everything super simple.
Step 1:
Let's assign some probability numbers.
Number 1: Guess the probability that she likes you regardless of anything else.
Based on your past dating success, you’d say this is 20%. You think at least 2/10
girls will like you.
Number 1 = 2
**to keep it simple all our numbers will be whole between 1 and 10 and
have no decimal place.
Number 2: Guess the probability that she doesn’t like you regardless of anything
else. Based on our answer above, if your past history tells you that your dates
like you 2/10 times, that means your date will not like you 8/10 times, or 80%.
Number 2 = 8
Number 3: Guess the probability of your date laughing and flirting if she likes
you. Considering that she is flirting, you guess that there is a 90% chance of this.
Number 3 = 9
Number 4: Guess the probability of your date laughing and flirting if she doesn’t

like you. You think this is low, so you guess 10%.
Number 4 = 1
Step 2:
Line your numbers up as ratios.

Step 3: Multiply down and simplify.
Conclusion:
Based on a quick calculation, the odds that she likes you are 9 to 4, or slightly
greater than 2 to 1. For simplicity, we’ll stay with the 2 to 1 ratio. What does this
mean? This means it is roughly twice as likely that she likes you as opposed to

not liking you. And that’s a good thing, right?!

Visual Approach
Here is the same problem but with a visual explanation.
Step 1:
Draw a square. Imagine the inside of the square represents 100%. Now, draw a
horizontal line through the square to create an area that represents the chances of
your date liking you regardless of anything else.

In Step 1 from the non-visual approach we guess 20%, so we will draw a line
that creates a space of roughly 20% of the entire square. We’ll call this Area X.
Got it? Okay, now the remaining 80% of the square represents the possibility of
her not liking you regardless of anything else. We’ll call this Area Y.
We now have two areas with numbers.**to keep it simple all our numbers will
be whole between 1 and 10 and have no decimal place.

Area X = 2
Area Y = 8

Step 2:
Now, if your date likes you, how likely is it that she would flirt and laugh? Shade
in Area X with your answer. In our example, we chose 90%. What about if your
date doesn’t like you? How likely is it that she would flirt and laugh with you
then? Shade in Area Y to show this. In our example, we chose 10%.
 
 

Step 3:
We now have four numbers. Let’s line them up as an ratios, then multiply down
and simplify to find our answer! Area X is on the left, and Y is on the right.
Conclusion:
We arrive at the same answer as before. Based on a quick calculation, the odds
that she likes you are 9 to 4, or slightly greater than 2 to 1. For simplicity, we’ll
stay with the 2 to 1 ratio. The left (2) represents the chance of her liking you and
the right (1) represents the chance of her not liking you. This means your date is
twice as likely to like you as opposed to not liking you. Hopefully knowing this

can help you take a deep breath and enjoy the rest of the date!

Scenario 2: Can You Trust Your Mechanic ?
You’ve recently moved to a new city with your family. One morning you are
stuck in traffic when your car starts to make odd noises. Once you arrive at work
the noises have increased and you begin to worry.
During lunch you ask someone if they know a trustworthy mechanic, and they
recommend Joe’s Garage. You Google Joe’s and see that there are no reviews
online, but since your friend recommended it and you are in a pinch, you drop
your car off at Joe’s after work.
Now, once at home you research Joe’s a bit more and discover a few reviews that
you had missed before. There are good reviews, but the bad ones are really bad
and you begin to sweat. Have you made a good choice? Is Joe an honest
mechanic?
We’ll approach this two ways:
1. Non-Visual Approach
2. Visual Approach

Non-Visual Approach
We’ll follow the same steps as in our previous scenario. What we are going to do
is find four numbers and quickly compute them. And don’t forget, all numbers
are rough beliefs that you are quickly putting together in your mind. We’ll keep
everything simple.
Step 1:
Let's assign some probability numbers.
Number 1: Guess the probability that the mechanic is honest regardless of
anything else. Based on your history with mechanics, you’d say that the majority
are honest. You think at least 7/10 mechanics are honest, or 70%.
Number 1 = 7
**to keep it simple all our numbers will be whole between 1 and 10 and
have no decimal place.
Number 2: Guess the probability that he is not honest regardless of anything
else. Based on our answer above, if your past history tells you that 7/10
mechanics are honest, that means 3/10 are not honest, or 30%.
Number 2 = 3
Number 3: Guess the probability of your mechanic having bad reviews if he is
honest. People will always complain even if service is fantastic, but not as often
or regularly. So, you guess that there is a 30% chance of this.
Number 3 = 3

Number 4: Guess the probability of your mechanic having bad reviews if he is
dishonest. People complain loudly if someone rips them off, so you think this
would be pretty high. So, you guess that there is a 90% chance of this.
Number 4 = 9
Step 2:
Line your numbers up as ratios.


Step 3:
Multiply down and simplify.
Conclusion:
After crunching the numbers, we can see that the odds are greater for your
mechanic being dishonest than honest. The odds are 7:9. The left (7) represents
the chance of him being honest, and the right (9) represents the chance of him
being dishonest. Knowing this, you’ll want to be careful and inspect everything
when you pick up your car. You might also want to bring a friend who knows
about mechanics to the shop with you.

Visual Approach
Here is the same problem but with a visual explanation. Same steps as the first
scenario!
Step 1:
Draw a square. The inside of the square represents 100%. Now, draw a
horizontal line through the square to create an area that represents the chances of
your mechanic being honest regardless of anything else.

In Step 1 of our example we guess 70%, so we will draw a line that creates a
space of roughly 70% of the entire square. We’ll call this Area X. Got it? Okay,
now the remaining 30% of the square represents the possibility of your mechanic
not being honest regardless of anything else. We’ll call this Area Y.
We now have two areas with numbers.**to keep it simple all our numbers will
be whole between 1 and 10 and have no decimal place.

Area X = 7
Area Y = 3

Step 2:
Now, if your mechanic is honest, how likely is it that he would have bad
reviews? Shade in Area X with your answer. In our example, we chose 30%.
What about if he is not honest? How likely is it he would have bad reviews?
Shade in Area Y to show this. In our example, we chose 90%.

Step 3:
We now have four numbers. Let’s line them up as an ratios, then multiply down
and simplify to find our answer!
Conclusion:
Our conclusion is the exact same as when we solved this non-visually. We can
see that the odds are slightly greater for your mechanic being dishonest than
honest. The odds are 7:9. How do you read this fraction? The left (7) represents
the chance of him being honest, and the right (9) represents the chance of him
being dishonest. Knowing this, you’ll want to be careful and inspect everything

when you pick up your car. You might also want to bring a friend who knows
about mechanics to the shop with you.

Reference: Definitions, Notations, and Proof
Welcome to our expanded reference section. Feel free to skip around to find
what you need. Here’s what we cover in this section:
Part 1: Definitions
Part 2: Notation
Part 3: Proof

Definitions
1. Bayes' Theorem Formula
We have expanded on the original definitions given in the Basic Overview. All
of the definitions from both formulas in the Basic Overview still apply. We are
simply building on this by adding in the terms that we will define below.
2. Probability
Probability is the chance that something will happen. Technically speaking, it is

a branch of mathematics that deals with calculating the likelihood of an event's
occurrence. Probability is expressed as a number between 1 and 0.
A probability of 1 means that there is a 100% likelihood of an event
occurring.
A probability of 0 means that there is a 0% likelihood of an event occurring.
Classic Coin Toss Example:
Question: Let’s say you have a coin. If it is a fair (properly weighted) coin
and tossed 3 times, what is the probability of 3 heads?
Answer: There are 8 possibilities if the coin is tossed three times. In this
example, T stands for Tail and H stands for Head.
Possibilities: HHH, HHT,HTT,HTH,TTT,TTH,THH,THT
All outcomes are equally possible, so the probability of tossing 3 heads in a
row is ⅛, or 12.5%.
3. Conditional Probability
Conditional probability is the probability of event “A” being true given that
event “B” is true. It helps us answer the question: How does the probability of an
event change if we have new evidence (or new information)? Conditional
probabilities always involve two independent events, “A” and “B”.
Classic Coin Toss Example Con’t:
Question: In the example above we concluded that the probability of
tossing 3 heads in a row is ⅛, or 12.5%. Now, what if we were given new

information, or new evidence that the first coin tossed was a head? How
would this impact our probability?
Answer: We are now dealing with a conditional probability because we are
taking into account other conditions (evidence or information). In this
example, knowing that the first coin toss was a head is our new
information. Now, instead of there being 8 combinations of coin tosses
there are only 4. In this example, T stands for Tail and H stands for Head.
Possibilities: HHH, HHT,HTT,HTH
All outcomes are equally possible, so the probability of tossing 3 heads in a
row is ¼, or 25%.
In Bayes' formula there are two conditional probabilities: P(A|B) and P(B|A).
P(A|B) - This is the posterior probability. It is what we are searching for.
Classic Coin Toss Example Con’t:
Let A = Three heads in a row.
Let B = First toss is a head.
How this fits together: We are wanting to know the probability of tossing three
heads in a row given that the first toss was a head. In this example, B is the new
evidence that alters or changes the probability of A.
P(B|A) - This is called the Likelihood and is often confused with P(A|B). In
real life, this is often the number we focus on and draw our conclusions
from - but it is only one piece of the puzzle! (This error is called the Base
Rate Fallacy). For example, say you have the flu and you research your
symptoms. We’ll label flu P(A) and symptoms P(B). You Google for some

answers and find that 90% of people with the flu have your symptoms. This
is P(B|A). Most people stop here and believe that they have the flu - but
Bayes' Theorem tells us to take this a step further to find P(A|B).
Classic Coin Toss Example:
Let A = Three heads in a row.
Let B = First toss is a head.
How this fits together: We are wanting to know the probability of the first toss
being a head given that three heads were tossed in a row. The answer of course is
1 or 100%.In this example, B is the new evidence that alters or changes the
probability of A.
4. Posterior Probability
Also sometimes called posterior odds, the posterior probability refers to our
changed belief after using Bayes' Theorem. It is what we initially define and
work towards discovering. Technically, it is the probability of event A being true
given that event B is true, which is expressed in the formula P(A|B). In addition,
it is a conditional probability and a normalized weighted average.
5. Prior Probability
Sometime called Prior Odds or Prior, this refers to an initial belief before new
evidence is introduced. In Bayes' Theorem:
Both P(B) and P(A) are priors.
The entire formula is divided by P(B) to normalize the answer. Normalizing
can have a lot of different meanings depending on its usage. For simplicity
in this case, it can be defined as summing an answer to 1.
6. Events

An event means one (or more) outcomes.
Example:
Tossing a coin and getting a head.
Taking a cancer test and receiving a positive result.
There are three types of events:
Independent: These events are not affected by other events.
Dependent: These events can be affected by previous events.
Mutually exclusive: Mutually exclusive events cannot happen at the same
time. For example, when tossing a coin you can either have a head or tail,
but not both at the same time.

Notation
There are many notations in Statistics, and Probability is no exception! Without
going into too much detail, some of the basic notations you will see when using
Bayes' Theorem include:
P(A) = the probability that event A will occur.
P(B) = the probability that event B will occur.
P(A|B) = the conditional probability that event A is true given that event B
is true.
P(A') = the probability of the complement of event A.
The complement of an event refers to the event not happening. For example,
if an event is that it rains, the complement of that event is that it does not
rain.
P(A ∩ B) = the probability of the intersection of events A and B. In other
words, the probability of events A and B both occurring.
An intersection is a set of elements that belong to two sets. For example, if
Set A has the elements {10,15,25} and Set B has the elements {5,10,15},
the intersection is {10,15} . In this example, 10 and 15 are the two elements
that are common to both Set A and Set B. Visually, intersections are best
demonstrated by using a Venn diagram. In a Venn diagram, the intersection
is where both sets occur, or overlap. See Circle # 3 in any of the scenarios
in Section 1 for an example.


Proof
At its most basic level, a proof is an argument that convinces other people that
something is true. It proves beyond any doubt that something is true and is a
written, step-by-step account of how a conclusion is reached. In mathematics, a
proof is a deductive argument used to prove a statement. Maths.org provides a
great overview of proofs.
There are simple and complex ways to demonstrate Proof of Bayes' Theorem.
We have opted to show a simple method. If you are wanting a more thorough
understanding of the proof, the University of Edinburgh offers a great
explanation. This PDF from the University of Pennsylvania is also a fantastic
overview.
1. First, let’s define what we are proving. We are wanting to know the
probability of A given that B has occurred.

2. Now, for our second step let us define what we already know. We know two
things:
1. The first thing we know is that the following is true, and that the right-hand
side of this statement can be read as: The probability of A, P(A) times the
probability of B given that A has occurred P(B|A).

2. We also know that the following is true, and that the right-hand side of this
statement can be read as: The probability of B, P(B) times the probability of
A given that B has occurred P(A|B).
3. For our third step we equate the right hand side of both statements above.

4. Now, using basic algebra we can rearrange the formula to find Bayes'
Theorem.
And that is Proof of Bayes' Theorem.

Recommended In-Depth Reading
If you want to know more about Bayes' Theorem there are a number of fantastic
books that we would recommend. All the descriptions are taken from Amazon,
and we provide links for you to click through to the Amazon website. Here we
go, in no particular order.
The Theory That Would Not Die: How Bayes'’ Rule
Cracked the Enigma Code, Hunted Down Russian
Submarines, and Emerged Triumphant from Two
Centuries of Controversy
By Sharon Bertsch McGrayne. Available on Kindle, Paperback, Hardcover,
Audio.
Buy it on Amazon.
Amazon Description: Bayes'' rule appears to be a straightforward, one-line
theorem: by updating our initial beliefs with objective new information, we get a
new and improved belief. To its adherents, it is an elegant statement about
learning from experience. To its opponents, it is subjectivity run amok.In the
first-ever account of Bayes'' rule for general readers, Sharon Bertsch McGrayne
explores this controversial theorem and the human obsessions surrounding it.
She traces its discovery by an amateur mathematician in the 1740s through its
development into roughly its modern form by French scientist Pierre Simon
Laplace.
She reveals why respected statisticians rendered it professionally taboo for 150
years at the same time that practitioners relied on it to solve crises involving
great uncertainty and scanty information, even breaking Germany's Enigma
code during World War II, and explains how the advent of off-the-shelf computer
technology in the 1980s proved to be a game-changer.
Today, Bayes'' rule is used everywhere from DNA de-coding to Homeland
Security.Drawing on primary source material and interviews with statisticians

and other scientists, The Theory That Would Not Die is the riveting account of
how a seemingly simple theorem ignited one of the greatest controversies of all
time.
Bayes'’ Rule: A Tutorial Introduction to Bayesian
Analysis
By Allen B. Downey. Available in Hardcover or Paperback Only
Buy it On Amazon
Amazon Description: Discovered by an 18th century mathematician and
preacher, Bayes'' rule is a cornerstone of modern probability theory. In this
richly illustrated book, a range of accessible examples is used to show how
Bayes'' rule is actually a natural consequence of common sense reasoning.
Bayes'' rule is then derived using intuitive graphical representations of
probability, and Bayesian analysis is applied to parameter estimation. As an aid
to understanding, online computer code (in MatLab, Python and R) reproduces
key numerical results and diagrams.
The tutorial style of writing, combined with a comprehensive glossary, makes
this an ideal primer for novices who wish to become familiar with the basic
principles of Bayesian analysis.
The Signal and the Noise: Why So Many Predictions
Fail - but Some Don’t
By Nate Silver. Available on Kindle, Paperback, Hardcover, Audio.
Buy it on Amazon
Amazon Description: Nate Silver built an innovative system for predicting
baseball performance, predicted the 2008 election within a hair’s breadth, and
became a national sensation as a blogger—all by the time he was thirty. He
solidified his standing as the nation's foremost political forecaster with his near
perfect prediction of the 2012 election. Silver is the founder and editor in chief of
FiveThirtyEight.com.

Drawing on his own groundbreaking work, Silver examines the world of
prediction, investigating how we can distinguish a true signal from a universe of
noisy data. Most predictions fail, often at great cost to society, because most of
us have a poor understanding of probability and uncertainty. Both experts and
laypeople mistake more confident predictions for more accurate ones. But
overconfidence is often the reason for failure. If our appreciation of uncertainty
improves, our predictions can get better too. This is the “prediction paradox”:
The more humility we have about our ability to make predictions, the more
successful we can be in planning for the future.
In keeping with his own aim to seek truth from data, Silver visits the most
successful forecasters in a range of areas, from hurricanes to baseball, from the
poker table to the stock market, from Capitol Hill to the NBA. He explains and
evaluates how these forecasters think and what bonds they share. What lies
behind their success? Are they good—or just lucky? What patterns have they
unraveled? And are their forecasts really right? He explores unanticipated
commonalities and exposes unexpected juxtapositions. And sometimes, it is not
so much how good a prediction is in an absolute sense that matters but how
good it is relative to the competition. In other cases, prediction is still a very
rudimentary—and dangerous—science.
Silver observes that the most accurate forecasters tend to have a superior
command of probability, and they tend to be both humble and hardworking. They
distinguish the predictable from the unpredictable, and they notice a thousand
little details that lead them closer to the truth. Because of their appreciation of
probability, they can distinguish the signal from the noise.

Bibliography
Visual Introduction Part 1 & 2
Acts17Apologetics. "Understanding Bayes Theorem." YouTube. YouTube, 03
July 2014. Web. 06 Sept. 2016. Link
The Bayes' Theorem Formula: A Basic Overview Wireless Philosophy.
"CRITICAL THINKING - Fundamentals: Bayes Theorem [HD]." YouTube.
YouTube, 22 Apr. 2016. Web. 06 Sept. 2016. Link
McRaney, David. "YANSS 073 – How to Get the Most out of Realizing You Are
Wrong by Using Bayes Theorem to Update Your Beliefs." You Are Not So Smart.
You Are Not So Smart, 22 Apr. 2016. Web. 06 Sept. 2016. Link
Kurt, Will. "A Guide to Bayesian Statistics." Count Bayesie. Will Kurt, 02 May
2016. Web. 06 Sept. 2016. Link
"Bayes Rule: Guide." Arbital. N.p., n.d. Web. 06 Sept. 2016. Link
Section 1
Wireless Philosophy. "CRITICAL THINKING - Fundamentals: Bayes Theorem
[HD]." YouTube. YouTube, 22 Apr. 2016. Web. 06 Sept. 2016. Link
Bonilla, Oscar. "Visualizing Bayes Theorem." Oscar Bonilla. N.p., 01 May
2009. Web. 06 Sept. 2016. Link
Kurt, Will. "Use Bayes Theorem to Investigate Food Allergies." Count Bayesie.
N.p., 22 Jan. 2016. Web. 06 Sept. 2016. Link
McRaney, David. "YANSS 073 – How to Get the Most out of Realizing You Are
Wrong by Using Bayes Theorem to Update Your Beliefs." You Are Not So Smart.
You Are Not So Smart, 22 Apr. 2016. Web. 06 Sept. 2016. Link
Azad, Kalid. "An Intuitive (and Short) Explanation of Bayes
Theorem."BetterExplained. N.p., n.d. Web. 06 Sept. 2016. Link
Base Rate Fallacy: Definition & Example." Study.com. Study.com, n.d. Web. 08
Sept. 2016. Link

Section 2
Wireless Philosophy. "CRITICAL THINKING - Fundamentals: Bayes Theorem
[HD]." YouTube. YouTube, 22 Apr. 2016. Web. 06 Sept. 2016. Link
PatrickJMT. "Bayes Theorem and Cancer Screening." YouTube. YouTube, 03
Jan. 2013. Web. 06 Sept. 2016. Link
Ingersoll, George. "Stats 10 Bayes Theorem." YouTube. YouTube, 26 May 2014.
Web. 06 Sept. 2016. Link
McRaney, David. "YANSS 073 – How to Get the Most out of Realizing You Are
Wrong by Using Bayes Theorem to Update Your Beliefs." You Are Not So Smart.
You Are Not So Smart, 22 Apr. 2016. Web. 06 Sept. 2016. Link
Section 3
Wireless Philosophy. "CRITICAL THINKING - Fundamentals: Bayes Theorem
[HD]." YouTube. YouTube, 22 Apr. 2016. Web. 06 Sept. 2016. Link
Bonilla, Oscar. "Visualizing Bayes Theorem." Oscar Bonilla. N.p., 01 May
2009. Web. 06 Sept. 2016. Link
Section 4
"Thomas Bayes." Wikipedia. Wikimedia Foundation, n.d. Web. 06 Sept. 2016.
Link
O'Connor, J.J, and E.F Robertson. "Thomas Bayes'." Bayes Biography.
University of St. Andrews, Scotland, n.d. Web. 06 Sept. 2016. Link
McGrayne, Sharon Bertsch. The Theory That Would Not Die: How Bayes Rule
Cracked the Enigma Code, Hunted down Russian Submarines, & Emerged
Triumphant from Two Centuries of Controversy. New Haven: Yale UP, 2011.
Print.
Tough, Paul. "A Speck in the Sea." The New York Times. The New York Times,
04 Jan. 2014. Web. 06 Sept. 2016. Link
Flam, F.D. "The Odds, Continually Updated." The New York Times. The New

York Times, 29 Sept. 2014. Web. 06 Sept. 2016. Link
"Bayesian Search Theory." Wikipedia. Wikimedia Foundation, n.d. Web. 06
Sept. 2016. Link
"How to Apply Bayes Theorem to the Search for a Fisherman Lost at Sea."Stack
Exchange. N.p., n.d. Web. 06 Sept. 2016. Link
"USS Scorpion (SSN-589)." Wikipedia. Wikimedia Foundation, n.d. Web. 06
Sept. 2016. Link
"Air France Flight 447." Wikipedia. Wikimedia Foundation, n.d. Web. 06 Sept.
2016. Link
"Naive Bayes Spam Filtering." Wikipedia. Wikimedia Foundation, n.d. Web. 06
Sept. 2016. Link
A Bayesian Approach to Filtering Junk E-mail." Bayesian Spam Filter:.
Microsoft, n.d. Web. 06 Sept. 2016. Link
Lafrance, Adrienne. "The Hazard of Tesla’s Approach to Driverless Cars." The
Atlantic. Atlantic Media Company, July 2016. Web. 06 Sept. 2016. Link
"Google SelfDriving Car Project." Google SelfDriving Car Project. Google, n.d.
Web. 06 Sept. 2016. Link
Rogers, Christina. "Ford Developing Fully Driverless Car." WSJ. Wsj.com, 16
Aug. 2016. Web. 06 Sept. 2016. Link
Chafkin, Max. "Uber's First SelfDriving Fleet Arrives in Pittsburgh This
Month."Bloomberg.com. Bloomberg, 18 Aug. 2016. Web. 06 Sept. 2016. Link
"Self Driving Car." CS221. Stanford University, n.d. Web. 06 Sept. 2016. Link
Section 5
Kiersz, Andy. "DATING FOR BAYESIANS: Here's How To Use Statistics To
Improve Your Love Life." Business Insider. Business Insider, Inc, 05 Nov. 2013.
Web. 06 Sept. 2016. Link
Galef, Julia. "A Visual Guide to Bayesian Thinking." YouTube. YouTube, 16 July
2015. Web. 06 Sept. 2016. Link

Section 6
Freiberger, Marianne. "Why We Want Proof." Plus.maths.org. N.p., 10 Apr.
2015. Web. 06 Sept. 2016. Link
"The Definition of Probability." Dictionary.com. Dictionary.com, n.d. Web. 06
Sept. 2016. Link

Table of Contents
Bayes Everyday
A Visual Guide
Bayes' Theorem Explained: 4 Ways
Visual Aids
Booklet Structure
Don’t Waste Your Time
A Visual Intro: Part 1
Introduction
The Bayes' Theorem Formula: A Basic Overview
A Visual Intro: Part 2
Introduction
Example Section 1: Solving For One Possible Outcome With All Data Provided
Introduction
Scenario 1: The Flu
Pulling The Scenario Apart
Scenario 1.1 Visualize The Problem
Scenario 1.2 Plugging Into Bayes' Formula And Solving
Scenario 2: Breathalyzer
Pulling The Scenario Apart
Scenario 2.1 Visualize the Problem
Scenario 2.2 Plugging Into Bayes' Formula And Solving
Scenario 3: Peacekeeping - A Surprise Attack.
Pulling The Scenario Apart
Scenario 3.1 Visualize The Problem
Scenario 3.2 Plugging Into Bayes' Formula And Solving
How To Understand Scenarios
Introduction
Discovering What You Are Looking For: P(A|B)
Defining P(B), P(A) P(B|A)
Example Section 2: Solving for One Possible Outcome With No P(B) Provided
Introduction
Scenario 1: The Flu
Scenario 1.1 Solve Using A Decision Tree
Scenario 1.2 Solve Using Bayes' Formula
Scenario 2: Breathalyzer

Scenario 2.1 Solve Using A Decision Tree
Scenario 2.2 Solve Using Bayes' Formula
Scenario 3: Peacekeeping
Scenario 3.1 Solve Using a Decision Tree
Scenario 3.2 Solve Using Bayes' Formula
Example Section 3: Solving For Two Possible Outcomes With All Probability
Data Provided
Introduction
The Flu Or Food Poisoning
Part 1: The Flu
Scenario 1.1 Visualize The Problem
Scenario 1.2 Plugging Into Bayes' Formula And Solving
Part 2: Food Poisoning
Scenario 2.1 Visualize The Problem
Scenario 2.2 Solve Traditionally With Bayes' Formula
History and Stories
A Brief History Of Bayes' Theorem
Real Life Uses: Search and Rescue
Real Life Uses: Spam Filtering
Real Life Uses: Driverless Cars
Three Steps To Thinking Like A Bayesian Everyday.
Let’s Get Real
Scenario 1: Dating.
Non-Visual Approach
Visual Approach
Scenario 2: Can You Trust Your Mechanic?
Non-Visual Approach
Visual Approach
Reference: Definitions, Notations, and Proof
Part 1: Definitions
Part 2: Notation
Part 3: Proof
Recommended In-Depth Reading
Bibliography

Table of Contents
Bayes Everyday
A Visual Guide
Bayes' Theorem Explained: 4 Ways
Visual Aids
Booklet Structure
Don’t Waste Your Time
A Visual Intro: Part 1
Introduction
The Bayes' Theorem Formula: A Basic Overview
A Visual Intro: Part 2
Introduction
Example Section 1: Solving For One Possible Outcome With All Data Provided
Introduction
Scenario 1: The Flu
Pulling The Scenario Apart
Scenario 1.1 Visualize The Problem
Scenario 1.2 Plugging Into Bayes' Formula And Solving
Scenario 2: Breathalyzer
Pulling The Scenario Apart
Scenario 2.1 Visualize the Problem
Scenario 2.2 Plugging Into Bayes' Formula And Solving
Scenario 3: Peacekeeping - A Surprise Attack.
Pulling The Scenario Apart
Scenario 3.1 Visualize The Problem
Scenario 3.2 Plugging Into Bayes' Formula And Solving
How To Understand Scenarios
Introduction
Discovering What You Are Looking For: P(A|B)
Defining P(B), P(A) P(B|A)
Example Section 2: Solving for One Possible Outcome With No P(B) Provided
Introduction
Scenario 1: The Flu
Scenario 1.1 Solve Using A Decision Tree
Scenario 1.2 Solve Using Bayes' Formula
Scenario 2: Breathalyzer

Scenario 2.1 Solve Using A Decision Tree
Scenario 2.2 Solve Using Bayes' Formula
Scenario 3: Peacekeeping
Scenario 3.1 Solve Using a Decision Tree
Scenario 3.2 Solve Using Bayes' Formula
Example Section 3: Solving For Two Possible Outcomes With All Probability
Data Provided
Introduction
The Flu Or Food Poisoning
Part 1: The Flu
Scenario 1.1 Visualize The Problem
Scenario 1.2 Plugging Into Bayes' Formula And Solving
Part 2: Food Poisoning
Scenario 2.1 Visualize The Problem
Scenario 2.2 Solve Traditionally With Bayes' Formula
History and Stories
A Brief History Of Bayes' Theorem
Real Life Uses: Search and Rescue
Real Life Uses: Spam Filtering
Real Life Uses: Driverless Cars
Three Steps To Thinking Like A Bayesian Everyday.
Let’s Get Real
Scenario 1: Dating.
Non-Visual Approach
Visual Approach
Scenario 2: Can You Trust Your Mechanic?
Non-Visual Approach
Visual Approach
Reference: Definitions, Notations, and Proof
Part 1: Definitions
Part 2: Notation
Part 3: Proof
Recommended In-Depth Reading
Bibliography

