



B E A U T I F U L 
M I N D S 
t h e 
p a r a l l e l 
l i v e s 
o f 
g r e a t 
a p e s 
a n d 
d o l p h i n s 
MADDALENA 
BEARZI 
& CRAIG B. STANFORD 
Harvard University Press 
Cambridge, Massachusetts & London, England = 2008 

Copyright © 2008 by the President and Fellows of 
Harvard College 
ALL RIGHTS RESERVED 
PRINTED IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA 
A Caravan book. For more information, visit 
www. caravanbooks. org 
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 
Bearzi, Maddalena. 
Beautiful minds: the parallel lives of great apes 
and dolphins / Maddalena Bearzi and Craig B. 
Stanford, 
p. cm. 
Includes bibliographical references and index. 
ISBN 978-0-674-02781-7 (cloth: alk. paper) 
1. Apes—Behavior. 2. Dolphins—Behavior. 
3. Animal societies. 4. Psychology, Comparative. 
I. Stanford, Craig B. (Craig Britton), 1956- II. Title. 
QL737. P96B39 2008 
599. 88'1513—dc22 
2007046199 

Maddalena: For Charlie 
Craig: For Erin 

C O N T E N T S 
Introduction: Beautiful Minds 1 
1 
An Eternal Fascination 
15 
2 
Two Histories Afield 45 
3 
Swimming with Dolphins, Swinging 
with Apes 65 
4 
Dolphin and Ape Societies—Whys 
and Wherefores 99 
5 
Cognition: Minds in the Sea and Forest 
135 
6 
Master Politicians 
183 
7 
Culture Vultures 
213 
8 
Toward the Roots of Human Intelligence 
241 
Conclusion: Beautiful Minds Are a Terrible Thing 
to Waste 265 
Further Reading 303 
Acknowledgments 
323 
Index 329 

beautiful minds 

i n t r o d u c t i o n 
ONE HAS HANDS much like yours or mine and 
can use them to skillfully manipulate a tool, deli-
cately groom a partner, or speak in fluent sign lan-
guage. The other doesn't have hands at all. One 
looks like you or me, more or less. The other has 
the body of a cruise missile. One swings through 
the trees of an African forest; the other dives deep 
1 
B E A U T I F U L 
M I N D S 

B E A U T I F U L 
M I N D S 
in cold oceans. Great apes and dolphins would 
seem to have very little in common. They live in 
worlds so different that you would have to dissect 
one to find that their organs and limbs share any 
common features. They are both mammals, but 
distantly related; the two groups haven't had a com-
mon ancestor in nearly a hundred million years. 
A gorilla and a bottlenose dolphin are about as 
closely related as a mouse and an elephant. 
In spite of these differences, dolphins and 
apes—and by extension ourselves—share some strik-
ingly similar and profoundly important traits. All 
three groups—the various dolphin species, the four 
great apes, and we humans—possess the acme of 
brains on Earth today. With due respect to a few 
other brainy animals like elephants, the ceta-
ceans—dolphins and whales—and higher primates 
are the most cerebral of the world's creatures. We 
are all highly intelligent relative to the millions of 
other co-inhabitants of Earth. We live in highly 
complex, often fluid societies which defy the easy 
categories that apply to most other animals. The 
two creatures have evolved in parallel, exemplify-
2 

Introduction 
ing what biologists call convergent evolution. Al-
though a casual observer won't see these parallels, 
research on dolphins and apes has produced in-
creasingly abundant evidence for the comparison. 
This is why we have written a book about apes 
and dolphins. Although both have been the sub-
ject of many other books, rarely have the two been 
considered as companion species, evolutionary part-
ners in ways that are not immediately apparent to 
most people. And we two—Stanford, a prima-
tologist, and Bearzi, a dolphin biologist—felt a con-
sideration of the surprising parallels between these 
two creatures might result in some timely lessons 
for humankind. We decided to write the book in 
the first person, so each of us could be the voice for 
the animals we have spent our lives observing. 
However you define intelligence, apes and dol-
phins are second only to humans in brainpower. 
Their brains are enormous in comparison to the 
size of their bodies. This brainpower has allowed 
dolphins and apes to possess communication skills 
and social interactions so complex that we are only 
now beginning to understand how they work. Un-
3 

B E A U T I F U L 
M I N D S 
like most animals, apes and dolphins tend to live 
in flexible, open societies, and the relationships 
among individual animals are based on long-term 
memory of who is whose friend, and who owes 
whom a favor. 
This combination of intelligence and social com-
plexity is incredibly rare. It occurs on Earth today 
mainly in the living tips of the two great lineages: 
the cetaceans (dolphins and whales) and great apes 
(chimpanzees, bonobos, gorillas, and orangutans). 
In this book we suggest that the parallels between 
great apes and dolphins point us toward a deeper 
understanding of what it means to be human. We 
are, after all, the ultimate in big, brainy social com-
plexity on the planet and possibly in the universe. 
We share with apes practically one-hundred percent 
of our evolutionary baggage, so our intellect is at 
its most basic primate level the same as theirs. Dol-
phins are an entirely different story; their big brains 
evolved without any historical connection to our 
own. But in this book we will consider whether the 
reasons for dolphin intelligence and social com-
plexity have parallels in the great apes' and there-
fore our own evolution. 
4 

Introduction 
Apes 
They sit like worried buddhas, their brows fur-
rowed and eyes burning from underneath, just a 
few inches away. Some are handsome and virile, 
others are youngsters, and a few are old and 
shabby—just like the people gathered around me 
outside the zoo exhibit. A strikingly handsome 
male chimpanzee is grooming himself, looking re-
gal compared to kids around him. An old female, 
Pandora, has a ragged body capped by a massive 
pink swelling that hangs off her posterior end. I 
find it pretty hideous, but its appeal apparently 
goes way beyond the human aesthetic range, be-
cause she raises excitement among the male chim-
panzees wherever she goes. 
The glass barrier between us looks at first 
glance like it is there to protect us from savage 
apes, but I know better. It's also there to protect 
them from savage, disease-ravaged visitors. Chim-
panzees can catch virtually all our diseases, for the 
diseases evolved to attack us have only a tiny ad-
justment to make to invade a creature so geneti-
5 

B E A U T I F U L 
M I N D S 
cally like us. With thousands pressing their noses 
to the glass every day to connect with the mind of 
an ape, chimps without the barrier would be like 
lost tribes at the mercy of the germs carried to 
them by well-meaning missionaries. 
The zoo has gone to great lengths to educate 
the public about the plight of the chimpanzee; its 
endangered status in Africa, the rate at which it 
is being hunted out of existence to feed people 
even while its forest homes are being logged. It's all 
happening with breathtaking speed, several mil-
lion years of evolution being scratched out in an 
instant. But the message seems lost on the zoo vis-
itors this morning; they're just trying to make a 
connection with an ape. 
One of the children hoping to leap momen-
tarily into the skin of an ape is my son. Adam 
looks through the window that separates us from 
the chimpanzees and then glances back at me. At 
seven years old, he stands about the same height 
they do. He's fascinated by all primates, partly 
because people naturally are, and also because his 
father is always talking about them or flying off 
to some remote place to study them. He was re-
6 

Introduction 
cently mentioned in a newspaper story about 
my work with chimpanzees—the journalist had 
watched Adam watching the chimpanzees in the 
zoo just as he is today and found it an irresistible 
hook for the story. 
Adam's understanding of our connection to 
chimpanzees is simple but accurate. We are they, 
and they are us, for the most part. Adam knows 
that people "came from" apes long, long ago. Like 
many kids, he knows all about dinosaurs and has 
no trouble imagining that there may have been 
myriad animal forms in Earth's history like noth-
ing we have seen since. It's usually adults who 
avoid acknowledging the continuity between them 
and us. Adam sees that the chimps are not mon-
keys, even though that is what most zoo visitors 
around us apparently believe. Chimpanzees are, in 
fact, more closely related to humans than they are 
to gorillas, all hirsute, beetle-browed appearances 
to the contrary. 
These chimpanzees, born and raised in the 
zoo, seem almost domesticated. Their physique is 
like that of bodybuilders compared to their wild 
counterparts. At four years old, zoo apes are the 
/ 

B E A U T I F U L 
M I N D S 
size that ten-year-old chimpanzees would be in the 
wild. With an abundant, carefully managed food 
supply, their growth rate is astounding, their 
muscles bulging at an early age. Yet zoo chimps are 
different from their wild-living cousins in many 
ways, including the ways in which they relate to 
one another. 
Despite their smaller size, in the wild, chim-
panzees are altogether different animals. They are 
sinewy and immensely powerful. I have seen males 
break off saplings to drag about in their macho 
charging displays at other males. Once a particu-
larly bellicose male broke a tree on top of me in 
an apparent attempt to bully me. It was highly suc-
cessful. Just as males can be brutal bullies, females 
are devoted, loving mothers. But females also exer-
cise their own power, ganging up at times on 
unruly males. Despite their strength, I am always 
struck at how restrained most chimpanzee behav-
ior is; they reserve their brute power for those rare 
times when it is truly needed. They spend nearly 
all of their lives peacefully plucking fruits, groom-
ing one another, and sleeping; only in the smallest 
fraction of their lives do they let loose and show 
their power. 
8 

Introduction 
Chimpanzees are one of four species of great 
apes, along with bonobos, gorillas, and orang-
utans. Their anatomy is close enough to ours that 
they belong in the same taxonomic family. Only 
because the earliest classifier, the Swede Carolus 
Linnaeus, was devoutly religious did the apes end 
up in their own family, separate from our own. 
Several million years ago, they and we shared the 
same ancestor. Then, the evolutionary lines split. 
Our own direct ancestors eventually stood up and 
walked, their brains mushroomed, and sophisti-
cated intelligence blossomed. So the apes offer us 
a window onto whom we once were, not so long 
ago. 
Jane Goodall began her famed study of wild 
chimpanzees in 1960, and not until the mid-1970s 
did a clear understanding of chimpanzee society 
emerge. The complexity of chimpanzee social be-
havior is such that it took nearly two decades to 
begin to understand how their society works. And 
now in spite of nearly half a century of research, we 
still have major gaps in our understanding about 
these apes. They are smart and resourceful, sharing 
the same range of emotions as ourselves. In watch-
ing wild chimpanzees, I have seen fear, aggression, 
9 

B E A U T I F U L 
M I N D S 
and nurturing, but also guilt, shame, and love. 
This is not just anthropomorphism on my part; 
given our kinship, our a priori assumption is that 
the emotional motivations of great apes are simi-
lar to our own. 
The great apes live in the tropical forests of Af-
rica and Asia. Their plight in the wild is so severe— 
from habitat loss to poaching for meat to rare viral 
epidemics—that they may well all disappear from 
Earth within our lifetimes. There are today an esti-
mated 200, 000-250, 000 great apes of all four spe-
cies combined—most of these are chimpanzees— 
and their numbers are in freefall. While they are 
still with us, they have much to teach, if only we 
would observe and listen. 
How genetically similar are we to the great 
apes? By some estimates, the percentage of spots 
on our mutual DNA sequences that do not match 
up is substantially less than one percent. Now that 
the human genome map is more or less complete, 
molecular biologists have turned to mapping the 
chimpanzee genome. When that work is complete, 
scientists may begin to understand not just the 
percentage of similarity between us, but which 
10 

Introduction 
genes differ in function. We are beginning to crack 
the code. 
Dolphins 
In the cold ocean waters of the world swim intel-
ligent torpedoes. If people and apes are cousins, 
then people and dolphins are long-lost relatives. 
We are both mammals; we nurse our babies, we 
have hair (precious little in the dolphins' case), we 
have big brains and live in complex societies. But 
in most respects, notwithstanding the mammalian 
link, they are perhaps as different from us as any 
smart extraterrestrial creature would be. Their 
world is seawater, not land, and they navigate their 
territory by sonar rather than by sight. Buoyancy, 
not gravity, defines their body form and function. 
Where we expect legs, they have flippers. Their vo-
cal communication, clicks and whistles, is unfath-
omably unfamiliar to us. 
Recently my children and I stood watching 
dolphins cavort in a large aquarium tank. Their 
beauty comes from grace and power, artfully 
blended. But whereas a child will immediately see 
11 

B E A U T I F U L 
M I N D S 
the human connection when staring at a chim-
panzee, there is no such mental leap when watch-
ing a dolphin. "What are they related to?" my son 
asked. He knows that these are mammals and not 
fish. His question is rather, "Where did they come 
from?" This is not a question we would ask about 
an ape, because we already know the answer. We 
came from apes, and apes came from monkeys, lit-
erally. But dolphins? When I start talking about 
dolphins and whales evolving over thousands of 
generations from animals that walked about on 
land, and over millions of years migrated into the 
sea, I can see my son trying to wrap his mind 
around the idea. He doesn't dismiss it, as some 
theologically driven folks might, it's just an idea 
that is a bit too abstract for him right now. But 
looking at an ape, there's only a baby step of faith 
needed to see that its history is our history, until 
very recently. The most recent evidence from fos-
sils and from DNA indicates a fork in our shared 
ancestral paths about 6 million years ago; all ear-
lier forms of people, from Lucy to Neanderthals, 
have lived since that split. 
But dolphins are very distant relatives. Many 
things about us that we consider human we see in 
12 

Introduction 
great apes, but those same qualities seem to be 
lacking in dolphins. Our range of facial expres-
sions, for example, which show so much of our 
collective soul, are reciprocated by the frozen faux-
smile of the dolphin. Our multi-limbed, three-
dimensional bodies, so apelike, contrast with the 
dolphin's sleek, sluglike frame. The way the two 
species express themselves could not be more dif-
ferent. Many of a dolphin's sounds, even those that 
our ears can detect, are produced not in a larynx 
but deep inside the skull. 
We have each spent large parts of our lives watch-
ing the animals we write about; Stanford study-
ing great apes and Bearzi studying dolphins. We 
are utterly fascinated by them, we feel passionately 
about them as fellow creatures, and we hope to 
convince you that understanding the unlikely par-
allels between these creatures gives us a rare 
glimpse into the origins of that most human of all 
qualities, our intellect. 
13 

AN 
ETERNAL F A S C I N A T I O N 
i t is s i x o ' c l o c k . The aquarium's doors are 
now closed to the public, leaving me alone while 
I wait for a friend in an interview. An assistant 
whispers that I can look around for half an hour. 
Among the jellyfish, shark, and sea turtle exhibits, 
1 am drawn toward one of the lateral portholes 
that look out into the submerged world of Miko 
15 
chapter one 

B E A U T I F U L 
M I N D S 
and Mara, a pair of elderly dolphins kept here in 
captivity. The tank seems empty, silent. 
Out of the blue, I see a gray body slowly ris-
ing from the bottom. Nose glued to the porthole, 
I strain to follow the fluid movements, looking 
downward until it almost hurts. Suddenly, an in-
quisitive eye pauses just inches from mine. It's only 
for an instant. Then, as though it were never there, 
the dolphin continues its rise to the surface and 
vanishes into the gloomy water. With my heart 
thumping, I frantically clean the winter sludge 
from the glass, hoping for another encounter. 
And here she is once again. It's Mara. I can see 
her sex as she approaches my little window in slow 
motion. She lingers this time, inspecting my face, 
so different from hers, so alien. With one eye, then 
the other, she rolls, seemingly weightless, in a sort 
of circular dance. An intense shiver runs down my 
spine. Three, four, five times we meet and meet 
again, so close and so distant, divided by that glass. 
My friend calling my name brings me back to the 
real world. His interview is over and now he's ready 
to leave. I reluctantly pull myself away from the 
window and turn to go. As I walk away I feel 
16 

An Eternal Fascination 
Mara's eyes following my every step until I have 
disappeared behind the aquarium gate. 
I still don't know what it was that struck me 
most: her living sad glance looking straight into 
my eyes, her mysterious "smile, " or that harmoni-
ous, lethargic ballet. I don't really remember if it 
was in that moment or some other that I decided 
to become a field biologist, but I know that I felt 
at home with that dolphin and suddenly realized 
how caged and confined her world must be. What 
I do remember is forming a firm conviction that 
dolphins have the right to their own home. 
My brief encounter with Mara gets lost among 
many stories and legends that tell of dolphins; in-
telligent, beautiful, curious, sensitive, playful dol-
phins. Since the dawn of civilization, humans have 
been fascinated with these elusive marine mam-
mals and their mysterious existence beneath the 
oceans. To us, there is something inexplicable 
about dolphins, about their life and their world. 
Signs of the magical and strong bond between 
humans and dolphins can be found engraved in 
the prehistoric caves of the Pyrenees. Respect for 
these creatures was demanded in ancient Egypt, 
17 

B E A U T I F U L 
M I N D S 
and the people of Greece regarded the killing of a 
dolphin as a sacrilege against the gods, a horrible, 
perfidious act punishable by death. 
Intelligence, consciousness, and compassion 
were among the words used by the ancient Greeks 
to describe their "companions of the sea. " The 
philosopher Plutarch regarded them as the only 
creatures that seek friendship for purely altruistic 
reasons. Greek myths portray that culture's fasci-
nation with dolphins: the sun god Apollo assumed 
the form of a dolphin when he founded his oracle 
at Delphi on the slopes of Mount Parnassus, and 
Orion was saved from drowning by a sociable dol-
phin and carried into the sky, riding on his back. 
Then there is Dionysus, the Greek god of wine 
and mirth, who once booked passage on a ship 
from the island of Ikaria bound for Naxos. The 
ship's crew was actually a band of pirates posing 
as merchant sailors, whose secret plan was to cap-
ture their passengers and sell them into slavery. 
When Dionysus discovered their conspiracy, he 
used his divine powers to punish them by causing 
the ship's mast to sprout branches, the men's oars 
to become snakes, and a strange flute to play. To 
18 

An Eternal Fascination 
escape this divine madness, the pirates cast them-
selves into the water, where the ocean god Posei-
don changed them into dolphins and commanded 
them to serve humankind forever. 
A century later, the Roman, philosopher Pliny 
the Elder told the story of a peasant boy living 
on the shores of the Mediterranean Sea who be-
friended a solitary dolphin named Simo. Every day, 
Simo used to take the boy on his back across a 
stretch of water between the child's home and his 
school. Tragically, the boy fell sick and died. Upon 
the boy's death and for many days thereafter, Simo 
kept returning to the place of their meeting un-
til he too died of a broken heart. Simo's story is 
one of the countless legends of friendship between 
children and dolphins that were popular during 
the Roman Empire. As it was with the Greeks, the 
Romans were fascinated with these creatures. 
These are some of the many legends that kept 
my adolescent mind awake late into the night, ea-
ger to read more about these wonderful and some-
how magical dolphins. One story after another, 
one legend overlapping the next, until my dreams 
became filled with gods, seas, and dolphins, and 
19 

B E A U T I F U L 
M I N D S 
from time to time, I would find myself among 
them. 
The mystical relationships with these marine 
mammals proliferated in the annals of ancient 
Greek and Roman culture, but there are other cul-
tures throughout the world that have honored dol-
phins and whales, many of which still exist today. 
Among the most marvelous folklore is that of Aus-
tralian aborigines who tell of being in communi-
cation with bottlenose dolphins in the Indian 
Ocean for thousands of years. They have a medi-
cine man that calls and talks to them telepathi-
cally, and through these communications guaran-
tees the good fortune and happiness of the tribe. 
No less enthralling are the tales from the banks 
of the Amazon River in Brazil, where some tribes 
believe that the boto, a local species of freshwater 
dolphins, hold the power to transform them-
selves into beautiful young men in order to seduce 
women during celebrations and ceremonies. Their 
belief is so strong that some children in the tribe 
are thought to have been fathered by these ani-
mals. 
It's hard to draw a line between legend and re-
20 

An Eternal Fascination 
ality when talking about the human fascination 
with dolphins. Stories abound of animals rescuing 
shipwrecked sailors, saving struggling swimmers 
by fending off shark attacks, of children riding on 
the backs of wild dolphins. Dolphins have become 
our saviors in art, poetry, and literature—even on 
television. Who can forget Flipper (or rather one of 
the five actual Flippers), the benevolent and watch-
ful "puppy of the sea," soliciting human compan-
ionship and protecting all that is good? It seems 
even dolphins can attain Hollywood stardom. 
Some of the legends told by our ancestors were 
not so far from reality. Consider for a moment in-
teractions between solitary dolphins and humans. 
Documented cases of these relationships appear 
more and more frequently in recent times. In the 
Italian port of Manfredonia lives Filippo, a lone 
and 
sociable 
adult 
male 
bottlenose 
dolphin. 
Filippo spends his time floating next to his favor-
ite moored boat or playing with the propellers of 
other vessels coming into and leaving the port. Fil-
ippo is anything but active. Unlike a wild dolphin, 
whose days are spent foraging sometimes over vast 
distances, Filippo spends his time leisurely catch-
21 

B E A U T I F U L 
M I N D S 
ing easy fish inside the port, masturbating with 
inflatable dinghies, but more than anything else, 
he loves interaction with humans, above all women, 
whom he approaches demanding some kind of sex-
ual contact. In the company of men, Filippo pre-
fers to play macho games, sometimes becoming a 
bit aggressive and intolerant, striking out with his 
beak in anxious moments. Filippo is one of the 
greatest examples of a human-dolphin relation-
ship. It is easy to find many similarities between 
his dolphin and our human behavior, whether we 
care to admit it or not. 
A few years after my first encounter with Mara 
at the aquarium in Italy, I finally found myself 
at home with dolphins. This time, it was in their 
home. Working at sea with dolphins had become 
my job as a scientist, my greatest passion, and a 
natural part of my everyday life. Spending hours, 
days, and years observing their behavior, following 
their movements, recording their sounds, I learned 
that they were not the big-brained Einsteins, wiz-
ards, or philosophers as described in so many fa-
bles, but rather they were very intriguing, highly 
complex and flexible social animals completely 
22 

An Eternal Fascination 
adapted to an ocean life—one that is still little un-
derstood and rich with their many secrets. The 
more I came to know them, the more I became 
skeptical of the chronicles and folklore depicting 
dolphins as creatures who voluntarily associate 
with people. The more I learned about their exis-
tence, the more I realized that the relationship be-
tween humans and sociable dolphins has not al-
ways been as congenial as I thought. Today more 
then ever, we are walking a thin line in our connec-
tion with these animals. 
It is true that dolphins are social by nature. 
But it is also true that dolphins do not always wel-
come physical contact with humans, and their ex-
istence as well as their home require as much re-
spect as we might give to our own. My scientific 
vision and my affection for these animals were pull-
ing me away from that need for physical contact 
that we humans impose on creatures that seem to 
fulfill our criteria of personhood. And with these 
realizations, I closed the door on the stories of hu-
mans and dolphins that had filled my adolescence 
. . . until one chilly winter morning. 
I was following a school of bottlenose dol-
23 

B E A U T I F U L 
M I N D S 
phins in the coastal waters of Los Angeles, as I 
do on a weekly basis. This particular morning, my 
"metropolitan" dolphins were foraging for prey 
somewhat sluggishly, moving along the beach sev-
eral hundred meters from the surf line. I was work-
ing to photo-identify the school, trying to take 
clear pictures of all the dorsal fins of all the indi-
viduals in the group. This is a technique used by 
many cetologists (scientists studying whales and 
dolphins) to recognize specific individuals. Not un-
like a human fingerprint, a dolphin's dorsal fin 
works well for identification thanks to its distinc-
tive scars and notches. 
Since I began my study of these animals, they 
had never seemed to mind my presence, often rid-
ing the bow waves created by my boat moving 
through the water in a behavior called bow riding 
or just continuing their natural behavior with me 
at their side as a tolerated intruder. I would like 
to believe that in some peculiar way, my boat and 
its researchers, jam-packed with cameras, hydro-
phones, and computers, had become part of their 
everyday life's scenery. 
The morning was foggy and cold, and the dol-
24 

An Eternal Fascination 
phins were moving north and then south, stop-
ping here and there for short inspecting dives. I 
was following and recording their activities as they 
encircled a large school of sardines just off the 
Malibu pier. The fish were trapped ingeniously, as 
if in a net shaped by a tight formation of nine dol-
phins. Just after they began feeding, one of the 
dolphins in the group suddenly left the circle, 
swimming offshore at a high speed. In less than an 
instant, the other dolphins left their prey to follow 
their companion. This was an odd behavior for my 
metropolitan dolphins. Usually they moved back 
and forth very close to the beach, taking the time 
to entirely deplete the school of fish on which they 
were dining while occasionally milling at the sur-
face like a bunch of oversized floating buoys. To 
abruptly stop feeding and take off in an unrelated 
direction was rather peculiar. 
Always curious, I left the schooling fish, still 
visible from the surface, and accelerated into the 
incoming waves to follow the dolphin group. We 
were at least three miles offshore when the dol-
phins stopped suddenly, forming a large ring with-
out exhibiting any specific behavior. That's when 
25 

B E A U T I F U L 
M I N D S 
one of my assistants spotted an inert human body 
with long, blonde hair floating in the center of the 
dolphin ring. Breaking the ring, I maneuvered the 
boat closer to the girl and asked if she was okay, 
but she looked at us with no apparent response. 
We decided to get her into the boat. As we came 
closer, she raised a weak arm in what seemed a plea 
for help. Her face was pale and her lips were blue 
as I pulled her fully dressed and motionless body 
from the water. We called the local lifeguards on 
the radio and were told not to touch anything un-
til they arrived, which we promptly disregarded, 
helping her out of her wet clothes and trying to get 
her warm by using blankets and contact from our 
bodies. When we pulled her from the water, she 
was hypothermic. She began to respond and as we 
turned to go back to port I noticed that the dol-
phins were gone. 
Later at the hospital, a doctor told me that she 
was from Germany, on vacation in Los Angeles. 
She was eighteen and was evidently trying to swim 
offshore to die by suicide. When we found her, 
she had all her travel and identification documents 
tied around her neck in a plastic bag. The bag also 
26 

An Eternal Fascination 
contained a letter, which I suspect must have been 
some explanation for her decision to kill herself. 
The doctor told me that had we not found her 
when we did, she would surely have died. That is 
when I remembered the dolphins and how we had 
come upon her. 
Sheer coincidence? Perhaps. But I still think 
and dream about that cold day and that tiny, pale 
girl lost in the ocean and found again for some in-
explicable reason, by us, by the dolphins? My ado-
lescent drawer filled with anecdotes and legends is 
still closed, but after that chilly morning, my fasci-
nation remains acute. 
What is it that makes dolphins so appealing to us? 
I often dwell on that question. Sometimes it is 
hard to be strictly scientific and deny the Greeks' 
model of an intelligent, conscious, and compas-
sionate creature. And so it seems tough to ignore 
the many similarities that dolphins share with hu-
mans. They are, it would seem, more like us in 
their family bonds, the care and education of their 
27 

B E A U T I F U L 
M I N D S 
young, culture, politics, social structure, even the 
ability to be sensitive and emotional. And they ri-
val our capacity to experience fear, pleasure, and 
pain. 
How can I forget the heartbreaking expression 
of Mara, enslaved in those four walls of the tank? 
Was it just my vivid imagination that her lethargic 
behavior and her soulful expression reflected her 
memory of life in the open ocean, a life without 
barriers and limits? Was she choking on the stale 
and confined waters of her tank? Did she miss 
her companions? Or was I just trying to humanize 
that dolphin and her feelings? 
What about Filippo and his strong and some-
times too passionate feelings toward our species? 
Also the fruit of a scientist's imagination? Or is his 
behavior an attempt to shift his emotions from his 
missing companions toward these terrestrial, bi-
ped friends? 
Communication may constitute yet another 
important facet of our fascination with dolphins. I 
can't count the number of times people have asked 
me, "Can we talk to them?" The origins of this 
mindset probably came from an extravagant scien-
28 

An Eternal Fascination 
cist named John Lilly and the work he did with 
dolphins in captivity. Lilly believed that dolphins 
possess a highly developed brain and sophisticated 
linguistic abilities. His work captivated the public 
interest in the 1960s and his books became best 
sellers. He believed that humans and dolphins 
could communicate with each other, and his work 
was focused on breaking through an interspecies 
language barrier. Whether Lilly's work was convinc-
ing or whether it was our human desire to believe 
him, the idea that dolphins were intelligent mam-
mals capable of communication became widely 
known. Whatever Lilly or we actually believe about 
human and dolphin communication, it remains 
that the story of the talking dolphin, especially for 
young children, today represents one of the most 
wonderful tales on Earth. 
Next to communication, our fascination with 
dolphins may begin with our childlike attraction 
to their playfulness. They seem to experience great 
joy in playing with their companions or with ani-
mate or inanimate objects that they come across. 
They are often observed amusing themselves with 
balls in captivity as well as with plastic bags or 
29 

B E A U T I F U L 
M I N D S 
strings of kelp in the open sea. They may toss a fish 
in the air with their beak and then grab it again 
and again as if in a silly mood, or engage in spec-
tacular acrobatic jumps, lateral breaches, synchro-
nous bows, and outrageous leaps. They may tease a 
sea turtle by pulling on its tail or imitate the move-
ment of a small shark by swimming in a side-to-
side motion. Joy seems to be contagious among 
dolphins. 
Our fascination with dolphins may also derive 
from the particular shape of their mouths, form-
ing what seems to us to be an indelible and friendly 
smile, even if, from time to time, that smile may 
conceal an upset or angry animal. Dolphins may 
become irritated and unpredictable, just as we do. 
Our friendly Filippo, for instance, cares for human 
contact more than anything, but now and again, 
he falls into a grumpy mood, displaying annoy-
ance and sometimes even biting. Whatever we may 
think of his smiling face, in those moments, he 
isn't happy or friendly. 
Are we drawn perhaps to the power of their 
streamlined bodies, able to streak through the wa-
ter at high speed just as racing cars might on the 
30 

An Eternal Fascination 
open road? Or might it just be that the curiosity of 
a dolphin in many ways is so similar to the inno-
cent inquisitiveness of a child? 
Maybe it is because their world seems so differ-
ent from our own; the multi-dimensional ocean 
world in which a dolphin seems to live in perfect 
harmony. If you have ever seen a dolphin leaping 
from the water or surfing the waves at the shore-
line, it may have left you astounded at its almost 
effortless ability to move as it pleases in an aquatic 
medium so foreign to us. In the sea, our efforts 
seem feeble by comparison. 
Perhaps our fascination with dolphins isn't re-
ally linked to any specific attribute. Maybe it is just 
the magnitude of what we still don't understand. 
Almost Like Us 
The gorilla in front of me sits like a Rodin statue, 
his chin propped in his hand. He is lying calmly in 
the deep shade of the forest, his broad, black back 
gleaming. Ruchina is a young adult male, a black-
buck, so-called because the saddle of silver hair has 
just begun to spread across his torso. He sits only a 
31 

B E A U T I F U L 
M I N D S 
few yards from me, having decided to take his mid-
day rest in this spot. He made a grand entrance a 
few minutes earlier, charging through a thicket, 
grabbing at a sapling tree, and cracking it in half 
before coming to rest like a runaway sixteen-
wheeler. The rest of his group is fifty yards away, 
happily munching a salad of tender plants. The 
morning in this African forest is already warm, 
and sitting in the shade is the best place for both 
gorillas and their researchers. 
Ruchina is something of an outcast, albeit self-
imposed. As he approached adolescence, he began 
to find himself at odds with Zeus, the group's silver-
back. Over time, he distanced himself from the 
rest of the group until he found himself in his 
present state, tagging along behind them like a 
child eager to be independent but ultimately tied 
by a psychological leash to a parent. Meanwhile, he 
is frustrated at the lack of attention he receives 
from females and his lack of status in life gener-
ally. So we have to take care, because Ruchina is 
prone to vent his anger on the people who follow 
him around. This day, he got rid of his negative en-
ergy merely by killing a small tree. 
32 

An Eternal Fascination 
As he sits near us, occasionally turning an eye 
in our direction, he seems the epitome of calm. 
But it can change at a moment's notice if some-
one moves too fast or steps in the direction he 
was planning on moving. So we watch and admire 
carefully. Everyone who has sat next to an ape and 
stared into his eyes must ponder the same ques-
tion. What do they understand? What goes on in-
side their heads? We swing between anthropomor-
phic thoughts of their essential humanness and 
denial of their intellect altogether. This is because 
of the intellectual black box they represent. As we 
shall see, fascinating recent research is opening the 
box for us a bit, and if interpreted correctly, will 
shine a whole new light on intelligence and cogni-
tion in gorillas and the other great apes. 
Our ignorance of apes, and of their common 
bonds with ourselves, has spurred our fascination 
with them and guided much of the history of in-
quiry into their lives. While most of the dolphin's 
life is hidden beneath the waves, the apes conceal 
themselves in tropical forests that until recently 
were too remote for the adventures of even the 
most intrepid explorers and scientists. And we 
33 

B E A U T I F U L 
M I N D S 
have spent much of history trying to deny that 
they and we are the closest of kin. Richard Owen, a 
renowned British paleontologist of the mid-nine-
teenth century, wanted to reclassify humans in an 
entirely different subclass of mammals than the 
apes. This would be like deciding that horses and 
zebras should not be considered horses simply be-
cause zebras have stripes. Owen was driven by a re-
ligious conviction that people and apes could not 
share a recent, common ancestry. But after seeing 
an orangutan in the London Zoo, Owen's contem-
porary and famed naturalist Charles Darwin wrote 
that people probably "retained from an extremely 
remote period some degree of instinctive love and 
sympathy." 
Even a century later, the degree of kinship be-
tween people and apes was still being challenged 
and widely misunderstood. Many scientists study-
ing the fossil record had long believed that apes 
and humans had not had a common ancestor in 
15 million years or more. Then in the late 1960s, 
the biochemist Allan Wilson and Vincent Sarich, 
then an anthropology graduate student at the Uni-
versity of California, Berkeley, compared the im-
34 

An Eternal Fascination 
mune system similarities of humans and apes. They 
devised a scale of the strength of antibody reac-
tions in relation to the likely evolutionary distance 
between the species. Their conclusion: that people 
and chimps last shared a common ancestor only 5 
million years ago. The idea of such a recent com-
mon ancestry outraged many in the scientific com-
munity, not to mention the public. But as further 
genetic research showed, Wilson and Sarich were 
just about right. Our kin and we were one and the 
same only several million years ago. 
Chimpanzees are familiar to all of us; they serve 
as the basis for all of our imaginings about what 
human ancestors may have been like millions of 
years ago. They are, after all, our cousins. Chim-
panzees live nearly human life spans, up to sixty 
years in captivity and forty-five or more in the wild. 
Their life cycle is almost human; a several-year pe-
riod of infant dependency, reaching puberty in the 
early teen years. Females begin to have offspring 
at around fifteen and, after an eight-month preg-
35 

B E A U T I F U L 
M I N D S 
nancy, give birth every four to five years for the rest 
of their lives. 
We recognize them as our kin because they are 
so much like us physically, beyond the hair and 
the four-legged posture. And the physical similari-
ties are not as riveting as the psychological, social, 
and emotional similarities. Apes have the same psy-
chosocial needs as children, from everything we 
understand about them. They can learn language 
skills, but only when reared in a properly social 
environment with nurturing love and attention, 
since their development is hinged on their emo-
tional needs, just like children. 
Through the centuries humanity has regarded 
apes as heroes, enemies, or victims depending on 
the historical attitudes of the moment. In ancient 
times apes were considered low, derogatory crea-
tures and a symbol of malice. They were ruthlessly 
trained for human amusement with little or no re-
spect and were rumored to possess mystical pow-
ers that could be utilized in potions or spells: in 
some traditions the urine of an ape near the door 
of an enemy would make that person hated, and 
an ape's eye had the power to render its possessor 
completely invisible. 
36 

An Eternal Fascination 
In ancient Egypt the reputation of apes 
changed for the better. Baboons were thought to 
represent the sun, moon, and stars and were re-
garded with great respect. Apes were highly cher-
ished and loved. The ancient Egyptian practice of 
mummifying the dead often included apes, which 
were considered sacred pets and prepared as mum-
mies to serve their masters in the eternal after-
life. By the time of the Old Kingdom, which began 
around 2650 B.C., baboons were closely associated 
with Thoth, the god of the moon, wisdom, and sa-
cred writing. Thoth was either portrayed in hu-
man form with the head of an ibis or as a baboon 
with a furled and pensive brow. The Nubian tribes 
who inhabited the area that is now Egypt and Su-
dan believed that apes could understand human 
speech and their ability to learn a language ex-
ceeded that of children. 
Ancient India was another good place to be a 
primate. In the Ramayana of Valmiki, the first epic 
poem written in Sanskrit recounting the mythical 
tales of King Rama and his travels, the powerful 
Vanaras were a monkey-like species of warriors loyal 
to King Rama. They were rumored to be able to 
converse with each other and served as the right 
37 

B E A U T I F U L 
M I N D S 
hand of Rama in his battle against the demons. 
The most powerful of the Vanaras was Hanuman, 
half monkey, half god, who became the symbol of 
loyalty, strength, and self-sacrifice. He possessed 
godly powers enabling him to fly and change his 
physical aspect. Hanuman could become gigantic, 
tiny, invisible, or similar to a man. He was so strong 
as to shake the mountains, demolishing the cliff 
tops as he flew. 
Chinese and Tibetan legend speak of the great 
stone ape Sun Wukong, who was born from a rock 
with supernatural powers and rose quickly to be-
come the king of the monkeys on Earth. Mischie-
vous and egocentric, Sun Wukong lived peacefully 
until realizing to his dismay that he was mortal 
like other monkeys. In a quest for immortality, the 
Monkey King wandered the world in search of 
someone able to teach him the secrets of perpetual 
life. He eventually enlisted the help of a great Tao-
ist sage who, among other things, uttered the words 
of illumination and taught him the secret of sev-
enty-two transformations and how to fly among 
the clouds. With a powerful magical weapon that 
he stole from the Dragon King, Sun Wukong bat-
38 

An Eternal Fascination 
tied many demons in service of the ruler of the 
universe, the Jade Emperor, until his ego again got 
the better of him and he left heaven in disgust. 
The infuriated Jade Emperor dispatched a power-
ful army to obliterate Sun Wukong, but the stone 
ape proved too powerful and rebuffed the attack. 
The Emperor then recruited the help of the Bud-
dha, who was able to subdue Sun Wukong with a 
simple wager. After centuries of service to the heav-
enly empire, Sun Wukong finally made peace with 
the Jade Emperor and his court, gaining the title of 
"Buddha Victorious against Disaster." This great 
stone ape was even considered (though not even-
tually chosen) as a possible mascot of the 2008 
Olympics in Beijing. 
It was Christian symbology that once again 
changed the ape's destiny from that of venerated 
god to a symbol of vanity and greed. Some legends 
tell of Satan recreating himself in the form of an 
ape. Western culture began to regard apes as im-
moral and a representation of insecurity and im-
modesty, the lowest form of our bestial nature. 
It is not clear from these legends and fables 
whether they relate to apes or monkeys or both. 
39 

B E A U T I F U L 
M I N D S 
The distinction between apes and monkeys was 
not made or understood in ancient times. It is even 
difficult to precisely trace the taxonomy of these 
species because the terminology has changed sev-
eral times throughout the history of the study of 
primates. 
The mention of apes in print dates back to oc-
casional references in the twelfth century, but it is 
not until the beginning of the twentieth century 
that they emerged as subjects of popular novels 
like Tarzan of the Apes by Edgar Rice Burroughs, 
the legendary 1914 story of a boy lost in the jun-
gle and raised by apes. Four years after its suc-
cessful publication, the silent movie version of the 
story starring Elmo Lincoln appeared in theaters 
to standing ovations, opening the door to the ape 
movies of the future. The 1933 film King Kong be-
gan with the words of an Arabian proverb: "And lo, 
the beast looked upon the face of beauty. And it 
stayed its hand from killing. And from that day, it 
was as one dead." In what became one of the most 
popular movies ever made, the fifty-foot-tall go-
rilla King Kong introduced moviegoers to an ape 
personality that at one moment was savage and at 
40 

An Eternal Fascination 
the next tender and protective. It became time for 
monkey business in show business. After the im-
mense success of King Kong, Hollywood went ape-
crazy, producing an average of a monkey movie 
every two years or so. From the 1949 Mighty Joe 
Young, in which a ten-foot-tall gorilla becomes the 
pet and protector of an orphan girl, to the 1951 
Bedtime for Bonzo, which starred U.S. president-to-
be Ronald Reagan, apes were and continue to be 
profitable endeavors; the second major remake of 
King Kong appeared in theaters in 2005. Hollywood 
also produced a string of ape movie flops like King 
Kong vs. Godzilla and The Beast that Killed Women, a 
story of a murderous gorilla that tiptoes nightly 
into a nudist camp to prey on topless women. 
It was the 1988 Gorillas in the Mist, however, 
starring Sigourney Weaver as Dian Fossey, the real-
life pioneer of an up-close-and-personal style of 
gorilla research, that gave our primate cousins 
some form of redemption on the big screen. It was 
perhaps this film that stimulated public awareness 
of the plight of gorillas and their disappearing hab-
itat, and initiated a deeper appreciation for the 
similarities between humans and gorillas. 
41 

B E A U T I F U L 
M I N D S 
Today everyone is familiar with chimpanzees. 
They fill our imagination from an early age, from 
Curious George to National Geographic program-
ming. The more we discover about them, the more 
we become fascinated by the striking number of 
similarities with our own existence—their social 
relations, their behavior, their desires and expres-
sions, their intellectual skills. Jane GoodalPs state-
ment that "the structure of the chimpanzee brain 
is startlingly similar to that of the human" may 
have forever changed how humans regard these 
animals. 
Even a perfunctory visual examination of a 
human brain and a chimp's will yield several ana-
tomical and striking similarities. This is perhaps 
not too surprising, considering our nearly identi-
cal DNA. It may seem peculiar, but chimps are 
even more closely related to us than they are to go-
rillas. Every day in the forests, they make decisions 
and cooperate as we do; they catch diseases as we 
do and make use of tools in a way that is similar to 
our use of them. They can learn the meaning of 
words and signs, master complex exercises, skills, 
42 

An Eternal Fascination 
and abstract concepts, and think in a logical fash-
ion. They hug, kiss, and wrestle. They feel pain, 
fear, and joy. And they share something with us 
that we often consider uniquely human: they have 
a concept of self. 
43 

c h a p t e r t w o 
TWO HISTORIES A F I E L D 
THERE WERE INFINITE constraints and innumer-
able logistical hurdles. There were unstable vessels 
to work from and elusive animals that lived mostly 
beneath the sea, swimming freely in an unknown 
world. They were difficult to follow, and changing 
conditions at sea could place the researchers them-
selves in peril with little or no warning. A dolphin 
45 

B E A U T I F U L 
M I N D S 
field researcher needed a variety of skills ranging 
from scientist to sailor. For these and other rea-
sons, it is perhaps unsurprising that fieldwork at 
sea lagged behind the study of apes twenty or more 
years. 
Although early data on the biology and popu-
lation of large whales and stock management were 
collected in the commercial whaling community, 
the first glimpse of the social lives of small dol-
phins came from the tanks of marine studios. In 
the early 1940s, the comparative psychologist 
Donald Olding Hebb shifted his focus from pri-
mates to dolphins, collaborating on one of the first 
studies of dolphin social behavior in captivity. Fol-
lowing in his footsteps, scientists turned increas-
ingly to the study of captive dolphins, who were 
trained primarily for public spectacles of synchro-
nized leaps through hoops and ball play. 
Seeking to escape the constraints of an aquar-
ium tank and willing to brave hostile conditions 
and elusive animals, a few resourceful individu-
als looked seaward in the hope of understanding 
the lives of wild dolphins observed in their natural 
habitat. In the late 1950s and 1960s, David and 
46 

Two Histories Afield 
Melba Caldwell, a husband-and-wife team who 
had studied animals in captivity, contributing to 
the understanding of social relations of small ceta-
ceans, ventured offshore in the Gulf of Mexico for 
what was probably one of the first opportunistic 
behavioral investigations of wild dolphins. John 
Prescott and Ken Norris, working at the now-
defunct Marineland of the Pacific, were the first to 
discover a dolphin's ability to echolocate. Their 
early work on dolphins in the wild and that of the 
Caldwells helped to set the stage for other studies 
of these free-ranging, fast-moving, and still unfa-
miliar animals. 
As cetacean scientists broadened their focus 
to include the open ocean, methodologies became 
more refined, and technologies were developed to 
solve the particular problems encountered in this 
kind of research. Inspiration for these methodolo-
gies and new technologies often came from the 
work of other animal behaviorists. For example, 
primate biologists had developed a method for 
recognizing and tracking individual mountain go-
rillas by collecting nose-print diagrams, and chim-
panzee individuals were being identified by cata-
47 

B E A U T I F U L 
M I N D S 
loging their unique facial characteristics. Following 
their lead, Bernd Wtirsig and other dolphin biolo-
gists created a system of photo-identification that 
utilized the natural nicks and marks on dolphin 
dorsal fins as a unique fingerprint to identify indi-
vidual animals. The ability to recognize individu-
als over periods of years or decades launched a new 
era of long-term cetacean research and opened the 
door to a deeper understanding of the structure of 
dolphin societies. 
The everyday presence of bottlenose dolphins 
near coastlines and their cosmopolitan distribu-
tion in temperate and tropical seas made them one 
of the most studied cetaceans worldwide. Randall 
Wells, a biologist at the Chicago Zoological Soci-
ety and his collaborators at the Mote Marine Lab 
were among the most persistent followers of dol-
phins' flukeprints in the 1970s. Equipped with 
notebooks, cameras, and tape recorders, they spent 
over three decades observing a forty-square-mile 
area of Florida's Sarasota Bay from their small 
fleet of research vessels, running what is now rec-
ognized as the world's longest study of wild Atlan-
tic bottlenose dolphins. In good and bad weather, 
48 

Two Histories Afield 
they chased four generations of resident dolphins, 
photo-identifying over 2,500 dolphins and open-
ing a window on the social organization of groups 
based on sex, age, and reproductive conditions. 
They established family trees, studied the reactions 
of pollutants in the water and the effects of inter-
actions with humans, and set the groundwork for 
the conservation and management of small ceta-
ceans. 
A decade later in the waters of Shark Bay, Aus-
tralia, Richard Connor, Rachel Smolker, and Janet 
Mann started a parallel project studying over four 
hundred identified Indian Ocean bottlenose dol-
phins. With its smooth, clear water, enviable 
weather, and dozens of animals to pursue for hours 
at a time, Shark Bay provided a paradise for dol-
phin research. While animals were bow riding up-
side-down, researchers were able to determine the 
sex of many local individuals, facilitating an un-
derstanding of their societies and the relationships 
between individuals. 
Scientists in Shark Bay came to know their 
subject animals so well that they could recognize 
named individuals by sight. In the company of 
49 

B E A U T I F U L 
M I N D S 
these dolphins, they discovered that the animals 
displayed associations similar to the ones found 
in Sarasota, but there was more. Male dolphins 
formed alliances with other males to cooperate, 
sometimes violently, against other alliances in com-
petition for resources. This discovery revealed an-
other face of dolphins; behind their eternal smile, 
these creatures were capable of violence not only 
toward other species but also toward their own. 
In the late 1960s, Ken Norris chose Kealake-
kua Bay on the Big Island of Hawaii to initiate his 
research on the resident spinner dolphins. Over 
the next thirty years, he carried out four differ-
ent studies and came to be known informally in 
cetologist circles as the grandfather of dolphin re-
search. In their book The Hawaiian Spinner Dolphin, 
Norris, Wells, Wiirsig, and his wife Melany Wiirsig 
presented the first complete scientific natural his-
tory of a wild dolphin species ever written. One of 
their first discoveries was that spinner dolphins 
have an extreme sensitivity toward intruders, in-
cluding researchers, which presented a new set of 
problems in observing them. 
Norris wasn't an ordinary research scientist; 
50 

Two Histories Afield 
he used his extraordinary understanding of the 
natural world as well as old-fashioned ingenuity 
to study these difficult animals without actually 
interacting with them. He designed what became 
known as the SSSM or "semi-submersible seasick 
machine." Though constrained by lack of financial 
support, his first prototype was impressive, an air-
plane fuel tank with a welded-on observation cyl-
inder. The field tests proved unsatisfying, however, 
and Norris began work on a second generation 
of underwater viewing vessel. The Maka'ala, which 
means "the watchful" in Hawaiian, lived a short 
life and ended up sinking in a rainstorm. 
The third generation was another story alto-
gether. The Smyg Tittar'n, Swedish for "the tip-toe-
ing looker," eventually evolved into a functional 
and sophisticated eight-meter research vessel of 4.5 
tons. An observer could climb down into a cham-
ber with an underwater viewing window and re-
cord the dolphins' behavior. Despite being limited 
to inshore work due to its weight, it was flawlessly 
in line with Norris's approach of examining the 
dolphin world from the perspective of a dolphin. 
The Smyg Tittar'n provided a truly amazing win-
51 

B E A U T I F U L 
M I N D S 
dow on dolphin underwater life . . . but the side-
effect of turning human spectators green with sea-
sickness was never solved. 
Norris collected data by any means available, 
including data from land-based stations, aerial 
surveys, boat surveys, and observations from the 
Smyg Tittar'n. The length and breadth of this data 
brought to light the high degree of fluidity in dol-
phin school membership, the high level of cooper-
ation among individuals, their tendency to use cer-
tain habitats for specific and repetitive purposes, 
and the importance and length of parental care 
and instruction in the development of offspring. 
Norris was also one of the first to use the human 
concept of "culture" when describing dolphin soci-
eties—a controversial assertion that now is gaining 
acceptance worldwide in the study of cetaceans. 
With its distinctive tall fin, striking black and 
white markings, and a cosmopolitan range, an-
other dolphin, the killer whale or orca, was a per-
fect candidate for long-term photo-identification 
studies. The world's authorities on these animals 
were Michael Bigg, Ken Balcomb, John Ford, and 
Graeme Ellis, whose studies in Washington state 
52 

Two Histories Afield 
and British Columbia began in the 1970s. Their 
work focused on the complex social organization 
prevalent in this species, an organization that in-
cludes pods, matrilineal groups, and acoustic 
clans, as well as amazing foraging specializations 
and cooperative group hunting. Their investiga-
tions not only improved our knowledge of these 
whales, but helped to diminish their public repu-
tation as ruthless killers. 
Over three decades of long-term field studies have 
laid a healthy foundation for a growing number of 
students, volunteers, and researchers who are now 
continuing the pioneer research of their mentors, 
venturing into previously unstudied seas and look-
ing at still-unfamiliar dolphin species. Although 
advancing technology has provided a vast array of 
aids that the first scientists could only dream of, 
like satellite tags, GPS, laptop computers, remote 
global imagery, and better foul weather gear, to-
day's cetologists must still struggle with the perils 
of working at sea. 
53 

B E A U T I F U L 
M I N D S 
The Veil Lifts on the Apes 
In the late nineteenth and early twentieth centu-
ries, great apes were zoological curiosities, obtained 
at great expense by expeditions to the most remote 
parts of Africa. Gorillas were the most sought af-
ter, because of their imposing size. If they survived 
the sea voyage to London or New York, they rarely 
lived more than a few months. A visitor's guide 
to the Bronx Zoo from 1903 tells the visitor that 
the gorilla on display will likely live only a short 
time before succumbing to "its own sullenness." 
Keepers had little idea what their dietary needs 
were, let alone their psychological welfare behind 
the bars of antiquated zoological parks. They were 
treated as highly dangerous, even savage animals, 
although a caged gorilla is generally an apathetic, 
bored creature unlikely to harm others. 
The public image of gorillas has evolved from 
savage beast to gentle giant. When the explorer 
and filmmaker Carl Akeley spent a few weeks try-
ing to film mountain gorillas in the 1930s, it was 
the most intensive quality time anyone had ever 
54 

Two Histories Afield 
spent with the enormous apes. Thirty years later, 
George Schaller, a famed wildlife biologist at the 
New York Zoological Society, spent a year living 
with mountain gorillas in the Democratic Repub-
lic of Congo. His account revealed gorillas to be 
timid creatures living in dire conditions, threat-
ened by a surrounding sea of people. A year of field 
observation in those days was considered a Hercu-
lean feat, but twelve months limited the quantity 
and quality of information that could be gathered. 
Schaller used stealth to observe the gorillas, not 
the long, arduous process of accustoming the ape 
to one's presence. 
Not until 1960 did the veil truly lift on the 
great apes. It was not an animal behaviorist but 
a fossil hunter who instigated the modern era of 
primate study. Louis Leakey, the son of English 
missionaries in Kenya, had established himself as 
an authority on fossils with the discovery of an 
early human skull, dubbed "Nutcracker Man," in 
Olduvai Gorge in 1959. He then turned to other 
ways to answer the great questions of human ori-
gins. Leakey reasoned that if one wanted to under-
stand how early humans lived, what better way to 
55 

B E A U T I F U L 
M I N D S 
do so than to study our nearest kin, who clearly re-
semble those ancestors, living in precisely the same 
sort of environment? He knew of a British colonial 
hunting reserve in the west of Tanzania, a place re-
nowned for its stock of roan antelope, bushbuck, 
and buffalo. The place was called Gombe Stream 
Reserve, and it also had a healthy complement of 
chimpanzees. 
Leakey needed an eager student to carry out 
his field study of chimpanzees. For this he turned 
to a young woman working as an assistant in his 
museum facility in Nairobi. Jane Goodall had gone 
out to East Africa from England as a tourist and 
secured a clerical position at Leakey's museum, 
hoping to pursue a life in science. Leakey gave her 
that chance. He sent her off to Gombe, thinking 
she might stay for a few months. Goodall im-
mersed herself in the life of the forest and per-
sisted through months of watching the rear ends 
of the apes fleeing her approach. Goodall's months 
turned into years, and as her subjects became ac-
customed to her presence, she painted a portrait 
of chimpanzee society that has given us a whole 
new view of what it means to be human. Hunting, 
56 

Two Histories Afield 
meat-eating, and tool use were all traits thought to 
be uniquely human until Goodall's discoveries in 
the early 1960s. Then in the 1970s, Goodall and 
her growing legion of students and field assistants 
reported infanticide, cannibalism, and warfare—a 
dark side of the apes that reflected so well the dark 
side of ourselves. Over forty years after arriving at 
Gombe, Goodall still directs a project that is the 
longest-running study of wild animals ever con-
ducted. Goodall herself is a leading voice for envi-
ronmentalism and environmental education world-
wide. 
Nearly a decade after sending Jane Goodall to 
Gombe, Leakey gave another young woman an op-
portunity in a field dominated by men. Dian Fossey 
was an American occupational therapist who had 
gone on an African safari and came home deter-
mined to return to Africa to study wild animals. 
Leakey helped set up Fossey in the Virunga Moun-
tains, a volcanic chain in east central Africa, where 
in the face of civil unrest, health problems, and 
numerous other hardships, she established and 
maintained a research station she named Karisoke 
for more than ten years. Fossey's triumph and trag-
57 

B E A U T I F U L 
M I N D S 
edy are well known to many through Gorillas in the 
Mist, a Hollywood film based on her book. Fossey 
persevered through numerous tribulations, but 
she made the tragic mistake of trying to protect 
her gorillas at gunpoint rather than through com-
munity outreach and education of local villagers. 
This approach eventually resulted in her murder 
by a presumed poacher at her research station in 
1984. Immediately following her death, a new gen-
eration of gorilla researchers and conservationists 
took over at Karisoke and focused on involving the 
people and government of Rwanda as protectors 
and beneficiaries of the gorillas. They established 
ecotourism as a major economic force in this poor, 
overcrowded nation, and though the horrors of 
war and genocide have taken a toll on the gorillas' 
future, the outlook is better today than it has been 
for some years. 
Not long after Leakey sent Fossey off to Africa 
to study gorillas, he met Birute Galdikas, a doc-
toral student at the University of California, Los 
Angeles, who expressed her desire to study orang-
utans. The result was a long, arduous study of the 
most inaccessible of the great apes. Galdikas re-
58 

Two Histories Afield 
ported previously unknown features of orangutan 
behavior such as male courtship calls and the oc-
casional occurrence of rape. Because orangutans 
are generally solitary, it took years for Galdikas 
to compile the rich portrait of their societies that 
Fossey and Goodall could see in a much shorter 
time watching the interactions of entire social 
groups. Galdikas stayed on in Borneo for decades 
as Goodall had in Africa, spearheading the Indo-
nesian conservation movement and butting heads 
with government officials time and again in ef-
forts to stop the rampant illegal logging the gov-
ernment tolerates in its own national parks and re-
serves. Like Goodall, her current role is as a social 
activist, and like Goodall her energy is often fo-
cused on the plight of orphaned apes. Galdikas 
and a number of other conservationists in Indone-
sia have established a series of rehabilitation cen-
ters, intended to return orphaned orangutans to 
the wild after a period of re-education to the ways 
of wild apes. This is no easy process; it requires for-
ests empty of apes (so the released orphans do not 
infect their wild cousins with diseases they may 
have acquired in captive life) and thousands of 
59 

B E A U T I F U L 
M I N D S 
hours spent teaching a maturing orangutan all the 
skills it would have normally learned from its 
mother. 
What we know about the last of the great ape 
species, the bonobo, is a fraction of what is known 
about each of the others. Unlike chimpanzees, 
which live in a variety of habitats across the equa-
torial belt of Africa, bonobos live only in a much 
smaller region of flat tropical forest in the center 
of the Congo Basin. The area is remote, accessi-
ble mainly by river and a few small dirt airstrips 
hacked from the rain forest. And it also lies in the 
heart of the war-torn Congo region, making the 
various field sites dangerous for researchers during 
times of war. At all times there is pressure from 
people poaching wildlife, including the bonobos. 
The bonobo was first described in the 1970s, when 
a team of Japanese scientists surveyed its remote 
forest world. But as early as the 1950s, European 
scientists who had observed bonobos in zoos had 
been writing about the "make love, not war" ape, 
as the bonobo came to be nicknamed. It was noted 
that they tend to have sex liberally in a variety of 
humanlike positions and contexts and show little 
60 

Two Histories Afield 
preference for males or females in their choice of 
partners. Only in the 1980s did in-depth research 
begin, and it was hampered by the years needed 
to accustom shy wild apes to a human presence. 
A group of American researchers led by Randall 
Susman began a study at a site along the Lomako 
river in the Democratic Republic of Congo, then 
Zaire. They saw many of the same behaviors that 
captive bonobos had displayed, though at much 
lower frequency than in the wild. The vagaries of 
grant funding and civil wars repeatedly interrupted 
their work, and after a decade there was still much 
to be learned about the apes. A German-led re-
search team arrived in the same area later, followed 
by a Belgian team a few miles away, and through 
the 1980s and 1990s our knowledge of bonobos 
increased exponentially. 
But much of what we know about bonobos is 
the result of work by Takayoshi Kano, a Japanese 
scientist from Osaka who established a research 
station at Wamba, also in the steamy jungles of 
Congo. Unlike the Americans at Lomako, Kano's 
team cleared a patch of rain forest and planted 
sugar cane, which they use as a massive candy store 
61 

B E A U T I F U L 
M I N D S 
to attract the local bonobos. The result was apes 
who rapidly became accustomed to people, and 
therefore highly observable. This allowed Kano and 
associates to make more detailed observations of 
wild bonobo social behavior at close range than 
anyone else had done previously. Many of the sex-
laden images of bonobo life as seen in captivity fall 
apart under scrutiny of their natural behavior in 
the rain forest. 
Although it may seem that we have been watching 
great apes for a long time, the era of close obser-
vation and modern research methods is less than 
four decades old. It cannot last much longer. Sev-
eral decades from now, the apes, if they exist in the 
wild at all, will be confined to tiny islands of forest 
in which their natural behavior will have been in-
fluenced by the many human disruptions that 
make their lives ever more difficult today. We will 
look back on the last forty years as a golden age for 
the apes; a time when their numbers were falling 
but still healthy. Their forest world had opened up, 
62 

Two Histories Afield 
modern transportation had improved to allow re-
searchers into their forest realms, and modern sci-
ence had the means to study them in great detail. 
All this will almost certainly be gone during the 
lifetime of our children, if not within our own. 
Even the depths of the oceans no longer repre-
sent a realm free of human presence as technol-
ogy marches onward. The logistical difficulties en-
countered in the study of apes and cetaceans in the 
wild may very well be what protected them until 
now. What a loss it would be if we allow ourselves 
to pressure these incredible animals out of exis-
tence. Perhaps their salvation lies in an increased 
human understanding of their lives and behavior. 
63 

chapter three 
S W I M M I N G WITH 
D O L P H I N S , 
S W I N G I N G WITH APES 
IF A SOCIETY is a group organized for some 
common purpose, then that implies the society has 
some knowledge of itself, perhaps even some de-
gree of will involved in the society's formation and 
maintenance. Is this the case with dolphins? Some 
scientists describe social structure in animals as 
the patterning of relationships, but they may be ig-
65 

B E A U T I F U L 
M I N D S 
noring the more subtle complexities of group or-
ganization. 
As scientists we try to make sense out of the 
various behaviors we observe in the field. By limit-
ing our observations to the measurement of pat-
terns, are we overlooking a more complete picture 
of animal society? As observers of this complex 
fabric of life, we can't overlook the sheer beauty 
and balance of what we see unfolding before us. 
This, too, must be an integral part of an animal so-
ciety. This, too, should figure into any definition. 
If we are to understand these societies, we proba-
bly need to revise our concept of intelligence and 
learn to think outside of our own species. 
A Society under the Waves 
All around me I see dolphins. I feel as though I 
could be part of a family, somehow different from 
my terrestrial one. At the bow of my boat, there's a 
group of exuberant bottlenose teenagers playing 
among themselves. Some carry strings of kelp on 
the end of their snouts while others frolic with 
small pieces of plastic or jellyfish. We are all follow-
66 

Swimming with Dolphins, Swinging with Apes 
ing one of those "freeways" called fronts, which 
form when water masses of different temperatures 
meet in the ocean. 
Most dolphins are social animals and, like apes 
and humans, derive more advantages than disad-
vantages from living in a group. Schools provide a 
dolphin with protection from predators, a food 
source, and a convenient place to meet fertile sex-
ual partners. 
Bottlenose dolphins are the most well-known 
and studied cetaceans. They spend their lives in 
what are known as fission-fusion societies. "Fis-
sion" means that the members of the local breed-
ing population are continually splitting up and 
going their separate ways. And "fusion" means 
they always come back. A fission-fusion society may 
consist of several to many schools, the composi-
tion of which may be constantly changing on a 
daily or even hourly basis. The complexity of these 
societies, coupled with the difficulties of studying 
animals at sea, present quite a challenge for scien-
tists bent on understanding these cosmopolitan 
animals. 
Who is with whom? Who is not with whom? 
67 

B E A U T I F U L 
M I N D S 
These are important questions for dolphin re-
searchers. Figuring out who, but also why, when, 
and how long different individuals stay together is 
very demanding due to the wide array of social 
strategies found in these animal populations. To 
illustrate how confusing this can be, it's enough to 
look at three populations of bottlenose dolphins-
one swimming in Shark Bay, Australia, another in 
Sarasota Bay, Florida, and the third in waters of 
Moray Firth, Scotland. In Sarasota and Shark Bay, 
females in a school may be either relatively social 
or completely solitary, avoiding the presence of 
other individuals in their group. Males may travel 
alone or form strong relationships with other 
males, bonding in alliances comparable to those 
of their primate cousins. However, when we travel 
half the world away to Scotland, the females be-
have similarly but the males act quite differently— 
they form no alliances at all. 
The unpredictable composition of a dolphin 
school becomes even messier when we look into 
the high variability in foraging strategies used by 
bottlenose dolphins at different locations. In some 
populations, they feed using a complex group 
68 

Swimming with Dolphins, Swinging with Apes 
strategy that involves ingeniously circling and herd-
ing fish schools while a few individuals at a time 
dive to catch prey. Several other animals stand 
guard nearby, occasionally switching jobs so that 
all members of the school may feed. In the Ba-
hamas, things are different. Dolphins work alone 
by diving nose first into the sandy sea bottom to 
seek a yet-unidentified solitary prey, leaving the 
seafloor riddled with face prints that resemble 
small volcanoes. In Shark Bay, dolphins chase fish 
schools by swimming belly up near the surface. 
Prey are then either taken underwater or tossed 
into the air and snatched. In yet another technique 
prevalent on the coastlines of Georgia and South 
Carolina, bottlenose dolphins search out a fish 
school and, once located, cooperatively herd it to 
the muddy shoreline of tidal creeks, forcing the 
prey to jump out of the water onto the beach. 
When the fish are helplessly stranded, the dol-
phins charge the muddy beach, sometimes throw-
ing their entire bodies out of the water to grab a 
fish, then leaping back to the safety of the water. 
This diverse repertoire of foraging behaviors 
emphasizes the ability of these animals to capitalize 
69 

B E A U T I F U L 
M I N D S 
on their own aptitudes and to adopt either soli-
tary or group strategies for hunting, depending on 
a variety of factors including the availability and 
type of food sources and the surrounding environ-
ment. If we think for a moment about accomplish-
ing any of these tasks and the many levels of com-
munication, organization, innovation, and learning 
capacity that these strategies require, we begin to 
gain an appreciation for the level of intelligence in-
herent in a dolphin society. 
Interspecific differences in foraging tech-
niques are plentiful in cetacean field research ob-
servations. At one end of the spectrum there are 
some species of river dolphins like the susu, a 
nearly blind species on the brink of extinction in 
South Asia that somewhat resembles a pink aquatic 
anteater. The susu generally behaves as a solitary 
hunter, side-swimming along the bottom, end-
lessly nodding its head to scan for fish and obsta-
cles with its sophisticated biosonar—a system used 
by dolphins to see and detect objects with sound. 
At the other end, we find huge schools of common 
dolphins—sometimes containing thousands of in-
dividuals—that can fan out to cover a vast amount 
70 

Swimming with Dolphins, Swinging with Apes 
of water in their search for patchily distributed 
fish schools in the open ocean. These cooperative 
groups may, later on, separate into smaller social 
units that disperse in different directions. 
Somewhere in the middle of the spectrum are 
killer whales, cosmopolitan marine mammals liv-
ing from the polar latitudes to the equatorial re-
gions. Among the most distinctive members of the 
dolphin family, they also live in highly coordinated 
and complex societies based on communication 
and group cooperation. Studies in the northeast-
ern Pacific show astonishing differences in dietary 
specializations between two sympatric populations 
of killer whales. These populations, referred to as 
resident and transient, live in the same coastal wa-
ters but are socially isolated from each other. They 
differ in morphology, genetic structure, distribu-
tion, and behavioral patterns. Resident groups 
feed on fish only, whereas transients feed mainly 
on marine mammals. Residents also live in long-
term, large, and stable pods formed by several ma-
ternal lineages, whereas in transient populations 
all of the offspring—except for one male—disperse 
from their maternal pod. The offspring of tran-
71 

B E A U T I F U L 
M I N D S 
sient whales, however, continue to live in their na-
tal range, displaying what is called locational 
philopatry. Transient whale pods of up to four in-
dividuals are much smaller than residents whose 
numbers can reach two hundred in a pod. 
No record of diet specialization like the one 
found in the sympatric populations of killer whales 
has ever been observed elsewhere in the mammal 
world. These dietary strategies seem to have been 
refined over a long period of time spanning multi-
ple generations. In a clever and mutually exclusive 
way, resident and transient whales have developed 
their group foraging tactics to increase both rate 
of prey encounter and prey capture success. De-
pending on the type of prey, resident and transient 
whales have skillfully learned how to adopt differ-
ent detection strategies, using echolocation when 
looking for fish or passive listening during a hunt 
for marine mammals. 
Living in a school of common dolphins or killer 
whales clearly requires much contact and strong 
communication among individuals. 
In highly 
multimodal animals like dolphins, this can be at-
tained through visual, tactile, and acoustic means. 
72 

Swimming with Dolphins, Swinging with Apes 
As in human societies, this voluminous exchange 
of information, transferred from one individual to 
another, forms the foundation for these coordi-
nated social organizations. 
In large or small schools, in fission-fusion socie-
ties or not, in coordinated foraging groups or as 
solitary hunters, cetaceans live in all oceans of the 
world. As diverse as their respective environments, 
they can be as different from each other as are the 
frozen seas of the arctic from the clear warm wa-
ters of the tropics. Different species may resem-
ble each other physically, or their diversity may be 
obvious, as illustrated by the tremendous size dif-
ference between sperm whales, the largest at over 
eighteen meters in length, and the diminutive 
vaquita, an endangered species of porpoise indige-
nous to Mexico's Sea of Cortez, measuring just 
under a meter. 
In their everyday life, all of these species must 
use context-dependent, complex social signals and 
draw from an extensive variety of strategies to re-
73 

B E A U T I F U L 
M I N D S 
solve any given task, including not only foraging 
but also engaging in courtships, maintaining rela-
tionships and hierarchies, or warning other indi-
viduals of peril. 
Like food, sex plays an all-important role in 
dolphin societies. Sex is essential both for repro-
duction and for communication. As observed with 
bonobos, sexual but nonreproductive behavior in 
marine mammal species like bottlenose dolphins 
and spinner dolphins is important in mediating 
social relationships. So-called "goosing" or rostro-
genital contact is widespread in dolphin societies. 
This genital check-up, in which an individual rubs 
its beak into the genital area of another of the 
same or different sex, may tell a dolphin the repro-
ductive state of the inspected animal. In the under-
water world, it is neither unusual nor outrageous 
to find infant males trying to mount their moth-
ers, young males sexually harassing older males, 
older males mounting calves, or an adult male 
mounting other males to express dominance. 
Bottlenose dolphin males reach their sexual 
maturity between ten and twelve years of age; fe-
males between five and ten. As in many dolphin 
74 

Swimming with Dolphins, Swinging with Apes 
species, bottlenose males and females do not dis-
play sexual dimorphism, meaning that both sexes 
look pretty much the same to a human observer. 
After a pregnancy of twelve months or so, a fe-
male dolphin gives birth to a single calf. The dol-
phin females invest a great deal in their offspring, 
as humans, great apes, and other mammals do. 
The birth of a dolphin calf marks the beginning of 
the strongest bond found within a school, that of 
a mother and her calf. They will be united for sev-
eral years to come. At its mother's side, under her 
guidance and devotion, the calf will gradually be 
taught how to survive in the challenging ocean 
world. Understanding parental "love" in species 
other than ours is not easy, mostly because this 
kind of emotion is thought to be for humans only. 
But those of us who have observed the meticulous 
care of a mother for a calf, who have heard the 
pleading and calling of a dolphin mother suddenly 
separated from her offspring, or who have wit-
nessed a mother lingering for hours near a lifeless 
calf, can't help but note the apparent similarities 
between dolphin and human behavior in such cir-
cumstances. 
75 

B E A U T I F U L 
M I N D S 
As they develop and grow older, the young dol-
phins will become increasingly more independent. 
After several years of living together, a mother and 
calf will go their separate ways. In bottlenose dol-
phin schools, some mothers will go off alone while 
others may stay in the school, forming "bands" 
with other mothers who are still caring for their 
calves. After reaching sexual maturity, males and 
females continue to breed well into their forties 
and live into their fifties. 
In learning to evaluate and understand dolphin 
societies, we encounter a vast range of behaviors 
that include the long-term bonds between moth-
ers and calves, alliances among males, group coop-
eration, complex feeding strategies, and more. But 
these diverse behaviors are not found only in dol-
phins. Surprisingly, these behaviors are also found 
in primates. A comparison of the societies of pri-
mates and dolphins reveals many parallels, despite 
the utterly different appearance and habitats of 
these two groups of mammals. 
76 

Swimming with Dolphins, Swinging with Apes 
A Society in the Forest 
Chimpanzees are the most versatile of the apes. 
They live across a wide swath of equatorial Africa, 
from Senegal in the west to Tanzania in the east, in 
habitats ranging from dense tropical rain forest 
to open, nearly treeless grassland. In the center of 
Africa, vast expanses of forest still are home to 
large populations of chimpanzees. But these forest 
tracts are no longer safe havens. Logging ventures 
are tunneling their way into the carpet of greenery, 
carving up ape habitat. 
Most people are familiar with chimpanzees, but 
a close cousin of the chimpanzee has only more re-
cently come to public attention. The bonobo looks 
very much like a chimpanzee. Early reports re-
ferred to it as the pygmy chimpanzee, but the two 
species are nearly the same in size, color, and every 
other physical characteristic. As we shall see later, 
it is in behavior that the two apes diverge. 
Bonobos no doubt once were chimpanzees. 
Their geographic distribution in Africa is below 
the vast bend of the Congo River. On the north-
77 

B E A U T I F U L 
M I N D S 
ern shore are chimpanzees, and also gorillas. The 
tracts of tropical rain forest below the arc of the 
river belong to bonobos, although their total dis-
tribution is a tiny fraction of that of the other Afri-
can apes. Unlike the environmentally catholic 
chimpanzee, bonobos are limited to lowland for-
est. Within their range they number no more than 
a few tens of thousands, and perhaps far less; on-
going political chaos in the Democratic Republic 
of Congo has prevented any recent census-taking. 
The third of the African apes is the largest of 
all primates—the gorilla. Gorillas come in several 
varieties. In most of Africa, western lowland goril-
las, the kind found in zoos, are the norm. These 
are majestic animals with silver-tipped, gray-black 
short hair and chestnut caps. They haunt the flat, 
rain-forested regions of western and central Africa. 
Lowland gorillas number in the tens of thousands, 
though numbers are believed to be falling fast. Far-
ther east, a blacker form, the eastern lowland go-
rilla, lives in both low-lying and mountainous for-
est. Eastern lowlanders are increasingly rare, their 
numbers dropping rapidly in the wake of civil war 
and much poaching in the limited forest areas in 
which they live. 
78 

Swimming with Dolphins, Swinging with Apes 
The best-known variety of gorilla is also the 
rarest. Mountain gorillas live in two separate, 
nearby forest kingdoms. Along the spine of the 
Virunga Volcanoes, a chain of cone-shaped volca-
nic mountains in east-central Africa, live 350 moun-
tain gorillas. Straddling the border between the 
troubled nations of Rwanda and the Democratic 
Republic of Congo, and dipping just a bit into 
Uganda as well, the Virungas harbor the animals 
made famous by the late Dian Fossey. 
Less well-known than the Virungas mountain 
gorillas are those living just a few miles away in a 
nearby range of rugged hills, Bwindi Impenetrable 
National Park. Bwindi is home to about 300 more 
mountain gorillas, distinguishable from 
their 
montane cousins only by a few superficial features. 
Between Bwindi and the Virungas, there are 650 or 
so mountain gorillas left on Earth. Their habitat 
is protected, but their numbers are precariously 
vulnerable to epidemics, civil war, poaching, and 
other social ills. 
In the forests of Asia live the last of the four 
great apes, and the most enigmatic, poorly under-
stood ones, too. Orangutans are shaggy-haired, 
red apes that live in the dense tropical forests of 
79 

B E A U T I F U L 
M I N D S 
the Indonesian islands of Borneo and Sumatra. 
The plight of the orangutan may be worse than 
that of all the other apes, or at least it is the best 
documented. Rapid and often illegal cutting of 
the Indonesian forests that are their homes are 
leaving orangutans without any place to live. This 
is happening at an accelerating rate despite the 
best efforts of conservationists to stem the tide. 
Before we have learned the inner details of the 
lives of these, our fourth nearest kin, they may well 
be gone. 
Chimpanzee and bonobo societies are superficially 
quite similar. Both species live in fission-fusion 
communities and spend their days searching for 
fruit with an occasional morsel of meat. But in 
their gender relations they have gone their own 
ways. Chimpanzees live in male-dominated socie-
ties in which males solicit sex, sometimes brutaliz-
ing females who do not produce. This is not to say 
that females are always submissive; but if they do 
not respond to a male's advances, males may at-
80 

Swimming with Dolphins, Swinging with Apes 
tack them violently. As a male matures, he rises in 
dominance rank, passing each female one by one 
until he begins to challenge the lowest-ranking 
males. Such is life for female chimpanzees; even 
the top-ranking female is subordinate to the lowli-
est male. 
Bonobo females avoid such maltreatment by 
the male gender by bonding together, forming co-
alitions that ward off male aggression. These alli-
ances sometimes even allow females to dominate 
males in some contexts. Bonobos have become fa-
mous as "feminist" apes, but this female tactic is 
really all about living with other females more than 
harassing males. By establishing a way to co-exist 
peacefully with one another, female bonobos avoid 
the sort of squabbling over food that prevents fe-
male chimps from forming alliances. 
Gorillas, meanwhile, live in far more conven-
tional arrangements. Walking through a forest in 
Uganda in the company of a mountain gorilla 
group is like being out on a family stroll in the 
park. They walk slowly, kids exploring every little 
nook and cranny as we go, moms attentive, and a 
silverback male looking worried. Weighing in at 
81 

B E A U T I F U L 
M I N D S 
upward of 400 pounds, gorillas are among the 
brainiest land animals ever to live on Earth. They 
are the most ground-based of the apes—their enor-
mous bulk doesn't suit them well for treetop acro-
batics, though they sometimes try—and also the 
most purely vegetarian. Whereas chimpanzees and 
bonobos love meat and sometimes go to great 
lengths to get a scrap, gorillas disdain even the in-
sects that chimpanzees relish. They are consum-
mate browsers, eating foliage and fruit in tropical 
forests across Africa. On the surface, gorilla society 
seems orderly and staid compared with the high-
energy comings and goings of chimpanzees. But 
underlying their majestic aura, gorillas are a bit 
edgy themselves. As we push through dense un-
dergrowth, the silverback suddenly stops and be-
gins to make anxious grunting sounds. The entire 
group freezes. After long minutes of silent tension, 
the cause of the silverback's worry appears. Across 
a small clearing about fifty yards away, another 
silverback's head pops through the wall of green-
ery. There is a face-off—the two grunt and roar and 
pace. The females and their young retreat to the 
thickets to let the two males stand down. After 
82 

Swimming with Dolphins, Swinging with Apes 
twenty minutes, the males back down and move 
apart, and the encounter ends. 
It all seems rather ritualized and utterly non-
physical, but important life decisions may be made 
during such encounters. Females in gorilla society 
tend to migrate from group to group, thwarting 
male attempts to monopolize. They use their feet 
to exercise their choice of mates. Such departures 
are likeliest to happen in the time after encoun-
ters between two rival groups. This suggests that 
female gorillas are using the stand-offs between 
silverbacks to size up both their own male and the 
one challenging him, and if they decide their own 
mate is something of a loser, they leave him. For all 
their bulk and muscle and bravado, silverback go-
rillas live in fear of their females walking out one 
day, and this motivates their solicitous protection 
of their group. 
Compared to the other living apes, the orang-
utans are quite bizarre, both in form and behavior. 
Male orangutans of the Bornean variety possess 
enormous flanges of flesh around their face and a 
pendulous sac of flesh on the throat. The throat 
sac helps to produce mating and dominance calls, 
83 

B E A U T I F U L 
M I N D S 
and the flanges are presumably attractive to females 
as well. Males are enormously larger than females, 
nearly twice their size and bulk. 
In behavior, the orangutan's uniqueness truly 
shines. Unlike the highly sociable gorillas, chim-
panzees, and bonobos, orangutans relish their soli-
tude. They are not only the most solitary of the 
apes, but among the most solitary of the higher 
primates. A female will defend her territory against 
all comers, while an adult male will try to main-
tain a sexual monopoly over several females. This 
is a good strategy on the male's part, but it ulti-
mately fails because adult male orangutans are not 
only big but also slow. They cannot cover their vast 
forest range quickly. This allows other males who 
don't have their own coterie of females to maraud. 
All the great apes share a few traits. They are 
among the largest of the primates. They have life 
cycles not unlike our own: an eight-month preg-
nancy, a several-year period of infancy and child-
hood, puberty in the early teen years, and repro-
duction from midteen years through their forties. 
And they are the brainiest creatures on Earth, 
along with the dolphins, whales, and ourselves. The 
84 

Swimming with Dolphins, Swinging with Apes 
parallels do not end there; they include the best 
and the worst of human nature, from warring to 
loving. 
Hunters 
Dolphins have no hands to make tools, yet they 
are efficient predators who use both their agility 
and their braininess to achieve hunting success. 
They are original, intelligent, and cooperative in 
their hunt for a meal. 
Among all dolphins, transient killer whales tri-
umph for their cooperative hunting. As the top 
predators of the oceans, they reveal breathtakingly 
complex tactics when attacking other mammals. 
Transient killer whales are the only cetaceans that 
attack and eat other marine mammals. They may 
prey on small marine mammals like seals lying on 
a beach, but they can also single out and strike 
whales much larger than themselves without any 
sign of fear or hesitation and with a high degree of 
predatory success. 
For example, a few miles off the Oregon coast, 
a pod of transient killer whales readies itself for an 
85 

B E A U T I F U L 
M I N D S 
attack. They have found a female gray whale and 
her calf traveling steadily northward on their mi-
gratory route from breeding grounds in Baja Cali-
fornia to the cold feeding grounds of Alaska. The 
killer whales trail a short distance behind, push-
ing the gray whale and her calf forward with their 
presence, waiting for the calf to tire and the mother 
to slow her pace. The killer whales do not hurry; 
their powerful bodies are well adapted to this, al-
lowing them to swim for long distances without 
any sign of fatigue. Not so, however, for the new-
born gray whale. Fleeing the attack has exhausted 
the calf, and the mother must slow down at some 
point to allow her offspring to rest. This is the mo-
ment for which the killer whales wait patiently, 
this the opportunity that they have engineered. 
In a synchronized action, they launch an as-
sault on the now almost motionless calf. The gray 
whale mother tries to protect her calf, fending off 
lunges from multiple directions with her powerful 
tail, though her efforts are eventually in vain. The 
killer whales attack from all directions in relentless 
synchrony, tearing off chunks of flesh and biting 
the calf on the flukes to disable any last attempt at 
86 

Swimming with Dolphins, Swinging with Apes 
flight. Successful, the killer whale pod now swarms 
around the dead baby whale, feeding at will un-
til their hunger is sated and they depart en masse. 
Distraught over the death of her calf and tired 
from her fight and her long journey, the gray whale 
mother lingers beside her dead offspring before 
resuming her journey northward. Only through 
complex communication has the pod of killer 
whales managed to feed themselves—a single at-
tacker would stand no chance. 
What we know about dolphins as "hunting 
machines" comes mostly from our surface obser-
vations. Standing on the deck of a research ship on 
the high seas, sitting near shore in a tiny inflatable, 
or looking down from a cliff with a pair of binocu-
lars, we attempt to glean what we can of dolphin 
life from their appearances at the surface. But the 
three-dimensional environment beneath the sea 
still holds the secrets of how these hunters exploit 
the water column for their foraging activities. Al-
though we humans must use all sorts of compli-
cated equipment to explore the underwater world, 
for a dolphin, diving to a depth of fifty meters or 
more for a meal is simply a daily routine. To make 
87 

B E A U T I F U L 
M I N D S 
the most of underwater food sources, dolphins 
have evolved sophisticated diving adaptations that 
allow them to spend time at depth while keeping 
their energetic expenses to a minimum. Sus-
pending respiration, bradycardia (a low heart rate), 
and peripheral vasoconstriction are some of the 
physiological tools employed by these diving 
champions. 
Being such accomplished ocean hunters make 
dolphins a valuable asset for other ocean dwellers 
in search of a meal. In my work in the coastal wa-
ters of Los Angeles, I frequently observed sea lions 
in proximity to common dolphins during feeding 
and foraging activities. Here were two species, trav-
eling and feeding together, with no evident hostil-
ity or competition. To me, this seemed unusual 
and warranted further investigation. What I dis-
covered was that the sea lions were capitalizing on 
the superior food-finding ability of echolocating 
common dolphins to find their own prey. In some 
cases, keeping up with traveling dolphins presented 
a challenge for sea lions. Dolphins can swim much 
faster and more efficiently. By videotaping sea 
lions in their pursuit of dolphins, we were able 
to observe pinnipeds spyhopping to get a better 
88 

Swimming with Dolphins, Swinging with Apes 
fix on the dolphins' movements, adjusting their 
routes and speed accordingly. Once at the feeding 
ground, dolphins and sea lions shared meals with 
no rivalry. Then each went its own way. 
On first evaluation, the sea lions seem to gain 
all the advantage from these aggregations, but dol-
phins may also profit from this sharing of re-
sources. For instance, numerous predators in a 
feeding area rich in prey can scare fish into a pro-
tective schooling behavior, thereby increasing the 
potential catch for sea lions and dolphins alike. 
Although dolphins are expert predators, using 
their intelligence to find widely scattered schools 
of fish or other animals and their speed and agil-
ity to catch them, at least one great ape, the chim-
panzee, also catches and eats animal protein. 
Chimpanzees hunt for monkeys, wild pigs, ante-
lope, and a number of other small mammals. Few 
people believed it when Jane Goodall first reported 
meat-eating wild chimpanzees, but hunting is a 
completely natural, routine part of chimpanzee life. 
Most species of primate eat a bit of animal 
89 

B E A U T I F U L 
M I N D S 
protein, usually in the form of insects. Only a few 
of the higher primates eat other mammals. In the 
tropical forest of Central and South America, ca-
puchin monkeys dine on a variety of smaller ani-
mals, including squirrels and other rodents. Ba-
boons also hunt small mammals such as rabbits 
and antelope fawns. But only chimpanzees engage 
in the sort of systematic predatory behavior that 
we believe was central to the lives of our earliest 
human ancestors. In all forests in which they have 
been studied intensively, they prey on a variety of 
vertebrates, including dozens of kinds of other 
mammals. The red colobus monkey is the most 
frequently eaten prey. In some years, chimpanzees 
in Gombe National Park, Tanzania, kill more than 
800 kilograms of prey, most of it red colobus. 
Hunting is social, whether by dolphins for fish 
or by chimpanzees for monkeys. Chimpanzees, usu-
ally adult males, attack groups of monkeys they 
encounter during their rambles in search of fruit 
in African forests. The chase, capture, and kill are 
heart-stopping, often gruesome, and always illus-
trative of the chimpanzees' social nature. To a lion 
the zebra it is chasing may be only meat, but to a 
90 

Swimming with Dolphins, Swinging with Apes 
chimpanzee the chance to kill and then share prey 
is not only nutritional but socially significant as 
well. The monkeys, pigs, and antelopes the chim-
panzees capture sometimes become pawns in the 
social dynamics of the group—currency to be used 
to negotiate new alliances, rub salt in the wounds 
of old rivals, and secure status that a chimpanzee 
without prey cannot. 
A chimpanzee hunt for monkey prey begins 
with a chance meeting in the forest. Chimpanzees 
travel from valley to valley in search of ripe fruit, 
and from time to time they walk under a tree in 
which a group of colobus monkeys sits. Colobus 
are long-tailed, treetop-dwelling monkeys that 
weigh perhaps twenty pounds—quite small com-
pared to an adult male chimpanzee's over 100-
pound bulk. Unlike most other types of monkeys, 
they don't usually flee when they spot chim-
panzees approaching. Instead, they continue eat-
ing leaves until the apes reach their tree, and then 
erupt in a frenzy of high-pitched alarm calls and 
nervous looks. Mothers retrieve their babies and 
males cluster together in a protective shield to keep 
the chimpanzees at bay. At this point the chimps 
91 

B E A U T I F U L 
M I N D S 
decide whether to continue walking or to take a 
shot at the monkeys. If they decide to hunt—and 
the mental factors in making their decision are as 
fascinating as they are unclear—the chimps begin 
to climb the tree. The male monkeys often descend 
to the first large fork in the trunk, trying to keep 
the chimpanzees out of the crown the way a metal 
baffle on a bird feeder is supposed to keep the 
squirrels at bay. 
If the chimpanzees persist and get past the le-
gion of male monkeys, several things can happen, 
all of them bad for the colobus. The chimps may 
rush toward a female carrying a baby, trying to 
take the baby as their prey, and the mother too if 
she fights back. More often she will almost pas-
sively allow the hunters to pluck the infant from 
her chest and kill it with a quick bite in the skull. 
The hunters may also capture and kill one or more 
male monkeys. This is the norm in some forests in 
western Africa, perhaps because chimpanzees there 
are bigger, and colobus males smaller, than in east-
ern Africa. These male monkeys are killed by be-
ing thrashed against a tree trunk or against the 
hard ground. The chimpanzees may continue to 
92 

Swimming with Dolphins, Swinging with Apes 
hunt after making one kill until two, three, four, 
or on rare occasions as many as a dozen monkeys 
lie dead. In cases like this, an entire group of mon-
keys may be decimated within minutes. 
Forty years after Dr. Goodall first witnessed 
the hunting behavior of chimpanzees, we know a 
great deal about their predatory patterns. At 
Gombe, red colobus account for more than 80 per-
cent of the prey eaten. Here, chimpanzees do not 
select the colobus they will kill randomly; most 
colobus killed are immature and often infants. In 
Gombe, chimpanzees are largely fruit eaters. Only 
3 percent of the time they spend eating is spent 
consuming meat—less than in nearly all human so-
cieties. Adult and adolescent males do most of the 
hunting, making about 90 percent of the kills re-
corded at Gombe. Females also hunt, but more of-
ten receive a share of meat from the male who 
either captured the meat or stole it from the cap-
tor. Although lone chimpanzees, both male and fe-
male, sometimes hunt by themselves, most hunts 
are social. 
The quantity of meat eaten is substantial. In 
some years the forty-five chimpanzees of the Kasa-
93 

B E A U T I F U L 
M I N D S 
kela community at Gombe kill and consume hun-
dreds of kilograms of prey. In the dry season, the 
meat intake is about 65 grams of meat per day for 
each adult chimpanzee, not far below the meat in-
take by the members of some human foraging so-
cieties. 
Jane Goodall had observed early on that her 
chimpanzees went on "hunting crazes," during 
which they would hunt and kill large numbers of 
monkeys and other prey. The most intense hunt-
ing binge we have seen occurred in the dry season 
of 1990. From late June through early September, 
a period of sixty-eight days, the chimpanzees were 
observed to kill over seventy colobus monkeys in 
forty-seven hunts. 
Hunting by wild chimpanzees appears to have 
both a nutritional and social basis. Early research-
ers had said that hunting by chimpanzees might 
be a form of social display, in which a male chim-
panzee tries to show his prowess to other members 
of the community. Richard Wrangham conducted 
the first systematic study of chimpanzee behavioral 
ecology at Gombe and concluded that predation 
by chimpanzees was nutritionally based, but that 
94 

Swimming with Dolphins, Swinging with Apes 
some aspects of the behavior were not well ex-
plained by nutritional needs alone. Researchers in 
the Mahale Mountains project reported that the 
alpha there, Ntologi, used captured meat as a po-
litical tool to withhold from rivals and dole out 
to allies. 
It initially seemed to me that hunting must 
serve a nutritional function above all. Meat from 
monkeys and other prey would be a package of 
protein, fat, and calories hard to equal from any 
plant food. I therefore examined the relationship 
between the odds of success and the amount of 
meat available with different numbers of hunters 
in relation to each hunter's expected payoff in meat 
obtained. That is, when is the time, energy, and 
risk (the costs) involved in hunting worth the po-
tential benefits, and therefore when should a 
chimp decide to join or not join a hunting party? 
And how does it compare to the costs and benefits 
of foraging for plant foods? The results were sur-
prising. I expected that as the number of hunters 
increased, the amount of meat available for each 
hunter would also increase. This would have ex-
plained the social nature of hunting by Gombe 
95 

B E A U T I F U L 
M I N D S 
chimpanzees. If the amount of meat available per 
hunter declined with increasing hunting-party size 
(because each hunter got smaller portions as party 
size increased), then it would be a better invest-
ment of time and energy to hunt alone rather than 
join a party. The hunting success rates of lone hunt-
ers are only about 30 percent, whereas that of par-
ties with ten or more hunters is nearly 100 percent. 
As it turned out, there was no relationship, either 
positive or negative, between the number of hunt-
ers and the amount of meat available per capita. 
This may be because even though the likelihood of 
success increased with more hunters in the party, 
the most frequently caught prey animal is a one-
kilogram baby colobus monkey. Whether shared 
among four hunters or fourteen, such a small pack-
age of meat does not provide anyone with much 
food. 
Once the killing has ended, the consumption 
and ritual sharing begins. Sometimes a captor 
takes his prize behind dense foliage to have a pri-
vate, well-earned meal. More often, the kill is eaten 
publicly, since the sharing or refusal to share ap-
pear to have social significance in chimpanzee so-
96 

Swimming with Dolphins, Swinging with Apes 
ciety. A male who did not catch a monkey himself, 
but whose high status allows him to abscond with 
a carcass from a lower-ranking hunter, may simply 
grab a monkey away from his mate with impu-
nity. The possessor of meat becomes a group focal 
point, and is subjected to intense begging. With 
hands outstretched, sometimes even inserted into 
the mouth of the meat-eater, other members of the 
group beseech the captor for a scrap of the rare 
treat of protein and fat. Allies get favors of meat, 
as do kin. Sometimes those who helped make the 
capture but didn't end up with the monkey also 
get a seat at the table. Sharing meat is a Machiavel-
lian act with a clear, public message. Not only will 
a male avoid sharing with a rival, he may purpose-
fully snub him in order to show everyone else pres-
ent just how impressive he is and how unimpor-
tant the rival is. Anthropologists have analyzed 
chimpanzee hunting behavior again and again be-
cause it is thought that meat-eating made us hu-
man. In the dark days 2 to 3 million years ago, 
scraps of meat would have been very precious com-
modities worth hunting for, scavenging for, and 
then treating with the highest regard once a cap-
97 

B E A U T I F U L 
M I N D S 
ture had been made. Tool use no doubt evolved be-
cause it enabled early humans to get more and 
better food then they could without tools. Even-
tually the little monkey and piglet prey were aban-
doned for big-bodied animals like zebra and wilde-
beest, which require cooperation to catch and 
sharp tools to carve up and steal away afterward. 
The diverse hunting strategies employed by dol-
phin and ape societies are an excellent reflection of 
their social complexity. It takes agility and weap-
onry for a lone predator to hunt and kill its prey, 
but for a social animal, it takes far more than that. 
It takes intelligence and the ability to coordinate 
actions with group mates. But the social com-
plexity of large-brained mammals cannot be deter-
mined by a description of hunting behavior alone. 
Digging deeper, we will examine in the following 
chapters the nature of the underlying relationships 
and ties that make this complexity possible. 
98 

chapter four 
D O L P H I N A N D APE S O C I E T I E S -
W H y S A N D WHEREFORES 
AT DAWN IN Gombe National Park, Tanzania, 
an orange sun is rising in the east, but it will be 
hours before it appears over the mountain ridge 
above us to shed warming light on the forest be-
low. A party of chimpanzees is waking up. They 
roll over, look up at the morning sky, and slowly 
revive themselves on this chilly morning. One by 
99 

B E A U T I F U L 
M I N D S 
one, they pull themselves upright in their nests. 
Each tree has a sleeping ape or two, and one tower-
ing Chrysophyllum tree holds several fresh nests and 
many old, wilted ones. Each chimpanzee sits sleep-
ily on the branch supporting his or her nest, 
peeing onto the ground many meters below. Min-
utes pass and the forest grows light; shapes emerge 
out of the gloom that reveal themselves as chimps. 
They've silently descended from their sleeping 
trees and are sitting like boulders on the hillside. 
At 5:45 AM, as if on cue, one of the older males 
gets up and begins to walk away from the sleeping 
area, heading north. Several other males immedi-
ately follow, while two males stay behind. Minutes 
later, these males turn and walk west, down toward 
the lake edge. A mother and her infant head off 
southward, alone. And a couple of young males 
just stay in the nesting area; later they will head 
east, up into the rugged hills. What started out at 
dawn as a nesting party of twenty-six chimpanzees 
has fragmented into at least five separate parties 
composed of one to eight chimpanzees each. 
100 

Dolphin and Ape Societies 
A little over seven hours earlier on the opposite 
side of the world, a frail rising sun is just begin-
ning to light up the village of Rio Lagartos on the 
northern coast of the Yucatan Peninsula, Mexico. 
It is almost 6:30 AM at the end of the fisherman's 
rickety wharf. The dolphins are rarely late. Gordo, 
a chubby male bottlenose boasting a clear, deep 
notch halfway down his dorsal fin, is the first to 
appear in the morning mist. He makes his way 
slowly westward along the shoreline, followed by 
the rest of the gang, a football field behind. As the 
sun starts to brighten, their dark grey bodies pass 
in front of the pier in an organized procession. 
There are fourteen in total: a female with her calf 
and a dozen others. Twenty or so meters past the 
wharf, the procession clusters together in a cir-
cle next to a colorful parade of moored pangas, 
small skiffs used for fishing. Some are diving, oth-
ers mill about at the surface. A few at a time, they 
explore the sandy bottom unhurriedly while an-
other group of dolphins leisurely joins them from 
the opposite direction. They are now twenty-three 
in number, with a couple more calves swimming 
next to their mothers, all tightly grouped together 
101 

B E A U T I F U L 
M I N D S 
in this uninspiring patch of murky water that 
likely hides a fishy meal. The dolphin circle sud-
denly unwinds in two lively threads. Five animals 
move steadily back toward the wharf in a formal 
procession; the others disappear quickly to the west. 
The sun is already high on the horizon, and what 
seemed for a moment to be a singular and cohesive 
group has reshuffled itself and divided once more. 
Handing over my binoculars to my assistant, I give 
up my spot on the wharf and head toward the vil-
lage for a breakfast of buevos con chorizo. 
Strong Bonds, Weak Bonds 
In their social grouping patterns, dolphins and 
apes show some striking parallels. Chimpanzees 
and their cousins the bonobos do not live in stable 
groups as traditionally defined. Instead, they exist 
in a fluid, flexible societal arrangement that pri-
matologists call fission-fusion polygyny. Polygyny 
means there are multiple males and females in the 
group. The arrangement is so lacking in apparent 
organization that it took nearly two decades from 
the start of Jane Goodall's research at Gombe to 
102 

Dolphin and Ape Societies 
determine that there is order at all in chimpanzee 
society. 
The first primatologists were convinced there 
was no structure to chimpanzee society, that life 
was just a sexual free-for-all in which females 
mated promiscuously whenever they were swollen 
and avoided males the rest of the time. But chim-
panzee life is far more orderly and proceeds by a 
number of rules. Female chimpanzees are strate-
gists who mate with males in hopes of securing 
their support, and more important their docility, 
toward their babies in future years. Males who have 
mated with a female and accept the ensuing birth 
as their own progeny are thought to be less likely 
to be aggressive to the female or her baby. At the 
same time, by inciting males to fight over her at 
the sight of an appealing pink swelling, a female 
may be able to judge which males are "keepers" 
and which losers in genetic strength and health. 
Overarching this pattern of coming together 
and parting over food and sex, chimpanzee society 
adds another layer. All the chimpanzees in a local 
breeding group live in a community; a stable and 
long-lasting aggregation of males, females, and ba-
103 

B E A U T I F U L 
M I N D S 
bies. Because males stay in the area of their birth 
while females emigrate at puberty, communities 
tend to be made of related males and less-related 
females. At about twenty to 120 individuals, these 
communities have well-defined territorial bound-
aries, the accidental crossing of which can lead to 
bloodshed. 
Why such a complicated system? We believe 
the chimpanzee tendency to fission and fuse is re-
lated, as it is in dolphins, to both food and sex. 
The goal of a female chimp's life is to rear her ba-
bies successfully, and to do this she needs opti-
mal access to good food. This means avoiding the 
competition as far as it is possible. So she spends 
much of her life searching for trees laden with ripe 
fruit, usually alone or in the company of her off-
spring. Males, meanwhile, have no such food and 
baby agenda. Their agenda is to find females and 
do what it takes to impregnate them. But female 
chimpanzees show an interest in mating only for 
about seven to ten days otit of a thirty-seven-day 
menstrual cycle. During this fertile period the fe-
male carries a billboard of sexual availability; a 
fluid-filled pink sexual swelling that hangs from 
104 

Dolphin and Ape Societies 
her rump. When her swelling is engorged, she 
seeks out males, and males seek her out, too. This 
leads to the formation of large, temporary parties 
of male and female chimps traveling the forest, the 
males vying for female affection and sometimes 
fighting over it. 
Researchers have struggled to understand ex-
actly what molds chimpanzee society. Certainly the 
dispersion of fruit across the forest has a lot to do 
with it. Leaves are widely available but low in nutri-
ent content. Unlike leaves, which are available on 
every tree, fruit is only seasonally available, and its 
distribution is also patchy. A chimpanzee search-
ing for fruit might need to walk several kilometers 
between trees bearing ripe fruit, and could arrive 
to find the next tree already picked over by other 
primates, birds, fruit bats, or a host of other ani-
mals. But the reward of a high-carbohydrate meal 
is 
enough 
to 
keep 
chimpanzees 
commuting 
among stands of fruit trees. Chimpanzees lead a 
high-energy life compared to many other animals, 
and their reliance on fruit—two-thirds to three-
quarters of their diet—is both a cause and a conse-
quence of it. 
105 

B E A U T I F U L 
M I N D S 
Their unconventional social system may be an 
adaptation to a life dependent on ripe fruit. Since 
fruit occurs in clumps—each clump being a tree-
competition for food is likely among the members 
of a chimpanzee community. Females avoid such 
competition by foraging alone, carrying their de-
pendent offspring. With females scattered across 
the entire territory of the community (although 
each female has a preferred area within the range), 
males attempt to maintain access to females while 
guarding their territory. When females emigrate at 
puberty or after, they may do so to avoid inbreed-
ing with their fathers, who have remained in the 
community for life. 
The community is therefore composed largely 
of immigrant, unrelated females and the cohort of 
males who have been born and have grown up in 
that same area. The only time during a female's 
life when she is highly sociable is when she is in 
estrus. Her sexual swelling becomes a magnet for 
males, and she herself is drawn to them. During 
this time of her five-week menstrual cycle, large 
parties of males and females and accompanying 
juveniles may form around such swollen females. 
106 

Dolphin and Ape Societies 
When highly desirable fruit trees are ripe at the 
same time that highly desired females are swollen, 
the community takes on an atmosphere of pande-
monium. Males jostle over the females, fights break 
out among the male hierarchy, and everyone wants 
access to the same tree. 
Although the influence of food on grouping 
is indisputable, there is also a clear role of social 
influences on grouping. Jane Goodall first stated 
that chimpanzee society was organized more 
around male access to females than around access 
to food. Researchers since have split on the ques-
tion, and many have come to recognize the influ-
ences of both sex and food. For instance, among 
the famed Gombe chimpanzees in Tanzania, the 
presence of a swollen female in the community is 
a predictor of large party size. When a female is 
swollen, males tend to socialize around her, and 
party size increases. Large parties hunt more and 
are more often successful, engage in territorial ag-
gression more readily, and exhibit higher levels of 
intra-community squabbling and competition for 
sex. In others words, stuff happens in large parties. 
Whether food or reproductively active females ex-
107 

B E A U T I F U L 
M I N D S 
ert the more important influence on party size is 
unknown. It appears to depend on which commu-
nity of chimpanzees one is watching. 
Chimpanzee society is remarkably uniform 
across Africa. Everywhere chimpanzees have been 
studied, they live in highly fluid communities— 
never cohesive groups—made up of immigrant fe-
males and lifelong resident males. Some commu-
nities are large—one such at Ngogo in Uganda is 
over 120 members—whereas others are as small as 
twenty-five. Some communities are more cohesive 
than others. In Ta'i National Park in Ivory Coast, 
females appear to be more closely integrated into 
the community. In Gombe National Park, Tanza-
nia, females are almost free agents, traveling inde-
pendently, with males of the community mapping 
themselves onto the ranges of the females. 
This form of society is mirrored in that of the 
closest kin of the chimpanzee, the bonobo. The 
bonobo also lives in communities centered around 
males from which females emigrate at maturity. 
The key difference between the two ape species is 
the conduct of females. Whereas female chimpan-
zees share a community membership without a 
great deal of interaction—and sometimes outright 
108 

Dolphin and Ape Societies 
hostility—female bonobos have learned to get 
along. Reports coming back from central Africa 
in the 1980s stunned scientists who had watched 
chimpanzees; bonobo females seem to form co-
alitions bent on preventing males from exerting 
power. These alliances create a female power base 
in bonobo society that is largely missing among 
chimpanzees. Bonobos have been hyped in recent 
years as the "make love not war" apes for their al-
leged extreme sexuality. These claims have been 
met with some skepticism by researchers who have 
actually watched wild bonobos. But the female 
power sharing in bonobo society is indisputable, 
and has profound implications for using great 
apes as models of human evolution. Chimpanzees 
live in societies in which males wield power over 
females, sometimes brutally. Females exert them-
selves too, actively (if furtively) seeking out pre-
ferred mates and risking physical abuse from males 
if caught. But among bonobos, females are power 
brokers; in the enforced proximity of zoo enclo-
sures, female bonobos have been known to attack 
and badly injure males, something almost unheard 
of among chimpanzees. 
Their social organization may be fluid and 
109 

B E A U T I F U L 
M I N D S 
flexible, but other bonds among chimpanzees and 
bonobos are rock solid. The central bond is be-
tween mother and child. The life history of a fe-
male chimpanzee is not very different from that of 
a woman. The infant female chimpanzee is utterly 
dependent on her mother until about age four. 
She is then weaned off mother's milk but remains 
psychologically dependent on mom for several 
more years. By age ten or eleven she is pre-adoles-
cent, and by about twelve she has experienced her 
first swelling. The sudden appearance of sexual ad-
vertisement in the maturing female causes males 
to treat her as a potential mating partner, and this 
dramatically alters her life in the community. At 
about this time she may begin to make temporary 
trips outside the community—visits, as it were— 
to neighboring communities. These visits will be-
come routine and longer in duration. Sometime 
between age twelve and fifteen she will settle per-
manently in the other community and take up a 
new life as a breeding female and mother (al-
though at some sites some females remain in their 
home community for life). 
Although the female has been mating with 
110 

Dolphin and Ape Societies 
males since her early teen years, she will likely not 
become pregnant until about age fifteen, and will 
produce her first baby at age sixteen or seventeen. 
Her pregnancies will last about eight and a half 
months. From then on, she will give birth to one 
offspring about every four to five years until the 
end of her life, which can be nearly fifty in the 
wild (though typically disease and predators end it 
much earlier) and up to the sixties in captivity. The 
only striking difference between chimpanzee and 
human is menopause, which in humans signifies a 
fairly abrupt end to the reproductive lifespan, but 
after which the woman may live decades. Chim-
panzees do not exhibit menopause of the human 
kind; a female's fertility may decline in her later 
years, but her reproductive life is usually brought 
to an end only when she dies. Anthropologists 
have long pondered this human-ape evolutionary 
distinction. The leading theory to explain human 
menopause is that there is an adaptive benefit to a 
woman who ceases her own reproductive output 
and turns to helping her offspring continue theirs. 
That is, she takes on the role of a grandmother. 
Male chimpanzees, on the other hand, spend 
111 

B E A U T I F U L 
M I N D S 
their entire lives in the same place, in the com-
pany of their brothers, cousins, and other male 
kin. Males have the same long, slow life history 
that females have, except that as they enter their 
teenage years they tend to become less social for a 
time, traveling alone and living as wannabe adult 
males that do not find easy acceptance among the 
adult cohort. At some point in the mid-teen years, 
males begin to emulate their elders and join forag-
ing parties. They attempt to hunt with the older 
males, although in the event that they catch a 
monkey or pig, it will be quickly repossessed by the 
larger hunters. On territorial patrols they are ea-
ger, if naive, participants. 
Over the ensuing years, males reach sexual and 
social maturity and begin to attempt an ascent up 
the dominance hierarchy. The chimpanzee domi-
nance hierarchy is a central part of their society. It 
is not a simple ladder but a multi-faceted, complex 
set of dominant and subordinate relationships 
among males and females. As we already know, 
one universal about chimpanzee dominance is 
that even the lowest-ranking male is dominant to 
the highest-ranking female. So when young males 
112 

Dolphin and Ape Societies 
want to achieve a level of status among the male 
hierarchy, they begin by systematically challenging 
each female in turn. Bluff attacks—rarely involv-
ing physical violence and injury—usually suffice to 
place a male in a socially superior position to each 
female. Once the highest-ranking female has been 
challenged and bested, he takes on the other males. 
But male dominance is highly dependent on con-
text, and on one's allies. Instead of a linear pecking 
order, it is a sophisticated affair in which a male's 
status may flip-flop depending on which of his al-
lies or rivals happens to be sitting near him at a 
given moment. Dominance contests are won not 
because of brute strength, but because of politi-
cal cunning. Just as a president doesn't derive his 
strength from being six feet five inches, an alpha-
ranked male chimpanzee can be small or large, so 
long as he knows how to manipulate those around 
him. 
As a young adult male chimpanzee seeks the 
next steps in his rise in the male hierarchy, it is en-
tirely insufficient for him to simply challenge each 
male above him. He needs to remember who is 
his ally, who is his rival, and the entire network of 
113 

B E A U T I F U L 
M I N D S 
alliances swirling around him. Like a character in 
Shakespeare's King Lear, a male chimpanzee must 
not challenge a higher-ranking male when that 
male is accompanied by his best allies. Instead, he 
waits to find that male alone, or in the company 
of his rivals, and employs a "the enemy of my en-
emy is my friend" tactic. By picking his time and 
place carefully, he can defeat a male with the aid 
of other low-ranking males, even if none of them 
could consider challenging that male alone. De-
feating the alpha doesn't have to mean physical vi-
olence, though it often does. It means demonstrat-
ing to him that the power base in the community 
has shifted and that, without power, the alpha 
needs to step down and get out of the way. In prac-
tice, most alphas who lose their status spend some 
time, often many months, nearly alone and return 
to the fold of the community duly chastened and 
much reduced in machismo. 
In the best of all worlds, a maturing male is 
able to rise in the dominance hierarchy until he is 
ready to challenge the alpha. But most males pla-
teau somewhere below this status, and end up us-
ing their alliances with both higher- and lower-
114 

Dolphin and Ape Societies 
ranking males to further their own interests in the 
community. There are rare exceptions. Goblin, of 
the Kasakela community at Gombe, began to chal-
lenge the top-ranking males when he was a ten-
year-old juvenile, an unheard-of occurrence in 
chimpanzee society. It worked, too; by the time he 
was thirteen, an age at which most male chimpan-
zees are still trying to figure out how to live peace-
fully among adult males without inviting too much 
aggression, Goblin had toppled the alpha and be-
come the top-ranking chimpanzee in the commu-
nity. He held this status on and off for nearly fif-
teen years, and even long after he had passed his 
prime, he remained a "king-maker," flip-flopping 
his allegiances on a daily basis when it suited him. 
The long-term alpha male of the Mahale Moun-
tains, Ntilogi, was an even more extreme example 
of chimpanzee overachievement. He was alpha for 
almost ten years before being overthrown. He then 
did the unexpected—after a time away from the 
community in exile, he suddenly returned and suc-
cessfully took back his rank, which he held until 
his death at almost age fifty. 
The careers of both male and female chimpan-
115 

B E A U T I F U L 
M I N D S 
zees are therefore not so different from our own, 
except for the greater degree of gender balance our 
own species still strives to achieve. In the case of 
both males and females, there is a Darwinian bot-
tom line: reproductive success. Males and females, 
whether dolphins or apes, have their own separate 
agendas for obtaining this common goal. For a fe-
male chimpanzee, the infant she bears will be one 
of only several she will produce in her life. Each in-
fant must therefore receive as large and time-con-
suming a dose of motherly care as necessary. For a 
chimpanzee, this may entail four to five years of 
nursing, followed by years more of emotional and 
psychological dependency. A male, meanwhile, in-
vests only a few minutes or hours of his life to mat-
ing with the mother of his babies; he provides no 
direct parental care whatsoever. 
Although this picture might make you think 
chimpanzee society is utterly male-dominated, that 
is not necessarily the case. The schism between male 
and female mating tactics leads to some more gen-
eral observations and predictions about chimpan-
zee society. Females' greater investment of time 
and energy predicts they should be choosier about 
116 

Dolphin and Ape Societies 
their mates than their mates are about them. Fe-
male chimpanzees are active choosers, too. They 
sneak behind shrubbery to have sex with males 
other than the alpha in order to avoid being as-
saulted and beaten by the alpha. When a male 
chimpanzee wants to have sex with a female, he 
will give her a hand gesture as a signal of his intent 
and desire. A common signal is to reach out and 
grasp a nearby bush, shaking it rapidly. If the de-
sired female ignores this gesture, he will shake it 
again, but more insistently. If repeated signaling 
does not get the desired attention from the female, 
the male may attack and brutalize her. The female 
nevertheless does not always submit to male mat-
ing intentions, the risk of physical violence not-
withstanding. Female great apes of all four species 
are active players in their societies, not passive re-
cipients of male mating tactics. One could say that 
females are the driving force in chimpanzee soci-
ety, because so much of a male's energy seems to 
be directed at obtaining access to females. 
And females mate quite liberally. Caroline 
Tutin, a chimpanzee researcher at Gombe in the 
1970s, observed an individual female mating with 
117 

B E A U T I F U L 
M I N D S 
up to half a dozen males in the same day when she 
was swollen. Why would a female be so promiscu-
ous as to mate with most of the males in the com-
munity in such a short time span? She may be at-
tempting to spread around the belief among males 
that each might be the father of any offspring that 
ensues eight months after the orgy. Females do 
need the protection of males at times—during ter-
ritorial incursions by neighboring gangs of males, 
for instance. Females also must worry that the 
males of their own community may turn on their 
infants. Infanticide has been observed in some 
chimpanzee field studies (as it has in dolphins), al-
though the circumstances and causes are less clear 
than in some other primates, in which infant-
killing fits an evolutionary scenario. Mating with a 
variety of males may be a female's way of cement-
ing bonds with males on whom they may need to 
rely in the future, or at least from whom they seek 
a neutral, rather than hostile, relationship. 
Some studies have produced genetic evidence 
that females living in one community may try to 
have their babies fathered secretly by males from 
neighboring communities. In other words, females 
1 18 

Dolphin and Ape Societies 
may live with one set of males, but also shop for 
genes elsewhere. This speaks further to the ability 
of females to be independent agents in chimpan-
zee society, not necessarily submitting to males. 
Rather than consider chimpanzee society to be 
male-dominated or female-driven, we should con-
sider it as we consider our own society. There are 
spheres of influence, many of them traditionally 
controlled by men, but in many of which women 
exert control and influence as well. 
Some species of dolphins don't live in stable groups 
but rather in fluid and flexible fission-fusion socie-
ties akin to those of their terrestrial ape counter-
parts. Bottlenose dolphins' social organization, for 
instance, is 
similar to chimpanzees 
in 
that 
adult males may form strong alliances with other 
males. Both female chimps and female bottlenose 
dolphins are seasonally polyestrous, have similar 
intervals between giving birth, and reach their sex-
ual maturity at about the same age. In both spe-
cies, males and females tend to aggregate when the 
119 

B E A U T I F U L 
M I N D S 
females become receptive, and promiscuity seems 
to be the rule in the ocean as it is in the forest. Ag-
gression and belligerence between rival males and 
strong male-male bonds are another communal as-
pect of both species, but in dolphins these bonds 
play a particular role, as I discover one morning 
during my field research. 
I have just finished my breakfast about the time 
my assistant calls on the walkie-talkie from the 
fishing wharf. Her voice has an urgent tone. She 
tells me excitedly that two dolphins are harassing 
Bonita. Bonita is a bottlenose female frequenting 
the waters of Rio Lagartos. She has a distinctive 
black spot on her left "cheek" that reminds us of a 
beauty mark in humans. We have often observed 
Bonita foraging near the moored pangas, some-
times following the fishermen out to sea in the 
early morning. 
When I arrive on the scene, my assistant ges-
tures frantically, attempting to jam the summary 
of her observations into a few short sentences. I 
can see Bonita near a red panga. Behind her, a pair 
of dark dorsal fins follow closely. Her movements 
are panicky and abrupt as she maneuvers between 
120 

Dolphin and Ape Societies 
the moored boats, coming irregularly to the sur-
face to catch a breath of air. She behaves evasively. 
The males are herding her, synchronously chasing 
her, charging her from both sides, turning upside 
down at times and snapping at her pectoral fins. 
They slam repeatedly against Bonita, cutting off 
her every attempt at escape. The conflict continues 
for a few more minutes until she finally manages 
to evade the two and vanishes offshore to safety— 
at least for today. 
What Bonita just experienced off Rio Lagartos 
is one of the various strategies bottlenose males 
adopt to mate with females. In Sarasota, Florida, 
and Shark Bay, Australia, associations between 
males and females are tied to the female reproduc-
tive state. In Shark Bay, two or three males may 
form alliances called consortships to mate with a 
single female. These may last for only a few min-
utes or continue for months. A consortship may 
begin with a simple chase that can evolve into ag-
gressive behavior and displays that restrict the fe-
male's ability to escape or take up with another 
consortship. To solicit sex and "convince" a female 
not to leave them and copulate with another male 
121 

B E A U T I F U L 
M I N D S 
group, a consortship may produce low-frequency 
"pop" sounds. Males may also become increasingly 
more violent toward their intended sexual partner 
in an attempt to bully her into mating. As Bonita 
clearly showed us, the herding events are not al-
ways well received by females. 
These types of consortships are called primary 
alliances and are the most simple. They consist 
of only a few males, generally occurring when the 
bonds among individuals are quite strong. These 
primary alliances function mainly to preserve the 
consortship at all costs, even with violence toward 
the female when necessary. Secondary alliances may 
occur when two primary alliances cooperate with 
each other to protect "their" females from exter-
nal intrusions by other alliances. Sometimes, these 
secondary alliance groups may grow fairly large. 
As they grow, they tend to become less stable, be-
cause the bonds among individuals in these larger 
groups tend to be weaker. These larger associations 
are called super-alliances. In these, males may fre-
quently switch companions to conquer females, 
and the group may become quite brutal with other 
nonaffiliated primary alliances if reproductive suc-
cess is at stake. 
122 

Dolphin and Ape Societies 
Males in primary and secondary alliances are 
related to one other. The advantage of having some 
"family connection" in the same alliance is that a 
member will increase his own fitness (his genetic 
contribution to future generations) even when he 
is not able to mate. So long as one of his allies is, 
the genes will be maintained "within" the same al-
liance. In other words, if you can't have children 
but your brother or nephew can, your name, to-
gether with some of your genes, will be passed to 
the next generation. In a super-alliance, however, 
males may not be related at all. So what's the pur-
pose of such a large group? Perhaps the real value 
of a super-alliance lies in its ability to easily subdue 
other alliances and steal their females, thereby in-
creasing overall mating success. 
How different, then, is male-male bonding in 
chimpanzees and dolphins? Some bottlenose dol-
phins form alliances to gain reproductive success, 
whereas chimpanzees use alliances to determine 
social rank and for success in aggressive intercom-
munity interactions. Aggression among adult dol-
phin males doesn't seem to have the same function 
of establishing dominance, as it does in chimps, al-
though the role of dominance in wild bottlenose 
123 

B E A U T I F U L 
M I N D S 
dolphin societies is not yet understood. Thus, the 
alliance mechanism likely goes with a large brain, 
but the differences in function have something to 
do with the diversity of the terrestrial versus the 
marine environment. 
The strong male-male bonding and mate 
guarding common in bottlenose dolphin societies 
is not typically found in other dolphin species. 
Males in resident killer whale populations live 
in cohesive pods where they bond strongly with 
their mothers rather than with other males. They 
have never been observed joining forces in an ef-
fort to control females. Resident killer whales and 
bonobos are both known as polite neighbors, be-
having peacefully within their respective commu-
nities. Even when killer whale clans overlap ter-
ritories, they tend to mind their own business, 
showing no signs of aggression toward fellow com-
munities. 
Killer whale pods are truly matriarchal. A resi-
dent pod may be formed by one or more matrilines 
that usually travel together. Matrilines include a 
mature female and all her direct male or female 
descendents. Resident killer whales stay with their 
124 

Dolphin and Ape Societies 
natal group for the rest of their lives. Their bonds 
are so intense that the animals remain together 
even after the matriarch has died. 
They avoid inbreeding simply by mating with 
other clans, outside the matrilines. Resident killer 
whales, in fact, always choose partners with a dif-
ferent "language" or "dialect." In other words, they 
seek out animals that don't sound at all like them-
selves. In the killer whale world, the more similar 
the dialect, the more closely two individuals are 
related. 
Transient killer whales are another story. They 
are entirely distinct from resident whales and there 
is no exchange of members or interbreeding be-
tween the two. The relationship between mothers 
and offspring is also different in transient killer 
whales. From birth, both male and female off-
spring stay with their mothers for some years. This 
maternal bond, however, may dissolve at the time 
of their sexual maturity. At that stage, males will 
either remain with their mothers or leave them to 
become solitary individuals that form labile asso-
ciations with other groups. Females usually leave 
their mothers at sexual maturity to aggregate with 
125 

B E A U T I F U L 
M I N D S 
other groups. In their late twenties they will either 
form their own pod, or return to their mothers. 
The striking difference in association patterns 
between resident and transient killer whales may 
be explained by their very different diets. Transients 
feed mostly on marine mammals, for which the 
optimal size of a hunting group is about three 
whales. As the group size increases, the prey suc-
cess rate decreases, so a small group size rather 
than a larger matriline is preferred. In resident fish-
eating whales, competition for food is no big deal, 
so the offspring have no good reason to abandon 
their natal group. 
What about female-female bottlenose dolphin 
relationships? Female social life seems to vary 
broadly within and between populations; even more 
so than in female chimpanzees. Some dolphin fe-
males are solitary, while others spend most of their 
lives in coalitions with other females called 
bands, which serve to protect against aggressive 
males. These bands are particularly well studied in 
Sarasota Bay, where researchers have noted re-
markable stability in these female associations. 
Even over the course of many years, they have ob-
126 

Dolphin and Ape Societies 
served very few changes in composition of the ini-
tial band structure. But why is there such variation 
in female social grouping? Female reproduction is 
limited by their access to resources, so their social 
grouping patterns are greatly influenced by ecolog-
ical factors. The patchy distribution of prey in the 
ocean and the risk of predation are the two most 
important factors that determine how female-
female relationships develop. Sponge-carrying fe-
males in Shark Bay, for instance, spend a lot of 
time alone looking for prey and don't seem to 
need a band for their daily survival. On the con-
trary, Sarasota females favor the company of oth-
ers, which may offer protection against calf preda-
tors or male aggressors. In a female band, a 
dolphin like Bonita might have been safe and shel-
tered from the troublesome males sneaking around 
the pangas of Rio Lagartos. 
When we look at the strong relationships be-
tween a mother and her offspring, we find that 
chimpanzees and bonobos are quite similar to their 
aquatic cousins. The birth of a bottlenose dolphin 
somewhere in the Pacific is accompanied by the 
same level of care, excitement, and concern from 
127 

B E A U T I F U L 
M I N D S 
the mother and her female associates as the birth 
of a newborn chimp in the middle of an African 
forest. 
Young bottlenose females, for instance, have 
an intense interest in the birth process and what 
follows. It is their chance to learn firsthand how to 
care for an infant. When the time comes, they have 
already prepared for motherhood. Babysitting is 
widespread in both primates and several dolphin 
species, but it is taken a step further by bottlenose 
dolphins. 
Infant chimps at the Gombe Stream Reserve 
in Tanzania never wander more than a few me-
ters from their mothers during their first year of 
life. Dolphin newborns, however, gain some inde-
pendence after just two months of age. The bond 
between bottlenose mother and calf remains pri-
mary, but other females, called "aunts" by re-
searchers, are allowed to take over momentary re-
sponsibility for the calf, sometimes escorting it for 
a swim of up to a hundred meters away from its 
mother. Child-rearing is as expensive in terms of 
time and effort for primates (including humans) 
as it is for dolphins; so, alloparental care by other 
128 

Dolphin and Ape Societies 
members of a group may be extremely useful. In 
our modern human world, alloparenting is becom-
ing less prevalent, but in the hunter-gatherer socie-
ties of our past, along with some traditional societ-
ies of today, sharing childcare among the members 
in a group was and is still considered the norm. 
Despite the extra parenting help, however, 
sometimes only weeks after birth a precocious dol-
phin calf may become so self-reliant and fearless as 
to venture off by itself without a baby-sitter. One 
summer day, from a panga along the coast of the 
Gulf of Mexico, I was tracking Torta and Ben, a 
mother and infant pair of bottlenose dolphins. At 
the time, Ben was less than one month old and 
hadn't yet grown comfortable with the process of 
breathing. Instead of the fluid regularity of his 
mother's breathing, Ben would surface at irregular 
intervals, jutting half of his body out of the water 
to catch a breath, though always remaining at his 
mother's side. We moved closer to the pair and 
stopped the boat to observe. Fascinated by our 
panga and the strange individuals in it, Ben left the 
security of Torta to explore. At that moment Ben's 
actions reminded me of a typical human tot's in-
129 

B E A U T I F U L 
M I N D S 
quisitiveness about the world. He possessed a de-
sire to discover things for the first time, and the 
awkward movements of one still unaccustomed to 
his new life on Earth. At first, he examined our 
outboard engine, which was making weird noises 
and producing a huge number of bubbles. He 
seemed fascinated by the spherical shapes full of 
air frothing the surface. Then, turning toward the 
bow, Ben swam slowly along the port side, almost 
touching my arm with his rostrum as I leaned over 
for a better look. All this time, Torta remained 
still, maintaining her distance. She was vigilant, 
constantly turning her head to check on Ben, but 
made no move to swim over to us. She was allow-
ing her infant to take its first steps to discover 
this new, bizarre world of outlandish creatures by 
himself. 
The water is a bottlenose calPs first playground. 
It can gambol with its playmates and snack on fish 
at will, always having mom nearby. Calves have a 
lot to learn from their mothers before taking their 
own road, but even within populations, there seems 
to be great variability in the time they spend with 
and away from their parent and with or without 
130 

Dolphin and Ape Societies 
alloparental care. Killer whale mothers, on the 
other hand, are not aided by other females—they 
parent alone. Taking their calves' education a step 
further, they invest great effort in tutoring their 
offspring with a high degree of inventiveness in 
their teaching techniques, as one research crew dis-
covered. 
It was late evening on January 15, 2006 aboard 
the National Geographic Endeavour. The ship was pass-
ing just above the Antarctic Circle when a small 
pod of killer whales caught the attention of the re-
search crew. What they observed had never been 
seen. It was a highly organized hunting technique, 
carried out with the deadly precision of a pro-
fessional assassin. A pod of grey and white killer 
whales was moving slowly toward a seal, which lay 
on a slab of floating ice. In a highly organized ef-
fort, the whales swam at the ice at high speed, veer-
ing off at the last moment to create a wave big 
enough to jar the ice floe and wash the seal off its 
safe station. A few young whales remained off to 
one side, attentively monitoring the entire opera-
tion. Their role, it seemed, was to observe and learn 
the strategy used by the adults and to remember it 
131 

B E A U T I F U L 
M I N D S 
for their own use in the future. It will be up to 
these young whales, when they reach the adult-
hood, to pass along the same successful hunting 
technique to the next generation—one more skill 
that may prove vital to the group for their survival 
in the freezing waters of Antarctica. 
When a dolphin calf reaches a certain age or 
when the mother becomes pregnant again, she may 
decide to release her infant once and for all, no 
matter how attached the young dolphin might be. 
If the calf is unwilling to leave, this maternal sepa-
ration may take on an aggressive facet, and the calf 
may end up on its own, carrying nothing from 
its mother other than a few unsympathetic tooth 
marks. But separation is a necessary step. After it 
has learned the required social expertise and for-
aging techniques, the young dolphin must now 
become skilled at how to catch food and survive 
on its own. Usually the young dolphin is in good 
company; other offspring are also taking indepen-
dent steps out into the ocean, where they will be-
gin to experience the next phase of their lives. 
A bottlenose dolphin's social life can vary sub-
stantially from individual to individual depending 
132 

Dolphin and Ape Societies 
on whether a highly social mother or a rather soli-
tary one raised the calf. In a highly social environ-
ment such as the waters off Sarasota, for exam-
ple, juveniles spend lots of time playing with each 
other while developing their social skills. Play seems 
to be very important in a young dolphin's life, but 
its meaning is still poorly understood. Play may 
strengthen social skills for use in later life or rein-
force the bonds among individuals. Males are the 
most involved in these sociosexual games, ex-
changing roles like Hollywood actors and attempt-
ing to mount females (and sometimes each other). 
This is also when juvenile males begin to establish 
a sort of hierarchical dominance, a juvenile expres-
sion of power and control over their peers that 
seems to be of less importance in adult life. 
There are numerous parallels between dolphins 
and apes in sexual alliances, mother-son bonds, 
hunting, and territorial aggression. Are these coin-
cidences or the result of similar factors coming 
together in two distantly related but equally big-
133 

B E A U T I F U L 
M I N D S 
brained, intelligent animals? What common fac-
tors in environment, social behavior, and brain size 
produce such a sophisticated degree of intellect in 
two groups of animals that are otherwise different 
in almost every way? To understand this we must 
turn to the cognition of both creatures, and con-
sider the evolution of intelligence. 
134 

chapter five 
C O G N I T I O N : M I N D S I N THE 
SEA A N D FOREST 
INTELLIGENCE IS PERHAPS the rarest commod-
ity in all living things. It is very hard to define, and 
even harder to find in the animal world. Of all 
the 5 billion or more species, only a handful have 
possessed a high degree of intellect; apes and hu-
mans (including many extinct forms of both), dol-
phins and whales, and perhaps elephants. That is 
135 

B E A U T I F U L 
M I N D S 
the brain-power short list, and it is short indeed. 
So we must begin by asking, "What's so beneficial 
about having a big brain?" The answer to this ques-
tion leads us toward understanding why these lin-
eages in particular, apes and dolphins, have such 
oversize brains. 
Scientists have argued for years about how to 
define intelligence. As debated as the value of IQ 
scores are for people, the usual intelligence tests 
cannot be applied to apes or dolphins at all. The 
term "intelligent" has very little precise meaning 
when we speak of animal behavior in particular; 
does it refer to learning, memory, or some other 
cognitive factor? Researchers in the area of pri-
mate and dolphin intelligence consider problem-
solving capacity to be a measure of intelligence. 
Problem-solving cognition is a successful adapta-
tion in these animals because it allows them to re-
spond effectively to novel situations. 
Every day, both our ancestors and modern non-
human primates must navigate their way through 
an environment, both physical and social, that 
tests their ability to survive and reproduce. Pri-
136 

Cognition 
mate intelligence is the way natural selection chose 
to promote those skills. You might think that some 
animals stumble on their food, but most have 
keenly honed strategies for food-finding. Bumble 
bees and hummingbirds travel across a field of wild-
flowers in an up-and-down series of rows, travers-
ing an efficient search grid. Chimpanzees travel 
from tree to tree feeding all day long; do they re-
call the locations of thousands of food trees, or 
do they travel a path that takes them randomly 
into food sources? Many fruit species, such as figs, 
ripen unpredictably, but a party of chimpanzees 
will usually be at the tree as soon as ripe fruits ap-
pear. This suggests that the apes are monitoring 
the fruiting status of trees as they forage, and re-
member which trees are worth waiting for. 
Dolphins must cope with a similarly complex 
environment. Although it might seem that the 
ocean is nothing at all like a rain forest, from the 
perspective of a food-finder they may not be all 
that different. The ocean is a vast place, with 
widely scattered resources that are constantly on 
the move. Dolphins seek schools of fish, and apes 
137 

B E A U T I F U L 
M I N D S 
seek stands of trees laden with ripe fruits. Unlike 
the fish, the trees stay in one place, but the tempo-
rary, unpredictable nature of fruit availability 
makes the apes' favorite food an equally hard-to-
get resource in a complicated forest world. 
Evolution may have placed a premium on flex-
ibility and the ability to remember and predict 
based on past experience the best spots to find 
schooling fish and the time of year when the best 
fruit trees are ripe. This ecological theory of intelli-
gence extends this logic to early humans, who also 
had to cope with a complex environment. 
Even though the physical environments dol-
phins and chimpanzees live in are complex, their 
common social environment is far more intricate. 
It is in their dealings with other members of their 
group that both make the best use of their exalted 
brain power. The prevailing view among scientists 
today is that the brain-size increase that occurred 
in great apes and was extended into early humans 
resulted from the premium natural selection placed 
on individuals that were socially clever. This the-
ory of social intelligence argues that the primary 
138 

Cognition 
evolutionary benefit of large brain size was that 
it allowed apes and hominids to cope with and 
even exploit increasingly complex social relations. 
In large social groups, each individual must re-
member the network of alliances, rivalries, debts, 
and credits that exist among group members. This 
is not so different from the politics of our own 
day-to-day lives. The primatologist Frans de Waal 
has observed that chimpanzees seem to engage in 
a "service economy" in which they barter alliances 
and other forms of support with one another. Rich-
ard Connor, a marine mammal expert, discovered 
that male bottlenose dolphins do something simi-
lar, bonding in tight, cooperative alliances. 
Those individuals best able to exploit this web 
of social relationships would likely have reaped 
more mating success than its group mates. The 
ability to subtly manipulate others is a fundamen-
tal aspect of group life. Some researchers even ar-
gue that as average group size increased, the neo-
cortex of the brain increased in size to handle the 
additional input of social information, in much 
the same way that a switchboard would be en-
139 

B E A U T I F U L 
M I N D S 
larged to handle added telephone traffic. This ef-
fect holds true even when the evolved patterns of 
social grouping are taken into account. 
The Pinnacle of Intelligence 
Both apes and dolphins possess extraordinarily 
large brains compared to the size of their bodies. 
In the case of both, this is because the neocortex— 
the cerebral package that sits inside the globe of 
your own skull—is so elaborately developed com-
pared to that of lower animals. Dolphins, in fact, 
possess a larger neocortex than that of any pri-
mate, including humans, and the ratio of their 
brain volume to their body size is larger than that 
of any primate, except humans. Merely in terms 
of brain volume compared to body size, therefore, 
great apes and cetaceans are at the apex of brain 
power in the nonhuman animal world. 
Using brain volume as an indicator of intelli-
gence is problematic, however, since dolphins and 
people use their brains for different tasks. The 
overall size and weight of a dolphin's brain is 
somewhat similar to your own. But much of a dol-
140 

Cognition 
phin's brain is devoted to making and understand-
ing sounds, both vocal and sonar. The organs and 
space devoted to the sonar apparatus account for 
a lot of the size difference between dolphins and 
other mammals. Dolphins produce sounds in their 
nasal cavity, but process and amplify them in a 
fatty mass of tissue called the "melon" next to the 
nasal cavity in their forehead. The organization of 
a dolphin's brain is superficially similar to an ape's; 
the frontal lobes resemble those of people, and the 
temporal lobes house a structure that resembles 
the language center of the human brain. Dolphins 
and primates have not shared a common ancestor 
for more than 90 million years, yet they possess 
cognitive abilities that are strikingly convergent. 
Still, many researchers feel these similarities are 
superficial, and caution that we should not leap to 
consider intelligence a prerequisite for the social 
complexity we see in apes and dolphins. 
What are the fundamental attributes that 
would place dolphins and great apes near humans, 
at the pinnacle of what we call the "intelligent" 
world? The abilities to be flexible, remember, imi-
tate, use tools, understand language, and be self-
141 

B E A U T I F U L 
M I N D S 
aware are certainly among the things that make 
humans extraordinary. But might some dolphins 
and great apes possess such attributes? 
Technological Smarts 
Until a few years ago no one would have guessed 
that an ordinarily underappreciated invertebrate 
like a sponge would have achieved much notoriety, 
especially among scientists expert in the study of 
cetaceans. 
It started in 1984 at Australia's Shark Bay 
where Halfluke, a female Indian Ocean bottlenose 
dolphin, was observed carrying a large, cone-shaped 
sponge on the tip of her rostrum like a mask. Fol-
lowing this first and seemingly unique sighting, re-
searchers began to notice that not only Halfluke 
but other dolphins exhibited this kind of behavior 
as well, always in the same deep-water channel of 
the bay. The dolphins were carefully inserting their 
noses into the cone-shaped sponges. Water pres-
sure created by the dolphin's fluid movement held 
them in place. Not all the bottlenose dolphins in 
the group wore these soft nose-caps; only a few sol-
142 

Cognition 
itary individuals were observed over a period of 
several years. Researchers called these mostly fe-
male dolphins the "regular sponge carriers." 
From the perspective of a human researcher, it 
was rather challenging to decipher how a sponge 
that covered a large part of the dolphin's face and 
probably interfered with its ability to open its 
mouth could have been of any advantage to the 
animal. Were the dolphins using the sponges to 
play? There were other instances, elsewhere in the 
world, in which wild bottlenose dolphins had been 
observed carrying objects like a kelp string or a 
piece of plastic; and it wasn't news that dolphins 
sometimes amused themselves with simple toys. 
Carrying of sponges, however, was a stereotyped 
and meticulous behavioral pattern displayed by 
only a few solitary females who practiced it for 
hours on end and repeated the behavior over a 
long period of time. This was certainly too me-
thodical to be just play; it had to be something 
else. 
So were the dolphins perhaps extracting some 
special antibacterial or antifungal substance from 
the sponges? Several species, including our own, 
143 

B E A U T I F U L 
M I N D S 
are known to use plants and other objects ex-
tracted from the environment as medicine. The idea 
of a therapeutic sponge used by dolphins sounded 
good but left too many questions unanswered. 
Why, for instance, were only a few seemingly 
healthy females interested in this marvelous medi-
cine? And why did they use it regularly over a sev-
eral-year span? 
The lack of answers led researchers to seek a 
third and more attractive hypothesis. A wide array 
of bottlenose dolphin foraging strategies had al-
ready been documented in Shark Bay, but it was 
becoming apparent to researchers that this group 
of sponge-wearing females were doing something 
altogether different. The sponge-carrying females 
were usually spotted while foraging or echolocat-
ing in search of prey. While toting the sponges, 
they were pursuing prey on the sea floor and cast-
ing off their nose caps at the last instant before 
the capture of their food. Might the dolphins have 
been wearing the sponges as a shield? It now 
seemed that the sponge mask was an intelligent 
way for the females to protect themselves from a 
variety of harmful and toxic organisms near the 
144 

Cognition 
sea floor and to avoid the abrasive sand, rocks, and 
broken shells that littered the deep waters of the 
channel. By using the sponges, the dolphins may 
also have been able to agitate the sea bottom and 
flush out burrowing prey species from the sand. 
This behavior seemed to be a "tradition" vertically 
transmitted from mother sponge carriers to their 
daughters. 
We use tools like spoons and chopsticks in our 
everyday life, but could sponges be considered a 
kind of foraging tool for dolphins? To answer this 
question, we need a rigorous description of "tool 
use." The most accepted definition was given by 
biologist Benjamin Beck in the 1980s: "tool use 
is the external employment of an unattached envi-
ronmental object to alter more efficiently the form, 
position and condition of another object, another 
organism, or the user itself when the user holds or 
carries the tool during or just prior to use and is 
responsible for the proper and effective orienta-
tion of the tool." Using this definition, the dol-
phin's use of sponges for protection against sting-
ing organisms and sand abrasion or for extraction 
of prey from the sea floor would meet all the crite-
145 

B E A U T I F U L 
M I N D S 
ria for using a tool, making the wild Indian Ocean 
bottlenose dolphin the first tool-using cetacean ever 
documented. 
We're sitting around a massive earthen termite 
mound in a forest in Tanzania in the same way a 
bunch of conventioneers would crowd a buffet ta-
ble. Three of our group of twelve are human ob-
servers; the other nine are chimpanzees. A termite 
mound houses a feast, especially during the start 
of the rainy season in November. The red clay soil 
of the mound is moist, and the myriad tunnels the 
solider termites have made can be easily picked 
open by chimpanzee fingernails. A female and her 
two daughters sit on the slope of the mound, the 
mom looking intently for tunnel openings while 
her daughters just as intently watch her. A few 
feet away an elderly male is picking at the mound. 
He breaks off a bit of soil and brings his termite-
extracting tool into play. A twig he had snapped 
from a bush a few minutes earlier is tucked side-
ways in his lips. He plucks this from his mouth, 
146 

Cognition 
clips off the frayed end in his teeth, and pokes 
it down the tiny tunnel. A few gingerly pokes later, 
the probe comes out of the mound coated with 
brown termites like a wooden spoon dipped in 
chocolate. The chimp runs the twig through his 
lips and munches the insects into a protein-rich 
pulp. Lunch. 
Watching him expertly fish for the termites, 
I get an idea. Picking up one of his discarded twig 
tools, I sit down on the opposite side of the 
mound, within his line of vision, and begin to do 
my own fishing. It's easier than I thought; on the 
first try I extract a stick full of angry, oversized sol-
diers, their jaws snapping at me. The chimpanzee 
immediately sees this, stops what he is doing, and 
moves to my side of the mound. He walks over to 
"my" termiting tunnel (I was proud to have lo-
cated such a productive vein on the first try), looks 
at me, and then down at the mound. As I begin 
to back away—we try to maintain a several-meter 
distance between apes and humans at all times 
because of the apes' vulnerability to nearly every 
human disease—he comes closer, almost pushing 
me off my spot on the earthen mound. With a 
147 

B E A U T I F U L 
M I N D S 
wave of his hand, I know I am being dismissed; 
he takes up a tool and begins to fish from my 
tunnel. 
Jill Pruetz and colleagues recorded another ex-
ample of a chimpanzee finding the right tool for 
the job. They recently observed a chimpanzee us-
ing a stick that it had peeled at one end to a ta-
pered point in order to jab it into a tree cavity. 
Inside the hole was a bushbaby, a squirrel-sized 
animal that the chimp then extracted, apparently 
dead or injured, from the hole. The chimpanzee 
had foreseen a problem in immobilizing and ex-
tracting its intended prey and thought up a clever 
tool solution—albeit not exactly a spear—in re-
sponse. 
This sort of technological intelligence is one 
of the behaviors that made chimpanzees famous 
in the early 1960s, when Jane Goodall reported 
apes manufacturing tools of grass blades and twigs 
with which they fished termites from their earthen 
tunnels. Ironically, Darwin had proposed techno-
logical competence as the key to the rise of intelli-
gence in his 1871 book, The Descent of Man. He saw 
a feedback loop between the emergence of upright 
148 

Cognition 
posture, tool use, and the evolutionary expansion 
of the brain. Once ape ancestors began to walk up-
right, Darwin postulated, their hands were freed to 
learn to make and use tools. The best tool makers 
would have reaped a survival and reproductive ad-
vantage, which would have placed intelligence at a 
premium. Thus our ancestry would have hinged 
on the ability to be technological, with its accom-
panying posture and cerebral expansion. 
Darwin's hypothesis, while logical, has since 
been revealed as flawed. Modern geology has dated 
the origins of tool use at least 3 million years after 
the transition from quadruped ape ancestor to 
bipedal hominid. Our earliest hominid ancestors, 
the australopithecines and their immediate prede-
cessors, arose around 6 million years ago based on 
current evidence. But the first evidence of stone 
tools does not appear until 2.5 million years ago. 
Moreover, although brain size increased slowly 
and incrementally throughout our lineage's his-
tory, the size of the cerebrum did not really ex-
plode until only the past few hundred thousand 
years; before that time brain size increases simply 
scaled to body size increases. So the three key events 
149 

B E A U T I F U L 
M I N D S 
that Darwin saw as interconnected—upright pos-
ture, tool use, and brain size—were in fact discon-
nected by millions of years. 
The Sophisticated Art of Imitation 
A key piece of evidence that apes and dolphins are 
capable of humanlike thought is their ability to 
imitate others. By imitation, we mean the ability of 
one individual to copy the behavior of another. 
You might think that imitation would be simple 
to recognize. But as psychologist Richard Byrne 
points out, scientists have tended to define imita-
tion by what it is not rather than by what it is. 
Only after excluding lower-order forms of copying 
do we call a behavior imitation. Many birds, for in-
stance, are accomplished mimics and have exten-
sive, highly accurate repertoires of songs of other 
species. Mockingbirds not only sing songs of other 
bird species, they also mimic the sounds of cats 
meowing, rusty gates creaking, and kettles hissing. 
Parrots of course are masterful mimics of human 
speech. Brit there is very little evidence that parrots 
understand the content they mimic (with the pos-
150 

Cognition 
sible exception of Alex, an African gray parrot who 
was the subject of research for many years). 
Determining whether apes understand what they 
appear to be imitating is at the heart of the debate 
over the role of imitation in ape intelligence. Skep-
tics point to two key criteria for declaring that apes 
and humans think about problems similarly. First, 
apes must have a theory of mind. By theory of 
mind, I mean the ability to place themselves in the 
mind of others, to intuit others' mental state, and 
to act on that insight. Second, apes must be able to 
copy an entire sequence of behaviors, each step of 
which may serve little function, putting them to-
gether into a whole behavior sequence. This re-
quires not simply the ability to repeat a sequence 
of behaviors but also the ability to recognize each 
step. Many animals can imitate simple actions they 
observe performed by humans or by members of 
their own species. Captive chimpanzees have readily 
copied tool use behavior they observed performed 
by other chimpanzees, even though the same tool 
151 

B E A U T I F U L 
M I N D S 
use performed by a human did not stimulate 
copying. 
To step into the mental shoes of another hu-
man is one thing; to recognize it in a nonverbal an-
imal is quite another. How do we know that when 
an ape copies a physical action, it truly understands 
what it is copying? Researchers usually make this 
judgment by distinguishing apparent imitation 
from trial and error. Other researchers have at-
tempted to distinguish between imitation, which 
they regard as a uniquely human ability, and emu-
lation, which they regard as an ape's approxima-
tion of human imitative abilities. To these research-
ers, imitation is copying with an understanding 
of both the goal and each step toward it. When 
an ape sees a person place a bandage on a cut, 
and then copies this behavior by placing a bandage 
on its own arm, is this imitation? Some scientists 
regard this as emulation, not imitation, because 
there is no evidence the ape understood the mean-
ing of the act of placing the bandage. Whereas a 
human child who watches a tool being used gains 
an understanding of deeper causation, the chim-
panzee lacks the ability to understand the causa-
tional aspects of the process. 
152 

Cognition 
The psychologist Michael Tomasello set out to 
determine if a chimpanzee could imitate the way a 
person performs a task requiring forethought and 
planning. He set up an experiment in which a ball 
could be reached at the end of a table only by in-
serting a rake through a grate from the opposite 
end, so that the ball could be dragged toward the 
person holding the rake. When a small child ob-
served this, it took the child only one trial to learn 
how to get the ball using the rake, and the child 
perfectly imitated the researcher's demonstration. 
The chimpanzee was also able to get the ball after 
watching only a single trial. However, the chimp 
devised its own method of using the rake to obtain 
the ball, not the style the researcher had demon-
strated. Tomasello concluded from this that the 
chimpanzee failed to imitate the process—even 
though it could achieve the same result—because it 
lacked a theory of mind that is necessary for true 
imitation. Tomasello labeled what the chimpanzee 
did as emulation; achieving the goal without un-
derstanding the importance of imitating the pro-
cess. 
Tomasello's experiment and others like it have 
been carried out by researchers who doubt that 
153 

B E A U T I F U L 
M I N D S 
chimpanzees possess a theory of mind. But critics 
point out that the rake-ball test is too similar to 
games children play every day, while utterly un-
familiar and unnatural to chimpanzees. This is a 
persistent problem for laboratory studies of great 
apes. Their cognition evolved in response to the 
pressures of tropical forest environments, not lab-
oratories. Even the best laboratories provide im-
poverished social learning environments for their 
study subjects compared to what children experi-
ence growing up. No human orphan who had been 
traumatically separated from his or her mother as 
a toddler and then reared in a socially impover-
ished environment would be deemed an appropri-
ate model for studying normal childhood cogni-
tive 
development. 
Apes, 
psychologically 
and 
emotionally similar to young children of similar 
age, may be no more suitable as models. 
Bottlenose mother LulaMom and Nin, her new-
born calf, are swimming side by side less than a 
hundred yards from the beach at Malibu. Nin, 
154 

Cognition 
barely a month old, is dark in color with a flabby 
dorsal fin. Nin still bears the fetal folds from the 
womb, which appear as light stripes on the sides of 
his body. Swimming in his mother's "slipstream," 
the hydrodynamic wake created by her movement 
through the water, Nin catches a free ride through 
the waves as they break near a shoreline packed 
with neoprene-clad humans on surfboards. The calf 
observes intently as LulaMom catches a few fish 
near the surface. Then, it's Nin's turn; imitating 
LulaMom's movements, Nin clumsily disappears 
under a wave, presumably chasing a fish. A mo-
ment later, unsuccessful, he bursts out of the wa-
ter to breathe with his whole head exposed, having 
not yet learned the fluid and effortless porpoising 
motion of adults. Nin tries again, following 
mother's example, until success is finally attained, 
then resumes his favored spot in her slipstream. By 
sticking close to his mother, constantly observing 
and repeating his mother's behavior, he will be-
come independent and able to survive on his own. 
Does Nin simply mimic the actions of his mother, 
eventually learning by doing that hunting leads to 
eating, or is there more to it? 
155 

B E A U T I F U L 
M I N D S 
When we speak of imitation and theory of 
mind in dolphins, we enter an area filled with con-
troversy and confusion in the scientific commu-
nity. Imitation, for instance, may be viewed at dif-
ferent levels, from simple or action-level imitation, 
in which movements or actions are copied without 
understanding, to true imitation, sometimes re-
ferred to as "emulation" or "program-level imita-
tion," which implies that the imitator has an un-
derstanding of the actions he or she is imitating. A 
recent study conducted by Wendy Fellner and her 
colleagues points out how the synchronous swim-
ming of a calf near its mother during the first 
months of its existence has advantages over and 
above reducing the hydrodynamic costs and the 
potential risk of predation. This close contact may 
also play a key role in initiating the process of 
simultaneous imitation of other dolphin behav-
iors. Following this thought, Nin will pass from 
the stage of action-level imitation during his years 
of development to a more complex program-level 
imitation in his adult life that will help Nin exist 
within a multifaceted societal group. 
For dolphins as with apes, a similar set of 
156 

Cognition 
problems plague the study of cognition. Most of 
the experiments attempting to prove or disprove a 
theory of mind in these animals come from close, 
unnatural, impoverished environments, where dol-
phins are not required to make full use of their 
brain power and where the socioecological sound-
ness of the experiments may be in doubt. That 
said, there have been many observations made 
both in captivity and in the field that may indicate 
something more complex than simple mimicry or 
action-level imitation in dolphins. 
To assess a dolphin's ability to imitate, there 
are some significant physical limitations to con-
sider. In an experiment with a chimpanzee, we 
might ask him to imitate a human gesture, like 
raising a leg. It is easy to see if he imitates us or 
not, given the similarities of our body features. Now 
imagine the same experiment carried out with a 
dolphin. When we raise our leg, what does a dol-
phin do? This is no simple request for an animal 
that doesn't have arms or legs. To imitate our ac-
tion, the dolphin needs to translate the act of rais-
ing a human leg into something it can express with 
its own body and then perform the task with that 
157 

B E A U T I F U L 
M I N D S 
attribute. In experiments like this one, dolphins 
have been observed raising a flipper or their entire 
tail out of the water in response to the human re-
quest. This act requires much more than the sim-
ple copying of a physical action; it implies some 
level of representational sophistication. 
The research team of C. K. Taylor and G. S. 
Saayman documented some interesting examples 
of dolphin behavior in captivity that seem to take 
us another step closer to the existence of a the-
ory of mind in these animals. In one anecdote, a 
trainer was smoking a cigarette near the underwa-
ter porthole of a dolphin tank. A calf stopped in 
front of the porthole and watched the trainer blow-
ing smoke in the air near the glass. After a while, 
the calf swam away to its mother waiting nearby, 
nursed, and then, with a mouthful of milk, re-
turned to the porthole where it first saw the in-
structor. The calf slowly released the milk from 
its mouth, producing a white cloud similar to the 
cloud of smoke produced a few moments before-
hand by its biped counterpart. 
Another account involved a dolphin and a 
scuba diver sent into the dolphin tank to remove 
158 

Cognition 
the algal growth from the underwater portholes. 
Following next to the diver, the dolphin observed 
the cleaning activity with great interest. After moni-
toring the diver's behavior for quite some time, the 
dolphin picked up a seagull feather in its mouth 
and started "cleaning" the windows with it while 
releasing sounds and streams of bubbles similar to 
those emanating from the diver's scuba gear. Per-
haps not entirely convinced it had finished the job, 
the dolphin then collected stones, paper, and dead 
fish and used them in the same way. This behavior 
seems more than just an action-level emulation; 
the dolphin was able to understand the relation-
ship between the actions of the diver and the out-
come. Many other examples of imitative behaviors 
such as these have been recorded in the literature— 
so many that we should consider looking at them 
as having some scientific significance. 
The existing evidence suggests that some dol-
phins are able to imitate and remember postures 
and movements originating not only from behav-
iors already familiar to them but also from novel 
activities displayed by other animals, including 
our own species. In general, adult dolphins seem 
159 

B E A U T I F U L 
M I N D S 
to learn new actions more easily than young indi-
viduals, but young dolphins, like human children, 
seem to learn quickly when something catches their 
interest. 
There are also a few cases of vocal imitation 
in dolphins recorded both in captivity and in the 
wild. Bottlenose dolphins, for instance, are fantas-
tic imitators of manmade sounds, as observed by 
Peter Tyack of Woods Hole Oceanographic Insti-
tution. They can listen to a sound and repeat it 
with exceptional accuracy within just a few sec-
onds of hearing it. In the wild, dolphins are able to 
address each other from a distance when they get 
separated, a behavior called "whistle matching," first 
observed by another Woods Hole researcher, Vin-
cent Janik. An individual might echo a compan-
ion's call as a welcome greeting or as an aggressive 
warning, depending on the situation. 
Other examples of vocal learning come from 
killer whale studies. David Bain described a captive 
killer whale from Iceland that was able to repeat 
and then learn the vocal repertoire of a British 
Columbian tankmate over a three-year period. A 
few years later, another researcher, John Ford, re-
160 

Cognition 
ported what he calls "interpod call mimicry" in the 
wild, showing again that orcas are capable of vocal 
learning. Vocal imitation seems to be extremely im-
portant in the communicative world of a wild dol-
phin. 
Dolphins can imitate postures and sounds with 
differing degrees of complexity. Observations indi-
cate that dolphins may understand more about 
their actions than can be explained by simple mim-
icry of behavior. Is this then indicative of the exis-
tence of a theory of mind? Certainly more studies 
are necessary to elucidate these questions, but with 
dolphins as with the study of apes, we must accept 
that a theory of mind in these animals may not 
closely resemble a theory of mind in humans. 
Look Who's Talking 
We are offshore in Santa Monica Bay, California, 
following about 200 short-beaked common dol-
phins. The otherwise calm surface of the ocean is 
teeming with what seem to be white caps formed 
by the porpoising motion of their fins at the sur-
face. They are hunting for food, deployed like a 
161 

B E A U T I F U L 
M I N D S 
platoon of soldiers on a battle line. They move 
steadily northward, spreading out to cover a larger 
body of water, keeping us ever busy in recording 
their behavior. A few whistles reach the headphones 
of my assistant, who is leaning over the DAT re-
corder intently listening to the signal coming 
through our hydrophones. Suddenly, beneath the 
surface, something happens. My assistant waves 
me over for a listen and motions to the captain to 
move the boat closer to the group. I put on the 
headset and listen as the "platoon" divides into 
smaller units who spin off in different directions. 
The occasional whistles are gone, replaced by an 
intense cacophony of whistling and rapid click 
trains. 
Half an hour later we are still recording as the 
school of dolphins feeds energetically on a feast of 
sardines seven miles off Los Angeles. Now, all we 
see are dorsal fins and flukes at the surface and 
all we hear are streams of high-pitched clicks. I 
am photographing their behavior when suddenly 
the clicking stops, turning instead to noisy and 
intense whistling. When I look back into the view-
finder, the surface is calm and the dolphins are 
162 

Cognition 
gone. My assistant tells me that the whistling has 
stopped as well. I scan the water through the cam-
era lens for a sign of them and stop on a large, tri-
angular fin with a light-grey patch on the lower 
front side. I look up just in time to see the great 
white shark as it passes under our boat. 
I don't know what the dolphins were "talking" 
about just before we spotted the shark but it was 
probably not just about how great the meal was 
at this particular feeding spot. Their language, or 
whatever we decide to call it, probably enabled them 
to advise each other of an imminent danger and 
keep track of where the other group members were 
at that moment. 
What we know of the natural world comes from 
our five senses. What dolphins know, or might 
know, about their own environment comes mostly 
from their visual and acoustic sensory channels, 
which are highly developed and specialized for the 
aquatic medium. It is through these systems, par-
ticularly their hearing ability, that a dolphin can 
163 

B E A U T I F U L 
M I N D S 
perceive its surrounding world and interact with 
its companions in a coordinated and complex so-
cial organization. 
Dolphin sounds can be divided into three main 
categories: whistles, burst-pulse sounds, which 
are used for social communication, and clicks, 
which are used to orient and navigate in the water 
and search for prey. Dolphin whistles represent 
some type of specific code involved in the ex-
change of information between a sender and a re-
ceiver. They are somewhat similar to human whis-
tles, except that the pitch, or frequency, is much 
higher. 
These sounds are believed by many scientists 
to be a form of language. In the late 1950s and 
1960s, John Lilly, a neurophysiologist, set out to 
break the interspecies language barrier. He be-
lieved that dolphins not only possess sophisticated 
linguistic abilities, but that they might also have 
the capacity to communicate with humans. His 
hypothesis was based on the fact that bottlenose 
dolphins have an exceptionally large brain with a 
highly developed neocortex, giving them the ca-
pacity, among other things, for the development of 
164 

Cognition 
a natural language. After dissecting many dolphin 
brains, which made him a target for the antivivi-
sectionists of the time, and spending days and 
days listening to dolphins speaking what he called 
"delphinese," his intrepid quest to break the lan-
guage barrier and teach English phonemes to 
dolphins failed. As I mentioned in Chapter 1, how-
ever, he thoroughly captured the imaginations of 
the general public in the process. 
Lilly wrote that "scientists should learn how to 
communicate with dolphins to prepare for com-
munication with intelligent life in outer space," 
which unleashed rivers of criticism from the sci-
entific world and a surprising public infatuation 
with his books. Those books painted an image of 
animals more intelligent than a man could ever be. 
Though all his hypotheses were negated, an impor-
tant observation did emerge from Lilly's work, al-
most accidentally. While listening to a set of tapes 
of dolphin vocalizations, he realized that one of 
his subject animals was mimicking what the hu-
man researcher was saying during the experiment 
in a "high-pitched Donald Duck, quacking-like 
way." Lilly's experiments set the groundwork for a 
165 

B E A U T I F U L 
M I N D S 
milestone series of studies on dolphin vocal learn-
ing, mimicry, communication, language compre-
hension, and cognition. 
Following in Lilly's footsteps, Louis Herman 
and his colleagues at the Kewalo Basin Marine 
Mammal Lab in Honolulu began devising two arti-
ficial languages they hoped to teach to the bottle-
nose dolphins housed at their facility. The lan-
guages, one computer-generated with high-pitched 
words, the other, a sign language conveyed by arm 
and hand signals from a trainer, didn't approxi-
mate human conversation but, like our language, 
were based on a set of grammatical rules. 
In an underwater classroom, dolphins Phoenix 
and Ake were taught a series of sentences. A trainer 
would say or sign "Phoenix Ake under," which 
meant that Phoenix needed to understand the 
command and then accomplish the task of swim-
ming under Ake. The "students" showed remark-
able academic promise and soon became able to 
distinguish between "right hoop left Frisbee fetch" 
(meaning "take the Frisbee on your left to the hoop 
on your right") or the opposite, "left hoop right 
Frisbee fetch." Herman concluded that his dolphins 
166 

Cognition 
were able to understand both the meaning of the 
words and the sentence patterns, basically compre-
hending the semantic and syntactic components 
of the language-like instructions. 
The dolphins' responses to the training were 
so successful that they were even able to formulate 
their own logical and spontaneous responses to 
meaningless phrases. For instance, when a trainer 
would occasionally "say" something that didn't 
make any sense, Ake ignored the command. Her-
man interpreted this to mean that the dolphin was 
not only capable of understanding words and se-
quences of words, but also clever enough to make 
decisions about them. 
The experiments became more and more chal-
lenging for the dolphins. Trainers might appear 
on an underwater TV screen or with bodies ob-
scured, leaving only the arms out for the dolphins 
to see. The goal was simple: to determine whether 
the dolphins could interpret gestural communica-
tion that included less and less detail. Even with 
the minimal, conceptual presence of communica-
tion, the dolphins were almost always able to give 
the correct response, leading Herman to conclude 
167 

B E A U T I F U L 
M I N D S 
that these dolphins could make sense of artificial 
grammar. 
Semantics and syntax have always been con-
sidered the key attributes of any human language. 
Our language can be considered syntactic in the 
sense that messages consist of components, each 
with their own meaning. Animal communication 
has always been considered to be nonsyntactic be-
cause their signals refer to "whole situations." In 
the evolution of our own language, the transition 
from the nonsyntactic to the syntactic form of com-
munication was a defining step that would sepa-
rate our human expressive ability from that of 
other animals. But by being able to acquire at least 
some of the proprieties of our syntax, Herman's 
dolphins taught us that the gulf between our re-
spective forms of communication is not as wide as 
previously thought. 
In the dolphins' underwater world there is an 
open system of communicative signals. For in-
stance, there are the individual-specific and dis-
tinctive signals of the bottlenose dolphins, which 
live in fission-fusion societies, and there are the 
group-specific vocal repertoires of killer whales, 
168 

Cognition 
which spend their existence in stable pods. Social 
signals and social structure in a dolphin group are 
interrelated in such complex and flexible ways that 
we still labor to understand what is really going on 
inside the big brains of these magnificent and in-
tuitive animals. 
The Ape Speaks 
After so many years spent watching wild apes, the 
opportunity to have a conversation with one was a 
shock. I shouldn't have been shocked; the chim-
panzees at the Chimpanzee/Human Communica-
tion Institute on the campus of Central Washing-
ton University are world-renowned. Washoe, Loulis, 
Dar, and Tatu have lived together as a social group 
for decades. They were first taught sign language 
by Allen and Beatrice Gardner in the 1960s. 
Washoe was the pioneering research subject, and 
Roger Fouts, the Gardners' graduate student, be-
gan a lifelong project teaching Washoe and her 
compatriots and then learning from them. 
Today the four chimpanzees live together in 
a comfortable indoor-outdoor zoolike enclosure, 
169 

B E A U T I F U L 
M I N D S 
tended to by a legion of nurturing students, care-
givers, and scientists. When I visited them one day 
in 2003, they were a picture of contentment. 
Washoe sat idly reading Newsweek, casually flip-
ping pages with her finger the way a girl at the 
beach reads Cosmopolitan. Occasionally she used 
her tongue to turn the pages. Now in her late thir-
ties, Washoe has assumed the status of matriarch 
among the four chimpanzees. 
Loulis is her 
adopted son, brought to her as a tiny infant to re-
place her baby, who had died. Over the years, the 
four have astounded Roger Fouts and his research 
partner and wife Debbie with their linguistic so-
phistication. In the early days, Washoe acquired 
her signing skills the way any mute child does; by 
listening to and watching a parent. The Fouts were 
Washoe's devoted foster parents, and they reared 
her in a human home as they had raised their own 
children. Although there are critics who claim the 
signing chimpanzees are only parroting their train-
ers rather than understanding the concepts they 
sign about, the Fouts have provided compelling 
counterevidence. The four chimpanzees don't sim-
ply sign "apple" when shown a photo of an apple 
170 

Cognition 
by a human trainer. They sit in their social group, 
observed only by the omnipresent videocameras, 
and sign to each other. Often it's just a trivial, two-
word sentence, such as, "Hey, give me that apple." 
But it's conversation, probably not unlike what 
early humans used, and it happens without train-
ing or prompting or rewards. Such simple conver-
sation is a wonderful example of both language 
and culture in action; learned traditions are passed 
down from one individual to another, encouraging 
an even greater range of communication. The lim-
its of their language, comparable to that of human 
toddlers, don't change its overall importance. Af-
ter all, in any daycare center there are a thousand 
interactions a day of lower communicative content 
and caliber. When we see simple language in chil-
dren, we still label it language. We know it will 
someday develop its full range of complexity. When 
we see the same process in chimpanzees, we shy 
away from drawing the same conclusions. 
The Central Washington University signing 
chimpanzees have taught us a great deal about lan-
guage itself. For instance, Washoe and her mates 
use one sign for "dog," which they apply to Dachs-
171 

B E A U T I F U L 
M I N D S 
hunds, Collies, and Great Danes alike. In other 
words, "dog" is a natural category in the chimpan-
zee mind, and the sign they use is chosen accord-
ingly. The Gardners and Fouts showed years ago 
that signing chimpanzees use novel signs to de-
scribe objects for which they know no other sign: 
hence the signs for candy and for fruit, given to-
gether, to refer to a watermelon. Although most 
chimpanzee sentences are only two signs long-
much like a toddler's utterances—sentences can 
stretch to six or seven signs, with some rudimen-
tary elements of grammar included. 
My host and translator for the encounter with 
the signing chimpanzees is Dr. Mary Lee Jensvold, 
a researcher who has worked with Washoe and 
company for many years and is also fluent in 
AMESLAN, or American Sign Language. As we 
watch the languid activities inside the chimpan-
zees' enclosure, Loulis comes over to the glass par-
tition and sits a couple of feet away, staring at me. 
"Hi Loulis," Mary Lee signs. 
Loulis answers by looking at me and saying, 
"Give me an apple." 
"He doesn't have an apple," replies Mary Lee. 
172 

Cognition 
But Loulis says, somewhat more insistently, 
"Give me a sandwich." 
Then the stereotypical "Give me a banana." 
Finally, convinced by Mary Lee that I haven't 
brought him anything, Loulis gestures to me, 
"Show me your shoes." 
1 obligingly lift my foot so he can get a look at 
black running shoes through the glass partition. 
"Black shoes. Nice," Loulis observes. Mary Lee 
explains that Loulis is fond of the color black. 
Whether this is connected in his mind with his 
own color is not clear, but he, and Washoe too, will 
sometimes thumb through stacks of photos and 
stop to sign "black, black," when they come across 
their favorite color. 
What does this use of language by chimpan-
zees tell us about ourselves? For years some lin-
guists and psychologists have denied that language 
is used by great apes, but gorillas, bonobos, and 
orangutans have all been shown to be linguisti-
cally savvy in laboratory studies. Critics claim that 
the use of symbolic language by chimpanzees is so 
limited that we should not call it language. In part 
they are correct; what chimpanzees do with ges-
173 

B E A U T I F U L 
M I N D S 
tural language is equivalent to the speech of a two-
year-old child. But I suspect all linguists would 
agree that two-year-old children possess language, 
even though they haven't fully mastered it. 
Language allows an individual to transmit cul-
ture across time and space. Information can be 
passed from one society to another, and from this 
generation to the next. The language skills acquired 
by chimpanzees reared in human home settings 
are not easily transferred to an ape's natural habi-
tat. In the wild, chimpanzees use a wide range of 
calls, some of which rely on context to provide 
meaning. And while the known vocabulary of wild 
chimpanzees consists of about fifty calls, they use 
gestures to communicate as often as they use vocal 
communication. 
Do apes have language? First we need to con-
sider what language is. Language is grammatical; it 
has rules and regularity of use, learned by children 
without a great deal of hands-on training. It is 
open, allowing a nearly infinite variety of possible 
combinations of relatively few sounds in order to 
convey an enormous array of meanings. And it is 
symbolic; there is nothing in the word "green" that 
174 

Cognition 
tells you anything about its meaning. We apply 
"green" as a label to a well-understood feature or 
object. Language allows for the indirect transmis-
sion of culture across wide geographic areas and 
across generations of time. The well-documented 
acquisition of language by chimpanzees reared in 
human home settings is not comparable to what 
apes do in the wild. Wild chimpanzee vocalizations 
rely heavily on context to provide meaning, and 
their calls do not resemble human language at all. 
Our key question about ape language should 
not be "Do apes have language?" but rather "Do 
apes and humans share the same foundations for 
language?" Since the concept of language is a hu-
man invention, it is not surprising that linguists 
and cognitive scientists have been reluctant to ap-
ply it more expansively to other linguistically 
skilled animals. If a chimpanzee shares with a hu-
man child the basic "software" for language acqui-
sition (the ape lacks the vocal "hardware" needed 
to produce intelligible speech sounds), this would 
be a profound statement about the deep history of 
language in the early human lineage. 
Perhaps the most persuasive research on lan-
175 

B E A U T I F U L 
M I N D S 
guage acquisition in apes is Sue Savage-Rum-
baugh's work with Kanzi, a male bonobo. Kanzi 
communicates by touching symbols on a lexicon 
board; he receives information through his under-
standing of spoken English. Savage-Rumbaugh es-
timates his production vocabulary as 300 words 
and his understanding of spoken English as over 
1,000 words. Work by Savage-Rumbaugh and 
many other researchers has conclusively settled at 
least two arguments over ape language. First, she 
demonstrates that apes understand and employ 
the concept of reference, symbolically using words 
to represent things in their environment. Second, 
these words and phrases are spontaneously com-
bined to request and give information as well as to 
comment on or describe the world around them. 
This is no mere parroting; Kanzi can follow com-
plex requests given in spoken English, such as, "Go 
to the refrigerator in the next room and bring me 
the red ball on the top shelf." Changes in word or-
der create the same sort of confusion for a chim-
panzee that they would for you, and simple syntax 
is present and necessary. If there is a difference be-
tween what Kanzi comprehends and what a hu-
176 

Cognition 
man toddler comprehends, scientists have not yet 
discovered it. 
Above all else, language is a social behavior 
that enables higher-order communication among 
individuals. Like many other chimpanzee and hu-
man social behaviors, it is learned through social-
ization. After the Gardners' and Fouts' work with 
signing chimpanzees, a psychologist named Her-
bert Terrace attempted to replicate the result with 
a chimpanzee he nicknamed "Nim Chimpsky" in 
mock honor of the famed linguist. Terrace made 
one key mistake, however, in preparing Nim for 
language research. Instead of rearing his study sub-
ject in a social environment in which the intense 
mother-infant bond was approximated (as it was 
when Washoe spent her early months and years 
raised as a human infant), Nim was raised in a lab-
oratory. Instead of one or two committed surro-
gate parents, Nim had a rotating host of students 
and lab assistants taking care of him. And by all 
accounts his social environment in those early for-
mative months was impoverished compared to 
what Washoe had received. And that may explain 
why Washoe was a skilled language-user, who in 
177 

B E A U T I F U L 
M I N D S 
turn taught sign language to her own chimpanzee 
peers and adopted son, while Nim turned out to be 
an underachiever. Terrace concluded that Nim's 
language use, more limited than Washoe's, was 
mere clever imitation rather than linguistic pro-
ficiency, and the results cast a shadow on ape lan-
guage work for years. 
In a laboratory in Japan, a chimpanzee named 
Ai displays math conceptual skills that would make 
any teacher proud. She has learned to recognize 
that Arabic numerals stand for particular numbers 
of objects. She has the ability to count from zero 
to nine, which she does by pressing a touch-sensi-
tive computer screen. She can properly order the 
sequence of numbers from zero to nine when they 
are flashed to her on the screen so quickly that a 
human would be hard-pressed to compete. The av-
erage person can remember numerical sequences 
easily to about seven digits—think of phone num-
bers—but after that our ability to remember such 
information rapidly diminishes. Ai is proficient at 
recalling number sequences up to five digits, about 
the same number of digits a four-year-old child 
can remember. She can even interrupt her sequence 
178 

Cognition 
to attend to something else, like food or a fight in 
the group, and then return and complete the se-
quence. This basic math competence in an ape was 
shocking when first reported by the Japanese re-
searcher Tetsuro Matsuzawa. 
Mirror, Mirror . . . 
To be capable of distinguishing oneself from oth-
ers or to somehow recognize oneself as a distinct 
entity is another attribute of what we call cogni-
tion. When I wake up in the morning and look 
at my face in the mirror, I recognize the image 
as myself. Consequently, I've demonstrated a sense 
of self-awareness. When my dog Burbank walks 
in front of the mirror, he sometimes stops briefly 
to face himself, but he probably doesn't recognize 
that image as himself. The outcome doesn't change 
if I place a hat on his head; Burbank's perception 
of the image remains exactly the same. 
But is this true of all animals other than hu-
mans? Proving the existence of a "sense of self" 
is experimentally challenging, but a few success-
ful experiments that use mirrors and markings as 
179 

B E A U T I F U L 
M I N D S 
tools have been carried out on various species in 
recent decades. The experiments were simple. Mark 
the body of the subject animal with a splash of 
paint or dye, encourage the animal to look at itself 
in a mirror, then observe and record its reactions. 
Chimps, gorillas, bonobos, and orangutans 
blotched with paint and stationed in front of a 
mirror were recorded examining and touching the 
actual spots on their bodies. They were not only 
able to recognize themselves in a mirrored image 
but were also capable of understanding that the 
blotches of paint had occurred on their own bod-
ies, not on that of the animals in the mirror. Re-
cently, one female Asian elephant named Happy 
was also able to pass the mirror self-recognition 
test, repeatedly touching a white X on the side of 
her head with her trunk. 
Similar experiments with dolphins were com-
plicated by their lack of arms and hands. Dolphins 
were marked with black ink in an area of their 
bodies not visible to them. They could, however, 
feel the ink. A mirror was then offered, and the 
dolphins were watched to see if they were visually 
monitoring their bodies to find the ink spot. Some 
180 

Cognition 
marine mammals, including bottlenose dolphins 
and killer whales (and perhaps false killer whales), 
showed a positive self-recognition response in that 
they were observed visually inspecting themselves 
in the mirror to find the marks. 
These experiments on self-recognition and self-
awareness in dolphins do not, by themselves, prove 
that these animals are self-aware in human terms. 
Scientists are still at odds over the degree to which 
dolphins are capable of self-consciousness, with 
some arguing that the animals do not have a con-
cept of self and are not cognitively advanced at all. 
Proving that dolphins and great apes are able to 
recognize themselves in a mirror, however, is an 
important step toward establishing these animals 
as cognitive species and toward suggesting conver-
gent cognitive evolution in our next of kin. 
Great apes and dolphins might not think like hu-
mans, but researchers have collectively established 
that they are able to memorize, imitate, use tools, 
understand language, and be self-aware, even if we 
181 

B E A U T I F U L 
M I N D S 
are still squabbling over the exact definitions and 
the degree to which they are capable of these things. 
We have, in the preceding chapters, laid the foun-
dation to envisage the many parallels between our 
intelligent world and theirs, but things become 
even more interesting when we begin to look at 
what Italians call the sfumature, what is beneath 
the words. Politics and culture are things thought 
to be exclusively human, but are they? 
182 

chapter six 
MASTER 
P O L I T I C I A N S 
g r e a t a p e s p o s s e s s an intellect that is often 
referred to as Machiavellian; they remember favors 
owed and debts incurred, and operate a service 
economy of behavior exchange. Male chimpanzees 
form paramilitary patrol parties and hunting par-
ties. Individual male chimps engage in manipula-
tion and deceit of rivals to Shakespearean propor-
tions. 
183 

B E A U T I F U L 
M I N D S 
Some dolphins make use of their own so-
cial intelligence to form coalitions of males that 
sexually coerce females and overthrow other male 
coalitions. These coalitions evolve into alliances— 
highly complex behavioral "agreements" between 
males of the same school that cooperate in pairs 
and triplets to sequester and control the move-
ment of females likely to be in estrus. These sorts 
of multiple-level alliances within a social group re-
quire a keen mind of a sort that is not seen in 
other animals. But coalitions are only one aspect 
of these animals' political repertoire. Not so unlike 
human politicians, dolphins can also be masters of 
deception and manipulation, with sharply honed 
networking skills. 
To illustrate how essential political savvy is to 
these creatures, we must navigate their social 
worlds to explore, with different examples from 
the oceans and the forests, this unusual part of 
their existence. 
The Art of Deception 
In our human society, intentional deception is 
commonplace. We deal with it every day of our 
184 

Master Politicians 
lives. Politicians deceive us. Salespeople trick us 
into purchases that we might not otherwise make. 
We must daily negotiate a myriad of manipulated 
information, misrepresentations, fabrications, and 
spin. Deception with forethought requires a large 
brain, cognitive skills, awareness, and an ability to 
think on the fly. It requires a theory of mind. But 
are we the only species on the planet capable of in-
tentional deception? Observations show that there 
are others whose swindling skills rival our own. 
Large-brained animals like dolphins are particu-
larly good at deception and, in some cases, seem to 
do it with some degree of intention. 
Stan Kuczaj has worked with captive dolphins 
for many years. He and his colleagues have recorded 
several occurrences of what could be considered 
deceptive behavior in dolphins. At one of their fa-
cilities, the subject of their research was a female 
adult dolphin named Kelly, who along with her 
tankmates had been trained quite successfully to 
retrieve objects from the pool in exchange for fish. 
After all the other dolphins had finished with their 
retrieval chores and gone their own way, Kelly ap-
peared at the surface with some objects of un-
known origin in the hope of gaining more fish. 
185 

B E A U T I F U L 
M I N D S 
Where did Kelly's objects come from? After search-
ing the pool, Kelly's trainer discovered a secret 
cache of toys that the dolphin had astutely con-
cealed under a drain cover. Day after day, she had 
collected objects inadvertently dropped into the 
pool by tourists, to be used for barter with her 
trainers for fish. On closer observation, it became 
clear that Kelly was extremely careful not to add 
or remove objects from her cache when other 
dolphins were present. Was she intentionally de-
ceiving other dolphins by secretly hoarding these 
objects for her own use or was this just a coinci-
dence? 
Another interesting case was that of what we 
might call the "paper dolphin." This female, like 
Kelly, was trained to bring objects to her trainer 
in exchange for a reward. In one session, at the 
trainer's request, she arrived at the surface with a 
small piece of paper picked up from the bottom of 
the pool ready to claim her reward. Shortly there-
after, she brought another piece of paper to ex-
change for a second fish. Then a third, a fourth, 
and so on; always small pieces and always one at a 
time. After a sizeable pile of paper bits had amassed 
186 

Master Politicians 
near the poolside, her trainer decided to make a 
closer inspection of the pool. Looking carefully, 
he discovered what remained of a large paper bag 
stuck in one of the underwater grates and subse-
quently gave the dolphin the command to retrieve 
it, which she did in its entirety. It was unclear how 
the bag became trapped in the grate and whether 
the dolphin had anything to do with its being 
there, but she had succeeded in fooling her trainer 
and increasing the rewards received by retrieving 
bits of the paper bag instead of the whole object. 
Deceptive behavior by wild dolphins is also 
found in the annals of scientific literature. Janet 
Mann of Georgetown University observed a band 
of female bottlenose dolphins using deception and 
misrepresentation to hoodwink an alliance of ag-
gressive males attempting to harass a single out-
numbered female in estrus. Swimming alone, the 
female had been completely surrounded by the 
group of males when a band of females arrived to 
her rescue, diverting the males' attention by rub-
bing up against them and stroking them with their 
fins. Once they had succeeded in confusing and 
misleading the male alliance from their initial tar-
187 

B E A U T I F U L 
M I N D S 
get, the female group, with the rescued female 
among them, moved quickly to safety. 
Dolphins are not the only large-brained mammals 
other than humans that hoodwink others. Both 
monkeys and apes have shown skill with these tac-
tics. Dorothy Cheney and Robert Seyfarth, who 
studied vervet monkey social behavior in Kenya, 
wanted to know the extent to which the monkeys 
understand the nature of social relationships 
within their group, and how that knowledge might 
be used by group members to manipulate and de-
ceive one another. Vervet monkeys are clearly good 
anthropologists; they understand kinship patterns 
in the group. Using tape-recorded playbacks of baby 
vervet distress calls issuing from cleverly placed 
loudspeakers, Cheney and Seyfarth showed that 
vervets are keenly aware of which baby belongs to 
which mother. When the call of a given baby was 
played by the researchers, the other animals in the 
group looked at the mother of the missing infant. 
188 

Master Politicians 
Female vervets, in other words, understand pat-
terns of maternity in their groups. 
The researchers also found that vervet mon-
keys lie. Many primatologists have seen examples 
of lying in primates. Lying appears to be an evolu-
tionary trend, becoming more widespread in the 
bigger-brained higher primates. For example, great 
apes seem to be skilled at deceiving one another, 
whereas lemurs rarely if ever do it. In the vervet 
study, one monkey would give a predator alarm 
call as the group fed in a desired fruit tree. As other 
group members fled from the "predator," the call-
giver would capitalize on its lie by feeding aggres-
sively in their absence. I once watched a low-rank-
ing male chimpanzee named Beethoven mate with 
a female despite the presence of the alpha male 
Wilkie by using deception. As a party of chimpan-
zees sat in a forest clearing, Beethoven made a 
charging display through the middle of the group. 
Because he was a low-ranking male, this was taken 
by the alpha Wilkie as an act of insubordination. 
As Beethoven charged past Wilkie and into dense 
thickets, Wilkie pursued and launched into his own 
189 

B E A U T I F U L 
M I N D S 
display. While Wilkie was absorbed in his display 
of dominance, Beethoven furtively made his way 
back to the clearing and mated. 
In the worlds of dolphins and primates we find 
examples supporting the idea that these animals 
may intentionally deceive others to gain a variety 
of benefits. Deception with forethought requires 
a complex brain, cognitive skills, awareness, and 
ability to learn new solutions to problems. Dol-
phins and apes seem to possess all of these traits, 
at least in some measure. Intentional deception is 
not solely a human talent, but one that also be-
longs to these animals of the forest and the ocean. 
A Service Economy 
In the ape's world, as in ours, size does not matter 
as much as smarts. U.S. politicians do not become 
president because they are tall, and male chimpan-
zees do not ascend to alpha rank by being physi-
cally big or brutish. An astute mind and a clever 
190 

Master Politicians 
sense of the political calculus better serves the pol-
itician, who must persuade people that he or she is 
the leader they want. In the same way, a male chim-
panzee rises in rank by currying favor with the 
right group members; if he learns how to make use 
of alliances with powerful group mates, both male 
and female, he will go far. At Gombe, many of 
the male chimps that are the largest in size do not 
even approach alpha rank; in fact there is some 
tendency for smaller males to end up dominating 
larger ones. But the one thing nearly all alphas 
have in common is a shrewd sense of favoritism, 
timing, and alliances. 
How, you may ask, can a nonverbal animal be 
such a clever politician? Without words, chimpan-
zees and other great apes engage in a complex ser-
vice economy, in which favors owed and debts to 
be repaid are a currency for securing needed social 
support. Other exchanges of services may occur 
too. This is not novel to primates; many animals 
engage in a market economy of sorts, in which be-
haviors or resources are exchanged. Animals in a 
position of power—such as high-ranking chimpan-
zees—may not need to engage in a fair exchange. 
191 

B E A U T I F U L 
M I N D S 
A low-ranking male needs the support of a high-
ranking male. Therefore, the higher-ranking ani-
mal can get away with offering his support, in a 
fight for example, on only rare occasions, because 
that is still more charity than the lowly animal 
can expect elsewhere. Such an imbalance of power 
is often a defining feature of the social networks 
found in many social animal species, especially the 
more cognitively complex ones. 
Frans de Waal showed that chimpanzees may 
engage in a service economy in which food and 
grooming are currencies swapped for each other. 
Grooming in chimpanzee society has multiple 
functions; it is communication, analogous to our 
small talk; a way of bonding with others; and, of 
course, a convenient way to rid oneself of parasites. 
Chimpanzees who receive food from other group 
members are more likely to groom those donors. 
Food sharing is not common among chimpanzees, 
except between mothers and their infants. When a 
chimpanzee willingly passes a morsel of food to 
another, it is done for a reason. The main reason is 
kinship. But chimpanzees do share with others at 
times, usually in strategic ways. For instance, fol-
192 

Master Politicians 
lowing a successful hunt, male chimpanzees share 
meat from the kill with others present. Sharing 
is not random or liberal. Captors share with al-
lies, and snub rivals. They readily share with their 
mothers, sisters, and brothers. They eagerly share 
with females who possess sexual swellings, or who 
are desired future mates. 
After one particularly successful hunt of colobus 
monkeys in which seven monkeys were caught, the 
male chimpanzees in the hunting party sat for 
hours feasting on their treats. Females and young 
or low-ranking males approached meat holders and 
begged, using the very human gesture of extending 
the hand in a supplicatory way. When this didn't 
work, the beggar actually placed his hand at the 
lips of the meat-eater in hopes of appealing to his 
charity, or perhaps just to persuade him that sur-
rendering a bit of cherished meat was better than 
fending off hours of demands. In another case, 
adult male Atlas captured a young colobus mon-
key that virtually leapt into his arms as it tried to 
flee during the hunt. Atlas had bitten the monkey 
at the base of its skull, and the small carcass hung 
limply in his hands. Moments after the capture, an 
193 

B E A U T I F U L 
M I N D S 
adult female named Trezia rushed to the scene, her 
hand extended in a begging gesture. Apollo, Atlas's 
little brother, also arrived. As Trezia approached 
Atlas, a smile-like fear-grimace stretched across her 
face, he turned toward her but held the body of the 
monkey behind him, at arm's length. He contin-
ued to do this until Trezia turned and presented 
her swelling to him. While they mated he contin-
ued to hold the colobus out of her reach. After sev-
eral mating bouts he offered a share of the meat to 
her and also to his little brother Apollo. 
Although meat is often used as a bargaining 
chip to cement alliances with males and desired fe-
males, male chimpanzees hunt avidly even when 
no females are present, and meat and sex often oc-
cur in the aftermath of a hunt without such an ob-
vious barter occurring. I am often asked if meat-
sharing in exchange for service rewards represents 
the origins of a service economy or even the origins 
of prostitution. The best way to view male chim-
panzee use of meat is in a wider arena of social 
manipulation. Monkey meat is valuable to females 
because it provides a dense package of protein, sat-
urated fat, and calories, all essential during times of 
gestation and lactation. But female chimpanzees 
194 

Master Politicians 
rarely hunt, and when they do they are rarely suc-
cessful. So meat remains a highly limited and 
sought-after commodity. Female chimpanzees are, 
as we have seen, highly promiscuous and strate-
gic when it comes to mating, pairing briefly with 
many males during the course of a single ovulatory 
period. This likely confuses the issue of paternity 
enough that each adult male has some disincen-
tive from harming an infant who may be his off-
spring, and perhaps also discourages him from un-
duly harassing the infant's mother. 
Being a skilled hunter is one way to get mon-
key meat, but being high-ranking or the kin or 
ally of someone high-ranking is another option. 
After a hunt, a high-ranking male will often steal 
colobus carcasses with impunity from low-ranking 
or immature males, or from the occasional female 
who makes her own kill. The alpha male thus uses 
his status as a means to control access to a limited 
resource that is desired by all, and he can dole out 
to his allies and withhold from his rivals. In this, 
he is very much the politician, securing "votes" in 
the form of favors in exchange for the spoils of 
his power. 
This sort of political behavior appears to be 
195 

B E A U T I F U L 
M I N D S 
widespread in chimpanzees and may reflect their 
common ancestry with us. When Newt Gingrich 
became the Speaker of the House in U.S. Congress 
in the 1990s, he publicly mentioned Frans de Waal's 
book Chimpanzee Politics as an influence on his abil-
ity to manipulate those around him. The political 
machinations of humans also tend to be related to 
the acquisition of power or other resources. 
In chimpanzee society, it is the males that en-
gage in Machiavellian behavior. Researchers used 
to think that the gregariousness of male chimpan-
zees was based largely on kinship. Since males do 
not emigrate from their home community, it 
would make sense if most of the males in a com-
munity were relatives. Indeed, during my own re-
search among the Gombe chimpanzees, the eleven 
adult and adolescent males consisted of four pairs 
of brothers (Frodo and Freud, Atlas and Apollo, 
Prof and Pax, and Goblin and Gimble). An elev-
enth male, Beethoven, had arrived as an orphan in 
the company of his apparent older sister. But male 
kinship within a community is not the norm among 
chimpanzee populations. In studies at other chim-
panzee study sites, male kinship has been found to 
196 

Master Politicians 
be low. The males at these sites work together to 
sexually coerce females, gang up on high-ranking 
males, patrol territories, and hunt based on shared 
interests, not the bond of genes. 
This is an interesting and surprising finding. 
It tells us that, like humans, chimpanzees make 
strategic and tactical decisions about how to be-
have in their social lives based on rapidly changing 
events. A male chimpanzee will flip-flop his alle-
giance from day to day, depending on how the sit-
uation of the moment fits his agenda in life. In this 
sense, male chimpanzees have political careers, in 
which the goals stay more or less the same—wield 
as much power, influence and reproductive success 
as possible—but the tactics for achieving them vary 
from day to day, year to year, and life stage to life 
stage. 
Male cooperation in wild chimpanzees does not 
seem to be based on genetic kinship. Nevertheless, 



























































































































































