
 Becoming Human 

 Life and Mind: Philosophical Issues in Biology and Psychology 
 Kim Sterelny and Robert A. Wilson, Series Editors 
 Becoming Human: The Ontogenesis, Metaphysics, and Expression of Human Emotionality , 
Jennifer Greenwood, 2015 
 The Measure of Madness: Philosophy of Mind, Cognitive Neuroscience, and Delusional 
Thought , Philip Gerrans, 2014 
 Evolution in Four Dimensions: Genetic, Epigenetic, Behavioral, and Symbolic Variation in 
the History of Life , revised and updated edition, Eva Jablonka and Marion J. Lamb, 
2014 
 Cooperation and Its Evolution, Volume 1: Agents and Environments , Kim Sterelny, 
Richard Joyce, Brett Calcott, and Ben Fraser, editors, 2012 
 Cooperation and Its Evolution, Volume 2: Agents and Mechanisms , Kim Sterelny, 
Richard Joyce, Brett Calcott, and Ben Fraser, editors, 2012 
 Ingenious Genes: How Gene Regulation Networks Evolve to Control Development , Roger 
Sansom, 2011 
 Yuck! The Nature and Moral Significance of Disgust , Daniel Kelly, 2011 
 Laws, Mind, and Free Will , Steven Horst, 2011 
 Perplexities of Consciousness , Eric Schwitzgebel, 2011 
 Humanity’s End: Why We Should Reject Radical Enhancement , Nicholas Agar, 2010 
 Color Ontology and Color Science , Jonathan Cohen and Mohan Matthen, editors, 
2010 
 The Extended Mind , Richard Menary, editor, 2010 
 The Native Mind and the Cultural Construction of Nature , Scott Atran and Douglas 
Medin, 2008 
 Describing Inner Experience? Proponent Meets Skeptic , Russell T. Hurlburt and Eric 
Schwitzgebel, 2007 
 Evolutionary Psychology as Maladapted Psychology , Robert C. Richardson, 2007 

 Becoming Human 
 Jennifer Greenwood 
 The MIT Press 
 Cambridge, Massachusetts 
 London, England 
 The Ontogenesis, Metaphysics, and Expression of Human Emotionality 

 © 2015 Massachusetts Institute of Technology 
 All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced in any form by 
any electronic or mechanical means (including photocopying, recording, or 
information storage and retrieval) without permission in writing from the 
publisher. 
 This book was set in Stone Sans and Stone Serif by Toppan Best-set Premedia 
Limited. Printed and bound in the United States of America. 
 Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data is available. 
 ISBN: 978-0-262-02978-0 
 10   9  8  7  6  5  4  3  2  1 

 For Irene Greenwood 
 In loving memory  


 Preface  xi 
 Acknowledgments  xv 
 1 Introduction and Chapter Outlines   1 
 1.1 
Introduction  1  
 1.2 
Chapter Outlines  11 
 2 Theories of Emotion   21 
 2.1 
Introduction  21  
 2.2 
Emotions: Some Rock-Bottom Preliminaries  23  
 2.3 
The Functions of Emotions  27  
 2.4 
Feeling Theories of Emotion  29  
 2.5 
Cognitive Theories of Emotion  31  
 2.6 
The Social Construction of the Emotions  37  
 2.7 
More Recent Theories of Emotion  40  
 2.8 
Scaffolding of Emotional Development  45  
 2.9 
Basic Emotion and Emotion as Natural Kind  48  
 2.10 Summary  51 
 3 Metaphysics and Mind   53 
 3.1 
Introduction  53  
 3.2 
Situated Cognition  54  
 3.3 
Embodied, Embedded, and Extended Cognition (CT)  55  
 3.4 
Deep Functional Integration  57  
 3.5 
Individualism and Externalism: A Short, Potted History  59  
 3.6 
Metaphysical Realization  62  
 3.7 
Technological Cognitive Augmentation  70  
 3.8 
Natural Environmental Cognitive Augmentation  72  
 3.9 
Sociocultural Cognitive Augmentation  73  
 3.10 Particular Intracranialist Challenges  75  
 3.11 Summary: The Hypothesis of Extended Cognition (HEC) versus the Hypothesis of 
Embedded Cognition (HEMC)  77 
 Contents 

viii 
Contents
 4 Mirror, Mirror . . . Human Emotional Ontogenesis   81  
 4.1 
Introduction  81  
 4.2 
The Ontogenesis of the Emotions  83  
 4.3 
Conclusion  108 
 5 Out of the Mouths of Babes and Sucklings   111  
 5.1 
Introduction  111  
 5.2 
Species-Typical Activity Patterns  112  
 5.3 
Turn Taking in Human Development  114  
 5.4 
The Emergence of Joint Attention  116  
 5.5 
Language Acquisition in Neonates and Young Children  120  
 5.6 
The Eyes Have It  128  
 5.7 
Neurochemical Underpinnings of Human Prosociality  130  
 5.8 
Summary  136 
 6 From Evolution to Emotionese   139 
 6.1 
Introduction  139  
 6.2 
Theories of Function: Rock-Bottom Preliminaries  141  
 6.3 
Millikan’s Proper Functions  143  
 6.4 
The Continuing Usefulness Requirement  146  
 6.5 
The Biosemantic Theory of Mental Content  147  
 6.6 
Natural Signs and Intentional Signs  159  
 6.7 
Linguistic Signs  165  
 6.8 
Meaning and Its Acquisition  165  
 6.9 
The Mark of the Cognitive  170  
 6.10 Summary  175 
 7 Loose Talk, Tight Worlds   177 
 7.1 
Introduction  177  
 7.2 
Metaphor: Some Rock-Bottom Preliminaries and a Very Brief History  179  
 7.3 
The Code Model of Communication  184  
 7.4 
Relevance Theory: A Brief Introduction  188  
 7.5 
Explicatures and Implicatures  191  
 7.6 
Loose Talk  192  
 7.7 
Cognitive Environment  197  
 7.8 
Metaphor’s 3NNTs  199  
 7.9 
Conclusions  199 
 8 Once More, with Feeling   205  
 8.1 
Introduction  205  
 8.2 
Moral Development  206  
 8.3 
Scaffolding  208  
 8.4 
Scaffolding 1 and Education  209  

Contents 
ix
 8.5 
Online Activity in the World  210  
 8.6 
Methodological Considerations  211  
 8.7 
Concluding Summary  212 
 Notes  213 
 References  217 
 Index  241  


 Preface 
 There are a number of interesting debates in contemporary emotion theory 
and a similar number in philosophy of mind, but two tend to stand out: the 
nature–nurture debate in emotion theory and the intracranialist–transcra-
nialist debate in philosophy of mind. Theorists in emotion theory argue 
that emotions are either predominantly inborn, biological, or “natural” 
devices or predominantly learned, cultural, or “nurtured” devices. Intracra-
nialist theorists in philosophy of mind argue that cognition takes place 
entirely in the head, and transcranialists argue that it can and frequently 
does take place in cognitive systems that extend into the natural, techno-
logical, and sociocultural world. This book has an important contribution 
to make to both debates. It demonstrates clearly that the nature–nurture 
debate is unfounded; biological and cultural resources are deeply function-
ally integrated throughout the development process. It also demonstrates 
clearly that human emotional and language development is a transcranial-
ist achievement; human ontogenesis takes place only in extended cognitive 
systems that include environmental, technological, and sociocultural 
resources. 
 This book tells the story, the quite wonderful story, of how each one of 
us becomes a full human being. It tells the story of how human brains are 
constructed and how these brains acquire their contents through massive 
epigenetic scaffolding. The process of becoming fully human takes some 
twenty years to (almost) complete. This should be unsurprising. 
 Consider the human newborn. This newborn is the most dependent of 
mammalian newborns; she is minimally equipped with emotional, linguis-
tic, and cognitive precursor preadaptations that function as assistance- or 
attention-soliciting devices to attendant caregivers. She is barely sentient, 

xii 
Preface
sensitive only to absolute stimulus thresholds that signal internal homeo-
static conditions (e.g., water depletion) and external environmental condi-
tions (e.g., loud noises). In addition, she is born into the most complex and 
challenging physical, technological, and social environments on earth. Yet, 
in some twenty years’ time, this creature will become an entirely indepen-
dent, autonomous agent, fully sapient, who emotes, thinks, and communi-
cates in ways typical of, or unique to, her species and culture. What this 
implies is that the human newborn is a highly efficient learning machine. 
 Investigation into the “design specification” for this human learning 
machine demonstrates its remarkable elegance and economy. It includes a 
neonatal repertoire of minimal inborn coarse-grained constraints and 
capacities, a perfectly complementary repertoire of coarse-grained maternal 
constraints and capacities, and a range of neurochemicals that fuel the 
interaction of these two repertoires. The equipment of minimal coarse-
grained capacities in both partners allows their progressive and flexible epi-
genetic fine-tuning. This flexibility allows the infant to adapt to the 
increasing complexity of her physical and social worlds as a result of increas-
ing mobility and sociality. Limiting inborn resources to a minimum ensures 
that the infant can attend to only a minimum number of stimuli and exer-
cise only a minimum number of capacities. This ensures that she focuses 
only on such stimuli and capacities to learn, respectively, how to recognize 
them and to practice their exercise. The maternal constraints repertoire 
ensures that the mother learns to respond promptly and sensitively to the 
infant’s assistance- and attention-soliciting needs. The mother is, of course, 
equipped with the full repertoire of human capacities that the infant must 
learn during development, and the mother’s constraints repertoire ensures 
that she has the motivation to help the infant learn them. 
 Endogenous opioids and prosocial neurochemicals are released during 
the mundane caring and nurturing activities that continue day in, day out, 
during the first year and beyond. What would inevitably be construed as 
tediously repetitive and sometimes even unappealing caring activities are 
rendered delightful through the release of these neurochemicals. They 
induce strong prosocial and bonding feelings in both partners to ensure 
that a close, linguistically mediated relationship develops between them. 
The mutual delight and developing relationship ensure that the interaction 
continues for the length of the developmental period. These neurochemi-
cals also excite intraneural genetic products into neurogenesis and circuit 

Preface 
xiii
maturation, and this process ensures that energy-expensive brain tissue is 
laid down only as needed to support the development of new capacities. 
The repetitious caring activities trigger neurogenesis and relationship devel-
opment that enable emotional development, language development, and, 
by implication, the development of symbolic thought. These three capaci-
ties develop concurrently and through the same developmental 
mechanisms. 
 The chapters that follow provide considerable detail relating to the struc-
tures and processes underpinning human development, and chapter 1 
includes a full introduction to the issues to be addressed. The book has been 
written for what I hope will be a multidisciplinary readership, and I have 
carefully defined all technical terms to facilitate this. Inevitably, however, 
some chapters will be more challenging than others, particularly for 
nonphilosophers; these are likely to be chapter 3, on metaphysics, and 
chapter 6, on biosemantics. Chapter 3 deals with the nature of the struc-
tures and processes that underpin emotion and cognition and also on their 
location. Chapter 6 focuses on how mental states, for example, thoughts, 
acquire their content or meaning, what philosophers term intentionality or 
“aboutness.” Chapter 3 is informed by Wilson’s (2004) work on metaphys-
ics, and chapter 6 by Millikan’s (1984) biosemantic theory. I have tried par-
ticularly to make the views of these extraordinary philosophers accessible 
to a multidisciplinary readership. 
 Researching the human emotional ontogenetic process has given me the 
intellectual ride of my life. Once I was into development, the process 
became utterly exhilarating (if punctuated occasionally by moments of des-
peration). As I stated at the beginning, human emotional ontogenesis, as 
well as ontogenesis more generally, “our story,” is a truly wonderful story.  


 Acknowledgments 
 I am indebted to a number of people who have encouraged me and contrib-
uted to the development of my scholarship over the years: Jessie Parnell of 
University College Hospital, London, who recognized the importance of 
university education for nurses; Dr. Mike Golby, Exeter University, who 
supervised my MEd and first introduced me to philosophy; Professor Peter 
Tomlinson, University of Leeds, who supervised my first PhD (in education) 
and encouraged my interest in both philosophy and cognition; Professor 
Rob Wilson, University of Alberta, Canada, who was my adviser in my pre-
PhD qualifying years and has continued to be a mentor since. I am grateful 
to all four for the quality of their mentorship. I am also extremely grateful 
to associate professor Deborah Brown, University of Queensland, who 
supervised the development of the thesis that informs this monograph. 
 I am also grateful to the (former) Australian Federation of University 
Women, Queensland, Inc., Fellowship Fund Branch for awarding me the 
2010 Rosemary Venton Commemorative Fellowship. This fellowship 
allowed me to concentrate full-time for a year on my research and to turbo-
charge its development. 
 I wish also to acknowledge Sage Publications and the Taylor & Francis 
Group for their kind permission to include material previously published, 
respectively, in the following titles:
 Greenwood, J. 2012. Wide externalism and the roles of biology and culture 
in human emotional development.  Emotion Review 14 (4): 423–431.  
 Greenwood, J. 2013. Contingent transcranialism and deep functional cog-
nitive integration: The case of human emotional ontogenesis.  Philo-
sophical Psychology 26 (3): 420–436.  

xvi 
Acknowledgments
 Material from these two articles has been included mainly in chapters 3 and 
4 of this book. 
 Finally, I wish to acknowledge the patience and professionalism of 
Cathy Nielson, who prepared the manuscript for publication, and 
Phil Laughlin (Senior Acquisitions Editor) and Judy Feldmann (Senior 
Editor), both of MIT Press, who guided me through the publication 
process. 
 My sincere thanks to all.  

 1  Introduction and Chapter Outlines 
 1.1   Introduction 
 All the world’s a stage  
 And all the men and women merely players:  
 They have their exits and their entrances;  
 And one man in his time plays many parts,  
 His acts being seven ages. As, first the infant,  
 Mewling and puking in his nurse’s arms.  
 And then the whining schoolboy, with his satchel  
 And shining morning face, creeping like snail  
 Unwillingly to school. And then the lover  
 Sighing like furnace, with a woeful ballad,  
 Made to his mistress’ eyebrow. 
 —Shakespeare,  As You Like It 
 This monograph tells the story of how a mewling, puking infant becomes 
an unwilling schoolboy and, eventually, a ballad-creating lover, but it 
is also a story that demonstrates, possibly surprisingly, just how important 
mewling is to development. It is a story that focuses on the development 
of human emotionality, but—because they are so closely connected, indeed, 
often develop concurrently—it is also a story of how the mewling infant 
becomes an articulate natural-language speaker (and, by implication, 
a symbolic thinker). Human infants and children learn to emote, to 
think, and to speak largely through the same developmental mechanisms 
and at the same time. It is really a story, therefore, that demonstrates how 
exquisitely the human newborn is minimally prepared biologically for a life 
of learning, a life of culture. 

2 
Chapter 1
 The epigenetic development implied in the last sentence should not be 
construed as sequential, that is, as first genetic and biological, and second 
environmental and cultural. Such a construal is typical of current ortho-
doxy in philosophy and psychology of emotion, and this is precisely one 
construal this book has been written to challenge. Contemporary ortho-
doxy in emotion theory construes emotions as falling into two distinct 
groups, one being largely innate, the basic emotions, and the other being 
largely socially constructed, the higher cognitive emotions. In addition, 
current orthodoxy construes emotions as operating primarily in psycho-
logical economies, that is, as operating primarily to benefit the subject-
emoter and, as such, as individualistic. Individualism (or internalism) in 
philosophy of mind views the structures and processes that exist to deter-
mine and support emotional ontogenesis and experience (i.e., the under-
pinning metaphysics), and, indeed, mentality more generally, as being 
located entirely within the individual agent, in her brain and nervous sys-
tem. In this book, I also argue that both of these construals are mistaken. I 
argue that basic emotions and, subsequently, higher cognitive emotions 
develop from inborn emotion precursors (affect expressions) and, further, 
operate primarily in social economies to enable human social life, first 
through interpersonal regulation and subsequently through intrapersonal 
regulation. In light of this, I also argue that the structures and processes 
that determine and support emotional ontogenesis and experience, and 
mentality more generally, extend beyond the brain and nervous system of 
the individual emoter-cognizer into her social and physical environment. 
The book therefore offers a novel theory of emotional ontogenesis, within 
the context of human ontogenesis more generally, and a metaphysics con-
sistent with it. 
 I begin the story with the broadest of brushes to enhance its accessibility 
to what I hope will be a multidisciplinary readership. I become more fine 
grained later in this chapter and, more especially, in the chapters that 
follow. 
 The human neonate is the most immature of mammalian neonates, 
especially in terms of neurological and motor development. Her neuro-
logical development at birth is just sufficient to support an extremely lim-
ited repertoire of primitive emotional (affective), communicative, and 
cognitive capacities. She depends completely on others to provide for her 
basic needs, such as nutrition, warmth, and intimacy. To ensure that such 

Introduction and Chapter Outlines 
3
needs are provided for, the neonate’s primitive inborn capacities function 
as signals of relative physiological and psychological well-being. They sig-
nal to attendant caregivers that something of salience to the infant’s well-
being is being experienced, for example, that she is cold, hungry, 
uncomfortable, and so on. I term these primitive capacities  assistance-
soliciting (or  producer )  devices . In addition, and as an additional safeguard, 
her primary caregiver (typically her mother) is preadapted with a comple-
mentary repertoire of dispositions and skills, collectively termed intuitive 
parenting skills, that enable the caregiver to diagnose what is ailing or 
pleasing her infant and provide whatever assistance is required to remedi-
ate or prolong it. I term these dispositions and capacities  assistance-
providing (or  interpreter )  devices . Both of these repertoires are preadaptations, 
that is, the results of an evolutionary process of natural selection. Natural 
selection thus equips the human neonate with a range of assistance-
soliciting devices, and her primary caregiver with a wonderfully comple-
mentary range of assistance-providing devices, to ensure the infant’s 
survival and well-being. This is the proper function of such devices, the 
function they were selected for. 
 This barely sentient creature, however, is born into the most complex 
environment on earth, typified by apparently accelerating physical, social, 
and technological change. Despite the complexity of the environment, 
within sixteen to twenty years, the infant has morphed into a fully 
sapient, independent agent who emotes, communicates, and thinks in 
ways unique to, or typical of, her species and culture. She responds 
appropriately to the continuously changing exigencies of her environ-
ment. This results from the continuous interaction of the preadapted 
constraint repertoires of neonates and primary caregivers that bootstraps 
this development. 
 The constraints (assistance-soliciting devices) with which neonates are 
preadapted are minimal in number and extremely coarse-grained or general-
purpose. They include primitive affect expressions (e.g., unfocused crying, 
motor unrest) that point to or express  something of salience to the infant’s 
well-being to attendant caregivers. As such, these are ostensive-expressive 
devices (ostension = to point to). As general-purpose capacities, they do not 
signal what the  something is; caregivers have to discover this for themselves 
and correct it. Inborn constraints also include certain sensorimotor compe-
tencies, such as a preference for human(like) faces and voices. Such inbuilt 

4 
Chapter 1
preferences enable the infant to focus on a limited range of stimuli in her 
environment, thus saving her from possibly overwhelming stimulation. 
These preferences also ensure that attention focuses on preferred stimuli to 
allow practice in recognizing and responding to them. A further and criti-
cally important sensorimotor competence is motor mimicry. 1 Motor mim-
icry facilitates the recognizing and responding process; it allows the infant 
to copy and learn, for example, facial expressions, gestures, and words. It is 
a process that progressively enables the fine-tuning of the infant’s emo-
tional responses and, subsequently, through mimicry of words, her linguis-
tic capabilities. Inborn capacities also include coarse-grained species-typical 
behavior patterns (e.g., prespeech “punctuated” suckling) that provide 
opportunities for caregivers to shape behaviors and for the infant to prac-
tice them. 
 Primitive affect expressions are triggered by the registering of absolute 
stimulus thresholds, both internal and external, by two types of receptors 
with which the neonate is equipped. The interoreceptors, which are widely 
located within the body, register significant changes in homeostatic condi-
tions, for example, when glucose or temperature levels rise or fall signifi-
cantly. The elicited affect expression, such as unfocused crying, triggers the 
parental response to deal with it. Proprioceptors are located in muscles, 
viscera, and skin; they register where body parts are in space. Proprioceptors 
in facial muscles, in particular, are crucial to the learning of emotional 
expression. Infants have to learn how a smile feels (as well as what causes 
smiles and what they are called). 
 The repertoire of dispositions and constraints (assistance-providing 
devices) with which the primary caregiver is preadapted is perfectly com-
plementary. Intuitive parenting skills are triggered by a physiological stress 
reaction that parents feel when their infant is distressed. They are alerted to 
the infant and focus on her. Caregivers experience a strong desire to iden-
tify the cause of the distress and rectify it; that is, a search-identify-correct 
reaction is triggered by the infant’s distress. This is a coarse-grained 
assistance-providing device. While exploring possible causes of the infant’s 
distress, the mother engages in a form of affect mirroring that emphasizes 
the main features of the facial and bodily response of the infant. The infant 
responds by mimicking the expression (and learns how it feels, through the 
operation of her proprioceptors). The mother accompanies this affect 

Introduction and Chapter Outlines 
5
mirroring with a continuous commentary of baby talk or “motherese.” This 
is typically high-pitched and rhythmical and consists of simple two- or 
three-word utterances. The commentary focuses on what might be causing 
the infant’s distress and what to do about it. The feedback elicited from the 
infant signals or fails to signal a correct diagnosis and treatment, which 
ensures that, in the future, the mother will try the same response or a dif-
ferent one. This serves to fine-tune the mother’s assistance-providing 
devices. In short, the continuous cycle of maternal-neonatal interaction 
ensures that, simultaneously, both infant assistance-soliciting devices and 
maternal assistance-providing devices are progressively fine-tuned. It also 
ensures that language and, by implication, symbolic thought are progres-
sively and simultaneously acquired. 
 These cycles of interaction continue in some form throughout the pro-
tracted human developmental period. They are fueled by the release of pro-
social neuropeptides and endogenous opioids that induce intense feelings 
of intimacy and delight; these feelings, in turn, progressively develop the 
very close, linguistically mediated social relationship that provides the con-
text for the development of progressively more complex forms of emo-
tional, (cognitive), and linguistic behavior. The same neuropeptides trigger 
intraneural genetic products into neurogenesis or maturation and connec-
tion. The release of these neuropeptides is triggered by the auditory, visual, 
tactile, and olfactory sensory stimulation afforded through the mundane 
caring interactions of mother and baby. The process ensures that the requi-
site neural machinery is developed only as required to support developing 
new capacities. 
 What the foregoing overview implies is that philosophers might inhabit 
worlds of blooming, buzzing confusion, but human neonates manifestly do 
not. Human neonates are born into what I term  tight worlds , characterized 
by constraints, context, and continuity (the three Cs); human emotional 
ontogenesis and human ontogenesis more generally result from the con-
tinuous interaction of these three factors. It is the continuous interaction of 
constraints that constructs the context in which human infants and chil-
dren progressively (continuously) develop. 
 It is important to recognize that continuity also includes developmental 
mechanisms. The same mechanisms, that is, the interaction of the two 
mutually complementary repertoires, operate in the development of full 

6 
Chapter 1
human emotionality from emotion precursors (affect expressions) and in 
the development of segmented speech from a range of nonlinguistic and 
linguistic precursors. It is the very tightness of the constraint repertoires 
and the most protracted, highly dependent childhood on earth that enable 
the development of fully flexible thought, intrapersonal control of emo-
tion, and full natural language. This is not to suggest that nonhuman ani-
mals do not “emote” in a manner appropriate to their lifeways; indeed, it is 
their supposed similarity to one group of human emotions, namely, basic 
emotions, that led to the construal of homology between animal and 
human emotions. It is to suggest, rather, that full  human emotionality is 
language dependent. 
 It has been recognized since the 1960s that a close, linguistically medi-
ated social relationship is the most significant factor in the development of 
distinctly human capacities; if denied this sort of relationship, human neo-
nates and children will fail to develop into normal human adults. Scholars 
from a range of disciplines have contributed explanatory insights into this 
phenomenon, but few have shared their insights across disciplines. I think 
the single-discipline approach is understandable but regrettable; cross-
disciplinary interaction lends breadth to research, as I hope this book bears 
witness. It is informed by insights harvested from philosophy and psychol-
ogy of emotion, developmental psychology, metaphysics, biosemantics, 
and psycholinguistics that have usefully cross-fertilized. In this respect, my 
approach is consistent with that of two giants in philosophy. It is consistent 
with De Sousa (2014), who suggests that philosophy of emotion is vastly 
enriched by the relevant empirical literature. It is also consistent with Mil-
likan (1984, 2004), who eschews conceptual analysis and philosophical 
argument concerning abstractions in favor of theory construction concern-
ing exactly how people interact with their environments to create meaning 
and reference in thought. Research like mine sets out to construct just such 
a theory. 
 As a result of my interdisciplinary approach, I have come to construe 
emotion precursors and their affect expressions as being at one end of a 
continuum of increasingly complex ostensive-expressive devices; emotion 
precursors and discrete emotions are all ostensive-expressive devices of dif-
fering levels of specificity and sophistication. In addition, I construe the 
species-typical behavior patterns of human neonates that are present at 
birth or develop soon afterward also as being at one end of a continuum of 

Introduction and Chapter Outlines 
7
ostensive-expressive devices, which develop through gestures and prag-
matic foundation to end in full natural language. Relatedly, I construe emo-
tion precursors and species-typical behavior patterns as referentially opaque 
expressions of homeostatic and physiologic status, the referential opacity 
decreasing progressively as caregiver behavior shapes the development of 
discrete emotions and language. Increasing referential clarity is acquired in 
both basic emotions and higher cognitive emotions with the assistance of 
language. In terms of language, referential clarity increases in the develop-
ment of gesture, pragmatic foundation, and, finally, semantic language 
devices. Continuity is also reflected in the development of the neural sub-
strata on which this continuum of ostensive-expressive devices partly 
supervenes. Each stage on the continuum represents a move away from 
fixed to highly flexible responses to salience (or relevance) detectors. The 
continuum begins in an extremely limited range of biological salience 
detectors (e.g., homeostatic absolute stimulus thresholds) and ends in a 
huge range of learned and considerably less obvious salience detectors (e.g., 
linguistic strings). All these responses to salience detectors are, of course, 
salience expressive. 
 Given these views on ostensive-expressive devices, another feature of my 
theorizing is my insistence that they are all intentional devices, even if, like 
emotion precursors and species-typical behavior patterns, only minimally 
so. They are intentional devices because they coevolved with the devices 
that use or consume them to the benefit of both. It was Dawkins (1986) 
who observed that sometimes traits are so perfectly complementary and 
integrated that “design” has to be implicated. 
 What the foregoing discussion also implies is that I construe all human 
communication to be essentially inferential; linguistic coding is clearly 
involved, but it enters inference processes as evidence of meaning just like 
nonlinguistic evidence. I think inference (albeit of a very simple kind) is 
involved in all mammalian communication. 2 Vervet alarms, for instance, 
communicate to conspecifics that a predator is approaching, but the con-
specifics have to see where the communicating vervet is looking to discover 
from which direction the predator approaches. They also have to look at 
her facial expression to see how close the predator is (i.e., how alarmed she 
is). Human natural language relies on inferencing processes, too, but much 
more sophisticated and complex inference processes. In addition, and relat-
edly, I construe all communication, in terms of both production and 

8 
Chapter 1
comprehension, as irredeemably context sensitive. What all of this leads to 
is my conviction that human emotionality, language, and thought are 
overwhelmingly learned capacities. I argue that the human neonates’ very 
few biological preadaptations equip them perfectly for development in a 
social environment replete with sensory-perceptual stimulation and 
symbols. 
 My research has also led me to a rather atypical view of epigenetic behav-
ioral scaffolding. Epigenesis can suggest that behavioral development 
involves a process of transformation from imperfect, immature precursors 
into the more perfect, more coordinated, and finely tuned behavioral rep-
ertoires of adults. This view is generally attended by a construal of scaffold-
ing as external adult support, for example, when an adult holds the baby 
upright to enable “walking.” The support is always unidirectional, that is, 
from adult or adult-provided physical support structure to child and, as 
such, is always controlled by the adult. Of course, human adults do provide 
this type of scaffolding, as my walking example demonstrates. This is not 
the only type of scaffolding they provide, however, or the most important. 
The type of scaffolding that is crucial to human development involves the 
interactions of neonatal and maternal constraint repertoires, noted earlier, 
which provides the context for the development of progressively more 
advanced forms of behavior (and the neural substrata on which they super-
vene) in  both partners, but to differing degrees. Both partners are jointly 
involved in the interaction and its control. For ease of reference, I term 
external adult scaffolding of the “walking” variety  Scaffolding 1 , and the 
coconstructing interactive variety  Scaffolding 2 . 
 Given that my account includes terms such as  preadaptation ,  biological 
equipment , and others, it is worth emphasizing that it reflects a merely mini-
malist construal of nativism and utterly rejects genetic determinism. Nativ-
ists are inclined to view genes as specific instructional causes of maturation 
with environmental factors featuring merely as background or permissive 
causes. This is not the position I take. My position is that neonates possess 
what Perovic and Radenovic (2011) term  biological prerequisites of maturated 
neurological centers that are present at birth or, more likely, emerge postna-
tally. These maturated neurological centers enable learning and are the 
result of genetic, epigenetic, and environmental instructive influences, as 
my account of emotional and language development illustrates. My posi-
tion, therefore, is consistent with that of Perovic and Radenovic (2011), 

Introduction and Chapter Outlines 
9
who characterize development as including two “segments,” namely, a 
maturational segment followed by a social segment. In the maturational 
segment, biological processes interact with epigenetic and environmental 
processes to produce neural circuits or “endogenous biological machinery” 
(Perovic and Radenovic 2011, 399). In the social segment, which kicks in 
after the prerequisite neural circuits have been sufficiently maturated, 
learning is enabled also via biological, epigenetic, and environmental fac-
tors. The point is that learning cannot take place until these centers are 
developed. The distinction, therefore, does not depend on the relative pri-
macy of genetic, epigenetic, or environmental influences; rather, it depends 
on the distinction between the processes and capacities that require learn-
ing and those that do not. This entire book, in particular chapters 4 and 5, 
is entirely consistent with this view: 
 Everyday activities and routines in which a caregiver regulates child’s eating, sleep-
ing, levels of arousal, and the like are environmentally as well as biologically based 
processes necessary for the development of brain centres responsible for language 
learning or social cognition. Such social environmental causes are indispensable for 
the development of the brain structures after the child is born, as are the inner ge-
netic and epigenetic (biological/environmental) processes in the prenatal period. 
Even so, the brain structures necessary for learning are not a result of the learning 
process which is virtually non-existent before the development of these centres is 
finalised. (Perovic and Radenovic 2011, 413)  
 The development of these views has led to an increasingly radical external-
ism in my theorizing. I was recruited to First Wave Extended Mind (EM), a 
progeny of mainstream functionalist information processing, by Clark and 
Chalmers’s (1998) landmark paper “The Extended Mind,” and like a num-
ber of First Wave enthusiasts, I have morphed into Third Wave via Second 
Wave. First Wave EM was based on a parity principle, that is, on functional 
isomorphism, and the Second Wave was based on the principle of comple-
mentarity, both parity and complementarity relating to biological and non-
biological elements in cognitive states and processes. Third Wave theorists 
construe First and Second Wave theories as presupposing that internal and 
external resources are fixed and noninterchangeable (Kirchhoff 2012). In 
addition, these theorists also suggest that Second Wave presupposes that 
sociocultural resources augment but do not significantly transform the 
brain’s representational capacities during development. Third Wave theo-
rists deny this idea. 

10 
Chapter 1
 Theorists who favor the complementarity of internal and external 
resources, which include sociocultural and natural environmental resources, 
construe them as deeply functionally integrated and as playing comple-
mentary roles in extended cognitive systems. Complementarity, therefore, 
is clearly a matter of degree. My own research focuses on the extremely 
deep and complex functional integration of neural and sociocultural 
resources that actually build and furnish brains, and to this extent my argu-
ment here is broadly consistent with Third Wave. 
 According to Clark, in a number of publications, mind “leaks” or “spills” 
into world, an idea that implies that extension is unidirectional, from mind 
to world. Clark (1997) does acknowledge world-to-mind extension, too, 
notably in his construal of continuous reciprocal causation, but his “leak-
ing” and “spilling” metaphors are what apparently inform the standard 
view of EM; see chapter 3 in this book. My research demonstrates a recipro-
cal world-to-mind extension, and because of this I have deliberately 
replaced the term  EM with leading intracranialists’ term of abuse “contin-
gent transcranialism” (CT) to signal my rejection of an implied mind-to-
world unidirectional extension. I argue that there is a world-to-mind 
extension, and I use human emotional ontogenesis and language develop-
ment as my examples. 3 I argue that the synchronous modulation (Scaffold-
ing 2) of neonate and maternal activity that develops during emotional 
ontogenesis and language development and results in neurogenesis and 
neural connection is a world-to-mind transcranial achievement. In light of 
the degree of deep functional integration (DFI), which includes (contin-
gent) transcranial processes, I replace EM with DFI with CT. 
 The research has taken five of my ten years’ training in philosophy, dur-
ing which time changes in construals regarding emotion, metaphysics, and 
language processing, in particular, have apparently accelerated. I briefly 
outline these various construals and show how they relate to my own theo-
rizing in the chapters that follow. The sequence of these chapters is, of 
course, deliberate. I separate my chapter on metaphysical realization and 
function to present the monograph in what I hope are digestible bite-sized 
chunks. In addition, function and biosemantics appropriately fit between 
chapter 5, “Out of the Mouths of Babes and Sucklings,” and chapter 7, 
“Loose Talk, Tight Worlds.”  

Introduction and Chapter Outlines 
11
 1.2   Chapter Outlines 
 1.2.1   Chapter 2: Theories of Emotion 
 In this chapter, to contextualize my own position that follows, I review 
traditional and contemporary theories of emotion to highlight their 
strengths and limitations. I begin by describing what are termed basic emo-
tions (BEs) and higher cognitive emotions (HCEs) and highlighting their 
purported differences in terms of neurology, physiology, and behavioral 
expression. I include considerable detail here; the purported distinction 
between BEs and HCEs has been a dominant focus in emotion theorizing 
and has led, inter alia, to apparently mistaken conclusions concerning the 
nature of the emotions and their natural-kind status (although this pur-
ported distinction has recently been challenged). 
 Emotions are generally considered to fall into two basic and quite dis-
tinct groups, namely, affect programs or basic emotions and higher cogni-
tive emotions; this is the “received view” in emotional science (Barrett 
2011, 400). Basic emotions (BEs) are characterized as involving relatively 
stereotypical physiological, behavioral, and expressive patterns, which are 
underpinned by specialized neural circuits, and as genetically inherited as a 
result of a protracted evolutionary history. BEs are typically activated, from 
a very early age, by simple unconditioned stimuli and exhibit a degree of 
modularity such that neither the unconditioned stimuli that elicit them 
nor the responses they automatically generate can be moderated by higher 
cognitive functioning. As well as being activated by unconditioned stimuli, 
BEs can also be activated by conditioned stimuli through learning. In con-
trast, HCEs are considered to lack many of these features (Griffiths 1997). 
They are considered to be uniquely human and thus lack a shared evolu-
tionary history with other animals. They are also considered to lack stereo-
typical physiological, behavioral, and expressive features and to vary 
culturally; any characteristics they possess are learned through and relative 
to the culture in which they are embedded. While both BEs and HCEs are 
considered capable of responding to higher cognitive inputs, HCEs are con-
sidered to lack simple unconditioned elicitors. 
 These views nicely encapsulate the contemporary biology–culture or 
nature–nurture debate; BEs are biological in that they are genetically inher-
ited, and HCEs are socioculturally determined in that they are learned. BEs 

12 
Chapter 1
and HCEs have traditionally been viewed as so distinct that they could not 
form a natural kind (or one type be more basic than the other). 
 More recently, however, these views have begun to be challenged. 
Griffiths (2003) and Griffiths and Scarantino (2009) acknowledge that some 
HCEs may have simpler, basic forms and may profitably be discussed within 
a common theoretical framework. Rather more strenuously, Jason Clark 
(2010) argues that BEs and HCEs are not distinct categories but serial homo-
logues, which means, although Clark fails to claim this explicitly, that they 
do form a natural kind, and BEs are more basic. My own research also chal-
lenges the distinction between BEs and HCEs, albeit from an ontogenetic 
perspective. I argue that both BEs and HCEs evolve from the emotion pre-
cursors with which neonates are biologically preadapted and through 
exactly the same developmental mechanisms.  
 I proceed to discuss, in just enough detail to be intelligible, feeling theo-
ries, cognitive theories (including dimensional appraisal theories), and 
social constructionist views. I identify (the admittedly well-rehearsed) 
objections to each of these views and conclude that although each has 
merit, none is adequate to explain the full complexity of human emotion-
ality. In addition, and as a result of their almost exclusive focus on the 
nature of adult emotion, these theories misconstrue both the nature and 
function of the emotions. My review then turns to three more recent con-
tributions, namely, Zinck and Newen’s (2008) multifactorial developmental 
theory, J. Clark’s (2010) views on emotional serial homology, and Colom-
betti’s (2007, 2014) enactivist theory. I point out where my views are similar 
and dissimilar to these more recent contributions.  
 1.2.2   Chapter 3: Metaphysics and Mind 
 Here I focus on the intracranialist–transcranialist debate. I begin by outlin-
ing the differences between embodied, embedded, and extended cognition 
(Extended Mind), emphasizing that extended cognition carries distinct 
metaphysical baggage; it views the vehicles of cognition or mental states as 
extending beyond the skin and skull of the cognizing agent. Extended Mind 
theorists, as the name implies, claim that the vehicles of content can extend 
beyond the skin and skull of the cognizer, whereas individualists or contin-
gent intracranialists deny this. After almost a decade of heated debate, 
Extended Mind theorists and contingent intracranialists remain completely 
unmoved by one another’s arguments; indeed, their respective positions are 

Introduction and Chapter Outlines 
13
so entrenched that scholars are beginning to talk of stalemate. My view is 
that Extended Mind theorists have failed to disarm the intracranialist chal-
lenge because they have failed to explicate precisely the nature of the deep 
functional integration on which their claims to vehicle or locational exter-
nalism depend and, in light of this, provide compelling examples of it. 
 Intracranialists accept that much of cognition is heavily scaffolded by 
extracranial technological, natural environmental, and sociocultural 
resources, that is, by Scaffolding 1. It is the metaphysics of externalism with 
which they take issue. Indeed, by misconstruing the nature of the external 
scaffolding of cognition, intracranialists claim that Extended Mind theo-
rists make a number of errors: 
 (i)  They fallaciously conflate causal coupling with constitution. 
 (ii)   They fail to recognize the mark of the mental.  
 (iii)   They are methodologically mistaken.  
 (iv)   They view mind always as extending unidirectionally, that is, as mind 
extending into world.  
 Beginning in this chapter and continuing in all subsequent chapters, I 
argue that intracranialists are mistaken on all four counts. My analytic tool 
for this discussion is that of metaphysical realization. I briefly contextualize 
my discussion of metaphysical realization with a short history of the 
individualism–externalism debate and proceed to explicate R. A. Wilson’s 
(2004) views on context-sensitive realization. This systematic treatment of 
metaphysical realization permits an analytic precision that might otherwise 
not be achieved. It provides a context-sensitive view of realization, which is 
the only one compatible with the theory of emotional ontogenesis I 
develop. I apply this analytic tool to two types of augmentations that tran-
scranialists claim can extend cognitive systems, namely, technological and 
natural environmental systems. I conclude the chapter with Rupert’s (2004) 
comparative analysis of the hypothesis of extended cognition versus the 
hypothesis of embedded cognition; this provides a useful summary of the 
main points of contention between intra- and transcranialists, as well as 
further opportunity to press the transcranialist case.  
 1.2.3   Chapter 4: Mirror, Mirror … Human Emotional Ontogenesis 
 This chapter focuses on human emotional ontogenesis. It draws heavily on 
empirical research from developmental psychology and the relevant 

14 
Chapter 1
cognitive neurosciences to address the limitations of traditional views of 
emotionality. It identifies the range of constraints in affect expressions and 
sensorimotor competencies and intuitive parenting skills, respectively, with 
which neonates and primary caregivers are preadapted and how they inter-
act. It demonstrates how caregivers shape discrete emotions, in both BEs 
and HCEs, starting from referentially opaque affect expressions. 
 The depth of the complementarity, complexity, and integration of 
these in the neonate’s emotional developmental trajectory become evident 
during the extremely detailed analysis. I include this level of detail to pre-
clude any intracranialist denial of DFI with CT in this example. I argue that 
the repertoires of constraints are perfectly complementary and enable the 
development of the very close, linguistically mediated social relationship 
on which emotional ontogenesis so crucially depends. This relationship 
provides the context in which infants learn which stimuli cause which 
responses, their differential phenomenologies, and what they are called or 
termed in the embedding culture. 
 This analysis provides grounds for my claims that (i) emotions are 
ostensive-expressive devices that evolved to enable mammalian, including 
human mammalian, social life; and (ii) the same developmental mecha-
nisms (and relationship) underpin the development of basic emotions 
from emotion precursors and subsequently to higher cognitive emotions. It 
demonstrates clearly that human neonates are biologically prepared for 
culture and that Scaffolding 2 is operational in human emotional ontogen-
esis. The analysis also subverts previous claims that the origins and devel-
opment of BEs and HCEs are so different that emotions cannot form a 
natural kind. 
 Chapter 4 is meant to highlight the depth of the functional integration 
of intraneural and external sociocultural resources in emotional ontogene-
sis for which both neonate and caregiver are genetically preadapted. My 
analysis thus shows that there is no causal coupling–constitution fallacy 
operational in my theorizing about emotional ontogenesis.  
 1.2.4   Chapter 5: Out of the Mouths of Babes and Sucklings 
 This is a second chapter on emotional ontogenesis, and given that full 
human emotionality in both BEs and HCEs is language dependent, I also 
address the acquisition of language (and, by implication, the attainment of 
symbolic thought). As such, the discussion demonstrates, again, by 

Introduction and Chapter Outlines 
15
including the same level of detail as in chapter 4, and for the same reason, 
the depth of complexity, complementarity, and integration, that is, DFI 
with CT in human ontogenesis. 
 My analysis focuses on species-typical behavior patterns (STBPs), which 
are innate or develop soon after birth, and how these provide the basis for 
the development of language. I argue that the linguistic environment into 
which human neonates are born and the complementary repertoires of 
neonatal STBPs and maternal intuitive parenting skills provide the neces-
sary and sufficient conditions for the construction of a pragmatic founda-
tion into which a semantic lexicon will subsequently be incorporated. 
 The analysis demonstrates the singular importance of “punctuated” 
suckling, a type of suckling that is unique to our species, which sets up the 
basis for joint attention and the development of different types of gestures. 
I argue that the importance of both turn taking and joint attention (which 
is also unique to our species) is underestimated in the relevant literatures; 
turn taking provides the time to imitate and practice new behaviors, 
and joint attention is hugely influential in speech production and 
comprehension. 
 It also demonstrates the importance of “motherese” in establishing the 
child’s pragmatic framework. Exaggeratedly succinct maternal utterances, 
which emphasize clause boundaries and the prosodic changes that occur 
naturally at them, and maternal mirroring (and correction) of the infant’s 
or toddler’s “words,” enable the construction of the pragmatic foundation 
of communication. The child naturally imitates mother’s interactive timing, 
clause boundary recognition, and the rhythms, stresses, and intonations 
associated with commands, requests, statements, and questions. These are 
repetitiously practiced day in, day out, in mother-child interaction. I argue 
that before the child can comprehend and produce her first word, she can 
engage in “conversation” with adults. She can distinguish different linguis-
tic devices in the utterances of adults and produce them herself by varying 
the pitch, volume, and rhythm of her own vocalizations. 
 This chapter once again demonstrates the depth of functional integra-
tion of internal and external resources in language development, for which 
both neonates and caregivers are genetically preadapted. It reinforces my 
rebuttal, in chapter 4, of the alleged intracranialist causal coupling–
constitution fallacy.  

16 
Chapter 1
 1.2.5   Chapter 6: From Evolution to Emotionese 
 The analyses in this chapter support my arguments for the DFI with CT of 
emotional ontogenesis and language development, but they also do some-
thing more (or more explicitly than previous analyses): they demonstrate 
the complexity of the DFI that operates between intraneural and external 
resources. In addition, whereas chapters 4 and 5 rebutted the causal 
coupling–constitution fallacy claim, this chapter also rebuts the claim that 
transcranialists fail to recognize the mark of the cognitive. 
 In previous chapters, I noted that affect expressions and species-typical 
behavior patterns of human neonates are the results of brute physiological 
processes that are interpreted as—that is, function as—signs of physiologi-
cal or homeostatic status by preadapted caregivers. That this is universally 
the case points to a selectionist history; affect expressions and species-
typical behavior patterns (STBPs) are produced by devices that were selected 
for in ancestral environments (and continue to be selected for) because 
they conferred (and continue to confer) a fitness advantage on their bear-
ers. Given this history, the chapter focuses on function and biosemantics (a 
naturalistic theory of how mental states acquire their contents or meaning, 
i.e., their intentionality). 
 The theory of function adopted is that of Millikan (1984) on proper 
function; I discuss direct proper function, and because they are so explana-
torily powerful with respect to biological and cultural devices alike (and 
thus fit so well with my theory), I also discuss relational, derived, and 
adapted proper functions. I also use Millikan (2004) to analyze the relation-
ship of natural, intentional, and linguistic signs and explain how one can 
emerge from another through a ratcheting process. Natural signs carry 
locally recurrent natural information; the information carried is recurrent 
because of the real causal connection between sign and signified. Inten-
tional and linguistic signs carry locally recurrent information, too, but the 
only information represented intentionally is that which is useful to its 
consumers. Perception through language, according to this account, is as 
natural as perception through any other sensory-perceptual modality. 
 Finally, intracranialists allege that transcranialists fail to recognize the 
mark of the cognitive, which, they suggest, consists in nonderived repre-
sentations, possessing intrinsic intentionality, which they further claim are 
found only in brains. I argue, in the light of this chapter’s analyses, that the 
cognitive is marked by organismal attention to environmental saliences. In 

Introduction and Chapter Outlines 
17
addition, I argue that representations are defined by the way they function 
not just in the head but in wider cognitive systems, which include 
representation-producing devices, objects in the environment, and 
representation-consuming devices. The representation-producing device 
produces representations that run isomorphically to the environmental 
conditions as defined by a semantic mapping rule, and the representation-
consuming device uses this rule to produce behaviors that will be effective 
only if these environmental conditions obtain. Representations are defined 
by their proper functions, that is, the functions they were selected to have 
in their evolutionary past. Intentionality is grounded in external proper 
relations between representations and their representeds, the term proper 
being defined in terms of evolutionary history of either the species or the 
evolving individual (or both). There is nothing in the head, just as such, 
that displays intentionality.  
 1.2.6   Chapter 7: Loose Talk, Tight Worlds 
 In this last research-based chapter, it is entirely fitting that continuity, con-
text, and constraints should feature as strongly as in previous chapters. 
Continuity is reflected in the move from natural signs (affect expressions 
and STBPs) to intentional signs (affect expressions, STBPs, gestures, and a 
range of inflectional and intonational pragmatic features) in previous chap-
ters to linguistic signs (literal, loose, and metaphoric strings) in this chapter. 
Continuity is also reflected in the processing of linguistic devices in two 
ways. First, exactly the same processing mechanisms are operational in the 
processing of literal, loose, and metaphorical expression. Second, the pro-
cessing involved is like all mammalian communication processing; that is, 
it is primarily inferential because it is context dependent. Context con-
strains both language production and interpretation in this account. What 
this implies is that my approach eschews a construal of human communi-
cation as primarily one of encoding–decoding. I argue that the code model 
of communication massively underdetermines communication interpreta-
tion, although human communication frequently includes encoded strings. 
These, however, enter the inferential process as evidence of meaning in 
exactly the same way as nonlinguistic evidence. I describe in some detail 
how a coding model underdetermines meaning, and show how an infer-
ence model avoids it. 

18 
Chapter 1
 I argue that language production and comprehension are always context 
dependent, and the tighter the world that interlocutors jointly inhabit, the 
looser their talk can afford to be. Indeed, as the discussion in chapter 5 
demonstrates, in the very tight worlds that infants and caregivers jointly 
inhabit, where the information perceived is almost always locally recurring 
natural information, talk is hardly needed at all. 
 Continuity is also reflected in the relevance-theoretic approach of Sper-
ber and Wilson (1995), which I adopt; the entire monograph focuses on the 
various forms that the expression of salience, that is, relevance, can take, so 
it is fitting that it concludes with this. A relevance-theoretic approach 
(obviously) construes verbal communication as governed by a principle of 
relevance and not the conventional construal of governance by maxim, 
rule, or convention of literal truthfulness. Truthfulness matters in commu-
nication, but only to the extent to which it is relevant to the needs of hear-
ers and speakers. 
 I conclude the chapter by claiming that all verbal communication is 
widely realized and, to the extent that utterance activity and saccadic track-
ing are involved, radically widely realized.  
 1.2.7   Chapter 8: Once More, with Feeling 
 In the final chapter, I sum up the significant contributions of this research 
to theorizing in philosophy of emotion and human development more 
generally. I also suggest avenues for future research that arise from these 
contributions in both content areas and methodology. I suggest that, cer-
tainly with respect to human development, an intracranialist metaphysics 
should be abandoned. Such a metaphysics, as analyses in preceding chap-
ters demonstrate, fuels if not actually generates the putative dichotomy of 
biology and culture, nature and nurture, which, in turn, underpins the mis-
taken construals of the BE-HCE distinction; it also fails to recognize suffi-
ciently the continuity of human evolutionary development with that of 
other, nonhuman animals. I briefly summarize the results of previous chap-
ters that claim that, inter alia, emotions are not primarily cognitive and 
somatic-feeling devices and do not function primarily in individual psy-
chological economies. Emotions are essentially ostensive-expressive devices 
that evolved to regulate human social life, initially through interpersonal, 
and subsequently through intrapersonal, emotional regulation. In addi-
tion, analyses in previous chapters demonstrate that human emotions 

Introduction and Chapter Outlines 
19
develop concurrently with, and through the same developmental mecha-
nisms as, natural language (and, by implication, symbolic thought), and all 
three uniquely human capacities are radically widely metaphysically 
realized. 
 I suggest that avenues for future research include further investigation 
into the nature and operation of Scaffolding 1 and 2 and their role in edu-
cation. I also suggest that moral development should be investigated; it is 
entirely plausible that children learn to think and behave morally as they 
learn to emote and to speak. I also suggest that further research is required 
into the extent of radically widely realized online interactivity. 
 I conclude by recommending, in light of the degree and complexity of 
the deep functional integration of neural, corporeal, and sociocultural 
resources in human ontogenesis, that a multidisciplinary, collaborative 
approach be preferentially adopted to investigate human development and 
behavior in naturalistic settings.  


 2  Theories of Emotion 
 2.1   Introduction 
 It is consensually agreed that emotions occur at the interface of our internal 
concerns and the outer world, especially our social world. As such, emo-
tions are essentially what they are in virtue of their relational and func-
tional properties, meaning that their properties can vary according to their 
relations and the context within which the agent finds herself. An agent 
can be terrified or mildly afraid of a whole range of objects and events, in a 
range of conditions that include her current physical and mental states, 
and a range of environmental, including social environmental, conditions. 
Emotions are evolved capacities (which may or may not be well designed 
for the modern world), many of which, scientists traditionally assumed, 
emerged from inbuilt neural circuits that are homologous in all mammals, 
others from repeated epigenetic interaction of those circuits with ecological 
and social environments, and yet others from our distinctly human capac-
ity to semantically conceptualize issues of importance to us. At their most 
basic, emotions track affect valence and are associated with subcortical lim-
bic structures in both human and nonhuman mammals. 
 Within both philosophy and psychology, emotions are considered to 
comprise or involve or essentially be the following: 
 • 
 Thoughts (propositional attitudes, e.g., judgments, cognitive apprais-
als, desires) (Solomon 1977, 1993, 2003; Lyons 1980; Lazarus 1991; 
Arnold 1960)  
 • 
 Modulation of mental processes (e.g., attention, memory) (Oatley 
2004; Oatley and Johnson-Laird 1987)  
 • 
 Categorization (L. Barrett 2005, 2006, 2009; Lindquist et al. 2012)  

22 
Chapter 2
 • 
 Subjective feelings of pleasure or displeasure (Ledwig 2006)  
 • 
 Subjective feelings of bodily changes: facial expression, orientation, 
musculature, visceral organs (Prinz 2004; De Lancey 2002; Griffiths 
1997; le Doux 1998; Ekman 1984; Papanicolaou 1989; Zajonc 1980; 
Darwin 1872/1965; Lange 1885/1922; James 1884)  
 • 
 Action tendencies (Frijda 1986)  
 • 
 Interactive orientation devices (Zinck and Newen 2008)  
 • 
 Paradigm scenario acquisition devices (De Sousa 1987)  
 • 
 Imagination (Morton 2013) 1  
 Although all theorists would agree that these components typify emo-
tional experience, apart from the last one, they disagree on (at least) three 
issues. First, they disagree about which particular component is the emo-
tion or is essential to emotional experience. Theories range from purely 
somatic-feeling (e.g., James 1884; Lange 1885/1922) to purely cognitivist 
(e.g., Nash 1989), with a range of less-radical views intervening, for exam-
ple, somatic (Prinz 2004; Damasio 1994); and “hybrids” of various compos-
ites (e.g., Zinck and Newen’s multifactorial theory [2008], Lyons’s 
cognition-feeling hybrid [1980]). Second, theorists disagree about the 
extent to which emotions are genetically hardwired or culturally and 
socially constructed. Theorists who opine the former (e.g., Panksepp 1998, 
2000, 2007; Ekman 1984, 2004) tend to do so because there is at least some 
evidence of universal emotion elicitors and expressions and because there 
is increasing evidence of specific neural substrata for at least some emotions 
(e.g., fear). Social constructionists, in contrast, deny the existence of univer-
sal emotions and therefore of genetic hardwiring. Emotions, to hard-nosed 
social constructionists (e.g., Harre 1986; Armon-Jones 1986; Averill 1980; 
Solomon 1977), are socioculturally determined. Third, theorists disagree on 
whether emotions are natural kinds and on their basicality or nonbasical-
ity. Those who favor emotional natural kinds (e.g., Prinz 2004), or even just 
a “unified ontological class” (e.g., Zinck and Newen 2008), favor a blending 
or combination of basic emotions; those who reject the natural-kind status 
of emotions also tend to reject the blending or combination thesis. 2  
 I address these three issues in this chapter. I review (of necessity, not 
exhaustively) the main theories of emotion, including those that relate to 
their nature and function, from both the philosophy and psychology of 
emotion. I show that even if subjective feelings and cognitions are 

Theories of Emotion 
23
necessary to individuate emotion (and there is evidence that, for some 
emotional capabilities anyway, they may not be), neither is sufficient. In 
addition, I show that despite their obvious dissimilarities, they share a 
number of less obvious similarities related to their foci. They all focus on 
fully developed adult emotions and on their essential nature, that is, their 
form. The debate focuses on the essentiality of cognitive judgments, propo-
sitional attitudes, perception, and bodily reactions and feelings in adult 
experience. This is despite consensus that emotions are evolved capacities, 
the functions of which increased hominid fitness. In addition, this focus on 
adult emotions persists despite agreement that the emotional repertoires of 
adult humans and human infants and children vary considerably in both 
number and complexity. As a consequence, both contemporary philoso-
phies and psychologies miss the point of the emotions and misconstrue 
their essential nature. They do involve perception, cognition and judg-
ment, and bodily reactions and feelings, to differing degrees and in differ-
ent circumstances, but they are not essentially perceptive or cognitive 
devices. In the two chapters that follow, I show that the emotions are essen-
tially ostensive-expressive, that is, communicative devices that evolved to 
regulate mammalian (including human mammalian) social life, first 
through interpersonal regulation, and subsequently through intrapersonal 
regulation. The focus on adult emotionality leads to a mistaken construal 
regarding the nature of basic emotions and higher cognitive emotions and, 
as a result, on their basicality or nonbasicality and natural-kind status. I 
conclude that analyses of emotional ontogenesis should reveal how an 
extremely limited range of patterns of bodily perturbation refers to, or is 
implicated in referring to, an extensive range of distinct perceptive-cogni-
tive-affective-behavioral complexes. I begin, however, with some brief, 
rock-bottom preliminaries related to emotion.  
 2.2   Emotions: Some Rock-Bottom Preliminaries 
 The emotions are typically classified into (at least) two basic groups despite 
the recent challenge to this distinction; see chapter 1. These are affect pro-
grams (Griffiths 1997; Ekman 1973), also known as blue-ribbon emotions 
(Maclean 1990) and basic emotions (J. Clark 2010), and the higher cogni-
tive emotions (Griffiths 1997), also known as higher sentiments (Maclean 
1990). These two groups are a function of discernible stages in brain 

24 
Chapter 2
development, characterized by increasing neurobiological volume, com-
plexity, and interconnectedness (Panksepp 1998, 2000, 2007). 
 2.2.1   Blue-Ribbon, Basic Emotions (BEs) 
 Basic emotions evolved from primitive reptilian brains, composed almost 
exclusively of corpus striatum, which still forms the innermost and oldest 
part of the brain. These reptilian brains controlled the essential life func-
tions of land-based vertebrates, such as choice of home site, choice of mate, 
territory defense, flocking, and daily routines. Daily routines include wak-
ing, local foraging, defecating, returning home, and settling to sleep. Neu-
ral circuits arising in this ancient part of the brain control reflexive affects, 
a group of eruptive and transient responses that are closely tied to precipi-
tating environmental conditions, such as startle, gustatory disgust, pain, 
and the various homeostatic distresses (e.g., hunger, thirst) and pleasures 
(e.g., good tastes). 
 Essential life functions and reflexive affects are governed by reactive rep-
resentations that register states of the environment and trigger appropriate 
fixed responses. The connections between registration and response are 
simple and hardwired; the creature that possesses only this type of repre-
sentation, therefore, is completely under environmental control (R. Wilson 
2004). 
 Basic emotions, that is, those typically thought to include (but see Prinz 
[2004] for an interesting alternative view) fear, anger, sadness, joy, affec-
tion, and interest, can markedly outlast precipitating environmental (and, 
in humans, internal precipitating) conditions. They are governed by a set of 
neural circuits in intermediate areas of the brain (Panksepp 1998, 2000, 
2007) and are conceptualized as sensorimotor command circuits. 3  
 The cortices of mammals orchestrate the complex and coordinated 
behavioral, physiological, cognitive, and affective responses characteristic 
of fear, anger, and so on. In terms of complexity, they involve several 
expressive elements in, for example, changes in facial musculature, muscu-
loskeletal functioning (e.g., flinching), orienting, expressive vocal changes, 
endocrine system changes, changes in autonomic nervous system (ANS) 
activity, subjective feelings, and a range of cognitive phenomena, such as 
directing attention. In terms of coordination, various elements co-occur in 
recognizable patterns or sequences, and in terms of automation, they 
unfold without need for conscious attention (Ekman 1984). 

Theories of Emotion 
25
 Blue-ribbon or basic emotions and their underlying neural circuits 
appear to be present in homologous fashion in all mammalian species, 
human and nonhuman, though their nature and expression could differ in 
fine detail (Griffiths 1997). The experience of most basic emotions (fear and 
interest excepted) presupposes sociality. Mammals take care of attached off-
spring (reptiles do not), they signal vocally and nonvocally to each other, 
and the young engage in rough-and-tumble play. 
 The local events that possess the properties of being dangerous, novel, 
and so on, will differ from one environment to the next; the young, how-
ever, inherit their environments along with their genes (Griffiths 1997, 61). 
Environmental influences, including parental guidance, inscribe properties 
of relevant stimuli. Learning is therefore involved in selecting which stim-
uli activate appropriate BEs, but this learning is, to greater or lesser extents 
(depending on the complexities of organismic nervous system and environ-
ment), biologically primed or constrained in that responses are attached 
much more easily to some stimuli than to others (Ohman 1986). Indeed, it 
has even been suggested that subpersonal organismic perceptual appara-
tuses are coupled to salient environmental particulars (O’Regan and Noe 
2001), which, in effect, off-loads some representational burden onto the 
environment. Both of these are true of human neonates; I return to both 
points at the appropriate juncture. 
 The cortices of mammals, which make up 30 to 40 percent of their brain 
mass, enable more social learning (and therefore more flexible responses to 
environmental exigency) than their more primitive ancestors. Such rela-
tively flexible responses are controlled by enactive representations that reg-
ister the state of the environment but do not automatically generate a 
response. Registrations are combined before bodily responses are generated. 
Creatures that possess enactive representations perceive both external and 
internal stimuli and appropriate responses; their locus of control, therefore, 
is shared with the environment (R. Wilson 2004). 
 Neural Bases of Basic Emotions (BEs) 
 Blue-ribbon emotions are subserved by dual circuits involving a very rapid 
(“quick and dirty”) “low road” and a much slower “high road” (Le Doux 
1998, 2000). The low road consists of sensory inputs to the amygdala (Greek 
for “almond”), which appraises positive and dangerous stimuli, via tha-
lamic projections both to expedite detection of environmental threats and 

26 
Chapter 2
to prime the amygdala to evaluate subsequent input arriving via the corti-
cal circuit. The high road consists of circuits from sensory thalamus to sen-
sory cortex and thence to amygdala. 
 In terms of an auditory stimulus “BANG”: 
 (i) The low road 
 The sensory thalamus is activated by the intense auditory stimulus “BANG”; 
the thalamus activates the amygdala via neural projections, which in turn 
activate a variety of subcortical structures that elicit the ANS changes, 
motor commands, and facial expression and hormone changes characteris-
tic of an emotional response. 
 (ii) The high road 
 The sensory thalamus stimulates the auditory cortex via appropriate neural 
circuits; the auditory cortex analyzes the location, frequency, intensity of 
noise, and so on, to determine the specific nature of potentially threatening 
auditory signals. In light of this analysis, the auditory cortex either inhibits 
or continues to stimulate the amygdala (and therefore the range of subcor-
tical structures that elicit the effects characteristic of the emotional 
response), that is, in light of whether stimulus indicates neutral, positive, or 
dangerous events (Le Doux 1998, 2000).  
 2.2.2   Higher Cognitive Emotions or Higher Sentiments 
 Eighty percent of the human brain is cortex, and along with enabling tool-
making, language, and planning, the cortex enables the higher cognitive 
emotions (Panksepp 1998, 2000), that is, the emotional-affective processes 
that emerge from the recent evolutionary expansion of forebrain. These 
processes are responsible for human beings’ subtle social emotions: shame, 
guilt, contempt, envy, humor, empathy, sympathy, and jealousy. 
 Unlike the basic emotions, higher cognitive emotions (HCEs) are tradi-
tionally considered not to display stereotypical patterns of physiological 
effects. They are more integrated with cognitive activity leading to planned, 
long-term actions than BE responses (Griffiths 1997, 100). The HCEs rely 
on symbolic representations that enable higher cognitive functioning, such 
as inferencing, reasoning, and planning. Human beings are uniquely 
endowed (some domesticated primates excepted) with symbolic representa-
tions that provide them with a completely internal locus of control. 

Theories of Emotion 
27
 Symbolic representations enable language, a social life governed by con-
vention, and rich cultural traditions. The HCEs presuppose language, since 
they can be experienced only by creatures with the ability to semantically 
conceptualize; for example, shame minimally presupposes the conceptual 
grasp of self and responsibility for transgression. In addition, the cultural 
traditions that structure human social life account for differences in their 
fine-grained natures and the relative plasticity of their expression. What 
HCEs an agent experiences, therefore, are a function of her language and 
culture. 
 It is worth noting that higher brain functions are not essential for gener-
ating feelings. There is evidence that direct neocortical stimulation fails to 
generate affective states, but the evidence that various brain stem areas 
mediate affect is substantial. Damage to cortex only modulates the degree 
of emotionality, not the ability to have emotional feelings (Le Doux 1998). 
Clearly, what the cortex allows is ever-more-sophisticated ways for organ-
isms to regulate their emotions (and, in human beings, how this ability 
develops, and the neurogenesis on which it is based, will be described in 
subsequent chapters).  
 2.3   The Functions of Emotions 
 Emotions are considered to have at least two functions: first, to monitor the 
environment and orchestrate the most appropriate response; and second, 
to enable the development and maintenance of social relationships. In 
terms of monitoring the environment and orchestrating the most appropri-
ate response, emotions bring an animal’s attention to relevant environ-
mental properties and mobilize resources to deal with them (Frijda 1994; 
Scherer 1994): 
 • 
 Some neural circuits are hardwired to solve specific adaptive problems 
(Panksepp 1998, 2000; Cosmides and Tooby 2000) and, when simulta-
neously activated, could deliver outputs that conflict, for instance, 
sleep and flight from a predator. To prevent such conflicts and maxi-
mize chances of survival, superordinate programs are developed that 
override some programs when others are activated.  
 • 
 Some adaptive problems are best solved by simultaneous activation of 
many different neural circuits; for example, predator avoidance may 

28 
Chapter 2
require simultaneous shifts in both heart rate and auditory acuity. 
Superordinate programs are required to activate and coordinate these 
differing circuits.  
 Emotions provide such programs; they are adaptations that have arisen 
in response to the adaptive problem of mechanism orchestration (Cosmides 
and Tooby 2000). This (probably) obtains for all vertebrate species. 
 More important for this monograph, however, is the function of 
emotion in enabling the development and maintenance of social 
relationships: 
 • 
 Many emotions produce characteristic species-typical displays that 
broadcast to conspecifics the emotional state of the signaler (e.g., “I am 
afraid”) and the identity of the recurrent evolutionary situation being 
confronted (e.g., “danger, above, in the local environment”). Many 
emotional expressions appear designed to be informative, and these 
have been so reliably informative that conspecifics have coevolved the 
appropriate response programs.  
 Vervet monkeys, for instance, use three distinct vocal-gestural alarm 
signals when threatened by predators. One alarm signals “snake,” another 
signals “eagle,” and a third signals “leopard.” These different vocal-gestural 
alarms elicit the appropriate defensive responses in conspecifics, either to 
take to the trees or to take to the undergrowth. In addition, human beings 
have coevolved automated “interpreter” circuits to decode public facial 
displays of emotion into knowledge of others’ mental states (Ekman 1984; 
Darwin 1872/1965), and when they cannot or will not verbalize intense 
emotion, they elicit from others typical comforting behaviors (e.g., 
hugging, kissing). It is also the case that smiling is a universally recogniz-
able signal of readiness for friendly interactions (Izard and Ackerman 2000, 
258). 
 • 
 Facial expressions are required for normal attachment in infants and 
for attachment in courtship. Infants born with congenital facial paraly-
sis have enormous difficulties forming any sort of social relationship. 
Facial expressions are also required to regulate aggression (Ekman 
1984).  
 • 
 People with emotional deficits due to damage to prefrontal cortex, for 
example, Phineas Gage, have considerable difficulty in making plans 
that involve others (Damasio 1994).  

Theories of Emotion 
29
 • 
 Emotions seem to require expression (see earlier) and, in human beings, 
physiological and behavioral reactions are supplemented by linguistic 
expression. The urge to verbally share emotional experiences appears 
to be a cross-cultural phenomenon and affects both women and men 
equally (although what, how, and with whom they share may differ). 
Sharing initially takes place with intimates, but within just a few hours, 
through “secondary propagation,” 50 to 60 percent of the relevant 
social group has been informed. This facilitates intragroup interaction 
and allows the group to keep track of the emotional status of members 
(Rime, Corsini, and Herbette 2002).  
 2.4   Feeling Theories of Emotion 
 “Folk psychology, our commonsense conception of the mind, tends to priv-
ilege conscious feelings. We ordinarily regard feelings as the essence of 
emotions. If a state did not feel like anything, it would not be a(n emo-
tional) state” (Prinz 2004, 4). Another aspect of folk psychology, following 
Darwin (1872/1965), construes physiological changes as consequences of 
emotion: we feel fear, and our respiratory and heart rates increase dramati-
cally, our musculature (including facial musculature) contracts in stereo-
typical patterns, and so on. However, William James (1884) famously 
challenges this thesis in his landmark paper “What Is an Emotion?”: 
 Our natural way of thinking about these standard emotions is that the mental per-
ception of some fact excites the mental affection called the emotion, and that this 
latter state of mind gives rise to bodily expression. My thesis, on the contrary, is that 
 the bodily changes follow directly the perception of the exciting fact, and our feeling of the 
same changes as they occur is the emotion . … Without the bodily states following on 
the perception, the latter would be purely cognitive in form, pale, colourless, desti-
tute of emotional warmth. We might then see the bear and judge it best to run, re-
ceive the insult and deem it right to strike, but we would not actually  feel afraid or 
angry. (13; James’s italics)  
 Carl Lange (in 1885) concluded similarly, although he emphasized the per-
ception of vasomotor changes, in particular, as implicated in emotional 
experience. More recently, David Papanicolaou (1989) and Antonio Dama-
sio (1994) have resuscitated the feeling theory, although Damasio has mod-
ified it in certain respects. First, he includes the perception of neurochemical, 
including hormonal, changes in emotion response. Second, he suggests an 

30 
Chapter 2
“as-if loop” whereby the brain centers normally associated with bodily 
changes can be active in the absence of bodily changes. Third, Damasio 
argues that emotional responses can be perceived unconsciously (this is 
why his theory is somatic rather than somatic-feeling like James’s and 
Lange’s). 
 James uses three arguments to support his thesis. The first is the subtrac-
tion argument (also used by Lange [1885/1922]): 
 If we fancy some strong emotion, and then try to abstract from our consciousness of 
it all the feelings of its characteristic bodily symptoms, we find we have nothing left 
behind, no “mind-stuff” out of which the emotion can be constituted, and that a 
cold and neutral state of intellectual perception is all that remains. (17)  
 To James, the phenomenology of emotional experience is exhausted by 
feelings of physiological perturbation: such perturbation, therefore, is the 
cause and not the effect of emotion. It is worth noting that his theory has 
found support in recent functional neuroimaging studies. It now seems 
incontrovertible that somatic brain centers (i.e., the centers in the brain 
that detect bodily changes) are activated during emotion induction (Dama-
sio et al. 2000). 
 The second argument is the expression argument: “Everyone knows how 
panic is increased by flight, and how the giving way to the symptoms of 
grief or anger increases these passions themselves. … Refuse to express a 
passion, and it dies” (21). 
 The third argument refers to the effects of pathology or lesions on emo-
tion. James hypothesized that victims of total body anesthesia would expe-
rience seriously reduced emotionality (and one French physician at the 
time confirmed that he had a patient with precisely this affliction and that 
James was correct). Empirical evidence to support James’s hypothesis was 
forthcoming in 1966, when Hohmann investigated patients with spinal 
cord lesions. He found that the higher in the cord the lesion was located, 
the greater was the patient’s reduction in emotionality (sadness excepted). 4 
 2.4.1   Objections to Feeling Theories of Emotion 
 (i)   Readout of physiological changes is insufficiently fine grained to enable 
the distinction between subtle forms of emotions. The hair stands on 
the back of the neck in excitement in one situation and in fear in 
another. We feel the hair standing on the back of the neck in both 
situations. In addition, feeling in emotion individuation is insufficient 

Theories of Emotion 
31
(even if it is necessary) because some felt body states, such as fatigue 
and hunger, are not associated at all with emotionality.  
 (ii)   The feeling theory fails to recognize the apparently frequent inclusion 
of thought in emotional experience. It just does not seem to be the case 
that we experience most of our feelings thoughtlessly. We can “think” 
ourselves into an emotional experience, we can think about what is 
going on while it is going on, and we can continue to think about it on 
its conclusion.  
 (iii)   Some emotions, including fear and anger, require beliefs and judg-
ments to elicit them. For example, blue exam books (Prinz 2004, 21) 
are not fearful in and of themselves (as coiled snake-shaped objects 
typically are); they only become fearful objects when linked to beliefs 
and judgments about what they are for, that is, to test or examine what 
has been learned, and how this can influence future career, prospects, 
self-esteem, and so on.  
 2.5   Cognitive Theories of Emotion 
 The locus classicus of cognitive theories of emotion is Kenny’s (1963)  Action, 
Emotion, and Will , which argues for conceptual links between emotion, 
propositional attitude ascription, and rational action. According to Kenny, 
any physiological state that lacks a suitable intentional object or fails to 
produce appropriate intentional behavior cannot be an emotion. It is logi-
cally absurd to insist that people can be afraid, for example, without believ-
ing that they are in danger or exhibiting avoidance behavior. The links 
between emotion, intentionality, and rational action, therefore, are con-
ceptual and criterial (Griffiths 1997, 22), whereas the links between emo-
tion and physiological states are merely contingent and empirical. This 
implies that only the logical links between emotion and belief and desire 
can form part of the definition of emotion; the contingent, empirical fea-
tures of emotion cannot be part of its definition. This is because there is no 
contradiction in supposing an emotion to lack these physiological 
accompaniments. 
 An emotion has two objects, namely, particular and formal. A formal 
object is the property in virtue of which an event elicits an emotion, and a 
particular object is the event itself. The death of a child, for example, can be 
a particular object of one’s sadness, but it causes sadness in virtue of being 

32 
Chapter 2
a loss. Being a loss is the formal object of sadness. Emotions represent their 
formal objects, not their particular objects. An episode of sadness may con-
cern a variety of distinct, particular objects, but the sadness represents loss 
in each case (Prinz 2004, 62). 
 As Lyons (1980, 33) puts it: “In general, a cognitivist theory of emotion 
is one that takes some aspect of thought, usually a belief, central to the 
concept of emotion and, at least in some cognitive theories, essential to 
distinguishing emotions from one another.” Cognitive theories of emotion 
have been termed propositional attitude theories by Griffiths (1997, 23). A 
propositional attitude is a mental state consisting of a representation of a 
proposition and an attitude (e.g., belief, desire, fear, hope, etc.) toward that 
proposition. A proposition, in turn, is a declarative statement that describes 
a state of affairs, such as “today is Tuesday.” This state of affairs is the propo-
sitional object of the mental state, and it is preceded by a statement of the 
attitude directed toward it and the word  that . Thus I believe  that today is 
Tuesday, or I suppose or hope or fear  that it is Tuesday (De Lancey 2002; 
Prinz 2004). 
 The foregoing account construes emotions as reducible to beliefs, but it 
would also hold for theorists who view emotions as reducible to desires 
(e.g., to flee or freeze). The important point is that the ascription of propo-
sitional attitudes to an emoting subject entails the ascription of the appro-
priate concepts to her. If I state that I am afraid that I will be attacked in the 
dark alley that lies ahead of me, we can assume that I possess concepts, for 
example, of fear, of being attacked, of danger, and of dark alleys. It is for this 
reason that Prinz (2004, 23) claims that cognitivist philosophers construe 
emotions as essentially conceptual. This is the basis of his conceptualiza-
tion hypothesis claim. He also claims, however, that cognitivist philoso-
phers are committed to two further hypotheses, that is, the disembodiment 
and appraisal hypotheses. 
 The disembodiment hypothesis (Prinz 2004, 25) denies that the cogni-
tions that constitute our emotions are identical to somatic changes or to 
internal states that register these changes. Some cognitivists even deny that 
somatic changes are required at all in emotional experience (e.g., Solomon 
1977; Nussbaum 2001), while others agree that such changes are necessary 
(e.g., Lyons 1980) but claim that nonsomatic cognitive states are necessary, 
too. They all insist, however, that the cognitions associated with emotions 
are something above and beyond somatic perturbation or the states that 

Theories of Emotion 
33
register these perturbations and, as previously indicated, that such cogni-
tions individuate the emotions (Gordon 1987; Lyons 1980). The cognitive 
components bound to our emotions are, in this account, disembodied 
(Prinz 2004, 25). 
 The third hypothesis underpinning cognitivist philosophies of 
emotion is that of appraisal. Appraisals are representations of an organism-
environment relationship that bear on well-being. It is interesting to note, 
along with Prinz (2004), that despite apparent dissimilarities, the theories 
of cognitivist philosophers and psychologists are extremely similar. Psy-
chologists prefer to talk of appraisals rather than propositional attitudes; 
appraisals, however, take the form of judgments (Solomon 1977; Lazarus 
1991). Anger, for example, comprises the judgment that there has been an 
offense against me or the people I love or admire (and judgments are 
quintessentially appraisals). Forming the judgment that there has been an 
offense, in addition, presupposes the concept of offense. A second point of 
similarity is that cognitions are necessary to individuate emotions. Psy-
chologists differ only insofar as they construe emotion as being caused by 
appraisals rather than as identical to or constituted by them. A third point 
of similarity is the construal of emotions as highly structured. Anger, for 
instance, involves more than the simple judgment that an offense has 
been committed. The highly structured nature of emotions, according to 
psychologists of emotion, is captured in their dimensional appraisal 
theories. 
 2.5.1   Dimensional Appraisal Theories 
 To appraise something is to judge it as somehow salient to one’s well-being 
(Arnold 1960; Lazarus 1991; Frijda 1986), and emotions, according to 
appraisal theorists, include appraisal judgments. Dimensional appraisal 
theorists claim, in addition, that all such appraisal judgments are drawn 
from a common set of appraisal dimensions. According to Arnold (1960), 
there are three dimensions involved, namely, whether the situation faced is 
beneficial or harmful, whether it involves objects absent or present, and 
whether those objects are easy or difficult to avoid. Different “answers” to 
dimensional appraisal “questions” elicit different emotions. Joy, for exam-
ple, involves objects that are beneficial, present, and easy to obtain. 
 Objections indicating the inadequacy of these three appraisal dimen-
sions to distinguish emotions (e.g., fear and anger both involve objects that 

34 
Chapter 2
are harmful, present, and difficult to avoid) have resulted in (at least) one 
hugely influential multidimensional appraisal theory, by Lazarus (1991). 
This appraisal theory includes six dimensions that are classified as primary 
or secondary appraisals. Primary appraisals establish that something salient 
to well-being is or could be present in the organism-environment relation-
ship, and secondary appraisals relate to the adequacy of the emoter’s cop-
ing resources. 
 Primary appraisals refer to goal relevance (is a given transaction with an 
object, event, or situation relevant to one’s goals?), goal congruence (does 
the experience of the object, event, or situation facilitate or impede the 
fulfillment of one’s goals?), and type of ego involvement (what in terms of 
self-identity, moral values, self-esteem, life goals, etc., is at stake here?). 
Again, answers to these dimensional appraisal questions determine the pos-
itivity or negativity of the emotional response. 
 Secondary appraisals include the ascription of blame or credit (who or 
what is accountable for the object, event, or situation, and should blame or 
credit be assigned?), the estimation of coping potential (what resources are 
available to deal with the event, object, or situation?), and future expec-
tancy (will things change to become more or less congruent with my 
goals?). 
 Lazarus further classifies his appraisals as either molecular or molar. 
Molecular appraisals are the products of his six appraisal dimensions; that 
is, they correspond to the judgments that people make before eliciting an 
emotional response. The combination of molecular judgments associated 
with anger, for instance, lead to the recognition that one has been offended 
against. This superordinate judgment is the molar appraisal. Molar apprais-
als, in turn, capture what Lazarus famously construes as “core relational 
themes,” which are relations that bear on well-being. Lazarus (1991, 122, 
table 3.4) identifies fifteen such core relational themes associated with dis-
tinct emotions. These emotions are anger, anxiety, fright, guilt, shame, sad-
ness, envy, jealousy, disgust, happiness, pride, relief, hope, love, and 
compassion. Core relational themes (CRTs) are not explicitly represented 
attitudes; rather, they represent the basic situations that emotions are 
designed to discriminate. For instance, the CRT associated with anger is a 
demeaning offense against me and mine; sadness is associated with the 
CRT of irrevocable loss; and fright is associated with the CRT of immediate, 
concrete, and overwhelming physical danger. 

Theories of Emotion 
35
 In sum, appraisal theorists construe emotions as preceded by conceptual 
appraisals and conceptual appraisals as dimensionalized to a greater or 
lesser extent. 
 Appraisal theorists (obviously) espouse the propositional attitude 
hypothesis of philosophers; it is clear, in addition, that they share concep-
tualization and disembodiment hypotheses, too. In general, therefore, such 
theorists are vulnerable to the same objections as philosophers. In addition, 
Lazarus and other “goal” theorists (e.g., Oatley 2004) are vulnerable to 
another objection: not all emotions are related to goals. I can be delighted 
by a surprise gift without my delight being in any way goal related. Simi-
larly, I can be disgusted, either physically or morally, without the object 
being related to goals (unless one insists that uncontaminated food and 
moral “goods” are goal related in some way, but this does seem rather 
desperate).  
 2.5.2   Objections to Cognitivist Theories of Emotion 
 (i)  
 Emotions are underdetermined by beliefs and judgments (Zinck and 
Newen 2008; Prinz 2004; De Lancey 2002; Griffiths 1997); that is, 
even if they were necessary (which they are not), they are not suf-
ficient to individuate emotions. By reducing emotions to proposi-
tional attitudes, cognitive theories fail to distinguish emotions from 
them (Goldie 2000; Zinck and Newen 2008). Reductive cognitivism 
fails on empirical grounds, too, for if emotions reduce to judgments, 
then the relevant judgments should always be accompanied by the 
proper emotion. Research, however, demonstrates that they are not 
(Damasio, Tranel, and Damasio 1990). Patients with damage to areas 
of prefrontal cortex show no loss of cognitive capability but manifest 
obvious emotional defects.  
 (ii)  
 Emotions can be elicited directly by electrical stimulation of relevant 
brain regions, either by electrode or even by epileptic stimulation (Fri-
jda 1986; Panksepp 1998) and by hypothermia, fatigue, and vigorous 
exercise (De Lancey 2002). In addition, at least one emotion, anger, 
can be triggered by faulty cooling of the brain, which can result from 
sinusitis (Zajonc, Murphy, and Inglehart 1989).  
 (iii)   Emotions can be elicited by voluntary changes in the body, especially 
by changing its musculoskeletal orientation and facial expression 
(Ekman 1972; Lange 1885/1922).  

36 
Chapter 2
 (iv)  
  Emotional responses are elicited by perceived objects, that is, by con-
creta (De Lancey 2002), for example, parental faces and snake shapes 
in human infants and predators in nonhuman infants, neither of 
which can semantically conceptualize. To deny that such responses 
are emotional in the face of overwhelming empirical evidence (e.g., 
Panksepp 1998), as, for example, Ortony, Clore, and Collins (1988) 
do, seems extraordinary.  
 (v)  
 Emotional responses can be triggered by imagination. People can 
experience full-blown emotions by simply imagining suitable objects 
(Greenspan 2004) or even while “enjoying” what they clearly under-
stand to be fictional events and situations. Beliefs and desires, in these 
situations, are ones the emoter explicitly does not possess (Griffiths 
1997, 29).  
 (vi)  
  Emotional responses are characterized by a whole suite of physiologi-
cal changes. These include changes in facial expression (De Lancey 
2002; Ekman 1984, 2004), musculoskeletal function (flinching, 
expressive vocal changes), and autonomic nervous system changes 
(adrenaline release, changes in heart rate, respiratory rate, etc.). These 
physiological changes form stereotypical patterns of responses asso-
ciated with particular emotions (De Lancey 2002; Levinson 2006). 
Importantly, too, recognizing emotional responses in others depends 
on these factors (Ekman and Friesen 1969). Cognitivist theories can-
not explain these phenomena.  
 (vii)   Emotions or emotionlike responses are present in many nonhuman 
animals. If we accept evolutionary theory, then we should expect 
there to be homologues of many emotional capabilities in many non-
human species, with more closely related species sharing more com-
mon features. We commonly talk of dogs and cats experiencing fear, 
but we never attribute this emotion to worms. If we deny that such 
responses are emotional (e.g., Ortony, Clore, and Collins 1988), then 
we have to acknowledge that scientists who attempt to study emo-
tion, especially fear, in nonhuman animals are seriously mistaken. It 
is also worth noting that when the use of emotion terms is prohibited 
in the description of primate behavior, the objective behavior state-
ments are inadequate to characterize behavior or to identify individ-
ual animals and safely predict their behavior (Hebb 1946). Scientists 
are left with no explanation of the animal behaviors in question.  

Theories of Emotion 
37
 (viii)   Burgeoning neuroscientific evidence suggests that at least certain 
emotions are associated with certain brain areas and neural circuits. 
Fear, for instance, is associated with the amygdala (Panksepp 1998).  
 (ix)  
 Emotional “objects” can be displaced. My anger that my employer 
underestimates my capabilities can be displaced onto the cafeteria 
assistant who offers me cold tea (De Lancey 2002, 41). If cognitivism 
were true, then these two judgments would elicit two different emo-
tions; they do not.  
 (x) 
 Human beings show evidence of the development of emotional capa-
bilities from early infancy right through to mature adulthood (Ekman 
1984), and infants develop affective capabilities before cognitive capa-
bilities (De Lancey 2002). Neonates show evidence of the facial expres-
sion of emotion and, after only a few weeks, exhibit the behavioral 
manifestations of basic emotions, such as anger at being frustrated 
and joy or happiness in the presence of the primary caregiver’s mov-
ing face. Cognitive theories fail to explain these phenomena, too.  
 2.6   The Social Construction of the Emotions 
 The foregoing account, especially as it relates specifically to basic emotions, 
demonstrates that some theorists (e.g., Ekman 1984, 2004) are convinced 
that some emotions, or at least their expression, are pancultural phenom-
ena. Others, however, deny that emotions can be pancultural, and cite a 
range of putatively idiosyncratic emotions or emotion analogues to support 
their thesis. Such theorists are social constructionists. 
 Social constructionism can be weak or strong: all social constructionists, 
however, believe that emotions are, in some sense, created by culture. 
Indeed, strong social constructionists (e.g., Lutz 1986; Harre 1986; Averill 
1980) insist that emotions are only constructs of culture and possess no 
pancultural features of the kind that biology or any other physical science 
might properly describe (De Lancey 2002, 71). More precisely, to claim that 
an emotion is socially constructed is to claim that its identity conditions 
depend on features that are a function of the sociocultural environment in 
which the subject emoter is embedded. “The identity conditions of such an 
emotion advert to a property that emerged through the influence of beliefs, 
values, practices and institutions that are specific to a particular human 
group. Culture makes a constitutive contribution” (Prinz 2004, 131–132). 

38 
Chapter 2
 Some of the emotions that social constructionists claim are peculiar to 
certain human groups and which are alien to Anglo-American culture 
include the following: 
 Gezellig : a Dutch emotion (or emotion term) that means something like 
feeling cozy in English but occurs only in the presence of other people 
(Harre 1986).  
 Amae : a Japanese emotion or emotion term that describes a feeling of pleas-
ant dependence on individuals and institutions (Morsbach and Tyler 
1986).  
 Song : an Ifaluk emotion or emotion term that describes an analogue of 
anger (Lutz 1986) but is more akin to simple admonition with moralis-
tic overtones with no disposition to revenge.  
 In addition, the phenomenon of romantic love is peculiar to Western 
cultures (Griffiths 1997; Averill 1980), and emotions, or their expression, 
are influenced by the individualistic or collectivist nature of their 
host culture (Prinz 2004; De Lancey 2002), which I discuss in detail in 
chapter 4. 
 2.6.1   Construals of Social Constructionism 
 There are three different construals of social constructionism: 
 (i)   A trivial sense. All concepts are socially constructed; no concept can 
exist independently of a community of speakers, and each concept is 
created by sociolinguistic processes.  
 (ii)   A strong sense. Citizens, members of Parliament, and husbands are 
social constructions in a way that gold, electrons, and hormones are 
not. The latter phenomena would exist, and examples of them would 
have certain properties in common, irrespective of the social construc-
tion of their conceptual categories. The category of member of Par-
liament, however, depends on the formulation of the concept of MP. 
The sociolinguistic processes focused on this concept imbue MPs with 
properties that differentiate them from non-MPs.  
 (iii)   A very strong sense. A concept exists, but that to which it putatively 
refers does not; the important point, however, is that people who 
use the concept fail to recognize this. Young men of the Gururumba, 
for example, manifest a “wild pig” syndrome, and the Gururumba 
people, in general, accept that this syndrome is real. Such practices or 

Theories of Emotion 
39
pretenses (Griffiths 1997, 147) cannot survive the realization that they 
are mere thoughts. They must be treated as natural by the relevant 
community.  
 Very strong social constructionists (VSSCs) like Harre (1986) and Lutz 
(1986) believe that emotions are just like the Gururumba’s wild pig 
syndrome: 
 Psychologists have always had to struggle against a persistent illusion that in such 
studies as those of the emotions there is something there, the emotion, of which the 
emotion word is a mere representation. This ontological illusion, that there is an 
abstract and detachable “it” upon which the research can be directed, probably lies 
behind the defectiveness of much emotion research. (Harre 1986, 4)  
 2.6.2   Objections to Very Strong Social Constructionism 
 Very strong social constructionism, at least as it relates to the emotions, is 
untenable. As a view, it is both conceptually incoherent and evidentially 
flawed. In terms of conceptual incoherence, the denial of any emotional 
panculturalism is lethal. If no common identity conditions exist for differ-
ent emotions, then ethnographers and anthropologists have no way to 
identify emotions or emotion analogues in other cultures. Indeed, we 
would have no reason to assume that other cultures experience emotions at 
all. 
 There are a number of other objections to VSSC: 
 (i)  It seems unwarranted to claim that different cultures have different 
emotions when, at best, research demonstrates, rather more mod-
estly, that different cultures manifest different eliciting conditions and 
response repertoires.  
 (ii)   It also seems unwarranted to claim that emotions are social scripts 
when the research suggests, again rather more modestly, that they 
might have scripts as components. Particular emotions can possess a 
number of scripts; romantic love, for instance, has both a “falling in 
love at first sight” script and a “growing to love another” script. It also 
has a “sex expectancy after marriage” script in certain cultures, and a 
“no sex expectancy” script in at least one other culture (in India).  
 (iii)   There seems little principled reason to assume that differences in vocab-
ulary point to the social construction of emotions (Pinker 1994). It is 
not implausible that non-Dutch and non-Japanese people could expe-
rience something closely akin to  gezelligheid and  amae even though 

40 
Chapter 2
they possess no emotion term for this feeling.  Gezelligheid and  amae 
might easily be felt by two close friends enjoying a beer together in 
their favorite English public house (Prinz 2004, 136).  
 (iv)   There are indications that VSSCs fail to distinguish formal from par-
ticular objects of emotion. For instance, 
 witiko among the Algonquin Indians is a morbid fear of having turned 
into a cannibal with a craving for human flesh (Trimble et al. 1984);  
 p’a-leng in China is a morbid fear of the cold (Kleinman 1980); and  
 koro in South China refers to an intense anxiety that penis or vulva and 
breasts will retract back into the body (Yap 1965).  
 These terms are all directed at different particular objects (cannibal-
ism, cold, genital retraction), but all have the same formal object, 
namely, danger or threat. This suggests that they are all fears. This, in 
turn, suggests that the fact that people of different cultures fear differ-
ent objects does not count as evidence for different emotions across 
cultures.  
 (v)  Finally, and pace Harre (1986), when we speak of emotions, we are 
speaking of something that  is there . Burgeoning evidence from neuro-
scientific research suggests that some emotional capabilities are signifi-
cantly biologically determined (Panksepp 1998; le Doux 1998); at least 
some pancultural emotional facial expressions exist (Ekman 1984); 
other nonhuman species possess emotions (Darwin 1872/1965; Hebb 
1946); and certain neural circuits are associated with certain emotions 
(Panksepp 2000; Damasio 1994; Le Doux 1998). Smiling, for instance, 
is not just a socially learned behavior that is part of our socially con-
structed emotion of joy. An independent neural pathway for facial 
control enables spontaneous smiling in hemiplegics, and congenitally 
blind-deaf-dumb and brain-damaged children (Eibl-Eibesfeldt 1973) 
spontaneously laugh and smile when playing but cry and shout when 
put into unfamiliar situations.  
 2.7   More Recent Theories of Emotion 
 Three more recent theories of emotion deserve brief attention in this review. 
These are Zinck and Newen’s (2008) multifactorial, developmental account, 
J. Clark’s (2010) serial homology account, and Colombetti’s (2014) enactiv-
ist account. 

Theories of Emotion 
41
 2.7.1   Zinck and Newen 
 My own account of human emotion is consistent with that of Zinck and 
Newen (2008) in that (i) the approach adopted is developmental and func-
tional, and (ii) emotions are essentially expressive devices (this is unremark-
able given that we support our argumentation using the same developmental 
psychological research). Where our approaches differ, however, is in our 
construals of precursor emotions. Zinck and Newen identify only two pre-
basic emotions, comfort and distress, which they distinguish from felt body 
states like homeostatic distress, for example, hunger. They distinguish them 
on the grounds that they do not evolve into more distinguished behavioral 
patterns as the “complex class of emotions” does (8). I argue that the unfo-
cused crying, motor unrest, and cooing and snuggling are the only expres-
sive responses neonates possess with which to respond to the distinct 
interoceptive and proprioceptive stimulation associated with precursor 
emotions and triggered by homeostatic distress. In addition, I argue that 
the developmental mechanisms (which Zinck and Newen fail to address) 
from emotion precursors (affect expressions) to basic to higher cognitive 
emotions are the same. In addition, it has recently been argued that ele-
ments of more primitive types of emotion persist throughout phylogeny. 
This is the view of J. Clark.  
 2.7.2   J. Clark 
 Clark’s (2010) serial homology account is another important recent theory. 
As previously noted, basic emotions are considered to possess a number of 
features that distinguish them from HCEs (Ekman 1992). These are charac-
terized as involving relatively stereotypical physiological, behavioral, and 
expressive patterns that are underpinned by specialized neural circuits, and 
as being genetically hardwired as a result of a long evolutionary history. BEs 
can be activated by unconditioned stimuli and manifest a degree of modu-
larity such that neither the unconditioned stimuli that elicit them nor the 
responses that are automatically generated can be moderated by higher 
cognitive functioning. These stimuli, it is claimed, have a privileged 
strength that makes their “unlearning” impossible or very difficult indeed. 
However, despite possessing relatively simple unconditioned elicitors, BEs 
can also be activated by conditioned stimuli through learning. Finally, BEs 
are considered to develop early in life, before the emergence of higher cog-
nitive capabilities. In contrast, HCEs are thought to lack many of these 

42 
Chapter 2
features (Griffiths 1997). They are typically construed as uniquely human 
and thus lack a shared evolutionary history with other animals. They are 
also considered to lack stereotypical physiological, behavioral, and expres-
sive features. HCEs are considered to be variable across cultures, and any 
characteristics they possess are learned through and relative to the embed-
ding culture. While both BEs and HCEs are considered capable of respond-
ing to higher cognitive input, HCEs are considered to lack simple 
unconditioned elicitors. Both the input and output sides of HCEs, there-
fore, are viewed as much more flexible than BEs. 
 Using shame as his example, Clark (2010) persuasively argues that BE 
shame and HCE shame are serial homologues. Homologues are traits that 
organisms share in common as a result of descent from a common ancestor. 
Homologous traits must all occur within a continuous line of descent but 
can cut across species and functional lines; for instance, dolphin flippers 
and human hands are homologues (78). 5  
 Clark argues that many features and functions of BE shame are directly 
retained in human forms of shame, to the extent that dominance hierar-
chies still play a role in human life (81). Shame in humans emerged from a 
rank-related emotion in nonhuman mammals, the primary function of 
which is to signal subordination to a dominant conspecific so as to appease 
him or her. The functional breadth of shame in humans has expanded in at 
least two ways. First, while the dynamics of dominance hierarchies con-
tinue to play a role in human social hierarchies, the focus has largely shifted 
from dominance (coercive power) to “prestige competitions” involving the 
attraction of positive social attention and the possession of socially valued 
traits or materials. Shame has come to be associated with loss in prestige 
competitions. Second, shame has acquired the function of facilitating 
cooperation and conformity by signaling one’s own awareness of one’s vio-
lations of social norms, as well as one’s desire to conform to them. This 
signals our reliability as partners for cooperative activities, which facilitates 
cooperation with others and enhances social reincorporation when these 
norms have been violated: 
 Despite the expanded functions of shame in humans, its physiological, expressive 
behavioural and perhaps some affective cognitive effects have been largely con-
served. For example, individuals in situations involving prestige or cooperations/
conformity shame still display the expressive and behavioural displays characteristic 
of BE shame. (J. Clark 2010, 81)  

Theories of Emotion 
43
 2.7.3   Colombetti 
 Giovanna Colombetti (2007, 2009a, 2009b, 2010, 2011, 2014; Colombetti 
and Krueger 2015) is a leading contemporary theorist in extended or, 
probably more accurately, extensive cognition and affectivity (see 
Hutto and Myin 2013; Hutto, Kirchhoff, and Myin 2014), whose approach 
is that of enactivism. Enactivism, as she points out, is a synthesis of several 
interrelated and mutually reinforcing insights from a variety of different 
disciplines, especially phenomenological philosophy, psychology, biology, 
and neuroscience. Enactivism denies that cognition is realized centrally by 
the brain; rather, it claims that cognition is realized (enacted) by the whole 
living organism, deeply embedded in the world, and because of this, puta-
tive boundaries between brain, body, and environment are also denied. 
This denial distinguishes extensive from extended affectivity. Affectivity is 
defined as a lack of indifference, or a sensitivity or interest in one’s exis-
tence, and both cognition and emotion are instances of “the relentless 
sense-making activity of the precarious living organism as it maintains 
itself via continuous processes of self-regulation and exchange with the 
environment” (Colombetti 2014, xviii). Enactivism views life as sufficient 
for cognition and sees all living systems as affective and cognitive (18). The 
fundamental life regulatory processes that enable organismic survival are 
already, in a primordial sense, meaning generating and thus affective. 
 A central feature of Colombetti’s enactivism (and enactivism in general) 
is its focus on the lived experience; enactivism adopts a distinctly phenom-
enological perspective, due primarily to Husserl (1952/1989) and Merleau-
Ponty (1962), in that the body is construed not merely as a physical entity 
but also as an experienced, lived structure. Accordingly, comprehending 
mentality and emotionality requires careful exploration of embodied 
nature at both the physical and experiential levels. These explorations 
should be mutually informative; descriptions of lived experience are 
required to make sense of brain and bodily activity, and data from brain 
and bodily activity should be used to refine experiential reports. 
 As an enactivist, Colombetti views emotional episodes, such as anger, 
and happiness, as self-organizing patterns of the entire organism that 
recruit neural, muscular, autonomic, and other processes into highly inte-
grated configurations (2009a, 2014). Self-organizing emotional episodes 
can be highly variable because the processes constituting them can self-
organize in different context-dependent ways. Importantly, however, the 

44 
Chapter 2
range of possible variations depends on the state of the organism and is 
evolutionarily and developmentally constrained. The enactivist perspective 
construes “internal causes” of emotion such as affect programs and the con-
cept of basic emotions as redundant; emotional episodes are construed as 
complex, flexible, and variable self-organizing patterns (see also M. Lewis 
2005; M. Lewis and Granic 2000). 
 The views of Colombetti, especially as they relate to extended (but not 
extensive) affectivity, the role of language in emotional experience and 
expression (see her 2009b), her emphasis on operational constraints and 
context dependence, and her strong advocacy for a multidisciplinary 
approach to affective science, are broadly consistent with mine; our views 
differ, however, in a number of significant respects. 
 First, I view affectivity as evolving to enable and regulate the lives of 
social species; I agree that even the simplest of organisms possess regulatory 
systems (e.g., chemotactic systems), but affectivity proper is, in my view, 
restricted to social animals. Second, while agreeing that affectivity is expe-
rienced by whole organisms, I disagree that it is a whole-organism response 
(although how much our disagreement is a matter of emphasis is a moot 
point). Complex creatures like mammals, especially human mammals, 
have evolved particular systems, which I term “realizer systems” in chapter 
3, to enable complex functionality. In chapter 3, I describe the total realizer 
systems of human emotionality, together with their partial and core realiz-
ers and the background conditions that sustain them. Claims relating to 
whole-organism response obviously mask these distinctions; indeed, such 
claims conflate realizer systems and background conditions. Emotions 
might be experienced by whole animals, but they are realized subpersonally 
by particular realizer systems. Third, I do not agree that affectivity and cog-
nition are always unbounded in the sense she describes; if no boundaries 
exist between brain, body, and world, then the functional contribution of 
individual components to a total realizer system cannot be identified. This 
would seem to hinder rather than to assist the detailed description and 
explanation of contributory phenomena. A related point, which I argue in 
later chapters, is that affectivity and cognition may well be unbounded in 
the sense she describes when they are up and running, but interaction is 
initiated typically by one partner and terminated by one partner or by 
either explicit or tacit agreement among partners. At the point of initiation 

Theories of Emotion 
45
and termination, at least, there are thus identifiable loci of interactive 
control. 
 Two further points of difference are worth mentioning. The first is that 
Colombetti sees affectivity as being sense making, whereas I see it as being 
specifically salience detecting and salience expressive (although, again, it is 
a moot point how far our construals here differ). In addition, our views 
relating to affect programs and the basicality of emotion differ (see chap. 4), 
and my theorizing is restricted to extended rather than extensive affectiv-
ity. The explanatory framework of deep functional integration that I favor 
is adequate to the description and explanation of the data I review. 
 There is one additional influence on human affectivity that both Colom-
betti and I recognize as central, but here again our emphases differ. Colom-
betti tends to focus on adult affectivity, whereas I emphasize emotional 
development. The influence in question is scaffolding.  
 2.8   Scaffolding of Emotional Development 
 A recent apparent burgeoning of interest in the scaffolding of affectivity, 
including developmental affectivity (e.g., Colombetti and Krueger 2015; 
Krueger 2013; Greenwood 2013; Sterelny 2010), that appears connected to 
various species of situated cognition (see chap. 3) is an emotion-focused 
offspring of Vygotsky’s (1978) more general sociocultural theory of devel-
opment. Vygotsky’s theory includes the concept of the zone of proximal 
development (ZPD), which represents what a child can accomplish with the 
guidance and support of an adult compared with what she can accomplish 
independently. Vygotsky suggests that a child’s future independent perfor-
mance largely depends on the guidance provided by her caregiver(s) in the 
ZPD. The caregiver creates and mediates the learning process by providing 
culturally appropriate guidance. This theory informed the work of Wood, 
Bruner, and Ross (1976), who introduced the metaphor of scaffolding, 
derived from the construction industry, to describe teachers’ scaffolding of 
student learning in a puzzle task. It has been used most frequently, how-
ever, to describe the kinds of instructional exchanges that take place in 
informal educational situations, such as parent-child interactions. The con-
cept was developed further by Rogoff and Wertsch (1984), who introduced 
the notions of orchestration and transfer to describe the process of develop-
ment from other-regulation to self-regulation. Successful scaffolding 

46 
Chapter 2
requires establishing a shared understanding of the task (Rogoff 1990), or 
“intersubjectivity.” In this process, the adult scaffolds the development of 
the child’s own conception of the task by providing appropriate guidance 
and support. 
 Two integrated functions operate in the mother-child interactions that 
promote gradual self-regulation in children. These are (i) the mother’s sen-
sitivity to her child’s level of performance and provision of appropriate 
guidance, and (ii) the mother’s gradual withdrawal of support, which allows 
the child more opportunity to perform independently (Rogoff 1990; Win-
sler, Diaz, and Montero 1997). The mother initially assumes responsibility 
for regulating and managing the activity, but as the child becomes more 
competent, the mother gradually transfers the responsibility to the child. 
Scaffolding thus includes the notion of reciprocal exchange, where partici-
pants adjust the way in which they understand something in relation to 
each other (Valsiner 1984). Scaffolding is a process that changes both the 
content and the structure of the interactions between the person doing the 
scaffolding and the person being scaffolded in relation to the strengths and 
needs of the person who is being scaffolded (Pea 2004). It is an important 
and seemingly inevitable process in the normal development of children’s 
self-regulation (see chaps. 4 and 5). 
 In terms of the development of self-regulation, scaffolding refers to an 
adult’s control over elements of a task initially beyond the capabilities of 
the child to enable the child to concentrate her efforts on elements that she 
is currently capable of managing (R. Clark, Menna, and Manel 2013). As 
scaffolding progresses, the adult remains sensitive to the child’s successes 
and failures, instituting further instruction according to the child’s perfor-
mance (Wood, Bruner, and Ross 1976). Effective maternal scaffolding 
includes verbal scaffolding, autonomy support, sensitivity, and contingent 
responsiveness to infant performance, all of which are included in intuitive 
parenting skills. 
 Research demonstrates that when scaffolding is provided in a develop-
mentally sensitive fashion, it can, for example, reduce the development of 
aggressive behavior in preschoolers (R. Clark, Menna, and Manel 2013); 
improve executive functioning in children born with very low birth weight 
and normal weight (Lowe et al. 2014); promote attention regulation in pre-
schoolers from low socioeconomic groups (Robinson, Burns, and Davis 

Theories of Emotion 
47
2009); and facilitate the development of IQs over 130 at four years (More-
lock, Brown, and Morrissey 2003). 
 Despite the recent nature of some of this research, and the recognition 
that sensitivity and responsiveness to the infant’s needs are crucial to devel-
opment, some researchers still tend to focus unidirectionally (see chap. 1), 
that is, on the contribution of the mother or caregiver rather than the con-
tribution of the child to the scaffolding process (Mascolo 2005). In addi-
tion, such research fails to identify what it is that the child must do 
(contribute) to benefit from scaffolding interactions with others (Mascolo 
and Fischer 2005; Rogoff 1990). A further weakness (Butler 1998) is that a 
primarily unidirectional view of scaffolding suggests a relatively fixed and 
predetermined goal in the development of scaffolded activity. Recognition 
of these limitations, enabled by the invention of highly sophisticated 
micro-videotaping techniques, has led to the development of bidirectional, 
transactional, or circular models of scaffolded interaction (Maccoby 1992) 
and, more recently, to dynamical systems models (e.g., Fogel, King, and 
Schanker 2008; M. Lewis and Granic 2000) and coaction models (Gottlieb 
2002; Mascolo 2005; Gottlieb and Halpern 2008). 
 From a coactive systems approach, the person-environment system 
functions as the primary unit of developmental analysis. This system 
involves at least five classes of coacting elements: “Within a given  socio-
cultural context ,  individual actions are directed toward some physical or psy-
chological  object . In interaction with  other persons , individuals engage 
dialogically using a variety of different  mediational means , including signs, 
symbols and other cultural tools” (Mascolo 2005, 186–187; his italics). In a 
coactive system, although these components are distinct from one another, 
they are inseparable as causes of action and development; control over the 
construction of action and meaning is distributed throughout the coacting 
elements of the person-environment system (Wertsch 2002; Granott 1998). 
“Although many approaches have embraced an interactive approach to 
development, empirical analyses often tend to focus on the independent 
contributions of one or more elements of the person-environment system. 
However, moment-to-moment analyses of changes in the person-environ-
ment system can illuminate how subtle and non-obvious coactions among 
system elements can create novel ways of thinking, acting and feeling” 
(Mascolo 2005, 186). Relational activity analysis provides a method for 
identifying the precise structure of joint action; it identifies which elements 

48 
Chapter 2
of the interaction are controlled by whom and also the coregulated scaf-
folding that occurs between actors. Coactive scaffolding occurs when ele-
ments of the person-environment system beyond the direct control of an 
individual direct or channel the construction of an action in novel or unan-
ticipated ways. However, it should be acknowledged that novelty is not 
unrestricted. In G. Bateson’s (1972) famous example of ecological scaffold-
ing of tree chopping, features of each element (e.g., musculature of chop-
per, weight of ax, radius of tree, etc.) all function as part of a feedback 
system. Each element exerts a constraint on the chopping process and thus 
functions as an integral part of the tree-chopping action. Feedback contin-
ues throughout the chopping action, introducing new constraints and 
channels for action. 
 Three varieties of coactive scaffolding have been identified, namely, 
social, ecological, and self-scaffolding (and all three are exemplified in the 
development of human emotionality, language acquisition, and symbolic 
thought). Social scaffolding refers to the process by which coregulated 
exchanges with other persons direct development in constrained direc-
tions. Ecological scaffolding refers to the ways in which one’s relation to, or 
position within, the broader physical and social ecology moves action 
toward novel forms. Any action necessarily occurs within the broader phys-
ical and sociocultural context that provides feedback to individual action or 
otherwise constrains and directs others (G. Bateson 1972; Wertsch 1998). 
Self-scaffolding refers to the ways in which an agent directly or indirectly 
changes the environment to suggest new meanings or cognitive operations, 
for instance, moving individual tiles to assist in the compilation of words 
in the game of Scrabble.  
 2.9   Basic Emotion and Emotion as Natural Kind 
 2.9.1   What Emotions Are Basic? 
 The debates concerning the nature and relationship of BEs and HCEs fuel 
two further debates concerning the emotions. These are the basicality or 
nonbasicality of the emotions and their natural-kind status. Theorists who 
favor a blending or subsumption of certain emotion categories, that is, the 
unity theory adherents, also tend to favor the basic–nonbasic distinction 
and the natural-kind status of the emotions (e.g., Prinz 2004). Such theo-
rists consider that there is a privileged set of basic emotions from which 

Theories of Emotion 
49
others are derived. Those who consider BEs and HCEs too different and too 
diverse to blend or subsume, that is, the disunity theory adherents, tend to 
reject the basic–nonbasic distinction and claims to natural-kind status (e.g., 
Griffiths 1997). Such theorists deny that there is a privileged set of basic 
emotions from which others are derived. 
 There are three ways to characterize basicality: 
 • 
 Psychologically primitive (Ortony and Turner 1990), which construes 
basic emotions as only those that are not derived in any way from 
other emotions.  
 • 
 Biologically primitive (Ortony and Turner 1990), which construes basic 
emotions as being innate or present in all normally developing mem-
bers of a species.  
 • 
 Emotions for which dedicated neuroanatomical regions and neuro-
chemicals can be identified (Panksepp 2000).  
 Panksepp’s view is intuitively attractive in that dedicated neural circuitry 
could be considered as evidence of innate endowment and nonderivative-
ness. Unfortunately, however, one familiar feature of neural networks is 
that different states can supervene on distinct patterns of activation across 
the same population of neurons. 
 Theorists who favor the idea of basic emotions unanimously identify 
the affect programs as psychologically and biologically primitive. 6 
Griffiths (1997) has been the most trenchant critic of the basicality 
thesis; he has vehemently denied that HCEs (e.g., guilt, jealousy) have 
BE components. As I have just noted, however, this position has been 
strongly challenged by J. Clark’s (2010) theory of serial homology (and I 
have already noted, in chap. 1, Griffiths’s [2003] and Griffiths and Scaran-
tino’s [2009] more recent concessions concerning the relationship of BEs to 
HCEs and how this might usefully be discussed within a common theoreti-
cal framework).  
 2.9.2   Are Emotions Natural Kinds? 
 The answer to this question will be affirmative if it can be shown that all 
emotions are or are derived from basic emotions. If emotions do not form a 
natural kind, as disunity theorists opine, there can be no single science of 
the emotions. Different explanatory frameworks will be required to explain 
different emotion categories. 

50 
Chapter 2
 A natural kind is generally construed (obviously) to be a “natural” phe-
nomenon in that its boundaries derive from nature and not from the way 
human beings choose to classify such phenomena. Nature has its own 
inbuilt “joints,” and it is the business of science to identify them (Prinz 
2004, 80). For example, lions, tigers, bears, water, gold, and the planets, and 
so on and so forth, are natural kinds. Good manners, poor arguments, and 
beautiful horses are not. 
 Philosophers disagree on what precisely distinguishes natural kinds from 
nonnatural kinds. There are at least two opposing views. The first view is 
Kripke’s (1980), who insists that members of a natural kind all share a com-
mon underlying essence. All dogs are dogs, in this account, in virtue of 
sharing a common canine genome; all samples of water are water in that 
they are composed of H 2 O molecules. The underlying essence in Kripke’s 
natural kinds, therefore, is a function of fixed properties. The underlying 
common-essence theory, however, is difficult to apply to certain other (nat-
ural) categories. Rivers, for instance, may not be composed of identical 
materials. 
 The second view is that of Boyd (1989, 1993), who has a more liberal 
construal of natural kinds. He includes homeostatic property cluster phe-
nomena, which typify complex, relational, and functional kinds like bio-
logical, psychological, and social kinds. The properties of such kinds are 
never fixed; they can be lost or gained through a change in the kind’s rela-
tions or in the context in which the kind exists or occurs. Biological kinds 
are essentially what they are in virtue of the interaction of morphology, 
physiology, and behavior (Boyd 1993). Species, for instance, are necessarily 
indeterminate; each species is an intermediate between its parent species 
and its emerging daughter species. The example of species is instructive; 
they typically show variation, not in some peripheral subset of their fea-
tures but in all of them. No character, however central to our stereotype of 
that species, to its morphology, or to its genotype, is essential for an indi-
vidual organism to be a member of the species. Tigers exist without stripes, 
calves are born with two heads, and Down syndrome sufferers are human 
despite an additional chromosome. Biological kinds, therefore, are homeo-
static property cluster kinds. Homeostatic mechanisms bring about the co-
occurrence of their properties in nature. Some properties of the cluster kind 
must be present for the cluster kind to be that kind, but not all the cluster 
properties must be present for the cluster kind to be that kind, unlike H 2 O 

Theories of Emotion 
51
and water (Greenwood and Bonner 2008). The account of human emo-
tional ontogenesis provided in this monograph demonstrates clearly that 
emotions are homeostatic property cluster natural kinds. 
 BEs and HCEs form a natural kind because they are serial homologues. 
They are homologues in that their shared line of inheritance accounts for 
the various deep commonalities in their underlying mechanisms at various 
levels of organization, including genetic, ontogenetic, physiologic, behav-
ioral, computational, and others (J. Clark 2010, 84–85). In addition, they 
are homologues when assessed against Remane’s (1952) operational criteria 
for identifying and testing the homologues of higher-level traits. 7 These 
criteria are the following: 
 (i)   Position : the spatiotemporal position or functional role of traits within 
a more general pattern of organization.  
 (ii)   Special quality : the complexity, distinctiveness, or specialization of the 
traits (which makes it less likely that they evolved separately).  
 (iii)   Continuity : the presence of an evolutionary continuum of properties, 
from a simpler and more productive state to a more complex and 
derived state of the trait.  
 (iv)   Shared developmental pathways : the use of two common developmental 
mechanisms or constraints to establish the traits (J. Clark 2010, 84).  
 Clark’s analyses relate to evolutionary time, of course, and he argues that 
both BE and HCE shame and pride are natural kinds. The account of human 
emotional ontogenesis I present in this monograph relates (of course) to a 
lifetime, but as will become obvious, human emotional ontogeny mirrors 
human emotional evolution. My account, however, differs in that it con-
strues emotion precursors as basic (in all three senses of Ortony and Turner 
1990).  
 2.10   Summary 
 Emotions are still consensually considered to fall into two basic and distinct 
groups, despite recent challenges to this view. The two groups are basic 
emotions (BEs) and higher cognitive emotions (HCEs). BEs are character-
ized as genetically hardwired, as homologous to similar devices in other 
mammalian species, and as involving relatively stereotypical physiological, 
behavioral, and expressive patterns. In addition, they are also construed as 

52 
Chapter 2
relatively modularized and as activated by simple, unconditioned stimuli; 
they can also be activated by conditioned stimuli through learning. In con-
trast, HCEs are considered to be uniquely human; to lack unconditioned 
stimuli activation and stereotypical physiological, behavioral, and expres-
sive features; and to vary culturally. 
 In both philosophy and psychology of emotion, theorists focus almost 
exclusively on full adult emotionality, construe emotions as operating pri-
marily in individual psychological economies, and variously claim that 
emotions are or essentially involve cognitions, feelings, or action tenden-
cies. In addition, they claim that they are either predominantly hardwired 
or socially constructed. Each view has merit, but none is adequate to explain 
the enormous complexity of human emotion. In chapter 4, I argue that 
emotions are essentially expressive-communicative devices that operate 
primarily in social economies, and both BEs and HCEs are language depen-
dent. In addition, I argue that biology and culture interact continuously in 
human emotional ontogenesis.  

 3  Metaphysics and Mind 
 3.1   Introduction 
 In this chapter, using the lens of metaphysical realization, I focus on the 
contingent intracranialist–transcranialist debate. The term  contingent intra-
cranialism is due to Adams and Aizawa (2001, 48), who claim that it is a 
contingent empirical fact that cognition takes place exclusively in the head; 
Extended Mind theorists, hereafter termed  contingent transcranialists (CTs; 
see chap. 1) disagree. As I noted in chapter 1, intracranialists accept that a 
great deal of cognition is heavily scaffolded by extracranial technological, 
natural, and sociocultural resources; it is the metaphysics of transcranialism 
with which they take issue. Indeed, they now claim that (i) the thesis of CT 
fallaciously conflates causal coupling with constitution, (ii) CT advocates 
fail to recognize the “mark of the cognitive,” and (iii) these errors lead to 
methodological error. They also allege that the differences between internal 
and putative external processes are so marked that even transcranialists 
“maintain that cognition extends from brains into the extraorganismal 
world rather than from the extraorganismal world into brains” (Adams and 
Aizawa 2009, 92). I argue in this and subsequent chapters that the contin-
gent intracranialists are mistaken on all four counts. I begin my rebuttal of 
the putative causal-constitution fallacy in this chapter and continue it in 
chapters 4 and 5. 
 As previously noted, my analytic device for this task is that of meta-
physical realization, specifically, R. A. Wilson’s (2004) views on context-
sensitive realization. Given this, “context” from my three Cs (see chap. 1) 
features strongly. The context-sensitive view is the only one compatible 
with the theories of emotional and language development that I subse-
quently construct. I apply this device to two augmentations that 

54 
Chapter 3
transcranialists claim can extend cognitive systems, namely, technological 
and natural environmental resources, and I identify their component par-
tial realizers, that is, core and noncore realizers in their total realizer sys-
tems. This allows me to demonstrate their bona fide mind-to-world 
transcranialism. 
 I include discussions of technological augmentations (e.g., a rake, which 
seems, prima facie, to be an unlikely candidate for inclusion in an extended 
cognitive system) and natural environmental augmentations (e.g., environ-
mental objects), although they may appear strictly irrelevant to analyses 
concerning human emotionality. I include them for two reasons. The first 
is to establish that CT, in principle, extends over a range of different extra-
personal resources. Thus if CT, in general, is a flawed hypothesis, then CT 
regarding emotion, in particular, will be flawed. The second is because sac-
cadic vision is highly influential, even indispensable, in language process-
ing (see chap. 7), and this is highly germane to human emotionality. I argue 
that both of these augmentations are widely metaphysically realized; that 
is, they do involve a heterogeneous mix of intracranial and extracranial 
resources. 
 I contextualize my discussion of metaphysical realization by briefly 
reviewing the history of the individualist (intracranialist)–externalist (tran-
scranialist) debate and contextualize the analyses included in the chapter as 
a whole by commencing with some introductory remarks concerning 
embodied, embedded, and extended cognition, all considered “species” of 
the “genus” situated cognition (Robbins and Aydede 2009, 3). I conclude 
the chapter with a comparative analysis of Rupert’s (2004) hypothesis of 
extended cognition (HEC) and hypothesis of embedded cognition (HEMC). 
This provides a useful summary of the contemporary debate and a further 
opportunity to rebut some of the intracranialists’ objections. I leave my 
rebuttal of the “mark of the cognitive” objection until chapter 6, where I 
marshal arguments against it.  
 3.2   Situated Cognition 
 According to situated cognitivist theory, mental activity is dependent on 
the situation or context in which it takes place, whether that situation be 
local (e.g., embodiment thesis) or more global (e.g., embedding and exten-
sion theses). These different “species” are more or less radical in both what 

Metaphysics and Mind 
55
structures and resources they construe as involved in cognition and how 
they are involved. Embodied cognition construes perceptual, cognitive, 
and motor capacities as dependent on features of the physical body, and 
embedded cognition construes cognition as heavily dependent on the nat-
ural and social environment insofar as a range of natural, technological, 
and sociocultural resources scaffold cognition (R. Wilson and Clark 2009). 
It is important to note, however, that both of these construals capture the 
explanatory importance of cognition’s bodily and environmental depen-
dence but do not commit to any constitution claims. Extended cognition, 
in contrast, is committed to constitution claims. Extended cognition, 
which includes vehicle or locational externalism, most recently termed 
contingent transcranialism (CT), claims, as the name implies, that genu-
inely cognitive processes and structures can extend beyond the skin and 
skull of the cognizing agent into her physical, sociocultural, and techno-
logical environments. These CT constitutivity claims depend, in turn, on 
claims that internal neural resources are deeply functionally integrated, to 
differing degrees, with these extraorganismic resources. In short, the theory 
of CT construes the supervenience base of genuinely cognitive processes 
and structures as sometimes extending into nonneural resources in the 
extraorganismal environment. According to this view, the metaphysical 
realization of such processes and structures is ineliminably context 
sensitive.  
 3.3   Embodied, Embedded, and Extended Cognition (CT) 
 As indicated earlier, these are differing species of the genus situated cogni-
tion, and as species, they differ in important respects. 
 3.3.1   Embodied and Embedded Cognition 
 Many forms of cognition are embodied in that they depend deeply on fea-
tures of the individual’s physical body; the body plays some significant 
causal or constitutive role in cognitive processes. These causal or constitu-
tive processes take three forms, namely, to constrain, to distribute, or to 
regulate cognitive activity (R. Wilson and Foglia 2011). More germane to 
my focus in this book, however, is embedded cognition where “cognitive 
processes depend  very heavily, in hitherto unexpected ways, on organismi-
cally external props and devices and on the structures of the external 

56 
Chapter 3
environment in which cognition takes place” (Rupert 2004, 393; his italics). 
Both intracranialists and transcranialists agree; where they differ is in their 
construal of the role of such external structures and devices. Intracranialists 
insist that such causally active structures and processes in the environment 
influence or act merely as input into intracranial cognitive processing 
(Adams and Aizawa 2001, 2008, 2009, 2010a, 2010b; Rupert 2004). These 
external structures and processes are never constitutive, that is, compo-
nents of genuinely cognitive systems. What this implies is that transcrani-
alists who argue that some cognitive activity is constituted by active features 
of the environment (e.g., Menary 2007, 2010) confuse the external causes 
of cognition with the external constituents of it. Although there are reasons 
to consider embodied and embedded cognition as leading to, or shading 
into, extended cognition, for example, in visual perception (A. Clark 1997), 
they are both entirely compatible with the denial of extended cognition. 
Both are compatible with neural and nonneural components being involved 
in inside-the-skin cognition.  
 3.3.2   Extended Cognition (Contingent Transcranialism [CT]) 
 Extended cognition “occurs when internal and external resources become 
fluently tuned and integrated so as to enable the larger system—the biologi-
cal agent and specific items of cognitive scaffolding—to engage in new 
forms of intelligent problem-solving” (R. Wilson and Clark 2009, 64). That 
is, CT “appropriates and integrates material resources around one into pre-
existing cognitive structures. In cognition, agents modify or augment the 
capacities that those pre-existing structures enable” (58). Such modifica-
tions and augmentations differ in both their nature and their reliability and 
durability. In terms of their nature, they can be (i) natural or environmen-
tal, for example, where objects in the world are interacted with directly, as 
in visual perception; (ii) technological, for example, a rake; and (iii) socio-
cultural, for example, the close, linguistically mediated social relationship 
of neonate and caregiver. In terms of durability and reliability, they can 
range from (almost) permanent, for example, as in the development of 
new, or the elaboration of existing, neural circuits; or they can be tempo-
rary but repeated, fleetingly, time and time again, as in saccadic vision. 
 Arguments supporting CT have occurred in three waves (Cash 2013; 
Kirchhoff 2012). The first wave focused on functional parity; if the informa-
tion encoded and retrieved from an external source, such as Otto’s note-
book (A. Clark and Chalmers 1998), was as easy to retrieve, as reliable, and 

Metaphysics and Mind 
57
as poised for automatic deployment as biologically encoded information, 
then it should be accorded similar status. Intracranialists disagree; what 
parity transcranialists construe as functional parity and CT, intracranialists 
construe as fallaciously conflating coupling with constitution. This fallacy, 
according to Adams and Aizawa (2009, 81), is to move from the causal cou-
pling of some object or process to some cognitive agent to the conclusion 
that the object or process is part of the cognitive agent’s processing: “What 
is common to these arguments is a tacit move from the observation that 
process X is in some way causally connected (coupled) to cognitive agent Y 
to the conclusion that X is part of the cognitive process Y.” 
 Their claim, however, ignores the fact that no transcranialist has ever 
claimed that just any coupling of a cognitive agent to a noncognitive extra-
organismic tool constitutes a cognitive system or agent, as the identifica-
tion of Clark’s parity criteria bears witness. 
 The second-wave arguments focus on the complementarity of the inter-
nal and external resources and their consequent integration into cognitive 
wholes (Menary 2007, 2010). Clearly what this implies, as Clark (2010) 
observes, is that CT depends on the degree of complementarity between 
internal and external resources and their degree of integration. If there is 
sufficient functional complementarity and integration, then it is plausible 
to treat the resultant larger system as a cognitive whole, with cognitive 
properties supervening on more than their biological components. Leading 
transcranialists (A. Clark 2008; Menary 2007; R. Wilson 2004) all claim that 
deep functional integration of nonneural resources in information process-
ing is prerequisite to the formation of extended cognitive systems.  
 Third-wave arguments claim that both first and second waves imply the 
existence of distinct inner and outer realms, each with its own proprietary 
characteristics (see chap. 1). Third-wave theorists construe component 
structures, processes, and properties as continually changing in the process 
of cognitive assembly and agency. It will be clear from my analyses in the 
chapters that follow that my views are broadly consistent with those of the 
third wave.  
 3.4  Deep Functional Integration 
 It is important to note that the differing resources that transcranialists 
claim can augment cognitive systems do not function merely as inputs to 
such systems, as intracranialists insist. Rather, they augment, that is, alter 

58 
Chapter 3
the system by becoming deeply functionally integrated into what becomes 
an altered system. The distinction, it is claimed, is “intuitive enough, even 
if it is one that has been surprisingly difficult to pin down. … The  degree and 
complexity of the integration is obviously implicated as is the goal or pur-
pose of the system” in question (R. Wilson and Clark 2009, 63; my italics). 
They use the example of a radio, the purpose of which is to receive, decode, 
and play contents borne by radio signals. Anything that helps the radio to 
perform these functions better, such as a better transistor or signal ampli-
fier, “looks like an augmentation of the system rather than mere input. This 
is so whether the additional transistor or amplifier falls inside the pre-
existing boundaries of the radio or lies beyond them.” 
 This characterization, too, fails to pin down the distinction between aug-
mentation and input, although it does get close. It also fails to answer the 
intracranialist challenge. Wilson and Clark (2009) are correct in suggesting 
that augmentations that improve function involve, because they necessar-
ily must, some sort of alteration in structure and in processing. Radio aug-
mentations in the form of new transistors and new signal amplifiers alter 
radio structure. The same is true of some cognitive augmentation: cognitive 
augmentations change neural structures in some way whether such aug-
mentation is natural, sociocultural, or technological in nature. Intracranial-
ists deny that this is augmentation, however; as noted previously, they 
readily concede that intracranial and extracranial resources can be deeply 
functionally integrated yet resist the further move to CT. They claim that 
such augmentations very heavily scaffold intracranial cognition but remain 
merely as causal inputs to it. 
 In my view, the move from DFI to CT does depend on the degree and 
complexity of functional complementarity and integration, as Wilson and 
Clark (2009) suggest, but this characterization is insufficiently precise. DFI 
and CT occur when the degree and complexity of functional complementa-
rity and integration in extended cognitive systems are such that the inter-
nal and external components of the system function synchronically as a 
whole, producing effects resulting only from the system functioning syn-
chronically as a whole. The more deeply functionally integrated extraor-
ganismal resources are with intraorganismal ones, the more the system will 
function as a whole, and the more effects it will produce only by function-
ing as a whole. Inevitably, therefore, there will be cases of functional inte-
gration that are relatively stronger and relatively weaker in terms of 

Metaphysics and Mind 
59
complementarity, complexity, and integration. This will be particularly true 
when DFI results from a progressive developmental trajectory that depends 
on the development, maturation, and connection of neural substrata. In 
such cases, the functional integration of intraorganismal and extraorganis-
mal components has to be triggered initially and then developed through 
processes in which functional complementarity, complexity, and integra-
tion are progressively increased. The process of emotional ontogenesis I 
describe in chapter 4 is instructive in this respect. 
 As noted earlier, the arguments of contingent intra- and transcranialists 
relate to the metaphysical realization of genuinely cognitive structures and 
processes. Before discussing forms that putative cognitive augmentations 
can take, therefore, I address the contemporary views and contextualize 
them in some brief introductory comments concerning individualism and 
externalism.  
 3.5  Individualism and Externalism: A Short, Potted History 
 One of the current orthodoxies in philosophy of emotion is that emotions 
occur at the interface of our internal concerns and the outer environment 
and, as such, are essentially what they are in virtue of their relational and 
functional properties. This orthodoxy, however, conceals what continues to 
be a deep division in philosophy of mind, that is, the division between 
individualists-intracranialists and externalists-transcranialists in terms of 
both metaphysical determination and how psychological states should be 
taxonomized and individuated. Very briefly, individualism arose as a means 
of “disciplining” psychology (R. Wilson 2004), that is, of establishing the 
conceptual, methodological, and institutional foundations for a science of 
psychology, distinct from philosophy and physiology from which it 
emerged (and from sociology, which was being “disciplined” at about the 
same time). Individualism was seen as a means of rendering psychology 
scientifically respectable. Individualism began as a normative constraint on 
psychological methodology, the principles of which were thought to be 
derived from the most successful explanatory practices in science. Such 
practices taxonomized their targets of investigation as supervening on the 
intrinsic physical properties of the individual object or organism that 
instantiated them. 

60 
Chapter 3
 This is “methodological solipsism” (Putnam 1975) and requires that psy-
chological states be construed without reference to anything that falls out-
side the boundary of the individual who bears them. The motivation 
behind methodological solipsism was (and remains) twofold: it reflects the 
standard view (see hereafter) that (i) no psychological change can occur 
without some accompanying physical change in cognizing individuals; and 
(ii) how a cognizer conceives the world determines content, not how the 
world actually is (Bach 1982). For example, one can think of nonexistent 
things, of things and events long past, and of things and events yet to hap-
pen. According to methodological solipsism, approaches to cognitive 
science that are not individualistic are both methodologically and meta-
physically misguided. They are methodologically misguided because the 
most explanatorily successful research paradigms in cognitive science and 
the sciences more generally have been individualistic, such as computa-
tional approaches to cognition and the taxonomizing of phenomena in 
science more generally according to their causal powers (which are a func-
tion of their intrinsic physical states). Contingent intracranialists, such as 
Adams and Aizawa (2001) and Rupert (2004), make precisely this claim. 
Nonindividualistic approaches are metaphysically suspect in that they 
must either (a) relinquish the most important contemporary insight into 
mental causation, that is, that cognition is computational, or (b) accept 
that the mind is not governed by principles that apply more generally to 
the physical world, such as supervenience on intrinsic physical properties 
(R. Wilson 2004, 13). 
 Individualists and externalists agree that agents causally interact with (a) 
their physical environments to collect information regarding it, using their 
different sensory apparatuses, and (b) their social environments, gathering 
information from their communicative interactions with others (R. Wilson 
2004). The nature of their minds, therefore, and in particular the intention-
ality of their mental states, is at least partly causally determined by the 
character of their physical and social environments. In this account, the 
environment causally contributes to the contents of mind, in terms of what 
is perceived, thought about, and desired. Where they differ is that individu-
alists insist that differences in the world cause some corresponding change 
in physical brain states, which give rise to differences in content, whereas 
externalists deny this. They insist that physically identical doppelgängers 
could have brain states with different content (and given that mental states 

Metaphysics and Mind 
61
with different content are ipso facto different types of states, their bearer’s 
intrinsic physical states do not fix or determine her mental states). 
 The classic Putnam–Burge thought experiments of the 1970s sought to 
challenge individualism by demonstrating, respectively, the centrality of 
natural kinds and sociality to mental content. Taxonomic externalism arose 
as a result of these challenges; it continued to construe content-laden men-
tal states as being internal to the individual who bore them, but allowed 
that they were not metaphysically determined (i.e., did not supervene on) 
the intrinsic physical states of the individual agent. 
 Putnam (1975) exploited the limitations of the descriptive theory of 
meaning of natural-kind terms to expose the limitations of individualism 
(R. Wilson 2004). Oscar, who lives on Earth, interacts with water on a daily 
basis; he drinks it, washes in it, and sees it fall from the clouds as rain. He 
has no conception of its molecular constitution; he describes it, therefore, 
as that which he drinks, washes in, and takes an umbrella to avoid. His dop-
pelgänger, Twin Oscar, lives on Twin Earth. Twin Earth is exactly the same 
constitutionally as Earth except that there is no H 2 O, only XYZ. XYZ is 
identical to water in appearance, taste, wetness, and so on. According to the 
descriptive theory of meaning, therefore, their terms  water should have the 
same reference, but clearly they do not. Both Oscar and Twin Oscar stand 
in the same relation to their respective environments; that is, Oscar’s water 
refers to water because it is drinkable, wet, and so on, and Twin Oscar’s 
water refers to Twin Water because it has the same perceptible characteris-
tics. What this means is that their natural-language terms differ in terms of 
reference despite the fact that their terms agree in their intracranial mean-
ing. The reference of natural-language terms, therefore, is not fixed or meta-
physically determined by what is in the head of cognizers; rather, it is fixed 
a posteriori by discovering the appropriate atomic constitution. 
 Burge’s (1979) thought experiment does not rely on the semantics of 
natural-kind terms; it relies, rather, on construals regarding natural-
language comprehension. Burge argues that we can and do possess incom-
plete understanding of the many things we think about and for which we 
have natural-language terms. Bert, for example, has incomplete under-
standing of arthritis; he thinks he has arthritis in his thigh muscle, that is, 
he thinks that arthritis is a disease of joints and muscles. In the actual lin-
guistic community that Bert resides in, however, arthritis is a disease con-
fined to joints, and this means that Bert harbors a false belief. In a 

62 
Chapter 3
counterfactual world, however, where arthritis does refer to a disease of 
both joints and muscles, Bert’s belief would be true. This is interesting 
because Bert is physically identical in both worlds but has thoughts with 
differing contents. The linguistic community in which one is embedded, 
therefore, and not the intrinsic physical states of their bearer, metaphysi-
cally determines the content of one’s mental states. 
 As previously indicated, the present debate more typically focuses on 
more radical species of externalism; these tend to subsume embodiment, 
enactivism, and distributed cognition (see above) and are variously classi-
fied as extended mind externalism (A. Clark and Chalmers 1998), vehicle 
externalism (Hurley 1998; M. Rowlands 2003, 2006), active externalism (A. 
Clark and Chalmers 1998), locational externalism (R. Wilson 2004), and 
environmental externalism (M. Rowlands 2003). 1 All of these explicitly rec-
ognize that the vehicles of mental content can include beyond-the-head 
relations and structures and, as noted earlier, are species of situated 
cognition. 
 Two important points are worth emphasizing. First, the theory of situ-
ated cognition is an ontological thesis, that is, a thesis of what mental pro-
cesses are. (Of course, the thesis has epistemological implications insofar as 
understanding the nature of at least some mental processes depends on 
understanding an individual’s manipulative, exploitative, and transforma-
tive operations on her environment.) Second, the deep functional integra-
tion of a range of nonneural resources into cognitive systems is always only 
partially constitutive of mental processes. There is always an ineliminable 
individualistic component, neural and bodily, in the constitution of mental 
processes (R. Wilson 2004; A. Clark 2008; M. Rowlands 2003).  
 3.6   Metaphysical Realization 
 The concept of realization (or, more accurately, realization physicalism; see 
Polger 2007) became a term of art in the 1970s through the work of Putnam 
(1975), for example, when it was introduced to formulate functionalism, 
that is, as a means of best characterizing mental roles. Early attempts used 
abstract computational specifications, later attempts used causal specifica-
tions, and still others used evolutionary specifications (Polger 2004). What 
these differing characterizations shared was the relational specification of 
roles in terms of input, interaction with other brain states, and outputs. For 

Metaphysics and Mind 
63
example, for my amygdala to realize the emotion of fear is for it to enter 
into relations with other brain states and the world through appropriate 
sensory-perceptual and motor mechanisms. Given the relational specifica-
tion of roles, Polger (2007, 251) suggests that realization should be con-
strued in terms of roles: “To occupy a role is to have relations that are 
distinctive of the role.” In short, the realizer role of a property or state is to 
have the function of producing it: 
 R realizes G if R has the G function, if it plays the G role. 
 A group of neurons, for example, realizes the property of being an amyg-
dala if it has the function of producing the emotion of fear. 
 The realization theory of mind began as the thesis that the brain should 
be understood as a computing machine, and the mind as a program or set 
of programs. This thesis reflects the view that computers implement or real-
ize the programs or algorithms they run. Certain electrical states of the 
device realize computational states; the electrical activity of the device is 
not identical to any program state of Microsoft Word, but it implements or 
realizes such program states (Polger 2007, 236). In exactly the same way, it 
was claimed, mental properties are realized by physicochemical brain states 
but are not identical to them. Despite the importance of this claim, how-
ever, some scholars argue that realization has received little serious atten-
tion until recently (Polger 2004, 2007; R. Wilson 2001, 2004). 
 Realization is a relation of metaphysical determination (R. Wilson 2004, 
2001); realizers determine the relevant realized properties. In Shapiro’s 
(2004, 35–36) terms, a realizer R realizes kind K when K’s existence depends 
on R and they exist synchronically. In other words, it is in virtue of R that 
K exists simultaneously with R. It is a “kind of compositional relation” (35) 
rather than a causal relation where the relation of R to K would typically be 
diachronic. Any adequate account of the realization of mental states must 
be able to account for the psychological, computational, and mechanical 
levels of realization. Today there are two views of realization physicalism 
(Polger 2007), namely, the standard view and the context-sensitive view. 
The standard view is espoused by intracranialists, and the context-sensitive 
view by transcranialists. I discuss these views in the following sections. The 
context-sensitive view, it is claimed, does more justice to the concept of 
realization operational in the biological, behavioral, and social sciences (R. 
Wilson 2004). 

64 
Chapter 3
 3.6.1   The Standard View of Realization 
 According to the standard view, realization is a two-place relation that 
holds between mental and physical states (R. Wilson 2001, 2004), where 
the physical states act as realizers for the mental. The intrinsic physical 
states of individuals, particularly of the central nervous system (CNS), 
exhaustively realize an individual’s mental states. The standard view of 
metaphysical realization thus includes both a sufficiency and a constitutiv-
ity thesis: 
 (i)   Sufficiency thesis : realizers are metaphysically sufficient for the proper-
ties or states they realize.  
 (ii)   Constitutivity thesis : realizers of states and properties are exhaustively 
physically constituted by the intrinsic physical states of the individual 
whose states or properties they are (R. Wilson 2001, 4–5).  
 It is the conjunction of the sufficiency and constitutivity theses for at 
least a variety of properties and states, including mental ones, that Wilson 
(2001, 6) challenges: 
 The sufficiency and constitutivity theses are not always true of the same putative 
realizers. Often the realizations that are metaphysically sufficient for the properties 
they realize are not exclusively physical constituents of individuals with those prop-
erties; conversely, sometimes the physical constitution of an individual with a given 
property is not metaphysically sufficient for that property to be present. Mental 
properties are no exception here.  
 The reason that the conjunction of sufficiency and constitutivity theses is 
often untrue of the same putative realizers, as previously indicated, is 
because realization is irreducibly context sensitive.  
 3.6.2   The Context-Sensitive View of Realization 
 Realizer systems of mental states are (obviously) metaphysically sufficient 
for the properties and states that they instantiate and can be either (i) entity 
bound, that is, confined within the boundary (skull and skin) of the cogniz-
ing individual, or (ii) widely realized, that is, extending beyond the bound-
ary (skull and skin) of the cognizing individual, into her physical and social 
environments. In addition, both involve, in differentially extended con-
figurations, nested contributory realizer components, termed  partial realiz-
ers . The realizer systems that are metaphysically sufficient for the properties 
they instantiate are termed  total realizer systems , and these include or 

Metaphysics and Mind 
65
contextually embed two types of partial realizers, which are termed  core 
realizers and  noncore realizers (to be defined below). Total realizer systems are 
also contextually embedded in a range of relevant background conditions, 
and this general contextual embeddedness points to the ineliminable role 
of context sensitivity in realization, both in general and in philosophy of 
mind, in particular (Hurley 1998; R. Wilson 2004). Take the adult experi-
ence of fear, for example: its core realizer is considered, by scholars of a 
somaticist-feeling persuasion, to be the amygdala because they view it as 
the specific part of the central nervous system most readily identified as 
playing a crucial causal role in producing or sustaining the experience of 
fear (R. Wilson 2004). They consider the amygdala to be the core realizer 
because they believe that its ablation or lesion eliminates or reduces emo-
tional response. I argue in the sections that follow that they are correct in 
identifying the amygdala as core in adult emotionality but mistaken in 
terms of emotional ontogenesis. The process of emotional ontogenesis in 
human beings results in the development, maturation, and connection of 
the neural circuits, including the amygdala, which are the eventual bases of 
adult emotional experience. The core realizer in each case, that is, in emo-
tional ontogenesis and adult emotional experience, differs. 
 This is important, for it points to the nature of core realizers; what is 
identified as core in any realizer system is a function of the conceptual or 
theoretical preferences of relevant scientists. Core realizers, therefore, are 
epistemically sensitive (R. Wilson 2004). Scholars of a distinctly cognitivist 
persuasion deny that the amygdala is the core realizer; they consider bodily 
and behavioral responses neither necessary nor sufficient for emotional 
experience. What is necessary for cognitivist philosophers and psycholo-
gists is a judgment or thought that something in the cognizer’s environ-
ment (internal or external) is frightening (see chap. 2). 
 Two points concerning core realizers are worth emphasizing here. The 
first is that whatever core realizer is identified in any total realizer system, 
it is still only a partial realizer (Shoemaker 1984), because it must receive, at 
the least, some excitatory sensory-perceptual input. The amygdala, for 
instance, is activated by sensory input from thalamus and cortex, and with-
out this input there would be no amygdala activation (Bush, Schafe, and Le 
Doux 2009). The second point is that, irrespective of conceptual disposi-
tion, core realizers are considered to provide the necessary conditions for 
emotionality. However, as partial realizers, they are not sufficient. When an 

66 
Chapter 3
individual adult is experiencing fear, as just indicated, other parts of her 
CNS (i.e., other partial realizers, such as the thalamus and cortex) are acti-
vated, and their activation is critical for amygdala stimulation to play the 
causal role that it does. 
 In sum, thus far: any property P is realized in a total system S that 
includes both core realizers and noncore realizers: 
 (a)  Core realization of P: a state of the specific part of S that is most readily 
identifiable as playing a crucial role in producing or sustaining P.  
 (b)  Total realization of P: a state of S, containing any given core realization 
and noncore realizations as proper parts, that is metaphysically suffi-
cient for P (R. Wilson 2004, 108).  
 Rather more specifically: in the adult experience of fear, the total system, 
S, which realizes the property of fear, P, is the fear system, which contains, 
inter alia, receptors in different sensory-perceptual systems, particularly the 
retina, optic nerve, cortex, nuclei in the thalamus, amygdala, hypothala-
mus, medulla, and a range of neuroendocrine hormones. Fear (P) is a prop-
erty experienced by some individual adult as a whole, but the total realizer 
(S) need not be identical to that adult, merely part of her. In terms of fear, 
for instance, the total realizer (S) excludes any properties of the individual 
who bears S that are not partial realizers of fear, such as her toenails or 
patellae. “Total realisations of P are exhaustively constituted by a core reali-
sation of P plus … the non-core part of the total realisation” (R. Wilson 
2004, 109). Noncore components of total realizers include the other parts 
of entities that are part of S; I have just noted that in the fear system, these 
include optic nerve, cortex, and so on. It is also important to acknowledge 
that other systems and processes that are not part of the total realization (S) 
are essential for the efficient functioning of S. These are a host of support-
ing background conditions that must obtain, for example, the provision of 
glucose and oxygen from digestive and respiratory systems, delivered to 
total realizer (S) by the circulatory system. Such background conditions are 
necessary for the efficient functioning of S and, indeed, for the efficient 
functioning of all body systems. Their input is necessary to develop and 
sustain total realizer systems such as S, but they are not part of S. Given 
their necessary input into the physical states constituting a total realiza-
tion, however, it is, strictly speaking, total realizer systems plus background 

Metaphysics and Mind 
67
conditions that metaphysically suffice for P. In this account, even total real-
izations are metaphysically context sensitive. 
 Note that the maturation and connection of the fear system and the 
elicitation of fear, whatever else they are or involve, are both primarily 
mechanisms. Clearly, as the foregoing description of the components of the 
fear system demonstrates, they depend on a whole range of submechanisms 
(e.g., retinal cone stimulation, optic nerve depolarization, etc.) to operate as 
they should. In addition, as the description of the fear system’s components 
also illustrates, they involve material entities (e.g., populations of neurons), 
but these crucially depend on certain spatial relations obtaining between 
them and their activation according to the correct temporal sequence (R. 
Wilson and Craver 2007). The fear system is composed of a hierarchy of 
mechanisms and submechanisms that are organized spatially and tempo-
rally to perform specific functions and subfunctions. I will argue, for exam-
ple, in chapters 4 and 5, that submechanisms in the neonate are responsible 
for the unfocused crying and motor unrest (i.e., assistance-soliciting 
devices) associated with absolute threshold deficit, and submechanisms in 
the caregiver are responsible for the various behavioral components of her 
search-and-identify responses (i.e., assistance-providing devices). Further 
submechanisms in the caregiver serve to fine-tune her own assistance-
providing devices, and these fine-tunings are fed back to the interacting 
neonate via further submechanisms to stimulate the maturation and con-
nection of her specific assistance-soliciting devices and, eventually, her 
assistance-providing devices. If any of these processes fail to operate, their 
failure must needs influence the operation of other mechanisms in the 
hierarchy (as lesion and ablation bear witness). 
 As previously indicated, there is yet another distinction to note with 
respect to total realizer systems; the core and noncore realizers they include 
can be either entity bound or wide. The distinction between entity-bound 
and wide realizations may be summarized in terms of the location of the 
noncore component of a total realization: 
 (c)   Entity-bound realization: a total realization of P whose noncore part is 
located entirely within the individual who has P.  
 (d)  Wide realization: a total realization of P whose noncore part is not 
located entirely within the individual who has P (R. Wilson 2004, 112).  

68 
Chapter 3
 In entity-bound total realizations, for example, spermatogenesis, both 
core and noncore partial realizers (e.g., testes, testosterone) are, as are all 
total realizations, metaphysically context sensitive. Spermatogenesis 
depends on a host of necessary background conditions, for instance, a sup-
ply of oxygen, but spermatogenesis takes place entirely within the bound-
aries of sexually mature (or maturing) males. Wide realizations, which 
include partial realizers that lie outside the boundaries of their possessors, 
are also metaphysically context sensitive, and for the same reasons, that is, 
the necessity of certain background conditions obtaining. I argue in chap-
ter 4 that human emotionality, including both emotional ontogenesis and 
adult emotional experience, is always widely realized; it is never simply 
entity bound, as intracranialists would assume. Wide realizations take two 
forms (R. Wilson 2004). In the first form, the total realizer system extends 
beyond the physical boundary of the subject that bears it; the core realizer, 
however, remains within the subject’s physical boundary. In the second 
form, that of radically wide realization, the core realizer extends or lies 
beyond the physical boundary of the subject. Minimally, therefore: 
 (e)  Radically wide realization: a total realization, the core realizer of which 
is not located entirely within the individual who possesses P (R. Wilson 
2004, 116).  
 Wilson suggests that social actions like writing a check are paradigmatic 
of such realizations. In cases like these, the mere signing of a piece of paper 
constitutes signing a check because it occurs in a particular social system or 
practice, that is, a banking system; had the paper signing gone on in a dif-
ferent social practice (its total realizer system), it would have constituted a 
different action, such as signing a legal contract, marriage license, and so 
on. In addition, in cases like these, the core realizer, the actual signing of 
the check, clearly lies outside the boundary of the signing individual. 
 Two objections are possible at this juncture. The first relates to the threat 
of irrealism (R. Wilson 2004, 137), and the second to the threat of wide 
individuals. 
 (i) The threat of irrealism  
 Following Wilson, I claimed earlier that metaphysical sufficiency requires 
both that some physical system be in a certain state (i.e., a total realizer 
state) and that certain background conditions obtain, in short, that total 

Metaphysics and Mind 
69
realizer systems are metaphysically context sensitive. This view of total real-
izers underpins the realism that this thesis reflects. It could be called into 
question, however, if one could argue that total realizers, just like the core 
realizers they include, are also epistemically sensitive (because then mental 
states may simply be states ascribed to individuals). Indeed, one might even 
claim that, given that core realizers are epistemically sensitive, the total 
realizers of which they are partial realizers are epistemically sensitive, too. 
This claim, however, rests on the assumption that total realizers inherit 
their epistemic sensitivity from constituent core realizers, and this is not 
the case. A total realizer of P can be defined simply as a state of S metaphysi-
cally sufficient for P, ignoring any further claims concerning putative core 
realizers (R. Wilson 2004). 
 To be a realist about mental properties is to be a realist about their total 
realizers at least, and thus about the systems with respect to which total 
realizers are defined (R. Wilson 2004). The distinction between background 
conditions and noncore parts of the total realizer, therefore, is required for 
realism. Yet one might reasonably object that it is never possible to define 
precisely the boundaries of a total realizer system and its background condi-
tions. Again, however, this is not the case. It is the case that the boundary 
between a total realizer system and its background conditions, in terms 
both of existence and of operation, can sometimes be unclear, but the indi-
viduation conditions for systems are highly constrained by the physical 
facts (R. Wilson 2004). For example, if the mammalian thorax were to be 
opened, the heart, great vessels, lungs, and pleura would be revealed, and 
scientists could choose to include the pleura, for instance, in the respiratory 
system and even the great vessels (at a stretch) or to view them as back-
ground conditions. It is how oxygen is taken into the body and carbon 
dioxide removed, however, that determines what, plus or minus extra com-
ponents, constitutes the respiratory system. Anatomists discovered, they 
did not invent, what constitutes the respiratory system. Similarly, cognitive 
scientists discover, they do not invent, what constitutes realizer systems for 
cognitive processes, be they entity bound or wide.  
 (ii) The possibility of wide individuals  
 If mental states can be wide, why can’t the individual bearers of such states 
themselves be wide? Quite simply because the characterization of realiza-
tion I am espousing here preserves the view that it is an individual I that 

70 
Chapter 3
possesses P even though S may be wide or radically wide (R. Wilson 2004). 
Fear is a property of individual animals even though it is widely realized, 
and my thought that I should exercise more regularly is my thought. We 
attribute properties to individual persons and animals that we would hesi-
tate to attribute to their component systems. Body systems have their own 
metaphysical constitution and have their own properties; they even con-
tribute to the metaphysical makeup of their bearers, but they are not the 
bearers of some of the properties that their individual bearers bear. Diges-
tive cells do not emote, plan, or grieve, but their individual bearers, in vir-
tue of their other hierarchically and complexly nested properties, do.  
 3.7   Technological Cognitive Augmentation 
 I noted earlier that the deep functional integration into extended cognitive 
systems of an extraorganismal tool, a rake, appeared prima facie highly 
unlikely; some research evidence, however, relating to primate tool use and 
human unilateral visual neglect suggests otherwise. 
 Primate brains include bimodal neurons (Maravita and Iriki 2004, 79) 
that respond both to somatosensory information from a given body region 
(the somatosensory receptive field [sRF]) and to visual information from 
the space adjacent to it (the visual receptive field [vRF]). In a series of exper-
iments, scientists recorded the bimodal neurons in the parietal cortex of 
Japanese macaques while the macaques learned to reach for food using a 
rake. After only five minutes of rake use, the experimenters discovered that 
some bimodal neurons whose original vRFs picked out stimuli near the 
hand had expanded to include the entire length of the tool, while others 
that previously responded to visual stimuli within the space reachable by 
the arm now had vRFs that covered the space accessible by the arm-rake 
combination. The researchers concluded that the vRFs responded to the 
rake as if it were part of the arm and forearm. Similar results have been 
found in human subjects suffering unilateral visual neglect where tool use 
(a stick) for reaching actually extends into the area of visual neglect to 
encompass the space now reachable using the stick. The researchers con-
cluded that “simply holding the stick causes a remapping of far space to 
near space. In effect, the brain, at least for some purposes, treats the stick as 
though it were part of the body” (Berti and Frassinetti 2000, 415). 

Metaphysics and Mind 
71
 In this case, the total realizer system of the foraging system includes 
partial realizers of the rake and the macaque’s body (minimally its hands, 
arms, shoulder, musculature, and nervous system) in terms of both neuro-
muscular and neurochemical supply and vRF. The core realizer in this case, 
that is, the part of the total realizer most readily identifiable as being cen-
trally implicated in acquiring the food, is the macaque’s hand-rake combi-
nation. Background conditions include all the circulatory, respiratory, and 
nutritional input into normal macaque physiology, plus the physical prox-
imity (accessibility) of the food. Remarkably, however, by treating the rake 
as an extension of the macaque’s natural arm, the macaque’s brain treats 
this extended arm as the core realizer of food acquisition. Given this, the 
macaque’s acquisition of the food is radically widely realized; the functional 
integration of internal neural and external technological resources could 
hardly be deeper. 
 In terms of locus of control, it has been suggested previously that the 
activities of macaques are controlled by enactive representations, and 
because of this, their locus of control, in terms of both triggering and execu-
tion, is shared between macaque and environment. I argue below that this 
is not the case, or not always the case for human beings. 
 Three points are worth noting at this juncture. The first is that such 
remappings and incorporations into body schemata might well explain the 
phenomenology of “tool expertise.” Expert nurses with wound probes and 
blind persons with white sticks (Merleau-Ponty 1962), for example, typi-
cally claim to feel wound abscesses and environmental objects, respectively, 
at the end of their probes and sticks. This feeling would follow from the 
brain seemingly treating the probes and sticks as extensions of the agent’s 
body. The second point is that such remappings and incorporations into 
body schemata tend to be only temporary, lasting only as long as tool-
using, goal-directed activity persists; in terms of my analysis, however, this 
time frame is irrelevant. If neurons respond to extraorganismic tools as 
deeply functionally integrated into body schemata  at all , as they clearly do, 
then they are deeply functionally integrated. Contingent intracranialists 
cannot object that this is just another example of very heavy Scaffolding 1, 
when the macaque’s brain treats the rake as an extended component or 
constituent, that is, constitutive of the macaque’s arm. 
 The last point relates to the comparative preadaptation of macaques and 
human beings to learn to fashion and, particularly, use artifacts in 

72 
Chapter 3
goal-directed activities. There can hardly be any comparison. Macaques are 
not preadapted to learn artifactual use to anywhere near the same extent as 
human beings. Their use of external physical objects is limited to the 
learned use of stones, sticks, and other natural objects found in their habi-
tats. Human beings, in contrast, learn not only to use but also to fashion a 
range of artifacts that are not naturally found in their habitats. If human 
beings really are biologically prepared for artifactual-assisted culture, then 
we should expect the DFI of extraorganismal and neural resources, to differ-
ing degrees, including DFI with CT, to typify distinctly human activity, and 
I argue hereafter that it does. Any activity or interactivity that is partly real-
ized transcranially exemplifies DFI with CT.  
 3.8   Natural Environmental Cognitive Augmentation 
 Research into visual perception provides compelling and remarkable evi-
dence of this type of natural environmental cognitive augmentation; the 
evidence I refer to concerns research into change blindness and saccadic 
vision. 
 In change blindness, even extremely large changes in a visual scene, 
such as objects changing color or appearing and disappearing, go unno-
ticed, provided that the actual change is masked or the observer is not pay-
ing attention (Rensink, O’Regan, and Clark 2000; Simons and Levin 1997). 
In one experiment (Simons and Levin 1998)), the observer even failed to 
notice that the person with whom the observer was interacting face-to-face 
had been replaced by someone else. Keijzer and Schouten (2007, 116) note 
that this evidence explodes the subjectively plausible myth that seeing is 
like taking a photograph. 
 A camera opens its shutter for a very short period, then closes it again, leaving a 
complete trace of the light pattern on its inner photographic film. Vision seems 
similar in that we (and our brains) seem to take in the whole visual scene with a 
single momentary glance, after which we have acquired a subjectively accessible in-
ternal representation of the external scene.  
 Change blindness suggests clearly that we do not construct rich internal 
representations of the external visual scene (for if we had, we would notice 
the changes). Visual perception is an ongoing process where the visual 
scene is scanned according to need, and at no particular moment is there a 
rich representation of the external visual scene activated in the brain. 

Metaphysics and Mind 
73
 This continuous scanning of the external visual scene is a function of sac-
cadic processing. Only a very small area in the center of the retina (the fovea) 
is sensitive to visual details and to color, while the remainder of the retina 
generates a much coarser image. To compensate, normal vision involves four 
to five small eye movements per second, named saccades, which scan the 
visual field continuously. Only by and during such an active and ongoing 
process is the general detailed view of normal vision acquired. Vision seems 
intuitively an intracranial process, with the external world featuring merely 
as causal input to visual processing, but it is not. Rather, vision is physically 
constituted by the deep functional integration of intracranial and extracra-
nial resources. It is only when these intra- and extracranial resources operate 
synchronously, as a whole, that is, when saccades scan environmental 
objects and events, that vision is realized. In this account, the core realizer 
of online vision is the interaction of neural and extraorganismic stimuli; 
online vision, therefore, is radically widely realized. 
 In terms of locus of control, vision in the human being can be controlled 
by symbolic representations, when the person is purposively scanning the 
external visual scene, or merely enactive, when she is not (i.e., when she is 
just scanning and monitoring the external visual scene routinely). The 
locus of control of her visual processing can thus change depending on the 
context in which it is operating (triggered by goal-directed motivation or 
routine monitoring), but the total realizer system and its core realizer do 
not. The individual human agent can symbolically trigger and represent 
the external world at will, but online visual processing is left to a heteroge-
neous range of internal and external resources. Online visual processing, 
therefore, is a transcranial achievement. What this implies is that if visual 
perception is involved in any online activity or interactivity, then the pro-
cesses underlying them are partially metaphysically realized transcranially. 
This is true, as I will subsequently argue, of both language production and 
comprehension. It is also true, of course, of any emotional experience that 
is triggered or monitored in part by visual processing.  
 3.9   Sociocultural Cognitive Augmentation 
 Sociocultural extended cognitive systems are formed when an individual 
systematically and reliably depends on social structures, other people, and 
cultural products in her cognitive activities (Krueger 2013; Cash 2013). 

74 
Chapter 3
They are so much part of mundane life that they are often taken for granted 
as being the normal conditions under which skills are acquired and facts 
learned. Indeed, R. Wilson and Clark (2009, 63) suggest that such extended 
systems are a kind of “cognitive oxygen.” R. Wilson (2004), Clark (2008), 
and Donald (1991) all suggest that the most obvious cases are the writing 
systems that humans have invented and provide relatively durable public 
cognitive resources that are crucial to education, training, industry, and so 
on. Such systems are not just used by an agent, pace Adams and Aizawa and 
Rupert, but become functionally integrated into the cognitive functioning 
of the agent. They significantly augment the preexisting cognitive struc-
tures and processes to increase, for example, their long- and short-term 
memory capacity and focus on and critique their own ideas (A. Clark 1998). 
Mathematical notation, similarly, does not simply input into mathematical 
ability (although, of course, it does this); rather, it builds on such abilities 
to produce an agent with significantly greater mathematical ability (Men-
ary 2013; Kirchhoff 2012; R. Wilson 2004). 
 There are many others, however, which again are so much part of the 
mundane furniture of the world that they are not recognized as extended 
cognitive systems. They are just accepted as part of the normal conditions 
under which their cognitive (including emotional) abilities develop. The 
various contingencies that are established in neonate-caregiver interaction 
in emotional ontogenesis and provide mind-world constancies that infants 
and children exploit (e.g., in social referencing, which I discuss in chap. 4) 
are useful examples here. Sociocultural resources  
 are not biologically—genetically, physically, or evolutionary—givens, as they have 
been created and modified by the activities of past generations of people. So socio-
cultural resources are distinguished by their origin. But they are worth high-lighting 
in reflecting on extended cognition because … they constitute a crucial part of some 
of the cognitive abilities and activities which distinguish human cognition from its 
nearest neighbors. There may be animal cultures, but it is only in  Homo sapiens that 
we find diverse cultures of cognition, social structures and products that, whatever 
their own origins, now significantly augment the cognitive capacities of individuals 
embedded in them. (R. Wilson and Clark 2009, 63–64)  
 My own view, however, is that human emotional ontogenesis provides a 
more compelling example of the deep functional integration of sociocul-
tural resources and intracranial circuitry and thus validates the CT hypoth-
esis. This is because their concerted and synchronous operation, and only 

Metaphysics and Mind 
75
their concerted synchronous operation, results in emotional ontogenesis. I 
address emotional ontogenesis in considerable detail in the next two 
chapters.  
 3.10   Particular Intracranialist Challenges 
 In this section, I begin to address the alleged coupling-constitution fallacy 
and transcranialists’ alleged methodological error. Further evidence that 
these intracranialist allegations are mistaken is provided in the next two 
chapters. I conclude the chapter with Rupert’s comparison of HEC and 
HEMC; it provides a useful overview of some intracranialist objections and 
a further opportunity to rebut them. 
 (i)  The Coupling-Constitution Fallacy 
 This fallacy, as Adams and Aizawa suggest, is to move from the causal cou-
pling of some object or process to some cognitive agent to the conclusion 
that the object or process is part of the cognitive agent or part of the cogni-
tive agent’s cognitive processing. The  reductio they offer to “terminally 
embarrass” transcranialists (A. Clark 2010, 81) is the following: 
 Question: Why did the pencil think that 2 + 2 = 4?  
 Clark’s answer: Because it was coupled to the mathematician.  
 Their  reductio , however, does Adams and Aizawa’s cause a disservice; it 
shows with commendable clarity what is wrong with their objection. No 
transcranialist has ever claimed that just any coupling of a cognitive agent 
(mathematician) to a noncognitive extraorganismic tool (pencil) consti-
tutes a cognitive agent (process or system). A mathematician who has been 
careless with a tube of superglue could end up being well and truly coupled 
to her pencil, but it would be implausible to claim that she and her pencil 
constituted a cognitive system or agent. Leading transcranialists (A. Clark 
2008; R. Wilson 2004; Menary 2010) all claim that deep functional integra-
tion of nonneural resources in information processing is prerequisite to the 
formation of wide cognitive systems, and my previous analysis relating to 
macaque tool use demonstrates clearly that this is the case. Macaque tool 
use is an example of a genuine mind-to-world transcranialism. I return to 
the putative causal-constitution fallacy in chapters 4 and 5, to argue further 
that there is no such fallacy. 

76 
Chapter 3
 The now (in)famous example of cognitive extension, that of Otto, an 
Alzheimer’s sufferer, plus his notebook (A. Clark and Chalmers 1998), may 
well lead to an inclination to overemphasize the coupling of cognizer and 
physical or technological tool in cognitive extension (as the foregoing 
 reductio indicates); such an inclination, however, should be resisted. 
Extended cognitive systems include the deep functional integration of nat-
ural environmental resources, as previous analyses indicate, and, of particu-
lar importance for this monograph, sociocultural resources.  
 (ii)  Transcranialists’ Methodological Error 
 Adams and Aizawa (2001, 57) are concerned that transcranialism or 
extracranialism threatens scientific integrity. They suggest that combining 
intracranial structures and processes with extracranial structures and pro-
cesses risks failing to identify the lawlike regularities that allow science to 
carve nature at its joints because these structures and processes are so differ-
ent. They cite the physical rotation of the image in the Tetris game and Otto’s 
notebook to claim that (i) firing electrons at a cathode-ray tube requires 
muscular activity to operate the button, and (ii) Otto’s extended memory 
recall involves cognitive-motor processing not found in Inga’s memory 
recall. More generally, we are invited to review the range of human memory 
augmenting technologies (photo albums, Rolodexes, notepads, etc.): “What 
are the chances of there being interesting regularities that cover humans 
interacting with all these sorts of things? Slim to none, we speculate” (Adams 
and Aizawa 2001, 61). In addition, in contrast, biological memory systems, 
as noted earlier, “display a number of what appear to be law-like regularities, 
including priming effects, chunking effects,” and others. Transcranial pro-
cesses are unlikely to give rise to interesting lawlike regularities. “There are 
no laws covering humans and their tool use over and above the laws of intra-
cranial (inner) human cognition and the laws of physical tools” (61). 
 There are two points to note here. First, given that methodological solip-
sism explicitly excludes extracranial resources from the domain of the cog-
nitive, and given also that it has been the dominant methodological 
doctrine for decades,  of course there will not be many research results that 
include these. Second, there is a beginning research tradition that does rec-
ognize widely different resources in realizer systems. Clark (2008, 9), for 
instance, points to the successes of complexity theory in discovering unify-
ing principles that apply across massive differences of scale, physical type, 

Metaphysics and Mind 
77
and temporality. He mentions the power laws that explain the emergent 
behavior of systems ranging from ant colonies to the World Wide Web. 
Analogously, he suggests that the processes that write to and read from 
Otto’s notebook and those that write to and read from his biological mem-
ory could well be covered by a unifying framework of information storage, 
transformation, and retrieval.  
 3.11   Summary: The Hypothesis of Extended Cognition (HEC) versus the 
Hypothesis of Embedded Cognition (HEMC) 
 As noted earlier, Rupert’s comparison of HEC and HEMC articulates some 
typical intracranialist objections to CT. Given this, it provides a useful con-
cluding device for this discussion. 
 The hypothesis of extended cognition (HEC) claims that human cogni-
tive processes and structures may loop into the environment in which the 
cognizer is embedded, and is thus to be contrasted with a more conserva-
tive view, the hypothesis of embedded cognition (HEMC), which is cham-
pioned by Rupert (2004, 2010). Rupert claims that everything of scientific 
interest in cognition can be captured by such a view, and methodological 
error avoided. 
 Rupert presents a series of arguments in favor of HEMC:  
 (i)  He appeals directly to common sense. He asserts that HEMC is more 
compatible with common sense than HEC; this implies that we should 
require strong reasons to prefer HEC.  
 (ii)   However, such reasons are not forthcoming, because there are pro-
found differences between inner and outer structures and processes 
(Adams and Aizawa make the same objection, but since it is the same 
objection, I did not mention it earlier); we should conceive of them, 
therefore, as different kinds.  
 (iii)   Endorsing HEC would incur considerable scientific cost. HEC construes 
transient props and aids, available in the extraorganismic environ-
ment, as components (vehicles) of human cognitive processes. This 
risks robbing science of integrated, persisting, organismically grounded 
capacities, that is, those belonging to persisting biological individuals 
whose responses are tested in a variety of environments under a variety 
of conditions.   

78 
Chapter 3
 In addition, and of particular relevance to this discussion, even in terms 
of development, where change, not stability, is at issue, one still needs to find 
some persisting, developing core. HEC, it seems, “offers developmental psy-
chologists no more reason to be interested in, for example, the series of tem-
poral segments we normally associate with Sally from ages two to six than it 
offers to be interested in, say, Sally aged two, together with a ball she was 
bouncing on some particular day, Johnny, aged five, together with a book he 
was reading on some particular afternoon, and Terry, aged seven, plus the 
stimulus item he has just been shown by an experimenter” (Rupert 2010, 30). 
 What this obviously suggests is that the sciences of the mind cannot 
afford to identify human cognitive processing with the activity of various 
transient coupled systems comprising neural, bodily, and environmental 
elements. The cost would be the loss of progress that cognitive psychology 
has made to date. 
 Rupert’s (2004) next objection relates to natural and explanatory kinds. 
This is concerned with the claim of Clark and Chalmers (1998) that Otto 
plus his notebook constitutes the supervenience base for some dispositional 
beliefs and therefore has more explanatory utility and power than Otto and 
notebook as Scaffolding 1. Rupert denies this; what constitutes a natural or 
explanatory kind is that which falls within the explanatory frameworks of 
successful science. Biological memory meets this requirement because it 
falls well within the explanatory frameworks of cognitive psychology, but 
extended memory does not fit the causal profile described by this successful 
science. Ergo extended memory is not memory at all. 
 My replies to these challenges must be obvious. First, we have no reason 
to expect that inner and outer structures and processes in any realizer sys-
tem be similar; indeed, Clark and Chalmers’s (1998) parity principle was 
formulated precisely to undermine the view that a fine-grained functional 
similarity between inner and outer processes is required. The claim made by 
Clark and Chalmers was that should an object in the external environment 
function in or as some process that, if it were to be intracranially bounded, 
would be accorded genuine cognitive status, then the fact that it is extracra-
nial should be irrelevant. 
 The parity probe was thus meant to act as a kind of veil of metabolic ignorance, in-
viting us to ask what our attitude would be if currently external means of storage and 
transformation were, contrary to the presumed facts, found in biology. Thus under-
stood, parity is not about the outer performing just like the human-specific inner. 

Metaphysics and Mind 
79
Rather, it is about equal opportunity: avoiding the rush to judgment based on spatial 
location alone. (Clark 2008, 114)  
 Second, we have no reason to expect that the various components in any 
unified realizer system should all behave according to the same laws; hor-
mones, genetic products, salutatory conduction, and depolarization (to 
name a vanishingly small number of subprocesses and structures involved 
in emotional ontogenesis and elicitation) do not all behave according to 
the same laws, because they are different sorts of processes and structures 
(and, presumably, it is precisely these differences that account for the differ-
ent contributions they make in different realizer systems). 
 Third, as Neisser (1981) reminds us, more than forty years of memory 
research undertaken within the frameworks of putatively successful science 
has harvested almost nothing of relevance to the understanding of every-
day memory, that is, memory on the hoof. In memory research at least, the 
solipsistic methodology of traditional cognitive psychology, involving 
hypothesis testing in tightly controlled experimental conditions, has been 
neither explanatorily prolific nor powerful. Recognizing this sad failure 
(surely) has been influential in the move to extended memory. 
 Fourth, that some research programs are focusing on wide total realizer 
systems does not preclude others from focusing on partial realizer systems. 
The foregoing discussion about realization and function indicates that real-
izers are complexly and hierarchically nested from the intracellular level 
upward. Mutually informative research focusing on all these levels can (and 
already does) enable the expeditious and interactive growth of scientific 
knowledge. 
 Fifth, as indicated in chapter 2, there has been a progressive widening of 
conceptions of psychological development, from unidirectional, through 
bidirectional, to transactional or circular, and most recently to dynamical 
and coactional conceptions. All of these widen the focus of developmental 
psychology from the individual’s neural circuitry to socioculturally sculpted 
developmental environments. I deal with these ideas in detail in chapters 4 
and 5. 
 But what of Rupert’s claim that we should preserve the persisting core of 
scientific focus, that is, the individual cognizer? Nothing in HEC threatens 
this core; indeed, as my earlier discussion of the possibility of wide indi-
viduals indicates, it remains individual agents who have thoughts, percep-
tions, dreams, and so on. In addition, and uniquely in the natural world, 

80 
Chapter 3
individual human cognizers are always the locus of control when volun-
tarily and actively engaged in information processing. This is true even 
when they are not the core realizers in radically wide total realizations (as 
when Sue signs her check). HEC, therefore, pace Rupert, just like HEMC, 
continues to construe individual cognizers as relatively stable spatiotempo-
rally extended beings, albeit with porous boundaries. 
 In conclusion, we have no principled reason to eschew HEC; indeed, the 
opposite is the case. HEC offers cognitive scientists an exciting new way of 
conceptualizing the human cognitive agent, one that may prove more 
fruitful in generating more powerful explanatory frameworks.  

 4  Mirror, Mirror … Human Emotional Ontogenesis 
 4.1   Introduction 
 In chapter 2 I reviewed, albeit briefly, the traditional views of human emo-
tionality and three of the most recent contributions. I noted where my 
views differ from these more recent contributions and concluded, regarding 
the traditional views, that their emphasis on particular components of 
emotional experience resulted in each view failing to adequately explain 
certain emotional phenomena. I cited, for instance, the feeling theories as 
eschewing the importance of cognitions and cultural variation, and cogni-
tive theories as eschewing the importance of subjective feelings and physi-
ological reactions. I suggested that these different construals reflect a more 
fundamental construal concerning the nature of emotions, namely, 
whether they are primarily biology-nature or culture-nurture. I claimed 
that the developmental account that I have constructed addresses all such 
limitations and also provides some insight into the mechanisms underpin-
ning emotional development. This is the first of two chapters that present 
my account and, as noted in chapter 1, begins to reveal the depth of the 
complementarity and integration of intracranial and extracranial resources 
involved in emotional ontogenesis. 
 In chapter 3, I began my rebuttal of two intracranialist challenges to 
transcranialism, namely, that by causally coupling intra- and extraorganis-
mal resources, transcranialists fallaciously conflate causal coupling with 
constitution, and the differences in these putative resources are such 
that cognitive extension is always from brain to world. I provided two 
compelling examples of mind-to-world DFI with CT, one relating to tech-
nological augmentation, and the second relating to natural environmental 

82 
Chapter 4
augmentation. In this chapter I provide a further, compelling example of 
world-to-mind DFI with CT relating to a sociocultural cognitive augmenta-
tion, that of human emotional ontogenesis. I provide further evidence in 
chapter 5 when I deal with language acquisition. I describe the processes 
involved in such rich detail that any intracranialist denial should be obvi-
ated. An incredulous stare, as David Lewis was apparently fond of remind-
ing us, is no substitute for argument (Millikan 2004). 
 The example of DFI with CT that I describe concerns the concerted oper-
ation of intracranial and extraorganismal sociocultural resources to pro-
duce new or reshape existing neural substrata, including interneural 
connection, and full human emotionality. Drawing on insights from devel-
opmental psychology, I argue that there is no illegitimate conflation of 
causal coupling and constitution in CT accounts of human emotional 
ontogenesis. The synchronized and mutual modulation of the relevant 
causal processes in caregiver and neonate, to which both are preadapted, 
provides the necessary and sufficient conditions for the development of full 
human emotionality, but only within a close, linguistically mediated social 
relationship. In addition, I argue that the mutual modulation of the differ-
ing causal processes in caregiver and neonate results in the development of 
the neural substrata of discrete emotions in neonates and children and the 
refinement and elaboration of the neural substrata underpinning caregiv-
ers’ intuitive parenting skills. In light of these analyses, I also argue that 
human emotional ontogenesis and experience are crucially dependent on 
the interplay between biological equipment and sociocultural environ-
ment. In addition, I argue that it is a mistake to construe the directionality 
that transcranialism takes as always from brain to world; the ontogenesis of 
human emotionality is a world-to-brain transcranial achievement. 
 My analyses constitute an argument that human emotions develop to 
enable human social life, first through interpersonal regulation, and subse-
quently through intrapersonal regulation. Human neonates and their pri-
mary caregivers are genetically and biologically equipped with a limited but 
perfectly complementary range of sensorimotor constraints and species-
typical behavior patterns that enable the development of the very close, 
linguistically mediated social relationship that, in turn, provides the 
context for the development of increasingly complex forms of behavior. 
This relationship provides the necessary sensory-perceptual stimulation to 
excite genetic activity and the resultant development and maturation of 

Mirror, Mirror … Human Emotional Ontogenesis 
83
emotion-related neural substrata. I describe in detail the nature of the sen-
sorimotor constraints primarily involved in emotional ontogenesis; in 
chapter 5, I describe in similar detail the species-typical behavior patterns 
(STBPs), the interaction of which contributes to the development of human 
emotionality. The interaction of STBPs also provides the basis for the devel-
opment of language and symbolic thought, which are essential to the 
development of full human emotionality. I conclude the chapter by assess-
ing intracranialists’ putative acceptance of some forms of DFI.  
 4.2   The Ontogenesis of the Emotions 
 “Organisms inherit environments along with their genes. … Parents create 
very specific conditions for infants and the adult is the product, not of its 
genes, but of the interaction of its genes in this structured developmental 
context” (Griffiths 1997, 61). This is particularly true in relation to mental 
capacities. Ample evidence accumulated over the last forty years demon-
strates that both human and nonhuman primates will fail to develop nor-
mal adult mental capacities and certain normal adult behaviors if denied 
the social interaction to which they are preadapted (Harlow and Harlow 
1962; Harlow and Zimmerman 1959). Emotions evolved to control and 
regulate the behavior of members of social species (Vandekerckhove et al. 
2008), and it is a necessary condition of emotional ontogenesis that social 
animals are exposed to the social lives their emotions evolved and devel-
oped to regulate. 
 The environments into which human neonates are born vary enor-
mously across the globe; it is entirely reasonable, therefore, that they should 
have to learn which objects and events in them should elicit emotional 
responses. It is unremarkable that although emotion-eliciting stimuli are 
learned, their learning is preadapted by the provision of precursor emotions 
that evolved to deal with experiential saliences in ancestral environments. 
Such saliences clearly included stimuli that were dangerous, noxious, chal-
lenging, novel, and pleasurable. These match the emotion precursors (affect 
expressions) with which human neonates are genetically equipped, that is, 
fright (danger), disgust (noxious stimuli), distress (challenges), interest 
(novelty), and endogenous pleasure (pleasant sensations). These affect 
expressions serve to benefit the neonate directly in its relationship to the 
environment; for instance, disgust results in opening the mouth, wrinkling 

84 
Chapter 4
the nose, extruding the tongue, and retching, which removes noxious sub-
stances from the digestive tract. In human emotional ontogenesis, how-
ever, they also benefit the neonate indirectly by serving as signs of 
physiological and psychological status to caregivers, for example, noticing 
signs of disgust during feeding and, as a result, interrupting feeding. This 
response presupposes correctly interpreting the sign and then providing 
the appropriate intervention. It is enabled by the complementary preadap-
tation of caregivers, which takes the form of intuitive parenting skills. 
 As a result of this complementary preadaptation, human emotional 
ontogenesis can be construed as taking place in five phases, three of which 
are germane to this book. These phases are age-related: 
 • 
 Birth to two years: During their first two years, neonates and infants 
build a differentiated and culturally specific repertoire of emotions 
from the affect expressions with which they are monomorphically 
and universally endowed. They learn to differentiate basic emotions as 
expression signs and acquire a repertoire of appropriate coping actions, 
all within the framework of interpersonal regulation with caregivers.  
 This implies that, at birth, neonates have components of emotional sys-
tems (appraisal, body reactions, expressive reactions, and feelings) only in 
precursor forms; this further implies that maternal causal attribution pro-
cesses and coping actions are precursor, too. 
 • 
 Three to six years: During this period, young children progressively 
reduce the comprehensive support previously required from caregivers 
and become capable, gradually, of intrapersonal regulation (Sroufe 
1996). The emergence of the self-evaluative emotions, such as pride, 
shame, guilt, and embarrassment, connect the actions of the increas-
ingly self-aware child to her culture’s norms and values. In addition, 
children show less inclination to have their goals satisfied by others 
and are able, increasingly, to delay gratification. In short, they learn to 
accommodate their motive satisfaction within cultural norms and val-
ues and to prioritize motives and goals and delay or even suppress 
gratification.  
 • 
 Six years to adolescence: Expression and speech signs are used increas-
ingly for intrapersonal regulation.  
 The ontogenesis of human emotions demonstrates that they develop 
from emotional precursors (affect expressions), but only in the context of 

Mirror, Mirror … Human Emotional Ontogenesis 
85
the appropriate human social relationships. Moreover, both human neo-
nates and their primary caregivers (usually mothers) are genetically pre-
adapted; that is, they coevolved to enable such appropriate human social 
relationships. Human infants will develop into emotionally blunted chil-
dren and adults if denied the appropriate socioemotional developmental 
context. 
 Human neonates are the most neurologically immature of mammalian 
neonates (Prechl 1993), and this is particularly true in relation to their 
motor abilities (Thelen 1984). In light of this, and to ensure survival and 
well-being, certain competencies evolved via a process of natural selection 
in both neonates and caregivers. In neonates, these take the form of a lim-
ited range of affect expressions, precursor strategies for regulating emo-
tions, and sensorimotor competencies; and in their caregivers, they take the 
form of “intuitive parenting” skills (Papousek and Papousek 1987). 
 Affect expressions, that is, the referents of the English words  distress , 
 disgust ,  fright ,  interest , and  endogenous pleasure (Izard 1978), which are con-
sistently observed in neonates from birth, are triggered solely by absolute 
stimulus thresholds; they are not directed toward particular objects. They 
are expressive reactions to sensed positive or negative internal physiologi-
cal change (e.g., hunger, pain, overstimulation) or external stimuli (e.g., 
body contact, sensory overarousal) that presuppose a further innate endow-
ment, that is, interoceptive and proprioceptive receptors in viscera, muscle, 
and skin, which are crucially important in emotional ontogenesis. The 
function of distress, disgust, and fright is to signal needs-related deficits 
(e.g., hunger) or impairments to physical integrity to caregivers (Sroufe 
1996). The function of interest and endogenous pleasure, however, is to 
help to build representations of the external and internal physical and phe-
nomenological environment. In terms of precursor strategies for regulating 
emotion, neonates are equipped with only two, and these operate only 
within a limited arousal range. Neonates engage in sucking to calm them-
selves and look away from overwhelming stimuli (Blass and Ciaramitaro 
1994) to control arousal. When arousal exceeds its stimulus range, the 
infant shows signs of (i.e., expresses) distress. Distress is typically elicited by 
a threshold-exceeding deficit state and is expressed initially through motor 
unrest. This is followed by unfocused crying, which increases in volume if 
distress continues or increases. Neither the motor unrest nor the crying 
indicates which threshold-exceeding deficit state is causing the distress 

86 
Chapter 4
(Lester 1984). Caregivers have to discover for themselves what ails their 
infant and what to do to remediate it. 
 What these distress expressions do, depending on their relative sensitiv-
ity, is elicit in caregivers a measureable degree of psychophysiological 
arousal, that is, measurable physiological stress symptoms (Boukydis and 
Burgess 1982), feelings of intense pressure to give assistance until the crying 
ceases (Gustafson and Harris 1990) and to seek the cause of distress, remove 
it, and engage in intuitive calming actions (M. Papousek 1990). Sensitivity 
means that caregivers perceive their infants’ precursor emotions, interpret 
them correctly, and react to them appropriately; it is therefore the basis of 
successful intuitive parenting. Sensitive caregivers perceive unspecific and 
subtle cues from their infants and respond promptly, regardless of their 
own current motives. Sensitive parenting results, at three, six, and nine 
months, in reduced negative affect expression, reduced frequency of cry-
ing, and increased communicative abilities (Ainsworth and Bell 1974). 
 In rather more detail: according to Papousek and Papousek (1999), intui-
tive parenting typically takes three forms. The first is that of coregulation of 
neonatal “emotion.” If the infant is distressed, sensitive parents intuitively 
engage in appropriate calming activities, and when the infant is apparently 
pleased with something, the parent attempts to prolong the stimulation 
and also to intensify it. The calming activities in which parents engage are 
precisely those to which neonates are preadapted to respond, that is, seeing 
a human face, hearing a human voice, being cradled in human arms. These 
activities are aimed at optimizing the infant’s state of arousal to optimize 
interaction opportunities. Sensitive caregivers register the state of the 
infant’s arousal and adjust their behaviors accordingly. The caregiver 
assesses the baby’s arousal level by opening her mouth or her hand to assess 
muscle tone; a lax tone indicates fatigue, but a good tone indicates readi-
ness for interaction. 
 The second form that intuitive parenting takes is the direction of infant 
behavior in optimizing the opportunity for motor mimicry. Parents express 
themselves with succinct, exaggerated expressive reactions, for example, 
exaggerating a facial expression and modulating their voices carefully in 
“baby talk” (“motherese”). These exaggerated expression signs exaggerate 
the central features of human emotional expression and the pragmatics of 
human speech (see chap. 5). The third form that sensitive parenting can 
take is allowing the infant’s expression signs to direct their behavior. When 

Mirror, Mirror … Human Emotional Ontogenesis 
87
parents intervene to provide whatever it is they believe their infant wants 
or needs, the baby responds with positive or negative feedback. Positive 
feedback includes smiling, cooing, and snuggling up to caregivers, and 
these responses encourage parents to provide the same response in similar 
situations, which, in turn, enables more prompt and more sensitive intui-
tive parenting. Thus the infant’s expressive reactions and caregivers’ intui-
tive parenting constitute a positive feedback loop that results in similar 
assistance provision in similar assistance-soliciting situations. This behavior 
results in the progressive fine-tuning of parents’ assistance-providing 
devices. 
 It is important to note, however, that sensitive intuitive parenting is not 
simply reactive. It is also proactive in selecting appropriate environments to 
optimize infant arousal and in actively seeking contact with the infant 
from birth. Caregivers talk, smile, cuddle, and position themselves to make 
mutual gaze possible (which engages precisely those resources with which 
infants are innately equipped). What all of this implies is that infants are 
very poorly equipped for intrapersonal emotional regulation but very well 
equipped for interpersonal regulation with caregivers who are preadapted 
to interpret their needs and respond appropriately. 
 Interest and focused attention are triggered by novelty of external stimu-
lation, and novelty is tied to certain temporal, sensory, and spatial contin-
gencies. Neonatal visual perception is limited to 20 to 25 centimeters and 
exhibits a preference for face-shaped forms (Umilta, Simion, and Valenza 
1996), and neonatal auditory perception exhibits a preference for the fre-
quency, range, and pattern of human speech (M. Papousek 1994). The 
“speaking” and slowly moving face of the person holding the baby in her 
or his arms (Langsdorf et al. 1993), moving slowly enough to track (Brazel-
ton 1983), is therefore one such contingency. Neonates do not simply 
respond to such contingencies, however; they also actively search for them 
(Stern 1985). When interest is stimulated, the baby ceases unfocused motor 
activity, orients toward, and visually fixates the stimulus object (Malatesta 
and Wilson 1988), which signals receptivity for information and interac-
tion to the caregiver. The caregiver assesses the arousal state of the baby and 
her readiness to interact and adjusts her facial, vocal, and gestural behaviors 
accordingly. 
 I stated earlier that human neonates are born equipped with certain sen-
sorimotor competencies, and cited sucking and turning the head as two of 

88 
Chapter 4
them. A third, critically important competency is that of motor mimicry 
(Meltzoff and Moore 1988, 1989). 1 Neonates imitate the facial expressions 
of caregivers, including sticking out their tongues and opening their mouths 
and even facial expressions for emotions, such as smiling, 2 frowning, and 
pursing their lips, within two days of birth. What this seems to imply is that 
neonates can translate visually perceived motor patterns into the appropri-
ate proprioceptive ones. The mimicry competence of neonates corresponds 
to a complementary competence in caregivers. They adapt their communi-
cation patterns intuitively to the infant’s perceptual limitations to reduce 
complexity; they mirror babies’ expressive reactions in their own expres-
sion and use “exaggeratedly succinct” (Holodynski and Friedlmeier 2006, 
100) expression signs to enable the infant to experience contingencies 
between expression and feeling (Gergely and Watson 1999). The expression 
is so exaggerated, for instance, an exaggerated smile, that it elicits an imi-
tated smile (with its accompanying feeling) in the infant. 
 As previously noted, in the first two years of life, infants must master 
two tasks through interpersonal regulation with caregivers: (i) they must 
construct, from the affect expressions and sensory-perceptual constraints 
with which they are preadapted, a range of differentiated emotion systems 
mediated by expressive reactions such as joy, anger, and sadness; and (ii) 
they must acquire a repertoire of appropriate coping mechanisms. The 
emotion systems are composed of appraisal, expression, body reaction, and 
feelings, which means that the framework of interpersonal regulation must 
enable both the synchronous differentiation of these components and their 
appropriate interaction. It is the componential differentiation and interac-
tion that leads to the development of differentiated sign-mediated emotion 
systems in infants. The development of these systems allows infants to 
assume, progressively, an increasingly equal share of interpersonal 
regulation by enabling their caregivers to satisfy their changing needs 
promptly and precisely. 
 It is through sensitive and prompt nurturing that carers create contin-
gencies between emotion elicitors, their infant’s precursor emotional 
responses to these, their own interpretation of the infant’s needs, and their 
own actions to deal with them. These contingencies constitute mind-world 
constancies that are exploited by the neonate to fine-tune her producer 
devices in emotional ontogenesis and by the caregiver to fine-tune her 

Mirror, Mirror … Human Emotional Ontogenesis 
89
interpreter devices. Through this process, the differing components become 
integrated into differentiated, sign-mediated emotion systems in neonates. 
In addition, the process allows infants to seize control of interpersonal 
encounters by orienting and guiding caregivers precisely and promptly to 
fulfill the infants’ needs. Infant smiling provides a good example. Caregiv-
ers are preadapted to seek contact with their baby and to position them-
selves to make mutual gaze possible; they also talk and smile in an attempt 
to elicit a reaction. The mother smiles, and the baby imitates it, to the 
delight of the mother. Parents respond by increasing their own smiling and 
vocalization and thus establish the conditions within which the infant will 
build up contingencies between smiling, its eliciting causes, and the feel-
ings of pleasure that become associated with it. That smiling is an expres-
sion of pleasure develops through synchronous experience of appraisal 
(cause) and feeling. 
 The developing ability to differentiate emotion elicitors is evident in the 
changes in infant smiling behavior in the first three months (Sroufe 1996, 
81). Smiling in the neonate is evident some seven seconds after perception 
of the cause and manifests in lifting the corners of the mouth, sometimes 
with the eyes closed. By three months, however, the infant smiles promptly 
after stimulus perception, directs her attention to the stimulus object, and 
actively grins and vocalizes or coos (81). What this reflects is the countless 
opportunities offered in the first three months for face-to-face interactions 
in which caregivers smile at infants to encourage motor mimicry and the 
learning of relevant contingencies. 
 Similarly, emotional reactions differentiate progressively in the early 
months, and anger provides a useful example. In their study of one-, four-, 
and seven-month-old infants whose arms had been restrained to induce a 
negative emotional reaction, Sternberg and Campos (1990) found the 
following: 
 • 
 At one month, infants reacted with a series of undifferentiated negative 
facial expressions and unfocused gaze before starting to cry.  
 • 
 At four months, they reacted with a clear expression of anger: drawn 
eyebrows, open rectangular mouth, and sometimes narrowed eyes; and 
at the commencement of the restraint, their gaze was focused on the 
hand or face of the person restraining them. This reaction demon-
strates that they had identified the cause of the discomfort.  

90 
Chapter 4
 • 
 At seven months, infants directed their gaze to their attendant caregiv-
ers, demonstrating that their anger had acquired a socially directed 
appeal character.  
 What these findings strongly suggest is that unfocused affect expressions 
of the neonate are transformed into specific basic emotions that are directed 
toward their cause. These follow the cause promptly, are fine-tuned to their 
context in terms of focus and timing, are supported by coordinated body 
reactions, and trigger assistance from caregivers. 
 It is worth noting, however, that not just any combination of appraisal 
pattern and expression sign can be generated within the framework of 
coregulation. Expression signs are typically coded iconically in line with 
the action readiness triggered by the appraisal pattern. Anger, for instance, 
requires the mobilization of physical resources needed to engage in aggres-
sive confrontation. In infants, these include scratching and biting oppo-
nents. Instrumental acts of aggression can then lead to the emergence of 
iconic signals of readiness to attack in the hope that the opponent might 
back down. Raising muscle tone, baring teeth, and clenching fists then 
become iconic expression signs for anger and are likely to be interpreted as 
such. This implies that the forms in which expression signs are encoded as 
icons and the instrumental usefulness of many body reactions impose lim-
its on how expression signs and appraisal patterns can be combined. This 
might explain why some facial expressions are interpreted and used in the 
same way in different cultures. This in no way implies, however, that such 
expression signs have not been fine-tuned in interpersonal regulation 
(Holodynski and Friedlmeier 2006, 107). 
 It is the interaction of the caregiver’s affect mirroring of infant expres-
sion reactions and infant motor mimicry that leads to the development of 
context-coordinated, emotion-specific appraisal patterns. The infant’s rudi-
mentary expression imitation is taken up by sensitive caregivers and shaped 
into salience through caregivers’ succinctly exaggerated affect mirroring. 
 Motor mimicry of emotion-specific expression signs is observed in 
infants as young as 2.5 months (Field et al. 1982). Infants show increased 
happiness and anger expression signs in response to maternal happiness 
and anger expression signs. Remarkably, however, when exposed to mater-
nal sadness expression signs (drooping mouth, raised eyebrows), infants 
respond with clear sucking and mouthing movements. This seems to 

Mirror, Mirror … Human Emotional Ontogenesis 
91
suggest that infants of this age are not merely mimicking expression signs 
but beginning to feel the emotion (sadness). In addition, infants as young 
as two to three months recognize the contingent affect mirroring of care-
givers and, in response, even anticipate such contingent affect mirroring 
(Legerstee and Varghese 2001), and this leads to a synchronization of care-
giver and infant expression signs. 
 It is worth emphasizing that the reciprocal influencing of appraisal pat-
terns and expressive reactions is generated by the special context in which 
infant emotions develop: Fogel (1993) terms this interdependent relation-
ship  coregulation to emphasize the interdependence. Infants build up their 
emotion-specific appraisal patterns not just in physical space but also in 
semantic space in which their emotional experiences are mediated by the 
interpretations of caregivers. Infant expressive behaviors play an important 
role in the emergence of these interpretations, not just as instrumental 
adaptation reactions to the physical environment, but also as indexical and 
iconic signs that appeal to the caregiver. Caregivers infer their infant’s emo-
tions and intentions through the coincidence of contextual features, 
knowledge of their infant’s developing character, and her current expres-
sive and body reactions, and they coordinate their responses with this 
interpretation of their infant’s expression. In turn, caregivers infer the 
rightness or wrongness of their interventions based on their interpretation 
of feedback from the infant’s expressive and body reactions. 
 As noted in chapter 2, this interdependence of neonate and caregiver in 
human emotional ontogenesis has increasingly been acknowledged in 
developmental psychology since the early 1990s, for example, Fogel’s 
(1993) coregulation model, and, if Vygotsky’s work is included, since the 
1930s. Conceptions have progressed from unidirectional models (where 
parental behaviors were viewed as antecedents and neonatal behaviors as 
outcomes), to bidirectional models, to transactional or circular models, and 
most recently to coaction models and explicitly dynamical models. The 
earlier models have progressively been challenged as relatively impover-
ished in explanatory power, especially since the development of sophisti-
cated microanalytic videotaping and computer technologies. Such 
technologies capture the synchronized, continuous parent-child-parent 
relationship in which it is impossible to pinpoint the influence of one part-
ner on another at any given moment. This is demonstrated in mutual gaze 
interactions: the infant’s gaze elicits the caregiver’s gaze, which perpetuates 

92 
Chapter 4
the infant’s gaze, and so on; in short, the two gazes are both effects and 
causes simultaneously in mutual gazing, because they each affect the oth-
er’s nervous system simultaneously. As Schore (1997, 602) puts it, this is 
evidence of “mutual entrainment of mother’s and infant’s brains.” It is 
worth emphasizing that coaction denies that it is the additive effects of dif-
ferent developmental influences that cause development. It is, rather, the 
 relationship or coaction between two or more components, not the compo-
nents themselves (Gottlieb and Halpern 2008; their italics). 
 Clearly, therefore, to insist that parental behaviors, including their lin-
guistic behaviors serve as mere input or triggers to a cascade of develop-
mental processes, as intracranialists most certainly would, is to fly in the 
face of state-of-art developmental psychology. Parental behaviors are no 
longer considered as mere antecedent causes of infant outcomes or effects 
because there is burgeoning research evidence of synchronized coaction 
between caregivers and neonate. 
 A further transformation accompanies the emotion-specific differentia-
tion of expression signs: their emotion-specific conventionalization during 
interpersonal regulation transforms expressive reactions into expression 
signs. As conventionalized signs, they represent generalized emotion-
specific responses. An expression sign does not just stand for a simultane-
ously triggered emotion but can also, just like a word, be used to represent 
the emotion symbolically. It can then be used purposefully, deliberately for 
affect attunement, social referencing, play, or even deceiving an interaction 
partner. 
 One of the clearest examples of conventionalization of expression and 
its symbolic use is in the social referencing manifested by infants from 
about ten months (Walden and Baxter 1989). An infant seeking assurance 
from her mother perceives her facial expression not as a mirror of the 
infant’s own emotional response but as a symbol for one. For example: A 
stranger offers a toddler a cookie in her mother’s presence. The toddler 
looks to the mother and reads from her facial expression how she should 
react. If the mother smiles, the toddler accepts the cookie; if, however, the 
mother looks anxious, the toddler refuses the cookie. 
 This constitutes an enormous achievement for a ten-month-old (Holo-
dynski and Friedlmeier 2006, 111) and reflects a great deal of learning since 
birth: the toddler has already learned that (i) she can attract her mother’s 
attention simply with a questioning gaze; (ii) this attention can be focused 

Mirror, Mirror … Human Emotional Ontogenesis 
93
on feelings, in this case, the toddler’s own uncertainty about what to do; 
(iii) facial expressions provide information about feeling (which she learned 
through affect mirroring); and (iv) her mother’s expression in this situation 
reflects neither her own nor her toddler’s feelings. It provides an answer to 
an unspoken question concerning what to do. Smiling means “everything 
is fine—go ahead,” whereas an anxious expression means “careful—don’t 
do it.” All of this, remarkably, is managed without speaking at all, just by 
using expression signs symbolically. 
 By ten months, therefore, expression signs can be used to indicate what 
is the case and what one should do. The mother’s smile is taken not as an 
expression of her real feeling state but as a symbol that has become detached 
from it. Nevertheless, this first symbolic use of expression signs is still tied 
completely to the situational context and, initially, to approach or avoid-
ance. The expression sign has not yet acquired the multifaceted, general-
ized meaning that it possesses for adults. 
 The symbolic use of expression signs is also found in mimic emblems 
(Ekman and Friesen 1969) and in symbolic play. Mimic emblems are con-
ventionalized mimic signs that are ascribed specific meaning with which 
they regulate social interaction; raised eyebrows to indicate a question to a 
partner is a common one. In symbolic play, infants imitate prototypical 
expressions, such as imitating a baby’s whining or crying or the comforting 
behaviors of parents in infant-child interaction. Another exquisitely mun-
dane example, well known to most parents, is the symbolic use of distressed 
howling when a wish is denied, to be followed immediately by its cessation 
once the wish has been granted. This howling is not a symptom of real 
distress but merely a symbol of it, which is used strategically and 
instrumentally by young children (especially when howling is effective in 
producing the desired result). 
 It is important to note that before infants can use expression signs sym-
bolically, they have to perceive and acquire an internal representation of 
contingencies between the cause of an expression, the expression itself, and 
what to do about it. (In addition, a further set of contingencies must be 
built up so that an expression sign can be detached from the concrete emo-
tion episode and used as a symbol, that is, to represent the emotion.) There 
are contingencies between the sensations in infants generated by their own 
expression signs and the expression signs of caregivers that mirror the 
infant expression signs in succinct, conventionalized ways. The mirrored 

94 
Chapter 4
expression thus becomes a sign marking the currently experienced feeling 
state that has acquired an emotion-specific meaning for the infant through 
the repeatedly experienced contingency between cause, feeling, and action. 
The smile that the caregiver uses to mirror the infant’s smile refers to the 
infant’s proprioceptively sensed smile. For the infant, this sensed smile is 
connected to further typical sensations for the emotion of joy or pleasure 
such as relaxation. It is also linked to a cause such as seeing the caregiver 
again and to an action to deal with it, namely, to enable the state to persist 
or to initiate it again. 
 Human neonates are born with just two emotion-regulating strategies, 
these being averting their gaze and sucking, but because these are successful 
in only a limited arousal range, emotional regulation develops predomi-
nantly in the form of interpersonal regulation between infant and caregiv-
ers. Parents, as noted, strive to maintain their infant’s optimal arousal 
levels, stimulating them when they show lack of interest, and calming or 
distracting them when they are distressed. In these responses, parents tend 
to use the same strategies that are modeled by their infant, for instance, a 
pacifier and mobile or playful distraction. In addition, parents resort to 
antecedent emotional regulation by preselecting contexts that are more 
likely to be optimal arousal contexts (R. Thompson 1990). 
 Of course, in the first two years, toddlers are characterized by the need 
for instant need gratification; they are tied exclusively to the here and now. 
Nevertheless, they do use strategies that exercise a degree of intrapersonal 
control; these include calming (sucking, comfort blanket), distraction 
(moving away, object manipulation), and, rarely, symbolically mediated 
strategies (reinterpretations) and antecedent strategies (purposeful selection 
and control of contexts that provide positive and avoid negative emotion). 
All of these are first applied during interpersonal regulation. 
 Affect mirroring elicits a further major transformation involving the 
feeling component of an emotion: the emergence of conscious feelings. 
Through affect mirroring, the unfocused sensation of interoceptive and 
proprioceptive feedback in the neonate becomes the conscious feeling in 
the infant. The all-encompassing, unfocused sensation of body and expres-
sive reactions induced by an elicitor is transformed into emotion-specific 
organized feeling. Characteristic of the latter is that from the range of 
simultaneous interoceptive and proprioceptive sensations, it singles out 

Mirror, Mirror … Human Emotional Ontogenesis 
95
and emphasizes the sensations that are typical for the specific emotion and 
symbolizes them through an expression sign. 
 For the feeling state of pleasure, the expression sign that is also felt pro-
prioceptively is smiling. At the same time, further feedback sensations are 
felt, such as relaxation and warmth, vocal gurgling, or effusive movements 
that all characterize the subjective feeling of pleasure. In contrast, other 
occurrent feedback sensations, such as a painful diaper rash, are not classi-
fied as pleasure feelings. “Just as the formation of symbols in speech signs 
categorises and structures perception of the external world, the formation 
of symbols for expression signs links together and structures the perception 
of the internal world, that of interoceptive and proprioceptive sensations” 
(Holodynski and Friedlmeier 2006, 113). Gergely and Watson (1999) sug-
gest that this transformation process is analogous to that of adult biofeed-
back therapy (Holodynski and Friedlmeier 2006, 113). Biofeedback provides 
an external display of internal body reactions such as heart rate. This exter-
nal mirroring increases the sensitivity for the interoceptive body sensations 
that provide subjective representations of body reactions. Importantly, too, 
it also enables subjects to gain a degree of voluntary control over their body 
reactions. 
 Parents’ affect mirroring provides a kind of natural biofeedback training 
for infants. Initially, infants may experience emotional expressive and body 
reactions only as all-encompassing, unfocused proprioceptive and intero-
ceptive sensations. Through affect mirroring, caregivers provide a contin-
gent external representation of the infant’s expressive reactions. Infants are 
preadapted to discover this contingency between their internal sensations 
and the external expression representation. Succinct affect mirroring of 
expression signs and the temporal contingency between the child’s own 
subjective feelings and mirrored expression is repeated, day in, day out, for 
months. Progressively infants attribute the expression sign mirrored by the 
caregiver no longer to the caregiver but to the self and start to interpret it as 
an expression sign for their own current feeling (Gergely and Watson 1999). 
In this process, infants progressively develop a sensitivity for the proprio-
ceptive and interoceptive sensations that correspond to their own emotion-
specific expressive and body reactions. They learn to use expression signs to 
group those sensations in an emotion-specific manner and to relate them 
to their own corresponding causal attributions and coping actions. This 

96 
Chapter 4
process makes infants aware of their feelings. Unmediated, unfocused body 
sensations become conscious, cause-focused feelings. 
 In affect mirroring, both awareness of others’ feelings and awareness of 
one’s own feelings emerge. Once feelings have become conscious, they 
make it possible to adjust expressive and body reactions to fit one’s motives, 
and they also take a step farther toward reflective emotion regulation. 
Accordingly, becoming aware of feelings not only emerges from the sym-
bolic use of speech signs and during verbal symbol formation but is present 
much earlier in the symbolic use of expression signs (Malatesta and  Izard 
1984). 
 The symbolization of expression signs precedes and prepares the infant 
for language acquisition; the development and use of expression symbols 
prepare the infant for the acquisition and use of speech symbols. Genuine 
self-regulation of emotion becomes possible only through the acquisition 
of language. This is because genuine self-regulation requires the capacity to 
anticipate future emotion-related situations, plan to respond to them in 
certain ways, and resist alternative, possibly more appealing, action possi-
bilities. This clearly requires symbolic thought. 
 Speech acquisition begins in infant protospeech (see chap. 5) but devel-
ops quickly up to the beginning of year three through two apparent stages; 
these are the stage of emotional and nonemotional expression indepen-
dence and the stage of linguistic action appeal (Holodynski and Friedlmeier 
2006, 116–117). In the first stage, regulation of emotional and nonemo-
tional responses occurs independently. Infants use the first speech signs 
almost exclusively in emotion-neutral situations. As soon as the situation 
becomes emotionally charged, interaction returns to expression sign regu-
lation (Bloom 1993). Infants in Bloom’s study uttered their first word at 
12.8 months, and their vocabulary spurt occurred at 19.2 months. Only at 
the time of the vocabulary spurt did toddlers begin to include speech in 
emotional expression. This indicates the integration of emotional and non-
emotional action self-regulation. 
 As noted, first words are emotion-neutral and are used to show caregiv-
ers objects of interest. Infants show the object to the caregiver and utter a 
more or less accurate word for it. Caregivers repeat (mirror) the word, 
emphasizing correct pronunciation (exaggeratedly succinct) and demon-
strating its relation to function, another object, and so on, by pretending to 
perform a typical action for it (e.g., digging with a spade) or uttering 

Mirror, Mirror … Human Emotional Ontogenesis 
97
a typical sound for it (e.g., dogs go bow-wow). The almost exclusively 
declarative use of words in toddlers and the mirroring response of caregiv-
ers ensure that the two partners share a common attentional focus. This 
impulse to share is uniquely human; I return to discuss it in chapter 5. 
 The second developmental task that infants and toddlers need to master 
is the use of words as action appeals toward others. This is not to share an 
attentional focus but to use words to direct others instrumentally. Once the 
toddler starts to use words in this way, caregivers respond by doing the 
same. Toddlers’ first use of words, however, is limited. They can only com-
pel action. Toddlers from one to two years can comply with requests and 
instructions to perform simple acts, such as clapping hands, but cannot 
regulate or inhibit such acts. When asked to squeeze a ball when a light 
comes on, toddlers at this age start to squeeze immediately and repeat the 
squeezing. Even commands not to squeeze trigger the squeeze reaction 
(Luria 1961, 1980). Speech at this age possesses only an action-triggering 
function, irrespective of any specific meaning their instructions might con-
vey. A “tiresome learning process” (Holodynski and Friedlmeier 2006, 118) 
is required before meaningful content of an utterance becomes effective in 
action and self-instruction can be used for one’s own self-regulation. 
 In a further series of experiments, Luria found that three- to four-year-
olds can reduce the number of errors when following simple self-instructions 
like “squeeze” and “don’t squeeze,” but found that, as with the two-year-
olds, “don’t squeeze” led to further squeezing. Children at this age there-
fore can initiate action by self-instruction but still not regulate or inhibit it. 
Not until five to six years does the meaningful content of an utterance 
become operational in action regulation. 
 4.2.1   The Emergence of Self-Evaluative Emotions (SEEs) 
 During the second year, children learn to consciously differentiate between 
themselves and others. They become aware of themselves as acting agents 
with their own intentions and expectations and are able to distinguish 
these from the expectations and intentions of others. This ability manifests 
in the use of the words  I ,  me , and the child’s own name and heralds what 
Stern (1985) terms “the birth of the verbal self” (see Holodynski and Friedl-
meier 2006, 134). 
 To produce effects oneself becomes a strong motive, but the effects are 
always object directed rather than aimed at eliciting parental reaction. 

98 
Chapter 4
Positive social evaluation is not an incentive for children at this stage, but 
it is used by parents to encourage its appreciation. Parents praise good 
behavior in exaggerated terms and communicate exaggerated signs of pride. 
They react not only with smiles and joyous vocalizations but also with 
exaggerated signs of admiration and pride: they puff out their chests and 
urge their children to do similarly, to stand up tall and feel grown-up. Their 
motor mimicry ability then allows children to attune to these expression 
signs through proprioceptive feedback and feel or “catch” the pride. The 
parental response thus stimulates a socially evaluative form of effect-related 
joy in the child, which is represented in expression signs of broad smiles, 
standing tall, and making celebratory gestures (K. Barrett 1995). The same 
sort of process occurs with the other self-evaluative emotions (SEEs). It is 
also the process through which children develop the ability to evaluate 
their own reactions in light of such norms, attempt to control norm-
violating emotions, and divert reactions into the appropriate channels. 
This development is scaffolded (Scaffolding 1) by the increasing use of lan-
guage in both caregivers and children in emotional regulation. Parents 
increasingly require children to request assistance verbally rather than just 
whine and hold out their hands, and children increasingly use verbal 
instructions and requests to others and to themselves. Children eventually 
learn to use SEEs to assess their behavior in relation to their culture’s norms; 
they feel pride when their behavior accords with such norms, shame when 
it does not, and indignation when other people disregard them (K. Barrett 
1995). 
 By four to five years, children are able to use symbolic strategies in emo-
tion regulation. They reinterpret situations, use imagery, and organize their 
goals according to priority. What all of this means is that intrapersonal 
regulation emerges through children doing for themselves what previously 
their caregivers did for them. This process is supported by the parents’ 
increasing refusal to do things for their children; they tell them to do it for 
themselves but often include instructions on what to do: “Do it yourself, 
like this …” This shows another aspect of sensitive parenting; it shows that 
during this early period of increasing intrapersonal regulation, children still 
need the guidance and support of a competent other. 
 From about four to six years, socially focused reactions to emotional 
episodes (e.g., seeking mother) decline, to be replaced increasingly by 
problem-focused (e.g., working harder, waiting for assistance) and 

Mirror, Mirror … Human Emotional Ontogenesis 
99
emotion-focused (e.g., making fun of the situation, controlling expression, 
and shifting attention) reactions. (However, it is the case that extremely 
intense emotional episodes require social support throughout the life span.) 
 Preschoolers initially show pride or shame only in social interaction 
with adults; they show only effect-oriented joy or frustration when alone 
(Holodynski and Oerter 2002). Only as they progress through elementary 
school do they start to react with pride and shame just as adults do. Young 
children, accordingly, still require social interactions in which an adult rep-
resents norms through her behavior if children are to experience pride after 
a success rather than simply effect-related joy. The same is true for shame 
after a failure or a moral transgression, rather than just effect-related disap-
pointment or frustration. 
 What this indicates is that the self-evaluative emotions also emerge 
through the interplay of caregiver affect mirroring and children’s motor 
mimicry. In coregulation with their child, caregivers establish emotion-
specific contingencies between cause, social evaluation, expression reac-
tions, and actions. Caregivers mirror child expressive reactions in their own 
expressions and present expression signs in their own behavior as models. 
This affect mirroring coincides with children’s sensitivity for contingencies 
and their ability to “pick up” the feelings of their partners through motor 
mimicry.  
 4.2.2   Cultural Shaping of Emotions 
 It is a species-specific characteristic of human beings to use socially created artefacts 
(in the form of tools and symbols) to reshape their naturally given environment 
within a process of social coordination, and to pass on this culture to the following 
generations. These, in turn, adopt the artefacts and apply them to regulate their 
activity and to maintain social and cultural life.  
 —Holodynski and Friedlmeier (2006, 182)  
 Each culture is characterized by ethnotheories that are often implicit but 
are “shared set(s) of beliefs, attitudes, norms, values and behaviour orga-
nized around a central theme and found among speakers of one language, 
in one time period and in one geographic region” (Triandis 1995, 443). 
Clearly, one such central theme in every human culture is child rearing, 
and ethnotheories clearly do inform parental child-rearing practices from 
the beginning (Trommsdorff and Kornadt 2003); the interpretation of the 

100 
Chapter 4
still-unfocused precursor emotions always occurs in light of their emotion-
related ethnotheories. Two types of ethnotheory interact to inform child-
rearing practices; these are ethnotheories that encapsulate the general 
norms and values for the appropriate conduct of human social life, which 
have normative consequences for the emotions; and ethnotheories that 
relate specifically to emotions. These are transmitted intergenerationally 
through parental (and school-related) socialization practices. Both types of 
ethnotheory inform the different intuitive parenting behaviors of caregiv-
ers in terms of coregulation, affect mirroring, and responding to infant 
feedback (see the previous section). 
 In terms of general norms and values, in a series of cross-cultural surveys, 
Hofstede (2000) found five dimensions of person-world relations that dis-
tinguish between cultures: (i) individualism–collectivism, (ii) power-
distance, (iii) masculinity, (iv) uncertainty avoidance, and (v) long-term 
versus short-term orientation. The most important dimension in emotional 
ontogenesis is individualism–collectivism. The dimension of individualism 
or collectivism refers to the extent to which a particular culture favors indi-
vidual goals and values compared with those of the larger reference group 
(Triandis 1995). Individualistic cultures emphasize the personal signifi-
cance of feeling in emotion; they view emotions as legitimate and impor-
tant and view emotional expression as both healthy and positive. In 
contrast, collectivist cultures view emotions as socially situated, that is, as a 
relation between a person and her environment; consistent with this view, 
the social situation in which emotion occurs is seen as important, as is the 
control of emotion, but personal feeling is not. Western cultures emphasize 
individual independence, encourage emotional expression, and expect self-
confident and competitive behavior and are disappointed with socially 
inhibited behavior (Holodynski and Friedlmeier 2006, 194), and the oppo-
site is true of collectivist cultures (Trommsdorff and Friedlmeier 2004). In 
China, for instance, even four-year-olds are expected to control their emo-
tional reactions (Ho 1986). Culture-specific ethnotheories, in particular, 
inform affect-mirroring behaviors and coregulation strategies. 
 Affect mirroring focuses on single emotion types, and the less affect mir-
roring of a particular emotion type, the less likely it is that children will 
construct a categorically discernible feeling state from their emotional reac-
tion. This occurs when caregivers either ignore or counter with distraction 
strategies emotional reactions construed as negative, such as anger. In a 

Mirror, Mirror … Human Emotional Ontogenesis 
101
study of twenty-four Japanese, Chinese, and American children between 
eleven months and two years, Camras et al. (1998) found that American 
children were more emotionally expressive in general and expressed anger 
freely, whereas Japanese children reacted to an anger-eliciting situation 
with sadness rather than with anger. In addition, the researchers found that 
both Japanese and Chinese mothers mirror affect expressions less than 
American mothers and prefer never to show anger. They even try to prevent 
their infants from screaming and crying. In a study of Japanese and Ameri-
can mothers, Rothbaum and Morelli (2005) found that Japanese mothers 
intervene proactively to prevent negative emotion, whereas American 
mothers tend to intervene reactively to deal with an actual emotion epi-
sode. Japanese mothers limit infants’ exposure to environmental stimuli, 
limit their own introduction of novel stimuli in their interactions with the 
infant, and also limit their attempts to manipulate infants’ attention. Inter-
estingly, both sets of mothers agreed that proactive intervention would pro-
mote accommodative behaviors and the opposite would be true of reactive 
intervention. Of course, proactive intervention limits opportunities for 
emotional exploration and the development of independence and intraper-
sonal emotional regulation. This results in the later attainment of Japanese 
children’s intrapersonal emotional regulation (Holodynski and Friedlmeier 
2006). Differences in the expression of shame and anger in collectivist cul-
tures of, for example, many Asian cultures compared with those of typically 
individualistic Western cultures illustrates this influence (Mascolo and Grif-
fin 1998). 
 Anger is a reaction to the hindrance or prevention of one’s goal attain-
ment and leads to readiness to act to overcome these obstructions. By con-
trast, shame reflects one’s own violation of social norms and readiness to 
subordinate oneself to these norms and leads to readiness to isolate oneself 
and comply with such norms in future. As would be expected, anger is less 
desirable in collectivist cultures because it is socially disruptive, and shame 
is viewed positively because it promotes social harmony; the opposite is the 
case in individualistic cultures. In individualistic cultures, anger is viewed 
positively, provided that it is expressed in socially acceptable ways, since it 
is seen to promote independence and self-expression; shame is viewed neg-
atively because it undermines personal self-esteem, but again, the opposite 
is true of collectivist cultures. In Asian cultures, a person is expected to 
adapt to the environmental situation by controlling the psychological 

102 
Chapter 4
effects of the emotion on herself and using calming, distracting, and reap-
praisal to control her reactions. In contrast, in Western cultures, persons are 
expected to use problem-focused strategies to alter the social or physical 
environment to achieve their goals. 
 In a series of studies using children from the United States and Germany 
and China and Japan, Holodynski and Friedlmeier found clear evidence 
that both at home and later at school children learn to express themselves 
according to the individualism or collectivism of their host culture. In Ger-
many and the United States, children are encouraged to express themselves 
emotionally as a reflection of an independent self-concept, whereas in 
China and Japan, children are expected to control their emotions and con-
form to group norms as a reflection of an interdependent self-concept 
(Holodynski and Friedlmeier 2006, 209–210). This is at least partly the 
result of deliberately limiting exposure to potentially emotional situations 
and limiting parental affect mirroring of emotions; Asian children typically 
display less emotion than Western children. 
 There are four important points to note at this juncture; I begin with the 
most obvious. The first is that affect expressions are the basic elements of 
human emotionality from which BEs and HCEs subsequently develop. 
They are clearly biologically and psychologically primitive (Ortony and 
Turner 1990) and can be at least roughly identified with neuroanatomical 
brain regions (Panksepp 2000). In addition, they are clearly homeostatic 
property cluster kinds (see chap. 2). Homeostatic mechanisms, such as very 
loud noises, bring about the co-occurrence of their properties, for example, 
facial expression and startle. Given this, it appears that emotions are a natu-
ral kind. 
 The second point is that the ability to emote properly at all, as a human 
being, is a function of linguistically mediated social relationship. When 
everything is functioning normally, that is, ideally as it evolved to (but sel-
dom does) in terms of neonate and caregiver input and output, the rela-
tionship provides the necessary and sufficient conditions to initiate the 
development of full human emotionality from a set of culturally universal 
and monomorphic emotional precursors. This emotionality includes the 
identification of culturally relevant emotions, their culturally relevant elici-
tors, what they are called or labeled in the emoter’s particular culture, and 
what the culturally appropriate response is. What this clearly implies is that 
(i) culture and language make a serious constitutive contribution to the 

Mirror, Mirror … Human Emotional Ontogenesis 
103
development of human emotions, including basic emotions; and (ii) the 
achievement of intrapersonal emotional regulation is the result of the cul-
tural and generational inheritance of the relevant ethnotheories. 
 The third important point to note is the synchronized operations of 
infant and caregiver throughout emotional ontogenesis. The affect expres-
sions of early neonatal life are producers of unfocused, undifferentiated 
signs or expressions of threshold deficits with a combination of both indic-
ative (“something’s wrong”) and imperative (“do something!”) functions. 
These trigger the coarse-grained interpreter devices with which caregivers 
are equipped to discover what is causing their infant to (precursor) emote 
and what to do about it. The repeated exercise of such search processes, 
complemented by relevant “baby talk” (Holodynski and Friedlmeier 2006), 
fine-tunes these interpreter devices to the particular idiosyncrasies of their 
infants’ needs, expressions, and satisfaction criteria (“Oh, Amy sad,” accom-
panied by exaggerated frown and downturned mouth, “Amy hungry?” 
“Oh, Amy got windy-pops?” “Oh, Amy wet diaper,” “Mummy make Amy 
comfy and dry,” and so on). My point is that the underlying neural circuits 
and the differential feelings, causes, and satisfaction criteria associated with 
basic emotions mature or develop from affect expressions through this pro-
cess. This must be the case. First, absence or interruption of close social 
relationships disrupts the development of normal mental capacities, includ-
ing emotional capacities in all primates (see sec. 4.2). Second, and if only 
because of the Muggle constraint (Wheeler 2005, 4–5), that is, that all magi-
cal explanations are precluded, such capacities are necessarily metaphysi-
cally realized in realizer systems that include neural substrata. 
 This is entirely consistent with what developmental biologists have 
repeatedly demonstrated, that is, that the development of any trait or char-
acteristic is a consequence of coactions between complex molecular inter-
actions within and across cells and the nature of the physical, biological, 
and social environments through which individuals pass during develop-
ment (Lickliter 2008). Coaction refers to the results of the relationship of 
interacting components in any developmental system, not the additive 
effects of the components themselves. Importantly, of course, such coac-
tions inevitably involve genes. 
 Biological scientists now recognize that one of the clearest links between 
gene activation in individual neurons and experience is that of immediate 
early genes (IEGs) and sensory stimulation (Johnston 2008; Johnston and 

104 
Chapter 4
Edwards 2002). Auditory, visual, tactile, and olfactory stimulation almost 
always results in the activation, within minutes, of one or more IEGs. These 
genes produce transcription factors to control the production of proteins by 
other genes, and these proteins construct and reshape neural circuits. The 
genetic activity is not restricted to early development; it is, rather, ever pres-
ent during the life of human and nonhuman animals. This explains why 
animals, including human animals, who are raised in total or relative social 
isolation fail to develop normal cognitive and emotional capacities; with-
out the requisite auditory, visual, tactile, and olfactory stimulation, there 
will be no activation of IEGs and no construction and reshaping of neural 
circuits. This clearly supports the claim that realizer systems are metaphysi-
cally context sensitive all the way down. It also indicates that emotionality 
(and cognition more generally) is social in a much deeper sense than for-
merly construed. The neural circuits that underpin assistance-soliciting and 
assistance-producing devices of BEs and HCEs are developed and fine-tuned 
in the human neonate and child in response to caregiver responses to emo-
tion precursors and differentiated (or differentiating) emotions. In addi-
tion, the reshaping of caregiver circuits that underpin the transition from 
coarse-grained to fine-grained assistance-providing devices results from the 
feedback they receive from their own search-identify-correct responses to 
the affect expressions of their infants and differentiated (or differentiating) 
emotions of their children. 
 Of course, one could object that human neonates do not require a close, 
linguistically mediated social relationship in which to develop their emo-
tions because some children, such as the wolf boy of Aveyron, seem to have 
developed basic emotions in the absence of such a relationship. We should 
note a distinction, however, between human emotionality and emotional-
ity in other species. This is not to deny that wolves emote in ways relevant 
to wolf lifeways; one would expect them, as social mammals, to emote in 
ways appropriate to the regulation of pack life. Human infants reared in 
close contact with wolves, therefore, would learn the emotions appropriate 
to pack life, and these emotions do seem to have analogues at least to the 
emotion precursors we pick out with the English words  fright ,  distress ,  inter-
est , and so on. This seems unremarkable; basic emotions and their precur-
sors are underpinned by neural circuits in primitive areas of the brain that 
human beings share with other nonhuman species, and this could account 
for the similar “emotionality” apparent in wolves (and other nonhuman 

Mirror, Mirror … Human Emotional Ontogenesis 
105
species). Human infants, just like all other nonhuman animals, can learn to 
respond emotionally to certain stimuli simply by association. In my 
account, however, they will not emote fully as human beings until they can 
semantically conceptualize the emotions they experience, their causes, and 
their appropriate responses. 
 This is an important point; as children develop and grow, they learn that 
an expanding range of stimuli can elicit basic emotional responses, and 
these typically do require semantic conceptualization. This is not to deny 
that subdoxastic concreta (e.g., slowly moving “speaking” heads, snake-
shaped objects), music, and changes in facial expression and bodily orienta-
tion can elicit basic emotions, for clearly they can and do. It is, rather, 
merely to claim that semantic conceptualization is also an important elici-
tor. In cases such as blue exam books (Prinz 2004), for instance, and sum-
monses from senior colleagues, the emoter-subject necessarily requires 
some grasp of the meaning, in terms of potential threat, of blue exam books 
and summonses from senior colleagues to experience a fear response. Nor is 
it to deny that BE responses can be automatic, for clearly here, too, they can 
be. It is, rather, merely to claim that some degree of top-down elicitation 
and regulation is possible in some situations. 
 Emotions are stimulus dependent, which means that they are con-
strained by their inputs. This is consistent, however, with the possibility 
that top-down processes can significantly affect the operation of perceptual 
systems. Bottom-up inputs trump top-down inputs when the two conflict 
(Prinz 2004). This might be because they activate phylogenetically ancient 
sensory thalamo-amygdala circuits in the midbrain much more speedily 
than the more phylogenetically recent sensory thalamo-cortico-amygdala 
circuits. When there is no bottom-up/top-down conflict, top-down inputs 
operate efficiently. 
 The fourth important point is that the entire human emotional ontoge-
netic process involves the progressive fine-tuning of the relevant develop-
mental mechanisms, and this occurs through progressively fine-grained 
mutual modulation of neonates’ assistance-soliciting and caregivers’ 
assistance-providing interpreter mechanisms. It is through these mutual 
modulation processes that neonate and caregiver become intimately 
acquainted and attached, that is, develop the special social relationship on 
which human emotional ontogenesis partly but crucially depends. In addi-
tion, such mutual modulation simultaneously results in the progressive 

106 
Chapter 4
development, maturation, and connection of the relevant neural substrata 
on which, again, human emotionality partly but crucially depends. Both 
developing social relationship and neural substrata enable further, progres-
sively synchronized mutual modulation of neonate and caregiver mecha-
nisms. In short, the special social relationship and neural substrata are both 
causes and effects of increasingly synchronized mutual modulation. The 
degree of complexity, complementarity, and integration is such that with-
out the coaction of all neural and extraneural components involved, 
human emotionality would fail to develop or to develop normally. 
 In sum, emotional ontogenesis provides a compelling example of deep 
functional integration and CT. Emotional ontogenesis, as noted previously, 
is crucially dependent on the close, linguistically mediated relationship of 
neonate and caregiver. The preadaptations with which both partners are 
genetically endowed, that is, neonates’ emotion precursors (affect expres-
sions), precursor emotion regulation strategies, and sensorimotor compe-
tences, and caregivers’ intuitive parenting skills, coevolved precisely to 
promote such deep functional integration. The frequency and intensity of 
the visual, auditory, and tactile stimulation in the affect mirroring and baby 
talk commentary typical of intuitive parenting skills engage precisely with 
the precursor strategies and sensorimotor competences, especially motor 
mimicry of neonates. It is through the coactions of affect mirroring, baby 
talk commentary (caregiver), and motor mimicry and rewarding feedback, 
that is, cooing, smiling, visually fixating, and snuggling up (neonate), that 
the coarse-grained search-identify-correct interpreter devices of caregivers 
are progressively fine-tuned and the coarse-grained affect expressions in the 
neonate are progressively fine-tuned into the producer and interpreter 
devices of basic emotions. It is through this interdependent (deeply func-
tionally integrated) process that contingencies between emotion expres-
sion, feeling, and responses are synchronically constructed in both partners 
because the requisite neural substrata are being developed, matured, and 
reshaped. In addition, subsequently, precisely the same interdependent 
(deeply functionally integrated) process of affect mirroring and verbal com-
mentary, including instructions (caregivers), and motor mimicry and verbal 
commentary, including instructions (children), promotes the development 
of the higher sentiments (Holodynski and Friedlmeier 2006). The level of 
deep functional integration of both neonatal and caregiver neural and cor-
poreal resources with external sociocultural resources in emotional 

Mirror, Mirror … Human Emotional Ontogenesis 
107
ontogenesis is such that they constitute a genuinely extended cognitive 
system by affecting the system as a whole, producing effects that result only 
from the system functioning as a whole. What this clearly implies is that 
component structures and processes in human emotional ontogenesis 
operating across two socially embedded brains are deeply metaphysically 
interdependent. In light of this, it is a mistake to construe causality and 
constitution as mutually exclusive relations; causal relations can be, and in 
this case very clearly are, constituents of larger, more complex structures 
and processes. In addition, the level of DFI in emotional ontogenesis is 
such that it is a mistake to maintain that cognition always extends from 
brain to world. The constitution of human emotional ontogenesis in neo-
nates and children and the fine-tuning of caregiver intuitive parenting 
skills are a result of mutual, synchronized modulation of causal processes in 
and across (at least) two socially integrated craniums. In this account, 
human emotional ontogenesis extends from the brains of people in the 
external environment and the sociocultural products into which they are 
deeply integrated into other people’s developing brains. What this clearly 
implies is that emotional ontogenesis is a world-to-brain transcranial 
achievement. 
 In the externalist account for which I argue, both wide and radically 
wide realizations are involved in human emotionality. I have argued that 
the intrinsic physical states of the individual bearer of emotional states 
(and affect expressive states) are necessary but not sufficient for the meta-
physical realization of human emotions. The total realizer systems, in terms 
of both emotional ontogenesis and adult emotionality, extend beyond the 
skin and skull of the emoter-subject into the sociocultural environment 
into which she is deeply embedded. The metaphysical realization of human 
emotionality, therefore, is never merely entity bound or individualistic. 
 Human emotional ontogenesis is radically widely realized; its core real-
izer is the close, complexly interdependent, linguistically mediated social 
relationship of neonate or infant and caregiver, which clearly extends 
beyond the physical boundary of the (precursor) emoting infant. This rela-
tionship provides, inter alia, the auditory, visual, tactile, and olfactory stim-
ulation required to activate the immediate early genes (IEGs), which 
progressively construct the neural circuits that eventually underpin adult 
emotionality. These circuits account for both the automatic processing of 
certain emotion-related sensory-perceptual stimuli and semantic and 

108 
Chapter 4
conceptual processing of sensory-perceptual and linguistic and symbolic 
stimuli. In short, this relationship is critical to the gradual development, 
maturation, and connection of emotion-related neural circuits, including 
the amygdala, which underpin the progressive shift from interpersonally 
regulated juvenile emotionality to intrapersonally regulated adult emotion-
ality. In the absence or disturbance of this relationship, human infants will 
fail to develop into full-blown human emoters, as the empirical evidence 
bears witness. (I deal with the changing locus of control in developmental 
interaction sequences in chap. 5.) 
 The total realizer system of human emotional ontogenesis, therefore, 
which includes core and noncore partial realizers, is metaphysically real-
ized in a range of heterogeneous but complementary internal physical 
resources (e.g., neural substrata, IEGs, optic nerve, facial musculature) and 
external sociocultural resources (e.g., language, emotional ethnotheories). 
 In full adult emotionality, the core realizer is the amygdala; it is, as indi-
cated previously, the part of the total realizer system most readily identifi-
able as producing and sustaining full-blown adult emotionality. In this 
case, the core realizer does not extend beyond the physical body of the 
emoter-subject, but the total realizer system does. Adult emoters under-
stand the meaning of the various emotion elicitors to which they are sub-
ject, the subjective feelings that they engender, and the culturally 
appropriate responses to them, and these depend on the sociocultural and 
linguistic traditions into which they are also deeply embedded. Thus adult 
emotionality is also realized in a heterogeneous but complementary mix of 
internal physical resources (e.g., amygdala, cortex, facial musculature) and 
external sociocultural resources (e.g., language, cultural ethnotheories).  
 4.3   Conclusion 
 I noted in the introduction that intracranialists claim that extraorganismal 
resources can be deeply functionally integrated with intraorganismal 
resources, yet deny that DFI can provide evidence of CT. I also noted that 
transcranialists claim that DFI hinges on the extent and complexity of 
functional complementarity and integration; thus DFI is a matter of degree. 
Deep functional integration with CT, I have claimed, is achieved when the 
internal and external components in a cognitive system function synchro-
nously as a whole, producing results only by functioning synchronously as 

Mirror, Mirror … Human Emotional Ontogenesis 
109
a whole. However, since DFI is a matter of degree, the deeper the functional 
integration of components, the more the system will function synchro-
nously as a whole, and the more it will produce the effects that result only 
from the system functioning synchronously as a whole. Inevitably, there-
fore, there will be cases of functional integration that are relatively weaker 
and relatively stronger in terms of complementarity, complexity, and inte-
gration, and claims at the weaker ends of these dimensions may well appear 
strained. Claims to CT at the stronger ends, however, will appear natural 
and justified. This will be particularly true when such cases are described in 
the kind of full and rich detail (Sutton et al. 2010) as the description of 
human emotional ontogenesis given in this chapter. What this implies is 
that intracranialists’ putative explicit acceptance of DFI while denying CT 
can only pertain to cases that are relatively weaker in terms of complemen-
tarity, complexity, and integration. 3  


 5  Out of the Mouths of Babes and Sucklings 
 5.1   Introduction 
 In chapter 1, I identified two forms that biological constraints can take. 
These were sensorimotor competencies and species-typical activity pat-
terns, and in chapter 4, I identified certain sensorimotor competencies with 
which human neonates are preadapted and applied these particularly to 
the learning of human emotionality. In this chapter, I identify early species-
typical activity patterns that are present at birth or develop in early life, and 
show how they provide the basis for the acquisition of language. I argue 
that the linguistic environment into which human neonates are born and 
the complementary repertoires of constraints (species-typical behavior pat-
terns) with which neonates and their primary caregivers are biologically 
equipped provide the necessary and sufficient conditions for the construc-
tion of what appears to be a two-stage process of language acquisition, 
incorporating first a pragmatic foundation and subsequently a lexicon. 
These constraint repertoires are as deeply functionally integrated as those 
that underpin emotional ontogenesis and serve, again, to help construct 
the close, linguistically mediated social relationship within which both 
emotions and language develop. What this implies is that the core realizer 
of language acquisition is the same close, linguistically mediated social rela-
tionship as that of emotional ontogenesis and that language acquisition is 
also radically widely realized. 
 I argue that the developmental mechanism is, again, (i) initially, auto-
matic, unthinking, exaggeratedly succinct parental mirroring of infants’ 
protowords, pitched to match their perceptual capacities and structured to 
establish the prelexical pragmatic context; and when the child signals her 

112 
Chapter 5
readiness or interest, (ii) a deliberately pedagogic approach to language 
learning. In light of these analyses, I also argue that a rich, innate language 
acquisition device is probably superfluous; very limited innate repertoires 
of constraints and the social environment probably provide all that is 
required for language development in normal children. I argue, further, 
that the learning of both language and emotion begins in turn taking, 
which is established through suckling, either breast or bottle, and that the 
constant daily repetition of simple vocalizations and gestures is fueled by 
the same endogenous opioids and prosocial neuropeptides as emotional 
ontogenesis. 
 In addition, in this chapter, I include a similar level of detail as that in 
chapter 4 to (i) preclude any intracranialist denial of genuinely transcranial 
processes operating in language development, and (ii) replay my rebuttal, 
albeit with details from language development, of intracranialists’ claim 
that transcranialists commit a coupling-constitution fallacy. I conclude the 
chapter by describing the opioids and prosocial neuropeptides that fuel 
neonate-caregiver interaction.  
 5.2   Species-Typical Activity Patterns 
 Behaviors that are present at birth or emerge in the early months include 
reach-and-grasp movements (Fischer and Bidell 1991); early lip and tongue 
movements, or “prespeech” (Trevarthen 1979); rhythmic supine kicking 
and hand waving (Thelen 1981); and, most important, burst-pause-burst 
suckling (Kaye 1982). These, I suggest, are the nonemotional or emotion-
neutral analogues of the unfocused crying and motor unrest and cooing, 
smiling, and snuggling up of emotional expression (see chap. 4). Primary 
caregivers are aware that such unfocused activities are not emotional reac-
tions simply because their infants are manifestly not distressed or very 
happy, but caregivers correctly assume that these activities are minimally 
intentional insofar as they are meant to attract parental attention. In the 
same way that mother is preadapted to search-identify-correct (distress) and 
prolong and intensify (happiness) the cause of her infant’s emotional reac-
tion, she is preadapted to search-identify-satisfy her infant’s nonemotional 
wishes and demands. In exactly the same way that she explores the possible 
causes of emotional distress or pleasure (e.g., by checking to see if the baby’s 

Out of the Mouths of Babes and Sucklings 
113
diaper is wet, watching to see if she sucks her fingers, shivers, etc.), the 
mother explores her infant’s possible wishes (e.g., by talking, picking up, 
playing peekaboo). What this implies is that the search-identify-correct or 
prolong-and-intensify responses to emotional expression and the search-
identify-satisfy responses to nonemotional species-typical behavior pat-
terns are both forms that intuitive parenting can take. Further, because 
both correcting or prolonging and satisfying wishes and demands are both 
means of satisfying infant need, intuitive parenting more generally involves 
search-identify-satisfy responses. In addition, again, similar to the role of 
affect expressions in emotional development, if hand waving results in 
being picked up and cuddled, and the infant responds with appropriately 
positive feedback, such as smiling, cooing, and cuddling up, the mother 
will repeat her lifting behavior the next time the infant waves her hand so 
as to elicit the same response. The same holds true for reach and grasp and 
supine kicking and prespeech. These are also interpreted as nonemotional 
assistance-soliciting signals that elicit in caregivers complementary, 
assistance-producing behaviors. I noted in chapter 4 that caregivers actively 
seek opportunities to interact with their babies, and the assistance-soliciting 
species-typical behavior patterns provide some of these. 
 There should be one important difference, however, in the physiological 
underpinnings of assistance-providing motivation in nonemotional 
assistance-soliciting situations. There is no need for a physiological stress 
reaction; the infant is manifestly not distressed. The assistance-providing 
motivation, therefore, is presumably a result of prosocial neuropeptide 
flooding at birth and during suckling. These prosocial neuropeptides excite 
the intraneural genetic products into neurogenesis and neural connection 
in neonate and caregiver. These new or more elaborate neural circuits 
underpin progressively fine-tuned assistance-soliciting and assistance-
providing devices in neonates and caregivers, which, in turn, underpin 
more fine-tuned and elaborate forms of mother-infant interaction. What 
this implies is that the species-typical behavior patterns and the responses 
they elicit, or the deep functional integration of complementary repertoires 
of neonatal species-typical behavior patterns and parental responses, are as 
instrumental in the development of the very close, linguistically mediated 
social relationship of neonate and caregiver as the emotionally focused 
complementary repertoires of neonate and caregiver. This relationship 

114 
Chapter 5
therefore provides the context for the continuing development of more 
complex forms of emotional and nonemotional behavior.  
 5.3   Turn Taking in Human Development 
 These species-typical behavior patterns are important, for they are all 
instrumental in the development of turn taking with the mother. Her 
responses, qua responses, follow infant activity and result in interactive 
sequences of turn taking (Bloom 1991; Bloom and Tinker 2001). A mother’s 
response to a pause in suckling (breast or bottle) is probably the most 
important in this respect; according to Hendriks-Jansen (1996, 253), it is 
the foundation for the “conversational dialogue” that develops between 
mother and infant. I agree with Hendriks-Jansen that this is one of the 
functions of turn taking, but not its main function; see below. 
 Human suckling is unique in that it is punctuated naturally by random 
pauses that may be due to the anatomical changes in the upper respiratory 
and digestive tracts that enable speech. Mothers notice these pauses because 
suckling is a distinctly rhythmic activity, and because such pauses could 
lead to malnourishment if allowed to persist, they are interpreted as signs 
of laziness or disinterest (“Something’s wrong! Do something!”) or even of 
a desire to play rather than suckle (“Something’s right! Do something!”). 
Mothers are preadapted to respond by jiggling (M. Bateson 1979), which is 
meant to encourage the infant to return to suckling. 
 Interestingly, it is not the jiggling but its cessation that results in the 
resumption of suckling; mothers, however, are not aware of this. What this 
means is that jiggling per se has no nutritional value; this further implies 
that it was selected for another function. Pause-jiggle sequences are clearly 
minimally intentional (they are produced for consumption or use by 
another device) and thus coevolved to establish turn taking. Feeding thus 
becomes a process of turn taking: suckle-pause-jiggle (pause)-suckle-pause-
jiggle (pause)-suckle, and so on. It was Kaye (1982, 188) who suggested that 
this turn taking resembles ordinary human conversation, where one speaker 
speaks and then pauses, and during or as a result of the pause, her interlocu-
tor then speaks. 
 My view is that both Kaye and Hendriks-Jansen underestimate the 
proper function of turn taking, which, they suggest, provides the platform 
for language acquisition. Suckling is probably the very first activity engaged 

Out of the Mouths of Babes and Sucklings 
115
in by human infants, and if suckle-pause-jiggle coevolved to enable turn 
taking to develop, then turn taking is one of the first activities to develop 
in every neonatal life. This implies that it is just as important in emotional 
ontogenesis as in language acquisition, and for the same reason. It provides 
essential opportunities for infants to mimic and practice behavior and for 
caregivers to provide feedback by means of, for instance, exaggerated affect 
mirroring and baby talk commentary and, as the child grows, to correct 
pronunciation and give instructions and advice. Turn taking, in this 
account, is not primarily to enable conversational dialogue per se: it is, 
rather, to enable learning of the essential skills of emotional control, lan-
guage, and symbolic thinking. A crucial implication of this is that human 
children learn to speak through the same process through which they learn 
to emote, that is, through motor mimicry and tediously repetitive practice, 
day in, day out, with interactive caregivers. 
 The other patterns of activity listed earlier are apparently initially fired 
off at random; the infant coos, kicks, and waves her arms, and the mother 
correctly interprets these as primitive intentional acts to which she needs to 
learn to respond appropriately. Each activity evolved initially to exercise 
and develop the neuromuscular apparatus that will underpin more com-
plex motor and speech acts, but was subsequently selected (together with 
maternal responses) to provide a turn in a “conversation” where the infant 
moves, then pauses, then the caregiver fills in the gaps, then pauses to 
allow her infant to respond, and so on. That this is the case is evidenced by 
the irrelevance of some of these activities (e.g., suckling pauses) to physio-
logical well-being, and the complete disappearance of others in the early 
months of life. 
 The caregiver thus allows herself to be paced by the infant, and all of this 
reinforces the interactive turn taking already established through feeding. 
The important point is that the mother responds to these expressions as 
minimally intentional, but she is the only one of the partners who can 
attribute meaning. There is no substantive content to maternal-infant “dia-
logue” in the early months, but it is foundational in establishing the prag-
matics of conversation that will enable the emergence of meaning for the 
infant in due course. In addition, the supine kicking, hand waving, and 
reach-and-grasp movements are developed and refined through highly 
repetitive motor sequences often scaffolded (Scaffolding 1) by the provision 
of bright, interesting toys (see sec. 5.6). 

116 
Chapter 5
 Turn taking provides the basis for a number of important developments 
over the next few months: 
 • 
 The infant discovers which activities elicit which responses from 
caregivers.  
 • 
 She develops routine sequences of interaction that are triggered 
predictably.  
 • 
 These provide a context for the development of mutual expectations.  
 5.4   The Emergence of Joint Attention 
 I noted earlier that by the age of six weeks, mother and infant are commu-
nicating intensively face-to-face and engaging in mutual gazing (Chappell 
and Sander 1979; von Hofsten and Rosander 2013). This is enabled by the 
increasing opportunities for interaction afforded by increasing neonatal 
alertness during mundane nurturing and cleansing activities in the early 
days and weeks. In addition, early face perception is enabled because it 
matches the operation of human sensory, perceptual, and cognitive mecha-
nisms (Bushnell 2013). Mother places herself directly in line with the 
infant’s eyes and at a distance of 20 to 24 centimeters, gently moving her 
face back and forward and speaking to the infant; the infant is preferen-
tially disposed to follow speaking, slowly moving heads (Simion, Regolin, 
and Bulf 2008; Troje 2013), and the infant’s eyes often fixate on the mater-
nal face. At this age, the infant’s visual system, although poorly developed, 
is sufficiently developed to allow the infant to follow movement, and the 
mother’s actions ensure that what she sees is her face. This gives the mother 
the impression that her infant is showing interest in her, and thus she inter-
prets the gaze as intentional. 
 This interpretation of intentionality is reinforced from about one month, 
when the infant begins to fixate on the mother’s face for extended periods; 
again, she interprets the gaze as intentional, which she finds rewarding. In 
turn, this enables the mutual attention and shared emotion of affect attun-
ement that characterizes Trevarthen’s (1979) primary intersubjectivity. At 
about six to eight weeks, the infant can track more fine-grained features in 
her visual field. This enables her to attend to the mother’s features and 
changing facial expressions, again increasing the impression of intentional 
response. 

Out of the Mouths of Babes and Sucklings 
117
 At four months, the infant’s visual behavior changes noticeably; having 
established intense face-to-face contact with mother, she begins to look 
away. Although no evidence at this stage suggests that the infant is foveat-
ing on particular objects, mother assumes that this is the case. The infant, 
however, may perform a random reach-and-grasp movement, possibly 
coincidentally with the direction of her gaze, and if an object is present 
(and the mother scaffolds the environment to ensure that there is), the 
mother interprets the movement as intentional. She assumes that the 
infant is expressing a desire for the object, which the mother then hands to 
the infant. By so doing, the mother incorporates a species-typical activity 
pattern into an interactional sequence that is about something. “With the 
aid of the dynamic scaffolding supplied by the mother, the infant thus per-
forms intentional acts (acts directed towards objects and about objects) 
long before he is capable of intentional thought” (Hendriks-Jansen 1996, 
273). This is because the mother is preadapted to behave with regularity 
and thus structure the interaction in ways that become familiar to the 
infant. After several responses of handing over the object, whether or not 
the infant actually signaled that she wanted it, the infant learns how to 
behave so as to have objects passed to her. This kind of interaction results, 
at about six months, in pointing emerging naturally as a communication 
gesture in infant-mother dialogue. 
 The infant points to an object in the environment, and the mother 
interprets the gesture in folk psychological terms, that is, the infant desires 
the object. This is imperative pointing and results in the child being given 
what she wants. However, two other forms of pointing emerge after this; 
these are informative and declarative-indicative pointing, and they have 
different purposes. Imperative pointing (rather obviously) indicates what 
the child wants; informative pointing assists others by providing informa-
tion that they might need (Aktar and Tomasello 1998); and declarative 
pointing is undertaken simply to share interest with another person (Lis-
kowski et al. 2006; Liskowski et al. 2004). Declarative pointing is under-
taken simply because it is rewarding (Wyman and Tomasello 2007, 233), 
and it appears at around one year. 
 It is around this time that toddlers hold out objects to caregivers simply 
to show them, thus bringing the object into common view. They also begin 
to direct the attention of others through indicative gestures, in particular 
by pointing to objects and events in the environment. This indicates a 

118 
Chapter 5
transition to secondary intersubjectivity (Trevarthen and Hubley 1978), 
where infant and mother can focus on an external object rather than just 
on each other. Two other behaviors emerge around this time. The first is 
that children show concern for others in distress and occasionally try to 
comfort them. Presumably this is learned through imitation of caregivers; 
see chapter 4. The second is the coordinated activity of toddler and adult in 
highly ritualized games, such as peekaboo or rolling a ball back and forth. 
These ritualized games are scaffolded (Scaffolding 1) by interacting adults. 
Even at this age, toddlers understand that the roles are interdependent; 
children prompt adults to resume playing if they stop. By 15 to 18 months, 
noticeably more frequent joint interaction emerges in free play situations, 
although still ritualized to some extent, which involve child, adult, and 
object or event. The child can both follow the adult’s lead and actively 
direct her attention (Wyman and Tomasello 2007, 470). By two years, how-
ever, interaction is occurring where child and adult cooperate much more 
on spontaneous rather than ritualized projects or problem-solving tasks. 
Should the adult cease interacting, again the child invites resumption. 
Thus, by two years, the child understands her role and her partner’s role as 
interconnected in joint activity (471). She also understands that she herself 
and those with whom she interacts can attend to the same object and, in 
addition, can monitor each other’s attention to that object. 
 These pointing and showing behaviors provide evidence of an early 
capacity to construct and negotiate interactional sequences (“dialogues”) 
with others, based on mutual attention. This enables children to focus 
jointly with others on objects and events that can become the object of a 
shared goal, such as building a tower with building blocks. And, of course, 
as toddlers learn their native language, they learn that words can be used in 
place of gestures as attention-directing devices (Tomasello 1999), such as 
“Dada!” By sixteen months, pointing is consistently accompanied by one 
word, often monosyllabic or reduplicated (e.g.,  Mama ,  Dada ,  Nana ) and 
related or relevant to the primary interests of the child (M. M. Lewis 2013; 
Bloom and Tinker 2001). 
 A strong relationship exists between pointing and language develop-
ment (Rowlands 2014). In a meta-analysis of language development from 
25 studies involving 734 children between 1978 and 2009, Colonnesi et al. 
(2010) showed a predictive relationship between the two. They conclude 

Out of the Mouths of Babes and Sucklings 
119
that “the pointing gesture is a key joint attention behaviour involved in the 
acquisition of language” (352). 
 It is worth emphasizing that the key to shared collaborative activity—
and, crucially, this includes communicative activity—is joint attention. It is 
unique to the human species (Butterworth 2013). A series of comparative 
studies of human toddlers and chimps of one to five years (Tomasello and 
Carpenter 2005; Warneken, Chen, and Tomasello 2006) discovered that 
chimps engage in no joint attentional behaviors at all. In addition, Toma-
sello and Carpenter (2005) found that chimps fail to develop any under-
standing of role and role reversal. Both sets of subjects were involved in a 
game requiring (minimal) cooperative interaction with a human experi-
menter, and although the chimps managed to imitate some of the experi-
menter’s actions, there was no evidence that these actions were conceived 
of as roles in the sense that they were intended for the partner. Of particular 
interest was the fact that the chimps failed altogether to look at the experi-
menter partner. Wyman and Tomasello (2007) suggest that chimps can 
coordinate their actions with others but do not conceive of the interaction 
as composed of designated roles that are interdependent and therefore 
reversible. It is the unique ability of the human species to do this, and it is 
this on which cooperative activity depends. 
 According to Butterworth (2008, 2013), joint visual attention (JVA) 
emerges when both participants engage focally with an object, and it com-
mences in primary intersubjectivity (see earlier). From about one month, 
the infant and mother attend focally to each other’s gaze, and from about 
four months, there is some evidence of joint attention to objects, albeit of 
a fleeting and infrequent nature. Butterworth (2008, 214) terms this “fragile 
triadic JVA.” This is followed, at about nine months, with “robust triadic 
JVA,” which characterizes secondary intersubjectivity. This change is 
accompanied, from about eleven months, with canonical pointing or 
pointing proper. 
 In addition, comprehension of pointing precedes production by some 
two months. 1 The communicative intent of pointing is fully understood by 
twelve months, and the production of pointing begins around fourteen 
months. In one of their studies, Butterworth and Grover (1989) found that 
infants at six to nine months fixated on a pointing hand rather than 
the target object, and if they did fixate on the target, they did so only after 

120 
Chapter 5
initially fixating on the hand. By twelve months, however, they fixated 
almost immediately on the target object. 
 In terms of production of pointing, infants point only in the presence of 
a social partner, never when they are alone. In terms of both declarative 
and imperative pointing, moreover, infants check, sometimes repeatedly, to 
see if their partner is attending to the target (Grover 1988). In addition, at 
around 12 to 14 months, another developmental transition occurs. Point-
ing becomes dissociated from the object pointed at; when the mother tries 
to hand the object to the child, she refuses to take it. Pointing is now used 
extensively to draw attention to unfamiliar objects, objects in pictures, and 
even objects not in view. The child looks at mother while pointing and 
perhaps utters a word (although not recognizable at this stage). Pointing 
has become a general-purpose means of expression. 
 When young children learn to communicate gesturally, they are learn-
ing that other people intend to direct their attention within a joint interac-
tional sequence and that they can direct the attention of others in the same 
way. By fourteen months, toddlers attend to an adult’s point as a commu-
nicative cue, can identify the referent of the point, and can infer the rele-
vance of the point to their goal, say, finding a hidden toy (Behne, Carpenter, 
and Tomasello 2005). “They understand that the adult’s motive is to help 
them and that she intends for them to attend to something. That is, mean-
ing that they understand ‘communicative intentions’ (Grice 1957)” 
(Wyman and Tomasello 2007, 232). By fourteen months, therefore, human 
toddlers understand what ostensive communication is and its relevance to 
their needs and desires. Chimps, in contrast, can follow the gaze of another 
to find hidden food, but they are unable to use intentionally produced 
communicative cues to do the same (Tomasello, Call, and Gluckman 1997). 
Chimps fail to understand that ostensive communication is an attempt to 
attract their attention. They cannot use ostensively and intentionally sig-
naled information from another who attempts to help them by informa-
tively directing their attention in some way (Povinelli 2004; Povinelli and 
Eddy 1996).  
 5.5   Language Acquisition in Neonates and Young Children 
 The infant at 8 to 20 weeks begins to coo when awake and alert (M. Bateson 
1979, 1975); the mother responds with soft tones, and turn taking begins; 

Out of the Mouths of Babes and Sucklings 
121
and by 20 weeks, the infant strings together her coos, but without rhythm 
or intonation. By 20 to 30 weeks, the infant introduces consonant and 
vowel sequences, which are repeated frequently with some variation in 
pitch. Mother responds energetically to these by imitating them and inter-
jecting pauses between individual bursts. This gives the interaction a sem-
blance of dialogue, which both partners find rewarding. Very little 
simultaneous vocalizing occurs (Bloom and Tinker 2001). Mother distin-
guishes clearly between vowel-like sounds and more advanced syllabic 
sounds and cooing or grizzling, which she interprets as signs of comfort or 
discomfort. The more advanced syllabic sounds are not interpreted as signs 
of anything but are imitated in interactive, dialogue-type sequences 
(Papousek and Papousek 1987). 
 Trevarthen (1979) places the origins of this specialization even earlier, by 
drawing attention to the small movements of the lips and tongue that he 
terms “prespeech.” Like Papousek and Papousek, he is at pains to point out 
that such movements occur at different times and appear to be manifesta-
tions of a different kind of state and are certainly interpreted in a different 
way by the mother compared to signs of emotion or physiological need. 
Language as a vehicle for content appears to have a grounding in species-
typical activity patterns that are entirely separate from the vocal-gestural 
expression of emotion. These species-typical activity patterns are exercised 
in an interactive context and incorporated into preverbal “dialogues” that 
serve to select and shape them further (Hendriks-Jansen 1996, 286–287). 
That language as a vehicle for content is grounded in species-typical activ-
ity patterns entirely separate from those of emotional expression is attested 
by the fact that infants emote  or talk (Bloom 1991; Bloom and Tinker 2001), 
up to the emergence of the verbal spurt at around two years (see sec. 5.6). 
 At about 25 to 50 weeks, the babbling stage commences. Babbling 
involves the production of sound just for its own sake (M. M. Lewis 2013, 
93). Before babbling proper, neonates engage first in cries of discomfort and 
vegetative sounds (0–8 weeks), cooing and laughter (comfort sounds) typi-
cally in response to another’s smiling or talking (8–16 weeks), followed by 
marginal babbling at 25 to 50 weeks (Vihman 1996), where consonant and 
vowel combinations are repeated with increasing frequency. By 40 to 50 
weeks, the babbling becomes variegated, where consonants and vowels are 
changed from one syllable to the next. The rhythm begins to resemble 
human adult speech, which parents interpret as speech acts, but the 

122 
Chapter 5
babbling has no obvious meaning. Parents institute games based on melodic 
sequences and particular syllables, producing protowords associated with 
specific interactive situations. Children in particular language communities 
at this age sound more like adults than each other. Babbling consists in 
small sequences of sounds that are very similar to those used in early lan-
guage; this implies that the capacity to use the words of native language 
emerges long before children learn to utter words proper. 
 These developments in sound production are accompanied or even pre-
ceded (often by up to two months) by infant advances in speech perception 
(Harris 2004; Butterworth and Grover 1989). Infants can make auditory 
discriminations at a very young age, and some of these are clearly speech 
related. Infants as young as one to four months can perceive most of the 
phonetic distinctions that exist in human languages (Miller and Jusczyk 
1989). As Hendriks-Jansen points out (1996, 287), these perceptive capaci-
ties require subvenient mechanisms of great complexity, since there is no 
one-to-one relation between acoustic and phonetic segments: “Speakers do 
not produce speech in well-defined phonetic atoms; the vocal gestures for 
a given segment will typically overlap those for the segments that precede 
and succeed it.” Human communication, therefore, requires underlying 
mechanisms of great flexibility: 
 We have inherited certain signals like smiling and eye-brow raising from our primate 
ancestors, but these become assimilated and elaborated into far more complex pat-
terns of social interaction. Early communicative exchanges with adults provide the 
means for launching an infant into such flexible patterns of “dialogue.” Human in-
fants have to be boot-strapped into the world of meaning. Turn taking of the 
particular human variety is the mechanism that makes it possible. (Hendriks-Jansen 
1996, 267)  
 Turn taking, in this account, can be construed as “the cradle of meaning” 
(Hendriks-Jansen 1996, 277), but contra Hendriks-Jansen, only because it 
provides essential opportunities for learning. 
 Researchers generally acknowledge (Levinson 2006) that neonate and 
mother are preadapted for speech perception and production. From birth 
(or even prenatally) neonates appear to be attracted by their mother’s voice 
(Kisilevsky et al. 2009), which is preadapted to the infant’s perceptual and 
production capabilities. Mother alters her pitch, syntax, and pronuncia-
tion, resulting in a soothing but highly modulated and repetitive, almost 
ritualized form of speech. Mother closely monitors the infant’s state of 

Out of the Mouths of Babes and Sucklings 
123
arousal (see chap. 4) and adjusts her speech accordingly. She facilitates the 
infant’s perception of her vocal utterances by her timing, that is, by her 
turn taking in vocalization-pause interactions (see sec. 5.3). 
 By just two to four months, infants begin to respond differentially 
to different tones of voice (M. M. Lewis 2013) and, at around six 
months, associate certain simple utterances with specific situations. Mother, 
again, adapts her vocalizations to her baby’s increasing perceptual and 
motor abilities; her baby’s focus on external objects elicits longer and 
more elaborate commentaries. In addition, mother begins to ignore some 
of her infant’s vowel-like utterances and attend more closely to her syllabic 
babbling. 
 By seven to ten months, infants exhibit a clear preference for “moth-
erese,” that is, the exaggeratedly succinct maternal utterances where pauses 
occur at clause boundaries, and in response, caregivers now exaggerate pro-
sodic changes that naturally occur at clause boundaries. These changes 
include extended pauses, lengthening of the final syllable, rise or fall in 
pitch, and increase in volume. Clauses, then, tend to be perceived as per-
ceptual units, allowing them to serve as scaffolding (Scaffolding 1) for later 
grammatical parsing. What clause perception enables is the ignoring, on 
the part of the infant, of false starts, “oohs” and “ums,” and ungrammatical 
strings that do not sound like clauses (Hendriks-Jansen 1996, 288). These 
anomalies are typically identified as examples of the difficulties children 
must experience in abstracting grammatical structure from defective strings, 
and therefore as providing grounds for the rich innate grammatical struc-
ture hypothesis. 
 What this implies is that speech perception and production are enabled 
by a range of prelinguistic activity patterns that have specifically been 
adapted to serve as a potential vehicle for content. From the beginning, and 
up until the vocal spurt, at least, the vocal behavior that will eventually be 
appropriated for the production of contentful sentences is clearly differen-
tiated from the vocal expression of emotional and physiological states. A 
species-typical capacity to produce a variety of language-like sounds, which 
matures gradually during the first year, supplies the raw material from 
which the mother can shape primitive dialogues in much the same way as 
precursor emotions provide the raw material for her to shape her baby’s 
basic emotions and, eventually, her HCEs. These species-typical activity 
patterns provide the means for initiating and sustaining vocal interactions 

124 
Chapter 5
with the mother, which serve as scaffolding (Scaffolding 2) within which 
the infant can practice the basics of speech acts. 
 It is interesting to note that, before the emergence of the vocal spurt, 
infant vocalizations are not tied to emotional stimuli. Language learning is 
a game. Mothers attempt to engage their young ones in dialogue only when 
they are not over- or underaroused (Bloom 1991). Language is learned 
through interactive play where emotions may be represented symbolically, 
but not through the attempt to express strong emotions. This clear separa-
tion between signals of immediate need and the interactive emergence of 
discursive language will eventually permit language to be about things that 
are not present and even counterfactual (Hendriks-Jansen 1996, 289). 
 In sum thus far: Before the infant learns to comprehend and produce 
her first words, she has become surprisingly skilled at conducting conversa-
tions. She is able to distinguish questions, statements, and commands 
in adult strings and produce them herself by varying the pitch, volume, 
and rhythm of her vocalizations. She has become skilled in turn taking, 
having learned to imitate and respond to adults’ phrasing by using vocal 
and nonvocal cues. As a result, the infant can follow the conversation of 
adults although she does not fully comprehend the explicit meaning of 
what is said. She has learned a range of ritualized games involving mother, 
objects, and herself. Finally, toward the end of her first year, she will have 
learned some words that stand for specific interactional contexts and 
games. 
 This prelinguistic dialogic interaction is what Spurrett and Cowley 
(2010) and Cowley (1998) term “utterance activity,” and it includes words 
and strings of words but is not restricted to them. It is also viewed as “con-
tinuous with and inextricable from (nonwritten) language” (Spurrett and 
Cowley 2010, 296) and persists throughout the life span. Cowley claims 
that it challenges the hypothesis that language is only a system of turn tak-
ing, and as such, his views are consistent with those of Fogel on coaction 
(see chap. 4). Cowley provides an interesting empirical example: The 
mother, father, and daughter of an Italian family are engaged in an “utter-
ance activity” that results in the almost simultaneous pitching and timing 
of an exclamation while gently and good-humoredly mocking the mother. 
The exclamation is “Oeu!” which means something akin to “Come on!” in 
English. Father’s “Oeu!” begins while Mother is midstream and ends pitched 
at about one octave above his normal to accurately match hers. Before 

Out of the Mouths of Babes and Sucklings 
125
Father stops his “Oeu!” his daughter joins in with an “Oeu!” of her own, 
extending longer than his but dropping her pitch to the top range of his 
before she stops speaking. She then gives a short laugh (“Ha!”) at that pitch. 
In this interaction, the utterances of father and daughter are in harmony, in 
both pitch and timing, and together they gently mock mother without any 
need for a single standard “word” (Cowley 1998). Accent, timing, loudness, 
and various kinds of visible movement, along with a host of other prag-
matic influences, allow adults to regulate each other’s speech. This type of 
influence, it is claimed, is ubiquitous in utterance activity at all ages and 
occurs in word-based speech as well (Spurrett and Cowley 2010; Cowley 
1998). 
 If this account is correct, then utterance activity is metaphysically widely 
realized. The utterance activity involves mutual and synchronous modula-
tion, the locus of control shifting from the interlocutor who initiates the 
utterance activity, to shared “environmental” control, then shifting again 
to the interlocutor who terminates the interaction. I return to this phenom-
enon later, when discussing the role of saccadic vision in utterance produc-
tion and comprehension. 
 By imitating parents, infants learn interactive timing, clause boundary 
recognition, and the rhythms, stresses, and intonations associated with 
commands, requests, statements, and questions, which are extensively 
practiced before the child learns her first words. These are all ontogenetic 
predecessors of fully linguistic communication in that the basic structure of 
human communication is already in place before toddlers begin to speak 
intentionally (Wyman and Tomasello 2007, 472). What sustains and shapes 
this repetitive activity is the interactive context of mother-infant dialogue, 
which is experienced as mutually highly rewarding. 
 At about one year, children start to use one-word language forms that are 
related to the people closest to them ( Mama ) and to routine daily activities 
( din-dins ,  hello ,  bye ); that is, they refer to people, objects, and events that are 
perceived in mundane dynamic relationships (Bloom 1991). What this and 
the detailed account of the development of conversational pragmatics 
given earlier indicate is that the linguistic environment into which neo-
nates are born and in which they develop scaffolds the development of 
children’s language and conceptual thought in much the same way as the 
physical environment scaffolds the development of motor capacities. From 
the one-year-old’s learning of simple labels, such as “Dada,” to the narrative 

126 
Chapter 5
soliloquies of four-year-olds, language allows the articulation of objects, 
people, and events perceived and the progressive refinement and elabora-
tion of such articulated percepts. 
 When the child first learns to use words, the nature of the intended 
speech act is conveyed by prosody and gesture. “Dada” spoken with rising 
intonation means “Where’s Daddy?”; “Dada” spoken with falling intona-
tion means “That’s Daddy”; and “Dada” uttered with insistent monotone 
means “Daddy, please give me some attention.” It is clear that much of the 
meaning of these utterances depends on the conversational context in 
which they are uttered and the interpretive skills of addressee caregivers. 
Even when the child progresses to two-word forms at around eighteen 
months, context remains critically important (as it does for most commu-
nication even in adult life; see sec. 5.6 and chap.7). 
 One- and two-word utterances can act as vehicles for content because 
the child and her parents have shared experiences of the situations, events, 
and activities that routinely and regularly take place within them (Hanks 
2006). One-word sentences, however, restrict the speaker’s communicative 
abilities to the immediate context. “Single word commands and requests 
will not get you very far if you want to convey things  about a routine or 
situation. In order to move beyond this stage in his speech, the child must 
learn to detach the linguistic object from the tight embrace of its ground-
ing, so that it may be used combinatorily as an atom of meaning, with 
abstract markers for the relations into which it can enter. Language itself 
provides the scaffolding for this next stage of development” (Hendriks-
Jansen 1996, 293; his italics). 
 Around eighteen months, the child begins to use two-word utterances 
and has begun to attend to the internal structure of her own and other 
people’s utterances. The existence of a public language with a grammatical 
structure allows the child to produce indicative and imperative icons as 
opposed to performing vocal gestures as part of the interactive process. 
“Teddy cry,” “There Daddy,” and “Kick ball” all mean something that is not 
tied to the immediate needs and interests of the child. In addition, children 
at this age provide a running commentary (learned by imitating mother) 
on any new or unusual activity (Eckerman 1993). They make sense because 
adults can use the structure of natural language, as well as the context of 
utterance, to disambiguate meaning, allowing them to respond to the 

Out of the Mouths of Babes and Sucklings 
127
child’s utterances as declarative statements rather than as signs of internal 
homeostatic status. 
 I have been at pains in this (and the preceding) chapter to emphasize the 
“tightness” of the infant’s world; this tightness, I have argued, is a function 
of inbuilt perceptuo-motor constraints and inbuilt caregiver tendencies to 
scaffold or bootstrap development. This mechanism is thought by some 
(e.g., Bruner 1976) to include concept formation, which begins in repeated, 
routine interactive activities and continues with linguistic bootstrapping 
from caregivers. Bruner (1976, 200) describes the beginnings thus: 
 Much of the child’s early mastery is achieved in oft-repeated tasks. The child spends 
most of his time doing a very limited number of things. There is endless time spent 
in reaching and taking and banging and looking, etc. But within any one of these 
restricted domains, there is a surprising amount of “systematicity.” It consists of two 
forms of “playful” activity: in one, a single act (like banging) is applied to a wide 
range of objects. Everything on which he can get his hands is banged. In the second 
type, the child directs to a single object all the motor routines of which he is 
capable—he takes hold of the object, bangs it, throws it on the floor, puts it into his 
mouth, puts it on top of his head, runs it through his entire repertoire.  
 Such activities are unified merely by spatial and temporal contiguity 
(although this is not Bruner’s view), themselves based in the limited motor 
repertoire of infants and the limited range of toys that are made available 
to them. Such toys will be characterized by their bright colors and interac-
tive potential (they will move or sound in interesting ways when variously 
manipulated). As Hendriks-Jansen (1996, 292) observes, the environment 
of young infants is constructed to facilitate, that is, to scaffold the activities 
of grasping, banging, and throwing. 
 True concepts, however, that can be separated from origin and combined 
with others require linguistic scaffolding. As discussed earlier, the child at 
eighteen months can already engage in “conversation.” She has learned 
that certain sounds are reliably associated with certain objects, events, and 
situations through continual exposure to baby talk commentary and, sub-
sequently, to commentary tailored to her comprehension capacities. Delib-
erate linguistic scaffolding by parents who diligently correct pronunciation 
(to be imitated) results, at about one to two years, in infants’ learning about 
ten new words a week; from two to ten years, however, during what is con-
sidered to be the vocal spurt, this increases to ten new words a day (Feld-
man 2006). By two to four years, children justify deviations from the norm 

128 
Chapter 5
in terms of narratives involving intentional ascriptions, and they spend 
appreciable periods of time soliloquizing about their own and other peo-
ple’s activities. They are not simply reporting these activities (K. Nelson 
1989); they are trying to make sense of the way they themselves and other 
people have acted. This obviously includes emotion-related narratives per-
taining to self and others (see chap. 4). Making sense of one’s own emo-
tions, actions, their causes and feelings, and those of others, that is, making 
sense of what is relevant to her, provides the child with a platform on which 
to build her intrapersonal control. All of this is entirely consistent with a 
relevance-theoretic approach to human communication, which I discuss in 
chapter 7. Of central importance to that approach is the use of “loose talk” 
by way of extension broadening or narrowing. Loose talk, however, is not 
something that is useful only to sophisticated language users; rather, it 
commences in early childhood. 
 Beginning at two to three years, children show an interesting creativity 
in their use of language. If the child does not possess a word in her vocabu-
lary to convey what she wants to convey, she will use a word that she does 
possess that is reliably associated with experiences that are similar, such as 
objects of the same shape or animacy (McDonough 2002). This is called 
“overextension.” It is, in an important sense, the beginning of loose talk, 
where children produce ad hoc meanings to provide evidence of their 
intended meaning. They can understand and produce metaphor once their 
conceptual and linguistic capacities (and the experiential world in which 
they interact requires them) are sufficiently developed and sophisticated to 
produce and understand complex implicature.  
 5.6   The Eyes Have It 
 A proper understanding of how language processing works requires attention to the 
perceptual motor patterns that interface the organism with its environment (Zwann 
and Kaschak 2007) and those environmental properties in which the language use 
is embedded. Without the many different environmental constraints that situate 
language processing, too often lumped together under the monolithic term  context —
language as we know it would not exist.  
 —Spivey and Richardson (2009, 384)  
 Spivey and Richardson (2009) report a range of eye-tracking experiments 
that demonstrate that the visual world is continuously accessed and 

Out of the Mouths of Babes and Sucklings 
129
integrated with spoken language processing, at a number of levels. This is 
one particular example of saccadic vision’s more general function of exploit-
ing external memory (world). Eye tracking is involved in word recognition, 
reference resolution, syntactic processing, and thematic role assignment. 
They argue the following points: 
 (i)   Even during the few hundred milliseconds it takes to hear a spoken 
word, situational constraints, that is, objects visually present, can influ-
ence the activations of lexical representations that result from hearing 
the first few phonemes. In an experiment that included both candy 
and candle in the visual display, subjects fixated on an object that 
shared the same first phonemes with the target object, that is, candy 
and candle. When the same subjects were shown a visual display with 
only a candy and no candle, they fixated on the candy and rarely on 
other objects. Spivey and Richardson also cite studies where the action-
able situational constraints determined comprehension. When subjects 
were asked to put a cube into a can, and two cans were available, one 
large enough to accommodate the cube and the other too small, the 
size of the cans immediately constrained the referential domain of the 
can. Subjects looked only at the appropriately actionable object despite 
the obvious ambiguity of the utterance. These are just two examples of 
the several that Spivey and Richardson cite to demonstrate clearly that 
the external world is visually interrogated continuously throughout 
the course of continuous language input. The two I mention here relate 
to word recognition and reference determination, but Spivey and Rich-
ardson also include interesting experiments relating to syntax parsing 
and thematic role assignment (which are superfluous to the needs of 
this discussion).  
 (ii)   A range of other situational factors influence language comprehension. 
Knowledge of the speaker’s occupation (e.g., which sense of “case” is 
appropriate when uttered by a judge or porter), the speaker’s identity 
(e.g., gender, ethnicity, social class), and the speaker’s actual visual field 
are all instrumental in utterance comprehension. Situational factors also 
include assumptions about the speaker’s past experience and beliefs. H. 
Clark (1996) terms these assumptions “the common ground,” and it is, 
of course, analogous to Sperber and Wilson’s cognitive environment 
(which I discuss in chap. 7). In addition, interlocutors actively manipu-
late the common ground to facilitate communication by, for instance, 

130 
Chapter 5
pointing and gesturing, both of which are visually processed. An addi-
tional and important fact is that the degree to which conversants can 
coordinate their visual attention moment to moment across a shared 
visual display is causally related to the success with which they com-
municate. This is a useful example of the operation of joint attention, 
which develops very early in ontogeny. (This is implied, I think, by 
Sperber and Wilson, but they do not specify coordinated visual atten-
tion in the cognitive environment.)  
 Spivey and Richardson conclude: “As part of the linguistic process of 
recognising words or parsing syntax, participants make saccades to refer-
ents in the world that are phonetically, semantically or pragmatically 
appropriate. In conversation, the degree to which a listener follows a speak-
er’s gaze around the world is an indication of their understanding, and in 
face-to-face conversation, eye movements can serve as linguistic cues” 
(2009, 296). This is because visual object fixation by the speaker referen-
tially fixates the utterance for the listener; that is, visual object fixation (or 
display interrogation) ostensively evidences what is relevant to the listener 
in the utterance. These nonlinguistic ostensive skills are learned very early 
in ontogeny and provide the scaffolding that enables the acquisition of 
natural language. 
 Two more points relating to the context dependence of utterance com-
prehension are worth noting. The first is that in many East Asian languages, 
it is sometimes acceptable to omit any elements that can be determined, 
that is, inferred, from context. Japanese children, for example, are explicitly 
taught how to determine meaning from context as part of their language 
education. In addition, adult Hebrew is written without vowels, but readers 
effortlessly pick (i.e., infer) the right words (Feldman 2006, 265).  
 5.7   Neurochemical Underpinnings of Human Prosociality 
 Researchers have suggested (Tomasello and Carpenter 2005) that human 
biological adaptations result in (i) an understanding of intentional action 
and perception, which coevolved in chimps in the context of intraspecific 
competition, and (ii) skills and motivation to share their psychological 
states with others. These skills and motivations are unique in human beings 
and evolved in the context of intensely cooperative activities of a particular 

Out of the Mouths of Babes and Sucklings 
131
kind (those that increased hominid fitness). Prosocial skills and motiva-
tions depend on appropriate circuit neurogenesis, maturation, and connec-
tion, which, in turn, depend on intraneural genetic activity, and IEGs were 
identified as one type of gene involved. This genetic activity is excited by 
what Panksepp (2007) terms prosocial neuropeptides and endogenous 
opioids. 
 Intraneural genetic activity is excited by endogenous opioids, which 
themselves are potentiated in their activity, particularly in terms of dura-
tion, by certain social neuropeptides and more generally active, appetitive 
neurochemicals (E. Nelson and Panksepp 1998). The former group includes 
oxytocin, vasopressin, and prolactin, and the latter serotonin, dopamine, 
and norepinephrine. Opioids are released during all prosocial activities, 
such as being held, being groomed, and playing, and, as opioids, induce 
feelings of great pleasure (Panksepp 2007). Oxytocin has been found to be 
particularly active in terms of producing maternal “urges” and in the social 
bonding of neonates and mothers; it has also been shown to generate feel-
ings of trust and love (Panksepp 2007; Zac, Matzner, and Kurzban 2008) 
and lower social fear (Kirsch et al. 2005). It is also released during suckling 
(with prolactin) and at other times (e.g., orgasm, parturition). 
 This neurochemistry explains the mutual pleasure both infants and 
mothers garner from their various interactions, how the very close relation-
ship (bond) develops between them, and why social interaction is enjoyed 
simply for its own sake. It also explains why caregivers feel compelled to 
respond to the unfocused crying and motor unrest of their distressed neo-
nates. This neurochemistry activates neuron producing, maturing, and 
connecting genetic activity that provides the neural basis for more advanced 
socioemotional and cognitive activity. 
 Some interesting implications arise from the foregoing; I begin with the 
most obvious: 
 (i)   The development of full human emotionality takes places simulta-
neously with the development of intentional thought and language 
and through precisely the same mechanisms, that is, through the 
progressive epigenetic Scaffolding (2) of mother-infant interaction, 
the initial establishment of which is enabled by inbuilt sensorimo-
tor constraints and species-typical activity patterns. This scaffolding 
provides the necessary and sufficient conditions for the progressive 

132 
Chapter 5
development of the infant’s emotion systems, including her emo-
tional thoughts, nonemotional thoughts, and their linguistic expres-
sion. Full human emotionality, I have argued, requires the semantic 
conceptualization of emotion, and segmented language enables both 
the prerequisite concept formation and the linguistic expression of 
emotion. Ever-increasing complexity in hominid social life provided 
ever-increasing complexity in the number and nature of potential 
emotional elicitors, and these selected for ever-more-sophisticated 
emotion and emotion-expressive systems. It is entirely reasonable, 
therefore, that emotional complexity evolved with intentional com-
plexity and the means to their expression, that is, segmented lan-
guage. The acquisition of language is explicitly pedagogical and is 
timed to avoid emotionally charged situations, both of which facili-
tate the learning of words. It seems unremarkable, therefore, that the 
linguistic expression of emotion begins only with the word spurt; pre-
spurt children simply do not possess the words with which to express 
emotion (and their emotion expression signs can manage without 
them at this stage of development).  
 (ii)     The key components of the simultaneous development of full human 
emotionality, intentionality, and language are species-typical activ-
ity patterns and cultural scaffolding. The findings from research in 
developmental psychology canvassed earlier identify a number of 
activity patterns that are unique to human beings and seem to have 
evolved to elicit the attention of caregivers. This is suggested by the 
suckle-pause-jiggle suckling patterns described earlier. The maternal 
jiggling response, it was noted, is not grounded in any biological 
need; the infant normally resumes suckling spontaneously after 15 to 
20 seconds. This suggests that what was selected for is its pivotal func-
tion in establishing turn taking, on which the psycho-emotional and 
perceptuo-motor development of the infant will crucially depend. In 
addition, these species-typical activity patterns are driven by primi-
tive intentional devices, and not any full-blown representation of the 
world. They are biological preadaptations to which caregivers are pre-
adapted to respond.  
 (iii)     The suckle-pause-jiggle species-typical interactivity pattern is clearly 
not selected for nutritional purposes; Hendriks-Jansen (1996, 266) 
suggests (reasonably, in my view) that its selection had to do more 

Out of the Mouths of Babes and Sucklings 
133
with establishing the pragmatics of communication than with feed-
ing. In addition, it is the caregiver’s intentional interpretation of the 
pause that enables the jiggle interaction to play the scaffolding role 
that it does. It provides the basis for launching the infant into an 
intentional, linguistically mediated adult social world. I have argued, 
however, that turn taking provides opportunities for motor mimicry 
and feedback regarding emotional signs, motor skills, and language. It 
is the learning opportunities that turn taking provides, not turn tak-
ing per se, that launch infants and children into the intentional and 
linguistically mediated adult world. This is consistent with turn tak-
ing shading into coregulation as mother and baby repeatedly interact 
in a limited range of activities.  
 (iv)     It is clearly efficacious for neonates and infants to possess primitive 
and limited forms of behavior in early development. It has already 
been noted that the infant’s visual limitations in both object resolu-
tion and fixation (together with the reciprocal maternal preadaptation 
to position her face at the appropriate 20–24 cm distance) result in an 
experiential world composed almost exclusively of the maternal face. 
This enables the establishment of face-to-face interaction on which so 
much will depend developmentally. Similarly, the infant’s inability to 
distinguish separate words in her mother’s vocalizations may allow 
the infant to respond to her clauses as unitary utterances, equivalent 
to her own coos and murmurs, and facilitate the process of turn taking 
in early dialogues. Both of these limitations provide the basis for the 
later scaffolding of parsing of clauses into meaningful units (M. Bate-
son 1979). They enable the infant to ignore “ums,” “ahs,” and false 
starts and any ungrammatical strings that do not sound like clauses. 
This sort of anomaly is considered sufficient to preclude the acquisi-
tion of correct grammatical structure from imperfect strings and led 
to the positing of a rich, innate language acquisition device (LAD). 
Yet these limitations are actually advantageous in the scaffolding of 
language acquisition. The infant’s inability at this stage to attend to 
the fine structure of maternal utterances allows her to attend to the 
gross features of the utterance, that is, its intonational and rhythmic 
features. A premature ability to distinguish syntactic and semantic 
detail would render the acquisition of these pragmatic features very 
difficult, and it is these intonational and rhythmic features on which 

134 
Chapter 5
syntactic and semantic speech acts are built. In addition, the child’s 
brain would be overwhelmed with detail and incapable of sustaining 
the interactive context out of which her more sophisticated language 
abilities will emerge (M. Bateson 1979, 68).  
 (v)     A great deal of the cultural scaffolding provided by such interaction is 
clearly of the Scaffolding 2 type. I noted in the previous chapter that 
infant-maternal interaction is best characterized as coactions where it 
is impossible to identify which partner is controlling or leading the 
interaction; mutual gazing was the example offered here. Fogel (1993) 
provides other examples, including object passing and smiling. When 
a child attempts to hand an object to her mother, it is widely assumed 
that the child is signaling a desire to the mother, who interprets the 
behavior as such and extends her hand to receive the object. The 
infant correctly interprets this signal and drops the object into her 
hand. Such an analysis is typical of Scaffolding 1 and is underpinned 
by folk psychological interpretations. The infant desires to pass the 
object and thus controls the interaction. However, when captured on 
slow-motion video camera, the interaction does not support such an 
interpretation. Mother and infant are moving simultaneously toward 
the point of mutual contact, but that point is not any predetermined 
location; rather, it is dynamically constituted by the continuous 
coregulated actions of both partners. It is impossible to identify who 
is sender and who is receiver. This interaction is clearly an example 
of Scaffolding 2. The same is also true of smiling. The typical folk 
psychological interpretation of a smile is that it conveys a specific 
message that originates with the smiler, who adjusts her facial expres-
sions, body movements, and gaze to the nature of the message she 
wishes to convey (e.g., joyful, encouraging, or merely being polite). 
Again, the folk psychological interpretation is that the smiler’s inten-
tion shapes the nature of the smile and determines the message it 
conveys. Once again, however, videotaping demonstrates that this 
is not the case. The smile emerges in an interactive context, and its 
nature may change at any point depending on the reaction of the 
receiver. Smiler and receiver continuously and synchronously adjust 
their facial expressions, bodily movements, and gaze in response to 
the other. The smiler’s mental state is relatively unimportant once the 
smiling interaction is under way (Fogel 1993).  

Out of the Mouths of Babes and Sucklings 
135
 (vi)     I have already argued that these species-typical activity patterns are 
primitive intentional icons, and mothers are correct in interpret-
ing them as such (pace Hendriks-Jansen). These examples, however, 
should not be taken to suggest that full-blown folk psychological 
ascriptions are always mistaken; this is clearly not the case. In adult 
interaction (as the previous analyses of ontogenetic emotional and 
cognitive development attest), people do ascribe mental states like 
belief and desire to others. It is this ascription that renders their 
behavior goal directed and intelligible and makes social intercourse 
possible at all. What I suggest, rather, is that activity patterns of any 
sort, including interactivity patterns, require initiating, and this is 
necessarily a function of intentional icon, even if only one that is 
genetically hardwired (like “punctuated” suckling). The full-blown 
intentional icons of adult human beings, those that are beliefs and 
desires, can be as instrumental in initiating species-typical activity 
patterns as any that are hardwired. Individual autonomy or internal 
locus of control depends on this. These examples are simply illustra-
tive of situated cognition. An agent “decides” to act or interact in a 
certain way and for a certain purpose, but once she has decided, she 
can leave it up to her highly trained and flexible subsystems to carry 
out the decision. Without this fluid situational flexibility, smooth 
and seamless interaction would not be possible.  
 (vii)     The above analyses demonstrate that human beings require a pro-
tracted apprenticeship into sociocultural life to acquire folk psycho-
logical explanations for behavior. Their apprenticeship is scaffolded 
by the intentional interpretations of their mothers, whose own 
apprenticeship was scaffolded by similar intentional interpretations 
of their mothers. The progressively more sophisticated (and initially 
heavily scaffolded) interactions provide the basis for the develop-
ment of a full-blown intentional folk psychology from the minimally 
intentional icons with which human infants are endowed. It is by 
participating in intentional activity of differing levels of complexity 
and explicitness (i.e., those of neonate and caregiver) that human 
infants become intentional agents in the fullest sense.  
 (viii)   The total realizer system of human emotional ontogenesis includes a 
host of heterogeneous intra- and extrapersonal elements (at least two 
bodies and two brains, deeply integrated into linguistic and artifactual 

136 
Chapter 5
cultural ethnotheories and practices), and the core realizer, obviously, 
is the special relationship that mother and infant progressively cocon-
struct. The locus of control in human ontogenesis changes from envi-
ronmental to shared to individual. Again, however, either partner can 
trigger interaction once the infant’s neural hardware is in place, and 
either can terminate it, but once online interaction is up and run-
ning, the locus of control is shared. The degree of complementarity, 
complexity, and integration, from inborn constraints to behavioral 
patterns, to mutual, synchronous modulation, from interpersonal 
emotional to intrapersonal regulation, is truly remarkable.  
 5.8   Summary 
 The acquisition of a pragmatic foundation and semantic lexicon are as 
dependent on the close, linguistically mediated social relationship of neo-
nate and caregiver as is emotional ontogenesis, with which it is so inti-
mately connected. The preadaptations with which both partners are 
genetically endowed, that is, neonates’ species-typical behavior patterns 
and parents’ intuitive parenting skills, evolved precisely to promote mutual 
engagement. It is through the coactions of baby talk commentary and 
speech modeling, in particular, and motor mimicry (including pragmatic 
features) and mutually rewarding feedback that coarse-grained search-
identify-satisfy interpreter devices of caregivers are progressively fine-tuned, 
and coarse-grained producer devices associated with protospeech and other 
species-typical behavior patterns are progressively fine-tuned. It is through 
this interdependent (deeply functionally integrated) process that contin-
gencies between objects and events, pragmatic features, and semantic con-
tent (including that relating to emotion) are synchronically constructed in 
both partners to differing extents. The intensity and frequency of the inter-
action are sustained by the extremely pleasant feelings generated by the 
release of endogenous opioids and prosocial neuropeptides, which also 
excite intraneural genetic products into neurogenesis and neural 
connection. 
 The level of deep functional integration of both neonatal and caregiver 
neural and corporeal resources with external sociocultural resources in lan-
guage development is just as deep as that of emotional ontogenesis; indeed, 
many of the resources are influential in both types of development. The 

Out of the Mouths of Babes and Sucklings 
137
level of deep functional integration is such that they constitute a genuinely 
extended cognitive system by affecting the system synchronously as a 
whole and producing effects that result only from the system functioning 
synchronously as a whole. This demonstrates, again, that it is a mistake to 
construe causality and constitution as mutually exclusive relations; the 
causal relations underpinning the development of language, as well as that 
of emotionality, are clearly constitutive of larger, more complex structures 
and processes. In addition, given that the same processes are involved in 
language development and emotional development, language develop-
ment is also a world-to-brain transcranialist achievement.  


 6  From Evolution to Emotionese 
 6.1   Introduction 
 In chapters 3 and 4, chapters focusing on the metaphysics of emotion and 
emotional ontogenesis, respectively, I argued that basic emotions and 
higher cognitive emotions both develop from innate emotional precursors 
in the context of a close, linguistically mediated social relationship, and 
that they are widely metaphysically realized, the realization of emotional 
ontogenesis being radically wide. In those chapters, moreover, I argued that 
human emotional ontogenesis proceeds from the triggering of innate pro-
prioceptive and interoceptive devices by positive and negative absolute 
stimulus thresholds, through interpersonal emotional regulation with care-
givers, to childhood intrapersonal regulation. I also argued that innate care-
giver capacities of exaggerated and succinct affect mirroring, augmented by 
baby talk commentary and informed by relevant ethnotheories, together 
with neonates’ and children’s sensorimotor preadaptations and mimicry, 
were the main vehicles for such development. Such innate complementary 
endowments enable the memetic transmission of parental emotional and 
more general ethnotheories to the next generation to regulate the social 
interaction of individuals and groups. Emotional ethnotheories ensure the 
appropriate observance of, and compliance with, the more general ethno-
theories of the culture. Similarly, in chapter 5, I argued that a range of 
species-typical behavior patterns interacted with intuitive parenting skills, 
most of which were also operational in emotional ontogenesis, in the 
development of language. The interaction of these complementary reper-
toires results in the development of the close relationship that provides the 
context for further development. 

140 
Chapter 6
 I emphasized in these previous analyses that both the emotion precur-
sors and the species-typical behavior patterns of human neonates are the 
results of brute physiological processes that are interpreted as or function as 
signs of psychophysical or homeostatic status by preadapted caregivers. 
That this is universally the case in all intact, normally functioning human 
caregivers points to a selectionist history: emotion precursors and species-
typical behavior patterns are produced by devices that were selected for in 
ancestral environments because they conferred a fitness advantage on their 
bearers. In short, emotion precursors and species-typical behavior patterns 
are signs or representations of psychophysiological states that are produced 
by devices whose purpose or function is to produce them. Similarly, the 
intuitive parenting skills that are triggered in caregivers by precursor emo-
tions and species-typical behavior patterns are produced by devices whose 
purpose or function is to produce them. Accordingly, one of the foci of this 
chapter is function; the theory I adopt here is that of Millikan (1984), which 
is consistent with previous analyses of emotional and language develop-
ment and metaphysical realization. Of particular interest to human emo-
tionality are Millikan’s theories of relational, derived, and adapted 
functions. 1  
 In addition, and since emotion precursors and the discrete emotions 
proper are both natural signs and intentional signs and, when expressed 
linguistically, linguistic signs, my second focus is the biosemantics of men-
tal content. I discuss the distinction between these different sign types, and 
how one emerges from another. I argue that natural signs carry local natural 
information relevant to individual (and group) well-being, “local” here 
referring to a natural reference class (or domain of reference), and when 
intentional and linguistic signs are functioning properly, they do, too. 
These analyses are largely informed by Millikan’s biosemantic theory. My 
indebtedness to Millikan is obvious; however, the chapter is not merely 
exegetical. My analyses are original in that they are the first, to my knowl-
edge, to apply Millikan’s theories to the development of human emotional-
ity and language. 
 In chapters 4 and 5, I was concerned to show, in particular, the deep 
functional integration of sociocultural caregiver and neonatal intracranial 
resources. The content of this chapter does this, too, but it demonstrates 
with additional precision the utterly breathtaking complexity of the func-
tional integration of these resources. 

From Evolution to Emotionese 
141
 Emotions and language, I have repeatedly claimed, develop together and 
largely through the same mechanisms. In light of this, and to keep the 
analysis manageable, I restrict my focus to emotional development. What I 
say about emotional development, therefore, will also be true of language 
development. 
 I conclude the chapter by rebutting the intracranialist claim that tran-
scranialists fail to recognize the mark of the cognitive. Transcranialists do 
not fail to recognize this putative mark. Most recognize a certain kind of 
information processing as being the mark of the cognitive; others of a teleo-
logical or biosemantical inclination, such as myself, while agreeing that 
information processing is what cognition essentially does, also deny that 
there is anything in the head that is intentional just as such. I begin my 
analysis, however, with some rock-bottom preliminaries with respect to 
theories of function.  
 6.2   Theories of Function: Rock-Bottom Preliminaries 
 According to  The New Shorter Oxford English Dictionary (1993, 1042), a func-
tion (derived from the past participle of  fungi , “to perform”) is “the activity 
proper or natural to a person or thing: an office, duty, employment or call-
ing. Also, a particular activity or operation (among several); an organisa-
tional unit performing this.” This (these) definition(s) subsume two distinct 
concepts of function extant in the philosophy of science and biology, 
namely, what have come to be known as proper (evolutionary, biofunc-
tions, or teleofunctions) and Cummins functions. The term  proper function , 
from the Latin  proprius , meaning “one’s own” (Millikan 2002, 116), is due 
to Millikan (1984, 1989a, 1989b, 1993, 2002, 2004, 2009); and  Cummins 
function is the term given to function in Cummins’s (1975) causal func-
tional analysis. 
 These two concepts have traditionally been considered to operate in dis-
tinctly different explanatory projects; proper functions operate in evolu-
tionary theory and behavioral ecology to explain the presence of a 
functional trait in its bearers (and, because of this, are classified as etiologi-
cal theories), and Cummins functions operate in physiology and develop-
mental biology to explain the causal contribution of a functional item to a 
complex process (Millikan 1989a; Godfrey-Smith 1994) and, because of 
this, are classified as dispositional theories. Some scholars (e.g., Buller 

142 
Chapter 6
1999b; Price 2001; Millikan 2002) now believe that, following a range of 
suggested amendments, the two types of functions do not operate in dis-
tinctly different explanatory projects but operate in a complementary fash-
ion in all explanatory projects concerning biological items. The views of 
Millikan on reconciling proper and Cummins functions include complex 
discussions concerning exaptation and are well beyond the requirements of 
the present discussion. All that is required for the present discussion is a 
minor tightening of the theory of proper function by adding Schwartz’s 
(2002) continuing usefulness requirement. 
 Etiological theories of function argue that the functions of biological 
devices are grounded in their evolutionary histories. The function of an 
intentional device depends on the function of the mechanism that pro-
duced it. In addition, the function of an intentional mechanism is to guide 
the operation of some further mechanism; for instance, an executive mech-
anism will control some aspect of the organism’s behavior in such a way 
that the behavior of the second mechanism is coincident with some favor-
able condition in the environment. What this immediately implies is that 
because it must fit or respond to the producer mechanism, the second, 
cooperating device is partly determinative of the producer device in terms 
of function and content. The tongue-snapping mechanism of the northern 
leopard frog,  Rana pipiens , is instructive: the mechanism exists to ensure 
that the tongue snaps when a fly is within range of the tongue snaps. To 
snap at flies when they are within range is the proper function or purpose 
of the tongue-snapping mechanism (Price 2001; Schwartz 2002). 
 Two philosophical problems are associated with biological teleology. The 
first relates to the concept of function itself, and the second to efficient 
causation (Buller 1999a). Biologists routinely refer to the concept of func-
tion in their descriptions of organs and traits of organisms; for example, the 
function of the heart is to pump blood, the function of the kidneys is to 
filter metabolic waste from blood, and so on. Such function statements cite 
effects of organs or traits, but not every effect of a trait or organ corresponds 
to a function of it. The heart makes lub-dub noises, now useful in cardio-
thoracic diagnostics, but making lub-dub noises is not the function of 
hearts (biologists agree that the function of the heart is to pump blood). 
This implies that “the function of X is to Y” does not simply mean “X pro-
duces the function Y,” because it would fail to distinguish the effects that it 
is the function of the trait or organ to produce from those it is not its 

From Evolution to Emotionese 
143
function to produce. What this further implies is that function does not 
appear to be wholly explicable in terms of ordinary causation. Buller (1999a, 
2–3) suggests that Hull (1974, 102) puts the matter “very nicely”: 
 Just as a physicist might say that heating a gas causes it to expand, a biologist might 
say that heating a mammal causes it to sweat. But a biologist might also say that a 
mammal sweats when heated in order to keep its temperature constant, while no 
physicist would say that a gas expands when heated in order to keep its temperature 
constant, even though that is exactly what happens.  
 The question, then, is this: why is the constant temperature merely an 
effect (i.e., caused by) the expansion of gas, whereas it is the or a function 
of sweating in mammals? Explicating the biologist’s concept of function is 
required to answer these questions. 
 In terms of efficient causation, it is plausible to construe the distinction 
between sweating mammals and expanding gases in terms of  purpose ; mam-
mals sweat  to bring about body temperature constancy, but gases do not 
expand for the purpose of maintaining constant temperature. Sweating in 
mammals, therefore, is a teleological process, whereas expansion of gases is 
not. The question, then, is this: how can a process like sweating be purpo-
sive, or goal directed? The metaphysical problem of teleology, therefore, is 
to explain whether, and if so, how, there can be purposive, goal-directed 
processes in a universe governed entirely by efficient causation. How can 
the biological concept of function, which is “prima facie infected with final 
causation” (Buller 1999a, 6), be rendered compatible with an exclusive, 
efficient-causation worldview? 
 Millikan deals with these two issues, and I show how she does so below. 
I discuss her theory and highlight its strengths and limitations. In light of 
the challenges to Millikan’s “pure” theory, however, I include Schwartz’s 
(2002) continuing usefulness requirement, which Millikan herself endorses 
(Millikan 2002).  
 6.3   Millikan’s Proper Functions 
 In a nutshell, proper functions are functions of reproduced or copied items; 
they are functions that were selected for by evolutionary processes because 
they increased organismal fitness. This implies that (i) an item’s proper 
function is what it does on purpose, rather than accidentally; (ii) the term 
 proper function is normative in a nonevaluative way; an item retains its 

144 
Chapter 6
proper function even when it fails to perform that function, temporarily or 
permanently, from malfunction, defect, or lack of enabling conditions (for 
example, a sperm requires an ovum to perform its proper function, and a 
diseased or defective heart is still a heart); and (iii) the proper function of a 
device or system explains its existence, that is, it explains why tokens of 
certain traits or properties exist at all. 
 The details of her theory are rather more complex. According to Mil-
likan, an item has a function only as a member of a reproductively estab-
lished family, which she distinguishes into first-order and higher-order 
reproductively established families. First-order families consist of replica-
tors, which directly reproduce their structures when making copies of 
themselves in accordance with the causal laws of nature. This means that 
each temporal sequence of replicators that are related by descent (through 
copying) forms a first-order reproductively established family. The copies of 
the immediate early genes for emotional neurogenesis, for instance, are 
members of a first-order reproductive family. Replicators do not only cause 
their own replication, however; they also cause the construction of the 
vehicles that contain them. As vehicles reproduce, therefore, not only are 
the replicators they contain reproduced, but the properties of the vehicles 
built by those replicators are reproduced, too. In short, replicators are 
directly reproduced through copying, whereas the properties of vehicles are 
indirectly reproduced via the reproduction of the replicators that construct 
the vehicular properties (Buller 1999b). Such indirectly reproduced proper-
ties of vehicles form higher-order reproductively established families, 
examples of which include traits such as certain emotional neural substrata, 
blood type, and body organs (livers, hearts, etc.). Members of a higher-order 
reproductively established family are thus related by descent also, via the 
direct relations of descent of the members of the first-order reproductively 
established family that produce the members of the higher-order family. 
(This presumably accounts for the term  higher order , which Millikan fails to 
explicate in detail.) In both cases, therefore, the  ancestors of a particular 
member of a reproductively established family are those temporally prior 
family members to which it is related by a continuous chain of direct or 
indirect reproduction (Millikan 1984). In short, it is the function of X to do 
Y if doing Y caused the proliferation of ancestors of X (through either direct 
or indirect reproduction). 
 The important point to note here is that a trait or property does not 
possess a function unless its ancestors were selected for in the lineage’s 

From Evolution to Emotionese 
145
evolutionary history. It is the function of a member X of a reproductively 
established family to do Y if ancestors of X did Y and doing Y causally 
contributed to their family’s having greater reproductive success than 
competing reproductively established families and, hence, causally contrib-
uted (eventually) to the production of Y. What this clearly implies is that 
trait T produces function F only when (a) T is hereditary, (b) there has been 
variation in T within a common selective environment, and (c) the bearers 
of T had a greater fitness within that common environment than bearers of 
T’s variants (at least partly) because of possessing T (Buller 1999b). These are 
all consequences of a strong adaptationist view that all beneficial effects of 
all traits of all proper functions are selected for, and selection always oper-
ates on variation. Godfrey-Smith (1994, 356) rightly points out that this 
imposes a “substantial biological commitment” that the account cannot 
support. 
 The substantial biological commitment that the strong theory cannot 
support is due to four serious problems: (i) despite the claim that only ben-
eficial effects can be selected for, at least one type of gene, the segregation 
distorter gene, disrupts cellular meiosis, and this explains its survival 
(Godfrey-Smith 1994, 348); (ii) it eliminates the functions of hereditary 
traits that are produced by genetic drift yet still contribute to their bearers’ 
fitness (Brandon 1990); (iii) it eliminates the functions of partial realizers 
that remain invariant in a total realizer system; this could occur when a 
complex trait T is constituted by ti, tii, … tn where T is selected for but 
where any one of ti to tn remained invariant (Buller 1999b, 290); and (iv) it 
fails to account for changes in function (Godfrey-Smith 1994) and loss of 
function as in vestigial traits (Griffiths 1992, 1993). These flaws are addressed 
by Schwartz’s (2002) continuing usefulness account, to be discussed 
subsequently. 
 Millikan’s theory has two important strengths, however. First, it quite 
clearly addresses the philosophical problem of teleology. It shows how “the 
function of X is to do Y” can causally explain the existence of X without 
invoking backward causation; it is not the fact that X itself produces Y that 
explains X’s existence (backward causation) but the fact that  ancestors of X 
produced the effect Y and that Y was among the causes of the existence of 
X (via the process of replication and development that eventually pro-
duced X). 
 Second, Millikan’s theory explains how teleology can emerge within a 
universe governed solely by efficient causation. In the beginning of the 

146 
Chapter 6
biological world, the only vehicles were probably replicators differentially 
replicating themselves in primeval soup, where their differential replication 
was due to differences in what they did in interacting with their environ-
ments. The first functions emerged, at this point in the universe, as func-
tions of members of first-order reproductively established families. 
Eventually, however, some replicator interactions resulted in types of repli-
cators combining together to form more complex vehicles consisting of 
combinations of replicators. The properties of these complex combinations 
of vehicles biased interactions in their favor, and as a result, they began to 
enjoy greater differential success in replication. Progressively, more and 
more replicators combined, and protein walls were formed for protection, 
and thus the first cells appeared. Multicellular vehicles eventually followed, 
and finally the complex organisms that we now take to be paradigmatic 
vehicles. In addition, the emergence of these higher levels of complexity 
was accompanied by the emergence of the functions of members of higher-
order reproductively established families (Buller 1999a). This provides an 
explanation relating to the origins of complex organisms but refers to noth-
ing but efficient causation and the differential perpetuation of replicators 
(which is a function of differential success in interaction with the environ-
ment). Millikan’s theory, therefore, is both highly complex (Buller 1999a) 
and ingenious (Griffiths 1993).  
 6.4   The Continuing Usefulness Requirement 
 A trait type  X has the proper function  F (at time  t ) if 
 (i)   X has arisen, been modified, or been maintained by natural selection 
at some point (before  t ) because its doing  F contributed to fitness of 
individuals with  X ; and  
 (ii)   X ’s doing  F has recently and importantly (before  t ) causally contributed 
to the survival and reproduction of organisms in this species with this 
trait.  
 What this account accomplishes is that it explains how traits can lose their 
proper function. The eyes of cave-dwelling species (Griffiths 1992, 1993) 
can lose their proper function of seeing if they no longer use their eyes to 
see or if their seeing no longer contributes to survival and reproduction. 
The “recently” refers to numbers of generations rather than years to explain 

From Evolution to Emotionese 
147
differences between species. The vagueness of “recently” here is similar to 
Godfrey-Smith’s (1994) “the recent past” and Griffiths’s (1992, 1993) “evo-
lutionary significant period.” The word “importantly” is to exclude a single 
event or something equally trivial restoring a vestigial trait. 
 Schwartz emphasizes that the notion of cause in (ii) is to be construed as 
permissive; it is meant to allow a wide range of ways that a trait may con-
tribute to survival and reproduction. Take the flight response associated 
with the emotion of fear as an example. This response, biologists suppose, 
was selected for because it enables organisms to escape predation (and so 
survive and reproduce). But it could also be argued that the flight response 
also assists in tuning the organism’s musculature through fright-induced 
exercise and minimizing intravenous atheroma buildup, again through 
fright-induced exercise. Many effects can count as putative contributions to 
survival and reproduction but (i) eliminates most from counting as proper 
functions. Thus, if biologists believe that the function of the emotional 
flight response is to tone musculature and thus contribute to survival and 
reproduction, it cannot be a proper function unless biologists also believe 
that natural selection favored this effect. They do not. They have no doubt 
that natural selection favored the flight response to enable the avoidance of 
predation (and other dangers) because the fear response appears to be 
designed to avoid predation (Dawkins 1986). 
 The continuing usefulness requirement avoids the “substantial biologi-
cal commitment” of a strong adaptationist construal of proper function. It 
includes a weak adaptationist perspective (Schwartz 2002, 256) by insisting 
only that “ some aspects of  some traits” are proper functions.  
 6.5   The Biosemantic Theory of Mental Content 
 Biosemantic theories of mental content are naturalistic, teleological theo-
ries of mental content. They are naturalistic in that they attempt to explain 
what it is about mental representations that enable them to represent some-
thing in terms consistent with those of the natural sciences. These theories 
typically include picture theories, causal or covariation theories, informa-
tion theories, and functionalist or causal role theories. They are teleological 
(from the Greek  telos , purpose, function, goal), as previously noted, in that 
they refer to the biological function or purpose of intentional mental states. 
The teleological component of the theory suggests that true representations 

148 
Chapter 6
are produced when the system housing the mental representation is func-
tioning properly, that is, functioning in accord with either natural selec-
tionist history or selection through learning (Millikan 2009). 
 The brain was and is designed by evolution or learning, in interaction 
with a range of heterogeneous resources including other brains, to make 
or learn to make representations. 2 Teleological theories thus sharply differ-
entiate intentional signs from natural signs. Even when intentional repre-
sentations are true, neither the fact that they represent nor what they 
represent is entirely determined by any current relation they actually bear 
to their representeds. The representational status and the content of the 
intentional representation are both partly determined by reference to its 
natural purpose or the natural purpose of the biological systems that pro-
duced it, and these purposes are determined by history, by what the mecha-
nisms were selected for doing, either during evolution of the species or 
through earlier trial-and-error learning (Millikan 1984). Naturalistic teleo-
logical theories of content, therefore, are externalist insofar as they take 
beyond-the-individual factors (i.e., evolutionary history) as importantly 
relevant in the metaphysical determination of mental states. In this they 
differ from individualist (or internalist) theories, as discussed previously. I 
return to this subsequently, to discuss the “mark of the cognitive” intracra-
nialist objection. 
 I have one more final point to make concerning teleological theories: 
they are based on the notion of function in selection, and this implies that 
they must explain how the production of representations can sometimes 
benefit an organism. This in turn implies that the organism must use them 
in some way; and this implies that there must be part of, or some activity 
of, the organism that interprets or understands them (Millikan 1984). 
 According to biosemantics, several different kinds of processes use repre-
sentations, from the relatively simple (e.g., animal signaling systems) to the 
highly complex (e.g., human doxastic systems), two of the most important 
being descriptive-indicative and directive-imperative. The former are 
designed to represent facts, and the latter to tell what to do. The most prim-
itive type of representation is designed to do both, to describe what is the 
case and direct what should be done about it. Millikan (1996) terms these 
pushmi-pullyu representations and cites the dancing of honeybees as exem-
plary. 3 The dance of the honeybee tells where the nectar is and simultane-
ously where the watching bees must go to find it. 

From Evolution to Emotionese 
149
 Representations are often considered rather more sophisticated than the 
primitive pushmi-pullyu suggests; for this reason, Millikan (1984) prefers 
the term “intentional icon” to refer to all representations, from the most 
primitive pushmi-pullyu to those of considerable sophistication that are 
included in human inference processes. 
 Each type of intentional icon includes a producer and an interpreter 
component. Some producers and interpreters will be within the one organ-
ism (e.g., the producers and interpreters of hormones), and others will be in 
separate organisms. The honeybee dance, for example, is produced in the 
dancing bee and interpreted in the watching hive bees. The important 
point is that what the producer does helps the interpreter to perform func-
tions that are mutually beneficial in either increasing the likelihood that 
both will survive and proliferate or maintain their current settings (selec-
tion through learning). The presence of both producer and interpreter is 
part of a normal mechanism by which the other helps itself to survive or 
proliferate, and this cooperative interaction is the result of past selection or 
learning that operated on both simultaneously. 
 Producers produce intentional icons that will be true (indicative-
descriptive) or satisfied (directive-imperative) only if they map onto some 
state of affairs in the world in accordance with some sort of “semantic” 
rules. “These are rules of correspondence between signs and world affairs 
that have been instantiated in the past when the consumer and the pro-
ducer or their ancestors have succeeded in performing their cooperative 
functions” (Millikan 2009, 397–398). 
 The semantic rule associated with a descriptive intentional icon deter-
mines the state of affairs that must obtain if the consumer is to perform its 
tasks, whatever they may be, in the normal way. The consumer varies its 
activities systematically according to the icons presented to it to ensure that 
its activities conform to, or are  adapted to, the state of affairs represented by 
the icon so that it performs its function properly given the state of affairs. 
Indicative-descriptive icons are designed to stand in for states of affairs typi-
cally outside the organism involved and to vary systematically with such 
states, governing behavior, both internal and external, to accord with or 
adapt to such states of affairs. 
 It is clear that from this account that the bee dance is, in part, a descrip-
tive intentional icon. If the bees are to perform their function by locating 
nectar by responding to the dance in the normal way, the dance needs to 

150 
Chapter 6
correspond by a certain semantic mapping rule to a fact about the location 
of nectar. An indicative intentional icon will be true (represent truly) only 
if it represents according to a certain semantic mapping rule. 
 Directive-imperative intentional icons that correspond to mapping 
rules are “satisfied” rather than “true.” The semantic rules associated 
with directive-imperative intentional icons determine the state of affairs its 
interpreters are to produce. It is the function of the interpreter to bring it 
about that a state of affairs corresponds by rule or  adapts to the icon. The 
bee dance, therefore, is also in part a directive intentional icon because it 
must correspond by a certain rule to the direction of flight of the hive bees 
if their dance-interpreting mechanisms are to serve their functions 
normally. 
 Drawing heavily on Millikan (2009, 398) here, I provide emotional onto-
genesis as an example. The activities of infant and caregiver fulfill their 
cooperative function of directing the caregiver to provide the requisite 
assistance in the normal way, that is, through the characteristic mecha-
nisms that have accounted for previous success and subsequent selection of 
the assistance-soliciting and assistance-providing devices. The infant 
expresses a need that maps, by a certain rule, first onto the nature, location, 
intensity, and so on, of the need, and second onto the nature and duration 
of the assistance provided by the caregiver. In each case, had certain vari-
ables of the assistance-soliciting expression been different (e.g., tone of cry, 
facial configuration, motor activity, etc.), the need or deficit would have 
needed to be different in type, location, and so on, and the caregiver would 
have needed to provide an alternative type of assistance for the expression 
to serve its purpose in the normal way. The semantic rules are defined by 
the way in which the set of possible needs, deficits, and pleasures deter-
mines an isomorphism between these producer-interpreter domains, an 
isomorphism that holds between the set of possible emotional expressions 
and the set of responses that will result if caregivers provide assistance 
through historically normal mechanisms. 
 Mappings or isomorphisms are an essential feature of each kind of sign 
system. Intentional icons are produced by systems that are designed to pro-
duce them to accord with predetermined mapping rules to which their 
interpreters are adapted. 
 It is worth noting that there is no limit to the complexity of the semantic 
mapping functions that can map intentional icons onto states of affairs 

From Evolution to Emotionese 
151
they represent. “A bizarrely coded secret message from a CIA agent can be 
as much an icon that maps on to a certain world affair in accordance with 
a definite semantic-mapping function as any bee dance, sentence or dia-
gram. Intentional icons must be things apt for use by icon users, but icon 
users can be very idiosyncratic in their habits” (Millikan 2009, 309). Every 
representation is in some kind of code, but the complexity of the code is 
irrelevant. 
 In Millikan’s account, biological devices are the most familiar items with 
proper functions. The various traits of biological items that are members of 
reproductively established families have been selected for by Darwinian 
natural selection. She emphasizes, however, that artifacts and cultural prac-
tices and traditions (including linguistic traditions) all have functions in 
her sense of proper function. In addition, the performance of a device’s 
proper function almost invariably depends on it having a suitable sur-
rounding environment that contains members of other reproductively 
established families that need it, in turn, to perform properly. There are 
three categories of proper function germane to the present analysis; these 
are relational, derived, and adapted proper functions, and it is to these that 
the discussion now turns. 
 6.5.1   Relational Proper Functions 
 Having relational proper functions is typical of the behaviors of organisms. 
These functions in higher species, controlled mostly by perceptual and cog-
nitive systems, are performed by altering the relation between the organism 
and the environment as required so that the environment will supply sur-
roundings and inputs conducive to the organism’s needs. Some functions 
involve changing the environment to suit the organism, some involve 
changing the organism to suit the environment, some involve merely 
changing the relationship of organism and environment, and some involve 
some combination of all three (Millikan 2002, 126). The devices responsible 
for these changes have relational proper functions of one kind or another; 
that is, their function is to ensure that environment and organism bear 
some particular relation to each other. Their function is to create relational 
structures. As with any other proper function, a relational proper function 
of a device corresponds to an effect that ancestors of the device have his-
torically possessed that assisted in accounting for its selection. In this case, 
the function was to create an abstract relational structure. 

152 
Chapter 6
 Millikan’s favorite examples are the chameleon and the honeybee 
(1984). The chameleon is equipped with chromatophores that contain 
granules of pigment that, through aggregation or dispersion, change the 
color of the chameleon’s skin to match that of its background (Cott 1966). 
The chromatophores’ function is to protect the chameleon from predation, 
and they accomplish this by producing a skin color that bears the relation 
 same color as (Millikan 1984, 35) to the chameleon’s background environ-
ment. To create this relational structure, the device causes changes in the 
chameleon but not in the environment. To produce the relational structure 
 skin bearing same color as its background , the chameleon does not need to 
produce both relata. It produces only one relatum, the skin color, but in 
such a way that it creates the requisite relation. 
 As for honeybees, their dance-producing devices have the function of 
producing a relational structure with two relata, the location of the nectar 
being one relatum and the particular dance produced another. The relation 
in question is the one given by the function (in the abstract mathematical 
sense) describing the semantic rules of “beemese” used by this particular 
species of bee. In most species, an angle that the dance movement marks 
out relative to aspects of the hive always bears the same definite relation of 
the angle of the location of nectar relative to hive and sun. The properly 
functioning dance-producing device always produces exactly the same 
thing, namely, this requisite relational structure. The device that produces 
the dance has an additional proper function, that is, to send hive bees flying 
to the nectar source. The relational structure thus produced has as relata (a) 
the orientation of the dance relative to the hive, and (b) the angle in which 
hive bees fly relative to hive and sun. The producer devices create this rela-
tional structure by altering the environment; there are no changes required 
in the dancing bee itself, but only in the hive bees. As a result of producing 
the proper dance–nectar location structure, the properly functioning device 
later produces always exactly the same thing, namely, existence of this sec-
ond relational structure between angle of dance and angle of flying. 
 In short, where a proper function of a trait is to produce a series of effects, 
each affecting the next, it is also a proper function of each stage to produce 
the next. In honeybees, this results in the production of one relational 
structure,  dance–nectar location , having the proper function of the produc-
tion of another,  dance–direction of flying . Finally, and as a result, yet a further 
relational structure is to produce  hive bees flying toward nectar . This is typical 

From Evolution to Emotionese 
153
of biological items. Proper biofunctional relational structures typically ful-
fill their functions by producing further relational structures that eventu-
ally produce a relation between organism and environment, yielding 
conditions or inputs conducive to the organism’s well-being. 
 In sum thus far: It is typical in biological items that proper functions 
involve series of interweaving stages, each of which is an abstract relational 
structure, some moments in these processes producing changes in the 
organism, others producing changes in the world, but involving always 
exactly the same relations, although among different relata each time they 
are run. It was to simplify these complex relational structures that Millikan 
(1984) introduced the terminology “adapted” and “derived” relational 
proper functions (2002, 128).  
 6.5.2   Adapted Proper Functions 
 Adapted proper functions are relational proper functions adapted to particu-
lar contexts. The chameleon and honeybee are again instructive. Imagine 
that the chameleon sits on a green background; the adapted proper function 
of the chromatophores in this particular case is to turn the chameleon’s skin 
color green. This function is adapted to a given context (Millikan 1984, 40). 
Similarly, when the searching bee locates nectar three kilometers north-
northeast of the hive, her dance will map this specific location in accor-
dance with the “semantic rules” of beemese (and acquire a further adapted 
function by sending the hive bees off in a specific direction and to a specific 
distance, that is, three kilometers north-northeast of the hive). 
 The configuration  chameleon bearing the relation same color as what it sits 
on is a member of a higher-order reproductively established family (because 
chromatophores in the chameleon proliferated because of their function to 
do so), and so too is the bee dancing  thus to the location of some nectar (Mil-
likan 1984, 40), and for the same reason; but neither the green skin of the 
chameleon nor the bee’s dance of three kilometers north-northeast is 
(because the devices that produce these specific color and dance features 
did not proliferate because they produced these specific colors or dances). 
The green color and the specific bee dance are adapted to some other item, 
that is, the specific background color green and the specific nectar location; 
Millikan terms these devices  adaptors (1984, 41). A derived proper function 
is a function derived originally from the relational function of the produc-
ing device plus its context, in these examples from the adapted functions of 

154 
Chapter 6
the chromatophores and the dance-producing device as operating in a cer-
tain context. All derived proper functions are adapted in this way. 
 Consider any device that has as a function the production of any kind 
of learning on the basis of experience, for example, a device that effects 
trial-and-error learning, learning by imprinting or imitation, or even learn-
ing by reasoning to a conclusion from premises derived from experience. 
Any such device has a relational function or functions. It is designed to turn 
out behaviors (e.g., beliefs or desires) as a function (in the mathematical 
sense) of certain designated kinds of input from experience. Baby sea otters 
learn to eat whatever their mother eats; their producer devices therefore 
have a relational function to create in the baby otter precisely this disposi-
tion. Given that the mother otter eats sea urchins, then, it is an adapted 
function of the device to produce a state that effects a disposition in the 
baby to eat sea urchins. And once this complex state is in place in the baby 
otter, it has a derived proper function to produce sea urchin collecting and 
eating. 
 It is the case that many biological devices have proper functions that 
they perform by varying (i.e., adapting) their performance in accordance 
with present conditions (their adapted device adaptors) to produce an 
invariant end result, such as not being eaten or securing a supply of nectar. 
In contrast to the chameleon and honeybee, the human neonate is not 
completely genetically equipped with adaptor devices, that is, devices 
whose relational proper functions are to adapt the assistance-soliciting and 
assistance-producing devices to particular features of a given context (e.g., 
green background, nectar at three kilometers north-northeast). The human 
infant must construct nearly all such devices. 
 In terms of human emotional ontogenesis, there are a number of impor-
tant points to note at this juncture: 
 (i)  The assistance-soliciting mechanisms in the infant and the assistance-
providing mechanisms in the caregiver(s) are coconstructed or learned 
through linguistically mediated social interaction. The inbuilt intero-
ceptor and proprioceptor devices in the neonate trigger the referen-
tially opaque precursor expressions in infants, such as unfocused 
crying, motor unrest, and so on, and these trigger the inbuilt non-
specific general-purpose interpreter devices of intuitive parenting skills 
in caregivers (to search, identify, and correct needs or deficits); these 

From Evolution to Emotionese 
155
repeated search processes serve to fine-tune the interpreter devices to 
the infant’s idiosyncratic needs, causes, and satisfaction conditions. 
These are fed back to the infant in linguistically mediated social inter-
action to promote the maturation of the neural substrata of specific 
producer devices, such as sadness in the infant. What this implies is 
that, in contrast to inbuilt producer-interpreter devices in honeybees, 
the emotionese producer-interpreter devices in human beings are 
largely learned through social interaction. Emotionese will, of course, 
include a limited range of inbuilt emotion elicitors (e.g., fright response 
to precipice stimuli), but it will also include a whole raft of cultur-
ally relevant and culturally appropriate elicitors (e.g., blue exam books 
and summonses from senior colleagues) and responses and culturally 
relevant linguistic labels for these elicitors. In Indonesia, for instance, 
crawling infants elicit disgust because they look like four-legged ani-
mals, which Indonesian culture despises. Other cultures have variants 
of what in English we term joy, such as  amae in Japan, a feeling of 
pleasant dependence on individuals or institutions (Morsbach and 
Tyler 1986), and what in English we term anger, such as  song in Ifa-
luk, which is an anger analogue but is more akin to simple admoni-
tion with no disposition to revenge (Lutz 1986). These emotions or 
emotion terms refer to responses that are entirely appropriate to the 
host culture in which they are embedded. Japanese lifestyles are such 
that dependence is viewed positively, and given the hostility of their 
natural environment, aggressive, retributive anger would be massively 
counterproductive for groups of Ifaluk.  
 (ii)   Human emotions possess the relational proper function of produc-
ing reactions that bear a specific relation to environmental saliences 
concerned with well-being (and thereby ensuring social regulation and 
harmony). The specific emotions are adapted to particular emotion-
eliciting stimuli that are frightening (e.g., spiders), saddening (e.g., loss 
of Teddy), pleasing (cuddles), and so on. Such stimuli are the adap-
tors of specific emotions. Each specific emotional producer device has 
an adapted proper function to produce, as a function (mathematical 
sense) of the semantic rules of human emotionese, the relational struc-
ture  response tailored to specific environmental stimulus . In addition, these 
adapted proper functions have further derived proper functions to pro-
duce, again as a function (mathematical sense) of the semantic rules 

156 
Chapter 6
of human emotionese, relational structures of even more specificity, 
for instance, to produce the relational structure  bear approaching–move 
away. These adapted and derived proper functions act as adaptors for 
further adapted and derived proper functions as complex capacities 
are functionally decomposed in detailed functional analyses. They are 
reflected right through functional networks, terminating, as they must, 
in the brute neurochemical devices that eventually produce the most 
basic effectors, such as neuronal depolarization and activation of IEGs.  
 (iii)   Yet another point to note is that the redirection of the imperative 
icon from other to self indicates the development within the emoting 
subject herself of her own internal interpreter devices. These too are 
gradually acquired in interaction with caregivers, simultaneously with 
producer devices. Both the interpreter and producer devices of the ref-
erentially opaque pushmi-pullyu “Something’s wrong! Do something!” 
are gradually elaborated and refined in light of, and simultaneously 
with, feedback from the caregiver’s progressively refining search-and-
correct activities. “Something’s wrong! Do something!” is gradually 
refined to more specific pushmi-pullyus, “I’m cold, cover me!” “I’m 
frightened, comfort me!” and so on. This too is evident in the vocaliza-
tions of young children. Around two years, at about the time of the 
word spurt, they begin increasingly to use and refine their own emerg-
ing interpreter devices by mirroring caregivers’ earlier utterances (Holo-
dynski and Friedlmeier 2006). Instead of the caregiver saying, “Amy 
sad,” “Amy lost toy,” and so on, Amy herself begins to comment on 
her own feelings (provided, that is, that they are not too intense; see 
chap. 4), their apparent causes, and what to do about them. Indeed, 
young children learn language initially by learning emotion words, for 
example, “Amy sad,” “Tommy love Mummy,” “Teddy happy.” This is 
consistent with what has been consensually acknowledged for many 
years, that is, that human neonates are also preadapted to acquire lan-
guage in sociolinguistic interaction. In an important sense, therefore, 
human children learn to emote as human beings as they learn to speak 
emotion words. As one theorist (Shanker 2008, 70) observes, “emo-
tions appear to serve as the very architect of language development.”  
 In addition, the emergence of some voluntary control indicates a 
gradual if incomplete separation of indicative-imperative functions. The 

From Evolution to Emotionese 
157
indicative-imperative cleavage becomes more apparent as the higher cogni-
tive emotions begin to develop from about four years of age. The cleavage 
is complete in adult emoters, who can reflect calmly on the causes and 
consequences of at least some of their emotions, “relive” them (from mem-
ory), and decide how to deal with them in the future. (“I am embarrassed; I 
talked too long and too loud today; next time I’ll talk less and more 
quietly.”) 
 All of this is possible because emotion precursors and caregiver intuitive 
parenting skills are devices that possess the proper function to learn on the 
basis of experience; they are to produce behaviors, such as imitation, trial-
and-error experimentation, even beliefs and desires, as a function (mathe-
matical sense) of certain kinds of experiential input. The auditory, visual, 
tactile, and olfactory sensory-perceptual stimulation provided in neonate-
caregiver mutual feedback provides (most of) this experiential input. The 
inbuilt emotion precursors and sensorimotor preadaptations in the neo-
nate, together with the caregiver’s inbuilt intuitive parenting skills, form 
the basis for the development of full human emotionality given these expe-
riential inputs (i.e., the normal conditions for proper function). The 
interaction-coaction cycles in which both parties engage, which progres-
sively lead to the development of the exquisitely fine-tuned emotional 
devices in both parties, are the result of mutual adaptation of relational 
proper function. 
 The devices in both neonate and caregiver possess proper functions to 
produce, first, dispositions to imitate; then, second, imitation dispositions 
have the relational proper function to produce, in both parties, the disposi-
tion to do whatever the caregiver (or neonate) does, which has the further 
adapted proper function of producing the disposition to imitate the smile, 
frown, noise, and so on, that the other is producing, and then the further 
derived proper function to produce this particular imitation behavior. The 
neonate’s producer devices are adapted to the caregiver’s adaptors, and the 
caregiver’s producer devices are adapted to the neonate’s adaptors. 
 Both neonate and caregiver learn through feedback which emotional 
stimulus is causing the infant to (precursor) emote and what to do to rem-
edy it. The inbuilt caregiver producer devices have the relational proper 
function to create in the caregiver the disposition to search-identify-cor-
rect, and once this disposition is created, it has the derived proper function 
of producing the requisite search-identify-correct behaviors. In due course, 

158 
Chapter 6
through trial-and-error experimentation (informed by general cultural eth-
notheories, emotion-specific ethnotheories, and her increasing knowledge 
of her infant), the caregiver learns precisely what causes her infant’s distress 
and how to remedy it. This is because her producer devices have the rela-
tional proper function to produce dispositions and then behaviors that cor-
relate with positive feedback, such as smiling, cooing, and cuddling up. 
This process also operates in the child, who progressively complements imi-
tation with trial-and-error learning (as these producer devices are gradually 
constructed), increasingly scaffolded by language (from about twelve 
months), and eventually reasoning from premises derived from experien-
tial input to conclusions (again, as these producer devices are gradually 
created). 
 In addition, the neonate’s responses of smiling, cooing, and snuggling 
up, as noted, are accompanied by feelings of great pleasure; the responses 
are imitated by the caregiver, and the feelings of great pleasure that attend 
them are experienced. These mutual responses and feelings form the basis 
of the special social relationship that develops between caregiver and 
infant. 
 As the caregiver goes through her baby-talk-commentary-accompanied 
search-identify-correct routine, she provides the necessary visual, auditory, 
tactile, and olfactory stimulation to excite the activity of the infant’s intra-
cellular IEGs (and possibly a host of other genes). The relevant IEGs respond 
by developing, maturing, and connecting neural circuits that will eventu-
ally underpin the child’s discrete, fine-grained producer and interpreter 
devices. This too reflects an adapted relational proper function where the 
release of specific IEGs is adapted to particular sensory-perceptual stimula-
tion. Again, in exactly the same way, the interaction with her infant pro-
vides the necessary sensory-perceptual stimulation to excite the maturation 
of the caregiver’s neural circuits that eventually underpin her fine-grained 
interpreter and producer devices. In other words, the operating IEGs, which 
are members of first-order reproductively established families, gradually 
construct emotional neural substrata that are members of higher-order 
reproductively established families. 
 (iv)   As basic emotions and higher cognitive emotions develop, they are 
experienced consciously by the individual emoter-subject (child or 
adult). A range of subpersonal biological processes that extend across 

From Evolution to Emotionese 
159
the body-environment boundary underpin this conscious experience, 
but the emotions are felt at the personal level. A range of subpersonal 
transcranial processes are implicated in emotional ontogenesis, experi-
ence, and expression, but no set of neurons or neuropeptides or any 
other subpersonal device emotes. Only individual animals emote. This 
seems entirely appropriate; the emotions evolved to protect the inter-
ests of whole organisms, typically by movement away from noxious 
stimuli in flight, or in the cessation of movement in freezing. An addi-
tional point is that whole organisms are typically required to provide 
the necessary background conditions for the efficient functioning of 
component systems (see chap. 3).  
 (v)   The foregoing process implies no infinite regress. The producer devices 
in the infant are activated initially by homeostatic deficits, and even 
if interpreter devices are required to read them off, these deficits are 
grounded in physiology. Similarly, at the opposite end of the pro-
cess, further interpretation is not required, as the process terminates 
in actual behavior in the world. In sum, human emotions have as a 
direct proper function to perceive and respond appropriately to envi-
ronmental saliences connected to well-being. This is their invariant 
end result. This invariant end result, however, is achieved through a 
series of adapted processes, the adapted proper functions of which are 
to respond appropriately to specific stimuli that are frightening, sad-
dening, frustrating, interesting, pleasing, and disgusting, and so on, 
which are the adaptors to which these are adapted.  
 6.6   Natural Signs and Intentional Signs 
 I have noted repeatedly in previous chapters that positive and negative 
stimulus thresholds are detected in human neonates by a range of surface 
sensory receptors (which detect bright lights, loud noises, physical discom-
fort, etc.) and internal interoceptors and proprioceptors (which detect 
saline and glucose depletion, changes in facial expression, etc.). These 
receptors activate, via the appropriate thalamic projections, the relevant 
nuclei in the amygdala, which identify stimulus positivity and negativity in 
terms of well-being. The amygdala circuits, in turn, activate the appropriate 
hypothalamic circuits, resulting initially in motor unrest and unfocused 
crying (and progressively in the full suite of emotional reactions once the 

160 
Chapter 6
requisite neural substrata are developed). Unfocused crying and motor 
unrest are recurrent natural signs of homeostatic distress; that is, they carry 
local natural information concerning their bearer’s homeostatic well-being 
to (a) consumer device(s). That they do so, however, is no accident; the 
amygdala and associated structures evolved precisely to do this. There is, in 
short, a real causal connection between the state of affairs signified (saline 
or glucose depletion) and the resultant sign (motor unrest, crying). Insofar 
as the amygdala and associated structures are devices selected for this func-
tion, the unfocused crying and motor unrest elicited are intentional signs 
(icons) of homeostatic deficit. 
 Ethologists suggest that communicative animal signals appear to have 
evolved from preparatory movements, called “intention movements,” 
made at the onset of some activity (Millikan 2004, 103). These movements 
originally served as cues to conspecifics of either the animal’s ensuing 
action or the stimulus that excited such activity, but only accidentally. 
They served as natural signs for danger, food, readiness to mate, and so 
on. When it became advantageous for conspecifics to know what the 
animal was preparing to do, and what it was doing it for, the intention 
movements gradually became genetically enabled, stereotyped, and exag-
gerated. Similarly and simultaneously, conspecifics interpreting the sign 
gradually became tuned to respond to the sign appropriately by learning 
and genetic selection. That conspecifics are aware of what one of their 
number is preparing to do, and why, is often useful to animals. For instance, 
most basically, it is useful for an animal to know when its partner is ready 
to mate. 
 Intentional signs thus arose from natural signs quite rapidly through a 
ratcheting process (Tomasello 1999), facilitated and expedited by learning, 
through imitation and concept formation on the part of human beings. It 
is only a small step from a nonlinguistic intentional sign to a linguistic 
intentional sign if one is genetically so predisposed. Natural signs, inten-
tional signs, and linguistic signs all carry locally recurrent natural informa-
tion (the kind of information that inhabits tight worlds). 
 An example: snow geese flying north over Whyte Avenue in Edmonton, 
Alberta, in April is a natural sign that spring will shortly arrive. The arrival 
of the geese carries natural information local to Alberta, Canada. Snow 
geese flying north in April means that spring will soon follow because, in a 
statistically significant number of cases, the arrival of the geese has been 

From Evolution to Emotionese 
161
followed by the arrival of spring. It is because there is a causal connection, 
that is, a nonaccidental statistical correlation between states of affairs signi-
fied and sign or signal, that local natural signs are recurrent, that is, they 
carry locally recurrent natural information. Real causal connection is the 
reason that many states of affairs persist and spread and replicate them-
selves over space and time and are experienced as occurring regularly, 
repeatedly, and often cyclically. The niches that animals inhabit are “tight”; 
the same objects, and the objects to which these objects are related, are 
experienced from a range of perspectives with mundane regularity, that is, 
as locally recurring. This locally recurrent information and the natural signs 
that carry it are what enable animals to learn about Bs (states of affairs signi-
fied) from encounters with As (signs or signals). Correlations are defined 
relative to reference classes (Millikan 2004, 37), and the relevant reference 
class will include all those “samples” to which the correlation of As and Bs 
in the present sample are projectable. 
 Views differ on what counts as natural information. Dretske (1981) 
insists that a sign or signal carries information about a state of affairs 
(source) only if the signal’s occurrence yields a probability of 1, determined 
in accordance with natural and logical necessity. Other theorists, including 
Millikan (1984), Price (2001), and myself, disagree (and even Dretske [1986, 
1991] seems to equivocate); we suggest that a sign or signal carries informa-
tion as a matter of statistical frequency, not natural law. This is partly 
because in nature there is no natural law that precludes the evolution of 
new species or devices that cause the same response. No natural law, for 
instance, precludes new eliciting stimuli from causing the fear response in 
emoters in any given culture. However, it is mainly because virtuous cogni-
tion involves the trade-off of two types of correlation, not just one, as 
Dretske believes (Godfrey-Smith 1991). 
 By using signal detection theory and Field’s (1990) construals of head-to-
world and world-to-head reliability correlations, Godfrey-Smith (1991) per-
suasively argues that virtuous cognition involves a trade-off between the 
two, depending on the relative significance of signal to noise (stimuli that 
falsely activate inner-action-guiding states). 
 A perfect head-to-world correlation exists when an inner state is tokened 
only if certain external conditions obtain; it is not required that the inner 
state always be produced by the external condition. A perfect world-to-head 
correlation exists when an inner-action-guiding state is always tokened by 

162 
Chapter 6
the external condition, whether or not the inner state obtains under other 
conditions. 
 “Except in the most epistemically benign and friendly environments, 
the two kinds of reliability cannot be bought as a package deal; rather, one 
must be traded off against the other” (Godfrey-Smith 1991, 718). The point 
is illustrated in extreme cases; one way to achieve excellent head-to-world 
reliability is to token action-guiding states, but this sacrifices nearly all an 
animal’s world-to-head reliability. Excellent world-to-head reliability can be 
achieved by activating the action-guiding inner state in response to all 
forms of noise, as well as correct stimulation, but this leads to too many 
false positives. These two types of reliability correlation must be traded off 
in virtuous cognition depending on the particular situation the animal 
finds itself in. The reliability trade-off depends on the degree of probability 
(which depends on stimulus or noise significance) and the costs and bene-
fits differentially associated with “hits” (correct positives), misses (false 
negatives), false positives, and correct negatives. The more actual survival 
depends on hits, that is, as the importance of signal relative to noise 
increases, the higher will be the trade-off of head-to-world reliability in 
favor of world-to-head reliability. 
 An example: A rabbit and a fox find themselves in the same field, and 
both notice movements in the nearby grass. The fox either interprets or 
fails to interpret the stimulus as prey; if he correctly interprets it as prey 
(scores a hit), he expends energy to capture it and benefit. If, however, he 
“misses” the prey, it costs him nothing in terms of energy expenditure. 
Compare the rabbit: if she scores a hit by interpreting the stimulus as preda-
tor, she expends energy to escape. If she misses, however, she could be 
killed or injured. The stakes for the rabbit are so high that she sacrifices 
head-to-world reliability to obtain an extremely high value of world-to-
head reliability and tolerates a number of false positives to achieve as many 
hits as she can. 
 Other points relating to natural signs are worth noting. The first is that 
natural signs are structured (as, indeed, are the states of affairs they signify). 
It is not geese flying south per se that is a natural sign that spring will soon 
arrive; rather, it is geese at time T flying over a certain place P (Whyte Ave-
nue) that is a sign that spring will arrive soon after T at P (Millikan 2004). It 
is the relational structure of a natural sign that determines its meaning. The 
meaning of a sign is determined as a function of values of significant 

From Evolution to Emotionese 
163
variables as determinables manifested by the sign. The meaning varies 
systematically to parallel significant transformations of the sign. What this 
implies is that a natural semantic mapping is recurrently applied. 
 The second is that the meaning of public language is determined by 
compositionality, but in the account given earlier, compositionality is just 
one way among many of being relationally structured (Millikan 2005). Rep-
resentations that exhibit compositionality are transformed into other rep-
resentations in the same system by rearranging the same parts or substituting 
parts for others. It is not compositionality in particular but relational struc-
turing more generally that yields the productivity of sign systems, their 
capacity to yield novel information or ways to convey information. 
 What this implies is that what recurs in the case of recurrent signs are 
other members of the same system of signs, where a sign system is com-
posed of a set of possible sign types, which are transformed (in an abstract 
mathematical sense) systematically by rule to correspond to transforma-
tions in what they signify. Time and place variables in any structure can be 
transformed by projecting forward in time and east or north in place, for 
instance, by observing another type of migrating goose flying north over 
the Yukon in May; by using precisely the same transformations, another 
(possible) natural sign in the same sign system can be produced. In short, 
recurring natural signs are semantic mapping functions from signs to signi-
fieds that define isomorphisms between the set of possible signs in any sign 
domain and their set of possible signifieds. 
 The third is that different natural signs can signify the same, more distal 
state of affairs by a different route or routes that are only partially the same. 
For example, certain patterns impinging on my retina at a certain time and 
place are local signs of the occurrence of the shape, color, size, and so on, of 
my crying infant that signifies a prior absolute stimulus threshold deficit, 
and these patterns are routes to the more distal state of affairs of, for exam-
ple, glucose or saline depletion. The sound of certain sound patterns ema-
nating from other family members (“it is four hours since her last feed”) and 
impinging on my auditory apparatus signifies what the crying means (abso-
lute stimulus threshold deficit) and is also part of the route to the distal state 
of glucose or saline depletion. What this implies is that natural signs typi-
cally co-occur with other signs in the relevant domain of reference. 
 As already indicated, local natural signs of more distal states of affairs 
carry local information about all the more proximal states of affairs en 

164 
Chapter 6
route from them to those distal affairs (e.g., an infant is crying because she 
is hungry, wet, startled, etc.). However, a natural sign that is also an inten-
tional sign will carry only some of this information intentionally, and this 
is the information it was selected to carry to be useful to its interpreters-
consumers. The information may be very abstract and may relate to very 
distal affairs, but this matters not; the only information that matters is that 
which is of use to interpreters-consumers. What this means is that if 
interpreters-consumers were designed to use only that  food is near or that 
 Amy is hungry , then it need not carry any of the more proximal relevant 
information such as patterns on the retina or sound patterns in the audi-
tory apparatus. Percepts are designed to carry information about a distal 
causal antecedent without apparently carrying information concerning the 
more proximal members of the causal chain (Dretske 1981). The percept 
treats proximate members as transparent to represent its more distal causal 
antecedents. The only information a percept carries intentionally is the 
information it was selected for carrying, that is, only the information that 
is used by its cooperative interpreter. 
 Consider an individual, Mary, who sees an intruder, armed with a knife, 
enter the bedroom in which she has been sleeping. Certain patterns on 
Mary’s retina that signify the presence of the intruder mediate between 
Mary and Mary’s awareness of him. She will not possess an intentional rep-
resentation, however, of the retinal patterns that recognize the intruder. In 
addition, certain patterns traversing the optic nerve will typically signify 
what is happening on the retina, but they will not be intentional signs of 
this. An intentional sign signifies only what it is used to represent when it 
is functioning normally. The patterns on Mary’s retina are not used to guide 
Mary’s behavior toward the retina or any inferences about the retina. It is 
irrelevant to the proper functioning of these patterns that they have been 
produced in the normal way from retinal images as long as they are consis-
tent with the intruder. The images on the retina are of absolutely no con-
cern to Mary. 
 Exactly the same is true for public language (linguistic) intentional signs. 
The English sentence “The sun is shining” is a recurrent natural sign that 
the speaker believes that the sun is shining. Its memetic function, derived 
compositionally from the combined memetic functions of its signified 
components, however, is to produce beliefs in hearers that the sun is shin-
ing, not that the speaker believes that the sun is shining. 

From Evolution to Emotionese 
165
 Like locally recurrent natural signs, intentional signs are always mem-
bers of a domain exemplifying a system of probable signs, the entire system 
running isomorphically to the domain of signified states of affairs. There is 
no need to restrict the complexity of the semantic mapping functions that 
might map representations onto their representeds. Signs must just be use-
ful to their consumers, and these can vary enormously in nature. Every 
representation is in some kind of code, but the complexity of the code is 
irrelevant. The only factor that is relevant is the ability of the consumer to 
use them.  
 6.7   Linguistic Signs 
 Linguistic signs do not represent states of affairs directly; they intentionally 
represent properties that are natural signs of these states of affairs. Linguis-
tic signs accomplish this, however, only when they are functioning prop-
erly, that is, functioning in the way that accounted for their selection and 
proliferation in a language community. To function properly, the properties 
they represent must actually be natural signs of something. Linguistic signs 
can also represent other representations as representations, and the repeated 
representations may or may not be signs of anything real.  
 6.8   Meaning and Its Acquisition 
 Meaning is generally construed to be “the conventional, common or stan-
dard sense of an expression, construction or sentence in a given language, or 
of a non-linguistic sign or symbol” (Loar 1995, 471). Emotions and linguistic 
forms are all intentional icons that differ simply in terms of relative complex-
ity and sophistication and proximality or distality, and as I have just argued, 
human emotions (and their precursors) are intentional signs carrying locally 
recurrent natural information. Prelinguistic emotional meaning is a func-
tion of genetic endowment, and linguistic meaning is a function of linguistic 
convention and conception at three different levels that dictate how sen-
tences and utterances are standardly constructed and interpreted. 
 As I have already indicated, the overall purpose of human emotionality 
is social regulation and control, whereas the purpose of natural, public lan-
guage is to enable communication between persons in the same speech 
community. Human language evolved, as did nonhuman calls, grunts, and 

166 
Chapter 6
gestures, to enable communication between conspecifics. As the size and 
foraging range of human social groups increased, full human language 
evolved from protolinguistic precursors (Wray 2000, 2002), initially to track 
present and past social activities and predict future ones. The evolution of 
full human language complemented and extended the role of prelinguistic 
emotion in early humans to keep track of who is (was, will) be doing what 
to whom, where, how, for what reason, and with what results (Dunbar 
1996). Subsequently it was exploited to allow the verbal transmission of 
object and event description and complete causal mythologies about the 
world. Even more recently, language also enabled the sharing of incomplete 
ideas and causal theories leading to the refinement, elaboration, and revi-
sion of ideas, that is, knowledge construction (D. Johnson 2003). Both 
these functions of language are required to enable human beings to survive 
and flourish in increasingly complex physical and social environments. 
 For any communication, prelinguistic or linguistic, to be possible, how-
ever, (i) the interactions of communicators or interlocutors must be coordi-
nated; (ii) the contents of their expressive behaviors, including their 
utterances, must map words relatively faithfully to objects and events in 
the world and otherwise comply with “satisfaction conditions” (discussed 
below); and (iii) communicators or interlocutors must possess the appropri-
ate perceptual and conceptual structures to enable the referential grasp of 
objects and events in the world. 
 (i)  Each sign system, including natural language, is characterized by a 
public pool of conventional sign forms, each with its own conven-
tional function, that is, facial expression, vocalizations, body orienta-
tion in terms of emotion and words, syntactic forms, tonal inflections, 
idioms, and so on, in terms of public language. These are what Dawkins 
(1976) terms “memes,” that is, cultural artifacts or items that are repro-
duced by imitation rather than genetically. Popular tunes, dress fash-
ions, ideas, values, forms of emotional and linguistic expression, and 
so on, are memes, and they are copied from one person to another 
and from one generation to another. Dawkins reminds us, however, 
that human memory and energy are not inexhaustible; this means that 
memes have to compete with each other for reproduction. Memes that 
are selected for reproduction are selected for their purpose; emotional 
and linguistic memes are selected for their cooperative purpose, and 

From Evolution to Emotionese 
167
the mechanisms that produce them have evolved to promote social 
coordination (Millikan 1984). Coordinating functions are served when 
the purposes of two or more individuals are simultaneously facilitated, 
bringing the separate behaviors of those individuals into a designed 
coordination that benefits both but has not been designed by either 
individually.  
 Emotional expressions, such as facial expressions and display rules, are 
reproduced from one generation of emoters to another and reproduced in 
the same subject-emoter on different occasions. The emotional responses 
and expressions are reproduced in specific emotion-related contexts simply 
because of the effects that they have on interactors in some critical propor-
tion of cases. These effects are precisely those the emotions evolved to pro-
duce and subject-emoters wish to produce. In a similar fashion, 
natural-language devices, such as words and phonemes and occasionally 
sentences, are reproduced from one generation of speakers to another and 
reproduced by the same speaker on different occasions. It is clear, however, 
that speakers reproduce words in specific concrete syntactic patterns rather 
than in others simply because of the effects these patterns have on hearers, 
in some critical proportion of cases. These effects are precisely the ones that 
speakers wish to produce. 
 The proper effects on interactors in an emotional context to those emo-
tional expressions—the proper reactions, if you will—are also reproduced. 
This is because interactors benefit (in terms of information received, reward-
ing feedback elicited) from reacting properly to the expressions they wit-
ness. Specific emotional reactions produce interpretations and responses in 
interactors in conformity with the appropriate mapping rules, and these are 
often enough to ensure that reproducing a reaction provides interactors 
with rewards in terms of information or action. 
 The proper effects on hearers of these language forms (the proper reac-
tions, if you will) are also reproduced. This is not due to hearers reproduc-
ing each other’s reactions, however, at least not typically. It is due to the 
fact that hearers benefit from reacting properly to the sentences they hear. 
Words in certain concrete syntactic patterns produce beliefs in hearers and 
actions in conformity with the rules of language, and these, often enough 
to ensure reproduction of reaction, provide hearers with rewards in terms of 
useful information or action. 

168 
Chapter 6
 Memetic linguistic forms are real (although what they refer to may not 
be real, e.g., the tooth fairy). They exist in the coordinated utterances of 
speakers and hearers (and their “private” utterances and thoughts). Words 
and meanings are produced by precedent, and they coordinate the interac-
tions of interlocutors. The conventional function of such linguistic forms 
will survive for only as long as they serve the interests of both speakers and 
hearers often enough to avoid extinction. The proper function of any lin-
guistic device that accounts for its continued survival is its direct proper 
function (Millikan 1984, 2000). For instance, indicative-descriptive (fact-
stating) syntactic forms in various languages perform a variety of functions 
(e.g., they impart beliefs, give orders, even deceive), but no form will be 
labeled “indicative” unless one of its functions is to produce true beliefs 
(Millikan 2005) having propositional contents carried by other compo-
nents of the sentence. Indicative syntactic forms continue only because it is 
in the interests of speakers and hearers that they should. Speakers usually 
have good reason to share information, for instance, to elicit assistance in 
some task, and hearers require true information to interpret stimuli and act 
in the world. The repeated use of false or uninterpretable information by 
appreciable numbers of people in a speech community would inevitably 
lead to the extinction of the indicative form. 
 (ii)   Meaning also involves a semantic-mapping function (Millikan 1984, 
2005), that is, the mapping (or matching) according to convention of 
words to states of affairs in the world. It is the application of the seman-
tic mapping function in normal environmental conditions (i.e., natu-
rally recurring local conditions) that accounts for a linguistic device’s 
success in fulfilling its proper function.  
 It is worth noting at this juncture that the proper function of an expres-
sion type in a public language may not accord with the speaker’s intention 
when producing tokens of it on any given occasion. Speakers’ intentions in 
use can lend a language device additional proper functions, as in Gricean 
implicature, satire, metaphor, and so on. I return to this subject in the next 
chapter. 
 (iii)   Finally, meaning is a function of the psychological mechanisms 
involved in the implementation of various linguistic forms, that is, 
the deployment of conceptions that govern individual speakers’ and 
hearers’ grasp of conventional referents and sentential satisfaction 
conditions.  

From Evolution to Emotionese 
169
 For language to be satisfactorily coordinated, interlocutors must share a 
knowledge (but not necessarily explicitly) of both the conventional linguis-
tic functions and semantic mapping functions of their language (otherwise 
they would become extinct). In contrast, there is no requirement for inter-
locutors to share or even possess knowledge of the concepts they deploy to 
track or refer to entities in the world, although it is frequently the case that 
they do. 
 For example, we typically perceive sounds, especially speech sounds, as 
the same sound at origin irrespective of whether we are near the sound 
origin or far, whether the sound is muffled or clear, whether heard through 
air or water, and so on. In addition, the perceptual systems use different 
clues in different situations, separately or together. The perception of dis-
tance, for example, is a function of at least ocular disparity, tension in 
focusing muscles, object occlusion by another, knowledge of size of objects 
viewed, and atmospheric haze (Millikan 2005). We also recognize distances 
by touch and stretch using many different parts of the body, and by sound. 
Importantly, too, we also recognize distances by using ruler and tape mea-
sure. None of these methods of distance perception is infallible, but each 
adds to our concepts of distance. Our sensory-perceptual organs thus enable 
the construction of concepts of entities we directly encounter “in the flesh” 
(Millikan 2005, 115). It is the case, however, that we also construct concepts 
of entities that we do not encounter in the flesh, such as the tooth fairy or 
Socrates. 
 Concepts of entities not encountered directly in the flesh are constructed 
from encounters with language. Language is a standard medium for the 
transmission of information, and learning to recognize (i.e., perceive) 
objects and their properties through language is as natural to human beings 
as through other perceptual channels, such as sight, sound, smell, touch, 
and taste. 
 Recognising a linguistic reference to a substance is as much a way of recognising that 
substance “in the flesh” as any other way of recognising it. It is identifying it and 
recognising natural information concerning it through one more medium of mani-
festation. Think of this medium, the speech of another person, as like an instrument 
that aids perception. If one wears corrective lenses, these are another such instru-
ment. The speech of another person is analogous to somewhat more complicated 
instruments of this kind. Like a camera, a radio, a CT scan or a microscope, another 
person who talks to you picks up information-bearing patterns from his environ-
ment, focuses them, translates them into a new medium, and beams them at you. 

170 
Chapter 6
Think of living in a language community as like being inundated in one more sea of 
ambient energy. (Millikan 2005, 117)  
 I noted earlier that we can perceive sound or distance via a range of modali-
ties and in a range of conditions. We can also perceive objects and sounds, 
however, on surprisingly little information if we are familiar or intimate 
with them. How much of a parent’s or sibling’s face do we need to see to 
recognize them, and how much of “Land of Hope and Glory” do we need 
to hear to recognize this rugby anthem, at Twickenham, when England is 
playing at home? This general perceptual ability is a function of a raft of 
previous and independent experiences of family intimates, favorite 
anthems, and so on. I could recognize my mother by the look of her face, 
her body contour, parts of her body, her mannerisms, habits, voice, hand-
writing, and even traces of her habits (the smell of a Golden Virginia hand-
rolled cigarette). These were all natural signs of my mother, which all 
occasioned the same cognitive response from me, that is, to form another 
representational token representing some new fact about my mother. 
 What this implies is that the purpose of perception through language is 
the same as through any sensory modality, that is, the  tracking of objects 
and events of salience to us, not the thinking or reflecting on them 
(although they may enter sophisticated inferencing processes once these 
have been developed). Children as young as two years track experiential 
saliences, including their own and their caregivers’ emotions, two years in 
advance of their acquiring concepts of emotion or of concepts.  
 6.9   The Mark of the Cognitive 
 If the fact that an object or process X is coupled to a cognitive agent does not en-
tail that X is part of the agent’s cognitive apparatus, what does? The nature of X of 
course. One needs a theory of what makes a process a cognitive process. One needs 
a theory of the “mark of the cognitive.”  
 —Adams and Aizawa (2001, 53)  
 Adams and Aizawa distinguish the mark of the mental from that of the 
cognitive by noting that qualia and phenomenal consciousness are “not in 
themselves essential elements of cognitive processes.” They take “learning, 
remembering, sensing, perceiving and thinking as paradigm cases of cogni-
tive processing” (2001, 48). They continue: “A first essential condition on 

From Evolution to Emotionese 
171
the cognitive is that cognitive states must involve intrinsic non-derived 
content”; that is, if a process is to be classified as cognitive, it must involve 
at least some vehicles with nonderived content (2001, 2008, 2010a, 2010b). 
They do not insist that cognition can only involve the processing of repre-
sentations with nonderived content (2001), but they do insist that if a pro-
cess involves no intrinsic content, then the condition rules that the process 
is noncognitive (2010a, 70). 
 Nonderived representations include those of trees, rocks, birds, and so 
on; these images of natural objects acquire their contents by satisfying nat-
uralistic conditions on meaning. They arise “from conditions that do not 
require the independent or prior existence of either content, representa-
tions or intentional agents” (2008, 33). In addition, “whatever is responsi-
ble for non-derived representations seems to find a place only in brains” 
(2001, 63). Derived representations, in contrast, include words, stop signs, 
warning lights, and so on, and these acquire their meaning by social 
convention. 
 Adams and Aizawa’s motivation for suggesting that underived content is 
required is “to explain lone thinkers. Some hundreds of million years 
ago, the brain of some primitive fish evolved in such a way as to incorpo-
rate a fundamentally new type of state. That primitive fish’s brain con-
tained a thought or a belief. … One can speculate about what that first 
primitive content was” (2008, 32). Adams and Aizawa take pains, especially 
in their “Defending Nonderived Content” (2005), to show how seriously 
philosophers take the emergence of the contentful from the content free. 
They cite Dretske’s (1981) informational semantics, Fodor’s (1987) asym-
metric causal dependency theory, and Cummins’s (1996) picture theory, 
while noting how each is variously limited (Adams and Aizawa 2005, 
662–663). 
 It is worth noting that the emergence of nonderived representations 
may well explain the first fishy mutation, but even if it does do this, this is 
all it does. It fails to explain why that initial fishy mutation, rather than 
proving lethal to the fishy bearer, as gross mutations frequently do, was 
reproduced in succeeding generations of this particular fish species. A biose-
mantic theory of mental content does this. In section 6.5, I noted that a 
biosemantic theory of mental content includes  both a naturalistic theory of 
representation  and a teleological theory and, because of this, includes both 
biological and social-conventional items. Adams and Aizawa acknowledge 

172 
Chapter 6
only a naturalistic theory in any meaningful sense, and this leads to their 
focus on the distinction between putatively nonderived and derived repre-
sentations; it also leads to the implausible implications of their views. 
 Adams and Aizawa’s one-sided view of the mark of the cognitive suggests 
that the processing of mental representations involves the following: 
 (i)  Those whose contents are nonderived, such as the images of trees, 
dogs, human faces, and so on. The processing of these images consti-
tutes “Cognition Central” in terms of learning, remembering, sensing, 
perceiving, and thinking.  
 (ii)   Those whose contents are both nonderived and derived.  
 (iii)   Those whose contents are entirely derived, such as words and numbers. 
The processing of these does not involve learning, remembering, sens-
ing, perceiving, or thinking.  
 The implications of these views are clear. To begin with, the off-line 
reflections of, for example, a theoretical physicist, in terms exclusively of 
words and numbers, and even the more mundane private soliloquizing of 
normal human agents, is not thinking. In addition, (Imagistic) Cognition 
Central is depressingly limited. In terms of human emotional ontogenesis, 
for example, neonates and children may well form images of human faces, 
eyes, hands, and so on, but the utility of such images is necessarily restricted 
to recognition of such features because imagistic representations are non-
conceptual. To learn, remember, sense, perceive, and think that these stim-
uli are faces, eyes, hands, and so on, what they are called in the parent 
culture, how they function, and so on, and how to use them in human 
interaction and in doxastic processes, the child requires the addition of 
derived, conventionally determined representations (and this presumably 
is why derived representations evolved). Without the addition of conven-
tionally derived meanings, the cognitive capacities of human beings would 
be limited to those of nonhuman animals. 
 A biosemantic theory avoids these implausible implications because it 
does not focus on nonderived representations; rather, it identifies what 
intentional icons of any ilk have in common. First, they must have had 
ancestors that conferred a survival or reproduction advantage on their bear-
ers that competitors in the relevant ecological niche did not enjoy. Inten-
tional icons were selected for in ancestral environments, and as such, they 
were and continue to be produced (copied) by devices that were built by 

From Evolution to Emotionese 
173
genes (in the appropriate enabling conditions). The constructing genes 
were and are members of first-order reproductively established families, 
and the devices that produce (copy) and interpret intentional icons are 
members of higher-order reproductively established families. Second, and 
relatedly, intentional icons are produced and interpreted by devices whose 
proper function is to use the same semantic mapping function (mathemati-
cal sense) to bring it about that environmental conditions conduce to agen-
tic well-being. What this implies is that the putative nonderived–derived 
distinction is redundant. It also implies that if nonderived representations 
exist at all, they are now as rare as the first fishy thoughts. 
 A further and related point, as the preceding discussion of human emo-
tional ontogenesis attests, is that the invention of derived representations, 
in terms particularly of words, has enabled the development of what are 
humankind’s distinctly human capacities. Public language enables the 
development of our distinctly human learning, remembering, sensing, per-
ceiving, and thinking capacities, which underpin, for example, human 
emotionality. It is the evolution of derived representations that has made 
our species distinctly human. Language, it should be acknowledged, 
evolved from vocal-gestural systems, through formulaic sequences, to fully 
segmented, generative natural language (Wray 2002), to allow the manage-
ment of ever-more-complex social relationships and environments (Dun-
bar 1996). Just as nonhuman animals produce and consume nonlinguistic 
pushmi-pullyus to manage their worlds, so too do adult human beings pro-
duce and consume strings of language devices to manage theirs. Nonlin-
guistic icons allow nonhuman animals to perceive experiential saliences in 
their niches and to respond appropriately; nonlinguistically but increas-
ingly as human beings develop and mature (see the discussion of emotional 
ontogenesis, chap. 4, and this chap., sec. 6.5.3), linguistic icons allow the 
perception of experiential saliences in their niches and the appropriate 
responses. The human species developed, as all species develop, typically 
through evolution by natural selection; the intentional systems with which 
adult human beings are equipped by evolution and epigenesis, therefore, 
are as naturalistically acquired as the nonlinguistic intentional systems of 
nonhuman animals. Derived representations are responsible for our dis-
tinctly human cognitive capacities, and these are evolution’s most sophisti-
cated achievements. It seems just odd, therefore, to privilege putatively 
nonderived representations in marking the cognitive. 

174 
Chapter 6
 In addition, Adams and Aizawa (2010a, 73) deny that information pro-
cessing marks the cognitive; they suggest that it is too general a phenome-
non because “DVD players, CD players, MP3 players, tape-recorders,” for 
example, are all information processors (hence the need for nonderived 
representations to mark the cognitive). They are suggesting, therefore, that 
the differences between internal and external information processing are 
such as to preclude functional integration. They conclude: “The weight of 
empirical evidence supports the view that there are processes that (a) are 
plausibly construed as cognitive, (b) occur within the brain, (c) do not 
occur outside the brain, and (d) do not cross the bounds of the brain” (74). 
 My response to these claims should be obvious; Adams and Aizawa are 
mistaken, for the following reasons: 
 (i)  The detailed analyses of human emotional ontogenesis included in 
chapter 4 demonstrate clearly that it is a genuine transcranial phenom-
enon; the structures and processes on which human emotional onto-
genesis supervene quite clearly cross the boundaries of individual brains 
to include other brains and the sociocultural resources in which they 
are deeply embedded. Human emotional ontogenesis provides a com-
pelling example of vehicle or locational externalism or transcranialism.  
 (ii)   DVD players, CD players, tape recorders, and so on, may well process 
information differently and process different kinds of information, and 
if they do, this is due to differences in their proper function. Such arti-
facts do possess proper functions; these are the functions their human 
designers designed them to perform. I have no clear idea of what the 
proper functions of these devices might be, but it will be the satisfac-
tory performance of these proper functions sufficiently frequently that 
results in their continued reproduction. In contrast, I do know what 
the proper function of human intentional devices is; it is for producer 
and interpreter devices to bring it about (through the operation of the 
same semantic mapping rule) that environmental conditions conduce 
to organismic well-being.  
 Cognitive capacities, that is, learning, remembering, sensing, perceiving, 
and thinking of differing levels of complexity, enable their bearers to navi-
gate their local environments. Organisms range from the very simple to the 
highly complex, and the local environments they inhabit range also from 
the very simple to the highly complex. The cognitive capacities of these 
organisms evolved to deal successfully with adaptive problems posed by 

From Evolution to Emotionese 
175
their environments, and indeed, this is reflected in the reactive, enactive, 
and symbolic representational systems that organisms can differentially 
possess (R. Wilson 2004). These differing representational systems enable 
the identification and tracking of, and appropriate response to, environ-
mental objects of salience to the well-being of their bearers. In this account, 
cognition involves the processing of information of salience to organismic 
well-being. The identification and tracking of environmental saliences pre-
suppose selective attention to these objects and events, and as I have been 
at pains to argue, selective attention can be inbuilt (e.g., innate sensory-
perceptual constraints) or learned (e.g., emotion elicitors). 
 The capacities that organisms require to attend to and manage objects 
and events of salience in their environments differ in complexity in line 
with the complexities of the local environment they inhabit (this is what 
“selection for” accomplishes); organisms inhabiting simple environments 
will need only simple, fixed pushmi-pullyu devices, but those, like the 
human species, that inhabit enormously complex physical and social envi-
ronments will need producer and interpreter devices of maximum flexibil-
ity. The mechanisms through which human beings acquire such devices, at 
least in terms of emotion, have been discussed. What is abundantly clear 
from these analyses is that distinctly human intentional capacities are pro-
gressively developed and refined epigenetically, from more primitive pre-
cursors, and only in the context of intensive social scaffolding of various 
kinds. In short, as I have previously argued, there is no cognition without 
the processing of intentional icons related to environmental salience and 
organismic well-being, and no distinctly human intentionality without 
massive social scaffolding involving, overwhelmingly, what Adams and 
Aizawa term “derived representations.”  
 6.10   Summary 
 The affect expressions and species-typical behavior patterns of human neo-
nates are the results of brute physiological processes that are interpreted 
or function as signs of physiological or homeostatic states by preadapted 
caregivers. This is universally the case and therefore points to a selectionist 
history. Affect expressions and STBPs have the relational proper function 
to produce dispositions and then responses in the caregiver to search-
identify-correct whatever distresses the neonate, and each particular 
neonatal emotion producer, once constructed, has the adapted 

176 
Chapter 6
proper function to produce a specific relational structure appropriate to the 
emotional stimulus. These adapted proper functions have further derived 
proper functions to produce relational structures of even more specificity 
(and so on). These relational structures of increasing specificity are pro-
duced as a function (mathematical sense) of the semantic mapping rules of 
human emotionese. 
 Neonatal affect expressions and intuitive parenting skills are devices that 
possess the proper function to learn on the basis of experience; they pro-
duce behaviors, such as imitation, trial-and-error learning, and beliefs and 
desires, as a function (mathematical sense) of certain sorts of experiential 
input. This experiential input is provided mainly by the visual, auditory, 
tactile, and olfactory sensory-perceptual stimulation provided in mutual 
neonate-caregiver feedback. The affect expressions and STBPs in the neo-
nate, together with intuitive parenting skills, interact to progressively con-
struct the exquisitely fine-tuned emotional devices in both parties and are 
the result of mutual adaptation of relational proper function. 
 Emotional producer and interpreter devices in both parties produce and 
interpret intentional icons of differential complexity and specificity; these 
icons include pushmi-pullyus and indicative and directive icons. Neonatal 
referentially opaque emotion precursors and STBPs and intuitive parenting 
skills are pushmi-pullyus that are progressively fine-tuned into indicative 
and imperative icons in response to the mutual feedback typical of neonatal-
maternal interaction cycles. 
 Two conclusions result from these analyses. The first is that transcranial-
ists do not fail to recognize the “mark of the cognitive.” Most transcranial-
ists claim that information processing involving neural partial realizers 
marks the cognitive; my own view, however, although concurring with this 
more general claim, is rather more precise. It is that the processing of inten-
tional icons of salience to organismic well-being marks the cognitive. The 
second and related conclusion is that, due to evolution, exclusively intra-
cranial underived representations are illusory. Representations are defined 
by the way they function, not just intracranially but in extended cognitive 
systems that include representation-producing devices of differing degrees 
of complexity and sophistication, objects in the environment, and 
representation-consuming devices, again of differing degrees of sophistica-
tion and complexity. There is nothing in the head, just as such, that dis-
plays intentionality.  

 7  Loose Talk, Tight Worlds 
 7.1   Introduction 
 In previous chapters, I have been at pains to argue that the intentional 
icons that human beings produce, interpret, and use to communicate their 
emotions and emotion precursors develop from primitive, prelinguistic 
pushmi-pullyus associated with unfocused affect expressions, through pre-
linguistic and limited linguistic indicative and imperative intentional icons 
associated with basic emotions, to complex linguistic icons associated with 
basic emotions but, more especially, higher cognitive emotions. I have also 
argued that this developmental trajectory occurs continuously, but only in 
the context of linguistically mediated social relationships. These relation-
ships are characterized by a range of constraints, ranging from, for example, 
innate sensory-perceptual competencies to “tight worlds” characterized by 
locally recurrent local information. The emotional developmental trajec-
tory of human beings is characterized by the interaction of these three Cs 
(constraints, context, and continuity). This chapter focuses on the linguis-
tic expression of sometimes highly complex emotions, in terms of literal, 
loose, and metaphorical expression, but even here, constraints continually 
operate in context to ensure that icon-producing and icon-interpreting 
devices succeed in communicating the correct meaning of the emotional 
expression. 
 Emotional discourse appears typified by apparently surprisingly literal 
expression (e.g., “you take my breath away”) and, rather more frequently, 
by metaphor (e.g., “you are the sunshine of my life”) (Gibbs 2008; Sperber 
and Wilson 2008; Punter 2007; Knowles and Moon 2006; Stanford 1936). 
Emotional discourse is replete with metaphor, not only in poetry but also 
in emotional expression in mundane conversation. This seems to imply 

178 
Chapter 7
that either (a) we require metaphor to express emotions because adequate, 
literal concepts are unavailable, or (b) aspects of the nature of emotion suit 
it to metaphorical expression. It also implies, rather obviously, that aspects 
of the nature of metaphor suit it to emotional expression. In this chapter, I 
argue that both implications are ill founded. 
 In previous chapters, I have also argued that both emotional and non-
emotional vocal-gestural systems and linguistic strings are ostensive-
expressive devices that evolved to attract others’ attention and communicate 
information concerning objects, events, and experiences of salience or rel-
evance to the communication producer, to an interpreter who infers the 
meaning of the communication (e.g., search-identify-satisfy; see chaps. 4 
and 5). In this chapter, and consistent with this ostensive, inferential, and 
salience-related construal of verbal communication, I apply a relevance-
theoretic framework to the explanation of literal, loose, and metaphorical 
emotional expression. A relevance-theoretic framework construes all inten-
tional communication (in the sense of both “aboutness” and purposive-
ness) as essentially ostensive and as governed by a principle of relevance. 
This means that the construal of verbal communication that I adopt is not 
the usual one of encoding and decoding and governance by maxim, rule, or 
convention of truthfulness that applies at the level of what is literally 
meant. 
 Using a relevance-theoretic framework, I argue that human communica-
tion is not a matter typically of encoding and decoding, nor is it governed 
by maxims or conventions of truthfulness. Human communication is typi-
cally a matter of inference, although encoding and decoding do feature as 
input into inference processes, and it is governed by a principle of rele-
vance, although truthfulness (or some approximation of truthfulness) is 
one form that relevance can take (i.e., in indicative-declarative intentional 
icons). I also argue that the same inferential processes operate in the pro-
duction and interpretation of literal, loose, and metaphorical emotional 
expression; they differ only insofar as the number and complexity of the 
implicatures (what the utterance implicitly implicates) and the explicatures 
(what the utterance explicitly implicates) that they include differ. The the-
ory of emotion and emotional expression that I have developed in this 
book, therefore, sheds light on the problems associated with figurative 
expression in the philosophy of language (see sec. 7.2.1). 

Loose Talk, Tight Worlds 
179
 Metaphorical expression of emotion is commonplace in mundane as 
well as poetic discourse, and in light of this, I include some rock-bottom 
preliminaries concerning traditional or orthodox construals of metaphor. I 
also address the problems perennially associated with metaphor, what Gut-
tenplan (2004, 15) rather interestingly terms metaphor’s “three nonnego-
tiable truths” (3NNTs). These relate to the puzzles concerning the 
truthfulness, paraphraseability, and transparency of metaphorical expres-
sion: metaphor is truthful in some sense (although literally false), it is typi-
cally difficult to paraphrase, but its meaning is readily grasped by its hearers. 
Guttenplan correctly asserts that any adequate explanation of metaphor 
must explain these puzzles. In light of this, I demonstrate the explanatory 
adequacy of a relevance-theoretic approach; when using this explanatory 
framework, the puzzles associated with metaphor evaporate. This is all I 
claim to do; I do not claim to have developed or even to have begun to 
develop a general theory of metaphor. 
 In addition, in previous chapters, I argued that the degree of deep func-
tional integration (DFI) of a range of internal and external factors in emo-
tional and language development is such that they are metaphysically 
radically widely realized and that the degree of DFI in adult emotional 
expression is widely realized. In this chapter, I focus on the details of such 
context dependence in literal, loose, and metaphorical emotional expres-
sion. Furthermore, I suggest that, to the extent to which utterance activity 
and saccadic vision are involved in online language processing, some 
aspects of language processing are radically widely realized. Finally, I amend 
Millikan’s notion of proper function as it relates to linguistic devices to 
accord with a relevance-theoretic approach.  By way of contextualizing 
these different analyses, however, I begin with some rock-bottom prelimi-
naries concerning metaphor.  
 7.2   Metaphor: Some Rock-Bottom Preliminaries and a Very 
Brief History 
 The New Shorter Oxford Dictionary defines metaphor as “a figure of speech in 
which a name or descriptive word or phrase is transferred to an object or an 
action different from, but analogous to, that to which it is literally appli-
cable” (Brown 1993, 1756). Metaphors figuratively and assertively compare 

180 
Chapter 7
objects, entities, and events to suggest a resemblance and, as such, differ 
from analogies. Analogies merely infer that two or more entities have simi-
lar qualities or properties. 
 A figure of speech, for example, “Richard is a lion,” transfers a name,  lion 
(which is termed the source or secondary subject in a metaphorical state-
ment), to an object that is different from, but analogous to, that to which it 
literally refers (which is the target or primary subject in a metaphorical 
statement). The metaphor helps people to understand one phenomenon, 
 Richard , in terms of its resemblances to another,  lion . Such resemblances 
may or may not be readily apparent (Black 1955; Davidson 1978; M. John-
son 1981; Searle 1983). Metaphors therefore point or refer to putative 
resemblances between objects, entities, and events in the world and their 
relationships. 
 Metaphor has had an interesting, if fluctuating, career since the incep-
tion of philosophy some two thousand plus years ago in Greece. Depending 
on the dominant ontological and epistemological construals of the time, 
metaphor has been seen, on the one hand, merely as stylistic ornament, 
and on the other hand, playing a central role in epistemology and meta-
physics, from being utterly disreputable to being both useful and, indeed, 
indispensable (M. Johnson 1981). 
 Metaphor began its philosophical career with Plato. Although he left no 
fragments with explicit analyses of metaphor, his distrust of poets and 
sophists and the language that they used so effectively is legendary. His 
distrust was due to three factors, namely, his view of poets as thrice removed 
imitators of the Forms, his recognition of metaphor’s persuasive power, and 
his fear of its potential misuse: “Poetry feeds and waters the passions, 
instead of drying them up; she lets them rule instead of ruling them,” and 
poets “lay on with words and phrases the colours of several arts in such a 
fashion that other equally ignorant men, who see things only through 
words, will deem his words most excellent” ( Republic X , 60la). In short, 
Plato believed that the use of metaphor and other tropes leads people away 
from truth (although, even as these short quotations illustrate, he fre-
quently used metaphor himself). 
 Aristotle recognized, along with Plato, that metaphor was useful in 
poetry and rhetoric, but his main contribution to the analysis of metaphor 
lay elsewhere. First, he recognized that metaphor was useful in achieving 
insight through the perception of similarities in dissimilarities ( Poetics  

Loose Talk, Tight Worlds 
181
1459a). This perception places objects and entities in a new light, enabling 
them to be seen as they have never been seen before. Altered perspective 
allows the “get[ting] hold of new ideas” ( Rhetoric 1410b). Second, he viewed 
metaphor as an elliptical simile ( Rhetoric 1406b). 1 This view persists in 
dictionary definitions of metaphor to this day, even though similes are 
typically true, whereas metaphors are not (e.g., Juliet is like the sun). 
 The most common construal of metaphor identification is that when 
taken literally, an utterance is seen to be defective in some way. Defects 
include (Beardsley 1962; Searle 1979) patent falsehood; semantic nonsense; 
violations of the rules of speech acts; violations of the principles of com-
munication, especially Grice’s maxim of quality; and lack of congruence 
with surrounding context, and these despite such violations also character-
izing hyperbole and oxymoron (Black 1955). It has also been claimed that 
the banality of literal readings, in terms of their truth or pointlessness, also 
points to metaphorical usage (e.g., Black 1955; Guttenplan 2004). 
 Other ways of identifying metaphor do not relate to word meaning. 
These include the “announcement” of metaphor when we warn of its 
imminent use by phrases such as “speaking metaphorically” or, rather more 
indirectly, “practically,” “virtually,” and so on. Similarly, Guttenplan (2004, 
10) suggests that we identify metaphors simply by recognizing a poetic con-
text in which they occur. 
 Metaphors are “born,” that is, spontaneously generated to impart some-
thing of what a speaker wishes to convey; if apt, they are taken up by the 
relevant speech community and, through use, become conventionalized, 
that is, used automatically almost as literal expressions; eventually, some, 
through overuse, become hackneyed and clichéd. Such metaphors are 
“dead” metaphors and are used as literal expressions. 
 7.2.1   Metaphor’s Three Nonnegotiable Truths (NNT3) 
 As noted in the chapter introduction, there are three noncontroversial puz-
zles associated with metaphor; these relate to truth, paraphraseability, and 
transparency. 
 (i)  Truth 
 When Romeo states that “Juliet is the sun,” his utterance has content with 
genuine assertoric force with which his audience can sensibly agree or dis-
agree in the ordinary truth-directed way. This is despite his utterance being 

182 
Chapter 7
literally false. It might be discourteous or pointless to tell Romeo that he is 
mistaken, but in many cases of metaphor, this kind of response is wholly 
appropriate. What requires explanation is that metaphorical utterances can 
be challenged or assented to and that their probity or truth is properly 
regarded as the  responsibility of their generators (Guttenplan 2004, 15; his 
italics).  
 (ii)  Paraphrase 
 Paraphrase quite literally means to say the same thing, to restate the sense 
of the passage “ in  other words ,” not just in another way (Guttenplan 2004, 
18; his italics). This obviously implies that only words can be paraphrased, 
but this simple implication can be overlooked. An invitation to paraphrase 
X is not equivalent to an invitation to state what X tells us or what X means. 
One can frequently say what an utterance means or tells us without para-
phrasing it. In addition, the invitation to paraphrase a metaphor is typically 
viewed as highly inappropriate. It is rather like asking someone who has just 
told you a joke to explain it; it kills the joke stone dead. However, when an 
attempt is made to paraphrase metaphor, this generally is difficult.  
 (iii)  Transparency 
 Metaphors, even the most complexly poetic ones, are usually composed of 
words that are familiar to the speech community in which they are used. 
Because of this, they are usually understood directly and immediately, 
apparently in the same sort of way that familiar words are understood when 
used literally (Guttenplan 2004, 21). Speakers of a language just do hear and 
grasp the meaning of the metaphor immediately. This is not to suggest that 
the immediate grasping constitutes the kind of deep semantic understand-
ing that might follow sustained reflection on a complex poetic metaphor. It 
is, rather, merely to suggest understanding in what Guttenplan (2004, 22) 
terms a “suitably lightweight sense” on first hearing in precisely the same 
way that we understand undeniably literal utterances when composed of 
familiar words. 
 Whatever else a satisfactory theory of metaphor must explain, it has 
previously been claimed, it must explain NNT3. I will show, in the course of 
the analyses that follow, that a relevance-theoretic approach to metaphor 
achieves this goal.  

Loose Talk, Tight Worlds 
183
 7.2.2   How Metaphors Work 
 There have been six major views concerning the operation of metaphor 
since the Greeks first took an interest in it. In rough chronological order, 
these are the following: 
 (i)   Substitution view (Aristotle): “Metaphor consists in giving a thing a 
name that belongs to something else” ( Poetics 1457b). A metaphor of 
the type “A is B” (e.g., Juliet is the sun) is merely an indirect way of pre-
senting some literal intended meaning “A is C” (e.g., Juliet is radiant).  
 (ii)   Comparison view: A metaphor of the type “A is B” is a means whereby 
we get the speaker’s intended literal meaning, “A is like B in the fol-
lowing respects …” (e.g., Juliet is like the sun in being radiant, etc.). 
According to this view, the meaning of the metaphor is a literal set 
of relevant similarities picked out by the context of the utterance (M. 
Johnson 1981, 24). This view no longer has adherents; as Black (1955) 
noted, it suffers from a vagueness that borders on vacuity. The theory 
fails to describe how the meaning of a metaphor is computed and to 
explain how the relevant similarities can be picked out.  
 (iii)   Interaction view (Richards 1936; Black 1955, 1993): A metaphor of 
the type “A is B” involves a system of associated commonplaces of A 
that interacts with a set of associated commonplaces of B to produce 
emergent metaphorical meaning. The commonplaces are whatever 
properties and relations are commonly believed to be true of an object, 
person, and so on, even if they do not actually apply. For example, 
“Richard is a gorilla” implies that Richard is fierce even when it is now 
recognized that gorillas are not typically fierce. Understanding a meta-
phor, therefore, is not typically a matter of comparing actual properties 
of objects; it is a matter of what the terms of the metaphor call to mind 
for us.  
 (iv)   Speech act view (Searle 1979; Cohen 1976): Understanding metaphor is 
a matter of identifying the speaker’s utterance meaning (i.e., what the 
speaker means by uttering words or sentences with literal meanings) 
from a word or sentence meaning (i.e., what the word or sentence means 
literally). Searle identifies three basic steps in understanding metaphor: 
(i) How does a hearer know how to look for metaphorical meaning in 
the first place? (ii) What strategies allow a hearer to compute possible 
values for C where “A is B” is uttered so as to mean “A is C”? (iii) What 

184 
Chapter 7
principles limit the range of possible Cs to grasp the precise meaning of 
the metaphor? This systematic approach to metaphor comprehension 
is inconsistent with our everyday experience of metaphor; we typically 
understand a metaphor immediately (Guttenplan 2004).  
 (v)   Causal theory (Davidson 1978): Metaphors express neither ideas nor 
thoughts; they belong entirely to the pragmatics of language. The 
words “Juliet is the sun” mean precisely what they mean literally, that 
is, Juliet is the sun. Metaphors simply cause associations and reflec-
tions as a contingent psychological fact about human speakers. If this 
were always the case, however, a hearer could never be mistaken in 
comprehending a metaphor. “Richard is a brick” could just as easily be 
interpreted as “Richard is a useful doorstop” as “Richard is utterly reli-
able,” which is highly implausible.  
 (vi)   Contemporary view (Lakoff and Johnson 1980; Lakoff 1993; Kovecses 
1990): The conceptual systems of human beings are, typically, funda-
mentally metaphorical in nature. Metaphor is pervasive in language, 
thought, and action. Conceptual systems are central in defining every-
day realities; the way we think, what we experience, and what we do 
are very much a matter of metaphor. “Argument is war,” for example, 
is not merely a linguistic expression; we actually do win or lose argu-
ments. Our interlocutor is viewed as an opponent, we attack his posi-
tion, we defend our own, we gain and lose ground, and so on. We live 
by the “argument is war” metaphor in our culture; it structures the 
actions we perform in arguing (Lakoff and Johnson 1980).  
 Each view includes a construal of the mechanism of metaphor and the 
level at which it operates, that is, at word, sentence, or some deeper level. 
In addition, each view (contemporary view excepted) is founded on a con-
strual of human language as code; I will not, therefore, discuss them fur-
ther here.  
 7.3   The Code Model of Communication 
 That metaphor is typically considered a distinctive linguistic device is 
a function of the generally considered construal of language use as 
governed by a norm of literalness that follows naturally from another 
widely held construal, namely, that of the function of language in 

Loose Talk, Tight Worlds 
185
communication. The function of language is to allow the speaker to encode 
the meaning of her thoughts, and the listener to decode such meanings; 
this construal is beautifully exemplified in Reddy’s (1979/1993) metaphor 
of language as conduit. It implies that (i) the interpretation of metaphor 
follows a failed literal interpretation; (ii) because of this, processing time is 
increased; and (iii) context is unimportant to metaphor interpretation. All 
three implications are mistaken (see hereafter); the code model is therefore 
untenable. 
 A code is a systematic pairing of messages with signals and is extremely 
common in nonhuman animal communication. To communicate entirely 
by code, however, each signal in the code must unambiguously convey 
exactly the same message on all occasions of use. The vervet’s alarm call 
“leopard! here! now!” to her group of conspecifics is exemplary in this 
respect. Ambiguity, where the same signal is paired with several messages, 
simply prevents the decoding process. Of course, there are examples in the 
nonhuman world where the exact message encoded by a given signal varies 
with context; the dance of the honeybee is an example of this. A coding–
decoding system can accommodate such limited context sensitivity but 
cannot support the overwhelming complexity of human languages. Human 
languages are codes in the same sense that they are pairs of phonetic-
semantic representations generated by an underlying grammar (Sperber 
and Wilson 1995, 9), but compared to nonhuman animal codes, they are 
incomparably richer (Sperber and Wilson 2008, 85). Human languages con-
tain a vast repertoire of expressive elements (the lexicon), and these ele-
ments are combined by a syntax with unlimited generative capacities. In 
addition, the sentences of natural language are multiply ambiguous; they 
contain referential expressions whose values cannot be assigned by decod-
ing alone, and the senses they encode are often elliptical or incomplete. 
This implies that a gap exists between the semantic structure a sentence 
encodes and the meaning a speaker manages to convey by uttering it in a 
given situation. This in turn implies that the linguistic content of all sen-
tences, including those that are literally understood, vastly underdeter-
mines their interpretation (Feldman 2006; D. Wilson and Sperber 2002; 
Sperber and Wilson 1986, 1995). 
 This underdetermination reflects important differences between sen-
tences and utterances. An utterance has a variety of properties, both lin-
guistic and nonlinguistic. It may contain the word  dog or a reflexive 

186 
Chapter 7
pronoun or a trisyllabic adjective; it may be spoken clearly or by someone 
with a heavy cold, loudly or whispered, in a supermarket or a bedroom. 
Generative grammars abstract out the purely linguistic properties of utter-
ances and describe a common linguistic structure, the sentence, shared by 
a variety of utterances that differ only in their nonlinguistic properties. By 
definition, a semantic representation of a sentence, as assigned to it by a 
generative grammar, can take no account of nonlinguistic properties such 
as time and place of utterance, identity of speakers, and speakers’ inten-
tions (Noveck and Sperber 2004). 
 The semantic representation of a sentence deals with a sort of common 
core of meaning shared by every utterance of it. However, different utter-
ances of the same sentence may differ in their interpretation, and they typi-
cally do: 
 (1) 
I am sad. 
 (2) 
Bill is angry. 
 (3) 
Betty’s gift made her happy. 
 Generative grammar cannot pick out who “I” am, which Bill “Bill” picks 
out; it can only provide some general indications. “I” always refers to the 
speaker, and “Bill” and “Betty” belong to people with those names. None of 
this, however, is sufficient to determine the thought expressed in sentences 
(1) to (3). There is no mention of how sad I am or how angry Bill is, and 
what sense of “gift” makes Betty happy. These aspects of interpretation 
involve interaction between linguistic structure and nonlinguistic informa-
tion, only the structure being dealt with by the grammar (Sperber and Wil-
son 1995, 10). 
 Further facts widen the gap between sentence meaning and utterance 
interpretation. One example is that one sentence, used to express the same 
thought, may sometimes be used to present the information as true, some-
times to suggest that it is not, sometimes to wonder whether it is true, and 
so on. Utterances are used not only to convey thoughts but to reveal the 
speaker’s attitude or relation to the thought expressed. Utterances express 
propositional attitudes, perform speech acts, or carry illocutionary force 
(Sperber and Wilson 1995, 11). 
 Another example is when an utterance explicitly expresses one thought 
but implicitly conveys another. Whereas a thought that is explicitly 

Loose Talk, Tight Worlds 
187
expressed must be in some correspondence to the semantic representation 
of the sentence uttered, those that are implicitly conveyed are not so 
constrained: 
 (4) 
 Jack : Do you want to go to the movies on Thursday? 
 (5) 
 Jill : Jane is coming to dinner. 
 Another source of underdetermination may be that the literal interpreta-
tion need not be the one intended and may not be the preferred interpreta-
tion, for example, “pigeonhole,” “seed funding,” “jump down his throat,” 
“move heaven and earth” (Knowles and Moon 2006, 12, 21). 
 This is not to suggest that human languages are grossly defective; on the 
contrary, that they survive, flourish, and evolve testifies to their excellence 
in fulfilling their function of communication. It is to suggest, rather, that 
the function of language cannot be simply to encode speakers’ meanings. 
In human communication, coding is surprisingly limited. 
 As emphasized throughout the foregoing chapters, human beings com-
municate not only with language but also by producing other nonlinguistic 
ostensive stimuli that are deliberately intended to attract the addressee’s 
attention and convey some content (e.g., unfocused crying, motor unrest). 
These ostensive stimuli include gestures, such as pointing and writing, as 
well as speech. Some of these are not codes, and yet human beings, even 
very young ones (see chaps. 4 and 5), can communicate extremely success-
fully without language at all. 
 It is worth emphasizing at this juncture that human communication is 
inferential communication. The communicator provides some evidence of 
her meaning in what she says and what she does, and her addressee infers 
the meaning on the basis of this evidence and the context. Linguistically 
encoded utterance is just another source of evidence, but it provides evi-
dential resources that can be as “nuanced, as complex, as richly structured 
as the speaker likes. … With language, and only with language, people can 
communicate about anything they can think about, whether they can 
point to it or not, imitate it or not, and they can do this with almost limit-
less refinement” (Sperber and Wilson 2008, 87). Language thus enables the 
expansion of emotional expressive repertoires when the emotions become 
more subtle, nuanced, and refined, as demonstrated by my previous discus-
sion in chapter 5 of language acquisition in infants and children.  

188 
Chapter 7
 7.4   Relevance Theory: A Brief Introduction 
 The theories of David Lewis (1975/1996) and, more particularly, Grice 
(1989) resulted from a recognition of sentence and utterance distinctions: 
they both reflect an inferential model of human communication. They 
tend to assume, however, that the inference from sentence meaning to 
speaker meaning is a function merely of assigning referents to referring 
expressions and calculating implicatures. Maxims or conventions of truth-
fulness reduce the gap to a minimum. This is despite the enormous com-
plexity of the comprehension process, which involves both decoding and 
inferential processes. A relevance-oriented inferential framework allows for 
much greater slack between sentence meaning and speaker meaning than 
has hitherto been assumed. It also provides a general framework adequate 
to the interpretation of literal, loose, and metaphorical expression. 
 Relevance has been characterized as a property of inputs to cognitive 
processes that makes them worth processing (D. Wilson and Sperber 2002, 
601). Such inputs may be external stimuli (e.g., a smell, a loud noise) or 
internal representations that may undergo further processing (e.g., the rec-
ognition of a smell, the memory of a loud noise, the linguistic decoding of 
an utterance). Of course, each human agent is potentially bombarded at 
any given moment with many more stimuli than she can process, either 
from the environment or from memory (we have many more memories 
than we can activate at any given moment). Cognitive efficiency, therefore, 
is a result largely of allocating processing resources to maximize cognitive 
benefit. This involves processing the inputs that offer the best expected 
cost-benefit value at the time (601). 
 An illustration: Peter wakes, feeling unwell, and goes to his doctor. She 
examines him carefully and could say any of the following: 
 (6) 
You are ill. 
 (7) 
You have flu. 
 (8) 
You have flu or 29 is the square root of 841 (D. Wilson and Sperber 
2002, 602). 
 Noticeably, the literal content of all three utterances is relevant to Peter. 
Clearly, however, (7) is more relevant than either (6) or (8). It would be 
more relevant than (6) in terms of cognitive effects; it yields all the informa-
tion of (6) plus additional information. Utterance (7) is more relevant than 

Loose Talk, Tight Worlds 
189
(8) in terms of processing effort; they both yield the same consequences, 
but the consequences are derived more easily from (7) than (8), which 
requires an additional effort of parsing and inference (to realize that the 
second disjunct is false and the first is therefore true). 
 The tendency to process the most relevant inputs available is so obvious 
to us that human beings can render their mental processes at least partially 
predictable to others. We are capable of identifying which external stimuli 
another person is likely to attend to and accurately predict what conclu-
sion, from the many available, she will in fact draw. We assume that she 
will attend to the potentially most relevant stimulus and process it to maxi-
mize relevance, that is, in the context of easily accessible background 
assumptions where the information it provides will carry relatively rich 
cognitive effects (D. Wilson and Sperber 2002, 603). This mutual predict-
ability is exploited in communication. 
 As communicators, we provide stimuli that are likely to strike our 
intended audience as relevant enough to be worth processing, and to be 
interpreted in the intended way. A communicator produces a stimulus, 
such as an utterance, that attracts her audience’s attention, and she does so 
in an overtly intentional way. In other words, she makes it manifest that 
she wants the audience’s attention. Since it is also manifest that the audi-
ence will tend to pay appropriate attention only to an utterance that seems 
relevant enough, it is manifest that the communicator wants her audience 
to assume that the utterance is indeed relevant enough (D. Wilson and 
Sperber 2002, 604). 
 What this implies is that listeners are encouraged to expect a minimum 
level of relevance. The utterance should be sufficiently relevant to warrant 
the listener’s effort of comprehension. However, an utterance is most 
likely to be comprehended when it simplifies the listener’s task by demand-
ing as little processing effort as possible but encouraging her to pay due 
attention by offering as much effect as possible. “The smaller the effort, 
the greater the effect, the greater the relevance” (D. Wilson and Sperber 
2002, 604). What this in turn implies is that it is manifestly in the speak-
er’s interest for the hearer to presume that the utterance is more relevant 
than merely sufficiently relevant to be worth her attention. The implica-
tion of this, again in turn, is that the speaker should provide the most 
appropriate information in terms of quality and quantity and present it in 
the most efficient way. Both of these factors—that is, what is included in 

190 
Chapter 7
the utterance and how it is presented—are a function of the speaker’s own 
communicative abilities, what she hopes to achieve in communicating, 
what cultural norms or rules of etiquette she wishes to observe, and so on, 
and the interpretive abilities she expects the listener to possess. When a 
speaker considers all these factors, she is aiming at an optimum level of 
relevance (of an utterance, for a listener). Thus, for example, when talking 
to her infant, a caregiver will use baby talk to comment on what she is 
doing and what the infant is doing, often using two-word sequences of 
just noun and verb. 
 As previously noted, when interpreting an utterance, there are indeter-
minacies, including illocutionary indeterminacies, ambiguities, and other 
indeterminate aspects of explicit content and implicatures to resolve, iro-
nies and metaphor to interpret. All of this requires an appropriate set of 
contextual assumptions. Given that the speaker is expected, within the lim-
its of her abilities and preferences, to ensure that her utterance is “of opti-
mal comprehensibility, the hearer should consider interpretive hypotheses 
(disambiguations, reference assignment, implicatures, etc.) in order of 
accessibility. In short, the hearer should follow a path of least effort and 
stop when she arrives at an interpretation which satisfies the expectation of 
relevance raised by the utterance” (D. Wilson and Sperber 2002, 605). 
 Relevance varies inversely with processing effort; the very accessibility of 
the first hypothesis renders it, or should render it, the correct one. This 
reflects a  relevance-guided comprehension heuristic : 
 (i)   Follow a path of least effort in constructing an interpretation of the 
utterance (and, in particular, in resolving ambiguities and referential 
indeterminacies, going beyond linguistic meaning, supplying contex-
tual assumptions, computing implicatures, etc.).  
 (ii)   Stop when your expectations of relevance are satisfied.  
 A hearer using the relevance-theoretic comprehension heuristic during 
online comprehension should find an interpretation of speaker meaning 
that satisfies the presumption of optimal relevance. To achieve this, she 
must do the following: 
 (iii)   Enrich the decoded sentence meaning at the explicit level and comple-
ment it at the implicit level by supplying contextual assumptions that 
will combine with it to yield enough conclusions (or other cognitive 
effects) to make the utterance relevant in the expected way.  

Loose Talk, Tight Worlds 
191
 (iv)   Follow a path of least effort and stop at the first overall interpretation 
that satisfies her expectations of relevance.  
 7.5   Explicatures and Implicatures 
 Explicatures refer to the explicit contents of utterances, and implicatures to 
their implicit contents. Explicatures are identified through a combination 
of decoding and inference, while implicatures are wholly inferred: 
 (9) 
 Lisa : What is the matter with you? 
 (10)  Alan : You take my breath away. 
 Alan’s reply might include the explicature that he has just been robbed of 
breath by unexpectedly seeing Lisa and the implicature that he has been 
rendered breathless because he finds her beautiful. The greater the relative 
contribution of decoding and the smaller the relative contribution of prag-
matic inference, the more explicit an explicature will be and vice versa 
(Sperber and Wilson 1995, 182). The weaker the explicature, the harder it is 
to paraphrase what the speaker was saying. 
 When the speaker’s meaning is quite explicit as in (10), and, in particu-
lar, when each word in an utterance is used to convey one of its encoded 
meanings, the explicature is close to what might commonsensically be 
termed explicit content, or what is said, or the literal meaning of the utter-
ance. The less explicit the meaning, the more responsibility the hearer must 
assume in interpreting the utterance. 
 The recovery of both explicit and implicit content may involve a sub-
stantial element of pragmatic inference. The linguistically encoded mean-
ing of an utterance gives no more than a schematic indication of the 
speaker’s meaning. The hearer’s task is to use this indication, together with 
background knowledge, to construct an interpretation of speaker meaning, 
guided by expectations of relevance raised by the utterance itself. This 
requires that the hearer must do the following: 
 (1)  Construct an appropriate hypothesis about explicatures by developing 
the linguistically encoded semantic schema.  
 (2)   Construct an appropriate hypothesis about the intended contextual 
assumptions (implicated premises).  
 (3)   Construct an appropriate hypothesis about the intended contextual 
implications (implicated conclusions).  

192 
Chapter 7
 These subtasks are undertaken simultaneously. The hearer does not first 
decode the sentence meaning, then construct an explicature and identify 
an appropriate context, then derive a range of implicated conclusions. 
Comprehension is an online process, and hypotheses about explicatures, 
implicated premises, and implicated conclusions are developed in parallel, 
against a background of expectations that may be revised or elaborated as 
the utterance unfolds. In particular, the hearer may bring to the compre-
hension process not only general assumptions of relevance but more spe-
cific expectations about how the utterance will be relevant to her (what 
implicated conclusions she is intended to derive), and these may contrib-
ute, via backward inference, to the identification of explicatures and impli-
cated premises. The overall process is guided by the relevance-theoretic 
comprehension heuristic outlined earlier. In this approach, explicatures 
and implicatures are constructed by mutually adjusting tentative hypothe-
ses about explicatures, implicated premises, and implicated conclusions to 
satisfy the expectations of relevance raised by the utterance itself. 
 Implicatures, like explicatures, may be stronger or weaker, depending on 
the degree of indeterminacy introduced by the inferential element of com-
prehension. When the hearer’s expectations of relevance can be satisfied by 
deriving any one of a range of roughly similar conclusions, at roughly com-
parable cost, from a range of roughly similar premises, the hearer also takes 
some responsibility for the particular premises he supplies and the conclu-
sions he derives from them.  
 7.6   Loose Talk 
 Loose talk includes rough approximations and sense extensions where an 
expression is applied to items that fall outside its linguistically determined 
denotation, strictly understood. The decoded senses of a word or other lin-
guistic expression in an utterance are the starting point of an inferential 
process of meaning construction. The meaning constructed can be nar-
rower than the decoded meaning or broader: 
 (11) I have a temperature. 
 Here temperature would be understood as narrowed to “temperature above 
normal.” If the speaker had a normal temperature (37°C), then, strictly 
speaking, her utterance would be false. This is because every living creature, 

Loose Talk, Tight Worlds 
193
the air, the sea, and so on, all possess the property of temperature, and to 
state “I have a temperature” when one’s temperature is normal is simply 
irrelevant. As this example demonstrates, in narrowing, some aspect of lit-
eralness is preserved; a high temperature is still a temperature. This distin-
guishes narrowing from broadening: 
 (12) I have a cold. I need a Kleenex. 
 This is an example of category extension or broadening. Category exten-
sion involves extending a word with a relatively precise sense to a range of 
items that clearly fall outside its linguistically specified denotation but 
share some contextually relevant properties with items inside that denota-
tion. What the speaker needs is a paper tissue, any paper tissue with which 
to wipe her nose. Thus (12), strictly speaking, is false. 
 It is important to recognize, however, that although the preservation of 
some literalness in narrowing and broadening differ, they are not function-
ally two distinct types of language use. They both involve the same process 
of meaning construction that leads, in some cases, to a broadening of the 
encoded concept and, in others, to a narrowing of it. 
 These narrowed or broadened lexical meanings are constructed by fol-
lowing the relevance-guided comprehension process outlined earlier. As 
already indicated, when (11) is interpreted literally (“I have a tempera-
ture”), it is simply an irrelevant truism that the hearer neither constructs 
nor entertains. What happens is that the concept  TEMPERATURE is activated 
in the hearer’s mind and points him toward a relevant interpretation. This 
concept has a range of values, some of which would be relevant in the cir-
cumstances (by implying, e.g., that the speaker is unwell). As the hearer 
constructs a relevant overall interpretation of the utterance, the decoded 
concept  TEMPERATURE provides a starting point for constructing a narrowed 
ad hoc concept  TEMPERATURE*, which ranges over only contextually relevant 
temperatures, that is, temperatures that are abnormally high. These are eas-
ily brought to mind, with implications that they are worth the hearer’s 
processing effort. 
 The word  temperature in this example is used in an utterance to activate 
potential implications of the encoded concept  TEMPERATURE . Ideas activated 
in utterance interpretation stand in inferential relation to the concepts 
that activate them and are not mere associations based on past 
co-occurrence with no inferential status (Sperber and Wilson 2008, 92). The 

194 
Chapter 7
ideas activated by a word in an utterance are likely to be true of items in the 
linguistically specified denotation of the word or, equivalently, of items in 
the extension of the concept encoded by the word. In narrowing, as in “I 
have a temperature,” the implications involve only part of the extension of 
the encoded concept (because only some temperatures imply malaise). In 
broadening, the implications involve not only items in the extension of the 
encoded concept but also contextually salient items that fall outside the 
extension but share with items inside the extension properties that deter-
mine these implications. 
 Of course, implications are not just activated by words in utterances; 
they are frequently activated by events or objects in the context of the 
utterance. I would offer someone a Kleenex if I had just witnessed her 
sneezing (Sperber and Wilson 2008, 92). And “Here is a Kleenex,” said of 
any paper tissue, activates the implication in the hearer’s mind that it can 
be used to blow her nose when she has just sneezed. Clearly, implications 
that are activated both by words in utterance and by events and objects in 
the conversational context are the first to come to mind and are tentatively 
added to the interpretation until the hearer’s expectations of relevance are 
satisfied. This is how caregivers infer the meaning of their toddlers’ loose 
talk, which begins at around two to three years of age. If the child does not 
yet possess the word for what it is she wants to convey, she selects one that 
represents similar features. Parents have no difficulty inferring from the 
utterance context and the child’s gestural accompaniments what she is 
trying to say. What this implies, rather obviously, is that loose talk is typical 
in human speech from the beginning of its ontogenetic acquisition. 
 Once expectations of relevance are satisfied, the explicit content of the 
utterance (in the case of assertion, the proposition whose truth the speaker 
is committing herself to) is retroactively determined by mutually adjusting 
the implicit and explicit components of the interpretation. The explicit 
content must be such that it contextually implies the implicit content. 
More technically, the explicatures of an utterance must be such that, 
together with the implicit premises of the utterance, they justify the deriva-
tion of its implicit conclusions (Sperber and Wilson 1998, 2005, 2008; D. 
Wilson and Sperber 2002, 2004). 
 In the case of “I have a temperature,” the result of the mutual adjust-
ment process is a contextual construal of “temperature” as  TEMPERATURE *, 
which is narrower than the lexicalized concept  TEMPERATURE . Strictly literal 

Loose Talk, Tight Worlds 
195
interpretations, that is, those that involve neither narrowing nor broaden-
ing of the lexicalized concept, are arrived at by the same mutual adjust-
ment of implicit and explicit content. A literal interpretation results when 
the implications that make an utterance relevant in the expected way 
depend on the explicit content of the lexicalized concept itself (which has 
undergone neither broadening nor narrowing). What this implies is that 
literal interpretations are not default interpretations; they are not the first 
to be considered, nor are they necessarily easier to construct than nonlit-
eral ones. 
 It is worth noting, even at this juncture, that metaphors generally but 
not invariably involve both narrowing and broadening: 
 (13) You are the sunshine of my life. 
 Here “sunshine” is narrowed to exclude all the negative effects of sunshine 
(e.g., burning, glare) and broadened to include all beloved people (Sperber 
and Wilson 2008). 
 Loose use of language also includes rough approximations: 
 (14) The lecture starts at five o’clock. 
 When interpreted in the most restrictive way (ignoring issues of ambigu-
ity and polysemy), this utterance is not strictly true; lectures very rarely 
start at five o’clock, precisely. For instance, you have a philosophy lecture 
this afternoon but do not know what time it starts. You are told “five 
o’clock.” From the utterance of this phrase, you may draw a number of 
inferences that make the utterance relevant to you: 
 You cannot go shopping at five o’clock.  
 You should leave the library by 4:50 p.m.  
 Yet neither of these depends on a strict interpretation of five o’clock. 
According to the relevance-theoretic approach, you take the speaker to be 
committed to the truth of the proposition that warrants just the implica-
tions you derive, a proposition that might be paraphrased as “between 4:50 
and 5:10,” which you, as hearer, have no need to formulate mentally. And, 
importantly, had the speaker uttered the strictly true longer phrase instead 
of the shorter approximation, the processing effort would have been 
increased but without additional cognitive effects. 
 Such loose uses are extremely common. Some may be tied to an idiosyn-
cratic situation, used once, and then forgotten. Others, such as Kleenex, 

196 
Chapter 7
may be used frequently enough to give rise to an extra sense that may sta-
bilize in an individual or population; lexical broadening (e.g., Kleenex 
means any paper tissue), along with lexical narrowing and metaphorical 
transfer, is one of the main pragmatic factors driving semantic change 
(Sperber and Wilson 2008). 
 The point is that if verbal communication was driven by expectations of 
truthfulness, such loose talk would be viewed as the result of sloppy thought 
or speech, accepted by hearers “whose expectations have been reduced to 
realistic levels by repeated encounters with normal human failings” (D. 
Wilson and Sperber 2002, 592). As hearers and speakers, we should always 
prefer literally true utterances like the following: 
 (15) The lecture commences around five o’clock. 
 (16) I need a Kleenex or other disposable paper tissue. 
 Yet clearly we do not. Hearers are not misled by the previous uses of (12) 
and (14), and their strictly true versions provide no additional valuable 
information. An additional point is that (15) and (16) are appreciably 
longer utterances than (12) and (14) and require extra processing effort. 
In cases like these, (12) and (14) are seen as preferable. Speakers and 
hearers are so used to loose talk that they generally fail to notice its 
occurrence. 
 The use of hyperbole, litotes, irony, synecdoche, metonymy, and meta-
phor is also illustrative of the limitations of an expectation of truthfulness 
in utterance; none are literally true. These tropes and figurative devices 
point to a range of potential interests operative in human cognizing rather 
than just one. Truthfulness is an expectation in indicative-declarative sen-
tences; indeed, as previous biosemantic analyses demonstrate, truth is a 
necessary prerequisite to their continuing use. When someone wishes to 
know what is the case, then truthfulness is expected, but only because and 
to the extent that it is relevant to her aims. However, when a speaker wishes 
to convey more than the linguistic meaning of an expression such as “your 
room is dirty and untidy,” she can say: 
 (17) You are a piglet (metaphorical expression). 
 (18) You are a pig (another metaphorical expression) (Sperber and Wilson 
1986, 153–154). 
 (19) Did a tsunami pass through here? (irony). 

Loose Talk, Tight Worlds 
197
 Each one of these conveys something in addition to “your room is dirty and 
untidy”: (17) conveys additional implicit information concerning the 
endearing nature of the addressee, which is absent from (18). Piglets, as 
baby animals, are generally endearing, whereas pigs, as adult animals, gen-
erally are not. In fact, to call someone a pig is (or can be) seen as insulting. 
Utterance (19), as irony, could point to the degree of untidiness in the 
room, since the effects of tsunami are usually devastating. And again, the 
use of irony can serve either to soften or to increase the degree of rebuke 
intended. All of these are relevant to the differing interests an utterance can 
be meant to convey.  
 7.7   Cognitive Environment 
 All humans live in the same physical world. Agents are all engaged in deriv-
ing information from this environment and constructing the best possible 
representations of it. Agents inhabit smaller locales than the world itself, 
however, and are differentially endowed in terms of perceptual, conceptual, 
and inferential abilities. In addition, different cultures speak different lan-
guages and include different concepts. This means that the representations 
people construct and store in memory differ. What this implies is that peo-
ple possess and inhabit different cognitive environments (Sperber and Wil-
son 1995, 38). An individual’s cognitive environment is the set of facts that 
are manifest to her,  manifest meaning that she is capable at that time of 
representing the fact and accepting it as true or probably true (39). To be 
manifest, in this account, is to be perceptible or inferable. An individual’s 
total cognitive environment is a function of both her physical and social 
environment and her cognitive abilities, including memory. 
 Cognitive environments, however, include not only facts; they include 
assumptions that may or may not be true but result from, and enter into, 
inference processes as if they were true. An additional point is that mani-
festness is a comparative concept; facts and assumptions can be more or less 
manifest. The stronger an assumption is manifested, the likelier it is to be 
entertained. Which facts and assumptions are manifest to an individual at 
any given time is a function of her physical and social environment and 
cognitive abilities. 
 Human cognition, it has been noted, is innately equipped with certain 
salience detectors. Certain phenomena (loud noises, large objects) are taken 

198 
Chapter 7
as highly salient, whereas less-noisy sounds and smaller objects are not. For 
instance, a doorbell ringing is highly salient, but the ticking of a clock is 
not. When a phenomenon is noticed, some assumptions about it are stan-
dardly more accessible than others. In an environment where the doorbell 
has just rung, the hearer will normally strongly assume that someone is at 
the door, less strongly assume that whoever rang the bell is tall enough to 
reach it, and even less strongly assume that the bell has not been stolen 
(Sperber and Wilson 1995, 40). 
 Another point worthy of attention here is that two people who share a 
physical environment are mutually aware that they share it; it is mutually 
manifest that they share it. If Jack and Jill are in the kitchen when the door-
bell rings, they will both hear it and be aware that they both hear it (“Will 
you get that?”). This mutual cognitive environment provides the back-
ground in which coordinated choice of code and context becomes possible. 
A mutual cognitive environment is strong enough to enable the speaker to 
correctly ascertain what codes and contextual information the hearer has 
access to so as to comprehend the utterance. 
 From assumptions about what is manifest to other people and, in par-
ticular, about what is strongly manifest to them, we are in a position to 
derive further, though necessarily weaker, assumptions about what assump-
tions they are actually making. From assumptions about what is mutually 
manifest to all of us, we are in a position to make assumptions about the 
assumptions they attribute to us. 
 These analyses are correct as far as they go, but they fail to go far enough. 
They fail to emphasize sufficiently how much of our mundane experiences 
are the same, how much they are repeatedly perceived, day in, day out. It is 
this sameness of locally recurrent signs of locally recurrent information (see 
chap. 6) that renders efficient communication possible. 
 To begin with, the experiences of human neonates are tightly con-
strained by their immobility and underdeveloped perceptual capacities. 
Their worlds are limited to cyclical rounds of sleeping, feeding, changing, 
and interacting or playing with a limited range of caregivers, at least ini-
tially. They sleep in the same cot, in the same bedroom, with the same wall 
decorations, mobiles, and so on. The faces of their caregivers are the same, 
even if their expressions change. Their caregivers not only look the same 
but smell the same and sound the same. As the child grows and her percep-
tive cognitive repertoire develops and expands, so too does her activity 

Loose Talk, Tight Worlds 
199
range. But the sameness continues. Friends are recognized only because 
they remain the same; the furniture in the home, equipment in the gym, 
the playground, the rules of sporting and other games remain the same. 
Weather is cyclical, together with flora and available food. In addition, 
from the outset, the child learns the language and concepts of her culture 
from her caregivers. Recognition is only possible (obviously) because 
objects, people, and events remain more or less the same (locally recurrent 
signs of locally recurrent information).  
 7.8   Metaphor’s 3NNTs 
 It should be clear from the foregoing discussion that a relevance-theoretic 
approach to communication satisfies Guttenplan’s desiderata, for the 
broadening and narrowing of the extension of the lexicalized concept, the 
target of the metaphor, is responsible for metaphor’s apparent truthfulness, 
lack of adequate paraphraseability, and transparency. In broadening, the 
implicatures involve not only items that fall within the extension of the 
lexicalized concept but also contextually salient items that, although fall-
ing outside its normal extension, share certain properties with items within 
the extension that determine such implicatures. In narrowing, although 
the ad hoc concept clearly falls outside its linguistically specified denota-
tion, it shares some contextually relevant properties that fall within that 
denotation. This accounts for metaphor’s apparent truthfulness and trans-
parency. And it is clear why it accounts for metaphor’s relative lack of para-
phraseability. Metaphor does not use normal lexicalized concepts directly; 
it merely uses them to indicate some features of the items they represent 
that resemble their target items. Their relative lack of paraphraseability is a 
function of the number and complexity of the implicatures they include.  
 7.9   Conclusions 
 The absence of any criterion for distinguishing literal, loose, and metaphor-
ical utterances suggests two things: first, there are no genuinely distinct 
categories as literal, loose, and metaphorical, at least not from a descriptive 
or pragmatic perspective; second, there is only one inferential procedure for 
interpreting all three types of utterance. If metaphorical interpretation was, 
in fact, dependent on a prior attempt at literal interpretation, processing 

200 
Chapter 7
time would inevitably be increased (for what amounts to a two-stage pro-
cess). This is not the case. The processing of metaphor takes no longer than 
the processing of putatively literal statements (Gibbs 2008). An example of 
this common procedure for both literal and metaphorical utterances is pro-
vided hereafter (adapted from Sperber and Wilson 2008, 95–96). 
 (a)  Inferential Procedure in a Literal Utterance 
 (i)   Lover says to beloved, “You take my breath away,” uttered in response 
to interoceptive subjective feelings of pleasant breathlessness (beloved’s 
decoding of lover’s utterance).  
 (ii)   Lover’s utterance is optimally relevant to beloved (expectation raised 
by the recognition that lover’s utterance is a communicative act, i.e., is 
an ostensive stimulus).  
 (iii)   Lover’s utterance will achieve relevance by beloved observing his 
breathless state, slightly gasping speech, and enraptured expression.  
 (iv)   Since the couple are face-to-face (and probably have just come face-
to-face) and the beloved knows from experience that the sudden sight 
of something beautiful can take one’s breath away, the enraptured 
look eliminates other possible causes of breathlessness, such as vigor-
ous exercise or fright (beloved’s tentative acceptance of this as implicit 
premises).  
 (v)  The beloved is beautiful in the eyes of her lover (beloved’s implicit 
conclusion derived from [iii] and [iv] and accepted as interpretation of 
lover’s utterance by relevance-guided comprehension heuristic).  
 (b)  Inferential Procedure in Metaphorical Utterance 
 (i)   Lover says to beloved, “You are the sunshine of my life” (beloved’s 
decoding of lover’s utterance).  
 (ii)   Lover’s utterance is optimally relevant to beloved (expectation raised 
by recognition of lover’s utterance as communicative act, i.e., as an 
ostensive stimulus).  
 (iii)   Lover’s utterance will achieve relevance by beloved’s observing the 
enraptured face and soft verbal tones of the lover (expectation raised 
by [ii], given that the lover is looking at his beloved).  
 (iv)   Sunshine brightens and lights up the world, intensifies color, is gen-
erally pleasant to experience, is warm, encourages plant growth, 

Loose Talk, Tight Worlds 
201
encourages outdoor recreation, and so on (assumptions activated by 
word  sunshine and lover gazing enraptured at beloved’s face. Some or 
all of these are accepted as implicit premises of lover’s utterance).  
 (v)   The beloved is a sunshiny person; she lights up her lover’s life, intensi-
fies his experiences, makes him feel warm, and so on (beloved’s implicit 
conclusion derived from [iii] and [iv] and accepted as interpretation of 
lover’s utterance, by relevance-guided comprehension heuristic).  
 In both literal and metaphorical interpretations, the interpretation is car-
ried out online and commences while the utterance is still in progress. This 
implies that the interpretive hypotheses concerning both explicit content 
and implicatures are developed at least partly in parallel rather than in 
sequence. They stabilize when their mutual adjustment confirms the audi-
ence’s expectations of relevance. 
 Of course, hearers do not consciously proceed through this inferential 
process or, if they do, do so only until they understand the meaning of the 
lexicalized items used. Meaning perception qua meaning perception, even 
when assisted or augmented by language, generally goes on automatically 
and effortlessly once the perceiver has learned to identify the object or 
event. 
 In terms of biosemantics, it is clear that Millikan’s analyses relating to the 
direct and derived proper functions of linguistic devices, including 
declarative-indicative and directive-imperative icons, are underpinned by a 
code theory of communication. She construes speech clearly as a form of 
direct perception of whatever the speech is about (see chap. 6); interpreting 
speech does not require making any inferences or having any beliefs about 
the speaker’s intentions. It is a sufficient condition for linguistic communi-
cation that the linguistic devices used succeed in performing their proper 
function. Indicative utterances, it has been noted, continue to be produced 
because they produce beliefs in hearers, and imperative utterances produce 
compliance. Yet Millikan does concede that understanding a language is 
never just decoding (1998, 176); further processes must use the output of 
decoding and information about the situation to fix the contextual mean-
ing of the utterance. These further processes, however, consist merely in 
strict disambiguation, that is, the selection of one of the possible decodings 
of the utterance. All the possible contextual meanings of a linguistic device 
must be conventionally associated with the device. This implies quite 

202 
Chapter 7
extraordinary ambiguity of nearly all linguistic utterances (Origgi and Sper-
ber 2000). According to Millikan, the hearer’s task is to recognize to which 
one of the families that proliferate phonetically or syntactically indistin-
guishable but semantically different tokens that this particular token 
belongs. 
 Yet almost infinitely many new meanings (generated syntactically and 
compositionally) can be communicated by the same means of the same 
linguistic device when used perfectly normally, for example, “go home.” 
This means that disambiguation (identifying from which family these lin-
guistic tokens were reproduced) will not explain the contextual aspects of 
comprehension. “Meanings are not just disambiguated, they are in part 
disambiguated, in part constructed in context” (Origgi and Sperber 2000, 
152). 
 Millikan is correct in claiming that the direct proper function of a device 
is that which keeps speakers and hearers reliably producing and respond-
ing to the device, thus stabilizing the device in a language community. 
This response, for Millikan, is to be found at the level of belief or desire 
formation or even at the behavioral level of compliance. The function of a 
word is to convey “conventional meaning” to the overall meaning of an 
utterance, which will be accepted as belief or desire by the hearer. The 
same linguistic device, however, may elicit a wide range of responses at the 
belief or desire level. It has been argued that language comprehension 
involves the decoding of linguistic stimuli that is then used by the hearer, 
together with contextual information, to infer the speaker’s meaning. The 
same unambiguous linguistic device, decoded in the same way each time it 
is produced, can serve as evidence of a range of different meanings in dif-
ferent contexts (“John is a computer”). The direct proper function of a 
linguistic device, therefore, is to provide reliable evidence of the speaker’s 
meaning. Consistent with this, the derived proper function of a linguistic 
device is to reliably provide evidence of the speaker’s meaning in a particu-
lar context. In short, the direct proper function of, for example, the word 
 piglet is to give evidence that the speaker’s meaning includes a concept, 
 PIGLET, which may be, but may not be, the concept lexically encoded by 
 piglet . This direct proper function is performed through each token of  piglet 
performing the derived proper function of evoking, in context, a specific 
concept that is part of the speaker’s meaning on that occasion (Origgi and 
Sperber 2000, 159). 

Loose Talk, Tight Worlds 
203
 All online language processing, in terms of both production and com-
prehension, is at least widely metaphysically realized. A raft of contextual 
factors, such as knowledge of each other’s cognitive environment and 
visual access to shared physical environment, are constitutive of meaning 
construction for both speaker and hearer. The more numerous and weak 
the implicatures in any utterance, the more production and comprehen-
sion are context dependent. 
 How much of online processing is radically widely realized is an interest-
ing question. Utterance activity, as Spurrett and Cowley (2010) and Cowley 
(1998) construe it, always underpins and accompanies linguistic expres-
sion, and so too does saccadic vision. At least elements of utterance activity 
are coregulated, that is, mutually and synchronously modulated, and sac-
cadic vision provides a straightforward example of locational or vehicle 
externalism. What this implies is that whenever elements of utterance 
activity or saccadic vision are involved in utterance comprehension (and it 
is difficult to imagine when they might not be), the core realizer system 
extends beyond the skin and skull of both interlocutors.  


 8  Once More, with Feeling 
 8.1   Introduction 
 In this chapter, I sum up the most significant theoretical and conceptual 
achievements cataloged previously and discuss their ramifications for phil-
osophical thinking (and thinking in other disciplines) in terms of human 
emotional and language development and for empirical research relating to 
these. I sum up research results that clearly suggest that an internalist, indi-
vidualist, and intracranialist metaphysics of mind should be abandoned; 
such a metaphysics fuels, if not actually generates, the range of putative 
dichotomies that this monograph explodes. These putative dichotomies, 
beginning with nature–nurture and biology–culture (which, in turn, under-
pin BE–HCE and vocal–gestural and natural-language dichotomies), have 
been comprehensively rejected. The development of what we consider to 
be our uniquely human capacities is metaphysically realized in relation-
ships that include continuously changing neural, corporeal, and sociocul-
tural resources that are insensitive to putative boundaries between internal 
and external environments. “Biology” and “culture,” it has been argued, 
interact continuously in social contexts to build such capacities. Relatedly, 
the view of emotion and language operating primarily in individual psy-
chological economies has also been rejected; emotions and language both 
develop and operate primarily in social economies. In addition, and consis-
tent with this idea, emotions should be construed as a unified natural class 
of essentially ostensive-expressive devices, the function of which is to 
enable human social life. Certainly, cognitions, feelings, and action tenden-
cies are involved, and the well-being of the individual emoting subject is 
protected, but only because individual well-being contributes to, and is 
enabled by, normal human emotionality. 1  

206 
Chapter 8
 In light of these more overarching results and rather more specifically, 
avenues for future research will usefully include further investigation into 
the nature of Scaffolding 1 and 2 and, relatedly, their place or potential 
place in education. They also include further investigation into the control 
of online interactivity in the world and the development of morality, the 
latter for reasons to be explained. I have touched on all these points in this 
monograph, and all deserve further detailed investigation. In addition, I 
suggest that they need investigation from an interdisciplinary or multidis-
ciplinary perspective, with contributions from scholars in a range of rele-
vant disciplines. This will enable the sort of synthesis I claimed that only 
interdisciplinary or multidisciplinary perspectives can achieve. This does 
not simply mean that scholars from one discipline trawl the relevant litera-
tures to inform their theorizing, as, for example, I have done; it potentially 
provides opportunities for researchers from a range of disciplines who are 
interested in the same phenomena to collaborate from the beginning and 
on the hoof on research projects of mutual relevance. (This is not to deny 
that unidisciplinary research has its place but rather to suggest that phe-
nomena as complex as human development and behavior in the world are 
probably not two of those places.)  
 8.2   Moral Development 
 In previous chapters, I have been at pains to argue that two highly comple-
mentary repertoires of constraints operating synchronously in a tight social 
and physical world provide the basis for the development of human emo-
tionality and language (and, by implication, symbolic thought); that is, 
they provide the basis for what are commonly construed as uniquely 
human capacities. I argued that neonates’ sensorimotor competencies, 
STBPs, and affect expressions, together with caregivers’ intuitive parenting 
skills, constructed the very close, linguistically mediated social relationship 
that is prerequisite to full human development. I further argued that the 
development of both BEs and HCEs is language and culture dependent 
and that both are radically widely realized; that is, their metaphysical real-
ization provides clear examples of DFI with CT. In addition, I argued that 
this linguistically dependent developmental trajectory resulted in a trans-
formation from interpersonal emotional regulation to intrapersonal emo-
tional regulation. The increasing use of language in requests, advice, 

Once More, with Feeling 
207
explanations, and admonitions and praise (parents) and in action and feel-
ing description and self-instruction (children) enables the transformation 
to intrapersonal emotional regulation. This transformation is accompanied 
by changes in locus of control in the total emotional realizer system. 
 Language development also depends on inbuilt neonatal and maternal 
constraints and, in particular, on motherese, the exaggeratedly succinct 
vocalizations that naturally accompany other activities and, when the child 
signals readiness, the introduction of deliberate language pedagogy. I char-
acterized motherese as providing Scaffolding 2 to both emotional and lan-
guage development, and deliberate pedagogy as providing Scaffolding 1. 
Language development is also radically widely realized and provides a fur-
ther example of DFI with CT. 
 Human emotionality, language, and symbolic thought are uniquely 
human capacities, but they are not the only ones. Another uniquely human 
capacity, one that emotions, language, and thought inevitably feature in 
and ultimately enable, is that of moral agency. Given this, I think it plau-
sible to suggest that children learn their ethics or morals through precisely 
the same mechanisms and at the same time as they learn to emote and to 
speak. Children learn to emote and to speak in culturally embedded inter-
action, and one dimension of such cultural embedding is moral or ethical. 
I think it plausible that just as Amy learns to say please and thank you for 
the reason that they are normal etiquette, so she learns not to squeeze 
Toby’s ears for the reason that it will hurt Toby, and not to help herself to 
Sarah’s pencil for the reason that it belongs to Sarah. If I am right, then 
moral development is radically widely realized, too, and moral agency is 
the result of a transformation from interpersonal to intrapersonal moral 
regulation with concomitant changes to locus of control in total realizer 
systems. 
 It would be interesting to investigate the extent to which emotional and 
language development influence moral development and the nature of the 
moral developmental trajectory. I think this is worth investigating using 
the same or similar method as I have used in this monograph. It is worth 
investigating for at least three different but related reasons. The first is that 
moral development, just like emotional and language development, is typi-
cally considered to be individualistic; both cognitivists and emotivists (both 
very generally construed) view moral development as part of individual 
psychological economies. If moral development can be shown to be 

208 
Chapter 8
developed concurrently with other radically widely realized uniquely 
human capacities, the case for DFI with CT in human development will be 
sealed. The second reason is that empirical evidence (Damasio 1994) sug-
gests that they are related. The neocortex is involved in emotional regula-
tion, and regulation takes time and a typical trajectory through which to 
develop. The third reason is that such a program would be timely. To begin 
with, the emotional–rational debate (yet another enduring putative dichot-
omy) has taken something of center stage again in mainstream moral psy-
chology (Mackenzie 2012) with the positing of, inter alia, a language 
module (Hauser 2006) and social intuitionism (Haidt 2001), both of which 
deny rationality any fundamental role in moral agency. Thorough analysis 
of how children actually do learn to be moral agents may reconcile the 
perennial emotional–rational debate in moral theorizing in much the same 
way as my research on emotional ontogenesis has done with emotion 
theory.  
 8.3   Scaffolding 
 In addition, some conceptual ground clearance in terms of developmental 
and behavioral scaffolding would be useful. In 2003, Andy Clark suggested 
that the single most important task for a science of the biotechnological 
mind was to investigate the range and type of cognitive scaffolding and the 
different ways in which nonbiological scaffoldings can augment (or impair) 
performance on tasks. 
 The construction of the type of taxonomy Clark recommends is under 
way but requires refinement. R. Wilson and Clark (2009) distinguish tech-
nological, sociocultural, and natural environmental resources and suggest 
that they can be integrated either very temporally or almost permanently 
into cognitive structures. It would be useful to flesh out these categories 
with specific examples: what kinds of resources are functionally integrated 
into cognitive wholes, and what are their different effects on brains, behav-
ior, affective states, and cognitive structure (Sutton 2010)? In addition, are 
they genuine examples of DFI with CT or examples of DFI or even only of 
“FI”? These questions relate to scaffolding. 
 Throughout the book, I have alluded to Scaffolding 1, that is, the 
assisted “walking” type of scaffolding or, as Sterelny (2010) would have it, 
beaver dams and termite mounds, and Scaffolding 2, the mutual 

Once More, with Feeling 
209
structure-building type of scaffolding found in emotional and language 
development. These two types of scaffolding would appear to lie at opposite 
ends of a continuum, and if the idea of a continuum is correct, then a range 
of scaffoldings must exist, some of which will be clearly identifiable as one 
sort and some as the other. Scaffolding 2, I have claimed, results in the syn-
chronous but unequal coconstruction of neural circuits in neonatal and 
maternal brains. This is structure building writ large and is relatively perma-
nent (subject to some refinement, degeneration, and decay). Scaffolding 2 
is coactive. Scaffolding 1, of the assisted “walking” and explicit pedagogy 
variety, involves an adult helping to build behavioral capacity in children, 
but inevitably involves some neuromuscular development. Scaffolding 1 of 
the beaver dam variety involves a physical construction built by generation 
 N to facilitate the development and activities of generation  N + 1. In both 
cases of Scaffolding 1, therefore, the support is unidirectional. 
 There will inevitably be scaffoldings, however, that will be difficult to 
classify, and this will be particularly true when development is sufficiently 
progressed to allow the complementing or replacing of Scaffolding 2 by 
Scaffolding 1. An example of this type of replacement is provided by lan-
guage development, when motherese is complemented or replaced by 
explicit linguistic pedagogy. Some extremely subtle changes will occur, and 
apart from constructing the type of taxonomy Clark recommends, it would 
also be interesting to investigate what individual differences in both moth-
ers and children and in physical and social environments influenced such 
changes.  
 8.4   Scaffolding 1 and Education 
 Given the wide availability of a range of exograms and systems for their use 
and manipulation, the role of deliberate scaffolding in schools and univer-
sities might usefully be explored. Examples of Scaffolding 1 involving com-
puter-assisted learning could be incorporated into the full range of education 
communities to augment local face-to-face classroom education (if appro-
priately technologically resourced) and to promote computer literacy. 
Research into this potentially very fruitful education augmentation has 
already begun (e.g., Newstead et al. 2012), and it has begun to harvest some 
interesting and pedagogically salient results. For example, certain types of 
computer-assisted learning, such as the use of virtual worlds to enhance 

210 
Chapter 8
scientific understanding, result in more positive learning outcomes when 
introduced after individual student failure in the same tasks than when 
introduced before any individual task attempts (Newstead et al. 2012). It 
would be worth investigating whether, for example, prior failure motivates 
students to learn or somehow primes relevant neural circuits, or both. It is 
certainly interesting to note that caregiver-provided Scaffolding 1 in human 
development is generally provided because the infant or child cannot pro-
vide whatever she wants for herself; that is, she has either failed in her 
attempt or signaled to her caregiver her readiness for support. It has also 
been found that, in some cases of student collaboration on computer-
assisted learning tasks, results are less positive (and easily measurable) 
learning outcomes. Clearly, therefore, the full range of potential scaffolds in 
differing educational contexts and their various strengths and limitations 
should usefully be explored.  
 8.5   Online Activity in the World 
 A further line of inquiry would be to explore the extent to which online 
activity in the world is radically widely realized. My research has mentioned 
utterance activity, mutual gazing, smiling, object passing, and visual per-
ception as examples, but given the range of these, it is entirely plausible to 
suggest that there may well be others. There is also a distinction or perhaps 
even a relationship to be explored between interactivity that is scaffolded 2 
and straightforward locational or vehicle externalism. Interactivities that 
are scaffolded 2 include utterance activity, mutual gazing, smiling, and 
object passing, where the activity of one interactor crucially depends on the 
activity of another. Visual perception is an example of straightforward 
locational externalism, where formal features in the environment are 
involved in wide computational processes. It has become obvious, however, 
during the development of this monograph that visual perception is very 
heavily involved in at least the examples of Scaffolding 2 given here. 
This makes sense. The function of our sensory-perceptual apparatuses is to 
keep track of events unfolding, moment to moment, in the real world so 
that we can respond appropriately. This implies that all our online interac-
tivity is radically widely realized, and suggests that there might be auditory, 
olfactory, and tactile analogues to saccadic scanning in visual perception. 2 
If this is the case, and it is certainly worth exploring, what remains 

Once More, with Feeling 
211
for intracranialist processing contracts decisively. It seems that the only 
genuinely intracranial (but taxonomically externalist) processes are those 
when we are deliberately off-line, concentrating in terms of reflection, 
planning, reasoning, and so on. Yet even here, our subpersonal sensory-
perceptual processes continue to operate to protect our interests.  
 8.6   Methodological Considerations 
 I suggested at the beginning of the chapter that the future research I recom-
mend should be undertaken by interdisciplinary or multidisciplinary teams 
because this kind of approach allows important synthetic theorizing; it 
motivates new perspectives on relations between the cognitive and social 
sciences and the humanities (Sutton 2010). I think it fitting, given Andy 
Clark’s pivotal and visionary leadership of the Extended Mind brigade, that 
he has almost the last word on methodological considerations: 
 Much of what matters about human intelligence is hidden not in the brain, nor in 
the technology, but in the complex and iterated interactions and collaborations be-
tween the two. … The study of these interaction spaces is not easy, and depends both 
on new multidisciplinary alliances and new forms of modelling and analysis. The 
pay-off, however, could be spectacular: nothing less than a new kind of cognitive 
scientific collaboration involving neuroscience, physiology, and social, cultural, and 
technological studies in equal measure. (A. Clark 2001, 154)  
 Clark’s vision has become reality in some multidisciplinary collaborative 
research groups involving, inter alia, cognitive neuroscientists, cognitive 
psychologists, historians, linguists, and philosophers (e.g., Sutton 2012) 
working within an Extended Mind framework. Barnier (2012), for instance, 
a cognitive psychologist, has been involved in multidisciplinary research 
into memory for the last five years and claims that multidisciplinary 
research, undertaken from the ground up, requires the development of 
what she terms “transformative” methodologies. These methodologies, in 
turn, can harvest transformative insights in theory development. Barnier 
and colleagues do not claim that establishing such research groups or man-
aging their ongoing operations is unproblematic. They insist, however, that 
when such research groups function as they should, the results they harvest 
can be unexpected and spectacular. For example, research has shown that 
25 percent of partners, living at home in long-term relationships, who have 
a degree of neural decay normally diagnostic of Alzheimer’s, remain 

212 
Chapter 8
symptom free. Barnier and colleagues have shown that this is because such 
subjects use their long-term partners as external memory sources. The 
potential therapeutic value of this research is clear. Research undertaken in 
other naturalistic settings, such as workplaces and schools, and informed 
by an Extended Mind framework has obvious potential to harvest other 
practically relevant results.  
 8.7   Concluding Summary 
 Human emotions develop from inborn emotional precursors, to basic emo-
tions and thence to higher cognitive emotions; as such, they form a natural 
class in which precursor emotions are basic. Human emotions develop to 
enable human social life, initially through interpersonal control and subse-
quently through intrapersonal control. They develop through the continu-
ous interaction of progressively fine-tuned neonatal or child affect 
expressions and caregiver intuitive parenting skills in a close, linguistically 
mediated social relationship. In addition, they develop concurrently 
through the same developmental mechanisms as language and, by implica-
tion, symbolic thought. The degree and complexity of functional integra-
tion of neural, corporeal, and sociocultural resources in human development 
are such that they represent a world-to-brain transcranialist achievement. 
Directions for future research include analyses of moral development. In 
addition, in light of the degree and complexity of functional integration of 
neural, corporeal, and sociocultural resources in human ontogenesis, 
research into human development and behavior in naturalistic settings 
should preferably be multidisciplinary. Finally, Ruth Millikan stated in one 
of her papers that she wanted to kill rationalism stone dead and then beat 
up on it. My aspirations for this monograph are similar. I hope that I have 
killed the biology–culture dichotomy in human development stone dead, 
and the intracranialist metaphysics that underpin it, and then beat up on 
them.  

 Notes 
 1  Introduction and Chapter Outlines 
 1.  Research is under way to discover what expressions, gestures, etc., if any, are 
automatically imitated by human neonates. Early findings suggest that only tongue 
protrusion is automatically imitated, but imitation is significantly increased after 
training with an adult model: “TP (tongue protrusion) can be accounted for by asso-
ciative learning and that early social experience improves newborn imitation. Whilst 
postnatal experience is not necessary for facial gesture imitation, neonatal imitation 
may nonetheless be influenced by experiences in the first weeks of life” (Slaughter, 
Oostenbroek, Suddendorf, and Nielson, personal communication, 2014).  
 2.  I assume that coding is exclusively involved in the communication systems of 
many submammalian species, such as honeybees. The bee has the brain the size of a 
pinhead, which contains a mere 1,000 neurons.  
 3.  I am not the only or the first theorist to suggest this idea. Menary (2007, 2009), 
for instance, in his Cognitive Integration Theory and, more especially, in his Encul-
turated Mind Theory (2013), does so too.  
 2   Theories of Emotion 
 1.  Morton’s views are so different from mainstream theories that I do not review 
them here. For those who enjoy good old-fashioned philosophy, however, they 
make very interesting reading.  
 2.   A unified ontological class is defined by four characteristic functional roles: (i) a 
phenomenally encoded appraisal of environment or of the cognitive system itself; 
(ii) the preparation and motivation for action by eliciting physiological changes; (iii) 
a typical expression that signals the emotion and action readiness to other people; 
and (iv) a flexibility of behavior that is a function of degree of cognitive content 
involved. Emotions are not a natural kind, according to Zinck and Newen (2008), 
because they have different causal mechanisms.  

214 
Notes
 3.  Prinz (2004, 157) suggests “a highly speculative list” of BEs; these are frustration, 
panic, anxiety, physical disgust, separation distress, and aversive self-consciousness 
(all negative) and satisfaction, stimulation, and attachment (all positive).  
 4.  Hohmann’s findings have not gone unchallenged; see, e.g., Chwalisz, Diener, 
and Gallagher 1988.  
 5.  Homologous traits differ from analogous traits in that analogues occur in differ-
ent evolutionary lineages as a result of adapting to a common evolutionary problem, 
but share no common ancestor. The eyes of octopuses and the eyes of human beings 
are examples of analogous traits.  
 6.  There are different construals of what emotion categories are basic emotions. 
Zinck and Newen (2008), for instance, exclude surprise and disgust, and Ekman 
(1994) adds contempt to the list.  
 7.  These criteria were initially identified in the 1820s. A famous modern formula-
tion is that of Remane (1952), reproduced in Reidl (1977) and translated by Jeffries. 
Clark, however, credits them to Ereshefski (2007), which provides a useful reference 
source.  
 3  Metaphysics and Mind 
 1.  The latest, most radical, and most controversial form of externalism is extensive 
enactivism, due to Hutto, Kirchhoff, and Myin (2014), which I note briefly in chap. 
2, sec. 2.7.3. It is controversial because it denies that cognition fundamentally 
involves contentful mental representations.  
 4  Mirror, Mirror … Human Emotional Ontogenesis 
 1.  But see my cautionary endnote 1 in chap. 1.  
 2.  Not all smiling in neonates is a function of mimicry. Early research shows that 
blind and deaf and blind neonates smile, laugh (Eibl-Eibesfeldt 1973), and cry spon-
taneously, but their facial expressions differ from those of sighted infants. Blind 
infants show much more facial involvement or exaggerated facial activity than 
sighted children, and this activity increases with age (Fulcher 1942). Parents attempt 
to suppress such exaggerated and odd expressions (J. Thompson 1941), but despite 
their efforts, such facial expressions actually increase with age (Fulcher 1942). The 
reverse is the case for sighted children; facial activity decreases with age, but differ-
entiation of emotion becomes sharper. The difference is thought to be due to sighted 
children’s use of visual cues and mimicry (J. Thompson 1941; Fulcher 1942).  
 3.  I am indebted to John Sutton for this insight.  

Notes 
215
 5  Out of the Mouths of Babes and Sucklings 
 1.  The timing of the onset of JVA remains controversial. Butterworth and coworkers 
construe it as emerging gradually from about four months, whereas others, such as 
Moore and Corkum (1994), construe its emergence as coincident with pointing 
comprehension at about one year. The reasons for the difference may be due, at 
least in part, to experimental conditions. For instance, evidence now suggests that 
early comprehension depends on an infant seeing the hand and target in proximal 
visual space and simultaneously (Butterworth 2013).  
 6  From Evolution to Emotionese 
 1.  Millikan’s is not the only teleological theory of function or one that is particu-
larly idiosyncratic. Indeed, Papineau (1987) observes that in the early 1980s the time 
had come for such theories, and both he and Millikan recognized similarities in 
their positions. I favor Millikan because of her obvious sympathy for nonhuman (as 
well as human) species.  
 2.  I use the word  design metaphorically here and in what follows.  
 3.  After Hugh Lofting’s two-headed creature of the same name.  
 7  Loose Talk, Tight Worlds 
 1.  Aristotle also subscribed to a substitution view; see sec. 7.2.2.  
 8  Once More, with Feeling 
 1.  This is not to suggest that the human emotional developmental trajectory is 
exclusively positive. It is possible that during development, parental interests will 
conflict with those of offspring (e.g., Uller 2008), although a mutual sensitivity, 
much larger than evolutionary theory would predict, has also been posited (P. Bate-
son 1994). Much more research is required to identify the conditions under which 
parental effects will be positive and involve factors classified as “environmental” as 
well as parental (Uller 2008).  
 2.  Some researchers are already focusing on other sensory modalities to investigate 
their enactive or embedded natures, with differing results. For example, Gray and 
Tanesani (2010) deny that taste is an enactive phenomenon, whereas I suggest that 
speech perception is an extended phenomenon.  


 References 
 Adams ,  F. , and   K.  Aizawa  .  2001 .  The bounds of cognition.   Philosophical Psychology  14  
( 1 ):  43 – 64 .  
 Adams, F., and K. Aizawa. 2005. Defending nonderived content.  Philosophical Psy-
chology 18: 661–669.  
 Adams ,  F.  , and   K.  Aizawa  .  2008 .  The Bounds of Cognition .  Oxford :  Blackwell .  
 Adams ,  F. , and   K.  Aizawa  .  2009 .  Why the mind is still in the head . In  The Cambridge 
Handbook of Situated Cognition ,  9th ed. , ed.   P.  Robbins and   M.  Aydede  ,  78 – 95 .  Cam-
bridge :  Cambridge University Press .  
 Adams ,  F.  , and   K.  Aizawa  .  2010  a .  Defending the bounds of cognition . In  The 
Extended Mind , ed.   R.  Menary  ,  67 – 80 .  Cambridge, MA :  MIT Press .  
 Adams ,  F.  , and   K.  Aizawa  .  2010  b .  The value of cognitivism in thinking about 
extended cognition.   Phenomenology and the Cognitive Sciences  9 ( 4 ):  579 – 603 .  
 Ainsworth ,  M. D. S.  , and   S. M.   Bell  .  1974 .  Mother-infant interaction and the devel-
opment of competence . In  The Growth of Competence , ed.   K. S.   Connolly  and   J. S.  
 Bruner  ,  97 – 118 .  New York :  Academic Press .  
 Aktar ,  N. , and   M.  Tomasello  .  1998 .  Intersubjectivity in early language learning and 
use . In  Intersubjective Communication and Emotion in Early Ontogeny , ed.   S.  Braten  , 
 316 – 335 .  New York :  Cambridge University Press .  
 Aristotle .  1984  a .  Poetics . In  The Complete Works of Aristotle , rev. Oxford translation, 
ed. J. Barnes. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.  
 Aristotle .  1984  b .  Rhetoric . In  The Complete Works of Aristotle , rev. Oxford translation, 
ed. J. Barnes. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.  
 Armon-Jones ,  C.  1986 . The thesis of constructionism. In  The Social Construction of 
Emotion , ed. R. Harre, 32–56. London: Oxford University Press.  
 Arnold ,  M.  1960 .  The Nature of Emotion .  Harmondsworth :  Penguin .  

218 
References
 Averill ,  J.  1980 .  A constructionist view of emotion . In  Emotion: Theory, Research, and 
Experience , vol.  1 , ed.   R.  Plutchik  and   H.  Kellerman  ,  305 – 336 .  New York :  Academic 
Press .  
 Bach ,  K.  1982 .  De re belief and methodological solipsism . In  Thought and Object: 
Essays on Intentionality , ed.   A.   Woodfield  .  Oxford :  Oxford University Press .  
 Barnier ,  A.  2012 . Otto and the barking dog: How the extended mind thesis helps us 
understand collaborative remembering. Paper presented at Distributed Cognition 
and Distributed Agency Workshop, March 16–18, Macquarie University, Sydney.  
 Barrett ,  K. C.  1995 .  A functionalist approach to shame and guilt . In  The Self-Con-
scious Emotions: The Psychology of Shame, Guilt, Embarrassment, and Pride , ed.   J. P.  
 Tangney  and   K. W.  Fischer  ,  25 – 63 .  New York :  Guildford Press .  
 Barrett ,  L. F.   2005 .  Feeling is perceiving: Core affect and conceptualization in the 
experience of emotion . In  Emotions: Conscious and Unconscious , ed.   P. M.   Niedenthal  
and  P.  Winkelman ,  255 – 284 .  New York :  Guilford Press .  
 Barrett ,  L. F.   2006 .  Solving the emotion paradox: Categorization and the experience 
of emotion.   Personality and Social Psychology Review  10 : 20 – 46 .  
 Barrett ,  L. F.   2009 .  Variety is the spice of life: A psychological construction approach 
to understanding variability in emotion.   Cognition and Emotion  23 : 1284 – 1306 .  
 Barrett ,  L. F.   2011 .  Was Darwin wrong about emotional expressions?   Advances in 
Psychological Sciences  20  ( 6 ):  400 – 406 .  
 Bateson ,  G.   1972 .  Steps to an Ecology of Mind .  New York :  Ballantine .  
 Bateson ,  M. C.  1975 .  Mother-infant exchanges: The epigenesis of conversational 
interaction . In  Developmental Psycholinguistics and Communication Disorders , ed.   D. 
 Aaronson  and   R. W.  Reiber  ,  107 – 113 .  New York :  Academy of Sciences .  
 Bateson ,  M. C.   1979 .  The epigenesis of conversational interaction: A personal 
account of research development . In  Before Speech: The Beginning of Interpersonal 
Communication , ed.   M.  Bullowa ,  63 – 78 .  Cambridge :  Cambridge University Press .  
 Bateson ,  P.  1994 .  The dynamics of parent-offspring relationships in mammals.  
 Trends in Ecology and Evolution  10 : 399 – 403 .  
 Beardsley ,  M.  1962 .  The metaphorical twist.  Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 
 22  ( 3 ):  293 – 307 .  
 Behne ,  T. ,   M.  Carpenter  , and   M.  Tomasello  .  2005 .  One-year-olds comprehend the 
communicative intentions behind gestures in a hiding game.   Developmental Science  8 
( 6 ):  492 – 499 .  
 Berti ,  A. , and   F.   Frassinetti  .  2000 .  When far becomes near: Remapping of space by 
tool use.   Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience  12 ( 3 ):  415 – 420 .  

References 
219
 Black ,  M.  1954–55 . Metaphor.  Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society 55:273–294.  
 Black ,  M.  1993 .  More about metaphor . In  Metaphor and Thought , ed.  A.  Ortony ,  19 –
 41 .  Cambridge :  Cambridge University Press .  
 Blass ,  E. M.  , and   V.  Ciaramitaro  .  1994 .  A new look at some old mechanisms in 
human newborns: Taste and tactile determinants of state, affect, and action.   Mono-
graphs of the Society for Research in Child Development  59  ( 1 ):  1 – 8 .  
 Bloom ,  L.  1991 .  Language Development from Two to Three .  Cambridge :  Cambridge 
University Press .  
 Bloom ,  L.   1993 .  The Transition from Infancy to Language: Acquiring the Power of Expres-
sion .  New York :  Cambridge University Press .  
 Bloom ,  L. , and   E.  Tinker .  2001 .  The Intentionality Model of Language Acquisition: 
 Engagement, Effort, and the Essential Tension in Development . Monographs of the Soci-
ety for Research in Child Development, serial no. 267, vol. 66, no. 4.  Oxford : 
 Blackwell .  
 Boukydis ,  C. F. Z.  , and   R. L.   Burgess .  1982 .  Adult physiological response to infant 
cries: Effects of temperament of infant, parental status, and gender.   Child Develop-
ment  53  ( 5 ):  1291 – 1298 .  
 Boyd ,  R.  1989 .  What realism implies and what it does not.   Dialectica  43  ( 1–2 ):  5 – 29 . 
 Boyd ,  R.  1993 .  Metaphor and theory: What is “metaphor” a metaphor for?  In  
Metaphor and Thought , ed.  A.   Ortony ,  481 – 532 .  Cambridge :  Cambridge University 
Press .  
 Brandon ,  R. N.   1990 .  Adaptation and Environment .  Princeton, NJ :  Princeton Univer-
sity Press .  
 Bratman ,  M. E.   1992 .  Shared cooperative activity.   Philosophical Review  101  ( 2 ): 
 327 – 341 .  
 Brazelton ,  T. B.   1983 .  Precursors for the development of emotions in early infancy . 
In  Emotion: Theory, Research, and Experience , vol.  2 , ed.   R.  Plutchik  and   H.  Kellerman  , 
 35 – 55 .  San Diego, CA :  Academic Press .  
 Brown ,  L.   1993 .  New Shorter Oxford Dictionary .  Oxford :  Clarendon Press .  
 Bruner ,  J. S.   1976 .  On prelinguistic prerequisites for speech . In  Recent Advances in the 
Psychology of Language: Language Development and Mother-Child Interaction , ed.   R. N.  
 Campbell and   R. T.   Smith ,  199 – 214 .  London :  Plenum .  
 Buller ,  D. J.  1999  a .  Natural teleology . In  Function, Selection, and Design , ed.   D. J.  
 Buller ,  1 – 28 .  Albany, NY :  SUNY Press .  
 Buller ,  D. J.  1999  b .  Etiological theories of function: A geographical survey . In  Func-
tion, Selection, and Design , ed.   D. J.  Buller ,  281 – 306 .  Albany, NY :  SUNY Press .  

220 
References
 Burge ,  T.  1979 .  Individualism and the mental . In  Midwest Studies in Philosophy , vol. 
 4 , ed.   P.  French  and   H.  Wettstein  ,  73 – 121 .  Minneapolis :  University of Minnesota 
Press .  
 Bush ,  D. E. A.  ,   G. E.   Schafe  , and   J.  Le Doux  .  2009 .  The neural basis of fear function-
ing . In  Handbook of Neuroscience for the Behavioral Sciences , vol.  2 , ed.  G. G.   Bernston  
and  J. J.  Cacioppo  ,  762 – 780 .  Hoboken, NJ :  John Wiley .  
 Bushnell ,  W. R.   2013 .  The origins of face perception . In  The Development of Sensory, 
Motor, and Cognitive Capacities in Early Infancy: From Sensation to Cognition , ed.   F. 
 Simion and   G.  Butterworth  ,  69 – 86 .  Hove, England :  Psychology Press .  
 Butler ,  D. L.   1998 .  In search of the architect of learning: A commentary on scaffold-
ing as a metaphor for instructional interactions.   Journal of Learning Disabilities 
 31 : 374 – 385 .  
 Butterworth ,  G.   2008 .  Joint visual attention in infancy . In  Blackwell Handbook of 
Infant Development , ed.   G.  Bremner and   A.  Fogel ,  213 – 240 .  Oxford :  Blackwell .  
 Butterworth ,  G.  2013 .  What is special about pointing in babies?  In  The Development 
of Sensory, Motor, and Cognitive Capacities in Early Infancy: From Sensation to Cognition , 
ed.  F.   Simion and   G.  Butterworth  ,  171 – 190 .  Hove, England :  Psychology Press .  
 Butterworth ,  G.  , and   I.  Grover .  1989 .  Joint visual attention: Manual pointing and 
preverbal communication in human infancy . In  Attention and Performance XII , ed. 
 M.  Jeannerod  ,  605 – 624 .  Hillsdale, NJ :  Erlbaum .  
 Camras ,  L. A.  ,  R.  Campos ,  J.  Campos ,  K.  Miyake  ,  H.  Oster ,  T.  Ujiie  ,  L.  Wang , and  Z. 
 Meng .  1998 .  Production of emotional facial expressions in European American, Jap-
anese, and Chinese infants.   Developmental Psychology  34  ( 4 ):  616 – 628 .  
 Cash ,  M.  2013 .  Cognition without borders: “Third Wave” society distributed cogni-
tion and relational autonomy.   Cognitive Systems Research  25–26 : 61 – 71 . doi: 10.1016/j
.cogsys.2013.03.007  
 Chappell ,  P. F.  , and   L. W.  Sander  .  1979 .  Mutual regulation of neonatal-maternal 
interactive process: Context for the origins of communication . In  Before Speech: The 
Beginning of Interpersonal Communication , ed.   M.  Bullowa  .  Cambridge :  Cambridge 
University Press .  
 Chwalisz ,  K. ,  F.  Diener , and   D.  Gallagher  .  1988 .  Autonomic arousal feedback and 
emotional experience: Evidence from the spinal cord injured.   Journal of Personality 
and Social Psychology  54 : 820 – 828 .  
 Clark ,  A.  1997 .  Being There: Putting Brain, Body, and World Together Again .  Cambridge, 
MA :  MIT Press .  
 Clark ,  A.  1998 .  Author’s response: Review symposium on  Being There .  Metascience  7 
( 1 ):  95 – 103 .  

References 
221
 Clark ,  A.  2001 .  Reasons, robots, and the extended mind.   Mind and Language  16 :
 121 – 145 .  
 Clark ,  A.  2003 .  Natural Born Cyborgs: Mind, Technologies, and the Future of Human 
Intelligence .  Oxford :  Oxford University Press .  
 Clark ,  A.  2008 .  Supersizing the Mind .  Oxford :  Oxford University Press .  
 Clark ,  A.  2010 .  Coupling, constitution, and the cognitive kind: A reply to Adams 
and Aizawa . In  The Extended Mind , ed.   R.  Menary  ,  81 – 100 .  Cambridge, MA :  MIT 
Press .  
 Clark ,  A. , and   D.  Chalmers .  1998 .  The extended mind.   Analysis  58  ( 1 ):  7 – 19 .  
  Clark ,  H. H.  1996 .  Using Language .  Cambridge :  Cambridge University Press .  
 Clark ,  J.  2010 .  Relations of homology between higher cognitive emotions and basic 
emotions .  Biology and Philosophy  25 ( 1 ):  75 – 94 .  
 Clark ,  R. ,  R.  Menna , and   W. S.   Manel  .  2013 .  Maternal scaffolding and children’s 
social skills: A comparison between aggressive preschoolers and non-aggressive pre-
schoolers.   Early Child Development and Care  183  ( 5 ):  707 – 725 .  
 Cohen ,  T.  1976 .  Metaphor and the cultivation of intimacy . In  On Metaphor , ed.   S. 
 Sachs ,  1 – 11 .  Chicago :  University of Chicago Press .  
 Colombetti ,  G.  2007 .  Enactive appraisal.   Phenomenology and the Cognitive Sciences 
 6 : 527 – 546 .  
 Colombetti ,  G.  2009  a .  From affect programs to dynamical discrete emotions.   Philo-
sophical Psychology  22 ( 4 ):  407 – 425 .  
 Colombetti ,  G.  2009 b .  What language does to feelings.   Journal of Consciousness Stud-
ies  16 : 4 – 26 .  
 Colombetti ,  G.  2010 . Enaction, sense-making, and emotion. In  Enaction: Toward a 
New Paradigm for Cognitive Science ,  ed. J. Stewart, O. Gapenne, and E. A. Di Paolo, 
145–164. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.  
 Colombetti ,  G.   2011 .  Varieties of pre-reflective self-awareness: Foreground and back-
ground bodily feelings in emotion experience.   Inquiry  54  ( 3 ):  293 – 313 .  
 Colombetti ,  G.   2014 .  The Feeling Body: Affective Science Meets the Enactive Mind .  Cam-
bridge, MA :  MIT Press .  
 Colombetti ,  G.  , and   J.  Krueger  .  2015 .  Scaffoldings of the affective mind.   Philosophi-
cal Psychology .  
 Colonnesi ,  C. ,   G. J. J. M.   Stams ,  I.  Koster , and   M.  Noomb .  2010 .  The relation between 
pointing and language development: A meta-analysis.   Developmental Review  30  ( 4 ): 
 352 – 366 .  

222 
References
 Cosmides ,  L. , and  J.  Tooby .  2000 .  Evolutionary psychology and the emotions . In 
 Handbook of Emotions , ed.   M. L.   Lewis  and   J. M.   Haviland-Jones  ,  91 – 115 .  New York : 
 Guildford Press .  
 Cott ,  H. B.   1966 .  Adaptive Colouration in Animals .  London :  Methuen .  
 Cowley ,  S. J.   1998 .  Of timing, turn-taking, and conversations.   Journal of Psycholin-
guistic Research  27  ( 5 ):  541 – 571 .  
 Cummins ,  R.  1975 .  Functional analysis.   Journal of Philosophy  72  ( 20 ):  741 – 765 .  
 Cummins ,  R.  1996 .  Representations, Targets, and Attitudes .  Cambridge, MA :  MIT Press . 
 Damasio ,  A. R.   1994 .  Descartes’ Error: Emotion, Reason, and the Human Brain .  New 
York :  Grosset/Putnam .  
 Damasio ,  A. R.  ,   T. J.  Grabowski  ,  A.  Bechara  ,  H.  Damasio  ,  L. L. B.   Ponto ,  J.  Parvisi  , 
and   R. D.   Hichwa .  2000 .  Subcortical and cortical brain activity during the feeling of 
self-generated emotions.   Nature Neuroscience  3 ( 10 ):  1049 – 1056 .  
 Damasio ,  A. R.  ,  D.  Tranel , and   H.  Damasio  .  1990 .  Individuals with sociopathic 
behaviour caused by frontal damage fail to respond automatically to social stimuli.  
 Behavioural Brain Research  41 ( 2 ):  81 – 94 .  
 Darwin ,  C. 1872/ 1965 .  The Expression of Emotion in Man and Animals .  Chicago :  Uni-
versity of Chicago Press .  
 Davidson ,  D.  1978 .  What metaphors mean . In  On Metaphor , ed.   S.  Sachs ,  29 – 46 . 
 Chicago :  University of Chicago Press .  
 Dawkins ,  R.  1976 .  The Selfish Gene .  Oxford :  Oxford University Press .  
 Dawkins ,  R.  1986 .  The Blind Watchmaker .  New York :  W. W. Norton .  
 De Lancey ,  C.  2002 .  Passionate Engines: What Emotions Reveal about Mind and Artifi-
cial Intelligence .  Oxford :  Oxford University Press .  
 De Sousa ,  R.  1987 .  The Rationality of Emotion .  Cambridge, MA :  MIT Press .  
 De Sousa, Ronald. 2014. Emotion. In  The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (spring 
2014 ed.), ed. Edward N. Zalta.  http://plato.stanford.edu.archives/spr2014/enties/
emotion/ .  
  Donald ,  M.  1991 .  The Origins of the Modern Mind .  Cambridge :  Cambridge University 
Press .  
 Dretske ,  F.  1981 .  Knowledge and the Flow of Information .  Oxford :  Blackwell .  
 Dretske ,  F.  1986 .  Misrepresentation . In  Belief: Form, Content, and Function , ed.  R. 
 Bogdan  ,  17 – 36 .  Oxford :  Oxford University Press .  

References 
223
 Dretske ,  F.   1991 .  Explaining Behavior: Reasons in a World of Causes .  Cambridge, MA : 
 MIT Press .  
 Dunbar ,  R. I. M.   1996 .  Grooming, Gossip, and the Evolution of Language .  London :  Faber 
& Faber .  
 Eckerman ,  C. O.   1993 .  Imitation and toddlers’ achievement of coordinated action 
with others . In  New Perspectives in Early Communicative Development , ed.   J.  Nadel and 
 L.  Camioni ,  116 – 138 .  London :  Routledge .  
 Eibl-Eibesfeldt ,  I.  1973 .  Emotion behaviour of the deaf and blind born . In  Social 
Communication and Movement , ed.   M.  Von Cranach  and  I.  Vine ,  163 – 194 .  New York : 
 Academic Press .  
 Ekman ,  P.  1972 .  Universals and cultural differences in facial expression of emotions . 
In  Nebraska Symposium on Motivation , ed.   J.  Cole  ,  34 – 84 .  London :  Academic Press .  
 Ekman ,  P.  1984 .  Expression and the nature of emotion . In  Approaches to Emotion , ed. 
 K. R.  Scherer  and   P.  Ekman ,  319 – 343 .  Hillsdale, NJ :  Erlbaum .  
 Ekman ,  P.  1992 .  An argument for basic emotions.   Cognition and Emotion  6 ( 3 ): 
 169 – 200 .  
 Ekman, P. 1994. Moods, emotions, and traits. In  The Nature of Emotion: Fundamental 
Questions , ed. P. Ekman and R. J. Davidson, 56–58. New York: Oxford: Oxford Uni-
versity Press.  
 Ekman ,  P.  2004 .  Emotions Revealed: Understanding Faces and Feelings. London: 
Phoenix.  
 Ekman ,  P. , and  W.  Friesen .  1969 .  The repertoire of non-verbal behaviors: Categories, 
origins, usage, and coding.   Semiotica  1 : 49 – 98 .  
 Ereshefski ,  M.  2007 .  Psychological categories as homologies: Lessons from ethology.  
 Biology and Philosophy  22 ( 5 ):  659 – 674 .  
 Feldman ,  J. E.   2006 .  From Molecule to Metaphor: A Neural Theory of Language .  Cam-
bridge, MA :  MIT Press .  
 Field, H. 1990. “Narrow” aspects of intentionality and the information-theoretic 
approach to content. In  Information, Semantics, and Epistemology , ed. E. Villenueva, 
102–116. New York: Blackwell.  
 Field ,  T. M. ,   B.  Healy  ,  R.  Greenburg  , and   D.  Cohen .  1982 .  Discrimination and imita-
tion of facial expressions by neonates.   Science  218  ( 4568 ):  179 – 181 .  
 Fischer ,  K. W.  , and   T.  Bidell .  1991 .  Constraining nativist inferences about cognitive 
capacities . In  The Epigenesis of Mind: Essays on Biology and Cognition , ed.   S.  Carey  and 
 R.  Gellman  ,  199 – 235 .  Hillsdale, NJ :  Erlbaum .  

224 
References
 Fodor ,  J. A.   1987 .  Psychosemantics: The Problem of Meaning in the Philosophy of Mind . 
 Cambridge, MA :  MIT Press .  
 Fogel ,  A.  1993 .  Developing through Relationships .  Chicago :  University of Chicago 
Press .  
 Fogel ,  A. ,  B. J.   King  , and   S. G.   Shanker  .  2008 .  Introduction: Why a dynamic systems 
approach to fostering human development . In  Human Development in the Twenty-first 
Century: Visionary Ideas from Systems Scientists , ed.   A.  Fogel ,  B. J.   King  , and  S. G.  
 Shanker  ,  1 – 8 .  Cambridge :  Cambridge University Press .  
 Frijda ,  N. H.   1986 .  The Emotions .  New York :  Cambridge University Press .  
 Fulcher ,  J. S.   1942 .  “Voluntary” facial expression in blind and seeing children.  
 Archives de Psychologie ,   September .  
 Gergely ,  G.  , and   J.  Watson  .  1999 .  Early social development: Contingency perception 
and the social biofeedback model . In  Early Social Cognition: Understanding Others in 
the First Months of Life , ed.   R.  Rochat  ,  101 – 136 .  Mahwah, NJ :  Erlbaum .  
 Gibbs ,  R. W. ,  Jr .  2008 .  Metaphor and thought: The state of the art . In  The Cambridge 
Handbook of Metaphor and Thought , ed.   R. W.   Gibbs   Jr  .  Cambridge :  Cambridge Uni-
versity Press .  
 Godfrey-Smith ,  P.  1991 .  Signal, detection, action.   Journal of Philosophy  88  ( 12 ): 
 709 – 722 .  
 Godfrey-Smith ,  P.  1994 .  A modern history theory of functions.  Noûs  28  ( 3 ): 
 344 – 362 .  
 Goldie ,  P.  2000 .  The Emotions: A Philosophical Exploration .  Oxford :  Oxford University 
Press .  
 Gordon ,  R.  1987 .  The Structure of Emotions .  Cambridge :  Cambridge University Press .  
 Gottlieb ,  G.   2002 .  Individual Development and Evolution: The Genesis of Novel Behavior . 
 Mahwah, NJ :  Erlbaum .  
 Gottlieb ,  G. , and  C. T.   Halpern .  2008 .  Individual development as a system of coac-
tions: Implications for research and policy . In  Human Development in the Twenty-first 
Century: Visionary Ideas from Systems Scientists , ed.   A.  Fogel ,  B. J.   King  , and  S. G.  
 Shanker  ,  41 – 47 .  Cambridge :  Cambridge University Press .  
 Granott ,  N.   1998 .  Unit of analysis in transit: From the individual’s knowledge to the 
ensemble process.   Mind, Culture, and Activity  5 : 42 – 66 .  
 Gray ,  R. , and   A.  Tanesani  .  2010 .  Perception and action: The taste test.   Philosophical 
Quarterly  60  ( 241 ):  718 – 734 .  
 Greenspan ,  P.  2004 .  Practical reasoning and emotion . In  The Oxford Handbook of 
Rationality , ed.   A.  Mele ,  206 – 221 .  Oxford :  Oxford University Press .  

References 
225
 Greenwood ,  J.  2013 . Is mind extended or scaffolded? Ruminations on Sterelny’s 
(2010) extended stomach.  Phenomenology and the Cognitive Sciences (Online First): 
1–22. doi:10.1007/s11097-013-9337-8.  
 Greenwood ,  J. , and   A.  Bonner .  2008 .  The role of theory-constitutive metaphor in 
nursing science.   Nursing Philosophy  9 ( 3 ):  154 – 168 .  
 Grice ,  H. P.  1957 .  Meaning.   Philosophical Review  66 ( 3 ):  377 – 388 .  
 Grice ,  H. P.  1989 .  Logic and conversation . In  Studies in the Way of Words , ed.  H. P.  
 Grice  ,  1 – 143 .  Cambridge, MA :  Harvard University Press .  
 Griffiths ,  P. E.  1992 .  Adaptive explanation and the concept of a vestige . In  Trees of 
Life: Essays in the Philosophy of Biology , ed.  P. E.  Griffiths  ,  111 – 131 .  Dordrecht, the 
Netherlands :  Kluwer Academic Publishers .  
 Griffiths ,  P. E.   1993 .  Functional analysis and proper function.   British Journal for the 
Philosophy of Science  44 : 409 – 422 .  
 Griffiths ,  P. E.  1997 .  What Emotions Really Are .  London :  University of Chicago Press . 
 Griffiths ,  P. E.  2003 .  Emotions . In  The Blackwell Guide to the Philosophy of Mind , ed.  S. 
 Stich and   T.  Warfield  ,  288 – 308 .  Oxford :  Blackwell .  
 Griffiths ,  P. E.  , and   A.  Scarantino  .  2009 .  Emotion in the wild: The situated perspec-
tive on emotion . In  The Cambridge Handbook of Situated Cognition , ed.   P.  Robbins  and 
 M.  Aydede ,  437 – 450 .  Cambridge :  Cambridge University Press .  
 Grover ,  I.  1988 . Comprehension of the pointing gesture in human infants. PhD 
diss., University of Southampton.  
 Gustafson ,  G. E.  , and   K. L.   Harris .  1990 .  Women’s responses to young infants’ cries.  
 Developmental Psychology  26 ( 1 ):  144 – 152 .  
 Guttenplan ,  S.  2004 .  Objects of Metaphor .  Oxford :  Oxford University Press .  
 Haidt ,  J.  2001 .  The emotional dog and its rational tail: A social intuitionist approach 
to moral judgment.   Psychological Review  108  ( 4 ):  814 – 834 .  
 Hanks ,  W. F.   2006 .  Joint commitment and common ground in a ritual event . In 
 Roots of Human Sociality: Culture, Cognition, and Interaction , ed.   N. J.  Enfield and  S. C.  
 Levinson  ,  299 – 328 .  Oxford :  Berg .  
 Harlow ,  H. F.  , and   M. K.   Harlow .  1962 .  Social deprivation in monkeys.   Scientific 
American  207  ( 5 ):  136 – 146 .  
 Harlow ,  H. F.  , and  R. R.   Zimmermann  .  1959 .  Affectional responses in infant mon-
keys.   Science  130  ( 3373 ):  421 – 432 .  
 Harre ,  R.  1986 .  The social constructivist viewpoint . In  The Social Construction of Emo-
tion , ed.   R.  Harre  ,  2 – 14 .  London :  Oxford University Press .  

226 
References
 Harris ,  M.  2004 .  First words . In  Cognitive and Language Development in Children , ed.  J. 
 Oates  and   A.  Grayson ,  63 – 106 .  Milton Keynes :  Open University Press .  
 Hauser ,  M. C.  2006 .  Moral Minds: How Nature Designed Our Universal Sense of Right 
and Wrong .  New York :  Ecco .  
 Hebb ,  D. O.   1946 .  Textbook of Psychology .  Philadelphia :  W. B. Saunders .  
 Hendriks-Jansen ,  H.  1996 .  Catching Ourselves in the Act: Situated Activity, Interactive 
Emergence, Evolution, and Human Thought .  Cambridge, MA :  MIT Press .  
 Ho ,  D.  1986 .  Chinese patterns of socialisation: A review . In  The Psychology of Chinese 
People , ed.   M.  Bond ,  1 – 37 .  Oxford :  Oxford University Press .  
  Hofstede ,  G. H.  2000 .  Culture’s Consequences: Comparing Values, Behaviors, Institu-
tions, and Organizations across Nations ,  2nd ed.   Thousand Oaks, CA :  Sage .  
 Hohmann ,  G. W.   1966 .  Some effects of spinal cord lesions on experienced emotion 
feelings.   Psychophysiology  3 : 143 – 156 .  
 Holodynski ,  M. , and   W.  Friedlmeier  .  2006 .  Development of Emotions and Emotion 
Regulation .  New York :  Springer .  
 Holodynski ,  M. , and  R.  Oerter  .  2002 .  Motivation, emotion und handlungssteuer-
ung . In  Entwicklungspsychologie , ed.   R.  Oerter  and   L.  Montada  ,  551 – 589 .  Weinheim, 
Germany :  Psychologie Verlags Union .  
 Hull ,  D. L.  1974 .  Philosophy of Biological Science .  Englewood Cliffs, NJ :  Prentice Hall .  
 Hurley ,  S.  1998 .  Consciousness in Action .  Cambridge, MA :  Harvard University Press .  
 Husserl ,  E.  1952/1989 .  Ideas Pertaining to a Pure Phenomenology and to a Phenomeno-
logical Philosophy: Second Book . Trans. and ed. R. Rojcewicz and A. Schuwer. Dordre-
cht: Kluwer.  
 Hutto ,  D. D. , and   E.  Myin  .  2013 .  Radicalizing Enactivism .  Cambridge, MA :  MIT Press . 
 Hutto ,  D. D.  ,  M. D.   Kirchhoff  , and   E.  Myin  . 2014.  Extensive enactivism: Why keep it 
all in?   Frontiers in Human Neuroscience  8 ( 706 ):  1 – 11 .  
 Izard ,  C. E.   1978 .  On the ontogenesis of emotions and emotion-cognition relation-
ships in infancy . In  The Development of Affect , ed.   M.  Lewis  and   L.  Rosenblum ,  389 –
 413 .  New York :  Plenum .  
 Izard ,  C. E. , and   B. P.   Ackerman  .  2000 . Motivational, organizational, and regulatory 
functions of discrete emotions. In  Handbook of Emotions , ed. M. L. Lewis and J. M. 
Haviland-Jones, 253–264. New York: Guildford Press.  
 James ,  W.  1884 .  What is an emotion?   Mind 9: 188 – 205 .  
 Johnson ,  D. M.  2003 .  How History Made the Mind .  Chicago :  Open Court .  

References 
227
 Johnson ,  M.  1981 .  Introduction: Metaphor in philosophical tradition . In  Philosophi-
cal Perspectives on Metaphor , ed.  M.  Johnson  ,  3 – 47 .  Minneapolis :  University of Min-
neapolis Press .  
 Johnston ,  T. J.  2008 .  Genes, experience, behaviour . In  Human Development in the 
Twenty-first Century , ed.   A.  Fogel ,  B. J.   King , and   S. G.   Shanker  ,  18 – 24 .  Cambridge : 
 Cambridge University Press .  
 Johnston ,  T. J. , and   L.  Edwards  .  2002 .  Genes, interaction, and the development of 
behaviour.   Psychological Review  10  ( 9 ):  36 – 54 .  
 Kaye ,  K.  1982 .  Organism, apprentice, and person . In  Social Interchange in Infancy , ed. 
 E. Z.   Tronick  ,  183 – 196 .  Baltimore :  University Park Press .  
 Keijzer ,  F. , and   M.  Schouten  .  2007 .  Embedded cognition and mental causation: Set-
ting empirical boundaries on metaphysics.   Synthese  158  ( 1 ):  109 – 125 .  
 Kenny ,  A.  1963 .  Action, Emotion, and Will .  London :  Routledge & Kegan Paul .  
 Kirchhoff ,  M. D.  2012 .  Extended cognition and fixed properties: Steps to a third 
wave version of extended cognition.   Phenomenology and the Cognitive Sciences  11  ( 2 ): 
 287 – 308 .  
 Kirsch ,  P. ,  C.  Esslinger ,  Q.  Chen ,  D.  Mier ,  S.  Lis  ,  S.  Siddhanti  ,  H.   Gruppe ,  B.  Gall-
hofer  , and   A.  Meyer-Lindenberg  .  2005 .  Oxytocin modulates neural circuitry for 
social cognition and fear in humans.   Journal of Neuroscience  25  ( 49 ):  11489 – 11493 .  
 Kisilevsky ,  B. S.  ,  S. M.   Hains  ,   C. A.   Brown  ,   C. T.   Lee ,   B.  Cowperthwaite  ,  S. S.  
 Stutzmann  , and   M. L.  Swansburg  .  2009 .  Fetal sensitivity to properties of maternal 
speech and language.   Infant Behavior and Development  32  ( 1 ):  59 – 71 .  
 Kleinman ,  A.  1980 .  Patients and Healers in the Context of Culture .  Berkeley :  University 
of California Press .  
 Knowles ,  M. , and   R.  Moon  .  2006 .  Introducing Metaphor .  London :  Routledge .  
 Kovecses ,  Z.  1990 .  Emotion Concepts .  New York :  Springer .  
 Kripke ,  S. A.  1980 .  Naming and Necessity .  Cambridge, MA :  Harvard University Press .  
 Krueger ,  J.  2013 .  Ontogenesis of the socially extended mind.   Cognitive Systems 
Research . doi: 10.1016/j.cpgsys.2013.03.001 .  
 Lakoff ,  G.  1993 .  The contemporary theory of metaphor . In  Metaphor and Thought , 
ed.  A.  Ortony ,  202 – 256 .  Cambridge :  Cambridge University Press .  
 Lakoff ,  J. , and   M.  Johnson  .  1980 .  Conceptual metaphor in everyday language.   Jour-
nal of Philosophy  77 ( 8 ):  453 – 486 .  
 Lange ,  C. G.    1885/1922 .  The emotions: A psychophysical study . In  The Emotions by 
Carl Georg Lange and William James , ed.   K.  Dunlop .  Baltimore :  Williams & Wilkins .  

228 
References
 Langsdorf ,  P. ,  C. E.  Izard ,   M.  Rayias  , and   E. A.   Hembree .  1983 .  Interest expression, 
visual fixation, and heart rate changes in 2- to 8-month-old infants.   Developmental 
Psychology  19  ( 3 ):  375 – 386 .  
 Lazarus ,  R. S.   1991 .  Emotion and Adaptation .  New York :  Oxford University Press .  
 Le Doux ,  J. E.  1998 .  The Emotional Brain .  New York :  Simon & Schuster .  
 Le Doux ,  J. E.  2000 .  Emotion circuits in the brain.   Annual Review of Neuroscience  23  
( 1 ):  155 – 184 .  
 Ledwig ,  M.  2006 .  Emotions: Their Rationality and Consistency .  New York :  Peter Lang .  
 Legerstee ,  M. , and   J.  Varghese  .  2001 .  The role of maternal affect mirroring on social 
expectancies in three-month-old infants.   Child Development  72  ( 5 ):  1301 – 1313 .  
 Lester ,  B. M.  1984 .  Infant crying and the development of communication . In  The 
Psychobiology of Affective Development , ed.   N.  Fox  and   R. J.  Davidson  ,  231 – 258 .  Hills-
dale, NJ :  Erlbaum .  
 Levinson ,  S. C.  2006 .  On the human “interaction engine .” In  Roots of Human Social-
ity: Culture, Cognition, and Interaction , ed.   N. J.  Enfield  and  S. C.  Levinson  ,  39 – 69 . 
 Oxford :  Berg .  
 Lewis ,  D.  1975/1996 .  Languages and language . In  Readings in Language and Mind , ed. 
 H.  Geirsson  and   M.  Losonsky  ,  134 – 155 .  Oxford :  Blackwell .  
 Lewis ,  M. D.   2005 .  Bridging emotion theory and neurobiology through dynamic 
systems modeling.   Behavioral and Brain Sciences  28 : 169 – 245 .  
 Lewis ,  M. D.  , and  I.  Granic  .  2000 . Introduction to  Emotion, Development, and Self-
Organization: Dynamic Systems Approaches to Emotional Development , by M. D. Lewis 
and I. Granic, 1–14. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.  
 Lewis ,  M. M.   2013 .  Infant Speech: A Study of the Beginning of Language .  Hoboken, NJ : 
 Taylor & Francis .  
 Lickliter ,  R.  2008 .  Developmental dynamics: The view from the life sciences . In 
 Human Development in the Twenty-first Century: Visionary Ideas from Systems Scientists , 
ed.  A.  Fogel  ,  B. J.   King  , and   S. G.  Shanker  .  Cambridge :  Cambridge University Press .  
 Lindquist ,  K. ,  T. D.   Wager ,   H.  Kober ,   E.  Bliss-Moreau  , and   L. F.   Barrett .  2012 .  The 
brain basis of emotion: A meta-analytic view.   Behavioral and Brain Sciences  35 :
 121 – 202 .  
 Liskowski ,  U. ,  M.  Carpenter  ,   A.  Henning  ,   T.  Striano , and   M.  Tomasello  .  2004 .  Twelve 
month olds point to share attention and interest.   Developmental Science  73 : 297 – 307 . 
 Liskowski ,  U. ,   M.  Carpenter  ,  T.  Striano , and   M.  Tomasello  .  2006 .  12- and 18-month-
olds point to provide information for others.   Journal of Cognition and Development 
 72 : 173 – 187 .  

References 
229
 Loar ,  B.  1995 .  Meaning . In  The Cambridge Dictionary of Philosophy , ed.  R.  Audi ,  471 –
 476 .  Cambridge :  Cambridge University Press .  
 Lowe ,  J. ,   S. J.   Erickson ,  P.  MacLean  ,  S. W.   Duvall  ,  R. K.   Ohls  , and   A. F.  Duncan  .  2014 . 
Associations between maternal scaffolding and executive functioning in 3- and 
4-year-olds born very low birth weight and normal birth weight.  Early Human Devel-
opment  90 : 587 – 593 .  
 Lowe ,  J. R.  ,  S. J.  Erickson ,   P.  MacLean  ,   R.  Schrader  , and   J.  Fuller .  2013 .  Association of 
maternal scaffolding to maternal education and cognition in toddlers born preterm 
and full term.   Acta Paediatrica  102  ( 1 ):  72 – 77 .  
 Luria ,  A. R.  1961 . Experimentelle analyse der entwicklung willensmassiger handlun-
gen bei kindern. In  Perspectiven der Personlichkeitsforschung , ed. J. C. Brengelman and 
H. P. David, 107–115. Bern: Huber.  
 Luria ,  A. R.   1980 .  Higher Cortical Functions in Man .  New York :  Basic Books .  
 Lutz ,  C.  1986 .  The domain of emotion words on Ifaluk . In  The Social Construction of 
Emotions , ed.   R.  Harre  ,  267 – 288 .  Oxford :  Blackwell .  
 Lyons ,  W.  1980 .  Emotion .  Cambridge :  Cambridge University Press .  
 Maccoby ,  E. E.   1992 .  The role of parents in the socialisation of children: An histori-
cal overview.   Developmental Psychology  28 ( 6 ):  1006 – 1017 .  
 Mackenzie ,  C.  2012 .  Emotions, reflection, and moral agency . In  Emotions, Imagina-
tion, and Moral Reasoning , ed.   R.  Langdon   and   C.  Mackenzie  ,  237 – 256 .  Hove, Eng-
land :  Psychology Press .  
 Maclean ,  P. D.   1990 .  The Triune Brain in Evolution: Role in Paleocerebral Functions .  New 
York :  Plenum .  
 Malatesta, C. Z., and C. E. Izard. 1984. The ontogenesis of human social signals: 
From biological imperative to symbol utilization. In  The Psychology of Affective Devel-
opment , ed. R. A. Fox and D. J. Davidson, 161–206. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.  
 Malatesta ,  C. Z. , and   A.   Wilson  .  1988 .  Emotion, cognition, interaction in personality 
development: A discrete emotions fundamentalist analysis.   British Journal of Social 
Psychology  27 : 91 – 112 .  
 Maravita ,  A. , and  A.   Iriki .  2004 .  Tools for the body schema.   Trends in Cognitive Sci-
ences  8 ( 2 ):  79 – 86 .  
 Mascolo ,  M. F.   2005 .  Change processes in development: The concept of coactive 
scaffolding.   New Ideas in Psychology  23  ( 3 ):  185 – 196 .  
 Mascolo ,  M. F. , and   K. W.   Fischer  .  2005 .  Constructivist theories . In  The Cambridge 
Encyclopedia of Child Development , ed.   B.  Hopkins ,   R. G.   Barr ,   G.  Michel  , and   P. 
 Rochat  ,  40 – 63 .  Cambridge :  Cambridge University Press .  

230 
References
 Mascolo ,  M. F.  , and   S.  Griffin  .  1998 .  Alternative trajectories in the development of 
anger-related appraisals . In  What Develops in Emotional Development? ed.   M. F.   Mas-
colo and   S.  Griffin  .  New York :  Plenum .  
 McDonough ,  L.  2002 .  Basic level nouns: First learned but misunderstood.   Journal of 
Child Language  29  ( 2 ):  357 – 377 .  
 Meltzoff ,  A. N.  , and  M. K.  Moore .  1988 .  The origins of imitation in infancy: Para-
digm, phenomena and theories . In  Advances in Infancy Research , ed.   C.  Rovec-Collier  
and  L. P.   Lipsitt  ,  265 – 301 .  Norwood, NJ :  Ablex .  
 Meltzoff ,  A. N.  , and   M. K.   Moore .  1989 .  Imitation in newborn infants: Explaining 
the range of gestures imitated and underlying mechanism.   Developmental Psychology 
 25  ( 6 ):  954 – 962 .  
 Menary ,  R.  2007 .  Cognitive Integration: Mind and Cognition Unbounded .  Basingstoke : 
 Palgrave Macmillan .  
 Menary ,  R.  2009 . Intentionality, cognitive integration and the continuity thesis. 
 Topoi 28:31–43.  
 Menary ,  R.  2010 .  Cognitive integration and the extended mind . In  The Extended 
Mind , ed.   R.  Menary  ,  227 – 244 .  Cambridge, MA :  MIT Press .  
 Menary ,  R.  2013 .  Cognitive integration, enculturated cognition, and the socially 
extended mind.   Cognitive Systems Research 25–26:26–34. doi: 10.1016/j.cogsys
.2013.05.002 .  
 Merleau-Ponty ,  M.   1962 .  The Phenomenology of Perception . Trans. and ed. C.   Smith . 
 New York :  Humanities Press .  
 Miller ,  J. L.  , and   P. W.  Jusczyk  .  1989 .  Seeking the neurobiological bases of speech 
perception.   Cognition  33  ( 1 ):  111 – 137 .  
 Millikan ,  R. G.   1984 .  Language, Thought, and Other Biological Categories .  Cambridge, 
MA :  MIT Press .  
 Millikan ,  R. G.   1989  a .  In defence of proper functions.   Philosophy of Science  56  ( 2 ): 
 288 – 302 .  
 Millikan ,  R. G.   1989 b .  Biosemantics.   Journal of Philosophy  86  ( 6 ):  281 – 297 .  
 Millikan ,  R. G.   1993 .  White Queen Psychology and Other Essays for Alice .  Cambridge, 
MA :  MIT Press .  
 Millikan ,  R. G.   1996 .  Pushmi-pullyu representations.   Philosophical Perspectives  9 : 
185 – 200 .  
 Millikan ,  R. G.   1998 .  Language conventions made simple.   Journal of Philosophy  95  
( 4 ):  161 – 180 .  

References 
231
 Millikan ,  R. G.   2000 .  On Clear and Confused Ideas .  Cambridge :  Cambridge University 
Press .  
 Millikan ,  R. G.   2002 .  Biofunctions: Two paradigms . In  Functions: New Readings in the 
Philosophy of Psychology and Biology , ed.   R.  Cummins ,   A.  Ariew  , and   M.  Perlman , 
 113 – 143 .  Oxford :  Oxford University Press .  
 Millikan ,  R. G.   2004 .  Varieties of Meaning . The Jean Nicod Lectures, 2002.  Cambridge, 
MA :  MIT Press .  
 Millikan ,  R. G.   2005 .  Language: A Biological Model .  Oxford :  Oxford University Press .  
 Millikan ,  R. G.   2009 .  Biosemantics . In  The Oxford Handbook of Philosophy of Mind , ed. 
 B. P.   McLaughlin  ,  A.  Beckerman  , and   S.  Walter  ,  394 – 406 .  Oxford :  Clarendon Press .  
 Moore ,  C. , and   V.  Corkum  .  1994 .  Social understanding at the end of the first year of 
life.  Developmental Review  14 ( 4 ):  349 – 372 .  
 Morelock ,  M. J. ,   P. M.   Brown  , and  A. M.  Morrissey  .  2003 .  Pretend play and maternal 
scaffolding: Comparisons of toddlers with advanced development, typical 
development 
and 
hearing 
impairment.  
 Roeper 
Review 
 26  
( 1 ): 
 41 – 51 . 
doi: 10.1080/02783190309554238 .  
 Morsbach ,  H. , and   W. J.  Tyler .  1986 .  A Japanese emotion: Amae . In  The Social Con-
struction of Emotions , ed.   R.  Harre  ,  289 – 307 .  Oxford :  Blackwell .  
 Morton ,  A.   2013 .  Emotion and Imagination .  Cambridge :  Polity .  
 Nash ,  R. A.   1989 .  Cognitive theories of emotion.   Noûs  23  ( 4 ):  481 – 504 .  
 Neisser ,  U.  1981 .  Memory Observed: Remembering in Natural Contexts .  San Francisco : 
 W. H. Freeman .  
 Nelson ,  E. E. , and  J.  Panksepp  .  1998 .  Brain substrates of infant-mother attachment: 
Contributions of opioids, oxytocin, and norepinephrine.   Neuroscience and Biobehav-
ioral Reviews  22  ( 3 ):  437 – 452 .  
 Nelson ,  K. , ed.  1989 .  Narratives from the Crib .  Cambridge, MA :  Harvard University 
Press .  
 Newstead ,  A. ,  M.  Jacobson  ,  D.  Richards  , and   C. A.  Taylor  .  2012 . Collaborative virtual 
world for enhancing collective scientific understanding. Paper presented at Distrib-
uted Cognition and Distributed Agency Workshop, March 16–18, Macquarie Uni-
versity, Sydney.  
 Noveck ,  I. A.  , and   D.  Sperber  .  2004 .  Introduction . In  Experimental Pragmatics , ed.   I. 
A.  Noveck  and   D.  Sperber  ,  1 – 24 .  Basingstoke :  Palgrave Macmillan .  
 Nussbaum ,  M. C.  2001 .  Upheavals of Thought: The Intelligence of the Emotions .  Cam-
bridge :  Cambridge University Press .  

232 
References
 Oatley ,  K.  2004 .  Emotions: A Brief History .  Oxford :  Blackwell .  
 Oatley ,  K. , and  K.  Johnson-Laird  .  1987 .  Towards a cognitive theory of emotion.   Cog-
nition and Emotion  1 ( 1 ):  29 – 50 .  
 Ohman ,  A.  1986 .  Face the beast and fear the face: Animal and social fears as proto-
types for evolutionary analyses of emotions.   Psychophysiology  23  ( 2 ):  123 – 145 .  
 O’Regan ,  J. K.  , and   A.   Noe .  2001 .  A sensori-motor account of vision and visual con-
sciousness.   Behavioral and Brain Sciences  24 ( 5 ):  939 – 973 .  
 Origgi ,  G. , and   D.  Sperber  .  2000 .  Evolution, communication, and the proper func-
tion of language . In  Evolution and the Human Mind: Modularity, Language, and Meta-
cognition , ed.   P.  Carruthers  and   A.   Chamberlain  ,  140 – 169 .  Cambridge :  Cambridge 
University Press .  
 Ortony ,  A. ,   G. L.   Clore , and   A.  Collins  .  1988 .  The Cognitive Structure of Emotions . 
 Cambridge :  Cambridge University Press .  
 Ortony ,  A. , and  W.  Turner  .  1990 .  What’s basic about basic emotions?   Psychological 
Review  97  ( 3 ):  315 – 331 .  
 Panksepp ,  J.  1998 .  Affective Neuroscience .  New York :  Oxford University Press .  
 Panksepp ,  J.  2000 .  Emotions as natural kinds within the mammalian brain . In  Hand-
book of Emotions ,  2nd ed. , ed.   M.  Lewis  and   J.  Haviland-Jones  ,  137 – 156 .  New York : 
 Guildford Press .  
 Panksepp ,  J.  2007 .  The neuroevolutionary and neuroaffective psychobiology of the 
prosocial brain . In  The Oxford Handbook of Evolutionary Psychology , ed.   R. I. M.  
 Dunbar  and   L.   Barrett  ,  145 – 162 .  Oxford :  Oxford University Press .  
 Papanicolaou ,  A. C.   1989 .  Emotion: A Reconsideration of the Somatic Theory .  New York : 
 Gordon and Breach Science Publishers .  
 Papineau, D. 1987.  Reality and Representation . Oxford: Blackwell.  
 Papousek ,  H. , and   M.  Papousek .  1987 .  Intuitive parenting: A dialectic counterpart to 
the infant’s integrative competence . In  Handbook of Infant Development , ed.   J. D.  
 Osofsky  ,  669 – 720 .  New York :  John Wiley .  
 Papousek ,  H. , and   M.  Papousek .  1999 .  Symbolbildung, emotionsregulation und 
soziale interaktion . In  Emotionale entwicklung, funktion, regulation und sociokultureller 
kontext von emotionen , ed.   W.  Friedlmeier  and   M.  Holodynski  ,  135 – 155 .  Heidelberg : 
 Spektrum .  
 Papousek ,  M.  1990 . Affektive verhaltensregulation des sauglings in Der eltern- kind-
interaktion, ed. M. J. S. Pachler and H. M. Strabburg, 203–221. Lubeck, Germany: 
Hansisches Verlagskontor.  

References 
233
 Papousek ,  M.  1994 .  Vom ersten schrei zum ersten wor: Anfange der sprachentwicklung in 
der vorsspechlichen kommunikation .  Bern :  Huber .  
 Pea ,  R. D.  2004 .  The social and technological dimensions of scaffolding and related 
theoretical concepts for learning, education and human activity.   Journal of the Learn-
ing Sciences  13  ( 3 ):  423 – 452 .  
 Perovic ,  S. , and   L.  Radenovic  .  2011 .  Fine-tuning nativism: The “nurtured nature” 
and innate cognitive structures.   Phenomenology and the Cognitive Sciences  10  ( 3 ): 
 399 – 417 .  
 Pinker ,  S.  1994 .  The Language Instinct .  New York :  HarperCollins .  
 Plato .  1974 .  The Republic . Trans. D. Lee.  London :  Penguin Books .  
 Polger ,  T. W.  2004 .  Natural Minds .  Cambridge, MA :  MIT Press .  
 Polger ,  T. W.   2007 .  Realization and the metaphysics of mind.   Australasian Journal of 
Philosophy  85  ( 2 ):  233 – 259 .  
 Povinelli ,  D.  2004 .  Behind the ape’s appearance: Escaping anthropocentrisms in the 
study of other minds.   Daedalus  133  ( 1 ):  29 – 41 .  
 Povinelli ,  D. J. , and   T. J.   Eddy .  1996 .  Factors influencing young chimpanzees’ (Pan 
troglodytes) recognition of attention.   Journal of Comparative Psychology  110  ( 4 ): 
 336 – 345 .  
 Prechl ,  H. F. R.   1993 .  Principles of early motor development in the human . In  Motor 
Development in Early and Later Childhood , ed.   A.  Kalverboer  ,  B.  Hopkins  , and   R. 
 Geuze ,  35 – 50 .  Cambridge :  Cambridge University Press .  
 Price ,  C.  2001 .  Functions in Mind: A Theory of Intentional Content .  Oxford :  Oxford 
University Press .  
 Prinz ,  J.  2004 .  Gut Reactions: A Perceptual Theory of Emotion .  Oxford :  Oxford Univer-
sity Press .  
 Punter ,  D.  2007 .  Metaphor .  London :  Routledge .  
 Putnam ,  H.  1975 .  The meaning of “meaning.”  In  Language, Mind, and Knowledge , ed. 
 K.  Gunderson  ,  131 – 193 .  Minneapolis :  University of Minnesota Press .  
 Reddy ,  M. J.   1979/1993 .  The conduit metaphor: A case of frame conflict in our lan-
guage about language . In  Metaphor and Thought , ed.   A.  Ortony ,  164 – 201 .  Cambridge : 
 Cambridge University Press .  
  Reidl ,  R.  1977 .  Order in Living Organisms: A Systems Analysis of Evolution . Trans. and 
ed. R. P. S.   Jeffries  .  Chichester :  John Wiley .  
 Remane ,  A.  1952 .  Die grundlagen des naturlichen systems, der vergleichenden anatomis 
und der phylogenetik . Konigstein: Otto Koeltz.  

234 
References
 Rensink ,  R. A.  ,   J. K.   O’Regan  , and   J. J.  Clark .  2000 .  On the failure to detect changes 
in scenes across brief interruptions.   Visual Cognition  7 ( 1–3 ):  127 – 146 .  
 Richards ,  I. A.  1936 .  The Philosophy of Rhetoric .  New York :  Oxford University Press .  
 Rime ,  B. ,   S.  Corsini , and   G.  Herbette  .  2002 .  Emotion, verbal expression and the 
social sharing of emotion . In  The Verbal Communication of Emotions: Interdisciplinary 
Perspectives , ed.   S. R.  Fussell  ,  185 – 208 .  Mahwah, NJ :  Erlbaum .  
 Robbins ,  P. , and   M.  Aydede  .  2009 .  A short primer on situated cognition . In  The 
Cambridge Handbook of Situated Cognition , ed.   P.  Robbins  and   M.  Aydede  ,  3 – 10 .  Cam-
bridge :  Cambridge University Press .  
 Robinson ,  J. B.  ,   B. M.   Burns , and   D.  Winders Davis  .  2009 .  Maternal scaffolding and 
attention regulation in children living in poverty.   Journal of Applied Developmental 
Psychology  30 : 82 – 91 .  
 Rogoff ,  B.  1990 .  Apprenticeship in Thinking: Cognitive Development in Social Context . 
 New York :  Oxford University Press .  
 Rogoff ,  B. , and   J.  Wertsch , eds.  1984 .  Children’s Learning in the “Zone of Proximal 
Development.” New Directions for Child Development, No. 23. San Francisco: 
 Jossey-Bass .  
 Rothbaum ,  F. , and   G.  Morelli  .  2005 .  Attachment and culture: Directions for future 
research . In  Human Development and Culture: The Importance of Cross-Cultural Research 
to Social Sciences , ed.   W.  Friedlmeier  ,  P.  Chakkarath  , and   B.  Schwartz  ,  1 – 124 .  Lisse : 
 Swets & Zeitlinger .  
 Rowlands ,  C.  2014 .  Understanding Language Acquisition .  Abingdon, Oxford : 
 Routledge .  
 Rowlands ,  M.  2003 .  Externalism: Putting Mind and World Back Together Again .  London : 
 Acumen .  
 Rowlands ,  M.  2006 .  Body Language: Representation in Action .  Cambridge, MA :  MIT 
Press .  
 Rupert ,  R.  2004 .  Challenges to the hypothesis of extended cognition.   Journal of Phi-
losophy  101  ( 8 ):  389 – 428 .  
 Rupert ,  R.  2010 .  Representation in extended cognitive systems . In  The Extended 
Mind , ed.   R.  Menary  ,  325 – 354 .  Cambridge, MA :  MIT Press .  
 Scherer ,  K. R.   1994 .  Emotion serves to decouple stimulus and response . In  The Nature 
of Emotion , ed.  P.  Ekman  and   K. T.  Davidson  ,  127 – 130 .  New York :  Oxford University 
Press .  

References 
235
 Schore ,  A. N.   1997 .  Early organization of the non-linear right brain and develop-
ment of a predisposition to psychiatric disorders.   Development and Psychopathology 
 9 : 595 – 631 .  
 Schwartz ,  P. H.   2002 .  The continuing usefulness account of proper function . In 
 Functions: New Essays in the Philosophy of Psychology and Biology , ed.   A.  Ariew  ,   R. 
 Cummins  , and   M.  Perlman ,  244 – 260 .  Oxford :  Oxford University Press .  
 Searle ,  J.  1979 .  Metaphor . In  Metaphor and Thought , ed.  A.  Ortony .  New York :  Cam-
bridge University Press .  
 Searle ,  J.  1983 .  Intentionality: An Essay in the Philosophy of Mind .  New York :  Cam-
bridge University Press .  
 Shakespeare ,  William  .  1997 .  The Complete Works of William Shakespeare: The Alexan-
der Text . Ed.   Peter   Alexander  .  London :  Collins .  
 Shanker ,  S. G.  2008 .  The impact of emotions and the emotional impact of a child’s 
first words . In  Human Development in the Twenty-first Century: Visionary Ideas from 
Systems Scientists , ed.   A.   Fogel ,  B. J.  King  , and   S. G.  Shanker  ,  65 – 71 .  New York :  Cam-
bridge University Press .  
 Shapiro ,  L.  2004 .  The Mind Incarnate .  Cambridge, MA :  MIT Press .  
 Shoemaker ,  S.  1984 .  Some varieties of functionalism . In  Identity, Cause, and Mind , ed. 
 S.  Shoemaker  ,  261 – 286 .  New York :  Cambridge University Press .  
 Simion ,  F. ,  L.   Regolin , and   H.  Bulf  .  2008 .  A predisposition for biological motion in 
the newborn baby.   Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States 
of America  105  ( 2 ):  809 – 813 .  
 Simons ,  D. J.  , and   D. T.   Levin  .  1997 .  Change blindness.   Trends in Cognitive Sciences  1 
( 7 ):  261 – 267 .  
 Simons, D. J., and D. T. Levin. 1998. Failure to detect changes to people during a real 
world interaction.  Psychonomic Bulletin and Review 5 (4): 644–649.  
 Solomon ,  R. C.  1977 .  The Passions .  New York :  Anchor Books .  
 Solomon ,  R. C.  1993 .  The Passions: Emotions and the Meaning of Life .  Indianapolis : 
 Hackett .  
 Solomon ,  R. C.  2003 .  Not Passion’s Slave .  Oxford :  Oxford University Press .  
 Sperber ,  D. , and   D.  Wilson  .  1986 . Loose talk.  Aristotelian Society Proceedings 86:
153–172.  
 Sperber ,  D. , and   D.  Wilson  .  1995 .  Relevance: Communication and Cognition .  2nd ed.  
 Oxford :  Blackwell .  

236 
References
 Sperber ,  D. , and  D.  Wilson  .  1998 .  The mapping between the mental and the public 
lexicon . In  Thought and Language , ed.   P.  Carruthers  and  J.  Boucher  ,  184 – 200 .  Cam-
bridge :  Cambridge University Press .  
 Sperber ,  D. , and  D.  Wilson  .  2005 .  Pragmatics . In  The Oxford Handbook of Contempo-
rary Philosophy , ed.   F.  Jackson  and   M.  Smith ,  468 – 504 .  Oxford :  Oxford University 
Press .  
 Sperber ,  D. , and   D.  Wilson  .  2008 .  A deflationary theory of metaphors . In  The Cam-
bridge Handbook of Metaphor and Thought , ed.   R. W.  Gibbs   Jr .,  84 – 108 .  Cambridge : 
 Cambridge University Press .  
 Spivey ,  M. , and   D.  Richardson  .  2009 .  Language processing embodied and embed-
ded . In  The Cambridge Handbook of Situated Cognition , ed.   P.  Robbins  and   M.  Aydede  , 
 382 – 400 .  New York :  Cambridge University Press .  
 Spurrett ,  D. , and   S.  Cowley  .  2010 .  The extended infant: Utterance-activity and dis-
tributed cognition . In  The Extended Mind , ed.  R.  Menary ,  295 – 324 .  Cambridge, MA : 
 MIT Press .  
 Sroufe ,  L. A.  1996 .  Emotional Development: The Organization of Emotional Life in the 
Early Years .  New York :  Cambridge University Press .  
 Stanford ,  W. B.   1936 .  Greek Metaphor: Studies in Theory and Practice .  Oxford : 
 Blackwell .  
 Sterelny ,  K.  2010 .  Minds: Extended or scaffolded?   Phenomenology and the Cognitive 
Sciences  9 ( 4 ):  465 – 481 .  
 Stern ,  D. N.   1985 .  The Interpersonal World of the Infant: A View from Psychoanalysis 
and Development .  New York :  Basic Books .  
 Sternberg ,  C. R. , and  J. J.  Campos .  1990 .  The development of anger expressions in 
infancy . In  Psychological and Biological Approaches to Emotion , ed.  N. L.   Stein  ,  B.  Lev-
enthal , and   T.  Trabasso  ,  247 – 282 .  Hillsdale, NJ :  Erlbaum .  
 Sutton ,  J.  2010 .  Exograms and interdisciplinarity: History, the extended mind, and 
the civilizing process . In  The Extended Mind , ed.   R.  Menary  ,  189 – 226 .  Cambridge, 
MA :  MIT Press .  
 Sutton ,  J.  2012 . Nudge or coup? Different ways to radicalise distributed cognition. 
Paper presented to Distributed Cognition and Distributed Agency Workshop, March 
16–18, Macquarie University, Sydney.  
 Sutton ,  J. ,  C. B.  Harris  ,   P. G.  Keil  , and   A. J.   Barnier  .  2010 .  The psychology of memory, 
extended cognition, and socially distributed remembering.   Phenomenology and the 
Cognitive Sciences  9 : 521 – 560 .  
 Thelen ,  E.  1981 .  Rhythmical behaviour in infancy: An ethological perspective.  
 Developmental Psychology  18 ( 5 ):  760 – 775 .  

References 
237
 Thelen ,  E.  1984 .  Learning to walk: Ecological demands and phylogenetic constraints . 
In  Advances in Infancy Research , ed.  L. P.  Lippsitt  and  C.  Rovier-Collier  ,  213 – 260 . 
 Norwood :  Ablex .  
 Thompson ,  J.  1941 . Development of facial expression of emotion in blind and 
seeing children.  Archives of Psychology 264. New York, July 1941.  
 Thompson ,  R. A.   1990 .  Emotion and self-regulation . In  Nebraska Symposium on Moti-
vation , ed.   R. A.   Thompson  ,  367 – 467 .  Lincoln :  University of Nebraska Press .  
 Tomasello ,  M.  1999 .  The Cultural Origins of Human Cognition .  Cambridge, MA :  Har-
vard University Press .  
 Tomasello ,  M. ,   J.  Call  , and   A.  Gluckman  .  1997 .  A comprehension of novel commu-
nication signs by apes and human children.   Child Development  68  ( 6 ):  1067 – 1080 .  
 Tomasello ,  M. , and   M.  Carpenter  .  2005 .  The emergence of social cognition in three 
young chimpanzees.   Monographs of the Society for Research in Child Development  70  
( 1 ):  1 – 152 .  
 Trevarthen ,  C.  1979 .  Communication and cooperation in early infancy: A descrip-
tion of primary intersubjectivity . In  Before Speech: The Beginning of Interpersonal Com-
munication , ed.   M.  Bullova ,  321 – 347 .  Cambridge :  Cambridge University Press .  
 Trevarthen ,  C. , and   P.  Hubley  .  1978 .  Secondary intersubjectivity: Confidence, con-
fiding, and acts of meaning in the first year . In  Action, Gesture, and Symbol: The Emer-
gence of Language , ed.   A.  Lock ,  183 – 266 .  London :  Academic Press .  
 Triandis ,  H. C.  1995 .  Individualism and Collectivism .  Boulder, CO :  Westview .  
 Trimble ,  J. E. ,  S. M.  Manson  ,   N. G.  Dinges  , and   B.  Medicine  .  1984 .  American Indian 
concepts of mental health: Reflections and directions . In  Mental Health Services: The 
Cross-Cultural Context , ed.   P. B.   Pedersen ,  N.  Sartorius , and   A. J.  Marsella  ,  199 – 220 . 
 Beverley Hills, CA :  Sage .  
 Troje ,  N. F.   2013 . What is biological motion? Definition, stimuli, and paradigms. In 
 Social Perception: Detection and Interpretation of Animacy, Agency, and Intention , ed. M. 
B. Rutherford and V. A. Kuhlmeier, 13–36. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.  
 Trommsdorff ,  G. , and   W.  Friedlmeier  .  2004 .  Zum verhaltnis zwischen kultur und 
individuum aus der perspektive der kulturvergleihenden psychologie . In  Positionen 
der kulturanthropologie , ed.   A.  Assmann ,   U.  Gaier , and   G.  Trommsdorf  ,  358 – 386 . 
 Frankfurt :  Spektrum .  
 Trommsdorff ,  G.  , and   H. J.   Kornadt .  2003 .  Parent-child relations in cross-cultural 
perspective . In  Handbook of Dynamics in Parent-Child Relations , ed.   L.  Kuczynski  , 
 271 – 306 .  London :  Sage .  
 Uller ,  T.  2008 .  Developmental plasticity and the evolution of parental effects.   Trends 
in Ecology and Evolution  238 : 432 – 437 .  

238 
References
 Umilta ,  C. ,   F.  Simion , and   E.  Valenza  .  1996 .  Newborns’ preferences for faces.   Euro-
pean Psychologist  1 ( 3 ):  200 – 205 .  
 Valsiner ,  J.  1984 . Construction of the zone of proximal development in adult-child 
joint action: The socialization of meals. In  Children’s Learning in the “Zone of Proximal 
Development,” ed. B. Rogoff and J. V. Wertsch, 65–76. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.  
 Vandekerckhove ,  M. ,  C.  von Scheve ,  S.   Ismer ,  S.  Jung , and   S.  Kronast  .  2008 .  Regulat-
ing emotions: Culture, social necessity, and biological inheritance . In  Regulating 
Emotions: Culture, Social Necessity, and Biological Inheritance , ed.   M.  Vandekerckhove  , 
 C.  von Scheve  ,  S.  Ismer ,  S.  Jung , and   S.   Kronast ,  1 – 12 .  Oxford :  Blackwell .  
 Vihman ,  M. M.   1996 .  Phonological Development: The Origins of Language in the Child . 
 Oxford :  Blackwell .  
 von Hofsten ,  C. , and  K.  Rosander  .  2013 .  The establishment of gaze control in early 
infancy . In  The Development of Sensory, Motor, and Cognitive Capacities in Early Infancy: 
From Sensation to Cognition , ed.  F.  Simion and  G.  Butterworth  ,  49 – 66 .  Hove, England : 
 Psychology Press .  
 Vygotsky ,  L. S.   1978 .  Mind in Society: The Development of Higher Psychological Processes . 
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.  
 Walden ,  T. A. , and  A.   Baxter  .  1989 .  The effect of context and age on social referenc-
ing.   Child Development  60 ( 6 ):  1511 – 1518 .  
 Warneken ,  F. ,   F.   Chen , and   M.  Tomasello  .  2006 .  Cooperative activities in young 
children and chimpanzees.   Child Development  77 ( 3 ):  640 – 663 .  
 Wertsch, J. V. 1998.  Mind as Action . New York: Oxford University Press.  
 Wertsch ,  J. V.   2002 .  Voices of Collective Remembering .  Cambridge :  Cambridge Univer-
sity Press .  
 Wheeler ,  M.  2005 .  Reconstructing the Cognitive World .  Cambridge, MA :  MIT Press .  
 Wilson ,  A. , and   C. F.  Craver .  2007 .  Realization: Metaphysical and scientific perspec-
tives . In  Handbook of the Philosophy of Psychology and Cognitive Science , ed.   P.  Thagard  , 
 81 – 104 .  Burlington :  Elsevier .  
 Wilson ,  D. , and  D.  Sperber  .  2002 .  Truthfulness and relevance.   Mind  111  ( 443 ): 
 583 – 632 .  
 Wilson ,  D. , and  D.  Sperber  .  2004 .  Relevance theory . In  The Handbook of Pragmatics , 
ed.  L.   Horn  and   G.  Ward ,  607 – 632 .  Oxford :  Blackwell .  
 Wilson ,  R. A.   2001 .  Two views of realization.   Philosophical Studies  104  ( 1 ):  1 – 31 .  
 Wilson ,  R. A.  2004 .  Boundaries of the Mind: The Individual in the Fragile Sciences—Cog-
nition .  Cambridge :  Cambridge University Press .  

References 
239
 Wilson ,  R. , and   A.  Clark .  2009 .  How to situate cognition: Letting nature take its 
course . In  The Cambridge Handbook of Situated Cognition , ed.   P.  Robbins  and   M. 
 Aydede ,  55 – 77 .  Cambridge :  Cambridge University Press .  
 Wilson ,  R. A.  , and   L.  Foglia .  2011 . Embodied cognition. In  Stanford Encyclopedia of 
Philosophy , ed. E. N. Zolta.  http://plato.stanford.edu/archives/fall2011/entries/
embodied-cognition/ .  
 Winsler ,  A. ,  R. M.  Diaz  , and  I.  Montero .  1997 .  The role of private speech in the 
transition from collaborative to independent task performance in young children.  
 Early Childhood Research Quarterly  12 : 59 – 70 .  
 Wood ,  D. ,  J.  Bruner , and   G.  Ross  .  1976 .  The role of tutoring in problem solving.  
 Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, and Allied Disciplines   17 : 89 – 100 .  
 Wray ,  A.  2000 .  Holistic utterances in protolanguage: The link from primates to 
humans . In  The Evolutionary Emergence of Language , ed.   C.  Knight  and   M.  Studdard  , 
 285 – 302 .  Cambridge :  Cambridge University Press .  
 Wray ,  A.  2002 .  Formulaic Language and the Lexicon .  Oxford :  Oxford University Press .  
 Wyman ,  E. , and   M.  Tomasello  .  2007 .  The ontogenetic origins of human coopera-
tion . In  The Oxford Handbook of Evolutionary Psychology , ed.   R.  Dunbar  and   L.  Barrett , 
 227 – 236 .  Oxford :  Oxford University Press .  
 Yap ,  P. M.   1965 .  Koro: A culture-bound depersonalisation syndrome.   British Journal 
of Psychiatry  3 : 43 – 50 .  
 Zac ,  P. ,  W.  Matzner  , and   R.  Kurzban  .  2008 .  The neurobiology of trust.   Scientific 
American Magazine  298  ( 6 ):  88 – 95 .  
 Zajonc ,  R. B.   1980 .  Feeling and thinking: Preferences need no inferences.   American 
Psychologist  35  ( 2 ):  151 – 175 .  
 Zajonc ,  R. B.  ,   S. T.   Murphy , and   M.  Inglehart  .  1989 .  Feeling and facial efference: 
Implications of the vascular theory of emotion.  Psychological Review  96  ( 3 ): 
 395 – 416 .  
 Zinck ,  A. , and  A.  Newen .  2008 .  Classifying emotion: A developmental account.   Syn-
these  161  ( 1 ):  1 – 25 .  


 Index 
 Action, Emotion, and Will (Kenny), 31 
 Active externalism, 62 
 Activity patterns, species-typical, 
112–114 
 Adaptation, 149–151 
 Adaptationist view, strong and weak, 
145, 147 
 Adapted proper functions, 151, 
153–159 
 Adaptive problems, 27–28, 174–175 
 Adaptors, 153, 155–157, 159 
 Affect expressions/emotion precursors, 
3, 4, 6–7, 14, 83–85, 103, 106, 107, 
140, 154, 157, 165, 175–176, 212. 
 See also Precursors 
 basic emotions and, 104 
 caregiver interpretation of, 86, 
99–100, 103, 176 
 caregiver responses to, 88, 101, 104, 
140, 175 
 and development of emotions, 4, 41, 
84–85, 90, 102, 103, 206, 212 
 development of full emotionality 
from, 5–8 
 differing approaches to the construal 
of, 41, 51 
 emotion-eliciting stimuli and, 83 
 responses to, 101, 104, 175 
 Affectivity 
 defined, 43 
 extensive vs. extended, 43–45 
 Affect programs, 23.  See also Basic 
emotions 
 Amygdala, 159 
 basic emotions and, 25–26 
 as core realizer, 65, 108 
 cortex and, 26, 65, 105 
 fear and, 36, 62–63 
 thalamus and, 65, 66, 105, 159 
 Amygdala circuits, 25–26, 105, 108, 
159–160 
 Anger, 33–35, 89–90, 100–101, 155 
 Animals 
 emotions and emotionlike responses 
in, 36 
 imitation in, 119 
 natural kinds in, 52–53 
 Appraisal hypothesis, 32–33 
 Appraisals, types of, 33–34 
 Appraisal theories, dimensional, 
33–35 
 Asian cultures, 101–102 
 “As-if loop,” 29 
 Assistance-producing behaviors, 113 
 Assistance-producing devices, 104 
 Assistance-providing devices, 3–5, 
67, 104, 113, 150, 154.  See also  
Constraints 
 Assistance-providing mechanisms, 105, 
154 
 Assistance-providing motivation, 113 
 Assistance-soliciting behaviors, 113 

242 
Index
 Assistance-soliciting devices, xi, 3, 5, 67, 
87, 104, 113, 150, 154.  See also  
Constraints; Producer devices 
 Assistance-soliciting mechanisms, 105, 
154 
 Assistance-soliciting needs, xii 
 Assistance-soliciting signals, 113 
 Assistance-soliciting situations, 87, 113 
 Attention-soliciting devices, xi 
 Babbling, 121–122 
 “Baby talk,” 5, 86, 103, 106, 127, 158. 
 See also Motherese 
 Barnier, A., 211–212 
 Basicality vs. nonbasicality of emotions, 
22 
 Basic emotions (BEs)/blue-ribbon 
emotions, 23–25.  See also under  
Natural kinds 
 list of, 214n3 
 nature of, 48–49 
 neural bases of, 25–26 
 vs. nonbasic emotions, 48–49 
 ways to characterize basicality, 49 
 Biofeedback, 95 
 Biological equipment, 8, 82 
 Biological kinds, 50 
 Biological prerequisites, 8–9 
 Biosemantic theories of mental content, 
147–151, 172 
 adapted proper functions, 153–159 
 relational proper functions, 151–153 
 Blue-ribbon emotions.  See Basic 
emotions (BEs)/blue-ribbon 
emotions 
 Body schemata, 71 
 Boyd, R., 50 
 Buller, D. J., 143 
 Burge, T., 61 
 Butterworth, G., 215n1 
 Category extension/broadening, 
193–194 
 Causal theory of metaphor, 184 
 Chinese, 101 
 Clark, H., 129 
 Clark, J., 41–42 
 Coaction, 79, 91, 92, 103, 106 
 Coaction models and coactive systems 
approach, 47–48 
 Coactive scaffolding, 47–48, 134, 209. 
 See also Scaffolding 2 
 types of, 48 
 Coarse-grained affect expressions. 
 See Affect expressions 
 Coarse-grained assistance-providing 
devices, 4, 104 
 Coarse-grained constraints, xii 
 Cognition, 55–56.  See also Extended 
cognition; Scaffolding: of cognition 
 situated, 54–56, 62, 135 ( see also  
Extended cognition) 
 Cognitive, mark of the, 53, 148, 
170–176 
 Cognitive augmentation. 
 See also Sociocultural cognitive 
augmentation 
 natural environmental, 72–73 
 technological, 70–72 
 Cognitive/cognitivist theories of 
emotions, 31–35 
 objections to, 35–37 
 Cognitive environment, 197–199 
 Cognitive extension.  See Extension: 
cognitive 
 Cognitive processing, intracranial, 56, 
73, 76, 211 
 Cognitive scaffolding, 208.  See also  
Scaffolding: of cognition 
 Cognitivist theories, 22 
 Communication, code model of, 
184–187 
 Comparison view of metaphor, 183 
 “Complex class of emotions,” 41 
 Conceptualization hypothesis, 31–32 
 Constitutivity thesis (realization), 63 

Index 
243
 Constraint repertoires, xii, 3, 6, 8, 14, 
111, 112, 206 
 Constraints, xii, 3.  See also Assistance-
providing devices; Assistance-
soliciting devices 
 situational, 129 
 Constraints, context, and continuity 
(the three Cs), 5, 177 
 Context-sensitive realization, 13, 53, 
63–70 
 Contingent intracranialism, 53 
 Contingent intracranialists, 60, 71 
 Contingent transcranialism (CT), 55, 
108–109, 206–208 
 deep functional integration (DFI) and, 
58, 106, 108, 109 
 deep functional integration (DFI) 
with, 10, 58, 72, 81–82 
 emotional ontogenesis and, 74, 106 
 intracranialist objections to, 77 
 overview, 55, 56 
 terminology, 10, 55 
 waves of arguments supporting, 56–57 
 Contingent transcranialists (CTs), 53, 
54 
 Continuing usefulness requirement, 
142, 146–147 
 Continuity, 5–7, 17, 18, 51, 177 
 Conventionalization of expression, 92 
 Core and noncore partial realizers, 108 
 Coregulated scaffolding, 47, 48.  See also  
Scaffolding 
 Coregulation, 86, 90, 91, 99, 100.  See 
also Intrapersonal emotional 
regulation 
 Core realizers, 71, 73, 107, 108, 111, 
136 
 and noncore realizers, 65–67 
 Core realizer system, 203 
 Core relational themes (CRTs), 34 
 Coupling-constitution fallacy, 75–76 
 Cultural groups, emotions peculiar to 
particular, 37–40, 155 
 Cultural scaffolding, 132–134.  See also  
Scaffolding 
 Cultural shaping of emotions, 99–108. 
 See also Sociocultural resources 
 Cultures, dimensions of person-world 
relations that distinguish between, 
100 
 Dawkins, R., 7, 166 
 Declarative-indicative icons, 201 
 Deep functional integration (DFI), 45, 
113, 208 
 with contingent transcranialism (CT), 
10, 72, 81–82 
 contingent transcranialism (CT) and, 
58, 106, 108, 109 
 degree/level of, 106–109, 136–137, 
179 
 emotional ontogenesis and, 74–75, 
106, 107 
 extended cognitive systems and, 57, 
76 
 Extended Mind theorists and, 13 
 of extraorganismal and neural 
resources, 72 
 of natural environmental resources, 76 
 of nonneural resources in information 
processing, 57, 75 
 of nonneural resources into cognitive 
systems, 62 
 overview, 57–59 
 sociocultural resources and, 74–75, 
106–107 
 technological cognitive augmentation 
and, 70 
 transcranialists and, 57, 75, 108 
 vision as constituted by DFI of 
intracranial and extracranial 
resources, 73 
 Dimensional appraisal theories, 33–35 
 Directive icons, 176 
 Directive-imperative icons, 150, 201 
 Disembodiment hypothesis, 32–33 

244 
Index
 Ecological scaffolding, 47–48.  See also  
Scaffolding 
 Embedded cognition, 55–56 
 Embedding thesis, 54 
 Embodied cognition, 55–56 
 Embodiment thesis, 54 
 Emotional and nonemotional 
expression independence, stage 
of, 96 
 Emotional experience, components of 
emotions essential to, 22 
 Emotional interpreter devices.  See  
Interpreter devices 
 Emotional “objects,” displacement 
of, 37 
 Emotional ontogenesis, 83–97 
 cultural shaping of emotions, 99–108 
 emergence of self-evaluative emotions 
(SEEs), 97–99 
 Emotional precursors.  See Affect 
expressions/emotion precursors 
 Emotional producer devices.  See  
Producer devices 
 Emotional self-regulation, 43, 83, 84. 
 See also Coregulation; Intrapersonal 
emotional regulation; Scaffolding 
 cortex and, 27 
 development of, 23, 43, 45, 46 
 emotional ontogenesis and, 44, 82–88, 
90–94, 96, 97–101, 103–106, 108 
 functions in mother-child interactions 
that promote, 46 
 integration of emotional and 
nonemotional action self-
regulation, 96 
 language and, 96, 97 
 neocortex and, 208 
 precursor strategies for, 85 
 symbolic strategies in, 98 
 Emotion precursors.  See Affect 
expressions/emotion precursors 
 Emotion-regulating strategies, innate, 
94 
 Emotions.  See also speciﬁ c topics  
 classification of, 2, 23–27 
 composition of, 21–22 
 functions of, 27–29 
 methodological considerations 
regarding, 211–212 
 nature of, 21–22, 29 
 objects of, 31 
 philosophy of, 6 
 recent theories of, 40 
 Colombetti, 42–45 
 J. Clark, 41–42 
 Zinck and Newen, 40–41 
 Emotion theory, 2 
 debates in, xi 
 Enactivism, 43 
 Entity-bound realization, 67, 68 
 Environmental externalism, 62 
 Epigenetic behavioral scaffolding, 
8, 131.  See also Scaffolding; 
Scaffolding 2 
 Ethnotheories, 99–100 
 Explanatory frameworks, 45, 49, 78, 80 
 Explanatory kinds, 78 
 Explanatory projects, 141–142 
 Explicatures, 191–192 
 Expression signs, 86–88, 90–96, 98, 99 
 Extended cognition, 42–43, 55, 74.  See 
also Contingent transcranialism; 
Extended Mind framework; 
Hypothesis of extended cognition 
 and embodied and embedded 
cognition, 56 
 overview, 56 
 Extended cognitive systems, xi, 10, 54, 
57, 58, 70, 71, 76, 137, 176 
 sociocultural, 73–74 
 Extended memory, 76, 78, 79 
 “Extended Mind, The” (Clark and 
Chalmers), 9 
 Extended mind externalism, 62 
 Extended Mind framework, 211, 212. 
 See also Extended cognition 

Index 
245
 Extended Mind theorists, 12–13, 53 
 Extended vs. extensive affectivity, 43–45 
 Extension 
 cognitive, 53, 76, 81 
 of the lexicalized concept, 199 
 mind-to-world, 10 
 world-to-mind, 10 
 Extension broadening and narrowing, 
128 
 Extension thesis, 54 
 Extensive cognition, 43 
 Extensive enactivism, 214n1 
 Extensive vs. extended affectivity, 43–45 
 External information processing, 174 
 Externalism, 107 
 forms of, 9, 55, 62, 174, 203, 210, 
214n1 
 and individualism, history of, 59–62 
 radical, 9, 62, 214n1 
 taxonomic, 61 
 Externalists, 60 
 External sources/external resources, 
56–57, 71, 73, 108, 136 
 External visual scene, 72–73 
 Eye tracking, 128–129 
 Fear, 32, 33, 40, 70 
 adult experience of, 65–66 
 amygdala and, 36, 62–63 
 beliefs, judgments, and, 31 
 flight response associated with, 147 
 in nonhuman animals, 24, 36 
 physiological responses associated 
with, 29, 30 
 Fear responses, 105, 147, 161 
 Fear system, 66–67 
 Feeling theory(ies) of emotions, 29–31 
 Damasio’s, 29–30 
 objections to, 30–31 
 First Wave Extended Mind (EM), 9 
 Flight response, 147 
 Formal object, 31–32 
 Function, theories of, 141–143 
 Genes.  See Epigenetic behavioral 
scaffolding; Immediate early genes 
 Genetic activity, intraneural, 131 
 Genetic products, intraneural, xii, 5, 
113, 136 
 Godfrey-Smith, P., 145, 161, 162 
 Harre, R., 39, 40 
 Higher cognitive emotions (HCEs)/
higher sentiments, 27, 123 
 basic emotions (BEs) and, 11–12, 26, 
41–42, 48–51, 102, 104, 205, 
206 
 “High road” (basic emotions), 25, 26 
 Homeostatic conditions, xii, 4 
 Homeostatic deﬁ cits, 159 
 Homeostatic distress, 24, 41 
 Homeostatic property cluster natural 
kinds, 50, 102 
 Homeostatic status, 7, 127, 140 
 Homology, serial.  See Serial homology, 
theory of 
 Hull, D. L., 143 
 Hypothesis of extended cognition 
(HEC).  See also Contingent 
transcranialism; Extended 
cognition 
 vs. hypothesis of embedded cognition 
(HEMC), 77 
 Iconic expression signs, 90, 91 
 Iconic signals, 79 
 Icon-producing and icon-interpreting 
devices, 177 
 Imagination, 36 
 Imitated smiles, 88, 89, 157 
 Imitation, 15, 90, 93, 118, 157, 166.  See 
also Mimicry; Mirroring 
 in animals, 119 
 automatic, 213n1 
 by caregivers, 93, 157, 158 
 of facial expressions and gestures, 88, 
213n1 ( see also Imitated smiles) 

246 
Index
 learning by, 118, 125, 154, 158, 160 
 verbal/language, 121, 124–127 
 Immediate early genes (IEGs), 103–104, 
135, 158 
 Imperative icons, 126, 156, 176, 177 
 Implicatures, 191–192 
 Indicative-declarative icons, 178 
 Indicative-descriptive icons, 149 
 Indicative icons, 126, 150, 176, 177 
 Indicative syntactic forms, 168 
 Individualism, 2 
 and externalism, history of, 59–62 
 limitations, 61 
 Individualist/internalist theories, 205 
 vs. naturalistic teleological theories of 
content, 148 
 Inferential procedure in a literal 
utterance, 200–203 
 Intentional icons, 135, 149–151, 160, 
165, 172–173, 175–177.  See also  
Natural signs and intentional signs 
 Intentionality, 116 
 Intention movements, 160 
 Interaction view of metaphor, 183 
 Internal and external resources, 
complementarity of, 10 
 Internal information processing, 174 
 Internalism/internalist theories, 2, 148, 
205 
 Internal locus of control, 26, 135.  See 
also Locus of control 
 Interoceptive feedback, 94 
 Interoceptive receptors, 3, 85 
 Interoceptive sensations, 94–95 
 Interoceptive stimulation, 41 
 Interoceptor devices, 154 
 Interoceptors, 4, 155 
 Interpersonal regulation, 87, 88.  See also 
Intrapersonal emotional regulation 
 Interpreter circuits, automated, 28 
 Interpreter devices, 3, 89, 103, 106, 
154–156, 158, 159, 174–176 
 Interpreter mechanisms, 105 
 Interpreters, 149, 150 
 Interpreters-consumers, 164 
 Intersubjectivity, 45 
 Intracranial and extracranial resources, 
deep functional integration of, 73 
 Intracranial cognitive processing, 56, 
73, 76, 211 
 Intracranialists and intracranialism, xi, 
53, 54, 56, 56–59, 63, 68, 75–77, 
92, 109, 112, 148, 176, 205.  See also 
Contingent transcranialists 
 Intracranialist-transcranialist debate, 
xi, 77 
 Intracranial processes, 211 
 Intraneural genetic activity, 131 
 Intraneural genetic products, xii, 5, 113, 
136 
 Intraneural resources, 16 
 Intrapersonal emotional regulation, 
82, 84, 87, 94, 98, 103.  See also  
Emotional self-regulation 
 development of, 88, 101 
 transformation from interpersonal 
regulation to, 45, 84, 108, 136, 
206–207 ( see also Coregulation) 
 Irrealism, threat of, 68–69 
 Japanese, 101 
 Joint attention, emergence of, 116–120 
 Joint visual attention (JVA), 119 
 timing of the onset of, 215n1 
 Kaye, K., 114 
 Kenny, A., 31 
 Lange, Carl, 29 
 Language.  See also Meaning 
 human emotionality as language 
dependent, 6 
 Language acquisition, 96–97, 207 
 in neonates and young children, 
96–97, 120–128 
Imitation (cont.)

Index 
247
 Lesions and emotion, 30 
 Linguistic action appeal, stage of, 96 
 Linguistically mediated social 
relationship, ability to emote 
properly as a function of, 102–103 
 Linguistic and nonlinguistic icons, 
173 
 Linguistic memes, 166–167 
 Linguistic scaffolding, 127, 130, 
133–134.  See also Scaffolding 
 Linguistic signs, 165 
 Loar, B., 165 
 Locational externalism, 55, 62, 174, 
203, 210 
 Locus of control, 25, 70, 71, 73, 80, 125, 
136, 207 
 internal, 26, 135 
 Loose talk, 192–197 
 “Low road” (basic emotions), 25–26 
 Lutz, C., 39 
 Lyons, W., 32 
 Mark of the cognitive, 53, 148, 170–176 
 Meaning 
 acquisition of, 165–170 
 defined, 165 
 descriptive theory of, 61 
 Memes, 166–167 
 Memetic linguistic forms, 168 
 Metaphor(s), 179–180.  See also Three 
nonnegotiable truths 
 defined, 179 
 history, 180–181 
 how they work, 183–184 
 Metaphysical realization.  See Realization 
 Methodological solipsism, 60 
 Mimic emblems, 93 
 Mimicry, 4, 86, 88–91, 98, 99, 106, 115, 
133.  See also Imitation; Mirroring 
 Mind, philosophy of 
 debates in, xi 
 Mirroring.  See also Emotional 
ontogenesis; Imitation; Mimicry 
 affect, 4–5, 90–91, 93–97, 99, 100, 106 
( see also Emotional ontogenesis) 
 Molar appraisals, 34 
 Molecular appraisals, 34 
 Moral development, 206–208 
 Motherese, 5, 15, 86, 123, 207, 209.  See 
also “Baby talk” 
 Motor mimicry.  See Mimicry 
 Natural environmental cognitive 
augmentation, 72–73 
 Natural information, 160–161 
 Natural kinds, 50, 78 
 (basic) emotions as, 22–23, 48–51, 
102 
 centrality to mental content, 53, 61 
 limitations of the descriptive theory of 
meaning of, 61 
 in nonhuman animals, 52–53 
 vs. nonnatural kinds, 49–50 
 serial homologues and, 50–51 
 shame and, 51 
 underlying conscience in, 53 
 Natural kind terms, 61 
 Natural signs and intentional signs, 
159–165.  See also Intentional icons 
 Nature-nurture debate, xi, 22 
 Neonates, 2–3.  See also speciﬁ c topics  
 language acquisition in, 96–97, 
120–128 
 Neuropeptides, social/prosocial, 5, 112, 
113, 131, 136 
 Newborns, xi–xii.  See also speciﬁ c topics  
 Online activity in the world, 210–211 
 Opioids, endogenous, 131 
 Ostensive-expressive devices, 6–7 
 Overextension, 128 
 Parenting, sensitive/intuitive, 86 
 forms of, 86–87 
 Partial realizers, 64–66, 68, 69, 71, 79, 
108, 145, 176 

248 
Index
 Particular objects, 32 
 Pathology and emotion, 30 
 Person-environment system, classes of 
coacting elements of, 47–48 
 Philosophy of emotion, 6 
 Pointing, 117–120 
 and language development, 118–119 
 Preadaptation, xi, 82, 95, 106, 136 
 biological, 8, 12, 132 
 of caregivers, 3, 4, 82, 84, 85, 87, 89, 
106, 112, 114, 117, 122, 132, 140, 
175 
 cognitive precursor, xi 
 comparative, 71–72 
 emotional, xi, 83, 88, 157 
 linguistic, xi, 122, 156 
 sensorimotor, 139, 157 
 sensory-perceptual constraints 
and, 88 
 Preadapted constraint repertoires, 3, 4 
 Precursor emotion regulation strategies, 
85, 106 
 Precursors.  See also Affect expressions/
emotion precursors 
 protolinguistic, 166 
 Prespeech, 112, 113, 121 
 Primary appraisals, 33–34 
 Primitive affect expressions.  See Affect 
expressions/emotion precursors 
 Producer devices, 3, 88, 106, 142, 
152, 154–159, 174–176.  See also  
Assistance-soliciting devices 
 Producer-interpreter devices, 155 
 Producer-interpreter domains, 150 
 Producer mechanisms, 142 
 Producers, 149 
 Proper functions, Millikan’s, 143–146 
 Proprioceptive feedback, 94, 98 
 Proprioceptive patterns, 88 
 Proprioceptive receptors, 3, 85 
 Proprioceptive sensations, 94–95 
 Proprioceptive stimulation, 41 
 Proprioceptor devices, 154 
 Proprioceptors, 4, 155 
 Prosociality, neurochemical 
underpinnings of, 130–136 
 Pushmi-pullyu representations, 
148–149, 156, 175, 176 
 Putnam–Burge thought experiments, 
61–62 
 Radically wide realization, 68, 107 
 Realization, 62–63 
 context-sensitive view of, 13, 53, 
63–70 
 standard view of, 63 
 Realizer systems, 44, 54, 64, 65, 76, 
78, 103, 104, 203.  See also Partial 
realizers; Total realizer systems 
 unified, 79 
 Received view in emotional science, 11 
 Reciprocal exchange, 46 
 Referential clarity, 7 
 Referentially opaque emotion precursors 
and precursor expressions, 154, 
156, 176 
 Regulation.  See also Scaffolding 
 of cognitive activity, 55 
 of emotional and nonemotional 
responses, 96 
 moral, 207 
 social, 18, 93, 139, 155, 165 
 Regulatory systems, 44.  See also  
Emotional self-regulation 
 Relational themes, core, 34 
 Relevance-guided comprehension 
heuristic, 190 
 Relevance theory, 188–191 
 Remane, A., 214n7 
 operational criteria for identifying and 
testing homologues of higher-level 
traits, 51 
 Rupert, R., 55–56, 77–80 
 Scaffolding, 117, 125–127, 130–135, 175 
 of cognition, 13, 55, 56, 58 

Index 
249
 of emotional development, 45–48 
 overview, 208–209 
 types of, 8, 47–48, 130–134, 175, 
208–210 ( see also Coactive 
scaffolding; Scaffolding 1; 
Scaffolding 2) 
 Scaffolding 1, 8, 13, 71, 78, 98, 115, 
118, 123, 134, 208–209 
 education and, 209–210 
 Scaffolding 2, 8, 10, 124, 131, 134, 
206–210 
 Search-identify-correct behaviors, 4, 
104, 106, 112, 113, 154, 157, 
158 
 Search-identify-satisfy responses, 112, 
113 
 Secondary appraisals, 34 
 Self-evaluative emotions (SEEs), 98 
 Self-regulation.  See Emotional 
self-regulation 
 Self-scaffolding, 48 
 Semantic rules, 149 
 Sense extensions, 192 
 Sensorimotor competencies, innate, 
87–88.  See also Mimicry 
 Sentiments, higher.  See Higher 
cognitive emotions (HCEs)/higher 
sentiments 
 Serial homologues and natural kinds, 
50–51 
 Serial homology, theory of, 49 
 Shame, 42, 51, 98, 99, 101 
 Shared developmental pathways, 51 
 Situated cognition, 54–56, 62, 135.  See 
also Extended cognition 
 Social constructionism, 22, 37–38 
 constructs of, 38–39 
 Social regulation, 18, 93, 139, 155, 
165 
 Social relationship.  See also Prosociality, 
neurochemical underpinnings of 
 ability to emote properly as a function 
of linguistically mediated, 102–103 
 Social scaffolding, 175.  See also  
Scaffolding 
 Sociocultural cognitive augmentation, 
73–75 
 Sociocultural resources.  See also Cultural 
shaping of emotions 
 deep functional integration (DFI) and, 
74–75, 106–107 
 Sociocultural theory of development, 45 
 Somatic-feeling theories, 22 
 Species-typical activity patterns, 
112–114, 117, 121, 123–124, 
131–132, 135 
 Species-typical behavior patterns 
(STBPs), 15, 113, 114, 136, 140, 
175 
 Speech acquisition, 96–97.  See also  
Language acquisition 
 Speech act view of metaphor, 
183–184 
 Spinal cord lesions, 30 
 Strong adaptationist view, 145, 147 
 Substitution view of metaphor, 183 
 Subtraction argument, 30 
 Sufﬁ ciency thesis (realization), 63 
 Symbolic play, 93 
 Symbolic representations, 26, 27, 73, 
92, 124, 175 
 Symbolic strategies in emotional 
regulation, 98 
 Symbolic thought, 96, 115, 206, 207 
 Symbolic use of expression signs, 
93–96 
 Technological cognitive augmentation, 
70–72 
 Teleological theories of mental content, 
147–148, 215n1 
 Teleology 
 biological, 145–146 
 philosophical problems associated 
with, 143–145 
 metaphysical problem of, 143 

250 
Index
 Thalamus, 25–26, 65, 66 
 amygdala and, 65, 66, 105, 159 
 sensory, 26 
 Three nonnegotiable truths 
(NNT3/3NNTs), 179, 181, 199 
 paraphrase, 182 
 transparency, 182 
 truth, 181–182 
 Threshold-exceeding deﬁ cit state, 85–86 
 Tight worlds, 5, 77, 160 
 Tongue protrusion (TP), automatic 
imitation of, 213n1 
 Tool expertise, 71 
 Total realizer systems, 64–69, 71, 73, 79, 
107, 108, 135–136, 145, 207 
 Transcranialists.  See also Contingent 
transcranialism; Contingent 
transcranialists; Externalists 
 deep functional integration (DFI) and, 
57, 75, 108 
 methodological error, 76–77 
 Transformative methodologies, 211 
 Triandis, H. C., 99 
 Truth.  See Three nonnegotiable truths 
 Turn taking in human development, 
114–116 
 Unconscious perception of emotion 
responses, 30 
 Uniﬁ ed ontological class, 22 
 defined, 213n2 
 Utterance activity, 124–125 
 Vehicle externalism, 55, 62, 174, 203, 
210 
 Very strong social constructionists 
(VSSCs), 39 
 objections to, 39–40 
 Vision, 128–130 
 Visual receptive ﬁ eld (vRF), 70 
 Weak adaptationist perspective, 147 
 Wide individuals, probability of, 69–70 
 Wide realization, 67, 68, 107 
 Wilson, R. A., 53, 56, 58, 74, 208 
 Zone of proximal development (ZPD), 
45  

