Benjamin Sampica
benjamin.sampica@gmail.com / 515-339-6504 / Altoona, IA
Summary
I currently work as a Software Engineer remotely for Comoto in Philadelphia. I'm a skilled professional in the .NET stack,
an Agile practictioner, and follower of the Software Craftsman principles. 
I like to not only make things work but make them work well. When things break, I like when they break really fast. I
yearn to work with a community of like-minded professionals to make constant, evolutionary change every day.
Employment History
Software Engineer III
Comoto • Philadelphia, PA
06/2021 - Present
As part of a Scrum team, developed and maintained features for jpcycles.com, revzilla.com, and cyclegear.com, largely
focused on marketing and search engine optimization so our pages and products would be seen by our customer's eyes
first.
Used a wide array of tools including .NET, Elixir, MSSQL, Postgres, TeamCity, and CircleCI to take features from concept
to cash.
Senior Application Developer
Homesteaders Life Company • Des Moines, IA
08/2020 - 06/2021
Maintained and enhanced a Blazor PDF processing application that utilized Azure OCR to scan each individual page,
ingest the results, perform additional scrubbing and business validation, and then saved to an Azure MSSQL database for
further manual processing. 
This application began with zero tests or code coverage. It now stands at 70% code coverage with a full suite of
tests.
Pair/mobbed daily with other developers on my team and advocated for these good software practices across the
organization by leading the adoption of a technical talk for interested developers.
Helped guide Azure DevOps organizational strategy for pipelines, templates, and projects.
Coached my team on Agile/Lean by facilitating events, encouraging discussions, and experimenting relentlessly to find
what worked and what didn't. 
Web Application Developer - Contract
Polk County • Des Moines, IA
08/2019 - 08/2020
Full-stack web developer that worked on a Scrum team to create and maintain web applications to enhance the ability of
Polk County to serve its residents. Largely worked in the .NET stack including ASP.NET Core MVC, Bootstrap 4, MSSQL,
JavaScript, and Git.
Steered, prototyped, and ultimately built, maintained, and skilled up Polk County's presence in Azure DevOps - moving
us away from Bitbucket and bringing CI/CD into our toolchain.
Steered and participated in a reimagining of teams into product-focused teams instead of project-based teams which led
to increased transparency, introspection, and adaptation.

Software Engineer
Casey's General Store • Ankeny, IA
03/2019 - 08/2019
Led an API strategy for sun setting legacy applications that needed to continue to speak with each other. These were
coupled with a few ASP.NET Core websites which utilized Azure DevOps for CI/CD in order to replace these legacy
applications. 
Maintained and refactored legacy applications written in VB.NET, VBScript, and other legacy languages.
Associate Web Developer
Polk County • Des Moines, IA
06/2016 - 03/2019
Full-stack web developer that worked on a Scrum team to create and maintain web applications to enhance the ability of
Polk County to serve its residents. Largely worked in the .NET stack including ASP.NET MVC 5, Bootstrap 3, MSSQL,
JavaScript, and Git.
The products our team built and maintained ranged from small to large-scale for the Treasurer, Sheriff, Accounting, and
Human Resources departments. Notably, we wrote a Scheduler application whose primary outcomes were managing
county-wide scheduling, leave, and payroll. We also wrote a CMS for the Sheriff's office to handle their entire Civil
division workflow - from notice to judgment to collection of which flowed millions of dollars.
Freelance Projects
The Machine Spirit - www.bensampica.com
Built using Hugo, a static site generator, and deployed via Netlify for CI/CD capabilities from GitHub. This is my site
where I post blogs, mostly about tech stuff and feature my GitHub profile. Check it out!
Angela Connolly - www.angelaconnolly.org 
Built using MVC5, EF 5, and Bootstrap 3, Angela Connolly is Polk County's current Board of Supervisor for District 2.
It utilized the Facebook API to pull content directly from her public Facebook page and also links with ShareBlue, a
fundraising organization for politicians. It received thousands of unique visitors and was responsible for tens of
thousands of dollars in donations during the 2018 election. After the election was won the site was decommissioned.
Education
Management Information Systems
University of Northern Iowa • Cedar Falls, Iowa
Graduated 05/2016
Computer Support Specialist
Kirkwood Community College • Cedar Rapids, Iowa
Graduated 12/2012
Hobbies
I'm a full-time DM for Dungeons and Dragons.
I like building really neat computers and like to one-up myself every time - see my site for pictures.
I spend a lot of time reading. I like to read soft/hard-skill books in the software development space but also enjoy
sprawling epics like the Horus Heresy, Wheel of Time, or most things Brandon Sanderson.

