II. CONNECTING 
MOLECULAR 
DYNAMICS TO THERMODYNAMICS 
II.A Instantaneous Mechanical Variables 
The two main goals of microscopic molecular dynamics calculations are to simulate and 
to understand macroscopic behavior in microscopic terms. We wish to understand the way in 
which the relatively complicated microscopic many-body dynamics gives rise to the relatively 
simple macroscopic few-variable behavior described by phenomenological thermodynamics and 
hydrodynamics. 
Some of the variables useful for describing macroscopic systems have obvious microscopic 
analogs. The macroscopic mass p dr and momentum pv dr in a volume element dr, for instance, 
correspond to simple sums of one-paxticle contributions. The macroscopic energy and the pressure 
tensor are more complicated functions. They include not only one-paxticle kinetic parts, but also 
two-or-more-particle potential contributions. 
The entropy and free energy functions are even more complicated than mass, momentum, 
energy, and pressure. For small few-paxticle volume elements there is no sensible and appealing 
instantaneous definition of an entropy guaranteed to resemble thermodynamic entropy. But for 
large volume elements, at least sufficiently close to equilibrium, Gibbs showed that the entropy 
corresponds to the logarithm of the available phase-space volume. This phase-spa~e volume can 
only be determined by explicitly carrying out calculations over an interval of time or by integrating 
over the appropriate phase space. Thus, the entropy depends upon the current state of the system 
in a relatively complicated way. Fluctuations likewise involve either time or phase-space averaging, 
and are more complicated to evaluate than mass or momentum or energy sums. 
In transient nonequilibrium systems, fax from equilibrium, it is not practical to define 
instantaneous properties in terms of constrained time or phase-space averages. This is because 
such systems change with time, so that the variables constraining a "phase-space-average" are 
not apparent. Nevertheless, no useful description of time-dependent nonequilibrium behavior is 
possible without some recipe for describing the instantaneous state of a system. Accordingly, we 
here consider the overall variables describing a microscopic many-body system. 
Energy, volume, and the number of particles are the independent variables describing 
either an isolated system or a microcanonical ensemble of such systems. For any individual 
closed and isolated system, obeying Newton's, or Lagrange's, or Hamilton's equations of motion, 
these properties are constants, "constants of the motion". The only other known constant of the 
motion, for most interesting interpaxticle force laws, is the momentum. It is convenient to divide 
the other nonconserved macroscopic variables needed to describe a many-body system into two 
categories. 

43 
The first category includes "mechanical variables". The mechanical variables of a dy- 
namical system can be usefully defined as instantaneous functions of the sets of coordinates and 
velocities, r and ~:, or the coordinates and momenta, q and p. These mechanical variables include 
not just mass, momentum, and energy but also the fluxes of these quantities. Provided that the 
interparticle interactions are pairwise-additive, the mechanical variables most useful to a hydro- 
dynamic description can all be expressed in terms of coordinates and momenta by using simple 
one-body and two-body functions. 
There is a second category of macroscopic variables, involving the thermodynamic entropy, 
which could be termed "entropic variables". These depend upon Gibbs' statistical definition of 
thermodynamic state, and include an entropy contribution based on a phase-space volume. The 
thermodynamic entropy, as well as the Gibbs and Helmholtz free energies, are examples taken 
from this second category. We will discuss both categories, mechanical and entropic, in turn. 
Three of the fundamental mechanical variables correspond to the zeroth, first, and second 
moments of the microscopic velocity distribution function. The zeroth moment is proportional 
to the mass density p. The first moment is proportional to the stream velocity v. The second 
moment, giving the fluctuation of the microscopic velocities about the mean, is, at equilibrium, 
proportional to the thermodynamic temperature T. This same equilibrium temperature definition 
serves as a convenient and consistent nonequilibrium generalization of temperature to far-from- 
equilibrium states. 
Temperature arises in two different ways in the microscopic statistical theory of equilibrium 
systems. In that theory it is usual to consider a "canonical ensemble" of similar systems weakly 
coupled together in such a way as to share a fixed total energy. If the probability distribution of 
the coupled systems over their states is expanded around the most likely distribution, temperature 
emerges as the derivative (OE/OS)v. Here the entropy S is defined as the product of -k, where 
k is Boltzmann's constant, multiplied by the average value of the logarithm of the phase-space 
volume accessible to an N-body system in the volume V with an energy E. The alternative, but 
equivalent, Lagrange-multiplier calculation of the distribution of maximum probability, using the 
constraint of fixed total energy for the ensemble, produces 1/kT as the corresponding Lagrange 
multiplier. 
In equilibrium thermodynamics temperature is introduced through the ideal-gas ther- 
mometer. This thermodynamic definition is more suggestive than the statistical phase-space 
definition because the second moment, relative to the mean, of the D-dimensional gas veloc- 
ity distribution, < p2/m) = DkT, is common to a/l classical equilibrium systems, not just ideal 
gases, and characterizes the whole equilibrium distribution, because the equilibrium distribution 
is Ganssian. The one-dimensional equilibrium distribution is shown in Figure 1. The arrow, at 
the inflection point, indicates the momentum p~ for which p~ equals mkT. The use of (p~)~(ink) 
to define a dynamic temperature is easy to defend. Given the need to do something, we follow 
Occam in making this, the simplest choice. 

44 
r 
Figure II.1 
I 
I 
I 
I 
-3 
-2 
-1 
0 
1 
2 
3 
Px/~ 
It is an empirical result of equilibrium thermodynamics that specifying the tempera- 
ture, volume, and composition is a complete fluid-state description. All other thermodynamic 
variables--pressure, energy, and entropy for instance--are coupled together through the empirical 
equilibrium ~equation of state". An isolated nonequilibrium system relaxes toward such an equi- 
librium state during a characteristic time of the order of the time required for mass, momentum~ 
or energy to diffuse across the system. 
The number of such variables required to describe a nonequilibrium %rate" sufficiently 
accurately has to be determined empirically. Any such state description must involve at least 
those variables required in equilibrium thermodynamics, plus the additional variables necessary 
to provide a reproducible description of the deviation from equilibrium. 
In nonequilibrium systems the main requirement useful state variables must satisfy is that 
these be mechanical, depending upon the particle coordinates and momenta, rather than en- 
tropic. This is because so little progress has been made in defining and calculating entropic 
variables for nonequilibrium systems. Entropy is certainly more complicated to define than is 
temperature. A generation ago, Jaynes suggested using Gibbs ~ equilibrium expression for the en- 
tropy, S = -k /lnf)--where f is the N-particle phase-space probability density--even for states 
far from equilibrium. This idea is the =information-theory" approach to statistical mechanics. 
The basis, choosing as many states as possible consistent with known restrictions on the system, 
is undisputable but unworkable. 

45 
The mathematics involved in using this definition is relatively involved because f, from the 
mathematical standpoint, is a constant of the motion. Thus the entropy too would be constant if 
it were calculated exactly. But this mathematical view of the entropy leaves out the "Kolmogorov 
entropy", that part of the entropy production which comes from the exponentially-fast diffusive 
motion of f in the phase space due to Lyapunov instability. This diffusive motion persists until 
an equilibrium or steady distribution has been reached. 
At present no simpler useful nonequilibrium prescription for entropy than Jaynes' is avail- 
able. But it is possible that suggestions will emerge, motivated by the results of nonequilibrium 
computer simulations. Entropy has an apparent connection to the friction coefficient ~, which 
appears in Gauss' or Nosfi's generalized equations of motion described in Sections D and E of 
Chapter I. In either case the derivative of the logarithm of the phase-space density function, 
f(q,p), with time, following the motion, is just 
(d/dt) lnf = - ~ 
[(O0/Oq) + (O[s/cgp)] = DN~. 
Thus, if we use the Boltzmann-Gibbs connection between -k (lnf/and entropy, the ther- 
modynamic friction coefficient measures directly the rate of entropy production, excluding the 
Kolmogorov instability entropy. This relationship is potentially useful in nonequilibrium systems, 
but has not so far been applied to estimate nonequilibrium free energies. 
In principle, equilibrium or nonequilibrium free energies could be calculated from S -- 
-k ( lnf ) if the phase-space probability density were known. In practice, too much time is required 
to visit, even once, each of the states of a system of any size at all, so as to find the entropy 
associated with that distribution. Twelve liquid argon atoms, with a triple-point entropy of 77k, 
require approximately the age of the universe to travel through all of their 1033 (quantum) states. 
Even the simple one-dimensional classical Nos~ oscillator requires a time of this same order, using 
a current CRAY computer, to reach a phase-space state lying only 11 standard deviations from 
the most-likely zero-energy state. 
An alternative to defining the entropy through state-counting can be based on a working 
definition of the free energies as equilibrium values corresponding to the instantaneous energy, 
density, and the fluxes. But because we will have no need for such a definition in these lectures, 
and, because this idea has never been used, we will not elaborate on this possibility. 
There is a special class of systems, "hard-particle" systems, for which entropy and the 
free energies can be estimated as instantaneous dynamical variables. In dense fluids or solids of 
hard spheres (or disks, in two dimensions) the space available for an additional sphere, a kind 
of ~free volume" made up of holes distributed through the system, gives a direct measure of the 
instantaneous work required to insert another sphere: 
# = COAION)v,T. 

46 
Figure 2 shows a typical configuration of 48 hard disks taken from an equilibrium sim- 
ulation. The density was half the close-packed density and periodic boundaries were used. The 
region lying outside the large "exclusion disks" is the free volume vf available for the center of a 
49th disk. The "excess" chemical potential ~EXCESS (measured relative to that for an ideal gas 
at the same density and temperature) can be evaluated from the equilibrium average of v$: 
(v.f) = V e -~xa~ss/(kT). 
Whether or not this recipe is useful in nonequilibrium systems such as far-from-equilibrium shear 
flows would be interesting to test. For sufficiently large volumes, free volume fluctuations can be 
ignored. Then the many-body state-counting problem reduces to estimating the probability of 
inserting one additional particle. Such an estimate involves errors of order (lnN)/N. 

Before 
II.B Macroscopic Dynamics 
The macroscopic description of continuum systems makes use of the mass density p, the 
stream velocity v, the pressure tensor P, the energy per unit mass e, and the heat flux vector 
Q as fundamental variables. The three basic dynamical equations connecting the time variation, 
conservation, and flow of mass, momentum, and energy can be written in terms of these vari- 
ables. The equations have their most transparent, compact, and elegant form when written in 
terms of the so-called "Lagrangian variables", using coordinates which follow the motion. These r 
coordinates can alternatively be called Heisenberg-picture or comoving coordinates. 
The "Lagrangian coordinates" have no connection with Lagrange's equations of motion. 
Figure 3 illustrates the difference between comoving "Lagrangian" coordinates and inertial-frame 
"Eulerian" coordinates. The two-dimensional disk shown in Figure 3 rotates counter clockwise 
about its center at angular velocity w. The comoving Lagrangian coordinate system keeps pace 
with the rotation, rotating with this same angular velocity. In the comoving Lagrangian system 
the mass and energy fluxes are both zero. The momentum flux is not zero because it contains 
centrifugal force contributions from the frame's rotation. 
The same problem can be considered in a fixed-frame coordinate system, corresponding to 
the SchrSdinger picture of quantum mechanics. In this inertial fixed-frame coordinate system-- 
usually called the "Eulerian frame'--the mass and energy fluxes are nonzero. In the Eulerian 
frame these fluxes are vectors in the 0 direction, with magnitudes pwr and pwr[e q- (w2r2/2)]. 
The comoving Lagrangian derivatives which follow the motion are sometimes termed "con- 
vective" or "substantive" or "total" derivatives. Such derivatives are conventionally indicated by 
D/Dt, by d/dt, or by a superposed dot. For example ~ = dp/dt gives the change in the mass 
density of a volume element dr following the motion of the element. 
47 
Figure II.3 
After 

48 
Velocity vanishes in a comoving frame. It is understood therefore that the symbol v, for 
velocity, refers to an inertial frame. Thus v is the rate at which the velocity of a volume element 
(measured in an inertial frame) changes with time. Derivatives describing changes of density, 
velocity, and energy density, (dp/dt), (dv/dt), and (de~dr), can be expressed in terms of the 
corresponding Eulerian derivatives, (Op/Ot), (av/Ot), and (Oe/at), by including the convective 
contributions proportional to the inertial-frame velocity v: 
d/dt = O/Ot + v. O/Or. 
The fundamental continuum equations describe the conservation of mass, momentum, and 
energy. Mass conservation is simplest. In the comoving Lagrangian coordinate system the mass 
of a moving volume element, p dr, is a constant of the motion, so that the "continuity equation", 
(dlnp/dt) = -V.v, 
follows from the observation that the volume strain-rate, dlnV/dt, is measured by the divergence 
of the velocity. 
dlnV/dt = (Ovx/Ox) + (Ovy/Oy) + (Ovz/Oz). 
The continuity equation can be derived from the inertial-frame "Eulerian" picture. In the 
Eulerian treatment the coordinate mesh is fixed in space, rather than embedded in the flowing 
materials, and the fluid or solid moves through the mesh. Thus, provided that the flow velocity v 
is a smooth function of the coordinates, the flow into a sufficiently small fixed cube dr = dx dy dz 
is given by the flux differences across the cube: 
aCp dr)/at -- -d= (a/O:~)Cpv= dy dz) - ay CO/ay)(pv,, d~ dx) - d~ (O/O~)(p~, d= dy). 
Figure 4 shows the two-dimensional version of this flow problem, in which the element of 
"volume" is the area dxdy. The hatched regions represent mass entering and leaving the volume 
element during a time dt chosen sufficiently small that the vertical motion in the hatched regions 
can be ignored. Because the Eulerian volume element dr = dx dy dz doesn't change with time, a 
simple differential equation results when the flux difference relation is divided by dr: 
(op/at) = - ,,. vp - 
p (v. 
,,). 

49 
Flows during 
dt ~ dx/v x 
dx 
+ dx 
= 
- 
X-- 
X 0 
x 
x o 
2 
2 
• 
f 
f 
/// 
/// 
/// 
/// 
/// 
/// 
/// 
/// 
/// 
/// 
/// 
/// 
/// 
/// 
/// 
/// 
/// 
/// 
/// 
/// 
/// 
/// 
/// 
J/]'/ 
Mass flow 
at x: 
p v x dy dt 
dy 
dx 
This equation is the Eulerian version of the continuity equation. It relates the change 
of density with time at a fixed location 0p/0~ to the mass-density gradient and the divergence 
of the velocity field. Combining the two density derivatives in the Eulerian continuity equation 
reproduces the Lagrangian one. 
The equivalence of the alternative Lagrangian and Eulerian approaches applies not only 
to the transport of mass, but also to the transport of momentum, energy, or any other property 
carried by a continuum. Both coordinate types can be useful. The Lagrange coordinates are 
particularly useful in numerical simulations involving large deformations, shockwaves, or interfaces 
separating materials, as long as the shear and rotation rates are not too large. Under such extreme 
conditions, the Eulerian coordinates are cumbersome and inconvenient. But problems involving 
very large deformations, or deformation rates, can lead to the tangling of hydrodynamic zones. 
In such a case neither choice of coordinates, Eulerian or Lagrangian, is troublefree. 

50 
Conservation of momentum in a continuum leads to the "equation of motion" 
p dv/dt = - V. P, 
where the comoving momentum flux P is the =pressure tensor", and includes all viscous con- 
tributions. In this Lagrangian form of the equation of motion, the comoving momentum flux is 
measured in a Lagrangian frame moving with an inertial-frame velocity v. Because momentum 
flux has two directions associated with it---one for the direction of the flow (x, B, or z) and one for 
the type of momentum (x, y, or z)--the tensor is a "second-rank" tensor, with doubly-subscripted 
elements. The element Pii of the tensor P represents the flux, in the i direction, of j momentum. 
Equivalently Pij is equal to the force per unit area exerted on the surrounding fluid by the ith 
face of an infinitesimal cube in the direction j. 
Figure II.5 
f 
Pyx dx 
pyydXl~**J~ 
Normal and 
shear forces 
on p dx dy 
/ 
f 
PxxdY 
Pxydy 
Figure 5 shows a small two-dimensional "volume" element dx dy. In a comoving frame the 
forces exerted on the boundary of this element by the surrounding continuum are proportional to 
the appropriate pressure-tensor elements and to the magnitudes of dx and dy. For a sufficiently 
small volume element the forces exerted on any of the four edges can be written as a superposition 
of perpendicular and parallel contributions as is shown in Figure 5. The forces exerted on the 
rightmost edge would be -P::= dy and -Pxy dy, respectively. The minus signs follow because Pz= 
and Pzy are fluxes of x and y momentum moving in the positive x direction, that is, leaving the 
volume element. 

51 
It might appear that the normal forces would act to accelerate linear momentum and that 
the shear forces would excite angular momentum, but the symmetry of the pressure tensor requires 
that Pzy = Pvz, for instance, so that the shear stresses (Pxz - Pvy)/2 and Pxv act to change the 
shape of the volume element, not its rotational velocity. It is an interesting exercise to show that 
an imbalance of Pxy and Pus would lead to a divergent angular acceleration (proportional to L -2 
for an infinitesimal D-dimensional cube with sidelength L). 
The derivation of the continuum equation of motion follows by considering the sum of the 
forces exerted by the surrounding continuum on a comoving cube (square in the two-dimensional 
case that was shown in Figure 5). Such a cube can be accelerated in the x direction if, for 
instance, the x forces on the x faces at x - ~dx and x + ½dx are not equal. In that case 
p dr dvz/dt includes dy dz [Pxz(X- ldx)-Pxz (x+ ½dx)]. In two dimensions the dz is absent and the 
units of momentum flux are [mass/time] rather than [mass/(lengthxtime)]. The force difference 
approaches -dr (BPzx/Ox) for a sufficiently small cube and a sufficiently smooth pressure tensor. 
Including also the x forces on the y and z faces gives the complete x component of the equation 
of motion: 
(p dr)dvz/dt = -dr [(OP~/cgx) + (OPvx/Oy) + (OPzx/OZ)]. 
Dividing by dr then leads to the Lagrangian form of the equation of motion given previously. 
Let us now consider the momentum flux P from the more-detailed atomistic viewpoint. On 
a microscopic basis there are two different kinds of contributions to the pressure tensor, "kinetic" 
and "potential". To describe the kinetic part we use the notation p to indicate the momentum 
carried by a particle relative to the comoving Lagrangian frame. Each Particle i in the comoving 
volume dr carries momentum Pi. During a small time interval dt this momentum is transported a 
distance (p~/rni) dr. This means that, on the average, a comoving plane, with area dydz and per- 
pendicular to the x axis will intersect the moving momentum with probability (dy dz/dr) Px dt/m 
during the time interval dr. The resulting "kinetic" contribution to the momentum flux, summed 
over all particles within the volume element dr is 
Pk,.o ,o =  
(pp/m)/dr. 
An additional "potential" flow of momentum, between all pairs of particles within dr, 
occurs through the mechanism of the interparticle forces. Consider the pair of particles, Particle 
1 and Particle 2, shown in Figure 6. The rate at which momentum is transported from Particle 1 
to Particle 2, the force on Particle 2 due to Particle 1, is given by the pair force F21 : -F12. For 
each such ij pair the direction of this transport is along the line of centers, parallel to rii = ri- r i. 

After 
Before 
Figure II.6 
52 
The contribution of all pairs of particles to the pressure tensor is the "potential" contribution to 
the momentum flux: 
Ppo*e,*t,al = ~ Fiir,j/dr. 
The action-at-a-distance interactions described by the interparticle forces give the micro- 
scopic pressure tensor, P = Pki,~etic + Ppote,~aZ, a nonlocal character. The details of treating 
pairs of particles which lie only partly in dr can lead to different definitions of P(r) and hence 
to different macroscopic constitutive relations. This is important in problems involving surface 
tension, where curvilinear coordinates seem natural for describing the pressure tensor. A simi- 
lar ambiguity arises if we attempt to go beyond a linear constitutive theory of nonequilibrium 
transport. 
Conservation of energy in a continuum leads to the "energy equation" 
pdr~ = dr [-P : Vv- V. Q], 
where e is the energy per unit mass and Q is the "heat flux vector". The heat flux vector measures 
the conductive flow of energy, per unit time and area, in the Lagrangian comoving frame. The 
energy equation is a straightforward generalization of the first law of thermodynamics, which 
gives the energy change in a volume element as the sum of the work done on that element by 
its surroundings less the heat leaving the volume element through comoving conduction. The 
relative motion of the x faces in the x direction gives a contribution to the work per unit volume, 
[-Pzz dy 4z (Ov=/Ox) dx]/dx dy gz. The sum of the nine separate terms of this type obtained by 
summing contributions of x, y, and z forces in the x, y, and z directions are indicated by the 
dyadic product -P : Vv. 

53 
From the microscopic point of view the heat flux vector, like the pressure tensor, con- 
tains both kinetic-energy and potential-energy contributions. If we retain the simplest possible 
assumption, that the energy of interaction of two particles is shared equally by both members of 
the pair, then each Particle i has an energy of the form 
E, = [p~/(2mi)] + ~(¢ff/2). 
where the sum includes all Particles j with which Particle i interacts. The flow of this energy, for 
all particles in the volume dr, gives the kinetic contribution to the energy flux: 
dr Qki,~etic = ~(pi/mi) Ei. 
The potential contribution of the interpartiele forces to the flow of energy can best be 
visualized by considering the example pair of hard-disk particles shown in the preceding Figure 
6, Particles 1 and 2. During a simple head-on collision.of these two disks the potential energy 
transports the (kinetic) energy p2/2m through one particle diameter. The general expression for 
the flow of energy associated with this mechanism has the form 
dr Qpo 0   o, = 
F ir j • (,4 +,j)/(2m). 
where the sum includes all pairs of particles in the volume element dr. 
With mechanical definitions of mass density, stream velocity, energy density, pressure 
tensor, and heat flux, we have the tools necessary to relate the microscopic and macroscopic 
descriptions of matter to each other. In deriving the continuity equation, equation of motion, and 
energy equation, our reasoning has been macroscopic, treating materials on a continuum basis. 
We also indicated the way in which atomistic flow mechanisms make it possible to define the 
fluxes as sums of one and two atom contributions. In the next section we consider the formal 
structure of the pressure tensor and heat flux vector from the detailed microscopic point of view. 

54 
II.C Virial Theorem and Heat Theorem 
In order to connect the microsopic pressure tensor P and heat flux vector Q to particle 
coordinates and momenta, we will examine the well-known virial theorem and a close relative we 
will call the "Heat Theorem". The usual derivation of the virial theorem of statistical mechanics 
begins with the canonical partition function 
Z(N,V,T) = e -A/(kT) -= f drDN/ dpDN e-(K~-~)/(kT)/N! h DN ' 
where A = E - TS is the Helmholtz free energy, h is Planck's constant, and the integration 
is carried out over all DN of the particle coordinates r and momenta p. The pressure can be 
obtained from the partition function by differentiating it with respect to volume 
P = - (OA/OV) T = kT (0 lnZ/OV) T. 
But straightforward differentiation is inconvenient because the volume dependence of the 
partition function,is implicit, appearing only in the integration limits. For simplicity, consider 
a three-dimensional cubic volume with V = L s. Next, introduce the dimensionless distance 
variables indicated in Figure 7: 
x= r/L; 
L= V t/3. 
-~ 
r 
x-~-- 
1 
L 
t. 
1 
Old 
Figure II.7 
New 
Then, the volume dependence appears instead only as a multiplicative factor of V iv in 
the partition function and in an explicit dependence of the potential energy • (x V I/s) on the 
volume. Differentiation of the partition function with respect to volume, when expressed in terms 
of the original variables then yields the usual virial theorem: 
PV/(NkT) -- 1 + ~ 
~ 
[(r,i. Fij)/(DNkT)]. 

55 
This expression has been used for over 30 years in obtaining pressure from many-body 
simulations. The theorem can be applied to elastic solids by making the shape of the volume, as 
well as the size, variable. To treat solids in a consistent way it is convenient to restrict (the center 
of) each particle to an individual cell, of volume V/N, and to introduce reduced coordinates 
which span this reduced volume rather than the total volume V. The tensor version of the virial 
theorem then results: 
PV = NkrI -C ~ ~ riiF, j. 
where I is the unit tensor and the double sum includes each pair of particles. The "unit tensor" 
I has unity for each of its diagonal elements and zero for each off-diagonal element. 
But, for nonequilibrium systems, where no analytic expression for a partition function 
can conveniently be used, this virial theorem is not applicable. In that case, a second, more 
useful, approach to the virial theorem begins with Newton's atomistic equation of motion 15 -- F, 
multiplied by r, summed up over all particles, and averaged over a sufficiently long time r: 
-NkrI 
= -PV 
+ 
r,iF, i. 
The pressure tensor P arises by separating the total force on each particle into "external" 
(wall) forces described by the pressure tensor and "internal" (particle) forces described in terms 
of microscopic interparticle forces. We work out the external forces for the simplest case, a cubic 
box. This involves no loss of generality because, if the box is sufficiently large, such sums become 
independent of box shape. The external forces acting on the x face of a cubic box are -+PxzV 2/3, 
:t=P~V 2/3, and =t=PzzV 2/8. It is necessary to assume that the wall forces are relatively short- 
ranged, so that the x coordinates of particles interacting with the corresponding pair of faces 
normal to the x axis differ by V 1/~. In that case the summed contributions are -P~zV, -PyxV, 
and - Pz~ V. 
The relationship between the internal and external forces is a tensor equation. The tensors 
contain sums involving the interparticle forces and the particle velocities. The equivalence, F (on 
i due to j) = -F (on j due to i) = Fii, has been used to combine the two terms riFii and 
rjFii to which the force Fii makes a contribution. The second-line equality, which introduces 
the temperature T, follows only at thermal equilibrium, where T is isotropic and well-defined. In 
that case the tensor ()--~= pp/m) is diagonal, and the three diagonal elements have time-averaged 
values equal to NkT. 

56 
Figure II.8 
(2 
Site 3 
Site 4 
Site= 1 
Site 2 
This time-averaging derivation can be modified in a conceptually important way, for solids. 
This involves introducing coordinates R fixed at the lattice sites and corresponding displacement 
coordinates dr such that r = R + dr. In Figure 8 the sites are indicated by filled circles and 
the displacement vectors dr by arrows. If we multiply the atomistic equation of motion mF = F 
by the lattice coordinates R rather than the instantaneous coordinates r of each particle--and 
this is unambiguous for solids--then the result for the pressure looks very much the same. But 
the dynamical variable rij is replaced by Rij and the velocity terms on the lefthand side do not 
appear because /~i3" is zero. Thus an alternative, but still exact, form for the solid-phase virial 
theorem is 
~ 
R~iF~ j = PV. 
This lattice-coordinates version of the virial theorem, with Rii = Ri - Rj, can also be 
derived from the solid-phase partition function by using the special particle displacement coor- 
dinates dr just defined. In Figure 9 three deformation modes for a (periodic) volume element 
containing two particles shown. The lattice coordinates, shown as filled circles, R, are carried 

57 
O-= 
Before 
Figure II.9 
10 o I 
O-= 
[oo I 
/ 
After 
along with the deformation while the displacement coordinates, shown in Figure 9 as horizontal 
lines joining the open-circle "particles" to their lattice sites, dr, are unchanged. These displace- 
ment coordinates are tied to lattice positions, r = R + dr. Then, in the differentiation of the 
Helmholtz free energy, only the R coordinates depend upon volume or shape. This solid-phase 
virial theorem has the advaaltage that it could be applied to a nonequilibrium steady state in 
which the external pressure forces and the temperature are constant. But the time-averaging 
step is particularly inconvenient in treating transient nonequilibrium problems. 
A third, and still more useful, virial theorem can be obtained by returning to the fun- 
damental definition of pressure as a momentum flux. In the Lagrangian frame a particle in the 
volume V = LxLyLz, moving a distance (pz/rn) dt and carrying with it some property ~ con- 
tributes (p~/m)~/V to the x component of the flux of/~. To see this, imagine saxnpUng this flux 
component in a uniform way, with a small element of area dy dz oriented perpendicular to the x 
direction. What is the probability that this element will intersect the trajectory through which 
a particle moves during dt? In the x direction the probability of overlap is (p=/m) dt/L~, where 

58 
L~ is the box length in the x direction. In the yz-plane at any x the probability of overlap is just 
dy dz/L~Lz. Thus the flux of p, the probability of observing the flow of fl divided by the time dt 
and by the area L~Lz, is (pz/m)fl/V. 
To illustrate the calculation of such a flux we imagine a shear flow in which the x velocity 
component varies with y, so that the transverse momentum flux, P~y = Py~, is nonzero. Consider 
the contribution of a particle to P~zV, the flow of x momentum p~ in the y direction. The 
quantity being carried, Px, intersects a plane perpendicular to the y direction with probability 
(dz dx/LzLz) [(py/m) dt/Ly], for a momentum flux contribution pzpy/(mV). The total pressure 
tensor for a volume V includes the corresponding sum over all particles, 
~-'~(pp/m) = PKinetieV C PV. 
But momentum can also be transferred from Particle i to Particle j through the interpartiele 
forces exerted by i on j and j on i, Fji and Fi i = -Fji. This momentum transfer can be visualized 
as a direct connection between the two interacting particles rij = ri - U- (If we wanted to derive 
the result for a solid we could alternatively use the separation vector linking two lattice sites, 
Rij.) Then the probability of intersection of the ij vector with an area dz dx perpendicular to 
the y axis is (the absolute value of) Yii dz dx/V. 
The complete instantaneous momentum flux has the form 
PV = ~(pp/m) + Z ~ rijFii. 
The expression is clearly symmetric, with Pij = Pji. Only six of the nine elements of this tensor 
are independent (three of the four in two dimensions). In the alternate expression involving the 
lattice coordinates Rij this symmetry is lost. A very similar complexity results if we consider 
molecules composed of atoms and imagine that the momentum of each molecule is located at its 
center of mass. The best feature of this third and most useful, direct, derivation of the virial 
theorem from momentum flux is that the unpleasant and impractical time-averaging, used to 
avoid the ~ r/~ term, as well as the fluctuations in the external forces, is not required. The third 
and last instantaneous form of the virial theorem applies equally well far from equilibrium. 
In most molecular dynamics simulations relatively short-ranged forces are used. 
It is 
apparent that the minimum-image method for calculating the energy, in which each Particle i 
interacts with the nearest image of Particle j, leads in a natural way to the realization that the 
rii appearing in the virial theorem are minimum-image separations. 

59 
In computer simulations this last expression for the pressure tensor is the most useful one. 
An analogous form for the heat flux vector can be derived by writing down the equation for the 
rate at which the energy of Particle i changes, Ei, and multiplying by either ri or Ri. If an 
external source of heat produces a heat flux Q by interaction with boundary particles, then the 
resulting theorem, the "Heat Theorem", is 
QV = 
+ 
. (p, + 
where again the double sum is over all N(N - 1)/2 pairs of particles in the volume V. 
If we multiply by Ri rather than ri, the first sum disappears, because Ri vanishes and the 
double sum contains Rij rather than rij: 
QV -- 
R,j [F,j. (p, + 
Just as with the virial theorem, an instantaneous derivation of the heat theorem can be 
based on a physically-based microscopic calculation. The kinetic contributions come from the 
rate at which particles carry energy, with each single-particle contribution multiplied by the 
probability that the corresponding trajectory intersects a sampling plane. Potential contributions 
to the heat flux occur whenever two moving particles interact in such a way that one particle 
transfers a part of their joint energy to the other particle. 
The nature of this energy transfer is most obvious in a collision between two hard spheres, 
with one at rest before collision, and the other at rest after collision. In such a collision the total 
energy of the pair is transferred through a distance a, the hard-sphere diameter, at the instant 
of collision. 
II.D Elastic Constants 
"Elastic constants" are equilibrium thermodynamic properties which describe the response 
of the pressure tensor to strain. These strains describe the stretches in the x, y, and z directions, 
as well as the changes in angles at the corners of a slightly-deformed cube. Thus the deformation 
of a three-dimensional solid can be described by specifying these six independent strains. In a two- 
dimensional solid there are only three independent strains, the stretches in the x and y directions 
and the change in the angle at the corner of a slightly-deformed square. Figure 9 illustrated 
these deformations. If the volume has already been specified as an independent variable the 
number of independent strains is reduced, from 6 to 5 in three dimensions, and from 3 to 2 in 
two dimensions. 

60 
At equilibrium, from either the microscopic or the macroscopic viewpoint, reversible elastic 
strain deformations can be carried out either isothermally or isentropically, so long as the change 
is sufficiently slow. Thus two different types of elastic constants--isothermal and adiabatic-can 
be measured for any particular choice of geometric deformation. In either case the kinetic energy, 
which measures the microscopic temperature, must remain in equilibrium with the potential 
energy throughout the deformation. In the adiabatic case temperature generally varies with 
deformation, but in such way that the energy change is solely the result of reversible "work 
terms" of the form -VP : Vu. 
Adiabatic sound waves result from macroscopic sinusoidal deformations, with wavelengths 
sufficiently long that heat conduction between the compressed and dilated parts of the crystal can 
be ignored. Thus the calculated microscopic adiabatic elastic constants correspond to the moduli 
which describe the propagation of macroscopic sound waves. 
There seems to be no direct dynamical derivation for the elastic-constant formulae. Micro- 
scopic expressions for the elastic constants follow from differentiation of the microscopic internal 
energy with respect to strain at constant entropy or the Helmholtz free energy with respect to 
strain at constant temperature. In both cases the first derivative gives the usual pressure tensor. 
The second derivative produces averages of fluctuations of pressure-tensor components. These 
so-called "fluctuation terms" arise from the changes in relative probability of a system's states 
brought about by the deformation itself. 
The reason for the extra terms can be understood by applying time-dependent perturbation 
theory. In first order, the theory shows that a system does not change state when it is deformed 
reversibly. Thus the pressure, P = -(OE/OV)s, can be calculated by averaging -(dEs:ate/dV) 
over all of the quantum (or classical) states of an elastic solid. In second order the state populations 
change. Thus the isentropic bulk modulus, -V(cgP/OV)s cannot be calculated by so averaging 
the adiabatic second derivative, (d2Es,a:e/dV2). 
Just as in deriving the virial theorem, there are alternative expressions for the elastic 
constants corresponding to the two kinds of deformation considered in our pressure-tensor deriva- 
tion, deforming the individual atomic coordinates r and deforming the underlying lattice-site 
coordinates R. 
In computer simulations the elastic constants can be determined by using the equilibrium 
fluctuation formulae. Alternatively, nonequilibrium simulations of deformation can be used. If 
the deformation is slow the response can be reversible and either adiabatic or isothermal. If it 
is fast the viscoelastic respose can be measured. Artificial deformations can be carried out so 
rapidly that the structure has no chance to relax. Then the so-called "infinite-frequency" elastic 
constants are measured. Simulations of elastic response over the whole frequency range from 
the zero-frequency adiabatic soundwave moduli to the infinite-frequency ones can be carried out 
using the nonequilibrium methods described in Chapter IV. 

3 
61 
[ 
I 
I 
Figure II.10 
2 
mary 
0~ 
] 
l 
I 
10 
20 
30 
40 
Typical results for a dense liquid, taken from Denis Evans' work, are sketched in Figure 
10. A typical single-particle vibrational Einstein frequency would correspond to the middle of the 
frequency range shown in the Figure. At that frequency the response of a fluid to a sinusoidal 
strain is mainly elastic (labelled "imaginary" in Figure 10) rather than viscous (which is labelled 
"real" in that Figure). 
Simulations become difficult outside the regime of small-amplitude homogeneous defor- 
mation. Exploratory work on high-amplitude deformation and plasticity has shown that the 
flow response is sensitive to both geometry and size. This work suggests strongly that new 
and fundamental understanding of deformational constitutive relations will result from increased 
computational power. 

62 
II.E Number-Dependence 
The number-dependence of small-system results needs to be understood in order to make 
the most efficient use of computer time. It is generally best to study the properties of several 
systems of different sizes rather than expending the entire computational effort on one large-sized 
system. The variation with number found in this way can be an accurate guide to extrapolation. 
By number-dependence we mean the way in which a thermodynamic or hydrodynamic system 
property depends upon the size of the system. Such a property must first be defined in a clear way. 
There are several different ways in which mechanical properties such as pressure can be measured. 
Not only can different methods produce different values, but also the corresponding fluctuations 
can differ. The differences vanish for sufficiently large systems, and the fluctuations vanish, but 
for finite systems the number-dependence is sometimes the largest source of uncertainty in a 
computer simulation of macroscopic properties. For this reason it is necessary to choose carefully 
the method through which a particular many-body property will be determined. 
For gases and for solids the number-dependence of thermodynamic properties can be un- 
derstood theoretically. Consider, for instance, the canonical partition function for the three hard 
disks shown in Figure 11: 
Z~= (2~mkT)3//ffff 
,1 +3o~o +30%+ 0~)drY~(3! h6). 
The diagrams represent the Mayers' expansion of the Boltzmann factor e -¢/(kT) into a 
product of terms: 
= ]-[[1+ 
in which lines joining particles together represent factors 
[ e -¢lCkT) - 1 ]. 
Two separate types of number-dependence can be seen in this simple three-particle ex- 
ample. The 3 appearing in the second term of Z3, for instance, corresponds, in the general 
N-particle case, to the number of pairs of particles in the system, N(N - 1)/2 = 3. The pres~ 
ence of an N - 1, rather than N, produces a number-dependence, in the free energy per particle, 
of order 1/N. Likewise, the N! in the denominator introduces a different number-dependence in 
the entropy and free energies per particle, of order (lnN)/N. 
This dependence can be seen by 
using Stirling's expansion to the factorial: 

63 
(l/N) lnN! = ln(N/e) + (lnN)/2N + (ln2r)/2N + O(N-2). 
The same logarithmic dependence arises again in the two-dimensional solid. As a series 
of p~ogressively larger crystals is examined the low-frequency end of the vibrational spectrum 
gradually dominates the high frequencies in determining the mean-squared displacement of the 
particles, 
<6r 2 ) = DkT<II~)I m. 
In two dimensions the linear dependence of the frequency distribution, proportional to w for 
low frequencies, leads to a logarithmic divergence of the mean-squared displacement, proportional 
to (kT/*;) lnN, where t¢ is a force constant. The gradual growth of the mean-squaxed displacement 
Figure 
i~ 1.11 

64 
for a series of N-particle nearest-neighbor triangular-lattice crystals is shown in Figure 12. 
The slope can alternatively be calculated d~rectly from elastic theory, and agrees well with the 
numerical data. 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
. 
2.5- Fig 
2.0 
'" 1.5 
A 
A 
1.0 
5 
0.5 
• 
0 
-- 
1 
I 
L 
L 
I 
I 
I 
0 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
INN-* 
Both kinds of number-dependence illustrated here, 1/N and (lnN)/N, are typically 
present in the mechanical and thermal properties of fluids and solids. It is usual to express the 
dependence of hard-particle macroscopic properties on the volume relative to the close-packed 
volume. For disks ~azld spheres of diameter a, these volumes are 
Ao = (3/4)1/2Na 2 and Vo = (1/2)1/2Na ~, 
respectively. To illustrate these number-dependent effects in a quantitative way consider the 
following Table of compressibility factors PV/NkT for three hard disks at a density one-fourth 
the close-packed value, with V = 4 × 3 × (3/4)1/2a 2 : 
Thermodynamic 
Monte Carlo 
E constant 
K constant 
PV/NkT 
1.68 
1.49 
1.74 
1.99 

65 
The first entry in the Table gives the large-system "Thermodynamic" value. The ~Monte 
Carlo" compressibility factor describes the result of an analytic evaluation of the three-disk par- 
tition function equivalent to an exact canonical-ensemble Monte Carlo simulation. The last two 
values, likewise calculated analytically, correspond to two different kinds of three-disk molecu- 
lar dynamics calculations, isoenergetic and isokinetic. The distinction between isoenergetic and 
isokinetic molecular dynamics may appear strange for hard disks, but hard-disk dynamics only 
makes sense as a limiting ease, with the range in which the forces act approaching zero. In this 
limit, two different results are obtained, one for isoenergetic (Newtonian) dynamics and one for 
isokinetic (Gaussian) dynamics. Both results approach the thermodynamic limit as the number 
of particles is increased from three toward infinity, but exhibit deviations of order 1IN from this 
limit in intensive thermodynamic properties. 
The situation for transport properties is similar. The Newtonian viscosity for a periodic 
low-density system of two hard disks, 
~/= 0.166 (mkT) 1/2/a, 
is about half the infinite-system value. Similarly, the heat conductivity for a moderate-density 
three-disk system is lower than the large-system value by about a factor of three. This last 
comparison is at present a little uncertain because the three-disk conductivity appears to vary 
logarithmically with the strength of the current, as discussed at the end of Chapter IV. 
Small systems often provide very interesting and suggestive results in return for relatively 
little computational effort. A periodic system of two hard disks is a good example. The canonical 
partition function for two disks or spheres can be worked out analytically at any density up to 
the maximum, at which the area A equals the close-packed area Ao. If boundaries are chosen as 
shown in Figure 13, so that the two disks can make a "triangular" (close-packed) lattice at high 
density (so that one side of the rectangular periodic box is 31/2 times the length of the other), 
then an interesting equation of state, shown as a solid line in Figure 13, results. It has a loop 
resembling a van der Waals loop linking a diffusionless solid phase to a fluid phase. This is a 
simple example illustrating the possibility of finding phase transitions, singularities in free-energy 
derivatives, in finite, even very small, systems. 
It is also shown in Figure 13 that the pressure and volumes at which this two-disk melting 
transition occurs lie within 10% of the large-system values indicated by the dashed line. Similar 
close agreement is found for the three-dimensional hard-sphere analog. The melting transitions 
found for two-dimensional hard disks and three-dimensional hard spheres were early successes of 
equilibrium molecular dynamics and Monte Carlo simulations. The phase transition found in two 
and three dimensions occurs in other numbers of dimensions too. See the paper by Michels and 
Trappeniers cited in-the Bibliography for a discussion of the hard hypersphere melting transition. 

66 
10 
8 
Z 
o 
7 
6 
5 
I 
I 
_ Figure 
II.13 
\ 
\ 
\ 
\ 
\ 
\ 
\ 
--\ 
\ 
\ 
\ \ \\ 
t 
I 
L 
L 
L 
1.20 
1.25 
1.30 
1.35 
1.40 
A/A o 
I 
Solids also exhibit number-dependence in the':r constitutive properties. Again, these ef- 
fects are usually of order 1/N and (lnN)/N. Both of these dependences can be illustrated and 
understood hy considering the simplest prototype of a crystal, a periodic one-dimensional chain 
of Hookes'-Law oscillators. We show a three-particle specimen in Figure 14. We choose the 
spring constant, interparticle spacing, and mass all equal to one. With these units a two-partlcle 
chain has a single vibrational frequency of 41/2 --- 2. Because the two particles would move in 
opposite directions the force each would feel is twice that which would result if the other were 
fixed. There is a second factor of two because there are two springs~ not just one, in a periodic 
system. For the three-particle chain there are two degenerate modes with frequencies 31/2 , in 

( 
67 
Figure II.14 
3 
) 
which one particle moves with an amplitude twice the magnitude, and opposite in sign, of the 
others. In a four-particle chain we have the same vibration that occurs in the two-particle chain as 
well as two more degenerate modes, with frequencies 21/2 , which occur when two non-neighboring 
particles are fixed and the remaining two move in opposite directions. 
From these examples we see that the products of the nonzero frequencies in the 2, 3, and 
4-particle periodic chains are respectively 2,3, and 4. Thus we correctly guess that the Nth 
root of the fixed-center-of-mass vibrational partition function for an N + 1 particle chain with N 
vibrational modes, 
[ ~vibrational] 1/N 
= 
rL(N+ 
"-'NTI 
J 
lies below the infinite-system limit by a factor of (N + 1)UN, so that the small-system free energy 
per mode exceeds the limiting thermodynamic-system value by kT [ln(N Jr 1)] IN. 
II.F Results 
Molecular dynamics simulations began over 30 years ago. 
Since then a vast body of 
gas, fluid, and solid results has been generated. These data have been invaluable in developing 
theories and models linking microscopic mechanisms to experimental data. Some of the early 
work, exemplified by Rahman's efforts, was motivated by the availability of distribution functions 
from xray and neutron data as well as Kirkwood's efforts to calculate these functions theoretically. 
As it became clear that computers could simulate the structure and motions of real fluids and 
solids, the work became more quantitative, elaborating the thermodynamic properties for simple 
potentials, over a wide range of conditions, to accuracies of a percent, or better. 
By combining thermodynamic properties from different phases, "phase diagrams" were 
mapped out for a variety of simple pair potentials. The simplest of these is the hard-sphere phase 
diagram shown in Figure 15. The diagram divides all possible equilibrium states for N hard 
spheres in a volume V at a temperature T into three classes: on the left, fluid; on the right, solid; 
in between, fluid-solid mixtures. Hard spheres, like hard disks, exhibit only two phases~ fluid and 

68 
solid. The fluid phase transforms at high density into the solid phase. At expansions (V/Vo) - 1, 
relative to close packing, between 35% and 50% an equilibrium hard-sphere system contains both 
phases. In principle phase diagram calculations Jof this kind are relatively easy to carry out, If 
only single-phase c~alculations are included, first compu~Che_pressure (using the virial theorem) 
and temperature (p2)/(Dmk) as functions of energy and volume, P(E, V) and T(E, V) for each 
phase. Then, use thermodynamic relations to find the Gibbs' free energy, G = E + PV - TS as 
a function of P and T for each phase. From this the phase diagram follows easily. 
Figure II.15 
T 
Fluid 
O0 
Solid 
0 
0 
1 
Vo/V 
In practice there can be difficulties with the free-energy approach due to the persistence 
of metastable states. This metastability difficulty can be minimized by using external fields to 
stabilize phases or to promote the conversion process linking pairs of phases. The essential idea is 
to develop a reversible computer process for the phase transformation, to which thermodynamics 
can be applied. Such studies have shown that not only do hard disks and spheres exhibit a first- 
order melting transition, but also that these transitions can be used as prototypes for melting in 
real systems. An alternative to the free-energy approach is to simulate a system in which two 
or more thermodynamic phases coexist, thereby automatically satisfying the requirements of a 
common pressure, temperature, and chemical potential. 

69 
~,TV::I:rC:"'" "*' ~" '~Figure 
iI.16 
A simulation carried out at the two-dimensional Lennard-Jones triple point is illustrated 
in Figure 16. 
As reliable thermodynamic data became available for different pair potentials the value of 
corresponding-states approaches, through which properties of different systems are correlated, was 
established. The success of corresponding-states or perturbation theories of dense fluid properties 
can be understood in terms of old variational principles due to Gibbs. He pointed out that 
the distribution function in phase space characterizes each Hazniltonian and that the use of a 
distribution function for one Hamiltonian to calculate thermodynamics for a different one (the 
essence of perturbation theory) always leads to a positive error in the Helmholtz free energy. 
This principle has been developed into an operational model capable of predicting gas and fluid 
properties for simple materials with high accuracy. A related theory of solid properties has also 
emerged. 
Less is known away from equilibrium, because the problem is a harder one. It has been 
established that the properties of low-density gases not too far from equilibrium can be described 
quantitatively by solutions of the Boltzmann equation. ,~ successful combination of the Liou- 
ville probability propagation at constant density with the spreading described by Kolmogorov's 
entropy--actually a rate of entropy production--hasn't yet been carried out. But there are in- 
dications that transport properties can also be described by corresponding states relations. For 
instance, we will see in Chapter IV that the thermal conductivity for fluids composed of particles 
interacting with simple force laws can be found within about ten percent by relating it to the 
excess entropy. This relationship between conductivity and entropy can be understood by relating 
both properties to the Einstein vibrational frequency. In view of the difficulties standing in the 
way of an exact theory, the computer simulations are essential to developing understanding of 
nonequilibrium corresponding-states relations. 

70 
Bibliography for Chapter II 
Free volumes for hard disks are described in a paper (rejected by Molecular Physics) by W. 
G. Hoover, N. E. Hoover, and K. Hanson, ~Exact Hard-Disk Free Volumes", Journal of Chemical 
Physics 70, 1837 (1980). 
Monte Carlo calculations of elastic constants for Lennard-Jones crystals appear in A. 
C. Holt, W. G. Hoover, S. G. Gray, and D. R. Shortle, "Comparison of the Lattice-Dynamics 
and Cell-Model Approximations with Monte-Carlo Thermodynamic Properties ~ , Physica 49, 61 
(1970). 
The viscoelastic fluid-phase results in Section D are reproduced from D. J. Evans, "Rheo- 
logical Properties of Simple Fluids by Computer Simulation", Physical Review A23, 1988 (1981). 
The number-dependence of the equation of state for systems of hard disks and hard spheres 
is discussed in a paper by W. G. Hoover and B. J. Alder, ~Studies in Molecular Dynamics. IV. The 
Pressure, Collision Rate, and Their Number-Dependence for Hard Disks", Journal of Chemical 
Physics 46, 686 (1967). 
The number-dependence of the entropy is discussed in ~Number-Dependence of Small- 
Crystal Thermodynamic Properties", by W. G. Hoover, A. C. Hindmarsh, and B. L. Holian in 
the Journal of Chemical Physics 57, 1980 (1972). A formalism, the cell-cluster theory, well-suited 
to crystal defect free-energy calculations is discussed in a series of papers by Dale Huckaby, Cesar 
M. Garza, Howard S. Carman, and Robert H. Kineaid, all in the Journal of Chemical Physics: 
"Derivation of the Cell-Cluster Theory for Harmonic Solids", 65, 607 (1976); "Effect of a Pair 
of Vacancy Defects on the Free Energy of Harmonic Cystals', 73, 1923 (1980); ~Cell-Cluster 
Calculations of the Entropy of Cracked Crystals', 75, 4651 (1981); ~Harmonic Surface Entropy 
of Noble Gas Crystals", 78, 2598 (1983). 
The phase diagrams for three-dimensional inverse-power repulsive potentials are estimated 
in a paper by W. G. Hoover, M. Ross, K. W. Johnson, D. Henderson, J. A. Barker, and B. C. 
Brown, ~Soft-Sphere Equation of State", Journal of Chemical Physics 52, 4931 (1970). 
J. P. J. Michels and N. J. Trappeniers "Dynamical Computer Simulation on Hard Hyper- 
spheres in Four- and Five-Dimensional Space ", Physics Letters A 104, 425 (1984) describe the 
calculation of phase diagrams for four- and five-dimensional hyperspheres. 
An accurate equation of state can be calculated for particles interacting with pairwise- 
additive forces using "A Perturbation Theory of Classical Equilibrium Fluids ", by H. S. Kang, 
C. S. Lee, and T. Ree, and F. H. Ree, Journal of Chemical Physics 82,414 (1985). For solids a 
similar approach can be followed: H. S. Kang, T. Ree, and F. H. Ree, ~A Perturbation Theory 
of Classical Solids", in the Journal of Chemical Physics 84, 4547 (1986). 

71 
A corresponding states treatment of fluid-phase heat conductivity based on computer sim- 
ulations is discussed by R. Grover, W. G. Hoover, and B. Moran, ~Corresponding States for 
Thermal Conductivities via Nonequilibrium Molecular Dynamics", Journal of Chemical Physics 
83, 1255 (1985). See Section I of Chapter IV of these notes. 
Farid Abraham kindly provided a preliminary draft of his comprehensive and stimulating 
review, "Computational Statistical Mechanics, Methodology, Applications, and Supercomputing", 
to appear in Advances in Physics (1986). The last Figure in this Chapter, the last Figure in 
Chapter I, and the first Figure in Chapter IV were all reproduced from originals in this review 
article. 

