See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/257688470
Bio-manufacturing technology based on diatom micro- and nanostructure
Article  in  Chinese Science Bulletin · October 2012
DOI: 10.1007/s11434-012-5410-x
CITATIONS
57
READS
5,000
6 authors, including:
Yu Wang
University of Washington Seattle
62 PUBLICATIONS   1,635 CITATIONS   
SEE PROFILE
Jun Cai
Beihang University (BUAA)
130 PUBLICATIONS   1,899 CITATIONS   
SEE PROFILE
All content following this page was uploaded by Jun Cai on 26 January 2014.
The user has requested enhancement of the downloaded file.

 
 
 
 
© The Author(s) 2012. This article is published with open access at Springerlink.com 
csb.scichina.com   www.springer.com/scp 
                      
†These authors contributed equally to this work. 
*Corresponding authors (email: zhangdy@buaa.edu.cn; hutter2@163.com) 
Review 
Mechanical Engineering 
October 2012  Vol.57  No.30: 38363849 
 
doi: 10.1007/s11434-012-5410-x  
Bio-manufacturing technology based on diatom micro- and 
nanostructure 
ZHANG DeYuan†*, WANG Yu†*, CAI Jun, PAN JunFeng, JIANG XingGang &  
JIANG YongGang 
Bionics and Biologic Micro/nano-bio-manufacturing Research Center, Beihang University, Beijing 100191, China 
Received March 31, 2012; accepted May 21, 2012 
 
Diatom frustules, considered as novel bio-functional materials, display a diversity of patterns and unique micro- and nanostruc-
tures which may be useful in many areas of application. Existing devices directly use the original structure of the biosilica frus-
tules, limiting their function and structural scale. Current research into the shapes, materials and structural properties of frustules 
are considered; a series of frustule processing methods including structure processing, material modification, bonding and assem-
bly techniques are reviewed and discussed. The aim is to improve the function of diatom frustules allowing them to meet the de-
sign requirements of different types of micro devices. In addition, the importance of the comprehensive use of diatom processing 
methods in device research is discussed using biosensors and solar cells as examples, and the potential of bio-manufacturing 
technology based on diatom frustules is examined. 
diatoms, biosilica structure, biomimetics, assembly, microfluidic, micro- and nanomanufacturing, micro device 
 
Citation:  
Zhang D Y, Wang Y, Cai J, et al. Bio-manufacturing technology based on diatom micro- and nanostructure. Chin Sci Bull, 2012, 57: 38363849, doi: 
10.1007/s11434-012-5410-x  
 
 
 
Nature presents a wide range of functional structures. Par-
ticularly at the micro- and nanoscale, the complexity and 
functionality of biological structures are far greater than 
those of equivalent artificial devices, making these biologi-
cal structures an appropriate subject for biotechnology and 
bio-manufacturing [1,2]. In our previous studies, we have 
reported bio-limited forming [3] and bio-replication forming 
[4,5] methods for manufacturing functional particles or sur-
face morphology from biological structures. Micro devices 
with highly desirable structure and characteristics could be 
produced from biological micro- or nanostructures. Sin-
gle-celled diatoms are widely distributed in rivers, lakes and 
other water bodies, and have a fast (exponential) reproduc-
tive rate. The cell wall of a diatom known as the frustule, 
has a transparent structure composed of amorphous silica 
[6]. The frustule has good mechanical strength [7,8], a variety 
of three-dimensional (3D) shapes [9,10], multi-level na-
nopores and microstructures [11,12], large surface area and 
unique optical properties [13–15], making it a potential 
novel functional material for bio-manufacturing. Studies on 
theoretical understanding, manufacturing methods and func-      
tionalization of diatom frustules are ongoing.  
In the last two centuries, the importance of diatom frus-
tules in the field of micro- and nanotechnology has become 
increasingly evident. The potential of frustules has been 
extensively explored by academics and for commercial ap-
plication. The resulting new theories and techniques have 
found wide application, leading to the formation of a new 
interdisciplinary area of research called diatom-based 
bio-nanotechnology (or diatom nanotechnology) [16–21]. 
The potential for diatoms in device applications, such as 
high-sensitivity gas sensors [22], drug delivery devices [23], 
biocarriers for biosensors [24–27], micro-filters [12,28], 
solar cells, battery electrodes and electroluminescent dis-
play devices [19] has been examined. However, the direct 

 
Zhang D Y, et al.   Chin Sci Bull   October (2012) Vol.57 No.30 
3837 
use of original frustules limits the function of any practical 
diatom based device. For example, diatom-based drug de-
livery devices and filters only work with particles of certain 
size, limiting the functionality to the available size of the 
frustule nanopores; diatom-based biosensing devices (gas 
detectors or biodetection carriers) lack improved arranging 
or bonding techniques, limiting detection stability and 
throughput. Recently reported processing methods for 
structure and material modification, bonding and assembly 
of diatom frustules may improve frustule functionality to 
meet the design requirements of micro devices. 
In this review, the shape, structure and material proper-
ties of frustules are examined as well as existing methods 
for frustule processing, bonding and assembly. These are 
discussed to suggest ways to improve the function of frus-
tule based devices. The development of diatom-based bio- 
manufacturing technology will lead to improvement in the 
efficiency of use of biological resources. The following 
topics will not be discussed as key points, including molec-
ular biology [28,29], frustule formation [6,30], microm-
achining [16], diatom nanotechnology (microfluidic/optical 
application and functional materials [17,21,31]), biosensing 
and biomimetic membranes [18], solar cells, battery, elec-
troluminescent devices [19], gasoline extraction [32], envi-
ronmental monitoring [33] and phytolith nanotechnology 
[34]; excellent reviews on these topics are available. 
1  Structure of diatom frustule 
1.1  Classification of frustule shape 
There are about 110000 species of diatoms, and their frus-
tules show a variety of 3D shapes [35]. To guide the selec-
tion of a diatom for a particular device application, the dia-
tom frustules may be classified into three categories ac-
cording to shape. 
The reference coordinate axes are defined as follows 
(Figure 1): The plane of the valve surface is defined as x, y 
plane; the major axis of the valve is X and the minor axis of 
the valve is Y (for pennates only; for centricae: X=Y); the 
valve-through axis is z-axis, and the length of the line con-
necting the centers of epivalve and hypovalve is Z. Frustules 
come in three shapes, rod shaped (when Z>3X/3Y for cen-
tricae diatoms, or X>3Y>3Z for pinnate diatoms), flake 
shaped (when X>3Z and Y>3Z, most of which are valves 
collected from diatom frustules) and a generic 3D shape 
(when X≈Y≈Z). Figure 1 illustrates some examples of 
frustules (or valves) shapes.  
The three shapes may give different properties in device 
application or processing. First, devices have varying re-
quirements of the diatom structure. For example, flake 
shaped frustules/valves are better biocarriers for optical 
biodetection, because confocal scanning demands that all 
the antibodies are bound in a plane (see section 3.1). Second, 
the processing method should match the diatom structure.  
 
Figure 1  (Color online) Shape classification of diatom frustules. The 
images are 3D models. For images of actual cells and frustules refer to 
[9,10,20,35]. The actual sizes of the frustules are about 10–80 m. 
Rod shaped frustules are more fragile (especially pennates) 
than other shapes, so they should be fixed before processing. 
However, rod shapes may have advantage in ease of assem-
bling, and the monolayer assembled from rods has larger 
area coverage rate (or fill rate). Flake shaped frustules/ 
valves (such as valve of Coscinodiscus sp.) are used more 
frequently in optical devices, filters and biosensing. One 
reason is that the multi-level pores of frustules are arranged 
in a two-dimensional (2D) plane, facilitating the exploita-
tion of their optical properties and filtration functionality. 
The second reason is that the flat surface of flake shaped 
frustules allows them to be fixed onto a substrate/device 
more easily and firmly (the work described in section 2.3 
and 2.4 uses this shape). 3D shaped frustules have higher 
porosity when stacked or assembled, and so can be pro-
cessed more uniformly (see methods of material modifica-
tion in section 2.2).  
The size of the frustule is another parameter relating to 
processing. For example, small frustules can be arranged by 
more methods, and are more affected by Van der Waals 
forces and particle Brownian motion; big frustules sink 
faster in still water. Diatom frustules come in a size range of 
2 m to 5 mm; however, the size of the frustule does not 
relate to the species of diatom. For example, the diatom 
Coscinodiscus sp. has about 500 species, but their cells and 
frustules have sizes ranging from 10 m to 2 mm. Very few 
species of diatom have cell sizes less than 5 m and are 
generally distributed in fresh water; few species have cell 
sizes greater than 100 m and are generally distributed in 
sea water. Species with cell sizes in the range 5–100 m 
account for more than 60% of extant diatoms, distributed 
widely in fresh and seawater, and have a variety of shapes. 
China has vast water resources spanning a large range of 

3838 
Zhang D Y, et al.   Chin Sci Bull   October (2012) Vol.57 No.30 
latitude, and thus has rich sources of diatoms. 
1.2  Material properties of diatom frustules 
The frustule is generated by the transformation of silicate in 
the aquatic environment into a hard shell composed of silica 
(a biomineralization process [31,36,37]). The frustule shows 
good transmittance in ultraviolet to infrared range, and 
transmits more than 90% of visible light. The frustule has 
physical and chemical properties similar to quartz glass, and 
a density of 2.1–2.3 kg/m3. Hamm et al. [7] performed sim-
ulation studies of stress distribution in frustules via finite 
element analysis, and tested the compressive strength of 
four types of typical diatoms using a glass needle. The re-
sults show that the compressive strength of valve and girdle 
band (pennate diatom) could reach 680 and 330 MPa, re-
spectively, and the Young’s modulus of a typical frustule is 
about 22.4 GPa. Losic et al. [8] tested the hardness and 
elastic modulus of two types of frustules using atomic force 
microscopy (AFM) and found that the cribellum, cribrum 
and girdles have different mechanical properties, and the 
elastic modulus of frustule is similar to that of porous sili-
con manufactured by anodic oxidation. Umemura et al. [38] 
found that the structure and pores deform after heating at 
800°C for 2 h. The frustule reacts with hydrofluoric acid 
and strong alkali [39,40], and thus it is compatible with sil-
icon processing technology, such as wet etching, LIGA mi-
cromachining and silicon bonding [41,42]. 
1.3  Diatom frustule structure 
Although there are a considerable variety of diatom frus-
tules, their structures do show some common characteristics. 
As shown in Figure 2, the main structure of a diatom frus-
tule comprises the petri-dish-like epitheca and hypotheca 
[16], which usually split during the fissiparity period. The 
new epitheca and hypotheca will separately combine with 
the original hypotheca and epitheca to form the frustules of 
the two daughter cells [10]. The epitheca or hypotheca is 
composed of valve, mantle and girdle band. The valve and 
girdle band could be easily split by acid washing. In addi-
tion, frustules have many micro- or nanoscale substructures 
[10], such as multilevel pores, marginal processes, spines,  
 
Figure 2  (Color online) Structure of diatom frustules (centricae diatom). 
and raphe.  
The multilevel pores are the main substructures. Figure 
3(a) shows typical Coscinodiscus pores [8,12]: hundreds of 
large pores (called foramen, Figure 3(b)) are regularly ar-
rayed on one side of the frustules; a circular or hexagonal 
chamber (called an areola) lies under the foramen; scores of 
second-level pores (blind holes, diameter 200 nm) are lo-
cated at the bottom of the areolae; and numerous sieve pores 
(diameter 40 nm, Figure 3(c)) are distributed within each 
second-level pore. The mantle and girdle band of Coscino-
discus also have myriads of pores (diameter 100 nm; Figure 
3(d)). Particularly, the pores arranged on the girdle have an 
asymmetric pore structure, affecting the Brownian motion 
of mesoscale particles [43]. The center process, satellite 
process and septa of some diatom frustules may also have 
micro- or nano-scale pores [10]. 
Some frustules are not isolated units but are connected 
with each other through a microstructure of valves. Some 
types of diatom cells form clusters for migration and to 
withstand water flow. Figure 4 shows various patterns of 
clusters, see [10] for more examples. A rational use of the-
se natural communities could simplify the assemblage of 
frustules for device use. However, the cluster needs careful 
fixing onto the substrate, because the adjacent frustules may 
disconnect after the organic matter is removed.  
2  Processing of diatom frustules 
Acid-cleaned frustules contain several components, including  
 
Figure 3  (Color online) Typical structure of multilevel pores (Coscino-
discus sp.). (a) 3D model; (b) arrays of foramen and second-level pores, 
scale bar 1 m; (c) array of sieve pores, scale bar 2 m; (d) array of na-
nopores on girdle band, scale bar 1 m. 

 
Zhang D Y, et al.   Chin Sci Bull   October (2012) Vol.57 No.30 
3839 
 
Figure 4  (Color online) Clusters of living diatom cells. (a) Models of 
diatom clusters; (b) a chain cluster composed of more than one hundred of 
Nitzschia cells (light microscope image); (c) a chain cluster of Nitzschia 
cells fixed by 2.5% glutaraldehyde; (d) microstructure of valves for con-
necting adjacent frustules of Nitzschia; (e) frustules of Skeletonema sp. 
connected by marginal processes. (c)–(e) are SEM images.  
the complete frustule, valve, girdle band, and divided pro-
cess, which all should be separated before use or further 
processing. The valves and girdles have similar diameter 
and quantity, and thus can hardly be separated using a filter 
cloth. Our lab (Bionic and Micro/Nano/Bio Manufacturing 
Technology Research Center of Beihang University) calcu-
lated the settling velocity of valve and girdle band of diatom 
Coscinodiscus sp. (diameter 40 m) in still-water using 
Stokes formula, and found both to have different settling 
velocity due to their different section area [44]. This results 
was verified experimentally: after stirring and settling for 20 
min, 80% quantity of valves settled to the bottom of the 
measuring cylinder (20 cm in liquid depth), while 80% 
quantity of girdles was still distributed in the liquid layer of 
10–50 mL scale (Figure 5(a)). Thus, a method of cycled 
settling and liquid removal as depicted in Figure 5(b) could 
be used to separate the valves (collected from the bottom of 
the cylinder; Figure 5(c)) and girdles (collected from the 
supernatant of the cylinder; Figure 5(d)).  
Using this method, different micro- and nanoscaled com-
ponents were separated and collected from many varieties of 
diatoms [45]. It was found that particles with dimensions of 
several microns settled more slowly than those with dimen-
sions of dozens of microns, and thus substructures separated 
from the frustules can be collected relatively easily. An ad-
vantage of the settling method is that the impact load of 
still-water exerted on the frustules is less than that by filtra-
tion, making the settling method ideal for industrial produc-
tion compared with filter cloth or gas phase separation.  
 
Figure 5  (Color online) Settling separation of valves and girdles of dia-
tom Coscinodiscus sp. (a) Quantity of valves and girdles on each liquid 
layer; (b) schematic of settling separation method; (c) valves and (d) gir-
dles collected (light microscope images). 
2.1  Structural modification of diatom frustule 
Most diatom frustules are thinner than a human hair (the 
diameter of adult human hair is about 70–100 m), and thus 
their structure is difficult to modify using traditional mi-
cromachining methods. This problem could be addressed by 
two strategies: a chemical method based on the material of 
frustule, and a culture method based on the growth and re-
production methods of the diatom.  
(i) Chemical method. Certain surface deposition pro-
cesses based on SiO2 could be used to thicken the frustule 
or reduce its pore size. In a study by Losic et al. [46], the 
technique of atomic layer deposition (ALD) was used, in 
which ultrathin films of TiO2 are deposited uniformly on the 
frustules to reduce their pore size and to increase the selec-
tivity of particle size when using frustules for filtration. At 
100°C, the frustules were ventilated using a sequence of 
gases: TiCl4 (0.4 s), N2 (0.5 s), H2O (0.5 s) and N2 (0.5 s). 
Every cycle of the sequence increases the thickness of TiO2 
film by 0.04 nm (see eq. (1)). The size of sieve pores may 
be reduced from 43 to 5 nm by repeated cycles (between 1 
to 1000 times). The ALD technique can also be used to de-
posit other materials onto the frustule, such as Al2O3, ZrO2, 
SnO2, V2O5, ZnO and TiN [46].  
Alternatively, frustules are soluble in hydrofluoric acid 
(HF) and strong alkali solutions (eqs. (2) and (3)). We used 
HF to etch the frustules to enlarging the pores and reducing 

3840 
Zhang D Y, et al.   Chin Sci Bull   October (2012) Vol.57 No.30 
the frustule thickness [39]. Due to the multilevel pore struc-
ture of Coscinodiscus sp., etching will result in a discontin-
uous change of pore size, which should be observable in 
filtration applications. Figure 6(a) shows the cross section 
of an areola, in which the sieve pores play the role of the 
filtration pore. The surface layer of frustule requires more 
time to dissolve, and can thus be considered to act as a resist 
layer. Figure 6(b) shows how filtration pores change during 
HF etching. After the first stage, the diameter of the sieve 
pore had increased from 40 to 60 nm, and then adjacent 
sieve pores began to interconnect; the filtration pores were 
about 60–200 m and became uncontrollable until the cri-
bellum dissolved completely. In the second stage, the second- 
level pores act as filtration pores and their size is increased 
from 200 to 300 nm, and then adjacent 2nd-level pores 
begin to connect; the filtration pores were about 300–700 m 
and became uncontrollable again, and the cribrum dissolved.  
 
Figure 6  (Color online) Enlargement of pores using HF as etchant. (a) 
Schematic model of areolae (cross-section); (b) structural modification 
caused by HF etching; (c) enlargement of foramen by different concentra-
tion of HF; (d) enlargement of foramen of different diatoms by 1% HF; 
(e)–(f) frustule samples processed by 1% HF solution for foramen en-
largement: (e) foramen of Coscinodiscus (C. sp.): (i) original, (ii) 1 h, and 
(iii) 3 h; (f) foramen of Navicula (N. sp.): (i) original, (ii) 1 h; (g) foramen 
of Melosira (M. sp.): (i) original, (ii) 3 h, and (iii) 3.5 h. Unlabelled scale 
bars: 1 μm. (e)–(g) are SEM images. 
At the third stage, the foramen plays the role of filtration 
pore, and the diameter is increased from 700 to about 1100 
nm (the dissolution of septa supporting areola will divide 
the valve into two plates at this stage), and then adjacent 
foramen connect and the valve became incomplete. There-
fore, the adjustable size ranges of the filtration pores of 
Coscinodiscus sp. are (40–60 nm), (200–300 nm), and 
(700–1100 nm). When using the valve as filter, the filtra-
tion pore can be adjusted in this span to suit the size of 
the particles. 
As shown in Figure 6(c) and (d), the sizes of the foramen 
are increased after etching with 1% HF for 1–3 h (Figure 
6(e)–(g) are SEM images of diatom samples). However, the 
cribellum will fully dissolve in 1% HF in 5 min. Thus 0.1 % 
HF is the proper etchant for enlarging the sieve pores. HF 
was not found to affect the composition, chemical bonds, or 
photoluminescence signature of diatom frustules but could 
reduce their surface area (the surface area of Melosira frus-
tules reduced from 75 to 14 m2/g in 5 min by 1% HF), im-
plying that the sieve pores contribute to at least 60% of sur-
face area.  
Crawford et al. [40,47] used NaOH mixture (1% NaOH, 
2% NaOCl, 1% sodium dodecyl sulfate and 50 mmol/L so-
dium dodecyl sulfate) to etch the frustules and observed that 
the inner structure of frustule is loose and porous (24–48 h 
is needed to remove the surface resist layer). Compared 
with baking [38] and alkali etching, HF etching is a faster 
and cleaner method for pore enlargement and structure 
modification.  
 
4
2
2
TiCl
2H O
TiO
4HCl



 
 
 
2
2
3
2
SiO
2NaOH
Na SiO
H O



 
 
 
2
4
2
SiO
4HF
SiF
2H O



 
 
(ii) Structural modification based on the natural methods 
of frustule formation: the formation of frustules in diatom 
cells is a bottom-up process. The formation process of the 
frustule structure is briefly discussed here; for full details 
see [6,17,30]. As shown in Figure 7(a), water-soluble silicic 
acid (Si(OH)4) in the environment passes through the sieve 
pores and cytomembrane (composed of a pectic substance) 
and enters into the diatom cell. Then, Si(OH)4 is transported 
by silica transport vesicles (STV) to reach the silica deposi-
tion vesicles (SDV) where valves are produced [48]. The 
silanol groups of adjacent Si(OH)4 are hydrolyzed in SDV 
and form Si-O-Si bonds [49]. The “silaffins” protein and 
long chain polyamines (LCPA) in SDV catalyze the hy-
drolysis reaction and affect the patterns of the valves 
[50–52]. The formation of valves occurs in two stages (see 
pennates and centricae in Figure 7(a)): at first, along with 
the widening of SDV, the framework structure is formed. 
This stage usually takes few to several minutes. At the next 
stage, the valve becomes thickened as does the SDV, and 
microstructures develop on the valve. The second stage  

 
Zhang D Y, et al.   Chin Sci Bull   October (2012) Vol.57 No.30 
3841 
 
Figure 7  (Color online) Schematic illustrations of (a) formation and (b) 
reproduction of diatom frustules. (a) was revised after consideration of 
[17,19,31]. 
usually takes several hours. The structure changes greatly 
during its formation, and thus different structures of the 
valve could be obtained by acid-washing the cells at differ-
ent stages. Moreover, the formation of frustule can be af-
fected by the mother liquor in SDV, such as H+ [53], salt 
[54] and metal ions [55,56]. In another study, Jeffryes et al. 
[56,57] added 50 μmol/L of Ge(OH)4 to the culture medium, 
which reduced the pore size of the newly generated frus-
tules from 203 to 124 nm, and a frustule framework struc-
ture was obtained. The GeO2-SiO2 composite frustule has 
special semiconducting and photoelectric characteristics, 
namely its photoluminescence (PL) intensity was enhanced 
by four fold. Townley et al. [55] observed that the pore size 
of diatoms in nickel sulfate-polluted seawater was altered, 
and the PL of polluted frustule vanished. This lesson from 
nature may help us improve the culture medium for fast 
cultivation of diatoms or modifications to frustules. For 
example, the nutrient profile of a lake during an algal bloom 
disaster may help us optimize the medium for fast cultiva-
tion of certain species of diatom. In addition, the protein and 
enzyme content in diatom cells was altered by Poulson et al. 
[58] using molecular genetic methods to modify the struc-
ture or properties of a diatom from its roots.  
(iii) Structural modification in the frustule reproduction 
method: diatoms reproduce mainly by fissiparity, which 
leads to fast reproduction, exponential growth and reduced 
frustule size. As shown in Figure 7(b), the epitheca and hy-
potheca of the mother cell are of different sizes (labelled as 
1 and 2); the newly formed “half-thecas” in SDV are slightly 
smaller than 1 and 2 (labeled as 2 and 3). After the first di-
vision, the two daughter cells have frustules composed of 
1–2 and 2–3 separately. After the second division, four 
daughter cells are produced, whose frustules are composed 
of 1–2, 2–3 (two) and 3–4 separately. Every act of division 
reduces the size of frustule by dozens of nanometers but the 
pore size does not change. When the size of a cell reduces 
to below two-thirds of the biggest cell, that cell will restore 
to the original size by auxospore formation. Using the size 
decline law, frustules of certain size can be obtained by 
measuring the reproductive duration. We have attempted to 
cultivate diatoms in a polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) micro-
fluidic chip. The reproduction speed in the PDMS chip was 
reduced even as new medium was injected into the culturing 
pool using a micro injector (the size of culturing pool 
should be larger than 500×500×20 m3 to keep the cells 
alive). However, there are several advantages in using a 
chip culture. First, the growth and reproduction of diatom 
could be observed more easily in such small space than in a 
petri-dish or 96-hole cell culture plate. Second, the inner 
environment of chip is cleaner and the condition of culture 
could be easily adjusted. Third, special frustule structures 
can be obtained by injecting 90°C H2O2 into the culturing 
pool to remove the organic matter (living cells), such as the 
framework structure of developmental valves in the SDV 
and frustules of a certain size after several reproduction 
cycles.  
(iv) Degeneration of diatoms in an artificial medium can 
be used as another approach to structural modification. Cer-
tain species of diatom show a reduction in cell size after 
years of cultivation in the laboratory, and other species even 
generate variant structures. For example, the triadius struc-
ture of Phaeodactylum tricomutum changes into a rhomboid 
structure after cultivating for several years under laboratory 
conditions (found by the Freshwater Algae Culture Collec-
tion of the Institute of Hydrobiology (FACHB) Collection 
of Wuhan, China). We propose two possible reasons for this: 
first, although the artificial culture medium can simulate all 
the nutrient substances available in natural waters, the dia-
toms grown in the laboratory lack certain necessary chal-
lenges to survival such as aquatic bacteria (some diatoms 
grow and reproduce faster when challenged by certain aquatic 
bacteria), upper food chain predators, severe environmental 
stress and other factors present in natural waters. Lack of 
these survival stimulations may weaken the physiological 
functions of diatom cells. Second, the small volume of the 
culture flask or incubator may restrain the generation of 
auxospores.  
One disadvantage of the culture method is that it requires 
weeks to months to accomplish significant structural modi-
fications. 

3842 
Zhang D Y, et al.   Chin Sci Bull   October (2012) Vol.57 No.30 
2.2  Material modification of diatom frustule 
Material modification is an important approach for chang-
ing the material property or function of frustules. Current 
research suggests several new materials to add or replace in 
frustules by chemical, culture or replica method while 
keeping the original structure of frustules. These methods 
are summarized in several reviews, including in a review by 
Losic et al. [21] (Figure 8 was revised on the basis of [21]).  
(i) Direct processing of frustules. Sandhage et al. [59–66] 
use the term Bioclastic and Shape-Preserving Inorganic 
Conversion (BaSIC) methods to describe their method for 
modifying the biosilica frustule into new nanocrystal mate-
rials whilst maintaining the original frustule structure. Through 
gas/silica displacement reactions (e.g. magnesio-isothermic 
reduction), MgO [59], TiO2 [60] and Si [61], frustules with 
fine nanoscale structures were obtained. The technological 
conditions of fabricating frustules composed of other mate-
rials, such as Al2O3, CaO, Fe2O3, Li2O, Nb2O5, SrO and 
Ta2O5 have been established [62]. Subsequent coating or  
 
Figure 8  (Color online) Methods of material modification of a biosilica 
frustule. Revised on the basis of [21]. 
displacement reactions on MgO frustule substrates could 
produce new products, such as frustules composed of ZrO2 
[63], MgO/BaTiO3, BaTiO3, MgO/BaTiO3 (coated with Eu3+ 
[64]), SrTiO3 [65], C, or Pt/C [66] (the expected properties 
or potential uses of these frustules are summarized in Figure 
8). In addition, both hydrothermal growth and vapor-phase 
transport can produce zeolites/SiO2 composite frustules 
[67,68], which have many uses such as molecular sieves and 
water/waste treatment [69,70]. Culture methods reported by 
Rorrer et al. [56,71] for the successful addition of GeO2 and 
TiO2 to biosilica frustules during the natural growth of a 
diatom have been described.  
(ii) Frustules have been used as templates to obtain cast 
or composite frustule structures. Several cast structures of 
frustules were obtained by coating and subsequent removal 
of the frustules, which were composed of Ag [72], Au [73], 
epoxy [74], carbon [75,76], boron nitride [77] or ZrO2 [78]. 
Solution coating and subsequent thermal treatment could 
coat ZnFe2O4 [79], Zn2SiO4 (coated with Mn [80]) and Ba-
TiO3 [81,82] onto frustules. Electroless plating has been 
shown to be effective in coating metal (Au, Ag or Pd) onto 
frustules [83]. Some composite frustules have new charac-
teristics, for example, a polyaniline coated frustule has a 
certain degree of electrical conductivity [84]. We have used 
frustules of different shapes as templates to fabricate elec-
tromagnetic shielding or wave adsorbing particles (e.g. frus-
tules coated with a layer of Ferrite [85,86], Ag [87], Cu, Ni- 
Fe alloy [88], CoNiP, NiFeP or BaCoZn-ferrite [89]), and 
found that the frustule shape affects the electromagnetic 
properties of the coated frustules. 
(iii) The replica method is precise at the nanoscale and 
could be used to make frustule structures with new and pure 
materials. Polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) has been used to 
replicate the pore patterns of two centricae diatom frustules 
by a two-step replica method [90]. The PDMS replicas had 
the same multi-level pore structure as the original frustules 
and nanoscale precision of replication. The size error in the 
horizontal plane was less than 20 nm, and the vertical size 
error was less than 50 nm.  
2.3  Bonding technology for diatom frustules 
Making the frustules bond onto a substrate is a key problem 
in the fabrication of diatom-based devices. Several studies 
have reported success in modifying the surface of diatoms 
and substrates so as to encourage bonding with covalent 
bonds. Umemura et al. [38] used 3-Aminopropyltriethox-     
ysilane (APES) to modify the mica substrate, and then the 
cells of pennate diatom would then readily attach to the 
modified surface during culturing. Wang et al. [91] used 
polyethylene with various electrical properties to separately 
modify the frustules and the substrate, and then the frustules 
can assemble and bind onto the area of the substrate having 
inverse electric charges.  
We used silica bonding technology to facilitate the 

 
Zhang D Y, et al.   Chin Sci Bull   October (2012) Vol.57 No.30 
3843 
bonding of biosilica frustules onto a silicon-based substrate, 
such as common glass composed of NaSiO3/SiO2, quartz 
glass consisting of a pure SiO2, silicon wafer with a na-
noscale surface oxide layer, and a PDMS substrate 
[41,42,92,93]. The mechanism of traditional silica bonding 
is to break the molecular structures at interfaces and then 
form Si-O-Si between the interfaces with the help of exter-
nal energy. The external energy may be supplied in the form 
of pressure, heat, ultraviolet (UV) light or a catalyst. The 
diatom frustules are made up of SiO2, and so theoretically, 
they can be bonded with a silica substrate (or with each 
other) and form clean and firm Si-O-Si bonding. HF can be 
used as a catalyst (or etchant) in bonding frustules onto a 
common glass, quartz glass or silicon substrate. After im-
mersing the frustules and substrate in 1% HF for 1–3 min, 
the two interfaces were etched and unstable silanol groups 
generated. Then, the two interfaces were joined at 80°C for 
3 h under a pressure of 0.6 MPa to form Si-O-Si groups 
[42,92] (Figure 9(a)). Figure 9(c) shows the bonding inter-
face of a frustule and quartz glass. Diatom frustules could 
be bonded with PDMS substrate under a more gentle condi-
tion (no pressure or heat). Exposing the sample to UV light 
with a wavelength 345 nm for 3 h, converts some -OSi 
(CH3)2O- groups on the surface of PDMS into -O4Si(OH)4-n- 
groups. The frustule and activated PDMS surface are at-
tached (in 1 min) and placed for 48 h. During this period,  
 
Figure 9  (Color online) Silica bonding between diatom frustules and 
silica-based substrate. (a) Schematic of bonding diatom frustules onto glass 
substrate assisted by HF activitation; (b) schematic of bonding diatom 
frustules onto PDMS substrate assisted by UV radiation; (c) interface be-
tween frustule (Coscinodiscus sp.) and quartz glass; (d) Nitzschia frustules 
bonded onto PDMS surface. 
the generated Si-OH of PDMS will condense with the frus-
tule Si-OH and form Si-O-Si cross bonds [41,93] (Figure 
9(b) and (d)). Both the above methods yield good bonding 
strength. When tested with AFM calibrated glass needle (for 
full test methods see [7,94]), a single frustule bonded onto 
glass/PDMS may be shown to withstand a shear force of 
more than 100 N. 
2.4  Assembly technologies for diatom frustules 
Assembling diatom frustules into a 2D array or monolayer 
film is an important technique to improve the efficiency, 
function or throughput of diatom devices. The arrangement 
and bonding process of diatom frustules should be consid-
ered at the same time. Whilst the bonding process has been 
discussed in previous section, the arranging process will be 
dealt with under this section. Some possible methods for 
assembling microscale frustules include precise operation, 
self-assembly and using natural clusters of diatoms. A dis-
placement precision of 0.1 m can be achieved using a mi-
cro-manipulator, which is ideal to precisely arrange diatom 
frustules on the 2D plane or 3D space. However, the effi-
ciency is too low for batch operation and device fabrication. 
As pointed out in section 1.3, some diatoms are known to 
self-organize into clusters of various patterns. After fixing 
with 2.5% glutaraldehyde, these clusters could be arranged 
and fixed onto a substrate. Our lab attempted to culture 
long-chain clusters of diatom Nitzschia and in a long and 
narrow channel of PDMS chip, the cell clusters bonded to 
the channel bottom by UV-assisted bonding (see section 
2.3), and the PDMS chip was well packed.  
For arranging large quantities of frustules in 2D plane, 
the self-assembly and self-alignment methods [95,96] of the 
macroscale or mesoscale could be referenced. Reports about 
self-assembly of frustules are rare. Wang et al. [91] used an 
inkjet device to modify a glass surface so as to attract frus-
tules to the modified region to form arrays. We have used 
lithography to study the patterning of frustules. As shown in 
Figure 10(a), a photo-resist film of 3 μm was spin-coated 
onto a PDMS surface. After exposing and developing, some 
pits on the resist film showed patterns generated by the 
photo-mask, and thus the frustules could contact with pat-
terned areas on PDMS surface. The subsequent bonding 
process and removal of resist film causes the frustules to fix 
onto PDMS in controlled patterns (Figure 10(c) and (d) are 
examples). For substrates composed of materials that cannot 
be easily bonded with frustules, an interlayer may be intro-
duced between the frustules and substrate to fix the pat-
terned frustules. For example, we fabricated a film of hot 
melt adhesive (HMA-the adhesive is composed of eth-
ylene-vinyl acetate copolymer) on the glass surface as a 
bonding layer. The photo-resist was spin-coated on the 
HMA layer (Figure 10(b)). After the frustules formed pat-
terns in pits of resist film, the glass substrate was heated to 
110°C for 3 min, at which temperature the HMA layer  

3844 
Zhang D Y, et al.   Chin Sci Bull   October (2012) Vol.57 No.30 
 
Figure 10  (Color online) Lithography-assisted arrangements of frustules 
on the substrate. (a) Schematic of arranging and bonding frustules onto 
PDMS substrate; (b) schematic of patterning and adhering frustules onto 
glass substrate; (c) array of Coscinodiscus valves bonded onto PDMS 
(SEM image, scale bar 50 m); (d) array of Cymbella frustules bonded 
onto PDMS (SEM image, scale bar 100 m); (e) eye patterns of Nitzschia 
frustules adhered onto PDMS (PL image under light microscope, scale bar 
500 m); (f) BUAA pattern of Cymbella frustules adhered onto glass sub-
strate (PL image, scale bar 500 m). 
would fix the frustule patterns. Figure 10(e) and 10(f) show 
the PL image of frustule patterns adhering on the HMA lay-
er after the removal of resist film, which indicates that the 
HMA material did not affect (or disturb) the optical proper-
ty of frustules. Although new material was added between 
the frustule and substrate, the interlayer fixing methods are 
more practical in certain cases, because it allows the use of 
substrates of different materials—even flexible or elastic 
materials. The lithography-aided frustule assembly method 
has some advantages: the patterns can be designed in any 
shape and size, and the position accuracy and the arranging 
efficiency are high. 
Some researchers in Japan have proposed methods to 
fabricate micro-particles into compact monolayers or multi-
layers based on gravity, interfacial tension or magnetic 
force [97]. We used the floating assembly phenomenon to 
prepare a compact monolayer of Coscinodiscus valves and 
fix it on the substrates [94]. Some species of diatom Coscino-
discus sp. have convex valves with sieve pores distributed 
on the external surface. This kind of valve could float on 
water and assembly at the highest point of water (Figure 
11(a)). The floating of the valves may due to the sieve pores, 
which prevent water from filling the areolae (Figure 11(c) is 
an estimate–the valve will sink in 1% HF solution in 1 min, 
as the sieve pores enlarge). The buoyancy causes the valves 
to assemble at the highest point, and the attractive force 
existing between valves maintains the assembly state of 
valves. As shown in Figure 11(b), when valve A is moved, 
valve B will move to valve A if the distance between them 
is not more than 100 m.  
The buoyancy of the valves has several uses. First, after 
the water evaporated, the valves maintaining their assembly 
state can be fixed onto the substrate using a bonding method 
of the type described in section 2.3 (Figure 11(d)). A compact  
 
Figure 11  (Color online) Floating assembly of Coscinodiscus valves and 
some potential uses. (a) Motion of valves floating on water droplet; (b) 
attraction between valves which maintained their contact state; (c) a possi-
ble interface between the valve and water; (d) method of fabricating mon-
olayer/multilayer of valves; (e) and (f) are methods of sealing particles 
with valves. 

 
Zhang D Y, et al.   Chin Sci Bull   October (2012) Vol.57 No.30 
3845 
monolayer of valves has been fixed onto a glass slide using 
HMA [94]. Second, valves with a convex lens shape can 
form an inner volume of about 1.5×104 m3 when attached 
onto a flat surface, which can be used to seal functional par-
ticles for filtration or optical use (e.g. light focusing). Figure 
11(e) and (f) shows simple methods of particle sealing. Big 
particles (or small frustules modified with functional mole-
cules) with sizes larger than sieve pores can be added to or 
scattered directly onto the valves; whilst particles smaller 
than sieve pores should be fixed onto the other substrate (B) 
in advance. The valves floating on the droplet of substrate A 
can be reversed and taken away by substrate B (see [98]). 
After bonding the large valves onto substrate B, the particles 
were contained within chambers formed by the valves and 
substrate B. A biosensor model with similar structures has 
been proposed [16]: receptor molecules were sealed in the 
chamber of frustule, and thus small molecules may enter via 
the pores of frustule and bind to the receptors, eliciting a 
signal, while larger molecules disrupting the signal are pre-
vented from entering the chamber.  
For frustules which hardly float on water, octadecyltri-
chlorosilane (OTS) can be used to improve their hydropho-
bicity [99] and make them float and assemble. The rod 
shaped and flake shaped frustules/valves are most suited for 
this monolayer fabrication method.  
3  The outlook for diatom-based manufacturing 
technology 
Biological materials have been largely used in industrial 
products due to their fast reproduction rate, green and re-
newable nature, complex structures, and natural optimized 
functions. Diatom frustules possess several excellent func-
tions and potential for micro- and nanoscale manufacturing. 
3.1  Potential of diatom frustules in device application 
Although diatoms are unicellular organisms, their frustules 
have evolved multiple physiological functions. In addition 
to protecting the interior of the cell [7], the frustules have 
the ability to adjust pH near cell surface for adsorbing CO2 
[100] or to connect with other cells for survival and migra-
tion [101]. The pores of frustules also have some physio-
logical functions. First, while providing the structural strength 
of the frustules, the pore chambers and pores help to control 
cell weight and allow the cells to float or migrate easily. 
Second, the pore matrix and the profile of the valves may 
form into a convex lens to gather light for photosynthesis 
[13]. Third, the sieve pores have a diameter between the 
size of nutrients and the size of bacteria [12], which help 
filter out harmful substances [102]. Moreover, the multi- 
level pores contribute to the large surface area of frustules, 
which help absorb nutrients from the surrounding environ-
ment. 
Many industrial products utilize the natural functions of 
diatom frustules described earlier. For instance, construction 
materials made of diatomite can insulate heat and noise, and 
regulate humidity because of the outstanding pore volumes 
[103]. Diatomite filters can remove impurities and bacteria 
from water, and at the same time absorb metallic ions, fluo-
ride ions and dye groups due to their surface electric proper-
ties [104]. However, the integration of these functions and 
properties into micro- or nano devices requires the compre-
hensive development and use of diatom processing tech-
nologies. Research on diatom-based biosensing devices and 
solar cells is discussed here to illustrate the importance of 
these new diatom processing technologies.  
Many recent studies on biosensing devices use the pho-
toluminescence (PL) properties of frustules. In 2005, De 
Stefano et al. [14] found that diatom frustules emit 500 nm 
wavelength blue light after being illuminated with an UV 
light of 325 nm wavelength, this is known as the PL phe-
nomenon. The peak of the PL spectrum varies when the 
frustules are surrounded by different gases or vapors (e.g. 
NO2, ethanol or acetone). PL has attracted wide interest, and 
methods for enhancing the PL characteristics of frustules 
through special medium culture, thermal treatment and 
chemical modification have been reported [57,61,105]. No-
tably, Bao et al. [61] modified the original biosilica frustule 
into a nanocrystalline Si material whilst maintaining the 
original frustule structure. The absorbability and PL char-
acteristics of modified frustules have an enhancement: PL 
spectrum sensitive to gases at 1 ppm. In 2009, Gale et al. 
[25] found that PL can be affected by the biomass attached 
to the frustules, and used frustules for protein detection a 
year after Townley et al. [24] first bound proteins onto 
frustules. With the technique of protein binding, Lin et al. 
[27] used frustules with uniform pores as biocarriers for 
electrochemical detection. Compared with other 3D carriers 
(e.g. porous alumina), the frustule-based carrier performed 
with better detection sensitivity and linearity. We have ex-
plored the potential of diatom in biochip or microfluidic 
chip detection (using fluorescence detection), which em-
ployed the techniques of protein binding and frustule ar-
ranging/bonding. There are several advantages of the use of 
frustules in optical detection (Figure 12(a)). First, the large 
surface and porous structure of the frustule allow the anti-
body to be bound to the outer surface, inner surface and 
pores, and all the optical signals of antibody can be still 
discerned due to the transparency of the frustule [106,107]. 
Second, a frustule region with a high antibody density can 
enhance the contact rate of both antibody and antigen, and 
thus improve the detection sensitivity and signal intensity (a 
triple signal intensity from the frustule system is detected 
compared with a glass equivalent). Third, the porous struc-
ture of the frustule allows the antigens to freely contact with 
the antibodies by “surface flow” or “flow-through” motion, 
reducing the hybridization time. These examples show the 
potential of frustules in biosensing devices, whilst stressing 

3846 
Zhang D Y, et al.   Chin Sci Bull   October (2012) Vol.57 No.30 
on the need to develop improved processing technology. 
Recently, diatoms have been proposed for use in solar 
cells, batteries, or electroluminescent devices by Rorrer’s 
research group [19]. Dye-sensitized solar cells (DSC) is a 
low cost photovoltaic device [108] with a solar-current con-
version efficiency of about 12%. DSC works as follows. The 
ruthenium based dye particles are bound to a crystalline 
anatase TiO2 film (forming the photoanode), which are im-
mersed in electrolyte. When irradiated by sunlight, the dye 
releases electrons to the TiO2 film and forms electron hole 
pairs. The electrons pass through the TiO2 layer, conductive 
glass (FTO-glass), the appliance or load and back to the 
electrolyte. The electrolyte releases electrons to fill the 
electron hole in the dye. Jeffryes et al. [71] inserted TiO2 to 
frustules by culture, and attached the composite frustules to 
the dye-TiO2 layer (Figure 12(b)). The transparent frustule 
will not block the penetration of photons; and the light scat-
tering, light reflection and light focusing caused by pores of 
frustules all help to direct photons to the dye [109,110]. 
Enhancement of photonic capture results in a thinner pho-
toanode layer which decreases the electron diffusion dis-
tance, increases the efficiency and reduces the fabrication 
cost. The effectiveness of the TiO2-frustule layer can be  
 
Figure 12  (Color online) Schematics of some diatom based devices. (a) 
Optical bio-detection using frustules as a biocarrier; (b) a diatom based 
DCS device (revised on the basis of [19]). 
improved, because the quality of titanium inserted into 
frustule is low (4.9 g TiO2/100 g SiO2) and the TiO2 is 
mostly distributed near the pores. In a subsequent study, 
Jeffryes et al. [111] used a deposition method to fabricate 
composite frustules with a uniform TiO2 coating layer (1.13 
g TiO2/1 g SiO2). The addition of the composite frustule in 
the photoanode improves the efficiency by 3.7%. Thus it 
can be seen that new diatom processing methods can im-
prove the performance of diatom devices.  
3.2  The evolution of diatom processing technologies 
In diatom processing, better methods for culturing, extrac-
tion and modification need to be identified. First, we should 
promote large scale culturing and extraction techniques for 
obtaining industrial quantities of frustule structures [112]. 
Thousands of species of diatoms could be obtained from 
natural waters (or diatom culture collections) for studies. 
However, no more than 30 species of diatoms have been 
found of use in processing technology and device applica-
tion. Often the source of the frustules is diatomite, the ad-
vantages of which include low cost and a high yield of 
frustules. One disadvantage of diatomite that, as compared 
with fresh frustules collected from living cells, is damage to 
the cribellum (or sieve plate) and the lower surface area. 
Thus, better culturing techniques need to be developed to 
actually realize the potential from frustule diversity in de-
vice research. Second, techniques for selecting matching 
frustules should be promoted. After diatom fissiparity, one 
can identify frustules of different sizes. For example marine 
Coscinodiscus sp., although the micropores are of the same 
size, their diameters range from 60 to 100 μm, in accord-
ance with the normal distribution. Current research uses the 
properties of a single frustule or considers the micropores 
en mass. However, when diatom devices are to be produced 
on a mass scale, frustule assembling and device stability 
depend to a certain degree on the uniform size of frustules. 
That is why size selection and structure selection methods 
are in great need. Third, the biological functions, growth 
methods, and structural, mechanical, physical and chemical 
properties of diatom frustules should be understood more 
completely and deeply, which will promote better pro-
cessing methods. In addition, material modification methods 
are important for diatom applications. Controlling and using 
the functions of new materials is also important. For repli-
cation methods, nanoscale replica precision has been real-
ized. In the next step, rapid and large area replication tech-
niques and structure magnifying/reducing replication tech-
nique are required.  
Assembling and bonding techniques are important for 
device manufacturing. Bonding problems mainly arise from 
frustule-substrate and frustule-frustule bonding. Some ex-
isting Si-O-Si bonding technologies can be tried, but high 
pressure and temperature (>600°C) should be avoided. The 
use of an interlayer simplifies the bonding process but the 

 
Zhang D Y, et al.   Chin Sci Bull   October (2012) Vol.57 No.30 
3847 
thickness of the interlayer must be controlled (to nanoscale 
at best) to avoid blockage of the micropores or decline in 
properties of the surface area. Possible materials for the 
interlayer include hot melt adhesive, photosensitive resins, 
and spin on glass. New methods may be exploited for 
bonding frustules onto different materials, such as metal 
plates, organic material products, or living bodies. Biosilica 
possesses good biocompatibility, and thus frustules may be 
fixed to the body of creatures without allergy and rejection, 
exploiting the potential of frustules in biodetection and tis-
sue engineering. To overcome assembling problems, the 
goal is to develop micro- or nanoporous devices composed 
of 2D or 3D assembled frustules. When such assembling 
technologies exist, numerous micro- or nanoporous prod-
ucts composed of frustules may appear in future, such as 
diatom clothes with multiple functions (air conditioning, 
humidity adjusting, and light warming), multi-channel fuel 
cells, integrated circuits, processors using light to perform 
logical operations, etc. 
As a new functional material, diatom frustules have at-
tracted attentions from many broad disciplines (biology, 
material, micro- and nanotechnology, chemistry, machinery, 
medical science.). In the past decade, the scientific and 
technological fruits from the use of diatom frustules have 
been used in medical science, micro- and nano-manufac-     
turing, optomechatronics devices, semiconductors, comput-
er science. A great measure of commercial interest has been 
achieved in those fields. In the foreword of Gordon’s mon-
ograph “Diatom nanotechnology: special issue”, seven cur-
rent or prospective applications of diatom nanotechnology 
were described [113]. Most research is still laboratory-based. 
This review mainly summarizes certain newly reported 
methods of diatom processing and discusses possible frus-
tule processing methods for device application. The aim of 
this paper is to support and encourage bio-manufacturing 
technology in our country. 
This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of 
China (50805005, 51075020), the National High Technology Research and 
Development Program of China (2009AA043804), and the Doctoral Can-
didate Academic Newcomer Award of the Ministry of Education of China. 
The authors expresses their great thanks to the Freshwater Algae Culture 
Collection of the Institute of Hydrobiology (FACHB-Collection) of Chinese 
Academy of Sciences, Prof. Yahui Gao and Dr. Lin Sun of the Diatom 
Laboratory of Xiamen University, the Capitalbio corporation, Linjiang 
Silite Diatomite Corporation, Shengzhou Huali Diatomite Corporation, 
and Mingli Chen, Aobo Li, Wenqiang Zhang, and Yuanyue Li for help and 
suggestions.  
1 
Dai Z, Tong J, Ren L. Researches and developments of biomimetics 
in tribology. Chin Sci Bull, 2006, 51: 2681–2689 
2 
Zhang D, Cai J, Li X, et al. Bioforming methods of bionic manufac-
turing (in Chinese). J Mech Eng, 2010, 45: 88–92 
3 
Li X, Li Y, Cai J, et al. Metallization of bacteria cells. Sci China Ser 
E: Technol Sci, 2003, 46: 161–167 
4 
Zhang D, Li Y, Han X, et al. High-precision bio-replication of syn-
thetic drag reduction shark skin. Chin Sci Bull, 2011, 56: 938–944 
5 
Han X, Zhang D. Study on the micro-replication of shark skin. Sci 
China Ser E: Technol Sci, 2008, 51: 890–896 
6 
Dickerson M B, Sandhage K H, Naik R R. Protein- and peptide- di-
rected syntheses of inorganic materials. Chem Rev, 2008, 108: 4935– 
4978 
7 
Hamm C E, Merkel R, Springer O, et al. Architecture and material 
properties of diatom shells provide effective mechanical protection. 
Nature, 2003, 421: 841–843 
8 
Losic D, Short K, Mitchell J G, et al. AFM nanoindentations of dia-
tom biosilica surfaces. Langmuir, 2007, 23: 5014–5021 
9 
Qi Y, Li J. Chinese Freshwater Algae Chapter 10: Bacillariophyta (in 
Chinese). Beijing: Science Press, 2004 
10 
Qian S, Liu D, Sun J. Phylology Chapter 9: Bacillariophyta (in Chi-
nese). Qingdao: Qingdao Ocean University Press, 2005 
11 
Bozarth A, Maier U G, Zauner S. Diatoms in biotechnology: Modern 
tools and applications. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol, 2009, 82: 195– 
201 
12 
Losic D, Rosengarten G, Mitchell J G, et al. Pore architecture of dia-
tom frustules: Potential nanostructured membranes for molecular and 
particle separations. J Nanosci Nanotechnol, 2006, 6: 982–989 
13 
De Stefano L, Rea I, Rendina I, et al. Lensless light focusing with the 
centric marine diatom Coscinodiscus walesii. Opt Express, 2007, 15: 
18082–18088 
14 
De Stefano L, Rendina I, De Stefano M, et al. Marine diatoms as op-
tical chemical sensors. Appl Phys Lett, 2005, 87: 233902. 1–3 
15 
Fuhrmann T, Landwehr S, El Rharbi-Kucki M, et al. Diatoms as liv-
ing photonic crystals. Appl Phys B, 2004, 78: 257–260 
16 
Parkinson J, Gordon R. Beyond micromachining: The potential of di-
atoms. Trends Biotechnol, 1999, 17: 190–196 
17 
Gordon R, Losic D, Tiffany M A, et al. The glass menagerie: Dia-
toms for novel applications in nanotechnology. Trends Biotechnol, 
2009, 27: 116–127 
18 
Yang W, Lopez P J, Rosengarten G. Diatoms: Self assembled silica 
nanostructures, and templates for bio/chemical sensors and biomi-
metic membranes. Analyst, 2011, 136: 42–53 
19 
Jeffryes C, Campbell J, Li H, et al. The potential of diatom nanobi-
otechnology for applications in solar cells, batteries, and electrolu-
minescent devices. Energy Environ Sci, 2011, 4: 3930–3941 
20 
Gordon R, Sterrenburg F A S, Sandhage K H. Diatom Nanotechnol-
ogy: Special issue. New York: American Scientific Publishers, 2005 
21 
Losic D, Mitchell J G, Voelcker N H. Diatomaceous lessons in nano-
technology and advanced materials. Adv Mater, 2009, 21: 2947–2958 
22 
Lettieri S, Setaro A, De Stefano L, et al. The gas-detection properties 
of light-emitting diatoms. Adv Funct Mater, 2008, 18: 1257–1264 
23 
Losic D, Yu Y, Aw M S, et al. Surface functionalisation of diatoms 
with dopamine modified iron-oxide nanoparticles: Toward magneti-
cally guided drug microcarriers with biologically derived morpholo-
gies. Chem Commun, 2010, 46: 6323–6325 
24 
Townley H E, Parker A R, White-Cooper H. Exploitation of diatom 
frustules for nanotechnology: Tethering active biomolecules. Adv 
Funct Mater, 2008, 18: 369–374 
25 
Gale D K, Gutu T, Jiao J, et al. Photoluminescence detection of bio-
molecules by antibody-functionalized diatom biosilica. Adv Funct 
Mater, 2009, 19: 926–933 
26 
De Stefano L, Rotiroti L, De Stefano M, et al. Marine diatoms as op-
tical biosensors. Biosens Bioelectron, 2009, 24: 1580–1584 
27 
Lin K-C, Kunduru V, Bothara M, et al. Biogenic nanoporous sili-
ca-based sensor for enhanced electrochemical detection of cardio-
vascular biomarkers proteins. Biosens Bioelectron, 2010, 25: 2336– 
2342 
28 
Kroth P. Molecular Biology and the Biotechnological Potential of 
Diatoms Transgenic Microalgae as Green Cell Factories. New York: 
Springer, 2007 
29 
Hildebrand M. Biological processing of nanostructured silica in dia-
toms. Prog Org Coat, 2003, 47: 256–266 
30 
Martin-Jézéquel V, Hildebrand M, Brzezinski M A. Silicon metabo-
lism in diatoms: Implications for growth. J Phycol, 2000, 36: 821– 
840 
31 
Nassif N, Livage J. From diatoms to silica-based biohybrids. Chem 
Soc Rev, 2011, 40: 849–859 

3848 
Zhang D Y, et al.   Chin Sci Bull   October (2012) Vol.57 No.30 
32 
Ramachandra T V, Mahapatra D M, Karthick B, et al. Milking dia-
toms for sustainable energy: Biochemical engineering versus gasoline- 
secreting diatom solar panels. Ind Eng Chem Res, 2009, 48: 8769– 
8788 
33 
Brayner R, Couté A, Livage J, et al. Micro-algal biosensors. Anal 
Bioanal Chem, 2011, 401: 581–597 
34 
Neethirajan S, Gordon R, Wang L. Potential of silica bodies (phyto-
liths) for nanotechnology. Trends Biotechnol, 2009, 27: 461–467 
35 
Round F E, Crawford R M, Mann D G. The Diatoms: Biology and 
Morphology of the Genera. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 
1990 
36 
Fan T X, Chow S K, Zhang D. Biomorphic mineralization: From bi-
ology to materials. Prog Mater Sci, 2009, 54: 542–659 
37 
Grachev M A, Annenkov V V, Likhoshway Y V. Silicon nanotech-
nologies of pigmented heterokonts. BioEssays, 2008, 30: 328–337 
38 
Umemura K, Noguchi Y, Ichinose T, et al. Diatom cells grown and 
baked on a functionalized mica surface. J Biol Phys, 2008, 34: 189– 
196 
39 
Zhang D Y, Wang Y, Zhang W Q, et al. Enlargement of diatom frus-
tules pores by hydrofluoric acid etching at room temperature. J Mater 
Sci, 2011, 46: 5665–5671 
40 
Crawford S A, Chiovitti A, Pickett-Heaps J, et al. Micromorphogene-
sis during diatom wall formation produces siliceous nanostructures 
with different properties. J Phycol, 2009, 45: 1353–1362 
41 
Wang Y, Pan J, Cai J, et al. Assembling and patterning of diatom 
frustules onto PDMS substrates using photo-assisted chemical bond-
ing. Chem Lett, 2011, 40: 1354–1356 
42 
Zhang D, Cai J, Pan J, et al. Bonding method of diatom shell or kie-
selguhr and glass. PRC Patent, CN 101786799-A, 2010-7-28 
43 
Matthias S, Muller F. Asymmetric pores in a silicon membrane acting 
as massively parallel brownian ratchets. Nature, 2003, 424: 53–57 
44 
Zhang D Y, Wang Y, Pan J F, et al. Separation of diatom valves and 
girdle bands from Coscinodiscus diatomite by settling method. J 
Mater Sci, 2010, 45: 5736–5741 
45 
Zhang D, Cai J, Wang Y, et al. Method for separating and extracting 
shell pieces and clitellum from kieselguhr or diatoms. PRC Patent, 
CN 101792145-A, 2010-8-4 
46 
Losic D, Triani G, Evans P J, et al. Controlled pore structure modifi-
cation of diatoms by atomic layer deposition of TiO2. J Mater Chem, 
2006, 16: 4029–4034 
47 
Crawford S A, Higgins M J, Mulvaney P, et al. Nanostructure of the 
diatom frustule as revealed by atomic force and scanning electron 
microscopy. J Phycol, 2001, 37: 543–554 
48 
Hildebrand M, Volcani B E, Gassmann W, et al. A gene family of 
silicon transporters. Nature, 1997, 385: 688–689 
49 
Sumper M. A Phase Separation model for the nanopatterning of dia-
tom biosilica. Science, 2002, 295: 2430–2433 
50 
Kröger N, Deutzmann R, Sumper M. Polycationic peptides from dia-
tom biosilica that direct silica nanosphere formation. Science, 1999, 
286: 1129–1132 
51 
Sumper M, Kroger N. Silica formation in diatoms: The function of 
long-chain polyamines and silaffins. J Mater Chem, 2004, 14: 2059– 
2065 
52 
Kröger N, Lorenz S, Brunner E, et al. Self-assembly of highly phos-
phorylated silaffins and their function in biosilica morphogenesis. 
Science, 2002, 298: 584–586 
53 
Telford R J, Vandvik V, Birks H J B. How many freshwater diatoms 
are pH specialists? A response to Pither & Aarssen (2005). Ecol Lett, 
2006, 9: E1–E5 
54 
Vrieling E, Sun Q, Tian M, et al. Salinity-dependent diatom biosilici-
fication implies an important role of external ionic strength. Proc Natl 
Acad Sci USA, 2007, 104: 10441–10446 
55 
Townley H E, Woon K L, Payne F P, et al. Modification of the phys-
ical and optical properties of the frustule of the diatom Coscinodiscus 
wailesii by nickel sulfate. Nanotechnology, 2007, 18: 295101.1– 
295101.5 
56 
Jeffryes C, Solanki R, Rangineni Y, et al. Electroluminescence and 
photoluminescence from nanostructured diatom frustules containing 
metabolically inserted germanium. Adv Mater, 2008, 20: 2633–2637 
57 
Jeffryes C, Gutu, T, Jiao J, et al. Two-stage photobioreactor process 
for the metabolic insertion of nanostructured germanium into the sil-
ica microstructure of the diatom Pinnularia sp. Mater Sci Eng C, 
2008, 28: 107–118 
58 
Poulsen N, Chesley P M, Kroger N. Molecular genetic manipulation 
of the diatom Thalassiosira pseudonana (Bacillariophyceae). J Phycol, 
2006, 42: 1059–1065 
59 
Cai Y, Allan S M, Sandhage K H. Three-dimensional magnesia- 
based nanocrystal assemblies via low-temperature magnesiothermic 
reaction of diatom microshells. J Am Ceram Soc, 2005, 88: 2005–2010 
60 
Lee S J, Huang C H, Shian S, et al. Rapid hydrolysis of organophos-
phorous esters induced by nanostructured, fluorine-doped titania rep-
licas of diatom frustules. J Am Ceram Soc, 2007, 90: 1632–1636 
61 
Bao Z, Weatherspoon M R, Shian S, et al. Chemical reduction of 
three-dimensional silica micro-assemblies into microporous silicon 
replicas. Nature, 2007, 446: 172–175 
62 
Sandhage K H, Dickerson M B, Huseman P M, et al. Novel, bioclas-
tic route to self-assembled, 3D, chemically tailored meso/nanostruc-     
tures: Shape-preserving reactive conversion of biosilica (diatom) mi-
croshells. Adv Mater, 2002, 14: 429–433 
63 
Shian S, Cai Y, Weatherspoon M R, et al. Three-dimensional assem-
blies of zirconia nanocrystals via shape-preserving reactive conver-
sion of diatom microshells. J Am Ceram Soc, 2006, 89: 694–698 
64 
Weatherspoon M R, Haluska M S, Cai Y, et al. Phosphor microparti-
cles of controlled three-dimensional shape from phytoplankton. J 
Electrochem Soc, 2006, 153: H34–H37 
65 
Dudley S, Kalem T, Akinc M. Conversion of SiO2 diatom frustules to 
BaTiO3 and SrTiO3. J Am Ceram Soc, 2006, 89: 2434–2439 
66 
Bao Z, Song M-K, Davis S C, et al. High surface area, micro/meso-     
porous carbon particles with selectable 3-D biogenic morphologies 
for tailored catalysis, filtration, or adsorption. Energy Environ Sci, 
2011, 4: 3980–3984 
67 
Anderson M W, Holmes S M, Hanif N, et al. Hierarchical pore 
structures through diatom zeolitization. Angew Chem Int Ed, 2000, 
39: 2707–2710 
68 
Anderson M W, Holmes S M, Mann R, et al. Zeolitisation of diatoms. 
J Nanosci Nanotechnol, 2005, 5: 92–95 
69 
Hernandez-Ramirez O, Hill P I, Doocey D J, et al. Removal and im-
mobilisation of cobalt ions by a novel, hierarchically structured, di-
atomite/zeolite Y composite. J Mater Chem, 2007, 17: 1804–1808 
70 
Sanhueza V, Kelm U, Cid R, et al. Synthesis of ZSM-5 from diato-
mite: A case of zeolite synthesis from a natural material. J Chem 
Technol Biotechnol, 2004, 79: 686–690 
71 
Jeffryes C, Gutu T, Jiao J, et al. Metabolic insertion of nanostructured 
TiO2 into the patterned biosilica of the diatom Pinnularia sp by a two- 
stage bioreactor cultivation process. ACS Nano, 2008, 2: 2103–2112 
72 
Payne E K, Rosi N L, Xue C, et al. Sacrificial biological templates 
for the formation of nanostructured metallic microshells. Angew 
Chem Int Ed, 2005, 44: 5064–5067 
73 
Yu Y, Addai-Mensah J, Losic D. Synthesis of self-supporting gold 
microstructures with three-dimensional morphologies by direct repli-
cation of diatom templates. Langmuir, 2010, 26: 14068–14072 
74 
Gaddis C S, Sandhage K H. Freestanding microscale 3D polymeric 
structures with biologically-derived shapes and nanoscale features. J 
Mater Res, 2004, 19: 2541–2545 
75 
Holmes S M, Graniel-Garcia B E, Foran P, et al. A novel porous car-
bon based on diatomaceous earth. Chem Commun, 2006, 2662–2663 
76 
Cai X, Zhu G, Zhang W, et al. Diatom-templated synthesis of ordered 
meso/macroporous hierarchical materials. Eur J Inorg Chem, 2006: 
3641–3645 
77 
Kusari U, Bao Z, Cai Y, et al. Formation of nanostructured, nano-
crystalline boron nitride microparticles with diatom-derived 3-D 
shapes. Chem Commun, 2007, 1177–1179 
78 
Zhao J, Gaddis C S, Cai Y, et al. Free-standing microscale structures 
of nanocrystalline zirconia with biologically replicable three-dimen-     
sional shapes. J Mater Res, 2005, 20: 282–287 
79 
Liu Z, Fan T, Zhou H, et al. Synthesis of ZnFe2O4/SiO2 composites 
derived from a diatomite template. Bioinspi Biomim, 2007, 2: 30 
80 
Lee D H, Gutu T, Jeffryes C, et al. Nanofabrication of green lumi-       

 
Zhang D Y, et al.   Chin Sci Bull   October (2012) Vol.57 No.30 
3849 
nescent Zn2SiO4:Mn using biogenic silica. Electrochem Solid-State 
Lett, 2007, 10: K13–K16 
81 
Weatherspoon M R, Allan S M, Hunt E, et al. Sol-gel synthesis on 
self-replicating single-cell scaffolds: Applying complex chemistries 
to nature’s 3-D nanostructured templates. Chem Commun, 2005, 
651– 653 
82 
Ernst E M, Church B C, Gaddis C S, et al. Enhanced hydrothermal 
conversion of surfactant-modified diatom microshells into barium  
titanate replicas. J Mater Res, 2007, 22: 1121–1127 
83 
Bao Z H, Ernst E M, Yoo S, et al. Syntheses of porous self-supporting 
metal-nanoparticle assemblies with 3D morphologies inherited from 
biosilica templates (diatom Frustules). Adv Mater, 2009, 21: 474–478 
84 
Li X W, Bian C Q, Chen W, et al. Polyaniline on surface modifica-
tion of diatomite: A novel way to obtain conducting diatomite fillers. 
Appl Surf Sci, 2003, 207: 378–383 
85 
Zhang D, Zhang W, Cai J. Magnetization of microorganism cells by 
thermal decomposition method. Sci China Technol Sci, 2011, 54: 
1275–1280 
86 
Zhang W, Zhang D, Cai J. Fabrication of flake-shaped core-shell 
micro particles by way of thermal decomposition of pentacarbonyl 
iron on diatomite surface. Adv Eng Mater, 2011: 730–733 
87 
Lan M, Zhang D, Cai J, et al. Electroless plating of silver on micro-
organism cells. Adv Mater Res, 2011: 531–535 
88 
Cai J, Zhang D Y, Lan M M, et al. Research on magnetic metalliza-
tion of microorganism cells using electroplating technique. Sci China 
Technol Sci, 2011, 54: 1525–1531 
89 
Zhang D, Zhang W, Cai J. Fabrication and electromagnetic proper-
ties of flake ferrite particles based on diatomite. J Magn Magn Mater, 
2011, 323: 2305–2309 
90 
Losic D, Mitchell J G, Lal R, et al. Rapid fabrication of micro- and 
nanoscale patterns by replica molding from diatom biosilica. Adv 
Funct Mater, 2007, 17: 2439–2446 
91 
Wang W, Gutu T, Gale D K, et al. Self-assembly of nanostructured 
diatom microshells into patterned arrays assisted by polyelectrolyte 
multilayer deposition and inkjet printing. J Am Chem Soc, 2009, 
131: 4178–4179 
92 
Zhang D, Pan J, Cai J, et al. Hydrofluoric acid-assisted bonding of 
diatoms with SiO2-based substrates for microsystem application. J 
Micromech Microeng, 2012, 22: 35021–35029 
93 
Cai J, Wang Y, Zhang D, et al. A method of assembling and patterning 
diatom frustules onto PDMS substrates. PRC Patent, CN 201110326629. 
1, 2011-10-25 
94 
Wang Y, Pan J, Cai J, et al. Floating assembly of diatom Coscinodis-
cus sp microshells. Biochem Biophys Res Commun, 2012, 420: 1–5 
95 
George M W, Grzybowski B. Self-assembly at all scales. Science, 
2002, 295: 2418–2421 
96 
Whitesides G M, Boncheva M. Beyond molecules: Self-assembly of 
mesoscopic and macroscopic components. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA, 
2002, 99: 4769–4774 
97 
Nagayama K. Science of Self-Aasembly. Tokyo: Maruzen Co., Ltd, 
1997 
98 
Srinivasan U, Liepmann D, Howe R T. Microstructure to substrate 
self-assembly using capillary forces. J Microelectromech Syst, 2001, 
10: 17–24  
99 
Kulkarni S A, Ogale S B, Vijayamohanan K P. Tuning the hydro-
phobic properties of silica particles by surface silanization using 
mixed self-assembled monolayers. J Colloid Interface Sci, 2008, 318: 
372–379 
100 
Milligan A J, Morel F M M. A proton buffering role for silica in di-
atoms. Science, 2002, 297: 1848–1850 
101 
De Stefano M, De Stefano L, Congestri R. Functional morphology 
of micro- and nanostructures in two distinct diatom frustules. Super-
lattices Microstruct, 2009, 46: 64–68 
102 
Raven J A, Waite A M. The evolution of silicification in diatoms: 
Inescapable sinking and sinking as escape? New Phytol, 2004, 162: 
45–61 
103 
Zhang F. Processing and Application of Diatomite (in Chinese). Bei-
jing: Chemical Industry Press, 2006  
104 
Lin J. Study on preparation, characterization and dyes adsorption 
properties of diatomite-based adsorbent (in Chinese). Doctoral Dis-
sertation. Hangzhou: Zhejiang University, 2007  
105 
Umemura K, Noguchi Y, Ichinose T, et al. Morphology and physi-
cal-chemical properties of baked nanoporous frustules. J Nanosci 
Nanotechnol, 2010, 10: 5220–5224 
106 
Wang Y, Zhang D, Pan J, et al. Key factors influencing the optical 
detection of biomolecules by their evaporative assembly on diatom 
frustules. J Mater Sci, 2012, doi: 10.1007/s10853-10012-16554- 
10854 
107 
Pan J, Cai J, Zhang D, et al. Micro-arraying of nanostructured dia-
tom microshells on glass substrate using ethylene-vinyl acetate co-
polymer and photolithography technology for fluorescence spec-
troscopy application. Physica E, 2012, doi: 10.1016/j.physe.2012. 
1003.1032 
108 
Grätzel M. Dye-sensitized solar cells. J Photochem Photobiol C, 2003, 
4: 145–153 
109 
Park K H, Gu H B, Jin E M, et al. Using hybrid silica-conjugated 
TiO2 nanostructures to enhance the efficiency of dye-sensitized solar 
cells. Electrochim Acta, 2010, 55: 5499–5505 
110 
Ito S, Murakami T N, Comte P, et al. Fabrication of thin film dye 
sensitized solar cells with solar to electric power conversion effi-
ciency over 10%. Thin Solid Films, 2008, 516: 4613–4619 
111 
Jeffryes C, Gutu T, Jiao J, et al. Peptide-mediated deposition of 
nanostructured TiO2 into the periodic structure of diatom biosilica. J 
Mater Res, 2008, 23: 3255–3262 
112 
Wang Y, Zhang D, Cai J, et al. Biosilica structures obtained from 
Nitzschia, Ditylum, Skeletonema, and Coscinodiscus diatom by a fil-
tration-aided acid cleaning method. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol, 2012, 
95: 1165–1178 
113 
Gordon R. Preface to the Diatom Nanotechnology Special Issue. J 
Nanosci Nanotechnol, 2005, 5: 1–4 
 
Open Access This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License which permits any use, distribution, and reproduction 
in any medium, provided the original author(s) and source are credited. 
 
View publication stats

