From D. M. Pisanelli (ed.), Ontologies in Medicine, Amsterdam: IOS Press, 2004, 20–38 
 
 
Biodynamic Ontology:  
Applying BFO in the Biomedical Domain 
 
 
Pierre GRENON,1 Barry SMITH1,2 and Louis GOLDBERG1,3 
1Institute for Formal Ontology and Medical Information Science, University of Leipzig 
2Department of Philosophy, University at Buffalo 
3Department of Oral Diagnostic Sciences, University at Buffalo 
 
 
Abstract. We propose a modular formal ontology of the biomedical domain with 
two components, one for biological objects, corresponding broadly to anatomy, and 
one for biological processes, corresponding broadly to physiology. The result 
constitutes what might be described as a joint venture between two perspectives – of 
so-called three-dimensionalism and four-dimensionalism – which are normally 
regarded as incompatible. We outline an approach which allows them to be 
combined together, and provide examples of its application in biomedicine. 
 
 
 
 
Introduction 
 
Current approaches to formal representation in biomedicine are characterized by their focus 
on either the static or the dynamic aspects of biological reality. We here outline a theory 
that combines both perspectives and at the same time tackles the by no means trivial issue 
of their coherent integration. Our position is that a good ontology must be capable of 
accounting for reality both synchronically (as it exists at a time) and diachronically (as it 
unfolds through time), but that these are two quite different tasks, whose simultaneous 
realization is by no means trivial.  
 The paper is structured as follows. We begin by laying out the methodological and 
philosophical background of our approach. We then summarize the structure and elements 
of the Basic Formal Ontology on which it rests, in particular the SNAP ontology of objects 
and the SPAN ontology of processes. Finally, we apply the general framework to the 
specific domain of biomedicine.  
 
 
1. Background 
 
1.1 Methodology  
 
The methodology presupposed in what follows and developed in [10, 33] is realist, 
fallibilist, perspectivalist, and adequatist:  
(i)  
Realism holds that reality and its constituents exist independently of our 
(linguistic, conceptual, theoretical, cultural) representations thereof. 
(ii)  
Fallibilism accepts that our theories and classifications can be subject to revision.  
(iii)  
Perspectivalism maintains that there exists a plurality of alternative, equally 
legitimate perspectives on reality.  

(iv)  
Adequatism maintains that these alternative views are not reducible to any single 
basic view. Thus adequatism is opposed to reductionism, i.e. to the thesis that 
there is some one privileged perspective to which all other representations of 
reality can be reduced.  
These four axes of our methodology are not independent of each other. Thus 
perspectivalism is constrained by realism, which means that it does not amount to the thesis 
that just any view of reality is legitimate. To establish which views are legitimate we must 
weigh them against their ability to survive critical tests above all when confronted with 
reality in scientific experiments.  
 Those perspectives which survive are deemed in the spirit of realism to be transparent to 
reality: it is however a fact that apparent scientific certainties are sometimes abandoned 
over time, and so each given perspective is accepted always in a way which leaves open the 
possibility of future revision. The biomedical sciences are themselves in considerable flux, 
a fact that is well illustrated by the recent radical reorganization of science departments in 
medical schools [21], reflecting an increasing emphasis in the biomedical sciences on 
subcellular processes and modes of organization.  
 Perspectivalism and realism combined with adequatism generate the view that we need 
(and do not merely have as an option) a plurality of alternative theories to reflect the 
different perspectives which cover complex domains of reality like that of biomedicine. 
Reality is like cheese: it can be cut in many ways. Our methodology endorses the need for 
views of entities belonging to different domains (neurology, cardiology, urology) all of 
which coexist within a single organism. The progress of science often involves appeal to 
the reductionistic methodology for instrumental reasons: scientific explanations often take 
the form of a demonstration of how coarse-grained phenomena can be reduced to finer-
grained phenomena, for example at the level of microphysical particles. But the purposes of 
building ontologies are distinct from those of empirical science, and experience has shown 
that an adequate representation of reality of the sort needed for purposes of biomedical 
ontology must take account of a plurality of different views, all of which are equally 
veridical. This is because the central purpose of ontology lies precisely in its ability to assist 
in the communication between the perspectives associated with different scientific 
disciplines.  
 A perspectivalist approach to biomedical ontology with ambitions to remain consistent 
with science and to cope with its reductionistic tendencies will need to find ways to do 
justice above all to a plurality of perspectives on different levels of granularity. Granularity 
is indeed here understood as reflecting those specific ways of carving up domains of reality 
we associate with different scientific theories. One perspective might focus on whole 
organisms, another on cellular assemblies. Yet another might seek to do justice to the very 
same reality in terms of complexes of atoms or molecules. A fourth might talk in terms of 
changes and invariants in an associated continuum of metabolic pathways, or of behavior 
(of walking, eating, drinking, sweating) on a whole-organism scale. Our approach allows 
that all of these views can be tenable within their respective boundaries, and that there need 
be no privileged approach which could justify the reduction of one to another. It allows us 
also simultaneously to embrace both commonsensical and scientific perspectives on reality; 
that is, it allows us to endorse the view that both common sense and science at different 
levels of detail and granularity can give us genuine knowledge of the world.  
 
 
1.2 Basic Formal Ontology in Context  
 
Basic Formal Ontology (BFO) is a theory of the basic structures of reality currently being 
developed at the Institute for Formal Ontology and Medical Information Science (IFOMIS) 

at the University of Leipzig. BFO is a formal ontology whose construction follows the 
methodological maxims presented above. The enterprise of building BFO is thus motivated 
on the one hand by the desire to be faithful to reality, and on the other hand by the need to 
accept a multiplicity of perspectives upon reality which may be skew to each other.  
  Such perspectives can be organized along two dimensions, reflecting (i) the opposition 
between different levels of granularity, from single molecules to whole populations of 
organisms, and (ii) the opposition between objects and processes. The bacterium in the 
Petri dish on your desk can be apprehended either as an object in its own right or as a 
structured group of molecules and either in terms of objects such as the cell and its 
components, or in terms of processes such as the movements of the cell, the interactions of 
its components. As to (i), we refer the reader to [4, 35, 37]. Here, we shall concentrate 
primarily on (ii). Our focus, more precisely, will be the reconciliation of the dynamic 
approach to biological phenomena with the orientation of biology around objects 
(molecules, cells, organs, organisms, species). It should be borne in mind throughout that 
what is said about objects and processes in what follows can be applied, in principle, at all 
of the different levels of granularity which are relevant to the enterprise of biomedical 
research. In practice, each material application of BFO will be restricted to some given 
level of granularity, and each resultant granular ontology will respect the two-component 
structure here presented.  
 
 
1.3 Continuants and Occurrents 
 
The central dichotomy between objects and processes concerns two distinct modes of 
existence in time. BFO endorses first of all a view according to which there are entities in 
the world that endure through time: entities which persist self-identically even while 
undergoing changes of various sorts. Such continuant or endurant entities come in several 
kinds. Examples are: you, your hippocampus, your kidneys, your chromosomes; but also: 
your bone mass, your cranial cavity, the surface of your skin. You are, for instance, the 
same person today as you were yesterday and as you will be tomorrow. In the terms of 
Zemach [45], continuants are said to be bound with respect to space. This means that if we 
segment the region of space occupied by a continuant, then we segment the continuant also. 
Continuants are not, however, bound with respect to time. This means that however we 
segment the interval of time during which a continuant exists, we find this continuant itself 
in every segment. This is what it means to endure. [19, 20, 25, 41]  
 BFO endorses in addition a view according to which the world contains occurrents, more 
familiarly referred to as processes, events, activities, changes. Occurrents include: your 
breathing, her coughing, my drinking, the spreading of an epidemic through a population 
and the chemical synthesis of proteins. Occurrents have, in addition to their spatial 
dimensions also a fourth, temporal dimension, and they are, in contradistinction to 
continuants, bound with respect to time. This means that if we segment the interval of time 
during which an occurrent occurs then we segment the occurrent also. Occurrents occur in 
time and they unfold themselves through a period of time in such a way that they can be 
divided into temporal parts or phases.  
 Not all entities are segmentable in this way. This is because there are beginnings and 
endings and other boundaries in the realm of occurrents, which are instantaneous: they are 
analogous to the edges and surfaces of objects in the realm of continuants. Just as the latter 
can exist only as the boundaries of three-dimensional spatially extended objects, so the 
former can exist only as the boundaries of temporally extended processes. Typically, the 
beginning and ending of an occurrent, as well as everything that takes place between these 
two points, are parts of the occurrent itself. The beginning and ceasing to exist of a 

continuant, in contrast, are not parts of the continuant itself, but rather parts of that 
occurrent which is its life or history. 
 
 
1.4 Spatiotemporal Ontologies 
 
The challenge is to build a unified framework within which we can do equal justice to the 
modes of being of both continuants and occurrents. This framework, we shall argue, needs 
to keep the two corresponding groups of entities clearly separate, since they have 
ontological features of quite different sorts. Above all, while we can sum of a pair of 
continuants or a pair of occurrents to produce larger continuant or occurrent entities, 
continuants and occurrents themselves cannot be summed together in any coherent way. At 
the same time, however, we have to find a way of bringing them together within the 
framework of a single theory: continuants are themselves subject to constant change; 
occurrents, as we shall see, depend in every case on continuants as their bearers: they are 
changes in continuants.  
 We distinguish at the outset two main kinds of ontologies, called SNAP and SPAN, the 
former for continuants, the latter for occurrents. Relations between continuants and 
occurrents are thus trans-ontological; that is, they are relations between entities that belong 
to distinct ontologies [10]. The resulting framework is thus a combination, in the spirit of 
perspectivalism, of the three- and four-dimensionalist perspectives currently predominating 
in philosophical ontology, positions which are normally seen as mutually incompatible.  
 Both three-dimensionalists and four-dimensionalists are, in their different ways, 
reductionists. Each asserts that the entities accepted by the other do not exist. The four-
dimensionalist will in effect accept just the SPAN part of the BFO framework, translating 
all talk about three-dimensional entities into talk which refers exclusively to processes, or 
to so-called four-dimensional ‘spatio-temporal worms’ or ‘process-things’ [24] or to some 
temporal parts or ‘stages’ thereof [26]. The three-dimensionalist [29] can take advantage 
only of the SNAP part of our framework by conceiving processes of change and motion not 
as entities in their own right but rather in terms of sequences of attributes of continuant 
objects. In order to account for both things and processes, one needs somehow to combine 
the two ontologies.  
 In keeping with our perspectivalist methodology, we shall argue that we need both types 
of component: SNAP, to do justice to the world of three-dimensional bodies; and SPAN, to 
do justice to the processes in which such bodies are involved. SNAP and SPAN are 
constructed in such a way that we can understand in formal terms how, precisely, they are 
integrated together. This, we believe, gives us the possibility of attaining a new sort of 
clarity as concerns the relations between anatomy and physiology and, more generally, 
between all of the structures and processes that constitute biomedical reality. 
 
 
2. Basic Formal Ontology 
 
The architecture of the SNAP-SPAN theory [11] is one which allows us to talk not only 
about entities but also about the ontologies through which entities are apprehended. Entities 
and ontologies are not however on a par with each other. Entities are denizens of reality. 
Everything which exists or occurs in the spatio-temporal world is an entity. An ontology 
grasps the entities which exist within a given portion of the world at a given level of 
generality. It includes a taxonomy of the types of entities and relations that exist in that 
portion of the world seen from within a given perspective.  

 Each ontology is such that the entities depicted within it fall under certain formal 
categories, and each type of ontology corresponds to a specific family of categories. In 
particular, each SNAP ontology corresponds to entities which fall under the categories of 
continuant entities, and each SPAN ontology corresponds to entities which fall under the 
categories of occurrent entities. Trans-ontological relations – that is relations between 
entities which belong to distinct ontologies – involve relations across categories. The 
distinction between ontologies of the relevant sorts thus allows us to conceive BFO as a 
multi-categorial ontology [12, 22].  
 
 
2.1 SNAP and SPAN Ontologies 
 
Each SNAP ontology is indexed to some specific instant of time, and being a constituent of 
a SNAP ontology thus amounts to existing as a continuant at the time of the ontology’s 
index. Each SNAP ontology may thus be conceived as an assay of the continuants existing 
at some specific temporal instant. Such continuants have of course typically existed already 
for some time in the past and will typically go on existing into the future. The entities 
recognized by SNAP ontologies are thus not themselves instantaneous entities, even though 
SNAP ontologies themselves are indexed by temporal instants. A SNAP ontology is 
analogous to a snapshot. 
 Capturing the world as it changes over time involves from the SNAP perspective taking a 
succession of temporally indexed SNAP ontologies into account. As single SNAP 
ontologies are akin to snapshots of reality, so a succession of such ontologies is akin to a 
slide show. Change is then reflected in discrepancies between the successive slides. A 
SNAP ontological treatment of development would consist, in effect, in a sequence of 
successive snapshots reflecting the state of the embryo, fetus, and developed organism as 
these exist at different times. Indices of SNAP ontologies may either be actual instants of 
time or, more abstractly, they may reflect generic phases of development of an organism. 
 A series of SNAP ontologies can reflect a series of findings (in the way in which a 
temperature chart is used as a basis for inferring changes in a patient’s health); but it cannot 
capture changes (for example the processes involved in growth and developments) 
themselves. Rather, it is in SPAN ontologies that we find changes as entities in their own 
right. Where each SNAP ontology relates to what exists in some single instant, a SPAN 
ontology relates to a whole span or interval of time. Here all times within the interval 
(whether past, present, or future) exist on a par, and these times are themselves constituents 
of the reality that is captured by the ontology. Occurrents are structured along both the 
spatial and the temporal dimensions, and they are located in spacetime, which is itself a 
SPAN entity. A SPAN ontology is obtained by depicting the reality constituted by those 
occurrent entities that unfold themselves within some determinate interval of time. As 
ontologies of continuants are analogous to snapshots of reality, so ontologies of occurrents 
are analogous to videos spanning time. Each SPAN ontology is indexed by some temporal 
interval.  
 Both SNAP and SPAN ontologies are indexed not only by times but also by domain and 
by level of granularity. An example of a SNAP domain is: this human organism or (more 
abstractly: the typical human organism, of a certain age and gender). An example of a 
SPAN domain is: the life of this human organism.  
 
 
2.2 Relations in BFO 
 
Our framework comprehends the following types of formal relations:  

 Intra-Ontological Relations. An intra-ontological relation is a relation between entities 
all of which are constituents of a single ontology. An example is the relation of topological 
connectedness between the different parts of an organism. Reflecting the SNAP-SPAN 
opposition between two main types of ontology is an opposition between two main types of 
intra-ontological relations. For details, see [11]. Part-whole and topological relations are 
always intra-ontological, and thus they never cross the SNAP-SPAN divide: an object is 
never a part of a process and a process is never a part of an object; objects and processes are 
never topologically connected to each other, nor are they topologically separated: they 
belong, precisely, to different ontologies. 
 Trans-Ontological Relations. A relation between entities that are constituents of distinct 
ontologies is called trans-ontological. Consider the relation of participation between an 
object and a process (as when the fingers of a hand participate in the making of a surgical 
incision). Trans-ontological relations will be needed also to relate entities in distinct 
ontologies of the same type (for instance the positions of the arm during the incision that 
are recognized by a succession of SNAP ontologies with distinct time indexes).  
 Examples of relations between SNAP and SPAN entities include: dependence, 
participation, initiation, termination, creation, destruction, sustenance, deterioration, 
facilitation, and hindrance. [13, 38] One type of relation is of special importance in 
integrating the SNAP and SPAN components of our framework. This is the relation 
between each SNAP entity and that unique SPAN entity which is its life. This relation is 
difficult to define; however it satisfies at least the following conditions: that the life of an 
organism is dependent on this organism (a life cannot exist without its bearer), and that an 
organism participates in its life. Roughly, the life of an organism (a continuant) is the sum 
of all occurrents in which it participates.  
 
 
2.3 Taxonomies of Entities in BFO 
 
Biomedical universals are as numerous as are the classes of entities treated of by the 
different branches of biomedicine, including the sciences of physiology, anatomy, 
molecular biology, neurology, immunology, psychology, psychiatry, pathology, internal 
medicine, and so forth. Universals are the real invariants or patterns in the world 
apprehended by the specific sciences. Universals are multiply instantiated: they wholly 
exist at different places and different times in the different particulars which instantiate 
them. [29, 14] The relation between universals and particulars is one of instantiation.  
 Universals are reflected by terms such as organ, cell, parthenogenesis, death. Which 
universals exist in reality is a question for empirical scientists, not for logicians or linguists, 
to determine. In particular, names for universals cannot be generated via logical 
composition. Thus while there are organs and cells, there is no universal organ-or-cell. We 
thus accept a sparse theory of universals, as embraced by realist ontologists as such as 
Armstrong [1] and Lewis [18]. 
 
 
3. The Taxonomy of SNAP Entities 
 
The hierarchy of top-level categories in SNAP is represented in Figure 1, which may be 
understood as a window on a certain portion of the world. We can look through this 
window in a way which selects particulars or in a way which selects universals. 
 
 

 
SNAP 
entities 
Substantial 
entities 
SNAP 
dependent 
entities 
Spatial regions 
Substances 
Fiat Parts 
Aggregates 
of substances
Boundaries 
Sites 
Niches, 
etc.
Qualities 
Roles,  
Functions, 
etc.
Points 
Lines,  
Surfaces, 
Volumes 
 
Figure 1. The principal categories of SNAP entities. 
 
 
3.1 Spatial Regions  
 
BFO embraces a so-called absolutist view of space, sometimes also called a container view. 
There are spatial regions, which are themselves continuants and which are such that other 
SNAP entities can be located at or in them. Space itself is the totality of such spatial regions 
(it is their mereological sum), and space exists – in conformity with the absolutist view – 
independently of the things which are located at its parts. On the other hand however we 
need to do justice also to certain intuitions underlying the relational conception of space. 
[7] On the relational view, spatial regions exist only in virtue of certain relations among 
objects. We shall see that some varieties of spatial entities – called sites below – are of just 
this sort.  
 There are spatial relations which obtain between the entities located at spatial regions at 
any given time in virtue of the relations which exist between the regions themselves. Some 
of these are topological (see for instance [8]),  some are distance and orientation relations. 
Thus, your brain is located in your brain cavity; a brain tumor may be located in the 
intermediate gray matter of the left side of the spinal cord between the thoracic levels T3 
and T4.  
 
 
3.2 Substantial Entities  
 
Apart from spatial regions, SNAP entities can be divided into two broad families of 
dependent and independent. Dependent entities, such as qualities or roles, are entities which 
require other, independent entities in order to exist. The latter serve as the bearers or 
carriers of the former. The category of independent SNAP entities, also called ‘substantials’, 
comprehends a number of subcategories, as follows. 
 
 
3.2.1 Substances  
 
Organisms are the prototypical examples of substances, which are maximal connected 
substantial entities. [29] They are those substantial entities which enjoy a certain rounded-
offness or natural completeness, including not only organisms but also cells, rocks, planets, 
and a range of self-contained artifacts such as a needle or a plastic bag. Substances have the 
following main features: 
− they do not depend for their being sustained or maintained in existence upon other 
entities (they are metaphysically independent); 
− they are the bearers of qualities and are subject to qualitative change; 

− they are enduring entities: they preserve their identity over time and through changes of 
various sorts; 
− they have a location in space; 
− they are self-connected wholes with physical boundaries which separate them off from 
other substances. 
The term ‘substance’ is used here as a count noun, in keeping with the philosophical 
tradition stretching back to Aristotle. For most purposes it can be regarded as synonymous 
with the term ‘object’ or ‘thing’. In ordinary English, of course, the term ‘substance’ has 
also a mass sense, according to which water is a substance, iron is a substance, and so on. 
The treatment of the referents of mass terms involves issues of granularity, which are here 
left aside.  
 
 
3.2.2 Fiat Parts  
 
It is possible to carve out zero-, one-, two- and three-dimensional fiat parts of an organism, 
which is to say parts not demarcated by physical discontinuities. [27, 42, 32] This is what is 
done when we demarcate upper and lower lobes of the left lung, or the dorsal and ventral 
surfaces of the body, or when a strip of brain surface is demarcated as the primary motor 
cortex. Such fiat parts can in some cases be transformed into substances in their own right, 
as when a certain segment of the kidney is demarcated as cancerous for purposes of surgical 
removal.  
 
 
3.2.3 Boundaries  
 
Boundaries in the SNAP ontology are lower-dimensional parts of spatial entities. Examples 
of two-dimensional boundaries are: the boundary of the organism, the inner surface of the 
stomach. When dealing with biomedical entities it will prove crucial that we are able to 
deal with the surfaces of substances and not only with the regions in which such surfaces 
are located. [6, 30, 42] Boundaries themselves can be divided into two kinds: the fiat, and 
the physical or bona fide. [42] The boundary between adjacent lobes of the lung is a fiat 
boundary (it depends upon our fiat demarcations); the surface of the whole organism is a 
bone fide boundary (it exists independently of any demarcations we may choose to make). 
 
 
3.2.4 Aggregates  
 
Aggregates of substances are mereological sums comprehending separate substances as 
parts. In contradistinction to substances, aggregates have non-connected boundaries. 
Aggregates on one level of granularity (for example a collection of cells) may correspond 
to substances (for example a whole organism) on another level of granularity, [35, 37]. 
 
 
3.2.5 Sites  
 
Sites are holes, cavities and similar entities [6], for example those holes, formed by 
aggregates of cells and bony structures together with associated fiat boundaries, which we 
call sinuses, canals, ventricles, etc. The spinal canal is a site, as are the cranial cavity, the 
cavernous sinus, and the lumen of the gastrointestinal tract. The tympanic cavity is a site, as 
also is the interior of your aorta, as also is the room or field in which you are reading these 

words. Each site is associated at any given time with some specific spatial region – 
typically with a succession of spatial regions at successive times. In this respect sites are 
analogous to substances, and like substances they may move through space. Sites are thus 
not identical with spatial regions. In addition to being located at spatial regions, substances 
may also, in virtue of their relations to other substances, be located at or in sites.  
 Niches, Environments: Niches [40] are special sorts of sites, marked out by their capacity 
to be occupied by organisms. Your nasal cavity may be a site of this kind insofar as it is 
inhabited by microorganisms. Niches are typically made of a medium (of air, or water) 
enclosed by a mix of fiat and physical boundaries. It is the medium which enables the niche 
to sustain the occupant in existence. The media of niches are marked by features such as 
water pressure and osmolarity, density and chemical constituency of nutrients, which 
together help to constitute the niches appropriate for given sorts of tenants.  
 Sites sometimes act as surrounding spaces for other entities [42], and they do this in 
different ways. The oral cavity is a site for the billions of microorganisms which live in it. 
The addresses where people live and work are labels for certain sites which they 
characteristically occupy. In the environment surrounding the organism, too, we may carve 
out fiat portions, for example corresponding to zones of different temperature or toxicity. 
 The cranial cavity and the eye socket are examples of sites within the human organism. 
The brain almost completely fills the cranial cavity. If it is significantly displaced by a 
tumor or internal bleeding its functional capabilities will be destroyed. 
 Boundary-Free and Physically Bounded Sites: Sites are typically a compound of rigid 
surroundings and fluid medium. Some sites, however, are defined in whole or in part in 
terms of fiat boundaries: for instance your lap, the crook in your elbow. Sites whose 
boundaries are partly or wholly solid we call ‘physically bounded’; others we call 
‘boundary-free’. Your nostril is a partly physically bounded site. Your oral cavity, when the 
lips are closed and the posterior of the tongue is elevated, is a wholly physically bounded 
site.  
 
 
3.3 SNAP Dependent Entities  
 
SNAP dependent entities are entities which endure in time and which inhere in substantial 
entities. Inherence is an intra-ontological relation between a SNAP dependent entity and its 
substantial bearer. The redness of the red blood cell inheres in the cell; the circumference of 
a waist inheres in the waist; the shape of a nose inheres in the nose. Such inherence is a 
form of existential dependence in the sense that the particular colour of the arterial blood 
would not exist without the arterial blood which it is the colour of. SNAP dependent 
entities include: particularized qualities (the elasticity of the skin, the core temperature of 
the body), functions (the function of the birth canal to transport the fetus), dispositions (of 
the teeth, that they are prone to decaying), powers (of tooth brushing, to prevent the decay 
of teeth), liabilities (of the teeth, to be abraded by the tooth brushing function), disorders 
(the headache you have been suffering from for the past two hours), bodily features (a 
smile). Other types of SNAP dependent entity include: states or conditions, plans, norms, 
tasks, rules, algorithms, procedures, and diseases.  
 The terminology is hard to fix here, and the types we have distinguished by way of 
example are themselves not clearly separated from each other and they form a highly 
heterogeneous family. We avoid the terms ‘property’ and ‘attribute’, not only because they 
can be applied at best to only some members of this family but also because they ride 
roughshod over distinctions of importance to us here.  
 There are both monadic or single-bearer and polyadic or relational (multiple-bearer) 
SNAP dependent entities. Examples of monadic SNAP dependent entities include qualities 

dependent on one substance only, such as the mass of your kidney. In what follows we shall 
sometimes use the term ‘quality’ as a convenient shorthand for ‘monadic SNAP dependent 
entity’. Relational SNAP dependent entities are entities which depend upon a multiplicity 
of substances, which they serve to relate together. Examples include relations of 
connection, by which motoneurons in the spinal cord and brainstem innervate a particular 
number of muscle fibers to form together a single motor unit. Each motor unit is composed 
of a motoneuron and the muscle fibers it innervates.  
 
 
3.4 SNAP Universals 
 
Universals form taxonomies of various sorts. Each taxonomy is a tree in the mathematical 
sense, whose nodes correspond to universals of greater and lesser generality. We introduce 
the terms ‘genus’ and ‘species’ to refer informally to universals at higher and lower 
positions within such trees. [3, 34] A biological taxonomy recognizes the genus cell and the 
species pyramidal cell, red blood cell, smooth muscle cell, retinal ganglia cell, and so on. 
Each of the latter is a sub-species of the single genus cell. (Similarly in a SPAN ontology, 
another biomedical taxonomy recognizes the genus biological synthesis and a variety of 
subspecies of this genus.) 
 There are two main kinds of SNAP universals: substantial universals and universals 
instantiated by SNAP dependent entities. The former include substance universals such as 
cell, limb, body; site universals such as cavity, groove, sinus; universals under which fiat 
parts of substances fall, such as leg, small intestine, spinal cord; universals instantiated by 
aggregates of substances such as family, nursing staff, population. Universals instantiated 
by SNAP dependent entities include role universals such as parent or doctor; function 
universals such as to pump blood, to transport air; and quality universals such as colour or 
shape, instantiated by the colour and the shape of this specific kidney. The universal red is 
a determinate of the determinable universal colour. [17]  
 By combining substantial and quality universals (or their associated defined predicates), 
we may build further constructed predicates a volo. [14] Take for instance ‘is a grey hair’. 
This predicate does not correspond to any universal, but it nonetheless applies by definition 
to all hairs which are grey, i.e., to all hairs in whose surface there inheres an instance of the 
quality universal grey.  
 
 
4. Taxonomy of SPAN Entities 
 
 
SPAN 
entities 
Processual 
entities 
Temporal 
regions
Spatiotemporal 
regions 
Processes 
Fiat parts 
Aggregates 
Instantaneous 
temporal 
boundaries 
Connected 
Scattered
Settings 
Events 
Intervals
Instants 
Scattered 
Connected 
 
Figure 2. The principal categories of SPAN entities.  
 
 

4.1 Processual Entities  
 
This family of processual entities stands to processes as the family of substantial entities 
stands to substances. Processuals are occurrents or happenings; they are entities which exist 
in time by occurring. Processuals involve participants of a SNAP kind and they are 
dependent on these participants. A process of drinking cannot exist without some organism 
and some liquid. Processual entities are located at spatiotemporal regions. They include not 
only processes (see below) but also arbitrary fiat parts, aggregates and boundaries thereof. 
Processuals may have more or less complex structures. However, in contradistinction to 
what is the case in regard to substantial entities, there are few clean joints in the realm of 
processual entities. This is because the latter merge with each other in a variety of ways to 
make larger wholes, to the degree that the SPAN realm is in large part a realm of flux (a 
realm of transitions which are characteristically continuous). When you breathe while your 
friend talks, these two processual entities become merged together in a way that has few 
counterparts in the SNAP realm of substances. The gastrointestinal motions in your body 
likewise became intertwined together with the processuals unleashed by the laxative pill 
you have taken. In each case, however, the processual entities involved can still be 
distinguished via the drawing of fiat boundaries, and the products of such fiat demarcations 
serve to make true propositions for example asserting causal relations between one 
processual and another.  
 
 
4.1.1 Processes  
 
Processes are the natural units in the processual realm in that they have bona fide 
beginnings and endings corresponding to real discontinuities in the processual order. 
Candidate examples are: the life of an organism, or the process of sleeping (demarcated by 
the boundary of falling asleep and waking up). 
 Just as substances in SNAP are defined in such a way as to be maximal spatially 
connected wholes, so processes in SPAN are required to be maximal spatiotemporally 
connected wholes. [16, 5] This means first of all that processes involve no temporal gaps. A 
given process may not be occurring at two distinct times without occurring also at every 
time in the interval between them. Similarly, a process may not occupy two spatiotemporal 
regions separated along the spatial dimension without occupying also a continuous 
sequence of spatiotemporal regions forming a bridge between them. In case a given 
processual entity is affected by gaps of this sort, we are dealing not with one single process 
but rather with a process-aggregate – of the sort which is involved, for example, in the 
production of a series of vowels and consonants that form a spoken sentence in articulated 
speech, or in the epidemic transmission of diseases across a scattered population. The line 
between processes and processuals of other sorts is however clearly difficult to draw, [11]. 
What is classified as process and what as aggregate of processes often depends on the 
chosen level of granularity.  
 
 
4.1.2 Fiat Parts  
 
The parts of processes on a given level of granularity are by definition fiat parts; for if 
processes are connected entities then any division into parts must of necessity be a fiat 
division. Examples of parts of processes are: an individual chewing process in the course of 
a meal, the passage of a bolus of food from the mouth to the stomach. When we move to a 
lower level of granularity, however, then we often find it possible to recognize bona fide 

parts (for example, the coordinated contractions of individual muscles in the performance 
of eating).  
 
 
4.1.3 Events  
 
Events are the fiat and bona fide instantaneous temporal boundaries of processes. Examples 
are: the forming of a synapse; the onset of REM sleep; the detaching of a finger in an 
industrial accident. They are the temporal analogues in SPAN of the spatial boundaries of 
substances in SNAP. Some extended processual entities are apprehended as event-like 
changes because they involve sudden qualitative or other jumps which seem to divide 
temporal reality into two parts. Truly instantaneous events, for example the passage from 
your 13th to your 14th year, are often created via fiat. 
 
 
4.1.4 Aggregates of Processes  
 
Examples of aggregates of processes are: the aggregate of all neuronal firings involved in 
the generation of a thought; the aggregate of all steps taken in the course of running a 
marathon. Again: aggregates of processes at one level of granularity may appear as 
processes in their own right at coarser grains.  
 
 
4.1.5 Settings (Spatiotemporal Environments)  
 
Just as we distinguished sites within SNAP, so we can distinguish settings, their four-
dimensional counterparts, within SPAN. [2, 31] Examples of settings are: a surgical 
operation as a setting for a nosocomial infection, a routine check-up as a setting for the 
finding of a tumor.  
 
 
4.2 Spatiotemporal Regions  
 
The totality of spatiotemporal regions reflects the totality of possible fiat demarcations of 
that maximal region we call spacetime. [28] They include in particular those spatiotemporal 
regions which are the spatiotemporal extensions of processual entities. Processuals then 
stand to spatiotemporal regions in SPAN ontologies in a way analogous to the way in 
which substantials stand to spatial regions in SNAP ontologies. Spatiotemporal regions are 
entities which exist in their own right in the sense that they exist independently of any 
processuals which may be located at or in them. Partitions of spatiotemporal regions at 
which processuals are located generate corresponding partitions of the processuals 
themselves. Spatiotemporal regions have specific sorts of four-dimensional shapes – for 
example the characteristic shapes of the spread of epidemics – and reference to such shapes 
may be used in the formulation of taxonomies of their processual occupants.  
 There are spatiotemporal relations which hold between processuals in virtue of the 
relations between the regions of spacetime at which they are located. Thus there are 
mereological and mereotopological relations; relations of coincidence in spacetime (when 
two entities occupy the same spatiotemporal region), relations of locational overlap (when 
their respective spatiotemporal regions share parts), and so on.  
 
 

5. Biodynamic Ontology 
 
A biomedical ontology is a theory of kinds of entities and relations we find in the 
biomedical realm. Such entities appear at a plurality of distinct levels of granularity 
(including especially the molecular and cellular levels and the organ/tissue and whole 
organism levels). Our basic assumption is that reality is made up of substantial entities: 
molecules, hearts, arms, brainstems, esophagi, bodies, which are involved in a continuous 
series of processes: of chemical manufacturing and transmission at one level, of reaching 
out, swallowing, responding to environmental conditions at another level. The processes in 
biomedical reality are in every case processes involving or taking place within objects. 
Objects and qualities are apprehended (for example through periodic sampling – as when 
we measure body-weight or temperature) as they exist at given instants of time; processes 
are grasped (through extended observation – as when we monitor heart rate on an 
oscilloscope) as they unfold through some given temporal interval. As should by now be 
clear, a biomedical ontology cannot be limited to objects and qualities but must make room 
for processes also.  
 Each biomedical SNAP ontology has one privileged substance – the organism, which 
plays a role in biomedical ontology that is analogous to that played by the Earth in 
geographic ontology [15]. We take the organism as a reference body for the location of 
entities at or near its surface and in its interior. (Whether the organism is a substance or an 
aggregate of substances will however depend on the level of granularity of the perspective 
taken.) There are no precise limits to the scope of a biomedical ontology, which can extend 
in principle as far as the outer periphery of the organism’s environment and down to the 
biochemical reactions in its core. A biomedical ontology must have the resources to deal 
with phenomena which causally interact with what exists or takes place in the external and 
internal environment of the organism even where such phenomena do not fall within the 
scope of biomedicine as narrowly conceived. The sun, for example, is not a biomedical 
object, but phenomena such as the heat it generates and the photons it emits are causally 
connected to the bearers of life.  
 We will leave aside such considerations here, however, and focus exclusively on the 
ontology of those objects, qualities, and processes which are located on or near the surface 
or in the interior of the organism and which are standardly understood as biomedical. (A 
full account of these matters would however require a detailed treatment of granularity, for 
this is needed in order to analyze the two concepts of existing or occurring in relationship 
to the organism and of being of biomedical scale.)  
 
 
5.1 Biospatial, Biotemporal, and Biospatiotemporal Regions  
 
We have used ‘region’ as a generic term embracing regions of space, of time, and of 
spacetime. The term ‘bioregion’ will have the same generic character here. It refers to 
regions that are of a scale relevant to biomedicine and that are located in proximity to the 
surface or interior of an organism.  
 We recognize three types of bioregions: 
 Biospatial Regions: Every organism is located at a biospatial region at any time at which 
it exists and so are all the parts of every organism. Biospatial regions are regions of space at 
or in which parts of the organism or its immediate environment are located.  
 Biotemporal Regions: These are temporal regions with a specific relation to the 
organism. They are the regions (intervals) of time during which the organism exists. The 
organism exists at any time at which the process we call its life is occurring, and 

conversely. The biotemporal regions are then precisely those parts of the region of time 
occupied by the life of the organism.  
 Biospatiotemporal Regions: These are spatiotemporal regions with a specific relation to 
the organism, namely they are those regions of spacetime which are parts of the 
spatiotemporal location of the life of the organism.  
 SNAP biomedical entities are characterized, inter alia, by the fact that they exist at 
biotemporal regions. SPAN biomedical entities are characterized by their having a 
biotemporal and a biospatiotemporal location.  
 
 
5.2 The SNAP Biomedical Object Ontology 
 
Biomedical objects are all either parts of the human organism or they are located within the 
human organism or they causally interact with the human organism in specific ways. 
Examples include proteins, cells, pathogens, limbs, livers, heads, hearts, bladders, brains 
and entire bodily systems (such as the cardiovascular system). They also include 
messengers of various sorts with their particular molecular configurations and sets of target 
cells as well as the media in which cells and organisms live and the aggregate of matter 
which they consume and excrete. 
 
 
5.2.1 Biomedical Substantial Entities 
 
In addition to organism, there are a number of other kinds of substantial entities which must 
be recognized by a biomedical ontology: fiat parts such as head and limbs, but also lower-
dimensional parts (surfaces, lines and points) and corresponding aggregates, including sites. 
We can recognize the following subcategories of biomedical substantial entities: 
 Biomedical Elements: For instance limbs, toes, hairs. Such substantial entities are the 
most salient biomedical entities for human subjects. In addition, there are biomedical 
elements distinguished by biomedical science, such as organs, chromosomes, genes, as well 
as segments of the stomach, regions of the brain, amino acid sequences, and so on. The 
elements of the body include cells, organs and organ systems, conceived as entities with 
specific functions rather than as mere aggregates of material substances. [39] The body is 
structured in a modular hierarchy, with elements appearing on finer levels of granularity 
contributing to the functioning of elements of coarser grain. 
 Biomedical Features: These are lower-dimensional entities appearing on those levels of 
granularity at which elements are given. They are typically boundaries or fiat parts of 
boundaries of elements. They can also be boundaries between two elements forming an 
aggregate. They can be internal as well as external. Examples include the face, the cheek, 
the waist, the palm of your hand.  
 Biomedical Artefacts: These include prosthetic teeth, hips, heart valves, breast implants, 
pacemakers, and so on. These, too, are substantial entities. They are not parts of the 
organism into which they are inserted, but rather exist in the organism’s interior and 
interact with those entities which are its parts. There exist also non-biomedical artifacts, 
which play a biomedical role because they exist in the interior of an organism (a piece of 
shrapnel, a swallowed coin) or more generally because they enter in causal relationships 
with the organism or its parts.  
 Biomedical Sites: These are first of all the spaces inside the body – the mediastinum, the 
intestinal tract, the nasal sinus, the brain cavity – in which body parts are located or with 
which they are associated in some other way. Body sites are organized into hierarchies of 
increasing size, from those, such as an alveolus of the lung, which can only be seen under 

the microscope, to those, such as the interior of a hospital bed, a hospital ward, and so on, 
which are objects of ordinary perception. There are also conduits, such as the interior of the 
ureter, which is designated to be a part of the urinary system.  
 Biomedical Boundary Entities: The boundaries of biomedical substantial entities are of 
two sorts: fiat and bona fide. The former reflect human demarcations, the latter are real 
physical discontinuities. Often some extended substantial entity will be taken as an 
indicator of a boundary (a plate of bone called the hard palate, for example, serves to 
demarcate the oral from the nasal cavity); the central sulcus participates in the physical 
delineation of the border between the precentral gyrus and the postcentral gyrus of the 
cerebral cortex. Brain regions are demarcated not just by physical discontinuities but by fiat 
boundaries drawn for the purposes of obtaining a partition that is coherent and useful for 
theoretical purposes. 
 The surface of the organism is the boundary that separates the interior of the organism 
from the rest of the world.  
 
 
5.2.2 Biomedical SNAP Dependent Entities 
 
The realm of SNAP dependent entities comprehends qualities such as an organism’s mass 
or shape. We can distinguish, again, between qualities as determinables and qualities as 
determinates. The former are universals such as body temperature or blood pressure. The 
latter are specific values of such universals, such as 39°C or 120 mm Hg. Values of 
attributes form scales, sometimes demarcated in terms of real numbers, sometimes in terms 
of other cardinal or ordinal measures. Some attributes, for example blood types, have 
qualitative determinables and determinates.  
 One distinguished subcategory of SNAP dependent entities in the biomedical domain is 
that of function. Functions are the ontological foundation for the engagement of parts of the 
organism in a variety of processes. The structure of the organism is to a certain extent 
determined by the functions of its parts. The realization of a function is a process: a 
functioning. The life of the organism includes such realizations among its parts: for instance 
actions of the organism driven by cells which result in delivery to those same cells of the 
resources which they require for their own survival.  
 
 
5.3 The SPAN Biomedical Process Ontology  
 
Biomedical processes are those processes which either take place within the human 
organism or are processes of causal interaction in which the human organism is involved. 
Examples include: a heart’s beating; a heart beating faster when its host organism exerts 
itself; an arm withdrawing when a finger touches a flame; a human becoming thirsty, 
fetching a glass of water, experiencing a pain in the abdomen, going to see a doctor; a 
peristaltic wave proceeding down an esophagus. 
 A primary division among the processual entities occurring within the biomedical 
domain can be made according to the kinds of participants they involve. First are physical 
processes – such as cartilage erosion, urination, local infections – whose main participants 
are organisms or organism parts. Second are social processes, which is to say processes 
involving (aggregates of) human beings, such as the making of diagnoses, clinical trials, the 
application of therapies, processes of demographic change, the spreading of epidemics. We 
can distinguish also various families of biomedical actions, which are processes involving 
either human beings or institutional agents on a given level of granularity, and the 
counterparts of such actions on the side of biomedical patients.  

 Other varieties of SPAN biomedical entities include changes in the qualities inhering in a 
SNAP entity, locational changes, substantial changes (for example: conception, death), fiat 
changes (getting older in the sense of calendar years), developmental changes (for example: 
gastrulation, neurulation), evolutionary changes (the formation and extinction of species). 
 
 
5.3.1 Changes in the Qualities Inhering in a SNAP Entity  
 
These include: 
 Changes in determinables. In many cases a SNAP dependent entity will instantiate 
different determinates of the same determinable quality at different times. The elasticity of 
the skin changes over time. Yet still there is something, a token – as opposed to a type –
determinable, which remains the same and which is the ultimate subject of such change in 
transitioning through successive token determinates or values. The temperature of your 
body is a continuant entity despite its variation in values from one moment to the next. [23] 
This is a common type of qualitative change in the biomedical context: it is illustrated by 
change in hair color and texture, muscle strength, joint flexibility, memory retrieval 
capacity and so on. Other sorts of biomedical changes include qualitative, structural and 
morphological changes: for example a change in temperature in the organism. Note that the 
latter is at another level of granularity a (non-biomedical) matter of the movement of 
molecules. This shows the importance of a more general formal apparatus within which 
macroscopic biomedical phenomena can be related to the microscopic processes by which 
they are constituted.  
 Qualitative Creation. A SNAP dependent entity that is not present in one ontology 
appears in later ontologies. This is what happens when sex hormones are secreted in 
adolescents and the body thereby acquires new dispositional qualities with the emergence 
of secondary sex characteristics.  
 Qualitative Destruction. A substance has a certain SNAP dependent entity for a certain 
interval of time but not at later times. This is what happens when a substance loses powers 
or functions, as when an older person loses the power of sight or is deemed not eligible for 
a needed liver transplant.  
 
 
5.3.2 Spatial and Locational Change  
 
In one SNAP ontology the testes are in the abdomen, in a later SNAP ontology they are in 
the scrotal sacs. In one SNAP ontology the saphenous vein is in the leg; in a later SNAP 
ontology a part of it is in the heart. The two types of location − sites and regions − 
correspond to two types of locational change. Some biomedical objects are tied to specific 
sites; this holds especially of biomedical elements such as the brain and heart. Other 
biomedical objects move through space – this applies for example to red blood cells and 
limbs. Yet others may change their relative positions within the organism over time – this 
applies for example to hairlines and waistlines and to the curvature of the spine. Such 
biomedical motions are locational changes on a biomedical scale.  
 
 
5.3.3 Substantial Change and Substantial Formation  
 
Substantial changes are always instantaneous (the conclusion of the process of gastrulation; 
the moment of the final heart beat) [36]; clearly however they are in every case associated 
with extended processes which proceed or follow them. Substantial changes occur when 

substances are created or destroyed, as when a substance is divided up in such a way as to 
produce a plurality of substances or when a plurality of substances is fused or merged. At 
some precursor stage in the life of each human organism there was a single, fertilized egg; 
at every stage in the life of the mature organism it is a complex of billions of cells and 
houses a wide variety of substances and sites of various shapes and relationships. This 
complex, the organism, is a continuant; it remains the same even while constantly gaining 
and losing parts.  
 We can distinguish in this connection the following simple types of substance formation. 
 Budding: a part of a substance becomes detached, forming a new substance while the 
original substance goes on existing; joint cartilage erosions form an example here, as also 
does the formation of cancerous tumors, or the build-up of plaque in the coronary arteries, 
or of new veins emanating from existing ones in the formation of corollary circulation. 
 Absorption: one substance ceases to exist after becoming absorbed into a second 
substance; as when osteoclasts remodel bone or in the formation of confluences of streams 
of afferent input at various parts of the central nervous system in the formation of memory 
traces.  
 Separation: parts of a substance are transformed into entities in their own right, as when a 
zygote splits into two cells.  
 Unification: separate substances join to form a new substance, as when separate plates of 
membranous bone fuse to form the cranial vault. 
 
 
5.3.4 Functions and Functionings 
 
Biological functions in general seem paradigmatically to be such that they are associated 
with parts of an organism and to be such that their realization brings benefits to the 
including organism which are relevant to the latter’s survival. Functions relate more 
specifically to the need for energy of the organism and its parts. Functions, like the 
functionings which are their realizations, exist at every level of granularity relevant to the 
organism. Functions are continuants (SNAP entities): functionings are processes and thus 
belong to the SPAN ontology. 
The organism is incessantly dynamic and in most cases this activity appears functional to 
the biomedical scientist. This is true for primitive prokaryotes as well as for human beings 
and other complex mammals. In normal circumstances, the organism serves itself oxygen, 
water and food in sufficient quantity to meet its needs for energy and matter to maintain its 
structure. These sources of energy and matter (which are themselves a matter of SNAP 
entities) are the fuel for the realization of the functions of the various parts of the organism. 
In turn these processes are precisely what enables the organism and its parts to endure. A 
case of normal functioning results in outcomes that, all things being equal, are beneficial to 
the organism. This is what ‘functioning’ (as opposed to engaging in the many different 
types of processes which are not realizations of functions) means. [39] 
 
 
5.3.5 Patterns of Change 
 
In all regions of the organism there are processes which occur with greater or lesser 
regularity, defining for example biomedical rhythms and other processes. Such patterns of 
change may be correlated with one another via complex relations of causality and 
dependence – for example in the way in which sleep-wake rhythms are correlated with day-
night cycles. In order to describe such SPAN patterns we have to build a framework for 
describing the characteristic attributes of processes. Biomedical processes have participants, 

they occur in places, and they typically amount to changes in SNAP biomedical entities 
participating more or less actively or passively in them. There are patterns of change of 
intensity or rate of a process, which are second-order processes (changes in changes). Other 
process-characteristics 
include: 
alternating 
(day-night 
variations), 
instantaneous, 
continuous, discrete, regular, zigzagging, cyclical, seasonal, gradual (aging), transitional 
(adolescence), transient (moods), and so on. There are also patterns of changes in spatial 
extent: spreading (of an infection), remission (of a tumor), migration (bacteremia), and so 
on. These patterns define subcategories of processual entities (extra nodes extending the 
taxonomies depicted in Figure 2 above) which are crucial for the understanding of the 
dynamism in the biomedical domain.  
 
 
6. Conclusion 
 
We have presented the main features of BFO, showing how it may be applied to the 
biomedical domain and focusing on BFO’s ability to capture in a perspicuous way the 
essentially dynamic nature of reality. The SNAP/SPAN distinction allows us to do justice 
to both sides of biospatial dynamics by allowing us to focus alternately and in a non-
reductionistic manner on both processes as occurrent entities and the substantial entities 
which they involve as agents and patients. In addition, our framework is conceived in such 
a way as to readily allow the formulation of relations between different ontologies, in 
particular between the SNAP and SPAN ontologies. [13, 38] 
 The framework can be readily extended to the treatment of families of ontologies of other 
types, above all to the treatment of relations between ontologies of different levels of 
granularity, from genes to species and from a single patient to epidemics at a geographical 
scale (combining an application of BFO to the medical and to the geographical domain). 
The framework may also be used as a tool for dealing with the relations between distinct 
perspectives on the biomedical domain including culturally-generated perspectives of the 
sort which are studied by linguists and anthropologists. [37] 
 We emphasize that our approach, which draws on [15] and applies the ideas of geospatial 
dynamics worked out in that paper to the domain of biomedical ontology, consists in 
devising a formal (domain neutral) ontology which can then be applied in successively 
more restricted domains. In this way, we secure clear foundations for a unified treatment of 
reality. We have laid what we believe is a firm ground for the specification of adequate 
ontologies of the biomedical domain. It remains to provide a more detailed (and formal) 
treatment of the categories and relations here surveyed.1 
 
 
References 
 
[1] Armstrong, D. M. Universals and Scientific Realism. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1978. 
[2] Barker, R. G. and Associates, Habitats, Environments, and Human Behavior. Studies in Ecological 
Psychology and Eco-Behavioral Science from the Midwest Psychological Field Station. 1947–1972. San 
Francisco: Jossey-Bass Publishers, 1978. 
[3] Berg, J. Aristotle’s Theory of Definition. In: Atti del Convegno Internazionale di Storia delle Logica. 
Bologna: CLUEB, 1983. 
[4] Bittner, T. and Smith, B. A Theory of Granular Partitions. In: Duckham M., M. Goodchild M. and 
Worboys M. (eds.) Foundations of Geographical Information Science. London: Taylor and Francis 
Books, 2003, 117-151. 
                                                 
1 This work was supported by the Alexander von Humboldt Foundation under the auspices of its Wolfgang 
Paul Program and also by the National Science Foundation Grant BCS-9975557: Geographic Categories; An 
Ontological Investigation.  

[5] Cohn A. G. and Varzi, A. C. Mereotopological Connection. Journal of Philosophical Logic, 32: 4 (2003), 
357-390.  
[6] Casati, R. and Varzi, A. C. Holes and other Superficialities. Cambridge, MA and London: The MIT Press, 
1994.  
[7] Casati, R. and Varzi, A. C. Parts and Places: The Structures of Spatial Representation. Cambridge, MA: 
The M.I.T. Press, 1999. 
[8] Donnelly, M. Layered Mereotopology. In: Proceedings of IJCAI-03. Morgan Kaufmann, San Francisco, 
2003, 1269-1274. 
[9] Grenon, P. Knowledge Management from the Ontological Standpoint. In: Proceedings of the WM2003 
Workshop on Knowledge Management and Philosophy. CEUR Workshop Proceedings, 2003, online 
CEUR-WS.org/Vol-85/grenon.pdf. 
[10] Grenon, P. The Ontology of Spatio-Temporal Reality and its Formalization. In: Guesguen, H. W., Mitra, 
D. and Renz, J. (eds.) Foundations and Applications of Spatio-Temporal Reasoning (FATSR), AAAI 
Spring Symposium Technical Reports Series, AAAI Press, 2003, 27-34.  
[11] Grenon, P. Spatio-Temporality in Basic Formal Ontology, Part I: SNAP and SPAN, Upper-Level 
Ontology and Framework for Formalization. IFOMIS Technical Report Series, 5/03 (2003). 
[12] Grenon, P. BFO in a Nutshell: A Bi-categorial Axiomatization of BFO and Comparison with DOLCE. 
IFOMIS Technical Report Series, 6/03 (2003).  
[13] Grenon, P. Spatio-Temporality in Basic Formal Ontology, Part II: Trans-Ontology. Manuscript.  
[14] Grenon, P. and Johansson, I. A Formalization of the Peculiarities of Aristotelian Universals. Manuscript. 
[15] Grenon, P. and Smith, B. SNAP and SPAN: Towards Dynamic Spatial Ontology. Forthcoming in Spatial 
Cognition and Computation. 
[16] Hazarika, S. M. and Cohn, A. G. Qualitative spatio-temporal continuity. In: Montello, D R (ed.) Spatial 
Information Theory: Foundations of Geographic Information Science; Proceedings of COSIT'01. 
Springer-Verlag, 2001, 92-107. 
[17] Johansson, I. Determinables as Universals. The Monist, 83: 1 (2000), 101-121. 
[18] Lewis, D. New Work for a Theory of Universals. Australasian Journal of Philosophy, 61:4 (1983), 343-
77. 
[19] Lewis, D. On the Plurality of Worlds. Oxford: Blackwell, 1986. 
[20] Lowe, E. J. The Possibility of Metaphysics: Substance, Identity, and Time. Oxford: Oxford University 
Press, 1998. 
[21] Mallon, W.T, Beibuyck, J.F, and Jones, R.F. The Reorganization of Basic Science Departments in U.S. 
Medical Schools, 1980-1999. Academic Medicine, 78: 3 (2003), 302-306. 
[22] Masolo, C., Borgo, S., Gangemi, A., Guarino, N., Oltramari, A., Schneider, L., Grenon, P., Mika, P., 
Sabou, M., and Oberele, D. WonderWeb Deliverable 18: Ontology Library.  
http://wonderweb.semanticweb.org/deliverables/documents/D18.pdf 
[23] Mulligan, K. Relations through Thick and Thin. Erkenntnis 48 (2-3) (1998): 325-353. 
[24] Quine, W. V. O. Word and Object. Cambridge, M.A: M.I.T. Press, 1960.  
[25] Simons, P. Parts: A Study in Ontology. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1987. 
[26] Sider, T. Four-Dimensionalism: An Ontology of Persistence and Time, Oxford: Clarendon Press, 2001. 
[27] Smith, B. On Drawing Lines on a Map. In: Frank A. U. and Kuhn W. (eds.) Spatial Information Theory. 
A Theoretical Basis for GIS (Lecture Notes in Computer Science, 988). Berlin: Springer, 1995, 475–484: 
[28] Smith, B. More Things in Heaven and Earth. Grazer Philosophische Studien , 50 (1995), 187-201. 
[29] Smith, B. On Substances, Accidents and Universals: In Defence of a Constituent Ontology. 
Philosophical Papers, 26 (1997), 105–127. 
[30] Smith, B. Boundaries: An Essay in Mereotopology. In: Hahn, L. H. (ed.) The Philosophy of Roderick 
Chisholm (Library of Living Philosophers). Chicago and LaSalle: Open Court, 1997, 534–561. 
[31] Smith, B. Objects and Their Environments: From Aristotle to Ecological Ontology. In Frank, A. U. (ed.). 
The Life and Motion of Socioeconomic Units (GISDATA 8). London: Taylor and Francis, 2001, 79-97. 
[32] Smith, B. Fiat Objects. Topoi, 20: 2 (2001), 131–148. 
[33] Smith, B. Ontology and Information Science. Forthcoming in Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. 
[34] Smith, B. The Logic of Biological Classification and the Foundations of Biomedical Ontology. In: 
Westerstahl, D. (ed.) Invited Papers from the 10th International Conference on Logic, Methodology and 
Philosophy of Science. Elsevier-North-Holland, forthcoming. 
[35] Smith, B. and Brogaard, B., Quantum Mereotopology. Annals of Mathematics and Artificial Intelligence, 
35: 1/2 (2002), 153-175. 
[36] Smith, B. and Brogaard, B. Sixteen Days. The Journal of Medicine and Philosophy, 28: 1 (2003), 45–78.  
[37] Smith, B. and Brogaard, B. A Unified Theory of Truth and Reference. Logique et Analyse, 43: 169/170 
(2003). 
[38] Smith, B. and Grenon, P. The Cornucopia of Formal-Ontological Relations. Forthcoming in Dialectica. 
[39] Smith, B., Papakin, I., and Munn, K. Bodily Systems and the Spatial-Functional Structure of the Human 
Body (in this volume). 

[40] Smith, B. and Varzi, A. C. The Niche. Nous, 33: 2 (1999), 198-222. 
[41] Smith, B. and Varzi. A. (eds.) Temporal Parts. The Monist 83:3 (2000).  
[42] Smith, B. and Varzi, A. C. Fiat and Bona Fide Boundaries. Philosophy and Phenomenological Research, 
60:2 (2000), 401–420. 
[43] Smith, B. and Varzi, A. C. Surrounding Space: The Ontology of Organism-Environment Relations. 
Theory in Biosciences, 121: 2 (2002), 139-162. 
[44] Stroll, A. Surfaces. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1998.  
[45] Zemach, E. Four Ontologies. The Journal of Philosophy, 47 (1970), 231-247. 

