BIOLOGY OF THE
MAMMARY GLAND

ADVANCES IN EXPERIMENTAL MEDICINE AND BIOLOGY 
Editorial Board: 
NATHAN BACK, State University of New York at Buffalo
IRUN R. COHEN, The Weizmann Institute of Science 
DAVID KRITCHEVSKY, Wistar Institute 
ABEL LAJTHA, N. S. Kline Institute for Psychiatric Research
RODOLFO PAOLETTI, University of Milan 
Recent Volumes in this Series 
Volume 474 
Edited by Robert C. Roach, Peter D. Wagner, and Peter H. Hackett 
Volume 475
Edited by Sukhamay Lahiri, Nanduri R. Prabhakar, and Robert E. Forster, II 
Volume 476
Edited by Michael E. Maragoudakis 
Volume 477
Edited by Jürgen Langner and Siegfried Ansorge 
Volume 478
HYPOXIA: Into the Next Millennium 
OXYGEN SENSING: Molecule to Man 
ANGIOGENESIS: From the Molecular to Integrative Pharmacology
CELLULAR PEPTIDASES IN IMMUNE FUNCTIONS AND DISEASES 2 
SHORT AND LONG TERM EFFECTS OF BREAST FEEDING ON CHILD 
HEALTH
Edited by Berthold Koletzko, Olle Hernell, and Kim Fleischer Michaelsen 
Volume 479 
THE BIOLOGY AND PATHOLOGY OF INNATE IMMUNITY MECHANISMS 
Edited by Yona Keisari and Itzhak Ofek 
Volume 480 
BIOLOGY OF THE MAMMARY GLAND 
Edited by Jan A. Mol and Roger A. Clegg 
Volume 481
Edited by Henk L. Granzier and Gerald H. Pollack 
Volume 482 
CHROMOGRANINS: Functional and Clinical Aspects 
Edited by Karen B. Helle and Dominique Aunis 
Volume 483
Edited by Laura Della Corte, Ryan H. Huxtable, Giampetro Sgaragli, 
and Keith F. Tipton 
Volume 484
Edited by Gregory Beck, Manickam Sugumaran, and Edwin L. Cooper 
ELASTIC FILAMENTS OF THE CELL 
TAURINE 4: Taurine and Excitable Tissues 
PHYLOGENETIC PERSPECTIVES ON THE VERTEBRATE IMMUNE SYSTEM 
A Continuation Order Plan is available for this series. A continuation order will bring delivery of each new 
volume immediately upon  publication. Volumes are billed only upon actual shipment. For further information 
please contact the publisher. 

BIOLOGY OF THE 
MAMMARY GLAND 
Edited by 
Jan A. Mol
Utrecht University 
Utrecht, The Netherlands 
and
Roger A. Clegg
Hannah Research Institute 
Ayr, Scotland, United Kingdom
KLUWER ACADEMIC PUBLISHERS 
New York, Boston, Dordrecht, London, Moscow

eBook ISBN:
0-306-46832-8
Print ISBN:
0-306-46414-4
©2002 Kluwer Academic Publishers
New York, Boston, Dordrecht, London, Moscow
All rights reserved
No part of this eBook may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic,
mechanical, recording, or otherwise, without written consent from the Publisher
Created in the United States of America
Visit Kluwer Online at:  
http://www.kluweronline.com
and Kluwer's eBookstore at:
http://www.ebooks.kluweronline.com

Preface
It is difficult to overstate the evolutionary and functional significance of 
mammary tissue in biology. Substantial progress has been made by 
researchers in various disciplines, particularly over the last fifteen years, 
towards realizing the potential of this tissue to yield powerful experimental 
models 
for 
morphogenesis 
and 
tissue 
development; 
for 
cellular 
differentiation; for the biosynthesis and secretion of proteins, lipids, small 
molecules and inorganic salts; and for the coordination and regulation of 
these processes. More recently, the possibility of exploiting the secretory 
epithelial cells of mammary tissue as "cell factories" has become a reality 
and the recombinant production by lactating animals of an increasing 
number of proteins, valuable both in the pharmaceutical and "nutraceutical"
fields, is in progress or under development. The fable of the goose that laid 
the golden egg has given way to the reality of Dolly the sheep and latter-day
Dollys yielding milks of staggeringly high value. Alongside this high-profile
biotechnology, the traditional role for mankind of lactating ruminant animals 
remains, as a "renewable" source of foodstuffs for human consumption. Also 
in this sphere of agricultural production, genetic as well as nutritional 
technologies are under investigation and exploitation to optimize milk 
composition for various end-uses - for instance in food process and 
manufacture. The possibilities of deriving health benefit from the bioactive 
properties of some of the minor constituents of milk are emerging to counter 
the highly-publicized negative health impact of excessive consumption of 
saturated animal fats. In human nutrition and medicine, the mammary gland 
is both a source of nutrition to the neonate and of potential health threat to 
the adult female - breast cancer remains the major single cause of female 
mortality in most developed countries. 
v

vi
Preface
For 3 days in the autumn of 1999 (September 16th-18th) a group of around
175 biologists, all sharing a common interest in the mammary gland, 
gathered together in Tours, France. Individual researchers within the group 
owed allegiance to many scientific traditions including those of cellular and 
developmental biology, biochemistry and molecular biology, nutrition, 
genetics, biotechnology and medicine. 
In all probability, this was the 
greatest number of mammary gland biologists ever to have assembled in a 
single location within Europe - perhaps, the world. The occasion for such a 
concentration of mammary tissue specialism was the first International 
Conference on the Biology of the Mammary Gland. The undoubted success 
of this conference, against a background of such disciplinary diversity, 
stands as a tribute to the success of the European networking project that 
gave rise to it. 
To trace back to the origin of the idea for the Tours conference it is 
necessary to explore the genesis of the COST Action (#825) on Mammary 
Gland Biology, since the two were conceptually interconnected from the 
beginning, although the location in Tours only emerged much later. For the 
benefit of readers not familiar with the European Union systems, structures 
and programmes for the Europe-wide support of science, COST is one of 
those acronymic programmes (for cooperation in the field of scientific and 
technical research). COST exists to nurture and support networks of 
scientists with the objective of stimulating scientific collaboration, 
cooperation and communication across, and somewhat beyond, the EU. The 
COST 825 seed was sown paradoxically far from Europe, in New 
Hampshire, in 1991. In the Spartan New England conditions of a Gordon 
Conference on Mammary Gland Biology, conversation among a group of 
scientists turned (certainly not for the first time in the distinguished history 
of the Gordon Conferences) to a consideration of an enigma - why do 
European scientists in this field apparently have to cross the Atlantic ocean 
to find the opportunity to meet together and to discuss shared interests? 
Michèle Ollivier-Bousquet was in the midst of this debate, and during the 
remaining days of the Gordon Conference, began discretely to speak with 
colleagues about her vision of a European Mammary Gland Biology group. 
The seed grew, and in 1994 a proposal from a consortium of European 
mammary gland biologists, led by Ollivier-Bousquet, was submitted to the 
EU COST New Actions Committee. In due course, Action #825 - Mammary
Gland Biology - was officially inaugurated in June 1995, with initial support 
for 5 years. 
A core aim of the COST 825 network has been to bring together the 
different scientific traditions which, while sharing an interest in mammary 
gland biology, have historically remained separate and even remote from one 
another. The medical (breast cancer) and the agricultural (lactation and 

Preface
vii
animal production) traditions represent the extremes of this separation. As
the end of the century approached, all the infrastructure of a mature network
was well-established, under the umbrella of COST, through meetings, 
workshops, a newsletter, a web-site, mailing-lists, and a searchable database 
of workers in the field. It seemed a good moment to draw together the varied 
scientific threads of the network and to join with colleagues worldwide in
attempting to define just where we had reached in the field of mammary 
gland biology and the directions in which we were heading. Thus, although 
the Tours Conference owed its existence to the COST European network, the 
contributions of scientists from many countries both inside and outside the 
EU/COST orbit, ensured that the dimensions of this defining moment were 
truly international. 
Collected together in this volume, the invited communications presented 
at the Tours International Conference on the Biology of  the Mammary Gland 
give a unique glimpse of our understanding, at the cutting edge of a variety 
of disciplines, of this versatile and extraordinary tissue, at the birth of the
twenty-first century. 
Jan Mol 
Roger Clegg 
April 2000

Acknowledgements
The chapters collected together here give an account of the proceedings 
of the first International Conference on the Biology of the Mammary Gland. 
The generous financial support for this Conference by the following not-for-
profit bodies is acknowledged: Conseil Régional de la Région Centre, 
France; European Union COST programme; International Union of 
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology; National Institute of Agricultural 
Research (INRA), France. In addition, the Conference enjoyed commercial 
sponsorship from Atelier Coperta, Gent, Belgium; Intervet International 
B.V., The Netherlands; Lipha Santé, France; Merck Sharp & Dohme-
Chibret, France; Monsanto Services Int SA, Belgium; Rhône Poulenc 
Animal Nutrition, France; Roche Pharma, France. 
Numerous individual members of the COST Action for Mammary Gland 
Biology contributed to the success of the Conference; their inputs were ably 
co-ordinated by an Organizing Committee consisting of Antonella Baldi 
(Italy), Paul Edwards (UK), Anne-Marie Massart-Leen (Belgium), Michèle 
Ollivier-Bousquet (France), Armand Sanchez (Spain) and Dieter Schams 
(Germany). Finally, it was the job of the local organizer, Charles Couet, to 
translate the will of the Organizing Committee into the reality of a 
Conference - a task that he undertook with great zeal, efficiency and good 
humour, and with valuable support from the Université François Rabelais, 
Tours. The staff at the Centre Vinci, Tours, not only ensured that the day-to-
day activities and facilities of the Conference ran without any hitches but 
also facilitated the collection of many of the manuscripts leading to this 
publication.
ix

x
Acknowledgements
The editors express their thanks to the contributors of individual chapters 
for their cooperation and to Joanna Lawrence of the London Office staff at 
Kluwer Academic/Plenum Publishers for her help and support in bringing 
this volume to publication. 

Contents
Fibroblast Growth Factor Signalling and Cyclin D1 Function are Necessary 
for Normal Mammary Gland Development during Pregnancy 
1
VERA FANTL, ANNA CREER, CHRISTIAN DILLON, JANINE BRESNICK,
DICKSON
DAVID
JACKSON,
PAUL
EDWARDS,
IAN
ROSEWELL
AND
CLIVE
Hepatocyte Growth Factor and Neuregulin in Mammary Gland Cell 
Morphogenesis 
9 
CATHERIN NIEMANN, VOLKER BRINKMANN, WALTER BIRCHMEIER
Expression and Localization of Growth Factors during Mammary Gland 
Development 
19 
FRED SINOWATZ, DIETER SCHAMS, ANNETTE PLATH, SABINE KÖLLE
Involvement of Growth Factors in the Regulation of Pubertal Mammary 
Growth in Cattle 
27 
PURUP, S., VESTERGAARD, M. AND SEJRSEN, K.
Insulin-like Growth Factor Binding Protein-5 (IGFBP-5) Potentially 
Regulates Programmed Cell Death and Plasminogen Activation in the 
ELIZABETH
TONNER,
GORDON
ALLAN,
LULZIM
SHKRETA,
JOHN
WEBSTER, C. BRUCE A. WHITELAW, DAVID J. FLINT
Mammary Gland 
45 
xi

xii
Contents
Somatostatin and Opioid Receptors in Mammary Tissue.
55
ANASTASSIA
HATZOGLOU,
EFSTATHIA
BAKOGEORGOU,
MARILLENA
LOUKAS, ELIAS CASTANAS
KAMPA,
SIMONE
PANAGIOTOU,
PIERRE-MARIE
MARTIN,
SPYROS
Heparan Sulphate
65
ISABELLE WARTELLE, RISHMA VIDYASAGAR, AND DAVID G. FERNIG
71
KIRSTY
L.
BATEMAN,
MARYSE
DELEHEDDE,
NICOLAS
SERGEANT,
Progestin-induced Mammary Growth Hormone (GH) Production
JAN A. MOL, IRMA LANTINGA-VAN LEEUWEN, EVERT VAN GARDE-
REN, AD RIJNBERK
CHARLES V. CLEVENGER AND MICHAEL A. RYCYZYN
Translocation and Action of Polypeptide Hormones within the Nucleus
77
Mammary Gland Development and the Prolactin Receptor
85
NADINE BINART, CHRISTOPHER J. ORMANDY AND PAUL A. KELLY
Paracrine Mechanisms of Mouse Mammary Ductal Growth
93
G. R. CUNHA, J. F. WIESEN, Z. WERB, P. YOUNG, Y. K. HOM, P. S.
COOKE, AND D. B. LUBAHN
Targeting of PKA in Mammary Epithelial Cells
99
ROGER A. CLEGG, RACHEL A. GARDNER, RUSHIKA N. SUMATHIPALA,
FRANÇOISE LAVIALLE, RAPHAËL BOISGARD AND MICHÉLE OLLIVIER-
B OUSQUET
YVAN DE LAUNOIT, ANNE CHOTTEAU-LELIEVRE, CLAUDE BEAUDOIN,
HUVENT, JEAN-LUC BAERT
ROSEMARY
KANE,
DARREN
FINLAY,
TERESA
LAMB
AND
FINIAN
MARTIN
The PEA3 Group of ETS-related Transcription Factors 
107
LAURENT
COUTTE,
SONIA
NETZER,
CARMEN
BRENNER,
ISABELLE
Transcription Factor NF 1 Expression in Involuting Mammary Gland 
117
The Elf Group of Ets-Related Transcription Factors 
WOLFGANG DOPPLER AND ISMAIL KOLA
123
ROSS S. THOMAS, ANNIE N.Y. NG, JIONG ZHOU, MARTIN J. TYMMS,

Contents
xiii
The Role of Stat3 in Apoptosis and Mammary Gland Involution 
129
RACHEL S CHAPMAN, PAULA LOURENCO, ELIZABETH TONNER, DAVID
FLINT, STEFAN SELBERT, KYOSHI TAKEDA, SHIZUO AKIRA, ALAN R
CLARKE, AND CHRISTINE J WATSON
Synergistic and Antagonistic Interactions of Transcription Factors in the
Regulation of Milk Protein Gene Expression 
WOLFGANG DOPPLER, SIBYLLE GEYMAYER, AND HARALD G. WEIRICH
139
Nucleosome Organisation of the b-Lactoglobulin Gene
147
C. BRUCE A. WHITELAW
Chromatin Remodeling in Hormone-Dependent and -Independent Breast 
Cancer Cell Lines 
155 
CLAIRE GIAMARCHI, CATHERINE CHAILLEUX, HÉLÈNE RICHARD-FOY.
The Use of Transplanted Mammary Gland to Study Cancer Signalling 
Pathways
163
PAUL A.W.EDWARDS
Development of Mammary Gland Requires Normal β1 -Integrin Function169 
MARISA M. FARALDO, MARIE-ANGE DEUGNIER, JEAN PAUL THIERY
AND MARINA A. GLUKHOVA
Repression of the Putative Tumor Suppressor Gene Bard1 or Expression of 
Notch4(Int-3) Oncogene Subvert the Morphogenetic Properties of 
Mammary Epithelial Cells 
175 
J.V. SORIANO, I. IRMINGER-FINGER, H. UYTTENDAELE, G. VAUDAN, J. 
KITAJEWSKI, A,-P. SAPPINO AND R. MONTESANO.
Oncogene Mediated Signal Transduction in Transgenic Mouse Models of 
Human Breast Cancer 
185 
PETER M. SIEGEL, DAVID L. DANKORT AND WILLIAM J. MULLER
Caspases: Decoders of Apoptotic Signals During Mammary Involution 195
ANDREAS
MARTI, HANS
GRABER, HEDVIKA
LAZAR, PHILIPP
M.
RITTER, ANNA BALTZER, ANU SRINIVASAN AND ROLF JAGGI
The Role of Plasminogen Activator in the Bovine Mammary Gland 
203
IOANNIS POLITIS
Regulation and Nutritional Manipulation of Milk Fat 
DALE E. BAUMAN AND J. MIKKO GRIINARI
209

xiv
Contents
Effect of Feeding Pattern and Behaviour on Hormonal Changes and Milk 
Composition 
217 
GIUSEPPE
BERTONI
Genetic Polymorphisms in Milk Protein Genes and their Impact on Milk 
Composition 
225 
PETER DOVC
Mammary Gland Immunology Around Parturition 
231
KARIN PERSSON WALLER
Cells and Cytokines in Inflammatory Secretions of Bovine Mammary Gland 
247
CÉLINE RIOLLET, PASCAL RAINARD, BERNARD POUTREL
Immune Surveillance of Mammary Tissue by Phagocytic Cells 
KAAT VAN OOSTVELDT AND CHRISTIAN BURVENICH
Mammary Gland Immunology And Neonate Protection In Pigs 
259
MAX J. PAAPE, KIMBERLY SHAFER-WEAVER, ANTHONY V. CAPUCO,
279
SALMON H.
Relationship Between Teat Tissue Immune Defences and Intramammary 
Infections
287
ALFONSO
ZECCONI,
JÖRN
HAMANN,
VALERIO
BRONZO,
PAOLO
MORONI, GIULIA GIOVANNINI AND RENATA PICCININI
Immunological Aspects of Pregnancy-Associated Glycoproteins 
295
DOSOGNE H., A.M. MASSART-LEËN AND C.BURVENICH
Vaccines Against Bovine Mastitis due to Streptococcus uberis Current Status 
and Future Prospects. 
307 
JAMES A. LEIGH
Index 
3 13 

1.
Fibroblast Growth Factor Signalling and CyclinD1
Function are Necessary for Normal Mammary 
Gland Development during Pregnancy 
A transgenic mouse approach 
Vera Fantl, Anna Creer, Christian Dillon, Janine Bresnick, David Jackson, 
Paul Edwards, Ian Rosewell and Clive Dickson 
2
Imperial Cancer Research Fund, Lincoln's Inn Fields, London , UK, 2Dept. of Pathology, 
University of Cambridge, UK. 
Key words: 
Fibroblast growth factor, fibroblast growth factor receptor, cyclin D 1, 
mammary, dominant negative receptor 
A number of growth factors, growth factor receptors and cell cycle regulatory 
proteins have been implicated in the genesis of mammary carcinomas both in 
animal models as well as in human breast tumour samples. Studies on the 
development of the mammary gland has revealed that several of the proto-
oncogenes, or their closely related gene-family members, have a function in 
the normal growth and differentiation of the gland. In this review the role of 
fibroblast growth factor signalling and the critical requirement for the cell 
cycle regulator, cyclin D1 is discussed with respect to their normal function in 
mammary gland development and abnormal role in mammary carcinogenesis. 
Abstract:
1.
INTRODUCTION
The search for genetic alterations that give rise to mammary cancer, in 
animal models or humans, has revealed several growth factors, growth factor 
receptors, as well as cell cycle regulators, that can act as proto-oncogenes
when they are over-expressed or constitutively activated through somatic 
mutation. In the mouse, where mouse mammary tumour virus has been 
shown to act as a powerful insertional mutagen, there is a preferential 
activation of dominant acting growth and differentiation factors, such as 
1

2
Fantl et al
fibroblast growth factors (FGFs) or members of the wnt gene family
(reviewed
1,2). In human breast cancer, the inappropriate activation of cell
cycle genes such as c-myc and cyclin D1 often in conjunction with loss of 
tumour suppressor genes appears to be more common, although mutation or 
over-expression of the epidermal growth factor-tyrosine receptor gene 
family also plays a significant role (reviewed3).
During the last decade, there has been a massive expansion in 
understanding of the genes involved in normal mammalian development 
which has implicated many proto-oncogenes, as important signalling 
molecules in pattern formation during organogenesis4. The mammary gland 
is unusual in that a large proportion of its development occurs after birth, 
through puberty and during pregnancy and lactation. A key question was 
therefore whether, when correctly regulated, the oncogenes implicated in 
mammary cancer are involved in normal mammary gland development. We 
have examined this question with regard to FGF-3 (originally called int-2 )
which is inappropriately expressed in many MMTV induced mouse 
mammary tumours, and cyclin D1 which is abnormally elevated in 40% of 
human breast cancers. 
2.
A ROLE FOR FIBROBLAST GROWTH FAC-
TORS IN LOBULOALVEOLAR DEVELOPMENT 
Fibroblast growth factors are pleiotropic cell to cell signalling molecules 
that can act as broad spectrum mitogens, promote cell migration or modulate 
cellular differentiation depending on their context (reviewed5.6). These 
secreted ligands signal by binding to high affinity cell surface receptors, 
inducing their dimerization and subsequent activation of their cytoplasmic 
tyrosine kinase (reviewed
6,7).
FGF-receptors contain two or three 
immunoglobin-like loops in the extracellular domain, a transmembrane 
element as well as the cytoplasmic tyrosine kinase. There are four FGF 
receptor genes ( FGFR-1 to FGFR-4 ), in mammals, although alternative 
splicing of FGFR-1, FGFR-2 and FGFR-3, yields seven proto-type receptors 
with different FGF binding specificities and tissue distributions8,9,10. The two
membrane proximal Ig-like domains constitute the ligand binding site, and it 
is part of the third Ig-loop which is encoded by an alternative exon 
(designated IIIb or IIIc) that defines FGF binding specificity. 
As FGF-3 is not found in the normal mammary gland, it seemed likely 
that an FGF with a receptor binding specificity overlapping that of FGF-3
was important for gland development. To determine the role such an FGF 
might have, we sought to compromise FGF signalling in the mammary 
epithelium and assess the effect this had during puberty and pregnancy. 

FGF and Cyclin D1 during pregnancy 
3
FGF-3 binds to the IIIb isoform of both FGFR- 1 and FGFR-2, and the latter 
receptor was selected for expression as a dominant negative receptor in the 
mammary epithelium of transgenic mice11. The dominant negative receptor 
gene was constructed by removing the cytoplasmic tyrosine kinase domain 
from an appropriate mouse cDNA, leaving the extracellular and 
transmembrane coding domains intact. Hence, ligand mediated dimerization 
of the truncated receptor protein potentiates the sequestration of wild-type
endogenous receptors as inactive heterodimers. Expression in the mammary 
epithelium was achieved using the MMTV promoter, which has a 
particularly high expression in this cell lineage, especially during pregnancy. 
Whole mount preparations and histological examination of the mammary 
glands from adult virgin females showed no discernible abnormalities 
associated with transgene expression12. However, by mid-pregnancy, the 
mammary glands of transgenic mice showed a distinct reduction in 
lobuloalveolar development that was maintained into lactation, although 
those alveolar lobules that developed showed a normal histology, and were 
filled with milk (Fig. 1). These findings indicate that FGF signalling is an 
important facet of lobuloalveolar development during pregnancy. Moreover, 
it explains why inappropriate and deregulated FGF-3 expression in this 
tissue leads to mammary hyperplasia since this would institute autocrine 
stimulation of epithelial cell growth. 
3.
CYCLIN D1 IS REQUIRED FOR MAMMARY 
GLAND GROWTH AND DIFFERENTIATION 
The FGF-3 locus maps to human chromosome 11 band q13 and is 
amplified in approximately 15% of breast tumour DNA samples12, although 
the gene is very rarely expressed in these tumours. This suggested that 
amplification of FGF3 was fortuitous, and that another gene on the amplicon 
was driving tumour development. The cyclin D1 gene ( CCND1) was
identified as a likely candidate oncogene since it was closely linked to and 
always co-amplified with FGF-314. Furthermore, CCND1 was involved in
chromosomal translocations for a subset of lymphomas and parathyroid 
adenomas further supporting its potential as an oncogene15. Moreover, 
immunohistochemical examination of breast cancer samples revealed that 
cyclin D1 is expressed at elevated levels in 40% of tumour samples, 
considerably more than the subset accounted for by gene amplification16,17.

4
Fantl et al 
Figure 1. Whole mount preparations of mammary glands from control and transgenic mice. 
The glands were taken at 17.5 days of pregnancy (A, B and C) and 1 da post partum (D, E 
reduced lobuloalveolar density is apparent in the mammary glands from pregnant DN-FGFR-
2(IIIb) and Cyl-l-/- mice. However, in the 1 day post partum samples the alveoli in the 
mammary gland of the DN-FGFR-2(IIIb) mice are distended with milk as are the controls, but 
those of the Cyl-I -/- gland remain contracted. 
and F) from control (A and D), DN-FGFR-2 (IIIb) (B and E), and Cyl-l -/- mice (C and F). A 
Other studies have shown that inappropriate expression of cyclin D1 as a 
transgene in the mouse mammary epithelium caused a late but significant 
incidence of mammary hyperplasia, strengthening its potential involvement 
in mammary cancer18.
Cyclin D1 is one of three closely related proteins that act as regulatory 
subunits for the cyclin dependent kinases (CDK) CDK4 and CDK6 
(reviewed19). The CDWcyclinD complexes are activated during the G1 
phase of the cell division cycle and the primary targets of the kinase 
complexes are the retinoblastoma (Rb) family of proteins (reviewed20,21),
Phosphorylation of Rb related proteins appear to relieve their repressive 
effect on a number of transcription factors that regulate genes necessary for 
DNA synthesis and subsequent entry into cell division. Thus an increase in 
cyclin D1 expression could perturb the negative regulation on cell division 
imposed by Rb, which in turn could result in abnormal cell proliferation, one 
of the early changes on the path to tumour formation. 

FGF and Cyclin D1 during pregnancy 
5
To investigate the role of cyclin D1 in vivo, and assess the level of 
redundancy among the three D-type cyclin family members, mutant mice 
lacking the protein have been generated22,23. These Cyl-l -/- mice are viable 
and fertile but have a retinopathy and, demonstrate defective mammary 
gland development during pregnancy. While the mammary glands of virgin 
cyclin D1 deficient mice are comparable to normals, by 7.5 days of 
pregnancy there is a distinct retardation of lobuloalveolar development, 
which continues to term (Fig. 1). Moreover, there is also a very poor 
lactogenic response, with a delayed appearance of milk proteins that are 
present in reduced amounts compared with control glands. Transplantation 
of mammary epithelium from mutant mice into the empty fat pad of 
histocompatible wild-type mice showed the same mammary gland 
gland development is a property of its epithelial component24.
phenotype as the Cyl-l -/- mice demonstrating that the defect in mammary 
4. 
CONCLUSIONS 
Two oncogenes identified in mammary cancer studies have now been 
shown to have crucial functions in the growth and differentiation of the 
normal mammary gland. The results clearly demonstrate a need for FGF 
signalling to produce the normal density of lobuloalveolar growth during 
pregnancy. However, the alveoli that do form when FGF signalling is 
deficient appear to function normally, and mothers are able to suckle their 
young. However, the litters produced are runted in appearance due to an 
insufficient supply of milk. The mammary glands of Cyl-l -/- mice also 
showed a reduction of lobuloalveolar development, but the alveoli also gave 
a poor lactogenic response, and although milk proteins can be detected 
biochemically, histologically the alveoli appear to be contracted with little 
luminal milk apparent (Fig. 1). Moreover, Cyl-l -/- mothers fail to nurture 
their young. 
These studies demonstrate that signalling and cell cycle regulatory 
molecules involved in normal mammary gland growth and differentiation 
during pregnancy can also act as oncogenes when inappropriately expressed, 
reinforcing the strong links between tumour and developmental biology. 
5.
REFERENCES
1.
Nusse, R. Insertional mutagenesis in mouse mammary tumorigenesis. Curr. Topics
Microbiol. Immunol. 171, 44-65. 1991.

6
Fantl et al
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
Peters, G. Inappropriate expression of growth factor genes in tumors induced by mouse 
mammary tumor virus. Sem. Virol. 2, 319-328. 1991. 
Callahan, R. and Campbell, G. Mutations in human breast cancer: an overview. J. Natl. 
Cancer Inst. 81, 1780-1786. 1989. 
Yamaguchi, T. P. and Rossant, J. Fibroblast growth-factors in mammalian development. 
Curr Opin Genet Dev. 5,  485-491. 1995.
Basilico, C. and Moscatelli, D. The FGF family of growth-factors and oncogenes. Adv 
Cancer Res. 59, 115-165. 1992. 
McKeehan, W. L., Wang, F. and Kan, M. The heparan-sulfate fibroblast growth-factor
family - diversity of structure and function. Prog Nucleic Acid Res Mol Biol. 59, 1998. 
Johnson, D. and Williams, L. Structural and functional diversity in the FGF receptor 
multigene family. Adv Cancer Res. 60, 1-41, 1993. 
Ornitz, D., Xu, J., Colvin, J., McEwen, D., MacArthur, C., Coulier, F., Gao, G. and 
Goldfarb, M. Receptor specificity of the fibroblast growth-factor family. J Biol Chem. 
Orr-Urtreger, A., Bedford, M., Burakova, T., Arman, E., Zimmer, Y., Yayon, A., Givol, 
D. and Lonai, P. Developmental localization of the splicing alternatives of fibroblast 
growth-factor receptor-2 (FGFR2). Dev Biol. 158, 475-486. 1993.
10. Peters, K., Werner, S., Chen, G. and Williams, L. Two FGF receptor genes are 
differentially expressed in epithelial and mesenchymal tissues during limb formation and 
organogenesis in the mouse. Development. 114, 233-243. 1992.
11. Mathieu, M., Chatelain, E., Ornitz, D., Bresnick, J., Mason, I., Kiefer, P. and Dickson, C. 
Receptor-binding and mitogenic properties of mouse fibroblast-growth-factor-3 -
modulation of response by heparin. J Biol Chem. 270, 24197-24203. 1995. 
12. Jackson, D., Bresnick, J., Rosewell, I., Crafton, T., Poulson, R., Stamp, G. and Dickson, 
C. Fibroblast growth factor signalling has a role in lobuloalveolar development of the 
mammary gland. J. Cell Science. 110, 1261-1268. 1997. 
13. Fantl, V., Richards, M., Smith, R., Lammie, G., Johnstone, G., Allen, D., Gregory, W., 
Peters, G., Dickson, C. and Barnes, D. Gene amplification on chromosome band 11q13 
and oestrogen receptor status in breast cancer. Eur. J. Cancer. 26, 423-429. 1990. 
14. Lammie, G. A., Fantl, V., Smith, R., Schuuring, E., Brookes, S., Michalides, R., 
Dickson, C., Arnold, A. and Peters, G. D11S287, a putative oncogene on chromosome 
11q13, is amplified and expressed in squamous cell and mammary carcinomas and 
linked to BCL-1. Oncogene. 6, 439-444. 1991.
15. Lammie, G. A. and Peters, G. Chromosome 11q13 abnormalities in human cancer. 
Cancer Cells. 3, 413-420. 1991.
16. Bartkova, J., Lukas, J., Muller, H., Lutzhoft, D., Strauss, M. and Bartek, J. Cyclin D1 
protein expression and function in human breast-cancer. Int J Cancer. 57, 353-361. 1994.
17. Gillett, C., Fantl, V., Smith, R., Fisher, C., Bartek, J., Dickson, C., Barnes, D. and Peters, 
G. Amplification and overexpression of cyclin-D1 in breast-cancer detected by 
immunohistochemical staining. Cancer Res. 54, 18 12- 18 17. 1994. 
18. Wang, T. C., Cardiff, R. D., Zukerberg, L., Lees, E., Arnold, A. and Schmidt, E. V. 
Mammary hyperplasia and carcinoma in MMTV-cyclin D1 transgenic mice. Nature. 369, 
19. Sherr, C. D-type cyclins. TIBS. 20, 187-190. 1995. 
20. Sherr, C. Cancer cell cycles. Science. 274, 1672-1677. 1996. 
21. Weinberg, R. The retinoblastoma protein and cell cycle control. Cell. 81, 323-330. 1995. 
271, 15292-15297. 1996. 
9.
669-671. 1994. 

FGF and Cyclin D1 during pregnancy 
7
22. Fantl, V., Stamp, G., Andrews, A., Rosewell, I. and Dickson, C. Mice lacking cyclin D1 
are small and show defects in eye and mammary-gland development. Genes Dev. 9, 
23. Sicinski, P., Donaher, J. L., Parker, S. B., Li, T. S., Gardner, H., Haslam, S. Z., Bronson, 
R. T., Elledge, S. J. and Weinberg, R. A. Cyclin D1 provides a link between 
development and oncogenesis in the retina and breast. Cell. 82, 621-630. 1995. 
24. Fantl, V., Edwards, P., Steel, J., Vonderhaar, B. and Dickson, C. Impaired Mammary 
Gland Development in Cyl-l-/- Mice During Pregnancy and Lactation is Epithelial Cell 
Autonomous. Devel. Biol. 212, 1-11. 1999. 
2364-2372. 1995. 

2.
Hepatocyte Growth Factor and Neuregulin in 
Mammary Gland Cell Morphogenesis 
Catherin Niemann, Volker Brinkmann, Walter Birchmeier 
Imperial Cancer Research Fund, Lincolns Inn Fields, London, UK and Max Delbrueck 
Center for Molecular Medicine, Berlin, Germany 
Key words: 
Hepatocyte Growth Factor, neuregulin, mammary epithelial cells, receptor 
tyrosine kinase signalling 
Organ culture and transplantation experiments in the early 1960s and 1970s 
have demonstrated that growth and morphogenesis of the epithelium of the 
mammary gland are controlled by mesenchymal-epithelial interactions. The 
identification of molecules that provide the essential signals exchanged in 
mesenchymal-epithelial interactions is an area of active research. Recent 
evidence suggests that morphogenic programs of epithelia can be triggered by 
mesenchymal factors that signal via tyrosine kinase receptors. This review 
concentrates on the effects of two mesenchymal factors, Hepatocyte Growth 
Factor/Scatter Factor and neuregulin, on morphogenesis and differentiation of 
mammary epithelial cells in vitro and signalling pathways involved during 
morphogenesis of mammary epithelial cells. 
Abstract:
1. 
INTRODUCTION 
During development, differentiation and morphogenesis of epithelial
organs are essential processes and lead to an astounding array of different
structures. Signals for growth and differentiation of epithelia are frequently
provided by neighbouring mesenchymal cells. The molecular basis for
signals exchanged during mesenchymal-epithelial interaction is provided by
paracrine signalling systems consisting of epithelial tyrosine kinase receptors
and their mesenchymal ligands. Hepatocyte Growth Factor/ Scatter Factor
(HGF/SF) and the c-met receptor, neuregulin and the members of the c-erbB
9

10
Niemann et al 
receptor family, Glial cell line Derived Neurotrophic factor (GDNF) and the 
c-ret receptor as well as the Fibroblast Growth Factors (FGFs) and their 
receptors constitute such paracrine signalling systems. During recent years, 
the analysis of mice that carry targeted mutations or express transdominant 
receptors have demonstrated an important role for epithelial tyrosine kinase 
receptors and their mesenchymal ligands for epithelial development1.
We have previously identified an important function for HGF/SF and 
neuregulin in the development of the mammary gland by using the whole 
organ culture system. 
In this review we will concentrate on the effects HGF/SF and neuregulin 
exert on mammary epithelial cells cultured on matrigel. We observe that 
these two growth factors elicit fundamentally distinct morphogenic 
responses. HGF/SF induces the formation of tubular structures, whereas 
neuregulin evokes the formation of alveolar structures. The structures 
generated in cell culture by these two growth factors resemble the ones 
which are formed during mammary gland development in vivo. We used this 
cell culture system to further analyse the signalling pathways that become 
activated by HGF/SF or neuregulin and lead to the different morphogenic 
responses of mammary epithelial cells. 
2.
THE EFFECT OF HGF/SF AND NEUREGULIN 
TION OF MAMMARY EPITHELIAL CELLS 
During mouse mammary gland development HGF/SF and neuregulin are 
expressed by the mesenchym that surrounds the epithelial cells which 
produce receptors for both ligands. Interestingly, HGF/SF is highly 
expressed in the mammary gland during puberty whereas neuregulin is 
specifically highly expressed during pregnancy of the mouse2. In 
experiments using whole organ cultures of mouse mammary glands HGF/SF 
promotes branching of ductal trees and inhibits terminal differentiation, as 
assessed by the expression of milk proteins. Neuregulin stimulates lobulo-
alveolar differentiation in this culture system and promotes the expression of 
milk components such as β-casein2. These results indicate that different
growth factors elicit distinct responses in organ culture of the mammary 
gland and raise the questions of whether different cellular populations of the 
mammary epithelium are affected by these factors and how these different 
responses are evoked on a molecular level. On one hand, the organ culture 
system provides a good model for the analysis of morphogenic events but on 
ON MORPHOGENESIS AND DIFFERENTIA-

HGF/SF and Neuregulin 
11
the other hand, its complex cellular composition precludes a biochemical 
analysis of signalling cascades activated by morphogenic factors. 
In the search for an appropriate way to examine signalling pathways 
responsible for morphogenic changes, we found that mammary epithelial 
cells (EpH4) grown on matrigel are affected by two growth factors, HGF/SF 
and neuregulin. 
EpH4/K6 mouse mammary epithelial cells3 cultured on matrigel in the 
presence of hormones (insulin, prolactin and hydrocortisone) form small 
spheroids and secrete milk protein4-6. These aggregates consist mainly of 3 
to 7 single-layered epithelial cells surrounding a small lumen. When 
HGF/SF was added, EpH4/K6 cells started to grow faster and built long 
tubular structures that could reach a length of up to several millimeters. 
Histological analysis revealed that the tubular structures induced by HGF/SF 
consist of several layers of cells lining the elongated lumina. In contrast, 
neuregulin induced an entirely different response in EpH4/K6 cells grown on 
matrigel: large alveolar-like structures or lobulo-alveolar-like aggregates are 
formed. Histological analysis demonstrated that neuregulin-induced alveoli 
and lobulo-alveoli consist of single-layered cells surrounding large lumina. 
We also tested other growth factors for their morphogenic effect on this 
mammary epithelial cells grown on matrigel: epidermal growth factor (EGF) 
stimulated growth, whereas keratinocyte growth factor (KGF) had only a 
moderate effect on proliferation. However, neither growth factor, EGF or 
KGF, elicited any particular morphogenic response: tubular structures or 
large alveoli were not induced
7.
We went on to analyse the distribution of the cell adhesion molecule E-
cadherin and the production of the differentiation marker β-casein by
immunofluorescence-staining
(Fig.
1).
In
control
aggregates,
β-casein
production was high but E-cadherin was evenly distributed along all cell 
surfaces, suggesting only moderate polarization of the cells (Fig 1A). 
HGF/SF reduced β-casein expression in the tubular structures as assessed by
the reduction of immunofluorescence-staining intensity (corroborated by a 
decrease of mRNA expression for casein, observed by northern blotting). E-
cadherin was largely distributed along the whole cell surface (Fig 1B). 
However, in accordance with the more pronounced polarization of cells in 
neuregulin-induced alveoli, E-cadherin was predominantly located at lateral 
membranes. β-Casein was strongly expressed in these cells as assessed by
the staining intensity observed by immunofluorescence analysis (Fig 1 C)7.
Thus, EpH4 mammary gland epithelial cells respond in a distinct manner 
when stimulated with HGF/SF or neuregulin. While HGF/SF induces 
branched multilayered tubes and inhibits the production of milk proteins, 
neuregulin causes the formation of alveoli and lobulo-alveolar-like
aggregates which often consist of a monolayered epithelium and possess a 

12
Niemann et al
higher degree of polarization and differentiation. Both growth factors can
induce complex morphogenic programs in mammary gland epithelial cells,
which resemble those observed in the mammary gland during postnatal
development.
Figure 1. Scanning confocal micrograph of EpH4/K6 aggregates treated with HGF/SF (B) or
neuregulin (C); controls are shown in A.
3.
SIGNALLING PATHWAYS ACTIVATED BY 
HGF/SF AND NEUREGULIN IN MAMMARY 
EPITHELIAL CELLS 
We used this cell culture system to further analyse components of the 
signalling cascades activated by HGF/SF and its receptor c-met as well as 
cascades regulated by neuregulin and the members of the c-erbB family of 
receptor tyrosine kinases. EpH4/K6 cells were transfected with the cDNA of 
the recently identified substrate of the c-met receptor, Gab1
8. When grown
on matrigel, the transfected cells produced tubular structures, even in the 
absence of HGF/SF. These structures were not observed with cells 
transfected with a control plasmid only. The histology of the Gab1-induced 
structures was identical to those induced by HGF/SF. 
In order to investigate which member of the c-erbB receptor family or 
what receptor combination is responsible for the neuregulin-induced 
phenotype of mammary epithelial cells, we performed transfection 
experiments with hybrid receptor molecules. Neuregulin signals are 
mediated by direct interaction with the high affinity receptors c-erbB3 or c-
erbB4. In addition, c-erbB2 acts as an important coreceptor for the 
transmission of neuregulin9-11. We transfected EpH4/K6 cells with cDNAs

HGF/SF and Neuregulin
13
for hybrid receptors consisting of extracellular portion of trk (the receptor for 
nerve growth factor, NGF) and intracellular c-erbBs. Remarkably, clones of 
EpH4 cells which stably expressed the hybrid trK/c-erbB2 receptor produced 
alveolar-like structures in the presence of NGF. These structures were found 
to be histologically identical to the neuregulin-induced alveoli. Control 
transfectants expressing pSVneo, trk or an trk/KGF hybrid receptor did not 
show this morphogenic response in matrigel. Similarly, stable cell clones 
expressing a trK/c-erbB4 hybrid receptor did not form alveolar structures in 
the presence of NGF. 
We then examined EpH4/K6 cells expressing mutants of trK/c-erbB2 to 
identify essential docking sites in the c-erbB2 receptor that elicit this 
morphogenic response. Recently, five phosphorylated tyrosine residues in 
the COOH-terminal substrate-binding region have been identified as 
important docking sites for signalling substrates acting downstream of the c-
erbB212,13. We found that a hybrid receptor trK/c-erbB4 containing only the 
first four tyrosines was sufficient to induce alveolar structures when 
overexpressed in EpH4 cells and activated by NGF. In contrast, a hybrid 
receptor of trK/c-erbB4 containing only the last one of these five tyrosines 
was not capable of inducing alveolar morphogenesis. These findings 
demonstrate that an activated trK/c-erbB2 is sufficient to elicit a specific 
morphogenic response in mammary epithelial cells, the formation of alveoli 
and lobulo-alveolar structures, even in the absence of active c-erbB3 and c-
erbB4 coreceptors. Furthermore, our results indicate that only the first four 
(Y1028, Y1144, Y1201 and Y1226/27) but not the last tyrosine (Y1253) are 
important for mediating the neuregulin-induced morphogenic response. 
In order to examine which of the known signalling cascades mediates the 
morphogenic responses evoked by HGF/SF and neuregulin we used 
inhibitors that interfere with specific signalling pathways. Addition of the 
PI3 kinase inhibitors, wortmannin and LY294002, to EpH4/K6 cells reduced 
the formation of elongated structures, whereas the MAPK kinase inhibitor 
PD98059 had no effect on the stimulation of elongated aggregates. In 
contrast, PD98059 quenched the induction of larger alveoli, whereas 
wortmannin was without effect on the formation of larger alveolar 
structures7.
These results suggest that the formation of tubular structures induced by 
HGF/SF requires pathways involving Gab1 and PI3 kinase, whereas for the 
induction of alveoli and lobulo-alveolar structures by neuregulin, an 
activated c-erbB2 receptor is sufficient and most likely the activity of MAPK 
kinase is required. 

14
Niemann et al
4.
DISCUSSION
Morphogenic activities of various growth factors on mammary gland
development have been examined previously; for instance it has been shown
that EGF (or TGF-α) and TGF-β can influence ductal as well as alveolar 
deveIopment14-21. These factors are predominantly expressed in an autocrine
fashion by epithelial cells and are produced throughout mammary gland
postnatal development. Mesenchymal-epithelial interactions are essential for
pre- and postnatal development of the mammary gland
22-26, so we have
focused on the functional analysis of mesenchymal ligands, HGF/SF and
neuregulin, and their epithelial tyrosine kinase, c-met and the c-erbBs.
Interestingly, both growth factors are highly expressed within the mammary
gland during specific developmental phases: HGF/SF is high expressed
during puberty, whereas neuregulin is strongly expressed only during
pregnancy2.
It has already been shown that epithelial cells isolated from kidney,
breast
and
other
organs
respond
to
HGF/SF
by
morphological
differentiation, the formation ofbranched tubules when grown in a collagen
matrix27-32. Here we used matrigel as a substrate to investigate effects of
HGF/SF and neuregulin on functional differentiation, that is, expression of
milk proteins. HGF/SF inhibits the expression of β-casein, indicating that a
morphogenic program without concomitant functional differentiation is
activated. This is consistent with developmental processes in vivo: milk
production is blocked during branching of the ductal tree during puberty. In
the whole organ culture system of the mouse mammary gland, HGF/SF
inhibits the expression of milk components whereas neuregulin stimulates
the production of milk components2. We did not observe an increase of β-
casein expression by neuregulin in our cell culture system. It seems possible
that neuregulin promotes an already programmed differentiation process
leading to alveolar morphogenesis and concomitant production of milk
components in the whole organ cultures ofthe mammary gland whereas such
a complex differentiation program does not exist in our EpH4 cell system.
Interestingly, neuregulin induced a redistribution of the cell adhesion
molecule E-cadherin to the lateral membranes of EpH4/K6 cells. Recently, 
this redistribution of cadherins has also been reported for other epithelial cell
lines33. In addition, it has been demonstrated that neuregulin can promote the
formation of ring-shaped multicellular structures in various cancer cell lines
cultured on plastic33.
Several tyrosine kinase receptors have been reported to affect epithelial
cells (e.g. trk, c-ros, KGFR) but only c-met was found to induce
tubulogenesis34. Although a variety of substrates were found to bind to
tyrosine phosphorylation
sites
in the COOH-terminus of met8,35,36, a

HGF/SF and Neuregulin
15
substrate which can mediate the signal responsible for branching 
morphogenesis, Gab1, has only recently been identified37,38. It has previously 
demonstrated that Gab 1 is the predominant protein phosphorylated following 
activation of the c-met receptor in epithelial cells
39. The c-met receptor can
signal through ras and PI3 kinase35,40,41. Signalling through ras, resulting in
cellular growth, requires the substrate Grb2, which binds to tyrosine residue 
Y1254 of c-met (i.e. the second tyrosine residue of the bidentate docking 
site35,36,39. Motility and morphogenic responses evoked by an active c-met
receptor require Gab1, which binds strongly to Y1347 (the first residue of 
the bidentate docking site37,39. Gab1 can also bind to Y1354, but in the 
presence of Grb2 binding to Y1347 is preferred and stabilised39.
Furthermore, it has recently been shown that the pleckstrin homology 
domain of Gab1 is crucial for its subcellular localization to cell-cell contacts 
as well as for the morphological response in MDCK cells38. Gab1 harbours 
three potential PI3 kinase-binding sites. Indeed, we found that inhibitors of 
PI3 kinase, wortmannin and LY294002, specifically reduce HGF/SF-
induced formation of elongated structures7. Recently it has been shown that 
LY294002 could inhibit the localization of Gab1 to areas of cell-cell
contacts38. These data indicate that tubular and branching morphogenesis 
depends on pathways involving PI3 kinase. In contrast, the neuregulin- 
induced formation of larger alveoli could be inhibited by a MAPK kinase 
inhibitor, PD98059. Thus, components of the ras/MAPK kinase pathway are 
important for alveolar development of mammary epithelial cells. It will now 
be important to identify which substrates or substrate combinations elicit the 
alveolar morphogenesis through the activated c-erbB2 receptor. 
5. 
REFERENCES 
1.
2.
Birchmeier C, Birchmeier W. Molecular aspects of mesenchymal-epithelial interactions. 
Annu Rev Cell Biol 9, 511-540, 1993. 
Yang Y, Spitzer E, Meyer D, Sachs M, Niemann C, Hartmann G, Weidner KM, 
Birchmeier C, Birchmeier W. Sequential requirement of hepatocyte growth factor and 
neuregulin in the morphogenesis and differentiation of the mammary gland. J Cell Biol 
Reichmann E, Ball R, Groner B, Friis RR. New mammary epithelial and fibroblastic cell 
clones in coculture form structures competent to differentiate functionally. J Cell Biol 
Wicha MS, Lowrie G, Kohn E, Bagavandoss P, Mahn T. Extracellular matrix promotes 
mammary epithelial growth and differentiation in vitro. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 79, 
Lin CQ, Bissell MJ. Multi-faceted regulation of cell differentiation by extracellular
matrix. FASEB J 7, 737-743, 1993. 
131,215-226, 1995. 
3.
108, 1127-1138, 1989. 
4.
3213-3217, 1982. 
5.

16
Niemann et al
6.
Streuli CH, Schmidhauser C, Bailey N, Yurchenco P, Skubitz AP, Roskelley C, Bissell 
MJ. Laminin mediates tissue-specific gene expression in mammary epithelia. J Cell Biol 
Niemann C, Brinkmann V, Spitzer E, Hartmann G, Sachs M, Naundorf H, Birchmeier 
W. Reconstitution of mammary gland development in vitro: Requirement of c-met and c-
erbB2 signalling for branching and alveolar morphogenesis. J Cell Biol 143, 533-545,
1998.
Weidner KM, Sachs M, Riethmacher D, Birchmeier W. Mutation of juxtamembrane
tyrosine residue 1001 suppresses loss-of-function mutations of the met receptor in 
epithelial cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci. USA 92 , 2597-2601, 1995. 
Plowman GD, Green JM, Culouscou JM, Carlton GW, Rothwell VM, Buckley S. 
Heregulin induces tyrosine phosphorylation of HER4/p180erbB4. Nature. 366, 473-475,
1993.
10. Carraway K3, Cantley LC. A neu acquaintance for erbB3 and erbB4: a role for receptor 
heterodimerization in growth signalling. Cell 78, 5-8, 1994. 
11. Carraway K3, Burden SJ. Neuregulins and their receptors. Curr Opin Neurobiol 5, 606-
612, 1995. 
12. Ben-Levy R, Paterson HF, Marshall CJ, and Yarden Y. A single autophosphorylation 
site confers oncogenicity to the Neu/ErbB-2 receptor and enables coupling to the MAP 
kinase pathway. EMBO J 13:3302-3311, 1994. 
13. Dankort DL, Wang Z, Blackmore V, Moran MF, Muller WJ. Distinct tyrosine 
autophosphorylation sites negatively and positively modulate neu-mediated
transformation. Mol Cell Biol 17, 5410-5425, 1997.
14. Silberstein GB, Daniel CW. Reversible inhibition of mammary gland growth by 
transforming growth factor-beta. Science 237, 291-293, 1987. 
15. Vonderhaar BK. Local effects of EGF, alpha-TGF, and EGF-like growth factors on 
lobuloalveolar development of the mouse mammary gland in vivo. J Cell Physiol 132, 
16. Coleman S, Silberstein GB, Daniel CW. Ductal morphogenesis in the mouse mammary 
gland: evidence supporting a role for epidermal growth factor. Dev Biol 127, 304-315,
1988.
17. Jhappan C, Stahle C, Harkins RN, Fausto N, Smith GH, Merlino GT. TGF alpha 
overexpression in transgenic mice induces liver neoplasia and abnormal development of 
the mammary gland and pancreas. Cell 61, 1137-1146, 1990. 
18. Jhappan C, Geiser AG, Kordon EC, Bagheri D, Hennighausen L, Roberts AB, Smith 
GH, Merlino G. Targeting expression of a transforming growth factor beta 1 transgene to 
the pregnant mammary gland inhibits alveolar development and lactation. EMBO J 12, 
19. Robinson SD, Silberstein GB, Roberts AB, Flanders KC, Daniel CW. Regulated 
expression and growth inhibitory effects of transforming growth factor-beta isoforms in 
mouse mammary gland development. Development 113, 867-878, 1991. 
20. Snedeker SM, Brown CF, DiAugustine Rp. Expression and functional properties of 
transforming growth factor alpha and epidermal growth factor during mouse mammary 
gland ductal morphogenesis. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 88, 276-280, 1991.
21. Pierce D, Johnson MD, Matsui Y, Robinson SD, Gold LI, Purchio AF, Daniel CW, 
Hogan BL, Moses HL. Inhibition of mammary duct development but not alveolar 
outgrowth during pregnancy in transgenic mice expressing active TGF-beta 1. Genes 
Dev 7, 2308-2317, 1993. 
129, 591-603, 1995.
7.
8.
9.
581-584, 1987. 
1835-1845, 1993. 

HGF/SF and Neuregulin 
17
22. Kratochwil K. Tissue combination and organ culture studies in the development of the 
embryonic mammary gland. In Developmental Biology: A Comprehensive Synthesis, 
Gwatkin RBL, editor. Plenum Press, NY, 315-334, 1987. 
23. Sakakura T, Nishizuka Y, Dawe CJ. Mesenchyme-dependent morphogenesis and 
epithelium-specific cytodifferentiation in mouse mammary gland. Science 194, 1439-
1441,1976.
24. Durnberger H, Kratochwil K. Specificity of tissue interaction and origin of mesenchymal 
cells in the androgen response of the embryonic mammary gland. Cell 19, 465-471,
1980.
25. Cunha GR, Young P, Hamamoto S, Guzman R, Nandi S. Developmental response of 
adult mammary epithelial cells to various fetal and neonatal mesenchymes. Epithelial 
Cell Biol 1, 105-118, 1992.
26. Cunha GR, Hom YK. Role of mesenchymal-epithelial interactions in mammary gland 
development. J Mamm G1 Biol Neopl 1, 21-35, 1996. 
27. Montesano R, Matsumoto K, Nakamura T, Orci L. Identification of a fibroblast-derived
epithelial morphogen as hepatocyte growth factor. Cell 67, 901-908, 1991. 
28. Montesano R, Schaller G, Orci L. Induction of epithelial tubular morphogenesis in vitro 
by fibroblast-derived soluble factors. Cell 66, 697-711, 1991. 
29. Weidner KM, Sachs M, Birchmeier W. The Met receptor tyrosine kinase transduces 
motility, proliferation, and morphogenic signals of scatter factor/hepatocyte growth 
factor in epithelial cells. J Cell Biol 121, 145-154, 1993. 
30. Berdichevsky F, Alford D, D'Souza B, Taylor-Papadimitriou J. Branching 
morphogenesis of human mammary epithelial cells in collagen gels. J Cell Sci 107, 
31. Brinkmann V, Foroutan H, Sachs M, Weidner KM, Birchmeier W. Hepatocyte growth 
factor/scatter factor induces a variety of tissue-specific morphogenic programs in 
epithelial cells. J Cell Biol 131, 1573-1586, 1995. 
32. Soriano JV, Pepper MS, Nakamura T, Orci L, Montesano R. Hepatocyte growth factor 
stimulates extensive development of branching duct-like structures by cloned mammary 
gland epithelial cells. J Cell Sci 108, 413-430, 1995. 
33. Chausovsky A, Tsarfaty I, Kam Z, Yarden Y, Geiger B, Bershadsky AD. Morphogenic 
effects of neuregulin (Neu Differentiation Factor) in cultured epithelial cells. Mol Biol 
Cell 9, 3195-3209, 1998. 
34. Sachs M, Weidner KM, Brinkmann V, Walther I, Obermeier A, Ullrich A, Birchmeier 
W. Motogenic and morphogenic activity of epithelial receptor tyrosine kinases. J Cell 
Biol 133, 1095-1 107, 1996. 
35. Ponzetto C, Bardelli A, Zhen Z, Maina F, Dalla-Zonca P, Giordano S, Graziani A, 
Panayotou G, Comoglio PM. A multifunctional docking site mediates signalling and 
transformation by the hepatocyte growth factor/scatter factor receptor family. Cell 77, 
36. Fixman ED, Holgado-Madruga M, Nguyen L, Kamikura DM, Fournier TM, Wong AJ, 
Park M. Efficient cellular transformation by the Met oncoprotein requires a functional 
Grb2 binding site and correlates with phosphorylation of the Grb2-associated proteins, 
Cbl and Gab1 . J Biol Chem 272, 201 67-20 172, 1997. 
37. Weidner KM, Di Cesare S, Sachs M, Brinkmann V, Behrens J, Birchmeier W. 
Interaction between Gab1 and the c-Met receptor tyrosine kinase is responsible for 
epithelial morphogenesis. Nature 384, 173- 176, 1996. 
38. Maroun CR, Holgado-Madruga M, Royal I, Naujokas MN, Fournier TM, Wong AJ, Park 
M. The Gab1 PH domain is required for localization of Gab1 at sites of cell-cell contact
3557-3568, 1994. 
261-27, 1994. 

18
Niemann et al 
and epithelial morphogenesis downstream from the met receptor tyrosine kinase. Mol 
Cell Biol 19, 1784-1799, 1999. 
39. Nguyen L, Holgado-Madruga M, Maroun C, Fixman ED, Kamikura D, Fournier T, 
Charest A, Tremblay ML, Wong AJ, Park M. Association of the multisubstrate docking 
protein Gab1 with the hepatocyte growth factor receptor requires a functional Grb2 
binding site involving tyrosine 1356. J Biol Chem 272, 20811-20819, 1997. 
40. Hartmann G, Weidner KM, Schwarz H, Birchmeier W. The motility signal of scatter 
factor/hepatocyte growth factor mediated through the receptor tyrosine kinase met 
requires intracellular action of Ras. J Biol Chem 269, 21936-21939, 1994. 
41. Royal I, Fournier TM, Park M. Differential requirement of Grb2 and PI3-kinase in 
HGF/SF-induced cell motility and tubulogenesis. J Cell Physiol 173, 196-201, 1997. 

3.
Expression and Localization of Growth Factors 
during Mammary Gland Development 
Fred Sinowatz, 2Dieter Schams, 2Annette Plath,
1SabineKölle
¹Institute of Veterinary Anatomy, University of Munich, Germany, 21nstitute of Physiology, 
Technical University of Munich, Weihenstephan, Germany 
1
Key words: 
Abstract:
Bovine, mammary gland, growth factors 
Growth and differentiation of the mammary gland during development and 
lactation are controlled by complex hormonal mechanisms. Additionally
growth factors are supposed to act as local mediators of the hormonally 
controlled developmental processes. Mammary tissue for this study was 
obtained from non pregnant control heifers, primigravid heifers (second part of 
pregnancy), around parturition, during lactation (early and late) and from dry 
cows. Using RT-PCR and ribonuclease protections assay (RPA) the expression 
of the following growth factors was studied in the different phases bovine 
mammary gland development : Insulin-like growth factor I (IGF-I), insulin-
like growth factor II (IGF-II), fibroblast growth factor 1 (FGF-1), fibroblast 
growth factor 2 (FGF-2), transforming growth factor a (TGF-a). Additionally 
the expression of fibroblast growth factor receptor (FGFR) and growth 
hormone receptor (GHR) was investigated. The cellular distribution pattern of 
several of these growth factors and GHR was obtained using 
Immunocytochemical techniques. The detailed expression and localization 
pattern of these growth factors are presented and their role in the local 
regulation of the bovine mammary gland is briefly discussed 
1.
INTRODUCTION
The profound effects of systemic hormones on all aspects of pre- and
postnatal development, differentiation and secretory activity of mammary 
gland are well documented1,2. The cyclic events of mammary growth and 
19

20
Sinowatz et al 
differentiation that occur during pregnancy and lactation are controlled by 
various steroid and peptide hormones3. At the cellular and tissue level the 
action of many of these hormones is mediated by growth factors in an 
intracrine, autocrine, juxtacrine or paracrine manner1,4. In the present 
communication we report on the expression of various growth factors (IGF- 
I, IGF-II, FGF- 1, FGF-2, TGF-α) in the bovine mammary gland during well 
defined stages of mammogenesis, lactation and involution. Additionally the 
expression pattern of GHR during these stages will be discussed. 
2.
MATERIAL AND METHODS 
2.1
Animals, tissue sampling and preparation. 
Mammary tissue was obtained from 27 German Brown Swiss heifers and 
cows at distinct periods of mammary gland development immediately after 
slaughter. The material studied comprised mammary tissue from non-
pregnant and primigravid heifers, cows during lactogenesis, early and late 
lactation and dry, non pregnant cows. The following classification of 
animals was established: 
I 
Mammogenesis 
I. 1 Mammogenesis-ductal growth (non pregnant heifers) 
I.2 Mammogenesis-lobuloalveolar development during first pregnancy
I.2.1: days 194-213 of pregnancy
I.2.2: days 255-272 of pregnancy
II
III 
Galactopoiesis 
Lactogenesis: days 5-11 post partum 
III.1 peak lactation 
III.2 late lactation 
IV
For histology and immunohistochemistry, tissue samples (approximately 
15 mm long and 5 mm thick) were fixed in Bouin's solution or in 
methanol/glacial acid (ratio 1:1, w/v) for 24 h, dehydrated in a graded series 
of ethanol, cleared in xylene and embedded in paraffin. Serial sections (5 
µm) were cut on a Leitz microtome and mounted on glass slides. Following 
deparaffinization, the presence of growth factors (IGF-I, IGF-II, TGF-α,
FGF-1, FGF-2, and receptors (FGFR and GHR) was demonstrated 
immunohistochemically by the streptavidin-biotin horseradish peroxidase 
complex (ABC) technique5. Controls were performed by a) omission of the 
primary antibody; b) replacing the antiserum against the growth factors or 
FGFR and GHR by normal mouse serum (Sigma, Munich) in different 
Involution (3-4 weeks dried off, non pregnant) 

Growth Factors during Mammary Gland Development 
21
concentrations (dilution 1:5; 1:10; 1:100). c) Preabsorption of the primary 
antibody. It was performed by preincubation of the primary antibody for 24 
h at 40°C with the respective recombinant growth factors in a siliconized 
polypyrene tube before incubation on the slides. 
2.2 
RNA extraction 
Total RNA was isolated from bovine tissues using a specifically adapted 
guanidium thiocyanate/phenol procedure6. The RNA pellet was washed in 
75% ethanol and diluted in distilled, DEPC treated water. Concentration of 
RNA was measured by photometry. For RT-PCR of GHR, total RNA was 
prepared from snap frozen bovine mammary gland tissue using Tripure 
Reagent (Sigma, Deisenhofen, Germany) according to the manufacturer's
instructions.
2.3
Reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction 
(RT-PCR)
For RT-PCR, total cellular RNA was denatured at 65°C for 10 min, 
quick-cooled on ice and reverse transcribed in a final volume of 20 ml. 
When RNA had been prepared using snap-frozen tissue and Tripure 
Reagent, 5 mg RNA were used for the RT reaction. The RT reaction mix 
included 1x ExpandTM Reverse Transcriptase buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl, 40 
mM MgCl2, 0.5% Tween 20 (v/v), pH 8.3), 10 mM DTT, 1.6 mg oligo dT, 
0.75 mM dNTP, 3 mM MgCl2, 30 units RNase inhibitor and 50 units 
ExpandTM reverse transcriptase. All reagents were purchased from 
Boehringer Mannheim, Germany. The reaction mix contained 1x reaction 
buffer (10 mM Tris, 50 mM KCI, 1.5 mM MgCl2, pH 8.3), 0.4 mM dNTP, 4 
units Taq polymerase (Boehringer, Mannheim, Germany) and 100 pmol of 
each primer. Controls were performed by using RNA instead of cDNA in the 
PCR reaction. The primers used for RT-PCR for the different growth factors 
and for GHR as well as the specific conditions of amplification are described 
previously4,7,8.
2.4 
RNase protection assay 
The total RNA (30 mg) was introduced into a commercial RNase
protection assay (RPA) (Ambion, Texas, USA) and performed as previously 
described4. Precast 10% polyacrylamide gels supplied with 7 M urea 
(Cleangels, Pharmacia, Freiburg, Germany) were used. Sense and 32P-
antisense riboprobes were generated by subcloning of the desired 

22
Sinowatz et al 
homologues gene products according to the manufacturer's instructions 
(PCR-Cloning and RNA-Transcription Kit; Stratagene, La Jolla, CA, USA). 
To quantify the mRNA of the growth factors by RPA, increasing amounts of 
in vivo synthesized sense RNA were hybridised with the respective 
32P-
antisense riboprobes and compared with the mammary RNA sample using 
densitometry. There was a linear increase in the abundance of RNase-
protected sense/antisense fragments between 0.25 and 5 pg. Individual 
samples were analysed to verify RT-PCR results and afterwards pooled 
RNA was examined to obtain the expression pattern throughout the different 
stages of mammary gland development. 
3. 
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
Semiquantitative densitometric data of the RPA for different growth
factors are given in table 1
Table I: Ribonuclease protection assay of growth factors
I.1
1.2.1
1.2.2
II
III.1
111.2
IV
Mam.
Mam.
M a m .
Lac.
Galac. 
Galac. 
Invol.
IGF-1
+++
+ 
+ + 
- 
- 
- 
+ - ++ 
TGFa
++
+
+
- 
- 
- 
++
FGF-1
+++
++
+
- 
- 
- 
+
FGF-2
++
+
+++
+
+
-
+
FGFR
++
+
++
+ 
+ 
± 
+ 
A general tendency of the expression pattern during the different stages 
of mammary gland development can be seen. All growth factors studied 
displayed a relatively high expression in virgin heifers (I.1), reduced (IGF-I
and TGF-α ) or equal levels (FGF-1 and FGF-2) during pregnancy (I.2.1 and 
I.2.2), negative or weak expression during lactogenesis (11) and galacto-
poiesis (IIII.1 and III.2) and again increased levels during involution (IV). A 
similar distribution pattern was found with RT-PCR. Additionally, using RT-
PCR, the growth factor IGF-II was demonstrated during all stages of 
mammary gland development but the tendency for a stronger expression 
during mammogenesis, as seen for the other growth factors, could not be 
proven for IGF-II. 
The immunohistochemical distribution pattern was studied for IGF-I,
IGF-II, FGF-1 and FGF-2. The results for immunostaining of IGF-I are 
summarized in table 2. Only a weak staining for IGF-I occurred in the 
epithelium of the ducts during mammogenesis. The epithelium of the alveoli 
were negative during mammogenesis, lactogenesis and galactopoiesis but 
displayed distinct IGF-I activity during involution. In the stroma a distinct 

Growth Factors during Mammary Gland Development 
23
staining of the cytoplasm of adipocytes and of vascular smooth muscle cells 
could be observed. A certain percentage of fibroblasts (usually 20 to 30 %) 
were also immunopositive. Macrophages which occurred in various numbers 
during the different stages of mammary gland development (comparatively 
many during mammogenesis and involution, few during lactopoiesis and 
galactopoiesis) always showed a strong reaction for immunoreactive IGF-I.
A similar pattern of immunoreactivity was found for FGF-1. Whereas 
mRNA for IGF-II could be demonstrated during all stages of mammary 
gland development using RT-PCR, no immunostaining was seen for this 
growth factor. 
Table 2: IGF-I Immunohistochemistry in bovine mammary gland
Epithelium
Ducts
+
+
±
±
±
+
++
Alveoli
No
- 
- 
± 
-
+ 
++
Myoepithelium
Stroma
Fibroblasts
+
+
±
+few
+few
+few
+
Adipocytes
++
++
++
++
no 
no 
++
Endothelium
Smooth muscle
++
++
+-++
+
+
+- ++
Macrophages
+++
+++
+++
+++
+++
+++
+++
(few) 
(few) 
(many)
Immunoreactive FGF-2 was observed in virgin heifers in endothelial cells, 
ductal epithelial cells and myoepithelial cells. During mammogenesis 
positive immunostaining occurred additionally in the epithelium of some 
alveoli. During lactogenesis only endothelial and myoepithelial cells were 
immunopositive. During involution positive staining was again observed in 
vascular cells, fibroblasts, smooth muscle cells and myoepithelial cells. The 
pronounced localization of FGF-2 in the endothelial cells of the vascular 
system of the mammary gland suggests an important role of FGF-2 in the 
changes of vascularization during the mammogenesis, lactation and 
involution.
The physiological role of GH for mammogenesis and lactation is not 
fully known and especially the role of GHR is controversial discussed. Using 
RT-PCR, non radioactive in situ hybridisation and immunohistochemistry 
we could demonstrate a characteristic pattern of GHR expression in the 
epithelial and stromal compartments of the bovine mammary gland (Table 3) 
The ductular epithelium showed distinct staining during most stages of 
development. The secretory epithelium of the alveoli contained a moderate 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
I.1 
I.2.1 
I.2.2 
II 
III.1 
III.2 
IV 

24
Sinowatz et al 
amount of GHR during pregnancy which significantly increased during 
lactation and galactopoiesis. In dry cows the immunostaining for GHR in the 
alveoli was only weak or negative. Contrary to the GHR protein, the amount 
of mRNA encoding GHR appeared to be relatively constant during 
mammogenesis and lactation and with in situ hybridization a distinct signal 
for GHR was found in the epithelial cells of ducts and alveoli during this 
stages.
Table 3: GHR-immunohistochemistry in bovine mammary gland 
Epithelium
I.1
I.2.1
1.2.2
II
III.1
III.2
IV
Ducts 
++ 
+ - + +
+ - + +
+ - + +
++ 
++ 
+/-
Alveoli 
No 
+ 
+ 
+ - ++
++ 
++ 
+/-
Myoepithelium 
+/-
Stroma
Fibroblasts 
10-20% 
10-20% 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+(few) 
+ 
+ 
Adipocytes
++ 
+ - ++
+ - + +
+ - + +
no 
no 
+ 
Endothelium
+ 
+ - ++
+ - + +
+
+ 
+ 
+ 
Smooth muscle 
++ 
++ 
++
++
++ 
++ 
++ 
Macrophages 
+++ 
+++ 
+++ 
+++ 
+++ 
+++ 
+++ 
(few) 
(few) 
(many) 
Even though an important role for GH in maintaining milk yield in 
ruminants is well established the precise mechanisms of its actions in the 
mammary gland is unclear as GHR appears to lack in this organ9. Proposals 
for GH action includes homeostatic mechanisms such as changes in energy 
partitioning and suggestions that GH increases milk production indirectly via 
stimulation of IGF-I production, either in the liver or locally in the mammary 
gland, which in turn increases milk production. Our results clearly point to a 
direct role of GH via its receptor. Using different techniques (RT-PCR, in 
situ hybridisation, immunocytochemistry) we could demonstrate a distinct 
amount of mRNA encoding GHR and its receptor protein during lactation 
and galactopoiesis whereas at the same time. the amount of IGF-I appeared 
to be low or negative in the glandular epithelium. and only weakly expressed 
in the stroma. 
4. 
REFERENCES 
1.
Woodward TL, Dumont N, OConnor-McCourt M. Turner JD, Philip A. Characterisation 
of transforming growth factor, growth regulatory effects and receptors on bovine 
mammary cells. J Cell Physiol 165: 339-348. 1995. 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 

Growth Factors during Mammary Gland Development 
2.
3.
25
Knabel M, Kölle S, Sinowatz F. Expression of growth hormone receptor in the bovine 
mammary gland during prenatal development. Anat Embryo1 198: 163-169, 1998. 
Schams D, Amselgruber W, Sinowatz F. Immunolocalisation of insulin-like growth 
factors and basic fibroblast growth factor in the bovine mammary gland. In: Intercellular 
signalling in the mammary gland, New York and London, Plenum Press. 1995, pp. 97-
98.
Plath A. Zur Expression von Wachstumsfaktoren in der Rindermilchdruse. Thesis. 
University of Munich. 1996. 
Hsu SH, Raine L, Fanger H. Use of avidin-biotin peroxidase complex (ABC) in 
immunoperoxidase techniques. A comparison between ABC and unlabelled antibody 
(PAP) procedures. J Histochem Cytochem 29: 577580, 1981. 
Plath A. Einspanier R. Peters F, Sinowatz F. Schams D. Expression of transforming 
growth factors alpha and beta-1 messenger RNNA in the bovine mammary gland during 
different stages of development and lactation. J Endocrinol 155: 501 -511, 1997.
Plath A, Einspanier R, Gabler C, Peters F, Sinowatz F. Gospodarowicz D. Schams D. 
Expression and localization of members of the fibroblast growth factor family in the 
bovine mammary gland. J Dairy Sci 81: 2604-2613, 1998. 
Kölle S. Sinowatz F, Boie G, Lincoln D. Developmental changes in the expression of the 
growth hormone receptor messenger ribonucleic acid and protein in the bovine ovary. 
Biol Reprod 59: 836-842, 1998. 
Flint DJ. Regulation of milk secretion and composition by growth hormone and 
prolactin. In: Intercellular signalling in the mammary gland, New York and London, 
Plenum Press, 1995, pp. 131.151. 
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.

4.
Involvement of Growth Factors in the Regulation of
Pubertal Mammary Growth in Cattle
Purup, S., Vestergaard, M. and Sejrsen, K.
Dept. of Animal Nutrition and Physiology, Danish Institute of Agricultural Sciences, Research 
Centre Foulum, DK-8830 Tjele, Denmark 
Key words:Bovine, mammary gland, growth factors 
Abstract:
Pubertal mammary growth in heifers is dependent on interactions of many 
hormones and growth factors of which some are stimulatory while others are 
inhibitory. Although estrogen and growth hormone (GH) are of primary importance, 
more recent studies have suggested a role for both systemic and mammary tissue-
specific growth factors. Growth factors may act as mediators of estrogen and GH or 
through specific effects of their own. These growth factors include insulin (INS),
IGFs (IGF-I and IGF- II), epidermal growth factor (EGF), FGFs (FGF-1 and FGF-
2), TGFs (TGF-α and TGF-ß’s, amphiregulin (AR), platelets derived growth factor
(PDGF), and mammary derived growth factor-1 (MDGF-1). Using mammary 
epithelial cells derived from prepubertal heifers and cultured in three-dimensional
collagen gels as an in vitro model, we have investigated the mitogenic effects of a 
number of different growth factors (IGF-I, des( 1-3) IGF-I, IGF-II, INS, EGF, TGF-
α, AR, FGF-1, FGF-2, and TGF-ß1). As expected, IGF-I, des(1-3)IGF-I, IGF-II and 
INS all stimulated proliferation of mammary cells with des( 1-3)IGF-I being the 
most potent and INS the least potent. The mitogenic effect of IGF-I could be 
inhibited by both IGFBP-2 and IGFBP-3 showing that these binding proteins 
modulate the bioactivity of IGF-I in the mammary gland at the cellular level. 
Regulation of IGF availability by IGFBPs in the extracellular environment therefore 
is critical for IGF action in the mammary gland. Proliferation of mammary epithelial 
cells was also stimulated by growth factors of the EGF family, i.e. EGF, TGF-α and
AR, however, not as much as growth factors from the IGF family. Members of the 
fibroblast growth factor family showed various mitogenic activities. FGF-1
stimulated DNA synthesis while FGF-2 in concentrations above 10 ng/ml inhibited 
DNA synthesis. TGF-ß1 at very low concentrations stimulated proliferation slightly 
whereas higher concentrations strongly inhibited proliferation of mammary 
epithelial cells and inhibited mitogenesis induced by growth factors of both the
27

28
Pump et al 
EGF- and IGF family. This shows that TGF-ß1 is a very potent regulator of pubertal 
mammary growth. 
1. 
INTRODUCTION 
Growth and development of the mammary glands in pubertal heifers is 
important for milk yield potential at maturity1. The regulation of mammary 
growth involves complex interactions of many hormones and growth factors, 
of which some are growth-stimulating and others growth-inhibitory. 
Although the systemic importance of the hormones estrogen and growth 
hormone (GH), for regulation of growth of the mammary gland has been 
well documented, these hormones have no or very little stimulating effect on 
mammary epithelial cell growth in vitro (for review2,3). Thus other factors of 
either systemic or local origin are of importance for growth and development 
of the mammary gland. In recent years, a number of growth factors and 
binding proteins have been discovered that may be involved in mediating the 
effects of estrogen and GH or have specific effects of their own. In the 
present paper, we present data from studies in which we have investigated 
the mitogenic effect of specific growth factors and binding proteins using an 
in vitro model of epithelial cells from 8-9 mo heifers. The factors studied 
include growth factors of the insulin-like growth factor (IGF) family, the 
epidermal growth factor (EGF) family, the fibroblast growth factor (FGF) 
family, the transforming growth factor-ß (TGF-ß) family, and two IGF 
binding proteins. Since factors are studied in the same cell culture system, it 
is possible to evaluate their relative importance in regulation of growth and 
development of the pubertal mammary gland. 
2.
PRIMARY CELL CULTURES OF MAMMARY 
EPITHELIUM
Mitogenic effects of growth factors have been investigated in different 
cell culture systems with mammary cells from different species at different 
developmental stages. Unfortunately, species specificity exists such that 
findings from laboratory animals cannot automatically be applied to 
ruminants. Therefore, comparisons of the observed growth-stimulatory or 
growth-inhibitory effects are difficult. To study the importance of growth 
factors for growth and development of the pubertal heifer mammary glands, 
mammary epithelial cells were isolated from heifers with body weights 
between 200 and 250 kg and 8-9 mo of age. At this body weight first estrus 

Growth Factors andPubertal Mammary Growth in Cattle
29
has normally not yet occurred and the heifers have significant amounts of 
mammary tissue showing allometric growth (it is growing at a faster rate 
than the body). Therefore heifers at this development stage are ideal for 
studying regulation of mammary growth. 
Mammary epithelial cells were cultured in three-dimensional collagen 
gels as described previously4. Briefly, tissue pieces excised aseptically form 
mammary parenchyma were digested in basal medium supplemented with 
collagenase, hyaluronidase, DNase and insulin. Organoids were isolated by
filtration, centrifugation and precipitation, and subsequently stored in liquid 
nitrogen until use in cell culture experiments. Experimental designs always 
included 3 replicates per treatment. Cells were cultured for 24 h in basal 
serum-free medium 199 containing insulin (10 ng/ml), followed by an 
additional 4 d in treatment media containing growth factors and/or binding 
proteins. Culture media were changed every 2 d and 1 µCi [methyl-
3H]thymidine was added for the last 24 h of the culture period. DNA 
synthesis was measured as thymidine incorporation as described previously4.
3. 
INSULIN AND INSULIN-LIKE GROWTH 
FACTORS (IGFS) 
Insulin and insulin-like growth factors are structurally homologues 
peptides that are involved in many biological processes5. The biological 
effect of IGFs is influenced by association with IGF binding proteins 
(IGFBPs)5. IGFs and IGFBPs are detected in many biological fluids 
including serum, colostrum, milk, lymph and follicular fluid. IGFs and 
IGFBPs are mainly synthesized in the liver but also locally in many tissues 
including mammary tissue. 
In ruminants, the stimulatory effects of insulin, IGF-I, IGF-II and the 
natural variant of IGF-I, des-(1-3) IGF-I, on DNA synthesis in ruminant 
mammary tissue in cultures has been documented in a number of reports. 
These studies include undifferentiated mammary epithelial cells from 4-6 mo 
old heifers6,7, mammary epithelial cells prepared from pregnant sheep8 and
pregnant, nonlactating heifers9,10, and prepartum and lactating cows11. In
undifferentiated mammary epithelial cells, des-( 1-3) IGF-I was found to be 
as potent as IGF-I, while IGF-II was significantly less active (Peri et al., 
1992). In 8-9 mo old heifers, we found des-(1-3) IGF-I to be more potent 
than IGF-I, IGF-II and insulin (Fig. 1). Des-( 1-3) attained half-maximal
activity at a concentration of less than 1.5 ng/ml, native IGF-I at 1.5-3 ng/ml, 
whereas IGF-II was required at 3-6 ng/ml before reaching half-maximal
activity. However, the maximal proliferative activity of des-( 1-3) IGF-I,
native IGF-I and IGF-II were not different, while insulin exhibited lower 

30
Purup et al 
total activity and did not attain the maximal activity of the IGFs even in a 
concentration of 1000 ng/ml (this concentration not shown). 
Fig. 1 Effect of IGF-I, IGF-II, des-(1-3) IGF-I and insulin on DNA synthesis, measured by 
incorporation of [methyl-3H]thymidine, into mammary epithelial cells prepared from 8-9 mo 
old prepubertal heifers and grown in 3-dimensional collagen gels. Values are LSmeans ± 
SEM of values obtained from cultures with triplicate samples. 
These results show that IGFs are very potent factors for mammary 
epithelial cell growth. Differences in potency of IGF-I, des-(1-3) IGF-I and 
IGF-II in different studies may depend on variation in affinity and number of 
IGF membrane receptors. Two types of IGF receptors (type 1 and 2) are 
known. We have confirmed the presence of type 1 IGF receptors in heifers at 
this developmental stage in ligand-binding assays with crude mammary 
membranes12. The potency of the IGFs in different culture systems may also 
depend on the extent of IGF-binding protein (IGFBP) accumulation in the 
particular culture system since IGF bioactivity is modulated by these 
specific, high-affinity binding proteins. Mammary cells derived from 
pregnant, nonlactating heifers and grown in collagen gels show IGF-I
inducible secretion of IGFBP-2 and IGFBP-310. We have recently shown the 
abundance of mRNA and protein for IGFBP-1, -2, -3 and -4 in mammary 
tissue from heifers13 suggesting the involvement of the binding proteins in 
regulating growth of mammary epithelial cells. We therefore studied the 
effect of recombinant IGFBP-2 at the cellular level by adding increasing 
concentrations to cell culture medium with (Fig. 2b) or without (Fig. 2a) 
IGF-I. IGFBP-2 alone did not have any significant (P>0.49) effect on DNA 
synthesis (Fig. 2a). However, when IGFBP-2 was added to cell culture 

Growth Factors and Pubertal Mammary Growth in Cattle 
31
medium containing IGF-I, IGFBP-2 abolished the bioactivity of IGF-I (Fig. 
2b). Addition of IGFBP-3 to cell culture medium significantly inhibited the 
mitogenic effect of IGF-I and IGF-II but not des-(1-3) IGF-I (Fig. 3) in line 
with the reduced affinity of des-(1-3) IGF-I for IGF-binding protein14 In
previous studies we found that IGFBP-3 alone also inhibited the mitogenic 
activity of serum and mammary tissue extracts from heifers at this stage of 
development4.
IGFBP-2
(ng/ml)
Fig. 2 Effect of IGFBP-2 on (a) DNA synthesis and (b) DNA synthesis stimulated by IGF-I
(6.25 ng/ml), measured by incorporation of [methyl-3H]thymidine into mammary epithelial 
cells prepared from 8-9 mo old prepubertal heifers and grown in 3-dimensional collagen gels. 
Values are LSmeans ± SEM of values obtained from cultures with triplicate samples. Dotted 
line represent mitogenic response obtained with cells in basal medium. 
The evidence therefore suggests that locally produced IGFBP-3 may 
therefore inhibit mammary cell growth, either by associating with IGF-I or 
IGF-II and modulating its activity, or by an IGF-independent mechanism. 

32
Pump et al
4.
THE EPIDERMAL GROWTH FACTOR (EGF)
FAMILY
The epidermal growth factor family is comprised of at least ten proteins
including
epidermal
growth
factor
(EGF),
heparin
binding
EGF,
transforming growth factor-α (TGF-α), amphiregulin and various heregulins. 
IGFBP-3 (ng/ml)
Fig. 3 Effect of IGFBP-3 on DNA synthesis stimulated by IGF-I, IGF-II or des-( 1-3) IGF-I
(all 6.25 ng/ml), measured by incorporation of [methyl-3H]thymidine into mammary 
epithelial cells prepared from 8-9 mo old prepubertal heifers and grown in 3-dimensional
collagen gels. Values are LSmeans ± SEM of values obtained from cultures with triplicate 
samples. Dotted line represent mitogenic response obtained with cells in basal medium. 
These proteins are a family of structurally related growth factors that act 
via the EGF (ErbB-1) receptor, which is a specific high-affinity receptor 
located on the plasma membrane. Currently, little is known concerning the 
mammogenic role of EGF and related growth factors in ruminants. Despite 
the existence of specific EGF receptors in mammary tissue from sheep and 
cows15,16, expression of EGF messenger RNA is so far known only from a 
single study with ruminant tissue17. Expression of other proteins of the EGF 
family, however, occur in ruminants, as the bovine mammary gland 
expresses TGF-α18,19. Recently, expression of mRNA for amphiregulin was 
shown in the sheep mammary gland20. Amphiregulin, that was originally 
isolated from conditioned medium from MCF-7 human mammary carcinoma 
cell line21,22, has to our knowledge never been investigated in bovine 
mammary tissue. 
The mitogenic effect of growth factors of the EGF family has been 
examined in a limited number of studies with ruminant cells. EGF and TGF-
α both stimulated DNA synthesis in mammary tissue explants from 
midpregnant heifers
23, in mammary epithelial cells from pregnant heifers and 

Growth Factors and Pubertal Mammary Growth in Cattle 
33
cows9,24
and in alveolar cells prepared from pregnant sheep25. DNA 
synthesis was also stimulated by EGF in undifferentiated mammary 
epithelial cells from 4-6 mo old heifers7, by TGF-α in alveolar cells from 
non-pregnant, pregnant and lactating sheep16, and by amphiregulin in 
alveolar cells prepared from pregnant sheep25. Furthermore, EGF infused 
into the bovine mammary gland, caused an increase in DNA synthesis in the 
gland26.
Concentration
(ng/mI)
Fig. 4 Effect of rhEGF, rhTGF-α and rhAR on DNA synthesis measured by incorporation of
[methyL3H]thymidine into mammary epithelial cells prepared from 8-9 mo prepubertal 
heifers and grown in 3-dimensional collagen gels. Values are LSmeans ± SEM of values 
obtained from cultures with triplicate samples. 

34
Purup et al
To investigate the mitogen activity of EGF, TGF-α and amphiregulin in 
mammary tissue from prepubertal heifers, we tested their effect on DNA 
synthesis in undifferentiated mammary epithelial cells from 8-9 mo heifers. 
Proliferation of mammary epithelial cells was stimulated by EGF, TGF-α 
and amphiregulin but not as much as by growth factors from the IGF family 
(Fig. 4). Synthesis of DNA was increased about 3.5 and 1.75 fold over basal 
medium by EGF and TGF-α at a concentration of 50 ng/ml. The previous 
studies with alveolar cells from pregnant sheep25 also showed significant 
effects of both EGF and TGF-α but the effect of EGF was smaller and not 
clearly dose-related compared with TGF-α. Likewise, Collier et al.9 found
that bovine mammary epithelial cells from pregnant heifers responded more 
to bovine TGF-α than to EGF. In the MAC-T bovine mammary epithelial
cell line, EGF was reported to be without effect27. The mitogenic effect of 
amphiregulin was significantly (P<0.01) increased in our study with a 
maximal effect (~30% increase) at a concentration of 100 ng/ml (Fig. 4) but 
the effect was smaller than the effect of EGF and TGF-α. The presence of
mRNA for EGF, TGF-α and amphiregulin in the ruminant mammary gland
and the results presented here, suggest that these growth factors may be 
important in regulation of mammary growth and development in prepubertal 
heifers. However, more information is needed about the suggested presence
of these factors in mammary tissue.
5.
THE FIBROBLAST GROWTH FACTOR (FGF) 
FAMILY
The fibroblast growth factors (FGFs) are a family of heparin binding 
growth factors that consist of at least 15 structurally related polypeptide 
growth factors28. The FGFs are widely distributed throughout the developing 
and adult body and display diverse biological activities, most of which are 
mediated via FGF tyrosine kinase receptors (FGFRs), of which five have 
been described until now29. At least three of the FGFs are supposed to 
participate in the regulation of growth and function of mammary gland cells 
in ruminants. These are fibroblast growth factor-1 (FGF-l), also known as 
acidic FGF (aFGF), fibroblast growth factor-2 (FGF-2), also known as basic 
FGF (bFGF), and fibroblast growth factor-7 (FGF-7), also known as 
keratinocyte growth factor (KGF). Recently, it was shown that these FGFs 
and their receptors are expressed during development, lactation and 
involution 
in the bovine mammary gland29. 
The highest mRNA 
concentrations of FGF-1, -2 and -7 were detected in the glands of virgin 
heifers and primigravid heifers during involution. Tissue concentrations of 
FGF-1 and -2 was also shown to be highest in these periods. 

Growth Factors and Pubertal Mammary Growth in Cattle
35
The mitogenic
effects of FGFs on mammary tissue has almost
exclusively been studied in rodents. Using primary cell cultures, FGF-2 has
been found to be growth-stimulatory for mouse mammary epithelial cells
from all stages of mammary development30,31. FGF-1 and -7 also stimulated
growth of mammary epithelial cells from virgin mice32. In ruminant
mammary tissue, only one study exist in which the effect ofFGF-2 has been
investigated. FGF-2 (0.1- 50 ng/ml) showed dose-dependent mitogenic
activity in undifferentiated mammary epithelial cells from 4-6 mo old
heifers33. Using our primary mammary epithelial cell cultures, we have
investigated the mitogenic effect of FGF-1 and -2. Fig. 5 shows that FGF-1
significantly increased DNA synthesis in concentrations above 0.5 ng/ml 
with maximum stimulation at the highest concentration (100 ng/ml) added to
the cell culture medium. FGF-2, however, tended to increase D N Asynthesis
at concentrations below 10 ng/ml, but significantly decreasedD N Asynthesis
when 50 and 100 ng/ml was added to culture medium. The stimulating effect
ofFGF-1 is in agreement with previous studies in mice, while the mitogenic
response to FGF-2 contrast the dose-dependent mitogenic activity in
mammary epithelial cells from 4-6 mo old heifers
33. Anyhow, previous
studies showing expression and tissue concentrations of FGFs and the
present results suggest FGFs to be important in the local regulation of the
bovine mammary gland.
Concentration (ng/ml) 
Fig. 5 Effect of bovine FGF-1 and FGF-2 on DNA synthesis measured by incorporation of 
[methyL3H]thymidine 
into mammary epithelial cells prepared from 8-9 mo prepubertal 
heifers and grown in 3-dimensional collagen gels. Values are LSmeans ± SEM of values 
obtained from cultures with triplicate samples. Dotted line represent mitogenic response 
obtained with cells in basal medium. 

36
Purup et al
6. 
THE TRANSFORMING GROWTH FACTOR-ß 
(TGF-ß) FAMILY 
The TGF-ß family is composed of at least five related multifunctional 
proteins that can affect a variety of cellular functions such as extracellular 
matrix formation, differentiation and growth depending on the cell and tissue 
type34,35 . TGF-ß is involved in a variety of physiological and pathological 
processes, including wound healing in which TGF-ß produced in blood 
platelets induces accelerated healing of incisional wounds36. Platelets 
represent the most concentrated natural source of TGF-ß1 (20 mg/kg37), but 
TGF-ß1 is believed to be secreted from nearly all cells35. Three isoforms of 
TGF-ß (TGF-ß1, TGF-ß2 and TGF-ß3) have been identified. The most well 
characterized member of the TGF-ß family is TGF-ß1, which in its 
biological active form is a 25 kDa disulphide-linked homodimer38. TGF-ß1 
is secreted in an inactive form bound to a 75 kDa glycoprotein known as the 
latency associated peptide (LAP)34. This latent TGF-ß1 complex has to be 
activated to obtain its biological functions. This activation may be important 
in controlling the physiological functions of TGF-ß1 in vivo34.
Very little is known about the role of TGF-ß in mammary development in 
ruminants. We have shown the existence of TGF-ß1 in prepubertal heifer 
serum in concentrations ranging from 7 to 30 ng/ml39, and Plaut et al.40 has
shown the existence of specific receptor binding to bovine mammary 
membranes from prepubertal and pubertal heifers as well as from lactating 
and dry cows. In addition, Plath et al19 showed expression of TGF-ß1 in the 
bovine mammary gland during mammogenesis, lactogenesis, galactopoiesis 
and involution. Both specific receptor binding and expression of TGF-ß1 
mRNA was higher during the prepubertal and pubertal periods than during 
lactation. These data support a role of TGF-ß1 in regulation of pubertal 
mammary growth and development. 
The actions of TGF-ß1 are mediated by binding to highly specific cell 
surface receptors of which most cells have three types, designated type I, II 
and III35. The type I and II receptors are supposed to be directly involved in 
signal transduction while the type III receptor has been postulated to enhance 
binding of TGF-ß1 to the signalling receptors. We have investigated the 
existence of the type I and II TGF-ß receptors in bovine mammary tissue 
from prepubertal heifers using immunohistochemistry. These studies showed 
extensive staining for both the type I and II receptor in the ductal epithelium 
making an effect of TGF-ß1, mediated through the receptor, possible in the 
heifer mammary glands (Purup et al., unpublished results). 
In accordance with this, we have investigated the biological effect of 
TGF-ß1 in primary cultures of mammary epithelial cells. A biphasic effect 
of TGF-ß1 was observed (Fig. 6)39. Addition of 25 and 50 pg/ml of TGF-ß1 

Growth Factors and Pubertal Mammary Growth in Cattle 
37
to cell culture medium stimulated DNA synthesis, while higher 
concentrations of TGF-ß1 (>100 pg/ml) inhibited DNA synthesis. Maximal 
inhibition occurred at 5 ng/ml, corresponding to a 66% inhibition of DNA 
synthesis. In addition, TGF-ß1 (5 ng/ml) inhibited 77 to 92% of the 
mitogenic effect of serum (5% added to cell culture medium) obtained from 
24 prepubertal heifers, and adding increasing concentrations of TGF-ß 
antibody had a positive effect on mitogenic activity of serum39.
TGF-β1 (ng/ml)
Fig. 6 Effect of TGF-ß1 on DNA synthesis in primary cultures of mammary epithelial cells 
prepared from 8-9 mo prepubertal heifers and grown in 3-dimensional collagen gels. TGF-ß1 
(12.5, 25, 50, 100, 250, 1000, 5000, 10000 pg/ml) was added to basal medium and DNA 
synthesis measured by incorporation of [methyL3H]thymidine in the last 24 h of the culture 
period. Values are LSmeans ± SEM. Data from Purup et al., 1999. 
To study the potency and relative importance of TGF-ß1 in regulation of 
pubertal mammary growth, we investigated whether TGF-ß1 can influence 
the mitogenic effects of growth factors of the IGF and EGF families. TGF-
ß1 in different concentrations (Fig. 7) was added to cell culture medium 
containing IGF-I (25 ng/ml), IGF-II (50 ng/ml), des(1-3)IGF-I (50 ng/ml), 
INS (100 ng/ml), EGF (25 ng/ml), TGF-α (5 ng/ml) and amphiregulin (100
ng/ml). The maximal effect of TGF-ß1 was obtained with concentrations of 
500 pg/ml. This concentration is 30 times lower than the observed mean 
concentrations in serum from prepubertal heifers. The inhibition of the 
mitogenic effects induced by the different growth factors at this 
concentration of TGF-ß1 corresponded to approximately 50% of the 
proliferation obtained without TGF-ß1 in the medium. It is interesting that 

38
Purup et al 
this relative growth inhibition was of the same size for growth factors from 
both the IGF and EGF family, while the inhibition measured as dpm was 
significant higher for the growth factors in the IGF family than in the EGF 
family. These results show that TGF-ß1 is a very potent regulator of pubertal 
mammary growth in heifers. 
TGF-b1(pg/mI)
TGF-β 1(pg/ml)
Fig. 7 Effect of TGF-ß1(0, 25,100,500,5000pg/ml) on DNA synthesis induced by IGF-I (25 
ng/ml), IGF-II (50 ng/ml), Des(1-3) IGF-I (50 ng/ml), INS (100 ng/ml), EGF (25ng/ml), 
TGF-α (5 ng/ml) and amphiregulin (AR; 100 ng/ml). DNA synthesis was measured by 
incorporation of [methyL-3H]thymidine into mammary epithelial cells prepared from 8-9 mo
prepubertal heifers and grown in 3-dimensional collagen gels. Values are LSmeans ± SEM of
values obtained from cultures with triplicate samples. Dotted line represent mitogenic 
response obtained with cells in basal medium. 

Growth Factors and Pubertal Mammary Growth in Cattle 
7. 
OTHER GROWTH FACTORS 
39
A number of other growth factors, both stimulatory and inhibitory, have 
been described as factors that might play a role in regulating growth and 
development of mammary gland. Among these are mammary-derived
growth factor-1 (MDGF- 1) and platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF). 
MDGF-1 has been detected in human and bovine milk as well as milk of 
other mammals41. Bovine MDGF-1 is predominant in mammary gland 
secretions from pregnant heifers and in colostrum and MDGF- 1 from human 
milk was observed to be growth stimulatory in normal and immortalized 
human mammary epithelial cells and in MCF-7 cells42. PDGF is a potent 
mitogen in human serum which specifically stimulates the proliferation of 
mesenchymal cells. PDGF is secreted by epithelial cell lines derived from 
normal human tissue43 and from a number of breast cancer cell lines44.
Receptors for PDGF, however, do not seem to be present at either breast 
cancer or normal mammary epithelial cells, suggesting the effect of PDGF 
on epithelial cells to be indirect via the stroma. Mammary-derived growth 
inhibitor (MDGI), a member of a family of fatty acid-binding proteins, has 
been isolated from mammary tissue of pregnant and lactating ewes45 as well 
as the lactating bovine mammary gland
46. MDGI is expressed in lobulo-
alveolar and ductal cells of pregnant and lactating animals but not in 
mammary epithelial cells of virgin animals47. The physiological role of 
MDGI remains speculative. The postulated growth inhibitory function of 
MDGI is based on studies with transformed cells but so far no inhibitory 
effect on normal mammary epithelial cells in vivo or in primary culture has 
been demonstrated. Its role in the mammary gland appears to be as a 
differentiation factor rather than a an anti-proliferative factor47.
8.
SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
The regulation of mammary growth and development in heifers is 
accomplished by complex interactions of hormones and growth factors. 
Although estrogen and growth hormone are of primary importance for 
regulation of pubertal mammary growth in heifers, a large number of both 
systemic and mammary tissue specific growth factors are also essential. This 
conclusion is supported by results obtained from studies using primary 
mammary epithelial cells derived from prepubertal heifers and cultured in 
three-dimensional collagen gels as an in vitro model. Growth factors of the 
IGF and EGF growth factor families and FGF-1 are growth-stimulatory
while FGF-2 and TGF-ß 1 have biphasic effects, stimulating DNA synthesis 
at low concentrations and inhibiting DNA synthesis at higher concentrations. 

40
Purup et al 
Furthermore, the results show that the IGF binding proteins, IGFBP-2 and 
IGFBP-3, modulates IGF-I action on mammary cell growth. This is most 
likely due to association with IGF-I, also supported by the results showing 
that the mitogenic activity of des-(1-3) IGF-I was unaffected by addition of 
IGFBP-3 to culture medium. 
In conclusion, the present results describing the biological effect of 
growth factors and binding proteins in vitro together with previous results of 
abundance of mRNA, protein and specific receptors, suggest that at least 
IGF-I, IGFBP-3, FGF-1, FGF-2 and TGF-ß1 are important factors for 
regulation of mammary development and growth in vivo in heifers. 
However, more information is needed concerning growth factors of the EGF 
family as well as other growth factors, especially about the suggested 
presence in mammary tissue, to conclude that these growth factors also are 
important in regulation of mammary growth in heifers. 
Acknowledgements
skilled technical assistance. 
The authors thank C.J. Juhl, A.K. Nielsen, and H.M. Purup for their 
9.
REFERENCES
1.
2.
3.
Sejrsen, K., and S. Purup. 1997. Influence of prepubertal feeding level on milk yield 
potential of dairy heifers: A review. J. Anim. Sci. 75, 828-835.
Forsyth IA. The mammary gland. In: Bailliere's Clinical Endocrinology and Metabolism 
Oka T, Yoshimura M, Lavandero S, Wada K, Ohba Y. Control of growth and 
differentiation of the mammary gland by growth factors. J Dairy Sci 74, 2788-2800,
1991.
Weber MS, Purup S, Vestergaard M, Ellis SE, Sondergaard J, Akers RM, Sejrsen K. 
Contribution of insulin-like growth factor-I (IGF-I) and IGF-binding protein-3 (IGFBP-
3) to mitogenic activity in bovine mammary extracts and serum. J Endocrinology 161,
Jones JI, Clemmons DR. Insulin-like growth factors and their binding proteins: 
Biological actions. Endocrine Rev 16, 3-34, 1995. 
Shamay, A., N. Cohen, M. Niwa, and A. Gertler. 1988. Effect of insulin-like growth 
factor I on deoxyribonucleic acid synthesis and galactopoiesis in bovine undifferentiated 
and lactating mammary tissue in vitro. Endocrinol 123, 804-809.
Peri I, Shamay A, McGrath MF, Collier RJ, Gertler A. Comparative mitogenic and 
galactopoietic effects of IGF-I, IGF-II and des-3-IGF-I in bovine mammary gland in 
vitro. Cell Biol International Reports 16, 359-368, 1992. 
Forsyth IA. The insulin-like growth factor and epidermal growth factor families in 
mammary cell growth in ruminants: action and interaction with hormones. J Dairy Sci 
5,809-832, 1991. 
4.
365-373, 1999. 
5.
6.
7.
8.
79, 1085-1096, 1996. 

Growth Factors and Pubertal Mammary Growth in Cattle 
9.
4 1
Collier RJ, McGrath MF, Byatt JC, Zurfluh L. Regulation of bovine mammary growth 
by peptide hormones: involvement of receptors, growth factors and binding proteins. 
Livest Prod Sci 35, 21-33, 1993. 
10.   McGrath MF, Collier RJ, Clemmonds DR, Busby WH, Sweeny CA, Krivi GG. The 
direct in vitro effect of insulin-like growth factors (IGFs) on normal bovine mammary 
cell proliferation and production of IGF bindings proteins. Endocrinology 129, 671-678,
1991.
1 1. Baumrucker CR, Stemberger BM. Insulin and insulin-like growth factor-I stimulate 
DNA synthesis in bovine mammary tissue in vitro. J Anim Sci 67, 3503-3514, 1989. 
12.   Purup S, Sejrsen K, Akers RM. Effect of bovine GH and ovariectomy on mammary 
tissue sensitivity to IGF-I in prepubertal heifers. J Endocrinol 144, 153-158, 1995. 
13.   Weber MS. The role of insulin-like growth factor-I (IGF-I) and IGF-binding proteins in 
mammary gland development. Ph. D. Thesis, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State 
University,1998.
14.   Forbes B, Szabo L, Baxter RC, Ballard FC, Wallace JC. Classification of the insulin-like
growth factor binding proteins with three distinct categories according to their binding 
specification. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 157, 196-202, 1988. 
15.   Spitzer E, Grosse R. EGF receptors on plasma membranes purified from bovine 
mammary gland of lactating and pregnant animals. Biochem International 14, 581-588,
1987.
16.   Moorby CD, Taylor JA, Forsyth IA. Transforming growth factor-β: receptor binding and 
action on DNA synthesis in the sheep mammary gland. J Endocrinology 144,165-171, 
1995.
17.   Sheffield LG. Mastitis increases growth factor messenger ribonucleic acid in bovine 
mammary glands. J Dairy Sci 80, 2020-2024,1997.
18.   Koff MD, Plaut K. Expression of transforming growth factor-β-like messenger 
ribonucleic acid transcripts in the bovine mammary gland. J Dairy Sci 78, 1903-1908,
1995.
19.   Plath A, Einspanier R, Peters F, Sinowatz F, Schams D. Expression of transforming 
growth factors alpha and beta- 1messenger RNA in the bovine mammary gland during 
different stages of development and lactation. J Endocrinol 155, 501-5 11 ,1997. 
20.   Forsyth IA, Keable S, Taylor JA, Turvey A, Lennard S. Expression of amphiregulin in 
the sheep mammary gland. Mol Cell Endocrinology 126,41-48,1997.
21.  Shouab M, McDonald VL, Bradley G, Todaro GJ. Amphiregulin: a bifunctional growth-
modulating glycoprotein produced by the phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate-treated human 
breast adenocarcinoma cell line MCF-7. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 85,6528-6532,1988.
22.   Shouab M, Plowman GD, McDonald VL, Bradley JG, Todaro GJ. Structure and function 
ofhuman amphiregulin: a member ofthe epidermal growth factor family. Science 243,
23.   Sheffield LG. Hormonal regulation of epidermal growth factor content and signalling in 
bovine mammary tissue. Endocrinology 139,4568-75,1998.
24.   Zurfluh LL, Bolten SL, Byatt JC, McGrath MF, Tou JS, Zupec ME, Krivi GG. Isolation 
of a genomic sequence encoding a biologically active bovine TGF-α  protein. Growth 
Factors 3, 257-266,1990.
25.    Forsyth IA, Taylor JA, Moorby CD. DNA synthesis by ovine mammary alveolar 
epithelial cells: effects of heparin, epidermal growth factor-related peptides and 
interaction with stage of pregnancy. J Endocrinology 156,283-290,1998.
26.   Collier RJ, McGrath MF. Effect of human epidermal growth factor (hEGF) on bovine 
mammary development in vivo. J Dairy Sci 71 (Suppl.1) 228,1988. 
1074-1076,1989.

42
Purup et al
27.
Woodward TL, Akers RM, Turner JD. Lack of mitogenic response to EGF, pituitary and
ovarian hormones in bovine mammary epithelial cells. Endocrine 2, 529-535, 1994.
28.
Szebenyi G, Fallon JF. Fibroblast growth factors as multifunctional signalling factors.
International Rev Cytology 185, 45-106, 1999.
29.
Plath A, Einspanier R, Gabler C, Peters F, Sinowatz F, Gospodarowicz, Schams D.
Expression and localization of members of the fibroblast growth factor family in the
bovine mammary gland. J Dairy Sci 81, 2604-2613, 1998. 
30.
Levay-Young BK, Imagawa W, Wallace DR, Nandi S. Basic fibroblast growth factor
stimulates the growth and inhibits casein accumulation in mouse mammary epithelial
cells in vitro. Mol Cell Endocrinology 62, 327-336, 1989. 
31.
Lavandero SA, Chappuzeau A, Sapag-Hagar M, Oka T. In vivo and in vitro evidence of
basic fibroblast growth factor action in mouse mammary gland development. FEBS Lett
32.
Imagawa W, Cunha GR, Young P, Nandi S. Keratinocyte growth factor and acidic
fibroblast growth factor are mitogens for primary cultures of mammary epithelium.
Biochem Biophys Res Commun 204, 1165-1169, 1994. 
33.
Sandowski Y, Peri I, Gertler A. Partial purification and characterization of putative
paracrine/autocrine bovine mammary epithelium growth factors. Livest Prod Sci 35, 35- 
48, 1993. 
34. Plaut K. Role of epidermal growth factor and transforming growth factors in mammary 
development and lactation. J Dairy Sci 76, 1526-1538, 1993. 
35. Roberts AB, Sporn MB. The transforming growth factor beta. In: Peptide Growth 
Factors and Their receptors. MB Sporn and AB Roberts (Eds.). Springer-Verlag,
Heidelberg, Germany, pp. 421 -472, 1990. 
36. Mustoe TA, Pierce GF, Thomason A, Gramates P, Sporn MB, Deuel TF. Transforming 
growth factor type beta induces accelerated healing of incisional wounds in rats. Science 
37. Van den Eijnden-van Raaij AJM, Koornneef I, van Zoelen EJJ. A new method for high 
yield purification of type beta transforming growth factor from human platelets. 
Biochem Biophys Res Commun 157, 16-23, 1988. 
38. Grainger DJ, Mosedale DE, Metcalfe JC, Weissberg PL, Kemp PR. Active and acid-
activatable TGF-ß in human sera, platelets and plasma. Clin Chim Acta 235, 11-31, 
1995.
39. Purup S, Vestergaard M, Weber MS, Plaut K, Akers RM, Sejrsen K . Local regulation of 
pubertal mammary growth in heifers. J Anim Sci, 1999 (In press). 
40. Plaut K, Maple RL, Capuco AV, Bell AW. Validation of transforming growth factor-(1
binding assay for bovine mammary tissue. In: Intercellular Signalling in the Mammary 
Gland. CJ Wilde, M Peaker, and CH Knight (Eds.), Plenum Press Ltd., 91-93, 1995. 
41. Bano M, Salomon DS, Kidwell WR. Purification of a mammary-derived growth factor 
from human milk and human mammary tumors. J Biol Chem 260, 5745-5752, 1985. 
42. Bano M, Kidwell WR, Lippman ME, Dickson RB. Characterization of mammary-
derived growth factor-1 receptors and response in human mammary epithelial cell lines. 
J Biol Chem 265, 1874-1880, 1990. 
43. Bronzert DA, Bates SE, Sheridan JP. Transforming growth factor-( induces platelet-
derived growth factor (PDGF) messenger RNA and PDGF secretion while inhibiting 
growth in normal human mammary epithelial cells. Mol Endocrinology 4, 981-989, 
1990.
44. Rozengurt E, Sinnet-Smith J, Taylor-Papadimitriou J. Production of PDGF-like growth 
factor by breast cancer cell lines. International J Cancer 36, 247-252, 1985.
439, 351-356, 1988. 
237, 1333-1336, 1987. 

Growth Factors and Pubertal Mammary Growth in Cattle 
43
45. Politis I, Fantuz F, Baldi A. Identification of mammary-derived growth inhibitor in sheep 
mammary tissue. Small Ruminant Res 18, 151-155, 1995. 
46. Böhmer FD, Kraft R, Otto A, Wernstedt C, Hellman U, Kurtz A, Muller T, Rohdi K,
Etzold G, Lehmann W. Identification of a polypeptide growth inhibitor from bovine 
mammary gland. J Biol Chem 262, 15137-15143, 1987, 
47. Kurtz A, Vogel F, Funa K, Heldin CH, Grosse R. Developmental regulation of 
mammary-derived growth inhibitor expression in bovine mammary tissue. J Cell Biol 
110, 1779-1789, 1990. 

5.
Insulin-like Growth Factor Binding Protein-5 (IGFBP-
5) Potentially Regulates Programmed Cell Death and 
Plasminogen Activation in the Mammary Gland 
Elizabeth Tonner¹, Gordon Allan¹, Lulzim Shkreta
2, John Webster3, C. Bruce
A. Whitelaw3, David J. Flint¹ 
Hannah Research Institute, Ayr, UK; 2University of Bologna, Italy; 3Roslin Institute, Edinburgh ,
UK
I
Key words: 
Insulin-like growth factor, apoptosis, plasminogen, casein 
This study aims to investigate the mechanism by which prolactin and GH 
interact to maintain mammary epithelial cell function in the rat. IGF-I is an 
important survival factor for the mammary gland and we have demonstrated 
that the effects of GH and prolactin involve IGF-I. GH acts by increasing IGF-
I whilst prolactin acts by inhibiting the expression of IGFBP-5 from the 
mammary epithelium. During mammary involution, when serum prolactin 
levels decline, IGFBP-5 expression is dramatically upregulated and it binds 
with high affinity to IGF-I preventing IGF-I interaction with the IGF-receptor
and thus leading to epithelial cell apoptosis. We have identified a specific 
interaction of IGFBP-5 with αS2-casein. This milk protein has also been shown 
to bind plasminogen and its activator tissue-type plasminogen activator (tPA) 
leading to enhanced conversion of plasminogen to plasmin. Plasmin is an 
important initiator of re-modelling of the extracellular matrix during mammary 
involution. A potential interaction between the cell death and extracellular 
matrix remodelling is evident from the observation that IGFBP-5 binds to 
plasminogen activator inhibitor-I (PAI- 1). We thus hypothesized that IGFBP-5
could activate cell death by sequestration of IGF-I and activate plasminogen 
cleavage by sequestering PAI- 1. In support of this hypothesis we have shown 
that both prolactin and GH inhibit tPA activity and plasminogen activation in 
the involuting mammary gland. Our results suggest that GH and prolactin 
inhibit cell death and ECM remodelling via the IGF-axis and also indicate a 
novel role for the milk protein αS2-casein in this process. We have now
established
lines
of
transgenic
mice
expressing
IGFBP-5
on
the
β-
lactoglobulin promoter to explore its function in greater detail. 
45

46
Tonner et al 
1. 
INTRODUCTION 
The IGFBPs are a family of 6 proteins which bind IGF-1 and IGF-2 with 
high affinity. These proteins can inhibit or enhance IGF action and the same 
binding protein can have both inhibitory or stimulatory effects dependent 
upon its concentration, phosphorylation status and proteolysis. Direct effects 
of some of these IGFBPs (i.e. independent of their ability to bind IGFs) have 
also been described. 
In this review we will focus upon the roles of these molecules in 
controlling cell death during mammary involution at the end of lactation and 
a possible IGF-independent effect of IGFBP-5 controlling the plasminogen 
system that is responsible for initiating the remodelling of the extracellular 
matrix (ECM). 
1.1 
IGFBPs in development 
Few studies have examined IGFBP expression in the developing rodent 
mammary gland although both IGFBP-2 and -5 have been implicated in 
aspects of branching morphogenesis which occurs during pregnancy33.
Similarities exist however with respect to the developing mammary gland 
and a variety of embryonic developmental processes and the mammary 
gland has been described as an ideal tissue to study these processes since its 
development occurs mainly in the adult. Based upon the observations of 
Wood et al33 and our own studies in the involuting mammary gland we have 
also examined IGFBP-2 and -5 expression in the developing mouse, rat, and 
chick embryo. 
Development in the embryonic limb bud shares many features with other 
systems since epithelial-mesenchymal interactions underlie morphogenesis, 
and the mammary gland is another example of this. Similarities between the 
limb bud and the mammary gland are apparent in relation to the IGF system. 
In the limb bud IGFBP-2 and –5 are expressed in the epithelial cells of the 
apical ectodermal ridge (AER), while IGF-1 is expressed in the neighbouring 
subridge mesoderm. This is similar to the mammary gland, where IGFBP-2 
and –5 are expressed in mammary epithelial cells while IGF-1 is expressed 
by the stromal cells. In addition, several other factors shown to be important 
in limb bud morphogenesis have also been shown to be developmentally 
regulated in the foetal and postnatal mammary gland, including Msx-1, Msx- 
2, BMP-2 and BMP-4 24 .
Intriguingly, all of the human IGFBP genes are localized to the same 
chromosomal regions as different homeobox (Hox) gene families1; IGFBP-2
and –5 are linked to the Hox D gene family on human chromosome 2 in 
opposite transcriptional orientations. The functional significance of this 

IGFBP-5 regulates apoptosis and plasminogen activation 
47
linkage is unknown, but vertebrate Hox genes are well known for their 
important functions during embryonic development. Recently, it has been 
shown that loss of function of Hoxa9, Hoxd9 and Hoxb9 in mice leads to 
impairment of adult mammary gland development during and after 
pregnancy4. These studies suggest a direct role for these factors in directing 
differentiation of the mammary epithelium ductal system prior to lactation. 
1.2 IGFBP expression in the mammary gland and milk 
during lactation 
The milk of all species studied contains IGFs and IGFBPs which vary in 
a species-dependent manner 8. The presence of IGFs in the milk is similar to 
that of other growth factors: higher in colostrum than in mature milk. 
IGFBP-2 is the major IGFBP in human milk with concentrations 10-fold
higher in milk than maternal serum suggesting that milk IGFBP-2 is made in 
the mammary gland 9.
Porcine milk contained IGFBP-1, 2, 3 and 4 and some of this IGFBP-3
was in association with ternary complexes7,27. IGFBP-2 and -3 mRNA are 
expressed in porcine mammary gland indicating that they are produced in the 
mammary gland rather than transported into the gland from blood16.
Bovine colostrum 28 contains IGFBP-1,-2, -3, and -4 and has high IGF-1
levels although serum IGF-1 is low32. IGFBP-3 predominates in prepartum 
secretions and colostrum but is reduced postpartum. 
Rat milk contains IGFBP-3, IGFBP-2, and IGFBP-4 and lactating 
mammary gland expressed IGFBP-2 mRNA suggesting that it is synthesised
in the gland5,6,30.IGFBP-4 expression has been described in rat mammary 
gland although its concentration in milk is low5 and we were unable to detect 
IGFBP-4 expression until involution of the mammary gland30. Mammary 
gland IGFBP-3 mRNA is decreased at parturition and remains low in 
lactation suggesting that milk IGFBP-3 is serum derived5,17. A portion of the 
IGFBP-3 in milk was in association with ternary complexes5. We were 
unable to detect IGFBPs-1,-3 or –6 in rat mammary gland during lactation or 
involution30. Although IGFBP-5 and –6 have not been detected in the milk 
during lactation in any of the species studied, the mammary gland of the 
bitch expresses IGFBP-2 and IGFBP-5 and progestin administration 
decreases IGFBP-5 mRNA levels20.
These studies have demonstrated the species-specific nature of the 
expression of IGFBPs in milk but, because of their descriptive nature they 
have failed to shed light on the roles played by the binding proteins at this 
time. Are they present to transport IGFs, to inhibit the actions of the IGFs or 
to inhibit the degradation of IGFs in the neonatal gut? It was our intention to 
ascribe functions to the IGFBPs present in the mammary gland and milk and 

48
Tonner et al
we therefore examined changes in IGFBP expression induced by involution 
of the mammary gland as well as examining the hormonal control of IGFBP 
expression during lactation. 
1.3
Changes in IGFBP expression during involution of 
the mammary gland 
A dramatic increase in the concentration of IGFBP-5 occurs in rat milk 
within 24 h of mammary involution induced by removal of the suckling 
young30. Increased levels of IGFBP-5 mRNA, as well as more modest 
increases in IGFBP-2 and -4 (but not IGFBP- 1, -3, and -6) were evident in
the mammary gland and in situ hybridisation studies showed that expression 
occurred in the mammary epithelial cells. 
IGF-1 has been implicated as a survival factor for many different cell 
types22, including the mammary epithelium and since milk from involuting 
mammary glands contained large quantities IGFBP-5, we proposed that this 
served to inhibit IGF-1 actions in the gland. Our studies also showed that 
both prolactin and GH maintained mammary gland function by inhibiting 
programmed cell death or apoptosis31. We further demonstrated that only 
prolactin was able to influence IGFBP-5 synthesis30 serving as a potent 
inhibitor of IGFBP-5 expression. These findings enabled us to propose a 
mechanism for the interactive effects of prolactin and GH. GH increases 
IGF- 1 synthesis whilst prolactin represses IGFBP-5 synthesis thereby 
maximising the effect of IGF-1 on mammary epithelial cell survival. Several 
studies have indicated that IGFBP-5 interacts with a variety of components 
of the ECM. However we demonstrated that IGFBP-5 in milk associates 
with the casein micelle fraction. The affinity of IGFBP-5 for IGF-1 was 
approximately 5-8 x 10-10M, which is higher than that of the type-I IGF
receptor29 and the concentration of IGFBP-5 in milk was approximately 40 
µg/ml. These findings support the proposal that IGFBP-5 acts as an inhibitor 
of IGF action in milk. 
1.4 
IGF-independent effects of IGFBPs 
Although all of the IGFBPs bind the IGFs, these molecules also exhibit 
additional properties, which have led to suggestions that the IGFBPs have 
biological effects which are independent of the IGFs. Both IGFBP-1 and-2 
contain an RGD sequence which is a common feature of molecules which 
interact with cell-surface integrins. Transfection of cells with IGFBP-1 led to 
increased rates of cell migration, an effect which was unaffected by the 
addition of IGF-1 14. IGFBP-3 has been shown to inhibit DNA synthesis in 
human breast cancer cells independently of its ability to bind IGF-1
23 .

IGFBP-5 regulates apoptosis and plasminogen activation 
49
Studies in which IGFBP-3 was shown to inhibit growth of a fibroblast cell 
line derived from a type-1 IGF receptor knock-out mouse were also 
compelling evidence for such IGF-independent effects. 
We thus considered whether the high concentrations of IGFBP-5 in milk 
from involuting mammary glands was present solely to inhibit IGF actions 
or whether it was also involved in IGF-independent actions of this IGFBP. 
1.5
Interactions of IGFBP-5 with the plasminogen 
system
IGFBP-5 was first identified in high concentrations in bone where it 
binds to hydroxyapatite, a crystalline form of calcium phosphate19. The 
casein micelle is composed of casein molecules stabilized by calcium 
phosphate nanoclusters. The caseins interact through phosphorylated 
residues, whereas non-phosphorylated proteins such as a-lactalbumin are not 
incorporated into the micelles12. IGFBP-5 has a consensus recognition site 
for the true mammary casein kinases and it has been reported to be 
phosphorylated15. There is no evidence, however, that IGFBP-5 is bound to 
calcium phosphate but we have been able to show that IGFBP-5 is involved 
in a protein-protein interaction with αs2-casein and, in particular, the dimeric 
form of this milk protein. Dimeric αs2-casein has also been shown to bind to 
plasminogen and tissue-type plasminogen activator (t-PA) which results in 
enhanced activity of t-PA and the generation of the enzyme plasmin11.
Plasmin cleaves a number of pro-enzymes, such as prostromelysins and 
procollagenases, and thereby initiates the degradation of the ECM which 
occurs at the end of lactation18. A possible functional interaction of IGFBP-5
and components of the plasminogen system on the casein micelle became a 
distinct possibility with the observation that IGFBP-5 binds to plasminogen 
activator inhibitor-I (PAI-1)
21. PAI-1 binds t-PA and inhibits its actions and
thus it is conceivable that IGFBP-5 plays a dual role of binding IGF-1 (to 
inhibit its actions and induce apoptosis) whilst also binding PAI-1 thereby 
activating 
t-PA and consequent ECM remodelling (see figure). Such a 
mechanism would link cell death and ECM degradation, to ensure a highly 
coordinated tissue-remodelling process. If this were the case we would 
anticipate that prolactin, by inhibiting IGFBP-5 synthesis, would increase the 
bioavailability of PAI-1 and suppress plasmin production. We have recently
shown that this is indeed the case, since if lactating rats have their litters 
removed but are treated with prolactin, both t-PA activity and plasmin 
production are inhibited. GH also inhibited t-PA activity and this could 
involve IGF-1 since IGF-1 has been shown to increase PAI-1 mRNA 
expression10. We are currently examining these possibilities with in vitro 
assays for tPA and plasmin activity as well as producing transgenic mice 

50
Tonner et al 
expressing IGFBP-5 on the β-lactoglobulin promoter and developing various
IGFBP-5 mutants to examine the effects of exogenous IGFBPs in vitro and 
in vivo. 
Does IGFBP-5 co-ordinate activation of cell death 
and remodelling of the extracellular matrix? 
2.
CONCLUSIONS
Perhaps one of the most intriguing aspects of IGFBP biology is the 
complexity of the IGFBPs produced and the way in which different species 
appear to adopt different IGFBPs to perform the equivalent function. For 
example IGFBP-3 appears to play a more important role than IGFBP-5 in 
apoptosis of human mammary cells. These two molecules are most closely 
related in an evolutionary sense and both possess other interesting properties 
and share nuclear localisation 
including cell surface receptors 
signals13,25,26 which may indicate that these molecules also have intracellular 
actions.
In this article we have developed a hypothesis which provides a 
mechanism to explain the interactive effects of GH and prolactin in 
maintaining mammary epithelial cell survival and also a possible mechanism 
which links epithelial ,cell death and extracellular matrix degradation. Our 
model proposes that GH increases IGF-1 production with IGF-1 acting as a 
2,3,23,34

IGFBP-5 regulates apoptosis and plasminogen activation 
51
survival factor. Prolactin acts by repressing expression of IGFBP-5 which 
allows IGF-1 to be maximally effective. The demonstration that IGFBP-5
binds to αS2-casein, as do plasminogen and tPA suggest that this milk protein 
assumes a novel role in the involuting mammary gland by serving as a 
matrix for the assembly of multi-protein complexes involved in tissue 
reorganization. The observation that IGFBP-5 binds to PAI-1 suggests that 
IGFBP-5 may possess IGF-independent effects by sequestering PAI- 1 and 
thereby activating tPA activity and plasmin production. This offers a 
mechanism whereby apoptosis and ECM degradation can be highly 
coordinated. This proposal is supported by the observation the GH and 
prolactin can both suppress plasmin activation as well as inhibiting 
apoptosis.
These hypotheses will shortly be tested using transgenic mice expressing 
IGFBP-5 in the mammary gland as well as examining various IGFBP 
mutants in terms of their IGF-binding capabilities, or their ability to bind to
 α S2-casein and influence remodelling of the extracellular matrix.
Acknowledgements
work was funded by the Scottish Executive Rural Affairs Department. 
We thank Miss Margaret Gardner for skilled technical assistance. This 
3.
REFERENCES
1.
Allander SV, Ehrenborg E, Luthman H, Powell DR. Conservation of IGFBP structure 
during evolution: cloning of chicken insulin-like growth factor binding protein-5.
Progress in Growth Factor Research 6, 159-165, 1995. 
Andress DL. Heparin modulates the binding of insulin-like growth factor (IGF) binding 
protein-5 to a membrane protein in osteoblastic cells. J Biol Chem 270, 28289-28296,
1995.
Andress DL. Insulin-like growth factor-binding protein-5 (IGFBP-5) stimulates 
phosphorylation of the IGFBP-5 receptor. Am J Physiol 274, E744-750, 1998. 
Chen F, Capecchi MR. Paralogous mouse Hox genes, Hoxa9, Hoxb9, and Hoxd9,
function together to control development of the mammary gland in response to 
pregnancy. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA 96,541-546,1998.
Donovan SM, Hintz RL, Rosenfeld RG. Investigation into the potential physiological 
sources of rat milk IGF-1 and IGF-binding proteins. J Endocrinol 145, 569-578, 1995. 
Donovan SM, Hintz RL, Wilson DM, Rosenfeld RG. Insulin-like growth factors 1 and 2 
and their binding proteins in rat milk. Pediatr Res 29, 50-55, 1991. 
Donovan SM, McNeil LK, Jiminez-Flores R, Odle J. Insulin-like growth factors and 
Insulin-like growth factor binding proteins in porcine serum and milk throughout 
lactation. Pediatr Research 36, 159-168, 1994. 
Donovan SM, Odle J. Growth factors in milk as mediators of infant development. 
Annual Review of Nutrition 14, 147-67, 1994. 
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.

52
Tonner et al
9.
Eriksson U, Duc G, Froesch ER, Zapf J. Insulin-like growth factors (IGF) 1 and 2 and
IGF binding proteins (IGFBPs) in human colostrud/transitory milk during the first week
postpartum: comparison with neonatal and maternal serum. Biochemical and Biophysical
Research Communications 196, 267-273, 1993.
10. Fattal PG, Schneider DJ, Sobel BE, Billadello JJ. Post-transcriptional
regulation of
expression of plasminogen activator inhibitor type- 1 mRNA by insulin and insulin-like
growth factor 1. J Biol Chem 267, 12412-12415, 1992.
11.
Heegaard CW, Andreasen PA, Petersen TE, Rasmussen LK. Binding of plasminogen
and tissue-type plasminogen activator to dimeric αS2-casein accelerates plasmin
generation. Fibrinolysis and Proteolysis 11, 29-36, 1997.
12. Holt C. The milk salts and their interactions with casein. In Advanced Dairy Chemistry,
Vol 3 Editor PF Fox. pp 233-254, Chapman and Hall, London, 1997.
13. Jaques G, Noll K, Wegmann B, WittenS , Kogan E, Radulescu RT, Havemann K.
Nuclear localization of insulin-like growth factor binding protein 3 in a lung cancer cell
line. Endocrinology 138: 1767-1770, 1997.
14.
Jones JI, Gockerman A, Busby WH Jr, Wright G, Clemmons DR. Insulin-like growth
factor binding protein -1 stimulates cell migration and binds to the a5bl integrin by
means of its Arg-Gly-Asp sequence. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 90, 10553-10557, 1993.
15. Jones JI, Gockerman A, Clemmons DR.
Insulin-like growth factor binding protein-5
(IGFBP-5) binds to extracellular matrix and is phosphorylated. 74th Annual Meeting of
the Endocrine Society, San Antonio TX, (A1284), 1992.
16. Lee CY, Bazer FW, Simmen FA. Expression of components of the insulin-like growth
factor system in pig mammary glands and serum during pregnancy and
pseudopregnancy: effects of oestrogen. J Endocrinol 137, 473-483, 1993.
17. Marcotty C, Frankenne F, Meuris S, Hennen G. Immunolocalisation and expression of
insulin-like growth factor I (IGF-1) in the mammary gland during rat gestation and
lactation. Mol Cell Endocrinol 99, 237-243, 1994.
18. Matrisian LM.
Metalloproteinases and their inhibitors in matrix remodelling. Trends
Genet 6, 121-125, 1990.
19. Mohan S, Bautista CM, Wergedal J, Baylink DJ. Isolation of an inhibitory insulin-like
growth factor (IGF) binding protein from bone cell conditioned medium: a potential
local regulator of IGF action. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 86, 8338-8342, 1989.
20.
Mol JA, Selman PJ, Sprang EP, van Neck JW, Oosterlaken-Dijksterhuis MA. The role of
progestins, insulin-like growth factor (IGF) and IGF-binding proteins in the normal and
neoplastic mammary gland of the bitch: a review. J Reprod Fertil Suppl 51, 339-344,
1997.
21. Nam TJ, W Busby W Jr, Clemmons DR. Insulin-like growth factor binding protein-5
binds to plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 . Endocrinology 138, 2972-2978, 1997. 
22. O’Connor R. Survival factors and apoptosis. Adv Biochem Eng Biotechnol 62, 137-166,
1998.
23. Oh Y, Muller HL, Lamson G, Rosenfeld RG. Insulin-like growth factor (IGF)- 
independent action of IGF-binding protein-3 in Hs578T human breast cancer cells. Cell 
surface binding and growth inhibition. J Biol Chem 268, 14964-14971, 1993. 
24. Phippard DJ, Weber-Hall SJ, Sharpe PT, Naylor MS, Jayatalake H, Maas R, Woo ID, 
Roberts-Clark, Francis-West PH, Liu Y-H, Maxson R, Hill RE, Dale TC. Regulation of 
Msx-1, Msx-2, Bmp-2 and Bmp-4 during foetal and postnatal mammary gland 
development. Development 122, 2729-2737,
1996.
25. Radulescu RT. Nuclear localization signal in insulin-like growth factor-binding protein 
type 3. Trends BiochemSci 19:278, 1994. 

IGFBP-5 regulates apoptosis and plasminogen activation 
53
26. Schedlich LJ, Young TF, Firth SM, Baxter RC. Insulin-like growth factor-binding
protein (lGFBP)-3 and IGFBP-5 share a common nuclear transport pathway in T47D 
human breast carcinoma cells. J Biol Chem 273, 18347-52, 1998. 
27. Simmen FA, Simmen RC, Reinhart G. Maternal and neonatal somatomedin C/insulin-
like growth factor-I (IGF-1) and IGF binding proteins during early lactation in the pig. 
Developmental Biology 130, 16-27, 1998. 
28. Skaar TC, Vega JR, Pyke SN, Baumrucker CR. Changes in insulin-like growth 
factor-binding proteins in bovine mammary secretions associated with pregnancy and 
parturition. J Endocrinol 131, 127-133, 1991. 
29. Steele Perkins G, Turner J, Edman JC, Hari J, Pierce SB, Stover C, Rutter WJ, Roth RA. 
Expression and characterisation of a functional human insulin-like growth factor 
receptor. J Biol Chem 263, 11486-11492.
30. Tonner E, Barber MC, Travers MT, Logan A, Flint DJ. Hormonal control of insulin-like
growth factor-binding protein–5 production in the involuting mammary gland of the rat. 
Endocrinology
138,
5101-5107, 1997. 
31. Travers MT, Barber MC, Tonner E, Quarrie L, Wilde CJ, Flint DJ. The role of prolactin 
and growth hormone in the regulation of casein gene expression and mammary cell 
survival: relationships to milk synthesis and secretion. Endocrinology 137, 1530-1539,
1996.
32. Vega JR, Gibson CA, Skaar TC, Hadsell DL, Baumrucker CR. Insulin-like growth factor 
(lGF)-1 and -2 and IGF binding proteins in serum and mammary secretions during the 
dry period and early lactation in dairy cows. J Animal Science. 69, 2538-2547, 1991. 
33. Wood TL. The IGFs and IGFBPs in ductal and alveolar development in rodent 
mammary glands. Journal of Mammary Gland Biol Neoplasia, in press. 
34. Yamanaka Y, Fowlkes JL, Wilson EM, Rosenfeld RG, Oh Y. Characterization of 
insulin-like growth factor binding protein-3 (IGFBP-3) binding to human breast cancer 
cells: kinetics of IGFBP-3 binding and identification of receptor binding domain on the 
IGFBP-3 molecule. Endocrinology 140, 1319-1328, 1999.

6.
Somatostatin and Opioid Receptors in Mammary
Tissue.
Role in cancer cell growth
Anastassia Hatzoglou, ¹Efstathia Bakogeorgou, ¹Marillena Kampa, 3Simone
Panagiotou, 3Pierre-Marie Martin, 2Spyros Loukas, ¹Elias Castanas
1Lab. of Experimental Endocrinology, School of Medicine, Heraklion,
2Institute of Biology, NCSR
Democritos, Athens, Greece,
3Experimental Cancerology, School of Medicine, Marseille France.
1
Key words: 
Abstract:
Opioid, Somatostatin, Peptide receptors, cell proliferation 
Somatostatin and opioid systems, are the two main inhibitory systems in 
mammals. Both classes of substances have been identified in normal and 
malignant mammary gland, as well as their cognitive receptors. They have 
been implied in the inhibition of cell growth of cancer cells and cell lines, in a 
dose-dependant and reversible manner. Somatostatin acts through homologous 
receptors (SSTRs), belonging to five distinct classes (SSTR1-5). We, and 
others have identified SSTR2 and 3 as been the only SSTRs present in the 
breast. Furthermore, opioids act through the three classes of opioid receptors 
(µ, δ,κ). In the breast, kappa opioid receptor subtypes (κ1-κ3) are the most
widely expressed. We further have shown that opioids, in addition to their
binding to opioid receptors, compete for binding to SSTRs. This functional 
interaction, together with other identified modes of opioid action in the breast 
(modulation
of steroid
receptors,
proteases,
secretion,
interaction
with
cytoskeletal elements), will be discussed, taking into consideration
also the
possible local production of casomorphins (casein-derived opioids), which are 
very potent antiproliferative agents. 
1. 
INTRODUCTION 
Different neuropeptides and hormones have been identified in breast 
cancer tissue, and breast cancer cell lines. They include growth hormone, 
prolactin, vasoactive intestinal polypeptide, GnRH, GHRH, IGF-1, and
55

56
Hatzoglou et al
. These two peptides are the 
finally somatostatin and opioids
major negative regulators in mammals, implicated in a variety of processes,
from hormone secretion to the modulation of cell proliferation. In the present 
review, we will focus on the role and possible interactions of these two 
systems in the human breast. 
4,5,9,10,27,44,47,51
2.          ROLE OF SOMATOSTATIN AND OPIOID 
SYSTEM IN THE BREAST. 
2.1 
Somatostatin system 
Somatostatin, a naturally occurring deka-tetrapeptide, is produced mainly 
in the hypo-thalamus and the pancreas, but it has also been identified in a 
variety of normal and cancer tissues38. Two main forms of somatostatin are 
present in biological fluids: Somatostatin 14 and somatostatin 28. 35 The
biological action of somatostatin is mediated through specific receptors, 
belonging to the seven-loop transmembrane receptor superfamily38. Five
different 
receptors 
(named 
SSTR1-5) 
have 
been 
cloned 
and 
pharmacologically characterized in a variety of tissues38.
In normal breast tissue, somatostatin immunoreactivity was detected in 
the stroma only, while epithelial cells show somatostatin production only 
after malignant transformation5. In addition somatostatin receptors have been 
identified in breast cancer tissue41, and human breast cancer cell lines15,45.
The existence of somatostatin receptors has been correlated in a great 
number of studies with other prognostic factors. The results are 
contradictory, depending on the number of tumors studied and the method of 
analysis, but, the general conclusion is that the assay of somatostatin 
receptors does not have any predictive significance on the development of 
the disease or the response to treatment9,20,21. Identification of receptor 
subtypes has also been assayed in malignant breast tissue. SSTR2 was the 
most abundantly found subtype in the breast, followed by SSTR342,43. In 
other studies, and depending on the technique used, SSRT1 and SSTR4 were 
equally identified, but in a much lesser extend than the two other subtypes
8.
Finally, peritumoral blood veins, seem also to possess somatostatin 
receptors 40, and this finding indicates a possible regulatory mechanism for 
tumor growth7.
The action of somatostatin in the breast might be direct or indirect. Direct 
action includes the inhibitory effect of the agent on cell proliferation15,45.
This effect is dose dependant, occurring at concentrations similar to the 

Somatostatin and Opioid Receptors in Mamma y Tissue. 
57
affinity of somatostatin for its receptors. It was verified in a number of cell 
lines, both hormone-sensitive and independent, as well as in transplantable 
tumors. Indirect action implies the effect of somatostatin on growth hormone 
secretion and IGF-1 concentration9,25. This later factor was indeed found to 
have a stimulatory effect on cell growth. Nevertheless, clinical trials in small 
or larger series, with the use of somatostatin alone or in combination with 
other factors do not have shown, until now any positive result. A final 
implication of the somatostatinergic system in diagnosis is the scintigraphy 
with somatostatin analogs. It has been used during the last years, and 
although it was reported that it could distinguish breast cancer tumors, their 
metastasis and finally metastatic tumors in which the primary focus was not 
identified, its discriminative value was not judged satisfactory, unless with 
the somatostatin analogs used until now, with the possible exception of 
intraoperative detection6.
2.2
Opioid system
Endogenous opioids derive from three different precursor proteins,
namely proenkephalin A and B (prodynorphin) and proopiomelanocortin
(POMC)16. These three proteins give rise to a number of opioid peptides
with different affinities towards opioid receptors. These later receptors
belong equally to the seven-loop membrane receptor superfamily33,37, and are
distinguished both pharmacologically and biochemically to three main
categories: delta, mu and kappa. In addition, pharmacological evidences
exist about a further subdivision of delta receptors to delta 1 and 2, of mu
receptors to mu1 and mu2 and finally of kappa receptors to kappa1-3
1, 2.
In addition to endogenous opioid peptides, a number of food derives
opioids have been identified, from different proteins including hemoglobin,
gluten, and caseins. Both alpha and beta caseins include peptides with a
potent opioid activity (see Kampa et al18, for a discussion). These later have
been tested and found to decrease the proliferation of breast and prostate
cells. In addition, we have identified a very potent opioid pentapeptide,
derived from human alphas1-casein18, with remarkable antiproliferative
activity in different systems, including bread18, prostate17, bladder (in
preparation), kidney14,31,32, and different cells of hemopoietic origin (in
preparation). It was named alphas1-casomorphin,and its structure is Tyr-Val-
Pro-Phe-Pro-NH218
.
Opioids were found in a great diversity of primary human tumors.
Between them breast tumors were found to possess endogenous opioid
peptides by different technique4,44,51. Furthermore, opioid receptors were 
equally found in primary tumors, as well as in different breast cancer cell
lines. Using opioid alkaloids, endogenous opioid peptide analogs and

58
Hatzoglou et al 
casomorphin peptides, we12,13, as well as other groups24 have shown that a 
dose-dependent and mostly reversible inhibition of cell proliferation can be 
obtained. Nevertheless, either the reversibility of this effect was not 
complete, either opioid agonists were not inhibited by selective antagonists. 
In addition, as was the case for morphine, no specific receptors were 
identified12. 
These 
results 
indicate 
a 
possible 
mediation 
of the 
antiproliferative effect by another membrane receptor system. 
In general seven loops membrane receptors act through adenylate cyclase 
increased, or decreased activity. Somatostatin and opioid receptors decrease 
intracellular
CAMP, through 
an inhibition of adenylate cyclase39. In 
addition, in breast cancer cell lines, as well as in different other organs 
(kidney, prostate), we have identified further mechanisms of opioid action: 
Interaction with the cellular cytoskeletal element28,29, both after an acute 
and a prolonged application. Furthermore, a decrease of steroid receptor 
levels30, and a decrease of the steroid regulated secretion of enzymes were 
also identified29. These different mechanisms, dependent and/or independent 
from steroid hormones and CAMP, indicate that the action of these drugs 
might be much more extended from previously described. It is further 
interesting to note that αS1-casomorphin is a very potent substance for all of 
the above actions, indicating that, probably, this peptide, might be a
promising agent in cancer chemotherapy. 
3.
INTERACTION BETWEEN OPIOID AND
SOMATOSTATIN SYSTEMS
The seven loop membrane receptor superfamily possesses a number of 
homologies between its members (see Kieffer et al19, for a description). This
result, in addition with the possible coexpression of multiple receptors on the 
r
same cell, makes possible an interaction either at the ligand, or at a post- 
receptor level. Indeed, such interactions have been reported for the 

Somatostatin and Opioid Receptors in Mammary Tissue. 
59
somatostatin and the EGF
48, VIP49, or the opioid receptor26,50, and the opioid 
, or the dopamine receptor3.
with the adrenergic 
The coexpression of opioids and somatostatin receptors in breast cancer 
cell lines, the inhibitory role of both systems in cell proliferation, and a 
possible common mode of action of these two families of receptors, via an 
inhibition of adenylate cyclase37,38, together with the partial inhibition of 
opioid agonists by selective antagonists, makes possible such an interaction. 
We have indeed reported that some opioid alkaloids inhibit somatostatin 
binding in the human T47D breast cancer cell line15. In addition, different 
casomorphins interact equally with somatostatin receptor13, indicating that 
this cross talking, at the receptor level might be of a biological importance. 
This interaction is not restricted in the breast, but was also found in other 
organs as the prostate17 and the kidney14. Therefore, this effect might be a 
general possible cross-talking between the two main inhibitory mammalian 
systems. Finally, mathematical simulations have shown that, although 
several systems could share a common signalling pathway, they might have 
compartmentated intracellular access to second messengers, such as cyclase 
or GTPasas molecules11.
22,23,34,46
4. 
CONCLUSION 
In view of the above results, a possible scheme emerges for the role of 
opioids and somatostatin in breast cancer. It is presented in Fig.1. In this 
hypothetical action, cancer cells become depolarized by their malignant 
transformation. In addition they produce a disruption of the basal membrane. 
Therefore, their secretion, which normally occurs towards the acinar lumen 
occurs equally towards the stroma. Stromal cells, and transformed epithelial 
cancer cells, produce high amounts of different proteases, which in turn 
could attack and partially degrade casein molecules, giving rise to 
casomorphin peptides. These peptides could bind to opioid receptors of 
malignant cells, inhibiting their proliferation, by the different mechanisms 
involved above, and by lowering the availability of the cells to steroids, 
which are responsible, at an early stage of carcinogenesis for growth. In 
addition, opioids, by binding to somatostatin receptors of the same malignant 
cells, and peritumoral vessels, they potentiate their inhibitory action. This 
scheme of biological action provides a possible control of tumor progression 
and spread, and could be of value at early stages of breast cancer. 
In addition to their production by casein degradation, opioids and 
somatostatin could arrive to tumor cell environment by several other sources. 
Indeed, the general circulation has a somatostatin and opioid content, 
provided by the secretion of these neuropeptides by other endocrine cells 

60
Hatzoglou et al 
such as the hypothalamus, the pituitary, the pancreas or the adrenals. Local 
production, especially by neuroendocrine cells, production by infiltrating 
lymphocytes, is another potential source of these neuropeptides. It is 
therefore plausible to propose that these two systems (opioids and 
somatostatin) may play a crucial role for the development of tumor control, 
especially at initial stages, and that possible pharmaceutical substances, 
acting via these two types of receptors might be a valuable addition for 
cancer control. 
5. 
REFERENCES 
1.
Castanas, E., Bourhim, N., Giraud, P., Boudouresque, F., Cantau, P., Oliver, C., 
Interaction of opiates with opioid binding sites in the bovine adrenal medulla: I 
Interaction with delta and mu sites., J. Neurochem. 45, 677, 1985a. 
Castanas, E., Bourhim, N., Giraud, P., Boudouresque, F., Cantau, P., Oliver, C., 
Interaction of opiates with opioid binding sites in the bovine adrenal medulla: II 
Interaction with kappa sites., J. Neurochem. 45, 688, 1985b. 
Castanas, E., P. Jaquet, G. Gunz, P. Cantau and P. Giraud, Direct action of opiates on 
bromocriptine-inhibited prolactin release by human prolactinoma cells in primary 
culture, J Clin Endocrinol Metab 61, 963, 1985. 
Chatikhine, V.A., A. Chevrier, C. Chauzy, C. Duval, J. d'Anjou, N. Girard and B. 
Delpech, Expression of opioid peptides in cells and stroma of human breast cancer and 
adenofibromas, Cancer Lett 77, 51, 1994. 
Ciocca, D.R., L.A. Puy, L.C. Fasoli, O. Tello, J.C. Aznar, F.E. Gago, S.I. Papa and R. 
Sonego, Corticotropin-releasing hormone, luteinizing hormone-releasing hormone, 
growth hormone-releasing hormone, and somatostatin-like immunoreactivities in 
biopsies from breast cancer patients, Breast Cancer Res Treat 15, 175, 1990. 
Cuntz, M.C., E.A. Levine, T.M. O'Dorisio, J.C. Watson, D.A. Wray, G.D. Espenan, C.
McKnight, J.R. Meier, L.J. Weber, R. Mera, M.S. O'Dorisio and E.A. Woltering,
Intraoperative gamma detection of 125I-lanreotide in women with primary breast cancer 
[In Process Citation], Ann Surg Oncol 16, 367, 1999. 
Denzler, B. and J.C. Reubi, Expression of somatostatin receptors in peritumoral veins of 
human tumors, Cancer 85, 188, 1999. 
Evans, A.A., T. Crook, S.A. Laws, A.C. Gough, G.T. Royle and J.N. Primrose, Analysis 
of somatostatin receptor subtype mRNA expression in human breast cancer, Br J Cancer 
75, 798, 1997. 
Foekens, J.A., H. Portengen, W.L. van Putten, A.M. Trapman, J.C. Reubi, J. Alexieva-
Figusch and J.G. Klijn, Prognostic value of receptors for insulin-like growth factor 1, 
somatostatin, and epidermal growth factor in human breast cancer, Cancer Res 49, 7002, 
1989.
10. Gespach, C., W. Bawab, P. de Cremoux and F. Calvo, Pharmacology, molecular 
identification and functional characteristics of vasoactive intestinal peptide receptors in 
human breast cancer cells, Cancer Res 48, 5079,1988. 
11. Graeser, D. and R.R. Neubig, Compartmentation of receptors and guanine nucleotide-
binding proteins in NG108-15 cells: lack of cross-talk in agonist binding among the 
alpha 2-adrenergic, muscarinic, and opiate receptors, Mol Pharmacol 43, 434, 1993.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.

Somatostatin and Opioid Receptors in Mammary Tissue.
12. Hatzoglou, A., E. Bakogeorgou and E. Castanas, The antiproliferative effect of opioid
receptor agonists on the T47D human breast cancer cell line, is partially mediated
through opioid receptors, Eur J Pharmacol 296, 199, 1996a. 
13. Hatzoglou, A., E. Bakogeorgou, C. Hatzoglou, P.M. Martin and E. Castanas,
Antiproliferative and receptor binding properties of alpha- and beta- casomorphins in the
T47D human breast cancer cell line, Eur J Pharmacol 310, 217, 1996b. 
14. Hatzoglou, A., E. Bakogeorgou, E. Papakonstanti, C. Stoumaras, D.S. Emmanouel and
E. Castanas, Identification and characterization of opioid and somatostatin binding sites
in the opossum kidney (OK) cell line and their effect on growth, J Cell Biochem 63, 410, 
1996c.
15. Hatzoglou, A., L. Ouafik, E. Bakogeorgou, K. Thermos and E. Castanas, Morphine
cross-reacts with somatostatin receptor SSTR2 in the T47D human breast cancer cell line
and decreases cell growth, Cancer Res 55, 5632, 1995. 
16. Hollt, V., Opioid peptide processing and receptor selectivity, Annu Rev Pharmacol
Toxicol 26, 59, 1986.
17. Kampa, M., E. Bakogeorgou, A. Hatzoglou, A. Damianaki, P.M. Martin and E. Castanas,
Opioid alkaloids and casomorphin peptides decrease the proliferation of prostatic cancer
cell lines (LNCaP, PC3 and DU145) through a partial interaction with opioid receptors,
Eur J Pharmacol 335, 255, 1997.
18. Kampa, M., S. Loukas, A. Hatzoglou, P. Martin, P.M. Martin and E. Castanas,
Identification of a novel opioid peptide (Tyr-Val-Pro-Phe-Pro) derived from human
alpha S 1 casein (alpha S1-casomorphin, and alpha S1 - casomorphin amide), Biochem J
319,903, 1996.
19. Kieffer, B.L., K. Befort, C. Gaveriaux-Ruff and C.G. Hirth, The delta-opioid receptor:
Isolation of a cDNA by expression cloning and pharmacological characterization., Proc
natl Acad Sci (USA) 89, 12048, 1992.
20.
Klijn, J.G., B. Setyono-Han, M. Bontenbal, C. Seynaeve and J. Foekens, Novel
endocrine therapies in breast cancer, Acta Oncol 35, 30, 1996.
21.
Lamberts, S.W., W.W. de Herder, P.M. van Koetsveld, J.W. Koper, A.J. van der Lely,
H.A. Visser-Wisselaar and L.J. Hofland, Somatostatin receptors: clinical implications for
endocrinology and oncology, Ciba Found Symp 190, 222,1995.
22.   Lameh, J., S. Eiger and W. Sadee, Interaction among mu-opioid receptors and alpha 2-
adrenoceptors on SH- SY5Y human neuroblastoma cells, Eur J Pharmacol 227, 19, 1992. 
23.
Lee, S., C.R. Rosenberg and J.M. Musacchio, Cross-dependence to opioid and alpha 2-
adrenergic receptor agonists in NG 108-15 cells, Faseb J 2, 52, 1988. 
24.
Maneckjee, R., R. Biswas and B.K. Vonderhaar, Binding of opioids to human MCF-7
breast cancer cells and their effects on growth, Cancer Res 50, 2234, 1990.
25.
Manni, A., Somatostatin and growth hormone regulation in cancer, Biotherapy 4, 3I,
1992.
26.
Maurer, R., B.H. Gaehwiler, H.H. Buescher and R.C.R. Hill, D., Opiate antagonistic
properties of an octapeptide somatostatin analog., Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. (USA) 79,
4815, 1982.
27.
Nass, S.J. and N.E. Davidson, The biology of breast cancer [In Process Citation],
Hematol Oncol Clin North Am 13, 311, 1999. 
28.
Panagiotou, S., E. Bakogeorgou, E. Papakonstanti, A. Hatzoglou, F. Wallet, C. Dussert,
C. Stoumaras, P.M. Martin and E. Castanas, Opioid agonists modify breast cancer cell 
proliferation by blocking cells to the G2/M phase of the cycle: involvement of 
cytoskeletal elements, J Cell Biochem 73, 204, 1999. 
61

62
Hatzoglou et al
29. Panagiotou, S., A. Hatzoglou, F. Calvo, P.M. Martin and E. Castanas, Modulation of the 
estrogen-regulated proteins cathepsin D and pS2 by opioid agonists in hormone-sensitive
breast cancer cell lines (MCF7 and T47D): evidence for an interaction between the two 
systems, J Cell Biochem 71, 416, 1998. 
30. Panagiotou, S., P.-M. Martin and E. Castanas, Opioid agonists decrease the 
concentration of steroid receptors in hormone-sensitive breast cancer cell lines., in: 
2emes Joumees of the IFR Jean RocheMarseille, France), 1997. 
31. Papakonstanti, E.A., E. Bakogeorgou, E. Castanas, D.S. Emmanouel, R. Hartig and C. 
Stournaras, Early alterations of actin cytoskeleton in OK cells by opioids., J. Cell. 
Biochem. , (accepted), 1998. 
32. Papakostanti, E.A., D.S. Emmanouel, A. Gravanis and C. Stournaras, Na+/Pi cotransport 
alters rapidly cytoskeletal protein polymerization dynamics in Opossum Kidney cells., 
Biochem. J. 315, 1996. 
33. Raynor, K., H. Kong, S. Law, J. Heerding, M. Tallent, F. Livingston, J. Hines and T. 
Reisine, Molecular biology of opioid receptors, NIDA Res Monogr 161, 83, 1996. 
34. Reggiani, A., A. Carenzi and D.D. Bella, Opioids and beta-receptors interaction: further 
studies in cultured cells, NIDA Res Monogr 75, 347, 1986. 
35. Reichlin, S., Somatostatin, in: Brain Peptides, eds. D.T. Krieger, M.J. Brownstein and 
J.B. Martin (John Wiley and sons, Inc., New York) p. 711, 1983. 
36. Reisine, T., Somatostatin, Cell Mol Neurobiol 15, 597, 1995. 
37. Reisine, T. and G.I. Bell, Molecular biology of opioid receptors [see comments], Trends 
Neurosci 16, 506, 1993. 
38. Reisine, T. and G.I. Bell, Molecular properties of somatostatin receptors, Neuroscience 
67, 777, 1995. 
39. Reisine, T., S.F. Law, A. Blake and M. Tallent, Molecular mechanisms of opiate 
receptor coupling to G proteins and effector systems, Ann N Y Acad Sci 780, 168, 1996. 
40. Reubi, J.C., U. Horisberger and J. Laissue, High density of somatostatin receptors in 
veins surrounding human cancer tissue: role in tumor-host interaction?, Int J Cancer 56, 
68 1, 1994a. 
41. Reubi, J.C., E. Krenning, S.W. Lamberts and L. Kvols, Somatostatin receptors in 
malignant tissues, J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol 37, 1073, 1990. 
42. Reubi, J.C., J.C. Schaer, B. Waser and G. Mengod, Expression and localization of 
somatostatin receptor SSTR1, SSTR2, and SSTR3 messenger RNAs in primary human 
tumors using in situ hybridization, Cancer Res 54, 3455, 1994b. 
43. Schulz, S., J. Schmitt, D. Wiborny, H. Schmidt, S. Olbricht, W. Weise, A. Roessner, C. 
Gramsch and V. Hollt, Immunocytochemical detection of somatostatin receptors sst1, 
sst2A, sst2B, and sst3 in paraffin-embedded breast cancer tissue using subtype- specific
antibodies, Clin Cancer Res 4, 2047, 1998. 
44. Scopsi, L., E. Balslev, N. Brunner, H.S. Poulsen, J. Andersen, F. Rank and L.I. Larsson, 
Immunoreactive opioid peptides in human breast cancer, Am J Pathol 134, 473, 1989.
45. Setyono-Han, B., M.S. Henkelman, J.A. Foekens and G.M. Klijn, Direct inhibitory 
effects of somatostatin (analogues) on the growth of human breast cancer cells, Cancer 
Res 47, 1566, 1987. 
46. Simantov, R., H. Nadler and R. Levy, A genetic approach to reveal the action of the 
opiate receptor in selected neuroblastoma-glioma cells. Interaction with alpha-
adrenoceptors, calmodulin and Ca2+-ATPase, Eur J Biochem 128, 461, 1982.
47. Spring-Mills, E.J., S.B. Steams, P.J. Numann and P.H. Smith, Immunocytochemical 
localization of insulin- and somatostatin-like material in human breast tumors, Life Sci 
35, 185, 1984. 

Somatostatin and Opioid Receptors in Mammary Tissue. 
48. Vidal, C., I. Rauly, M. Zeggari, N. Delesque, J.P. Esteve, N. Saint-Laurent, N. Vaysse 
and C. Susini, Up-regulation of somatostatin receptors by epidermal growth factor and 
gastrin in pancreatic cancer cells, Mol Pharmacol 46, 97, 1994.
49. Virgolini, I., Q. Yang, S. Li, P. Angelberger, N. Neuhold, B. Niederle, W. Scheithauer 
and P. Valent, Cross-competition between vasoactive intestinal peptide and somatostatin 
for binding to tumor cell membrane receptors, Cancer Res 54, 690, 1994.
50. Walker, J.M., W.D. Bowen, S.T. Atkins, M.K. Hemstreet and D.H. Coy, µ- Opiate 
binding and morphine antagonism by octapeptide analogs of somatostatin., Peptides 8, 
869, 1987. 
51. Zagon, I.S., P.J. McLaughlin, S.R. Goodman and R.E. Rhodes, Opioid receptors and 
endogenous opioids in diverse human and animal cancers, J Natl Cancer Inst 79, 1059, 
1987.
63

7.
HeparanSulphate
Regulation of growth factors in the mammary gland 
Kirsty L. Bateman, Maryse Delehedde, Nicolas Sergeant, Isabelle Wartelle, 
Rishma Vidyasagar, and David G. Fernig 
School of Biological Sciences, University of Liverpool, UK. 
Key words 
Heparan sulphate, glycosaminoglycan 
Abstract:
Heparan sulphate (HS) is a linear glycosaminoglycan found ubiquitously on 
the surface and in the pericellular matrix of metazoan cells that is covalently 
attached to core proteins to form HS proteoglycans. HS interacts specifically 
with a large number (>100) of extracellular regulatory proteins, many of which 
are key players in mammary development and function. HS thus acts a 
receptor, in which capacity it regulates the bioavailability, localisation and 
activity of these regulatory proteins. 
1.
HS: STRUCTURAL BASIS OF FUNCTION
The initial product of HS biosynthesis is a linear polysaccharide of the 
disaccharide glucuronic acid β1-4 N-acetyl glucosamine. This starting
structure, usually of several hundred saccharides in length, is the substrate 
for a series of modification reactions, the first of which results in the 
replacement of the N-acetyl group on glucosamine by a sulphate. The N-
sulphate acts as a signal for the majority of the subsequent modifications, 
which include 6-O and 3-O sulphation of the glucosamine, epimerization of 
the glucuronic acid to iduronic acid and the 2-O sulphation of the latter 
saccharide. The sequence complexity of HS arises from two factors. Firstly, 
only a fraction of all potential modification reactions take place. Secondly, 
the modifications are clustered so that the HS chain consists of alternating 
unmodified domains and highly modified S-domains, enriched in iduronate 
residues and sulphate groups. The potential repertoire of S-domain structures 
65

66
Bateman et al
is much larger than the number of proteins encoded by the human genome.
Since proteins bind to S-domains there is sufficient structural diversity in HS
to ensure that each protein-HS interaction is highly specific.
Table 1. Examples of HS-binding regulatory proteins
Fibroblast growth family1-3
Wnt family5,6
Amphiregulin, betacellulin heparin-binding EGF
(HB-EGF), heregulins/neuregulins
7-9
(HGF/SF) 10
Cytokines, e.g., interleukins interferon γ
11,12
Lipoprotein lipase
IGF-1 binding proteins (BP3, BP5)
Platelet-derived growth factor
Hepatocyte growth factor /scatter factor
Collagens, fibronectin, laminin.
13,14
Transforming growth factor β1 (TGFb 1)4
HARP/HB-GAM
The majority of growth factors and morphogens implicated in the 
regulation of mammary gland development bind to HS (Table 1) and it 
appears that each of these proteins recognises a different structure in HS. In 
addition, key regulatory binding proteins such as IGFBP3 and IGFBP5 also 
bind to HS. The three main components of the extracellular matrix and the 
basement membrane, collagens, fibronectin and laminin, also interact with 
specific S-domains in HS, though it would appear that the collagens 
collectively recognise saccharide sequences of similar, if not identical 
structure. Finally, lipoprotein lipase, a key enzyme in lipid metabolism, 
which is an important feature of lactation is anchored to its target cells 
through HS. 
2. 
REGULATORY ACTIVITIES OF HS 
HS critically controls two key features of extracellular regulatory 
proteins, their localisation and sequestration and their generation of 
intracellular signals. 
The sequestration of a growth factor on extracellular HS was first 
proposed 12 years ago15. This can prevent the diffusion of the growth factor
within a tissue compartment or between tissue compartments, as well as 
allowing a local store of the growth factor to act on a restricted number of 
cells. In the mammary gland there is direct evidence for HS performing this 
function with regard to FGF-2 and FGF-3, and indirect evidence for many 
other HS-binding proteins. A regulatory role for HS is supported by the 
observation of changes in the structure of the HS chains which accompany 
the growth and development of many epithelia, including the mammary 
gland16. Moreover, the association between the growth state of the cells 
(quiescent duct versus growing terminal end bud) and the number of HS 
receptors for FGF-2 associated with these structures in vivo suggests that HS 

Heparan Sulphate
67
dynamically regulates the activity of FGF-2 in the developing mammary 
gland17. Other results support a similar role for HS in the regulation of the 
activity of HGF/SF and Wnt family members and it is likely from studies in 
other systems that HS has an analogous function towards all the growth 
factors and cytokines in Table 1. 
Many of the HS-binding proteins possess a dual receptor system, which 
consists of a conventional signalling receptor, e.g., receptor tyrosine kinase 
or integrin and an HS receptor. 
Upon ligand binding the conventional 
signalling receptor activates specific intracellular signalling pathways. The 
dual receptor systems provide a means to increase the combinatorial 
outcome of cellular signals generated by a single effector. 
FGF-2 is the classic growth factor with a dual receptor system1. It elicits
a cellular response through its FGFR receptor tyrosine kinase. In the 
presence of the activating HS receptor, a specific temporal pattern of 
activation of signalling pathways is observed. For example, following the 
addition of FGF-2 to Go synchronised rat mammary (Rama) 27 fibroblasts,
the phosphorylation of mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) peaks after 
10 min, and then declines to half maximal levels, which are maintained well 
into S-phase, 18 h later. The early peak of MAPK phosphorylation is 
probably related to the activation of the c-fos promoter. In the same cells 
treated with chlorate, which prevents the biosynthesis of the HS receptor, the 
signalling pathways are activated in a transient manner, which is sufficient 
for the stimulation of c-fos transcription, but not for entry into the cell cycle. 
HGF/SF, a product of the mammary stroma, has been thought to target 
exclusively the epithelium. Indeed HGF/SF does not stimulate the growth of 
Rama 27 fibroblasts and these cells possess very few HS receptors for 
HGF/SF
18. However, Rama 27 fibroblasts do produce c-met, the tyrosine
kinase receptor for HGF/SF. In the absence of its HS receptor, HGF/SF 
stimulates the phosphorylation of MAPK in Rama 27 
fibroblasts 
biphasically, a response that is neither sustained nor sufficient for cell 
proliferation.
There is also evidence for a contribution of the proteoglycan core protein 
to dual receptor systems. Human mammary (Huma) myoepithelial-like 109 
cells possess both the HS18 and the c-met receptors for HGF. When these 
cells are grown on a plastic substratum, they express the proteoglycans 
perlecan and syndecan-2 on their cell surfaces and, surprisingly, HGF/SF has 
no effect on the proliferation of these cells. However, under these conditions 
HGF/SF does cause an early and transient stimulation of the phosphorylation 
of MAPK. In contrast, HGF/SF induces a sustained activation of MAPK and 
stimulates the proliferation of Huma 109 cells grown on a fibronectin or 
collagen substratum. Compared to cells grown on a plastic substratum, 
Huma 109 myoepithelial-like cells grown on fibronectin or collagen 

68
Bateman et al 
substrata show a marked reduction in the expression of cell surface perlecan, 
but not syndecan-2.
There are, as yet, no studies in transgenic mice in which a perturbation to 
HS biosynthesis in the mammary gland has been introduced. A number of 
studies have examined the effects of chlorate, an inhibitor of the sulphation 
of HS on the differentiation of mammary epithelial cells in collagen gels. 
The results show that both the basal morphogenic potential of the cells and 
the ability of FGFs and HGF/SF to stimulate ductal morphogenesis in this 
system are dependent on HS. 
In conclusion HS is a ubiquitous component of the cell surface and 
pericellular matrix that binds to and regulates the activities of many of the 
key proteins which control the development and function of the mammary 
gland. 
Moreover, HS chains are carried on the core proteins of 
proteoglycans and each chain will possess several S-domains. 
Thus HS, 
strategically placed at the cell surface and in the pericellular matrix, has the 
potential to integrate signals arriving from disparate effectors. 
Acknowledgments
We apologise for not citing the key papers of numerous colleagues, due 
to the lack of space. We thank the AICR, the Cancer and Polio Research 
Fund, the Mizutani Foundation for Glycoscience,
the Medical Research
Council, The Royal Society and the NWCRF for financial support. 
3.
REFERENCES
1. Femig, D. G., and Gallagher, J. T., 1994, Fibroblast growth factors: an information 
network controlling tissue growth, morphogenesis and repair. Prog. Growth Factor Res. 5:
353-377.
2. Rahmoune, H., Gallagher, J. T., Rudland, P. S., and Femig, D. G., 1998, Interaction of 
heparan sulphate from mammary cells with extracellular regulatory proteins. Acidic and 
fibroblast growth factor: regulation of the activity of bFGF by high and low affinity 
binding sites in heparan sulphate. J. Biol. Chem. 273: 7303-7310.
3. Tumbull, J. E., Fernig, D. G., Ke, Y. Q., Wilkinson, M. C., and Gallagher, J. T., 1992, 
Identification of the basic fibroblast growth factor binding sequence in fibroblast heparan 
sulfate. J. Biol. Chem. 267: 10337-10341.
growth factor-betas with heparin/heparan sulfate is isofom-specific. J. Biol. Chem. 272:
4. Lyon, M., Rushton, G., and Gallagher, J. T., 1997, The interaction of the transforming 
18000-6.
5. Lin, X. H., and Perrimon, N., 1999, Dally cooperates with Drosophila Frizzled 2 to 
6. Tsuda, M., Kamimura, K., Nakato, H., Archer, M., Staatz, W., Fox, B., Humphrey, M., et 
transduce Wingless signalling. Nature. 400: 28 1-284.
al., 1999, The cell-surface proteoglycan Dally regulates Wingless signalling in Drosophila. 
Nature. 400: 276-280.

Heparan Sulphate 
69
7. Aviezer, D., and Yayon, A., 1994, Heparin-dependent binding and autophosphorylation of 
epidermal growth factor (EGF) receptor by heparin-binding EGF-like growth factor but 
not by EGF. Proc Natl Acad Sci U SA. 91: 12173-7.
8. Higashiyama, S., Abraham, J. A., and Klagsbrun, M., 1993, Heparin-binding EGF-like
growth factor stimulation of smooth muscle cell migration: dependence on interactions 
with cell surface heparan sulfate. J Cell Biol. 122: 933-40.
9. Luetteke, N. C., Qui, T. H., Fenton, S. E., Troyer, K. L., Riedel, R. F., Chang, A., and Lee, 
D. C., 1999, Targeted inactivation of the EGF and amphiregulin genes reveals distinct 
roles for EGF receptor ligands in mouse mammary gland development. Development. 126:
10.Lyon, M., Deakin, J. A., Mizuno, K., Nakamura, T., and Gallagher, J. T., 1994, Interaction 
of hepatocyte growth factor with heparan sulfate. Elucidation of the major heparan sulfate 
structural determinants. J Biol Chem. 269: 11216-23.
11.Hasan, M., Najjam, S., Gordon, M. Y., Gibbs, R. V., and Rider, C. C., 1999, IL-12 is a 
heparin-binding cytokine. J Immunol. 162: 1064-70.
12. Lortat-Jacob, H., and Grimaud, J. A., 199 1, Interferon-gamma binds to heparan sulfate by 
a cluster of amino acids located in the C-terminal part of the molecule. FEBS Lett. 280:
13.LeBaron, R. G., Hook, A., Esko, J. D., Gay, S., and Hook, M., 1989, Binding of heparan 
sulfate to type V collagen. A mechanism of cell- substrate adhesion. J Biol Chem. 264:
14.Walker, A., and Gallagher, J. T., 1996, Structural domains of heparan sulphate for specific 
2739-2750.
152-4.
7950-6.
recognition of the c-terminal heparin-binding domain of human plasma fibronectin 
(HEPII). Biochem. J. 317: 871-877.
15.Vlodavsky, I., Folkman, J., Sullivan, R., Fridman, R., Ishai-Michaeli, R., Sasse, J., and 
Klagsbrun, M., 1987, Endothelial cell-derived basic fibroblast growth factor: synthesis and 
deposition into subendothelial extracellular matrix. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA. 84: 2292-
2296.
16.Rudland, P. S., Fernig, D. G., and Leinster, S. (ed.), 1998, Mammary Development and 
Cancer, vol. 63. Portland Press, Colchester, UK. 
17.Rudland, P. S., Barraclough, R., Fernig, D. G., and Smith, J. A. 1997. Mammary stem 
cells in normal development and cancer, p. 147-232. In C. Potton (ed.), Stem cells and 
cancer. Churchill Livingstone. 
18.Rahmoune, H., Gallagher, J. T., Rudland, P. S., and Femig, D. G., 1998, Interaction of 
heparan sulphate from mammary cells with hepatocyte growth factor/scatter factor. 
Biochemistry (USA). 37: 6003-6008.

8.
Progestin-induced Mammary Growth Hormone (GH) 
Production
Jan A. Mol, Irma Lantinga-van Leeuwen, 2Evert van Garderen, Ad Rijnberk 
Dept. of Clinical Sciences of Companion Animals and Pathology2, Faculty of Veterinary 
Medicine, Utrecht University, The Netherlands 
Key words: 
Abstract:
growth hormone, dog, progestins 
Toxicity studies using beagle dogs revealed in the 1980s that synthetic 
progestins may induce a syndrome of growth hormone (GH) excess, known as 
acromegaly, and the development of predominantly benign mammary 
hyperplasia. In the early 1990s is was discovered that progestin-induced GH 
excess in the dog originates within the mammary gland. This mammary-
derived GH may have endocrine, pardautocrine as well as exocrine effects. 
The expression of GH mRNA is also found in cats and humans indicating that 
mammary GH expression is not unique for the dog. The mammary gene is 
identical to the pituitary-expressed gene and uses the same promoter. 
Nevertheless a striking difference exists in the mammary gland. Pit-1, which is 
a prerequisite factor for pituitary GH mRNA expression, is likely not involved 
in the mammary gene expression. These studies shed new light on the 
mechanism of progesterone-induced mammary hyperplasia and urges for 
further research on potential adverse effects of synthetic progestins. 
1. 
INTRODUCTION 
Steroid hormones play an essential role in the proliferation and 
differentiation of the mammary gland. As a consequence steroid hormones 
make the mammary epithelium prone to oncogenic derailment. In addition 
they may stimulate the promotion and progression of mammary tumors1
Studies using progesterone receptor knockout mice (PRKO) have revealed 
the importance of progesterone in mammary development. Progesterone is 
71

72
Mol et al 
essential for the lobulo-alveolar outgrowth of mammary epithelium2. The 
highest DNA labeling indices are found in the progesterone-dominated phase 
of the sexual cycle3,4. Progesterone exerts its effect through activation of 
type A- or type B-progesterone receptors, which bind to specific DNA 
response elements after dimerization4,5. In addition specific co-activator or 
co-repressor proteins are essential for interaction with the general 
transcription complex and modulation of the transcription process6. When 
wild-type mammary epithelium is transplanted into mammary tissue of PR-/- 
mice, progesterone stimulates the normal outgrowth of the neighbouring PR- 
/-
epithelium7. This indicates that progesterone stimulates epithelial 
proliferation in part by a paracrine factor. 
2.
MAMMARY GROWTH HORMONE
Synthetic progestins as well as endogenous progesterone may induce 
excessive plasma GH concentrations in the dog resulting in acromegaly and 
insulin
resistance8-10.
The
elevated
plasma
GH
concentrations
were
characterized by the absence of a pulse pattern and insensitivity to 
stimulation and inhibition tests,11,12 with the exception of an inhibition by the 
progesterone antagonist RUU 48611. These autonomous characteristics, and
the absence of a decrease of plasma GH concentrations after complete 
hypophysectomy was the impetus for a search for an extra-pituitary source. 
This resulted in the finding that the mammary gland was the source of 
progestin-induced plasma GH concentrations13. This was confirmed by an 
arterio-venous gradient over the mammary gland, an immediate decline of 
plasma 
GH 
concentrations 
after 
complete 
mammectomy 
and 
the 
immunohistochemical staining of GH positive cells in foci of hyperplastic 
mammary tissue13,14.
The expression of the gene encoding GH was also proven by RT-PCR,
and Northern blot in the canine mammary gland15,16. The stimulation of GH 
mRNA expression after progestin treatment in the cat15 and the presence of 
GH mRNA in the human mammary gland17 did prove that mammary GH 
expression is not a dog specific phenomenon18.
3.
REGULATION OF MAMMARY GH GENE 
EXPRESSION
Improved insights in the regulation of mammary GH synthesis may lead 
to specific treatments aimed to interfere with mammary GH production. 

Progestin-induced Mammary GH Production 
73
-300
-200
-100 
+1 
+100 
-300
-200
-100 
+1 
+100 
Fig. 1 Comparison of the human and canine GH gene promoter region19,20.
Analysis of the mammary GH mRNA revealed that the mammary 
transcript is identical to that of the pituitary, including the 5’UTR. This 
suggests that also the same promoter is used. An essential element in the GH 
gene promoter is a Pit-1 response element. Mutations in Pit-1 (also called 
POU1F1) result into dwarfism due to disturbances in the development of GH 
(and prolactin and TSH) producing cells in the pituitary. Comparison of the 
canine GH gene promoter with that of the human GH gene showed the 
presence of a Pit-1 and a progesterone receptor response element20 (Fig. 1). 
However, analysis of Pit-1 mRNA within the mammary gland revealed that 
mammary GH expression occurred in the absence of Pit-1 expression16. In 
addition the finding that German shepherd dwarfs, which have a pituitary 
anomaly resulting in GH deficiency, produce GH after progesterone 
stimulation further strengthen the differences in GH gene expression 
between mammary and pituitary tissue21.
Immunohistochemically all canine GH producing mammary cells stain 
for the PR but not all PR containing cells express GH. In malignant tumors 
GH mRNA can be found in the absence of detectable PR by ligand binding 
assays. These findings indicate that additional transcription factors are 
required for mammary GH expression14,15.
4.
BIOLOGICAL FUNCTIONS OF MAMMARY GH 
The release of mammary produced GH into the circulation results in the 
dog into clinical features of GH excess. However, mammary GH may have 

74
Mol et al 
also local autocrine or paracrine effects on proliferation and differentiation 
of mammary epithelium (Fig. 2). Apart form direct effects on recruitment of 
stem cells22, GH may also stimulate the local expression of IGF-I in stromal 
cells of the mammary fat pad23.
Fig. 2 Schematic representation of the contribution of mammary GH to the endocrine effects 
of pituitary produced GH, local para/autocrine tissue effects, and exocrine effects via milk.
It has been shown that especially in colostrum supra-physiological GH 
concentrations higher than 1000 µg/1 can be found24. The effects on immune 
function or postnatal development of the gastro-intestinal system of the 
neonate remain to be elucidated. 
5.
MAMMARY GH AND BREAST CANCER 
The local production of GH has implications for the insights in mammary 
gland tumor formation and progression, and treatment of mammary cancer. 
Expression of mammary GH is associated with local expression of IGFs and 
their binding proteins (IGFBPs), thus creating a proliferative environment 
for the glandular epithelium18. Also treatment with GH may induce 
mammary gland hyperplasia as has been shown in aging primates25. The 
stimulated cell proliferation may increase the possibilities for tumor 

Progestin-induced Mammary GH Production 
75
initiation by mutagenic compounds, or stimulate tumor promotion and 
progression.
Against the background of these considerations treatment of mammary 
cancer with progesterone agonists may need to be re-evaluated for potential 
adverse effects. Whether progestins have beneficial or adverse effects may 
be dependent upon the specificity of the progestin. Frequently used 
compounds such as MPA and megestrol acetate have also profound 
glucocorticoid and androgen agonistic effects, which may in part be 
responsible for the observed beneficial effects in patients with mammary 
cancer27,28.
Acknowledgement
This work was supported in part by the Dutch Cancer Society. 
6. 
REFERENCES 
1.
2.
Pike MC, Spicer DV, Dahmoush L, Press MF. Estrogens, progestogens, normal breast 
cell proliferation, and breast cancer risk. Epidemiol Rev 15, 17-35, 1993. 
Humphreys RC, Lydon J, O’Malley BW, Rosen JM. Mammary gland development is 
mediated by both stromal and epithelial progesterone receptors. Mol Endocrinol 11, 801-
811, 1997. 
Anderson TJ, Battersby S, King RJB. Oral contraceptive use influences resting breast 
proliferation. Hum. Pathol. 20, 1139-1144, 1989.
Clarke CL, Sutherland RL. Progestin regulation of cellular proliferation. Endocr. Rev. 
Graham JD, Clarke CL. Physiological action of progesterone in target tissues. Endocr 
Rev 18,502-519, 1997. 
Torchia J, Glass C., Rosenfeld MG. Co-activators and co-repressors in the integration of 
transcriptional responses. Current Opinion Cell Biol. 10: 373-383, 1998. 
Brisken C, Park S, Vass T, Lydon JP, O’Malley BW, Weinberg RA. A paracrine role for 
the epithelial progesterone receptor in mammary gland development. Proc Natl Acad Sci 
Concannon P, Altszuler N, Hampshire J, Butler WR, Hansel W. Growth hormone, 
prolactin, and cortisol in dogs developing mammary nodules and an acromegaly-like
appearance during treatment with medroxyprogesterone acetate. Endocrinology 106, 
Rijnberk A, Eigenmann JE, Belshaw BE, Hampshire J, Altszuler Acromegaly associated 
with transient overproduction of growth hormone in a dog. N J Am Vet Med Assoc 177, 
10. Eigenmann JE, Eigenmann RY, Rijnberk A, van der Gaag I, Zapf J, Froesch ER. 
Progesterone-controlled growth hormone overproduction and naturally occurring canine 
diabetes and acromegaly. Acta Endocrinol (Copenh) 104, 167-76, 1983. 
11. Watson ADJ, Rutteman GR, Rijnberk A, Mol JA. Effect of somatostatin analogue SMS 
201-995 and antiprogestin agent RU 486 in canine acromegaly. Front Horm Res 17, 193-
198,1987.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
11, 266-301, 1990. 
USA 28: 5076-5081, 1998. 
8.
1173-1177, 1980.
9.
534-537, 1980. 

76
Mol et al
12. Selman PJ, Mol JA, Rutteman GR, and Rijnberk A. Progestin treatment in the dog. I
Effects on growth hormone, insulin-like growth factor I and glucose homeostasis. Eur J
Endocrinol 131, 413-421, 1994.
13. Selman PJ, Mol JA, Rutteman GR, van Garderen E, Rijnberk A. Progestin-induced
growth hormone excess in the dog originates in the mammary gland. Endocrinology 134, 
14. Van Garderen E, de Wit M, Voorhout WF, Rutteman GR, Mol JA, Nederbragt H, 
Misdorp W: Expression of growth hormone in canine mammary tissue and mammary 
tumors. Am J Pathol 150, 1037-1047, 1997. 
15. Mol JA, van Garderen E, Selman PJ, Wolfswinkel J, Rijnberk A, Rutteman GR. Growth 
hormone mRNA in mammary gland tumors of dogs and cats. J Clin Invest 95, 2028-
2034, 1995. 
16. Lantinga-van Leeuwen IS, Oudshoom M, Mol JA. Canine mammary growth hormone 
gene transcription initiates at the pituitary-specific start site in the absence of Pit-1. Mol 
Cell Endocrinol 150, 121-128, 1999. 
17. Mol JA, Henzen-Logmans SC, Hageman Ph, Misdorp W, Blankenstein MR, Rijnberk A. 
Expression of the gene encoding GH in the human mammary gland. J Clin Endocr Metab 
18. Mol JA, van Garderen E, Rutteman GR, Rijnberk A. New insights in the molecular 
mechanism of progestin-induced proliferation of mammary epithelium; induction of the 
local biosynthesis of growth hormone (GH) in the mammary gland of dogs, cats and 
humans. J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol 57, 67-71, 1996. 
19. Tuggle CK, Trenkle A. Control of growth hormone synthesis. Dom Animal Endocrinol 
20. Lantinga-van Leeuwen IS, Mol JA. Cloning and characterisation of the 5’flanking region 
of the canine growth hormone gene. Submitted. 
2 1. Kooistra HS, Voorhout G, Selman PJ, Rijnberk A: Progestin-induced growth hormone 
(GH) production in the treatment of dogs with congenital GH deficiency. Domest Anim 
Endocrinol 15, 93-102, 1998 
22. Green H, Morikawa M, Nixon T. A dual effector theory of growth-hormone action. 
Differentiation 29, 195-198, 1985 
23. Walden PD, Ruan W, Feldman M, Kleinberg DL. Evidence that the mammary fat pad 
mediates the action of growth hormone in mammary gland development. Endocrinol. 
24. Schoenmakers I, Kooistra HS, Okkens AC, Hazewinkel HAW, Bevers MM, Mol JA. 
Growth hormone concentrations in mammary secretions and plasma of the periparturient 
bitch and in plasma of the neonate. J Reprod Fert Suppl. 51: 363-367, 1997.
25. Ng ST, Zhou J, Adesanya OO, Wang J, LeRoith D, Bondy CA. Growth hormone 
treatment induces mammary gland hyperplasia in aging primates. Nature Medicine 10, 
26. Feldman M, Ruan W, Cunningham BC, Wells JA, Kleinberg DL. Evidence that the 
growth hormone receptor mediates differentiation and development of the mammary 
gland. Endocrinology 133, 1602-1608, 1993. 
27. Birrell SN, Hall RE, Tilley WD. Role of the androgen receptor in human breast cancer. J 
Mammary Gland Biol Neoplasia 3, 95103, 1998. 
28. Bentel JM, Birrell SN, Pickering MA, Holds DJ, Horsfall DJ, Tilley WD. Androgen 
receptor agonist activity of the synthetic progestin, medroxyprogesterone acetate, in 
human breast cancer cells. Mol Cell Endocrinol 154: 11-20, 1999. 
287-292, 1994. 
80, 3094-3096,1995.
13, 1-33, 1996. 
139: 659-662, 1998 
1141-1144, 1997.

9.
Translocation and Action of Polypeptide Hormones 
within the Nucleus 
Relevance to Lactogenic Transduction 
Charles V. Clevenger and Michael A. Rycyzyn 
Department of Pathology & Laboratory Medicine, University of Pennsylvania Medical Center, 
Philadelphia, USA 
Key words: 
Abstract:
Prolactin, Growth Hormone, Retrotransport, Peptide hormones, Nuclear. 
The action of polypeptide hormones at the cell surface as mediated by 
transmembrane receptors is well recognised. However, a growing body of 
evidence also indicates that such hormones are also translocated and act 
directly within the cell nucleus. This chapter will overview what is known of 
the action of one such example, namely prolactin (PRL), from its classic action 
at the cell surface, to its novel function within the nucleus. 
1.
FUNCTION OF PRL IN RESPONSIVE TISSUES 
Prolactin (PRL) was originally identified as a neuroendocrine hormone of 
pituitary origin
1. While the primary function of this hormone was initially 
thought to lie solely within the breast, the functional pleiotropism of this 
peptide with regards to reproduction, osmoregulation, and behavior was 
subsequently
recognised2.
Several
lines
of evidence
have
now
also
demonstrated an immunoregulatory role for this peptide3. Structural analysis
of PRL has revealed it to be related to members of the cytokine/hemato- 
poietin family such as growth hormone (GH), erythropoietin, granulocyte 
macrophage colony stimulating factor (GM-CSF) and the interleukins 2-7
4 .
Synthesis of PRL is not limited to the hypophysis, as numerous extra-
pituitary sites of PRL expression including the decidua, breast, and T-
lymphocytes have been detected5-7. The receptor for prolactin (PRLr) is 
present on numerous tissues including mammary epithelia, T and B 
lymphocytes, and macrophages 8,9.
Acting through its receptor, PRL 
signalling stimulates cell proliferation, survival, and cellular differentiation 
77

78
Clevenger et al 
in a tissue- and microenvironment-dependent manner. With respect to the 
mammary and immune systems, these data indicate that PRL acts at the 
endocrine, paracrine, and autocrine levels in regulating T-lymphocyte 
proliferation and survival10-13 and the terminal maturation of mammary 
tissues14,15. Several lines of evidence have also indicated that PRL may act as 
both an endocrine and autocrine/paracrine progression factor for mammary 
carcinoma in both rodents and human8,16-19.
2.
TRANSDUCTION OF THE PRL SIGNAL 
2.1 
CELL SURFACE RECEPTOR-ASSOCIATED
SIGNALS
The effects of PRL on responsive tissues are mediated by the interaction
of ligand with its receptor, the PRLr. As the initial event in PRL-induced
signalling,
binding
of PRL
induces
PRLr
dimerization20,21. Receptor
dimerization mediates the juxtaposition of the intracytoplasmic domains of
the PRLr. The intracellular (signalling) domain of the PRLr contains a
region ofmembrane-proximal homology to other cytokine receptors, i.e. the
Box 1/Variable Box/Box 2/X box, as well as a unique C-terminal tail. The
box 1 and 2 motifs have been implicated in Jak2 binding, and respectively
consist of hydrophobic/proline and hydrophobic/acidic residues. The box 1
motif is essential for PRLr function; its deletion abrogates PRLr function22.
The tyrosine residues present within the C-terminus ofthe rat PRLr may also
contribute to the engagement of Stat 5 and the activation of Jak223. PRLr
dimerization results in the rapid phosphorylation of the PRLr signalling
domains24 and the activation ofPRLr-associated kinases such as Jak225,26 and
Fyn27,
Shc-Grb2-Sos28,29, Vav30,
and
Bag-1/Bc1-231.
These
events
induce
several signalling cascades, contributing to the transactivation of PRL-
responsive gene loci involved in proliferation (i.e. IRF-1, cyclin B, histone
H3) and the differentiated mammary phenotype (i.e. milk proteins such as b-
casein)
.
2.2 
NUCLEAR TRANSLOCATION OF PRL 
32,33,26
The internalisation of PRL occurs within 30 min of its addition to cells 
expressing the PRLr. Di-leucine motifs within the intracellular domain of the 
PRLr are thought to mediate the internalisation of both ligand and receptor 
into an endosomal/multivesicular body/lysosomal pathway 
, While some 
of this internalised hormone is degraded, an appreciable quantity can be 
stored by the murine T-cells for up to one week of culture. By itself (i.e. in 
9,34,35

Prolactin action within the nucleus
79
the absence of other mitogenic hormones), PRL is weakly mitogenic to
breast cancer cell cultures and non-mitogenic
to cultures of murine T
lymphocytes9,32. Recent data however indicate that in both lymphocytes and
mammary epithelium PRL acts as a potent survival factor in the absence of
other growth factors31.
PRL, however, does act as a potent co-mitogen with both IL2 (on T-cells)
and epidermal growth factor (EGF; on human breast cancer cells). These
data indicate that PRL is necessary (but not sufficient) for cell cycle transit
into S-phase during IL2-driven T-cell proliferation; in its absence, the
expression of genes necessary for S-phase entry (i.e. histone, cyclins) does
not occur32. When both IL2-stimulated T-cells and EGF-stimulated breast
cancer cells are cultured in media containing PRL, appreciable quantities of
PRL (up to 10-20% of total intracellular PRL) can be detected within the cell
nucleus
by biochemical,
immunofluorescent,
and
immunogold
electron
microscopy
approaches
. The internalisation
of proteins
from the
extracellular medium through a trans-Golgi/ER pathway into the cytosol or
nucleus has been previously observed with several bacterial toxins and viral 
proteins, and is a process known as retrotransport37-41. In the absence of co-
mitogenic stimulation (such as supplied by IL2 or EGF), the nuclear 
retrotranslocation of PRL does not occur, an observation noted by other 
laboratories42. While the nuclear retrotransport of PRL could represent an 
epiphenomenon of cell proliferation, we hypothesised that this event was 
necessary for cell cycle progression. To confirm this hypothesis, three 
eukaryotic expression constructs of PRL were synthesised: 1) wild-type
PRL, bearing its N-terminal ER leader sequence (termed “PRL/WT”), 2) a 
deletion construct of PRL lacking its leader sequence (“PRL/ER-”), and 3) a 
chimeric construct of PRL which replaced its leader sequence with the SV40 
large T nuclear translocation signal sequence (“PRL/NT+”). When these 
constructs were transfected into the IL2- and PRL-responsive T-cell line 
Nb2, the expressed proteins were found within the extracellular medium, 
cytoplasm, and the nucleus, respectively, and were bioactive and of the 
appropriate size43. Only the transfectant that secreted PRL into the 
extracellular medium (PRL/WT) was capable of proliferation in the absence 
of any mitogenic stimulation. In the presence of IL2, both the PRL/WT and 
PRL/NT+ transfectants demonstrated markedly increased proliferation (5- 10
fold increased over either the parental of PRL/ER- lines). In the presence of 
exogenous neutralising anti-PRL antiserum (which blocked the action of 
extracellular PRL), however, significant proliferation and survival of only 
the PRL/NT+ transfectant was noted43. These data demonstrated that nuclear 
PRL contributed to IL2-stimulated proliferation by providing a necessary, 
but not sufficient, function within the cell nucleus. 
9,35,36

80
Clevenger et al 
The nuclear retrotranslocation of PRL has been observed in several PRL-
responsive tissues including the breast, T-lymphocytes, liver44,45, ovary46,
and adrenal47. Other peptide hormones such as EGF, NGF, and PDGF48,49,
insulin50-52, FGF
53, and IL554,55 have also been observed within the nucleus
after their introduction into the extracellular medium. These data would 
indicate that the nuclear retrotranslocation of peptide hormones is a 
widespread 
phenomenon 
that could regulate 
numerous 
physiologic 
processes.
3.
MECHANISMS OF PRL RETROTRANSPORT TO
THE NUCLEUS, THE ROLE OF CYCLOPHILIN B
Given that PRL lacks intrinsic localisation motifs or enzymatic activity, it 
was reasoned that its nuclear retrotransport and action was mediated by 
PRL-associated chaperones. To identify these binding partners, yeast two-
hybrid analysis was employed with PRL as “bait”. This analysis has revealed 
that the peptidyl-prolyl isomerase (PPI) cyclophilin B (CypB) interacts with 
PRL
56. The cyclophilins are a family of peptidyl-prolyl isomerases (PPI) that
serve as protein chaperones and mediate the immunosuppressive effects of 
cyclosporine (CsA). Structural motifs within N- and C-termini of CypB 
mediate its ER/extracellular/nuclear localisation. Indeed, CypB can be found 
in serum and breast milk at concentrations of 150 ng/ml. Our data 
demonstrate that CypB directly interacted with both PRL and GH in vitro 
and in vivo through the use of recombinant CypB, PRL, and GH and 
antibodies targeted against these proteins. This interaction was significantly 
enhanced by the inclusion of cyclosporine A. The exogenous addition of 
physiologic concentrations of CypB into the defined medium of responsive 
cell lines potentiated PRL- and GH-driven proliferation ten- and forty-fold, 
respectively. CypB by itself was non-mitogenic, nor did it potentiate the 
action of either interleukin-2 or -3. CypB did not alter the affinity of the 
PRLr for its ligand, or increase the activation of PRLr-associated Jak2. The 
potentiation of PRL-action by CypB, however, was accompanied by a 
dramatic increase in the nuclear retrotranslocation of PRL. A CypB mutant, 
termed CypB-NT, was generated that lacked the wild-type N-terminal
nuclear localisation sequence. Although CypB-NT demonstrated levels of 
PRL binding and PPI activity equivalent to wild type CypB, it was incapable 
of mediating the nuclear retrotransport of PRL or enhancing PRL-driven 
proliferation. These data reveal that CypB serves as a reverse chaperone for 
PRL that potentiates the action of this hormone. Given that cyclophilins 
associate with and/or modulate the activity of both the ER transporter Sec61 

Prolactin action within the nucleus 
81
and known transcription factors, the interaction between CypB and PRL may 
provide a direct mechanism for somatolactogenic action within the nucleus. 
4. 
CONCLUSION 
While classically viewed as signalling only from the cell surface, the 
action of PRL and other related peptide hormones is also directly mediated 
within the nucleus. Thus, both peptide and steroid hormones demonstrate 
analogous signalling mechanisms, i.e. immediate-early signalling from the 
surface, and delayed-sustained signalling f'rom within the nucleus. Given the 
fundamental nature of the process of hormone retrotransport, novel strategies 
aimed at interrupting this signalling pathway may be of significant biologic 
and clinical utility. 
Acknowlegdments
This work was supported by grants from the National Institutes of Health, 
R01 CA69294 and DK50771 (to C.V.C.). M.A.R. is supported by the NIH 
training grant T32 CA09140. 
5. 
REFERENCES 
1.
Riddle, O. and Braucher, P. F., 193 1, Studies on the physiology of reproduction in birds. 
Control of the special secretion of the crop-gland in pigeons by an anterior pituitary 
hormone. Am J Physiol 97: 617-625.
Nicoll, C. S., 1974, Physiological actions of prolactin. In Handbook of Physiology, 
Section VII, (Greep, R. O. and Astwood, E. B., eds.), American Physiological Society, 
Washington, DC, pp. 253-292.
Clevenger, C. V., Freier, D. O., and Kline, J. B., 1998, Prolactin receptor signal 
transduction in cells of the immune system. Journal of Endocrinology 157: 187-197.
Bazan, J. F., 1990, Haematopoietic receptors and helical cytokines. Immunology Today 
Clevenger, C. V. and Plank, T. L., 1997, Prolactin as an autocrine/paracrine growth 
factor in breast tissue. Journal of Mammary Gland Biology and Neoplasia 2: 59-68.
DiMattia, G. E., Gellersen, B., Bohnet, H. G., and Friesen, H. G., 1986, A human B-
lymphoblastoid cell line produces prolactin. Endocrinology 122: 2508-25 17. 
Neal, K. D., Montgomery, D. W., Truong, T. M., and Yu-Lee, L.-Y., 1992, Prolactin 
gene expression in human thymocytes. Molecular and Cellular Endocrinology 87: R19-
R23.
Clevenger, C. V., Chang, W.-P., Ngo, W., Pasha, T. L. M., Montone, K. T., and 
Tomaszewski, J. E., 1995, Expression of prolactin and prolactin receptor in human breast 
carcinoma: Evidence for an autocrine/paracrine loop. Am J Pathol 146: 1-11.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
11: 350-354.
8.

82
Clevenger et al 
9.
Clevenger, C. V., Russell, D. H., Appasamy, P. M., and Prystowsky, M. B., 1990, 
Regulation of IL2-driven T-lymphocyte proliferation by prolactin. Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Science USA 87: 6460-6464.
10. Gala, R. R., 1991, Prolactin and Growth Hormone in the Regulation of the Immune 
System. PSEBM 198: 513-527.
11. Yu-Lee, L. Y., 1997, Molecular Actions of Prolactin in the Immune System. 
Proceedings of the Society for Experimental Biology and Medicine 215: 35-52.
12. Kooijman, R., Hooghe-Peters, E. L., and Hooghe, R., 1996, Prolactin, Growth Hormone, 
and Insulin-like Growth Factor-1 in the Immune System. Advances in Immunology 63:
3 77-454.
13. Prystowsky, M. B. and Clevenger, C. V., 1994, Prolactin as a second messenger for 
interleukin 2. Immunomethods 5: 49-55.
14. Horseman, N. D., Zhao, W., Montecino-Rodriguiez, E., Tanaka, M., Nakashima, K., 
Engle, S. J., Smith, F., Markoff, E., and Dorshkind, K., 1997, Defective mammopoiesis, 
but normal hematopoiesis, in mice with a targeted disruption of the prolactin gene. 
15. Shiu, R. P. C., Murphy, L. C., Tsuyuki, D., Myal, Y., Lee-Wing, M., and Iwasiow, B., 
1987, Biological actions of prolactin in human breast carcinoma. Recent Progress in 
Hormone Research 43: 277-299.
16. Reynolds, C., Montone, K. T., Powell, C. M., Tomaszewski, J. E., and Clevenger, C. V., 
1997, Distribution of prolactin and its receptor in human breast carcinoma. 
Endocrinology 138: 5555-5560.
17. Fields, K., Kulig, E., and Lloyd, R. V., 1993, Detection of prolactin messenger RNA in 
mammary and other normal and neoplastic tissues by polymerase chain reaction. Lab
Invest 68: 354-360.
18. Ormandy, C. J., Hall, R. E., Manning, D. L., Robertson, J. F. R., Blamey, R. W., Kelly, 
P. A., Nicholson, R. I., and Sutherland, R. L., 1997, Coexpression and cross-regulation
of the prolactin receptor and sex steroid hormone receptors in breast cancer. Journal of 
Clinical Endocrinology and Metabolism 82: 3692-3699.
19. Mertani, H., Garcia-Cabellero, T., Lambert, A., Gerard, F., Palayer, C., Boutin, J. M., 
Vonderhaar, B. K., Waters, M. J., Lobie, P. E., and Morel, G., 1998, Cellular expression 
of growth hormone and prolactin receptors in human breast disorders. Int J Cancer 79:
202-211.
20. Gertler, A., Grosclaude, J., Strasburger, C. J., Nir, S., and Djiane, J., 1996, Real-time
measurements of the interactions between lactogenic hormones and prolactin-receptor
extracellular domains from several species support the model hormone-induced transient 
receptor dimerization. Journal of Biologic Chemistry 271: 24482-2449 1. 
21. Sommers, W., Ultsch, M., DeVos, A. M., and Kossiakoff, A. A., 1994, The X-ray
structure of a growth hormone-prolactin receptor complex. Nature 372: 478-48 1. 
22. Lebrun, J.-J., Ali, S., Ullrich, A., and Kelly, P. A., 1995, Proline-rich sequence-mediated
Jak2 association to the prolactin receptor is required but not sufficient for signal 
transduction. Journal of Biologic Chemistry 270: 10664-10670.
23. Lebrun, J.-J., Ali, S., Goffin, V., Ullrich, A., and Kelly, P. A., 1995, A single 
phosphotyrosine residue of the prolactin receptor is responsible for activation of gene 
transcription. Proceedings of the National Academy of Science USA 92: 4031-4035.
24. Chang, W.-P., Ye, Y., and Clevenger, C. V., 1998, Stoichiometric structure/function 
analysis of the prolactin receptor signaling domains by receptor chimeras. Molecular and 
Cellular Biology 18: 896-905.
EMBO J 16: 6926-6935.

Prolactin action within the nucleus 
25. Campbell, G. S., Argetsinger, L. S., Ihle, J. N., Kelly, P. A., Rillema, J. A., and Carter-
Su, C., 1994, Activation of JAK2 tyrosine kinase by prolactin receptors in Nb2 cells and 
mouse mammary gland explants. Proceedings of the National Academy of Science USA 
26. Rui, H., Lebrun, J.-J., Kirken, R. A., Kelly, P. A., and Farrar, W. L., 1994, JAK2 
activation and cell proliferation induced by antibody-mediated prolactin receptor 
dimerization. Endocrinology 135:
1299-1306.
associated with prolactin receptor and is activated by prolactin stimulation of T-
lymphocytes. Molecular Endocrinology 8: 674-681.
28. Clevenger, C. V., Torigoe, T., and Reed, J. C., 1994, Prolactin induces rapid 
phosphorylation and activation of prolactin receptor associated Raf- 1 kinase in a T-cell
line. Journal of Biologic Chemistry 269: 5559-5565.
29. Erwin, R. A., Kirken, R. A., Malbarba, M. G., Farrar, W. L., and Rui, H., 1995, Prolactin 
activates Ras via signaling proteins SHC, growth factor receptor bound 2, and son of 
sevenless. Endocrinology 136: 3512-35 18.
30. Clevenger, C. V., Ngo, W., Luger, S. M., and Gewirtz, A. M., 1995, Vav is necessary for 
prolactin-stimulated proliferation and is translocated into the nucleus of a T-cell line. J
Biol Chem 270: 13246-13253.
31. Clevenger, C. V., Thickman, K., Ngo, W., Chang, W.-P., Takayama, S., and Reed, J. C., 
1997, Role of Bag-1 in the survival and proliferation of the cytokine-dependent
lymphocyte lines, B/aF3 and Nb2. Mol Endocrinol 11: 608-618.
32. Clevenger, C. V., Sillman, A. L., Hanley-Hyde, J., and Prystowsky, M. B., 1992, 
Requirement for prolactin during cell cycle regulated gene expression in cloned T-
lymphocytes. Endocrinology 130: 32 16-3222.
33. Yu-Lee, L. Y., 1990, Prolactin stimulates transcription of growth-related genes in Nb2 T 
lymphoma cells. Molecular and Cellular Endocrinology 68: 21-28.
34. Vincent, V., Goffn, V., Rozakis-Adcock, M., Mornon, J.-P., and Kelly, P. A., 1997, 
Identification of Cytoplasmic motifs required for short prolactin receptor internalization. 
Journal of Biologic Chemistry 272: 7062-7068.
35. Clevenger, C. V., Sillman, A. L., and Prystowsky, M. B., 1990, Interleukin-2 driven 
nuclear translocation of prolactin in cloned T-lymphocytes. Endocrinology 127: 3151 -
3159.
36. Rao, Y.-P., Buckley, D. J., Olson, M. D., and Buckley, A. R., 1995, Nuclear 
translocation of prolactin: Collaboration of tyrosine kinase and protein kinase C 
activation in rat Nb2 node lymphoma cells. J Cell Physiol 163: 266-276.
37. De Virgilio, M., Weninger, H., and Ivessar, N. I., 1998, Ubiquitination is required for the 
retrotranslocation of a short-lived luminal endoplasmic reticulum glycoprotein to the 
cytosol for degradation by the proteasome. Journal of Biologic Chemistry 273: 9734-
9743.
38. Hazes, B. and Read, R. J., 1997, Accumulating evidence suggests that several AB toxins 
subvert the endoplasmic reticulum-associated protein degradation pathway to enter target 
cells. Biochemistry 36: 11051-11054.
39. Johannes, L. and Goud, B., 1998, Surfing on a retrograde wave: How does Shiga toxin 
reach the endoplasmic reticulum. Trends in Cell Biology 8: 158-162.
40. Wiertz, E. J. H. J., Tortorella, D., Bogyo, M., Yu, J., Mothes, W., Jones, T. R., Rapaport, 
T. A., and Ploegh, H. L., 1997, Sec61-mediated transfer of a membrane protein from the 
endoplasmic reticulum to the proteasome for destruction. Nature 384: 432-438.
83
91: 5232-5236.
27. Clevenger, C. V. and Medaglia, M. V., 1994, The protein tyrosine kinase p59fyn is

84
Clevenger et al 
41. Wiedlocha, A., Falnes, P. O., Rapak, A., Muraguchi, A., Klingenberg, O., and Olsnes, S., 
1996, Stimulation of proliferation of a human osteosarcoma cell line by exogenous acidic 
fibroblast growth factor requires both activation of receptor tyrosine kinase and growth 
factor internalization. Molecular and Cellular Biology 16: 270-280.
42. Perrot-Applanat, M., Gualillo, O., Buteau, H., Edery, M., and Kelly, P. A,, 1997, 
Internalization of prolactin receptor and prolactin in transfected cells does not involve 
nuclear translocation. J Cell Sci 110: 1123-1132.
43. Clevenger, C. V., Altmann, S. W., and Prystowsky, M. B., 1991, Requirement of nuclear 
prolactin for interleukin-2-stimulated proliferation of T lymphocytes. Science 253: 77-
79.
44. Josefsberg, Z., Posner, B. I., Patel, B., and Bergeron, J. J. M., 1979, The uptake of 
prolactin into female rat liver. Journal of Biologic Chemistry 254: 209-215.
45. Buckley, A. R., Crowe, P. D., and Russell, D. H., 1988, Rapid activation of protein 
kinase C in isolated rat liver nuclei by prolactin, a known hepatic mitogen. Proceedings
of the National Academy of Science USA 85: 8649-8653.
46. Nolin, J. M., 1978, Intracellular prolactin in rat corpus luteum and adrenal cortex. 
Endocrinology 102: 402-406.
47. Nolin, J. M., 1980, Incoporation of regulatory peptide hormones by individual cells of 
the adrenal cortex: Prolactin-adrenocorticotropin differences. Peptides 1: 249-255.
48. Maher, D. W., Lee, B. A., and Donoghue, D. J., 1989, The alternatively spliced exon of 
the platelet-derived growth factor A chain encodes a nuclear targeting signal. Molecular
and Cellular Biology 9: 225 1-2253.
49. Rakowicz-Szulczynska, E. M., Rodeck, U., Herlyn, M., and Koprowski, H., 1986, 
Chromatin binding of epidermal growth factor, nerve growth factor, and platelet-derived
growth factor in cells bearing the appropriate surface receptors. Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Science USA 83: 3728-3732.
50. Smith, R. M., Goldberg, R. I., and Jarett, L., 1988, Preparation and characterization of 
colloidal gold-insulin complex with binding and biological activities identical to native 
insulin. Journal of Histochemistry and Cytochemistry 36: 359-365.
51. Smith, R. M. and Jarett, L., 1987, Ultrastructural evidence for the accumulation of 
insulin in nuclei of intact 3T3-L1 adipocytes by an insulin-receptor mediated process. 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Science USA 84: 459-463.
52. Soler, A. P., Thompson, K. A., Smith, R. M., and Jarett, L., 1989, Immunological 
demonstration of the accumulation of insulin, but not insulin receptors, in nuclei of 
insulin-treated cells. Proceedings of the National Academy of Science USA 86: 6640-
6644.
53. Baldin, V., Roman, A. M., Bosc-Bierne, I., Amalric, F., and Bouche, G., 1990, 
Translocation of bFGF to the nucleus is G1 phase cell cycle specific in bovine aortic 
endothelial cells. EMBO Journal 9: 15 11-1517. 
54. Jans, D. A., Briggs, L. J., Gustin, S. E., Jans, P., Ford, S., and Young, I. G., 1997, A 
functional bipartite nuclear localization signal in the cytokine interleukin-5. FEBS
Letters 406: 3 15-320.
55. Jans, D. A., Briggs, L. J., Gustin, S. E., Jans, P., Ford, S., and Young, I. G., 1997, The 
cytokine interleukin-5 (IL-5) effects cotransport of its receptor subunits to the nucleus in 
vitro. FEBS Letters 410: 368-372.
56. Rycyzyn, M. A., Reilly, S. C., O'Malley, K., and Clevenger, C. V., 1999, Role of 
cyclophilin B in somatolactogenic transduction and nuclear retrotranslocation. 
Submitted.

10.
Mammary Gland Development and the Prolactin 
Receptor
Nadine Binart1, Christopher J. Ormandy2 and Paul A. Kelly1
1
INSERM Unité 344 - Endocrinologie Moléculaire, Faculté de Médecine Necker, Paris Cedex, 
France.
2Cancer Research Program, Garvan Institute of Medical Research, Sydney, Australia 
Key words: 
prolactin, prolactin receptor 
Abstract:
Prolactin (PRL), synthesized by the anterior pituitary and to a lesser extent by 
numerous extrapituitary tissues, affects more physiological processes than all 
other pituitary hormones combined. This hormone is involved in >300 separate 
effects in various vertebrate species where its role has been well documented. 
The initial step in its action is the binding to a specific membrane receptor 
which belongs to the superfamily of class 1cytokine receptors. The function of
this receptor is mediated, at least in part, by two families of signaling 
molecules: Janus kinases and signal transducers and activators of transcription. 
PRL-binding sites have been identified in a number of cells and tissues of 
adult animals. Disruption of the gene for the PRL receptor has provided a new 
animal model with which to better understand the actions of PRL on mammary 
morphogenesis and mammary gland gene expression. The recent availability 
of genetic mouse models provides new insights into mammary developmental 
biology and how the action of a hormone at specific stages of development can 
have effects later in life on processes such as mammary development and 
breast cancer initiation and progression. 
1. 
INTRODUCTION 
In the normal mammary gland, development, growth and differentiation 
are under the control of a variety of growth factors and hormones. Prolactin 
is considered a major player1. Functional differentiation of the gland as 
measured by induction of milk protein synthesis both in vivo and in vitro is
85

86
Binart et al 
dependent on prolactin. To summarize our understanding of PRL actions in 
the development of mammary gland, we will discuss PRL secretion and 
mammary gland morphogenesis, and will describe recent findings regarding 
this hormone in the context of mammary development. 
2. 
PITUITARY AND EXTRAPITUITARY PRL 
SECRETION
Three decades after PRL was identified, the amino acid sequence of 
sheep PRL (also referred to as lactogenic hormone or luteotropic hormone 
depending on its biological properties) was determined and shown to be a 
protein of 199 amino acids2. At the end of the 1970's, the nucleotide
sequence of PRL cDNAs from several species was identified3. As 
anticipated from earlier structural studies, the primary structure of PRL 
appeared closely related to that of two other hormones, growth hormone 
(GH), also of pituitary origin, and placental lactogen (PL), secreted by 
mammalian 
placenta4,5. 
Today, 
genetic6,7
structural3,8, 
binding8
and
structure- functional3,8 studies of these three hormones, as well as the more 
recently identified somatolactin and prolactin-related proteins, have clearly 
demonstrated that they all belong to a unique family of proteins. 
In addition to being synthesized and secreted by lactotrophic cells of the 
anterior pituitary gland, PRL is also produced by numerous other cells and 
tissues4. The subject of extrapituitary PRL has recently been reviewed
4 and
thus will only be briefly discussed. In addition to the anterior pituitary gland, 
PRL gene expression has been confirmed in various regions of the brain, 
decidua, 
myometrium, 
lacrimal 
gland, thymus, 
spleen, 
circulating 
lymphocytes and lymphoid cells of bone marrow, and tumors, skin 
fibroblasts, and sweat glands (reviewed in4). PRL can thus be found in 
several fluid compartments in addition to serum, such as cerebrospinal fluid, 
amniotic fluid, tears, follicular fluid, and sweat. 
In addition, the mammary epithelial cell is an important site of PRL 
synthesis and secretion. PRL is present in significant concentrations in milk 
and milk PRL is absorbed by the neonatal gut and is thought to cause 
changes in the maturation of the hypothalamic neuroendocrine system9.
Interestingly, hypophysectomized rats retain ~ 20% of biologically active 
PRL in the circulation, which increases to ~ 50% of normal levels with time. 
Neutralization of circulating PRL with anti-PRL antibodies results in 
immune dysfunction and death10, suggesting that extrapituitary PRL is 
important, and under some circumstances, can compensate for pituitary PRL. 
Pituitary PRL acts via a classical endocrine pathway, meaning it is 
secreted by a gland, transported by the circulatory system and acts on 

Mammary Gland Development and the Prolactin Receptor 
87
peripheral target cells via specific receptors located on the plasma 
membrane. The PRL that is produced by different non pituitary/peripheral 
cell types can act in a more direct fashion, that is as a growth factor, 
neurotransmitter, or immunomodulator, in an autocrine or paracrine manner. 
Thus, locally produced PRL can act on adjacent cells (paracrine) or on the 
PRL-secreting cell itself (autocrine). Using paracrine or autocrine 
mechanisms, it would thus be possible to activate many of the actions 
associated with PRL without ever affecting the circulating concentration of 
the hormone. 
3. 
MAMMARY GLAND ORGANOGENESIS 
At birth, mice show rudiments of indistinguishable mammary ductal 
architecture. Pubertal mammary gland development is controlled by pituitary 
and gonadal hormones that act directly and indirectly. After growth until the 
onset of puberty, terminal end buds (TEBs) form and ductal epithelium 
begins. Proliferation at this stage occurs mainly in the body cells of the 
terminal end bud. Later during puberty, under the influence of PRL and 
progesterone, 
lobular buds branch off from the 
ductal 
system11.
Organogenesis of the mammary gland is completed when the ductal system 
has grown to the full extent of the fat pad and lobule buds have sprouted at 
regular intervals along the ducts. Up to midpregnancy, ductal elongation, 
branching, and the number of lobules increased. Under the influence of PRL, 
placental 
lactogens, 
progesterone, 
and 
local 
growth 
factors, 
the 
lobuloalveolar epithelium undergoes extensive proliferation. At parturition, 
the lobuloalveolar epithelium is converted to a secretory phenotype and the 
full complement of milk proteins and lactogenic enzymes are synthesized. 
Involution of the lobuloalveolar system occurs at the end of the lactation in 
response to milk stasis, and decrease of systemic lactogens. Thus, PRL and 
placental lactogens, which bind to the PRL receptor, act during these 
different stages: lobule budding, lobuloalveolar expansion during pregnancy, 
and lactational differentiation and maintenance of milk secretion.
4.
STUDIES OF MICE WITH TARGETED GENE 
DISRUPTIONS
Studies of mice with targeted disruptions of PRL and the PRL receptor 
(PRLR) genes have demonstrated that this hormone is an obligate regulator 
of mammary 
organogenesis, 
lobuloalveolar 
growth, 
and functional 

88
Binart et al 
differentiation12,13.
In nulliparous mice ( PRL-/-) the mammary glands 
consists of a primary and secondary branched ductal system with numerous 
terminal end buds along the ducts. Terminal end buds are absent in the 
mature glands of the normal mice. Thus the complete absence of PRL results 
in the arrest of mammary organogenesis at an immature pubertal state. 
Females with one functional allele of the PRL receptor (PRLR+/-) showed 
almost complete failure of lactation after their first pregnancy. The severity 
of this phenotype was reduced when the females were mated at 20 weeks 
and was absent following a second pregnancy. Histological and whole mount 
analysis of virgin mammary glands are reported elsewhere14. In PRLR-/- mice
mammary development is reduced, but relatively normal up to puberty. A 
partial rescue of pregnancy by administration of progesterone allowed 
analysis of mammary development at day 5.5. Progesterone is required for 
ductal branching, and the addition of this steroid to maintain the pregnancy 
is also able to rescue ductal sidebranching in PRLR-/- females, as ductal 
bifurcation appeared to be normal (Fig 1). To distinguish between the 
developmental defects intrinsic to the epithelium and those resulting from 
systemic endocrine alterations, mammary epithelium from PRLR-/- mice was 
transplanted into mammary fat pads of wild-type mice. In virgin mice, the 
PRLR-/- epithelial transplants developed normally at puberty; indicating an 
indirect effect of prolactin on ductal development. During pregnancy, these 
transplants showed normal side branching and formation of alveolar buds, 
however without any lobuloalveolar development15, These experiments 
indicate that during pregnancy PRL acts directly on the mammary 
epithelium to produce lobuloalveolar development. 
Fig. 1. Whole mount analysis of mammary development in wild-type and knockout mice at 
day 5.5 of pregnancy. Whole mounts of mammary glands from mice at 12 weeks of age were 
prepared from wild-type (A) or knockout (B and C ) animals. Administration of progesterone 
leads to the maintenance of pregnancy in knockout mice (C). The fourth inguinal mammary 
gland is shown. 
The complete absence of the progesterone receptor gene results in a
gland lacking terminal end buds but displaying only some branched ducts16.
Estradiol receptor α knockout females are infertile, and a lack of ductal 
growth and differentiation has been reported17. In mice deficient in Stat5a, a

Mammary Gland Development and the Prolactin Receptor 
89
primary mediator of PRL action, mammary lobuloalveolar outgrowth during 
pregnancy is curtailed and females are unable to lactate after parturition
because of a failure of terminal differetiation18. Similarly, mammary gland 
development is also impaired in Stat5b-/- females and, although milk protein
genes are expressed, there is insufficient milk to feed pups19. Interestingly, 
Stat5b, but not Stat5a, deficient females exhibit severely compromised 
fertility. Mice homozygous for a germline mutation in A-myb, a nuclear 
protein regulator of transcription, show a marked underdevelopment of the 
breast epithelial compartment following pregnancy demonstrating a critical 
role of A-myb in mammary gland development20. Mice lacking cyclin D1 
gene also exhibit a dramatic impairment of mammary gland development 
leading to inability to lactate their litters21.
In conclusion, the phenotypes of animals lacking functional genes 
encoding PRLR, PRL, Stat5a, or Stat5b, confirm the essential role of the 
lactogenic receptor and its signaling pathways in mammary gland 
development, whereas estradiol and progesterone receptors are also 
important but perhaps do not play as central a function as prolactin. 
5. 
MECHANISMS 
The role of locally derived growth factors in the mediation of PRL-
induced mammary gland development remains unknown. Several growth 
factors are known to play specific and nonredundant paracrine roles at 
different stages of mammary development. These include epidermal growth 
factor (EGF), neuregulin (NRG), Wnt gene products, keratinocyte growth 
factor (KGF), hepatocyte growth factor (HGF) and insulin-like growth 
factor- 1 (IGF-1). The interplay between endocrine hormones and epithelial 
and stromal factors is necessary for normal mammary development. 
Neuregulin stimulates alveolar development and secretory activity22,23. This 
member of EGF family is expressed during pregnancy in the stroma24 so it 
may be involved in mediating effects which are important during pregnancy. 
Cyclin D1 knockout mice are devoid 
of PRL-dependent lobuloalveolar 
structures in the mature gland 25, reminiscent of those in progesterone 
receptor knockout mice. The schematic role of prolactin actions is 
summarized in Fig 2. 

90
Binart et al 
Fig. 2. Schematic
action of PRL on mammary
epithelial
cells. PRL acts directly on the
mammary gland epithelium, 
and indirectly through the corpus luteum via the signal 
transducer and activator of transcription Stat5b. In the mammary gland, the major mediator is 
Stat5a. Growth factor signalling between the mammary epithelium and stroma/adipose 
compartment induces growth and morphogenesis of the epithelium. Thus, PRL acts through 
endocrine and autocrine/paracrine pathways. 
6. 
CONCLUSIONS 
The technique of gene targeting in mice has been used to develop 
experimental models where the effects of the complete absence of any 
lactogen or PRL-mediated effects can be studied. It is clear that there are 
multiple actions associated with PRL. 
It will be important to correlate 
known effects with local production of PRL in some cases in order to 
distinguish classical endocrine from autocrine/paracrine effects in the 
mammary gland. The fact that extrapituitary PRL can compensate for 
pituitary PRL raises the interesting possibility that there may be other effects 
of PRL than those originally observed in hypophysectomized rats, including 
a potential role in human breast cancer. The PRL receptor knockout mouse 
model remains an interesting system to look for effects only activated by 
PRL or other lactogenic hormones. 

Mammary Gland Development and the Prolactin Receptor 
91
In general these model systems will be in the future crucial to facilitate 
and identify the PRL regulated genes important in the development of the 
mammary gland. 
7. 
REFERENCES 
1,
2.
3.
Neville, M.C. and Daniel, C.W., 1987, The Mammary Gland: Development regulation 
and function (New York: Plenum Press), pp 383-438.
Li, C.H., Dixon, J.S., Lo, T.B., Pankov, Y.M., and Schmidt, K.D., 1969, Amino acid 
sequence of ovine lactogenic hormone. Nature 224: 695-696.
Nicoll, C.S., Mayer, G.L., and Russell, S.M., 1986, Structural features of prolactins and 
growth hormones that can be related to their biological properties. Endocr. Rev. 7: 169-
203.
Ben-Jonathan, N., Mershon, J.L., Allen, D.L., and Steinmetz, R.W., 1996, Extrapituitary 
prolactin: distribution, regulation, functions, and clinical aspects. Endocr. Rev. 17: 639-
669.
Kelly, M.A., Rubinstein, M., Asa, S.L., Zhang, G., Saez, C., Bunzow, J.R., Allen, R.G., 
Hnasko, R., Ben-Jonathan, N., Grandy, D.K., and Low, M.J., 1997, Pituitary lactotroph 
hyperplasia and chronic hyperprolactinemia in dopamine D2 receptor-deficient mice. 
Neuron 19: 103-113.
Niall, H.D., Hogan, M.L., Sauer, R., Rosenblum, I.Y., and Greenwood, F.C., 1971, 
Sequences of pituitary and placental lactogenic and growth hormones: evolution from a 
primordial peptide by gene duplication. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 68: 866-870.
Miller, W.L. and Eberhardt, N.L., 1983, Structure and evolution of the growth hormone 
gene family. Endocr. Rev. 4: 97-130.
Goffn, V., Shiverick, K.T., Kelly, P.A., and Martial, J.A., 1996, Sequence-function
relationships within the expanding family of prolactin, growth hormone, placental 
lactogen and related proteins in mammals. Endocr. Rev. 17: 385-410.
Kacsoh, B., Veress, Z., Toth, B.E., Avery, L.M., and Grosvenor, C.E., 1993, Bioactive 
and immunoreactive variants of prolactin in milk and serum of lactating rats and their 
pups. J. Endocrinol. 138: 243-257.
10. Nagy, E. and Berczi, I., 1991, Hypophysectomized rats depend on residual prolactin for 
survival. Endocrinology 128: 2776-2784.
11. Imagawa, W., Yang, J., Guzman, R., and Nandi, S., 1994, Control of mammary 
development. In The Physiology of Reproduction. E. Knobil, J.D. Neil, L.L. Ewing, G.S. 
Greenwald, C.L. Markert, and D.W. Pfaff, eds. (New York: Raven Press), pp. 1033-
1063.
12. Horseman, N.D., Zhao, W., Montecino-Rodriguez, E., Tanaka, M., Nakashima, K., 
Engle, S.J., Smith, F., Markoff, E., and Dorshkind, K., 1997, Defective mammopoiesis, 
but normal hematopoiesis, in mice with a targeted disruption of the prolactin gene. 
13. Ormandy, C.J., Camus, A., Barra, J., Damotte, D., Lucas, B.K., Buteau, H., Edery, M., 
Brousse, N., Babinet, C., Binart, N., and Kelly, P.A., 1997, Null mutation of the 
prolactin receptor gene produces multiple reproductive defects in the mouse. Genes Dev. 
14. Ormandy, C.J., Binart, N., and Kelly, P.A., 1997, Mammary gland development in 
prolactin receptor knockout mice. J. Mammary Gland. Biol. Neopl. 2: 355-364.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
EMBO J. 16: 6926-6935.
11: 167-178.

92
Binart et al
15. Brisken, C., Kaur, S., Chavarria, T.E., Binart, N., Sutherland, R.L., Weinberg, R.A., 
Kelly, P.A., and Ormandy, C.J., 1999, Prolactin controls mammary gland development 
via direct and indirect mechanisms. Dev. Biol. 210: 96-106.
16. Lydon, J.P., DeMayo, F. J., Funk, C.R., Mani, S.K., Hughes, C.A., Montgomery, C.A., 
Shyamala, G., Conneely, O.M., and O'Malley, B.W., 1995, Mice lacking progesterone 
receptor exhibit pleiotropic reproductive abnormalities. Genes Dev. 9: 2266-2278.
17. Korach, K.S., 1994, Insights from the study of animals lacking functional estrogen 
receptor. Science 266: 1524-1527.
18. Liu, X., Robinson, G.W., Wagner, K.U., Garrett, L., Wynshaw-Boris, A., and 
Hennighausen, L., 1997, Stat5a is mandatory for adult mammary gland development and 
lactogenesis. Genes Dev. 11: 179-186.
19. Udy, G.B., Towers, R.P., Snell, R.G., Wilkins, R.J., Park, S.H., Ram, P.A., Waxman, 
D.J., and Davey, H.W., 1997, Requirement of Stat5b for sexual dimorphism of body 
growth rates and liver gene expression. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 94: 7239-7244.
20. Toscani, A., Mettus, R.V., Coupland, R., Simpkins, H., Litvin, J., Orth, J., Hatton, K.S., 
and Reddy, E.P., 1997, Arrest of spermatogenesis and defective breast development in 
mice lacking A-myb. Nature 386: 713-717.
21. Fantl, V., Stamp, G., Andrews, A., Rosewell, I., and Dickson, C., 1995, Mice lacking 
cyclin D 1 are small and show defects in eye and mammary gland development. Genes
Dev. 9: 2364-2372.
22. Jones, F.E., Jerry, D.J., Guarino, B.C., Andrews, G.C., and Stem, D.F., 1996, Heregulin 
induces in vivo proliferation and differentiation of mammary epithelium into secretory 
lobuloalveoli. Cell Growth Differ. 7: 1031-1038.
23. Krane, I.M. and Leder, P., 1996, NDF/heregulin induces persistence of terminal end buds 
and adenocarcinomas in the mammary glands of transgenic mice. Oncogene 12: 1781 -
1788.
24. Yang, Y., Spitzer, E., Meyer, D., Sachs, M., Niemann, C., Hartmann, G., Weidner, K.M., 
Birchmeier, C., and Birchmeier, W., 1995, Sequential requirement of hepatocyte growth 
factor and neuregulin in the morphogenesis and differentiation of the mammary gland. J.
Cell Biol. 131: 215-226.
25. Sicinski, P., Donaher, J.L., Parker, S.B., Li, T., Fazeli, A., Gardner, H., Haslam, S.Z., 
Bronson, R.T., Elledge, S.J., and Weinberg, R.A., 1995, Cyclin D1 provides a link 
between development and oncogenesis in the retina and breast. Cell 82: 621-630.

11.
Paracrine Mechanisms of Mouse Mammary Ductal 
Growth
1G. R. Cunha, 1J. F. Wiesen, 1Z. Werb,1P. Young,1Y. K. Hom, 2P. S. Cooke 
and 3D. B. Lubahn 
1Anatomy Department University of California, San Francisco, California, USA; 
2Department oj
Veterinary Biosciences, University of Illinois, Urbana, IL, USA; 3Departments of Biochemistry 
University of Missouri, Columbia, MO, USA 
Abstract:
Ductal growth during puberty is stimulated by estrogens, which elicit their 
effects via specific estrogen receptors, ERα and ERβ. Analysis of mice with 
targeted disruption of ERa or ERb has emphasized the importance of ERa in 
mammary gland development. In the mouse mammary gland, ERα are 
expressed in both epithelial and stromal cells (Kurita and Cunha, unpublished), 
which raises the possibility that the growth and morphogenetic effects of 
estrogen could be mediated via either epithelial or stromal ER. The aim of this 
paper is to review the role of epithelial versus stromal ER in mammary ductal-
alveolar growth to assess the importance of paracrine mechanisms. 
1. 
INTRODUCTION 
For many years it has been tacitly assumed that actions of estradiol and 
on epithelium are mediated directly through ER in epithelial cells 
themselves. Mammary ductal growth gland is induced by estradiol. The 
presence of ERα in mammary epithelium combined with the ability of 
estradiol to induce proliferation in mammary epithelium certainly suggests a 
causal link; i.e., that effects of estradiol on mammary epithelial proliferation 
are mediated directly through ER in these cells. However, such a causal link 
between the presence of mammary epithelial ER and the effects of estradiol 
on proliferation of mammary epithelium has never been established. In fact, 
a rapidly emerging body of evidence suggests that this is clearly not true and 
93

94
Cunha et al
that stromal ER mediates many effects of estradiol on estrogen target 
epithelium. 1
Methodologies for producing αERKO mice, in which the ERα gene has 
been rendered non-functional by gene targeting,2 has allowed examination of 
phenotypic and functional consequences of an absence of ERα.
3. We have 
recently developed a new experimental system, which utilizes tissues from 
ERKO mice to study the mechanism of estradiol action.
1
This system 
involves separating and recombining epithelial and stromal tissue from 
αERKO mice with that of a wild-type mice, which express ERα. This tissue 
separation/recombination 
technique 
provides 
a unique 
method 
for 
experimentally controlling the ERα status of both stroma and epithelium.
Thus, tissue recombinations can be prepared, which lack ERα in both
stromal and epithelial compartments, express ERα in either epithelium or 
stroma, or express ERα in both epithelium and stroma. Tissue recombinants
are then transplanted into host animals. By analyzing effects of a lack of 
stromal and/or epithelial ERα on estradiol response such as ductal growth,
the role of ERα in each tissue compartment can be definitively determined.
2.
STROMAL ERαIS REQUIRED FOR DUCTAL
GROWTH IN THE MOUSE MAMMARY GLAND 
Ductal mammary growth is profoundly impaired in αERKO mice. By the 
end of puberty, the mammary fat pad (FP) was almost entirely filled with 
ducts in wild-type mice, while in αERKO mice most of the FP was devoid of 
ducts4. Analysis of tissue recombinants were prepared with mammary 
epithelium (MGE) and mammary fat pad (FP) of wild-type (wt) and αERKO
mice demonstrated that tissue recombinants composed of wt-FP+wt-MGE
developed an extensively branched ductal network, which completely filled 
the fat pad. In contrast, ductal growth was minimal in αERKO-FP+αERKO-
MGE tissue recombinants. When αERKO mammary epithelium was grown 
in association with wild-type FP (wt-FP+αERKO-MGE), αERKO mammary 
epithelium underwent extensive ductal growth. Although there was some 
variability in the amount of ductal growth in individual tissue recombinants, 
ductal growth was always more extensive in wt-FP+wt-MGE and wt-
FP+αERKO-MGE versus αERKO-FP+αERKO-MGE tissue recombinants. 
Surprisingly, ductal tissue was never recognized in wholemounts of 
αERKO-FP+wt-MGE tissue recombinants. However, serial sections of 
αERKO-FP+wt-MGE tissue recombinants revealed that all contained small 
foci of mammary ducts.4 These findings demonstrate that stromal fat pad 
cells are critical estrogen targets, and that estrogen elicits mammary ductal 
growth through stromal ERa. Epithelial ERa is neither necessary nor 

Paracrine Mechanisms of Mouse Mammary Ductal Growth 
95
sufficient for ductal growth. These findings in mammary gland are in 
complete agreement with comparable tissue recombinant studies in the 
uterus and vagina. 1
Stromal epidermal growth factor receptor plays a critical role in 
mammary epithelial growth. Growth factors such as epidermal growth factor 
are known to play a role in stromal-epithelial interactions which are critical 
in determining patterns of mammary growth, development, and ductal 
morphogenesis. To determine the role of signaling through the epidermal 
growth factor receptor (EGFR) in mammary ductal growth and branching, 
mice with a targeted null mutation in the EGFR were used. Such EGFR-KO
mice die perinatally, and thus transplantation methods were used to study 
growth
and
development
of
EGFR-KO
mammary
glands.5
When
transplanted under renal capsules of athymic female mice, neonatal 
mammary glands of wild-type mice underwent extensive ductal growth with 
complete filling of the FP. Conversely, neonatal mammary glands of EGFR-
KO mice exhibited impaired ductal growth with incomplete filling of the FP. 
These findings demonstrated that EGFR is essential for mammary ductal 
growth. To determine whether impaired ductal growth was due to an absence 
of EGFR in epithelium (E), FP or both, EGFR-KO or wild-type MGE was 
transplanted into wild-type gland-free FPs. Surprisingly, transplants of either 
EGFR-KO or wild-type MGE into wild-type mammary FPs exhibited 
extensive ductal growth with comparable complete filling of the FP in 
transplants into intact virgin female hosts. Similarly, lobulo-alveolar
development was equivalent in transplants of EGFR-KO or wild-type MGE 
into wild-type mammary FPs, when the hosts also received a pituitary 
isograft as a source of prolactin.5 These findings suggested that the absence 
of EGFR-signaling in the epithelium is not required for mammary ductal 
growth and lobulo-alveolar development. Instead, these findings suggested 
that the impaired ductal growth exhibited by EGFR-KO mammary glands 
was due to an absence of EGFR signaling in the mammary FP. 
To determine the irrespective roles of stromal versus epithelial EGFR in 
mammary ductal growth, neonatal EGFR-KO and wild type (wt) mammary 
glands were surgically separated into FP and main epithelial duct (E) and 
then recombined as follows: wt-FP+wt-E, wt-FP+EGFR-KO-E, EGFR-KO-
FP+wt-E, and EGFR-KO-FP+EGFR-KO-E+. When tissue recombinants 
contained wild type stroma, ductal development proceeded regardless of the 
epithelial source (wt or EGFR). This outcome corroborates results of 
transplantation of epithelium into cleared FPs. However, when tissue 
recombinants contained EGFR-KO stroma, ductal growth was meager 
regardless of the epithelial source. These data indicate that signaling through 
EGFR must occur in the stroma surrounding the epithelial ducts to induce 
normal ductal proliferation and morphogenesis in the mammary gland.5

96
Cunha et al 
3. 
CONCLUSION 
Mammary ductal growth is estrogen-dependent and is profoundly
impaired in αERKO mice.6 Tissue recombinant studies using FPs and 
mammary epithelia from aERKO and wt mice demonstrate that estrogen
stimulates mammary ductal growth via a paracrine mechanism, acting
through stromal ERα. Epithelial ERα is neither necessary nor sufficient for 
ductal growth.4 EGFR signaling is thought to be a downstream effector of
estrogen action in several estrogen target organs.7 Mammary epithelium
expresses EGFR, and epidermal growth factor and TGFα are mitogens for 
mammary epithelial cells.8 Despite this, our data clearly show that ductal
growth does not require signaling through epithelial EGFR in the mammary
gland in vivo. Instead, EGFR is absolutely necessary in the stromal FP to
induce estrogen-dependent ductal growth. Our results suggest that under
stimulatory estrogenic conditions the stroma responds to estrogen action
through an EGFR-mediated signaling event that is required for stimulation
ofepithelial growth and development. In contrast, epithelial EGFR and ERa
are neither necessary nor sufficient for ductal growth. What are the gene
targets of estrogen action in mammary epithelial cells? One target of
estrogen action in mammary epithelium is upregulation of the progesterone
receptor (PR), which is only detectable in mammary epithelium9. The
importance of epithelial PR in the mammary gland is demonstrated as
impaired lobulo-alveolar development in PR null mice.10 The targets of
EGFR signaling remain to be determined.
Acknowledgments
The work from our laboratory was supported by the following grants: 
CA 58207, CA44768, CA57621, and Department of Defense grant 
DAMDH17-97-7324 to JFW.
4. 
REFERENCES 
1. Cooke PS, Buchanan DL, Lubahn DB, Cunha GR 1998 Mechanism of estrogen action: 
2.
Lubahn DB, Moyer JS, Golding TS, Couse JF, Korach KS, Smithies O 1993 Alteration
lessons from the ERKO mouse. Biology of Reproduction 59:470-475
of reproductive function but not prenatal sexual development after insertional disruption of 
the mouse estrogen receptor gene. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 90:11162-11166
3. Korach KS, Couse JF, Curtis SW, Washburn TF, Lindzey J, Kimbro KS, Eddy EM, 
Migliaccio S, Snedeker SM, Lubahn DB, Schomberg DW, Smith EP 1996 Estrogen 
receptor gene disruption: molecular characterization and experimental and clinical 
phenotypes.
Recent Prog Horn Res 51:159-186

Paracrine Mechanisms of Mouse Mammary Ductal Growth 
97
4. Cunha GR, Young P, Hom YK, Cooke PS, Taylor JA, Lubahn DB 1997 Elucidation of a 
role of stromal steroid hormone receptors in mammary gland growth and development by 
tissue recombination experiments. J Mammary Gland Biology and Neoplasia 2:393-402
5. Wiesen JF, Young P, Werb Z, Cunha GR 1999 Signaling through the stromal epidermal 
growth factor receptor is necessary for mammary ductal development. Development 
6. Bocchinfuso WP, Hively WP, Couse JF, Varmus HE, Korach KS 1999 A mouse 
mammary tumor virus-Wnt-1 transgene induces mammary gland hyperplasia and
tumorigenesis in mice lacking estrogen receptor-alpha. Cancer Res 59:1869-76
7. Nelson KG, Takahashi T, Bossert NL, Walmer DK, McLachlan JA 1991 Epidermal 
growth factor replaces estrogen in the stimulation of female genital-tract growth and 
differentiation. Proc NatI Acad Sci USA 88:21-25
growth in mice and rats. Endocrine Reviews 11 :494-523
progesterone receptors in normal mouse mammary glands: absence of receptors in the 
connective and adipose stroma and a heterogeneous distribution in the epithelium. J 
Steroid Biochem Mol Biol 63:251-259
10.Lydon JP, DeMayo FJ, Funk CR, Mani SK, Hughes AR, Montgomery CA, Shyamala G, 
Conneely OM, O'Malley BW 1995 Mice lacking progesterone receptor exhibit 
pleiotropic reproductive abnormalities. Genes and Development 9:2266-2278
126:335-44
8. Imagawa W, Bandyopadhyay GK, Nandi S 1990 Regulation of mammary epithelial cell 
9. Shyamala G, Barcellos-Hoff MH, Toft D, Yang X 1997 In situ localization of 

12.
Targeting of PKA in Mammary Epithelial Cells 
Mechanisms and functional consequences 
Roger A. Clegg, 1Rachel A. Gardner, 1Rushika N. Sumathipala, 2Françoise
Lavialle,
2Raphaël Boisgard and 2Michéle Ollivier-Bousquet 
1Hannah Research Institute, Ayr, Scotland UK: 2Unité de Biologie des Transports Cellulaires, 
Laboratoire de Biologie Cellulaire et Moléculaire, INRA, Jouy-en-Josas CEDEX, France 
1
Key words: 
Abstract:
PKA, mammary cell, AKAP, secretion, targeting. 
Targeting of protein kinases, promoting association with specific partner-
molecules and localisation to particular sites within the cell, has come to be 
recognised as a key mechanism for attributing specificity to these enzymes. In 
mammary epithelial cells, the repertoire of acute regulatory roles played by 
cyclic AMP-dependent protein kinase (PKA) differs from that in other lipoge-
nic cell-types. Furthermore, PKA is implicated in the regulation of mammary-
specific function, mediating a tonic stimulation of the flux of newly-
synthesised casein through its basal secretory pathway. Both these 
observations imply mammary-specific properties of either PKA targeting 
systems or of PKA itself. Evidence for the latter is currently lacking. Pulse-
chase labelling experiments in the presence and absence of selective effectors 
of PKA have enabled the site(s) of action of this protein kinase on casein 
secretion to be localised to the early stages of the secretory pathway. Possible 
mechanisms are considered for the physical targeting of PKA to the 
membrane-enclosed components of the secretory pathway and evidence for 
their occurrence in mammary epithelial cells is presented. 
1. 
INTRODUCTION 
Targeting of protein kinases is a mechanism of imposing functional 
selectivity on their action, additional to that which their own sequence- 
recognition specificity gives them1,2. Furthermore, the characteristics of an
individual targeting mechanism may be such as to enable a single enzyme to 
99

100
Clegg et al 
manifest diverse specificities both between cells and, within a single cell, at 
different points in time or during a programme of growth and differentiation. 
1.1 
PKA isozyme diversity 
Cyclic AMP-dependent protein kinase (PKA) is one of a relatively small 
number of generic protein kinases acting pleiotropically as primary 
transducers of regulatory signals within cells. It is catalytically activated in 
proportion to the prevailing concentration of CAMP in its immediate 
environment. In its inactive state, PKA exists as a heterotetramer consisting 
of two catalytic (C-) and two regulatory (R-) subunits. Multiple isozymes of 
both R- and C- subunit are encoded by different genes (RIα,β; RIIα,β;
Cα,β,γ3,4,5. Splice variants of C-subunit also exist, most strikingly in C.
elegans but also in mammalian species6-9. The precise function of all this 
diversity is not known with certainty either in C. elegans or in mammals, but 
evidence is beginning to emerge to support the suggestions that determinants 
of targeting8
and/or stability and turnover of the C-subunit protein 
molecule10 may reside in these alternative terminal sequences. 
1.2
Basal activity and activation of PKA
The presence of R-subunit sequences occluding the substrate cleft of C- 
subunit causes the latter to remain catalytically inactive in the holoenzyme. 
The cAMP signal is transduced via its high-affinity binding to two sites on
each R-subunit, causing them to dissociate as an R-subunit dimer, 
concomitantly 
liberating 
two 
catalytically 
active 
C-subunits.
Phosphorylation of proteins by C-subunit can lead to a variety of biological 
effects depending on the identity of the phospho-acceptor substrate protein. 
Examples of these include: enzymes catalysing biosynthesis, degradation 
and metabolic interconversion; transcriptional regulators; ion channels; 
transmembrane receptors and other signalling mediator proteins11. The PKA 
activation cycle is reversed by the action of CAMP phosphodiesterases. 
When making experimental measurements of PKA activity, a “snapshot” of 
the dissociation status at the time of sampling can be made by assaying in 
the absence of added CAMP to determine the “basal” or “expressed” activity. 
The “total” activity (measured in the presence of a saturating excess of 
CAMP) measures the maximum potential of the tissue for C-subunit 
catalysed protein kinase activity in the event of complete dissociation of all 
the cellular holoenzyme. In real situations within living cells, activation of 
PKA is not an “all-or-none” phenomenon but a proportional response to the 
prevailing CAMP level which may itself vary from place to place within the 
cell
12. Thus the tonic or basal level of PKA activation is an important

Targeting of PKA in Mammary Epithelial Cells 
101
determinant of cellular activity (see e.g. Thorens et al.13). This function of
PKA has attracted much less attention than its complementary role in the 
mediation of cellular responses of cells to acute modulators of cAMP levels, 
such as β-adrenergic agents or glucagon.
1.3 
PKA targeting 
The biological effects of PKA can be modulated by restricting its 
distribution within the cell. One way in which this can be achieved is by the 
expression of AKAPs (A-kinase anchoring proteins) which bind to R-
subunits and to a secondary binding partner, thereby tethering the 
holoenzyme to that secondary partner1,2. Cells express a number of AKAPs,
and a temporal dimension can be added to the spatial regulation of PKA if 
various AKAPs (having specificity for different secondary binding partners) 
are differentially expressed with respect to time, for instance, throughout the 
cell cycle or during differentiation14. In addition to holoenzyme targeting via 
AKAPs, it is possible that spatial localisation of PKA catalytic activity can 
be achieved by intrinsic targeting of C-subunit. The myristoylated amino 
terminus of C-subunit is a candidate motif for involvement in intrinsic 
targeting15. Although the majority of free C-subunit molecules are uniformly 
distributed throughout the cytosol of most cells, several examples of the 
specific interaction of C-subunit with partner proteins (in addition to R-
subunit and the specific heat-stable inhibitor protein isoforms16) have 
recently been described17,18, and atypical sub-cellular distribution of C-
subunit has been reported in ovine spermatozoa which express a non-
myristoylated splice-variant of the kinase8.
2. 
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
In mammary epithelial cells, three separate lines of evidence point 
towards sequestration/targeting of PKA. The first of these concerns the 
regulation of acetyl-CoA carboxylase (ACC). The phosphorylation cascade 
controlling its activity is normally initiated by PKA activation19; however, 
this is abrogated in intact mammary epithelial cells although it operates 
efficiently with intrinsic mammary components in cell-free systems20.
Secondly, there is evidence for the membrane-localisation of a small fraction 
of the total mammary cellular PKA21. Thirdly, the tonic level of PKA 
activation in mammary epithelial cells has been shown to modulate the rate 
of the constitutive pathway of casein secretion and this effect has been 
localised to early steps (ER-Golgi; Golgi-TGN) in the pathway22. The effect 
of inhibition of basal PKA activity on casein secretion is illustrated in Fig. 1. 

102
Clegg et al 
Fig.1. Suppression of constitutive secretion of newly-synthesised caseins in explants of rat 
mamma y gland by inhibition of PKA. SDS PAGE analysis of pulse-labelled proteins.
2.1
Association of PKA and AKAPs with membranes of 
secretory pathway elements 
The occurrence of PKA in unfiactionated (microsomal) membranes from 
unstimulated lactating rat mammary tissue has been confirmed by three 
independent methods: (1) Western blotting with anti-C-subunit antibodies; 
(2) photoaffinity-labelling of R-subunits with 8-azido-[32P]cAMP; (3) 
enzymic assay of catalytic activity. Following stimulation of adenylate 
cyclase in intact cells with forskolin or isoprenaline, or direct activation of 
PKA with cpt cAMP, the following were found to be increased in 
microsomal membranes: PKA activity (total and expressed components); 
concentration of total C-subunit; concentration of MI-subunit (Fig. 2). 
Facultative targeting via conventional AKAPs is implied by this selective 
sequestration of RII subunit. 
The AKAP content of microsomes from lactating rat mammary tissue 
was investigated by overlay (ligand blotting) with 32P-labelled recombinant 
RII∀subunit. Major AKAPs with apparent molecular weights of 129000,
106000, 75000 were detected along with endogenous RII subunit at 54000. 
As previously described23, expression of the 129000 and 75000 AKAPs was 
tightly developmentally regulated: they were expressed during lactation but 
not during pregnancy nor beyond 24h of involution following induction of 
milk stasis by litter-removal. AKAP distribution between cytosol and 
membranes was unaffected by PKA activation in intact cells (Fig. 2). 

Targeting of PKA in Mammary Epithelial Cells 
103
Fig. 2. Membrane-associated components of the PKA system in mammary tissue from 
lactating rats: effects of PKA activation before tissue fractionation. 
Microsomal membranes were further fractionated on the basis of their 
buoyant density in sucrose gradients. Scanning down these gradients, 
AKAPs of Mr
106000, 75000 and intrinsic RII predominated in light 
membrane fragments enriched in plasma membrane markers. RII was not 
found in denser membrane fragments, whereas 106000 and 75000 
components persisted into fragments of intermediate density, enriched in 
Golgi membrane markers, but not into denser regions of the gradient. AKAP 
129000 began to appear in Golgi/secretory vesicle-enriched fragments and 
became the predominant AKAP in the denser ER-derived membrane 
fragments. ER membrane was also, on the basis of protein content, the most 
abundant component in the gradient. Assay of PKA catalytic activity 
intrinsic to these membrane fractions, using Kemptide (a synthetic peptide 
phospho-acceptor substrate) showed firstly that “expressed” activity was 
virtually absent from all fractions and secondly that “total” activity 
distributed in a peak coincident with ER membranes. Potential phospho-
acceptor substrate proteins of PKA resident in individual membrane 
fractions were identified by in vitro incubation of membranes (20µg protein) 
with [(-
32P]ATP in the absence of CAMP. Multiple phospho-proteins were
found, and although only their Mr and not their identity was revealed in these 
experiments, it is noteworthy that all phosphorylations were suppressed by 
the addition of PKI (a peptide inhibitor selective for PKA) and were only 
modestly enhanced by the addition to each incubation of 5µg of pure 
recombinant C-subunit.
3.
CONCLUSIONS AND PERSPECTIVES
These results indicate the presence of two populations of C-subunit
molecule in mammary microsomal membranes. In one, C-subunit is

104
Clegg et al 
stoichiometrically associated with R-subunit in the form of heterotetrameric 
holoenzymes; these are totally cAMP-dependent in their Kemptide kinase 
activity and are probably anchored predominantly to ER membranes via 
AKAP 129000. The association of this AKAP with ER membranes, and its 
apparent molecular size, suggest that it may be the ER-targeted (N1 splice- 
variant) derivative of the carboxyl-extended D-AKAP 1 splice isoform 1 c 
(known in rodents as AKAP 121), hitherto thought to be expressed only in 
live24. The other population consists of free C-subunit, occluded from 
access to Kemptide but able to 
catalyze the cAMP-independent 
phosphorylation of membrane-resident proteins that are themselves, at best, 
poorly accessible to exogenous free C-subunit. These endogenous free C- 
subunit molecules are tethered to the membrane via an intrinsic targeting 
mechanism relying only on the ability of C-subunit itself to interact with 
membrane component(s) – protein or lipid. The hypothesis that terminal 
domains of C-subunit are involved in its intrinsic targeting has been 
considered above. Future characterisation of this membrane-associated sub-
population will further test this hypothesis and elucidate the mechanism of 
intrinsic targeting of C-subunit. 
Acknowledgements
Aspects of this work have been funded by BBSRC and the British 
Council. Collaboration has been fostered by EU Action COST 825; the UK 
and French research teams are grateful to SERAD and INRA respectively for 
continuing support. 
4. 
REFERENCES 
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
Pawson, T., and Scott, J.D., 1997, Signalling through scaffold, anchoring, and adaptor 
proteins. Science 278: 2075-2080.
Faux, M.C., and Scott, J.D., 1996, More on target with protein phosphorylation: 
conferring specificity by location. TIBS 21: 312-3 15. 
Beebe, S.J., 1994, The cAMP-dependent protein kinases and cAMP signal transduction. 
Sem. Cancer Biol. 5: 285-294.
Uhler, M.D., Chrivia, J.C., McKnight, G.S., 1986, Evidence for a second isoform of the 
catalytic subunit of cAMP-dependent protein kinase. J. Biol. Chem. 261: 15360-15363.
Beebe, S.J., Salomonsky, P., Jahnsen, T., and Li, Y., 1992, The Cg subunit is a unique 
isoenzyme of the CAMP-dependent protein kinase. J. Biol. Chem. 267: 25505-25512.
Tabish, M., Clegg, R.A., Rees, H.H., and Fisher, M.J., 1999, Organization and 
alternative splicing of the Caenorhabditis elegans cAMP-dependent protein kinase 
catalytic subunit gene (kin-1). Biochem. J. 339: 209-216.
Guthrie, C.R., Skålhegg, B.S., and McKnight, G.S., 1997, Two novel brain-specific
splice variants of the murine Cb gene of CAMP-dependent protein kinase. J. Biol. Chem. 
7.
272: 29560-29565.

Targeting of PKA in Mammary Epithelial Cells 
8.
105
San Augustin, J.T., Leszyk, J.D., Nuwaysir, L.M. and Witman, G.B., 1998, The catalytic 
subunit of the cyclic AMP-dependent protein kinase of ovine sperm flagella has a unique 
amino-terminal sequence. J. Biol. Chem. 273: 24874-24883.
Thomis, D.C., Floyd-Smith, G., and Samuel, C.E., 1992, Mechanism of interferon action 
– cDNA structure and regulation of a novel splice-site variant of the catalytic subunit of 
human protein kinase A from interferon-treated cells. J. Biol. Chem. 267: 10723-10728.
10. Chestukhin, A., Litovchick, L., Muradov, K., Batkin, M., and Shaltiel, S., 1997, 
Unveiling the substrate specificity of meprin β on the basis of the site in protein kinase A
cleaved by the kinase-splitting membranal protease. J. Biol. Chem. 272: 3153-3160.
11. Meinkoth, J.L., Alberts, A.S., Went, W., Fantozzi D., Taylor, S.S., Hagiwara, M., 
Montminy, M., Feramisco, J.R., 1993, Signal-transduction through the CAMP-dependent
protein kinase. Mol. Cell. Biochem. 128: 179-186.
12. Houslay, M.D., and Milligan, G., 1997, Tailoring cAMP-signalling responses through
isoform multiplicity. TIBS 22: 217-224.
13. Thorens, B., Dériaz, N., Bosco, D., DeVos, A., Pipeleers, D., Schuit, F., Medea, P., and 
Porret, A.,1996, Protein kinase A-dependent phosphorylation of GLUT2 in pancreatic β 
cells. J. Biol. Chem. 271: 8075-8081.
14. Feliciello, A., Rubin, C.S., Avvedimento, E.V., and Gottesman, M.E., 1998, Expression 
of A kinase anchor protein 121 is regulated by hormones in thyroid and testicular germ 
cells. J. Biol. Chem. 273: 23361-23366.
15.  Boutin, J.A., 1997, Myristoylation. Cell Signal. 9: 15-35.
16. Wiley, J.C., Wailes, L.A., Idzerda, R.L. and McKnight, G.S., 1999, Role of regulatory 
subunits and protein kinase inhibitor (PKI) in determining nuclear localization and 
activity of the catalytic subunit of protein kinase A. J. Biol. Chem. 274: 6381-6387.
17. Wang, J., Zhou, Y., Wen, H., and Levitan, I.B., 1999, Simultaneous binding of two 
protein kinases to a calcium-dependent potassium channel. J. Neurosci. 19: RC4 (1-7).
18. Zhong, H., SuYang, H., Erdjument-Bromage, H., Tempst, P., and Ghosh S., 1997, The 
transcriptional activity of NF-kB is regulated by the IkB-associated PKAc subunit 
through a cyclic AMP-independent mechanism. Cell 89: 413-424.
19. Hardie, D.G., 1989, Regulation of fatty acid synthesis via phosphorylation of acetyl-coA
carboxylase. Progr. Lipid Res. 28: 117-146.
20. Clegg, R.A., West, D.W., and Aitchison, R.E.D., 1987, Protein phosphorylation in rat 
mammary acini and in cytosol preparations in vitro: phosphorylation of acetyl-CoA
carboxylase is unaffected by cyclic AMP. Biochem. J. 241: 447-454.
21. Clegg, R.A., and Connor, K., 199 1, Cyclic AMP-dependent protein kinase in mammary 
epithelial cells: activity and subcellular distribution are acutely modulated by 
isoprenaline. Cell Signal. 3: 201-208.
22. Clegg, R.A., Gardner, R.A., Lavialle, F., Boisgard, R., and Ollivier-Bousquet, M., 1998, 
Casein secretion in mammary tissue: tonic regulation of basal secretion by protein kinase 
A. Mol. Cell. Endocrinol. 141: 163-177.
23. Clegg, R.A., Gordge, P.C., and Miller, W.R., 1999, Expression of enzymes of covalent 
protein modification during regulated and dysregulated proliferation of mammary 
epithelial cells: PKA, PKC and NMT. Adv. Enzyme Regul. 39: 175-203.
24. Huang, L.J-s., Wang, L., Ma, Y., Durick, K., Perkins, G., Deerinck, T. J., Ellisman, M.H., 
and Taylor, S.S., 1999, NH2-terminal targeting motifs direct dual specificity A-kinase -
anchoring protein 1 (D-AKAP1) to either mitochondria or endoplasmic reticulum. J. Cell 
Biol. 145: 951-959.
9.

13.
The PEA3 Group of ETS-related Transcription 
Factors
Role in breast cancer metastasis 
1,2Yvan de Launoit,
1,3Anne Chotteau-Lelievre,1Claude Beaudoin,
2Laurent
Coutte,
1Sonia Netzer, 2Carmen Brenner, 2Isabelle Huvent, 1 Jean-Luc Baert 
1UMR 8526 CNRS - Institut Pasteur, Institut de Biologie de Lille, France. 2Laboratoire de 
Virologie Moléculaire - Faculté de Médecine, ULB, Brussels, Belgium.
3Laboratoire de Biologie
du Développement - UPRES EA 1033 - SN3, USTL, Villeneuve d’Ascq, France.
Key words: 
Abstract
Ets, Transcription Factor, Breast Cancer, PEA3 
The ets genes encode eukaryotic transcription factors that are involved in 
tumorigenesis and developmental processes. The signature of the Ets family is 
the ETS-domain, which binds to sites containing a central 5’-GGAA/T-3’ 
motif. They can be sub-classified primarily because of the high amino acid 
conservation in their ETS-domains and, in addition, in the conservation of 
other domains generally characterized as transactivating. This is the case for 
the PEA3 group, which is currently made up of three members, PEA3/E1AF, 
ER81/ETV1 and ERM, which are more than 95% identical in the ETS-domain
and more than 85% in the transactivation acidic domain. The members of the 
PEA3 group are activated through both the Ras-dependent and other kinase 
pathways, a function which emphasizes their involvement in several oncogenic 
mechanisms. The expression pattern of the three PEA3 group genes during 
mouse embryogenesis suggests that they are differentially regulated, probably 
to serve important functions such as tissue interaction. Although the target 
genes of these transcription factors are multiple, their most frequently studied 
role concerns their involvement in the metastatic process. In fact, PEA3 group 
members are over-expressed in metastatic human breast cancer cells and 
mouse mammary tumors, a feature which suggests a function of these 
transcription factors in mammary oncogenesis. Moreover, when they are 
ectopically over-expressed in non-metastatic breast cancer cells, these latter 
become metastatic with the activation of transcription of matrix 
metalloproteinases or adhesion molecules, such as ICAM-1.
107

108
de Launoit et al 
1.
INTRODUCTION
The ets genes encode a family of eukaryotic transcription factors that 
includes more than 30 members from sponges to humans1,2. They have been 
involved both in tumorigenesis and in a number of developmental processes. 
Members of this family were originally identified on the basis of a region of 
primary sequence identity with the protein product of the v-ets oncogene
encoded by the E26 (E twenty-six) avian erythroblastosis virus. This
signature is the ETS-domain3, a domain of 85 amino acids structured as a 
winged helix-turn-helix structure and responsible for DNA-binding1. Many 
promoters have been characterized as containing active Ets-binding sites. 
For example, Ets proteins are involved in the regulation of the transcription 
of membrane receptors, growth factors or transcription factors1-2. Except for 
very limited examples, the specificity of an Ets protein to the regulation of 
gene transcription has not yet been established. However, this specificity 
could be at three levels: (1) the expression sites of the ets gene, (2) the DNA- 
binding specificity of the ETS-domain, and (3) the presence of specific 
domains required for protein-protein interactions. These factors can be sub- 
classified primarily because of the amino acid conservation in their ETS-
domains and, in addition, in the conservation of other domains generally 
characterized as transactivating. 
2. 
THE PEA3 GROUP MEMBERS 
This is the case for the PEA3 group, which is currently made up of three 
members, PEA3 (also called E1AF in the human or ETV4)4-6, ER81 (also
called ETVl in the human) 7-9 and ERM (also called ETV5) 10-12, which are 
more than 95% identical in the ETS-domain and more than 85% in the 32 
residue acidic domain, and almost 50% identical in the final 61 residues 
corresponding to the carboxy-terminal tail of the proteins (Ct)
13. ERM and
ER81 are more closely related to each other than PEA3, suggesting that a 
common ancestor of the three genes has undergone two successive 
duplications. As illustrated in Fig. 1, human erm gene is composed of 14 
exons split into at least 65 kbp of genomic DNA14. Human etvl and human
el af are each composed of 13 exons covering more than 85 kbp and 19 kbp, 
respectively15,16. The genomic organization of the ETS and the acidic
domains of these genes is similar; i.e. they are both encoded by three 
different exon14-16. Concerning their chromosomal locations in the human, 
erm is situated at position 3q27-q29
10,11, elaf at position 17q22
17,18 and etvl
at position 7q21
8.

The PEA3 Group of ETS-related Transcription Factors 
109
Fig 1. Organization of the three human genes of the PEA3 group. (A) Schematic representation of 
genomic DNA exons. The 13 exons are represented by the rectangles. The introns are indicated by 
horizontal lines. The protein-coding region is represented by the large box, which contains the acidic 
and the ETS-domains; the flanking 5’- and 3’-untranslated regions are shown as small boxes. (B) 
Comparison of the genomic organization of the three human PEA3 group members. Chomosomal 
localization is presented for each gene. 
3. 
TRANSCRIPTION FACTOR CAPACITIES 
All Ets transcription factors bind to sites containing a central “GGAA/T” 
motif. The residues flanking this motif dictate whether a particular ETS-
domain will bind the site. It has been shown by means of gel shift analysis 
that the PEA3 group proteins bind to this DNA core consensus 
sequence 
. In fact, in vitro target detection assay experiments have 
shown that the three PEA3 group proteins recognize similar sequences 
outside the core sequence. ERM contains two inhibitory domains for the 
DNA-binding activity which are adjacent to the ETS-domain. These are the 
Ct domain and a central region spanning residues 203 to 29720, Only the Ct 
domain is conserved in the three PEA3 group members. 
In transient cotransfection assays these three PEA3 group proteins 
increase transcription of a reporter plasmid which contains artificial 
multimerized Ets-responsive elements that may or may not be adjacent to an 
AP1 site21, as well as reporter plasmids containing the functional promoter 
regions of the human metalloproteinases (MMP) 1, 3 and 9
22, the human 
vimentin23, and the human ICAM-I24 genes. This transactivating activity is
due to two conserved domains : the 32 residues of the acidic domain and the 
61 residues in the Ct domain of human ERM
11,20,21 , mouse ER81
25 and
mouse PEA3. The central region encompassing the DNA-binding inhibitory 
region decreases the transactivation potency of ERM and ER8 1 
11,20,22,25.
Structurally, the first 15 residues of the 32-residue amino terminal domain of 
these proteins form an alpha helix which contains the main transactivation 
1,13,19

110
de Launoit et al 
potency26. Ets transcription factors exhibit low selectivity in binding site 
preference, suggesting that in addition to protein-DNA interactions, the 
specificity of promoter targeting by these factors relies on cooperation with 
other groups of transcription factors. This type of functional interactions has 
been demonstrated for almost all Ets proteins. The most studied cooperation 
is the ternary complex, in which the Ets proteins from the Elk group interact 
with the serum responsive factor (SRF) on the c-fos promoter1. As the other
Ets proteins, the transcription factors from the PEA3 group do not 
functionally act solely to activate the transcription. ERM physically interacts 
with basal machinery elements from the TFIID complex, such as the TATA-
binding protein (TBP) and the TAFII60 protein26. ERM also cooperates with 
other transcription factors, such as the androgen receptor, which negatively 
regulates MMP-1 expression probably following ERM fixation
27. Recent
data indicate that the PEA3 group members also functionally interact with 
the transcriptional co-activator CBP (personal communication). 
4.
ACTIVATION OF PEA3 GROUP MEMBERS BY 
TRANSDUCTION PATHWAYS 
Differential 
phosphorylation 
of 
transcription 
factors 
by 
signal 
transduction pathways such as the mitogen activated protein kinase (MAPK) 
pathways plays a crucial role in the regulation of gene expression. The 
activation of MAPK cascades leads to changes in the activity of many Ets 
factors1,28. The transcription capacities of mouse and zebrafish PEA3, mouse 
and human ER81, and human ERM have been shown to be increased by 
components of these cascades, Ras, Raf-1, MEK, and MAPK ERK-1 and 
ERK-2; thus suggesting that these factors may contribute to the nuclear 
response to stimulation of cells and also to Ras-induced cell transformation 
. The JNK/SAPK pathway is also involved in mouse PEA3 
activation29. Moreover, protein kinase A (PKA) is also able to increase the 
transcriptional activity of the human ERM21, the human ETV1 
15 and the 
zebrafish PEA319 through a classical PKA consensus site, RRGS, present at
the edge of the ETS-domain. In contrast, the mouse and human PEA3 
proteins contain a RRGA sequence in place of the PKA site, thus avoiding 
these proteins to be activated by the PKA (personal communication). 
15,19,21,25,29

The PEA3 Group of ETS-related Transcription Factors 
5.
111
EXPRESSION OF THE PEA3 GROUP MEMBERS 
5.1 
In the embryonic development 
Recent data are yet available in regard to a role of these three genes 
during embryonic development. A prerequisite to investigations in this field 
is to obtain an accurate spatio-temporal expression map for the erm, er81 
and pea3 genes. To this end, in situ hybridization used to compare their
expression patterns during critical stages of murine embryogenesis shows 
that all three genes are expressed in numerous developing organs coming 
from different embryonic tissues. They appear co-expressed in different 
organs but present specific sites of expression, so that the resultant 
expression pattern could in fact reveals several distinct functions depending 
upon isolated and/or various 
combinations of the PEA3 
member 
expression12. In developing dorsal root ganglia, erm is expressed both in 
satellite glia that express the NRG1 receptor ErbB3, and in neurons. 
However, this transcript is not detectable in presumptive Schwann cells 
along peripheral nerves. ERM represents thus the first mammalian marker 
that distinguishes satellite glia from presumptive Schwann cells at an early 
developmental stage30. In the Xenopus the homologue of ER81 (XER81) is 
expressed in the marginal zone at the onset of gastrulation. Over-expression
of XER81 in Xenopus embryos results in the induction of ectopic, tail-like
protrusions, or disturbed eye development. In later embryogenesis XER81 
transcripts are found in neural crest cells, eyes, otic vesicles and pronephros 
and its expression requires active FGF signalling. The spatial overlap of 
eFGF and XER81 expression supports the idea that XER81 transcription 
could be a marker for regions with active FGF signalling in the embryo31. In 
the chick embryo, it has been demonstrated that motor neuron pools and 
subsets of muscle sensory afferents can be defined by the expression of pea3
and er81. There is a matching in pea3 and er81 expression by functionally 
interconnected sensory and motor neurons. Expression of these genes by 
motor and sensory neurons fails to occur after limb ablation, suggesting that 
their expression is coordinated by signals from the periphery. These genes 
may therefore participate in the development of selective sensory-motor
circuits in the spinal cord32. Altogether, these data suggest that these genes 
probably serve important functions as cell proliferation control, tissue 
interaction mediator or cell differentiation, all over successive steps of the 
mouse, chick, and Xenopus organogenesis 

112
de Launoit et al 
5.2 
In the adult 
At the mRNA level, ERM has been classified in adult human and mice as 
a ubiquitously expressed gene with its highest expression in the brain10.
ER81/ETV1 displays an expression pattern with high expression levels in 
human and murine lung, heart and brain7-10. In contrast, PEA3/E1AF 
presents an expression pattern very restricted in normal adult tissues. It is 
almost exclusively expressed in the brain4,12.
6.
THE FUSION OF PEA3 GROUP GENES AND 
THE EWS GENE IN THE EWING’S SARCOMA 
In almost all Ewing’s sarcoma tumors, the RNA-binding protein gene 
ews is fused to an ets gene, either fli or erg by a t(11;22)(q24;q12) or 
t(2 1;22)(q22;q12) chromosome translocation33,34. Etv1 and el af have also 
been identified as translocation partners of ews
in Ewing’s sarcoma 
involving t(7;22)(p22;q12) and t(17;22)(q12;q12) translocations in these 
undifferentiated child sarcomas, leading to the synthesis of a chimeric 
protein which is formed by the transactivating domain of EWS and the ETS- 
domain of ETV1
8 or ElAF
35-37. The translocation breakpoint observed in
the Ewing’s sarcoma involving part of the el af gene is situated between the 
exons coding the acidic domain and the ETS-domain. More precisely, the 
translocation breakpoint for the el af gene is situated in intron 8, which is 
about 2.5 kbp long and contains repetitive Alu sequences, which were shown 
as being involved in the mechanisms of translocation with the ews gene36. At 
the present time, only the EWS-Fli chimera protein presents typical 
oncogenic properties, whereas EWS-Erg is less transforming and EWS-Etv1 
is not at all38. Together with the putative cooperation with the activating 
domain of EWS, these capacities could be crucial in inducing the 
transcription of genes linked to transformation. 
7.
THE PEA3 GROUP MEMBERS AND THE 
BREAST CANCER METASTASIS 
Although the target genes of these transcription factors are multiple, their 
most frequently studied role concerns their involvement in the metastatic 
process. In fact, it has been shown that PEA3 group members are over- 
expressed in metastatic human breast cancer cells39 and mouse mammary 
tumors
40, a feature which suggests a function of these transcription factors in 
mammary oncogenesis. An initial experiment has shown that when ElAF is 

The PEA3 Group of ETS-related Transcription Factors 
113
ectopically over-expressed in the non-metastatic MCF-7 human breast 
cancer cell line, the cells become metastatic in nude mice by activating the 
transcription of the matrix metalloprotease collagenase IV 41. El AF confers 
the invasive phenotype on cancer cells. E1AF is thus supposed to play an 
important role in cancer invasiveness/metastasis through transcription of 
metastasis-related genes. This role has been confirmed in another model, 
where non-metastatic mouse fibrosarcoma cells became metastatic when 
El AF is ectopically expressed42. This El AF over-expression contributes to 
invasiveness by activating MT1 -MMP expression. By contrast, Hida et al. 43,
showed in human metastatic oral squamous carcinoma cells that repression 
of E1AF by using a specific antisense RNA restrained the invasive 
phenotype. It however remains to be tested whether the effect obtained with 
E1AF is the same when the expression of the two other members of the 
PEA3 group is changed. 
Several data now indicate that these factors are not per se oncogenic
since we have generated transgenic lines specifically over-expressing these 
genes in the mammary gland and which do not develop tumors after two 
years (unpublished, Netzer and de Launoit). In contrast, crossing-over of 
these transgenic mice with mice developing tumors could add interesting 
data concerning the role of these factors in in vivo metastatic process. 
Since these transcription factors are probably involved in the regulation 
of specific metastatic processes in the breast, as well as in other tissues, they 
can be used in the near future as metastatic markers. Moreover, gene 
therapies using antisense of these genes could be envisaged to treat 
metastatic breast cancer. 
Acknowledgements
This work has been carried out on the basis of grants awarded by the 
"Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique" (France), the “Institut 
Pasteur de Lille”, the "Association pour la Recherche contre le Cancer" 
(France), the “Fonds National de la Recherche Scientifique” (Belgium) and 
the “Action de Recherche Concertée” from the “Communauté Frangaise” 
(Belgium). LC is holder of a ARC fellowship. CB is holder of a MRC 
fellowship.
8. 
REFERENCES 
1.
2.
Sharrocks A. D., Brown A. L., Ling Y. and Yates P. R., The ETS domain transcription 
factor family. Int. J. Biochem. Cell. Biol. 29, 12, 1371-1387, 1997 
Dittmer J. and Nordheim A., Ets transcription factors and human disease. Biochem. 
Biophys. Acta. 1377, F1-F11, 1998 

114
de Launoit et al 
3. 
Karim F. D., Umess L. D., Thummel C. S., Klemsz M. J., McKercher S. R., Celada A., 
Van Beveren C., Maki R. A., Gunther C. V., Nye J. A. and Graves B. J., The ETS-
domain: a new DNA-binding motif that recognizes a purine-rich core DNA sequence. 
Genes Dev. 4, 9, 1451-1453, 1990 
Xin J. H., Cowie A., Lachance P. and Hassell J. A., Molecular cloning and 
characterization of PEA3, a new member of the Ets oncogene family that is differentially 
expressed in mouse embryonic cells. Genes Dev. 6, 481-496, 1992
Higashino F., Yoshida K., Kamio K. and Fujinaga K., Isolation of a cDNA encoding the 
adenovirus E1A enhancer binding protein: a new human member of the ets oncogene
family. Nucl. Acid Res. 21, 547-553, 1993 
Friedman L. S., Ostermeyer E. A., Lynch E. D., Szabo C. I., Anderson L. A., Dowd P., 
Lee M. K., Rowell S. E., Boyd J. and King M. C., The search for BRCA1. Cancer Res. 
Brown T. A. and McKnight S. L., Specificities of protein-protein and protein-DNA
interaction of GABPa and two newly defined ets -related proteins. Genes Dev. 6, 2502-
2512, 1992 
Jeon I. S., Davis J. N., Braun B. S., Sublett J. E., Roussel M. F., Denny C. T. and Shapiro 
D. N., A variant Ewing’s sarcoma translocation (7;22) fuses the EWS gene to the ETS 
gene ETV1. Oncogene 10, 6, 1229-1234, 1995 
Monte D., Coutte L., Baert J.-L., Angeli I., Stéhelin D. and de Launoit Y., Molecular 
characterization of the Ets-related human transcription factor ER81. Oncogene 11, 771-
780, 1995 
10. Monte D., Baert J.-L., Defossez P.-A., de Launoit Y. and Stéhelin D., Molecular cloning 
and characterization of human ERM, a new member of the ETS family closely related to 
mouse PEA3 and ER81 transcription factors. Oncogene 9, 1397-1406, 1994 
11. Nakae K., Nakajima K., Inazawa J., Kitaoka T. and Hirano T., ERM, a member of the 
PEA3 subfamily of Ets transcription factors, can cooperate with c-jun. J. Biol. Chem. 
12. Chotteau-Lelièvre A., Desbiens X., Pelczar H., Defossez P.-A. and De Launoit Y., 
Differential expression patterns of the PEA3 group transcription factors through murine 
embryonic development. Oncogene 15, 937-952, 1997
13. de Launoit Y., Baert J.-L., Chotteau A., Monté D., Defossez P.-A., Coutte L., Pelczar H.
and Leenders F., Structure-function relationships of the PEA3 group of Ets-related
transcription factors. Biochem. Mol. Med. 61, 2, 127-35, 1997 
14. Monté D., Coutte L., Dewitte F., Defossez P.-A., Le Coniat M., Stéhelin D., Berger R. 
and de Launoit Y., Genomic organization of the human ERM (ETV5) gene, a PEA3 
group member of ETS transcription factors. Genomics 35, 1, 236-240, 1996 
15. Coutte L., Monte D., Imai K., Pouilly L., Dewitte F., Vidaud M., Adamski J., Baert J.-L.
and de Launoit Y., Characterization of the human and mouse ETV1/ER81 transcription 
factor genes: role of the two alternatively spliced isoforms in the human. Oncogene in 
press, 1999 
16. Coutte L., Monté D., Baert J.-L. and de Launoit Y., Genomic organization of the human
E1A-F gene, a member of ETS transcription factors. Gene in press, 1999 
17. Isobe M., Yamagichi F., Yoshida K., Higashino F. and Fujinaga K., Assignment of the 
ets-related transcription factor El AF gene (ETV4) to human chromosome region 17q21. 
Genomics 28,357-359, 1995 
18. Osborne-Lawrence S., Welcsh P. L., Spillman M., Chandrasekharappa S. C., Gallardo T. 
D., Lovett M. and Bowcock A. M., Direct selection of expressed sequences within a 1-
4.
5.
6.
54, 24, 6374-82, 1994 
7.
8.
9.
270, 40, 23795-23800, 1995 

The PEA3 Group of ETS-related Transcription Factors 
115
Mb region flanking BRCA1 on human chromosome 17q21. Genomics 25, 1, 248-55,
1995
19. Brown L. A., Amores A., Schilling T. F., Jowett T., Baert J.-L., Ingham P. W., de 
Launoit Y. and Sharrocks A. D., Molecular characterisation of the zebrafish PEA3 ETS-
domain transcription factor. Oncogene 17, 1, 93-104, 1998 
20. Laget M.-P., Defossez P.-A., Albagli O., Baert J.-L., Dewitte F., Stéhelin D. and de 
Launoit Y., Two functionally distinct domains cooperate for transactivation by the ETS 
family member ERM. Oncogene 12, 6, 1325-1336, 1996
21. Janhecht R., Monté D., Baert J.-L. and de Launoit Y., The ETS-related transcription 
factor ERM is a nuclear target of signaling cascades involving MAPK and PKA. 
Oncogene 13, 8, 1745-1754, 1996 
22. Higashino F., Yoshida K., Noumi T., Seiki M. and Fujinaga K., Ets-related protein E1A-
F can activate three different matrix metalloproteinase gene promoters. Oncogene 10, 
23. Chen J. H., Vercamer C., Li Z., Paulin D., Vandenbunder B. and Stehelin D., PEA3 
transactivates vimentin promoter in mammary epithelial and tumor cells. Oncogene 13, 
24. de Launoit Y., Audette M., Pelczar H., Plaza S. and Baert J.-L., The transcription of the 
intercellular adhesion molecule- 1 is regulated by Ets transcription factors. Oncogene 16, 
25. Janknecht R., Analysis of the EM-stimulated transcription factor ER81. Mol. Cell. Biol. 
26. Defossez P.-A., Baert J.-L., Monnot M. and de Launoit Y., The ETS family member 
ERM contains an alpha-helical acidic activation domain that contacts TAFII60. Nucleic 
Acids Res. 25, 22, 4455-4463, 1997 
27. Schneikert J., Peterziel H., Defossez P.-A., Klocker H., de Launoit Y. and Cato A. C. B., 
Androgen receptor Ets protein interaction is a novel mechanism for steroid hormone 
mediated down regulation of matrix metalloproteinase expression. J. Biol. Chem. 271, 
28. Treisman R., Regulation of transcription by MAP kinase cascades. Curr. Opin. Cell Biol. 
29. O'Hagan R. C., Tozer R. G., Symons M., McCormick F. and Hassell J. A., The activity 
of the Ets transcription factor PEA3 is regulated by two distinct MAPK cascades. 
Oncogene 13, 1323-1333, 1996 
30. Hagedorn L., Paratore C., Mercader N., Brognoli G., Baert J.-L., Suter U. and Sommer 
L., The Ets domain transcription factor Erm distinguishes satellite glia from Schwann 
cells and is maintained in satellite cells by neuregulin signalling. submitted 1999 
31. Munchberg S. R. and Steinbeisser H., The Xenopus Ets transcription factor XER81 is a 
target of the FGF signaling pathway. Mech. Dev. 80, 1, 53-65, 1999 
32. Lin J. H., Saito T., Anderson D. J., Lance-Jones C., Jessell T. M. and Arber S., 
Functionally related motor neuron pool and muscle sensory afferent subtypes defined by 
coordinate ETS gene expression. Cell 95, 3, 393-407, 1998 
33. Delattre O., Zucman J., Plougastel B., Desmaze C., Melot T., Peter M., Kovar H., 
Joubert I., De Jong P., Rouleau G., Aurias A. and Thomas G., Gene fusion with an ETS 
DNA-binding domain caused by chromosome translocation in human tumours. Nature 
34. Zucman J., Melot T., Desmaze C., Ghysdael J., Plougastel B., Peter M., Zucker J. M., 
Triche T. J., Sheer D., Turc-Carel C., Ambros P., Combaret V., Lenoir G., Aurias A., 
1461-1463, 1995 
1667-1675, 1996 
2065-2073, 1998 
16, 1551-1556, 1996 
39, 23907-23913, 1996 
8, 2, 205-15, 1996
359, 6391, 162-165, 1992 

116
de Launoit et al 
Thomas G. and Delattre O., Combinatorial generation of variable fusion proteins in the 
Ewing family of tumours. EMBO J. 12, 4481-4487, 1993 
35. Kaneko Y., Yoshida K., Handa M., Toyoda Y., Nishihira H., Tanaka Y., Sasaki Y ., 
Ishida S., Higashino F. and Fujinaga K., Fusion of an ETS-family gene, EIAF, to EWS 
by t( 17;22)(q12;q12) chromosome translocation in an undifferentiated sarcoma of 
infancy. Genes Chromosomes Cancer 15, 2, 115-121, 1996 
36. Ishida S., Yoshida K., Kaneko Y., Tanaka Y., Sasaki Y., Urano F., Umezawa A., Hata J. 
and Fujinaga K., The genomic breakpoint and chimeric transcripts in the EWSR1- 
ETV4/E1AF gene fusion in Ewing sarcoma. Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 82 ,3-4, 278-83,
1998
37. Urano F., Umezawa A., Yabe H., Hong W., Yoshida K., Fujinaga K. and Hata J., 
Molecular analysis of Ewing's sarcoma: another fusion gene, EWS-E1 AF, available for 
diagnosis. Jpn. J. Cancer Res. 89, 7, 703-11, 1998
38. Braun B. S., Frieden R., Lessnick S. L., May W. A. and Denny C. T., Identification of 
target genes for the ewing's sarcoma EWS/FLI fusion protein by representational 
difference analysis. Mol. Cell. Biol. 15, 8, 4623-4630, 1995
39. Baert J.-L., Monte D., Musgrove E. A., Albagli O., Sutherland R. L. and de Launoit Y., 
Expression of the PEA3 group of ETS-related transcription factors in human breast-
cancer cells. Int. J. Cancer 70, 590-597, 1997
40. Trimble M. S., Xin J. H., Guy C. T., Muller W. J. and Hassell J. A., PEA3 is 
overexpressed in mouse metastatic mammary adenocarcinomas. Oncogene 8, 3037-3042,
1993
41. Kaya M., Yoshida K., Higashino F., Mitaka T., Ishii S. and Fujinaga K., A single ets-
related transcription factor, El AF, confers invasive phenotype on human cancer cells. 
Oncogene 12, 22 1-227, 1996 
42. Habelhah H., Okada F., Kobayashi M., Nakai K., Choi S., Hamada J., Moriuchi T., Kaya 
M., Yoshida K., Fujinaga K. and Hosokawa M., Increased E1AF expression in mouse 
fibrosarcoma promotes metastasis through induction of MT1 -MMP expression. 
Oncogene 18, 9, 177 1-6, 1999 
43. Hida K., Shindoh M., Yasuda M., Hanzawa M., Funaoka K., Kohgo T., Amemiya A., 
Totsuka Y., Yoshida K. and Fujinaga K., Antisense E1AF transfection restrains oral 
cancer invasion by reducing matrix metalloproteinase activities. Am. J. Pathol. 150, 6,
2125-2132, 1997 

14.
Transcription Factor NF 1 Expression in Involuting 
Mammary Gland 
Rosemary Kane, Darren Finlay, Teresa Lamb and Finian Martin 
Dept. of Pharmacology and Biotechnology Centre, University College Dublin, Belfield, Dublin 
4, Ireland 
Key words: 
Abstract:
Mammary Gland, Involution, Transcription Factor, NF1 
Transcripts of each of the four NF1 genes (NF1 A, B, C (CTF/NF1) and X) are 
expressed in both lactating and involuting mouse mammary gland but there is 
an indication that increased expression of an NF1 C (CTF/NF1) transcript 
accompanies early involution. The involution-associated 74 kD NF1 and the 
114 kD lactation-associated NF1 are recognised by an anti-NF1 C-specific
antibody that does not cross-react with other NF1 proteins. It is most likely 
that this lactation/involution switch in NF1 factors represents a change in 
expression of NF1 C (CTF/NF1) proteins. 
1. 
INTRODUCTION: 
Clusterin gene expression is rapidly induced in early involution of the 
mouse mammary gland after weaning. A search for involution enhanced 
DNaseI footprints in the proximal mouse TRPM-2/clusterin gene promoter 
led to the identification and characterization (by DNase I footprinting) of a 
twin NF1 binding element at -356/-309, relative to the proposed transcription 
start-site, with nuclear extracts from 2d-involuting mouse mammary gland 
showing an enhanced footprint over the proximal NF1 element, relative to 
extracts from lactating mammary gland. Subsequent EMSA and western 
analysis led to the detection of a 74 kD NF1 protein whose expression is 
triggered in early involution in the mouse mammary gland. This protein was 
not found in lactation where three other NF1 proteins of 114, 68 and 46 kD 
117

118
Kane et al 
were detected. Reiteration of the epithelial cell apoptosis associated with 
early mammary gland involution, in vitro, in a primary cell culture system, 
triggered the appearance of the 74 kD NF1. Overlaying the cells with 
laminin-rich ECM suppressed the apoptosis and the expression of the 74 kD 
NF1 and, in the presence of lactogenic hormones, initiated milk protein gene 
expression and the expression of two of the lactation associated NF 1 proteins 
(68 and 46 kD)1. Below we describe the transcripts of NF1 genes in mouse 
mammary gland which potentially encode the involution-associated 74 kD 
NF1.
2. 
MATERIALS AND METHODS 
The basic procedures employed are described by Furlong et al. 1. Specific PCR 
analyses employed hot start and suitable cycling conditions established for each 
primer pair. 
3. 
RESULTS 
NF1 (nuclear factor 1) and CTF/NF1 (CCAAT-binding transcription 
factors/NF 1) proteins are a heterogeneous family of transcription factors 
which have a highly conserved N-terminal DNA binding and dimerisation 
domain2,3,4 and proline-rich carboxy-terminal transactivating domains that 
are highly divergent in size and sequence. Thus, related products encoded by 
four different genes have been characterized NF1-A, B, C and X) and 
multiple splice variants which differ in the carboxy terminus of these have 
been described5,6,7. Based on the sequence of known transcripts of the four 
mouse NF-1 genes we devised an RT-PCR strategy that would allow us 
clone the NF1 transcripts expressed in lactating and involuting mouse 
mammary gland. Table 1 shows that multiple transcripts of each of the four 
NF1 genes (NF1 A, B, C (CTF/NF1) and X) are expressed in both lactating 
and involuting mouse mammary gland. Three transcripts of NF1 A, two of 
NF1 B and two of NF1 X were cloned and characterised (by DNA 
sequencing) from both lactating and early involuting mammary gland. Only 
in the case of NF1 C (CTFNF1) were transcripts found exclusively in either 
lactating or involuting mammary tissue. However, these were seemingly rare 
and previously undescribed transcripts: NF1 C-∆-5^8,9,10* was detected in 
lactating tissue; and, NF1 C-∆-8,9 and NF1 C-∆-5^8,9 were detected in 
involuting tissue (numbers denote the spliced-out exons; 5^8, spliced from 
within exon 5 to within exon 8). 

NF I expression during involution 
119
Table I.: NF1 Transcripts Expressed in the Mouse Mammary Gland 
Transcript 
Lactation 
Involution 
NF1A
mNF1-A1 (Y07690*) 
+ 
+ 
mNF1-A2 (Y07691) 
+ 
+ 
mNF1-B1 (Y07685) 
+ 
+ 
mNF1-B2 (Y07687) 
+ 
+ 
mNF1-B3 (Y07686) 
+ 
+ 
mNF1-X1 (Y07688) 
+ 
+ 
mNF1-X2 (Y07689) 
+ 
+ 
NF1-B
NF1-X
mNF1-X3 (S81451) 
NF1-C
(h)CTF- 1 (X 12492) 
mNF1-C2, (U57635, Y07692, Y07693) 
+ 
+ 
mCTF-5 (X92857)** 
+ 
+ 
mNF1-C3 (Exons 7&9 spliced) 
+ 
+ 
mNF1-C4 (Exons 8&9 spliced) 
- 
+ 
mNFl-C4 (Exons 7&9 spliced)** 
+ 
+ 
mNF1-C6 (Exons 5^8&9 spliced) 
-
+
mNF1-C7 (Exons 5"8,9&10 spliced) 
+
-
Novel mouse NF1-C
*Genbank accession numbers are provided for all previously cloned NF1s **Described 
previously for human not for mouse 
We next designed specific primer sets for PCR analysis of total NF1 A, 
NF1 B and NF1 X transcripts and the predominant individual NF1 A, B and
X transcripts in lactating (L), involuting (2 di) and re-suckled 2-day
involuting mammary gland (36h s). There was no striking difference in total 
NF1 A, B or C transcript levels between lactating, involuting or re-
differentiated mammary tissue; however, analysis of the individual NF1 A 
transcripts suggested that there was greater expression of NF1 A1 in 
lactation and the resuckled gland than in involution (Fig 1). In the case of the 
NF1 B family members a bias towards increased expression in involution 
was seen; no discernible differences could be established for the individual 
NF1 X transcripts (Fig. 1). 
While these experiments suggested that the involution-associated 74 kD 
NF1 was possibly encoded by an NF1 B gene we obtained more compelling 
evidence that it was encoded by an NF1 C/CTF-NF1 gene: The 74kD 
involution-associated-NF1 was detectable in western analysis by a range of 
antibodies raised against the conserved N-terminal NF1 DNA binding 
domain1 but also by an anti-CTF/NF1 C-specific antibody8. We established 
that this latter antibody is seemingly NF1 C-specific by its ability to detect 
HA-epitope-tagged mouse NF1 C2 transiently expressed in JEG 3 cells 
-
-
-
-

120
Kane et al
(which have low endogenous NF1 expression
9 ; the antibody did not detect 
expressed epitope-tagged NF1 A, B or X. An anti-HA antibody detected all 
four expressed proteins in transiently transfected JEG 3 cells (results not 
shown).
Figure 1. NF1 transcript levels in lactating and involuting mouse mammary gland 
The dominant NF1 C transcripts detectable in mammary epithelial cells 
are NF1 C2 and NF1 C5. We established an RT PCR assay for these two 
transcripts (Fig. 2). We found a definite tendency towards higher expression 
of these transcripts in involuting mammary gland than in lactating and re-
differentiated mammary gland (Fig. 2). However, this increased NF1 C 
transcript expression tends to be higher on day 3 of involution while 
expression of the 74 kD involution-associated protein tends to be higher on 
day 2 of involution1.

NF 1 expression during involution 
121
Figure 2. NF1 C transcripts in lactating and involuting mouse mammary gland. 
4. 
CONCLUSION 
The involution-associated 74 kD NF1 (and the 114 kD lactation-associated NF1 
are recognised by an anti-NF1 C–specific antibody (see above). It is most likely, 
therefore, that this lactation/involution switch in NF 1 factors represents a change 
in expression of NF1 C (CTF/NF1) proteins. We present preliminary evidence 
here that there is also an involution-associated increase in NF1 C transcript 
levels but highest levels are detectable slightly later in involution (day 3), after 
highest levels of the 74 kD protein are seen (day 2). Of significant consequence, 
also, is the fact that the known mouse NF1 C transcripts encode proteins of 
approximately < 60 kD. Thus, the 74 kD NF 1 is a post-translationally modified 
NF1 C or encoded by an NF1 transcript of novel exonic structure. We are 
presently endeavouring to answer these questions. 
Acknowledgements.
This work was supported by grants from Enterprise Ireland and The Health 
Research Board, Ireland. 

122
Kane et al 
5.       REFERENCES 
1.
E. Furlong, N. Keon, F. Thornton, T. Rein and F. Martin , 1996, Expression of a 74 kD 
NF-1 protein is induced in mouse mammary gland involution. Involution enhanced 
occupation of a twin NF-1 binding element in the TRPM-2/clusterin promoter. J. Biol. 
Chem., 271, 29688 – 29697.
Roy, R.J. and Guerin, S.L., 1994, The 30-Kda rat liver transcription factor Nuclear 
Factor 1 binds the rat growth-hormone proximal silencer. Eur J Biochem 219: 799-806.
Reifel-Miller, A.E., Calnek, D.S. and Grinnell, B.W., 1994, Tyrosine phosphorylation 
regulates the DNA binding activity of a Nuclear Factor 1-like repressor protein. J Biol 
Chem 269:23861–4.
Hay, R.T., 1985, The origin of adenovirus DNA replication: Minimal DNA sequence 
requirement in vivo. EMBO J. 4: 421-426.
Santoro, C., Mermod, N., Andrews, P.C. and Tjian, R., 1988, A family of human 
CCAAT-box-binding proteins active in transcription and DNA replication: cloning and 
expression of multiple cDNAs. Nature 334 :218-24.
Apt, D., Liu, Y. and Bernard, H.U., 1994, Cloning and functional analysis of spliced 
isoforms of human Nuclear Factor I-X: interference with transcriptional activation by 
NF1/CTF in a cell-type specific manner. Nucleic Acids Res 22 :3825-3833.
Inoue, T., Tamura, T., Furuichi, T. and Mikoshiba, K. , 1990, Isolation of 
complementary DNAs encoding a cerebellum-enriched Nuclear Factor I family that 
activates transcription from the mouse myelin basic protein promoter. J Biol Chem 
Szabo, P., Moitra, J., Rencendorj, A., Rakhely, G., Rauch, T. and Kiss, I., 1995, 
Identification of a Nuclear Factor-I family protein-binding site in the silencer region of 
the cartilage matrix protein gene. J Biol Chem 270: 10212-219.
Chaudry A., Lyons G. E. and Gronostajski R.M., 1997, Expression patterns of the four 
nuclear factor 1 genes during mouse embryogenesis indicate a potential role in 
development. Developmental Dynamics, 208, 313-325.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
265: 19065-70.
8.
9.

15.
The Elf Group of Ets-Related Transcription Factors 
ELF3 and ELF5 
Ross S. Thomas 2, Annie N.Y. Ng 1, Jiong Zhou 1, Martin J. Tymms 3, Wolfgang
Doppler4 andIsmailKola1
1 Centre for Functional Genomics and Human Disease, Monash University, Melbourne, 
Australia:
2 Transcription Laboratory, Imperial Cancer Research Fund, London, UK:
3 National
Vision Research Institute of Australia, Melbourne, Australia:
4 Institut fur Medizinische Chemie
und Biochemie, Innsbruck, Austria 
Key words 
ELF3, ELF5, transcription factors 
1. 
INTRODUCTION 
We provide an initial characterisation of two new mammalian ETS 
transcription factors, ELF3 and ELF5. Expression of ELF3 and ELF5 
appears to be restricted to the epithelial cells of multiple organs, and we are 
examining their role in normal mammary differentiation and function, and in 
mammary neoplasia. We show evidence that both ELF3 and ELF5 are able 
to positively regulate transcription of the whey acidic protein (WAP) 
promoter in mammary epithelial cells, independently of hormone treatment. 
1.1 
Background 
One of the major milk proteins produced by mammary epithelial cells 
during pregnancy and lactation is whey acidic protein (WAP). WAP 
expression is very low until mid-gestation, after which time the combined 
actions of the glucocorticoid and prolactin pathways produce a several 
thousand-fold increase in transcription. Transcription is also partly 
dependent upon the binding of factors to the mammary-cell activating factor 
(MAF) site 1,2, a conserved ETS-like element present in the WAP proximal 
promoter and in the regulatory regions of other mammary specific genes. 
123

124
Thomas et al 
The ETS family of transcription factors regulate gene expression during 
normal biological processes such as haemopoiesis, angiogenesis and 
cartilage/skeletal development, and aberrant forms have also been implicated 
with various types of neoplasia. Despite the large variety of ETS factors, 
functions in epithelial cells, such as those in the mammary gland, have not 
been examined extensively. Overexpression of PEA3 is, however, associated 
with aggressive subsets of breast carcinoma that also overexpress erbB2 3.
PEA3 does not appear to be involved in normal mammary function, but may 
be required for early mammary development. 
We have recently cloned two new ETS transcription factors, ELF3 4 and
ELF5 5. The HUGO Nomenclature Committee has upheld the ELF naming 
convention despite ELF3 being cloned and differently named by other 
groups (ESX 6, ESE-17, jen 8, ERT 9).
2.
EXPRESSION OF ELF3 AND ELF5 
We examined the expression of ELF3 and ELF5 in mouse organs by 
Northern blot analysis of poly A+ RNA. The expression patterns of these two
genes were similar, but both differ significantly to the expression of other 
ETS family members. Most other ETS factors are expressed strongly in 
haemopoietic compartments, but ELF3 and ELF5 levels were undetectable 
in adult thymus or spleen (Figs la and 2a), nor in peripheral lymphocytes of 
leukaemic cell lines (data not shown). 
Strong expression, however, was 
observed in a subset of organs that contain secretory epithelial cells, such as 
the lung, stomach, prostate and mammary gland. 
The mammary gland undergoes distinct phases of growth, differentiation 
and regression; from virginal mice to pregnancy, parturition and weaning. 
Examination of expression levels through these stages revealed that ELF3 is 
present in virginal mammary gland and during early pregnancy, when cells 
are proliferating, but drops in late pregnancy when epithelial cells undergo 
terminal differentiation and begin to produce milk components (Fig 1b). 
Expression remains low during lactation, but reappears upon weaning, when 
most of the epithelial cells in the mammary gland are undergoing apoptosis. 
Another group’s study made similar findings 10 . In situ expression analysis in 
human mammary gland confirms that ELF3 is expressed specifically in the 
epithelial cells of the ductules and lobular structures (Fig 1C). 
One possible explanation for the pattern of ELF3 expression is that it is 
associated with a small proportion of epithelial stem cells, rather than the 
differentiated functional cells, and that these cells survive apoptosis to re-
colonise the mammary gland during the next pregnancy. 

The Elf Group of Ets-Related Transcription Factors 
125
a
b.
c.
Fig. 1. Expression of ELF3. a. Northern blot of mouse organs probed with labelled ELF3 and 
GAPDH cDNAs. Li; liver, Lu; lung, Br; brain, Ki kidney, He; heart, Sm; small intestine, Sp; 
spleen, Th; thymus, Co; colon, Sk; skin, Ut; uterus, Ov; ovary. b. Northern blot of mouse 
mammary gland. V; virgin, P; pregnant, L; lactating, I; involuting. c. Human mammary gland 
section probed with labelled ELF3 cDNA (light field and exposure). 
ELF5 is also expressed specifically in human mammary gland epithelial 
cells (Fig 2b), and, in two time points, mammary ELF5 expression is 
increased during pregnancy in the mouse (Fig 2a), suggesting that the 
temporal pattern of ELF5 expression may be very different to that of ELF3. 

126
Thomas et al 
a.
b.
Fig. 2. Expression of ELF5. a. Northern blot of mouse organs probed with labelled ELF5 and 
GAPDH cDNAs. As above, and additional organs St; stomach, Pa; pancreas, To; tongue, B1; 
bladder, 2Fa; fat, 2Ma; mammary gland day2 pregnancy, 10Fa; fat, 10Ma; mammary gland 
day 10 pregnancy. b. Human mammary gland section probed with labelled ELF5 cDNA (light 
field and exposure). 
3.
FUNCTION OF ELF3 AND ELF5 IN MAMMARY 
GLAND
Expression of the WAP gene has been studied extensively as it is highly 
specific to mammary epithelial cells and is induced several thousand fold 
during late pregnancy and lactation. The WAP promoter responds to 
lactogenic hormones, but also contains other important transcription factor 
elements that are essential for expression. In vitro studies indicate that the 
MAF site is critical for maximal WAP expression, independently of 
hormone treatment 1. Mouse transgenic studies indicate that the site is 
important for expression of WAP during pregnancy, but not critical during 
lactation, when the promoter is most active and under the control of 
hormones 2.
The MAF site is similar to others described as binding sites for the ETS 
family of transcription factors. We have investigated the ability of ELF3 and 

The Elf Group of Ets-Related Transcription Factors 
127
ELF5 to control WAP transcription through the MAF site (herein called 
ETS/1) and another adjacent ETS site (ETS/2). 
a.
c
Figure 3. Transactivation of the WAP promoter by ELF3 and ELFS. a. Co-transfection of an 
ELF3 
expression 
vector 
with 
WAP 
promoter-reporter 
constructs 
in 
HC-11 
cells. 
Transcriptional activity is measured by CAT assay. BOS is an empty expression vector 
control. b. As above, but with ELFS. c. Schematic of the 133 bp WAP promoter attached to 
the CAT reporter gene. ETS/1 (MAF) and ETS/2 are binding sites for ELFs. Mutations m4 
and ml of the binding sites are indicated. 
Recombinant ELF3 and ELF5 proteins are able to strongly interact with 
the ETS/1 site, and also more weakly with the ETS/2 site, in electrophoretic 
mobility shift assay (data not shown). Consistent with the binding, we found 
that both ELF3 (fig 3a) and ELF5 (fig 3b) were able to transactivate a WAP 
promoter construct in a mammary epithelial cell line, although ELF3 was 
much more potent than ELFS. Both factors were able to function 
independently of lactogenic hormones. A longer promoter construct, 
containing more distal hormone response elements, behaved similarly (data 
not shown). 

128
Thomas et al 
Point mutations (fig 3c) of either ETS/1 or ETS/2 alone were enough to 
disable most transactivation, indicating the ELF3 and ELF5 operate through 
these sites. Both mutations together had only a slightly greater effect, 
suggesting that the ETS/1 and ETS/2 sites work cooperatively, both being 
required for maximal promoter activity. 
4. 
CONCLUSION 
Expression of mammary-specific genes is under the control of both 
hormone dependent and independent mechanisms, neither of which may be 
totally mammary-specific. It seems that a complex interplay of transcription 
factors may be responsible for mammary expression. 
Our challenge is to 
determine whether ELF3 and/or ELF5 are important for the expression of 
mammary-specific genes in vivo, and whether they cooperate with other 
stimuli, such as prolactin. Because the mammary gland is not a static tissue, 
but can continually undergo cycles of growth, differentiation and function, it 
will be interesting to examine whether ELF3 and ELF5 operate 
cooperatively or differentially during these different phases. 
REFERENCES
1. Welte T, Garimorth K, Philipp S, Jennewein P, Huck C, Cato ACB and Doppler W, 1994, 
2. McKnight RA, Spencer M, Dittmer J, Brady JN, Wall RJ and Hennighausen L, 1995, Mol.
3. Benz CC, O'Hagan RC, Richter B, Scott GK, Chang CH, Xiong X, Chew K, Ljung BM, 
4. Tymms MJ, Ng AY, Thomas RS, Schutte BC, Zhou J, Eyre HJ, Sutherland GR, Seth A, 
5. Zhou J, NG AY, Tymms MJ, Jermiin LS, Seth AK, Thomas RS, Kola I, 1998 Oncogene
6. Chang CH, Scott GK, Kuo WL, Xiong X, Suzdaltseva Y, Park JW, Sayre P, Emy K, 
7. Oettgen P, Alani RM, Barcinski MA, Brown L, Akbarali Y, Boltax J, Kunsch C, Munger 
8. Andreoli JM, Jang SI, Chung E, Coticchia CM, Steinert PM, Markova NG, 1997, Nuc.
9. Choi SG, Yi Y, Kim YS, Kato M, Chang J, Chung HW, Hahm KB, Yang HK, Rhee HH, 
10. Neve R, Chang, CH, Scott, GK, Wong, A, Friis RR, Hynes, NE and Benz CC, 1998, 
Eur. J. Biochem. 223: 997-1006.
Endo. 9: 717-24.
Edgerton S, Thor A and Hassell JA, 1997, Oncogene 15: 15 13-25.
Rosenberg M, Papas T, Debouck C, Kola I, 1997, Oncogene 15: 2449-62.
17: 2719-32.
Collins C, Gray JW, Benz CC, 1997, Oncogene 14: 16 17-22.
K, Libermann TA, 1997, Mol. Cell. Biol. 17: 4419-33.
Acids Res. 25: 4287-95.
Bang YJ, Kim SJ, 1998, J. Biol. Chem. 273: 110-7.
Faseb J. 12;1541-50.

16.
The Role of Stat3 in Apoptosis and Mammary Gland 
Involution
Conditional deletion of Stat3 
1Rachel S Chapman, 
1Paula Lourenco, 
2Elizabeth Tonner, 
2David Flint, 
Stefan Selbert, 
3Kyoshi Takeda, 
3Shizuo Akira,1Alan R Clarke, and 
Christine J Watson 
1
4
1Dept. of Pathology, University of Edinburgh, UK, 2Hannah Research Institute, Ayr, UK, 3Dept.
of Host Defence, Research Institute for Microbial Diseases, Osaka University, Japan, and 4Dept.
of Pathology, University of Cambridge, UK 
Key words: 
Abstract:
Stat3, apoptosis, mammary gland, lox/Cre, involution 
STATs (signal transducer and activator of transcription) are a family of latent 
transcription factors which are activated in response to a variety of cytokines 
and growth factors. This family of signalling molecules have been implicated 
in growth, differentiation, survival and apoptosis. In this article, we will 
review work which highlights the role of individual STAT factors in mammary 
gland and demonstrate the value of genetically modified mice in defining the 
function of STAT3. Involution of the mouse mammary gland is characterised 
by extensive apoptosis of the epithelial cells and the activation of STAT3. 
STATs 3 and 5 have reciprocal patterns of activation throughout a mammary 
developmental cycle suggesting that STAT5 may be a survival factor and 
STAT3 a death factor for differentiated mammary epithelium. To clarify the 
role of STAT3 in mammary epithelial apoptosis, we have generated a 
conditional knockout using the lox/Cre recombination system. Mammary 
glands from crosses of transgenic mice expressing Cre recombinase under the 
control of the β-lactoglobulin milk protein gene promoter with mice
harbouring one floxed STAT3 allele and one null STAT3 allele, showed a 
decrease in epithelial apoptosis and a dramatic delay of the involution process 
upon forced weaning. This was accompanied by precocious activation of 
STAT1 and increases in p53 and p21 levels - these may act as a compensatory 
mechanism for initiating the eventual involution which occurs in STAT3 null 
mammary glands. This demonstrates for the first time the importance of STAT 
factors in signalling the initiation of physiological apoptosis in vivo and
highlights the utility of the lox/Cre system for addressing the function of 
129

130
Chapman et al 
genes, which have an embryonic lethal phenotype, specifically in mammary 
gland.
1. 
INTRODUCTION 
Involution of the mammary gland is the final phase in the developmental 
cycle 
initiated by pregnancy. 
The removal of the 
lobuloalveolar 
compartment is a dramatic process which is characterised by apoptosis of 
these epithelial cells. The signals which trigger this physiological cell death 
have interested mammary gland biologists for many years but it is only 
recently that specific signalling molecules have been shown to have a role in 
the remodelling process. 
One of the reasons for the slow progress has been the difficulty of 
modelling involution in vitro since lactation is a prerequisite for normal 
involution and full lactation requires a complex hormonal and extracellular 
environment. Elegant cell culture models have been developed, particularly 
in the laboratory of Mina Bissell1. However, understanding the regulatory 
mechanism of mammary gland involution and the role of specific genes in 
this process requires an in vivo approach using transgenesis. Overexpression 
of genes, or expression at the wrong time in development, by introducing 
fusion gene constructs has been very informative. For example, precocious 
expression 
of 
the 
matrix 
metalloproteinase 
stromelysin- 1 
caused 
unscheduled apoptosis during pregnancy which was abolished by crossing 
with transgenic mice overexpressing TIMP- 12 whilst involution was delayed 
by overexpressing IGF-13. A more subtle approach is to delete the gene of 
interest by gene targeting. This circumvents problems which arise from 
perturbation of other signalling pathways by overexpression of a particular 
component of one pathway which can complicate interpretation of the 
phenotype.
Gene targeting is now a relatively straightforward procedure and 
thousands of genes have been knocked out. Gene deletion in the mammary 
gland is complicated by the fact that it is one of the few tissues which 
undergoes most of its development in the adult. Genes which have functions 
in other tissues or at earlier stages of development are difficult therefore to 
investigate by conventional targeting. An example is the prolactin receptor 
which has been knocked out and shown to have a multitude of effects4.
Many genes are required during embryonic development thus precluding 
analysis of the function of these genes in the adult. This problem can be 
overcome by conditional gene targeting, that is, knocking out a gene in a 
tissue-specific manner. 

Stat3 in apoptosis and involution 
131
We have developed a conditional gene targeting strategy to investigate 
the function of specific transcription factors and signalling molecules in 
mammary development, This article will focus on the use of this approach to 
determine the role of a member of the JaW/STAT signalling pathway, 
STAT3, in mammary development particularly during the involution phase. 
2.
THE JAW/STAT SIGNALLING PATHWAY. 
About 8 years ago, a mammary gland transcription factor was described
independently in both our laboratory and that of Berndt Groner and named
MPBF (for milk protein binding factor) or MGF (for mammary gland factor)
respectively5,6. Subsequently, cloning of MPBF/MGF7 revealed it to be a
member of the family of STAT (signal transducer and activator of
transcription) factors originally identified in Darnell8. laboratory8. This
family of transcription factors comprises seven members which are localised
in pairs on three different chromosomes (counting STAT5a and STAT5b,
which are highly similar, as one gene). In evolutionary terms, STAT5
appears to be the ancestral gene having homologues in other species such as
Drosophila and Dictyostelium8. STATs are latent transcription factors
which are sequestered in the cytoplasm in an inactive form. Upon ligand
engagement of a cytokine (or in some cases) a growth factor receptor, the
receptor
subunits
aggregate
and
initiate
a
cascade
of
tyrosine
phosphorylation events in which the receptor-associated Jaks (Janus protein
tyrosine kinases) become activated. This creates a docking site for the STAT
which then becomes phosphorylated on a single tyrosine residue, dimerises
and dissociates from the receptor and translocates to the nucleus where is
interacts with its
recognition site in the promoters of target genes. The
specificity of STATs for receptors appears to depend on the cell type and a
single ligand can activate a number ofdifferent STATs. The target genes are
just beginning to be characterised but the milk protein gene promoters were
among the earliest targets to be identified. Indeed, the original identification
of STAT5 in the mammary gland was through its interaction with the β-
lactoglobulin (BLG) and β-casein promoters.
3.
STATS IN THE MAMMARY GLAND 
The first clue that STAT5 was important for mammary function came 
from mutational analyses of the BLG and whey acidic protein (WAP) 
promoters. Transgenic mice were generated which had mutations in 
combinations of the three STAT binding sites in the sheep BLG promoter (9) 

132
Chapman et al 
or the two sites in the rat WAP promoter10. Abolishing STAT binding 
reduced expression of BLG by 80% and WAP by 90% but did not affect the 
tissue-specificity of expression. Mutation of a single site in the BLG 
promoter had little effect whereas mutation of any 2 sites dramatically 
reduced expression9. It has recently been shown that binding of 2 STAT 
dimers to adjacent sites, where they form tetramers, induces maximal 
expression11 , The next step was to determine if other members of the STAT 
family were expressed in mammary tissue and whether their expression 
pattern mimicked that of STAT5. Interestingly, STAT5a/b are unique in 
their induction during pregnancy since both STATs 1 and 3 are expressed at 
fairly constant levels and STAT4 is barely detectable12. STAT2 DNA 
binding activity could not be detected in extracts from lactating tissue 
although there is some evidence that STAT6 may have a role in mammary 
gland.
Analysis of protein levels and DNA binding activities showed that 
STATs 3 and 5 have a reciprocal relationship suggesting that they play very 
different roles in mammary gland12’13. Of particular interest is the activation 
of STAT3 at the beginning of involution indicating that it may be a death 
signal for the epithelial cells. The subsequent knockout of both STAT5 
genes showed unequivocally that STAT5a, at least, is required for 
mammopoeisis and not suprisingly, given its requirement for efficient milk 
protein gene expression, for lactogenesis14,15. The role of STAT5b is less 
clear although it is worth noting that a high proportion of STAT5 DNA 
binding activity in mammary tissue is composed of heterodimers and 5a and 
5b despite the lower levels of STAT5b protein12. However, the knockout of 
the STAT3 gene proved to have an embryonic lethal phenotype, with death 
occurring around day 5 of gestation16. The demonstration, in ES cells, that 
STAT3 is required for stem cell renewal explains this very early lethality17.
In order to address the role of STAT3 in mammary involution, it was 
therefore necessary to generate a conditional knockout. 
4.
THE LOW/CRE RECOMBINATION SYSTEM AND 
GENERATION OF BLG/CRE TRANSGENIC MICE 
A number of approaches have been devised to facilitate conditional gene 
targeting. These include the lox/Cre recombination system from P1 
bacteriophage, and the yeast Flp system. The most extensively used of these 
is lox/Cre. This is summarised in Fig. 1 and reviewed18. The essential 
components of this binary system are a transgenic line harbouring a Cre 
recombinase/tissue-specific promoter fusion construct and a floxed knockout 
line containing ideally one null (non-functional) allele of the chosen gene (in 

Stat3 in apoptosis and involution 
133
this case STAT3) and one allele with 2 loxP sites inserted within introns a 
suitable distance apart. We first generated a transgenic line with mammary-
restricted Cre expression. 
Conditional Gene Targeting using Cre/lox Recombination 
Fig. 1 STAT3 deleted only in mammaryepithelialcells
The BLG promoter has been used extensively, primarily in John Clark’s 
laboratory, to drive expression of genes specifically to the secretory 
epithelial cells of mammary gland during late pregnancy and lactation. This 
promoter was chosen to drive expression of Cre recombinase to mammary 
gland. Variable expression in the 15 Cre-positive transgenic lines generated 
was observed and a subset of these were analysed further. 
The specificity of expression of the Cre transgene was examined by RT-
PCR and mammary-restricted expression observed in a number of these. The 
two lines with the highest, mammary restricted expression were crossed to a 
reporter strain harbouring a floxed DNA ligase I (LigI) allele to determine 
functionality and specificity of the Cre 
recombinase. Using Southern 
blotting and a quantitative PCR based approach to detect the excision event, 
we observed 70-80% recombination in the lactating mammary gland in 

134
Chapman et al 
crosses with one of the lines (line BLG-Cre 74) with less than 1.1% in all 
other tissues. Lower levels of recombination occurred in mammary glands of 
virgin animals (7%) and during pregnancy (20-30%).
Immunohistochemistry and in situ PCR show that Cre mediated 
recombination is very likely restricted to the epithelial cells of the mammary 
gland which are embedded therefore in a wild-type stroma19. Conditional 
gene targeting using this BLG-Cre line will allow thus the role of genes in 
lactogenesis or apoptosis of the epithelial compartment to be investigated. 
5.
CONDITIONAL STAT3 KNOCKOUT 
Due to the early embryonic lethality of STAT3, a floxed strain was
generated, in the laboratory of Shizuo Akira, in which an exon of the
essential SH2 domain was flanked by loxP sites20. Both floxed and null
STAT3 animals were crossed with the BLG-Cre transgenic line 74 to
generate animals of the desired genotype. These were then analysed for
phenotype during lactation and involution.
Given the activation profile of STAT3, it was anticipated that the most
dramatic phenotype would be observed during involution and indeed this
was the case. Fig. 2 shows H & E staining ofmammary sections from day 3
involution time points. It is striking that involution is not initiated in the
conditional knockouts for at least 3 days following the removal ofpups and
that the extent of apoptosis in the epithelial cells is reduced. Mammary
glands in conditional knockout animals do eventually undergo remodelling
demonstrating that a compensatory mechanism(s) exists.
STAT3 floxed/BLG-Cre 3 day involution
Floxed / -
Floxed / +
Fig. 2. Mammary phenotype of Stat3 knockout mice. H & E stained sections of mammary 
glands from control (right) and conditional STAT3 knockout (left) mice at day 3 of 
involution.

Stat3 in apoptosis and involution 
135
Analysis of changes at the molecular level shed some light on possible 
mechanisms for initiating this delayed involution process and apoptosis21. Of 
particular interest is the precocious activation of STAT1 , a dimerisation 
partner for STAT3, which is often activated in concert with it (Fig. 3). 
Perhaps STAT1 can activate a similar set of target genes. This speculation 
can be addressed by generating double knockouts of both STATs 1 and 3 
and by using microarray analysis to identify downstream target genes of 
these transcription factors. 
6.
STATS AND BREAST CANCER 
What is the relevance of this work for breast cancer? We demon-
strated a number of years ago that constitutive activation of STATs 1 
and 3, but not STAT5, is a feature of invasive breast carcinoma but 
not
in situ or benign disease22. Constitutive STAT activation has 
subsequently been shown to be associated with transformation by Src, 
Abl, and other oncoproteins and tumour viruses23 in a variety of cell 
types. More recently, STAT factors have been shown to be involved 
in apoptosis. STAT3 is required for cytokine-induced apoptosis in 
myeloid leukaemia cells24 but can suppress apoptosis in a pro-B cell 
line25. Similarly, STATs 1 and 5 have been implicated in cell survival 
and death26. Truncated, dominant-negative STAT mutants can block 
these effects27 and in this context it is worth noting that dominant-
negative mutants can occur naturally. 
Antibody
Extract
Fig. 3 Precocious activation of STAT1 in STAT3 knockout mammary glands. Electrophoretic 
mobility shift assays of nuclear extracts prepared from mammary tissue from either control 
(C) or STAT3 null (KO) mice at day 10 of lactation (L) or day 3 of involution (I). The 2 
tracks on the left are from KIM-2 mammary epithelial cells stimulated with IFN-g which 
activates only STAT1. Supershift of the complexes with antibodies to either STAT 1, 3, or 5 
is indicated above each lane. The highest mobility band is the STAT1 complex which is 
present in the STAT3 null glands, but not in the control glands, during involution. 

136
Chapman et al 
Cancer may be viewed as a failure of apoptosis. Our observations on the 
conditional STAT3 knockout demonstrate that STAT3 is required for 
apoptosis. It will be interesting to determine if these mice are more 
susceptible to tumour development following pregnancy or if deletion of 
STAT3 has a protective effect. In light of the opposing roles of different 
STATs in the mammary epithelial cell, it may be necessary to perturb the 
function of more than one member of this family to cause cancer. Crosses of 
knockouts of STATs 1 and 3 will be particularly interesting. The undoubted 
role of the JaW/STAT pathway in apoptosis and transformation places STAT 
factors in the range of therapeutic targets for breast cancer and high 
throughput analysis is being used by drug companies to discover inhibitors 
of STAT function. 
7. 
THE WAY AHEAD 
We have presented an example of conditional gene targeting in the 
mammary gland using the lox/Cre recombination system and a BLG-Cre
transgenic line. This approach is applicable to any gene of interest and we 
are currently generating floxed Jak2 animals to overcome the embryonic 
lethal phenotype and investigate its role in mammary development. Since 
Jak2 lies upstream of both STATs 3 and 5 and is implicated in other 
signalling pathways, a mammary conditional Jak2 knockout can be expected 
to have a different phenotype from both the STAT3 and STAT5 knockouts. 
The BLG-Cre transgenics from our laboratory and the WAP-Cre
transgenics from the Henninghausen laboratory28 will be a valuable resource 
to those interested in the conditional knockout of any one of the number of 
genes which have already been implicated in breast cancer. However, a 
further level of sophistication in conditional gene targeting is desirable to 
provide both tissue-specificity and temporal regulation. Strategies to achieve 
this have been devised and the new millennium should herald the arrival of 
finely tuned gene deletion. 
Acknowledgements
We would like to thank John Clark for providing the BLG promoter. This 
work was supported by grants to Christine Watson and Alan Clarke from the 
Biotechnology and Biological Sciences Research Council, the Association 
for International Cancer Research and The Cancer Research Campaign. 

Stat3 in apoptosis and involution 
8. 
REFERENCES 
137
1.
Weaver, VM and MJ Bissell 1999. Functional culture models to study mechanisms 
governing apoptosis in normal and malignant mammary epithelial cells J. Mam Gland 
Biol. & Neoplasia 4: 193-201.
Alexander CM, EW Howard, MJ Bissell, and Z Werb. 1996. Rescue of mammary 
epithelial cell apoptosis and entactin degradation by a tissue inhibitor of 
metalloproteinases-1 transgene. J. Cell Biol. 135:
1669-1677.
Neuenschwander, S., A. Schwart, T.L. Wood, C.T. Roberts Jr, L. Hennighausen and D. 
Le Roith. 1996. Involution of the lactating mammary gland is inhibited by the IGF 
system in a transgenic mouse model. J. Clin. Invest. 97: 2225-2232.
Ormandy, CJ, A Camus, J Barra, JD Damotte, B Lucas, H Buteau, M Edery, N Brousse, 
C Babinet, N Binart, and PA Kelly 1997. Null mutation of the prolactin receptor gene 
produces multiple reproductive defects in the mouse Genes & Dev. 11: 167-178.
Watson, C.J., K.E. Gordon, M. Robertson, and A.J. Clarke 1991. Interaction of DNA-
binding proteins with a milk protein gene promoter in vitro : identification of a 
mammary-specific factor. NUC. Acids Res. 19: 6603-6610.
Schmitt-Ney, M., W. Doppler, R.K. Ball, and B. Groner 1991. Beta-casein gene 
promoter activity is regulated by the hormone-mediated relief of transcriptional 
repression and a mammary gland-specific nuclear factor. Mol. Cell. Biol. 11: 3745-
3755.
Wakao, H., F. Gouilleux, and B. Groner 1994. Mammary gland factor (MGF) is a novel 
member of the cytokine regulated transcription factor gene family and confers the 
prolactin response. EMBO J. 13: 2 182-21 9 1. 
Ihle, J.N. 1996. STATs: Signal transducers and activators oftranscription. Cell 84: 331-
334.
Burdon, T.G., K. A. Maitland, A.J. Clark, R. Wallace and C. J. Watson 1994. 
Regulation of the sheep b-lactoglobulin gene by lactogenic hormones is mediated by a 
transcription factor that binds to an IFN-)g activation site-related element. Mol. Endo. 8
10. Li, S. and J. M. Rosen 1995. Nuclear factor-1 and mammary gland factor (STATS) play 
a critical role in regulating rat whey acidic protein gene expression in transgenic mice. 
Mol.Cell. Biol 15:
2063-2070.
11. John, S, U. Vinkemeier, E Soldaini, JE Damell, and WJ Leonard 1999. The significance 
of tetramerization in promoter recruitment by Stat5. Mol. Cell. Biol. 19: 1910-1918.
12. Philp, J.C., T.G. Burdon, and C.J. Watson. 1996. Differential activation of STATs 3 and 
5 during mammary gland development. FEBS Lett. 396: 77-80.
13. Liu, X.W., G.W. Robinson, and L. Hennighausen. 1996. Activation of Stat5a and Stat5b 
by tyrosine phosphorylation is tightly linked to mammary gland differentiation. 
Mol. Endocrinol. 10: 1496-1506.
14. Liu, X.W., G.W. Robinson, K.U. Wagner, L. Garrett, A. WynshawBoris, and L. 
Hennighausen. 1997. Stat5a is mandatory for adult mammary gland development and 
lactogenesis. Genes & Dev. 11: 179-186.
15. Teglund, S., C. Mckay, E. Schuetz, J.M. vanDeursen, D. Stravopodis, D.M. Wang, M. 
Brown, S. Bodner, G. Grosveld, and J.N. Ihle. 1998. Stat5a and Stat5b proteins have 
essential and nonessential, or redundant, roles in cytokine responses. Cell 93: 841-850.
16. Takeda, K., K. Noguchi, W. Shi, T. Tanaka, M. Matsumoto, N. Yoshida, T. Kishimoto, 
and S. Akira. 1997. Targeted disruption of the mouse Stat3 gene leads to early 
embryonic lethality. Proc.Natl.Acad.Sci. U.S.A. 94: 3801 -3804.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
1528-1536.

138
Chapman et al 
17. Niwa, H., T.G. Burdon, I. Chambers and A. G. Smith 1998. Self-renewal of pluripotent 
embryonic stem cells is mediated via activation of STAT3. Genes & Dev. 12: 2048-
2060.
18. Rossant,J and A McMahon 1999. "Cre"-ating mouse mutants - a meeting review on 
conditional mouse genetics Genes & Dev. 13: 142- 145.
19. Selbert, S., D.J. Bentley, D.W. Melton, D. Rannie, P. Lourenco, C.J. Watson, and A.R. 
Clarke. 1998. Efficient BLG-Cre mediated gene deletion in the mammary gland. 
Transgenic Res. 7: 387-396.
20. Takeda, K., T. Kaisho, N. Yoshida, J. Takeda, T. Kishimoto, and S. Akira. 1998. Stat3 
activation is responsible for IL-6-dependent T cell proliferation through preventing 
apoptosis: Generation and characterization of T cell-specific Stat3-deficient mice. 
J lmmunol. 161: 4652-4660.
21. Chapman, R.S., P.Lourenco, E. Tonner, D. Flint, S. Selbert, K. Takeda, S. Akira, A.R. 
Clarke, and C.J. Watson 1999. Suppression of epithelial apoptosis and delayed 
mammary gland involution in mice with a conditional knockout of STAT3. Genes & 
Dev. 13: 2604-2616.
22. Watson, C.J. and W.R. Miller 1995. Elevated levels of members of the STAT family of 
transcription factors in breast carcinoma nuclear extracts. British J. Cancer 71: 840-844.
23. Garcia, R. and R. Jove 1998. Activation of STAT transcription factors in oncogenic 
tyrosine kinase signaling. J. Biomed. Sci. 5: 79-85.
24. Minami, M., M. Inoue, S. Wei, K. Takeda, M. Matsumoto, T. Kishimoto, and S. Akira. 
1996. STAT3 activation is a critical step in gp130-mediated terminal differentiation and 
growth arrest of a myeloid cell line. Proc.Natl.Acad.Sci. U.S.A. 93: 3963-3966
25. Fukada, T., M. Hibi, Y. Yamanaka, M. Takahashi, Y. Tezuka, T. Fujitani, T. 
Yamaguchi, K. Nakajima, and T. Hírano 1996. Two signals are necessary for cell. by a 
cytokine receptor gp130: Involvement of STAT3 in anti-apoptosis. Immunity -460.
26. Zamorano, J., H.Y. Wang, R. Wang, Y. Shi, G.D. Longmore, and A.D. Keegan. 1998. 
Regulation of cell growth by IL-2: Role of STAT5 in protection from apoptosis but not 
in cell cycle progression. J. Immunol. 160: 3502-35 12. 
27. Bovolenta, C., L. Testolin, L. Benussi, P.J. Lievens, and E. Liboi. 1998. Positive 
selection of apoptosis resistant cells correlates with activation of dominant negative 
STAT5. J Biol Chem. 273: 20779-20784.
28. Xu, X., K. Wagner, D. Larson, Z. Weaver, C. Li, T. Reid, L. Hennighausen, A. 
Wynshaw-Boris and C. Deng. 1999. Conditional mutation of Brcal in mammary 
epithelial cells results in blunted ductal morphogenesis and tumour formation. Nature
Gen. 22: 37-43.

17.
Synergistic and Antagonistic Interactions of 
Transcription Factors in the Regulation of Milk 
Protein Gene Expression 
Mechanisms of cross-talk between signalling pathways 
Wolfgang Doppler, Sibylle Geymayer, and Harald G. Weirich 
Insitut for Medical Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of Innsbruck, Austria 
Key words: 
Abstract:
STATS, glucocorticoid receptor, NF-KB, prolactin, beta casein 
The stage and tissue specific expression of milk protein genes in the mammary 
gland is controlled by modular response regions with multiple binding sites for 
distinct classes of transcription factors, which either co-operate or are 
antagonistic. In addition, the activity of some of these factors is individually 
control-led by diverse extracellular signals. A well studied paradigm for a 
synergistic co-operation is the activation of beta-casein gene transcription by 
prolactin and glucocorticoids mediated by the signal transducer and activator 
of transcription STAT5 and the glucocorticoid receptor (GR). As an example 
for an antagonistic interaction we can demonstrate inhibition of prolactin 
signalling by TNF-α, which is mediated by NF-κB. In both cases, the 
interactions occur at several levels: For GR and STATS, the synergy is 
discussed to be promoted by protein-protein interactions. Furthermore, we can 
demonstrate a co-operation between GR and STAT5 in DNA binding by a 
mechanism, which is dependent on the integrity of the DNA binding domain 
of the GR and on the existence of half-palindromic GR binding sites in the 
hormone response region. Indirect effects of glucocorticoids by modulation of 
the expression of secondary genes are also important. They might account for 
the observed enhancement of prolactin induced tyrosine phosphorylation of 
STAT5 by glucocorticoids. For NF-κB and STATS, one component of the
antagonism is the inhibition of STAT5 tyrosine phosphorylation by activation 
of NF-KB. Another potential mechanism is the inhibition of DNA binding of 
STAT5 due to overlapping binding sites for STAT5 and NF-κB in the beta-
casein gene promoter. Thus, synergistic and antagonistic interactions between 
GR, NF-κB, and STAT5 involve (a) cross-talk mechanisms influencing the
activation of STAT5 and (b) promoter-dependent interactions modulating the 
DNA binding activity of the transcription factors 
139

140
Doppler et al 
1. 
INTRODUCTION 
The activation of milk protein gene expression is an extensively studied 
example for the interaction of several signalling pathways. Long before the 
discovery of molecular details concerning the operation of the individual 
pathways, endocrinologists could demonstrate a synergism involving three 
hormones, namely the lactogenic hormones prolactin, glucocorticoids and 
insulin (reviewed1). Later it became evident, that signals elicited by 
extracellular matrix components are also necessary for the activation of milk 
protein gene expression in mammary epithelial cells2. Numerous other 
extracellular stimuli, most of them triggering the inhibition of milk protein 
gene expression, were discovered subsequently. Current knowledge indicates 
that many if not all of these extracellular signals influence milk protein gene 
expression at the level of transcription initiation. A summary of extracellular 
signals and transcription factors (TFs) implicated in the regulation of milk 
protein gene expression is given in Table 1. For the signals triggered by 
steroid hormones, prolactin, insulin, interleukin-4 (IL-4), and TNF-α,
the
transcription factors mediating the response to these stimuli have been 
identified. For other signals, such as insulin and TGF-β, the targeted
transcription factor (TF) is either not known or the response to the signal is 
not dependent on the activation or repression of a TF. It should be noted that 
for several TFs with an established function in milk protein gene 
transcription such as NF-1, Oct- 1, CTF/NF-1 and Ets domain proteins, it has 
still to be established whether and how they are regulated by extracellular 
stimuli.
2.
MODULAR ARRANGEMENT OF TRANSCRIP-
TION FACTOR BINDING SITES IN THE ß-
CASEIN GENE PROMOTER 
An important principle in directing the interaction between TFs is the 
modular arrangement of their binding sites in the DNA response regions of 
the regulated genes. Depending on the relative position of binding sites and 
the affinity of the TFs to these sites, cooperative binding or competition for 
binding sites can be observed, resulting in either synergy or antagonism. The 
structure of TF binding sites in the two lactogenic hormone response region 
(LHRR) of the β-casein gene has been studied in detail. Fig. 1 shows a
schematic overview of the principle binding sites mapped in the rat18,21-24, the 
bovine25 and the human
26 gene and the conservation of these binding sites 
between species. A common feature of all LHRRs is the presence of multiple 

Transcription factors and milk protein gene expression 
141
binding sites for CCAAT enhancer binding proteins and at least one binding 
site for STAT5. The human and ruminant proximal LHRR exhibits impaired 
functional activity in comparison to the LHRR of rodents12,26.
Table 1. Extracellular signals and targeted TFs regulating milk protein gene transcription. So 
far, the activation of STAT5 by insulin has only been described in non-mammary tissues3.
Epidermal growth factor has a dual function on milk protein gene expression: it promotes the 
competence of mammary epithelial cells to express the β-casein gene, but represses the action
of lactogenic hormones in terminal differentiated cells4. A truncated version of the CCAAT 
enhancer protein C/EBP β is expressed in mammary epithelial cells (LIP) and is discussed to
block the action of full length C/EBP β (LAP) 5.
Extracellular Signal 
Targeted TF 
Effect on Transcription 
Ref. 
Prolactin
STAT5 
activation 
6 
interleukin-4 
STAT6 
activation 
7 
Glucocorticoids 
Gl ucocorticoid receptor
activation
1
Progestins
Progesterone receptor 
repression 
1
Insulin
STAT5?
activation
3
Epidermal growth 
STAT5 
repression, (activation) 
4,8,9 
factor
Tumor necrosis factor
NF-κB
repression
10
a
Transforming growth
?
repression
11
factor β
extracellular matrix 
STATS, NF- 1 ? 
activation
12,13
?
CCAAT enhancer 
activation, repression 
5,18 
?
Ets domain proteins 
activation
19
?
octameric factor 
activation
20
?
YY-1
repression
2 1,22 
?
NF-1
activation
14-17
binding proteins 
(?)
This might relate to the lack of a second STAT5 binding site, which is 
required for the function of the LHRR in rodents (H. Weirich, unpublished 
results). In these species, activation of milk protein gene expression depends 
on a distal enhancer region with multiple C/EBP and STAT5 sites (Fig. 1). 
YY1 has been described as a factor participating in the repression of β-
casein gene transcription by its binding to a site in the proximal LHRR. Due 
to the close proximity of binding sites, STAT5 inhibits binding of YY1. 
Such a STAT5 mediated relief of repression by YY1 has been postulated to 
be important for stimulation of β-casein gene expression21,22. In the next
sections two other examples for interactions of TFs with STAT5 are 
discussed. In both cases, a full understanding of their action on STAT5 
signalling has to consider in addition mechanisms other than interactions 
mediated by the LHRR. 

142
Doppler et al 
Fig. 1 Structural organisation of TF binding sites in the two defined regulatory regions of the 
β-casein gene. For rodents, the conserved transcription factor binding sites mapped in the
sequence of the mouse and rat gene are shown. For ruminants, the depicted binding sites are 
identical for sheep, goat and cattle. 
3.
SYNERGY BETWEEN GLUCOCORTICOID 
RECEPTOR (GR) AND STAT5 
The proximal rat LHRR of the β-casein gene has been shown to direct
the synergy between the GR and STAT5 
27. Evidence obtained from 
immunoprecipitation 
experiments indicate protein-protein interactions 
between the GR and STAT5, which do not depend on the binding of the GR 
to DNA28,29. These interactions appear to contribute to the functional synergy 
between GR and STAT5 30. However, mutational analysis of the GR binding 
sites in the β-casein gene promoter revealed that the structural integrity of
GR binding sites is a prerequisite to achieve a synergy between these two 
TFs31, indicating that binding of the GR to DNA is also important. A 
particularity of the binding of GR to the LHRR of milk protein genes is the 
recognition of half-palindromic sites, which do not function in the absence 
of activated STAT5 to mediate the action of GR on transcription. This mode 

Transcription factors and milk protein gene expression 
143
of interaction provides an efficient means to restrict gene expression to 
conditions were both STAT5 and the GR are active32.
In addition to the direct interactions between GR and STAT5 at the b- 
casein 
gene 
promoter, 
activated 
GR 
promotes 
STAT5 
tyrosine 
pho~phorylation33. Indirect actions of the GR, such as inhibition of the 
expression of cytokine inducible SH-2 domain proteins by glucocorticoids 
might be important for this effect and might explain the delayed effects and 
slow kinetics of glucocorticoid action on β-casein gene transcription34. The
left part of Fig. 2 illustrates the two levels of interaction between GR and 
STAT5.
Fig. 2 Cross-talk mechanisms between glucocorticoid, prolactin and tumor necrosis-factor α 
induced signalling pathways in mammary epithelial cells. 
4.
ANTAGONISM BETWEEN NF-κB AND STAT5
Tumor necrosis factor a (TNF-α) has been shown to be a multifunctional
regulator of mammary gland development with an inhibitory action on milk 
protein gene expression35,36. It is an activator of NF-κB. We and others
(C.J. Watson, personal communication) could demonstrate developmental 
regulated nuclear NF- κB p50/p65 in the mammary gland of mice, with peak
levels between mid- and late-pregnancy. During the lactation period, DNA 
binding activity of NF- κB p50/p65 was low due to inhibited nuclear
translocation (S.Geymayer et al., submitted). Co-transfection experiments 
performed with 293 cells revealed an inhibition of STAT5 dependent 
activation of β-casein gene expression by NF- κB p50/p65. Similar as in the
case of the above described synergism between STAT5 and GR, more than 
one mechanism is potentially involved in the antagonism between the 

144
Doppler et al 
STAT5 and NF-κB signalling pathways: (a) competition of STAT5 and NF-
KB for binding in the β-casein gene promoter, mediated by binding sites for
NF-kB in the proximal LHRR (Fig. 1); and (b) inhibition of STAT5 tyrosine 
phosphorylation, which was found to be inversely correlated to the NF-κB
activation status in the mammary epithelial cell line HC11 (S.Geymayer et 
al., submitted). 
In conclusion, for the interaction of TFs involved in the regulation of 
milk-protein gene transcription, two different types of cross-talk mechanism 
are operative. The structural organization of the TF binding sites in the 
LHRR determines the gene specific response to simultaneous activation of 
signalling pathways. Thereby, species specific arrangement of sites are likely 
to contribute to the differences in strength and stage dependence of 
expression in different species. A second level of interaction, which does not 
necessarily require binding of interacting TF to DNA, is promoted by cross- 
talk between the signalling pathways leading to the activation of the TFs. A 
concise analysis of the co-operation or antagonism between TF has to 
consider both modes of interaction. 
5. 
REFERENCES 
1.
2.
Topper YJ, Freeman CS. Multiple hormone interactions in the developmental biology of 
the mammary gland. Physiol Rev 60, 1049-1106, 1980. 
Lee YHP, Lee WH, Kaetzel CS, Parry G, Bissell MJ. Interaction of mouse mammary 
epithelial cells with collagen substrata: regulation of casein gene expression and 
secretion. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 82, 1419-1423, 1985. 
Chen J, Sadowski HB, Kohanski RA, Wang LH. Stat5 is a physiological substrate of the 
insulin receptor. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 94, 2295-2300, 1997. 
Hynes NE, Tavema D, Hanverth IM, Ciardiello F, Salomon DS, Yamamota T, Groner B. 
Epidermal growth factor receptor, but not c-e rbB-2 activation, prevents lactogenic
hormone induction of the β-casein gene in mouse mammary epithelial cells in culture.
Mol Cell Biol 10, 4027-4034, 1990. 
Raught B, Liao WSL, Rosen JM. Developmentally and hormonally regulated 
CCAAT/enhancer- binding protein isoforms influence beta-casein gene expression. Mol 
Endocrinol 9, 1223-1232, 1995. 
Wakao H, Gouilleux F, Groner B. Mammary gland factor (MGF) is a novel member of 
the cytokine regulated transcription factor gene family and confers the prolactin 
response. EMBO J 13, 2182-2191, 1994. 
Moriggl R, Berchtold S, Friedrich K, Standke GJ, Kammer W, Heim M, Wissler M, 
Stocklin E, Gouilleux F, Groner B. Comparison of the transactivation domains of Stat5 
and Stat6 in lymphoid cells and mammary epithelial cells. Mol Cell Biol 17, 3663-
3678, 1997. 
Welte T, Garimorth K, Philipp S, Doppler W. Prolactin-dependent activation of a 
tyrosine phosphorylated DNA binding factor in mouse mammary epithelial cells. Mol 
Endocrinol 8, 1091-1102, 1994. 
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.

Transcription factors and milk protein gene expression 
9.
145
Doppler W, Villunger A, Jennewein P, Brduscha K, Groner B, Ball RK. Lactogenic 
hormone and cell type-specific control of the whey acidic protein gene promoter in 
transfected mouse cells. Mol Endocrinol 5, 1624-1632, 1991. 
10.  Varela LM, Ip MM. Tumor necrosis factor-α:: a multifunctional regulator of mammary 
gland development. Endocrinology 137, 4915-4924, 1996. 
11.
Mieth M, Boehmer FK, Ball R, Groner B, Grosse R. Transforming growth factor-β 
inhibits lactogenic hormone induction of β-casein expression in HCl 1 mouse mammary
epithelial cells. Growth Factors 4, 9-15, 1990. 
12.
Schmidhauser C, Bissell MJ, Myers CA, Casperson GF. Extracellular matrix and
hormones transcriptionally regulate bovine β-casein 5' sequences in stably transfected
mouse mammary cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 87, 9118-9122, 1990. 
13. Streuli CH, Edwards GM, Delcommenne M, Whitelaw CBA, Burdon TG, Schindler C, 
Watson CJ. Stat5 as a target for regulation by extracellular matrix. J Biol Chem 270, 
14. Lubon H, Hennighausen L. Conserved region in the rat a-lactalbumin promoter is a 
target site for protein binding in vitro. Biochem J 256, 391-396, 1988. 
15. Watson CJ, Gordon KE, Robertson M, Clark AJ. Interaction of DNA-binding proteins 
with a milk protein gene promoter in vitro: identification of a mammary gland-specific
factor. Nucleic Acids Res 19, 6603-6610, 1991. 
16. Mink S, Härtig E, Jennewein P, Doppler W, Cato ACB. A mammary cell-specific
enhancer in mouse mammary tumor virus DNA is composed of multiple regulatory 
elements including binding sites for CTFNFI and a novel transcription factor, mammary 
cell-activating factor. Mol Cell Biol 12, 4906-4918, 1992. 
17. Li S, Rosen JM. Nuclear factor I and mammary gland factor (STATS) play a critical role 
in regulating rat whey acidic protein gene expression in transgenic mice. Mol Cell Biol 
18. Doppler W, Welte T, Philipp S. CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein isoforms β and δ are
expressed in mammary epithelial cells and bind to multiple sites in the β-casein gene
promoter. J Biol Chem 270, 17962-17969, 1995. 
19. Alam T, An MR, Mifflin RC, Hsieh C-C, Ge X, Papaconstantinou J. trans -Activation of
the a1-acid glycoprotein gene acute phase responsive element by multiple isoforms of 
C/EBP and glucocorticoid receptor. J Biol Chem 268, 15681-15688, 1993. 
20. Groner B, Altiok S, Meier V. Hormonal Regulation of Transcription Factor Activity in 
Mammary Epithelial Cells. Mol Cell Endocrinol 100, 109-114, 1994. 
21.
Raught B, Khursheed B, Kazanasky A, Rosen J. YY1 represses β-casein gene expression
by preventing the formation of a lactation-associated complex. Mol Cell Biol 14, 1752-
1763, 1994. 
22.
Meier VS, Groner B. The nuclear factor YY 1 participates in repression of the β-casein
gene promoter in mammary epithelial cells and is counteracted by mammary gland factor 
during lactogenic hormone induction. Mol Cell Biol 14, 128-137, 1994. 
23.
Schmitt-Ney M, Doppler W, Ball RK, Groner B. β-Casein gene promoter activity is
regulated by the hormone-mediated relief of transcriptional repression and a mammary-
gland-specific nuclear factor. Mol Cell Biol 11, 3745-3755, 1991. 
24. Welte T, Philipp S, Cairns C, Gustafsson J-Å, Doppler W. Glucocorticoid receptor 
binding sites in the promoter region of milk protein genes. J Steroid Biochem Molec Biol 
25. Myers CA, Schmidhauser C, Mellentinmichelotti J, Fragoso G, Roskelley CD, 
Casperson G, Mossi R, Pujuguet P, Hager G, Bissell MJ. Characterization of BCE-1, a 
21639-2 1644, 1995. 
15, 2063-2070, 1995. 
47, 75-81, 1993. 

146
Doppler et al 
transcriptional enhancer regulated by prolactin and extracellular matrix and modulated 
by the state of histone acetylation. Mol Cell Biol 18, 2184-2195, 1998. 
26. Winklehner-Jennewein P, Geymayer S, Lechner J, Welte T, Hansson L, Geley S, 
Doppler W. A distal enhancer region in the human beta casein gene mediates the 
response to prolactin and glucocorticoid hormones. Gene 217, 127-139, 1998. 
27. Doppler W, Groner B, Ball RK. Prolactin and glucocorticoid hormones synergistically 
induce expression of transfected rat β-casein gene promoter constructs in a mammary
epithelial cell line. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 86, 104-108, 1989. 
28. Sköcklin E, Wissler M, Gouilleux F, Groner B. Functional interactions between Stat5 and 
the glucocorticoid receptor. Nature 383, 726-728, 1996. 
29. Cella N, Groner B, Hynes NE. Characterization of Stat5a and Stat5b homodimers and 
heterodimers and their association with the glucocorticoid receptor in mammary cells. 
Mol Cell Biol 18, 1783-1792, 1998. 
30. Stöcklin E, Wissler M, Moriggl R, Groner B. Specific DNA binding of Stat5, but not of 
glucocorticoid receptor, is required for their functional cooperation in the regulation of 
gene transcription. Mol Cell Biol 17, 6708-6716, 1997. 
31. Lechner J, Welte T, Tomasi JK, Bruno P, Cairns C, Gustafsson J-Å, Doppler W. 
Promoter-dependent synergy between glucocorticoid receptor and Stat5 in the activation 
of β-casein gene transcription. J Biol Chem 272, 20954-20960, 1997.
32. Lechner J, Welte T, Doppler W. Mechanism of interaction between the glucocorticoid 
receptor and Stat5: role of DNA-binding. Immunobiol 197, 175-186, 1997. 
33. Wyszomierski SL, Yeh J, Rosen JM. Glucocorticoid receptor/signal transducer and 
activator of transcription 5 (STAT5) interactions enhance STAT5 activation by 
prolonging STAT5 DNA binding and tyrosine phosphorylation. Mol Endocrinol 13, 
34. Doppler W, Höck W, Hofer P, Groner B, Ball RK. Prolactin and glucocorticoid 
hormones control transcription of the β-casein gene by kinetically distinct mechanisms.
Mol Endocrinol 4, 912-919, 1990. 
35. Ip MM, Shoemaker SF, Darcy K. Regulation of rat mammary epithelial cell proliferation 
and differentiation by tumor necrosis factor-α. Endocrinology
130, 2833-2844, 1992.
330-343, 1999. 

18.
Nucleosome Organisation of the β-Lactoglobulin Gene
Transcription complex formation 
C. Bruce A. Whitelaw 
Roslin Institute (Edinburgh), Division of Molecular Biology, Roslin, Midlothian, UK
Key words: 
Abstract:
Chromatin, mammary, ovine, STAT5 
In most mammals, the major whey protein beta-lactoglobulin (βlg) represents
a marker for tissue-specific, temporally regulated gene expression in the 
mammary gland. Prolactin, the major lactogenic stimulus which activates βlg
expression acts through a cytoplasmic signalling cascade ending in the 
activation of the transcription factor STAT5. Although much is known about 
the complexities of this signalling cascade, little is known about how this 
transcription factor functions within the context of chromatin. Using DNaseI 
as a probe of chromatin structure we have identified temporally regulated 
elements within the ovine βlg gene domain. The appearance of these
hypersensitive sites accompanies changes in expression state of the βlg gene.
Changes in DNaseI hypersensitivity at the proximal promoter region, while 
reflecting STAT5 activation, is not dependent upon STAT5 interaction at this 
site. We have mapped the nucleosome positions over the entire βlg gene, both
in vitro using the monomer extension assay and in vivo using cuprous 
phenanthroline to probe for nucleosome-linker positions. The specific 
positioning pattern detected, which reflects strong sequence-directed
positioning over the proximal promoter, complement the STAT5 consensus 
sites within this region. The comparison of both the functional and chromatin 
data enables a model for blg gene transcription to be developed. 
1. 
INTRODUCTION 
The accurate switching ‘on’ and ‘off’ of gene expression is central for 
life with each gene having its own specific spatial and temporal expression 
pattern. To ensure this pattern is faithfully adhered to several layers of 
regulation are imposed within the cell. Over the past two decades there have 
147

148
Whitelaw
been great advances in our understanding of how soluble transcription 
factors regulate gene expression. With this knowledge has come an increased 
awareness of the importance of the whole nuclear environment within which 
genes are regulated. Gene expression takes place in the context of chromatin, 
a condition that many think contributes to the developmental and spatial 
control of transcription. Clearly a full understanding of how a gene is 
regulated must incorporate knowledge of the chromosomal environment in 
which it is contained. 
We have focussed our effort on investigating mammary gene expression. 
The mammary gland represents a differentiated tissue which expresses a 
specific set of genes in response to a variety of hormonal, cellular and 
extracellular matrix derived signals. It is also the only organ in which the 
majority of development takes place in the adult and which can undergo 
successive cycles of development and regression. In addition, the mammary 
gland is an important organ from an agricultural perspective (milk 
production) and can be harnessed for new genetic biotechnologies1.
2.
β-LACTOGLOBULIN GENE
In most mammals, the major whey protein is β-lactoglobulin (βlg). The
function of βlg is unconfirmed although it shares considerable similarity to
retinol-binding protein and other lipocalins2, and therefore may transport small 
hydrophobic molecules3. In ruminants, this protein represents a marker for 
tissue-specific, temporally regulated gene expression in the mammary gland4.
Numerous studies in a variety of cell-based systems have shown that βlg
expression is regulated by a complex interaction of hormones and growth factors 
in association with cell-cell and cell-extracellular matrix interactions5. The major 
lactogenic stimulus prolactin6, activates βlg expression through a cytoplasmic
signalling cascade ending in the activation of the transcription factor STAT5 7,8.
There are three binding sites for STAT59 within the ovine blg gene promoter 
(Fig. 1). 
Activation of βlg gene expression is accompanied by changes in the
chromatin structure surrounding the promoter region. No DNaseI hypersensitive 
sites are present in the liver where the gene is not expressed, while distinct sites 
are present in the lactating sheep mammary gland10. Additional mammary 
specific hypersensitive sites are detected within the first two introns prior to over 
βlg transcription11. Analysis, both in cell culture12,13 and transgenic mice10,14,
indicates that only the hypersensitive site located at the promoter, termed HSIII, 
is essential for expression in mammary cells. 

Nucleosome organisation of the β-lactoglobulin gene
149
Fig. 1 .The ovine βlg gene contains 7 exons (black boxes) within about 5 kb of genomic
sequence. The entire sequence is known (X12817). Mammary specific DNaseI hypersensitive 
sites are depicted as arrows with roman numerals8 . Specific transcription binding sites are 
shown in the enlarged promoter region; open circles, STAT5; filled circle, TATA-box.
This region (Fig. 1) contains several binding sites for the transcription 
factors NF-1 and STAT5 9
, the latter of which is activated by the 
intracellular signaling pathway induced by prolactin , the main lactogenic 
7,8
Fig. 2.DNaseI hypsensitive
site formation on the ovine βlg gene during pregnancy and
lactation in sheep 11
. The ovine βlg gene is shown with exons as black boxes and
hypersensitive sites are shown as arrows. Relative mammary expression levels as a percentage 
of maximal levels obtained during lactation are shown. 
In the virgin animal βlg expression is barely detectable. Then, as
pregnancy proceeds, βlg expression gradually increases, with the first major
increase occurring at the 110th day of pregnancy. Expression continues to 
increase through parturition to reach maximal levels during lactation4 .
hormone

150
Whitelaw
DNaseI hypersensitivity at HSIII parallels this expression profile, with 
minimal cutting before mid-pregnancy and substantial cutting thereafter and 
during lactation15. This temporal pattern of DNaseI hypersensitivity parallels 
the differential activation of complexes containing the prolactin induced 
transcription factors STAT5a and STAT5b 7. Specifically, there is a marked 
increase in STAT5a relative to STAT5b during late pregnancy16 which
suggests a major role for STAT5a in regulating βlg expression. In support of
this, STAT5a null-mice indicate that this transcription factor is the principal 
mediator of the lactogenic signal17. Nevertheless, STAT5a interaction with 
the βlg promoter is not essential for tissue-specific expression of βlg12
Therefore, other mechanisms must be involved in establishing a mammary-
restricted transcription factor complex upon the βlg promoter.
3.
NUCLEOSOME MAPPING OF β-LACTOGLO-
BULIN PROMOTER 
The positioning of nucleosomes contributes to both the structure and 
function of chromatin and has a decisive role in controlling gene 
expression18. A major determinant of nucleosome positioning, and therefore 
distribution, is the DNA sequence itself. Other components may modulate 
DNA-directed nucleosome positioning, but must act in conjunction with, 
rather than independently of the DNA sequences. In most studies of 
sequence-directed nucleosome positioning, only short regions of DNA have 
been analysed in any detail. Understandably, the tendency has been to focus 
in the immediate vicinity of regulatory DNA sequences. Only one study has 
addressed an entire gene19.
We have mapped the in vivo nucleosomal profile for about 10 kb of 
contiguous genomic sequence encompassing the ovine blg gene. Two probes 
of nucleosomal organisation have been used. The first relies on the ability of 
the enzyme MNase to preferentially digest DNA in the linker region between 
two nucleosomes. The second approach involves cuprous phenanthroline 
probed mercaptopropionic acid cleaved chromatin. Again cleavage is 
predominately in the linker region between nucleosomes. Both methods 
clearly indicate that a periodic nucleosome pattern based on 180 bp is 
present on both the inactive and active blg gene. Furthermore, reflecting 
gene expression state, there are distinct differences between the active and 
inactive chromatin. In addition, a specific relationship between nucleosome 
positioning over the promoter region and the location of known transcription 
factor binding sites is evident (Fig. 3). 
To further define the nucleosomal profile of blg we have mapped in vitro 
reconstituted, sequence directed nucleosomal positioning. This has been 

Nucleosome organisation of the b-lactoglobulin gene 
151
performed using the monomer extension assay19 developed by Dr, Jim Allan 
map essentially supports the in vivo map and offers the opportunity to 
identify sequence determinates of nucleosomal positioning. 
(University of Edinburgh) and optimised for βlg by Simon Boa. The in vitro
Fig. 3. 
Alternative nucleosome positions relative to STAT5 binding site (open circle). 
Thus, the STAT5 site resides either within the linker region between two adjacent 
nucleosomes or near the nucleosome dyad. 
4. 
PROPOSED MODEL FOR TRANSCRIPTION 
COMPLEX FORMATION AT β-LACTOGLO-
BULIN PROMOTER 
From the DNaseI and nucleosomal mapping data we propose a co-
operative model for transcription complex formation at the ovine β1g
promoter. This model revolves around the precise positioning of a 
nucleosome within the promoter (Boa et al., manuscript in preparation). 
Furthermore, STAT5 probably fulfils a late function to stabilise the 
transcription factor complex (Whitelaw et al., manuscript in preparation), 
thus ensuring efficient transcription. 
Acknowledgements
I gratefully acknowledge that much of this work was performed by 
Simon Boa and John Webster; and through my on-going collaboration with 
Dr. Jim Allan (University of Edinburgh). The initial STAT5 studies were 
performed by Tom Burdon, Jerome Demmer and Christine Watson. This 
work was supported by the BBSRC (UK). 

152
Whitelaw
5. 
REFERENCES 
1.
2.
Wilmut I, Whitelaw, CBA. Strategies for production of pharmaceutical proteins in milk. 
Reprod Fert Dev 6,625-630, 1994. 
Ali S, Clark AJ. Characterization of the gene encoding ovine beta-lactoglobulin.
Similarity to the genes for retinol binding protein and other secretory proteins. J Mol 
Biol 199, 415-426, 1988.
Flower DR. The lipocalin protein family: structure and function. Biochem J 318, 1-14,
1996.
Harris S, McClenaghan M, Simons JP, Ali S, Clark AJ. Developmental regulation of the 
sheep beta-lactoglobulin gene in the mammary gland of transgenic mice. Dev Genet 12, 
Streuli CH, Edwards GM, Delcommenne M, Whitelaw CBA, Burdon TG, Schindler, C, 
Watson CJ. Stat5 as a target for regulation by extracellular matrix. J Biol Chem 270, 
Osborne R, Howell M, Clark AJ, Nicholas KR. Hormone-dependent expression of the 
ovine beta-lactoglobulin gene. J Dairy Res 62, 321-319, 1995. 
Hennighausen L, Robinson WG, Wagner KU, Liu X. Prolactin signaling in mammary 
gland development. J Biol Chem 272, 757-7569, 1997.
Watson CJ, Burdon TG. Prolactin signal transduction mechanisms in the mammary 
gland: the role of the Jak/Stat pathway. Rev Reprod 1-5, 1996. 
Watson CJ, Gordon KE, Robertson M, Clark AJ. Interaction of DNA-binding proteins 
with a milk protein gene promoter in vitro: identification of a mammary gland-specific
factor. Nucl Acids Res 19, 6603-6610, 1991. 
10. Whitelaw CBA, Harris S, Archibald AL, McClenaghan M, Simons JP, Clark AJ. 
Position-independent expression of the ovine beta-lactoglobulin gene in transgenic mice. 
Biochem J 286,31-39, 1992. 
11. Whitelaw CBA, Webster J. Temporal profiles of appearance of DNase I hypersensitive 
sites associated with the ovine beta-lactoglobulin gene differ in sheep and transgenic 
mice. Mol Gen Genet 257,649-654, 1998. 
12. Burdon TG, Maitland KA, Clark AJ, Watson CJ. Regulation of the sheep beta-
lactoglobulin gene by lactogenic hormones is mediated by a transcription factor that 
binds an interferon-gamma activation site-related element. Mol Endocrinol 8, 1528-
1536, 1994. 
13. Demmer J, Burdon TG, Djian J, Watson CJ, Clark AJ. The proximal milk protein 
binding factor binding site is required for the prolactin responsiveness of the sheep beta-
lactoglobulin promoter in Chinese hamster ovary cells. Mol Cell Endocrinol 107, 113-
121, 1995. 
14. Webster J, Wallace R, Clark A., Whitelaw CBA. Tissue-specific, temporally regulated 
expression mediated by the proximal ovine beta-lactoglobulin promoter in transgenic 
mice. Cell Mol Biol Res 41, 11-15, 1995. 
15. Whitelaw CBA. Regulation of ovine beta-lactoglobulin gene expression during the first 
stage of lactogenesis. Biophys Biochem Res Comm 209, 1089-1 093, 1995 
16. Philp JAC, Burdon TG, Watson CJ. Differential activation of STATs 3 and 5 during 
mammary gland development. FEBS Lett 396, 77-80, 1996.
17. Liu X, Robinson GW, Wagner KU, Garret L, Wynshaw-Boris A, Hennighausen L. 
Stat5a is mandatory for adult mammary gland development and lactogenesis. Genes Dev 
3.
4.
299-307, 1991. 
5.
21639-2 1644, 1995. 
6.
7.
8.
9.
11, 179-186, 1997. 

Nucleosome organisation of the b-lactoglobulin gene 
18. Kornberg RD, Lorch Y. Twenty-five years of the nucleosome, fundamental particle in 
the eukaryotic chromosome. Cell 98, 285-294, 1999. 
19. Davey C, Pennings S, Meersseman G, Wess TJ, Allan J. Periodicity of strong 
nucleosome positioning sites around the chicken adult beta-globin gene may encode 
regularly spaced chromatin. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 92, 11210-11214, 1995. 
153

19.
Chromatin Remodeling in Hormone-Dependent and -
Independent Breast Cancer Cell Lines 
2Claire Giamarchi, 1Catherine Chailleux, 1Hélène Richard-Foy.
1Laboratoire de Biologie Moléculaire Eucaryote, CNRS, Toulouse, France and 2 Institut
Claudius Regaud, Laboratoire de Biochimie. Toulouse, FRANCE 
Key words: 
Abstract:
breast cancer, oestrogens, chromatin structure, gene expression 
Chromatin restricts the accessibility of DNA to regulatory factors; its remodel-
ling over the regulatory regions contributes to the control of gene expression. 
An increasing number of evidence links defects in chromatin remodelling 
machinery and cancer. Our aim is to elucidate the role of chromatin structure 
in the control of the expression of hormone-induced genes in breast cell lines 
oestrogen-dependent or -independent for growth. Mammary tumour growth is 
controlled by steroid hormones via their nuclear receptor and by growth 
factors via tyrosine kinase receptors. 50% of these tumours elude to hormonal 
control. This limits the anti-oestrogen therapy. As a model, we have analysed 
in several cell lines the chromatin organisation of the regulatory regions of two 
genes, pS2 that is associated with a good prognostic, and cathepsin D (catD) 
that is a bad prognostic marker. The expression of the two genes is oestrogen-
regulated in oestrogen-dependent cell line MCF7. In contrast in the hormone-
independent cell line MDA MB 23 1, pS2 is not expressed and catD is 
constitutively expressed. Within the regulatory regions of pS2 gene, we have 
localised two regions that undergo a hormone-dependent change in chromatin 
structure in MCF7 cells but not in MDA MB 23 1 and that can be correlated 
with gene expression. In contrast catD regulatory regions did not display 
hormone-dependent changes in chromatin structure, suggesting that hormone 
regulation takes place within regions with a constitutively open chromatin 
structure.
155

156
Giamarchi et al 
1. 
INTRODUCTION 
Chromatin structure plays a major role in processes such as DNA 
transcription, replication and repair. This structure is dynamic and changes 
can be correlated with transcriptional repression or activation. Cell 
differentiation is accompanied by changes in chromatin structure of large 
domains of the genome that become transcriptionally competent (Fig. 1). 
Transcription of the genes located within these domains involves additional 
changes in chromatin structure localised within small regulatory regions. 
In breast cancer cells, cell proliferation is controlled by estrogens and by 
growth factors such as EGF and IGFI. This is achieved through changes in 
the level of expression of groups of genes. Transcriptional activation of a 
gene by a steroid, via its cognate receptor, or by growth factors, via their 
tyrosine-kinase receptors, both result in changes in composition and/or 
activity of large multi-protein complexes containing CBP/p300 
1.This
process is accompanied by changes in chromatin structure over the proximal 
promoter and regulatory regions. 
Fig. 
1: 
Chromatin structure and transcription. 
A
- Transcriptionally incompetent 
chromatin. B - The opening of chromatin domains generates transcriptionally competent 
chromatin. C - Within these domains, transcription may be triggered. A localized change in 
chromatin structure (nucleosome displacement or nucleosome remodelling?) accompanies 
transcription.

Estrogens and chromatin remodeling 
157
One major problem in breast cancer biology concerns the cellular 
changes leading to breast cell population whose growth is hormone- 
independent. The mechanisms involved in such a cell progression remain 
unclear. 
Establishment 
of the 
hormone-independent 
phenotype 
is 
accompanied by a loss of the expression of the estrogen receptor (ERa). 
However the lack of ERa is not the cause of the hormone independence2.
To get new insights on the mechanisms involved in the establishment of 
the hormone-independent phenotype of breast cancer cells, we have analysed 
the chromatin structure of the regulatory regions of two model genes: pS2 
and cathepsin D (CatD) in three cell lines. The MCF7 cells are hormone-
dependent, MDA MB 231 are hormone independent and HE5 are MDA 
MB231 cells in which the expression of ERa has been restored3. We have 
mapped the DNase I hypersensitive sites (these sites mark regions with an 
“open” chromatin structure) et compared the results with transcription of the 
genes, assayed by Northern blot analysis. 
Fig. 2. Chromatin structure of pS2 regulatory regions and gene expression. A - Comparison of 
DNase I hypersensitivity of pS2 gene in the 3 cell lines, untreated or treated with hormone (E2). 
B - Effect of estrogen and IGFI on DNase I hypersensitivity of pS2 regulatory regions in MCF7 cells. 
C -Mapping of the DNase I hypersensitive sites in the 5’-flanking sequences of pS2 gene. D -
Influence of estradiol (E2), IGFI, and an estrogen antagonist (OH-Tam) on pS2 expression in MCF7 
cells. For the experimental details see Giamarchi et al., 1999. 

158
Giamarchi et al 
2. 
THE pS2 GENE 
We have investigated the chromatin structure of the regulatory region of 
pS2 gene in MCF-7, MDA MB 231, and HE5 cells treated or not with 
estradiol. Fig 2A shows the DNase I hypersensitivity profiles of pS2 gene in 
the 3 cell lines, treated or not with estradiol. In MCF7, in which pS2 
transcription is hormone-induced, there were two DNase I hypersensitive 
sites (pS2-HS1 and pS2-HS4) induced by estrogen treatment. In contrast, in 
MDA MB 231 and HE5 cells, in which pS2 is not expressed whether or not 
Fig. 3. Chromatin structure of CatD regulatory regions and gene expression. A – Comparison of
DNase I hypersensitivity of CatD gene in the 3 cell lines, untreated or treated with hormone (E2). 
B - Mapping of the DNase I hypersensitive sites in the 5’-flanking sequences of CatD gene. C –
Influence of estradiol (E2) and two anti-estrogens (ICI and OH-Tam) on CatD mRNA expression in 
the 3 cell lines. 
hormone is present, there was only one hormone-independent DNase I 

Estrogens and chromatin remodeling 
159
hypersensitive site (pS2-HS2). This site maps immediately upstream of site 
pS2-HS1, and encompasses a region containing an AP1 binding site (Fig 
2C). A synergistic effect of estrogens and IGFI on pS2 gene transcription 
has been described4. We have compared the chromatin structure of pS2 gene 
in MCF7 cells untreated or treated with estradiol, IGFI or both. Estrogen or 
IGF 
treatment 
induced 
DNase 
I 
hypersensitive 
sites 
that 
are 
indistinguishable (pS2-HS 1 and pS2-HS4, Fig 2B). Treatment with both 
IGFI and estradiol did not increase the intensity of the hypersensitive sites, 
contrasting with the effect on RNA synthesis (Fig 2D). This is the first 
description of a DNase I hypersensitive site induced by a growth factor5. The 
fact that hypersensitive sites induced by estradiol and IGFI 
are 
indistinguishable may be due to the recruitment of the partners from 
different signal transduction pathways in a large coactivator complex1,6.
3. 
THE CatD GENE 
We have performed the same chromatin structure analysis as for the pS2
gene in the three cell lines (Fig. 3). Contrasting with the results obtained for
pS2 gene, there is no hormone-dependent DNase I hypersensitive site in the
regulatory regions of CatD gene (Fig 3A), although RNA synthesis is
induced by estradiol in the hormone dependent cell line MCF7 (Fig 3C). In
HE5 cells the expression of estrogen receptor allows recovering the
hormonal regulation of CatD while in the parental cell line MDA MB 231
CatD was constitutively expressed at a high level (Fig 3C). In these two cell
lines the DNase I hypersensitivity profiles are indistinguishable. Both cell
lines display an additional site compared to MCF7 cells (CatD-HS4, Fig.
3A). Similar studies in other hormone-independent cell lines are in progress
to determine if the presence of this DNase I hypersensitive site is
characteristic of the hormone-independent status, or of MDA MB 231 cells.
4. 
CONCLUSION 
The promoters of pS2 
7,8 and CatD9,10 genes have been extensively 
studied with classical approaches. The comparison of chromatin structure 
changes in the regulatory regions of the two genes suggests that the 
mechanisms controlling their expression are different. The lack of 
expression of pS2 in cell lines MDA MB 231 and HE5 correlates with a 
closure of the hormone-dependent hypersensitive sites pS2-HS1 and pS2-
HS4. As it should be expected from mRNA measurements, the presence of 
ERa in HE5 cells has no effect on the chromatin structure. This indicates 

160
Giamarchi et al 
that in hormone-independent cells there is a closure of the chromatin over 
large domains (Fig. 1 - A), one of them containing the pS2 gene. Extinction 
of
ERα gene
in
hormone-independent
cells
may
obey
to
similar
mechanisms. It has been established that factors other than ERα are involved
in the progression of the cells towards hormone-independent growth2,11.
Such factors could also play a critical role 
in modulating chromatin 
structure. The situation for CatD gene is different. In hormone-dependent 
cells, CatD transcription is controlled by estrogens. However changes in 
transcription level are not accompanied by chromatin structure changes. 
Contrasting with pS2 gene, in hormone-independent cells, cathepsin D is 
constitutively expressed at a high level; in these cells, re-expression of ERα
allows recovering the hormonal control of CatD gene expression. This 
indicates that in hormone-independent cells, it is the lack of ERαthat results
in an abnormally high expression of CatD. The chromatin structure of the 
regulatory regions of CatD does not undergo a closure in hormone-
independent cells. DNase I hypersensitive sites are constitutive, allowing 
gene expression (actively transcribing chromatin). In the presence of 
unliganded ERαthere is a decrease in CatD expression. This decrease is not
accompanied by detectable changes in chromatin structure probably because 
the chromatin being already open, proteins can fully interact with each other 
and regulate transcription. In this context, the exact role of histone 
acetyltransferases, histone deacetylases12
and/or chromatin remodelling 
complexes remain to elucidate. 
5. 
REFERENCES 
1.
2.
3.
Montminy M. Something new to hang your hat on. Nature, 387,654-655,1997.
Levenson A and Jordan C. Transfection of the human estrogen receptor (ER) cDNA into 
ER-negative mammalian cell lines. J. Steroid Biochem. Molec. Biol., 51,229-239,1994.
Touitou I, Vignon F, Cavailles V and Rochefort H. Hormonal regulation of cathepsin D 
following transfection of the estrogen or progesterone receptor into three sex steroid 
hormone resistant cancer cell lines. J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol, 40, 23 1-237, 1991. 
Chalbos D, Philips A, Galtier F and Rochefort H. Synthetic antiestrogens modulate 
induction of pS2 and cathepsin-D messenger ribonucleic acid by growth factors and 
adenosine 3',5'- monophosphate in MCF7 cells. Endocrinology, 133, 571-576,1993. 
Giamarchi C, Solanas M, Chailleux C, Augereau P, Vignon F, Rochefort H and Richard-
Foy H. Chromatin structure of the regulatory regions of pS2 and cathepsin D genes in 
hormone-dependent and -independent breast cancer cell lines. Oncogene, 18, 533-
541,1999.
Torchia J, Rose DW, Inostroza J, Kamel Y, Westin S, Glass CK and Rosenfeld MG. 
The transcriptional co-activator p/CIP binds CBP and mediates nuclear-receptor
function. Nature, 387, 677-684,1997.
4.
5.
6.

Estrogens and chromatin remodeling 
161
7.
Berry M, Nunez AM and Chambon P. Estrogen-responsive element of the human pS2 
gene is an imperfectly palindromic sequence. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A, 86, 121 8-
1222,1989.
Nunez AM, Berry M, Imler JL and Chambon P. The 5' flanking region of the pS2 gene 
contains a complex enhancer region responsive to estrogens, epidermal growth factor, a 
tumor promoter (TPA), the c-Ha-ras oncoprotein and the c-jun protein. EMBO J, 8, 823-
829,1989.
Augereau P, Miralles F, Cavailles V, Gaudelet C, Parker M and Rochefort H. 
Characterisation of the proximal estrogen-responsive element of human cathepsin D 
gene. Molecular endocrinology, 8, 693-703,1994.
10. Cavailles V, Augereau P and Rochefort H. Cathepsin D gene is controlled by a mixed 
promoter, and estrogens stimulate only TATA-dependent transcription in breast cancer 
cells. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, 90, 203-207, 1993. 
11. Garcia M, Derocq D, Freiss G and Rochefort H. activation of estrogen receptor 
transfected into a receptor-negative breast cancer cell line decreases the metastatic and 
invasive potential of the cells. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci USA, 89, 11538-11542, 1992.
12. Utley RT, Ikeda K, Grant PA, Cote J, Steger DJ, Eberharter A, John S and Workman JL. 
Transcriptional activators direct histone acetyltransferase complexes to nucleosomes. 
Nature, 394, 498-502, 1998.
8.
9.

20.
The Use of Transplanted Mammary Gland to Study 
Cancer Signalling Pathways 
Paul A.W.Edwards 
Dept. of Pathology, University of Cambridge, U.K 
Key words: 
Mammary, breast cancer 
Abstract:
Mammary epithelium can be genetically manipulated by reconstituting a 
mammary gland, in an animal, from epithelium and a mammary fat pad from 
which the endogenous epithelium has been removed at 3 weeks of age. Genes 
can be introduced into the epithelium before transplantation using retrovirus 
vectors. To remove genes from the epithelium at present requires epithelium to 
be transplanted from knockout donor mice, but this is a valuable extension of 
knockout technology, as (a) it creates knockout epithelium in a normal stromal 
and systemic environment, or vice versa, and (b) where the knockout mouse 
does not survive into adulthood, epithelium can be rescued from embryos after 
about 12 days of gestation, and grown to form mature mammary epithelium in 
a normal recipient mammary fat pad. 
1.
MAMMARY TRANSPLANTS 
A powerful way to investigate the mammary gland is to genetically 
manipulate the epithelium by reconstructing the mammary gland, in vivo, 
from transplanted epithelial cells. Mammary epithelial cells are isolated from 
one mouse mammary gland and put into a mammary fat pad in another 
mouse, from which the natural epithelium has been removed. Remarkably, 
transplanted epithelial cells grow into the fat pad and form a mammary 
epithelium almost exactly like a naturally-occurring one, except that it is not 
connected to a nipple1. To introduce a gene into the mammary epithelium, 
the mammary epithelial cells to be transplanted can be infected with non- 
163

164
Edwards
replicating retrovirus vector between isolation from one mouse and 
transplantation into the host2,3 (Fig. 1). 
This approach has a number of advantages over the more familiar 
approach of creating a transgenic mouse with an exogenous gene driven by a 
mammary-specific promoter. The first advantage is that the gene is entirely 
confined to mammary epithelial cells, so any promoter can be used -
typically actin, SV40 or retrovirus LTR promoters have been used. In 
contrast, transgenics have to be made with mammary-specific promoters, the 
MMTV promoter, the WAP (Whey acidic protein) promoter or the beta- 
lactoglobulin promoter. All three are much more active in lactation than in 
virgin animals and the MMTV promoter at least is active in tissues other 
than mammary gland. A major difference between the approaches is that in 
the transgenics all mammary epithelial cells contain the introduced gene, and 
all are capable of expressing it, though in practice expression can be patchy. 
In the transplants infected with retrovirus, only a few percent of the 
transplanted cells express the gene, unless those cells have a selective 
advantage after transplantation3. However, while this is a weakness of 
transplantation where the whole gland is to be altered, it is a unique strength 
of the approach for modelling cancer development, as individual cells can be 
genetically altered among an excess of normal cells, a true model of the 
cancer situation. 
Examples of the use of this approach include the expression of mutant 
forms of the EGF-receptor family of receptors, such as neu, a point-mutated 
form of rat erbB2, and v-erbB, the original retroviral truncated EGF-receptor 
mutant. These gave focal abnormalities of growth pattern, as expected if 
clones or small groups of cells were expressing the introduced gene. There 
were striking differences in the patterns of abnormal growth. neu gave a 
spectrum of lesions, including DCIS and occasional tumours, that resembled 
histologically a range of lesions found in human breasts4. v-erbB on the other 
hand gave enlarged and distorted ducts with loose cells in the lumens5. Thus 
two closely-related receptors gave different alterations to growth pattern. 
Whether the difference was between erbB2 and erbB, or was due to the type 
of activating mutation, or even to the species of origin of the receptor (rat 
versus chicken) remains to be determined. A very different result was 
obtained when the genes myc, Wnt-1 and Wnt-4 were expressed this way2,6,7.
In all three cases, large parts or even the whole of a transplanted mammary 
epithelium were hyperplastic, suggesting that cells expressing the exogenous 
gene had a selective advantage over their normal neighbours during 
outgrowth of the transplant. This may be important as a model of cancer 
development3,8. Also, the pattern of growth in the virgin animal induced by 
expression of Wnt-1 and Wnt-4 was remarkably similar to the pattern 
induced early in pregnancy, suggesting that the normal change of pattern in 

Transplants to study cancer signalling pathways 
165
pregnancy may be signalled locally by a member of the Wnt family, perhaps 
Wnt-4 itself, which is expressed naturally in early pregnancy7. Other genes 
expressed 
this 
way 
include 
ras9,10
and 
the 
marker 
gene 
beta-
galactosidase11,12.
Transplantation can be used not only to introduce genes into epithelium, 
but also to manipulate mammary epithelium lacking a gene, and here the 
method solves different problems of the transgenic approach. In transgenic 
knockout mice where mammary epithelium is altered, it is not in general 
possible to tell whether the effect on the epithelium is due to alteration in the 
behaviour of the epithelial cells themselves, or is an indirect effect of a 
systemic change, or changes to the environment in which the epithelium 
grows. And, of course, in some cases no knockout mammary epithelium can 
be obtained because the mutation is lethal before the mice reach maturity. 
Both problems can often be solved by transplanting fragments of mammary 
epithelium between mice. 
For example, mice with null mutations in the cyclinD1 gene develop 
more or less normally, but the mammary epithelium fails to respond properly 
to pregnancy. This could be because the epithelial cells were unable to 
respond to signals, but it was at least as likely that they were not receiving 
signals. In pregnancy the mammary epithelium proliferates in response to 
systemic signals coming from, for example, the pituitary and the placenta, 
and these signals may well act on the stroma of the mammary fat pad to 
provoke local signals to the epithelium, as for many epithelial-mesenchymal
signals. To distinguish these possibilities we transplanted mammary 
epithelium from knockout mice into normal, histocompatible (an important 
issue as discussed below) recipients. The resulting mice had knockout 
epithelium in a normal fat pad and mouse, but they continued to show the 
same attenuated response to pregnancy, showing that most or all of the 
reduction in response to pregnancy was a failure within the epithelial cells 
themselves13. In principle, we could also have transplanted normal 
epithelium into knockout recipients to see if their mammary epithelium had a 
normal response, but in the mixed-background transgenic line we used, this 
combination would not have been histocompatible. Transplantation of, or 
into, transgenic mice is often complicated by the fact that transgenic lines are 
frequently made by crossing two strains of mice. The resulting transgenics 
individually 
have 
an 
unknown 
and 
variable 
combination 
of 
histocompatibility alleles from the two backgrounds. Such tissue can be 
transplanted into an F1 mouse from a cross between the two strains, as it has 
all the alleles, but nothing can be transplanted into these transgenics as they 
will almost invariably lack at least one allele from any donor chosen. The 
solution to this problem is for the transgenic knockout line to be made on a 
pure 129 background. 

166
Edwards
To solve the problem of lethality of mutations, it may often be possible to 
rescue mammary epithelium from embryonic or neonatal mice and transplant 
it into adult normal mice, where it grows to form epithelium apparently 
equivalent to mature adult epithelium. Transplantation can be done from 
about 12 or 13 days of gestation, and indeed the developing mammary 
glands, or rather the nipples, are easiest to find at or soon after this point, 
before the presence of hair follicles and folds in the skin make them more 
difficult to recognise. 
In the future it will probably be possible to create clones of knockout 
epithelial cells in a normal fat pad, to model clonal loss of a tumour 
suppressor gene. This could be done by transplanting epithelium from 
conditional knockout mice - in which the gene of interest is flanked by lox
sites14 - and inducing knockout of the genes in clones by infecting them with 
a cre -expressing retrovirus. (Cre protein catalyses recombination between 
lox sites).
Fig. 1. Creating genetically-manipulated mammary epithelium by transplantation 
2. 
REFERENCES 
1.
DeOme KB, Faulkin, LJ, Bern HA, Blair P B (1959). Development of mammary tumc 
from hyperplastic alveolar nodules transplanted into gland-free mammary fat pads of 
female C3H mice. Cancer Research 19, 515-520. 
Edwards PAW, Ward JL, Bradbury JM (1988). Alteration of morphogenesis by the v-
myc oncogene in transplants of mouse mammary gland. Oncogene 2, 407-412.
Edwards PAW (1996). Tissue reconstitution or transgenic mammary gland technique for 
modelling breast cancer development. In Mammary tumour cell cycle, differentiation 
and metastasis: advances in cellular and molecular biology of breast cancer, R. B. 
Dickson and M. E. Lippman, eds. (Boston: Kluwer Academic), pp. 23-36.
Bradbury JM, Amo J, Edwards PAW (1993). Induction of epithelial abnormalities that 
resemble human breast lesions by the expression of the ne/erbB2 oncogene in 
reconstituted mouse mammary gland. Oncogene 8, 1551-1558.
2.
3.
4.

Transplants to study cancer signalling pathways 
5.
167
Abram CL, Bradbury JM, Page MJ, Edwards PAW (1 995). v-erbB induces abnormal 
patterns of growth in mammary epithelium. In Intercellular Signalling in the Mammary 
Gland, C. J. Wilde, M. Peaker and C. H. Knight, eds. (New York: Plenum), pp. 67-68.
Edwards PAW, Hiby SE, Papkoff J, Bradbury JM (1992). Hyperplasia of mouse 
mammary epithelium induced by expression of the Wnt-1 (int-1) oncogene in 
reconstituted mammary gland. Oncogene 7, 204 1-2051.
Bradbury JM, Edwards PAW, Niemeyer CC, Dale TC (1995). Wnt-4 expression induces 
a pregnancy-like growth pattern in reconstituted mammary glands in virgin mice. Dev 
Biol 170, 553-563.
8. 
Edwards PAW (1993). Tissue reconstitution models of breast cancer. Cancer Surveys 16, 
9. 
Aguilar-Cordova E, Strange R, Young LJT, Billy HT, Gumerlock PH, Cardiff RD 
(1 99 1). Viral Ha-ras mediated mammary tumour progression. Oncogene 6, 1601 -1607.
10. Bradbury JM, Sykes H, Edwards PAW (1 991). Induction of mouse mammary tumours in 
a transplantation system by sequential introduction of the myc and ras oncogenes. Int J 
Cancer 48, 908-915.
11. Smith GH, Gallaghan D, Zweibel JA, Freeman SM, Bassin RH, Callaghan R (1991). 
Long-term in vivo expression of genes introduced by retrovirus-mediated transfer into 
mammary epithelial cells. Journal of Virology 65, 6365-6370.
12. Edwards PAW, Abram CL Bradbury JM (1996). Genetic manipulation of mammary 
epithelium by transplantation. Journal of Mammary Gland Biology and Neoplasia 1, 75-
89.
13. Fantl F, Edwards PAW, Steel JH, Vonderhaar BK, Dickson C (1999) The Impaired 
Mammary Gland Development in Cyl-l-/- mice during pregnancy and Lactation is 
Epithelial Cell Autonomous. Developmental Biology, 212: 1 - 11
14. Xu X, Wagner KU, Larson D, Weaver Z, Li C, Ried T, Hennighausen L, Wynshaw-
Boris A, Deng CX (1999) Conditional mutation of Brcal in mammary epithelial cells 
results in blunted ductal morphogenesis and tumour formation. Nat Genet 22, 37-43
6.
7.
79-96.

21.
Development of Mammary Gland Requires Normal 
βl-Integrin Function
Marisa M. Faraldo, Marie-Ange Deugnier, Jean Paul Thiery and Marina A. 
Glukhova
UMR 144, CNRS-Institut Curie, Section de Recherche, Paris, France. 
Key words: 
Abstract:
Mammary epithelium, Integrins, Transgenic mice 
To study the role of βl-integrins in mammary gland development we have
generated transgenic mice expressing a dominant negative mutant of the βl-
integrin chain in the mammary epithelium. The transgenic glands presented a 
delayed development in pregnancy and lactation due to decreased epithelial 
cell proliferation and increased apoptosis, whereas at the beginning of 
lactation, expression of milk proteins, WAP and β-casein was diminished. In
correlation with transgene expression, the basement membrane component, 
laminin, and the β4 integrin were accumulated at the lateral surface of luminal
epithelial cells, revealing defects in polarization. Our data show that β1-
integrins are involved in vivo in the control of proliferation, apoptosis, 
differentiation, 
and 
maintenance 
of baso-apical 
polarity 
of mammary 
epithelium.
1. 
INTRODUCTION 
The mammary gland consists of secretory alveoli interconnected by a 
system of branching ducts. Its development is tightly regulated and needs the 
concerted action of soluble and extracellular matrix bound factors as well as 
the correct cell-cell and cell-matrix interactions. 
A number of studies in different cell systems, including the mammary 
gland, have shown that cell-matrix interactions are important regulators of 
cell growth and programmed cell death1. In addition, extracellular matrix 
(ECM) can regulate the phenotype of mammary epithelium. Particularly, 
169

170
Faraldo et al 
adhesion of mammary epithelial cells to laminin is believed to mediate β-
casein gene expression
2, whereas activity of STAT5 transcription factor, an 
essential regulator of milk gene transcription, is also controlled by cell-ECM 
interactions3.
Integrins are the major cellular ECM receptors. They are transmembrane 
heterodimers constituted by non-covalently associated α and β subunits. The 
large extracellular domain of integrins binds to various ligands, i.e. to the 
ECM proteins or to other cell surface receptors. The cytoplasmic domain of 
the receptor interacts with the cytoskeletal complexes triggering a signal 
transduction cascade in response to ligand binding4,5,6.
a2b1,a3b1,a6b1, a6b4 
LUMINAL EPITHELIUM 
BASAL MYOEPITHELIUM 
a1b1,a2b1,a3b1,a6b1, a6b4 
Figure I. Integrins in the mammary gland bilayer. 
In the mammary gland bilayer, luminal epithelial cells express α2β1,
α3β1, α6β1 and α6β4, integrin dimers and basal myoepithelial cells present, 
in addition, α1β17,8 (Fig.1). To study the involvement of β1-integrins in the 
cellular functions of mammary epithelium in vivo, we have targeted the 
expression of a transgene coding for a chimeric molecule containing the 
cytoplasmic and the transmembrane domains of the β1-integrin subunit and 
the extracellular domain of the T-cell differentiation antigen, CD4, to the 
luminal mammary epithelium using MMTV promoter. Such chimera neither 
binds to α-integrin subunits, nor interacts with the ECM integrin ligands. 
However, in vitro, it was shown to be delivered to focal contacts of the 
adherent cells and, if expressed at high level, to interfere with integnn 
functions such as adhesion to ECM proteins and FAK phosphorylation 
following integrin clustering9. Thus the chimeric molecule can uncouple 
adhesion from the intracellular integrin-associated events and acts as a 
dominant inhibitor of integrin function (Fig. 2A). 

β1 Integrins in mammary gland development
2. 
GENERATION OF TRANSGENIC ANIMALS 
171
Four founders (F0) expressing the βl-chimera
under the control of
MMTV promoter were generated. The females from 3 transgenic lines were 
able to feed their litters of normal size, whereas 25% of the females of line 
17 lost some or all the pups during the 1st and 2nd days of lactation. 
Northern blot analysis of glands from different developmental stages has 
shown that the transgene was already expressed in 8-week-old virgin mice, 
although its expression was significantly up-regulated in pregnancy, and 
reach the maximal levels in lactation. The expression of the transgene, was 
high in line 17, moderate, in line 42, and weak, in lines 44 and 46. 
Consistent with the transgene expression levels, the morphological 
differences described below were more drastic in females from line 17, 
much less pronounced in line 42, and hardly detectable in lines 44 and 46. 
3.
EFFECTS OF TRANSGENE EXPRESSION ON 
MAMMARY EPITHELIUM 
In the transgenic animals, we have analysed the mammary gland 
morphology, proliferation and apoptosis rates and differentiation of luminal 
epithelial cells at different stages of the mammary gland development. 
3.1 
Delay in the development of mammary glands 
expressing βl-chimera
Morphological analysis of the wild-type and transgenic glands at 
different developmental stages has shown the first alterations at mid-
pregnancy stage. By day 10- 12 of pregnancy the transgenic glands appeared 
smaller with a branching pattern less complex than the one observed in 
normal glands (Fig. 2B). Histological analysis of 2-day-lactating wild-type
glands has shown a fat pad completely occupied by the secretory epithelium, 
with small fat stroma islets between the lobules. On the contrary, in the 
transgenic glands, the alveoli appeared sparse and were surrounded by vast 
areas of fat stroma. 
Later in lactation no significant morphological differences between wild-
type and transgenic glands were detected. 

172
Faraldo et al 
Figure 2. A) Perturbation of β1 integrin functions in the presence of transgene. B) Whole
mount staining of mammary glands from wild-type (WT) and βl-transgenic (Tg) animals at
12 days of pregnancy. 
The delayed development of the mammary glands of the transgenic mice 
might be due to decreased proliferation and/or increased apoptosis rates. We 
have found that proliferation was significantly diminished in transgenic 
glands at mid-pregnancy as well as at the second day of lactation (Table 1). 
On the other hand, TUNNEL analysis has revealed an increase in the 
apoptosis rates in 12 and 18-day pregnant and in 2-day lactating transgenic 
glands whereas later in lactation, similar to wild-type glands, apoptosis rates 
were low and did not exceed 0.1% (Table 2). 
Table 1. BrdU incorporation in normal and transgenic mammary glands 
Stages 
Wild-type 
Transgenic 
12-day-pregnant 
19.91 ± 1.47 
12.10± 2.35 
2-day-lactating 
7.96 ± 0.64 
3.21 ± 2.08 
Values presented as mean ± SD. 
Table 2. Apoptosis in normal and transgenic mammary glands 
Stages 
Wild-type 
Transgenic 
12-day-pregnant 
1.11 ± 0.11 
2.46 ± 1.19 
2-day-lactating 
0.28 ± 0.10 
1.15 ± 0.41 
18-day-pregnant
0.42 ± 0.10 
0.90 ± 0.18 
4-day-lactating
< 0.1 
< 0.1 
10-day-lactating
< 0.1 
< 0.1 
Values presented as mean ± SD. 

β1 Integrins in mammary gland development
173
3.2
βl-chimera
expression
affects
differentiation
of
secretory epithelium during lactation 
To 
determine 
whether 
the 
transgene 
expression 
affected 
the 
differentiation of mammary secretory epithelium, we analysed by Northern 
blot the expression of WAP and β-casein genes in 2-day-lactating normal
and transgenic mammary glands. The amount of mRNA for both proteins are 
reduced in transgenic glands, however the expression levels varied in 
different animals. We have observed 40-80% and 20-60% reduction in the 
amount of mRNA for WAP and β-casein, respectively. These data are in
keeping with the results of the in vitro studies suggesting that expression of 
β-casein gene in mammary epithelial cells requires interaction with laminin
mediated by β1-integrin2 and that DNA-binding activity of a transcription
factor STAT5, regulator of milk protein gene expression, depends on 
adhesion to basement membrane3.
3.3
βl-chimera expression in luminal epithelial cells
affects polarity 
Polarity is an important property of all organized epithelia and its 
establishment is mediated by the interaction of the cells with their basement 
membrane. We have detected evidences of altered cell polarity in the 
transgenic mammary epithelium as well as in cultured mammary epithelial 
cells expressing the transgene. 
Overall, the mammary epithelium bilayer organization in the transgenic 
animals appeared normal, and the basement membrane around alveoli 
appeared continuous as revealed by staining with an anti-laminin antibody. 
However, surprisingly, in addition to basal localization, at the sites of 
transgene expression, laminin was accumulated at the lateral surface of 
luminal epithelial cells. Similar to laminin, distribution of the β4-integrin
chain was altered and it was colocalized with laminin at lateral cell surfaces. 
These observations reveal defects in cell polarization and suggest 
malformation of cell-cell junctions. 
We have isolated epithelial cells from mammary glands of wild-type and 
transgenic mice and cultured them in Matrigel, in order to compare their 
ability to establish polarity when interacting with the basement membrane 
components in vitro. The cells isolated from wild-type animals formed cysts 
if cultured in Matrigel, while the cells obtained from the transgenic glands 
remained in aggregates without lumen, failing to establish polarity and to get 
organized into cysts. In agreement with our results, polarization and 

174
Faraldo et al 
organization of normal mammary epithelial cells into cysts in collagen gels 
as well as in Matrigel were reported to require function of β1-integrins10.
In conclusion, our data prove that β1-integrins are involved in growth
control and differentiation of mammary epithelium and are essential for 
normal mammary gland development and function. We are currently 
searching for the intracellular signalling pathways responsible for the 
impaired growth and differentiation control in the transgenic glands during 
pregnancy and lactation. 
Acknowledgements
Cancer (ARC 1661). 
This work was supported by the Association pour la Recherche contre le 
4. 
REFERENCES 
1. Frisch, S.M. and Ruoslahti, E., 1997, Integrins and anoikis. Curr. Op. Cell Biol., 9: 701-
706.
2. Streuli, C.H., Schmidhauser, C., Bailey, N., Yurchenko, P., Skubitz, A.P.N., Rockelley, C., 
Bissell, M.J. ,1995, Laminin mediates tissue-specific gene expression in mammary 
epithelia. J. Cell Biol., 129: 591-603.
3. Streuli, C.H., Edwards, G.M., Delcommenne, 
M., Whitelaw, B.A., Burdon, T.G., 
Schindler, C. and Watson, C.,1995, Stat5 as a target for regulation by ECM. J. Biol. 
Chem., 270: 21639-21644.
4. Dedhar, S. and Hannigan, G.E., 1996, Integrin cytoplasmic interactions and bidirectional 
transmembrane signalling. Curr. Op. Cell Biol., 8: 657-669.
5. Giancotti, F.G., 1997, Integrin signaling: specificity and control of cell survival and cell 
cycle progression. Curr. Op. Cell Biol., 9: 69 1-700.
6. Meredith, J.E., Winitz, S., McArthur Lewis, J., Hess, S., Ren, X.-D., Renshaw, M.W. and 
Schwartz, M.A., 1996, The regulation of growth and intracellular signaling by integrins. 
Endocrine Rev. 17: 207-220.
7. Sonnenberg, A., Daams, H., van der Valk, M.A., Hilken, J. and Hilgers, G., 1986, 
Development of mouse mammary gland: identification of stages of differentiation of 
luminal and myoepithelial cells using monoclonal antibodies and polyvalent antiserum 
against keratin. J. Histochem. Cytochem. 34: 1037-1046.
8. Glukhova, M., Koteliansky, V., Sastre, X. and Thiery, J.P., 1995, Adhesion systems in 
normal breast and in invasive breast carcinoma. Am. J. Pathol. 146: 706-716.
9. Lukashev, M.E., Sheppard, D. and Pytela, R., 1994, Disruption of integrin function and 
induction
of
tyrosine
phosphorylation
by
the
autonomously
expressed β1
integrin
cytoplasmic domain. J. Biol. Chem., 269: 183 11-18314.
10. Howlett A.F., Bailey N., Damsky C., Petersen O.W. and Bissell M.J., 1995, Cellular 
growth and survival are mediated by βl integrins in normal human breast epithelium but
not in breast carcinoma. J. Cell Sci., 108: 1945-1957.

22.
Repression of the Putative Tumor Suppressor Gene 
Bardl or Expression of Notch4(Int-3) Oncogene 
Subvert the Morphogenetic Properties of Mammary 
Epithelial Cells 
J.V. Soriano1, I. Irminger-Finger2, H. Uyttendaele3, G. Vaudan2, J. Kitajewski3,
A.-P. Sappino2 and R. Montesano1.
1Dept. of Morphology, and 2Division of Oncology, University Medical Center, Geneva, 
Switzerland. 3Dept. of Pathology, Columbia University, New York, USA 
Key words: 
Bard1, Brcal, breast cancer, int-3, morphogenesis, Notch, oncogene, tumor 
invasion
We have investigated whether repression of the putative tumor suppressor gene 
BARD1 or expression of the Notch4(int-3) oncogene in non-tumorigenic
mammary epithelial cells affects their in vitro morphogenetic properties. Bard l
(Brcal -associated ring domain) is a protein interacting with Brcal and thought to 
be involved in Brca l -mediated tumor suppression. To investigate the potential role 
of Bardl in mammary gland development, we repressed its expression in TAC-2
cells, a murine mammary epithelial cell line which, when grown in three-
dimensional collagen gels, forms branching ducts in response to hepatocyte 
growth factor (HGF) and alveolar-like cysts in response to hydrocortisone. 
Whereas Bardl repression did not markedly modify the tubulogenic response of 
TAC-2 cells to HGF, it dramatically altered cyst development, resulting in the 
formation of compact cell aggregates devoid of central lumen. In addition, when 
grown to post-confluence in two-dimensional cultures, Bard l -suppressed TAC-2
cells overcame contact-inhibition of cell proliferation and formed multiple cell 
layers. The Notch4(int-3) oncogene, which codes for a constitutively activated 
form of the Notch4 receptor, has been reported to induce undifferentiated 
carcinomas when expressed in the mammary gland. The potential effect of 
activated Notch4 on mammary gland morphogenesis was investigated by retroviral 
expression of the oncogene in TAC-2 cells. Notch4(int-3) expression was found to 
significantly reduce HGF-induced tubulogenesis and to markedly inhibit 
hydrocortisone-induced cyst formation. In addition, Notch4(int-3) expressing 
TAC-2 cells formed multilayers in post-confluent cultures and exhibited an 
Abstract:
175

176
Soriano et al 
invasive behavior when grown on the surface of collagen gels. Taken together, 
these results indicate that both repression of Bardl and expression of Notch4(int-
3) disrupt cyst morphogenesis and induce an invasive phenotype in TAC-2
mammary epithelial cells. 
1. 
INTRODUCTION 
During the multistage process of mammary carcinogenesis, stepwise 
accumulation of genetic changes causes uncontrolled growth, disruption of 
normal glandular architecture, and invasion of epithelial cells into the 
adjacent stroma. While unscheduled proliferation also occurs in benign 
adenomas, subversion of orderly epithelial tissue organization is a hallmark 
of malignancy and plays a crucial role in tumor progression. Interestingly, 
the inability of carcinoma cells to correctly polarize and to generate 
histotypic three-dimensional structures is reflected in in vitro assays of 
morphogenesis. 
Thus, unlike cells derived from normal mammary 
epithelium, breast carcinoma cells are unable to form duct-like or alveolar-
like structures when grown in collagen or basement membrane gels6,9.
Overexpression of normal or mutated proto-oncogenes or inactivation of 
tumor suppressor genes has been shown to result in mammary 
carcinogenesis and/or transformation of mammary epithelial cells in vitro. 
However, the potential role of oncogenes and tumor suppressor genes in the 
control of epithelial architecture has only recently begun to be elucidated2,8.
To address this question, we have investigated whether repression of the 
putative tumor suppressor gene Bard1 or expression of the Notch4 (int-3) 
oncogene in non-tumorigenic mammary epithelial cells affects their in vitro 
morphogenetic properties. For this purpose, we utilized TAC-2 clonal 
mammary epithelial cells, which when grown in three-dimensional collagen 
gels, have the ability to form branching tubules in response to HGF and 
alveolar-like cysts in response to hydrocortisone11. The studies summarized 
below indicate that both repression of Bard1 and expression of Notch4(int-3)
disrupt cyst morphogenesis and induce an invasive phenotype in TAC-2
mammary epithelial cells. 
2. 
REPRESSION OF BARD1 (BRCA1-ASSOCIATED
RING DOMAIN) GENE IN TAC-2 CELLS 
BARD1 is a protein that interacts with the product of the breast cancer 
susceptibility gene BRCA1. The identification of BARD1 mutations in 

Disruption of mammary morphometries in vitro 
177
human breast carcinomas has suggested that this protein participate in 
BRCA1-mediated tumor suppression12. However, whether BARD1 plays a 
role in mammary gland morphogenesis is not known. To address this 
question, we reduced levels of Bardl expression in TAC-2 mammary 
epithelial cells. By transfecting TAC-2 cells with an antisense sequence of 
murine Bard1, we obtained a partial reduction of Bard1 mRNA and protein 
expression levels. This resulted in marked phenotypic changes consisting of 
increased cell size and high frequency of multinucleated cells, when 
compared to mock-transfected TAC-2 cells. 
Since disruption of normal glandular architecture is an early step in the 
process of mammary tumorigenesis, it was relevant to assess whether Bard1
repression would affect the morphogenetic properties of TAC-2 cells. When 
grown in collagen gels under control conditions, mock-transfected TAC-2
cells gave rise to small colonies with a morphology ranging from irregular 
cell aggregates to poorly branched structures. 
Fig. 1. Repression of Bard1 abrogates hydrocortisone-induced lumen formation by TAC-2
cells. Cells suspended in collagen gels were incubated with 1 µg/ml hydrocortisone and 
10 µg/ml insulin for 8 d. Under these conditions, mock-transfected cells form alveolar-
like cystic structures containing a wide lumen (A) delimited by a palisade of cubic 
epithelial cells (D). In marked contrast, Bard1 repressed cells form solid ball-like
structures (B) devoid of lumen (E), or irregular aggregates (C) containing small focal 
lumina (F). A-C, Bright-field microscopy; D-F, semi thin sections. Bars, 100 µm. 
[Reproduced from the J. of Cell Biol. 143, 1329-1339, by copyright permission of the 
Rockefeller University Press.] 
Addition of HGF to the cultures induced the formation of highly 
arborized branching cords, as previously observed with non-transfected
TAC-2 cells11. Addition of HGF to collagen gel cultures of Bard1 repressed
cells induced branching tubulogenesis to a similar extent as in mock-

178
Soriano et al 
transfected cells. These findings suggest that Bard1 does not play a major 
role in the elongation and branching of duct-like structures by TAC-2 cells4.
We next analyzed whether Bard1
repression could influence lumen 
formation by TAC-2 cells. When grown in collagen gels in the presence of 
hydrocortisone, mock-transfected cells formed spheroidal cysts enclosing a 
widely patent lumen (Fig. 1A) delimited by a palisade of cubic epithelial 
cells (Fig. 1D), as previously observed with non-transfected TAC-2 cells11.
In contrast, under the same experimental conditions, two different clones of 
Bard1 repressed cells formed either solid aggregates devoid of lumen (Fig. 
1 B,E) or irregularly shaped cell aggregates occasionally containing small 
focal lumina (Fig. 1C,F). A quantitative analysis demonstrated a marked 
inhibition of lumen formation in Bard1 repressed cells, as evidenced by a 
significant 6-fold and 8-fold (p= 0.001) decrease in the mean percentage of 
cysts, when compared to mock-transfected cells4. Taken together, these 
results demonstrate that repression of Bard1
expression inhibits the 
formation of alveolar-like cystic structures by TAC-2 cells. 
Since loss of contact-mediated inhibition of proliferation is a hallmark of 
malignant transformation, we analyzed the growth properties of mock-
transfected and Bard1 repressed TAC-2 cells. Although both cell lines 
showed a similar proliferation rate in subconfluent cultures, they had a 
markedly different behavior when grown to post-confluence. Whereas 
postconfluent mock-transfected cells formed regular, contact-inhibited
monolayer, Bardl repressed cells overlapped each other and continued to 
grow in a disorganized criss-cross pattern. This differential behavior was 
further enhanced in the presence of exogenous growth factors. Thus, 
addition of either epidermal growth factor (EGF) or insulin-like growth 
factor-I (IGF-I) did not induce multilayering in mock-transfected cells, but 
resulted in a marked degree of stratification in Bard1 repressed cells (Fig. 2). 
This indicates that Bard1 repressed cells have lost sensitivity to contact-
inhibition of growth. However, Bard1 repressed cells lacked the ability to 
grow under anchorage-independent conditions, and were not tumorigenic in 
vivo4. Altogether, our findings suggest that repression of Bard1 induces a 
partially transformed phenotype in TAC-2 cells, consisting of disruption of 
normal alveolar-like morphogenesis and loss of contact-inhibition of cell 
growth. It remains to be established whether complete inhibition of Bard1
expression could induce a fully malignant phenotype. 

Disruption of mammary morphometrics in vitro 
179
Fig. 2. Loss of contact-mediated inhibition of cell proliferation in Bard1- repressed cells. Cells 
were seeded in collagen-coated wells at saturating cell density and grown for 2 d, at 
which time the cultures were incubated in the absence or the presence of 20 ng/ml EGF 
for a further 5 d. In EGF-supplemented cultures, mock-transfected cells form a contact-
inhibited cobblestone-like monolayer (a), whereas Bard1 repressed cells (b) grow in a 
disordered crisscross pattern. (c and d) Thin sections perpendicular to the plane of 
cultures shown in a and b demonstrate the lack of stratification in mock-transfected cells 
and the obvious multilayering in Bard1 repressed cells. Bars: (a and b) 100 µm; (c and 
d) 5 µm. [Reproduced from the Journal of Cell Biology, 143, 1329-1339, by copyright 
permission of the Rockefeller University Press.] 
3.
EXPRESSION OF AN ACTIVATED NOTCH4 
(INT-3) ONCOPROTEIN IN TAC-2 CELLS 
Genes of the Notch family encode transmembrane receptor proteins that 
regulate cell differentiation in a variety of cell types in both vertebrates and 
invertebrates1. Notch4 (int-3) is an oncogenic, truncated form of Notch4 
which has most of its extracellular domain deleted and behaves as a 
constitutively activated receptor7,13. Expression of Notch4(int-3) as a 
transgene in the mouse impairs mammary gland ductal morphogenesis and 
promotes the formation of undifferentiated carcinoma3,5,10. To gain insight 

180
Soriano et al 
into the mechanisms that might be responsible for the tumorigenicity of this 
oncogene, we studied the biological consequences of Notch4(int-3) 
expression on the in vitro morphogenetic properties of TAC-2 cells. We 
found that retroviral expression of Notch4(int-3) in TAC-2 mammary 
epithelial cells impairs HGF-induced formation of branching tubules in 
collagen gels13. Interestingly, the structures formed by Notch4(int-3) 
expressing cells (TAC-2 int-3 cells) in collagen gels were not only less 
branched than those generated by mock-transfected TAC-2 cells, but were 
also frequently devoid of a central lumen. These observations led us to 
investigate whether expression of Notch4(int-3), in addition to inhibiting 
branching tubulogenesis, might specifically interfere with the process of 
lumen formation. When grown in collagen gels in the presence of 
hydrocortisone, mock-transfected TAC-2 cells formed alveolar-like cystic 
structures containing a wide lumen (cf. Fig. 1A,D), as previously observed 
with wild type TAC-2 cells4,11. In contrast, TAC-2 int-3 cells were virtually 
unable to form alveolar-like cystic colonies, and generated instead solid cell 
aggregates devoid of a central lumen. Thin section electron microscopy 
revealed that the wall of the cysts formed by mock-transfected cells 
consisted of closely apposed, well polarized epithelial cells. Intercellular 
junctions were located between the apical portions of adjacent cells, and 
microvilli were mostly restricted to the surface of the cell facing the lumen 
of the cyst (Fig. 3A). In marked contrast, the colonies formed by TAC-2 int-
3 cells consisted of loosely associated epithelial cells lacking obvious cell 
polarity. The cells were separated by a wide intercellular space bridged by 
cytoplasmic processes establishing focal cell-cell contacts. Abundant 
polymorphic microvilli projected from the entire cell surface (except for 
regions of cell-collagen interactions), and no clearly defined apical pole 
could be identified (Fig. 3B)14. Taken together with the finding that TAC-2
int-3 cells fail to undergo branching tubulogenesis in response to HGF, these 
results demonstrate that activated Notch4(int-3) subverts the normal 
morphogenetic properties of TAC-2 cells. They also suggest that formation 
of disorganized cell aggregates by TAC-2 int-3 cells recapitulates the 
architectural destructuring observed in anaplastic carcinomas induced by 
transgenic expression of Notch4(int-3) 3,5,10.

Disruption of mammary morphometries in vitro 
181
Fig. 3. Disruption of cyst morphogenesis and of apico-basal polarity by Notch4 (int-3). Thin 
sections of colonies formed in collagen gels by mock- and Notch4(int-3)-transfected
TAC-2 cells incubated with hydrocortisone. (A) Wall of a cyst formed by mock-
transfected cells. (B) Portion of a colony formed by TAC-2 int-3 cells. Bars, 5 µm. See 
text for details. 
To determine whether expression of Notch4 (int-3) in TAC-2 cells 
induces additional changes that may be relevant to the process of mammary 
carcinogenesis, we evaluated the ability of TAC-2 cells to invade three- 
dimensional collagen gels. When grown on a collagen gel under control 
conditions, mock-transfected cells formed a cobblestone-like monolayer and 
remained exclusively confined to the surface of the gel. Addition of EGF to 
the cultures did not induce appreciable invasion (Fig. 4A,C). In contrast, 
TAC-2 int-3 cells invaded the underlying collagen matrix as thick branched 
cords. Invasion was enhanced by the addition of EGF to the cultures (Fig. 
4B,D) and was suppressed in a dose-dependent manner by a synthetic 
inhibitor of matrix metalloproteinases. These results demonstrate that 
expression of Notch4(int-3) in TAC-2 cells is associated with the acquisition 
of invasive properties. 

182
Soriano et al 
Fig. 4. Expression of Notch4 (int-3) confers an invasive phenotype to TAC-2 cells. TAC-2
cells were seeded onto the surface of a collagen gel and grown for 6 days in the 
presence of 20 ng/ml EGF (A,B) or 20 ng/ml EGF and 10µg/ml insulin (C,D). Whereas
mock-transfected cells (A,C) form a monolayer exclusively confined to the surface of 
the gel, TAC-2 int-3 cells (B,D) invade the underlying matrix as thick branched cords. 
(A,B) Phase-contrast microscopy (focus is 20µm beneath the surface of the gel); bars, 
150 µm. (C,D) Semi-thin sections perpendicular to the surface of the gel; bars, 100 µm.
We next investigated whether Notch4 (int-3) expression may alter 
contact-inhibition of cell proliferation. We found that whereas mock- 
transfected cells form cobblestone-like, contact-inhibited monolayers, TAC- 
2 int-3 cells grow in a disorganized criss-cross pattern and overlap each 
other in post-confluent cultures. These findings suggest that Notch4(int-3)
blunt the responsiveness of TAC-2 cells to the normal regulatory 
mechanisms responsible for contact-inhibition of proliferation, thereby 
maintaining them in a hyperproliferative state. However, we found that 
TAC-2 int-3 cells are unable to form colonies when grown under anchorage- 
independent conditions. Thus, while exhibiting some properties of 
transformed cells (i.e., disorganized growth in collagen gels and cell 
multilayering in two-dimensional cultures), TAC-2 int-3 cells are still 
dependent on cell-substratum adhesion for proliferation. 
Taken together, our results demonstrate that expression of Notch4 (int-3) 
in TAC-2 cells disrupts their ability to form organized lumen-containing 
structures, confers upon them an invasive phenotype, and suppresses 
contact-inhibition of cell proliferation. These alterations may represent 

Disruption of mammary morphometrics in vitro 
183
important contributing factors in the development of anaplastic carcinomas 
observed in Notch4(int-3) transgenic mice3,5,10.
4. 
CONCLUSION 
The studies we have summarized above suggest that subversion of the 
normal morphogenetic properties of mammary epithelial cells represent an 
important mechanism by which loss of tumor suppressors or expression of 
oncogenes promotes malignant progression of epithelial tumors. 
5. 
REFERENCES 
1.
2.
Artavanis-Tsakonas S, Rand MD, Lake RJ. Notch signaling: cell fate control and signal 
integration in development. Science, 284, 770-776, 1999. 
Fialka, I., Schwarz, H., Reichmann, E., Oft, M., Busslinger, M., and Beug, H. The 
estrogen-dependent c-JunER protein causes a reversible loss of mammary epithelial cell 
polarity involving a destabilization of adherens junctions. J Cell Biol 132, 1115-1132, 
1996.
Gallahan D, Jhappan C, Robinson G, Hennighausen L, Sharp R, Kordon E, Callahan R, 
Merlino G, Smith GH. Expression of a truncated Int3 gene in developing secretory 
mammary epithelium specifically retards lobular differentiation resulting in 
tumorigenesis. Cancer Res 56, 1775-1785, 1996. 
Irminger-Finger I, Soriano JV, Vaudan G, Montesano R, Sappino AP. In vitro repression 
of Brcal -associated RING domain gene, Bard1, induces phenotypic changes in 
mammary epithelial cells. J Cell Biol 143, 1329-1339, 1998. 
Jhappan C, Gallahan D, Stahle C, Chu E, Smith GH, Merlino G, Callahan R. Expression 
of an activated Notch-related int-3 transgene interferes with cell differentiation and 
induces neoplastic transformation in mammary and salivary glands. Genes Dev 6, 345-
355, 1992. 
Petersen OW, Ronnov-Jessen L, Howlett A R, Bissell MJ. Interaction with basement 
membrane serves to rapidly distinguish growth and differentiation pattern of normal and 
malignant human breast epithelial. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 89, 9064-9068, 1992. 
Robbins J, Blondel BJ, Gallahan D, Callahan R. Mouse mammary tumor gene int-3: a 
member of the notch gene family transforms mammary epithelial cells. J Virol 66, 2594-
2599, 1992. 
Reichmann, E., Schwarz, H., Deiner, E. M., Leitner, I., Eilers, M., Berger, J., Busslinger, 
and M., Beug, H. Activation of an inducible c-FosER fusion protein causes loss of 
epithelial polarity and triggers epithelial-fibroblastoid cell conversion. Cell 71 : 1103- 
1116,1992.
Shearer M, Bartkova J, Bartek J, Berdichevsky F, Barnes D, Millis R, Taylor-
Papadimitriou J. Studies of clonal cell lines developed from primary breast cancers 
indicate that the ability to undergo morphogenesis in vitro is lost early in malignancy. Int 
J Cancer 5 1,602-6 12, 1992. 
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.

184
Soriano et al 
10. Smith GH, Gallahan D, Diella F, Jhappan C, Merlino G, Callahan R. Constitutive 
expression of a truncated tNT3 gene in mouse mammary epithelium impairs 
differentiation and functional development. Cell Growth Differ 6, 563-577, 1995. 
11. Soriano, J. V., Pepper, M. S., Nakamura, T., Orci, L., and Montesano, R. Hepatocyte 
growth factor stimulates extensive development of branching duct-like structures by 
cloned mammary gland epithelial cells. J Cell Sci 108, 413-430, 1995.
12. Thai TH, Du F, Tsan JT, Jin Y, Phung A, Spillmann MA, Massa HF, Muller CY, Ashfaq 
R, Mathis JM, Miller DS, Trask BJ, Baer R, Bowcock AM. Mutations in the Brcal-
associated RING domain (BARD1) gene in primary breast, ovarian, and uterine cancers. 
Hum Mol Genet 7, 195-202,1998
13. Uyttendaele H, Soriano JV, Montesano R, Kitajewski J. Notch4 and Wnt-1 proteins 
function to regulate branching morphogenesis of mammary epithelial cells in an 
opposing fashion. Dev Biol 196, 204-217, 199
14. Soriano JV, Uyttendaele H, Kitajewski J, Montesano R. Expression of an activated 
Notch4 (int-3) oncoprotein disrupts morphogenesis and induces an invasive phenotype in 
mammary epithelial cells in vitro. Manuscript submitted 

23.
Oncogene Mediated Signal Transduction in 
Transgenic Mouse Models of Human Breast Cancer 
Peter M. Siegel, David L. Dankort and William J. Muller 
The Institute for Molecular Biology & Biotechnology, McMaster University, Hamilton, Ontario 
Key words: 
oncogenes, mouse 
The ability of mammary epithelial cells to respond growth factor is
dependent on specific growth factor receptors coupled to number of
intracellular signaling pathways.
Of relevance to
this proposal, the
development, maturation and differentiation of the mammary epithelial cell
are dependent on the interplay of both hormones and growth factors. The
development of the mammary gland is thought to involve a series of defined
steps consisting of cell proliferation, differentiation and programmed cell
death (apoptosis). After of the formation the primary mammary tree from its
embryonic rudiment, there is a rapid expansion of ductal outgrowth through
the mammary fat pad which is accompanied by the formation mammary
terminal end buds (TEBs). By 10 weeks ofage the mammary epithelium has
reached the end of the fat pad and ceases further ductal outgrowth1.
Following pregnancy, a further rapid expansion of the lobuloalveolar
epithelium occurs leading to induction of terminal differentiation and
lactation at birth1,2. After the pups have been weaned from the lactating
mother, the mammary epithelium undergoes a rapid involution through the
induction of programmed cell death (apoptosis)3. The balance of soluble
growth factors, hormones and cell-substratum interactions controls the
regulation ofthis cycle ofproliferation, differentiation and apoptosis.
Mammary epithelial growth and differentiation is regulated by a number
by growth factors and growth factor receptors. For example, implantation in
the mammary fat pad of EGFR family ligands including EGF can
dramatically accelerate lobuloalveolar development in virgin mammary
glands4. Consistent with these observations, ectopic expression of another
185

186
Siegel et al 
EGFR ligand ,TGFa, in the mammary glands of transgenic mice results in 
dramatic impairment of normal mammary gland involution5-8.
Similarly
mammary epithelial specific expression of the ErbB-3 and ErbB-4 ligand, 
heregulin, leads to the induction of increased number of terminal end bud 
hyperplasias9. 
Conversely, 
germline 
inactivation 
of 
EGFR 
ligand 
amphiregulin results in a dramatic impairment of normal mammary ductal 
development10.
The ability of growth factors to modulate proliferation, differentiation 
and apoptosis is thought to occur through activation of their cognate 
receptors and coupled signal transduction pathways. Indeed, there is 
evidence to suggest that alteration of growth factor receptor activity can have 
a dramatic effect on normal mammary gland development. For example, a 
naturally occurring mouse mutant (Waved-2 mice) carrying a catalytically 
inactive epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR), exhibit a impaired 
mammary gland development and a severe lactation defect11,12. Ultimately, 
the activation of these growth factor receptors such as the EGFR family 
leads to the recruitment of a number of cytoplasmic signaling molecules. For 
example, stimulation of the intrinsic tyrosine activity of these growth factor 
receptors results in the tyrosine phosphorylation of specific phosphotyrosine 
residues within these receptors. Depending on the sequence context of these 
phosphotyrosine residues, specific src homology 2 (SH2) or phosphotyrosine 
binding/interaction domain (PTB) containing proteins can then be recruited 
to the activated growth factor receptor. 
One class of SH2 containing proteins that are thought to play a critical 
role in RTK signal transduction is the phosphatidylinositol 3í (PI-3í) kinase. 
Genetic and biochemical analyses of PI-3í kinase has revealed that its 
recruitment to the inner face of the cytoplasmic membrane by its association 
with activated growth factor receptors results in the generation of 
phosinositide 3í lipids13. With respect to erbB-2, stimulation of the PI-3í
kinase signaling pathway is dependent on its heterodimerization with erbB-3
which carries 6 consensus binding sites for the p85 subunit of the PI-3í 
kinase14,15. The lipid products generated by the PI-3í kinase are involved in 
the recruitment to the membrane of a number pleckstrin homology domain 
containing protein serine kinases including PDK1, ILK and Akt/pKB16-21.
Following activation of PDK1 and ILK, Akt/PKB is phosphorylated on two 
distinct phosphorylation sites by these serine kinases and becomes 
enzymatically activated18,20.
There is growing body of evidence that activation of the PI-3í/Akt kinase 
axis an have profound effects cell survival pathways. For example, 
activation of PI-3í kinase pathway has been implicated in preventing 
apoptotic cell death in a number of different tissue systems including the 
mammary epithelial cell22-29. Ultimately, activation of PI-3í kinase targets 

Oncogenes in transgenic mouse models 
187
such as Akt result in inhibition of pro-apoptotic proteins such as Bad, 
Caspase-9 and the forkhead transcription factor family30-32. In addition, 
activation of the PI-3í kinase signaling pathway can activate transcription 
factors such as NF kappa beta that are involved in anti-apoptotic cellular 
response33.
Growth factor receptor mediated activation of the PI-3í kinase can also 
have profound effects on epithelial cell morphology. Activation of either 
Met or erbB-2 receptor in MDCK cells gown in matrigel can induce 
branching morphogenesis that is sensitive to specific inhibitors of the PI-3í
kinase. Moreover stimulation of either primary cells34 or EpH4 cells35 with
hepatocyte growth factor (HGF), the ligand for the Met receptor results in 
branching morphogenesis without functional differentiation. The HGF 
branching morphogenesis signal was dependent on activation of the PI-3i
kinase signaling axis35. Taken together these observations suggest that 
activation of the PI-3í signaling axis plays critical role in both mammary cell 
morphogenesis and survival responses. 
Another signaling pathway that plays a critical role in modulating the 
epithelial proliferation is the activation of the Ras signaling pathway. In 
particular SH2 and PTB domain containing proteins such as Grb2 and Shc 
have been demonstrated to form specific complexes with these growth factor 
receptors and in turn activate the Ras signaling pathway36-46. Direct 
interaction of Grb2 adapter protein with activated growth factor receptor 
through it SH2 domain results in recruitment and stimulation of the guanine 
nucleotide exchange SOS to convert Ras from its inactive GDP bound state 
to its active GTP form42, 46-48 . In addition to directly recruiting the Grb2/SOS 
complex, activated growth factor receptors can bind this complex indirectly 
through its association with the Shc adapter protein through specific tyrosine 
phosphorylation sites located within Shc39,49-56. More recently, several 
groups have suggested that in addition to recruitment of the Grb2/SOS 
complex, the interaction activated growth factor receptors with Shc can 
result in the stimulation of a Ras independent pathway involving the 
transcriptional upregulation of c-Myc transcription factor54,56,57. Activation 
of the Ras signaling pathway in turn can result in stimulation of a cascade of 
serine kinases including Raf, MEK and MAP kinase58-61. Ultimately, the 
downstream targets of these activated kinase cascades are nuclear 
transcription factors such as Fos, Jun and Ets protein62-65.
There is increasing body of evidence that receptor tyrosine kinases 
(RTKs) such as erbB-2 can activate the Ras signaling pathway via multiple 
functionally redundant adapter proteins. Indeed, we have previously 
demonstrated that any one of four erbB-2 tyrosine autophosphorylation sites 
(tyrosine 1144, 1201, 1227 and 1253) can independently mediate oncogenic 
transformation through activation of Ras signaling pathway37. We have 

188
Siegel et al 
further identified the tyrosine 1144 binding partner as Grb2 adapter protein 
and tyrosine 
1227 as the Shc adapter protein37. In addition, to 
autophosphorylation sites that positively modulate erbB-2 transformation,
we identified at one tyrosine autophosphorylation site (1028) that negatively 
regulates erbB-2 mediated transformation. 
Another event that accompanies activation of activated growth factor 
receptors is stimulation of the Src family of tyrosine kinases. In fact RTKs 
such as Met and erbB-2 are known to associate with Src family kinases 
through specific phosphotyrosine residues within the receptorb66-71. As a result 
of this physical interaction of RTKs with Src family kinase the specific 
activity of the src family kinases is increased 
. Elevated Src family 
kinase activity can influence both cell cycle progression through its 
stimulation of cyclin D173 and cell substratum interaction via activation of 
the focal adhesion kinase74-78. Together these observations suggest that 
growth factor activation Src kinase family member play a critical role in 
mediating cell proliferation and migration. 
Whereas it is clear that these signaling pathways are involved in the 
transduction of proliferative and differentiation signals from these cell 
surface receptors, the precise role of these signaling pathways play in 
mammary tumorigenesis is unclear. One of the important genetic changes tat 
are implicated in the genesis of human breast cancer is amplification and 
elevated expression of erbB-2/neu oncogene79-81. To more rigorously define 
the importance of erbB-2/neu
expression in mammary tumorigenesis, 
transgenic mice have been generated which express the activated neu cDNA
under the control of the mouse mammary tumor virus - long terminal repeat 
(MMTV-LTR)
82-84. In the first report, all the female carriers from one 
transgenic line (TG.NF) demonstrated global mammary transformation 
involving all glands after 95 days84. The appearance of mammary gland 
abnormalities coincided with regions of transgene expression as determined 
by
in situ hybridization. 
An independent transgenic line (TG.NK), 
characterized in the same study, demonstrated a non-uniform pattern of 
transgene expression that translated into a stochastic tumor phenotype in 
which mammary tumors arose next to morphologically normal epithelium. 
The phenotypes displayed by these two lines of transgenic mice suggested 
that expression of activated neu requires few, if any, additional events to 
transform the primary epithelial cell. In contrast, other transgenic strains 
carrying an MMTV/activated neu transgene develop focal mammary tumors 
that arose asynchronously in animals between 5 to 10 months of age83. The 
discrepancy in the phenotypes displayed by these different strains may 
reflect differences in the levels of activated Neu protein expressed in the 
mammary epithelium of the different strains. For example, transformation of 
the primary epithelial cell may require a critical threshold of activated Neu 
66,67,72

Oncogenes in transgenic mouse models 
189
expression, which is not achieved in those animals exhibiting the stochastic 
tumor phenotype. Regardless of the explanation for such differences, these 
studies argue that activated neu can effectively transform the mammary 
epithelium of transgenic mice. 
The strong transforming ability demonstrated by the neu oncogene in the 
mammary epithelium has prompted several groups to examine whether a 
similar point mutation within erb B-2 might occur in human breast tumors. 
Screens based on direct sequencing, sequence-specific oligonucleotide 
hybridization85 or differential endonuclease digestion86 have failed to detect 
the presence of the analogous mutation within the transmembrane domain of 
ErbB-2 in human breast cancers. The lack of activating mutations in the 
transmembrane domain, coupled with clinical observations suggesting that 
erbB-2 is often amplified in human tumors, suggests that the primary 
mechanism operating in human breast cancer is overexpression of the 
normal, unaltered, receptor. To directly test the oncogenic potential of wild-
type neu in the mammary epithelium, several strains of transgenic mice 
expressing the wild-type neu cDNA under the control of the MMTV-LTR
have been established87. These animals develop focal mammary tumors with 
an average latency of approximately 7 months that frequently metastasize to 
the lung. Expression analysis of these mice revealed that in many cases the 
level of transgene RNA was significantly higher in the tumor than the 
surrounding epithelium, although in certain instances both the tumor and 
adjacent tissue expressed similar levels of the neu transgene.
In animals 
belonging to the latter group, Neu protein was also detected in both tumor 
and adjacent mammary epithelium. 
However, analysis of the receptor's 
catalytic activity within these tissues revealed that the tumors alone 
exhibited elevated levels of Neu tyrosine kinase activity. 
Further 
characterization of these mice have demonstrated that mutations in the neu 
transgene are responsible for activation of the receptor in a majority of these 
mammary turmors87-90.
Biochemical and genetic analyses of these alterations have revealed that 
these mutations involve a conserved set of cysteine residues located in the 
juxta transmembrane domain of erbB-2. Indeed, we have demonstrated that 
these alterations involve either a addition or deletion of cysteine residue 
within this region that result in the formation of disulfide bonded dimers of 
erbB-2 that are constitutively activated88-90. More recently, we have directly 
demonstrated that mammary-epithelial expression of these activated erbB-2
alleles leads to the rapid induction of metastatic mammary tumors89. In 
addition to the to the elevated expression of these activated neu alleles, we 
have observed a dramatic upregulation of the erbB-3 protein during 
tumorigenesis. Interestingly, the elevated expression of erbB-3 does not 
involve increases in erbB-3 transcript but rather appears to occur at either the 

190
Siegel et al; 
level erbB-3 translation or stability89. Consistent with these transgenic 
studies, a survey of a number of erbB-2 expressing breast cancers revealed 
that 8/9 co-expressed erbB-3. Taken together, these observations argue that 
coexpression of erbB-3 and neu are critical events in mammary tumor 
progression.
REFERENCES
1, Hennighausen, L. and G.W. Robinson, Think globally, act locally: the making of a mouse 
2. Vonderhaar, B.K. and A.E. Greco, Lobulo-alveolar development of mouse mammary 
3. Humphreys, R.C., et al., Apoptosis in the terminal endbud of the murine mammary gland: 
4. Coleman, S., G.B. Silberstein, and C.W. Daniel, Ductal morphogenesis in the mouse 
mammary gland. Genes Dev, 1998. 12 (4): 449-55.
glands is regulated by thyroid hormones. Endocrinology, 1979. 104 (2): 409-1 8. 
a mechanism of ductal morphogenesis. Development, 1996. 122 (12): 4013-22.
mammary gland: evidence supporting a role for epidermal growth factor. Dev Biol, 1988. 
127(2): 304-15.
5. Sandgren, E.P., et al., Overexpression of TGF alpha in transgenic mice: induction of 
epithelial hyperplasia, pancreatic metaplasia, and carcinoma of the breast. Cell, 1990. 
61(6): 1121-35.
6. Sandgren, E.P., et al., Inhibition of mammary gland involution is associated with 
transforming growth factor alpha but not c-myc-induced tumorigenesis in transgenic mice. 
Cancer Res, 1995. 55 (17): 3915-27.
alpha transgenic mice. Cell, 1990. 61 (6): 1147-55.
and abnormal development of the mammary gland and pancreas. Cell, 1990. 61 (6): 1137-
46.
9. Krane, I.M. and P. Leder, NDF/heregulin induces persistence of terminal end buds and 
adenocarcinomas in the mammary glands of transgenic mice. Oncogene, 1996. 12 (8):
10.Luetteke, N.C., et al., Targeted inactivation of the EGF and amphiregulin genes reveals 
7. Matsui, Y., et al., Development of mammary hyperplasia and neoplasia in MMTV-TGF
8. Jhappan, C., et al., TGF alpha overexpression in transgenic mice induces liver neoplasia 
1781-8.
distinct roles for EGF receptor ligands in mouse mammary gland development. 
Development, 1999. 126 ( 12): 2739-50.
has a profound effect on receptor biochemistry that results in impaired lactation. Proc Natl 
Acad Sci U S A, 1995. 92 (5): 1465-9.
12.Sebastian, J., et al., Activation and function of the epidermal growth factor receptor and 
erbB-2 during mammary gland morphogenesis. Cell Growth Differ, 1998. 9(9): 777-85.
13.Whitman, M., et al., Type I phosphatidylinositol kinase makes a novel inositol 
phospholipid, phosphatidylinositol-3-phosphate. Nature, 1988. 332 (6 165): 644-6.
14. Prigent, SA. and W.J. Gullick, Identification of c-erbB-3 binding sites for 
phosphatidylinositol 3’- kinase and SHC using an EGF receptor/c-erbB-3 chimera. Embo 
1 l.Fowler, K.J., et al., A mutation in the epidermal growth factor receptor in waved-2 mice 
J, 1994. 13 (12): 2831-41.
l5.Soltoff, S.P., et al., ErbB3 is involved in activation of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase by 
epidermal growth factor. Mol Cell Biol, 1994. 14 (6): 3550-8.

Oncogenes in transgenic mouse models 
191
16. Alessi, D.R., et al., Characterization of a 3-phosphoinositide-dependent protein kinase 
which phosphorylates and activates protein kinase Balpha. Curr Biol, 1997. 7(4): 261-9.
17. Alessi, D.R., et al., 3-Phosphoinositide-dependent protein kinase- 1 (PDK1): structural and 
functional homology with the Drosophila DSTPK61 kinase. Curr Biol, 1997. 7 (10):
776-
89.
allowing PDK-1 to activate protein kinase B. Curr Biol, 1998. 8 (12): 684-91.
activity and localization of 3-phosphoinositide-dependent protein kinase-1 . Biochem J, 
20. Delcommenne, M., et al., Phosphoinositide-3-OH kinase-dependent regulation of glycogen 
synthase kinase 3 and protein kinase B/AKT by the integrin-linked kinase. Proc Natl Acad 
Sci U S A, 1998. 95 19): 1121 1-6.
21. Watton, S.J. and J. Downward, Akt/PKB localisation and 3' phosphoinositide generation at 
sites of epithelial cell-matrix and cell-cell interaction. Curr Biol, 1999. 9(8): 433-6.
22. Gibson, S., et al., Epidermal growth factor protects epithelial cells against Fas-induced
apoptosis. Requirement for Akt activation. J Biol Chem, 1999. 274 (25): 17612-8.
23.Kennedy, S.G., et al., Akt/Protein kinase B inhibits cell death by preventing the release of 
cytochrome c from mitochondria [In Process Citation]. Mol Cell Biol, 1999. 19 (8): 5800-
10.
phosphoinositide 3-OH kinase and protein kinase B/Akt cellular survival pathway. Embo 
18.Anderson, K.E., et al., Translocation of PDK-1 to the plasma membrane is important in 
19. Currie, R.A., et al., Role of phosphatidylinositol 3,4,5-trisphosphate in regulating the 
1999. 337 (Pt 3): 575-83.
24.Khwaja, A., et al., Matrix adhesion and Ras transformation both activate a 
J, 1997. 16 (10): 2783-93.
25, Rodriguez-Viciana, P., et al., Role of phosphoinositide 3-OH kinase in cell transformation 
26. Stambolic, V., et al., Negative regulation of PKB/Akt-dependent cell survival by the tumor 
27.Staveley, B.E., et al., Genetic analysis of protein kinase B (AKT) in Drosophila. Curr Biol, 
28. Sun, H., et al., PTEN modulates cell cycle progression and cell survival by regulating 
phosphatidylinositol 3,4,5,-trisphosphate and Akt/protein kinase B signaling pathway. 
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A, 1999. 96 (11): 6199-204.
signaling pathways in polyomavirus middle T-mediated mammary tumorigenesis. Mol 
Cell Biol, 1998. 18 (4): 2344-59.
intrinsic death machinery. Cell, 1997. 91 (2): 231-41.
Science, 1998. 282 (5392): 1318-21.
transcription factor. Cell, 1999. 96 (6): 857-68.
and control of the actin cytoskeleton by Ras. Cell, 1997. 89 (3): 457-67.
suppressor PTEN. Cell, 1998. 95 (1): 29-39.
1998. 8 (10): 599-602.
29. Webster, M.A., et al., Requirement for both Shc and phosphatidylinositol 3' kinase 
30.Datta, S.R., et al., Akt phosphorylation of BAD couples survival signals to the cell-
31 .Cardone, M.H., et al., Regulation of cell death protease caspase-9 by phosphorylation. 
32.Brunet, A., et al., Akt promotes cell survival by phosphorylating and inhibiting a Forkhead 
33.Kane, L.P., et al., Induction of NF-kappaB by the Akt/PKB kinase. Curr Biol, 1999. 9 (11):
34.Yang, Y., et al., Sequential requirement of hepatocyte growth factor and neuregulin in the 
morphogenesis and differentiation of the mammary gland. J Cell Biol, 1995. 131 (1): 215-
26.
35.Niemann, C., et al., Reconstitution of mammary gland development in vitro: requirement 
of c- met and c-erbB2 signaling for branching and alveolar morphogenesis. J Cell Biol, 
601-4.
1998. 143 (2): 533-45.

192
Siegel et al 
36. Janes, P.W., et al., Activation of the Ras signalling pathway in human breast cancer cells 
37. Dankort, D.L., et al., Distinct tyrosine autophosphorylation sites negatively and positively 
38. Vijapurkar, U., K. Cheng, and J.G. Koland, Mutation of a Shc binding site tyrosine residue 
overexpressing erbB-2. Oncogene, 1994. 9 ( 12): 3601 -8.
modulate neu-mediated transformation. Mol Cell Biol, 1997. 17 (9): 541 0-25.
in ErbB3/MER3 blocks heregulin-dependent activation of mitogen-activated protein 
kinase. J Biol Chem, 1998. 273 (33): 20996-1002.
Oncogene, 1995. 11 (5): 899-907.
breast cancer cell lines. Oncogene, 1994. 9 (9): 2723-7.
proteins is implicated in activation of the Ras pathway by tyrosine kinases. Nature, 1992. 
42.Lowenstein, E.J., et al., The SH2 and SH3 domain-containing protein GRB2 links receptor 
tyrosine kinases to ras signaling. Cell, 1992. 70 (3): 431-42.
43. Skolnik, E.Y., et al., The function of GRB2 in linking the insulin receptor to Ras signaling 
pathways. Science, 1993. 260 (5116): 1953-5.
44.Rozakis-Adcock, M., et al., The SH2 and SH3 domains ofmammalian Grb2 couple the 
EGF receptor to the Ras activator mSos1 [see comments]. Nature, 1993. 363 (6424): 83-5.
45.Egan, S.E., et al., Association of Sos Ras exchange protein with Grb2 is implicated in 
tyrosine kinase signal transduction and transformation [see comments]. Nature, 1993. 
39.Pelicci, G., et al., Constitutive phosphorylation of Shc proteins in human tumors. 
40.Daly, R.J., M.D. Binder, and R.L. Sutherland, Overexpression of the Grb2 gene in human 
41 .Rozakis-Adcock, M., et al., Association of the Shc and Grb2/Sem5 SH2-containing
360 (6405): 689-92.
363 (6424): 45-51.
46.Gale, N.W., et al., Grb2 mediates the EGF-dependent activation of guanine nucleotide 
47. Li, N., et al., Guanine-nucleotide-releasing factor hSos1 binds to Grb2 and links receptor 
48.Chardin, P., et al., Human Sosl: a guanine nucleotide exchange factor for Ras that binds to 
49. Skolnik, E.Y., et al., The SH2/SH3 domain-containing protein GRB2 interacts with 
exchange on Ras [see comments]. Nature, 1993. 363 (6424): 88-92.
tyrosine kinases to Ras signalling [see comments]. Nature, 1993. 363 (6424): 85-8.
GRB2. Science, 1993. 260 (5112): 1338-43.
tyrosine- phosphorylated IRSl and Shc: implications for insulin control of ras signalling. 
Embo J, 1993. 12 (5): 1929-36.
induced by growth hormone. Nature, 1997.390(6655): 91-6.
regions. Oncogene, 1996. 13 (3): 633-41.
52.Segatto, O., et al., Shc products are substrates of erbB-2 kinase. Oncogene, 1993. 8 (8):
53.Hashimoto, A., et al., Shc Regulates Epidermal Growth Factor-induced Activation of the 
JNK Signaling Pathway. J Biol Chem, 1999. 274 (29): 20139-20143.
54.Gotoh, N., M. Toyoda, and M. Shibuya, Tyrosine phosphorylation sites at amino acids 239 
and 240 of Shc are involved in epidermal growth factor-induced mitogenic signaling that 
is distinct from Radmitogen-activated protein kinase activation. Mol Cell Biol, 1997. 
2105-12.
17(4): 1824-3 1. 
55.Harmer, S.L. and A.L. DeFranco, Shc contains two Grb2 binding sites needed for efficient 
formation of complexes with SOS in B lymphocytes. Mol Cell Biol, 1997. 17 (7): 4087-
95.
50.Yamauchi, T., et al., Tyrosine phosphorylation of the EGF receptor by the kinase Jak2 is 
5l.Pelicci, G., et al., A family of Shc related proteins with conserved PTB, CH1 and SH2 

Oncogenes in transgenic mouse models 
56.van der Geer, P., et al., The Shc adaptor protein is highly phosphorylated at conserved, 
twin tyrosine residues (Y239/240) that mediate protein-protein interactions. Curr Biol, 
57.Gotoh, N., A. Tojo, and M. Shibuya, A novel pathway from phosphorylation of tyrosine 
residues 239/240 of Shc, contributing to suppress apoptosis by IL-3. Embo J, 1996. 
193
1996. 6 (11): 1435-44.
15 (22): 6197-204.
58.Jelinek, T., et al., RAS and RAF-1 form a signalling complex with MEK-1 but not MEK-
59.Moodie, S.A., et al., Association of MEK1 with p21ras.GMPPNP is dependent on B-Raf.
60.Moodie, SA. and A. Wolfman, The 3Rs of life: Ras, Raf and growth regulation. Trends 
61.Marshall, M.S., Ras target proteins in eukaryotic cells. Faseb J, 1995. 9 (13): 1311-8.
62.Whitmarsh, A.J., et al., Integration of MAP kinase signal transduction pathways at the 
serum response element. Science, 1995. 269 (5222): 403-7.
63. Deng, T. and M. Karin, c-Fos transcriptional activity stimulated by H-Ras-activated
protein kinase distinct from JNK and ERK. Nature, 1994. 371 (6493): 171-5.
64.Hipskind, R.A., M. Baccarini, and A. Nordheim, Transient activation of RAF-1, MEK, 
and ERK2 coincides kinetically with ternary complex factor phosphorylation and 
immediate-early gene promoter activity in vivo. Mol Cell Biol, 1994. 14 (9): 6219-31.
65. Treisman, R., Ternary complex factors: growth factor regulated transcriptional activators. 
Curr Opin Genet Dev, 1994. 4 (1): 96-101.
66.Luttrell, D.K., et al., Involvement of pp60c-src with two major signaling pathways in 
human breast cancer. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A, 1994. 91 (1): 83-7.
67. Muthuswamy, S.K., et al., Mammary tumors expressing the neu proto-oncogene possess 
elevated c-Src tyrosine kinase activity. Mol Cell Biol, 1994. 14 ( 1): 735-43.
68.Muthuswamy, S.K. and W.J. Muller, Activation of the Src family of tyrosine kinases in 
mammary tumorigenesis. Adv Cancer Res, 1994. 64: 11 1-23.
69.Muthuswamy, S.K. and W.J. Muller, Activation of Src family kinases in Neu-induced
mammary tumors correlates with their association with distinct sets of tyrosine 
phosphorylated proteins in vivo. Oncogene, 1995. 11 (9): 1801-10.
70.Muthuswamy, S.K. and W.J. Muller, Direct and specific interaction of c-Src with Neu is 
involved in signaling by the epidermal growth factor receptor. Oncogene, 1995. 11 (2):
71 .Ponzetto, C., et al., A multifunctional docking site mediates signaling and transformation 
by the hepatocyte growth factor/scatter factor receptor family. Cell, 1994. 77 (2): 261-71.
72.Courtneidge, SA., et al., Activation of Src family kinases by colony stimulating factor-1,
and their association with its receptor. Embo J, 1993. 12 (3): 943-50.
73.Lee, R.J., et al., pp60(v-src) induction of cyclin D1 requires collaborative interactions 
between the extracellular signal-regulated kinase, p38, and Jun kinase pathways. A role for 
cAMP response element-binding protein and activating transcription factor-2 in pp60(v- 
src) signaling in breast cancer cells. J Biol Chem, 1999. 274 (11): 7341-50.
74.Calalb, M.B., T.R. Polte, and S.K. Hanks, Tyrosine phosphorylation of focal adhesion 
kinase at sites in the catalytic domain regulates kinase activity: a role for Src family 
kinases. Mol Cell Biol, 1995. 15 (2): 954-63.
transduction. Embo J, 1999. 18 (9): 2459-71.
Carcinog, 1999. 25 (2): 150-4.
2. Mol Cell Biol, 1994. 14 (12): 8212-8.
Mol Cell Biol, 1994. 14 (11): 7153-62.
Genet, 1994. 10 (2): 44-8.
27 1-9.
75.Klinghoffer, R.A., et al., Src family kinases are required for integrin but not PDGFR signal 
76.Lo, S.S., et al., Inhibition of focal contact formation in cells transformed by p185neu. Mol 

194
Siegel et al 
77. Oktay, M., et al., Integrin-mediated activation of focal adhesion kinase is required for 
signaling to Jun NH2-terminal kinase and progression through the G1 phase of the cell 
cycle. J Cell Biol, 1999. 145 (7): 1461-9.
78. Schaller, M.D., et al., Autophosphorylation of the focal adhesion kinase, pp125FAK, 
directs SH2- dependent binding of pp60src. Mol Cell Biol, 1994. 14 (3):
1680-8.
79. Andrulis, I.L., et al., neu/erbB-2 amplification identifies a poor-prognosis group of women 
with node-negative breast cancer. Toronto Breast Cancer Study Group. J Clin Oncol, 
80.Slamon, D.J., Clark, G.M., Wong, S.G., Levin, W.J., Ullrich, A. and McGuire, W.L., 
Human breast cancer: correlation of relapse and survival with the amplification of the 
HER2/neu oncogene. Science, 1987. 235: 177-182.
81.Slamon, D.J., Godolphin, W., Jones, L.A., Holt, J.A., Wong, S.G., Keith, D.E., Levin, 
W.J., Stuart, S.G., Udove, J., Ullrich, A., and Press, M.F., Studies of the HER-2/neu proto-
oncogene in human breast and ovarian cancer. Science, 1989. 244: 707-712.
82.Guy, C.T., R.D. Cardiff, and W.J. Muller, Activated neu induces rapid tumor progression. 
J Biol Chem, 1996. 271 (13): 7673-8.
83.Bouchard, L., et al., Stochastic appearance of mammary tumors in transgenic mice 
carrying the MMTV/c-neu oncogene. Cell, 1989. 57 (6): 93 1-6.
84.Muller, W.J., et al., Single-step induction of mammary adenocarcinoma in transgenic mice 
bearing the activated c-neu oncogene. Cell, 1988. 54 (1): 105-15.
85. Lemoine, N.R., et al., Absence of activating transmembrane mutations in the c-erbB-2
proto- oncogene in human breast cancer. Oncogene, 1990. 5 (2): 237-9.
86.Zoll, B., et al., Alterations of the c-erbB2 gene in human breast cancer. J Cancer Res Clin 
Oncol, 1992. 11 (6): 468-73.
87.Guy, C.T., et al., Expression of the neu protooncogene in the mammary epithelium of 
transgenic mice induces metastatic disease. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A, 1992. 89 (22):
88. Siegel, P.M. and W.J. Muller, Mutations affecting conserved cysteine residues within the 
1998. 16(4): 1340-9.
10578-82.
extracellular domain of Neu promote receptor dimerization and activation. Proc Natl Acad 
Sci U S A, 1996. 93 (17): 8878-83.
89. Siegel, P.M., et al., Elevated expression of activated forms of Neu/ErbB-2 and ErbB-3 are 
involved in the induction of mammary tumors in transgenic mice: implications for human 
breast cancer [In Process Citation]. Embo J, 1999. 18 (8): 2149-64.
induction of mammary tumors. Mol Cell Biol, 1994. 14 (11): 7068-77.
90.Siegel, P.M., et al., Novel activating mutations in the neu proto-oncogene involved in 

24.
Caspases: Decoders of Apoptotic Signals During 
MammaryInvolution
Caspase activation during involution 
Andreas Marti1, Hans Graber1, Hedvika Lazar1, Philipp M. Ritter1, Anna 
Baltzer1, Anu Srinivasan2 and Rolf Jaggi1
1Department for Clinical Research, University of Bern, Switzerland, 
2Idun Pharmaceuticals, La 
Jolla, USA 
Key words: 
Abstract:
apoptosis, caspase, Fas, involution, mammary gland 
At weaning most of the alveolar epithelial cells in the mammary gland die by 
apoptosis and are removed by phagocytosis. Caspases are a family of aspartate 
specific cysteine proteases. Activation of caspases is generally thought to 
represent a major and irreversible event in the apoptotic process. We analyzed 
caspase expression and activation during mammary gland involution. A 
quantitative RT-PCR based approach revealed that levels of mRNA expression 
of several caspases are induced during involution. Using an antibody that 
specifically recognizes activated caspases we measured a transient induction of 
caspase activity in situ and found a maximal activation at days two and three 
of involution. These data were corroborated by monitoring caspase-3 like 
activity in mammary extracts with a synthetic DEW-afc peptide as caspase-3
substrate. Using Fas-deficient mice we present evidence that the Fas signaling 
pathway is not essential for caspase activation and apoptosis during mammary 
gland involution. In summary, signaling pathways during involution seem to 
involve activation of caspases as intraepithelial triggers of mammary epithelial 
cell apoptosis. 
1. 
INTRODUCTION 
Proliferation and programmed cell death (PCD) are two major principles 
contributing to many different biological processes during development and 
in adults. Apoptosis is a form of PCD which is morphologically 
195

196
Marti et al 
characterized by membrane blebbing, condensation of chromatin and 
generation of apoptotic bodies consisting of membrane surrounded cellular 
fragments1. In many cases it is an energy dependent process requiring gene 
expression and a non-random fragmentation of genomic DNA is often 
observed during apoptosis1, 2. Induction of apoptosis involves the activation 
of specific death signaling pathways including the activation of proteases 
termed caspases. Caspases are a family of aspartate specific cysteine- 
proteases that are believed to be major effectors of apoptosis 3,4. They share 
typical structural and functional features such as an N-terminal pro-domain 
that is variable in length and sequence and two catalytic subunits. The 
prodomain mediates subcellular localization and protein/protein interaction; 
the catalytic subunits include a large ~17-20 kDa and a small ~10 kDa form. 
During apoptosis caspases are activated by a proteolytical separation of the 
large and small subunits that assemble to form the active enzyme complex. 
Many caspase substrates are cleaved by limited proteolysis, among them are 
poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP)5, α-fodrin6, MEKK- 1 7, U1 associated 
70 kDa protein8, DNA fragmentation factor (DFF)9,10 and Bcl-211.
In the mammary gland apoptosis occurs in secretory epithelial cells 
during post-lactational involution12,13. Upon removing the pups from their 
mother, milk transiently accumulates in the glands resulting in a strong 
engorgement. At about three days of involution, milk is resorbed, alveolar 
structures collapse and epithelial cells undergo apoptosis. The lack of the 
suckling stimulus also leads to a drop of lactogenic hormone levels (e.g. 
prolactin and glucocorticoids) which is believed to contribute to the 
involution process in all glands14,15. Accumulation of milk and changes of 
hormone levels are possibly major triggers of apoptosis 
Several signal transduction pathways resulting in caspase activation have 
been described that involve death receptors such as Fas/APO- 1 18. Indeed, for 
induction of apoptosis in the prostate and the ovary it was proposed that 
activation of Fas may play an important role19, 20. These studies mainly relied 
on animals with defined genetic mutations in the Fas pathway21. Here we 
studied the involvement of the Fas pathway and caspases during involution 
of the mouse mammary gland. After weaning, elevated caspase-3 and 
caspase-9 mRNA expression and an induction of caspase activity were 
observed. In Fas-deficient mice (lpr mice) caspase activation and apoptosis 
as analyzed by terminal transferase assays (TUNEL) was indistinguishable 
from wildtype animals implicating that the Fas signaling pathway is not 
essential for mammary gland involution. 
15, 16, 17

Caspases and mammary involution 
197
2. 
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
For the mammary gland, little information is available about expression 
and activity of caspases during phases of epithelial cell apoptosis. For 
caspase- 1 an induction at the mRNA level was shown during involution 22,23;
in addition, Krajewska and co-workers24 demonstrated the presence of 
caspase-3 protein in ductal epithelial cells of human mammary biopsies. We 
investigated the expression of caspase-3 and caspase-9 in the mammary 
gland by quantitative RT-PCR (using Taqman technology). Total RNA of 
mammary tissue at lactation and 2, 3, 6, and 10 days of involution was 
prepared and Taqman-PCR was performed. As an internal reference 7S 
ribosomal RNA was measured. In addition, c-fos, a gene that was previously
shown to be induced during involution25, was also analyzed. After weaning, 
an induction of caspase-3 and caspase-9 mRNA expression was observed. 
Fig. 1 .Caspase cleavage activity during lactation and involution. Cytoplasmic extracts were 
prepared from mammary glands at lactation and 1, 2, 3 and 4 days of involution as 
described25. 25 µg protein were incubated in the presence of DEW-afc in caspase buffer 
(Promega) and fluorescence was measured in a Fluorometer over a period of 1 h (200 cycles 
of measurement). Shown are the relative DEVD cleavage activities as arbitrary units of 
fluorescence.
Induction of c-fos and caspase-3 mRNA expression was maximal at day
2 (35 fold induction for c-fos, 3.3 fold induction for caspase-3) whereas
caspase-9 mRNA levels were maximal at day 6 of involution (10.5 fold 
induction). These results indicate that, like caspase-1, caspase-3 and 
caspase-9 mRNA levels are induced during mammary gland involution. 

198
Marti et al 
To further investigate the involvement of caspases during involution, 
caspase activity was analyzed in mammary extracts derived of glands at 
lactation and 1, 2, 3, and 4 days of involution. Extracts were incubated with 
a synthetic caspase substrate (DEVD-afc) and cleavage of the substrate was 
analyzed in a fluorometer. 
Fig. 1 shows that caspase activity was strongly and transiently induced, 
peaking at day 2 of involution. Caspase activation was further studied on 
mammary tissue sections using an antibody that specifically recognizes 
active caspase-3 but not the inactive zymogen (CM1 antibody)26. As shown 
in Fig. 2, a strong induction of active caspase-3 was observed in epithelial 
cells at 3 days of involution (panel B) whereas almost no active caspase was 
found in epithelial cells at lactation (panel A). 
Fig. 2. Caspase activation during involution. Shown are mammary glands of wildtype (panels 
A, B) and Fas-deficient mice (panels C, D) at lactation (panel A, C) and at 3 days of 
involution (panel B, D). Paraffin embedded sections from paraformaldehyde fixed samples 
were incubated with an antibody (CM 1) that recognizes active caspase-326. Antigen-antibody
complexes were detected with the Envision System (DAKO, Glostrup, Denmark) using AEC 
as substrate. The bar represents 25 µm. 
In order to investigate a potential involvement of Fas during mammary 
gland involution, Fas-deficient mice were analyzed immunohistochemically 
for caspase-3 like activity at lactation (Fig. 2, panel C) and at 3 days of 
involution (panel D). A similar caspase activation was observed in Fas-
deficient animals as compared to wildtype animals. 

Caspases and mammary involution 
199
These results indicate that caspases are activated during involution in the 
absence of functional Fas. To confirm these data, mammary sections derived 
of wildtype and Fas-deficient animals were analyzed for DNA fragmentation 
using a terminal transferase (TUNEL) assay (Fig. 3). Both, in wildtype and 
in Fas-deficient animals similar levels of DNA fragmentation were found at 
2 days of involution (panels B, D) whereas almost no cells stained positive 
for fragmented DNA at lactation (panels A, C). In addition, total DNA was 
isolated from wildtype and Fas-deficient animals at lactation and 3 days of 
involution and analyzed by gel electrophoresis (data not shown). Again, the 
typical DNA ladder was observed in wildtype and in Fas-deficient animals at 
2 and 3 days of involution but not at lactation. Taken together, these results 
indicate that mammary epithelial cell apoptosis occurs to a similar extent in 
Fas-deficient mice and in wildtype animals. 
Fig. 3.DNA fragmentation in Fas-deficient animals during involution. Terminal transferase 
assays (TUNEL) were performed on mammary gland sections of wildtype (panels A and B)
and Fas-deficient animals (panels C and D) at lactation (A and C) and at 2 days of involution 
(B and D). The bar represents 50 µm.
In summary, our data suggest that epithelial cell death that occurs during
mammary gland involution involves an activation of caspases, both, at the
mRNA and protein level. Cell death in the mammary gland seems to occur
in a Fas independent manner.

200
Marti et al 
Acknowledgement
This work was supported by the Swiss National Science Foundation, the 
Sandoz Foundation (Switzerland) and the Foundation for Clinical and 
Experimental Cancer Research (Switzerland). 
3. 
REFERENCES 
1. Wyllie, A. H., J. F. R. Kerr, and A. R. Currie: Cell death: The significance of apoptosis. 
2. Schwartz, L. M., and B. A. Osborne: Programmed cell death, apoptosis and killer genes. 
3. Salvesen, G. S., and V. M. Dixit: Caspases: intracellular signaling by proteolysis. Cell 91,
4. Thornberry, N. A., and Y. Lazebnik: Caspases: enemies within. Science 281, 1312-1316 
(1998).
5. Tewari, M., L. T. Quan, K. 0 Rourke, S. Desnoyers, Z. Zeng, D. R. Beidler, G. G. Poirier, 
G. S. Salvesen, and V. M. Dixit: Yama/CPP32 beta, a mammalian homolog of CED-3, is a 
CrmA- inhibitable protease that cleaves the death substrate poly(ADP- ribose) polymerase. 
Cell 81, 801-809 (1995). 
6. Martin, S. J., G. A. O’Brien, W. K. Nishioka, A. J. McGahon, A. Mahboubi, T. C. Saido, 
and D. R. Green: Proteolysis of fodrin (non-erythroid spectrin) during apoptosis. J. Biol. 
Chem. 270, 6425-6428 (1995). 
regulation of anoikis: MEKK-1 activation requires cleavage by caspases. Cell 90, 315-323 
(1997).
8. Casciola-Rosen, L., D. W. Nicholson, T. Chong, K. R. Rowan, N. A. Thornberry, D. K. 
Miller, and A. Rosen: Apopain/CPP32 cleaves proteins that are essential for cellular 
repair: a fundamental principle of apoptotic death. J. Exp. Med. 183, 1957-1964 (1996). 
9. Enari, M., H. Sakahira, H. Yokoyama, K. Okawa, A. Iwamatsu, and S. Nagata: A caspase-
activated DNase that degrades DNA during apoptosis, and its inhibitor ICAD. Nature 391,
Int. Rev. Cytol. 68, 251-306 (1980). 
Immunol. Today 14, 582-590 (1993).
443-446 (1 997). 
7. Cardone, M. H., G. S. Salvesen, C. Widmann, G. Johnson, and S. M. Frisch: The 
43-50 (1998). 
10.Liu, X., P. Li, P. Widlak, H. Zou, X. Luo, W. T. Garrard, and X. Wang: The 40-kDa
subunit of DNA fragmentation factor induces DNA fragmentation and chromatin 
condensation during apoptosis. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 95, 8461-8466 (1998). 
M. Hardwick: Conversion of Bcl-2 to a Bax-like death effector by caspases. Science 278,
12. Walker, N. I., R. E. Bennett, and J. F. Kerr: Cell death by apoptosis during involution of 
the lactating breast in mice and rats. Am. J. Anat. 185, 19-32 (1989). 
13.Strange, R., F. Li, S. Saurer, A. Burkhardt, and R. R. Friis: Apoptotic cell death and tissue 
remodelling during mouse mammary gland involution. Development 115,49-58 (1992). 
14.Topper, Y. J., and C. S. Freeman: Multiple hormone interactions in the developmental 
biology of the mammary gland. Physiol. Rev. 60, 1049-1106 (1980). 
15.Feng, Z., A. Marti, B. Jehn, H. J. Altermatt, G. Chicaiza, and R. Jaggi: Glucocorticoid and 
progesterone inhibit involution and programmed cell death in the mouse mammary gland. 
J. Cell Biol. 131, 1095-1103 (1995). 
11.Cheng, E. H., D. G. Kirsch, R. J. Clem, R. Ravi, M. B. Kastan, A. Bedi, K. Ueno, and J. 
1966-1968 (1997). 

Caspases and mammary involution 
201
16.Marti, A., Z. Feng, H. J. Altermatt, and R. Jaggi: Milk accumulation triggers apoptosis of 
mammary epithelial cells. Eur. J. Cell Biol. 73, 158-165 (1997). 
17.Li, M., X. Liu, G. Robinson, U. Bar-Peled, K. U. Wagner, W. S. Young, L. Hennighausen, 
and P. A. Furth: Mammary-derived signals activate programmed cell death during the first 
stage of mammary gland involution. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 94, 3425-3430 (1997).
18.Ashkenazi, A., and V. M. Dixit: Death receptors: signaling and modulation. Science 281,
19. Suzuki, A., A. Matsuzawa, and T. Iguchi: Down regulation of Bcl-2 is the first step on 
20.Sakamaki, K., H. Yoshida, Y. Nishimura, S. Nishikawa, N. Manabe, and S. Yonehara: 
1305-1308 (1998). 
Fas-mediated apoptosis of male reproductive tract. Oncogene 13, 31-37 (1996). 
Involvement of Fas antigen in ovarian follicular atresia and luteolysis. Mol. Reprod. Dev. 
21.Cohen, P. L., and R. A. Eisenberg: The lpr and gld genes in systemic autoimmunity: life 
22.Boudreau, N., C. J. Sympson, Z. Werb, and M. J. Bissell: Suppression of ICE and 
47, 11-18 (1997). 
and death in the Fas lane. Immunol Today 13, 427-428 (1992). 
apoptosis in mammary epithelial cells by extracellular matrix. Science 267, 891-893
(1995).
Werb: Two distinct phases of apoptosis in mammary gland involution: proteinase-
independent and -dependent pathways. Development 122, 181 - 193 (1996). 
C: Reed: Immunohistochemical analysis of in vivo patterns of expression of CPP32 
(Caspase-3), a cell death protease. Cancer Res. 57, 1605-1613 (1997). 
and AP-1 (c-Fos/JunD) are induced during apoptosis of mouse mammary epithelial cells. 
Oncogene 9, 1213-1223 (1994). 
26. Srinivasan, A., K. A. Roth, R. O. Sayers, K. S. Shindler, A. M. Wong, L. C. Fritz, and K. 
J. Tomaselli: In situ immunodetection of activated caspase-3 in apoptotic neurons in the 
developing nervous system. Cell Death Differ. 5, 1004- 1016 (1998). 
23.Lund, L. R., J. Romer, N. Thomasset, H. Solberg, C. Pyke, M. J. Bissell, K. Dano, and Z. 
24.Krajewska, M., H. G. Wang, S. Krajewski, J. M. Zapata, A. Shabaik, R. Gascoyne, and J. 
25.Marti, A., B. Jehn, E. Costello, N. Keon, G. Ke, F. Martin, and R. Jaggi: Protein kinase-A

25.
The Role of Plasminogen Activator in the Bovine 
Mammary Gland 
Ioannis Politis 
Department of Animal Production, Agricultural University ofAthens, Athens, Greece 
Key words: 
plasminogen activator, bovine 
1.
INTRODUCTION
The major portion of mammary growth occurs during pregnancy. 
Following parturition, milk synthesis begins. Peak production in dairy cows 
occurs during the second month of lactation and then declines throughout the 
remaining months of lactation. The declining phase of lactation is known as 
gradual involution. When the lactation has ended, postlactation involution 
begins, characterized by a marked decrease in secretory tissue mass1.
The plasmin-plasminogen system is thought to play an important role 
during cell proliferation in a variety of cellular systems. However, a 
relationship between bovine mammary cell growth and the plasminogen-
activating system has not been established. Furthermore, while the 
physiologically important role of the plasminogen-activating system for 
mammary involution has been examined extensively, the role of the same 
system during mammary involution in dairy cows has received only limited 
attention.
In this paper, four main topics will be addressed: 
a) Fundamental biochemical aspects of the plasminogen-activating system, 
b) Regulation of mammary growth 
c) The plasminogen-activating system during mammary involution 
d) The plasminogen-activating system and mammary pathology. 
203

204
Pol it is 
2. 
BIOCHEMICAL ASPECTS 
The process of plasminogen activation leads to the formation of a serine 
protease, plasmin, that in turn, is capable of degrading most extracellular 
proteins. This process is controlled by an interplay between plasminogen 
activators (PA) and PA inhibitors (PAI). There are two types of PA: 
urokinase-PA (u-PA) and tissue PA (t-PA). These two enzymes are products 
of different genes. Even though some exceptions exist, the general belief is 
that t-PA is mainly implicated in the maintenance of fluidity of the 
extracellular milieu (thrombolysis), while u-PA is involved in the proteolysis 
that accompany tissue remodelling events such as the involution of the 
mammary gland2. The activity of PA can be limited by the action of PAI. 
The most important, fast acting, PAI have been designated PAI- 1 and PAI-2. 
Recently, a specific receptor for u-PA (u-PAR) was discovered. The u- 
PAR is a protein that binds u-PA with high affinity. The primary function of 
u-PAR is to localize plasminogen-activation at the cell surface. The rate of 
plasminogen activation is enhanced when u-PA is bound to its receptor, 
leading to accelerated formation of plasmin2.
3. 
REGULATION OF MAMMARY GROWTH 
Several studies have shown that most factors regulating expression of 
PA-related genes were also among the most powerful regulators of growth of 
cultured cells. The concept that bovine mammary cell growth and PA 
expression are related has received limited attention. 
A number of bovine mammary epithelial and myoepithelial cell lines 
were generated to allow appropriate experiments to be carried out
3. Whether 
expression of PA-related genes are connected to the cell cycle was 
examined. Results indicated that expression of all components of the 
plasminogen-activating system (u-PA, PAT-1, u-PAR) occurs in both 
epithelial and myoepithelial cell lines but in a manner tightly connected to 
the cell cycle. As the cell cycle progressed, accumulated u-PA activity 
increased. Maximal activity occurred at the S-G2 border and decreased 
during the G2 and M phases4.
Three experiments examined the effects of known regulators of bovine 
mammary cell growth on expression of PA-related genes. In the first 
experiment, the effect of insulin, insulin-like growth factor I (IGF-I) and 
IGF-II was examined. Results indicated that insulin, IGF-I and IGF-II 
increased cell proliferation. Furthermore, insulin, IGF-I and IGF-II increased 
by 2-4 fold expression of u-PA, PAI-1, and u-PAR mRNA indicating that 
there is a correlation between cell proliferation and expression of PA-related 

Plasminogen activator 
205
genes3. The second experiment examined the effect of phorbol myristate 
acetate (PMA) on mammary epithelial (BME-UV1) cell function. Against 
any preconceived notion, PMA caused a small inhibition of mammary 
epithelial cell proliferation. Furthermore, PMA caused 3-4 fold increases in 
expression of u-PA and u-PAR mRNA. Thus, induction of PA-related genes 
is not always associated with increased cell proliferation3. The third 
experiment examined the effects of extracellular calcium on mammary 
epithelial cell proliferation. Addition of extracellular calcium resulted in 
large increases in cell proliferation without any apparent effects on 
expression of u-PA, PAI- 1 and u-PAR mRNA. 
In conclusion, the three experiments described above allow two 
important conclusions to be made. First, increased expression of PA-related
genes can occur without concomitant cell growth (PMA case). Second, 
accelerated cell growth can occur without increases in the expression of PA-
related genes (calcium case). It is clear that expression of PA-related genes is 
likely to serve multiple functions in bovine mammary cells. 
4. 
THE PLASMIN-PLASMINOGEN, IN VIVO 
STUDIES
A number of experiments were performed to evaluate the role of the 
plasminogen-activating system during gradual and postlactation involution. 
Both plasmin and plasminogen in milk increased with advancing lactation. 
However, the ratio of plasminogen to plasmin declined with advancing 
lactation, indicating enhanced conversion of plasminogen to plasmin during 
late lactation3. As expected, milk from late lactation cows contained more 
PA than did early lactation milk. Immunoreactive u-PA was present in high 
levels in mammary tissue obtained from late lactation cows (8 month in 
lactation) and involuting cows (2-6 days following cessation of milking) but 
not in mammary tissue obtained from early or middle lactation cows. In fact, 
the highest levels of immunoreactive u-PA were detected during late 
lactation. Thus, lactation and involution may occur concurrently during late 
lactation in dairy cows. 
Whether administration of bST to dairy cows affected the plasmin-
plasminogen system was examined. Administration of bST prevented the 
increase in plasmin activity that normally occurs during late lactation. Those 
results were interpreted to indicate that bST caused a retardation of gradual 
involution3. Very recently, using a co-culture of epithelial and myoepithelial 
cells, cultured on collagen, we were able to show that IGF-I (the factor that 
mediates the effects of bST) enhanced expression of PAI-1 mRNA, but not 

206
Politis
that of u-PA and u-PAR mRNA by both epithelial and myoepithelial cells. 
This provides further for the bST-plasmin hypothesis. 
5. 
THE PLASMIN-PLASMINOGEN SYSTEM AND 
MAMMARY PATHOLOGY 
Mastitis results in increased proteolytic activity that is related to 
increased concentrations of plasmin in milk. It appears that two mechanisms 
might be responsible for the increased amounts of plasmin in milk during 
mastitis. The first mechanism favors transport of both plasmin and 
plasminogen from blood to milk. The compromised permeability of the 
mammary epithelium allows transport of these two enzymes to milk3. The 
second mechanism favors increased conversion of plasminogen to plasmin 
by the action of both u-PA and t-PA. Milk from mastitic quarters contained 
10- to 20-fold higher amounts of u-PA and t-PA than milk obtained from 
healthy quarters5.
It has been suggested that some pathogenic bacteria including 
Staphylococcus aureus may use the plasminogen-plasmin system to 
penetrate and colonize mammalian tissue. S. aureus produces the bacterial 
PA-like protein staphylokinase, which converts the host plasminogen to 
plasmin. However, bovine strains of S. aureus are staphylokinase-negative.
Thus, the plasmin-plasminogen system may be unimportant in bovine 
mammary infections or some other unknown mechanism compensates for 
the inability of S. aureus to produce staphylokinase. Using mammary 
epithelial and myoepithelial cell lines, it was found that S. aureus causes a 
large increase of u-PA production by mammary cells. Transcytosis of S. 
aureus across a mammary epithelial monolayer was enhanced by addition of 
bovine plasminogen6. Those data suggest that it might be possible that S. 
aureus causes an increase in expression of u-PA by mammary cells and this 
might compensate for the lack of intrinsic staphylokinase (PA-like) activity. 
6. 
CONCLUSIONS 
The plasmin-plasminogen system plays an important role in the bovine 
mammary gland. Increased conversion of plasminogen to plasmin occurs 
during late lactation and during postlactation involution. The highest levels 
of immunoreactive u-PA were detected during late lactation suggesting that 
lactation and involution may occur concurrently in the bovine mammary 
gland during late lactation. Other data indicated that expression of PA- 

Plasminogen activator 
207
related genes are not directly related to mitogenesis but are likely to serve 
multiple functions in the bovine mammary gland. Lastly, increased amounts 
of both u-PA and t-PA occur in milk obtained from mastitic quarters. In 
cultured mammary cells, bovine strains of Staphylococcus aureus upregulate 
expression of u-PA by mammary cells in an apparent attempt to compensate 
for their own inability to produce a PA-like protein that could facilitate 
tissue colonization. The latter needs to be confirmed in vivo. 
7. 
REFERENCES 
1. Knight, C.H., and Wilde, C. J., 1993, Mammary cell changes during pregnancy and 
lactation. Livest. Prod. Sci. 35:3-19.
2. Saksela, O., and Rifkin, D. B, 1988, Cell-associated plasminogen activation: regulation 
and physiological significance. Annu. Rev. Cell Biol. 4:93-118.
3. Politis, I., 1995, Plasminogen activator system: Implications for mammary cell growth and 
involution. J. Dairy Sci. 79: 1097- 1107.
4. Zavizion, B., White, J. H., and Bramley, A.J., 1998, Cell cycle-dependent fluctuation of 
urokinase-type plasminogen activator, its receptor, and inhibitors in cultured bovine 
mammary epithelial and myoepithelial cells. Bioch. Biophys. Acta 1403:141-150.
5. Heegard, C. W., Christensen, T., Rasmussen, M. D., Benfeldt, C., Jensen, N. E., Sjersen, 
K., Petersen, T. E., and Andreasen, P.A., 1994, Plasminogen activators in bovine milk 
during mastitis, an inflammatory disease. Fibrinolysis 8:22-27.
6. Zavizion, B., White, J. H., and Bramley, A. J., 1997, Staphylococcus aureus stimulates 
urokinase-plasminogen activator expression by bovine mammary cells. J. Infectious Dis. 
176: 1637-1640.

26.
Regulation and Nutritional Manipulation of Milk Fat 
Low-Fat Milk Syndrome 
Dale.E. Bauman and 2J. Mikko Griinari 
1Dept. of Animal Science, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY USA: 2Dept. of Animal Science, 
University of Helsinki, Helsinki, FINLAND 
1
1. 
INTRODUCTION 
Milk fat represents the major energy source in milk and the major energy 
cost in production of milk components. There has been a renewed interest in 
milk fat because changes in the economic value of milk fat favor increased 
production in some cases and reduced production in other cases. In addition, 
as more is learned about the biological roles of specific fatty acids, we have 
the opportunity to alter milk fatty acid composition to improve the 
healthfulness of milk as a food. 
Milk fat is predominantly composed of triglycerides. In ruminant 
animals, milk fatty acids arise from de novo synthesis from acetate and 
b-hydroxybutyrate and from the uptake of circulating long chain fatty acids 
that originate from the diet or from body fat reserves. The fatty acids 
comprising milk triglycerides vary in chain length; milk fatty acids C4 to CI4
and a portion of the C16 arise from de novo synthesis and the remainder of 
C16 and all of the longer chain fatty acids originate from the uptake of 
preformed fatty acids. Reviews have detailed the biosynthesis of milk fat1,2
and summarized factors which affect milk fat yield and composition in dairy 
cows3,4. The high genetic correlation between fat yield and the yield of milk 
and other milk components makes it difficult to use selection to alter milk fat 
independently of other milk components. In contrast, nutrition and diet can 
be used to rapidly and extensively alter milk fat yield and composition. In 
particular, certain diets cause a dramatic reduction in milk fat synthesis and 
this is generally referred to as milk fat depression (MFD) or low-fat milk 
209

210
Bauman and Griinari 
syndrome5. MFD is of obvious economic importance to producers but it is 
also of interest as a model to understand the regulation of the quantity and 
composition of milk fat. 
2.
GENERAL CHARACTERISTICS OF MILK FAT 
DEPRESSION
Diets that cause MFD on commercial dairy farms are generally divided 
into two broad groups. The first group involves diets that provide large 
amounts of readily digestible carbohydrate and reduced amounts of fibrous 
constituents. Of these, high grain/low forage diets (HG/LF) would be the 
most common. The second group represent dietary supplements of certain 
plant oils and fish oils. The presence of unsaturated fatty acids in the oils is 
essential and MFD occurs with dietary supplements of the oils themselves or 
with addition of full fat seeds containing the unsaturated fatty acids. In 
addition, the extent to which these two groups of diets induce MFD is related 
to other factors such as physical preparation of the diet (e.g. particle size and 
pelleting), management practices (e.g. feeding frequency), and animal 
factors (e.g. stage of lactation, level of intake)3,4,5. 
The classical diet-induced MFD occurs within a few days following 
dietary changes. Effects are specific and milk fat yield can be reduced by 
50% or more with little or no change in milk yield or other milk components. 
In general, classical MFD results in a decrease yield of all fatty acids. 
However, the decline is greatest for fatty acids synthesized de novo so that 
the milk fat composition shifts toward lower proportions of short and 
medium chain fatty acids and greater concentrations of longer chain fatty 
acids. There is also a particularly noticeable increase in trans fatty acids 
with MFD. Buffering the rumen pH reduces or abolishes MFD which occurs 
with HG/LF diets and bypassing the rumen by abomasal infusion reduces or 
abolishes the MFD observed with oil supplement4,5,6. Thus, the induction of 
MFD must involve products produced by rumen bacteria that are related to 
the dietary-induced shifts in rumen fermentation. 
The actual mechanisms involved in low-fat milk syndrome have not been 
fully elucidated but several theories have been proposed. 
These can be 
broadly summarized into two categories: theories which consider the 
depression to be a consequence of a shortage in the supply of lipid 
precursors to the mammary gland and theories that attribute MFD to a direct 
inhibition at the mammary gland of one or more steps in the synthesis of 
milk fat. The glucogenic-insulin theory is the main theory involving a lipid 
precursor shortage as the cause of MFD and it suggests that insulin plays a 
key role in the etiology of MFD3,5. The major theory that MFD is caused by 

Regulation and nutritional manipulation of milk fat 
211
a direct inhibition of mammary fatty acid synthesis involves products from 
incomplete or unusual biohydrogenation of polyunsaturated fatty acids in the 
rumen. Trans fatty acids have received special attention as a cause5,6, and
more recently this has been expanded to include trans fatty acids and related
metabolites7,8.
3.
GLUCOGENIC-INSULIN THEORY AND MFD
Endocrine status can alter the partitioning of nutrients to specific tissues. 
Insulin has acute effects on adipose tissue rates of lipogenesis (stimulatory) 
and lipolysis (inhibitory), but the ruminant mammary gland is not responsive 
to changes in circulating insulin. This forms the basis for the glucogenic-
insulin theory of MFD and it has been primarily applied to the MFD which 
occurs with diets high in readily digestible carbohydrate and low in fiber. 
High grain diets result in increased rumen production of propionate and 
increased hepatic rates of gluconeogenesis, which in turn increase pancreatic 
release of insulin. The elevated circulating concentrations of insulin, often 
two- to fivefold increases, enhance uptake of lipogenic precursors and 
decrease the release of fatty acids by adipose tissue. According to the 
glucogenic-insulin theory, this will result in an increase in adipose tissue use 
of acetate, β-hydroxybutyrate and diet-derived long chain fatty acids, and a
reduction in mobilization of long chain fatty acids from body reserves. 
Thus, these overall changes preferentially channel nutrients to adipose tissue, 
resulting in a shortage of lipogenic precursors for the mammary gland and 
milk fat depression3,5.
Evaluation of the involvement of insulin in MFD is complicated by its 
central role in glucose homeostasis. We have examined the role of insulin in 
milk fat synthesis by lactating cows by using a chronic hyperinsulinemic-
euglycemic clamp to avoid hypoglycemia and counter-regulatory changes in 
glucose homeostasis. Milk yield was maintained during the 4-day insulin 
clamp and there was no evidence of insulin resistance based on circulating 
insulin concentrations, exogenous glucose required to maintain euglycemic 
(2 to 3 kg/d) and effects on circulating nonesterified fatty acids (antilipolytic 
effects). Relative to the glucogenic-insulin theory, we observed little or no 
effect on milk fat synthesis during studies with the insulin clamp (Table 1). 
Examination of milk fat composition revealed shifts had occurred, but they 
differed markedly from those observed during classical MFD (Fig. 1). Thus, 
our results with the insulin clamp technique offered no support for 
glucogenic-insulin theory as the cause of diet-induced MFD9,10,11.

212
Bauman and Griinari 
Table I. 
Effect of hyperinsulinemic-euglycemic clamp on milk fat yield (kg/d)1 
Reference
Control
+Insulin
Control
+ Insulin
McGuire
et
al.9
1.26
1.30                           -                                - 
Griinari
et
al.10
0.91
0.85
1.01
0.94
Mackle
et al.11
0.86
0.77
0.86
0.83
1During the 4-day hyperinsulinemic-euglycemic clamps circulating insulin was approximately 
4-fold over basal levels. Values represent milk fat yield on day 4 of the insulin clamp. 
2Supplemental amino acids were provided by abomasal infusion of casein or casein plus 
branched chain amino acids. 
Standard 
Diet 
Supplemental 
Protein2
Others have infused propionate, glucose, or starch to examine the
). In general, these infusions
present a challenge to the lactating cow in terms of maintenance of glucose
homeostasis. Nevertheless, effects on milk fat yield range from none to a
modest reduction. Just as with the insulin clamp, the pattern of change in
milk fat composition differs from classical MFD (Figure 1). The changes in
the pattern of milk fat composition for glucose infusion and the insulin
clamp are consistent with insulin inhibition of lipolysis and a reduction in
mammary use ofpreformed fatty acids from body fat reserves. The extent of
their effect on milk fat yield is undoubtedly related to the magnitude of the
fatty acid contribution from body fat reserves. Overall, the results ofinfusion
of glucogenic substrates and the hyperinsulinemic-euglycemic clamp do not 
support the glucogenic-insulin theory as the cause of classical diet-induced
MFD.
glucogenic-insulin theory (e.g. see 5,13,14,15
4.
TRANS FATTY ACIDS AND MFD 
Direct inhibition of milk fat synthesis by trans -C18:1 was first proposed 
more than two decades ago
5. Trans-C18:1 fatty acids arise as intermediates in
the biohydrogenation of polyunsaturated fatty acids. Thus, their involvement 
in MFD was typically proposed for dietary supplements of plant and fish 
oils, but some proposed that trans-C18:1 were also involved in MFD with 
high grain/low fiber diets5,7. Consistent with the theory, several groups 
demonstrated that feeding of partially hydrogenated vegetable oils to 
lactating dairy cows caused MFD (see review
6) and Wonsil et al.16 reported
the outflow of trans -18:1 from the rumen correlated with the degree of 
MFD. Other studies summarized by Erdman6 showed that the simple 
substitution of trans -C18:1 fatty acids for cis -18:1 fatty acids in abomasal 
infusions resulted in a dramatic reduction in milk fat yield. 

Regulation and nutritional manipulation of milk fat 
213
Figure 1. Changes in fatty acid composition of milk fat which occur with high grain/low fiber (HG/LF) bets12, 
abanasal infusion of trans -10, Cis -12 conjugated linoleic acid (10,12 CLA)8, hyperinsulinemic-euglycemic clamp 
(insulin clamp)10, and abomasal infusion of glucose13.
Over a wide range of diets, there is a close relationship between the 
decrease in milk fat percentage and the increase in milk fat content of trans-
C18:16,7. Occasionally when dietary oils are fed, the decrease in milk fat is 
less than predicted from the linear relationship with trans- C18:1. In
examining this, we found that two conditions were required to get MFD - a
dietary source of unsaturated fatty acids and an altered rumen fermentation 
which leads to an incomplete biohydrogenation7. We further demonstrated 
that MFD was related to a shift in the pattern of trans C18:1 isomers to 
increased concentrations of trans -10 C18:17. In the biohydrogenation of 
linoleic acid, the first step is an isomerization to form cis -9, trans -11
conjugated linoleic acid (CLA). This is followed by two reductions to form 
trans -11 C18:1 and then stearate. Consistent with this, cis-9, trans-11 CLA
and trans -11 C18:1 are the major fatty acid isomers of the biohydrogenation 
process typically found in milk fat. However, under some circumstances 
rumen biohydrogenation must be altered to give rise to the trans -10 C18:1,
observed during MFD. Putative biohydrogenation pathways for its formation 
have been proposed and in this case the initial isomerization step would form 
a trans-10, cis-12 CLA17.
Based on the above discussion we postulated that trans -10 C18:1 or related 
metabolites (e.g. trans -10, cis -12 CLA) might be the case of MFD7. In 
support of this we observed that increases in the milk fat content of trans- 10

214
Bauman and Griinari 
C18:1 and trans -10-, cis -12 CLA were both inversely related to milk fat 
content7,18. To directly examine their role in MFD, we compared effects of 
abomasal infusion of cis -9, trans -11 and trans -10, cis -12 isomers of CLA8.
The 9,11 CLA isomer had no impact on milk fat whereas a 4-day abomasal 
infusion of less than 10 g/d of trans - 10, cis - 12 CLA resulted in over a 40% 
reduction in milk fat content and yield (Figure 2). Furthermore, the shifts in 
milk fat composition observed with trans -10, cis -12 CLA parallel those 
which occur with classical dietary-induced MFD (Fig. 1). 
figure 2 Temporal patternofmilk fat contentduringabomasal infusion ofconjugatedlinoleic
acid(CLA)isomers. Infusions were of 10g/d of cis-9,trans-11 CLAortrans-10,cis-12 CLA8.
The mechanisms whereby trans-10, cis-12 CLA inhibits milk fat
synthesis represents an active area of research. Specific mechanisms have
not been established but based on the changes in milk fat composition they
must involve de novo fatty acid synthesis and the desaturase system8. The
regulation of key enzymes such as acetyl CoA carboxylase, fatty acid
synthase, and ∆9-desaturase are logical possibilities.
5.
CONCLUSIONS
Certain diets induce MFD in lactating dairy cows and several theories
have been proposed as the basis. One of these is the glucogenic-insulin

Regulation and nutritional manipulation of milk fat 
215
theory, but recent investigations offer no support for this theory as the cause 
of MFD. Another theory is that intermediates 
formed in rumen 
biohydrogenation of unsaturated fatty acids inhibit fat synthesis at the 
mammary gland. Recent studies suggest that pathways of rumen 
biohydrogenation are altered under certain dietary conditions and this results 
in a shift in the CLA and trans C18:1 isomers that are produced. Specifically, 
diet-induced MFD corresponds to increases in milk fat content of trans - 10,
cis -12 CLA and trans -10 C18:1, and the former has been shown to be a potent 
inhibitor of milk fat synthesis. 
6. 
REFERENCES 
1.
2.
Barber, M.C., Clegg, R.A., Travers, M.T., and Vernon, R.G., 1997, Lipid metabolism in 
the lactating mammary gland. Biochim. Biophys. Acta. 1347: 10 1-1 26. 
German, J.B., Morand, L., Dillard, C.J., and Xu, R., 1997, Milk Fat Composition: 
Targets for Alteration of Function and Nutrition. In Milk Composition and 
Biotechnology (R.A.S. Welch, D.J.W. Bums, S.R. Davis, A.I. Popay, and C.G. Prosser, 
eds.), CAB International, New York, NY, pp. 35-72.
Sutton, J.D., 1989, Altering milk composition by feeding. J. Dairy Sci. 72:2801-2814.
Palmquist, D.L., Beaulieu, A.D., and Barbano, D.M., 1993, Feed and animal factors 
influencing milk fat composition. J. Dairy Sci. 76: 1753-1771.
Davis, C.L., and Brown, R.E., 1970, Low-fat Milk Syndrome. In Physiology of 
Digestion and Metabolism in the Ruminant (A.T. Phillipson, ed.), Oriel Press Limited, 
Newcastle upon Tyne, UK. pp. 545-565.
Erdman, R., 1996, Milk fat depression: some new insights. Tri-State Dairy Nutrition 
Conference, Fort Wayne, IN, pp. 1-16.
Griinari, J.M., Dwyer, D.A., McGuire, M.A., Bauman, D.E., Palmquist, D.L., and 
Nurmela, K.V.V., 1998, Trans -octadecenoic acids and milk fat depression in lactating 
dairy cows.J. Dairy Sci. 81:1251-1261.
Baumgard, L.H., Corl, B.A., Dwyer, D.A., SFbp, A., and Bauman, D.E., 1999, 
Identification of the conjugated linoleic acid isomer which inhibits milk fat synthesis. 
Am. J. Physiol. (in press). 
9. 
McGuire, M.A., Griinari, J.M., Dwyer, D.A., and Bauman, D.E., 1995, Role of insulin in 
the regulation of mammary synthesis of fat and protein. J. Dairy Sci. 78:816-824.
10. Griinari, J.M., McGuire, M.A., Dwyer, D.A., Bauman, D.E., and Palmquist, D.L., 1997, 
Role of insulin in the regulation of milk fat synthesis in dairy cows. J. Dairy Sci. 
11. Mackle, T.R., Dwyer, D.A., Ingvartsen, K.L., Chouinard, P.Y., Lynch, J.M., Barbano, 
D.M., and Bauman, D.E., 1999, Effects of insulin and amino acids on milk protein 
concentration and yield from dairy cows. J. Dairy Sci. 82: 15 12-1 524. 
12. Stony, J.E., and Rook, J.A.F., 1965, The effects of a diet low in hay and high in flaked 
maize on milk-fat secretion and on the concentrations of certain constituents in the blood 
plasma of the cow. Brit. J. Nutr. 19:101-109.
13. Hurtaud, C., Rulquin, H., and Verite, R., 1998, Effects of graded duodenal infusions of 
glucose on yield and composition of milk from dairy cows. 1. Diets based on corn silage. 
J. Dairy Sci. 81 :3239-3247.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
80: 1076-1084.

216
Bauman and Griinari 
14. Reynolds, C.K., Sutton, J.D., and Beever, D.E., 1997, Effects of feeding starch to dairy 
cattle on nutrient availability and production. In Recent Advances in Animal Nutrition 
(P.C. Gamsworthy and J. Wiseman, eds.), Butterworths, London, UK, pp. 105-134.
15. Lemosquet, S., Rideau, N., Rulquin, H., Faverdin, P., Simon, J., and Verite, R., 1997, 
Effects of duodenal glucose infusion on the relationship between plasma concentrations 
of glucose and insulin in dairy cows. J. Dairy Sci. 80:2854-2865.
16. Wonsil, B.J., Herbein, J.H., and Watkins, B.A., 1994, Dietary and ruminal deprived 
trans -18:1 fatty acids alter bovine milk lipids. J. Nutr. 124:556-565.
17. Griinari, J.M., and Bauman, D.E., 1999, Biosynthesis of CLA and Incorporation into 
Milk Fat. In: Advances in Conjugated Linoleic Acid Research, Vol. I (M.P. Yurawecz, 
M.M. Mossoba, J.K.G. Kramer, M.W. Pariza, and G. J. Nelson, eds.), AOCS Press, 
Champaign, IL, pp. 180-200.
18. Griinari, J.M., Nurmela, K., Dwyer, D.A., Barbano, D.M. and Bauman, D.E., 1999, 
Variation of milk fat concentration of conjugated linoleic acid and milk fat percentage is 
associated with a change in ruminal biohydrogenation. J. Anim. Sci. 77(Suppl. 1): 117-
118 (abstr.). 

27.
Effect of Feeding Pattern and Behaviour on Hormonal 
Changes and Milk Composition 
Giuseppe Bertoni 
Istituto di Zootecnica, Facoltà di Agraria, Università Cattolica del Sacro Cuore, Piacenza, Italy 
Key words: 
Abstract:
Dairy cows, feeding pattern, hormones, milk 
There is no doubt that feeding and nutrient availability modify the metabolism 
through hormonal changes. It is otherwise interesting to better define the 
influence of the imposed or freely chosen meal distribution during the day; in 
fact the daily feed intake in a relatively short time, namely during the daylight, 
seems to induce a clear anabolic phase in afternoon-night (high insulin and 
low urea) and a catabolic one in the morning (low insulin and high urea); 
among the possible consequences, the lower fat content in the morning 
milking and the higher one in the afternoon, are of great importance. The 
factors that can influence these daily changes are many, namely the meal size, 
the day or night, the stage of lactation and perhaps a genetic effect. These 
results can be useful for a better interpretation of blood parameters and of the 
relationships between feeding and milk composition. 
1. 
INTRODUCTION 
It is well known that feeding influences the availability of nutrients 
which in turn represent the precursors of milk constituents. It is also known 
that mammary gland uptake and utilisation of these precursors are strongly 
influenced by the hormonal status' as well as by the mammary gland itself2.
These facts could explain many differences in milk yield and composition 
that the availability of nutrients alone cannot fully justify, namely the 
different behaviour of milk fat content in early or late lactation in cows fed 
different concentrate: forage ratios3; the same is true for the protein content 
(our Institute unpublished results). 
217

218
Bertoni
The obvious consequence is that many different factors are involved in 
the milk components synthesis and not all are well known as suggested by 
Maas et al.4 for the protein. 
2.
FEEDING, ENDOCRINE CHANGES AND 
MAMMARY RESPONSE 
One of the reasons is surely the effects of hormones that in turn can be 
modified in their release, blood levels, peripheral activity etc.; feeding is one 
of the causes of these variations, but our interest has been attracted to the 
feeding pattern. Quite old works have shown the influence of concentrate 
partitioning on the rumen pH and on milk yield5; even the frequency of 
feeding and methods of feeding (e.g., total mixed rations) are commonly 
known to influence milk composition3. Also Yang and Varga6 did show that 
feeding concentrate four times daily increased milk fat and proteins. Similar 
results were obtained by Sutton et al.7 and Sutton et al.8, but later9 these
authors reconsidered their results and concluded that the partitioning of 
nutrients may be more critically related to the postprandial changes in 
circulating volatile fatty acids and insulin, and that the postprandial increase 
in insulin measured after feeding a 70% concentrate ration twice daily may 
have been sufficient to stimulate milk-fat depression. 
Nevertheless, the concept of a tight relationship between VFA and 
hormone levels that Bassett10 emphasized for insulin and glucagon, does not 
seem so sure; in fact the last paper of Bergman11, speaking about the indirect 
effects of volatile fatty acids on metabolism, stated: “despite the above clear- 
cut effects of VFA on insulin and glucagon secretion in ruminants, there is 
still uncertainty about the physiological importance of propionate and 
butyrate as regulators of hormone release”. Furthermore, it is longer known 
that in ruminants the postprandial insulin raise is mainly consequence of 
nervous-endocrine 
(digestive 
tract) 
effects 
and 
this 
explains 
the 
contemporary glucose decline12.
3.
FEED DISTRIBUTION 
Since the late ‘70s we tried to understand the effects of the meals on the
blood metabolite13, but only in the early ‘80s some hormones were also
considered; namely, after the meal there is a rise of insulin and thyroid
hormones, while cortisol is suddenly reduced14. Nevertheless, it was only in
the early ‘90s l5 that we paid attention to the metabolites and hormones as

Feeding effects on hormonal changes and milk composition 
219
influenced not only by the meals, but also by the type and frequency of them 
during the day and how such influence can be affected by the lactation stage 
as well as by the genetic merit. The most interesting results of this last 
research work can be summarized: 16:
a) in the early lactation the thyroid hormone raise after the meal is very 
small respect to the advanced stages of lactation; 
b) also in the early stages, insulin and GH show an opposite behaviour 
respect to the late lactation, namely insulin is unchanged or reduced after 
the meal and GH is increased. 
Nevertheless we were also able to show that small concentrate meals do 
not have relevant influence respect to the big forage-concentrate meals 
which effects, in turn, depend on the interval from the previous meal17,18
when the meals are not symmetric. The effects on milk yield cannot be 
reliably quantified in this kind of experiments of short period; on the 
contrary, the milk composition is modified when 3 vs. 2 meals are 
administered: i.e. milk fat and protein contents are increased17
A similar experiment with not yet published data has been carried out on 
5 cows in their early lactation, switched from 12-12 to 8-16 h intervals 
immediately after a daily blood sampling from 7.00 a.m. (1st meal) to 11 
p.m.; the same blood sampling was repeated after 4 days. The treatment was 
repeated 15-30, 40-60 and 80-100 days after calving. The very short period 
did not allow any important difference at the milk level, while blood 
variations of urea (fig. 1), insulin (fig. 2) and T3 confirm the data of previous 
Fig.1-2 Daily pattern of changes of urea (mmol/1) and insulin µU/ml) in dairy cows fed 
forages at equal (12-12 h: E - - ) or unequal (8-16 h: U — ) intervals and checked at 15-30,
40-60 and 80-100 days of lactation. 
experiment, but furthermore it has been observed that: 
a)
urea is increased after 1
st and not after 2
nd meal in 8-16 h intervals,
therefore its level fluctuate much more and particularly at the 3
rd month
of lactation; 

220
Bertoni
b) the rise of insulin is more evident after the 2nd meal in the 8-16 h 
intervals and it becomes more remarkable as much as the lactation stage 
is advanced. 
These data seemed promising for a better understanding of well known 
relationships between feeding, digestive activity, endocrine-metabolic 
response and milk yield and composition. Two new experiments were 
therefore carried out: 
a ) the first to see blood changes, every 1-2 h for a whole day, and milk 
differences between morning and afternoon milkings of 2 groups of dairy 
cows fed at 8-16 h intervals but with the 8 h interval alternatively during the 
day (7.00 a.m. and 3.00 p.m.) or the night (7 p.m. and 3 a.m.). The main 
results as presented by Trevisi et al19 can be summarized: 
1. the nightly fed animals show a slower intake, particularly after the 2nd
meal;
2. this seems to allow a more spread nutrient availability during the 24 h 
because the insulin (fig. 3) and urea (fig. 4) pattern of changes are index 
of a relatively better constancy, particularly if compared with the 
daylight fed animals that show a long and deep anabolic phase (high 
insulin and low urea) from late afternoon to early morning while a 
shorter catabolic phase appears in the early morning (12-15 hours after 
the last meal start); 
3. a small positive effect could be seen on the milk yield (and lactose 
synthesis), but it is particularly evident for the fat content that tends to be 
similar between the 2 daily milkings for the nightly fed animals and 
otherwise tends to be lower in the morning (fig. 5) after the long 
anabolic phase appearing in the daylight fed animals with 8-16 intervals; 
b ) within the dairy cows bred in our tied experimental stable, and with a 
perfectly symmetric distribution of meals, we had the opportunity to choose 
quick and slow eaters, the first being characterized by the tendency to eat the 
diet in few hours after the meal start. The animals were bled 
Fig.3-4
diurnal or nocturnal meals at 8-16 h intervals. 
Daily pattern of changes of insulin µU/ml) and urea (mmol/1) in dairy cows fed 

Feeding effects on hormonal changes and milk composition 
221
Fig. 5 Milk fat content in a.m. and p.m. milkings with diurnal and nocturnal meals. 
Fig. 6 Average milk fat content of morning and afternoon milkings in dairy cows with a 
different ingestion rate (slow = S or fast = F) before, during and after an attempt to modify 
their feeding behaviour. 
during the day before and after the quick eaters were obliged to a slower 
eating rate dividing the diet in 4 x 6 h meals. The results cannot be 
considered definitive, however the fat content of the morning milking was 
much lower in the slow eaters, while it was only slightly lower in the fast 
eaters (fig. 6) and it became similar or slightly higher (3,53 vs. 3,50%) 
compared to the afternoon milking when the fast eaters were obliged to slow 
down the eating rate. These results suggest that the slow eaters are in a 
situation similar to the 8-16 h intervals distribution of meals. In fact the 
insulin behaviour during the day shows that in fast eaters it suddenly 
increases after each meal but remains generally lower than in the slow eaters, 
in which insulin level is characterized by a gradual increase during the day 
and by a supposed higher value during the night. Moreover, the quick eaters 
obliged to slow down are not comparable to the “natural” slow eaters 
because they rapidly eat the available feeds and the post-prandium peak of 
insulin occurs 4 times instead of 2. 
4. 
FINAL REMARKS 
As recently underlined by Dawson20, the way of feed intake during the 
day (light and dark) has an effect on the nutrient availability and, in turn, on 
the levels of some hormones, namely insulin. As suggested by Dawson20,
well distributed meals maintain a “constant” concentration of insulin that 
may suppress the tissue protein degradation with an improved protein gain. 
The interest in the dairy cows may be different, because insulin may be more 
important for milk composition (fat and protein); it is however interesting to 
consider the possibility that this could be due to the way of feed intake and 
that other hormones may be involved. 

222
Bertoni
Anyhow, our results suggest that some different factors, like meal 
distribution restricted to light time and slow feed intake rate, can cause some 
peculiar responses: 
1. at endocrine-metabolic level with a well differentiated anabolic phase 
(late afternoon till night) from a shorter catabolic phase (early morning 
till noon); 
2. at milk composition level, particularly for fat content, much lower in the 
milking following the anabolic phase. 
Besides a confirmation of an insulin role on the milk fat content, these 
interesting results suggest some stimulating remarks, particularly for future 
experiments:
1. the behaviour of metabolites and hormones can be different according to 
the feeding strategy, many times unknown because the animals can 
choose it; this impose some caution to interpreter blood parameters if 
measured;
2. small or big meals can influence the animal metabolism and the lactation 
stage can contribute to modify such influence; 
3. perhaps there is a genetic effect on the feed intake rate and this could 
influence the milk fat contents of 2 consecutive milkings, the question is 
whether this could be used as a diagnostic tools for feeding habits 
evaluation.
5. 
REFERENCES 
1.
2.
3.
4.
Bertoni G. Feeding and bovine milk quality: endocrine and metabolic factors. Zoot. Nutr. 
Anim. 22, 205-214, 1996. 
Bequette BJ, Backwell FRC. Amino acid supply and metabolism by the ruminant 
mammary gland. Proc. of the Nutr. SOC. 56, 593-605, 1997. 
Kennelly JJ, Glimm DR. The biological potential to alter the composition of milk. Can. 
J. Anim. Sci. 78(supp.), 23-26, 1998. 
Maas JA, France J, McBride BW. Application of a mechanistic model of bovine milk 
protein synthesis to examine the use of isotope labeling methods. J. Dairy Sci. 81, 2440-
2450, 1998.
Kaufmann W. Influence of the composition of the ration and the feeding frequency on 
pH-regulation in the rumen and on feed intake in ruminants. Livestock. Prod. Sci. 3, 103-
114, 1976.
Yang C-M J, Varga GA. Effect of three concentrate feeding frequencies on rumen 
protozoa, rumen digesta kinetics, and milk yield in dairy cows. J. Dairy Sci. 72, 950-957,
1989.
Sutton JD, Broster WH, Napper DJ, Siviter JW. Feeding frequency for lactating cows: 
effects on digestion, milk production and energy utilization. British Journal of Nutrition 
5.
6.
7.
53, 117-130, 1985. 

Feeding effects on hormonal changes and milk composition 
8.
223
Sutton JD, Hart IC, Broster WH, Elliot RJ, Schuller E. Feeding frequency for lactating 
cows: effects on rumen fermentation and blood metabolites and hormones. British 
Journal of Nutrition 56, 181-192, 1986. 
Sutton JD, Hart IC, Morant SV, Schuller E, Simmonds AD. Feeding frequency for 
lactating cows: diurnal patterns of hormones and metabolites in peripheral blood in 
relation to milk-fat concentration. British Journal of Nutrition 60, 265-274, 1988. 
10. Bassett JM. Dietary and gastro-intestinal control of hormones regulating carbohydrate 
metabolism in ruminants. In: Digestion and Metabolism in the Ruminant. Proceedings of 
the IV International Symposium on Ruminant Physiology. Sydney, Australia, 383-398,
1975.
11. Bergman EN. Energy contributions of volatile fatty acids from the gastrointestinal tract 
in various species. Physiol. Rev. 70(2), 567-590, 1990. 
12. Riis PM. Adaptation of metabolism to various conditions. Nutritional and other 
environmental conditions. In: Dinamic biochemistry of animal production, Amsterdam: 
Elsevier, 319-357, 1983. 
13. Bertoni G, Galimberti A. I1 Profilo Metabolico nelle lattifere: esecuzione ed 
interpretazione. Atti SOC. Ital. Buiatria IX, 241-251, 1977. 
14. Bertoni G, Lombardelli R, Piccioli Cappelli F. Variazioni ormonali post-prandiali in 
lattifere con alimentazione ed in fase fisiologica diverse. Atti 2º Congr. Naz. S.I.B.C.A. 
15. Bertoni G, Lombardelli R. Effetti dell'alimentazione sul quadro endocrino e metabolico 
degli animali da latte. Atti IX Congr. Naz. A.S.P.A. Roma 2, 1161-1169, 1991. 
16. Bertoni G, Lombardelli R, Cappa V. Variazioni di alcuni metaboliti ed ormoni nel corso 
della giornata e in fasi fisiologiche diverse in bovine da latte. Zoot. Nutr. Anim. 21,271 -
283,1995.
17. Lombardelli R, Bertoni G, Piccioli Cappelli F. Frequenza dei pasti nelle bovine da latte: 
effetti a livello metabolico, endocrino e produttivo. Zoot. Nutr. Anim. 19, 123-130, 1993. 
18. Bertoni G, Trevisi E, Bani P. Metabolic effects of two different lapses without 
concentrate in early lactating dairy cows. Livestock Prod. Sci. 39, 139-140, 1994. 
19. Trevisi E, Lombardelli R, Piccioli Cappelli F, Bertoni G. Effect of different daily 
distribution of feeds on blood insulin and milk composition. Cost 825 – Mammary Gland 
Biology, Tours, 16-18 Sept., 1999. 
20. Dawson JM. Variation in nutrient supply and effects on whole body anabolism. In: Proc.
VIIIth Protein metabolism and nutrition Symp.-EAAP Publ. n. 96 Wageningen Pers., 
9.
139-148, 1986. 
101-126, 1999. 

28.
Genetic Polymorphisms in Milk Protein Genes and 
their Impact on Milk Composition 
Peter Dove 
Dept. of Animal Science, Biotechnical Faculty, University of Ljubljana, Domzale, Slovenia 
Key words: 
lactoprotein genes, genetic variants, casein, b-lactoglobulin, alternative 
splicing, gene expression, pseudogene. 
About 40 different genetic variants are present at bovine milk protein loci and 
considerable differences in allele frequencies were observed among breeds. 
Advanced electrophoretic methods and recently, the DNA technology have 
been applied for identification and characterisation of milk protein genetic 
variants. Mutations with impact on gene expression have been identified. The 
influence of lactoprotein genetic variants on milk composition and cheese 
making ability has been studied extensively. The most prominent effects have 
been found for β-LG A/B and κ-CN A/B in cattle and αS1-CNE in goat. 
Abstract:
1. 
INTRODUCTION 
Six major milk proteins in ruminants are encoded by four casein genes, 
beta lactoglobulin- (β-LG) and alpha lactalbumin- (a-LA) gene. In cattle
four casein genes (αS1-CN, β-CN, αS2-CN,κ-CN) are clustered on 
chromosome 6 occupying a genomic region of about 250 kb1. The gene 
order and transcriptional orientation are highly conserved among ruminant 
species. While casein genes are present in ruminants as single copy loci, 
pseudogenes for β-LG were found in cattle2 , goat and sheep3. In addition,
pseudogene for α-LA, flanked by two directly repeated LINE sequences, 
was found in cattle4. The length of the transcription unit and number and 
length of exons vary among milk protein genes considerably5. Due to the 
large number of short exons and presence of retroposon elements in the 
225

226
Dove
bovine aS2-CN gene, it has been proposed6 that αS2- and β-CN gene evolved 
from the common ancestor by a couple of internal duplications. The 
availability of genomic sequences for all lactoprotein genes and analysis of 
allelic differences at molecular level enabled identification of new alleles 
and shed new light onto the regulatory mechanisms involved in the 
regulation of milk protein gene expression. 
2. 
GENETIC POLYMORPHISMS AT 
LACTOPROTEIN LOCI 
The genetic typing of milk was traditionally performed using 
electrophoretic separation of milk proteins in starch and polyacrylamide 
gels. These methods allowed only identification of deletions and mutations, 
which caused the change of the net charge of the protein. The application of 
more sensitive electrophoretic methods (isoelectric focusing, IEF) allowed 
faster routine typing of lactoproteins and led to the identification of new 
genetic variants at αS1-CN-, κ-CN- and β-LG locus7,8. In cattle, goat and 
sheep the sequence and position of amino acid differences in almost all the 
known variants has been established using biochemical methods. Besides the 
single amino acid substitutions, which are the most common type of 
mutations, some deletions9 as well as changes in the number of phosphate 
groups have been observed. In cattle, which is compared with goat and sheep 
more polymorphic species, some 40 genetic variants at six major 
lactoprotein loci have been identified (Table 1). 
The introduction of DNA technology enabled typing of lactoprotein 
genes in both sexes independent on lactation status. Using this technology, 
new allelic variants have been characterised10 and identification of mutations 
within the non coding region became feasible. It has been shown that the 
deletion of 13 aa in bovine aS1-CN A is caused by exon 4 skipping due to the 
point mutation within the splice donor site and not by deletion of genomic 
DNA11. Similarly, shorter variants of ovine and caprine αS1-CN are 
associated with exon 16 skipping12 and differential splicing of exons 11,13 
and 16 of pre-mRNA13, respectively. In addition, mutations within the non-
coding regions might have important quantitative effects as demonstrated by 
the occurrence of the LINE element in the exon 19 (last untranslated exon) 
of the goat αS1-CN E allele. The presence of the LINE element could be 
responsible for the reduced mRNA stability and consequently for the three-
fold reduction of αS1-CN E expression in goat14. Allele A and B specific
polymorphisms were found in the proximal promoter region of the β-LG
gene15, which might cause differential expression of both alleles due to 
different AP-2 binding affinity. The bovine κ-CN A and B alleles are also

Polymorphisms in milk protein genes 
227
expressed differentially16, but no allele specific polymorphisms could be 
found in the proximal promoter region. However, 
allele specific 
polymorphism within the 3'-UTR of the κ-CN gene might be related with
differential stability of the allele specific mRNA transcripts17.
ND: not determined
3.
ALLELE FREQUENCIES IN DIFFERENT
BREEDS
The distribution of lactoprotein allele frequencies among different cattle 
breeds varies considerably. For the majority of breeds αS2-CN and a-LA
locus are considered to be monomorphic. In most breeds αS1-CN B and β-
CN A1 and A2 are the most common alleles. High frequencies of K-CN A
allele were found in Ayershire, Holstein Friesian, Fleckvieh, Guernsey and
Red Danish Dairy Cattle, whereas K-CN B allele is present at intermediate
frequencies in Jersey, Normande and Brown Swiss. However, in Jersey
population in California a very high frequency of κ−CN B was found18.
Distribution of β-LG A and B alleles is close to intermediate frequencies in
the majority of the breeds with exception of Canadian Shorthorn, Red

228
Dove
Danish Dairy Cattle and Ayershire19, where the frequency of B allele is 
around 0.8. The most common haplotype for the α S1-CN, β-CN and κ-CN
locus in most breeds is B/A2/A with the frequencies of 0.30 - 0.40. In 
Europe β-CN A1 and α S1-CN C are almost absent in the Northern breeds and
α S2-CN D and β-LG D are mainly found in and around the Alpine area.
4.
LACTOPROTEIN GENETIC VARIANTS, MILK 
COMPOSITION AND CHEESE MAKING 
PROPERTIES
Several studies examined the effects of milk protein genetic variants on 
milk production traits, milk composition and technological properties of 
milk. However, results from those studies are sometimes conflicting with 
respect to the significance and the size of genotype effects20. The age of the 
animals, stage of lactation, different genetic background in different breeds 
and statistical model can bias the results considerably. The association with 
higher milk, fat and protein yields has been shown for aS1-CN B and b-CN A 
alleles as well as positive effect of κ-CN BB and β-LG AA genotypes on
protein yield21. Significant positive effect on fat percentage, overall solids 
and casein content was found for κ-CN B and β-LG B alleles22. In addition,
positive additive effect of β-LG allele B on casein content and casein
number has been found23. Quantitative effects of β-LG alleles A and B and
α S1-CN alleles B and C were demonstrated in the Simmental and Brown
Alpine breeds24. Comparison of statistical models analysing single locus and 
multi-locus effects revealed only small number of statistically significant 
effects20. Considering the technological properties of milk it has been shown 
that milk containing κ-CN B variant has better rennetability, better curd
firmness, better cheese yield and better recovery of fat25. In the Finnish 
Ayershire population, where 8% of non coagulating milk occurs, a positive 
effect of κ-CN B allele on curd firmness compared with κ-CN E was
found26. In addition it has been shown that quantitative differences in 
Parmesan cheese production between κ-CN AA and κ-CN BB milk were
greater than expected from differences in milk composition27.
In conclusion, the most striking effects of lactoprotein genetic variants in 
cattle were found for κ-CN allele B, which is associated with shorter
coagulation time, faster rate of firming and production of firmer curd, and 
for β-LG B allele which has major effect on β-LG content (A>B) and
positive effect on casein number. In goat The major effect on casein content 
in goat has α S1-CN, where the E allele is expressed at three-fold lower
level14.

Polymorphisms in milk protein genes 
5. 
REFERENCES 
229
1.
2.
3.
Rijnkels, M., Kooiman, P. M., de Boer, H.A., Pieper, F.R. 1997. Organization of the 
bovine casein gene locus. Mammalian Genome 8: 148-152.
Passey, R.J. and Mackinlay, A.G. 1995. Characterization of a second, apparently 
inactive, copy of the bovine β-lactoglobuline gene. Eur. J. Biochem. 233 (3): 736-743.
Folch, J. M., Coll, A., Hayes, H. C., Sanchez, A. 1996. Characterization of a caprine 
beta-lactoglobulin pseudogene, identification and chromosomal localization by .in situ 
hybridization in goat, sheep and cow. Gene 177 (1-2): 87-91.
Vilotte, J. L., Soulier, S., Mercier, J.C. 1993. Complete sequence of a bovine alpha-
lactalbumin pseudogene: the region homologous to the gene flanked by two directly 
repeated LINE sequences. Genomics 16 (2): 529-32.
Mercier,J.C. and Vilotte, J.L. 1993. Structure and Function of Milk Protein Genes. 
J.Dairy Sci. 76: 3079-3098.
Groenen, M. A. M., Dijkhof, R. J. M., Verstege, A. J. M. and van der Poel, J. J. 1993. 
The complete sequence of the gene encoding bovine αs2-casein. Gene 123: 187-193
Krause, I., Buchberger, J., Weiss, G., Pflügler, M., Klostermeyer, H. 1989. Isoelectric 
focusing in immobilized pH gradients with carrier ampholytes added for high-resolution
phenotyping of bovine β-lactoglobulins: characterization of a new genetic variant.
Electrophoresis 9: 609-6 13 
Erhard, G. 1993. Allele frequencies of milk proteins in German cattle breeds and 
demonstration of α S2- casein variants by isoelectric focusing. Arch. Tierz.,Dummerstorf
Grosclaude, F., Joudrier, P., Mahe, M.F. 1978. Polymorphisme de la caséine aS2 bovine:
étroite liasons du locus α S2-Cn avec les loci α S1-Cn, β-Cn et κ−Cn; mise en evidence
dune deletion dans le variant αS2- CN D. Ann. Génét. Sél. Anim. 10: 3 13-327.
10. Rando, A., Di Gregorio, P., Ramunno, L., Mariani, P., Fiorella, A., Senese, C., Marletta, 
D., Masina, P. 1998. Characterization of the CSN1A G Allele of the Bovine aS1-Casein
Locus by the Insertion of a Relict of a Long Interspersed Element. J. Dairy Sci. 81:
11. Mohr, U., Koczan, D. Linder, D., Hobom, G., Erhardt, G. 1994. A single point mutation 
results in A allele-specific exon skipping in the bovine α S1-casein mRNA. Gene 143:
12. Passey, R., Glenn, W., Mackinlay, A. 1996. Exon skipping in the ovine α S1-casein gene.
Comp. Biochem. Physiol. 114B: 389-394.
13. Ferranti,P., Addeo, F., Malorni, A., Chianese, L., Leroux, C., Martin, P. 1997. 
Differential splicing of pre-messenger RNA produces multiple forms of mature caprine 
α S1-casein. Eur. J. of Biochem. 249: 1-7.
14. Perez, M. J., Leroux, C., Bonastre, A. S., Martin, P. 1994. Occurrence of a LINE 
sequence in the 3'UTR of the goat alpha s1-casein E-encoding allele associated with 
reduced protein synthesis level. Gene 147: 179-187.
15. Lum, L. S., Dove, P., Medrano, J. F. 1997. Polymorphisms of Bovine β-Lactoglobulin
Promoter and Differences in the Binding Affinity of Activator Protein-2 Transcription 
Factor. J. Dairy Sci. 80: 1398-1397.
16. VanEenennaam, A., Medrano, J.F. 1991. Differences in allelic protein expression in the 
milk of heterozygous κ-casein cows. J. Dairy Sci. 74: 1491-1496.
17. Debeljak, M., Susnik, S., Marinsek-Logar, R., Medrano J. F., Dove, P. Allelic 
differences in bovine kappa-CN gene related to the regulation of gene expression. Eur. J. 
Physiol. Pflügers Archiv (in press). 
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
36: 145-152
9.
1735-1742.
187-192.

230
Dove
18. VanEenennaam, A., Medrano, J. F. 199 1. Milk protein polymorphisms in California 
dairy cattle. J. Dairy Sci 74: 1730-1742.
19. Buchberger, J. 1995. Genetic polymorphisms of milk proteins: Differences between 
breeds. Bulletin of the IDF 304: 5-6.
20. Bovenhuis, H., van Arendonk, J. A. M., Korver S. 1992. Associations between Milk 
Protein Polymorphism and Milk Production Traits. J.Dairy Sci. 75: 2549-2559.
21. Ng-Kwai-Hang, K. F., Hajes, J. F., Moxley, J. E., Monardes,H.G. 1986. Relationships 
between Milk Protein Polymorphism and Mayor Milk Constituents in Holstein-Friesian
Cows. J.Dairy Sci. 69: 22-26.
22. Ron, M., Yoffe, O., Ezra, E., Medrano, J. F., Weller, I. J. 1994. Determination of effects 
of milk protein genotype on production traits of Israeli Holsteins. J. Daily Sci. 77: 1106-
1113.
23.
Lunden, A., Nilson, M., Janson, L. 1997. Marked Effect of β-Lactoglobulin
Polymorphism on the Ratio of Casein to Total Protein in Milk. J. Dairy Sci. 80: 2996-
3005.
24. Graml,R., Weiss, G., Buchberger, J., Pirchner, F. 1989. Different rates of synthesis of 
whey protein and casein by alleles of the β-lactoglobulin and α S1-casein locus in cattle.
Genet. Sel. Evol. 21: 547-554.
25. Jakob, E. and Puhan, Z. 1992. Technological Properties of Milk as Influenced by Genetic 
Polymorphism of Milk Proteins. Int. Dairy Journal 2: 157- 178.
26. Ikonen, T., Ahlfors, K., Kempe, R., Ojala, M., Ruottinen, 0. 1999. Genetic parameters 
for the milk coagulation properties and prevalence of noncoagulating milk in Finnish 
Dairy Cows. J. Dairy Sci. 82: 205-214.
27. Aleandri, R., Buttazzoni, G., Schneider, J.C., Caroli, A., Davoli, R. 1990. The effects of 
milk protein polymorphisms on milk components and cheese-producing ability. J. Dairy 
Sci. 73: 241-255.

29.
Mammary Gland Immunology Around Parturition 
Influence of stress, nutrition and genetics 
Karin Persson Waller 
Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Centre for Reproductive Biology, Swedish 
University of Agricultural Sciences, Uppsala, Sweden 
Key words: 
Abstract:
Bovine, mammary, immunology, stress, nutrition, genetics 
Adequate immune functions are essential for the defence against udder 
infections. Detailed knowledge about the immune response and important 
defence factors is essential in order to find new ways for the prevention and 
treatment of udder infections leading to mastitis. Work should be concentrated 
on ways of minimising the negative influence on immune functions and/or 
ways of stimulating these functions, especially during periods of immune 
suppression. A depression of important immune functions has been reported 
around parturition and there is a higher prevalence of clinical mastitis and 
other diseases during this period. Immunosuppression is often associated with 
high levels of glucocorticoids in blood, a common finding around parturition 
and during stressful conditions. A number of stressors are present around 
calving, e.g. parturition, onset of lactation and changes in feeding and 
management regimes. Adequate management including feeding strategies and 
routines are important for the immune functions. Metabolic stress as well as 
deficiencies in vitamins and minerals around parturition and during the first 
month of lactation can have a negative influence on the immune functions and 
thereby increase the risks for udder infections and mastitis. There seem to be a 
genetic variability in certain immune functions among periparturient cows. 
This might indicate a possibility to find markers for genetic selection of 
individuals with a well-developed immune system without negative effects on 
milk productivity. 
1.
INTRODUCTION
Udder infections and mastitis are major problems for the dairy industry
throughout the world, and the yearly costs are substantial. The risks for
udder infections are highest around drying-off and parturition, and the
231

232
Persson Waller 
prevalence of clinical mastitis is higher during the first month after calving. 
Other diseases prevalent in the periparturient period, such as retained 
placenta, parturient paresis and ketosis, increase the risk for clinical mastitis. 
Adequate immune functions are essential for the defence against udder 
infections. However, increasing evidence show that several important 
immune functions are depressed during certain periods, in particular around 
calving. This immune suppression renders the animals more susceptible to 
infections and diseases like mastitis. The causes for the immune suppression 
are not fully understood but several factors are involved such as stress, 
changes in hormonal patterns as well as in feeding and management, onset of 
lactation and high milk production, metabolic disturbances and genetics. 
Detailed knowledge about the immune responses and important host 
defence factors is essential in order to find better ways for the prevention and 
treatment of udder infections and mastitis. Work should be concentrated on 
ways of minimising the negative influence on immune functions and/or ways 
of stimulating these functions, especially during periods of immune 
suppression, to increase the natural ability of the cow to resist, or defend 
herself, against udder infections. 
This paper will consist of a review of the knowledge in bovine mammary 
gland immunology around parturition with special emphasis on the influence 
of stress, nutrition and genetics. 
2, 
IMMUNE FUNCTIONS AROUND CALVING 
An increasing number of reports describe changes in leukocyte 
trafficking patterns and decreased functions of a number of immunological 
parameters in dairy cows around parturition. Alterations in immune 
responsiveness during this period has lately been reviewed47,67.
The numbers and proportions of white blood cells (WBC) change around 
parturition. The highest total leukocyte counts occur at parturition, then 
return to normal levels within a few weeks22,52. In a recent study, we detected 
significantly higher numbers of total WBC, polymorphonuclear neutrophils 
(PMN) and monocytes in blood at parturition compared with 1 month before 
and 1 month after parturition, but the numbers of lymphocytes and 
eosinophils did not change76. This is somewhat different from a study by 
Moreira da Silva et al52 who reported an increase of lymphocytes, but not of 
monocytes, at parturition. 
The greatest numbers of PMN in blood are found on the day of 
parturition22. At parturition and onset of lactation there is an increasing 
demand for PMN which are mobilised from the marginating pool, due to 
high levels of cortisol at parturition, and from the bone marrow. Only small 

Mammary gland immunology around parturition 
233
numbers of mature PMN are stored in the bone marrow, therefore the 
numbers of immature neutrophils in circulation increase, with the highest 
proportion occurring during the first week after parturition 
. In 
immature PMN, several important functions are reduced such as 
phagocytosis, intracellular killing and chemotaxis 
. The numbers of 
circulating mature neutrophils was negatively correlated with severity of 
mastitis.
The lymphocyte patterns in both blood and milk also change around 
parturition. The proportion of T-cells declines and a number of T-cell
subsets (CD4, CD8, WC1) vary significantly during this period69. The 
proportions of several cell populations (CD2, CD4, CD8, MHCII) are lower 
in milk than in blood following parturition, while the proportion of WC1+ 
cells is higher in milk47. The proportions of CD4+ cells decrease around 
parturition, both in blood and mammary tissue, and this is correlated with a 
decrease in interferon-γ (IFN-γ) secretion by lymphocytes and in IFN-γ
concentrations in colostrum31,61. The ratio of CD4+/CD8+ T cells is lower in 
milk than in blood, indicating a higher proportion of CD8+ cells in the 
mammary gland. Moreover, Shafer-Weaver and Sordillo61
observed
preferential trafficking of CD8+ T-cells of the suppressor type rather than of 
the cytotoxic type into the mammary gland around calving. This was 
supported by the finding that interleukin-4 (IL-4) is the main cytokine in 
mononuclear cells from cows at parturition, while IFN-γ is the main cytokine
in monocytes from cows in middle to later stages of lactation61. Moreover, 
mononuclear cells from periparturient cows produce more tumor necrosis 
factor-α than cows in mid-lactation
66.
Several important functions of blood and mammary neutrophils and 
lymphocytes decrease during the weeks immediately before calving. Most 
commonly they are at their lowest at, or just after, calving and return to 
normal levels within three weeks after calving10,35,36,44,62 . Reduced functions 
of the leukocytes diminish their ability to kill bacteria and to stimulate the 
immune defence making the animals more susceptible to infections. 
Impaired PMN function is clearly associated with a higher incidence and 
severity of periparturient mastitis6,63.
Impaired phagocytosis, respiratory burst, superoxide anion production, 
random migration, chemotaxis, and myeloperoxidase activity of PMN has 
been observed around parturition6,19,35,59 . However, other studies report 
increased, or unchanged, phagocytosis by blood PMN after calving15.
Moreover, the activity in PMN of the enzyme acyloxyacyl hydrolase 
(AOAH), important for degradation of endotoxin, decreases after calving14.
The ability of neutrophils to migrate from blood to tissues is impaired at 
parturition due to a decreased proportion of cells expressing adhesion 
receptors44,76. Lymphocyte functions, like mitogen-induced proliferation, are 
22,35,52
13,14,32

234
Persson Waller 
also 
depressed 
around 
calving36,47,59. 
Moreover, 
mammary 
gland 
lymphocytes have a lower capacity than blood cells, possibly due to less 
efficient presentation of antigen by antigen-presenting cells of the mammary 
gland.
Cytokines are essential for adequate immune functions. The levels of 
interleukin-2 (IL-2) and IFN-γ in mammary gland secretions decrease
around calving65 which might contribute to the increased susceptibility to 
infections. Moreover, the capacity of B-cells from periparturient cows to 
secrete IgM is impaired which might be caused by the impaired production 
of IFN-γ and IL-2
1 1,39. In addition, at parturition the corticosteroid levels are
high which can block cellular production of IL-1, IL-8 and tumor necrosis 
factor- (TNF-α ) as a response to endotoxin stimulation39.
What is the reason behind the depressed functional capacity of 
leukocytes? Metabolic and hormonal changes after parturition are probably 
important factors. Increased levels of beta-hydroxybutyrate, not uncommon 
during early lactation, can for example reduce the respiratory burst activity 
of PMN, probably due to impaired production of hydrogen peroxide, and 
inhibit lymphocyte functions. There is also a significant relationship between 
negative energy balance, increased blood ketone levels and impaired PMN 
function. This will be further elucidated in Section 4. 
Large changes in many hormones occur around parturition. Such changes 
in progesterone, estradiol 17ß, cortisol, IGF-1 and growth hormone around 
parturition can modulate PMN and lymphocyte function47,52. Recently, 
bovine pregnancy-associated glycoprotein (BPAG), originating in bovine 
fetal cotyledons, has been associated with immune suppression15. The 
plasma concentration of BPAG increases around parturition and may be 
associated with inhibition of PMN function. Plasma levels of the endogenous 
opioids 
ß-endorphin 
and met-enkephalin also increase 
during the 
periparturient period with the peak level at parturition which also might 
influence the immune functions2.
Plasma cortisol levels are increased shortly after calving. A number of 
potentially stressful factors, like parturition, onset of lactation and changes in 
management, influence the cow around calving probably through additional 
release of cortisol. The changes in immune functions around calving are 
similar to those observed in vivo and in vitro after treatment with 
corticosteroids.
3. 
INFLUENCE OF STRESS
Stress, occurring for example around calving or due to adverse 
environmental factors, can have negative effects on the immune response 

Mammary gland immunology around parturition 
235
and make both adults and young animals less resistant to infectious diseases. 
This is probably mainly due to increased levels of corticosteroids which can 
affect both the functions and numbers of leukocytes, and thus increase the 
host's susceptibility to infections22. The effects of stress on leukocyte 
trafficking and immune response were reviewed by Kehrli et al39.
Treatment of cows with synthetic glucocorticoids, like dexamethasone, 
negatively influences the numbers and proportions of leukocytes in blood by 
down-regulation of adhesion molecules on blood neutrophil3,5. Such 
changes are correlated with leukocytosis and increased shedding of 
Staphylococcus aureus in subclinically infected mammary glands, which 
reinforces the potential risk of treating infected animals with potent synthetic 
glucocorticoids.
Administration of cortisol and dexamethasone induce neutrophilia in 
cattle without significant increase in immature neutrophils suggesting that 
glucocorticoids decrease the marginal pool of neutrophils and reduce the 
efficiency of their egress from blood to tissues5. As mentioned, 
glucocorticoids decrease the adherence of PMN to the endothelium by 
altering the expression of leukocyte adhesion molecules CD62L and CD18, 
possibly by inhibiting production of regulating cytokines. This will 
negatively affect the ability of neutrophils to migrate from blood to sites of 
infections. Moreover, dexamethasone reduces the expression of intercellular 
adhesion 
molecule- 1 
(ICAM-1) 
on 
endothelial 
cells 
in 
vitro8.
Glucocorticoids do not influence PMN phagocytosis of E. coli in vitro, and
results from a study in periparturient cows suggest that phagocytosis of 
blood PMN was not affected by increased plasma cortisol levels14.
Moreover, increased levels of cortisol did not have any effect on PMN 
chemiluminescence26. However, corticosteroids can interfere with adherence 
of IgG and complement to leukocytes in vitro 60.
An increase in plasma cortisol decreases the numbers of circulating 
lymphocytes30.
The
numbers
of
γδT-cells
in
blood
decline
after
glucocorticoid administration, but the expression of CD62L on the cells is 
not affected. This suggests that glucocorticoids can enhance migration of 
γδT-cells from blood into tissues4. However, the ability of lymphocytes and
monocytes to produce INF-γ and IgM in vitro is negatively affected by
corticosteroid12,54. Glucocorticoids can also decrease the expression of 
MHC class I and II molecules on mononuclear cell4,54, and inhibit 
endotoxin-stimulated cytokine production and gene expression of the 
cytokines IL-1, IL-8 and TNF-α 39.

236
Persson Waller 
4. 
INFLUENCE OF NUTRITION 
4.1 
General aspects 
Adequate nutrition is essential for a good immune response and thus for 
overall health and the ability of the animal to resist diseases. The balance 
between protein and energy, the feeding routines and eating time are factors 
influencing animal health by potentially increasing the risk for metabolic 
disturbances. Differences in feeding strategy and/or routines can be factors 
causing high or low incidence of clinical mastitis24. Of course, good hygienic 
quality of the feed is also essential. 
Metabolic stress is a common state in high-producing dairy cows at the 
beginning of lactation due to negative energy balance leading to the 
mobilisation of considerable amounts of tissue reserves. Negative energy 
balance and elevated blood ketone levels could play a role in the decreased 
neutrophil function observed after parturition and increased incidence of 
disease. Increased levels of ß-hydroxybutyrate (BHB) and ketone bodies can 
have a negative effect on neutrophil functions such as chemotaxis, 
phagocytosis and killing27,41,68. BHB can also inhibit the responses of bovine 
lymphocytes41. Kremer et al42 reported that cases of coliform mastitis were 
more severe and of longer duration in ketotic cows compared with non- 
ketotic cows. In vitro studies by Hoeben et al28 suggested that BHB and 
acetoacetic acid can alter the numbers of circulating neutrophils due to their 
effects on bone marrow progenitor cells. 
Balanced feeding during the dry period is a prerequisite for good feed 
consumption after calving thus avoiding metabolic stress and increased risk 
for disease during the early lactation period. Overfeeding results in a larger 
demand on tissue reserves and higher levels of free fatty acids in the blood 
after calving, which can be negative for both humoral and cellular immune 
responses58,73. Underfeeding during the dry period can also cause metabolic 
diseases and immunosuppression18,34. A high fat content in the liver after 
calving can increase the risk for metabolic disturbances, and is associated 
with a decreased function of blood and uterine granulocytes75.
The amino acid glutamine has several important metabolic functions. The 
demand of the dairy cow for glutamine increases in association with 
metabolic stress23,43, such as at the beginning of lactation. During this period, 
the plasma content of glutamine decreases substantially49. Substantial 
amounts of glutamine are metabolised in the udder where it is used for 
synthesis of milk protein, as a source of energy and as substrate for cell 
proliferation48. Glutamine is a key substance also in the immune defence, 
such as for proliferation of lymphocytes and macrophage57. The glutamine 

Mammary gland immunology around parturition 
237
concentration in blood is essential for these functions, but the plasma pool is 
small. A low plasma concentration of glutamine might indicate metabolic 
stress.
In a recent study Holtenius et al (unpublished data) investigated the 
connection between metabolic stress around calving/early lactation and the 
incidence of clinical mastitis in high producing Swedish cows. High-
producing herds with low bulk milk SCC, but with either low (LT) or high 
(HT) treatment incidence of mastitis were studied. The results indicate that 
cows in the HT group mobilise their tissue reserves of fat and protein to a 
greater extent during the weeks after calving than cows in the low treatment 
group. The concentration of glutamine decreased during late pregnancy and 
early lactation, and was lower (p=0.09) in cows from HT herds during early 
lactation. Moreover, the blood concentrations of tryptophane and free fatty 
acids were lower (p<0.0l) and higher (p=0.04), respectively, in HT herds 
during early lactation. These differences could be due to increased metabolic 
stress in these herds. The results also indicate that the metabolic changes 
started earlier than three weeks before calving. Preliminary results indicate 
that there were differences in feeding strategies between the groups, the HT 
group was fed more concentrates and less roughage. There was probably 
other management differences as well. 
The results of the blood leukocyte counts also indicated a higher stress 
level in the HT group, which possibly affected the immune defence of these 
animals. The numbers of eosinophils were lower (p=0.08) in the HT group, 
while the numbers of neutrophils tended to be higher (p=0.06) in this group. 
Lower numbers of eosinophils are connected with stress. A higher number of 
blood neutrophils can also be a result of stress causing release of cortisol, 
thus having a negative effect on the adhesion and migration ability of these 
cells. An alternative explanation to the higher numbers of neutrophils is that 
an increased recruitment of cells from the bone marrow due to some 
inflammatory stimulus in the body occurred. 
4.2
Micronutrients
A balanced supply of micronutrients, vitamins and minerals, is also 
important for immune functions, especially during periods of immune 
suppression. Deficiencies in selenium (Se), vitamin E, vitamin A, copper 
(Cu) and zinc (Zn) have been associated with a negative influence on the 
immune response in relation to mastitis 
. The blood concentrations of 
many micronutrients vary considerably around calving indicating a role in 
the immune suppression observed during this period. 
Se deficiency can be a problem mainly in areas where the Se content in 
the soils and pasture is low. Se is an important component of the enzyme 
25,56,64

23 8 
Persson Waller 
glutathione peroxidase, which is essential for the protection of cells and 
tissues from auto-oxidative damage from production of oxygen radicals56.
Deficiency in Se resulted in reduced neutrophil migration into the udder, 
impaired neutrophil intracellular killing and extracellular hydrogen peroxide 
production, but did not affect neutrophil phagocytosis and superoxide anion 
production21,29
Se supplementation can improve udder health by reducing 
the severity and duration of cases of clinical mastitis29. Moreover, in vitro 
supplementation of Se can enhance production of neutrophil chemotaxins by 
bovine mammary macrophages and enhance proliferation of peripheral 
blood lymphocyte53. Plasma Se decreases at calving according to Weiss et 
al(1990). However,in our study, plasma and erytyrocryte Se were highter at 
calving than at one month before or after calving, indicating that Se 
deficiency was not a problem during this period76.
Vitamin E is important for both cellular and humoral immune functions. 
This may be elicited through its effect on cell membrane stability and 
regulatory role in biosynthesis of various inflammatory mediators56,64.
Dietary supplementation of vitamin E is of value, especially as the 
concentration of this vitamin in fodder decreases with length of storage. 
Moreover, the serum concentration of vitamin E drops during the weeks 
around calving, a period of immune depression and increased susceptibility 
to disease, reaching lowest levels 1 day after calving20,72. Supplementation 
with vitamin E before and after calving increased neutrophil intracellular 
killing of bacteria, and reduced the numbers of new intramammary 
infections29. Politis et al55 observed that the suppression in blood neutrophil 
and monocyte functions postpartum was abrogated when cows were 
supplemented with vitamin E before and after parturition. Vitamin E 
supplementation did not affect lymphocyte proliferation and mammary 
macrophage production of superoxide, chemotactic factors and IL-1, or 
MHC class II expression
55. However, vitamin E enhanced production of 
chemotaxins by bovine mammary macrophages and stimulated blood 
lymphocyte proliferation in vitro 53. Dietary supplementation with vitamin E 
should be considered as a preventive measure in the control of mastitis 
especially during the late stage of the dry period and around calving. 
Vitamin A and ß-carotene are also important for mucosal integrity and 
stability. ß-carotene can act independently as an oxygen radical scavenger. 
Both substances have stimulatory effects on immune cell populations and 
have been correlated with an increased resistance to disease67. Deficiencies 
were related with severity of mastitis7. Vitamin A and ß-carotene plasma 
concentrations decrease at parturition, reaching the lowest concentrations of 
vitamin A at, or just after, calving and the lowest concentrations of ß- 
carotene occur somewhat later20,33. The concentrations remained low for the 
first weeks after parturition. Concentrations of both vitamin A and ß-

Mammary gland immunology around parturition 
239
carotene were higher in colostrum than in milk33. Mastitic cows had a lower 
concentration of vitamin A in blood plasma during the first weeks of 
lactation than non-mastitic cows, but the opposite was the case for ß- 
carotene33. However, in milk, there were no significant differences in the 
concentrations of either substance between mastitic and non-mastitic COWS.
The concentration of vitamin A was negatively correlated with the SCC in 
milk during lactation while the opposite was the case for ß-carotene33.
Vitamin A supplementation around calving was shown to stimulate the 
functions of blood lymphocytes and phagocytes51.
Limited information is available about the importance of Cu and Zn in 
relation to the risk for diseases in dairy cows. However, both substances 
have important biological functions. For example they have importance for 
certain anti-oxidative enzyme systems and can thus protect cells and tissues 
from detrimental effects of oxidative substances which are released during 
phagocytosis and killing by leukocytes56. Deficiency in Cu can decrease the 
antibacterial effect of the immune defence25,56. Limited information is 
available regarding Cu levels in blood around calving. In our own study, the 
Cu levels were significantly lower one month before calving than at calving 
and one month after calving
76 which is in line with findings by Xin et al
74.
Supplementation of Cu resulted in a considerable decrease in the number of 
infected udder quarters at calving compared with untreated controls25.
Moreover, the cell count in milk tended to be lower in the group that 
received extra Cu. 
Zn is important for the integrity of the skin, which is the first barrier 
against infections, and has also importance for immune functions. Zn 
deficiency can cause degeneration of lymphoid tissues and have a negative 
influence on immune cells25,56. Few studies have been made to study the 
relationship between Zn and mastitis. However, deficiency in Zn can 
predispose cows to secondary infections, which can be reversed by 
supplementation of Zn25,56. Problems in connection with deficiency in Zn can 
be exacerbated by a feeding regime containing high amounts of calcium 
during early lactation. Moreover, plasma Zn concentrations decrease 
markedly at parturition, but returns to normal values within a few days20,76.
This might be connected with the immune suppression observed during this 
period. During the acute phase of inflammation, Zn is removed from the 
blood circulation and stored in the liver where it is bound to the acute phase 
protein methallothionein46. A similar release of acute phase proteins at 
parturition may explain the decrease in Zn levels. 

240
Persson Waller 
5.
INFLUENCE OF GENETICS ON THE IMMUNE 
RESPONSE
The genetic influence on immunological parameters and disease 
resistance is another area of interest. Studies are aimed towards the 
possibility of selecting cows with improved immune response, without 
negative effects on milk productivity. It is also likely that genetic factors can 
have an effect on how an individual cow can handle stress in different 
situations.
Heritabilities for clinical mastitis has been estimated to be low9,16.
Somatic cell counts (SCC) have a higher heritability, and might be a better 
selective tool9,16. Moderate genetic correlation has been estimated between 
clinical mastitis and SCC. In Scandinavia, a combination of these parameters 
is included in the breeding values of bulls with the aim of improving disease 
resistance. High milk production and various udder traits (such as udder 
suspensory ligament, fore udder attachment and udder depth) are associated 
with increased incidence of mastitis1,16. However, Detilleux et al11 showed
that cows selected for high milk production had significantly higher numbers 
of circulating neutrophils and mononuclear cells and higher neutrophil 
chemiluminescence and directed migration, than cows with average 
production.
Variations in leukocyte sub-populations may have a role in the 
probability of an individual cow developing mastitis, as the proportions of 
neutrophils, macrophages, and CD4+ or CD8+ T-lymphocytes differ 
significantly between cows45. Kelm et al40 used different measures of 
mastitis, a number of immunological assays and molecular markers. The 
molecular markers accounted for up to 40 % of the variation in estimated 
breeding value (EBV) for measures of mastitis. In cows with a low EBV for 
somatic cell score, the neutrophils functioned more effectively at maximal 
immunosuppression, the serum immunoglobulin concentration was lower, 
and the numbers of circulating mononuclear cells were higher. Significant 
differences between sire progeny groups within lines for lymphocyte 
blastogenes, neutrophil function and serum conglutinin activity have also 
been observed37. Moreover, results by Fitzpatrick et al17 indicated that 
immunological assays may be useful in identifying bulls whose progeny 
would be associated with a higher resistance to intramammary infections 
with S. aureus. 
A selection program for animals resistant to immunosuppression and 
disease around parturition would be especially desirable. Genetic variability 
in certain immune functions, i.e. total numbers of neutrophils, neutrophil 
chemokinesis, assays of neutrophil respiratory burst associated with 
phagocytosis, and in serum concentrations of immunoglobulins 
and 

Mammary gland immunology around parturition 
241
hemolytic complement activity was observed in periparturient dairy cows10.
Mallard et al47 showed that cows at peripartum may be categorised as high or 
low responders to ovalbumin and E. coli J5 immunisations, and that the 
heritability for specific antibody responses was moderate to high. These 
findings may be used to identify animal with high resistance to disease. 
Several groups have investigated associations between alleles of the 
bovine MHC (BoLA) and disease resistance or immune response 
parameters50,71. Such associations were found, but the relationships varied 
among breeds and it is not clear which gene, or genes, are responsible for 
these associations. 
The importance of adhesion molecules, essential for leukocyte migration, 
has recently been highlighted. Genetic leukocyte adhesion deficiencies 
leading to chronic, or even fatal, infections have been observed in several 
animal species including cattle bovine leukocyte adhesion deficiency 
(BLAD)38. All species affected show signs of chronic and recurrent 
infections due to a deficiency in the chemotactic and phagocytic properties 
of leukocytes, particularly neutrophils. However, there does not seem to be 
any differences in neutrophil and macrophage function or in the risk for 
udder infections at calving between BLAD carriers and noncarriers70.
6. 
REFERENCES 
1.
Alexandersson G. Genetiska samband mellan exteriöra juveregenskaper och klinisk 
mastit hos förstakalvande SRB-kor. Publication 195, Department of Animal Breeding 
and Genetics, Swedish University of Agricultural Sciences, Uppsala, Sweden, 1998. 
Aurich JE, Dobrinski I, Hoppen H-O, Grunert E. ß-endorphin and met-enkephalin in 
plasma of cattle during pregnancy, parturition, and the neonatal period. J Reprod Fertil, 
Burton JL, Kehrli ME Jr. Regulation of neutrophil adhesion molecules and shedding of 
Staphylococcus aureus in milk of cortisol- and dexamethasone-treated cows. Am J Vet 
Res 56, 997-1006, 1995.
Burton JL, Kehrli ME Jr. Effects of dexamethasone on bovine circulating T lymphocyte 
populations. J Leukocyte Biology, 59, 90-99, 1996. 
Burton JL, Kehrli ME Jr, Kapil S, Horst RL. Regulation of L-selectin and CD18 on 
bovine neutrophils by glucocorticoids: effects of cortisol and dexamethasone. J 
Leukocyte Biol 57, 317-325, 1995. 
Cai T-Q, Weston PG, Lund LA, Brodie B, McKenna DJ, Wagner WC. Association 
between neutrophil functions and periparturient disorders in cows. Am J Vet Res, 55, 
934-943, 1994. 
Chew BP, Hollen LL, Hillers JK, Herlugson ML. Relationship between vitamin A and D-
carotene in blood plasma and milk and mastitis in Holsteins. J Dairy Sci 65, 2111-2118, 
1982.
Cronstein BN, Kimmel SC, Levin RI, Martiniuk F, Weissmann G. A mechanism for the 
anti-inflammatory effects of corticosteroids: The glucocorticoid receptor regulates 
leukocyte adhesion to endothelial cells and expression of endothelial-leukocyte adhesion 
2.
89, 605-612, 1990. 
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.

242
Persson Waller 
molecule 1 and intercellular adhesion molecule 1. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA, 89, 999 1 -
9995, 1992. 
De Haas Y. Genetic parameters of mastitis traits and protein production in the first two 
lactations of Swedish red and White cows. Publication no 17. Department of Animal 
Breeding and Genetics, Swedish University of Agricultural Sciences, Uppsala, Sweden, 
1998.
10. Detilleux JC, Koehler KJ, Freeman AE, Kehrli ME Jr, Kelley DH. Immunological 
parameters of periparturient Holstein cattle: Genetic variation. J Dairy Sci 77, 2640-
2650, 1994. 
11. Detilleux JC, Kehrli ME Jr, Stabel JR, Freeman AE, Kelley DH. Study of immunological 
dysfunction in periparturient Holstein cattle selected for high and average milk 
production. Vet Immunol Immunopathol, 44,25 1-267, 1995. 
12. Doherty ML, Bassett HF, Quinn PJ, Davis WC, Monaghan ML. Effects of 
dexamethasone 
on 
cell-mediated 
immune 
responses 
in 
cattle 
sensitized 
to 
Mycobacterium bovis. Am J Vet Res, 56, 1300-1306, 1995. 
13. Dosogne H, Burvenich C, van Werven T, Roets E, Noordhuizen-Stassen EN, Goddeeris 
B. Increased surface expression of CD1 1b receptors on polymorphonuclear leukocytes is 
not sufficient to sustain phagocytosis during Escherichia coli mastitis in early postpartum 
dairy cows. Vet Immunol Immunopath 60, 47-59, 1997a. 
14. Dosogne H, Burvenich C, Paape MJ, Capuco A, Fenwick B. Defense against Escherichia
coli: Phagocytosis and detoxification of endotoxins by neutrophils. Flem Vet J, 66, 
15. Dosogne H, Burvenich C, Freeman AE, Kehrli ME Jr, Detilleux JC, Sulon J, Beckers JF, 
Hoeben 
D. 
Pregnancy-associated 
glycoprotein 
and 
decreased 
polymorphonuclear 
leukocyte function in early post-partum dairy cows. Vet Immunol Immunopathol, 67, 47-
54, 1999. 
16. Emanuelson U, Danell B, Philipsson J. Genetic parameters for clinical mastitis, somatic 
cell counts, and milk production estimated by multiple-trait 
restricted maximum 
likelihood. J Dairy Sci 71, 467-476, 1988. 
17. Fitzpatrick JL, Logan KE, Stear MJ, McGuirk B, Platt DJ. Immunological responses of 
Holstein/Friesian 
cattle 
to 
Staphylococcus 
aureus. 
In: 
Proceedings 
of the 
5th 
International Veterinary Immunology Symposium, November 8-13, Punjab Agricultural 
University, Ludhiana, India, 117, 1998. 
18. Franklin S, Young J, Nonnecke B. Effects of ketones, acetate, butyrate and glucose on 
bovine lymphocyte proliferation. J Dairy Sci, 80, 2507-2516, 1991. 
19. Gilbert RO, Gröhn YT, Miller PM, Hoffman DJ. Effect of parity on periparturient 
neutrophil function in dairy cows. Vet Immunol Immunopatol, 36, 75-82, 1993. 
20. Goff JP, Stabel JR. Decreased plasma retinol, a-tocopherol, and zinc concentration 
during the periparturient period: Effect of milk fever. J Dairy Sci 73, 3195-3 199, 1990. 
21. Grasso P, Scholz RW, Erskine RJ, Eberhart RJ. Phagocytosis, bactericidal activity, and 
oxidative metabolism of mammary neutrophils from dairy cows fed selenium-adequate
and selenium-deficient diets. Am J Vet Res, 51, 269-274, 1990. 
22. Guidry AJ, Paape MJ, Pearson RE. Effects of parturition and lactation on blood and milk 
cell concentrations, corticosteroids, and neutrophil phagocytosis in the cow. Am J Vet 
Res, 37, 1195-1200, 1976. 
23. Hall JC, Heel K, McCauley R. Glutamine: A review. Brit J Surg 83, 305-312, 1996. 
24. Hallén Sandgren C. Field experiences of mastitis risk factors with special emphasis on 
heifer management and replacement. In: Proceedings of the Nordic Seminar Regarding 
Future Aspects of Mastitis Prevention, January 21-22, Aarhus, Denmark, 1998. 
25. Harmon RJ, Torre RM. Copper and zinc: do they influence mastitis? In: Proceedings of 
the 33rd Annual Meeting of the National Mastitis Council, Orlando, FL., National 
Mastitis Council, Inc., Arlington, VA, USA, 54, 1994. 
9.
Suppl., 243-268, 1997b. 

Mammary gland immunology around parturition 
243
26.
Hoeben D, Burvenich C, Heyneman R, Hamann J. Respiratory burst of bovine 
granulocytes around parturition: Modulation by antibiotics. Flem Vet J, 66, Suppl., 269-
295, 1997a. 
27. Hoeben D, Heyneman R, Burvenich C. Elevated levels of beta-hydroxybutyric acid in 
periparturient cows and in vitro effect on respiratory burst activity of bovine neutrophils. 
Vet Immunol Immunopathol, 58, 165-170, 1997. 
28. Hoeben D, Burvenich C, Massart-Leen AM, Lenjou M, Nijs G, Van Bockstaele D, 
Beckers JF. In vitro effect of ketone bodies, glucocorticoids and bovine pregnancy-
associated glycoprotein on cultures of bone marrow pregenitor cells of cows and calves. 
Vet Immunol Immunopathol, 68, 229-240, 1999.
29. Hogan JS, Weiss WP, Smith KL. Role of vitamin E and selenium in host defense against 
mastitis. J Dairy Sci 76, 2795-2803, 1993.
30. Hopster H, van der Werf JT, Blokhuis HJ. Stress enhanced reduction in peripheral blood 
lymphocyte numbers in dairy cows during endotoxin-induced mastitis. Vet Immunol 
Immunopathol, 66, 83-97, 1998. 
31.
Ishikawa H, Shirahata T, Hasegawa K. Interferon-g production of mitogen stimulated 
peripheral lymphocytes in perinatal cows. J Vet Med Sci, 56, 735-738, 1994. 
32. Jain NC, Paape MJ, Beming LM, Salgar SK, Worku M. Functional competence and 
monoclonal antibody reactivity of neutrophils from cows injected with Escherichia coli 
endotoxin. Comp Haematol Int, 1, 10-20, 1991. 
33. Johnston LA, Chew BP. Peripartum changes of plasma and milk vitamin A and ß- 
carotene among dairy cows with or without mastitis. J Dairy Sci 67, 1832-1840, 1984.
34. Kaneene J, Miller R, Herdt T, Gardiner J. The association of serum nonesterified fatty 
acids and cholesterol, management and feeding practices with peripartum disease in 
dairy cows. Prev Vet Med, 31, 59-72, 1997. 
35. Kehrli ME Jr, Nonnecke BJ, Roth JA. Alterations in bovine neutrophil function during 
the periparturient period. Am J Vet Res, 50, 207-214, 1989. 
36. Kehrli ME Jr, Nonnecke BJ, Roth JA. Alterations in bovine lymphocyte function during 
the periparturient period. Am J Vet Res, 50, 215-220, 1989 
37. Kehrli ME Jr, Weigel KA, Freeman AE, Thurston JR, Kelley DH. Bovine sire effects on 
daughters’ in vitro blood neutrophil functions, lymphocyte blastogenesis, serum 
complement and conglutinin levels. Vet Immunol Immunopath 27, 303-319, 1991.
38. Kehrli ME Jr, Shuster DE, Ackermann MR. Leukocyte adhesion deficiency among 
Holstein cattle. Cornell Vet 82, 103-109, 1992. 
39. Kehrli ME, Burton JL, Nonnecke BJ, Lee EK. Effects of stress on leukocyte trafficking 
and immune responses: Implications for vaccination. Adv Vet Med, 41, 61-81, 1999. 
40. Kelm SC, Detilleux JC, Freeman AE, Kehrli ME Jr, Dietz AB, Fox LK, Butler JE, 
Kasckovics I, Kelley DH. Genetic association between parameters of innate immunity 
and measures of mastitis in periparturient Holstein cattle. J Dairy Sci 80, 1767-1775,
1997.
41. Klucinski W, Degorski A, Miernik-Degorska E, Targowski S, Winnicka A. Effect of 
ketone 
bodies 
on 
the 
phagocytic 
activity 
of bovine 
milk 
macrophages 
and 
polymorphonuclear leukocytes. Zentralbl Veterinarmed A, 35, 632-639, 1988. 
42. Kremer WDJ, Burvenich C, Noordhuizen-Stassen EN, Grommers FJ, Schukken YH, 
Brand A. Severity of experimental E. coli mastitis in ketonemic and nonketonemic cows. 
J Dairy Sci, 76, 348-3436, 1993. 
43. Lacey JM, Wilmore DW. Is glutamine a conditionally essential amino acid? Nutrition 
Rev 48, 297-309, 1990. 
44. Lee E-K, Kehrli ME Jr. Expression of adhesion molecules on neutrophils of 
periparturient cows and neonatal calves. Am J Vet Res, 59, 37-43, 1998. 
45. Leitner G, Chaffer M, Winkler M, Glickman A, Weisblit L, Krifucks O, Ezra E, Saran A. 
The determination of milk leukocyte population in heifers free of udder infection as a 
tool for the genetic improvement of dairy cows. In: Proc. of the 5th Int. Vet. Immunol. 

244
Persson Waller 
Symposium, November 8-13, Punjab Agricultural University, Ludhiana, India,
119,
1998.
46. Lappalainen R, Kaartinen L, Veijalainen K, Kuosa PL, Sankari S, Pyörälä S, Sandholm 
M. Sequential changes of mineral and trace elements in milk during endotoxin-induced
mastitis as analyzed by particle induced X-rays (PIXE), gamma-ray emission (PIGE) and 
ion selective electrodes. J Vet Med B, 35, 664-676, 1988. 
47. Mallard BA, Dekkers JC, Ireland MJ, Leslie KE, Sharif S, Van Kampen CL, Wagter L, 
Wilkie BN. Alteration in immune responsiveness during the peripartum period and its 
ramification on dairy cow and calf health. J Dairy Sci, 81, 585-595, 1998. 
48. Meijer GA, Van der Meulen J, van Vuuren AM. Glutamine is a potentially limiting 
amino acid for milk production in dairy cows: A hypothesis. Metabolism 42, 358-364,
1993.
49. Meijer GA, Van der Meulen J, Bakker JG, van der Koelen CJ, Van Vuuren AM. Free 
amino acids in plasma and muscle of high yielding dairy cows in early lactation. J Dairy 
Sci, 78, 1131-1141, 1995. 
50.
Mejdell
CM,
Lie O,
Solbu
H,
Amet
EF,
Spooner
RL.
Association
of major
histocompatibility complex antigens with AI bull progeny test results for mastitis, ketosis 
and fertility in Norwegian cattle. Anim Genet, 25, 99-104, 1994. 
51. Michal JJ, Heirman LR, Wong TS, Chew BP, Frigg M, Volker L. Modulatory effects of 
dietary beta-carotene on blood and mammary leukocyte function in periparturient dairy 
cows. J Dairy Sci, 77, 1408-1421, 1994. 
52. Moreira da Silva F, Burvenich C, Massart-Leen AM, Russell-Pinto FF. Effect of some 
reproduction hormones on the oxidative burst of bovine neutrophils. Flem Vet J, 66, 297-
314, 1997. 
53. Ndiweny N, Finch JM. Effects of in vitro supplementation of bovine mammary gland 
macrophages and peripheral blood lymphocytes with alpha-tocopherol and sodium 
selenite: implications for udder defences. Vet Immunol Immunopathol, 47, 111-121, 
1995.
54. Nonnecke BJ, Burton JL, Kehrli Jr ME. Associations between function and composition 
of blood mononuclear leukocyte populations from dexamethasone-treated Holstein bulls. 
J Dairy Sci, 80, 2403-2410, 1997. 
55. Politis I, Hidiroglou M, Batra TR, Gilmore JA, Gorewit RC, Scherf H. Effects of vitamin 
E on immune function of dairy cows. Am J Vet Res, 56, 179-184, 1995. 
56. Reddy PG, Frey RA. Nutritional modulation of immunity in domestic food animals. Adv 
Vet Sci Comp Med, 35,255-281, 1990. 
57. Rohde T, McLean DA, Klarlund-Petersen B. Glutamine, lymphocyte proliferation and 
cytokine production. Scand J Immun, 44, 648-650, 1996. 
58. Rukkwamsuk T, Wensing T, Geelen M. Effect of overfeeding during the dry period on 
regulation of adipose tissue metabolism in dairy cows during the periparturient period. J 
Dairy Sci, 81, 2904-2911, 1998. 
59. Saad AM, Concha C, Astrom G. Alterations in neutrophil phagocytosis and lymphocyte 
blastogenesis in dairy cows around parturition. Zentr Vet Med B, 36, 337-345, 1989. 
60. Schreiber AD, Parsons J, McDermett P. Effect of corticosteroids on the human monocyte 
and IgG and complement receptors. J Clin Invest, 56, 1189-1197, 1975. 
61. Shafer-Weaver KA, Sordillo LM. Bovine CD8+ suppressor lymphocytes alter immune 
responsiveness during the postpartum period. Vet Immunol Immunopath 56, 53-64,
1997.
62. Shafer-Weaver KA, Pighetti GM, Sordillo LM. Diminished mammary gland lymphocyte 
functions parallel shifts in trafficking patterns during the postpartum period. Proc Soc 
Exp Biol Med 212, 271-279, 1996. 
63. Shuster DE, Lee EK, Kehrli ME. Bacterial growth, inflammatory cytokine production 
and neutrophil recruitment during coliform mastitis in cows within ten days after calving. 
Am J Vet Res, 57, 1569-1575, 1996. 

Mammary gland immunology around parturition 
245
64. Smith KL, Hogan JS, Weiss WP. Dietary vitamin E and selenium affect mastitis and 
milk quality. J Animal Sci 75, 1659-1665, 1997. 
65. Sordillo LM, Redmond MJ, Campos M, Warren L, Babiuk LA. Cytokine activity in 
bovine mammary gland secretions during the periparturient period. Can J Vet Res 55, 
66. Sordillo LM, Pighetti GM, Davis MR. Enhanced production of bovine tumor necrosis 
factor-alpha during the periparturient period. Vet Immunol Immunopath 49, 263-270,
1995.
67. Sordillo LM, Shafer-Weaver K, DeRosa D. Immunobiology of the mammary gland. J 
Dairy Sci 80, 1851-1865, 1997. 
68. Suriyasathapom W, Daemen AJ, Noordhuizen-Stassen EN, Dieleman SJ, Nielen M, 
Schukken YH. Beta-hydroxybutyrate levels in peripheral blood and ketone bodies 
supplemented in culture media affect the in vitro chemotaxis of bovine leukocytes. Vet 
Immunol Immunopathol, 68, 177-186, 1999. 
69. Van Kampen C, Mallard BA. Effects of peripartum stress and health on circulating 
bovine lymphocyte subsets. Vet Immunol Immunopathol 59, 79-91, 1997. 
70. Wanner JM, Rogers GW, Kehrli ME, Cooper JB. Intramammary infections in 
primiparous Holsteins: Heritabilities and comparisons of bovine leukocyte adhesion 
deficiency carriers and noncarriers. J Dairy Sci 81, 3293-3299, 1998.
71. Weigel KA, Kehrli ME, Freeman AE, Thurston JR, Stear MJ, Kelley DH. Associations 
of class I bovine lymphocyte antigen complex alleles with in vitro blood neutrophil 
functions, lymphocyte blastogenesis, serum complement, and conglutinin levels in dairy 
cattle. Vet Immunol Immunopathol, 27, 321-335, 1991. 
72. Weiss WP, Todhunter DA, Hogan JS, Smith KL. Effect of duration of supplementation 
of selenium and vitamin E on periparturient cows. J Dairy Sci, 73, 3187-3194, 1990. 
73. Wentink GH, Rutten VP, van den Ingh TS, Hoek A, Muller KE, Wensing T. Impaired 
specific immunoreactivity in cows with hepatic lipidosis. Vet Immunol Immunopatol, 
74. Xin Z, Waterman DF, Hemken RW, Harmon RJ. Copper status and requirement during 
the dry period and early lactation in multiparous Holstein cows. J Dairy Sci, 76, 2711- 
2716, 1993 
75. Zerbe H, Schneider N, Obadnik C, Schuberth H-J, Wensing T, Kruip T, Grunert E, 
Leibold W. The negative energy balance reduces the neutrophil defense capacity in 
cows. In: Proceedings of the 5th International Veterinary Immunology Symposium, 
November 8-13, Punjab Agricultural University, Ludhiana, India, 185, 1998 
76. Meglia G and K. Persson Waller, unpublished data 
298-301, 1991. 
56,77-83, 1997. 
-

30.
Cells and Cytokines in Inflammatory Secretions of 
Bovine Mammary Gland 
Céline Riollet, Pascal Rainard, Bernard Poutrel 
Laboratoire de Pathologie Infectieuse et Immunologie, INRA, 37380 Nouzilly, France 
Key words: 
Abstract:
Neutrophils, T cells, cytokines, mastitis, cattle 
In response to invading bacteria, the mammary gland is protected by a variety 
of defence mechanisms, which can be separated into two distinct categories: 
innate immunity and specific immunity. Milk somatic cells consist of several 
cell types, including neutrophils, macrophages, lymphocytes and a smaller 
percentage of epithelial cells. In the healthy lactating mammary gland, 
macrophages are the predominant cell type whereas neutrophils are the major 
cell population during early inflammation. Following a bacteria invasion, 
neutrophil recruitment is elicited by inflammatory mediators that are produced 
in the infected gland by cells, possibly macrophages, activated by bacteria 
phagocytosis or responding to bacterial toxins or metabolites. Several 
cytokines, including interleukin- (IL-) 1 β, IL-6, IL-8, tumour necrosis factor-
(TNF-) α and interferon- (IFN-) γ are known to be important to elicit the acute
phase response and allow the accumulation of leukocytes at the site of 
infection. In addition to their role in early non-specific defences, macrophages 
also play a key role in the specific immune system, as antigen processing and 
presenting cells for the T cells. Few lymphocytes are found in milk of healthy 
glands where the predominant phenotype is CD8+ T cells. During the 
inflammatory reaction, T cells are recruited in milk and CD4+ cells become 
the predominant phenotype. The understanding of the specific and non-
specific immune mechanisms involved in the mammary gland defence against 
invading bacteria may lead to the development of new vaccines and to the use 
of cytokines to design immunomodulatory strategies for the control of bovine 
mastitis.
247

248
Riollet et al 
1. 
INTRODUCTION 
Inflammation of the mammary gland caused by invading pathogens is 
common among lactating dairy cows and is a major cause of economic 
losses. The mammary gland is protected by a variety of defence 
mechanisms, which can be separated into two categories: innate immunity 
and specific immunity. During the early stages of infection, non-specific
responses are the predominant defences. They are mediated by the physical 
barrier of the teat end, macrophages, neutrophils, natural killer like cells, and 
by certain soluble factors such as lactoferrin, complement, lysozyme and 
enzyme lactoperoxydase. The specific immune system recognizes specific 
determinants of a pathogen that facilitate selective elimination. Recognition 
of pathogenic factors is mediated by antibody molecules, macrophages, and 
several lymphoid populations. Both innate and specific immunity are 
coordinated to provide optimal protection of the mammary gland from 
infection65.
The various strategies utilized by the immunoinflammatory system to 
deal with bacterial pathogens rely heavily on the family of intercellular 
signalling proteins known as cytokines. These molecules are essential local 
and systemic hormones and major homeostatic mediators which form part of 
the system of innate immunity. Some of these cytokines (interleukin- (IL-) 1 , 
IL-6, IL-8, tumour necrosis factor- (TNF-) α) are involved in the induction
of inflammation17. Other cytokines (for example: IL- 1 receptor antagonist 
(IL- 1ra), IL-10) play a role in downregulating inflammatory processes27,28.
Many of them are involved in the activation of T and B lymphocytes, their 
clonal expansion and interactions with non-lymphoid cells. It is the balance 
between these cytokines, along with other factors (other mediators such as 
eicosanoids, nitric oxide (NO), soluble cytokine receptors, etc ) that controls 
the induction, perpetuation and cessation of inflammation30.
The investigation and characterization of cattle leukocyte differentiation 
antigens has resulted in the identification of a large number of surface 
molecules. Differential expression of these molecules has allowed the 
identification of functionally distinct subpopulations of cells, enabling in
vitro and in vivo studies of their roles to be made in immune responses 
following infection or injection of antigens. Step by step, mechanisms of the 
defence of the bovine mammary gland are better understood and appear as a 
complex network of interactions between bacteria and host, involving innate 
and specific immunity, orchestrated by cytokines. 

Cells and cytokines in inflammatory secretions 
2.
249
THE INNATE IMMUNITY: THE FIRST LINE OF 
DEFENSE OF THE MAMMARY GLAND 
Bacterial pathogens that are able to traverse the teat end opening must 
then 
escape 
the 
antibacterial 
activities 
of 
the 
mammary 
gland 
microenvironment in order to establish disease. The activities of resident and 
newly recruited leukocytes during the early stages of pathogenesis play a 
pivotal role in the establishment of intramammary infection. Differential 
cellular counts reveal that milk somatic cells consist of several cell types, 
including neutrophils, macrophages, lymphocytes, and a smaller percentage 
of epithelial cells. Depending on the healthy or infectious status of the gland, 
SCCs vary in number and composition (Table 1). 
Table. 1 SCC in healthy and infected bovine mammary gland12,37,45,65.
SCC 
SCC composition (%) 
(cells/ml of milk) 
Neutrophils 
Macrophages 
lymphocytes 
Epithelial cells 
Healthy 
<200,000 
0 - 11 
66 – 88 
10 - 27 
0 – 7 
quarter 
often <100,000 
quarter
Infected 
>200,000 
50 - 95 
9 – 32 
14 - 24 
0 – 9 
Macrophages are the predominant cell type in milk and tissues of healthy 
mammary gland and their primary function is phagocytosis and intracellular 
killing of invading microorganisms and removal of milk fat from involuting 
glands47. Mammary macrophages may act as initiators of infection and, on 
stimulation by phagocytosis, release chemotactic activity for neutrophils, 
thereby amplifying the inflammatory response13. Few hours after infusion of 
Escherichia coli lipopolysaccharide into a healthy lactating gland, large 
amounts of the pro-inflammatory cytokines IL- 1 and IL-6 are found in milk, 
while high concentrations of IL-1, IL-6 and TNF-a are found after E. coli 
infusion60,61. These inflammatory cytokines have local and systemic effects. 
At the systemic level, they mediate the acute phase reaction (fever, high 
serum cortisol concentration, release of acute phase proteins, leukopenia, 
etc)18,33,39 . At the local level, they trigger the neutrophil migration from the 
blood into the infected mammary gland, through several actions. They 
activate the endothelial cells to express more E-selectin and P-selectin.
These molecules allow neutrophils to bind more tightly in these areas. This 
binding, as well as stimulation by inflammatory mediators, enhances 
expression and adhesiveness of another neutrophil adhesion molecule, Mac-
1 (known also as CD11b/CD18), which is a member of the β2-integrin
family of leukocyte adhesion molecules. At the same time that Mac-1
expression increases, L-selectin is proteolytically shed from the neutrophil 

250
Riollet et al 
surface
35. The Mac-1 molecule allows neutrophils to bind tightly to activated 
endothelium via another endothelial adhesion molecule, ICAM-1. This 
second adhesive interaction allows neutrophils to migrate along the 
endothelial surface and into tissues along a concentration gradient of 
chemoattractants, one of the most potent being IL-8
31, Studies showed that 
IL-1 and TNF-α stimulate IL-8 secretion36,50, and IL-8 was suggested to be
an important mediator of IL- 1 -induced neutrophil migration11 . This 
neutrophil recruitment from the circulation to the focus of infection is 
essential in the defence of the mammary gland against invading bacteria and 
the promptitude of the recruitment and the amount of recruited neutrophils 
are determining for the outcome of the infection. 
Once at the site of infection, neutrophils phagocyte and kill bacteria 
through a respiratory burst that produces hydroxyl and oxygen radicals, 
which are key components of the oxygen-dependent killing mechanism. 
Inflammatory cytokines such as IL-1, TNF-α or interferon- (IFN-) γ can
enhance neutrophil phagocytosis and/or their bactericidal activity55,64,66. In 
addition to their phagocytic capabilities, neutrophils are a source of small 
antibacterial peptides, the defensins, which are able to kill a number of 
pathogens that cause mastitis57.
If the acute phase response allows the elimination of the bacteria which 
represent the inflammatory stimuli, then neutrophil recruitment ceases and 
SCC returns to healthful levels. This is what it is observed during clinical 
mastitis, mainly induced by E. coli, and accompanied by a spontaneous cure 
of the infected gland within a few days after the beginning of the 
infection60,62. If bacteria are able to survive this immediate host response, 
then the inflammation and the leukocyte migration continue. Prolonged 
diapedesis of leukocytes causes damage to mammary parenchyma tissue, 
resulting in decreased production of milk25. This is the case of S. aureus 
mastitis which are chronic and most of the time subclinical. Several months 
after the beginning of the infection, neutrophils are still the major cells 
present in infected gland (Riollet et al, submitted). 
3.
THE SPECIFIC IMMUNE DEFENSES OF THE 
MAMMARY GLAND 
Most of the studies undertook to understand the mechanisms of the 
defence of the mammary gland against pathogens have focused on the innate 
immunity mediated by macrophages, neutrophils, natural killer-like cells and 
soluble factors. Recently, attention has been paid to the role of the specific 
immunity, particularly to the role of the lymphocyte population, in the 
protection of the mammary gland against bacterial infection48,67,68. In the 

Cells and cytokines in inflammatory secretions 
251
lactating healthy gland, the lymphocyte population consists predominantly of 
T cells, with few B cells. The T lymphocytes can be subdivided into αβ T
cells, which include CD4+ (T-helper) lymphocytes and CD8+ (T-cytotoxic
or T-suppressor) lymphocytes, and γδ T lymphocyte65. In normal mammary
gland secretions, T cells mainly express the αβ T cell receptor and are
predominantly CD8+48,67. As in human milk, bovine milk T lymphocytes 
display the phenotype of memory cells3,67,70. Any change in one particular 
subset of lymphocytes can have effects upon the activity of other cell 
subsets 10,49.
The functional significance of the various lymphocyte subpopulations 
found in the bovine mammary gland remains unclear. Even in healthy 
glands, variations in the composition of the lymphocyte population are 
observed during a lactation cycle but the consequences of these changes on 
the defence of the mammary gland are still hypothetical48,67. Recently, it has 
been described shifts in cell functions of trafficking CD4+ and CD8+ cells 
during the postpartum period and these shifts may be one reason for 
increased incidence of mastitis during this lactation stage58,59.
In infected mammary glands, specific immune response to bacteria is 
mediated by lymphocytes that recognize antigens through membrane 
receptors that are specific for invading pathogens. In contrast to healthy 
gland, CD4+ cells are the predominant phenotype of the T lymphocyte 
population68. The CD4+ lymphocytes produce cytokines in response to 
recognition of an antigen-maj or histocompatibility complex (MHC) class II 
complex on B lymphocytes or macrophages. Through the ability to secrete 
certain cytokines, CD4+ cells play an important role in activating B 
lymphocytes, T lymphocytes, macrophages and various other cells that 
participate in the immune response. Regulatory cytokines have been shown 
to polarize the T helper subsets and the concept prevails that immune 
responses against specific pathogens can be categorized as either Th1 or Th2 
response46. IL-12 has been shown to be produced by macrophages and B 
cells to favour the development of Th1 cells69 and IL-4 is the critical 
cytokine which favours the development of Th2 cells56. IL-2 and IFN-g are 
the major cytokines associated with the Th1 cells which promote cellular 
responses against intracellular pathogens and virus. The Th2 lymphocytes 
mainly secrete IL-4, IL-5 and IL-10 and promote humoral immunity. 
However, in cattle and humans, in contrast to mice, IL- 10, which exerts anti-
inflammatory effects, was found to be produced by and to downregulate all 
subtypes of Th cells7,15 . It has been shown that once activated, each type of 
Th cells may be able to regulate the proliferation and/or function of the 
other20,24 and it is now admitted that the paradigm of Th1 or Th2 responses is 
oversimplified and that it is rather one type of response that is predominant 
compared to the other type6,34,

252
Riollet et al 
It is now well established that CD8+ cells can exert either cytotoxic or 
suppressor function32. Cytotoxic T cells recognize and eliminate altered self 
cells via antigen presentation in conjunction with MHC class I molecules. 
Therefore, cytotoxic cells may act as scavengers, removing old or damaged 
secretory cells, the presence of which could increase the susceptibility of the 
mammary gland to infection67. Suppressor T lymphocytes are thought to 
control or modulate the immune response. Park et al49 demonstrated that in 
bovine mammary glands infected with S. aureus, the CD4+ cell proliferation 
was suppressed by activated CD8+ cells, which could therefore enhance 
persistent intramammary infection by S. aureus. As for CD4+ cells, different 
cytokines have been found to be expressed by the two subpopulations of 
CD8+ cells: IL-4 has been associated with the suppressor phenotype, and 
IFN-γ with the cytotoxic phenotype32,59.
Recently, authors emphasized on the possible role of γδ T cells in the
bovine immune system26 but this role is still unclear, especially in response 
to infectious pathogens in the mammary gland. The WC1+ subpopulation 
represents a minor portion of lymphocyte population in the normal 
mammary secretions 
, and WC1+ cells are not recruited in chronic S.
aureus infected mammary secretions54, suggesting that if these cells play a 
role in the defence of the mammary gland against bacterial infection, it is 
rather in the mammary tissue than in milk. This would be in accordance with 
the fact that they preferentially migrate to the epithelial surfaces and do not 
recirculate extensively2,40. There are indications that γδ T cells can mediate
cytotoxicity with variable involvement of MHC41, suggesting they may be 
able to destroy altered epithelial cells40.
In addition to the T cells, there is a second subset of lymphocytes which 
is the B cells. Their primary role is to produce antibodies against invading 
pathogens. B lymphocytes utilize their cell surface receptors to recognize 
specific pathogens. They can internalize, process and present antigen in the 
context of MHC class II molecules to T-helper cells. Upon presentation of 
the processed antigen to T-helper cells, cytokines, such as IL-2, IL-4, IL-6 
and IL-10, are secreted by the T cells, which in turn induces proliferation 
and differentiation of the B lymphocytes into either plasmocytes that 
produce antibodies or memory cells. Their proportion among the total 
lymphocyte population in milk does not increase when infection occurs54.
54,67,71
4.
COORDINATION OF INNATE AND SPECIFIC
IMMUNITY IN THE MAMMARY GLAND 
First of all, generation of effective immunity involves both antigen-pre-
senting cells and lymphocytes. Macrophages play a key role in antigen

Cells and cytokines in inflammatory secretions 
253
processing and presentation23,51. Antigens from bacteria are processed within 
macrophages and appear on the membrane in association with MHC class I 
or11.
Moreover, macrophages secrete cytokines that are known to regulate T 
cell differentiation. For example, it has been shown that IL-12 enhances 
development of cytotoxic and IFN-γ producing CD8+ cells
44, and polarizes
the CD4+ T cells toward a Th1 type response69. On the contrary, cytokines 
expressed by lymphocytes can act on macrophage cytokine production and 
functions. As an example, IL-10, secreted among other cells by Th2 cells, 
has been shown to inhibit the ability of macrophages to stimulate Th1-T cell 
clones
to
produce
IFN-γ 22
and
to
have
an
inhibitory
effect
on
lipopolysaccharide- (LPS) induced cytokine production by macrophage cell 
lines21.
In addition, traditionally, mature neutrophils have been considered to be 
terminally differentiated cells lacking the ability to synthesize proteins. In 
recent years, however, it has become increasingly clear that this view is 
outdated. There now exists compelling evidence that neutrophils can release 
a number of cytokines, chemokines, growth factors, and interferons, both in
vitro and in vivo 8,38. In view of the broad spectrum of biological activities 
exerted by cytokines and of the fact that neutrophils represent the first cell 
type to migrate toward inflamed tissue, and given that most neutrophil 
responses are stimulus specific, it can be reasonably inferred that neutrophils 
not only play an important role in eliciting and sustaining inflammation, but 
may also significantly contribute to determine or at least to influence the 
evolution of subsequent host responses9. No studies have been reported 
concerning the cytokine secretion of neutrophils in milk of infected 
mammary glands. Nevertheless, as in the other in vivo animal models9,43,
neutrophils recruited in the bovine mammary gland may likely synthesize 
pro- and/or anti-inflammatory cytokines which may play a crucial role in the 
communication between innate cells and adaptive cells. 
5. 
CONCLUSION 
Therefore, a variety of signals from both cells of innate immune system 
and specific immune system is produced during an immune response and 
this molecule network mediates cross-regulation of the different cellular 
actors in order to eliminate invading bacteria. However, it is certainly more 
complicated ! Indeed, currently, it is accepted that the interaction between 
microorganisms and host cells is a linear causal chain of events in which the 
exogenous organism induces the host to synthesize cytokines which warn 
and protect the host or induce tissue pathology or both. Recently, authors29

254
Riollet et al 
advanced the hypothesis that bacteria have the ability to modulate host 
cytokine networks and are, in turn, able to respond to such networks in order 
to minimize host inflammatory responses. Of significance to the hypothesis 
are recent reports of the existence of bacterial proteins which have the ability 
to downregulate pro-inflammatory cytokine networks. For example, YopB 
protein from Yersinia enterocolitica has been found to inhibit TNF-α
production by host cells
4. In addition, host cytokines have been reported to 
act on bacteria. For example, IL-1, IL-2 and growth macrophage-colony
stimulating factor (GM-CSF) have been claimed to stimulate the growth of 
virulent strains of E. coli16,52. Of course, this leaves the key question to be
answered - how do bacteria control host cytokine networks? 
The understanding of specific and non-specific immune mechanisms and 
the understanding of the bacterial-host interaction mechanisms will open up
new avenues for the development of new vaccines and for the design of new 
immunomodulatory strategies to control bovine mastitis. It has already been 
reported promising results for use of cytokines, such as IL- 1, IL-2 and IFN- 
γ, in the prevention or treatment ofbovine mastitis14,53,63.
The immunoinflammatory 
system, however, contains a paradox. 
Cytokines, which are central to the protective role of this system, are also the 
major mediators of the pathology which accompanies infections. The most 
striking example of this is Gram-negative septic shock which can be 
prevented by neutralizing a number of pro-inflammatory cytokines including 
IL-1, IL-6 and TNF-α or by administering IL-10
42. This illustrates the
importance of the balance of the cytokine network in the control of tissue 
pathology and the pivotal nature of this balance to host survival. 
At last, the role of the epithelial cells has to be considered in the defence 
of the bovine mammary gland against bacterial infections. Indeed, several 
studies have demonstrated that epithelial cells can generate a variety of 
inflammatory mediators upon interaction with the bacteria1,5,19. The 
contribution of epithelial cells to leukocyte recruitment has still not been 
deeply studied but it could be helpful to understand and control the 
interaction network that occurs between pathogens and host. 
6. 
REFERENCES 
1.
2.
3.
Agace WW, Hedges SR, Ceska M, Svanborg C. Interleukin-8 and the neutrophil 
response to mucosal gram-negative infection. J Clin Invest 2, 780-785, 1993. 
Allison JP, Havran WL. The immunobiology of T cells with invariant gamma delta 
antigen receptors. Annu Rev Immunol , 679-705, 1991.
Bertotto A, Gerli R, Fabietti G, Crupi S, Arcangeli C, Scalise F, Vaccaro R. Human 
breast milk T lymphocytes display the phenotype and functional characteristics of 
memory T cells. Eur J Immunol 8, 1877-1880, 1990. 

Cells and cytokines in inflammatory secretions 
4.
255
Beuscher HU, Rodel F, Forsberg A, Rollinghoff M. Bacterial evasion of host immune 
defense: Yersinia enterocolitica encodes a suppressor for tumor necrosis factor alpha 
expression. Infect Immun 4, 1270-1277, 1995. 
Boudjellab N, Chang-Tang HS, Li X, Zhao X. Interleukin-8 response by bovine 
mammary epithelial cells to lipopolysaccharide stimulation. Am J Vet Res, 1563-1567,
1998.
Brown WC, Rice-Ficht AC, Estes DM. Bovine type 1 and type 2 responses. Vet 
Immunol Immunopathol 1-2, 45-55, 1998.
Brown WC, Woods VM, Chitko-McKown CG, Hash SM, Rice-Ficht AC. Interleukin-
10 is expressed by bovine type 1 helper, type 2 helper, and unrestricted parasite-specific
T-cell clones and inhibits proliferation of all three subsets in an accessory-cell-
dependent manner. Infect Immun 11, 4697-4708, 1994.
8. 
Cassatella MA. The production of cytokines by polymorphonuclear neutrophils. 
Immunol Today 1, 21-26, 1995.
9. 
Cassatella MA. Neutrophil-derived proteins: selling cytokines by the pound. Adv 
Immunol , 369-509, 1999.
10. 
Chiodini RJ, Davis WC. The cellular immunology of bovine paratuberculosis: 
immunity may be regulated by CD4+ helper and CD8+ immunoregulatory T 
lymphocytes which down-regulate gamma/delta+ T-cell cytotoxicity. Microb Pathog 5, 
Colditz IG, Zwahlen RD, Baggiolini M. Neutrophil accumulation and plasma leakage 
induced in vivo by neutrophil-activating peptide-1. J Leukoc Biol 2, 129-137, 1990. 
Concha C, Holmberg O, Astrom G. Cells found in non-infected and staphylococcus-
infected bovine mammary quarters and their ability to phagocytose fluorescent 
microspheres. Zentralbl Veterinarmed [B] 5, 371-378, 1986.
13. 
Craven N. Generation of neutrophil chemoattractants by phagocytosing bovine 
mammary macrophages. Res Vet Sci 3, 310-317, 1983.
14. 
Daley MJ, Coyle PA, Williams TJ, Furda G, Dougherty R, Hayes PW. Staphylococcus
aureus
mastitis: pathogenesis and treatment with bovine interleukin-1 beta and 
interleukin-2. J Dairy Sci 12, 4413-4424, 1991. 
Del Prete G, De Carli M, Almerigogna F, Giudizi MG, Biagiotti R, Romagnani S. 
Human IL- 10 is produced by both type 1 helper (Th 1) and type 2 helper (Th2) T cell 
clones and inhibits their antigen-specific proliferation and cytokine production. J 
Immunol 2, 353-360, 1993.
Denis M, Campbell D, Gregg EO. Interleukin-2 and granulocyte-macrophage colony-
stimulating factor stimulate growth of a virulent strain of Escherichia coli. Infect
Dinarello CA. Interleukin-1. Adv Pharmacol , 21-51, 1994. 
Eberhart RJ, Natzke RP, Newbould FHS. Coliform mastitis - a review. J Dairy Sci , 1-
22, 1979. 
Eckmann L, Kagnoff MF, Fierer J. Epithelial cells secrete the chemokine interleukin-8
in response to bacterial entry. Infect Immun 11, 4569-4574, 1993.
Fiorentino DF, Bond MW, Mosmann TR. Two types of mouse T helper cell. IV. Th2 
clones secrete a factor that inhibits cytokine production by Th1 clones. J Exp Med 6, 
Fiorentino DF, Zlotnik A, Mosmann TR, Howard M, O'Garra A. IL-10 inhibits cytokine 
production by activated macrophages. J Immunol 11, 3815-3822, 1991a.
5.
6.
7.
355-367, 1993. 
11.
12.
15.
16.
Immun 5, 1853-1856, 1991. 
17.
18.
19.
20.
2081-2095, 1989. 
21.

256
Riollet et al 
22. 
Fiorentino DF, Zlotnik A, Vieira P, Mosmann TR, Howard M, Moore KW, O'Garra A. 
IL-10 acts on the antigen-presenting cell to inhibit cytokine production by Th1 cells. J 
Immunol 10, 3444-345 1, 1991. 
Fitzpatrick JL, Cripps PJ, Hill AW, Bland PW, Stokes CR. MHC class II expression in 
the bovine mammary gland. Vet Immunol Immunopathol 1-2, 13-23, 1992. 
Gajewski TF, Fitch FW. Anti-proliferative effect of IFN-gamma in immune regulation. 
I. IFN- gamma inhibits the proliferation of Th2 but not Th1 murine helper T 
lymphocyte clones. J Immunol 12, 4245-4252, 1988.
Harmon RJ, Heald CW. Migration of polymorphonuclear leukocytes into the bovine 
mammary gland during experimentally induced Staphylococcus aureus mastitis. Am J 
Vet Res 6, 992-998, 1982.
Hein WR, Mackay CR. Prominence of gamma delta T cells in the ruminant immune 
system. Immunol Today 1, 30-34, 1991. 
Henderson, B. and Bodmer, M. In Therapeutic modulation of cytokines. Boca Raton: 
CRC Press 1996. 
Henderson B, Poole S. Modulation of cytokine function: therapeutic applications. Adv 
Pharmacol , 53-115, 1994.
Henderson B, Poole S, Wilson M. Bacterial modulins: a novel class of virulence factors 
which cause host tissue pathology by inducing cytokine synthesis. Microbiol Rev 2, 
316-341, 1996a. 
Henderson B, Poole S, Wilson M. Microbial/host interactions in health and disease: 
who controls the cytokine network? Immunopharmacology 1, 1-21, 1996b. 
Huber AR, Kunkel SL, Todd RF, Weiss SJ. Regulation of transendothelial neutrophil 
migration by endogenous interleukin-8 [published errata appear in Science 1991 Nov 
1;254(5032):631 and 1991 Dec 6;254(5037):1435]. Science 5028, 99-102, 1991. 
Inoue T, Asano Y, Matsuoka S, Furutani-Seiki M, Aizawa S, Nishimura H, Shirai T, 
Tada T. Distinction of mouse CD8+ suppressor effector T cell clones from cytotoxic T 
cell clones by cytokine production and CD45 isoforms. J Immunol 6, 2121-2128, 1993. 
33. 
Jackson JA, Shuster DE, Silvia WJ, Harmon RJ. Physiological responses to 
intramammary or intravenous treatment with endotoxin in lactating dairy cows. J Dairy 
Sci 3, 627-632, 1990. 
Kelso A. Th1 and Th2 subsets: paradigms lost? Immunol Today 8, 374-379, 1995. 
Kishimoto TK, Jutila MA, Berg EL, Butcher EC. Neutrophil Mac-1 and MEL-14
adhesion proteins inversely regulated by chemotactic factors. Science 4923, 1238- 1241,
1989.
Larsen CG, Anderson AO, Oppenheim JJ, Matsushima K. Production of interleukin-8
by human dermal fibroblasts and keratinocytes in response to interleukin-1 or tumour 
necrosis factor. Immunology 1,31-36, 1989. 
Lee CS, Wooding FB, Kemp P. Identification, properties, and differential counts of cell 
populations using electron microscopy of dry cows secretions, colostrum and milk from 
normal cows. J Dairy Res 1, 39-50, 1980. 
Lloyd AR, Oppenheim JJ. Poly's lament: the neglected role of the polymorphonuclear 
neutrophil in the afferent limb of the immune response. Immunol Today 5, 169-172,
1992.
Lohuis JA, Verheijden JH, Burvenich C, van Miert AS. Pathophysiological effects of 
endotoxins in ruminants. 1. Changes in body temperature and reticulo-rumen motility, 
and the effect of repeated administration. Vet Q 2, 109-116, 1988. 
Mackay CR, Hein WR. Marked variations in gamma delta T cell numbers and 
distribution throughout the life of sheep. Curr Top Microbiol Immunol , 107- 111, 1991. 
23.
24.
25.
26.
27.
28.
29.
30.
31.
.
32.
34.
35.
36.
37.
38.
39.
40.

Cells and cytokines in inflammatory secretions 
41.
42.
43.
44.
257
Mackay CR, Hein WR, Brown MH, Matzinger P. Unusual expression of CD2 in sheep: 
implications for T cell interactions. Eur J Immunol 11, 1681-1688, 1988. 
Marchant A, JL Vincent, M Goldman. In Novel therapeutic strategies in the treatment 
of sepsis. New York: Marcel Dekker 1996. 
Matsukawa A, Yoshinaga M. Neutrophils as a source of cytokines in inflammation. 
Histol Histopathol 2, 511-5 16, 1999. 
Mehrotra PT, Wu D, Crim JA, Mostowski HS, Siegel JP. Effects of IL-12 on the 
generation of cytotoxic activity in human CD8+ T lymphocytes. J Immunol 5, 2444-
2452, 1993. 
45. 
Miller RH, Paape MJ, Fulton LA. Variation in milk somatic cells of heifers at first 
calving. J Dairy Sci 11, 3782-3790, 1991. 
46. 
Mosmann TR, Coffman RL. TH1 and TH2 cells: different patterns of lymphokine 
secretion lead to different functional properties. Annu Rev Immunol , 145-173, 1989. 
47. 
Outteridge PM, Lee CS. Cellular immunity in the mammary gland with particular 
reference to T, B lymphocytes and macrophages. Adv Exp Med Biol ,513-534, 1981. 
48. 
Park YH, Fox LK, Hamilton MJ, Davis WC. Bovine mononuclear leukocyte 
subpopulations in peripheral blood and mammary gland secretions during lactation. J 
Dairy Sci 4, 998-1006, 1992. 
Park YH, Fox LK, Hamilton MJ, Davis WC. Suppression of proliferative response of 
BoCD4+ T lymphocytes by activated BoCD8+ T lymphocytes in the mammary gland 
of cows with Staphylococcus aureus mastitis. Vet Immunol Immunopathol 2, 137-151,
1993.
Persson K, Larsson I, Hallen SC. Effects of certain inflammatory mediators on bovine 
neutrophil migration in vivo and in vitro. Vet Immunol Immunopathol 2, 99-112, 1993. 
Politis I, Zhao X, McBride BW, Burton JH. Function of bovine mammary macrophages 
as antigen-presenting cells. Vet Immunol Immunopathol 4, 399-410, 1992. 
Porat R, Clark BD, Wolff SM, Dinarello CA. Enhancement of growth of virulent strains 
of Escherichia coli by interleukin-I [see comments]. Science 5030, 430-432, 1991. 
Reddy PG, Reddy DN, Pruiett SE, Daley MJ, Shirley JE, Chengappa MM, Blecha F. 
Interleukin 2 treatment of Staphylococcus aureus mastitis. Cytokine 3, 227-231, 1992. 
Riollet C, Rainard P, Poutrel B. Cell subpopulations and cytokine expression in bovine 
milk in response to chronic Staphylococcus aureus infection. submitted for publication, 
1999.
55. 
Sample AK, Czuprynski CJ. Priming and stimulation of bovine neutrophils by 
recombinant human interleukin-1 alpha and tumor necrosis factor alpha. J Leukoc Biol 
Seder RA, Paul WE, Davis MM, Fazekas dS. The presence of interleukin 4 during in 
vitro priming determines the lymphokine-producing potential of CD4+ T cells from T 
cell receptor transgenic mice. J Exp Med 4, 1091-1098, 1992. 
Selsted ME, Tang YQ, Morris WL, McGuire PA, Novotny MJ, Smith W, Henschen 
AH, Cullor JS. Purification, primary structures, and antibacterial activities of beta-
defensins, a new family of antimicrobial peptides from bovine neutrophils. J Biol Chem 
Shafer-Weaver KA, Corl CM, Sordillo LM. Shifts in bovine CD4+ subpopulations 
increase T-helper-2 compared with T-helper-1 effector cells during the postpartum 
period. J Dairy Sci , 1696-1706, 1999. 
Shafer-Weaver KA, Sordillo LM. Bovine CD8+ suppressor lymphocytes alter immune 
responsiveness during the postpartum period. Vet Immunol Immunopathol 1-2, 53-64,
1997.
49.
50.
51.
52.
53.
54.
,
2, 107-115, 1991. 
56.
57.
9, 6641-6648, 1993. 
58.
59.

258
Riollet et al 
60. 
Shuster DE, Kehrli MEJ, Rainard P, Paape M. Complement fragment C5a and 
inflammatory cytokines in neutrophil recruitment during intramammary infection with 
Escherichia coli. Infect Immun 8, 3286-3292,1997.
Shuster DE, Kehrli MEJ, Stevens MG. Cytokine production during endotoxin-induced
mastitis in lactating dairy cows. Am J Vet Res 1, 80-85, 1993. 
Shuster DE, Lee EK, Kehrli MEJ. Bacterial growth, inflammatory cytokine production, 
and neutrophil recruitment during coliform mastitis in cows within ten days after 
calving, compared with cows at midlactation. Am J Vet Res 11, 1569-1575, 1996. 
Sordillo LM, Babiuk LA. Controlling acute Escherichia coli mastitis during the 
periparturient period with recombinant bovine interferon gamma. Vet Microbiol 2, 189-
198, 1991a. 
Sordillo LM, Babiuk LA. Modulation of bovine mammary neutrophil function during 
the periparturient period following in vitro exposure to recombinant bovine interferon 
gamma. Vet Immunol Immunopathol 4, 393-402, 1991b. 
Sordillo LM, Shafer-Weaver K, DeRosa D. Immunobiology of the mammary gland. J 
Dairy Sci 8, 1851-1865, 1997. 
Steinbeck MJ, Roth JA. Neutrophil activation by recombinant cytokines. Rev Infect Dis 
Taylor BC, Dellinger JD, Cullor JS, Stott JL. Bovine milk lymphocytes display the 
phenotype of memory T cells and are predominantly CD8+. Cell Immunol 1, 245-253,
1994.
Taylor BC, Keefe RG, Dellinger JD, Nakamura Y, Cullor JS, Stott JL. T cell 
populations and cytokine expression in milk derived from normal and bacteria-infected
bovine mammary glands. Cell Immunol 1, 68-76, 1997. 
69. 
Trinchieri G. Interleukin- 12: a proinflammatory cytokine with immunoregulatory 
functions that bridge innate resistance and antigen-specific adaptive immunity. Annu 
Rev Immunol , 251-276, 1995.
Wirt DP, Adkins LT, Palkowetz KH, Schmalstieg FC, Goldman AS. Activated and 
memory T lymphocytes in human milk. Cytometry 3, 282-290, 1992.
Yang TJ, Ayoub IA, Rewinski MJ. Lactation stage-dependent changes of lymphocyte 
subpopulations in mammary secretions: inversion of CD4+/CD8+ T cell ratios at 
parturition. Am J Reprod Immunol 5, 378-383, 1997. 
Yssel H, De Waal M, Roncarolo MG, Abrams JS, Lahesmaa R, Spits H, de Vries JE. 
IL-10 is produced by subsets of human CD4+ T cell clones and peripheral blood T 
cells. J Immunol 7, 2378-2384, 1992.
61.
62.
63.
64.
65.
66.
67.
4, 549-568, 1989. 
68.
70.
71.
72.

31.
Immune Surveillance of Mammary Tissue by 
Phagocytic Cells 
Max J. Paape, 1Kimberly Shafer-Weaver, 2Anthony V. Capuco, 3Kaat Van 
Oostveldt and 3Christian Burvenich 
1Immunology and Disease Resistance Laboratory, 2Gene Evaluation and Mapping Laboratory, 
United States Department Of Agriculture, Beltsville, MD and 3University of Ghent, Faculty of 
Veterinary Medicine, Merelbeke, Belgium 
1
Key words: 
Immune surveillance, mastitis 
Abstract:
The leukocytes in milk consist of lymphocytes, neutrophil polymorphonuclear 
leukocytes (PMN) and macrophages. Lymphocytes together with antigen-
presenting cells function in the generation of an effective immune response. 
Lymphocytes can be divided into two distinct subsets, T- and B- lymphocytes,
that differ in function and protein products. The professional phagocytic cells 
of the bovine mammary gland are PMN and macrophages. In the normal 
mammary gland macrophages are the predominate cells which act as sentinels 
to invading mastitis causing pathogens. Once the invaders are detected, 
macrophages release chemical messengers called chemoattractants that cause 
the directed migration of PMN into the infection. Migration of neutrophils into 
mammary tissue provides the first immunological line of defense against 
bacteria that penetrate the physical barrier of the teat canal. However, their 
presence is like a double-edged sword. While the PMN are phagocytosing and 
destroying the invading pathogens, they inadvertently release chemicals which 
induces swelling of secretory epithelium cytoplasm, sloughing of secretory 
cells, and decreased secretory activity. Permanent scarring will result in a loss 
of milk production. Resident and newly migrated macrophages help reduce the 
damage to the epithelium by phagocytosing PMN that undergo programmed 
cell death through a process called apoptosis. Specific ligands on the 
neutrophil surface are required for directed migration and phagocytosis. In 
response to infection, freshly migrated leukocytes express greater numbers of 
cell surface receptors for immunoglobulins and complement and are more 
phagocytic than their counterparts in blood. However, phagocytic activity 
rapidly decreases with continued exposure to inhibitory factors such as milk 
fat globules and casein in mammary secretions. Compensatory hypertrophy in 
259

260
Paape et al 
non-mastitic quarters partially compensates for lost milk production in 
diseased quarters. Advances in molecular biology are making available the 
tools, techniques, and products to study and modulate host-parasite
interactions. For example the cloning and expression of proteins that bind 
endotoxin may provide ways of reducing damaging effects of endotoxin 
during acute coliform mastitis. The successful formation of bifunctional 
monoclonal antibodies for the targeted lysis of mastitis causing bacteria 
represents a new line of therapeutics for the control of mastitis in dairy cows. 
1.
INTRODUCTION
The first line of defense against mammary infection is the teat canal. 
Bacteria that pass this barrier and enter the teat cistern meet the second line 
of defense: phagocytic leukocytes. Phagocytes, consisting of neutrophil 
polymorphonuclear leukocytes (PMN) and macrophages, ingest and kill 
mastitis pathogens. Bacterial invasion and growth within the mammary 
gland is the main cause of mastitis. Invading bacteria settle next to the 
epithelial cells lining the mammary ducts, absorbing nutrients from milk 
while expelling harmful toxins that attack and destroy the epithelium. While 
helpless against the invading horde of bacteria, the epithelium and white 
blood cells called macrophages soon release chemical messengers called 
cytokines that signal the body for help. These chemicals increase blood flow 
to the udder and open spaces between the endothelial cells lining the 
capillary bed of the udder allowing for the release of blood plasma into the 
milk. If this bacterium has been encountered before, specific antibodies will 
pass into the milk along with the plasma. Soon PMN, a specialized form of 
white blood cells, migrate directly from blood into the bacterial hoard. The 
PMN release potent oxidants that destroy not only some of the bacteria but 
also some of the epithelial cells lining the ducts and alveoli within the udder. 
The PMN also combats the bacteria directly by ingestion or phagocytosis, 
aided by antibodies that attach to the bacteria and allow the PMN to 
recognize them as foreign. For the PMN it is a dead end mission. After 
ingestion and release of their chemicals most of the PMN perish. Next 
macrophages migrate in through the pores of the capillaries. Damage to the 
epithelium is limited by induction of programmed cell death (apoptosis) in 
PMN and their engulfment by macrophages. Through this process damaging 
chemicals are walled off within dying PMN that are then ingested by 
macrophages to minimize damage to the epithelium of the udder. Within 
several hours lymphocytes arrive at the site of the infection and take the 
battle to another level of immunological defense, as they recognize antigens 
through membrane receptors that are specific for invading pathogens. Soon 

Immune surveillance by phagocytic cells 
261
the balance of the struggle is tipped away from the invading bacteria. 
However, vast areas of the epithelium have been destroyed. Extensive 
scarring will result in a loss of secretory epithelium and milk production will 
never again reach normal levels. If all of the bacteria are not completely 
destroyed, the cellular drama becomes chronic and a subclinical form of the 
disease may continue for the remainder of lactation. 
2. 
CELLS IN MILK
The cells in normal milk consist of lymphocytes, PMN, macrophages and 
epithelial cells. Because of the presence of epithelial cells, the term milk 
somatic cells was coined
54. In mammary quarters free from bacterial 
infection macrophages are the predominate cell type (35-79%), followed by 
PMN (3-26%), lymphocytes (10-24%) and epithelial cells (2-15%)
(37,46,50). During early and late lactation the percentage of PMN tends to 
increase while the percentage of lymphocytes decreases46,69. In infected 
mammary glands the percentage of neutrophils can approach 100%63. Total 
milk somatic cell count (SCC) from non-infected mammary quarters are low 
averaging 50,000/ml, and cows with subclinical intramammary infections 
will exceed this level50,52. Recent examination of Dairy Herd Improvement 
records during 1996-97 from 3,349,186 lactations obtained from 22 states in 
the USA, average SCC ranged from 254,000 to 485,000/ml45. Means by 
month indicated lowest SCC in November - January and peak counts in July 
- August. The percentage of herds exceeding 750,000, the cell count limit for 
normal milk in the USA, was as high as 14% in some states. However, 15 to 
25% of the herds that exceeded 750,000 also were above 750,000 on the next 
test day. Thus, it would appear that some of the herds are harboring cows 
with subclinical mastitis and would have problems meeting the European 
Union cell count limit of 400,000 cells/ml of milk. 
3. 
LYMPHOCYTES 
Generation of an effective specific immune response involves both 
antigen-presenting cells and lymphocytes. Lymphocytes are the only cells of 
the immune system that have specificity as they recognize antigens through 
membrane receptors that are specific for invading pathogens. Upon antigen 
recognition, lymphocytes can become effector or memory cells, and these 
functions can be augmented by repeated exposure to the same antigen. 
Lymphocytes can be divided into two distinct subsets, T-
and B-
lymphocytes, that differ in function and protein products. T-lymphocytes can 

262
Paape et al 
be further subdivided, by their T-cell receptor (TCR), into αβ and γδ T-
lymphocytes. Lymphocytes that express the ap TCR include CD4+ (T-
helper) and CD8+ (T-cytotoxic/suppressor) effector cells. Although natural 
killer (NK) cells do not specifically recognize antigen, they are classified as 
large, granular, nonimmune lymphocytes and are thought to arise from the 
same lineage as T-lymphocytes.
Lymphocytes participate in mammary gland mucosal immunity by 
trafficking (homing) to the gland and there is preferential trafficking of 
certain lymphocyte subpopulations to this tissue site77,94. The homing 
process plays a major role in enhancing the efficiency of immune 
surveillance and effector responses in potential tissue sites of antigen 
deposition. Lymphocyte trafficking into different tissue sites, including the 
mammary gland, can be separated into the following successive steps: 
tethering (transient adhesion) of the lymphocyte to the endothelium; rolling 
of the lymphocyte along the endothelium; cellular activation via G-coupled
receptors; firm arrest of the lymphocyte to the endothelium; diapedisis of the 
lymphocyte through the endothelium; and migration of the lymphocyte 
within the tissue microenvironments11,12. Lymphocyte migration is directed 
by cell-surface molecules known as homing receptors that interact 
selectively with molecules on endothelial cells and facilitate lymphocyte 
migration into particular tissue areas20. Subsequent entry of the cells into the 
tissue may require further chemotactic or chemokinetic signals. The 
underlying mechanisms for shifts in lymphocyte trafficking to the bovine 
mammary gland have not been elucidated. 
Mammary gland and milk lymphocytes are hyporesponsive to mitogenic, 
antigenic, and allogenic stimulation compared with peripheral blood 
cells27,68. This hyporesponsiveness is speculated to be partially due to distinct 
lymphocyte subpopulations and to the high proportion of memory T-
lymphocytes present in the gland77. Under healthy conditions, the 
mononuclear leukocyte population of the bovine mammary tissue consists of 
approximately 
40-50% 
T-lymphocytes 
and 20-25% 
B-lymphocytes.
However, depending on the stage of lactation and tissue location, the 
percentages and functions of bovine lymphoid cells, especially T-
lymphocytes, can vary significantly. Alterations in the proportion and 
function of lymphocyte subsets, including their ability to migrate to 
appropriate locations (trafficking), can affect both local and systemic 
immunity, influence the risk of infection and disease and contribute to 
disease pathogenesis. In the bovine, shifts in the trafficking patterns and 
therefore, the ratio of lymphocytes have been correlated to diminished 
immune functions such as cytokine production, lymphocyte proliferation and 
cytotoxicity and, thus, disease susceptibility
68. Although changes in 
lymphocyte numbers or relative proportions does not necessarily relate to a 

Immune surveillance by phagocytic cells 
263
change in lymphocyte function, alterations in lymphocyte subsets, 
particularly 
with the CD4:CD8 
ratio, have been associated with 
immunosuppressive diseases in various species. Reduced secretion of 
important immunoregulatory
cytokines, such as IL-2 and IFN-γ
,
observed during the postpartum period could be partially explained by the 
lower relative percentages CD4+ lymphocytes at this time. 
T-helper (TH) lymphocytes produce cytokines in response to recognizing 
specific antigens via MHC II on antigen presenting cells. Recognition of 
specific antigen by TH lymphocytes stimulates clonal proliferation, 
differentiation into effector or memory cells and the secretion of cytokines. 
The repertoire of cytokines produced by CD4+ lymphocytes activate and 
regulate both humoral and cell-mediated immunity. CD4+ lymphocytes are 
the predominant T-lymphocyte phenotype in bovine peripheral blood and the 
supramammary lymph node with a CD4:CD8 ratio > 1 regardless of 
lactation stage68,95. However, the percentage and effector functions of CD4+ 
lymphocytes is diminished in the peripheral blood, supramammary lymph 
nodes, and mammary gland during the postpartum compared with the mid to 
late lactating period68. Lowered percentage of these cells partially explains 
reduced production of IL-2 and IFN-γ observed postpartum31,68,73. Because
the relative percentages of TH1 or TH2 subsets or responses can greatly 
influence the type and amount of cytokines produced, a predominance of one 
subpopulation or response over the other can alter host immune 
responsiveness. Recently, bovine peripheral blood CD4+ lymphocytes have 
been shown to function primarily as TH2 compared with TH1 effector cells 
during the postpartum period
66. Greater percentages of TH2 effector cells 
can further explain lower levels of IL-2 and IFN-γ observed at this time.
In contrast to the peripheral blood and supramammary lymph node, 
CD8+ lymphocytes are the predominant T-lymphocyte phenotype in both the 
tissue and secretions of the healthy mammary gland. CD8+ lymphocytes 
comprise about 50-60% of the T-lymphocyte population in the mammary 
gland with the ratio of CD4 to CD8 ratio constitutively < 1 3,68,77,94 . This 
suggests that CD8+ lymphocytes preferentially traffic to the bovine 
mammary gland under normal conditions. The vast majority of T-
lymphocytes in mammary parenchyma and lacteal secretion are CD8+ ap T-
lymphocytes that display characteristics of memory cells77. The functional 
significance for the elevated frequency of CD8+ over CD4+ lymphocytes in 
both milk and mammary tissue of bovines has not been thoroughly defined. 
Researchers demonstrated that CD8+ lymphocytes activated during 
bacterial infections can suppress important host immune responses 
. 
During the postpartum period, peripheral blood CD8+ lymphocytes mainly 
produced IL-4 and demonstrated limited cytotoxic activity67. These data 
indicate that CD8+ lymphocytes, in the absence of pathogen-induced
31,68,73
29,30,59

264
Paape et al 
activation, can suppress the activity of other immune cells thus, contributing 
to delayed host immune responsiveness during the early stages of 
pathogenesis.
T-lymphocytes bearing the γδ form of the TCR are the predominant T-
cell phenotype in epithelial tissues such as skin, intestine, and lung7,39, In the 
ruminant system, the prevalence of γδ T-lymphocytes is quite high, with the
highest percentage found in calves. Ruminants express greater levels of γδ 
T-lymphocytes in mammary secretions and mammary parenchyma relative 
to
blood38.
The
finding
that
γδ
T-lymphocyte
percentages
decrease
significantly in the mammary parenchyma during the postpartum period68
raises interesting questions about the potential effector functions of these 
lymphoid cells that preferentially home to epithelial surfaces. Although the 
specific function of these cells in the mammary gland are not well defined, 
γδ T-lymphocytes can mediate cytotoxicity with variable involvement of
MHC and can mediate some NK activity40. γδ T-lymphocytes stimulated
with IL-2 are capable of recognizing and lysing malignant breast carcinoma 
cells lines43. The cytotoxic ability of these lymphoid cells suggests they are 
capable of eliminating altered epithelial cells39. Additionally, there are 
indications that γδ T-lymphocytes play a role in antibacterial immunity and
may provide a unique barrier function for mucosal microenvironments to 
bacterial pathogens. The percentage of γδ T lymphocytes in mammary gland
parenchyma 
significantly 
decreases 
during 
periods 
of 
heightened 
susceptibility to bacterial infections68 suggesting that these lymphocytes may 
constitute an important antibacterial defense of the bovine mammary gland. 
Changes in gd T-lymphocytes percentages during the postpartum period also 
may influence, via chemokine, production of leukocyte subpopulations that 
traffic to the gland at this time6.
Natural killer (NK) cells are large, granular, nonimmune lymphocytes 
that possess cytotoxic ability in the absence of MHC restriction. NK cells 
have been shown to play an important role in host defense against bacterial 
pathogens. NK cells are capable of lysing target cells through a diverse 
repertoire of rnechanisms12,78. These pathways include antibody-dependent 
cell-mediated cytotoxicity (ADCC), granule exocytosis, release of cytolytic 
factors and receptor-mediated antigen recognition. Their ADCC activity is 
mediated through expression of CD16 Fc, the receptor for IgG, on the 
surface of NK cells. Once the NK cell binds an antibody bound target cell 
via Fc receptors, target-cell destruction is mediated by degranulation of 
porforin-containing granules. Natural killer cells can also secrete various 
toxic molecules such as TNF-α that may initiate apoptosis in altered cells. In
the bovine mammary gland, the role of NK cells in host defense remains to 
be elucidated 

Immune surveillance by phagocytic cells 
265
The primary role of B-lymphocytes is to produce antibodies against 
invading pathogens. Unlike macrophages and PMN, B-lymphocytes utilize 
their cell-surface receptors to recognize specific pathogens. B-lymphocytes
can internalize, process, and present antigen in the context of major 
histocompatibility complex (MHC 11) to T-helper cells. Upon presentation of 
the processed antigen to T-helper lymphocytes, IL-2 is secreted by the T 
cell, which in turn induces proliferation and differentiation of the B-
lymphocyte into either antibody producing plasma cells or memory cells . 
Under certain conditions B-lymphocyte differentiation can be directly 
stimulated by an antigen such as lipopolysaccharide. 
Plasma cells secrete immunoglobulins (Ig) which are important specific 
soluble effector molecules of the humoral immune response72. Antibodies 
are present in bovine milk and are either synthesized locally or are 
selectively transported or transducted from serums5,47,68. The four different 
classes of Ig that play a predominant role in mammary gland defense against 
bacterial pathogens include, IgG1, IgG2, IgM, and IgA, Of these, IgG1 is the 
predominant isotype in uninfected mammary glands. IgG1, IgG2, and IgM 
act as opsonins and facilitate PMN and Mf phagocytosis. IgA is thought to 
play a role in toxin neutralization, agglutination, and hindering bacterial 
colonization47. In contrast to T-lymphocytes, the percentages of B-
lymphocytes remain fairly constant regardless of lactation stage. However 
during the postpartum period, B-lymphocyte functional capabilities, 
including antibody production, is diminished48.
4. 
PMN LEUKOCYTE 
The fine structure of the bovine PMN leukocyte has been carefully 
defined in classic studies57,58. The cell is delineated by a plasma membrane 
that has a number of functionally important receptors. These include L-
selectin and
E
2-integrin adhesion molecules associated with the binding of
PMN to endothelial cells that are important for migration into sites of 
infection21 Membrane receptors for the Fc component of the IgG2 and IgM 
classes of immunoglobulins and complement component C3b are necessary 
for mediating phagocytosis of invading bacteria2. Dying or apoptotic PMN
express receptors that mark them for quick disposal by macrophages62.
The most prominent characteristic of the PMN is the multilobulated
nucleus. The multilobulated nucleus is important because it allows the PMN 
to line up its nuclear lobes in a thin line, allowing for rapid migration 
between endothelial cells. Macrophages on the other hand have a large 
horseshoe shaped nucleus that makes migration between endothelial cells 
more difficult. Thus, the PMN is the first newly migrated phagocytic cell to 

266
Paape et al 
arrive at an infection site. Within the cytoplasm are isles of glycogen that 
make up 20% of the cell on a dry weight basis and numerous bactericidal 
granules that are used by the cell in killing bacteria. Like other species, 
bovine PMN contain azurophilic and specific granules. They also contain a 
third novel granule that is larger, denser and more numerous than the other 
two granules. It contains lactoferrin, which is also found in secondary 
granules, but does not contain constituents common to azurophil granules. 
Instead, it contains a group of highly cationic proteins and is the exclusive 
store of powerful oxygen-independent bactericidal corn pound23. The most 
important antibacterial mechanism derived from azurophilic granules is the 
myeloperoxidase-hydrogen peroxide-halide system35. Myeloperoxidase in 
the presence of hydrogen peroxide and halide ions kills bacteria. 
The life cycle of bovine PMN is brief. In the bone marrow, this cell 
requires 10 to 14 days to mature4. After maturation, PMN may be stored for 
a few additional days. The mature PMN leaves the hematopoietic 
compartment of the bone marrow and enters the vascular sinus by traveling 
in migration channels through the endothelial cell. The PMN circulate in the 
blood stream briefly (half-life of 8.9 hr) 
16, leave the blood stream by 
diapedesis between endothelial cells, and enter tissues where they function 
as phagocytes for 1 - 2 days. Older neutrophils are removed by macrophages 
as they undergo apoptosis or programmed cell death. The continuous 
migration of PMN into mammary tissue provides the first immunological 
line of defense against bacterial invasion. The nursing or milking stimulus 
induces directed migration of fresh PMN into mammary tissue51. Thus, the 
normal sterile mammary gland is supplied with a constant source of PMN. 
Furthermore, drainage of newly synthesized milk into milk ducts leads to 
removal of freshly migrated PMN, and further exudation of PMN into newly 
formed milk in the alveoli . However, once in the lumen of alveoli, ingestion 
of fat and casein causes a loss in phagocytic and bactericidal functions and 
leads to death of PMN53. Milking removes compromised PMN, which are 
replaced by healthy PMN, thus enhancing defense against bacterial infection. 
In healthy animals, production and destruction of PMN is tightly 
regulated, which keeps their number in blood, milk, and tissue constant
32.
Influx of PMN into the mammary gland occurs at a low level for immune 
surveillance but increases rapidly in response to bacterial invasion. Here, 
potent chemical messengers guide PMN toward foci of infection. Potent 
chemoattractants for bovine PMN include C5a, a cleavage product of the 
fifth component of complement, various lipopolysaccharides (LPS), 
leukotriene B4, and interleukin- 1 (I1-1), 11-2, and I1-8,19,24,76,96. , It was recently 
discovered that in the presence of LPS mammary secretory cells secrete I1-8 
. While the influx of PMN into the infection site is important for controlling 
spread of the bacterium, their presence also results in tissue damage that 
8

Immune surveillance by phagocytic cells 
267
leads to fibrosis and impaired mammary function2,15,49. PMN promote tissue 
injury and disturbed mammary function via 1) reactive oxygen metabolite 
generation (the respiratory burst) and 2) granular enzyme release (degranula-
tion)34,44. It has been shown that vitamin E and the selenium containing 
enzyme glutathione peroxidase provide protection against damaging effects 
of reactive oxygen metabolites70.
The first events to occur in the process of phagocytosis are contact and 
recognition between the phagocyte and bacterium. This is accomplished by 
specific antibodies (IgG2 and IgM) that recognize the bacterium through Fab 
regions on the antibodies and Fc receptors on the phagocyte. Activation of 
complement components C3b and C3bi, on the surface of bacteria following 
antibody union, also promote phagocytosis by binding to CR1 and CR3 
receptors on PMN22. During migration in response to infection, some of the 
bound antibodies and complement components are removed and new Fc 
receptors appear on the PMN surface22,91. Also, T-lymphocyte derived 
cytokines secreted in response to inflammation, induce further increases in 
Fc receptors for IgG2 92. Thus, PMN are fully armed to do battle with the 
invading horde of bacteria, resulting in a more rapid ingestion and 
elimination of the pathogens. Also, lectin-carbohydrate receptors found on 
the surface of PMN recognize carbohydrate rich fimbriae of Escherichia coli 
in the absence of specific opsonins55, and is referred to as non-opsonic
phagocytosis. In the absence of specific opsonins, PMN are able to bind and 
ingest E. coli, and may be an important mechanism in controlling 
intramammary infections by Gram-negative bacteria. After contact and 
recognition, pseudopods form around the microbe. Fusion of the engulfing 
pseudopods results in the formation of a phagocytic vacuole or phagosome. 
Cytoplasmic granules migrate toward the phagosome where the membrane 
surrounding the granule fuses with the internalized plasma membrane that 
lines the phagosome, creating the phagolysosome. As a result of this, 
bactericidal contents of the granule are then emptied into the phagolysosome 
where digestion of the microbe occurs. 
5. 
APOPTOSIS 
Apoptosis or programmed cell death is a physiological form of cell death 
that results in cell removal without inducing an inflammatory reaction. 
Adequate numbers of circulating leukocytes requires a balance between cell 
proliferation and apoptosis. In the blood stream PMN seldom die an 
apoptotic cell death. Apoptosis occurs specifically at the tissue level. The 
process of apoptosis happens through well defined morphological and 
biochemical events. First, the cell shrinks and changes in the membrane 

268
Paape et al 
structure take place. In later stages, the DNA in the nucleus of the cell 
fragments in pieces of consistent sizes. Finally, the cell breaks up into a 
number of membrane-bound fragments containing structurally intact 
organelles. These cell fragments, called apoptotic bodies are phagocytosed 
by neighboring cells and rapidly degraded. Necrosis is a form of cell death 
that results in cell swelling and blebbing. Every component is adversely 
affected and finally the cell reptures. This results in the release of toxic cell 
components into the surrounding tissue64. Many procedures have been 
developed to measure apoptosis in blood based on the typical features for 
apoptotic cells as described above. Most procedures apply flow cytometry. 
Recently, a flow cytometric procedure was adapted to detect apoptosis of 
bovine PMN in whole blood79.
Expression of programmed cell death can be altered within the 
inflammatory microenvironment. Inflammatory mediators modulate PMN 
apoptosis. In vitro tests on human PMN have shown that bacterial products 
such as LPS36 and host derived cytokines such as IL-1, interferon-(17 and
granulocyte-macrophage colony stimulating factors18 retard PMN apoptosis. 
TNF-α 75, IL-61 and the respiratory burst86 induces PMN apoptosis. The net
biologic effect of these competing compounds in vivo is unknown. In vitro 
studies on bovine PMN of early- and mid-lactating cows have shown that 
incubating blood with TNF-α accelerates PMN apoptosis. The same effect is
observed after incubation of blood with high concentrations of LPS (10 
µg/ml)80. This effect is indirect. LPS stimulates macrophages to release 
cytokines. These cytokines in turn prime PMN. Coincubation of LPS treated 
blood with TNF-α or actinomycin D, a well known apoptosis inducer of
bovine PMN, did not have any additional accelerating effect on apoptosis. 
This suggests that primed cells are less sensitive to apoptosis following 
treatments with actinomycin D and TNF-α80. In vitro studies on human
PMN have shown that glucocorticosteroids have an apoptosis retarding 
effect42. Such research has not yet been performed on bovine PMN. 
From in vitro studies on human PMN, it is known that apoptotic PMN 
display a loss of function such as cytoskeletal functions, phagocytosis, 
granular enzyme release, and respiratory burst activity87. Diapedesis of 
bovine PMN through an in vitro model consisting of a monolayer of 
epithelial cells isolated from the bovine mammary gland on a collagen 
coated membrane, caused a decrease in phagocytosis and oxidative burst71.
These decreases are assumed to be due to PMN apoptosis. Diapedesis of 
PMN through the collagen coated membrane only, also induced apoptosis of 
the diapedesed PMN. However, the apoptotic response was negated by a 
monolayer of endothelial cells81.

Immune surveillance by phagocytic cells 
269
6.
LPS- CD14-TUMOR NECROSIS (TNF) PATHWAY 
The CD14 antigen, which is commonly found on monocytes and
macrophages but not on circulating neutrophils and lymphocytes, was
recently discovered on bovine mammary PMN and macrophages55. This
receptor bind LPS-protein complexes and induces the synthesis and release
of TNF93. TNF up-regulates PMN phagocytosis, adherence, chemotaxis and
release of reactive oxygen metabolites65. It is recognized that two forms of
CD14 exist, a membrane and soluble form41. The soluble form results from
the shedding of membrane CD14 (mCD14). Soluble CD14 can bind LPS
directly and prevent it from binding to mCD14, thus preventing over
secretion of TNF that could lead to increased severity of clinical symptoms.
Soluble CD14 has been tentatively identified in bovine milk83 and may play
an important role in neutralizing LPS and controlling the clinical symptoms
associated with acute coliform mastitis. CD14 has recently been cloned and
the protein has been expressed82. Intramammary and systemic use of this
protein may provide a means of eliminating the potential damaging effects of
LPS during acute coliform mastitis .
7. 
MAMMARY EPITHELIAL CELL DAMAGE 
A significant negative correlation exists between milk SCC and milk 
yield60. Infection is the primary reason for increased SCC. During 
experimentally induced Staphylococcus aureus mastitis, PMN seem to 
traverse the mammary epithelium at alveolar regions exhibiting extensive 
morphological damage26. The tissue damage and decline in milk yield may 
result from damage to secretory tissue by bacterial toxins, as a result of 
neutrophil migration, or as a consequence of phagocytic activity of 
neutrophils. Attempts have been made to dissociate these factors to assess 
their individual potential for damaging the mammary epithelium. 
A mammary explant model was developed to assess mammary tissue 
damage caused by normal PMN function15. Mammary tissue from lactating 
Holsteins was cultured in the presence of intact or lysed PMN, or PMN that 
were allowed to phagocytose opsonized zymosan. The relative extent of 
damage to mammary epithelium caused by PMN treatments was as follows: 
phagocytosing PMN > lysed PMN > intact PMN. Cytological damage 
observed included cell sloughing from the basement membrane, nuclear 
pyknosis, cell debris in luminal areas and epithelial vacuolation. During 
phagocytosis, lysosomes migrate toward the particle being internalized and 
lysosomal enzymes are released before fusion of the pseudopods is 
completed, resulting in release of lysosomal contents to the outside of the 

270
Paape et al 
PMN23. Once within the alveolar lumen, ducts and cisterns of the gland, 
PMN phagocytose fat globules, casein and, when infection is present,
bacteria. Phagocytic activity may in part account for the negative correlation 
between SCC and milk production. 
8.
COMPENSATORY GROWTH OF THE
MAMMARYGLAND
Normal quarters within an udder are capable of partially compensating 
for a dysfunctional quarter(s). In 1938, Swett et al.74 reported that, in a single 
cow with non-functional rear quarters, growth and development of the front 
quarters compensated for parenchymal loss in the rear quarters with partial 
compensation of milk production. More recently, Woolford89,90 compared
milk yields of 39 cows experimentally infected with S. aureus with their 
infection-free identical twins. Milk production declined approximately 20% 
in infected quarters. In multiparous cows this loss was compensated for by 
an increase in milk production in noninfected quarters. In contrast, within-
udder compensation did not occur in response to mastitis in heifers. In 
general clinical mastitis is associated with a decrease in total milk yield
33,
the magnitude of this reduction presumably being a reflection of the degree 
of systemic involvement10,28, In contrast to the milk production response to 
subclinical mastitis89, a compensatory response to lack of milk removal in 
adjacent glands was evident in both cows and heifers. Hamann and 
Reichmuh25
similarly reported increased compensatory milk production 
when one to three adjacent quarters were not milked. Capuco and Akers13
demonstrated that lack of milk removal in two quarters induced increased 
cell proliferation in the adjacent, compensatory quarters, and also tended to 
increase metabolic activity per cell. Thus, compensation likely induces both 
hyperplasia and hypertrophy. The compensatory response of a mammary 
gland to subclinical mastitis, or milk stasis in adjacent glands may be due to 
reactivation of quiescent cells, epithelial hyperplasia or hypertrophy. 
Evidence exists for a combination of effects. In any event, it is clear that 
division of mammary epithelial cells is not limited to major periods of 
mammogenesis - the prepubertal period, estrous cycles, and gestation. Cell 
turnover, and likely the potential for increasing the number of mammary 
secretory cells, exists throughout the lactation cycle14. The hyperplastic and 
hypertrophic response to frequent milking are clearly mediated by a locally 
active feedback inhibitor88. The mediator(s) of the compensatory prolifera-
tion and milk yield response is unknown. 

Immune surveillance by phagocytic cells 
9,
271
USE OF MONOCLONAL ANTIBODIES FOR 
TARGETED LYSIS OF MASTITIS PATHOGENS 
Monoclonal antibodies provide useful reagents for the study of PMN 
surface antigens and receptors, as well as to probe mechanisms of cell 
activation. A number of anti-bovine neutrophil monoclonal antibodies 
(MAB) have been produced61. Some of these MAB recognize CD11/CD18 
integrins21 and L-selectin adhesion molecules84. Others, when binding to 
antigens on the PMN cell surface regulate chemotactic, phagocytic and 
oxidative burst activity61. Bi-functional MAE3 were recently created by 
linking MAB to Staphylococcus aureus to MAB to PMN85. When injected 
into the mammary gland, one end hooks up to a S. aureus while the other 
end hooks up to a PMN. When binding to the PMN occurs the MAE3 causes 
the cell to undergo oxidative burst killing the bound organism. This new 
technology represents a new generation of therapeutics for the treatment and 
prevention of bacterial diseases in food producing animals. 
10.
SUMMARY
During immune surveillance of mammary tissue there is preferential
trafficking of certain lymphocyte subpopulations. This homing process plays
a major role in enhancing the efficiency of immune surveillance. During
diapedesis of PMN into the mammary gland, several functionally important
receptors are up-regulated, allowing for a more efficient phagocytosis of
invading Gram-positive and Gram-negative mastitis pathogens. In vitro
studies revealed that PMN and bacterial toxins produce extensive tissue
damage that results in a decrease in milk synthesis. Furthermore, damage to
epithelial cells by toxins
secreted by
S. aureus contributes to the
pathogenicity of this organism. Advances in biotechnology have made
available tools, techniques, and products for use in mastitis research. The
study of apoptosis may contribute to an understanding of the impairment in
PMN function in cows and its relation to mastitis. The cloning and
expression of CD14 may provide a means of neutralizing LPS and
minimizing its damaging effect on mammary secretory tissue. Use of
bifunctional antibodies for targeted cytotoxicity of mastitis pathogens may
prove useful in the treatment and prevention of bovine mastitis.

272
Paape et al 
11. 
REFERENCES 
1.
Afford, S.C., Pongracz, J., Stockley, R.A., Crocker, J., Burnett, D. The induction by 
human interleukin-6 of apoptosis in the promonocytic cell line U937 and human 
neutrophils. Journal of Biological Chemistry, 1992, 267:21612-21616.
Akers, R.M., Thompson, W. Effect of induced leukocyte migration on mammary cell 
morphology and milk component biosynthesis. Journal of Dairy Science, 1987,70: 1685-
1695.
Asai, K., K. Kai, H. Rikiishi, S. Sugawara, Y. Maruyama, T. Yamaguchi, M. Ohta, 
Kumagai, K. Variation in CD4+ T and CD8+ T lymphocyte subpopulations in bovine 
mammary gland secretions during lactating and non-lactating periods. Veterinary 
Immunology Immunopathology, 1998, 65:51 - 61.
Bainton, D.F., Ullyot, J.L., Farquahar, M.G. The development of neutrophilic 
polymorphonuclear leukocytes in human bone marrow. Journal of Experimental 
Medicine, 197 1, 134: 907-934.
Bastida-Corcvera, K.F. 1992. The enhancement of mammary gland immunity through 
vaccination. Page 335 in Bovine Medicine: Diseases and Husbandry of Cattle. A.H. 
Andrews, R.W. Blowey, H. Boyd, and R.C. Eddy, ed. Blackwell Sci Publ., Cambridge, 
MA.
Boismenu, R., L. Feng, Y. Y. Xia, J. C. Chang, Harvan, W. L. Chemokine expression by 
intraepithelial gd T cells: implications for the recruitment of inflammatory cells to 
damage epithelia. Journal of Immunology, 1996, 157:985-992.
Boismenu, R.. Havran, W. L. An innate view of γδ T cells. Current Opinions in
Immunology, 1997, 957- 63.
Boudjellab, N., Chan-Tang, H.S., Li, B.S., Zhao, X. Interleukin 8 response by bovine 
mammary epithelial cells to lipopolysaccharide stimulation. American Journal of 
Veterinary Research, 1998, 59: 1563-1567.
9. 
Brittenden, J., S. D. Heys, J. Ross, Eremin, 0. Natural killer cells and cancer. Cancer, 
10. Burvenich, C., Heyneman, R., Fabry, J., Vandeputte-Van Messom, G., Massart-Leen,
A.M., Roets, E. Possible role for bovine somatotropin (BST) during the recovery of 
experimentally induced E. coli mastitis in cows soon after parturition. Proc. Int. 
Conference on Mastitis, 1989, St. Georgen/Langsee, Karnten, Austria, 4-9.
11. Butcher, E. C. The regulation of lymphocyte traffic. Current Topics in Microbiology and 
Immunology, 1986, 128: 85-122.
12. Butcher, E. C., Picker, L. J. Lymphocyte homing and homeostasis. Science, 1996, 
13. Capuco, A.V., Akers, R.M. Thymidine incorporation by lactating mammary epithelium 
during compensatory mammary growth in beef cattle. Journal of Dairy Science, 1990, 
14. Capuco, A.V., Byatt, J. Cell trunover in the mammary gland. Journal of Dairy Science, 
15. Capuco, A.V., Paape, M.J., Nickerson, S.C. In vitro study of polymorphonuclear 
leukocyte damage to mammary tissues of lactating cows. American Journal of 
Veterinary Research, 1986, 47: 663-668.
16. Carlson, G.P., Kaneko, J.J. Intravascular granulocyte kinetics in developing calves. 
American Journal of Veterinary Research, 1975, April:421-425.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
1996, 77: 1226-1243.
272:60-66.
3:3094-3103.
1998, 81 (Suppl. 1):224. 

Immune surveillance by phagocytic cells 
17. Collota, F., Re, F., Polentarutti, N., Sozzani, S., Mantovani, A. Modulation of 
granulocyte and programmed cell death by cytokines and bacterial products. Blood, 
18. Cox, G., Gauldie, J., Jordana, M. Bronchial epithelial cell derived cytokines (G-CSF and 
GM-CSF) promote the survival of peripheral blood neutrophils in vitro. American 
Journal of Cell Molecular Biology, 1992, 7:507-5 17. 
19. Daley, M. J., Coyle, P.A., Williams, T. J., Furda, G., Dougherty, R., Hayes, P. W. 
Staphylococcus aureus mastitis: pathogenesis and treatment with bovine interleukin - 13
and interleukin - 2. Journal of Dairy Science, 1991, 74:44 13-4424.
20. Dailey, M. O. Expression of T lymphocyte adhesion molecules: Regulation during 
antigen-induced T cell activation and differentiation. Critical Reviews in Immunology, 
21. Delcommenne, M., Letesson, J.J., Depelchin, A. Characterization of monoclonal 
antibodies raised against CD 11 a, CD 11 c and CD 18 in the bovine species. Proceedings 
International Conference on Mastitis Physiology and Pathology, University of Ghent, 
1990, page 8 1. 
22. DiCarlo, A.L., Paape, M.J. Comparison of C3b binding to bovine peripheral blood and 
mammary gland neutrophils (PMN). American Journal of Veterinary Research, 1996, 
23. Gennaro, R.B., Dewald, B., Horisberger, U., Gubler, H.U., Baggiolini, M. A novel type 
of cytoplasmic granule in bovine neutrophils. Journal of Cell Biology, 1983, 96:1651- 
1661.
24. Gray, G.D., Knight, K.A., Nelson, R.D., Herron, M.J. Chemotactic requirements of 
bovine leukocytes. American Journal of Veterinary Research, 1982, 43:757-759.
25. Hamann, J., Reichmuth, J. Compensatory milk production within the bovine udder: 
Effects of short-term non-milking of single quarters. Journal of Dairy Research, 1990, 
26. Harmon, R.J., Heald, C.W. Migration of polymorphonuclear leukocytes into the bovine 
mammary gland during experimentally induced Staphylococcus aureus mastitis.
American Journal of Veterinarian Research, 1982, 43:992-998.
27. Harp, J. A., Nonnecke, B. J. Regulation of mitogenic responses by bovine milk 
lymphocytes. Veterinary Immunology Immunopathology, 1986, 11:215-224. 
28. Heyneman, R., Burvenich, C., Vercauteren, R. Interaction between the respiratory burst 
activity of neutrophil leukocytes and experimentally induced Escherichia coli mastitis in 
cows. Journal of Dairy Science, 1990, 73:985 - 994.
29. Hisatsune, T., A. Enomoto, K. Nishijima, Y. Minai, Y. Asano, T. Tada, Kaminogawa, S. 
CD8+ suppressor T cell clone capable of inhibiting the antigen- and anti-T cell receptor-
induced proliferation of Th clones without cytolytic activity. Journal of Immunology, 
30. Holly, M., Y.S. Lin, Rogers, T.J. Induction of suppressor cells by staphylococcal 
enterotoxin B: identification of a suppressor cell circuit in the generation of suppressor-
effector cells. Immunology, l988, 64:643-648.
31. Ishikawa, H., T. Shirahata, Hasegawa, K. Interferon-g production of mitogen stimulated 
peripheral lymphocytes in perinatal cows. Journal Veterinary Medical Science, 1994, 
32. Jain, N.C. Clinical interpretation of changes in leukocyte numbers and morphology. In 
Schalm’s Veterinary Hematology, Lea and Febiger, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, 1986. 
33. Janzen, J.J. Economic losses resulting from mastitis. A review, Journal of Dairy Science, 
273
1992, 80:2012- 2020.
998, 18:153-184. 
57: 151-156. 
57: 17-22.
1990, 145:2421-2426. 
56:735-738.
1970, 53: 115 1-1160.

274
Paape et al 
34. Kehrli, M.E., Shuster, D.E. Factors affecting milk somatic cells and their role in health of 
the bovine mammary gland. Journal of Dairy Science, 1994, 77:619-627.
35. Klebanoff, S.J. Myeloperoxidase - mediated antimicrobial systems and their role in 
leukocyte function. In Biochemistry of the Phagocytic Process, North-Holland
Publishing Company, London, 1970, 89-114.
36. Lee, A., Whyte, M.K.B., Haslett, C. Inhibition of apoptosis and prolongation of 
neutrophil functional longevity by inflammatory mediators. Journal of Leukocyte 
Biology, 1993, 54: 283-291.
37. Lee, C.W., Wooding, F.B.P., Kemp, P. Identification, properties, and differential counts 
of cell populations using electron microscopy of dry cows secretion, colostrum, and milk 
from normal cows. Journal of Dairy Science, 1980, 47:39-50.
38. Machugh, N. D., J.K. Mburu, M.J. Carol, C.R. Wyatt, J.A. Orden, Davis, ,W.C. 
Identification of two distinct subsets of bovine γδ T cells with unique cell surface
phenotype and tissue distribution. Immunology, 1997, 92:340-345.
39. Mackay, C.R., Hein, Marked variations in gamma delta T cell numbers and distribution 
throughout the life of sheep. Current Topics in Microbiology and Immunology, 
40. Mackay, C.R., W.R. Hein, M.H. Brown, Matzinger, P. Unusual expression of CD2 in 
sheep: implications for T cell interactions. European Journal of Immunology, 
41. Maliszewski, C.R. CD14 and immune response to lipopolysaccharide. Science, 1990, 
42. Meagher, L.C., Cousin, J.M., Seckl, J.R., Haslett, C. Opposing effects of 
glucocorticosteroids on the rate of apoptosis in neutrophilic and eosinophilic 
granulocytes. Journal of Immunology, 1996, 156 : 4422 - 4428.
43. Miescher, S., M. Schreyer, C. Barras, P. Capasso, von Fliedner, V. Sparse distribution of 
gamma/delta T lymphocytes around human epithelial tumors predominantly infiltrated 
by primed/memory T cells. Cancer Immunology Immunotherapy, 1990,32:81-87
44. Miller, J.K., Brzezinska-Slebodzinska, Madsen, F.C. Oxidative stress, antioxidants, and 
animal function. Journal of Dairy Science, 1993, 76:2812 - 2823.
45. Miller, R.H., Norman, H.D., Wiggans, G.R., Wright, J.R. National survey of herd 
average somatic cell counts on DHI test days. National Mastitis Council Annual Meeting 
Proceedings, 1999, 161-162. 
46. Miller, R.H., Paape, M.J., Fulton, L.A. The relationship of milk somatic cell count to 
milk yield for Holstein heifers after first calving. Journal of Dairy Science, 1993, 76:728-
733.
47. Musoke, A.J., F.R. Rurangirwa, . Nantulya, V.M. 1987. Biological properties of bovine 
immunoglobulins and systemic antibody responses. Page 393 in The Ruminant Immune
System in Health and Disease. W.I. Morrison, ed. Cambridge Univ. Press, Cambridge, 
England.
48. Nagahata, H., A. Ogawa, Y. Sanada, H. Noda, Yamamoto, S. Peripartum changes in 
antibody producing capabilities of lymphocytes from dairy cows. Veterinary Quarterly, 
49. Nickerson, S.C., Heald, C.W. Histopathologic response of the bovine mammary gland to 
experimentally induced Staphylococcus aureus infection. American Journal of 
Veterinary Research, 1981, 42:1351-1354.
50. Östensson, K., Hageltorn, M., Aström, G. Differential cell counting in fraction-collected
milk from dairy cows. Acta Veterinaria Scandinavica, 1988, 29:493-500.
199,1 73:107-111.
1988, 18 (11):1681-1688.
252: 1321 - 1322.
1992, 14:39-40.

Immune surveillance by phagocytic cells 
275
51, Paape, M.J., Guidry, A.J. Effect of milking on leukocytes in the subcutaneous abdominal 
vein of the cow. Journal of Dairy Science, 1969, 52:998-1002.
52. Paape, M.J., Guidry, A. J., Jain, N.C., Miller, R.H. Leukocytic defense mechanisms in the 
udder. Flemish Veterinary Journal, 1991, Supplement 1 :95- 109.
53. 
Paape, M.J., Guidry, A.J., Kirk, S.T., Bolt, D.J. Measurement of phagocytosis of 32P-
labeled Staphylococcus aureus by bovine leukocytes: Lysostaphin digestion and 
inhibitory effect of cream. American Journal of Veterinary Research, 1975, 36: 1737-
1743.
54. Paape, M.J., Hafs, H.D., Snyder, W.W. Variation of estimated numbers of milk somatic 
cells stained with Wright’s stain or Pyronin Y-methyl green stain. Journal of Dairy 
Science, 1963, 46:1211-1216.
55. Paape, M.J., Lillius, E.M., Wiitanen, P.A., Kontio, M.P. Intramammary defense against 
infections induced by Escherichia coli in cows. American Journal of Veterinary 
Research, 1996, 57:477-482.
56. Paape, M.J., Weinland, B.T. Effect of abraded intramammary device on milk yield, 
tissue damage and cellular composition. Journal of Dairy Science, 1988, 71:250-256.
57. Paape M.J., Wergin, W.P. The leukocyte as a defense mechanism. Journal of the 
American Veterinary Association, 1977, 170: 1214-1223.
58. Paape, M.J., Wergin, W.P., Guidry, A.J., Pearson, R.E. Leukocytes - the second line of 
defense against invading mastitis pathogens. Journal of Dairy Science, 1979,62: 135-
153.
59. Park, Y. H., L. K. Fox, M. J. Hamilton, Davis, W. C. Suppression of proliferative 
responses of BoCD8+ T lymphocytes in the mammary gland of cows infected with 
Staphylococcus aureus mastitis. Veterinary Immunology Immunopathology, 1993, 
60. Raubertas, R.F., Shook, G.E. Relationship between lactation measures of somatic cell 
concentration and milk yield. Journal of Dairy Science, 1982, 65:419-425.
61. Salgar, S.K., Paape, M.J., Alston-Mills, B., Peters, R.R. Modulation of bovine neutrophil 
functions by monoclonal antibodies. American Journal of Veterinary Research, 1994, 55: 
62. Savill, J. Recognition and phagocytosis of cells undergoing apoptosis. British Medical 
Bulletin, 1997, 53:491-508.
63. Schalm, O.W., Carroll, E. J., Jain, N.C. In Bovine Mastitis, Lea and Febiger, 
Philadelphia, 1971, pages 103-106.
64. Schwartzman, R.A., Cidlowsky, J.A. Apoptosis: the biochemistry and molecular biology 
of programmed cell death. Endocrinology Review, 1993, 14:133-151. 
65. Semnani, M.J., Kabbur, M.B., Jain, N.C. Activation of bovine neutrophil functions by 
interferon-gamma, tumor necrosis factor alpha, and interleukin - 1 alpha. Comparative 
Haematology International, 1993, 3:81-88.
66. Shafer-Weaver, K.A., C.M. Corl, Sordillo, L.M. Shifts in bovine CD4+ subpopulations 
increase T-helper-2 compared with T-helper-1 effector cells during the postpartum 
period. Journal of Dairy Science, 1999, 82: 1696-706
67. Shafer-Weaver, K.A., Sordillo L.M. Bovine CD8+ suppressor lymphocytes alter immune 
responsiveness during the postpartum period. Veterinary Immunology 
Immunopathology, 1997, 56:53-64.
68. Shafer-Weaver, K. A., G. M. Pighetti, Sordillo, L. M. Diminished mammary gland 
lymphocyte functions parallel shifts in trafficking patterns during the postpartum period. 
Proceedings Society of Experimental Biology and Medicine, 1996, 212:271-280. 
36:137-151.
227-233.

276
Paape et al 
69. Sheldrake, R.F., Hoare, R.J.T., McGregor, G.D. Lactation stage, parity, and infection 
affecting somatic cells, electrical conductivity, and serum albumin in milk. Journal of 
Dairy Science, 1983, 66:542-547. 
70. Smith, K.L., Harrison, J.H., Hancock, D.D., Todhunter, D.A., Conrad, H.R. Effect of 
vitamin E and selenium supplementation on incidence of clinical mastitis and duration of 
clinical symptoms. Journal of Dairy Science, 1984, 67: 1293-1300.
71. Smits, E., Burvenich, C., Guidry, A.J., Heyneman, R., Massart-Leen, A. Diapedesis 
across mammary epithelium reduces phagocytic and oxidative burst of bovine 
neutrophils. Journal of Immunology and Immunopathology, 1999, In press. 
72. Sordillo, L.M., Nickerson, S.C. Quantification and immunoglobulin classification of 
plasma cells in nonlactating bovine mammary tissue. Journal of Dairy Science, 1988,
73. Sordillo, L. M., M. J. Redmond, M. Campos, L. Warren, and L. A. Babiuk. 1991. 
Cytokine activity in bovine mammary gland secretions during the periparturient period. 
Canadian Journal of Veterinary Research, 55:298-301.
74. Swett, W.W., Matthews, C.A., Miller, F.W., Graves, R.R. Nature’s compensation for the 
lost quarter of a cow’s udder. Journal of Dairy Science, 1938, 21:7-15.
75. Takeda, Y., Watanabe, H., Yonehara, S., Yamashita, T., Saito, S., Sendo, F. Rapid 
acceleration of neutrophil apoptosis by tumor necrosis factor-A. International 
Immunology, 1993, 5:691-694.
76. Taubb, D.D., Pooenheim, J.J. Review of the chemokine meeting: Third International 
symposium of Chemotactic Cytokines. Cytokine, 1993: 175-179
77. Taylor, B.C., Dellinger, J.D., Cullor, J.S., Stott, J.L. Bovine milk lymphocytes display 
the phenotype of memory T cells and are predominantly CD8+. Cell Immunology, 1994, 
78. TTrinchieri, G. Biology of natural killer cells. Advances in Immunology, 1989,47: 187-
376.
79. Van Oostveldt, K., Dosogne, H., Burvenich, C., Paape, M.J., Brochez, V., Van den 
Eeckhout, E. Flow cytometric procedure to detect apoptosis of bovine 
polymorphonuclear leukocytes in whole blood. Veterinary Immunology 
Immunopathology, 1999, In press. 
80. Van Oostveldt, K., Burvenich, C., Paape, M.J. Effect of LPS on apoptosis of bovine 
neutrophils. European Journal of Physiology, 1999, In press. 
81. Van Oostveldt, K., Burvenich, C., Paape, M.J., Meyer, E. The effect of diapedesis on the 
apoptotic response of isolated bovine neutrophils. Cell Biology International, 1999, In 
press.
82. Wang, Y. Personal communication, 1999. 
83. Wang, Y., Paape, M.J., Detection and identification of soluble CD14 in bovine milk. 
Molecular Biology of the Cell, 1997, Supplement 1:85a. 
84. Wang, Y., Paape, M.J., Leino, L., Capuco, A.V., Narva, H. Functional and phenotypic 
characterization of monoclonal antibodies to bovine L-selectin. American Journal of 
Veterinary Research, 1997, 58:1392-1401.
85. Wang, Y., Paape, M.J., Segal, D.M., Rainard, P., Poutrel, B., Nakamura, Y. Production 
of bispecific antibodies to bovine polymorphonuclear neutrophils and to Staphylococcus
aureus capsular polysaccharide type 5. Journal of Animal Science, 1998, Supplement 
1:37.
86. Watson, R.W., Redmond, H.P., Wang, J.H., Condron, C., Bouchier-Hayes, D. 
Neutrophils undergo apoptosis following ingestion of Escherichia coli. Journal of 
Immunology, 1996, 156:3986-3992.
71 :84-91.
156:245-253.

Immune surveillance by phagocytic cells 
87. Whyte, M.K.B., Meagher, L.C., MacDermot, J., Haslett, C. Impairment of function in 
aging neutrophils is associated with apoptosis. Journal of Immunology, 1993, 150:5 124-
5134.
88. Wilde, C.J., Calvert, D.T., Daily, A., Peaker, M. The effect of goat milk fractions on 
synthesis of milk constituents by rabbit mammary explants and on milk yield in vivo: 
Evidence for autocrine control of milk secretion. Biochemistry Journal, 1987, 242:285-
288.
89. Woolford, M.W. The relationship between mastitis and milk yield. Kieler 
Milchwirtschaftliche Forschungsberichte, 1985, 37:224-232.
90. Woolford, M.W., Williamson, J.H., Copeman, P. J.A., Napper A.R., Phillips, D.S.M., 
Uljee, E. An identical twin study of milk production losses due to subclinical mastitis. 
Proceedings Ruakura Farmers Conference, 1983, Ruakura, New Zealand, 115-119. 
91. Worku, M., Paape, M.J., Filep, R., Miller, R.H. Effect of in vitro and in vivo migration 
of bovine neutrophils on binding and expression of Fc receptors for IgG2 and IgM. 
American Journal of Veterinary Research, 1994, 55:221-226.
92. Worku, M, Paape, M.J., Marquardt, W.W. Modulation of Fc receptors for IgG on bovine 
polymorphonuclear neutrophils by interferon-gamma through de novo RNA transcription 
and protein synthesis. American Journal of Veterinary Research, 1994, 55:234-238.
93. Wright, S.D., Ramos, R.A., Tobias, P.S., Ulevitch, R.J., Mathison, J.C. CD14, a receptor 
for complexes of lipopolysaccharide (LPS) and LPS binding protein. Science, 1990,249: 
94. Yang, T. J., Ayoub, I.A., Rewinski, M. J. Lactation stage-dependent changes of 
lymphocyte subpopulations in mammary secretions: inversion of CD4+/CD8+ T cell 
ratios at parturition. American Journal of Reproductive Immunology, 1997, 37:378-383.
95. Yang, T.J., Mather, J.F., Rabinovsky, E.D. Changes in subpopulations of lymphocytes in 
peripheral blood, and supramammary and prescapular lymph nodes of cows with mastitis 
and normal cows. Veterinary Immunology Immunopathology, 1988, 18:279-85.
96. Zwahlen, R.D., Roth, D.R. Chemotactic competence of neutrophils from neonatal calves: 
functional comparison with neutrophils from adult cattle. Inflammation, 1990, 14:109- 
115.
277
1431-1436.

32.
Mammary Gland Immunology And Neonate Protection In 
Pigs
Homing of lymphocytes into the MG
Salmon H. 
Laboratoire Lymphocytes et Immunité des Muqueuses, INRA, 3 7380 Nouzilly 
Key words:
mammary gland, lymphocyte, homing, plasma cells, hormone, secretory IgA,
lactogenic immunity, entero-mammary link
Since placenta of pregnant sows are impermeable to immunoglobulin passage,
the neonates are born agammaglobulinemic ; although immunocompetent, they
are unable to develop rapidly an immune response which will protect their
systemic and mucosal compartments ; thus their survival depend upon the
passive acquisition ofmaternal immunity including at least 3 components: i) a
systemic humoral immunity, transmitted through colostrum conveying mainly
by IgG; these IgG are transferred from maternal serum via Fcg receptors on the
epithelial cells of mammary gland (MG). ii) a local humoral immunity,
especially secretory IgA (IgAs), transmitted mainly by milk (lactogenic
immunity) until weaning. IgAs are secreted by MG recruited plasma cells and
are excreted in milk via secretory component of epithelial cells : these IgA
exhibit a specificity for the antigens present in the maternal digestive tract, the
so-called “entero-mammary link”; this link is due to the migration of
lymphocytes from the gut to the mammary gland ; they are recruited from the
blood via the interaction of their homing receptor (α4β7) with the 
developmentally regulated mucosal vascular addresin MadCAM-1. In the MG,
MadCAM-1 increased in pregnancy (probably under oestrogenic stimulation)
but regressed in lactation ; its density is closely related to the T cell numbers in
MG; in contrast the increase in plasma cell numbers is not related to
MadCAM-1 density. Thus IgA precursor cells (α4β7 B cells) seem to be 
recruited by a milk B cell chemoattractant. On the other hand, presence of T
and B lymphocytes in MG (some of them originating from the systemic
compartment), sustains the attempts ofMG immunization and the results
sustain the view of a true local immune response. iii) possibly but not formally
proved, a cellular immunity transmitted via maternal immunocompetent cells
present in mammary secretions; the exported lymphocytes may represent a
Abstract:
279

280
Salmon
selected population of lymphocytes after their passage through the MG 
epithelium.
1. 
INTRODUCTION 
Pigs (and ruminants too) are artiodactyls that have a epitheliochorial 
placenta impermeable to immunoglobulins (Ig), so the neonates are born 
hypo-or agammaglobulinemic ; although immunocompetent at birth, due to 
the lack of previous antigenic sensitization during embryonic life, neonates 
are unable to develop rapidly an immune response which will protect their 
systemic and mucosal compartments so that their survival depend upon the 
passive acquisition of maternal immunity, and this consists of various 
components: 1) a systemic humoral immunity, in the form of IgG, 
transmitted through colostrum within the first 24-36 hours after birth. The 
maternal serum antibodies are transferred via colostrum which is particularly 
rich in IgG due to a specific concentrative mechanism in the mammary 
tissue. 2) a local humoral immunity, especially in the form of secretory IgA 
(IgAs), transmitted mainly by milk (lactogenic immunity) until weaning. The 
antibodies present in mammary secretions exhibit a specificity for the 
antigens and microorganisms present in the maternal digestive tract. After 
ingestion, these immunoglobulins are not absorbed via the intestinal mucosa 
of the young, but instead they remain in situ where they provide a local 
protection against endemic microorganisms and dietary antigens. 3) lastly, a 
cellular immunity transmitted via maternal immunocompetent cells present 
in mammary secretions. 
2. 
ORIGIN OF IMMUNOGLOBULINS IN 
COLOSTRUM AND MILK 
The maternal antibodies are transferred from blood to colostrum through 
the mediation of Fcγ receptors on the surface of epithelial cells ; hence,
colostrum is particularly rich in IgG due to a specific concentrative 
mechanism in the mammary tissue. In addition, 40% of colostral IgA and 
85% of IgM are also derived from serum3.
The existence of local antibody synthesis superimposed to transudation is 
supported by immunohistochemical location of IgA and IgG plasma cells in 
MG5the majority of milk antibodies (70% of IgG and greater than 90% of 
IgM and IgA) result from local synthesis in the MG3 by these plasma cells. 
In sow similarly to mice, very few plasma cells were detected in the MG 

Mammary gland immunology and neonate protection in pigs 
281
before parturition but their numbers increase very rapidly throughout 
lactation5This suggests that there may be hormonal control13. Mammotropic 
hormones also seem to influence the binding of antibodies to mammary 
epithelial cells, as well as their transepithelial transport2.
3.
ORIGIN OF MAMMARY GLAND IGA PLASMA 
CELLS : THE LACTOGENIC IMMUNITY 
In many mammals, including humans, the ingestion of maternal milk 
confers the offspring with a certain degree of immunity against infection of 
the digestive tract and limits the number of infections in the upper 
respiratory system. 
Although numerous nonspecific factors have been 
identified in milk, this protection seems to be due to secretory antibodies 
present in mammary secretions2,20. Detection of IgA specific for Escherichia 
coli 083 in the milk of women who were orally immunized against this 
bacteria and the presence of anti-pneumococcus antibodies in the milk of 
rabbits exposed to this intestinal antigen, even in the absence of systemic 
humoral response, suggests the existence of a relationship between 
lactogenic immunity and intestinal local immunity. In sows, the existence of 
this gut-mammary link is sustained by the observations of the presence of 
specific IgA antibodies in milk of individuals, whose gut were stimulated by 
the corresponding antigens or entero-pathogenic virus of transmissible 
gastro-enteritis14,15,The lack of evidence for dissemination of the intestinal 
antigen to the mammary gland and the demonstration of a lymphoblast 
migration in the organism suggests that during pregnancy and lactation, cells 
of gut-associated lymphoid tissues are capable of migrating, via the 
mesenteric lymph node (MLN), the thoracic duct and the blood, to mammary 
tissues. This has been demonstrated in mouse; shortly before parturition and 
during lactation, the IgA lymphoblasts from the MLN, compared to those 
from peripheral lymph nodes, preferentially migrate to the MG. 
4.
DUAL ORIGIN OF RECRUITED
IMMUNOCYTES INTO THE MG 
The number of MG lymphocytes (T, B and null) increases from day 80 of 
pregnancy, in parallel to the increase of prolactin receptor density onto the 
epithelial cells16. When lymphocytes emigrating from mesenteric and 
inguinal lymph nodes are labelled distinctly, they were found 24 hours later 
in MG at the same frequency12: this study carried out on the whole 

282 
Salmon 
lymphocyte populations indicated that a proportion of the MG lymphocytes 
arose from both the systemic and the mucosal lymphocyte pools, this later 
including the IgA lymphoblast entero-mammary cycle. 
The different migration pathways of lymphocytes in the organism, 
reflected by the compartmentalisation of the immune system into systemic 
and mucosal, may be determined by the expression of particular structures 
on the surface of endothelial cells (Vascular addressin) and complementary 
structures on the membranes of lymphocytes (Homing receptor21). The 
endothelia of the venules within the lamina propria of the gut and in the 
lactating MG22 express a mucosal addressin cell adhesion molecule, 
MadCAM-1. This molecule interacts with the α4β7 integrin present onto gut 
derived lymphocytes11.
Our data in mouse23, indicate the presence of MadCAM- 1 on endothelial 
cells of MG with a maximal expression at the end of pregnancy (probably 
under estrogenic stimulation) but regression in lactation ; its density is 
closely related to the α4β7 T cell numbers in MG; in contrast the increase in 
plasma cell numbers is not related to MadCAM-1 density, since plasma cell 
increased when MadCAM- 1 decreased. Thus IgA precursor cells (a4b7, IgA 
B cells) need a milk B cell chemoattractant6,7, as compared to T cells, to be 
recruited during the lactation.. We have sought for a similar factor in the 
sow1in the lactoserum, but not in the blood serum sampled at the same time, 
we have found a peptide with a chemotactic activity1 towards B lymphocytes 
from the mesenteric but not inguinal lymph-node ; in addition, a peptide 
derived from bovine β-casein was found similarly chemoattractant for swine
B lymphoblast as the sow lactoserum itself8.
All cell types involved in the immune response were present in the MG at 
the different stages of gestation and lactation and nearer the alveolar 
epithelium as gestation proceeded: T lymphocytes, including CD4 and CD8, 
B lymphocytes and class II bearing cells (epithelial cells and macrophages). 
T lymphocytes accumulated early in pregnancy, specifically T helper cells; 
the specific increase of IgA lymphocytes occurring after this phase could 
suggest a role for these T cells in the induction of IgA response. The local 
accumulation of immune cells and the increase in CD8 cells near the 
epithelium suggests a role in local immune defence5,13. Only few functions 
of the MG lymphocytes have been explored in vitro; mammary lymphocytes 
had comparable maximum levels of PHA and ConA stimulation as blood 
lymphocytes, suggesting the presence of virgin lymphocyte 13 .

Mammary gland immunology and neonate protection in pigs 
283
5.
INTRA-MAMMARY IMMUNISATION 
The above observations raise the possibility of a genuine local immune 
response ; thus to ascertain this hypothesis, a search was made about intra-
mammary immunisation, inasmuch as the MG could be a better route than 
the gut, needing less antigen because of the absence of degradation; in 
addition, this is reminiscent of the nature experiment where the piglets may 
inoculate antigen in the MG during suckling. 
In sow, ferritin used alone led to an IgM response whilst in presence of 
complete Freund's adjuvant, which provokes a local granuloma formation 
and targets the antigen to the secretory site, there was a predominant IgA 
response14. The intra-mammary inoculation of live attenuated gastro-enteritis
virus in pregnant sow induced persisting high levels of IgG neutralizing 
antibodies in milk whereas in lactation IgA antibodies were elicited10, which 
fit with the data about the dual origin of lymphocytes in MG. 
6.
TRANSFER OF CELLULAR IMMUNITY BY 
MILK CELLS TO NEONATE 
Depending, upon, the animal species and animals within species, milk 
contains 2x10 to 10 cell/ml. There are epithelial cells (3 1% of total cells in 
sow's milk) and non-nucleated cell fragments, and granulocytes, mainly 
represented by neutrophils (47%) and a few eosinophils (1%), lymphocytes 
(12%) and macrophages (9%)17.The mean ratio of CD4+:CD8+ T 
lymphocytes in the peripheral blood and mammary gland secretions was 
1.53 and 0.85 respectively. It can be speculated that the high ratio of CD8+ 
cells in secretion is most likely due to overflow of the cells which are mainly 
located intra-epithelialy, into milk. Activated CD8+ T lymphocytes may play 
an important role in the regulation and expression of the local immune 
response to pathogens9.
Therefore, milk contains immune components to permit the passive 
transfer of specific cellular immunity. A number of research studies carried 
out in humans and rodents demonstrated that there was transmission from 
mother to offspring, through mammary secretions, of such reactions as cell-
mediated hypersensitivity and skin transplant rejection. However, the 
efficiency of the transfer depends upon the ability of the cells to survive in 
the digestive tract of the young. That is, unless the passive acquisition by the 
young of the immunity mediated by maternal cells results from the passage 
of soluble factors produced by lymphocytes, such as transfer factor, rather 
than from the actual transfer of lymphocytes themselves. In new-born pigs, 
intra-epithelial lymphocytes are devoid of NK activity against virally 

284
Salmon
infected cells and transfer from adult pigs of blood mononuclear cells 
increased the resistance to gastro-enteritis virus4.
7. 
CONCLUSIONS 
Study of lactogenic immunity and of the protection of the new-born
demonstrates the compartmentalisation of the immune system into systemic 
and local systems. There is no problem to enhance the systemic protection of 
the neonate by a convenient systemic immunisation of the mother ; but the 
biological importance of the transmission of secretory antibodies from 
mother to offspring, that ensures the protection of the mucosa which is the 
first site to experience the antigenic challenge, requires a better 
understanding of the physiology of IgA humoral immune response. The later 
can take place at various levels: one step would be to investigate further the 
mechanisms that induce the expression of the IgA isotype by B cell 
precursors, for instance those localized in Peyer's patches, without 
overlooking the part played by the auxiliary T cells, antigen-presenting cells 
and the nature of the antigen itself. The regulation of the circulation 
pathways of the IgA lymphoblasts still are unclear, particularly if we take 
into account the variation due to the hormonal status. Because research has 
demonstrated existence of organ specific markers in vascular endothelia that 
determines the homing of immunocompetent cells, it seems important to 
verify that these findings can be extended to all mammals. Localized at the 
mucosal level, IgA lymphoblasts differentiate into plasma cells that locally 
produce specific secretory antibodies. There are few data available of the 
possible regulation in situ of this local humoral response by lymphokines 
and/or by tissue factors released by adjacent cells. 
Lastly, with a better insight into what determines the expression of 
membrane antigens at the level of the endothelial cell, sites that are 
specifically recognized by homing receptors present on the surface of 
lymphocytes, it may be possible to envision the control of lymphocyte 
circulation in the organism. Understanding this control process may, for 
example, allow us to induce specific migration of immunocompetent cells to 
the mammary gland to start or enhance the specific humoral immune 
response and to improve the immune quality of the milk produced by the 
mammary gland. 

Mammary gland immunology and neonate protection in pigs 
8. 
REFERENCES 
285
1.
2.
3.
4.
Abda R, Chevaleyre C, Salmon H: Effect of cryopreservation on chemotaxis of 
lymphocytes. Cryobiology. 36: 184-193, 1998 
Berthon P, Salmon H, Martinet J, Houdebine LM: Immunological factors in mammary 
secretions. Biologie de la lactation 389-414; 102 
Bourne FJ, Curtis J: The transfer of immunoglobins IgG, IgA and IgM from serum to 
colostrum and milk in the sow. Immunology 24:157-162, 1973 
Cepica A, Derbyshire JB. The effect of adoptive transfer of mononuclear leukocytes 
from an adult donor on spontaneous cell-mediated cytotoxicity and resistance to 
transmissible gastroenteritis in neonatal piglets. Can. J.Comp.Med . 48:360-364, 1984 
Chabaudie N, Le Jan C, Olivier M, Salmon H: Lymphocyte subsets in the mammary 
gland of sows. Res.Vet.Sci. 55:351-355, 1993 
Czinn SJ, Lamm ME: Selective chemotaxis of subsets of B lymphocytes from gut-
associated lymphoid tissue and its implications for the recruitment of mucosal plasma 
cells. J.Immunol. 136:3607-3611, 1986 
Czinn SJ, Robinson J, Lamm ME: Chemotaxis as a mechanism for recruitment of 
mucosal plasma cell precursors. Adv.Exp.Med.Biol. 21 6A:305-3 11, 1987 
Fronteau D, Tanneau, G, Henry G, Chevaleyrec C, Leonil J, Salmon, H. Activités 
chimiotactique de lait d’artiodactyle sur les lymphocytes porcins. 30, 363-367. 1998. 
Paris, Institut Technique du porc. Joumées Rech. Porcine en France. 98. 
Park YH, Fox LK, Hamilton MJ, Davis WC: Bovine mononuclear leukocyte 
subpopulations in peripheral blood and mammary gland secretions during lactation. 
J.Dairy.Sci. 75:998- 1006, 1992 
10. Saif, LJ., Bohl, EH. Passive, immunity to transmissible gastrænteritis virus: 
intramammary viral inoculation of sows. Annals N. Y Acad. Sc., 409, 708-722, 1983.
11. Salmi M, Adams D, Jalkanen S: Cell adhesion and migration. IV. Lymphocyte 
trafficking in the intestine and liver. Am.J.Physiol. 274:G1-G6, 1998. 
12. Salmon H: Surface markers of swine lymphocytes: application to the study of local 
immune system in mammary gland and transplanted gut., Swine in biomedical research. 
Edited by Tumbleson ME. New York, Plenum, 1986, pp 1855-1864.
13. Salmon H: The intestinal and mammary immune system in pigs. 
Vet.Immunol.Immunopathol. 17:367-388, 1987. 
14. Salmon H: Humoral lactogenic immunity in the sow: basis and practice. Pig News and 
Information 10:151-157, 1989. 
15. Salmon H: (Lactogenic immunity and vaccinal protection in swine). Vet.Res. 26:232-
237, 1995. 
16. Salmon H, Delouis C: (Kinetics of lymphocyte sub-populations and plasma cells in the 
mammary gland of primiparous sows in relation to gestation and lactation). 
Ann.Rech.Vet. 13:41-49, 1982. 
17. Schollenberger A, Degorski A, Frymus T: Cells of sow mammary secretions. I. 
Morphology and differential counts during lactation. Zentralblatt. 33:31-38, 1986. 
18. Schollenberger A, Frymus T, Degorski A: Cells of sow mammary secretions. II 
Characterization of lymphocyte populations. Zentralblatt. 33:39-46, 1986. 
19. Schollenberger A, Frymus T, Degorski A: Cells of sow mammary secretions. III Some 
properties of phagocytic cells. Zentralblatt. 33:353-359, 1986. 
20. Silim A, Rekik MR, Roy RS, Salmon H, Pastoret PP: Immunité chez le foetus et le 
nouveau-né, Immunologie Animale. Edited by Pastoret PP, Govaerts A, Bazin H. Paris, 
Flammarion, 1990, pp 197-204
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.

286
Salmon
21. Springer TA: Traffic signals for lymphocyte recirculation and leukocyte emigration: the 
multistep paradigm. Cell 76:301-314, 1994. 
22. Streeter PR, Berg EL, Rouse BT, Bargatze RF, Butcher EC: A tissue-specific endothelial 
cell molecule involved in lymphocyte homing. Nature 331 :41-46, 1988. 
23. Tanneau G.M Hibrand-Saint Oyant L Chevaleyre C.C Salmon. Differential recruitment 
of T and IgA B lymphocytes in the developing Mammary Gland in relation to Homing 
Receptors and Vascular addressins, J. Histochem. Cytochem. 1999 (in press). 

33.
Relationship Between Teat Tissue Immune Defences 
and Intramammary Infections 
Alfonso Zecconi*, Jörn Hamanno, Valerio Bronzo*, Paolo Moroni*, Giulia 
Giovannini* & Renata Piccinini* 
* Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Institute for Infectious Diseases, Milan Italy, 
° Tierärztliche 
Hochschule Hannover, Zentrum für Lebensmittelwissenschaften, Hannover Germany 
Key words: 
Abstract:
Teat , teat tissues, immunity, milking machine, intramammary infections 
The teat is the main entrance for pathogens into the mammary gland. It also 
acts as a sensory, motor and primary defence organ. This latter function is 
important in preventing intramammary infections while efficiency in 
preventing new infections is determined by teat tissue integrity. Machine 
milking may evoke mechanical and circulatory impairment in teat tissues. 
These local metabolic disorders may decrease the efficiency of the local 
immune defence mechanisms. Teat tissue changes can be estimated by 
measuring teat thickness before and after milking. Experimental and field 
studies showed a high correlation between changes in thickness and infection 
risk. Teats with >5% change in thickness have significantly increased teat duct 
colonisation rates and intramammary infection rates. The link between 
changes in teat thickness and infections should be found in changes in local 
immune defences and measurable changes in cytological and biochemical 
immune factors are expected. Indeed, the application of experimental milking 
conditions (i.e. no pulsation milking and positive pressure milking) showed to 
have a significant influence on some non specific immune factors in teat 
secretion. Positive pressure milking increases PMNs content and decreases 
macrophages content of teat secretion . Some enzymes such as NAGase and 
lysozyme were decreased by positive pressure milking, the concentration of 
the same enzymes were higher after no pulsation milking. A better knowledge 
on the interaction between the teat apex immune defense mechanisms and the 
machine milking process is necessary to reduce the new infection rate of the 
bovine mammary gland. 
287

288
Zecconi et al 
1. 
INTRODUCTION 
The teat is the main entrance for pathogens into the mammary gland and 
works as the first line of defence against invading pathogens. Under 
physiological conditions, the teat canal acts as an efficient valve guarding 
the entrance of the teat cistern. The average length of the teat canal is about 
10 mm and ranges from 3 to 18 mm. The teat canal diameter varies markedly 
depending on the measured location (distal, middle, and proximal). The data 
for the teat diameter cover a range of 0,35 to 5,0 mm with an average value 
of around 2 mm7.
There are two major components of the anatomical defences: the 
sphincter muscle and the teat keratin. The sphincter muscle is a smooth 
muscle distributed in spiral form starting from the base of the teat and ending 
around the teat canal. Its function is to keep the teat canal closed, thus 
reducing the risk of invasion by pathogens8. Pathogens entering the teat 
canal encounter a mesh-like matrix of keratin. Keratin seals the teat canal 
between milkings and during dry period. Keratin adsorbs bacteria in mesh-
like network, then sheds the adsorbed bacteria during next milking. Keratin 
also has antibacterial activity3.
Within teat tissues, there are also cellular and humoral defences. Cellular 
defences in udder tissue and secretion include: polymorphonuclear 
leukocytes (PMN), monocytes, macrophages, lymphocytes, plasma cells, 
and mast-cells. The concentration of these cells, particularly of plasma cells 
increases from deep parenchyma to Furstenber’s rosettes11. The humoral 
defences 
of the 
mammary 
gland 
include: 
lactoferrin, 
lysozyme, 
immunoglobulins, NAG-ase and basic protein3,12.
2.
FACTORS AFFECTING TEAT TISSUES STATUS 
The most important aspect in reducing the contamination risk especially 
concerning contagious pathogens (e.g. Staph. aureus) consists in the 
maintenance of a healthy skin condition of the teat. As long as the skin is 
healthy most pathogens have only a limited chance to survive on the teat 
skin9,17. This can only be achieved as long as the integrity and functionality 
of stratum corneum is ensured. Indeed, several studies showed that after 
artificial teat chapping the colonisation rate by Staph.aureus
was
significantly increased5. Colonisation of the teat skin predisposes the cow to 
new intramammary infection13

Teat immune defences and intramammary infections 
289
2.1 
Teat canal closure 
The closure of the teat canal is an active process related to the function of 
the smooth muscle in the teat wall. The impulses from the autonomic 
sympathetic nervous system keep these muscles under a constant tension14.
Milk accumulation during the intermilking period increases the tone, 
whereas milk withdrawal decreases the sympathetic tone. Consequently, 
diameter and penetrability of the teat canal have the highest values just after 
milking. Therefore, as a physiological phenomenon, the ease of bacterial 
penetration into the teat canal is increased for approximately 2 hours after 
milking compared with later stages of the intermilking interval16. Improper 
machine milking function contribute to circulatory impairment which 
counteracts to maintain the closure of the teat canal between milkings to 
prevent leakage, and keep the keratin occluding the canal lumen compressed 
as a barrier in preventing the penetration of bacteria to the teat cistern. 
2.2 
Teat canal keratin lining 
The teat canal is lined by a stratified squamous epithelium which shows 
in comparison with the general bovine skin much greater widths of the 
stratum granulosum and stratum corneum. The stratum corneum is 
equivalent to the keratin layer. Physical attributes of the keratin and its 
chemical, bacteriostatic or bactericidal properties limit or prevent the 
penetration of pathogens into the teat cistern. Teat canal keratin represents a 
primary defence mechanism as a physical barrier by occlusion, adsorption of 
bacteria to the keratin surface, elimination of bacteria by desquamation of 
corrupted cells during milking. Its components (lipids, basic proteins) have 
also bactericidal effects. The fundamental importance of the teat canal 
keratin lining as infection barrier is well documented since more than 30 
years10. However, different types of mastitis pathogens can growth and 
survive on the keratin for considerable time periods4.
2.3 
Blood and lymph circulation 
The teat blood supply is mainly provided by the teat artery (arteria
papillae) which runs from the base to the tip of the teat near the inner surface
of the wall. Teat veins are characterised by a very thick muscular wall. They
drain into the Furstenberg’s venous ring, a circle of veins at the teat base.
Based on their anatomic structure the veins are well situated to maintain
blood flow during the machine milking process when the pressures are
applied to the teat differences. In contrast to the secretory tissue, the teat skin
and teat wall blood circulation show no lactation dependent variation15. The

290
Zecconi et al 
lymphatic system of the teat consists of a superficial and deeper part. The 
abundance of lymph vessels in the teat tissue has been characterised as a 
“lymphatic corpus cavemosus” which becomes turgescent during sucking or 
milking1.
Under emotional stress induced by fright and pain or by local 
impairment, blood flow intensity can be decreased and this results in a lower 
uptake of oxygen from the circulation and might be able to increase the 
infection risk. In addition to these processes, teat stimulation may decrease 
the sympathetic tone of the mammary gland so that blood supply is 
increased. However, the rate and amplitude of the teat and teat sphincter 
muscle contractions, which are partly responsible for blood movement in the 
tissue, are decreased. The integrity of the circulation system providing a 
sufficient blood supply is the basis to enable optimum functioning of all 
mechanisms involved in the defence against pathogens. Physiological and 
pathological changes in the circulatory system associated with milking may 
decrease the efficacy of the defence systems at least for some time after 
milking.
3.
TEAT STATUS AND INFECTION RISK 
The major factor affecting teat status is the milking machine. Milking 
machine influence status by: a.: moving pathogens into the teat cistern 
during milking; b.: increasing external teat contamination; and c.:decreasing 
teat tissue defences potential. 
A significant higher proportion of bacteriological positive findings has 
been observed for teat duct swabbing samples compared with foremilk 
samples. Therefore, teat duct colonization can be assumed to be a source of 
new intramammary infections (IMI), even though spontaneous elimination 
of pathogens can often take place19. The risk of new IMI increases as much 
as teat tissues immune defences are impaired. Machine milking may evoke 
mechanical and circulatory impairment of teat tissue. Frequently this 
impairment is subclinical and there is no way to restore the physiological 
conditions. Using teat thickness measurement before and after milking6 it is 
possible to evaluate teat tissue status due to the action of machine milking. 
Several field studies based on this method19,20 have shown: 
a. a significant association between teat thickness changes and IMI; 
b. the IMI risk increases in association with both an increase and a 
decrease of teat thickness; 
c. the IMI risk is higher when thickness increases than when a decrease 
of thickness is observed; 

Teat immune defences and intramammary infections 
291
d. within 
different 
bacteria 
species, 
only 
coagulase 
negative 
staphylococci IMI showed to be significantly associated with teat 
thickness changes. 
4.
TEAT STATUS AND IMMUNE DEFENCES 
Even if the association between teat thickness changes, and more in 
general, between machine milking action and IMI risk can be demonstrated, 
information on the immune factors affected by the action of milking 
machine, are relatively few. To address this issue, two different “extreme” 
milking systems (positive pressure and no pulsation) were applied on the 
same group of cows. Different immune parameters were assessed on the 
milk and on the teat secretion2. Figures 1 and 2 summarise the results for 
some of them. 
Fig. 1 Cellular ratio and enzyme concentration in teat secretion measured in 32 quarters of 8 
primiparous cows milked with a positive pressure milking system for 8 days. Conventional 
milking system was applied for the same period of time before and after the application of 
positive pressure milking system. 
The results showed that positive pressure milking system increased PMN 
ratios and decreased macrophage ratios during and after the application of 
positive pressure milking system. This latter one induced a decrease of 
lysozyme concentration in teat secretion, while milking system did not 
significantly influence NAGase concentration. 

292
Zecconi et al 
Fig. 2 Cellular ratio and enzyme concentration in teat secretion measured in 32 quarters of 8
primiparous cows milked with a no-pulsation milking system for 8 days. Conventional
milking system was applied for the same period of time before and after the application of
no pulsation milking system.
The results showed that PMN ratios were not influenced by no pulsation 
milking system, while a decrease of macrophage ratio was observed. 
Lysozyme and NAGase concentration showed a slight increase during and 
after the application of no pulsation milking system. 
The results of these experiments confirmed that machine milking could 
affect teat immune factors. The pattern of factor changes was different 
depending on the type of milking system applied. 
5. 
CONCLUSIONS 
The efficiency of bovine defences is one of the most important factors in 
the epidemiology of intramammary infections. Within the bovine immune 
defences, teat plays a pivotal role being the main entrance for bacteria to the 
udder. The maintenance of a physiological blood supply and the avoidance 
of mechanical impairment resulting from unsuitable milking procedures and 
malfunctioning milking machines are fundamental to ensure teat tissue 
integrity.
More knowledge on the influences of milking machine on teat immune 
defences is needed to avoid the impairment of these latter ones and to ensure 
that milking machine will milk the cow as much physiologically as possible. 

Teat immune defences and intramammary infections 
6. 
REFERENCES 
293
1.
2.
Blum, J.W., D. Schams And R. Bruckmaier (1989): Catecholamines, oxytocin and milk 
removal in dairy cows. J. Dairy Res. 56, 167 -177
Bronzo, V., Hamann, J.& Zecconi, A. 1995. Changes in anatomical, cytological and
biochemical parameters of the teat associated with the use of three different milking 
units. Proc. 3rd Int.Mastitis SeminarTel Aviv, 1, 110-113.
Craven, N. & Williams, M. R. 1985. Defences of the bovine mammary gland against 
infection and prospects for their enhancement. Veterinary Immunology & 
Immunopathology 10 7 1 - 127
4. 
Du Preez, J.H. (1985): Teat canal infections. Kiel. Milchwirtschaftl. Forschungs-
berichte, 267 - 273
5. 
Fox, L. K. and M. S. Cumming (1996): Relationship between thickness, chapping and 
Staphylococcus aureus colonization of the bovine teat tissue. J. Dairy Res. 63, 369-375
6. 
Hamann, J. 1985. Measurement of machine milking induced teat tissue reactions. 
Milchwissenschaft 40 16-18.
7. 
Hamann, J. 1987. Effect of machine milking on teat end condition - a literature review. 
IDF-Bulletin, No 215, 33-53
8. 
Hamann, J. and C. Burvenich 1994. Physiological status of the bovine teat. IDF-Bulletin
9. 
King, J. S. 1981. Streptococcus uberis: A review of its role as a causative organism of 
bovine mastitis. II. Control of infection. Br. Vet. J. 137, 160-165
10. Morse, G. E. and J. Platonov 1964. Basic studies of bovine mastitis: I. The role of the 
teat canal as a barrier to udder infections with Streptococcus agalactiae. J. Dairy Sci. 47, 
11. Nickerson, S. C. & Pankey, J. W. 1983. Cytologic obdervations of the bovine teat end. 
J. Vet. Res. 44 1433-1441.
12. Outerridge, P. M. & Lee, C. S. 1988 The defence mechanism of the mammary gland of 
domestic ruminants. Moving Frontiers in Veterinary Immunology. R. Pandey. Basel, 
Karger: 165-196.
13. Pankey, J. W., R. J. Eberhart, A. L. Cumming, R. D. Daggett, R. J: Farnsworth and C. K. 
Mcduff 1984. Uptake of postmilking teat antisepsis. J. Dairy Sci. 67, 1336 - 1353
14. Peeters, G., R. Coussens and G. Sierens 1949. Physiology of the nerves in the bovine 
mammary gland. Arch. Int. Pharmacodyn. Ther. 79: 75 - 82
15. Peeters, G., A. Houvenaghel, E. Roets, A.-M. Massart-Leen, R. Verbeke, G. Dhondt and 
F. Verschooten 1979. Electromagnetic blood flow recording and balance of nutrients in 
the udder of the lactating cow. J. Anim. Sci. 48: 1143 - 1153
16. SCHULTZE, W.D. and S.C. BRIGHT 1983. Changes in penetrability of bovine 
papillary duct to endotoxin after milking. Am. J. Vet. Res. 44: 2373 - 2375
17. Smith,A., H.G.J. Coetzee 1979. The survival of Staphylococcus aureus on teats and 
orifices of cows in the dry period. S. Afr. J. Dairy Technol. 11 79 - 81
18. Tagand, R. 1932. Anatomie des vaisseaux mammaires. Lait XII: 881 - 893
19. Zecconi, A.,Hamann, J.,Bronzo, V.& Ruffo, G. 1992. Machine-induced teat tissue 
reaction and infection risk in a dairy herd from contagious mastitis pathogens. J.Dairy 
Research 59 265-271.
20.
Zecconi, A., Bronzo, V.,Piccinini, R., Moroni, P.& Ruffo, G. 1996. Field study on the
relationship between teat thickness changes and intramammary infections 
3.
NO
297, 3-12
696-700

34.
Immunological Aspects of Pregnancy-Associated
Glycoproteins
Dosogne H., A.M. Massart-Leen and C.Burvenich 
University of Ghent, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Department of Physiology, Biochemistry 
and Biometrics, Merelbeke, Belgium 
Key words: 
Pregnancy associated glycoproteins 
Abstract:
The incidence of severe cases of acute E. coli mastitis in dairy cows is highest 
during early lactation. This phenomenon has been associated with a decreased 
function and decreased numbers of circulating polymorphonuclear neutrophil 
leukocytes (PMN). The cause of this impaired function and decreased number 
is poorly understood. Stress, hormonal and metabolic alterations around 
parturition and the onset of lactation may play a role in this phenomenon. 
Several molecules, such as cortisol and beta-hydroxybutyrate have been found 
to alter the oxidative burst activity of circulating PMN around parturition. 
Pregnancy-Associated Glycoprotein (bPAG) could also be involved. The 
theory of immunosuppression by bPAG was investigated because analogous 
glycoproteins produced by the placenta of other species exert local immuno-
suppression in order to maintain the histoincompatible feto-maternal unit. The 
production and subsequent release into the maternal circulation of bPAG is 
ensured by the binucleate cells from the trophoblast and starts already at 
implantation. However, peak levels are only reached 1 week before parturition. 
Due to the long half-life time of this molecule, high levels are found in plasma 
until 2 weeks after calving. The co-occurrence of the impairment of PMN 
oxidative burst activity in the early postpartum period and a peak in plasma 
bPAG concentrations might support the hypothesis of an immunosuppressive 
effect of PAG. Moreover, an inhibitory effect of bPAG on the proliferation of 
bovine bone marrow progenitor cells has been found recently in our 
laboratory. bPAG occurs in colostrum, but its effect on milk cells has not been 
clarified. It is concluded that interaction between the physiology of 
reproduction and lactation on the one side and immune function on the other 
side in dairy cattle requires further research. 
295

296
Dosogne et al 
1. 
INTRODUCTION 
The mammalian placenta represents the contact area between foetus and 
mother. Besides being a barrier, it plays a role in nutrient supply to and 
waste removal 
from the 
foetus. 
Moreover, 
it has an important 
endocrinological-immunological function. It can affect the maternal metabo- 
lism and plays a role in mammogenesis and lactogenesis. Certain 
glycoproteins are an important aspect of this endocrinological-immunologi-
cal function. These molecules are typical for gestation and indicate the 
development of a trophoblast. They are secreted into the maternal circulation 
soon after implantation. Presently, about 100 different of these glycoproteins 
are identified. In humans and horses, chorion gonadotrophins (hCG and 
eCG, respectively) are commonly used for early pregnancy detection. In 
cows, the bovine pregnancy-associated glycoprotein (PAG) is determined for 
these purposes. A luteotropic hormone (LH) activity is attributed to CG, but 
for PAG there is no clear function discovered until now. 
2. 
Physiology of placental glycoproteins 
2.1 
Chorion Gonadotrophin 
The CG is a glycoprotein that consists of an alpha and a beta subunit. It is 
produced during pregnancy in several species, but not in ruminants. Both 
human hCG and equine eCG (also called pregnant mare serum 
gonadotropin) have a clear luteinizing hormone (LH)-activity . When 
administered to other species, its effect is predominantly that of the follicle 
stimulating 
hormone 
(FSH). 
Whereas 
hCG 
is 
produced 
by 
the 
syncytiotrophoblast, eCG is produced by the endometrial cups. Human CG 
would also postpone luteal regression. Equine CG is responsible for 
maintenance of primary corpora lutea and for induction of secondary corpora 
lutea24. Equine CG, which has a high percentage of sialic acid, would realise 
an immunological isolation of the trophoblast by absorption of destructive 
factors produced by the maternal immune system. It would also play a role 
in the accumulation of leukocytes around the endometrial cups17.
2.2 
Placental lactogen 
Placental lactogen (PL) is a single-chain polypeptide that is produced by 
trophoblast cells in humans, sheep and cows. Human PL has a prolactin and 

Pregnancy-associated 
glycoproteins 
297
growth hormone activity, because it stimulates milk secretion on the one 
hand and plays a role in proliferation of the mammary gland and maternal 
intermediary metabolism on the other hand. In sheep, oPL would also have 
prolactin activity. In this species, a growth hormone activity has not been 
identified. Horses and pigs do not produce PL. 
2.3
Other pregnancy-associated glycoproteins in humans 
The 
pregnancy-specific 
B1 
glycoprotein 
is 
produced 
by 
the 
syncytiotrophoblast. It would exert an immunosuppressive effect with 
prevention of foetal rejection. Pregnancy-associated plasma protein A 
(PAPP-A) is also produced by the syncytiotrophoblast in early pregnancy21.
PAPP-A is a strong inhibitor of leukocyte elastase, a protease that can affect 
the chorionvilli of the trophoblast. Pregnancy-associated α 2-glycoprotein is
a high molecular weight (360 kDa) glycoprotein with immunosuppressive 
properties both in vitro and in vivo9.
2.4
Interferon-γ
Interferon-γ (IFN-() in ruminants is produced by the mononuclear cells of
trophoblast epithelium even before implantation. It inhibits the production of 
prostaglandins by the endometrium and prevents luteolysis in sheep and 
cows. IFN-γ has the typical features of interferons: antiviral activity,
modulation of the immune system and inhibition of cell proliferation6.
2.5 
Uterine milk proteins 
In sheep, uterine milk proteins (UTMP) are produced by uterine 
epithelium under the influence of progesterone. They probably have an 
immunoregulatory function because both in vitro and in vivo they suppress a 
number of immune responses, in particular the proliferation of lymphocytes. 
UTMP show an amino acid sequence homology with the family of serine 
proteinase inhibitors, but a functional activity as serine proteinase has not 
been demonstrated so far14. In the bovine, a progesterone-induced UTMP has 
also been demonstrated, but possible immunoregulatory effects have not 
been investigated13.

298
Dosogne et al 
2.6 
Bovine pregnancy-associated glycoproteins 
2.6.1 
Identification of pregnancy-associated glycoproteins 
In 1982, Butler and co-workers isolated the pregnancy-specific 
glycoprotein B from rabbit antisera after injection with extracts from bovine 
cotyledons. It appeared to be a new molecule. PSPB was a group of 
analogous proteins with a molecular weight varying between 47 and 90 kDa. 
Later, the pregnancy-associated glycoprotein was isolated from bovine fetal 
cotyledons1,28. From amino acid sequence analysis, it appeared to be the 
same molecule as PSPB18. Besides in cows, PAG has been identified in 
sheep27, deer25, goats15, bisons and moose12. Recently, new members of the 
PAG family were discovered in the porcine23 and equine11 placenta.
2.6.2 
Biochemistry of pregnancy-associated glycoproteins 
PAG belongs to the family of aspartic proteinases. From analysis of 
amino acid sequence homology, PAG demonstrated a surprising 60% 
homology with the family of pepsinogens. The aspartic proteinase family is 
a highly conserved family of which also pepsin, chymosine, cathepsin E and 
D and renine are members. Because of some mutations in active sites and 
because of their inactivity in proteolytic assays, it has been concluded that 
both bovine and ovine PAG are probably not active as proteïnases11,26.
Bovine PAG has a bilobed macromolecular structure with a cleft that can 
bind peptides 7 to 8 amino acids long. The cDNA of bPAG-1 coded for a 
polypeptide of 380 amino acids long. From cDNA sequencing, it has been 
concluded that the theoretical molecular weight of bPAG should be 36 kDa. 
However, its actual molecular weight is 67 kDa. Addition of carbohydrates 
to the 4 possible sites of N-linked glycosylation can lead to a substantial 
increase in size and heterogeneity. From these data, it is rather likely that 
PAG functions as a carrier of bioactive peptides than as a proteolytic agent. 
An alternative hypothesis is that they are hormones which bind to specific 
receptor molecules20.
2.6.3
Function of bovine pregnancy-associated glycoprotein 
Until now there has been no clear function attributed to PAG. However, 
their evolutionary survival and abundant presence at the foeto-maternal site 
suggest that they are not simply a curiosity. Since the isolation and 
characterization of PAG, different hypotheses for its function have been 
presented. One is that they are placental hormones directed towards the 

Pregnancy-associated glycoproteins 
299
mother, perhaps with an action on the corpus luteum. Indeed, PAG1 
stimulated the induction of prostanoids in both cultured luteal cells and 
endometrial explants4. However, reports on the action of PAG on 
progesterone production have generated variable results and more research is 
required to elucidate their possible role as hormones. 
Several lines of evidence have lead to the hypothesis that PAG could 
have an immunosuppressive effect in dairy cows. The incidence of acute E.
coli mastitis is very high shortly after calving2. Impairment of neutrophil 
function plays an important role in the pathogenesis of this disease. 
Although bPAG is produced and released at implantation, peak values of this 
glycoprotein in the maternal circulation are only found around calving29.
Concentrations in maternal plasma increase up to 2,500 ng/ml at the day of 
calving. Also, other pregnancy-associated glycoproteins have been found to 
exert immunosuppressive effects. For example, pregnancy-associated plasma 
protein A is a strong inhibitor of leukocyte elastase21. Moreover, higher 
levels of PAG were found in the plasma of cows during their first pregnancy 
than in following pregnancies29 (Dosogne et al., unpublished results). In first 
pregnancies higher titers of antibodies are found against some trophoblast 
antigens that are recognized as foreign by the maternal immune system. This 
is consistent with the concept of an immunosuppressive effect of PAG. 
Fig. 1. Phorbol myristate acetate (PMA)-induced chemiluminescence (CL) activity of 
polymorphonuclear leukocytes (PMN) isolated from blood of cows before and during the 
early postpartum period. Values are means ± SEM of 11 cows. 
The hypothesis of immunosuppression in periparturient cows by PAG 
was investigated in studies with healthy cows and in cows with mastitis. The 
phagocytosis and oxidative burst activity of polymorphonuclear neutrophil 
leukocytes (PMN) isolated from blood and PAG concentrations in plasma 

300
Dosogne et al 
were evaluated in 2 longitudinal studies in dairy cows from 3 weeks before 
until 5 weeks after calving, carried out in the United States and in Europe. 
Phagocytosis of Escherichia coli was not changed in the early postpartum 
period. In both studies, a significant decrease in oxidative burst activity of 
PMN was observed between 1 and 3 weeks after calving (Fig. 1). Figure 1 
presents the results from the European study. Results from the USA study 
were similar. In all cows, a very significant increase in plasma bPAG 
concentration was found between 1 week before and 2 weeks after calving 
(Fig. 2). The peak of bPAG concentration in plasma immediately preceded
the alterations of blood PMN functions. These results suggested that bPAG 
could be associated with inhibition of PMN function of dairy cows during 
the early postpartum period5.
Fig. 2. Pregnancy-associated glycoprotein (PAG) concentrations in plasma of cows before and 
during the early postpartum period. Values are means ± SEM of 11 cows. 
The mechanism of action of bPAG on PMN function is still poorly
understood. Binding studies between the PAG molecule and bovine PMN
isolated from blood and milkhave been unsuccessful so far (Dosogne et al.,
unpublished results). It has been found that PAG inhibits the proliferation of
bone marrow cells that are the precursors ofmature neutrophils8. This could
play a role the presence of high numbers of immature neutrophils in the
circulation around calving. However, an important condition for acceptance
of this hypothesis, is that bPAG has to penetrate the blood-bone marrow
barrier. This is not evident for such a large molecule. At this moment, not
much is known about the penetrability ofthe blood-bone marrow barrier. A
blood-bone marrow barrier to macrophage colony-stimulating factor, a

Pregnancy-associated glycoproteins 
301
glycoprotein of only 23 kDa, has been demonstrated in mice22. The 
penetrability of the blood-bone marrow barrier to bPAG and other molecules 
is an interesting subject for further research. 
A second part of the investigations of a role of PAG in bovine mastitis 
entails its possible effects on neutrophil function during mastitis. For this 
purpose, 6 early lactating dairy cows were experimentally infected with 20 
ml 1. 104 cfu E. coli P4:O32. Both neutrophil functions and the concentration 
of PAG in plasma were investigated at several times before and during 
mastitis. An increased number of immature neutrophils was found in plasma 
with a peak of 72% immature neutrophils per 100 neutrophils at 12 h after 
infection (Fig. 3). This was associated with an observed decrease of 
detoxification of endotoxins by the neutrophil enzyme acyloxyacyl 
hydrolase (Fig. 3). 
Fig. 3. Percentage of immature neutrophils and acyloxyacyl hydrolase activity of bovine 
polymorphonuclear leukocytes isolated from blood before and during experimental infection 
of the mammary gland with E. coli. Values are means ± sem of 6 cows. 
During inflammation, cortisol is released into the circulation. This results 
in an impairment of protein synthesis and a stabilization of lysosomal 
membranes. This may affect the breakdown of the PAG molecule in 
pathological conditions because both the production and the release of 
proteolytic enzymes is inhibited. Alternatively, acute-phase reactant proteins 
are synthesized by the liver and released into the circulation during 
inflammation19. Increased serum levels of α1 -acid glycoprotein have been
found in cattle following intravenous Fusobacterium necrophorum -induced
inflammation16. Moreover, the severity and outcome of experimentally 

3 02 
Dosogne et al 
induced mastitis in pregnant heifers was related to the amount of acid- 
soluble
glycoproteins in plasma7.
In analogy with these results,
the
concentration of PAG in plasma during mastitis was investigated. In our 
experiment, a gradual decrease of PAG plasma levels was found before and 
during experimentally induced E. coli mastitis in early lactation cows (Fig. 
4) .
Fig. 4. Concentration of PAG in plasma from cows before and during experimental 
infection of the mammary gland with E. coli. Values are means ± sem of 6 cows. 
This decrease, however, had already started before the induction of 
mastitis in these early lactation cows. It was not different from the decrease 
of PAG in plasma in healthy cows (Fig 2) when the data were arranged in 
function of the day relative to parturition. Therefore, the breakdown of the 
PAG molecule was not changed during mastitis. 
3. 
CONCLUSION 
It appears that most glycoproteins that are produced by the mammalian 
placenta, are involved in the maintenance of pregnancy. In the case of 
chorion gonadotrophins, this is ensured by a luteinizing hormone effect. For 
other glycoproteins, a suppressive effect towards the maternal immune 
system has been demonstrated. In the case of bovine PAG, effects have not 

Pregnancy-associated 
glycoproteins 
303
been clearly demonstrated. However, its high concentrations in maternal 
plasma around calving suggests that its possible immunosuppressive effects 
may be extended beyond the maintenance of pregnancy. It may play a role in 
the pathogenesis of acute E. coli mastitis by impairment of neutrophil 
function. Until now, the only known mechanism of action of this molecule 
on the immune system is the inhibition of proliferation of bone marrow cells 
in vitro. The role of PAG in periparturient immunosuppression requires 
further research. 
4. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
The research on immunomodulatory effects of bPAG has been supported 
by the Belgian Ministry of Small Enterprises and Agriculture D1/2-5741A.
The authors greatly acknowledge the scientific and technical assistance of 
Prof. J.-F. Beckers and Dr. J. Sulon from the University of Liege, Faculty of 
Veterinary Medicine. 
5. 
REFERENCES 
1.
2.
Beckers J.F., Wouters-Ballman P., Ectors F. (1988). Isolation and radioimmunoassay of 
a bovine pregnancy-specific protein. Theriogenology 29, 219 (abstract).
Burvenich, C., Paape, M.J., Hill, A.W., Guidry, A.J., Miller, R.H., Heyneman, R., 
Kremer, W.D.J. & Brand, A. (1994). Role of the neutrophil leukocyte in the local and 
systemic reactions during experimentally induced E. coli mastitis in cows immediately 
after calving. The Veterinary Quarterly, 16, 45-50.
Butler J.E., Hamilton W.C., Sasser R.G., Ruder C.A., Hass G.M., Williams R.J. (1 982). 
Detection and partial characterization of two bovine pregnancy-specific proteins. 
Biology of Reproduction 26, 925-933.
Del Vecchio R.P., Sutherland W.D., Sasser R.G. (1995). Effect of pregnancy-specific
protein B on luteal cell progesterone, prostaglandin, and oxytocin production during two 
stages of the bovine estrous cycle. J. Anim. Sci. 73, 2662-2668.
Dosogne H., Burvenich C., Freeman A.E., Kehrli M.E., Detilleux J.C., Sulon J, Beckers 
J.-F., Hoeben D. (1999). Pregnancy-associated glycoprotein and decreased 
polymorphonuclear leukocyte function in early postpartum dairy cows. Veterinary 
Immunology and Immunopathology 67, 47-54.
Ealy A.D., Green J.A., Alexenko A.P., Keisler D.H., Roberts R.M. (1998). Different 
ovine interferon-tau genes are not expressed identically and their protein products 
display different activities. Biol. Reprod. 58, 566-573.
Hirvonen J., Pyörälä S., Jousimies-Somer H. (1996). Acute phase response in heifers 
with experimentally induced mastitis. J. Dairy Res. 63, 351-360. 
Hoeben D., Burvenich C., Massart-Leen A.M., Lenjou M, Nijs G., Van Bockstaele D., 
Beckers J.-F. (1999). In vitro effect of ketone bodies, glucocorticosteroids and bovine 
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.

304
Dosogne et al 
pregnancy-associated glycoprotein on cultures of bone marrow progenitor cells of cows 
and calves. Vet. Immunol. Immunopathol. (in press). 
Home C.H. W., Armstrong S.S., Thomson A. W., Thomson W.D. (1983). Detection of 
pregnancy associated a2-glycoprotein, an immunosuppressive agent, in IgA producing 
plasma cells and in body secretions. Clin. Exp. Immunol. 51, 631-638. 
10. Green J.A., Xie S., Newman A., Szafranska B., Roberts R.M., Baker C.B., McDowell K. 
(1995). Pregnancy-associated glycoproteins of the horse. Biology of Reproduction 50 
(Suppl.1), Abstract 152. 
11. Guruprasad K., Blundell T.L., Xie S., Green J., Szafranska B., Nagel R.J., McDowell K., 
Baker C.B., Roberts R.M. (1996). Comparative modelling and analysis of amino acid 
substitutions suggests that the family of pregnancy-associated glycoproteins includes 
both active and inactive aspartic proteinases. Protein engineering 9, 849-856.
12. Haigh J.C., Dalton W.J., Ruder C.A., Sasser R.G. (1993). Diagnosis of pregnancy in 
moose using a bovine assay for PSPB. Theriogenology 40, 905-911 . 
13. Hansen P.J. (1997). Interactions between the immune system and the bovine conceptus. 
Theriogenology 47, 121-130.
14. Hansen P.J., Liu W.-J. (1997). Biology of progesterone-induced uterine serpins. In: 
Church et al. (ed.). Chemistry and Biology of Serpins. Plenum Press, New York., 143-
154.
15. Houston B.D., Robbins C.T., Ruder C.A., Sasser R.G. (1986). Pregnancy detection in 
mountain goats by assay for PSPB. Journal of Wildlife Management 50, 740-742.
16. Itoh H., Motoi Y., Haritani M., Kobayashi M., Tamura K., Takase K., Oikawa S. (1 997). 
Immunohistochemical localization of al -acid glycoprotein in liver tissues of bovine 
fetuses, newborn calves, and sich or healthy adult cattle. Am. J. Vet. Res. 58, 725-728.
17. Koets A.P. (1995). The equine endometrial cup reaction: a review. Vet.Quart. 17, 21-29.
18. Lynch R.A., Alexander B.M., Sasser R.G. (1992). The cloning and expression of the 
bovine pregnancy-specific protein B (bPSPB) gene. Biology of Reproduction 46 
(Suppl.), Abstract 89. 
19. Ricca G.A., Hamilton R.W., McLean J.W. (1981). Rat a1-glycoprotein mRNA. J. Biol. 
Chem. 256, 1032-1038.
20. Roberts R.M., Xie S., Nagel R.J., Low B., Green J., Beckers J.F. (1995). Glycoproteins 
of the aspartyl proteinase gene family secreted by the developing placenta. In: Aspartic 
proteinases: structure, function, biology, and biomedical implications. Takahashi K. (ed.) 
Plenum Press, New York, 231-240. 
21. Rosen S.W. (1986). New placental proteins: chemistry, physiology and clinical use. 
Placenta 7, 575-594.
22. Shadduck R.K., Waheed A., Wing E.J. (1989). Demonstration of a blood-bone marrow 
barrier to macrophage colony-stimulating factor. Blood 73, 68-73.
23. Szafranska B., Xie S., Green J., Roberts R.M. (1995). Porcine pregnancy-associated
glycoproteins: new members of the aspartic proteinase gene family expressed in 
trophectoderm. Biology of Reproduction 53, 21-28.
24. Talamantes F., Ogren L. (1994) The placenta as an endocrine organ: polypeptides. The 
Physiology of reproduction, edited by E. Knobil and J. Neill et al., Raven Press, Ltd, 
New York ©, Chapter 52, 2093-2144.
25. Wood A.K., Short R.E., Darling A.E., Dusek G.L., Sasser R.G., Ruder C.A. (1986). 
Serum assays for detecting pregnancy in mule and white-tailed deer. Journal of Wildlife 
Management 
50,684-687.
26. Xie S., Low B.G., Kramer K.K., Nagel R.J., Anthony R.V., Zoli A.P., Beckers J.F. 
(1991). Identification of the major pregnancy-specific antigens in cattle and sheep as 
9.

Pregnancy-associated 
glycoproteins 
305
inactive members of the aspartic proteinase family. Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Science USA 88, 10247-10251.
27. Zoli A.P., Beckers J.F., Ectors F. (1995). Isolement et caractérisation partielle d’une 
glycoprotéine associée à la gestation chez la brebis. Annales de Médecine Véterinaire 
28. Zoli A.P., Beckers J.F., Wouters-Ballman P., Closset J., Falmagne P., Ectors F. (1991). 
Purification and characterization of a bovine pregnancy-associated glycoprotein. Biology 
of Reproduction 45, 1-10,
29. Zoli A.P., Guilbault L.A., Delahaut P., Ortiz W.B., Beckers J.F. (1992). 
Radioimmunoassay of a bovine pregnancy-associated glycoprotein in serum: its 
application for pregnancy diagnosis. Biology of Reproduction 46, 83-92.
139, 177-184.

35.
Vaccines Against Bovine Mastitis due to Streptococcus
uberis Current Status and Future Prospects. 
James A. Leigh 
Institute for Animal Health, Compton Laboratory, Compton, Newbury, Berks UK. 
Key words: 
Vaccines, mastitis 
Abstract
The prevalence of bovine mastitis in the UK has been reduced over the past 
twenty five years due to the implementation of a five-point control plan aimed 
at reducing exposure, duration and transmission of intramammary infections 
by bacteria. This has markedly reduced the incidence of bovine mastitis caused 
by bacteria which show a contagious route of transmission but has had little 
effect on the incidence of mastitis due to bacteria which infect the gland from 
an environmental reservoir. Streptococcus uberis is one such bacterium which 
is responsible for a significant proportion of clinical mastitis worldwide. The 
inadequacies of the current methods of mastitis control have led to the search 
for additional measures to prevent intramammary infection by this bacterium. 
A live vaccine in combination with an intramammary administration of a 
soluble cell surface extract was shown to induce protection of the mammary 
gland from experimental challenge with S. uberis. Protection was strain 
specific, but was achieved in the absence of opsonic activity and without a 
large influx of neutrophils. One hypothesis is that protection was achieved by 
reducing the rate of bacterial growth in vivo. This view has led to the 
identification and exploitation of a novel plasminogen activator as a vaccine 
antigen. Vaccines containing this antigen conferred cross strain protection. 
1. 
INTRODUCTION 
Three species of Streptococcus are intimately associated with intramammary 
infection in the dairy cow. Two, Streptococcus dysgalactiae and Streptococ-
cus agalactiae are transmitted largely from animal to animal by contagious 
routes. The third, Streptococcus uberis, is also transmitted to the bovine 
307

308
Leigh
mammary gland, at a significant frequency, via contact with the organism in 
the environment. Due to the ubiquitous nature of S. uberis in the 
environment of the dairy cow teat end contamination by this organism poses 
a constant threat of infection. At present, mastitis due to S. uberis remains a 
persistent problem which impacts on the economic production of milk and 
on the welfare of the dairy cow 1.
2. 
CURRENT STATUS 
2.1 
Live vaccines 
Immunisation with live S. uberis by the sub-cutaneous route, along with the 
administration of a soluble preparation of bacterial cell wall antigens by the 
intramammary 
route, conferred some protection against subsequent 
experimental challenge. All challenged quarters on the non-immunised
animals shed high numbers of bacteria (~107 cfu / ml of milk) and developed 
clinical mastitis. In contrast, quarters of animals which received the vaccine 
shed considerably fewer bacteria (<102 cfu / ml of milk) and only two out of 
eight quarters, on four animals, developed clinical mastitis2. Subsequent 
experiments have confirmed the protective effect of vaccination with live S.
uberis but also demonstrated that this was less effective against strains other 
than that administered as the immunising antigen3. Neither milk nor serum 
from immunised animals promoted an increase in the uptake and killing of S.
uberis by bovine neutrophils. The control of infection was not associated 
with a marked influx of neutrophils into the mammary gland. One possible 
explanation for the protective effect was that vaccination had decreased the 
rate at which S. uberis was able to colonise the gland. Consequently, it was 
possible that bacterial numbers had been controlled due to the dilution and 
elimination of S. uberis within the milk. 
Due to the strain specific nature of the protection obtained and the wide 
diversity of strains which are able to induce clinical disease even within a 
single herd4,5, it is unlikely that further vaccine development will be centred 
on a live antigen. However, it is possible, but as yet untested, that a similar 
regime may protect against a small number of related strains in the field. 
This series of experiments demonstrated, for the first time, that protection 
from intramammary infection by S. uberis and the consequent mastitis could 
be achieved in the absence of a marked inflammatory response and the 
production of opsonic activity. This challenged the view that killing of S.
uberis by neutrophils was essential for the control of intramammary 
infection. Furthermore, the interpretation of these data offered an alternative 

Vaccines against bovine mastitis 
309
hypothesis, namely the inhibition of bacterial colonisation of the mammary 
gland, around which strategic research on S. uberis should be centred. 
2.2 
Sub-unit vaccines 
The possession of the biochemical machinery necessary to obtain adequate 
nutrition from the host is a prerequisite for maintenance of a bacterial 
infection. Following experimentally induced infection of the lactating 
mammary gland, S. uberis is found predominantly in the luminal areas of 
secretory alveoli and ductular tissue6, indicating that much of the bacterial 
growth occurs in residual and newly synthesised milk. This environment is 
likely to be deficient in free and peptide associated amino acids7.
S. uberis is auxotrophic for between 10 and 13 amino acids and 8 were 
commonly required by all strains8. It has been postulated that early in 
pathogenesis, prior to the induction of an inflammatory response, growth of 
S. uberis would be facilitated by the ability to hydrolyse host proteins9.
However, S. uberis does not hydrolyse protein directly9 and in a chemically 
defined medium in which a single, essential amino acid was omitted, the 
inclusion of intact alpha, beta or kappa bovine caseins failed to restore 
growth8.This species has been shown to activate bovine and ovine 
plasminogen 9 to the serine protease, plasmin. Plasminogen occurs naturally 
in bovine milk10. In the absence of certain essential amino acids, growth of S.
uberis can be restored by the inclusion of plasmin-hydrolysed caseins8 thus
demonstrating that acquisition of some essential nutrients may be achieved 
by this route. 
Despite the multiplicity of bacterial activities which must be employed by 
S. uberis in the colonisation the bovine mammary gland, the plasminogen 
activator (PauA) is currently the only molecule to be assigned a putative role 
in this process. Sub-cutaneous immunisation with concentrated culture 
supernatant containing PauA from one strain conferred between 37.5% -
62.5% protection from clinical disease following experimental challenge 
with a different strain11. The mean bacterial recovery from immunised 
animals did not exceed 103 cfu / ml of milk whereas that from non 
vaccinated animals was around 107 cfu / ml of milk. Protection correlated 
with the production of neutralising activity towards PauA and was achieved 
without a marked inflammatory response. The mean SCC from immunised 
animals remained below 300,000 cells / ml of milk whereas that from control 
animals exceeded 5,000,000 cells /ml of milk. Furthermore, immunisation 
with a similar preparation from which the plasminogen activator had been 
removed using an immobilised monoclonal antibody showed no protective 
effect11.
PauA is produced by the vast majority of strains isolated from clinical 
cases of bovine mastitis; it appears to be the major bovine plasminogen 

310
Leigh
activator produced by S. uberis, and it can be neutralised by specific 
antibody. It has been determined that the pau A genes from two strains, one 
from the UK and the other from the USA, shared over 99% sequence 
identity (Rosey et al., 1995 unpublished) suggesting the antigen is highly 
conserved between distinct strains over a wide geographical area. A 
subsequent survey of ten strains from the UK, USA and Denmark revealed 
similar levels of homology in nine12. The other strain (an isolate from 
Denmark), which has now been confirmed as S. uberis by analysis of the V2 
region of the 16s rDNA sequence (L. Johnsen personal communication), did 
not have the pau A gene but was able to activate plasminogen through the 
action of a distinct protein of 45kda. The frequency of this gene rather than 
pau A within the population of S. uberis would appear low, but has not yet 
been determined precisely. 
3. 
FUTURE PROSPECTS 
Due to wide variety of strains of S. uberis which are associated with clinical 
disease any vaccine aimed at this organism must show broad, cross strain 
protection. The live vaccine which showed very good protection against the 
vaccine strain clearly did not protect against one other strain that was tested. 
The precise mode of protection induced by the live vaccine has not yet been 
determined and as a consequence the importance of particular antigens in not 
known. However, the possibility remains that such a regime may confer 
cross protection against specific clusters of related strains. Until such data is 
available such an approach is unlikely to be taken forward commercially. A 
sub unit vaccine based on the plasminogen activator, PauA, has shown cross 
protective effects following experimental challenge, its efficacy in field trial 
is yet to be shown. Most, if not all, strains of S. uberis isolated from clinical 
disease are able to activate bovine plasminogen. In only one case has this 
been shown to be mediated by a molecule other than PauA. It is important 
that the frequency at which this alternate gene occurs within S. uberis from
clinical samples is determined, as such strains are unlikely be controlled by a 
vaccine directed solely at PauA. 
To date, research has not led to the commercial production of an effective 
vaccine against any of the streptococcal species involved in mastitis. 
However, the prospects of an effective vaccine against S. uberis are
significantly better than they have been at any time in the past. If successful, 
the approach of a growth retarding immunity may be extended to confer 
greater protection and may be extrapolated to other bacterial, and in 
particular streptococcal, species. 

Vaccines against bovine mastitis 
311
4. 
REFERENCES 
1.
2.
Leigh, J. A. (1999) Streptococcus uberis: A permanent barrier to the control of bovine 
mastitis? The Veterinary Journal. 157. 225-238.
Hill, A. W., Finch, J. M., Leigh, J. A. & Field, T. R. (1 994) Immune modification of the 
pathogenesis of Streptococcus uberis mastitis in the dairy cow. FEMS Immunology & 
Medical Microbiology. 8, 109-118
Finch, J.M, Winter, A., Walton, A. & Leigh, J. A. (1997) Further studies on the efficacy 
of a live vaccine against mastitis caused by Streptococcus uberis. Vaccine. 15, 1138- 1143 
Hill, A. W. & Leigh, J. A. (1989) DNA-fingerprinting of Streptococcus uberis: A useful 
tool for the epidemiology of bovine mastitis. Epidemiology and Infection. 103, 165-171
Jayarao, B. M., Oliver, S. P., Tagg, J. R. & Matthews, K. R. (1991) Genotypic and 
phenotypic analysis of Streptococcus uberis isolated from bovine mammary secretions. 
Epidemiology & Infection. 107, 543-555
Thomas, L. H., Haider, W., Hill, A. W. & Cook, R. S. (1994) Pathologic findings of 
experimentally induced Streptococcus uberis infection in the mammary gland of cows. 
American Journal of Veterinary Research. 55, 1723-1728
Aston, J. W. (1975) Amino acids in milk. Their determination by gas-liquid
chromotography and their variation due to mastitic infection. Australian Journal of 
Dairy Technology. 30, 55-59
Kitt, A. J. & Leigh, J. A. (1997) The auxotrophic nature of Streptococcus uberis: The
acquisition of essential amino acids from plasmin derived casein peptides. Advances in 
Experimental Medicine & Biology. 418,647-650
9. 
Leigh, J. A. (1993) Activation of bovine plasminogen by Streptococcus uberis. FEMS 
Microbiology Letters. 114, 67-72
10. Kaminogawa, S & Yamauchi, K (1972) Decomposition of beta casein by milk protease. 
Similarity of the decomposed products to temperature sensitive and R-caseins.
Agricultural and Biological Chemistry. 36, 255-260
11. Leigh, J. A., Finch, J. M., Field, T. R., Real, N. C., Winter, Walton, A. W. & 
Hodgkinson S. M. (1999) Vaccination with the plasminogen activator from 
Streptococcus uberis induces an inhibitory response and protects against experimental 
infection in the dairy cow. Vaccine. 17, 851-857
12. Johnsen, L. B., Poulsen, K., Kilian, M & Petersen, T. E. (1999) Purification and cloning 
of a streptokinase from Streptococcus uberis. Infection & Immunity. 67, 1072-1078
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.

Index
A-kinase anchoring proteins (AKAP) . 97
Ewing’s sarcoma................................. 110
Extracellular
matrix
(ECM). 43, 116, 165 
Apoptosis.............................168,191, 236            Fas .................................................. ......... .191
BARD1.................................................171             Feeding pattern........................................213
Beta1-integrins.................................... 165             FGF....................................................2, 3, 5 
Beta-lactoglobulin ..... 127,145,160, 221             
FGF receptor..................................2,19,65
Fibroblast growth factor (FGF) . 1, 19,27, 
Glucocorticoid receptor (GR) ............ 137 
Glucocorticoids..............................................231
165, 221, 255
Glycosaminoglycan.........................................63
Growth hormone (GH)23, 27, 43, 55, 69, 
Growth hormone receptor (GHR) .. 19, 23 
Heparan sulphate ........................................  63 
(HGF/SF)................................................9,65
Homing ..........................................................275
IFN- γ..............................229,247, 259, 293 
IgA ....................................................261, 275
IGF -binding protein (IGFBP)......27,43, 46 
IgG ....................................................... 275 
Immune  surveillance .............................255 
Cycli D1 gene (CCNDI) ..................... 3
Immunity .......................................................283
Immunology .................................................227
Infection .....................................................265 
Insulin (INS) ................................27, 207, 21 6
Insulin- like growth factor I (IGF-I)19,27,
Bovine leukocyte adhesion deficiency 
BRCA1 .............................................
171
Casein ... 10, 14, 43, 57, 76, 97, 129, 137, 
(BLAD) ........................................
237
34, 64
70, 75, 84, 215 
c-ErbB receptor  ........................................  10 
Hepatocyte growth factor/Scatter factor 
Chorion Gonadotrophin (CG) ............ 292 
Cyclin dependent kinases (CDK) .......... 4 
Cyclophilin-B (CypB) .........................
78
Cytokines ...............................  230, 243, 250 
Dog ........................................................ 69 
E74-like-factor (ELF) ..................... 121 
E-cadherin...........................................
11
EGF receptor (EGFR) ........ .93, 160, 181 
Epidermal growth factor (EGF) ........ 11, 
ErbB ............................................... 182 
43, 55, 72, 174 
Insulin- like growth factor II (IGF-II) .. 19, 
Int-2 ................................................................2
Interleukin 2 (IL2) ...................................77
Intramammary infections (IMI)........... 286
153
JAK2 ......................................................76, 134
27
14, 27, 31, 77, 152, 174, 181 
Ivolution .................................115, 117, 128
Jak / STAT signaling pathway .................128
Keratinocyte growth factor (KGF)....11, 34
ETS transcription factors ... 105, 121, 138 
ETS-domain  .......................................... 106 
313
Amphiregulin (AR)........................27,33 
Caspases .................................... 183, 191 
Cathepsin D (CatD) .......................... 153 
Cattle............................... 19, 27, 223, 243 
c-ErB................................................... 9 
Chromatin ........................... 145, 151, 152 
c-Met ................................................ 9,65 
c-Myc .................................................... 2 
Conjugated linoleic acid (CLA) ........ 209 
CTF/NF1 ........................................... 116 
Cyclin D1 ............................................ 1,4 
ERM ......................................... 105,106
Estrogen recptor (ER). 77, 91, 101, 102, 

3 14
Index
Knockout
Plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 (PAI-1)
..........................................
43, 47, 200
Platelet -derived growth factor (PDGF)27,
38
Polymorphonuclear neutrophils 228, 255,
cyclinD1.................................................. 161
PRL-/- ..................................................... 86
284,291
PRLR-/- .................................................. 86
Pregnancy - associatedglycoprotein (PAG)
Lactogenic hormone response region 138 
Prolactin (PRL)..........................49,75,83,145
Lactoprotein genes .............................. 212          Prolactin.......................................... 84,137 
Lymphocyte.....................................................275
Prolactin receptor................................................75
Lymphocytes ..................................255, 257             Protein kinase A (PKA) .............97, 99, 108 
Mammary transplant...............................159            proto-oncogenes......................................172
Mammary-derived growth factor                                   Proto-oncogenes.............................................1 
 pS2 gene ....................................................154
MAPK kinase  .........................................................13 
                                       Somatic cell counts............................................... 236 
Mastitis..........................202, 243, 255, 271, 303                Somatostatin (SS)......................................53, 54 
Medoxy progesterone acetate (MPA).... 73        Somatostatin (SS) receptor ...................54
Micronutrients ......................................233        STAT...............................86, 87, 127, 137
Milk composition.....................................217              STAT protein...........................................145
Milk fat ...........................................................205                 Strepococcus................................................ 303 
Milk fat depression .................................... 205                TAC-2 cells ............................................... 171 
Milking machine..........................................286
T-cells... ...................................77,166, 229, 243
Natural killer cells...........................258,279          Terminal  end  buds ...........................85, 181 
Neuregulin........................................................ 10 
Transforming growth factor alpha (TGF-
alpha) ..................................
14, 19, 27 
Transforming growth factor beta (TGF-
beta) ...........................................14, 27, 35
TRPM-2/clusterin .......................................115
Tumour necrosis factor-a (TNF-a) ..23 1,
Urokinase- PA. ....................................... 200
Vaccines .......................................................303
Vitamins
....................................................234
Wnt gene ...........................................65, 160
(MDGF).............................................27,38
Trans fatty acids ....................................207
Nutrition ..........................................227, 232 
244
Placental lactogen (PL) ............... 84,292 
Plasminogen activator ................. 47, 200 
Cyl-l-/-............................................... 5
ERα ................................................ 92
PRKO ............................................ 69
STAT................................................130
Stat5b-/-..........................................87
......................................230,291
Progesterone recptor(PR)..............71, 94
Progestins............................................69
lox/Cre recombination system.............130
NF1 (nuclear factor 1).........................138
NF-κB................................................137
Notch4................................................171
Nuclear factor 1 (NF1)..... 115, 116, 147
Opioid recptor ......................................57
PEA3...............................................105
PI-.......................................................182
Pit-I......................................................71

