F
f-Function
The Mayer f-function is defined as
f ¼ eV2=kT  1
where V2 is the two-body intermolecular potential energy. The func-
tion is zero for a perfect system (one with no interactions). It is used in
calculations of the second virial coeﬃcient through
B ¼  NA
2V
ð
f dr1dr2
For an intermolecular potential energy that depends only on the
separation of the molecules but not their relative orientation this
expression simplifies to
B ¼  2pNA
ð
fr2 dr
f Orbital
An f orbital is an atomic orbital with l ¼ 3 (Figure F.1). There are
seven such orbitals in a given shell of an atom and their occupation
gives rise to the f-block of the periodic table (the lanthanoids and the
actinoids).
Linear combinations of the orbitals depicted here can be formed to
generate seven orthogonal orbitals of the same shape (Figure F.2).
Concepts in Physical Chemistry: 2nd Edition
By Peter Atkins
r Peter Atkins 2024
Published by the Royal Society of Chemistry, www.rsc.org
113
Downloaded from http://books.rsc.org/books/monograph/chapter-pdf/1818725/bk9781837674244-00113.pdf by guest on 23 May 2024

They are aligned along the edges of a pair of heptagonal pyramids that
share an apex, as shown on the right, and which make an angle of
30.388 to the vertical line through the shared apex.
Faraday’s Constant
Faraday’s constant, F, is the magnitude of the charge per mole of
electrons, F ¼ NAe, and has the value 96.485 332 12 kC mol1.
Figure F.1
The conventional form of f orbitals.
Figure F.2
One of seven equivalent f orbitals.
114
Concepts in Physical Chemistry: 2nd Edition
Downloaded from http://books.rsc.org/books/monograph/chapter-pdf/1818725/bk9781837674244-00113.pdf by guest on 23 May 2024

FEMO
The acronym FEMO stands for free electron molecular orbital. It is a
primitive description of p-electron distributions in linear conjugated
molecules, which treats the molecule as a box and then uses the en-
ergy levels of a particle-in-a-box. If the molecule contains NC carbon
atoms it is treated as a box of length NCRCC where RCC is the carbon–
carbon bond length and the box is taken to extend one-half bond
length at each end of the molecule. The energy levels and wavefunc-
tions are
En ¼
n2h2
8meN2
CR2
CC
;
n ¼ 1; 2; . . .
cn(x) ¼
2
NCRCC

1=2
sin (npx=NCRCC) for 0rxrNCRCC
If each atom supplies one electron, as in a conjugated polyene, then
the quantum number of the highest filled level is n ¼ 1
2 NC and the
frequency of the lowest energy transition (HOMO - LUMO) is
n ¼
2NC þ 1
N2
C


n0;
n0 ¼
h
32meR2
CC
The transition frequency decreases and the wavelength increases as
NC increases. The x-component (the only nonzero component) of the
transition dipole moment for that transition is
mx ¼  e
ðNCRCC
0
c1
2 NC þ 1(x)xc1
2 NC(x)dx ¼
 2(NC þ 2)N2
C
(NC þ 1)2p2 eRCC;
NC even
 2NC
p2 eRCC;
NC odd
8
>
>
>
<
>
>
>
:
The two expressions converge when NCc2. The intensity, which is
proportional to the square of the transition dipole moment, increases
as the length of the chain increases.
Fermi–Dirac Distribution
The Fermi–Dirac distribution is a version of the Boltzmann distri-
bution that takes into account the eﬀect of the Pauli principle, which
limits the occupation by fermions of any state (‘state’ includes spin) to
either 0 or 1. It is used to calculate the population of a state of given
Concepts Beginning with F
115
Downloaded from http://books.rsc.org/books/monograph/chapter-pdf/1818725/bk9781837674244-00113.pdf by guest on 23 May 2024

energy in a many-electron system at a temperature T. Given the
density of states, r(E), which is used to express the number of states
between E and E þ dE as r(E)dE, the number of electrons dN(E) that
occupy states between E and E þ dE is the product of that number of
states and the probability f (E) that the state is occupied:
dN(E) ¼ r(E)dE  f (E)
The function f (E) is the Fermi–Dirac distribution:
f (E) ¼
1
e(Em)=kT þ 1
In this expression m is a temperature-dependent parameter known as
the chemical potential (it has a subtle relation to the familiar chemical
potential of thermodynamics). The Fermi level is the uppermost
occupied level at T ¼ 0. The Fermi energy is the energy level at which
f (E) ¼ 1
2 at a specified temperature. The Fermi energy coincides with
the Fermi level as T - 0.
Provided the temperature is not so high that many electrons are ex-
cited to states above the Fermi level, the chemical potential can be
identified with EF, in which case the Fermi–Dirac distribution becomes
f (E) ¼
1
e(EEF)=kT þ 1
This function is illustrated in Figure F.3. For energies well above EF,
the exponential term is so large that the 1 in the denominator can be
neglected, and then
f (E)Ee(EEF)=kT
Probability of occupation, f
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
–6
–4
–2
0
2
4
6
(E EF EF 
– 
)/
kT/EF = 0
10 3
1
1/3
1/10
Figure F.3
The FermiDirac distribution at several temperatures.
116
Concepts in Physical Chemistry: 2nd Edition
Downloaded from http://books.rsc.org/books/monograph/chapter-pdf/1818725/bk9781837674244-00113.pdf by guest on 23 May 2024

The function now resembles a Boltzmann distribution, decaying
exponentially with increasing energy; the higher the temperature, the
longer is the exponential tail.
Fermion
A fermion is a particle with a half-integral spin quantum number.
Important fermions in chemistry are the electron and proton, both of
which are spin-half particles. Fermions obey the Pauli principle, that
their wavefunctions change sign under particle exchange, and there-
fore obey the Pauli exclusion principle, that no more than one can
occupy any state (state here including spin, so up to two can occupy a
spatial state provided their spins are opposite). A general feature of
the universe is that matter can be regarded as fermions (including the
constituents of nuclei) bound together by the exchange of bosons.
Ferromagnetism
A ferromagnetic material is one in which domains of electrons are
aligned with their spins parallel (Figure F.4). Materials that possess a
ferromagnetic phase do so below a critical temperature called the
Curie temperature, TC. In an antiferromagnetic solid adjacent atoms
have their electron spins locked together in an antiparallel array. The
transition from paramagnetism to antiferromagnetism occurs at the
Néel temperature, TN. A ferrimagnetic solid is like an antiferromagnetic
material but the spins on neighbouring atoms are diﬀerent and the
net spin of the sample is nonzero.
Figure F.4
Varieties of magnetic solid.
Concepts Beginning with F
117
Downloaded from http://books.rsc.org/books/monograph/chapter-pdf/1818725/bk9781837674244-00113.pdf by guest on 23 May 2024

Figure Axis
The figure axis of a body is the principal n-fold rotational axis with
n42 (Figure F.5). Some molecules (those classed as tetrahedral,
cubic, octahedral, and icosahedral) have more than one principal
axis.
Fine Structure
The fine structure of an NMR spectrum is the line spitting that arises
from coupling between nuclear spins. The fine structure in an
atomic spectrum is the line splitting that arises from spin–orbit
coupling.
Fine-structure Constant
The fine-structure constant, a, is a dimensionless measure of the
strength of the coupling between an electrically charged body and the
electromagnetic field. It is related to the fundamental charge by
a ¼ m0ce2
2h
¼
e2
2e0hc
where m0 is the magnetic constant and e0 is the electric constant (they are
related by e0m0¼ 1/c2). The numerical value of a is 7.297 352 5693  103,
or approximately 1/137.
The fine-structure constant can be used to express in a compact
form a number of other basic quantities that are related to the
strength
of
the
interaction
between
electrical
charges.
For
example, the Bohr radius is a0 ¼ h/amec2 and the Rydberg constant
is hc~RN ¼ 1
2 a2mec2.
Figure F.5
Two examples of figure axes.
118
Concepts in Physical Chemistry: 2nd Edition
Downloaded from http://books.rsc.org/books/monograph/chapter-pdf/1818725/bk9781837674244-00113.pdf by guest on 23 May 2024

First Law of Thermodynamics
the First law of thermodynamics represents a combination of the
statements of the conservation of energy and the equivalence of
heat and work as modes of transferring energy between a system
and its surroundings. There are several equivalent statements of
the law:
1. The work required to transform a system from a specified initial
state to a specified final state along an adiabatic path is in-
dependent of the path.
2. A change in the internal energy of a system is an exact diﬀer-
ential that can be written in the form dU ¼ dw þ dq, where dw is
the energy supplied to the system as work and dq is the energy
supplied as heat.
3. The internal energy of an isolated system is constant.
4. Perpetual motion of the first kind (the generation of work
without the consumption of fuel) is impossible.
Statement 1 implies the existence of a state function and motivates
the introduction of the internal energy into thermodynamics. State-
ment 2 acknowledges the equivalence of heat and work as modes of
transferring energy between the system and its surroundings. State-
ment 3 acknowledges the conservation of energy augmented by
recognizing two modes of changing the internal energy (heat and
work). Statement 4 is a verbalization of the second and third state-
ments, and is essentially the earliest statement of the law.
First-order Reaction
A reaction is classified as first-order in a reactant J if its rate law has
the form
d[ J]
dt ¼  kr[ J]
where kr is the rate constant for the reaction. Unimolecular elementary
reactions are first-order reactions, so are radioactive decays. The in-
tegrated form of a first-order rate law is
[ J](t) ¼ [ J](0)ekrt;
ln [ J](t)
[ J](0) ¼  krt
Concepts Beginning with F
119
Downloaded from http://books.rsc.org/books/monograph/chapter-pdf/1818725/bk9781837674244-00113.pdf by guest on 23 May 2024

The reactant decays exponentially (Figure F.6). The half-life of J is
therefore
t1=2 ¼ ln 2
kr
and is independent of the initial concentration (and of any con-
centration taken to be the start of an interval). A rate law of the form
d[J]/dt ¼ kr[J][A]n becomes d[J]/dt ¼ kr,eﬀ[J] when [A] is in eﬀect-
ively constant excess, with kr,eﬀ¼ kr[A]n, and is then known as a
pseudofirst-order reaction. In this case, the concentration of J falls
exponentially, but with the eﬀective rate constant in place of the
actual rate constant.
Fission and Fusion
Nuclear fission is the decay of a nucleus into two fragments of
similar mass. Nuclear fusion is the formation of a nucleus by the
coalescence of two smaller nuclei. These processes are often
accompanied by the ejection of particles such as neutrons,
neutrinos, and g-ray photons. Fission that can take place without
needing to be initiated by the impact of other particles is called
spontaneous nuclear fission. That is in contrast to induced nuclear
fission, which is initiated by the impact of a neutron on a heavy
nucleus. Nuclei that can undergo induced fission are called fis-
sionable. Nuclei that can be nudged into undergoing fission even by
slow (thermal) neutrons are classified as fissile. Fissile nuclei
include uranium-235, uranium-233, and plutonium-239.
Figure F.6
The exponential decay of a reactant for three diﬀerent rate
constants.
120
Concepts in Physical Chemistry: 2nd Edition
Downloaded from http://books.rsc.org/books/monograph/chapter-pdf/1818725/bk9781837674244-00113.pdf by guest on 23 May 2024

Flash Desorption Spectroscopy
Flash desorption spectroscopy is the observation of the pressure surge
of desorbed adsorbate that occurs when a temperature is swept up
through a characteristic value. If the adsorbate is present at sites with
diﬀerent binding characteristics, then a series of peaks is observed as
the temperature reaches values at which desorption is rapid from
each site. The technique is used to determine the activation energy for
desorption from a surface.
Flory y Temperature
The Flory y temperature is the temperature at which the osmotic viral
coeﬃcient of a macromolecular solution is zero. A solution that is at
its Flory y temperature is called a y-solution. Such a solution behaves
nearly ideally and so its thermodynamic and structural properties are
easier to describe even though its concentration might not be low.
Fluorescence
The observational definition of fluorescence is that it is the emission of
electromagnetic radiation from an excited state of a molecule that
ceases as soon as the exciting radiation is extinguished. The mech-
anistic definition includes the statement that excitation and emission
occur without change of multiplicity. Except in the special case of
resonance fluorescence (see below), it occurs at longer wavelengths,
lower frequencies, than the exciting radiation and displays the
vibrational fine structure of the lower electronic state.
The mechanism of fluorescence is that excitation to a higher elec-
tronic state of a molecule is followed by radiationless transitions
down the vibrational states of that electronic state as it discards en-
ergy into its surroundings (Figure F.7). The final transition is by the
emission of radiation as the molecule returns from the vibrational
ground state of the excited electronic state to various vibrational
states of the lower electronic state. The electronic states involved all
have the same multiplicity and are typically singlet states. Con-
sequently, there are no slow, spin-forbidden transition involved in the
process and it is therefore fast.
In resonance florescence the incident radiation and the resulting
fluorescence radiation have the same frequency. The fluorescence is
Concepts Beginning with F
121
Downloaded from http://books.rsc.org/books/monograph/chapter-pdf/1818725/bk9781837674244-00113.pdf by guest on 23 May 2024

much more intense because the emissive transitions are stimulated
by the incident radiation. In delayed fluorescence the emission is de-
layed after the initial excitation. There are two mechanisms of delayed
fluorescence. In one mechanism, the excited molecule forms an
excimer or exciplex, which subsequently decays. In the other mech-
anism, two triplet excited states pool their energy to form an excited
singlet state, which then decays radiatively. In X-ray fluorescence
radiation is emitted from a sample after an X-ray photon has ejected
an electron from an inner shell of an atom or deep in the band
structure of a metal. Then emission occurs when an electron of higher
energy falls into the vacancy and emits the excess energy as radiation.
Flux
The flux, J, of a property is the quantity that passes through a region
in an interval divided by the area of the region and the length of
the interval (colloquially, the ‘quantity per unit area per unit time’).
It includes the flux of matter, of energy as heat, and of electric charge.
It is found empirically that the flux of a property is proportional to the
gradient of a related property. Thus it is found that the flux of matter
is proportional to the concentration gradient and the flux of energy as
heat is proportional to the temperature gradient. See diﬀusion.
Force Constant
The force constant, kf, is the constant of proportionality that occurs in
Hooke’s law, which states that the restoring force is proportional to
the displacements of a body, Fx ¼ kfx, where x is the displacement
from equilibrium. It follows that the potential energy of a body sub-
ject to Hooke’s law varies with its displacement from equilibrium as
V ¼ 1
2kfx2, which is referred to as a parabolic potential (Figure F.8).
Figure F.7
The steps leading to fluorescence.
122
Concepts in Physical Chemistry: 2nd Edition
Downloaded from http://books.rsc.org/books/monograph/chapter-pdf/1818725/bk9781837674244-00113.pdf by guest on 23 May 2024

A body of mass m so constrained undergoes harmonic motion with
frequency
o ¼
kf
m

1=2
;
n ¼ 1
2p
kf
m

1=2
When the potential varies in a more complicated way than para-
bolic, except in special cases it is parabolic close to a local minimum,
and the force constant can then be inferred from
kf ¼
d2V
dx2


0
It follows that the force constant is a measure of the sharpness of the
curvature of the potential energy curve close to zero displacement.
The force constant of a bond correlates with bond order.
Fourier Synthesis
A Fourier synthesis is a procedure in X-ray crystallography in which the
electron density distribution, r(r), in a unit cell of volume V is con-
structed from the experimentally determined structure factors, Fhkl:
r(r) ¼ 1
V
X
h;k;l
Fhkleikr;
k  r ¼ hx þ ky þ lz
Fourier Transform
In mathematics, the Fourier transform of a function of position, f (x),
or a function of time, f (t), is the integral
g(k) ¼
1ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
2p
p
ðN
N
f (x)eikxdx;
g(o) ¼
1ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
2p
p
ðN
N
f (t)eiotdt
Figure F.8
A parabolic approximation to the true potential energy.
Concepts Beginning with F
123
Downloaded from http://books.rsc.org/books/monograph/chapter-pdf/1818725/bk9781837674244-00113.pdf by guest on 23 May 2024

The inverse Fourier transform in each case is
f (x) ¼
1ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
2p
p
ðN
N
g(k)eikxdk;
f (t) ¼
1ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
2p
p
ðN
N
g(o)eiotdo
A Fourier transform expresses f as a superposition of harmonic
(sine and cosine) functions, with g the amplitude of the corres-
ponding harmonic function in the mix. If f is a rapidly changing
function (in space or time), then mainly short-wavelength, high-
frequency components are needed and g is correspondingly large for
those components and small for others. If f is a slowly changing
function, then the opposite is true (Figure F.9).
Fourier transform techniques in spectroscopy are eﬀectively physical
realizations of this mathematical procedure. In X-ray crystallography,
the intensity of the diﬀraction at a range of angles is related to
structure factors, and the spatial Fourier transform gives the electron
density distribution in the unit cell (see Fourier synthesis). Spectroscopy
makes use of temporal Fourier transforms. In Fourier-transform NMR
spectroscopy (FT-NMR) the resonance spectrum is extracted by Fourier
transformation of the time-variation of the absorption signal. Thus, in its
simplest form, a free-induction decay (FID) signal from a molecule that
has been subjected to a radiofrequency pulse emits a range of fre-
quencies as it returns to equilibrium. The Fourier transform of that
signal reveals the component frequencies present (that is, the spectrum).
Fractional Distillation
In fractional distillation a liquid mixture is separated into its com-
ponents by successive vaporizations and condensations in a vertical
fractionating column. In terms of a phase diagram, these successive steps
result in the vapour highest in the column being richest in the most
Figure F.9
Exponential decay curves (left) and their Fourier transforms
(right).
124
Concepts in Physical Chemistry: 2nd Edition
Downloaded from http://books.rsc.org/books/monograph/chapter-pdf/1818725/bk9781837674244-00113.pdf by guest on 23 May 2024

volatile component. If that fraction, or sample of distillate boiling in
a particular temperature range, is withdrawn the next fraction may
be removed and so on until the components have been separated
(Figure F.10). The eﬃciency of a particular process is measured by in
terms of the number of theoretical plates, or horizontal tie lines, that are
encountered between the initial composition and the most highly
refined fraction. The separation fails if the mixture forms an azeotrope.
Franck–Condon Principle
The Franck–Condon principle states that an electronic transition
occurs within a stationary nuclear framework. Its classical basis is
that the nuclei are much heavier than the electrons, so remain in their
initial state while the electronic transition takes place. The impli-
cation of the principle is that an electronic transition occurs vertically,
in the sense that the nuclei remain in their initial locations in a
molecular potential energy diagram (Figure F.11). Moreover, because
Figure F.10
The steps involved in fractional distillation.
Figure F.11
The classical version of the Franck–Condon principle.
Concepts Beginning with F
125
Downloaded from http://books.rsc.org/books/monograph/chapter-pdf/1818725/bk9781837674244-00113.pdf by guest on 23 May 2024

they are stationary initially, they remain stationary. Consequently, at
the end of the electronic transition the nuclei are found at a turning
point of the upper electronic molecular potential energy curve. They
then begin to vibrate with the corresponding energy. In other words,
the Franck–Condon principle accounts for the excitation of vibration
as a result of an electronic transition.
In quantum mechanical terms, the principle expresses the fact that
the dynamical state of the nuclei (that is, their wavefunction) is pre-
served as much as possible during an electronic transition. The final
nuclear vibrational wavefunction is therefore the one that most re-
sembles the initial nuclear vibrational wavefunction (Figure F.12).
The former has a peak near a classical turning point, and the latter
has a peak close to the equilibrium nuclear conformation. Thus, the
quantum mechanical description captures the essence of the classical
description. Moreover, because there are several quantized vibra-
tional states lying close to the intersection of a vertical line with the
upper curve there is a probability that any of these nearby states can
be excited. The same remarks apply to the downward transition
responsible for fluorescence and phosphorescence. The principle is
made quantitative by noting that the intensities of the transitions are
proportional to the square the overlap integral between the initial and
final vibrational wavefunctions, Svfvi (a measure of the resemblance of
two wavefunctions). In this context, the squares of these integrals, are
referred to as Franck–Condon factors.
Frontier Orbitals
The frontier orbitals of a molecule are their highest occupied molecular
orbital, the HOMO, and the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital,
Figure F.12
The quantum mechanical version of the Franck–Condon principle.
126
Concepts in Physical Chemistry: 2nd Edition
Downloaded from http://books.rsc.org/books/monograph/chapter-pdf/1818725/bk9781837674244-00113.pdf by guest on 23 May 2024

the LUMO. Frontier orbitals are important because they are largely re-
sponsible for the chemical and spectroscopic properties of molecules.
The lowest energy electronic transition is typically HOMO -LUMO.
Fugacity
The fugacity is the eﬀective thermodynamic pressure of a gas. It is
defined so that the chemical potential of the gas is given by
m p
ð Þ ¼ m- þ RTln f ( p)=p-


Note that fugacity has the dimensions of pressure. The dependence of
the fugacity on the pressure is expressed by introducing the dimen-
sionless pressure-dependent fugacity coeﬃcient, f(p), and writing
f p
ð Þ ¼ f p
ð Þp
The fugacity is determined experimentally by measuring the com-
pression factor, Z(p), of a gas from very low pressures up to the
pressure of interest and then evaluating the following integral:
ln f( p) ¼
ðp
0
Z(p)  1
p
dp;
Z(p) ¼ pVm
RT
If attractive forces are dominant under the conditions of the gas, fo1
and the fugacity is lower than the pressure of a perfect gas. If repulsive
forces are dominant, f41 and the fugacity is greater than the
Figure F.13
The fugacity coeﬃcient of a van der Waals gas at two reduced
temperatures.
Concepts Beginning with F
127
Downloaded from http://books.rsc.org/books/monograph/chapter-pdf/1818725/bk9781837674244-00113.pdf by guest on 23 May 2024

pressure of a perfect gas. The thermodynamic equilibrium constant
for a reaction that includes gases is exact if the contribution of the
gases is expressed in terms of their fugacities and the contributions of
other species are expressed in terms of their activities. Figure F.13
shows how the fugacity coeﬃcient depends on the (reduced) pressure
of a gas described by the van der Waals equation of state, for two
reduced temperatures. (A reduced property is Xr ¼ X/Xc, where Xc is its
critical value.)
Fundamental Equation
The fundamental equation in thermodynamics expresses a change in
internal energy, U, of a closed system in terms of changes in entropy, S,
and volume, V:
dU ¼ TdS  pdV
A consequence for a closed system is
dG ¼ Vdp  SdT
It follows that
@G
@T


p
¼  S;
@G
@p


T
¼ V
Two important consequences of these relations are that the Gibbs
energy is very sensitive to temperature if the entropy of the system is
large and to the pressure if its volume is large. Another implication is
that the Gibbs energy increases with pressure and decreases with
temperature. The stabilities of phases and the characteristics of
transitions between them are discussed on this basis and the ten-
dency of the Gibbs energy to become a minimum.
For an open system, the fundamental equation becomes the fun-
damental equation of chemical thermodynamics:
dG ¼ Vdp  SdT þ
X
J
mJdnJ;
dG ¼ Vdp  SdT þ l  dn
This expression is the basis of the definition of the chemical potential
and of electrochemistry, where the generation of nonexpansion work
(such as electrical work) at constant temperature and pressure can be
traced to the change in composition of a reacting system.
128
Concepts in Physical Chemistry: 2nd Edition
Downloaded from http://books.rsc.org/books/monograph/chapter-pdf/1818725/bk9781837674244-00113.pdf by guest on 23 May 2024

