C
Caesium-chloride Structure
The caesium-chloride structure (Figure C.1) is one of the simplest struc-
tures displayed by a number of ionic compounds, particularly when the
ionic radii of the cations and anions are similar. It has (8,8) coordination.
Calorimeter
A calorimeter is a device used to measure the energy transferred as heat
due to a chemical reaction. A constant-volume calorimeter measures DU;
Concepts in Physical Chemistry: 2nd Edition
By Peter Atkins
r Peter Atkins 2024
Published by the Royal Society of Chemistry, www.rsc.org
Figure C.1
The caesium-chloride structure.
38
Downloaded from http://books.rsc.org/books/monograph/chapter-pdf/1818854/bk9781837674244-00038.pdf by guest on 23 May 2024

a constant-pressure calorimeter measures DH. An adiabatic bomb calo-
rimeter is a closed vessel that is thermally insulated from its surround-
ings; that isolation can be achieved if the walls are thermally
conducting by ensuring that the surroundings are at the same
temperature as the vessel itself. In an adiabatic bomb calorimeter
the energy released as heat is monitored by noting the rise in
temperature that accompanies reaction and interpreting that rise
by using the calorimeter constant, C, in the form DU ¼ CDT. The
calorimeter constant (essentially the heat capacity of the entire
assembly) is determined by calibration either electrically or by the
combustion of a compound of known heat output.
Capillary Action
Capillary action is the tendency of liquids to rise in capillary tubes
(tubes of narrow bore). The height h to which a liquid of mass density r
and surface tension g will rise in a vertical capillary tube of radius r is
h ¼ 2g
rgr cos yc
where yc is the contact angle and g is the acceleration of free fall.
Capillary rise occurs when 0oyco908 (where yc ¼ 0 is perfect wetting)
and capillary depression occurs when 908oyco1808 (perfect anti-
wetting). The contact angle is related to the interfacial surface tensions
(as specified in Figure C.2) by
cos yc ¼ gsg  gsl
glg
Figure C.2
The contact angle.
Concepts Beginning with C
39
Downloaded from http://books.rsc.org/books/monograph/chapter-pdf/1818854/bk9781837674244-00038.pdf by guest on 23 May 2024

Carnot Cycle
The Carnot cycle is the following sequence of reversible changes in a
heat engine in which the working substance is a perfect gas with hot
and cold reservoirs at temperatures Thot and Tcold (Figure C.3).
1. Isothermal expansion at a temperature Thot:
w1 ¼  nRThot ln V2
V1
;
q1 ¼ nRThot ln V2
V1
;
DS1 ¼ nR ln V2
V1
2. Adiabatic expansion from Thot to Tcold:
w2 ¼  nCV;m(Thot  Tcold);
q2 ¼ 0;
DS2 ¼ 0
3. Isothermal compression at Tcold:
w3 ¼ nRTcold ln V4
V3
;
q3 ¼  nRTcold ln V4
V3
;
DS3 ¼  nR ln V4
V3
4. Adiabatic compression from Tcold to Thot:
w4 ¼ nCV;m(Thot  Tcold);
q4 ¼ 0;
DS4 ¼ 0
The Carnot cycle is used to show that entropy is a state function
(by demonstrating that
þ
dS ¼ 0) and to devise an expression for the
maximum thermodynamic eﬃciency, Z, of a heat engine regardless of
working substance:
Z ¼ Thot  Tcold
Tcold
CARS
The acronym CARS denotes coherent anti-Stokes Raman spectroscopy.
The technique makes use of the mixing of two laser beams and
Figure C.3
The Carnot cycle.
40
Concepts in Physical Chemistry: 2nd Edition
Downloaded from http://books.rsc.org/books/monograph/chapter-pdf/1818854/bk9781837674244-00038.pdf by guest on 23 May 2024

adjusting their frequencies until they generate an intense narrow
beam at one of the anti-Stokes transition frequencies.
Catalyst
A catalyst is a substance that accelerates a reaction but does not ap-
pear in its overall chemical equation. It functions by providing an
alternative path for the reaction with a lower activation energy.
Catalysts are classified as homogenous if they occur in the same phase
as the reaction, and heterogeneous if they occur in a diﬀerent phase.
Homogeneous catalysts include the H1 provided by a strong acid,
which participates in acid catalysis, and certain d-metal complexes.
Heterogeneous catalysts are typically solid and zeolitic (multiporous)
materials. They function by participating in steps that include
chemisorption of at least one of the reactants. In the Eley–Rideal
mechanism, a gas-phase molecule B collides with another molecule A
already adsorbed on the surface of the catalyst. If the extent of ad-
sorption of A obeys a Langmuir adsorption isotherm, then the rate of
the reaction A þ B - P is
v ¼ krpByA;
yA ¼
KpA
1 þ KpA
In the Langmuir–Hinshelwood mechanism, reaction takes place be-
tween molecules already adsorbed on the surface. Then the rate is
v ¼ kryByA;
yJ ¼ A;B ¼
KJpJ
1 þ KApA þ KBpB
Cathodic Protection
In cathodic protection a relatively valuable metallic object is protected
from corrosion (oxidation) by being connected to a more electro-
positive metal which undergoes preferential oxidation.
Cell Potential
The (zero-current) cell potential, Ecell, is the potential diﬀerence be-
tween the two electrodes of a galvanic cell when the cell reaction is
balanced against an externally applied potential diﬀerence to ensure
reversibility. The standard cell potential, E-
cell, is nominally the cell
potential when the participants in the cell reaction are all in their
Concepts Beginning with C
41
Downloaded from http://books.rsc.org/books/monograph/chapter-pdf/1818854/bk9781837674244-00038.pdf by guest on 23 May 2024

standard states. However, it is best regarded as the standard Gibbs
energy of reaction expressed as a potential diﬀerence (in volts):
E-
cell ¼  DrG-
nF
where n is the stoichiometric coeﬃcient of electrons in the half-
reactions used to reproduce the cell reaction. The cell potential at an
arbitrary composition of the cell is related to its standard potential by
the Nernst equation:
Ecell ¼ E-
cell  RT
nF ln Q
In this expression, Q is the reaction quotient written in terms of the
stoichiometric numbers that occur in the equation for the cell re-
action and n is the stoichiometric coeﬃcient of the electron in the
half-reactions in terms of which the cell reaction may be expressed.
The standard Gibbs energy of reaction is related to the equilibrium
constant for the cell reaction by DrG- ¼ RT ln K; therefore, the
relation DrG ¼ nFEcell implies that
ln K ¼ nFE-
cell
RT
The cell potential is presumed to arise from the diﬀerence of the po-
tentials of the two electrodes, Ecell ¼ ERight  ELeft, where Right and Left
refer to the cell as depicted in relation to the cell diagram, Left||Right.
Cell Reaction
A cell reaction is the chemical reaction taking place in a galvanic cell. See
electrochemical cell. It is formulated by expressing the reaction at the
right-hand electrode (as specified by the cell diagram M|RedL,OxL||RedR,
OxR|M) as a reduction, OxRþ n e -RedR, and subtracting from it the
reduction half-reaction at the left-hand electrode, OxLþ n e -RedL.
The overall cell reaction OxR þ RedL - RedR þ OxL is spontaneous in
the direction written if the cell potential is positive. If the cell potential
is negative, the reverse reaction is spontaneous under the prevailing
conditions.
Celsius Scale
The Celsius scale of temperature is defined in terms of the Kelvin scale
by the exact relation
yC=1C ¼ T=K  273:15
42
Concepts in Physical Chemistry: 2nd Edition
Downloaded from http://books.rsc.org/books/monograph/chapter-pdf/1818854/bk9781837674244-00038.pdf by guest on 23 May 2024

On the Celsius scale, 0 8C corresponds to the normal freezing point of
water and 100 8C corresponds to the normal boiling point of water.
The scale was originally defined in terms of these two ‘fixed points’,
but both are now experimentally determined. The Fahrenheit scale is
related to the Celsius scale by the exact relations
yF=1F ¼ 8
5 yC=1C þ 32; yC=1C ¼ 5
8 yF=1F  20
Centre of Inversion
A centre of inversion, i, is the symmetry element corresponding to the
operation of inversion in which all points of a body are projected
through a single point to the same distance on the other side. A centre
of inversion is equivalent to a two-fold axis of improper rotation:
i ¼ S2 ¼ shC2.
Centrifugal Distortion
The eﬀect of centrifugal distortion on a diatomic molecule is to stretch
the bond and hence to reduce the rotational constant, B. As a result,
the rotational energy levels are closer together at high rotational
quantum numbers than for a rigid rotor. The eﬀect is taken into ac-
count empirically by writing
F(J) ¼ BJ( J þ 1)  Dcf J2( J þ 1)2
where Dcf is the centrifugal distortion constant (here, expressed as a
frequency). An approximate relation between the vibrational fre-
quency of the bond (a measure of its stiﬀness), n, and the centrifugal
distortion constant is
Dcf ¼ 4B3
n2
Therefore, the stiﬀer the bond, the smaller is the value of Dcf.
Chain Reaction
A chain reaction occurs when a reaction intermediate generated in
one step attacks another species to produce another intermediate,
and so on. The intermediate that propagates the chain is called the
chain carrier. If the chain carrier is a radical, then the reaction is a radical
Concepts Beginning with C
43
Downloaded from http://books.rsc.org/books/monograph/chapter-pdf/1818854/bk9781837674244-00038.pdf by guest on 23 May 2024

chain reaction. A chain reaction typically has several characteristic types of
steps:
1. Initiation: the initial formation of chain carriers. If they are
produced by heat, then the step is a thermolysis. If they are
produced by light, then the step is photolysis. A typical initial step
might be A - B þ R·.
2. Propagation, a reaction that gives rise to a new carrier, as in
R· þ A - B þ R·.
3. Branching, the formation more than one chain carrier in a propa-
gation step, as in R·þ A-R·þ R·. A branching step may result in a
cascade of reaction and result in a chain-branching explosion.
4. Retardation, the attack of a chain carrier on a product molecule
as in R· þ P - A þ R·.
5. Inhibition, the removal of a chain carrier by reaction with the
walls of the vessel or with foreign radicals, as in R· þ M· - B.
6. Termination, the combination of chain carriers, as in R· þ R· - P.
Character
The character, w, of an operation R is the sum of the diagonal elements
of the matrix representative D(R) for the selected basis:
w(R) ¼
X
r
Drr(R)
All operations of the same class have the same character for a given
basis. A character table is a list of the characters of the irreducible
representation of the group.
The following rules and equations are used in group theory and are
based on the little orthogonality theorem:
1
h
X
C
g(C)w(G)(C)w(G0)(C) ¼ dGG0
where the sum is overall classes, C, of operations, g(C) is the number
of operations of each class, and h is the order of the group (the total
number of operations). The symbol dGG0 is the Kronecker delta, which
is equal to 1 if the two subscripts are the same and to 0 if they are not.
1. The condition for an integral to be nonzero. An integral I ¼
Ð
f1 f2dt
may be nonzero only if the integrand has the symmetry species
of the totally symmetric irreducible representation.
44
Concepts in Physical Chemistry: 2nd Edition
Downloaded from http://books.rsc.org/books/monograph/chapter-pdf/1818854/bk9781837674244-00038.pdf by guest on 23 May 2024

To employ this rule, multiply the characters of the irreducible
representation spanned by each function class by class, inspect
the resulting set of characters, and see if it includes the characters
of the totally symmetric irreducible representation of the group.
2. Selection rules. To decide whether the integral of the form
I ¼
Ð
f1 f2 f3dt may be nonzero, as in the formulation of selection
rules, proceed as above for all three functions.
3. Decomposition of a product. To identify the number of times, c!,
that a particular irreducible representation with symmetry spe-
cies G occurs in a product given the characters w(C), form
cG ¼ 1
h
X
C
g(C)w(G)(C)w(C)
In the particular case of G being the totally symmetric irreducible
representation, G(0) with w(C) ¼ 1 for all classes C, which is needed
for the two rules specified above,
cG(0) ¼ 1
h
X
C
g(C)w(C)
4. The formulation of a symmetry adapted linear combination. To
construct a symmetry adapted linear combination from an ar-
bitrary basis, use the following projection operator, an operator
that projects out from that arbitrary basis a basis that spans a
specific irreducible representation:
PG ¼ 1
h
X
R
w(G)(R)R
where R is an operation of the group.
Charge Density
The charge density, r(r), in an atom or molecule is defined such that
r(r)dt is the electric charge in the infinitesimal volume element dt.
It is related to the wavefunction for an electron by r(r) ¼ ec*(r)c(r).
Chemical Exchange
Chemical exchange occurs when an atom or group of atoms is trans-
ferred between two species. An example is the chemical exchange
of a proton (a hydrogen ion) between a molecule and the solvent.
Concepts Beginning with C
45
Downloaded from http://books.rsc.org/books/monograph/chapter-pdf/1818854/bk9781837674244-00038.pdf by guest on 23 May 2024

Chemical exchange is detected in nuclear magnetic resonance by loss
of fine structure arising from the exchanged protons.
Chemical Potential
The chemical potential, mJ, of a species J is its partial molar Gibbs energy:
mJ ¼
@G
@nJ


p;T;n0
where the constraint n0 implies that the abundances of all species
other than J are held constant (Figure C.4). It follows from this def-
inition that
dG ¼
X
J
mJdnJ;
G ¼
X
J
mJnJ
dG ¼ ldn;
G ¼ ln
The consistency of these two relations implies the Gibbs–Duhem
equation, which relates changes in the chemical potentials of all the
components of a mixture in a closed system:
X
J
nJdmJ ¼ 0;
n dl ¼ 0
Thus, for a binary mixture, dmB ¼  (nA=nB)dmA.
The chemical potential of a species depends on the composition of
the mixture, and in general
mJ ¼ m-
J
þ RT ln aJ
where m-
J
is the standard chemical potential of J and aJ is its activity
(for a gas, the fugacity; specifically fJ/p-); see Figure C.5. In elementary
Figure C.4
The definition of the chemical potential.
46
Concepts in Physical Chemistry: 2nd Edition
Downloaded from http://books.rsc.org/books/monograph/chapter-pdf/1818854/bk9781837674244-00038.pdf by guest on 23 May 2024

applications, the activity is replaced by the mole fraction, xJ, the partial
pressure, pJ/p-, or some other measure of concentration, with stand-
ards that depend on the adoption of either Raoult’s law (for a solvent) or
Henry’s law (for solutes). The physical interpretation of the chemical
potential is that it is a measure of the potency of J to bring about
spontaneous physical or chemical change.
From the general conditions for equilibrium, at constant tem-
perature and pressure DG ¼ 0, and therefore at equilibrium the
chemical potential of a species must be the same in each phase in
which it occurs and throughout each phase. The establishment of these
criteria leads to expressions for the conditions of pressure and tem-
perature at which the phases are equilibrium, develop expressions for
colligative properties, derive the phase rule, and formulate expressions
for the equilibrium constants of chemical reactions. Thus, the reaction
Gibbs energy for a reaction with stoichiometric numbers nJ is
DrG ¼
X
J
nJmJ;
DrG ¼ vl
The chemical potential carries more information than being merely
the partial molar Gibbs energy:
mJ ¼
@U
@nJ


S;V;n0
¼
@H
@nJ


S; p;n0
¼
@A
@nJ


T;V;n0
¼
@G
@nJ


T; p;n0
It also expresses the maximum nonexpansion work (such as electrical
work) that can be achieved by a process occurring at constant tem-
perature and pressure in an open system:
dwadd;max ¼
X
J
nJdmJ;
dwadd;max ¼ ndl
Figure C.5
The variation of chemical potential with activity.
Concepts Beginning with C
47
Downloaded from http://books.rsc.org/books/monograph/chapter-pdf/1818854/bk9781837674244-00038.pdf by guest on 23 May 2024

Chemical Shift
The chemical shift of a nucleus in nuclear magnetic resonance is the
diﬀerence between the resonance frequency of the nucleus in question
and that of the reference standard. For protons the reference is tetra-
methylsilane (TMS); for carbon-13 it is the carbon-13 resonance in TMS;
for phosphorus-31 it is the phosphorus-31 resonance in 85 per cent
H3PO4(aq). Chemical shifts are reported on the delta scale which is
defined as
d ¼ n  n1
n1
 106
Chemically Equivalent Nuclei
A group of nuclei are chemically equivalent if they are related by a
symmetry operation of the molecule and have the same chemical
shift. They are magnetically equivalent if as well as being chemically
equivalent they have identical spin–spin interactions with any other
magnetic nuclei in the molecule. Chemically equivalent nuclei couple
together, but due to the selection rules that coupling does not appear
in an NMR spectrum (Figure C.6).
Chemiluminescence
Chemiluminescence is the production of light by a chemical reaction. It
occurs when a chemical reaction leads to products in excited states,
which then discard their excess energy as electromagnetic radiation.
If the reaction leads to vibrationally excited states then the emitted
radiation is in the infrared region and the phenomenon is termed
infrared chemiluminescence.
Figure C.6
Chemical and magnetic equivalence of nuclei.
48
Concepts in Physical Chemistry: 2nd Edition
Downloaded from http://books.rsc.org/books/monograph/chapter-pdf/1818854/bk9781837674244-00038.pdf by guest on 23 May 2024

Chirality
A chiral molecule is a molecule that cannot be superimposed on its
mirror image. Provided it is suﬃciently long lived, a chiral molecule is
optically active (see birefringence). A chiral molecule and its mirror
image partner constitute an enantiomeric pair and rotate the plane of
polarization of electromagnetic radiation in equal and opposite dir-
ections. A molecule is chiral if it does not possess an axis of improper
rotation, Sn. Note that S1 is equivalent to a mirror plane and S2 is
equivalent to a centre of inversion, so a molecule is achiral (not chiral)
if it possesses either a mirror plane or a centre of inversion. Molecules
with neither are also achiral if they possess an S4 axis.
Cholesteric Phase
A cholesteric phase is a liquid crystalline mesophase in which mol-
ecules lie in a helical column (Figure C.7).
Chromatography
Chromatography is a technique for the separation of components of a
mixture that makes use of the diﬀerent chemical or physical prop-
erties of the components, particularly but not exclusively their abil-
ities to adsorb to surfaces or to dissolve in liquids. The sample is
carried in a mobile phase or eluent, which may be a liquid or a gas. The
mobile phase passes through a stationary phase, which is a solid or a
solid coated with a liquid. Liquid chromatography is employed in a
variety of forms, including column chromatography, in which the sta-
tionary phase is packed into a column, and thin-layer chromatography,
in which it forms a layer on a plate. In high performance liquid
Figure C.7
The cholesteric phase of a liquid crystal.
Concepts Beginning with C
49
Downloaded from http://books.rsc.org/books/monograph/chapter-pdf/1818854/bk9781837674244-00038.pdf by guest on 23 May 2024

chromatography (HPLC), the solid phase consists of closely packed
particles less than 10 mm in diameter. The eluent is pumped through
the stationary phase at high pressure and at a precisely controlled
rate. Detection devices make use of ultraviolet and visible absorption,
redox properties, conductivity, fluorescence, or refractive index. In gas
chromatography (GC) the stationary phase may be a liquid or a liquid
coated on a solid. The latter technique is called gas–liquid chroma-
tography (GLC). The stationary phase is packed inside a capillary tube
but is maintained at an appropriate temperature in an oven. Detectors
make use of thermal conduction, flame ionization (the detection of
ion currents following pyrolysis), electron capture by halogen atoms
and the resulting modification of the conductivity of a plasma of ions
and electrons, or mass spectrometry.
Chromophore
A chromophore is a group of atoms that is responsible for specific
optical absorption of molecules and is broadly transferable between
them. Two common chromophores are CQC, in which the transition
is p to p* and the carbonyl group, CQO, in which the transition is n to
p*, where n denotes a nonbonding orbital on the O atom.
Circular Dichroism
Circular dichroism (CD) is the diﬀerential absorption of left- and right-
circularly polarized electromagnetic radiation. A CD spectrum is a re-
cord of eL – eR, where e is a molar absorption coeﬃcient, against the
frequency of the incident radiation. The technique can be used to
determine the absolute configuration of d-metal complexes.
Clapeyron Equation
The Clapeyron equation
dp
dT ¼ DtrsS
DtrsV ; and therefore dp
dT ¼ DtrsH
TDtrsV
is a relation between the changes in pressure and temperature re-
quired to retain equilibrium between two phases. It can be regarded
as an expression for the slope at each point of a coexistence curve in a
phase diagram. The slope is positive if the entropy of transition and
50
Concepts in Physical Chemistry: 2nd Edition
Downloaded from http://books.rsc.org/books/monograph/chapter-pdf/1818854/bk9781837674244-00038.pdf by guest on 23 May 2024

volume of transition have the same sign but is negative if they have
opposite signs. The fusion (melting) of ice is an example of the latter,
for although the entropy increases (fusion is endenthalpic), the
density decreases, which implies that the molar volume decreases.
An approximate form of the Clapeyron equation applies when one
phase is condensed and the other is a vapour that may be treated as
being perfect. The resulting Clausius–Clapeyron equation is
d ln p
dT
¼ DvapH
RT2
A similar expression applies to the solid–vapour coexistence curve but
with the enthalpy of sublimation in place of the enthalpy of vapor-
ization. This equation can be regarded as specifying the slope of the
(logarithm of) the vapour pressure curve of the liquid. If the enthalpy
of vaporization is assumed constant over the temperature range of
interest, then the equation can be integrated to obtain the vapour
pressure at any temperature:
p(T2) ¼ p(T1)ek(T2;T1);
k(T2; T1) ¼ DvapH
R
1
T2
 1
T1


Class
Two symmetry elements S1 and S2 fall into the same class if they are
related by a symmetry operation S3 of the group in the sense that
S1 ¼ S3S2S3
1. The number of irreducible representations of a group is
equal to the number of classes in the group.
Clausius–Mosotti Equation
The Clausius–Mosotti equation
er  1
er þ 1 ¼ N a
3e0
is a relation between the relative permittivity of a bulk sample and the
polarizability, a, of nonpolar molecules, where N is the number
density of molecules. If the molecules are polar with dipole moment
of magnitude m and free to rotate, this relation is replaced by the
Debye equation:
er  1
er þ 1 ¼ N
3e0
a þ m2
3kT


Concepts Beginning with C
51
Downloaded from http://books.rsc.org/books/monograph/chapter-pdf/1818854/bk9781837674244-00038.pdf by guest on 23 May 2024

Although these equations are widely quoted, it has been claimed that
a better fit to the data is obtained by replacing the left-hand side
by e1=3
r
 1.
Clebsch–Gordan Series
The Clebsch–Gordan series is a statement about which states of
coupled angular momentum can arise from the angular momenta of
two component quantum systems. Thus, if the angular momentum
quantum numbers of the two component systems are j1 and j2, then
the total angular momentum quantum number J is confined to the
values
J ¼ j þ j2; j1 þ j2  1; . . .; j j1  j2j
The series is sometimes expressed in terms of the triangle rule, that
the only values of J permitted are such that lines of length j1, j2, and
J can form a triangle. The series is applicable to orbital angular
momenta, spin angular momenta, and both (and other sources of
angular momentum, such as molecular rotation).
Close-packed Structure
A close-packed structure is an arrangement of identical spheres with
the greatest possible number density. It can be modelled by laying
down a layer of spheres in which each sphere is surrounded and
touched by six neighbours, to give layer A (Figure C.8). Then spheres
are placed in the dips formed by each triangle of spheres in layer A
to give a second layer, layer B. The process is continued to give a
succession of layers. The relative locations of successive layers can
produce a series of polytypes, structures that diﬀer in one dimen-
sion. An ABAB. . . arrangement results in a hexagonally close packed
(hcp) structure. An ABCABC. . . arrangement, in which the centres of
the spheres in layer C lie above gaps in layer A, results in a cubic
close-packed (ccp) structure. The corresponding Bravais lattices are
hexagonal and face-centred cubic-F (fcc). Other polytypes (such as
ABABCAB. . .) are also possible. The coordination number, the num-
ber of nearest neighbours, is 12 in all close-packed polytypes. The
packing fraction, the fraction of space occupied by the sphere
relative to the total volume, is p=3
ﬃﬃﬃ
2
p
E0:740:
52
Concepts in Physical Chemistry: 2nd Edition
Downloaded from http://books.rsc.org/books/monograph/chapter-pdf/1818854/bk9781837674244-00038.pdf by guest on 23 May 2024

Closed Shell
An atom has a closed shell if all its subshells are fully occupied by
paired electrons. The orbital angular momentum of a closed shell is
zero. The total orbital angular momentum of an atom is that of the
electrons in the valence shell, which itself is closed for noble-gas
atoms and ions with noble-gas configurations.
Colligative Property
A colligative property is one that depends on the number of solute
species present but not on their chemical identity. The principal
colligative properties are the depression of vapour pressure, the ele-
vation of boiling point, the depression of freezing point, and osmosis.
In each case the property arises from the modification of the chemical
potential of the liquid solvent by the solute and the consequent
modification of the conditions, such as the pressure or the tem-
perature, required to ensure the equality of the chemical potentials of
the solvent in the solution and its vapour or solid phase.
The depression of vapour pressure is summarized by Raoult’s law
(see ideal solution) that psolvent ¼ xsolvent psolvent, written in the form
psolvent ¼ (1  xsolute)psolvent
Figure C.8
Various depictions of close-packed structures.
Concepts Beginning with C
53
Downloaded from http://books.rsc.org/books/monograph/chapter-pdf/1818854/bk9781837674244-00038.pdf by guest on 23 May 2024

The resulting expressions for the elevation of boiling point and
depression of freezing point are normally written
DTb ¼ Kbbsolute;
DTf ¼ Kfbsolute
where bsolute is the molality of the solute, Kb is the ebullioscopic con-
stant, and Kf is the cryoscopic constant. The two constants are best
regarded as empirical, but if it is assumed that the solution is ideal
then they are related to the properties of the solvent by
Kb ¼ RT 2
b M
DvapH- ;
Kf ¼ RT 2
f M
DfusH-
Collision Theory
Collision theory is an interpretation of the rates of bimolecular
elementary reactions in the gas phase in terms of a model in which
reaction occurs when two molecules collide and react providing they
possess at least a minimum kinetic energy along their line of centres
and are in the correct orientation. The minimum kinetic energy is
identified with the activation energy. It follows that the rate constant,
kr, for the reaction A þ B - P is
kr ¼ Ps 8kT
pm

1=2
NAeEa=RT
where s is the collision cross-section and m is the reduced mass of the
reactant molecules. The quantity P is the steric factor, which is in-
cluded in an attempt to take into account the presumption that
molecules must collide in a particular orientation for a reaction to
occur. Thus, the collision theory expression has the form
rate constant ¼ steric requirement  encounter rate
 minimum energy requirement
Collisional Lifetime
The collisional lifetime, tcol, of an excited state is the lifetime of the
state due to deactivating collisions with other molecules or with walls
of the container. The process of de-excitation by collision is called
collisional
deactivation
and
the
resulting
spectral
linewidth
is
DE ¼ ˉh=tcol. If each collision in the gas phase results in de-activation,
then the collisional lifetime is the inverse of the collision frequency, z.
54
Concepts in Physical Chemistry: 2nd Edition
Downloaded from http://books.rsc.org/books/monograph/chapter-pdf/1818854/bk9781837674244-00038.pdf by guest on 23 May 2024

Collisions
Collisions involving gas molecules are normally expressed in terms of
the kinetic theory of gases. The collision frequency, z, the number of
collisions made by an A molecule with B molecules at a molar con-
centration [B] in a period of time divided by the duration of the period
(colloquially, ‘the number of collisions per unit time’):
z ¼ s 8kT
pm

1=2
NA[B];
1
m ¼ 1
mA
þ 1
mB
The quantity s is the collision cross-section (see kinetic theory) and m
is the reduced mass. The collision density, ZAB, is the total number if
{A,B} collisions in a region in a period of time divided by the volume
of the region and the duration of the period (colloquially, ‘the total
number of collisions per unit volume per unit time’):
ZAB ¼ s 8kT
pm

1=2
N2
A[A][B]
The surface collision frequency, ZW, is the total collision frequency with
a surface divided by the area of the surface when the pressure is p:
ZW ¼
p
(2pmkT)1=2
Colour
The relation of perceived colour to the frequency of electromagnetic
radiation (and its vacuum wavelength and wavenumber) is set out in
Table C.1.
Additive colouration occurs when the sample emits radiation of
particular frequencies. Thus, emitted blue light is perceived as blue,
emitted mixed red, blue, and green light is perceived as white.
An incandescent black body emits all wavelengths (see black-body
radiation) and at high temperatures is perceived as white. Subtractive
colouration can have a variety of eﬀects. If red and blue are removed
from white light, the object appears green; it also appears green if
only red is removed, indicating that red is the colour ‘complementary’
to green. Complementary colours, a pair of colours consisting of the
colour itself and the colour that white light becomes when the colour
is subtracted from it, are opposite each other on a colour wheel
(Figure C.9).
Concepts Beginning with C
55
Downloaded from http://books.rsc.org/books/monograph/chapter-pdf/1818854/bk9781837674244-00038.pdf by guest on 23 May 2024

Table C.1
The colour of light.
l/nm
n/(1014 Hz)
~n=(104 cm1)
E/eV
Em/(kJ mol1)
Infrared
41000
o3.00
o1.00
o1.24
o120
Red
700
4.28
1.43
1.77
171
Orange
620
4.84
1.61
2.00
193
Yellow
580
5.17
1.72
2.14
206
Green
530
5.66
1.89
2.34
226
Blue
470
6.38
2.13
2.64
254
Violet
420
7.14
2.38
2.95
285
Near ultraviolet
300
10.00
3.33
4.15
400
Far ultraviolet
o200
415.00
45.00
46.20
4598
56
Concepts in Physical Chemistry: 2nd Edition
Downloaded from http://books.rsc.org/books/monograph/chapter-pdf/1818854/bk9781837674244-00038.pdf by guest on 23 May 2024

The scattering of light, specifically its diﬀraction by structures with
spacing comparable to the wavelength, gives rise to rays of diﬀerent
colour in diﬀerent directions.
Combination Diﬀerences
The method of combination diﬀerences is used to extract the rotational
constants of the ground and excited states of molecules from the
structure of the rotational branches of the spectrum. Specifically:
nR( J  1)  nP(J þ 1) ¼ 4B0
J þ 1
2


nR(J)  nP(J) ¼ 4B1
J þ 1
2


Combination Principle
The combination principle states that any line in a spectrum can be ex-
pressed as the diﬀerence of two terms. A term is a spectroscopic state
such as a vibrational or electronic state. The two terms are said to
combine in a transition that gives rise to a spectral line. The combination
principle is a consequence of the Bohr frequency condition.
Commutator
A commutator of the two operators bO1 and bO2 is denoted [bO1; bO2] and
defined as
[bO1; bO2] ¼ bO1bO2  bO2bO1
Figure C.9
An artist’scolour wheel, withvacuumwavelengths in nanometres.
Concepts Beginning with C
57
Downloaded from http://books.rsc.org/books/monograph/chapter-pdf/1818854/bk9781837674244-00038.pdf by guest on 23 May 2024

A fundamental principle of quantum mechanics is that the oper-
ators for position along the q axis (where q ¼ x, y, or z) and linear
momentum pq0 along the q0 axis satisfy the commutation relation
[bq; bpq0] ¼ iˉhdq;q0
Diﬀerent selections of operators that satisfy this relation give rise to
the diﬀerent representations of quantum mechanics. One common
representation is the position representation in which
bq ! q  ;
bpq ! ˉh
i
@
@q
In quantum mechanics, angular momentum is defined as a set of
three operators that satisfy the commutation relations
[bjx;bjy] ¼ iˉhbjz;
[bj
2;bjq] ¼ 0;
bj
2 ¼bj
2
x þbj
2
y þbj
2
z
and essentially all properties of angular momentum flow from this
definition. Note that properties other than conventional rotational
motion may be described by operators with the same set of commu-
tation rules, and thus be classified as angular momenta. Spin is one
example; charge another.
An important consequence of the existence of a commutation re-
lation is that a pair of physical observables represented by operators
that do not commute are complementary in the sense that they cannot
have simultaneously exactly specifiable values (see uncertainty
principle).
Conductivity
The electric conductivity, k, of an electrolyte solution is a measure of
its ability to transport an electric current. For a sample of cross-
sectional area A, length L, and resistance R,
k ¼ L
RA
In practice, the conductivity is measured by using a calibrated con-
ductivity cell. The SI units of conductivity are siemens per metre,
S m1, with 1 S ¼ 1 A V1 ¼ 1 O1. The molar conductivity, Lm, of a
solution of an electrolyte with molar concentration c is
Lm ¼ k
c
58
Concepts in Physical Chemistry: 2nd Edition
Downloaded from http://books.rsc.org/books/monograph/chapter-pdf/1818854/bk9781837674244-00038.pdf by guest on 23 May 2024

The SI units of molar conductivity are S m2 mol1. It might be helpful
to note that
Lm=(S cm2 mol1) ¼ 103 
k=(S cm1)
c=(mol dm3)
Electrolytes are classified as weak or strong according to the depend-
ence their molar conductivity on the molar concentration. A weak
electrolyte is a substance with a molar conductivity that depends
strongly on the concentration. This dependence arises from the in-
complete dissociation into ions of a solute (its incomplete deprotona-
tion if it is an acid) and the dependence of that extent of dissociation on
concentration. A strong electrolyte is eﬀectively fully dissociated (fully
deprotonated if an acid, fully protonated if a base) in solution at all
concentrations. When ion–ion interactions can be ignored, the molar
conductivity of a weak electrolyte follows the Ostwald dilution law:
1
Lm
¼ 1
Lo
m
þ Lmc=c-
KLo
m
2
where K is the equilibrium constant for the dissociation or deproto-
nation of the electrolyte. The dependence of the molar conductivity
on molar concentration implied by this expression is
Lm ¼
K
2c=c-
1 þ 4c=c-
K

1=2
1
(
)
Lo
m
See Figure C.10.
Figure C.10
The molar conductivity of a weak electrolyte.
Concepts Beginning with C
59
Downloaded from http://books.rsc.org/books/monograph/chapter-pdf/1818854/bk9781837674244-00038.pdf by guest on 23 May 2024

The limiting molar conductivity, L○
m, the molar conductivity in the
limit of zero concentration, is found by plotting 1/Lm against c and
obtaining a straight line with intercept 1=L○
m at c ¼ 0. The degree of
dissociation, a, of the electrolyte is
a ¼ Lm
L○
m
The weak concentration dependence of the molar conductivity of a
strong electrolyte is expressed by Kohlrausch’s law:
Lm ¼ L○
mK(c=c-)1=2
where K is an empirical constant. In the limit of c ¼ 0, the molar
concentration of a salt MaXb can be expressed by the law of the in-
dependent migration of ions, that
L○
m ¼ alþ þ bl
The l are the individual ionic conductivities. An ionic conductivity of
an ion of charge number z is related to its mobility, u, by
l ¼ zj juF
If the Einstein relation (u¼ |z|DF/RT) is applicable, the ionic conduc-
tivity is related to the diﬀusion coeﬃcient, D, by the Stokes–Einstein
relation:
l ¼ z2DF2
RT
Configuration
The electron configuration of an atom or molecule is the specification
of its occupied atomic or molecular orbitals. A single configuration
can give rise to a variety of terms (see term symbol). The ground-state
electron configuration of atoms can be rationalized in terms of the
building-up principle.
There are other meanings of ‘configuration’ in diﬀerent contexts.
The configuration of a macromolecule is the specification of the
sequence of monomers and can be changed only by breaking and
reforming chemical bonds. The absolute configuration of a molecule is
the identification of the specific enantiomer. In statistical thermo-
dynamics, the configuration of an ensemble is a specification of the
distribution of molecules over the available states in a microcanonical
ensemble or of the systems over a canonical ensemble.
60
Concepts in Physical Chemistry: 2nd Edition
Downloaded from http://books.rsc.org/books/monograph/chapter-pdf/1818854/bk9781837674244-00038.pdf by guest on 23 May 2024

Consolute Temperature
The upper consolute temperature (or upper critical solution temperature)
is the temperature at which a two-phase liquid mixture becomes a
single phase (Figure C.11). The lower consolute temperature (the lower
critical solution temperature) is the temperature below which a two-
phase liquid mixture becomes a single phase. Some liquid mixtures
have both upper and lower critical solution temperatures and so form
partially miscible solutions only within a band of temperatures.
Contact Interaction
The (Fermi) contact interaction between an electron and the nucleus is
a magnetic interaction that stems from the breakdown of the point-
dipole approximation for the magnetic moment of the nucleus (as
suggested in Figure C.12). Only s-electrons of an atom approach the
central nucleus suﬃciently closely for this breakdown to be relevant.
Figure C.11
Phase diagrams of partially miscible liquids.
Figure C.12
The origin of the Fermi contact interaction.
Concepts Beginning with C
61
Downloaded from http://books.rsc.org/books/monograph/chapter-pdf/1818854/bk9781837674244-00038.pdf by guest on 23 May 2024

The energy of the interaction is denoted aI.s, with a proportional to
c(0)2. The contact interaction plays a role in electron paramagnetic
resonance, where it is responsible for the isotropic contribution to the
hyperfine structure, and in nuclear magnetic resonance, where it
contributes to the mechanism of spin–spin coupling.
Conventional Temperature
Standard states can be defined for any specified temperature; how-
ever, it is common for tabulations of the data to be listed at the
conventional temperature of 298.15 K (25.00 8C).
Cooling Curve
A cooling curve shows the temperature of a sample as it cools. A pause
in the rate of cooling occurs at a transition temperature (Figure C.13).
Therefore, a cooling curve can be used to identify phase transitions
and to construct phase diagrams.
Correlation Analysis
Straight lines are often obtained when log K for a reaction is plotted
against log kr, where K is the equilibrium constant for the reaction
and kr is its rate constant. The implication is that the standard re-
action Gibbs energy of reaction is proportional to the activation Gibbs
energy. The resulting relation is called a linear free energy relation
(LFER).
Figure C.13
A typical cooling curve.
62
Concepts in Physical Chemistry: 2nd Edition
Downloaded from http://books.rsc.org/books/monograph/chapter-pdf/1818854/bk9781837674244-00038.pdf by guest on 23 May 2024

Correlation Diagram
A correlation diagram is a portrayal of the evolution of the state of a
system when a parameter is varied. Correlation diagrams are con-
structed by taking note of the noncrossing rule of quantum mechanics,
which forbids the crossing of states of the same symmetry (Figure C.14).
Correlation Spectroscopy
Correlation spectroscopy (COSY) is a pulse technique in nuclear mag-
netic resonance in which the basic pulse sequence is 908-t1-908-
acquire(t2), where 908 denotes a pulse of suﬃcient strength and
duration to rotate the magnetization vector through 908 around the
x-axis. A series of acquisitions is taken with variable t1. A double
Fourier transform is then taken on the variable t2 and the inter-
ferogram arising from t1.
Correspondence Principle
According to the correspondence principle, classical mechanical prop-
erties emerge from quantum mechanical formulations in the limit of
high quantum numbers.
Coulomb Potential
The Coulomb potential, f(r), is the electric potential at a distance r
from a point charge Q1:
f(r) ¼ Q1
4per
Figure C.14
The noncrossing rule.
Concepts Beginning with C
63
Downloaded from http://books.rsc.org/books/monograph/chapter-pdf/1818854/bk9781837674244-00038.pdf by guest on 23 May 2024

with e ¼ ere0, where e0 is the electric constant and er is the relative
permittivity (er ¼ 1 in a vacuum). The Coulomb potential energy of a
charge Q2 located at r is
Ep ¼ Q2f(r) ¼ Q1Q2
4per
For an electron in the field of a nucleus, Q1 ¼ Ze and Q2 ¼ e, where
e is the fundamental charge. A shielded Coulomb potential is
f(r) ¼ Q1
4per er=l
where l is the shielding length. For an example, see the Debye–Hückel
limiting law.
Covalent Bond
A covalent bond, A–B, is a chemical bond formed by a pair of shared
electrons. The Lewis structure is A:B. According to valence bond
theory, the bond has a wavefunction of the form {cA(1)cB(2) þ
cA(2)cB(1)}s(1,2), where cA and cB are atomic orbitals on the bonded
atoms and s(1,2) ¼ (1/2)1/2{a(1)b(2)  a(2)b(1)}, denoting paired elec-
tron spins. According to molecular orbital theory, a covalent bond is
c(1)c(2)s(1,2), where c(i)¼ cA(i)þ cB(i). In each description the
strength of the bond stems largely from the accumulation of electron
density in the internuclear region. The term dative bond or coordinate-
covalent bond is still sometimes used to denote a covalent bond in which
both electrons are provided by one atom. A covalent bond is polar if
there are partial charges on the participating atoms. Typically, but not in
every case, the more electronegative atom carries the negative partial
charge. The limit of this polar character is an ionic bond, when one atom
acquires the shared pair entirely. A single bond consists of one shared
pair of electrons, a double bond two shared pairs (usually a s bondþ a p
bond), and a triple bond three shared pairs (usually a s bondþ two p
bonds). A covalent solid is a solid in which the atoms are held together by
a network of covalent bonds (diamond is an example).
Critical Isotherm
The critical isotherm of a substance is its isotherm at its critical tem-
perature (see critical point). For a van der Waals equation of state, the
critical isotherm has a flat inflexion at the critical pressure.
64
Concepts in Physical Chemistry: 2nd Edition
Downloaded from http://books.rsc.org/books/monograph/chapter-pdf/1818854/bk9781837674244-00038.pdf by guest on 23 May 2024

Critical Micelle Concentration
The critical micelle contribution (CMC) is the concentration above
which micelles will form provided the temperature is above a min-
imum temperature, the Kraﬀt temperature.
Critical Point
The critical point of a substance is the pressure, pc, and temperature,
Tc, at which the liquid–vapour coexistence curve terminates. The
liquid phase does not exist above the critical temperature. Heating a
liquid in a closed container to above its critical temperature results in
the disappearance of the physical surface between the two phases.
The critical point of a substance that is described by the van der
Waals equation of state is related to the van der Waals coeﬃcients
a and b by
pc ¼
a
27b2 ;
Tc ¼
8a
27bR ;
Vc ¼ 3b
The quantity Vc is the critical molar volume, the molar volume at the
critical point. The critical pressure, temperature, and molar volume
are collectively called the critical constants of the substance.
Curie Law
The Curie law expresses the molar magnetic susceptibility of a para-
magnetic substance as
wm ¼ C
T
For a ferromagnetic material the Curie law is replaced by the Curie–
Weiss law:
wm ¼
C
T  TC
where TC is the Curie temperature, the temperature at which the
transition to ferromagnetism occurs as the temperature is lowered.
Concepts Beginning with C
65
Downloaded from http://books.rsc.org/books/monograph/chapter-pdf/1818854/bk9781837674244-00038.pdf by guest on 23 May 2024

Cycle
A thermodynamic cycle is a sequence of processes that starts and ends
at the same state. For a process that takes place in infinitesimal steps
and X is a state function,
þ
dX ¼ 0
All the steps must be under the same conditions unless allowances
are made for changes in them. For example, the sum of the standard
reaction enthalpies (at the same temperature) around a Born–Haber
cycle is zero, and if one is unknown it may be inferred from the sum
of the others.
Cyclic Voltammetry
In cyclic voltammetry, the current through a working electrode is
monitored as the applied potential diﬀerence is changed cyclically at a
constant rate between preset limits (Figure C.15). As the potential ap-
proaches the standard potential E-(Ox/Red) for a solution that con-
tains the reduced components (Red) current begins to flow as Red is
oxidized then falls as Red is depleted near the electrode. A similar event
occurs when the potential is reversed and Ox is reduced. The forward
and reverse sweeps span E-(Ox/Red). If the redox reaction is rapid, the
shape of the cyclic voltammogram is independent of the sweep rate and
the reaction is ‘reversible’. If the reaction is irreversible (as a result of
Ox reacting to form an inert material), the cyclic voltammogram is
asymmetric because Ox becomes unavailable for reduction.
Figure C.15
A cyclic voltammetry plot.
66
Concepts in Physical Chemistry: 2nd Edition
Downloaded from http://books.rsc.org/books/monograph/chapter-pdf/1818854/bk9781837674244-00038.pdf by guest on 23 May 2024

