N
Neighbouring-group Contribution
The neighbouring-group contribution is the contribution to the chem-
ical shift of a nucleus caused by a nearby group of atoms. It arises
from the magnetic moment induced in the group by an applied
magnetic field. The contribution to the shielding constant, s, in a
freely tumbling molecule is
sp(wJ  w>) 1  3cos2y
r3
where wJ and w> are the magnetic susceptibilities of the group par-
allel and perpendicular to its symmetry axis, y is the angle between
the axis of the group and the vector from it to the nucleus of interest,
and r is the distance of the nucleus.
Nematic Phase
Concepts in Physical Chemistry: 2nd Edition
By Peter Atkins
r Peter Atkins 2024
Published by the Royal Society of Chemistry, www.rsc.org
Figure N.1
The nematic phase of a liquid crystal.
218
Downloaded from http://books.rsc.org/books/monograph/chapter-pdf/1819026/bk9781837674244-00218.pdf by guest on 23 May 2024

The nematic phase of a liquid crystal mesophase is the phase in which
molecules are aligned parallel to one another but lack other spatial
organization (Figure N.1).
Nernst Diﬀusion Layer
The Nernst diﬀusion layer (Figure N.2) is a model of the concentration
profile at the interface of an electrode and electrolyte solution in
which the concentration falls linearly from a plane at a distance d
from the outer Helmholtz plane (OHP).
Nernst Equation
The Nernst equation expresses the zero-current cell potential, Ecell, in
terms of the standard cell potential, E-
cell, and the reaction quotient, Q,
for the cell reaction:
Ecell ¼ E-
cell  RT
nF ln Q
where n is the stochiometric coeﬃcient of electrons in the match-
ing half-reactions into which the cell reaction can be divided. At equi-
librium, the cell potential is zero and Q¼ K, the equilibrium constant of
the cell reaction. Therefore, an implication of the equation is that
ln K ¼ nFE-
cell
RT
If the cell reaction is of the form Reactants þ np H1(aq) - Products,
then the cell potential depends on pH as
Ecell(pH) ¼ Ecell(0) þ npRT ln10
nF
pH
Figure N.2
The Nernst diﬀusion layer.
Concepts Beginning with N
219
Downloaded from http://books.rsc.org/books/monograph/chapter-pdf/1819026/bk9781837674244-00218.pdf by guest on 23 May 2024

Nernst Heat Theorem
The Nernst heat theorem states that the entropy change accompanying
any physical or chemical transformation approaches zero as T - 0.
See Third law of thermodynamics.
Neutron Diﬀraction
Neutrons slowed to speeds close to those characteristic of room
temperature have wavelengths close to 100 pm, and hence are
suitable for diﬀraction by molecules. Neutrons pass through the
electronic structure and are scattered by interactions with nuclei
through the strong force. This scattering can be markedly diﬀerent
for isotopes and for elements that are neighbours in the periodic
table. Moreover, a neutron has a magnetic moment, and the inter-
action of this moment with the electron spin magnetic moment,
which is called magnetic scattering, modifies the scattering pattern.
Thus, neutron diﬀraction is especially useful for studying magnetic-
ally ordered lattices. In inelastic neutron scattering, the scattering of a
neutron results in the transfer of energy between it and the target
molecules. An analysis of the spectrum of energy exchange gives in-
formation about the dynamical properties of liquid samples.
Newtonian Flow
A fluid is in a state of Newtonian flow if it can be regarded as streaming
in a series of layers or laminas (Figure N.3). The layer adjacent to
Figure N.3
Newtonian flow.
220
Concepts in Physical Chemistry: 2nd Edition
Downloaded from http://books.rsc.org/books/monograph/chapter-pdf/1819026/bk9781837674244-00218.pdf by guest on 23 May 2024

the wall is stationary and successive layers have increasingly greater
speeds.
Newton’s Law of Cooling
Newton’s law of cooling states that the rate at which a system cools is
proportional to the diﬀerence in temperature, DT, between it and its
surroundings:
dDT
dt
¼  cDT;
DT(t) ¼ DT(0)ect;
DT ¼ T  Tambient
where c is a constant that depends on the heat capacity of the sample
and details of its thermal contact with its surroundings. Thus, the
temperature of the system falls exponentially to the temperature of its
surroundings (Figure N.4).
Node
A node is a point, line, or plane at which a wavefunction passes
through zero (Figure N.5). Note that the wavefunction must pass
through and not merely approach zero. A radial node is a node at a
point in a radial wavefunction; an angular node is a plane dividing
regions of opposite sign in an angular wavefunction. A nodal plane
occurs in molecular orbital theory where there is complete destructive
interference between atomic orbitals contributed by neighbouring
atoms. It is typically associated with antibonding character in that
region. The wavefunction of the ground state of a system has no
Figure N.4
Newtonian cooling.
Concepts Beginning with N
221
Downloaded from http://books.rsc.org/books/monograph/chapter-pdf/1819026/bk9781837674244-00218.pdf by guest on 23 May 2024

nodes; it is generally the case that the energy of a system increases
with the number of nodes in its wavefunctions.
Nonbonding Orbital
A nonbonding orbital is a molecular orbital that when occupied is
neither bonding nor antibonding between two neighbouring atoms. It
is commonly denoted n. Typically, a nonbonding orbital might be a
lone pair on one atom or, in an ABC molecule, a molecular orbital that
has contributions from A and C but not from B.
Normal Mode
A normal mode is a collective, independent, synchronous motion of
atoms or groups of atoms that leaves the centre of mass and the
orientation of the molecule unchanged (Figure N.6). Provided the
extension remains small and the potential is parabolic, a normal
mode may be excited without leading to the excitation of another
normal mode. Each normal mode has the energy levels of a harmonic
oscillator:
E(Q)
v
¼
v þ 1
2


ˉhoQ;
oQ ¼
kf;Q
mQ
 
!1=2
;
v ¼ 0; 1; 2. . .
where kf,Q is the force constant for the mode Q and m is its eﬀective
mass, a measure of the mass that is moved in the course of the vi-
bration. The force constant is in general a mixture of a variety of
diﬀerent terms: it is generally smaller for normal modes that are
largely bending distortions of the molecule than for normal modes
that are largely stretching distortions.
Figure N.5
A nodal point and a nodal plane.
222
Concepts in Physical Chemistry: 2nd Edition
Downloaded from http://books.rsc.org/books/monograph/chapter-pdf/1819026/bk9781837674244-00218.pdf by guest on 23 May 2024

The number of normal modes of a nonlinear molecule consisting
of N atoms is 3N – 6; if the molecule is linear then the number of
normal modes is 3N – 5. Normal modes cease to be dynamically in-
dependent of each other when anharmonicities are present. A normal
mode is classified as infrared active if it corresponds to a changing
electric dipole moment of the molecule. It is classified as a Raman active
if it corresponds to a changing polarizability. The exclusion rule states
that a normal mode of a molecule with centre of inversion cannot be
both infrared and Raman active (it may be inactive in both).
Normalization
A wavefunction c is said to be normalized (to 1) if
ð
c cdt ¼ 1
where the integration is over all space. When this condition is satis-
fied, the Born interpretation identifies c*c as a probability density,
not merely as proportional to a probability density. A wavefunction
that is not normalized can be normalized by forming Nc and finding
the normalization factor N such that
N2
ð
c cdt ¼ 1
Nuclear Magnetic Resonance
Nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) is the resonant absorption of
radiofrequency electromagnetic radiation by magnetic nuclei in a
magnetic field (Figure N.7). In its simplest form, nuclei are exposed to
a magnetic field and the frequency of an incident field is varied until a
strong resonant absorption is observed.
Figure N.6
Four normal modes of an AB4 molecule.
Concepts Beginning with N
223
Downloaded from http://books.rsc.org/books/monograph/chapter-pdf/1819026/bk9781837674244-00218.pdf by guest on 23 May 2024

Nuclei of atoms of the same element come into resonance at dif-
ferent frequencies for two principal reasons. One is that they occupy
diﬀerent local magnetic environments, with the chemical shift, s, de-
fined through
Blocal ¼ (1  s)B0
where B0 is the applied magnetic flux density. The resulting resonance
frequencies are reported on the d-scale, with
d ¼ n  n1
n1
 106
The resonance of a group of equivalent nuclei is split into a set of
absorption frequencies known as fine structure by spin–spin coupling,
their magnetic interaction with groups of nearby magnetic nuclei,
with a splitting denoted J. If the latter group consists of N nuclei with
spin quantum number I ¼ 1/2, the resonance of the first group is spit
into N þ 1 lines with a binomial intensity distribution (that is, with
relative intensities given by Pascal’s triangle).
Modern techniques of NMR are all based on the use of pulses of
radiofrequency radiation and the interpretation of the observed signal
by using Fourier transform techniques.
Nuclear Overhauser Eﬀect
In the nuclear Overhauser eﬀect (NOE) in nuclear magnetic resonance,
a spin relaxation process is used to transfer the population diﬀerence
typical of one type of nucleus to another nucleus, so enhancing the
intensity of the signal produced by the latter. The NOE enhancement
is usually reported in terms of the parameter Z, where
Z ¼ IA  I3
A
I3
A
Here I3
A is the intensity of the signals due to nucleus A before satur-
ation, and IA is the intensity after the X spin transitions have been
Figure N.7
The energy levels of a proton in a magnetic field.
224
Concepts in Physical Chemistry: 2nd Edition
Downloaded from http://books.rsc.org/books/monograph/chapter-pdf/1819026/bk9781837674244-00218.pdf by guest on 23 May 2024

saturated. If the only source of relaxation is the dipole–dipole inter-
action, Z lies between 1 (a negative enhancement) for slow tumbling
molecules and þ1
2 (a positive enhancement) for fast tumbling mol-
ecules. The enhancement is proportional to 1/R6. Therefore, for there
to be significant dipole–dipole relaxation between two spins they
must be close. For a heteronuclear spin system the maximal en-
hancement is
Z ¼ gX
2gA
where gA and gX are the magnetogyric ratios of A and X.
Nuclear Statistics
The term nuclear statistics refers to the selective occupation of
molecular rotational states that stems from the requirement of the
Pauli principle. The rotation of a molecule may result in the
interchange of identical nuclei, so the wavefunction must change
in accord with the principle: that is, be unchanged for bosons
(I ¼ 0, 1, 2,. . .) but change sign for fermions (I ¼ 1/2, 3/2,. . .).
For spin-0 bosons, as in CO2, only even-J states are allowed
(Figure N.8).
For pairs of identical spin-1/2 fermions, the electronic and ro-
tational contributions to the total wavefunction might all change
in phase. Which values of the rotational quantum number, J, are
allowed then depends on how the other contributions change
(Figure N.9).
For a homonuclear diatomic molecule in the state 1Sþ
g with nuclear
spin I in its vibrational ground state, the ratio of populations is given by
Population of state with odd J
Population of state with even J ¼
(I þ 1)=I for fermions
I=(I þ 1) for bosons
(
Figure N.8
Nuclear statistics and the exchange of spin-0 bosons.
Concepts Beginning with N
225
Downloaded from http://books.rsc.org/books/monograph/chapter-pdf/1819026/bk9781837674244-00218.pdf by guest on 23 May 2024

The consequences of nuclear statistics include the appearance of
rotational absorption spectra and thermodynamic properties, such as
heat capacity. As the conversion of nuclear spins from a parallel to an
antiparallel relative orientation is typically slow, even-J and odd-J
molecules may constitute separable species. Thus, ortho-hydrogen
(o-H2, Itotal ¼ 1, odd J) and para-hydrogen (p-H2, Itotal ¼ 0, even J), with
H specifically the fermion 1H, persist and interconvert only slowly. As
odd-J rotational states are associated with Itotal ¼ 1 (with z-com-
ponents þ1, 0, and 1) and even-J rotational states are associated
with Itotal ¼ 0 and its single state, in an equilibrium sample of
dihydrogen, specifically diprotium, 1H2, at room temperature, there
is about three times as much ortho-hydrogen as there is para-
hydrogen.
Nucleation
Nucleation refers to the presence of centres on which droplets of
vapour or microcrystals of solid may form to enable a phase transition
to occur.
Nucleus
In the nuclear model of an atom, the nucleus is the small, positively
charged, massive cluster of nucleons (protons and neutrons) at its
centre. A nucleus is characterized by the atomic number, Z, the num-
ber of protons present (and therefore the electric charge Ze), and the
nucleon number (or mass number), A, the total number of nucleons
Figure N.9
Nuclear statistics and the exchange of spin-1/2 fermions.
226
Concepts in Physical Chemistry: 2nd Edition
Downloaded from http://books.rsc.org/books/monograph/chapter-pdf/1819026/bk9781837674244-00218.pdf by guest on 23 May 2024

present. A nuclide is an atom (not just its nucleus) of an element E with a
specific atomic number and nucleon number, and is denoted A
ZE.
Nuclides with the same value of Z but diﬀerent values of A (such as
12
6C and 13
6C) are isotopes of the element E. Nuclides with the same
nucleon number (such as 12
6C and 12
5B) are isobars, and those with the
same number of neutrons (such as 13
6C and 14
7N) are isotones.
Nuclei are also characterized by their spin, their intrinsic angular
momentum, with nuclear spin quantum number I. Nuclei with half-
integer values of I are fermions and those with integer values
(including 0) are bosons.
Nuclei with I40 possess a magnetic dipole moment
l ¼ gNI;
or
l ¼ gI(mN=ˉh)I
where gN is the (empirically determined, positive or negative)
magnetogyric ratio of the nucleus, gI is likewise its g-factor, and mN is
the (positive) nuclear magneton, mN ¼ eh/2mp. Nuclei with I41/2 may
also possess an electric quadrupole moment (a measure of the
asymmetry of distribution of electric charge over the particle).
Unstable nuclei undergo a variety of transformations, with the
ejection of particles (such as a-rays or b-rays, which consist of
4
2He2þ and e, respectively) or photons (as g-radiation) giving rise to
radioactivity. They may also capture electrons from the inner extra-
nuclear shells of the atom. If the process results in a change in atomic
number, it amounts to the transmutation of the original element.
Concepts Beginning with N
227
Downloaded from http://books.rsc.org/books/monograph/chapter-pdf/1819026/bk9781837674244-00218.pdf by guest on 23 May 2024

