W
Walden’s Rule
Walden’s rule states that the product ZLm, where Z is the solvent
viscosity and Lm the molar conductivity, is approximately constant for
the same ions in diﬀerent solvents.
Wavefunction
A wavefunction, c, is a mathematical function that contains all the
dynamical information about a quantum mechanical system. It is
obtained by solving the Schrödinger equation subject to the boundary
conditions (and initial conditions if the system is evolving with time)
characteristic of the system. It may also be regarded as an eigen-
function of the Hamiltonian operator for the system. A wavefunction
is normalized (to 1) if
ð
c cdt ¼ 1
where the integration is over all space. Wavefunctions are single-
valued, continuous, not infinite over a finite region, and (except for
certain potential energies) have continuous gradients. Many-particle
wavefunctions are sometimes denoted C(r1,r2,. . .) and are subject to
the Pauli principle.
According to the Born interpretation, |c(r)|2 (with c normalized) is
the probability density of a particle being at r (Figure W.1). Other
Concepts in Physical Chemistry: 2nd Edition
By Peter Atkins
r Peter Atkins 2024
Published by the Royal Society of Chemistry, www.rsc.org
352
Downloaded from http://books.rsc.org/books/monograph/chapter-pdf/1818998/bk9781837674244-00352.pdf by guest on 23 May 2024

dynamical observables are extracted by applying the appropriate
operator. If c is an eigenvalue of the operator bO corresponding to the
observable O and the eigenvalue o, then the outcome of a measure-
ment of O will be o. If it is not an eigenfunction, then the average
value of a series of measurements of O will be the expectation value:
hOi ¼
ð
c bOcdt;
c normalized
The ground-state wavefunction of a system has no nodes (locations
where a function passes through zero). Regions of high curvature
contribute high kinetic energy to the total energy (Figure W.2). Spatial
wavefunctions may be complex or real: complex wavefunction cor-
respond to a specific direction of travel; real wavefunctions do not.
Figure W.1
The Born interpretation of the wavefunction.
Figure W.2
Curvature and its contribution to the mean kinetic energy.
Concepts Beginning with W
353
Downloaded from http://books.rsc.org/books/monograph/chapter-pdf/1818998/bk9781837674244-00352.pdf by guest on 23 May 2024

(See translational motion.) One-electron wavefunctions in atoms and
molecules are known as orbitals.
Wavelength
The wavelength, l, of a harmonic wave, a wave of the form cos(2px/
l  ot), is its peak-to-peak distance. It is related to the frequency,
n ¼ o/2p, of the wave and its speed of propagation through the
medium, cmedium, by
l ¼ cmedium
n
For electromagnetic radiation in a vacuum, cmedium is the speed of
light, c. Note that an electromagnetic wave retains its frequency when
entering a medium but its wavelength changes on account of the
change in its speed of propagation. See refractive index.
Wavenumber
The vacuum wavenumber, ~n, is the reciprocal of the vacuum wavelength:
~n ¼ 1
l ¼ n
c
A wavenumber (which is commonly expressed in reciprocal centi-
metres, cm1) can be pictured as the number of wavelengths of the
radiation per centimetre.
Work
In mechanics, work, w, is done when a body is moved against an
opposing force, F. For an infinitesimal displacement, dx, the work
done on the body is
dw ¼  Fdx
More generally, if a body is moved along a path s and experiences a
force F that might vary in strength and direction along the path, then
the total work done on the body is
w ¼ 
ð
Path
F  ds
As a result of doing work, the potential energy of the body changes
by w. For instance, to raise a body of mass m through a height h on the
354
Concepts in Physical Chemistry: 2nd Edition
Downloaded from http://books.rsc.org/books/monograph/chapter-pdf/1818998/bk9781837674244-00352.pdf by guest on 23 May 2024

surface of the Earth, where the force of magnitude mg is directed
downwards (Fz ¼ mg),
w ¼ 
ðh
0
(mg)dz ¼ þ mgh
and the potential energy of the body increases by that amount.
In thermodynamics, work is a process equivalent to (in the sense
that it can in principle be adapted to) achieving the raising of a
weight in the surroundings. It is one of the ways in which energy
may be transferred between a system and its surroundings and
therefore bring about a change in the internal energy, U, of a sys-
tem. The sign convention normally adopted in chemical thermo-
dynamics (but not in engineering thermodynamics, where the
opposite is commonly adopted), is that w o 0 if energy leaves the
system as work.
Work is classified as expansion work or nonexpansion work. Ex-
pansion work is done when the system expands or contracts against an
external pressure. If the external pressure acting on the system is pex,
then when it undergoes a change of volume dV (which is positive for
expansion and negative for compression, Figure W.3).
dw ¼  pexdV
The expansion is reversible if pex ¼ p, the pressure of the system, at
all stages of the expansion. For the reversible, isothermal expansion
of a perfect gas from Vi to Vf at a temperature T,
w ¼  nRT ln Vf
Vi
Nonexpansion work (or additional work), work that does not involve
expansion, includes driving an electric current through an external
circuit. See Table W.1.
Figure W.3
Expansion work.
Concepts Beginning with W
355
Downloaded from http://books.rsc.org/books/monograph/chapter-pdf/1818998/bk9781837674244-00352.pdf by guest on 23 May 2024

The maximum work that can be done by a system at constant
temperature is equal to the change in its Helmholtz energy, A:
wmax ¼ DA at constant T
The maximum nonexpansion work that a system can do at constant
temperature and pressure is equal to the change in its Gibbs energy, G:
wnonexpansion; max ¼ DG at constant T; p
In molecular terms, work is the transfer of energy that makes use of
the uniform motion of atoms in the surroundings (Figure W.4); for
instance, the uniform upward motion of the atoms of a weight.
Table W.1
Varieties of work.a
Type of work
dw
Comments
Unitsb
Expansion
pexdV
pex is the external pressure
Pa
dV is the change in volume
m3
Surface expansion
gds
g is the surface tension
N m1
ds is the change in area
m2
Extension
f dl
f is the tension
N
dl is the change in length
m
Electrical
f dQ
f is the electric potential
V
dQ is the change in charge
C
Q df
df is the potential diﬀerence
V
Q is the charge transferred
C
a In general, the work done on a system can be expressed in the form dw ¼  jFjdz, where jFj is
the magnitude of a ‘generalized force’ and dz is a ‘generalized displacement’.
b For work in joules ( J). Note that 1 N m ¼ 1 J and 1 V C ¼ 1 J.
Figure W.4
The molecular interpretation of work.
356
Concepts in Physical Chemistry: 2nd Edition
Downloaded from http://books.rsc.org/books/monograph/chapter-pdf/1818998/bk9781837674244-00352.pdf by guest on 23 May 2024

