G
g and u
The labels g (gerade, even) and u (ungerade, odd) denote the parity of a
molecular orbital, its behaviour under inversion (Figure G.1). If the
orbital does not change sign under inversion, it is denoted g; if it does
change sign, it is denoted u. The classification is applicable only if
the molecule has a centre of inversion (for example, a homonuclear
diatomic molecule but not a heteronuclear diatomic molecule). The
overall parity of a many-electron molecule is obtained by multiplying
Concepts in Physical Chemistry: 2nd Edition
By Peter Atkins
r Peter Atkins 2024
Published by the Royal Society of Chemistry, www.rsc.org
Figure G.1
The parity classification of orbitals.
129
Downloaded from http://books.rsc.org/books/monograph/chapter-pdf/1818671/bk9781837674244-00129.pdf by guest on 23 May 2024

the parities of the wavefunctions of all the electrons and using the
rules g  g ¼ g, g  u ¼ u, and u  u ¼ g. The parity classification is
used in the specification of certain selection rules.
g-Factor
The magnetic moment, l, of a free electron is related to its spin
angular momentum, s, by
l ¼ ges;
ge ¼  gee
2me
where ge is the magnetogyric ratio of the electron and ge is its g-factor.
In terms of the Bohr magneton, mB,
l ¼  ge(mB=ˉh)s;
mB ¼ eˉh
2me
According to the Dirac equation (the relativistic version of
the Schrödinger equation), ge ¼ 2. The experimental value is
ge ¼ 2.002 319 304 352 56. (Note that some sources report ge with a
negative sign and define ge as gee/2me.) The diﬀerence from the
integer 2 is due to the influence of zero-point fluctuations of the
electromagnetic field (the ‘vacuum’). When the electron is part of a
molecule its g-value is written simply g and diﬀers slightly from the
free-spin g-factor due to its interaction with the orbital angular
momentum of its own and other electrons in the molecule. The
nuclear g-factor, gN, is the analogous relation between the magnetic
moment of a nucleus and its spin angular momentum, I:
l ¼ gNI;
gN ¼ gNe
2mp
¼ gNmN=ˉh;
mN ¼ eˉh
2mp
Here, mN is the nuclear magneton and mp is the mass of a proton. The
nuclear g-factor depends on largely unknown details of nuclear
structure and is an empirical quantity.
g
The heat capacity ratio g (or adiabatic constant) is defined as
g ¼ Cp;m
CV;m
130
Concepts in Physical Chemistry: 2nd Edition
Downloaded from http://books.rsc.org/books/monograph/chapter-pdf/1818671/bk9781837674244-00129.pdf by guest on 23 May 2024

From the equipartition theorem (disregarding vibrational contri-
butions) and the relation Cp,m  CV,m ¼ R for a perfect gas, its values
are as follows:
Atoms
Linear molecules
Nonlinear molecules
g
5/3
7/5
4/3
The heat capacity ratio appears in the expression for the pressure
volume relation in a reversible adiabatic expansion:
piVg
i ¼ pfVg
f
It also appears in the expression for the speed of sound (which
propagates as a sequence of adiabatic expansions and compressions)
through a gas of molecules of molar mass M:
cs ¼
gRT
M

1=2
For other uses of the symbol g see the discussion of the magneto-
gyric ratio in the entry on g-factor and the discussions of activities and
surface tension.
Galvani Potential Diﬀerence
The Galvani potential diﬀerence, Df, is the diﬀerence in electric potential
between points in the metal electrode and the bulk solution.
Gas Constant
The (molar) gas constant, R, is defined as R¼ NAk, where k is Boltzmann’s
constant and NA is Avogadro’s constant, both of which currently have
defined, exact values which imply that RE8.314 462 618 JK1mol1. Its
name arises from its original appearance in the perfect gas equation of
state, pV¼ nRT. However, it appears in expressions unrelated to gases by
virtue of its relation to the more fundamental Boltzmann’s constant.
Gas Laws
The gas laws are statements that summarize the observation of the
response of gases to changes in the conditions and are now collected
Concepts Beginning with G
131
Downloaded from http://books.rsc.org/books/monograph/chapter-pdf/1818671/bk9781837674244-00129.pdf by guest on 23 May 2024

into the perfect gas equation of state, pV ¼ nRT. The individual com-
ponents of this expression are
Boyle’s law: pV ¼ constant; pp1=V at constant T
Charles’ law: ppT at constant V; VpT at constant p
Avogadro’s principle: ppn at constant V; T
Avogadro’s contribution is called a principle rather than a law because
it is based on the molecular model rather than being a direct summary
of experience.
Gaussian Function
A Gaussian function is a bell-shaped function of the form eax2
as
illustrated in Figure G.2. Gaussian functions are encountered as
components of the wavefunctions of the harmonic oscillator, as the
shapes of certain spectral lines, and in expressions related to
diﬀusion.
Gibbs–Duhem Equation
The Gibbs–Duhem equation is a relation between changes that occur in
the partial molar quantities X̄J of the components of a mixture at
constant temperature and pressure:
X
J
nJdXJ ¼ 0;
ndX ¼ 0
Figure G.2
The Gaussian function (the function is symmetrical on either
side of x ¼ 0).
132
Concepts in Physical Chemistry: 2nd Edition
Downloaded from http://books.rsc.org/books/monograph/chapter-pdf/1818671/bk9781837674244-00129.pdf by guest on 23 May 2024

It follows that for a binary mixture of A and B
dXB ¼  nA
nB
dXA
A consequence of the Gibbs–Duhem equation is the Gibbs–Duhem–
Margules equation for the relation between the changes to vapour
pressures (more exactly the vapour fugacity, fJ) that occur when the
composition of a binary mixture is varied:
@ ln fA
@ ln xA


T;p
¼
@ ln fB
@ ln xB


T;p
Gibbs Energy
The Gibbs energy (which is also known as the Gibbs free energy or
simply the free energy), G, is defined in terms of the enthalpy, entropy,
and temperature of a system as
G ¼ H  TS
It is a state function. Its importance stems from the fact that at
constant temperature and pressure
DG ¼  TDStotal
and therefore that a spontaneous process (which is always accom-
panied by an increase in total entropy, the sum of changes in the
system and the surroundings) under these conditions is accom-
panied by a decrease in Gibbs energy (a property of the system
alone). A change in Gibbs energy at constant pressure and tem-
perature is equal to the nonexpansion work that a system can do:
wnonexpansion ¼ DG
One important application of this relation is to the prediction of a cell
potential, Ecell:
DG ¼  nFEcell
In general, a change in Gibbs energy may arise from changes in
temperature, pressure, and composition, with
dG ¼ Vdp  SdT þ
X
J
mJdnJ;
dG ¼ Vdp  SdT þ l  dn
Concepts Beginning with G
133
Downloaded from http://books.rsc.org/books/monograph/chapter-pdf/1818671/bk9781837674244-00129.pdf by guest on 23 May 2024

See fundamental equation. The Gibbs energy depends on pressure as
@G
@p


T
¼ V
For an incompressible phase G depends on measurable changes in
pressure as
G p
ð Þ ¼ G- þ ( p  p-)V
where G- is the standard Gibbs energy, the value of G at the pressure
p- ¼ 1 bar. The corresponding expression for a (compressible) perfect
gas is
G p
ð Þ ¼ G- þ nRT ln( p=p-)
See Figure G.3. For a real gas, replace the pressure by the fugacity.
The temperature dependence is given by
@G
@T


p
¼  S
This relation implies the Gibbs–Helmholtz equation:
@(G=T)
@T


p
¼  H
T 2
Gibbs Energy of Formation
The Gibbs energy of formation of J, DfG(J). is the Gibbs energy of re-
action for the formation of J from its elements in their reference states
expressed as a quantity per mole of J. The reference state of an element
Figure G.3
The variation of Gibbs energy with the pressure of a perfect gas.
134
Concepts in Physical Chemistry: 2nd Edition
Downloaded from http://books.rsc.org/books/monograph/chapter-pdf/1818671/bk9781837674244-00129.pdf by guest on 23 May 2024

is its thermodynamically most stable form at the specified tempera-
ture. (The exception to this general rule is phosphorus, for which the
reference state is white phosphorus.) The standard Gibbs energy of
formation, DfG-(J), adds to this definition that all components of the
formation reaction are in their standard state (pure, 1 bar) at the
specified temperature. To apportion values between cations and an-
ions in solution, the standard Gibbs energy of formation of hydrogen
ions in aqueous solution is defined as zero for all temperatures:
DfG-(H1, aq)¼0. Compounds for which DfG-(J)40 are classified
as endergonic and are unstable with respect to their elements
(Figure G.4). Compounds for which DfG-(J)o0 are classified as
exergonic and are stable with respect to their elements. The principal
application of standard Gibbs energies of formation is to the calcu-
lation of the standard Gibbs energy of reaction by taking the diﬀer-
ence between the stoichiometrically weighted values for the products
and reactants (see that entry).
Gibbs Energy of Reaction
The Gibbs energy of reaction, DfG, is formally defined in terms of the
extent of reaction:
DrG ¼
@G
@x


T; p
Although formally a diﬀerential property (with dimensions of a molar
energy) the fact that dG can be expressed in terms of chemical
potential and changes in amount of all the substances involved in the
reaction, dnJ ¼ nJdx, means that it can be written as the stoichiome-
trically weighted (products – reactants) chemical potentials evaluated
at the current composition of the reaction mixture:
DrG ¼
X
J
nJmJ;
DrG ¼ m  l
Figure G.4
The thermodynamic classification of compounds.
Concepts Beginning with G
135
Downloaded from http://books.rsc.org/books/monograph/chapter-pdf/1818671/bk9781837674244-00129.pdf by guest on 23 May 2024

For the standard reaction Gibbs energy, DfG-, all reactants and
products are taken to be in their standard states (pure, 1 bar), and
DrG- ¼
X
J
nJDfG- Jð Þ;
DrG- ¼ mDfG-
The relation between DfG and DfG- is
DrG ¼ DrG- þ RT ln Q;
Q ¼
Y
J
aJ
nJ
where Q is the reaction quotient. At equilibrium, DrG¼ 0 and Q has the
value known as the equilibrium constant, K, for the reaction (Figure G.5).
It follows that
DrG- ¼  RT ln K;
K ¼
Y
J
aJ
nJ
 
!
equilibrium
Gibbs–Helmholtz Equation
The Gibbs–Helmholtz equation is
@(G=T)
@T


p
¼  H
T2
It also applies when a substance is in its standard state, in which case
the partial derivative becomes a complete derivative because pressure
is no longer a variable. It also applies to diﬀerences in standard Gibbs
energies, therefore to the standard reaction Gibbs energy too, and
through that to the equilibrium constant. In that case it becomes the
van ’t Hoﬀequation (or van ’t Hoﬀisochore):
d ln K
dT
¼ DrH-
RT 2
Figure G.5
The variation of Gibbs energy in the course of a reaction.
136
Concepts in Physical Chemistry: 2nd Edition
Downloaded from http://books.rsc.org/books/monograph/chapter-pdf/1818671/bk9781837674244-00129.pdf by guest on 23 May 2024

Gibbs Surface Tension Equation
The Gibbs surface tension equation (or Gibbs isotherm) expresses the
change in the surface tension, g, of a liquid in terms of the changes in
the chemical potentials of the components of a solution:
dg ¼ 
X
J
GJdmJ;
dg ¼  C  dl;
GJ ¼
nJ  (na
J þ nb
J )
s
In this expression, GJ is the surface excess, nJ is the total amount of
J present in the system, na
J and nb
J are the amounts of J in the two
adjacent phases treated as uniform up to their interface, and s is the
area of the interface. If it is assumed that only a surfactant, S, accu-
mulates in the interface, then the equation implies that
@g
@c


T
¼  RTGS
c
where c is the molar concentration of S. This result implies that the
surface tension decreases when a surfactant accumulates at the
interface.
Glory Scattering
Glory scattering is the enhanced intensity of scattering in the forward
direction; it arises when two paths interfere constructively (Figure G.6).
One path is at large impact parameter and is undeflected by the target
molecule. The other path is at low impact parameter and is deflected as
it enters regions of attractive and repulsive regions of force but then
continues in the forward direction.
Figure G.6
Glory scattering.
Concepts Beginning with G
137
Downloaded from http://books.rsc.org/books/monograph/chapter-pdf/1818671/bk9781837674244-00129.pdf by guest on 23 May 2024

Grotrian Diagram
A Grotrian diagram displays the energy of the states of an atom (or
molecule) as a ladder of horizontal lines and depicts the observed
transitions by lines connected the terms responsible for them. In
some cases, the relative intensities of the transitions are depicted by
the width of the lines.
Grotthuss Mechanism
In the Grotthuss mechanism of proton conduction in water, the migration
of a hydrogen ion occurs by the coordinated adjustment of the locations
of protons in a chain of neighbouring molecules rather than the actual
motion of an identifiable proton through the liquid (Figure G.7). Its rate
is determined by the ability of protons to tunnel through potential
barriers and for the molecules to rotate in the chain.
Ground State
The ground state of an atom or molecule is its state of lowest energy. It
is a characteristic of quantum mechanics that the wavefunction of the
ground state of a system has no nodes.
Group Theory
Group theory is the mathematical theory of symmetry. The h members
of a set of elements gi form a group of order h if they satisfy the following
conditions:
1. The set includes the identity E, an element for which gE ¼ Eg ¼ g
for all elements of the set.
Figure G.7
The Grotthuss mechanism.
138
Concepts in Physical Chemistry: 2nd Edition
Downloaded from http://books.rsc.org/books/monograph/chapter-pdf/1818671/bk9781837674244-00129.pdf by guest on 23 May 2024

2. The set includes the inverse g1 for each member of the set,
where gg1 ¼ g1g ¼ E.
3. The rule of combination is associative; that is, gi(gjgk) ¼ (gigj)gk.
4. All the elements of a set conform to the group property, that
gigj ¼ gk, a member of the set.
The link between this mathematical structure and symmetry is that
the symmetry operations of an object fulfil the conditions for them to
form a group. A point group consists of all symmetry operations that
leave a single point unchanged; a space group extends that concept to
include translational symmetry.
The theory is rendered quantitative in terms of numbers by repre-
senting the eﬀect of symmetry operations by a set of matrices that obey
the same multiplication properties as the symmetry operations. Each
matrix is a representative of the corresponding symmetry operation and
the entire set of matrices for a given basis is a matrix representation of the
group. The representation is irreducible if a transformation of the basis
cannot be found that simultaneously reduces all the matrices to block
diagonal form. A matrix representation is characterized by the character
of each representative, the sum of its diagonal elements. These char-
acters are collected in character tables.
Group theory, particularly the information in character tables, is
used to classify molecules according to the point group to which they
belong, to establish selection rules, to classify orbitals, and to con-
struct molecular orbitals from the appropriate symmetry-adapted
combinations of atomic orbitals.
Concepts Beginning with G
139
Downloaded from http://books.rsc.org/books/monograph/chapter-pdf/1818671/bk9781837674244-00129.pdf by guest on 23 May 2024

