A
Ab Initio Methods
The Latin phrase ab initio means (loosely) ‘from scratch’. It is applied
to calculations of the electronic structures and properties of mol-
ecules starting from only the atomic numbers of the elements and the
mass and charge of an electron. They are in contrast to semi-empirical
methods, which import empirical information into the calculation as
a substitute for calculating certain integrals.
Absorption
In spectroscopy, absorption is the process by which electromagnetic
radiation excites an atom or molecule into a state of higher energy.
Absorption is most intense when the energy, hn, of a photon of the
incident radiation matches the energy diﬀerence, DE, between the
initial and final states. For electric dipole transitions, the intensity
of absorption is proportional to the square of the transition dipole
moment. The intensity is reported as the absorbance (at a specified
frequency, wavelength, or wavenumber) or, when the absorption
spans a range of frequencies, as the integrated absorption coeﬃcient.
When the upper state is already populated, the net intensity of
absorption is the diﬀerence between the intensity of absorption
from the ground state and the intensity of emission from the upper
state.
Concepts in Physical Chemistry: 2nd Edition
By Peter Atkins
r Peter Atkins 2024
Published by the Royal Society of Chemistry, www.rsc.org
1
Downloaded from http://books.rsc.org/books/monograph/chapter-pdf/1818886/bk9781837674244-00001.pdf by guest on 23 May 2024

Accommodation
Accommodation in surface science is the dissipation of energy
that leads to the adsorption of a gas-phase molecule on to a
substrate.
Acid
An Arrhenius acid is a compound that releases hydrogen ions in
aqueous solution. A Brønsted acid, HA, is a proton donor (with
‘proton’, in this context, a hydrogen ion, H1). Loss of the proton
results in the formation of the conjugate base of the acid, A. Con-
versely, the acquisition of a proton by a base, B, result in the for-
mation of its conjugate acid, HB1. A strong acid is eﬀectively fully
deprotonated in solution; a weak acid is only partially deprotonated
at normal concentrations. In terms of acidity constants, Ka, a weak
acid has Ka{1. A Lewis acid is an electron-pair acceptor. A hard acid
is a Lewis acid that tends to bond strongly to a hard base; a soft acid
is a Lewis acid that tends to bond strongly to a soft base. Hard acid–
hard base combinations are largely ionic whereas soft acid–soft
base combinations are largely covalent.
Acid–Base Indicator
An acid–base indicator is a water-soluble organic dye that changes
colour according to the pH of the solution. The indicator is a weak
acid with acidity constant KIn (and pKIn ¼ log KIn); the relative molar
concentrations of the protonated and deprotonated form depend on
pH as
log [HInþ; colour1]
[In; colour2]
¼ pH  pKIn
See Figure A.1. The end point of a titration is the stage at which HIn1
and In are present in equal concentrations, and occurs at pH ¼ pKIn.
For precise results, an indicator should be chosen with an end point
that coincides with the pH of the stoichiometric point (or ‘equivalence
point’).
2
Concepts in Physical Chemistry: 2nd Edition
Downloaded from http://books.rsc.org/books/monograph/chapter-pdf/1818886/bk9781837674244-00001.pdf by guest on 23 May 2024

Acidity Constant
The acidity constant, Ka, of an acid HA (including the conjugate acid of
a base) is defined as
Ka ¼ a(H3Oþ)a(A)
a(HA)
;
pKa ¼  log Ka
where a(J) is the activity of J in solution. In elementary applications,
the activities are replaced by the numerical values of the molar
concentrations:
KaE ([H3Oþ]=c-)([A]=c-)
[HA]=c-
¼ [H3Oþ][A]
[HA] c-
The acidity constant is a measure of the proton-donating strength
of the acid to water. A low value of Ka, and therefore a high value of
pKa, indicates a weak acid.
Activation Energy
The activation energy of a chemical reaction is the parameter Ea that
occurs in the Arrhenius expression for the temperature-dependence
of the rate constant, ln kr ¼ ln A  Ea/RT, and is determined from an
Arrhenius plot. The molecular interpretation of the activation energy
is that it represents the height of the energy barrier on the reaction
coordinate between reactants and products (Figure A.2). A high acti-
vation energy signifies a rate constant that is very sensitive to tem-
perature; a low activation energy signifies a rate constant that varies
2
4
6
8
10
12
0
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
pH
14
1
Proportion of HIn+
4
7
10
Figure A.1
Indicator concentration curves for pKIn ¼ 4, 7, and 10.
Concepts Beginning with A
3
Downloaded from http://books.rsc.org/books/monograph/chapter-pdf/1818886/bk9781837674244-00001.pdf by guest on 23 May 2024

only little with temperature. In a multistep reaction the overall acti-
vation energy is a combination of the activation energies of the in-
dividual steps. That leaves open the possibility that the sensitivity of
the rate to temperature is dominated by one step with a high acti-
vation energy. Another possibility is that an activation energy may be
negative, such as when the reverse reactions in a sequence are more
sensitive to temperature than the forward reactions. The formal def-
inition of activation energy, which allows for the possibility that the
Arrhenius plot is not a straight line and therefore that in some sense
the activation energy varies with temperature, is
Ea ¼ RT2 d ln kr
dT
Activation Parameters
The standard Gibbs energy of activation, DzG-, the standard enthalpy
of activation, DzH-, and the standard entropy of activation, DzS-, are
defined by analogy with the corresponding expressions for chemi-
cal equilibria. Thus, by analogy with the thermodynamic relation
DrG- ¼ RT ln K,
the
standard
Gibbs
energy
of
activation
is
defined as DzG- ¼ RT ln kr. The thermodynamic relation DG ¼
DH  TDS is then mirrored by writing DzG- ¼ DzH-  TDzS-. These
relations then imply that the parametrization of the rate constant is
kr ¼ eDzG-=RT ¼ eDzS-=R
zﬄﬄﬄ}|ﬄﬄﬄ{
A
eDzH-=RT
Note that the entropy of activation maps on to the Arrhenius frequency
factor, A, and the enthalpy of activation replaces the activation energy.
Reactants
Products
Activation energy
(of forward reaction)
Potential energy
Progress of reaction
Figure A.2
The energy barrier on the reaction coordinate.
4
Concepts in Physical Chemistry: 2nd Edition
Downloaded from http://books.rsc.org/books/monograph/chapter-pdf/1818886/bk9781837674244-00001.pdf by guest on 23 May 2024

Activity
Thermodynamic expressions are typically developed for ideal solu-
tions and perfect gases, with expressions such as mJ ¼ mJ
- þ RT ln xJ
(where mJ
- is the standard chemical potential and xJ is the mole
fraction of J). The activity of a species J, aJ or a(J), is introduced
principally to retain the form of these expressions for systems that are
not ideal. Thus, for a real solution the chemical potential is written
mJ ¼ mJ
- þ RT ln aJ. The activity is therefore an ‘eﬀective’ version of the
mole fraction (or other measures of abundance, such as molar con-
centration [J] and molality bJ). Activities are dimensionless. For re-
version to ideal expressions (as in many elementary applications)
given an expression in terms of activity, use the relations aJ ¼ pJ/p-
(for a gas) and either aJ ¼ [J]/c- or aJ ¼ bJ/b- for a solute; for any pure
solid, aJ ¼ 1.
Activities can be measured by making observations on the vapour
pressure of a solvent and comparing it with the vapour pressure of the
pure solvent (at the same temperatures): aJ ¼ pJ/pJ*. The activity of the
solute can then be inferred from this value by using the Gibbs–
Duhem equation. Electrochemical measurements in conjunction with
the Nernst equation can be used if the solute is ionic.
Thermodynamic equations expressed in terms of activities are
exact (by definition). For them to be useful, activities need to be
related to measures of abundance. To do so, it is common to
introduce the activity coeﬃcient, gJ, by the relation aJ ¼ gJxJ (or
analogous expressions in terms of molar concentration and molal-
ity), and to focus on the activity coeﬃcient. For the the solvent,
Raoult’s law implies that gJ - 1 as xJ - 1. For the solute, Henry’s law
implies that gJ - 1 as xJ - 0. Models and theories are then needed to
relate gJ to measurable properties. Typically, these theories are
limiting laws, reliable only in the Raoult’s or Henry’s law limits. An
example is the Debye–Hückel limiting law for electrolyte solutions.
The utility of these limiting-law expressions is best regarded as a
guide to how measurements should be extrapolated to low concen-
trations rather than as the basis for making reliable estimates of
numerical values.
Adiabatic
A boundary is adiabatic if it does not allow the exchange of energy as
heat between the system and its surroundings. A process is adiabatic
Concepts Beginning with A
5
Downloaded from http://books.rsc.org/books/monograph/chapter-pdf/1818886/bk9781837674244-00001.pdf by guest on 23 May 2024

if q ¼ 0. The practical realization of an adiabatic boundary is that of a
container with eﬃciently insulated walls, such as a Dewar vessel. For
the adiabatic, reversible expansion of a perfect gas, the initial and
final states are related by
piVg
i ¼ pfVg
f ;
TiV1=c
i
¼ TfV1=c
f
where g ¼ Cp/CV is the heat capacity ratio (or adiabatic constant) and
c ¼ CV,m/R. The two graphs (Figures A.3 and A.4) show how the pres-
sure (for g ¼ 2) and temperature (for CV,m ¼ 2R) change (the dotted
line is for isothermal expansion).
1
2
3
4
5
Volume ratio, Vf/Vi
Pressure ratio, pf/pi
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Figure A.3
The pressure variation for a reversible adiabatic expansion of a
perfect gas. The dotted line is for a reversible isothermal expansion.
1
2
3
4
5
Temperature ratio, Tf/Ti
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Figure A.4
The temperature variation for a reversible adiabatic expansion
of a perfect gas.
6
Concepts in Physical Chemistry: 2nd Edition
Downloaded from http://books.rsc.org/books/monograph/chapter-pdf/1818886/bk9781837674244-00001.pdf by guest on 23 May 2024

Adiabatic Demagnetization
Adiabatic demagnetization is a procedure for cooling objects to very
low temperatures. A sample of electron or nuclear spins (on their
parent atoms or ions) at a given temperature has a certain entropy.
The application of a magnetic field on the sample in thermal contact
with its surroundings partially aligns the spins and therefore lowers
the entropy of the spin system. Then, with the thermal contact broken
to make the subsequent step adiabatic, the field is slowly reduced to
zero (Figure A.5). This step is adiabatic and reversible, so it is also
isentropic (that is, occurs without change of entropy). The result of
this step is a sample in which the newly partially aligned spins survive
in the absence of a magnetic field. The lower entropy of this spin
distribution corresponds to a temperature lower than it was initially.
The process can be repeated to reach successively lower temperatures.
When the spins are those of nuclei, the technique is called adiabatic
nuclear demagnetization.
Adsorption
Adsorption is the attachment of a species, the adsorbent, to a surface,
the substrate. If no chemical bonds are formed between adsorbent
and substrate, it is called physisorption; if chemical bonds are formed,
then the process is called chemisorption. The reverse of adsorption is
desorption.
0
0
Temperature, T
Entropy, S
Isothermal 
magnetization
Adiabatic
demagnetization
Field off
Field on
Figure A.5
The steps in the process of adiabatic demagnetization.
Concepts Beginning with A
7
Downloaded from http://books.rsc.org/books/monograph/chapter-pdf/1818886/bk9781837674244-00001.pdf by guest on 23 May 2024

Adsorption Isotherm
An adsorption isotherm is the relation between the fractional coverage,
y (which is the ratio of occupied adsorption sites to the total number
of sites), and the partial pressure of the overlying gas. The simplest
version is the Langmuir isotherm:
y ¼
Kp
1 þ Kp
where K is an empirical constant, with dimensions of 1/pressure,
which can be identified with the ratio of the rate constants for ad-
sorption and desorption, K ¼ kads/kdes. The Langmuir isotherm
(Figure A.6) is based on the assumption that all adsorption sites are
equivalent, that there are no interactions between neighbouring ad-
sorbed molecules (so the ability to adsorb is independent of the
fractional coverage), and that adsorption does not proceed beyond
monolayer coverage. Multilayer adsorption is modelled by the BET
isotherm.
Aﬃnity of Reaction
The aﬃnity of reaction, A, is the quantity
A ¼
@G
@x


T; p
¼ 
X
Jj
nJmJ;
A ¼  v  l
where G is the Gibbs energy of the system, x is the extent of reaction,
Figure A.6
The Langmuir isotherm for three values of K.
8
Concepts in Physical Chemistry: 2nd Edition
Downloaded from http://books.rsc.org/books/monograph/chapter-pdf/1818886/bk9781837674244-00001.pdf by guest on 23 May 2024

and the nJ are (signed) stoichiometric numbers. A reaction proceeds
spontaneously towards products if A40 and is at equilibrium
when A ¼ 0. Don’t confuse this A with the Helmholtz energy, also
denoted A.
Allowed Transition
An allowed transition is a spectroscopic transition that is permitted by
the selection rules. A transition that is forbidden may become allowed
by perturbations or departures from the assumed symmetry of the
molecule. Allowed transitions are identified by consideration of the
transition dipole moment, which in turn can be assessed by con-
siderations of symmetry.
Amount of Substance
The amount of substance, n, is a measure of the number of specified
entities in a sample of matter. It is the physical quantity that is
measured in moles, and hence is still widely colloquially referred to as
the ‘number of moles’. The term ‘amount of substance’ is somewhat
unwieldy, so it is often abbreviated to ‘amount’ or, preferably,
‘chemical amount’. For a sample of a substance of mass m and molar
mass M, n ¼ m/M. To avoid ambiguity, the value of n should always
include the identity of the species; thus 1 mol H(g) or 1 mol H2(g), not
1 mol of hydrogen.
Amphiprotic
An amphiprotic species is one that can act as both a proton donor and a
proton acceptor. Water is an example. See autoprotolysis.
Angular Momentum
In classical mechanics, angular momentum is the moment of mo-
mentum of a body about a point. It is defined as l ¼ r  p, where
r is the location of the centre of mass of the body on its orbit and
p is its linear momentum (Figure A.7). The angular momentum is
commonly represented by a vector that depicts the sense of ro-
tation, its orientation, and magnitude. In classical mechanics, all
Concepts Beginning with A
9
Downloaded from http://books.rsc.org/books/monograph/chapter-pdf/1818886/bk9781837674244-00001.pdf by guest on 23 May 2024

three components lq (q ¼ x, y, z) may be specified simultaneously.
The magnitude, l, of angular momentum is l ¼ Io where I is the
moment of inertia of the body travelling with angular velocity o
(in radians per second) on a circular path. If the mass of the body
is m and the path has radius r, the moment of inertia is I ¼ mr2.
The magnitude of angular momentum is related to its components
by
l2 ¼ l2
x þ l2
y þ l2
z
In quantum mechanics, the angular momentum is a physical
observable that is represented by a set of three operators with the
commutation relations
[blx;bly] ¼ iˉhblz;
[bly;blz] ¼ iˉhblx;
[blz;blx] ¼ iˉhbly;
[bl
2;blq] ¼ 0
The three components are mutually complementary variables, so
only one of them can be specified (together with the magnitude).
The quantum numbers that specify the angular momentum are
denoted l,ml for orbital angular motion, s,ms for spin, and j,mj in
general. The commutation relations imply the following restrictions
to the values of the observables for spatial motion (as distinct from
intrinsic spin):
Magnitude of angular momentum ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
l(l þ 1)
p
ˉh; l ¼ 0; 1; 2; . . .
z-component of angular momentum ¼ mlˉh; ml ¼ 0;  1;  2; . . .; l
See also vector model and spin.
Anharmonicity
An oscillator is mechanically anharmonic if its potential energy diﬀers
from the parabolic form characteristic of a harmonic oscillator.
r
l
p
lx
ly
lz
Figure A.7
The vector representation of classical angular momentum.
10
Concepts in Physical Chemistry: 2nd Edition
Downloaded from http://books.rsc.org/books/monograph/chapter-pdf/1818886/bk9781837674244-00001.pdf by guest on 23 May 2024

One model that is used to express anharmonicity is the Morse
potential energy:
V(x) ¼ hc~De(1  eax)2;
a ¼
kf
2hc~De

1=2
The energy levels of a Morse oscillator of mass m are
Ev ¼
v þ 1
2


ˉho 
v þ 1
2

2
ˉhoxe;
o ¼
kf
m

1=2
;
oxe ¼ ˉha2
2m
with v ¼ 0; 1; . . .; vmax, where vmax is the highest integer below
(2hc~De=ˉho)  1
2 (Figure A.8).
Note that the levels converge with increasing v and that there is a
finite number of bound states. The zero-point energy is
E0 ¼ 1
2
1  1
2 xe


ˉho
and
hc~De ¼ ˉho
4xe
The dissociation energy hc ~D0 (which is measured from the zero-point
energy) is at hc~D0 ¼ hc~De  E0. For a more general potential energy,
the Morse expression is extended to
Ev ¼
v þ 1
2


ˉho 
v þ 1
2

2
ˉhoxe þ
v þ 1
2

3
ˉhoye þ   
0
0
Displacement, ax
Potential energy, V/hcDe
1
2
4
vmax
1
–1
1
2
3
4
5
~
v = 0
3
Figure A.8
The potential energy and the allowed energies of a Morse
oscillator.
Concepts Beginning with A
11
Downloaded from http://books.rsc.org/books/monograph/chapter-pdf/1818886/bk9781837674244-00001.pdf by guest on 23 May 2024

where the empirical anharmonicity constants xe, ye, . . . are charac-
teristic of the molecule. Another consequence of anharmonicity
is that the selection rule Dv ¼ 1 weakens and transitions with
Dv ¼ 2; 3; . . ., become allowed. Anharmonicity mixes normal
modes, so they are no longer independent. One consequence of this
mixing is that a forbidden transition may borrow intensity from an
allowed transition and so become weakly allowed.
Antibonding Orbital
An antibonding orbital is a molecular orbital with an energy higher
than that of its constituent atomic orbitals. In dihydrogen, the anti-
bonding orbital is c ¼ cA1s  cB1s. When discussing polyatomic
molecules, it is appropriate to refer to the antibonding character of a
molecular orbital in relation to pairs of neighbouring atoms and to
identify an orbital as antibonding between two atoms if there is an
internuclear nodal plane (Figure A.9).
Antisymmetric
A mathematical function f (x) is antisymmetric if f (x) ¼ f (x).
A many-particle wavefunction is said to be antisymmetric with respect
to particle interchange if it changes sign under the interchange of the
labels of two identical particles: c(. . .,i,. . ., j,. . .) ¼ c(. . ., j,. . .,i,. . .).
See Pauli principle. A normal mode of vibration of a centrosymmetric
polyatomic molecule is classified as antisymmetric if the extension of
Node
Antibonding
Bonding
+
+
+
–
–
–
Figure A.9
The regions of bonding and antibonding in a polyatomic
molecule.
12
Concepts in Physical Chemistry: 2nd Edition
Downloaded from http://books.rsc.org/books/monograph/chapter-pdf/1818886/bk9781837674244-00001.pdf by guest on 23 May 2024

one bond is mirrored by the contraction of an equivalent bond (as in
Figure A.10). The term antisymmetry should be distinguished from
asymmetry, which means the absence of symmetry.
Arrhenius Parameters
The Arrhenius parameters are the activation energy, Ea, and the fre-
quency factor (formerly the pre-exponential factor), A, which occur in
the expression kr ¼ AeEa=RT or equivalently ln kr ¼ ln A  Ea=RT for
the temperature dependence of the rate constant of a chemical re-
action. They are determined experimentally by making an Arrhenius
plot of ln kr against 1/T, the intercept at 1/T ¼ 0 being ln A and the
slope Ea/R. A high activation energy signifies a strong dependence of
the rate constant on the temperature (Figure A.11).
Asymmetric unit
An asymmetric unit is the entity (an atom, ion, or molecule) from
which a crystal is built. The location of an asymmetric unit is
Figure A.10
The antisymmetric stretching mode of an AB2 molecule.
1/Temperature, 1/T
ln kr
ln A
0
High Ea
Low Ea
Zero Ea
Figure A.11
The dependence of the rate constant on temperature for diﬀer-
ent activation energies.
Concepts Beginning with A
13
Downloaded from http://books.rsc.org/books/monograph/chapter-pdf/1818886/bk9781837674244-00001.pdf by guest on 23 May 2024

denoted by a lattice point. The crystal structure itself is the array of
asymmetric units obtained by associating each one with a lattice
point (Figure A.12).
atmosphere (the unit)
The atmosphere (atm) is a unit of pressure defined as 1 atm¼ 101 325 Pa
exactly. The unit is used in the current definitions of normal melting
and boiling points. It is a component of the definition of standard
temperature and pressure (STP).
Atomic Number
The atomic number, Z, of an element is the number of protons in
the nucleus of one of its atoms. The nuclear charge is Ze, where e is
the fundamental charge. It follows that the number of electrons in
an electrically neutral atom is also Z. See also eﬀective nuclear
charge.
Atomic Orbital
An atomic orbital is a one-electron wavefunction for an atom. Most
developments in chemistry are based on hydrogenic atomic orbitals,
which are the orbitals found by solving the Schrödinger equation for a
hydrogenic atom. Each of these wavefunctions can be expressed as
Figure A.12
An asymmetric unit associated with lattice points.
14
Concepts in Physical Chemistry: 2nd Edition
Downloaded from http://books.rsc.org/books/monograph/chapter-pdf/1818886/bk9781837674244-00001.pdf by guest on 23 May 2024

the product of a radial wavefunction, R(r), and an angular wave-
function, Y(y,f), where r, y, and f are the polar coordinates of a point
relative to the nucleus. Each orbital is specified by three quantum
numbers:
principal quantum number n, with n ¼ 1, 2,. . .
orbital angular momentum quantum number l, with l ¼ 0,1,
2,. . ., n  1
magnetic quantum number ml ¼ 0, 1, 2,. . ., l
It follows that there are n2 orbitals that can have the quantum number
n and which in a hydrogenic atom are degenerate.
Atomic orbitals are referred to according to the following notation:
l
0
1
2
3
4. . ..
Orbital
s
p
d
f
g. . .
The value of l specifies the orbital angular momentum of the
electron it describes. The angular wavefunctions are the spherical
harmonics. See that entry and also the entries for individual types of
orbital for their shapes. The radial wavefunction has n  l  1 nodes
where the wavefunction passes through zero. An s orbital is unique in
having a nonzero value at the nucleus: in classical terms, there is no
orbital angular momentum to fling an electron away from the nu-
cleus. An electron that ‘occupies’ (that is, is described by) an atomic
orbital with quantum number n is called an ns-electron (if l ¼ 0) an
np-electron (if l ¼ 1), and so on. See also shell, subshell, and hydro-
genic atom.
Atomic Structure
According to the nuclear model, an atom consists of a small, central,
positively charged, massive nucleus surrounded by shells of electrons.
The electronic structures of atoms are expressed in terms of the
atomic orbitals that are occupied by the Z electrons that are present in
a neutral atom of atomic number Z. The structure is reported in terms
of the electron configuration, the list of occupied orbitals such as 1s1
for hydrogen, 1s2 for helium, 1s22s1 for lithium, and so on. The
electron configuration is determined spectroscopically and mag-
netically and can be rationalized in terms of the building-up
Concepts Beginning with A
15
Downloaded from http://books.rsc.org/books/monograph/chapter-pdf/1818886/bk9781837674244-00001.pdf by guest on 23 May 2024

principle. The orbitals available to the electrons lie in a series of
concentric shells labelled as follows:
n
1
2
3
4. . ..
Shell
K
L
M
N. . .
Attractive and Repulsive Surfaces
An attractive surface is a potential energy surface for a chemical re-
action in which the saddle point occurs early in the reaction coordinate
(Figure A.13). Reactions with attractive surfaces take place more
readily if the energy of the reactants is principally in their relative
translational motion. A surface is repulsive if the saddle point occurs
late in the reaction coordinate (right illustration). Reactions with such
surfaces take place most readily if the excess energy of the reactants is
in the form of molecular vibration.
Auger Eﬀect
The Auger eﬀect is the emission of a secondary electron after high-
energy radiation (either X-ray or, more commonly, a beam of fast
electrons) has expelled another electron. The first electron to depart
leaves a vacancy in the low-lying orbital and an electron falls into it
from an upper level (Figure A.14). The energy released ejects the
secondary electron. The latter’s kinetic energy is characteristic of the
solid. Its use in determining composition is called Auger electron
Figure A.13
Attractive (left) and repulsive (right) potential energy surfaces.
16
Concepts in Physical Chemistry: 2nd Edition
Downloaded from http://books.rsc.org/books/monograph/chapter-pdf/1818886/bk9781837674244-00001.pdf by guest on 23 May 2024

spectroscopy (AES). Instead of the released energy ejecting a second
electron, it might result in the generation of an X-ray photon, which is
observed as X-ray fluorescence.
Autocatalysis
Autocatalysis is the acceleration of a reaction as a result of a product
acting as a reactant. Thus, the reaction Aþ B-C followed by C -A þ D
is autocatalytic.
Autoprotolysis
The term autoprotolysis means the transfer of a proton between like
molecules, with a molecule acting both as a proton donor (acid) and
proton acceptor (base), as in the autoprotolysis of water, 2 H2O(l) -
H3O1(aq) þ OH(aq). The equilibrium constant of this reaction is
called the autoprotolysis constant (of water), Kw:
Kw ¼ aH3OþaOH;
pKw ¼  log Kw
At 25 8C, pKw ¼ 14.01. In elementary applications the activities in the
definition of Kw are interpreted as [ J]/c-, where [ J] is the molar
concentration of J and c- ¼ 1 mol dm3.
Avogadro’s Constant
Avogadro’s constant, NA, is the number of entities per mole of a
substance. It has the defined value NA ¼ 6.022 140 76  1023 mol1
(a value chosen to be close to the traditional definition, which was the
number of atoms in exactly 12 g of carbon-12). See mole.
Incident
electron
Primary electron
Secondary electron
Coulomb interaction
Figure A.14
The processes involved in the Auger eﬀect.
Concepts Beginning with A
17
Downloaded from http://books.rsc.org/books/monograph/chapter-pdf/1818886/bk9781837674244-00001.pdf by guest on 23 May 2024

Axilrod–Teller Formula
The Axilrod–Teller formula is an approximate form of the potential
energy of interaction of three molecules:
V ¼  C6
r6
AB
 C6
r6
BC
 C6
r6
CA
 C0(yA;yB;yC)
(rABrBCrCA)3 ; C0(yA;yB;yC)¼a(1þ3cos yAcos yB cos yC)
where a is a parameter that is approximately equal to 3
4 a0C6 with
a0 the polarizability volume of the molecule. The angles are depicted
in Figure A.15.
Axis of Symmetry
An axis of symmetry is the symmetry element corresponding to a
symmetry rotation of a body. An n-fold axis of symmetry is the sym-
metry element associated with a rotation through 2p/n.
Azeotrope
An azeotrope is a liquid mixture that boils to give a vapour of the same
composition as the liquid. A high-boiling azeotrope has a boiling
Figure A.15
The angles used in the Axilrod–Teller formula.
Figure A.16
High-boiling (left) and low-boiling (right) azeotrope phase
diagrams.
18
Concepts in Physical Chemistry: 2nd Edition
Downloaded from http://books.rsc.org/books/monograph/chapter-pdf/1818886/bk9781837674244-00001.pdf by guest on 23 May 2024

temperature higher than that of both its components (Figure A.16).
A low boiling azeotrope has a boiling point that is lower than that of
both its components. Azeotropes have important consequences for
fractional distillation. When a mixture that forms a high-boiling
azeotrope is fractionally distilled, the more volatile component
vaporizes until the remaining liquid has reached its azeotropic
composition; the mixture then distils unchanged. When a mixture
that forms a low-boiling azeotrope is distilled, the vapour has the
composition of the azeotropic mixture.
Concepts Beginning with A
19
Downloaded from http://books.rsc.org/books/monograph/chapter-pdf/1818886/bk9781837674244-00001.pdf by guest on 23 May 2024

