I
Ideal Solution
An ideal solution is a solution in which the vapour pressures, pJ, of
both the solute and the solvent obey Raoult’s law, that
pJ ¼ xJ pJ
where pJ is the vapour pressure of the pure component J and xJ is its
mole fraction in the solution (Figure I.1). An alternative, equivalent
definition (because it implies Raoult’s law) is that the chemical
potential of J in the solution is given by
mJ ¼ m-
J
þ RT ln xJ
Concepts in Physical Chemistry: 2nd Edition
By Peter Atkins
r Peter Atkins 2024
Published by the Royal Society of Chemistry, www.rsc.org
Figure I.1
The vapour pressure of an ideal solution.
157
Downloaded from http://books.rsc.org/books/monograph/chapter-pdf/1818790/bk9781837674244-00157.pdf by guest on 23 May 2024

In an ideal solution, the interactions between the components
are the same as in the pure materials and the solute is distributed
randomly through the solvent. That is, the enthalpy of mixing of
the component is zero and the entropy and Gibbs energy of mixing
are
DmixS ¼  nR
X
J
xJ ln xJ;
DmixG ¼ nRT
X
J
xJ ln xJ
See Figure I.2 and I.3.
A regular solution is one for which the entropy of mixing has its
ideal value (so the solute is distributed randomly) but the enthalpy
Figure I.2
The entropy of mixing of an ideal solution.
Figure I.3
The Gibbs energy of mixing of an ideal solution.
158
Concepts in Physical Chemistry: 2nd Edition
Downloaded from http://books.rsc.org/books/monograph/chapter-pdf/1818790/bk9781837674244-00157.pdf by guest on 23 May 2024

of mixing is nonzero; see excess functions. Note that in an ideal
system the interactions are all the same but in a perfect system
(that is, a perfect gas) they are not only the same but also zero.
This distinction between ideal and perfect is not always made.
Ideal–Dilute Solution
An ideal–dilute solution is one in which the solvent obeys Raoult’s law
and the solute obeys Henry’s law, that
psolute ¼ xsoluteKsolute
where Ksolute is an empirical constant obtained by extrapolating the
low concentration data to xsolute ¼ 1. Henry’s law is used as the basis
of the definition of activity coeﬃcient of the solute and for the esti-
mation of the solubilities of gases (Figure I.4).
Identity Operation
The identity operation, E, is the act of doing nothing. It is required in
the formal structure of group theory. The largest character of the
identity in a character table for a point group is the maximum de-
generacy possible for a system (and atom, ion, or molecule) that be-
longs to that point group.
Figure I.4
Henry’s and Raoult’s laws.
Concepts Beginning with I
159
Downloaded from http://books.rsc.org/books/monograph/chapter-pdf/1818790/bk9781837674244-00157.pdf by guest on 23 May 2024

Impact Parameter
The impact parameter, b, is the initial perpendicular distance between
the line of approach of a projectile molecule and the target molecule
(Figure I.5).
Improper Rotation Axis
An n-fold improper rotation axis (or axis of improper rotation), Sn, is
a combination of an n-fold axis and a horizontal mirror plane:
Sn ¼ shCn. Note that S1 is equivalent to a mirror plane and that S2 is
equivalent to a centre of inversion. Molecules that do not possess an
Sn axis are chiral (Figure I.6).
Incongruent Melting
Incongruent melting is the decomposition of a compound as it
melts. The corresponding feature in the phase diagram is indicated in
Figure I.7 by the ringed area.
Figure I.5
The definition of impact parameter.
Figure I.6
Improper rotation axes with n ¼ 4 and 6.
160
Concepts in Physical Chemistry: 2nd Edition
Downloaded from http://books.rsc.org/books/monograph/chapter-pdf/1818790/bk9781837674244-00157.pdf by guest on 23 May 2024

Indexing Reflections
Indexing reflections is the procedure in which a reflection in X-ray
crystallography is ascribed to planes with the Miller indices {hkl}.
Inexact Diﬀerential
An inexact diﬀerential (or incomplete diﬀerential) is one for which its
integral depends on the path of integration. They are sometimes
denoted :x. Examples of inexact diﬀerentials are dw and dq for work
and heat, respectively. An inexact diﬀerential can be converted into an
exact diﬀerential by multiplication by an integrating factor. An ex-
ample is the conversion of the inexact diﬀerential dqrev into the exact
diﬀerential dS by multiplication by 1/T.
Infrared Spectroscopy
Infrared spectroscopy (IR spectroscopy) is the observation of the ab-
sorption of infrared radiation by the vibrational modes of a molecule.
A molecule consisting of N atoms has 3N – 6 normal modes of vibra-
tion (3N – 5 if it is linear), where a normal mode is a synchronous, in-
dependent vibrational displacement of its atoms that leaves its centre
of mass and its orientation unchanged. A normal mode is infrared
active in the sense that its transition dipole moment is nonzero, and
therefore interacts with the electromagnetic field, if it is accompanied
Figure I.7
A feature indicating incongruent melting.
Concepts Beginning with I
161
Downloaded from http://books.rsc.org/books/monograph/chapter-pdf/1818790/bk9781837674244-00157.pdf by guest on 23 May 2024

by a changing electric dipole moment. The frequency of the vibration
depends on a combination of force constants for the displacement
(with the force constants for angular displacements typically smaller
than those for changes of bond length) and on the eﬀective mass of the
mode, a measure of the quantity of matter moved in the course of the
vibration. The independence of the normal modes depends on their
motion being harmonic (that is, in accord with Hooke’s law). The
single normal vibrational mode of a diatomic molecule AB with atomic
masses mA and mB, and its vibrational frequency is
n ¼ 1
2p
kf
m

1=2
;
m ¼
mAmB
mA þ mB
Of the four normal modes of an ABA linear molecule, two are de-
generate (in the sense that they have the same frequency. The allowed
transitions, those for which Dv ¼ 1, are the first harmonics. When the
motion is anharmonic (when the restoring force deviates from Hooke’s
law), then overtones with Dv41 (the higher harmonics) are allowed
with low intensity. In the gas phase, vibrational transitions are ac-
companied by rotational transitions, giving rise to a branch structure
of the vibrational spectrum.
The vibrational spectra of large molecules can be very complex. The
fingerprint region of complex structure is characteristic of the substance,
and can be used to recognize it by reference to a library of spectra.
Inhibition
Inhibition in biochemistry is the reduction in eﬃciency of an enzyme.
Inhibitors are classified in terms of their binding properties, or
equivalently in terms of their eﬀect on the values of the maximum
velocity, vmax, and the Michaelis constant, KM, of the uninhibited
enzyme. They can be distinguished experimentally by making a
LineweaverBurk plot (Figure I.8).
Figure I.8
LineweaverBurk plots for a variety of inhibition schemes.
162
Concepts in Physical Chemistry: 2nd Edition
Downloaded from http://books.rsc.org/books/monograph/chapter-pdf/1818790/bk9781837674244-00157.pdf by guest on 23 May 2024

Competitive inhibition: the inhibitor binds to E but not to ES.
Inhibitor binding is often but not always at the active site, and the
formation of EI prevents binding of the substrate (Figure I.9).
The y-intercept of a Lineweaver–Burk plot is unchanged, but the
slope increases by a factor 1 þ [I]/Kd,EI. Thus, Kinhibited
M
increases as [I]
increases, but vmax is unaﬀected.
Uncompetitive inhibition: the inhibitor binds to ES but not E,
thereby reducing the concentration of the catalytically active ES
through the formation of ESI (Figure I.10).
In this case Kd,EI - N because EI does not form. The slope of the
Lineweaver–Burk plot is unchanged, but the y-intercept of the plot
increases by a factor of 1 þ [I]/Kd,ESI. Thus, as [I] increases uncompetitive
inhibition reduces Kinhibited
M
and vinhibited
max
by the same amount.
Mixed inhibition: the inhibitor binds to both E and ES (Figure I.11).
Both the slope and intercept of the Lineweaver–Burk plot increase
upon addition of the inhibitor.
Figure I.9
Competitive inhibition.
Figure I.10
Uncompetitive inhibition.
Figure I.11
Mixed inhibition.
Concepts Beginning with I
163
Downloaded from http://books.rsc.org/books/monograph/chapter-pdf/1818790/bk9781837674244-00157.pdf by guest on 23 May 2024

Non-competitive inhibition: is a special case of mixed inhibition in
which the inhibitor has no eﬀect on the binding of the substrate to
the active site, and equally the substrate has no eﬀect on the
binding of the inhibitor.
Here Kd,ESI ¼ Kd,EI because the dissociation equilibria ESI " ES þ I
and EI " E þ I are unaﬀected by the presence of S in ESI. In this case,
the lines for the uninhibited and inhibited enzymes in the Line-
weaver–Burk plot intersect on the horizontal axis, showing that KM is
unaﬀected by the inhibitor.
Inhomogeneous Broadening
Inhomogeneous broadening is the line broadening in NMR arising from
imperfections in the magnetic field across the sample. It is expressed
in terms of the eﬀective transverse relaxation time,
T2 ¼
1
pDn1=2
where Dn1/2 is the observed width of the resonance line at half height.
Intensive Property
A property is classified as intensive if it is independent of the amount
of substance in the sample. More precisely, if the sample is imagined
to be divided into smaller samples, then a property is intensive if its
value for the original sample is the same as the values for each of the
smaller samples. Properties that are not intensive are extensive. Ex-
amples of intensive properties are temperature, pressure, mass
density, and all molar quantities. In some cases (temperature and
pressure, for instance) the properties are intrinsically independent of
the size of the sample. In others (density and molar quantities, for
instance), the property is a ratio of two extensive properties.
Interference
Interference is the interaction between the amplitudes of waves (in-
cluding wavefunctions) that results in a wave with altered amplitude.
In constructive interference the waves have the same phase in the re-
gion where they overlap and the total amplitude is larger than either
164
Concepts in Physical Chemistry: 2nd Edition
Downloaded from http://books.rsc.org/books/monograph/chapter-pdf/1818790/bk9781837674244-00157.pdf by guest on 23 May 2024

component alone. In destructive interference the phases of the com-
ponents are opposite and the amplitude of one wave subtracts from
the other to result in a diminished amplitude.
Intermolecular Forces
Intermolecular forces are the forces of interaction of attraction and
repulsion that act between closed shell atoms and molecules. Some of
the interactions are universal, in the sense that (apart from their
strength) they act regardless of the identity of the species. These
universal interactions are electromagnetic in origin and most can be
traced to the Coulombic interaction between permanent or transient
charges. The distance dependence of their potential energies are as
follows (where z is the charge number of an ion, m is the dipole mo-
ment of a polar molecule, and a is the molecular polarizability):
1. Ion–ion interaction. The electrostatic interaction between char-
ges; V p z1z2/r.
2. Ion–dipole interaction. The electrostatic interaction between the
charge of an ion and the partial charges of a permanent electric
dipole; V p z1m2/r2.
3. Dipole–dipole interaction. The electrostatic interaction between
the partial charges of two polar molecules. V p m1m2/r3 if the
dipoles are locked in position; V p (m1m2)2/Tr6 if they are freely
rotating at a temperature T.
4. Dipole–induced dipole interaction. In this interaction, the partial
charges of a polar molecule induces a dipole moment in a
neighbouring molecule (which might already be polar) and the
initial and induced dipoles interact. V p (m1a2)2/r6.
5. Induced-dipole–induced-dipole interaction (or London interaction,
dispersion interaction). A fluctuation in the electron distribution
in one molecule gives rise to a transient electric dipole, which
induces an electric dipole in a neighbouring molecule, and the
two transient dipoles interact. V p (a1a2)2/r6.
6. Repulsion. Once the two molecules come into contact and their
wavefunctions start to overlap, they repel each other. This re-
pulsion increases sharply with decreasing distance.
All the interactions may be present, depending on the charge and
polarity of the molecules involved. The interactions that are pro-
portional to 1/r6 are classified as van der Waals interactions, although
Concepts Beginning with I
165
Downloaded from http://books.rsc.org/books/monograph/chapter-pdf/1818790/bk9781837674244-00157.pdf by guest on 23 May 2024

the term is often applied to all nonbonded interactions. Note that the
force is proportional to dV/dr, so a potential energy proportional to
1/r n is associated with a force proportional to 1/r n11. At large mo-
lecular separations, the potential energy of the dispersion interaction
becomes proportional to 1/r7. This weakening is due to the time it
takes for information to pass between the molecules.
A specific interaction, one that does depend on the identity of the
molecules, is hydrogen bonding; see that entry.
Internal Conversion
Internal conversion is the process by which a molecule in one elec-
tronic state converts non-radiatively into another electronic state of
the same multiplicity (Figure I.12). The conversion occurs in accord
with the Franck–Condon principle and takes place at the intersection
of the two molecular potential energy curves.
Internal Energy
The internal energy, U, of a system is the total energy of the system
(strictly, in the frame moving with the observer, disregarding its
motion through space). Its thermodynamic definition is based on the
First law and the statement that for a closed system
dU ¼ dw þ dq
where dw is the (infinitesimal) energy supplied as work done on the
system and dq is the (infinitesimal) energy supplied as heat to the
system. This expression summarizes the observation that work and
Figure I.12
The process of internal conversion.
166
Concepts in Physical Chemistry: 2nd Edition
Downloaded from http://books.rsc.org/books/monograph/chapter-pdf/1818790/bk9781837674244-00157.pdf by guest on 23 May 2024

heat are equivalent ways of transferring energy between a system and
its surroundings and the statement of the First law that the internal
energy of an isolated system (dw ¼ 0, dq ¼ 0) is constant. A more
subtle definition is that the diﬀerence in internal energy between two
specific states is equal to the work needed to take the system from one
state to another along an adiabatic path:
DU ¼ wadiabatic
As work can be identified with a mechanical process (the raising of a
weight), this definition links thermodynamics with mechanics.
The internal energy is a state function. For a closed system that
does no other kind of work, a change in internal energy can be
identified with the energy transferred as heat at constant volume:
DU ¼ qV
The temperature dependence of the internal energy is summarized by
the isochoric heat capacity:
CV ¼
@U
@T


V
A change in internal energy may also be expressed in terms of changes
in volume and entropy through
dU ¼ TdS  pdV
from which various relations may be inferred, such as
@U
@S


V
¼ T
This relation is a purely thermodynamic definition of temperature
(and combines concepts from the Zeroth law, T; the First law, U; and
the Second law, S).
The internal energy of a system relative to its value at T ¼ 0 is re-
lated to the canonical partition function Q by
U(T) ¼ U(0) 
@ ln Q
@b


V
;
b ¼ 1
kT
For a system composed of N independent molecules with partition
function q,
U(T) ¼ U(0)  N @ ln q
@b


V
;
b ¼ 1
kT
Concepts Beginning with I
167
Downloaded from http://books.rsc.org/books/monograph/chapter-pdf/1818790/bk9781837674244-00157.pdf by guest on 23 May 2024

Thus, the internal energy can be interpreted as the population-
weighted average over the energies of the available states of a system.
Intersystem Crossing
Intersystem crossing (ISC) is the radiationless transition of a molecule
from one electronic state into another with a diﬀerent multiplicity
(Figure I.13). An example is the singlet-to-triplet crossing that occurs
as a step in the mechanism of phosphorescence.
Intersystem crossing is brought about by spinorbit coupling and
entails the transfer of orbital angular momentum to spin angular
momentum (the change from S ¼ 0 to S ¼ 1 in singlet-to-triplet ISC).
The mechanism of this transfer is the magnetic field due to orbital
motion of the electron acting on its own spin and thereby reversing its
orientation relative to a second spin (mk - mm, Figure I.14). The
opportunity for ISC, which conforms to the Franck–Condon principle,
Figure I.13
The process of intersystem crossing.
Figure I.14
The vector model of intersystem crossing from a singlet to a
triplet state.
168
Concepts in Physical Chemistry: 2nd Edition
Downloaded from http://books.rsc.org/books/monograph/chapter-pdf/1818790/bk9781837674244-00157.pdf by guest on 23 May 2024

arises where the two molecular potential energy curves intersect. The
intersection of curves eﬀectively opens the door to the crossing and
the spin–orbit coupling pushes the molecules through. As heavy
atoms have strong spin–orbit couplings, ISC is most likely to occur in
molecules that contain them.
Ionic Bond
An ionic bond is an electrostatic attraction between oppositely charged
ions. Except in the case of the formation of ion pairs in the gas phase, it
is best regarded as a global property of an aggregation of ions rather
than a localized interaction between one cation and one anion. The
formation of an ionic bond involves transfer of an electron from one
atom to another, so its formation is facilitated by a low ionization
energy of the element that is to form the cation. Low ionization ener-
gies are associated with metallic elements, so ionic bonds are typically
characteristic of a metal in combination with a nonmetal. There are
major exceptions, such as the formation of compounds containing
NH4
1. The energetics of formation of an ionic bond take into account
the ionization energy of one element, the electron aﬃnity of the other,
and the global Coulombic interaction energy of the ions they form; the
net result of the first two alone only rarely accounts for the lower energy
of an ionic solid relative to the free atoms.
The (molar) lattice energy, Elattice,m, of an ionic compound, the dif-
ference in energy between the solid and the gas of infinitely separated
ions, is inferred experimentally from a Born–Haber cycle and esti-
mated from the Born–Mayer equation:
Elattice;m ¼  NAjzAzBje2
4pe0d
1  d
d


A
In this expression, zA and zB are the charge numbers of the ions, d
is the sum of their ionic radii, d* is a constant typically taken to be
Table I.1
Madelung constants.
Structural type
A
Caesium chloride
1.763
Fluorite
2.519
Rock salt
1.748
Rutile
2.408
Sphalerite (zinc blende)
1.638
Wurtzite
1.641
Concepts Beginning with I
169
Downloaded from http://books.rsc.org/books/monograph/chapter-pdf/1818790/bk9781837674244-00157.pdf by guest on 23 May 2024

34.5 pm, which aims to take into account repulsive interactions, and A
is the Madelung constant, a constant characteristic of the arrangement
of ions in the solid (Table I.1).
Ionic Radius
The ionic radius is the notional radius of an ion in a solid. Its value
depends on a largely arbitrary apportioning of the internuclear sep-
aration of the two ions, and a typical scale is based on ascribing the
value 140 pm to the ionic radius of the O2 ion. Other scales are
sometimes more appropriate, such as for halides. Ionic radii vary
periodically, with values typically increasing down a group and de-
creasing from left to right across a period. The d-block elements show
some subtle variations. Cations are smaller than their parent atoms
and anions are larger. The lanthanide contraction is a marked decrease
in atomic and ionic radius following the lanthanoids.
Ionic Strength
The (dimensionless) ionic strength, I, of a solution that contains irons
of charge number zi at a molality bi is
I ¼ 1
2
X
i
z2
i bi=b-
where b- ¼ 1 mol kg1. Note that the sum extends over all the ions
in the solution, including any spectator ions that may be present.
The ionic strength apars in a number of expressions relating to the
thermodynamic and kinetic properties of ions in solution, such as the
Debye–Hückel limiting law and the kinetic salt eﬀect. A characteristic
of some properties of ionic solutions is that they approach a limiting
value for I ¼ 0 as I1/2.
Ionization Energy
The ionization energy, I, of an element is the minimum energy re-
quired to remove an electron from one of its atoms in the gas phase:
I(X) ¼ E(Xþ; g)  E(X; g)
170
Concepts in Physical Chemistry: 2nd Edition
Downloaded from http://books.rsc.org/books/monograph/chapter-pdf/1818790/bk9781837674244-00157.pdf by guest on 23 May 2024

Successive (and increasing) ionization energies are designated first,
second, and third ionization energies. In some applications it is
sometimes appropriate to consider the ionization energy from a
specific orbital: see Koopmans’ theorem. First ionization energies
increase from left right across a period and decrease down a group.
The standard enthalpy of ionization, DionH-, is related to the molar
ionization energy by
DionH- T
ð Þ ¼ DionU- T
ð Þ þ RTEI þ RT
Isenthalpic Process
An isenthalpic process is a process taking place at constant enthalpy.
An example is the isothermal reversible expansion of a perfect gas
(which is isenthalpic but endothermic). See Joule–Thomson eﬀect.
Isobaric Process
An isobaric process is a process taking place at constant pressure. For an
isobaric process in a closed (constant composition) system, DH ¼ qp.
Isochoric Process
An isochoric process is a process taking place at constant volume. For
an isochoric process in a closed (constant composition) system,
DU ¼ qV.
Isoelectric Point
The isoelectric point of a macromolecule is the pH of a solution in
which its net electric charge is zero.
Isolation Method
The isolation method is a technique for examining the influence of an
individual reactant on the rate of a chemical reaction and for deter-
mining the order of the reaction with respect to that reactant. In the
procedure, each reactant except the one of interest is present in a large
excess so that its concentration is eﬀectively constant throughout the
Concepts Beginning with I
171
Downloaded from http://books.rsc.org/books/monograph/chapter-pdf/1818790/bk9781837674244-00157.pdf by guest on 23 May 2024

course of the reaction. The concentration of the remaining reactant is
varied and the rate law for that component is inferred in the normal way.
Isomorphous Replacement
Isomorphous replacement is a technique used in X-ray crystallography
in which a modification to the diﬀraction pattern is obtained by the
substitution of atoms of one element for those of another without
significantly changing the structure of the crystal. The replacement
can result in a greatly simplified diﬀraction pattern, especially if the
replacement atoms dominate the diﬀraction, and so be a guide to the
determination of the normal structure of the crystal.
Isopleth
An isopleth is a line of constant composition in a phase diagram
(Figure I.15).
Isosteric Process
An isosteric process is a process that occurs at constant surface coverage.
Isothermal Process
An isothermal process is a process that occurs at constant temperature.
An isotherm is a line in a graphical representation of a process occurring
at constant temperature; for example, the variation of the pressure of
a gas with volume at constant temperature (Figure I.16).
Figure I.15
Isopleths in a phase diagram.
172
Concepts in Physical Chemistry: 2nd Edition
Downloaded from http://books.rsc.org/books/monograph/chapter-pdf/1818790/bk9781837674244-00157.pdf by guest on 23 May 2024

An adsorption isotherm is an expression for the variation of the extent
of surface coverage with pressure. The work done by a gas expanding
isothermally and reversibly is equal to the area below its isotherm and
enclosed between the initial and final volumes (Figure I.17).
Figure I.16
An isotherm and an adiabat of a perfect gas.
Figure I.17
The relation between reversible expansion work and area under
an isotherm.
Concepts Beginning with I
173
Downloaded from http://books.rsc.org/books/monograph/chapter-pdf/1818790/bk9781837674244-00157.pdf by guest on 23 May 2024

