
A 
T H O U S A N D 
B R A I N S
A  N E W  T H E O R Y  O F 
I N T E L L I G E N C E
J E F F  H A W K I N S
With a foreword by Richard Dawkins
New York

Copyright © 2021 by Jeffrey C. Hawkins
Foreword copyright © 2021 by Richard Dawkins
Cover images © Alexsl / E+ via Getty Images; © Dmitri Gomon / Shutterstock.com
Cover copyright © 2021 Hachette Book Group, Inc.
Hachette Book Group supports the right to free expression and the value of 
copyright. The purpose of copyright is to encourage writers and artists to produce 
the creative works that enrich our culture.
The scanning, uploading, and distribution of this book without permission 
is a theft of the author’s intellectual property. If you would like permission to 
use material from the book (other than for review purposes), please contact 
permissions@hbgusa.com. Thank you for your support of the author’s rights.
Basic Books
Hachette Book Group
1290 Avenue of the Americas, New York, NY 10104
www.basicbooks.com
Printed in the United States of America
First Edition: March 2021
Published by Basic Books, an imprint of Perseus Books, LLC, a subsidiary of 
Hachette Book Group, Inc. The Basic Books name and logo is a trademark of the 
Hachette Book Group.
The Hachette Speakers Bureau provides a wide range of authors for speaking events. 
To find out more, go to www.hachettespeakersbureau.com or call (866) 376-6591.
The publisher is not responsible for websites (or their content) that are not owned 
by the publisher.
Print book interior design by Trish Wilkinson
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Names: Hawkins, Jeff, 1957– author.
Title: A thousand brains : a new theory of intelligence / Jeff Hawkins ; with a 
foreword by Richard Dawkins.
Description: First edition. | New York : Basic Books, 2021. | Includes 
bibliographical references and index.
Identifiers: LCCN 2020038829 | ISBN 9781541675810 (hardcover) | ISBN 
9781541675803 (ebook)
Subjects: LCSH: Brain. | Intellect. | Artificial intelligence.
Classification: LCC QP376 .H2944 2021 | DDC 612.8/2—dc23
LC record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2020038829
ISBNs: 978-1-5416-7581-0 (hardcover), 978-1-5416-7580-3 (ebook)
LSC-C
10  9  8  7  6  5  4  3  2  1

A human brain 

Connections in the neocortex

Neurons in a slice of neocortex 

A typical neuron

A model of a cortical column




Suggested Readings
People who have heard about our work often ask me what I recommend
reading to learn more about the Thousand Brains Theory and the related 
neuroscience. This usually prompts a deep sigh from me, because there 
isn’t a simple answer, and to be honest, it is hard to read neuro science 
papers. Before I give you specific reading recommendations, I have some 
general suggestions.
Neuroscience is such a large field of study that even if you are a scien-
tist intimately familiar with one subfield you might have trouble reading 
the literature in a different one. And if you are completely new to neuro-
science it can be difficult to get started.
If you want to learn about a specific topic—say, cortical columns or 
grid cells—and you are not already fluent in that topic, then I recom-
mend starting with a source such as Wikipedia. Wikipedia usually has 
multiple articles on any topic, and you can quickly jump between them 
by following links. It is the quickest way I know to get a feel for termi-
nology, ideas, themes, etc. You will often find that different articles dis-
agree or use different terminology. You will find similar disagreements 
in peer-reviewed scientific papers. As a rule, you need to read multiple 
sources to get a sense of what is known about a topic.
To dig deeper, the next thing I recommend are review articles. Re-
view articles appear in peer-reviewed academic journals, but, as their 
name implies, they present an overview of a topic, including areas where 

Suggested Readings
scientists disagree. Review articles are usually easier to read than typical 
papers. The citations are also valuable because they present most of the 
important papers related to a topic in one list. A good way to find re-
view articles is to use a search engine such as Google Scholar and type in 
something like “review article for grid cells.”
Only after you have learned the nomenclature, history, and concepts 
of a topic would I recommend reading individual scientific papers. The 
title and abstract of a paper are rarely sufficient to know if it has the in-
formation you are looking for. I typically read the abstract. Then I scan 
the images, which in a well-written paper should tell the same story as 
the text. Then I jump to the discussion section at the end. This section is 
often the only place where the authors plainly describe what the paper 
is about. Only after these preliminary steps will I consider reading the 
paper from beginning to end.
Below are suggested readings by topic. There are hundreds to thou-
sands of papers on each subject, so I can only give you a few suggestions 
to help you get started.
Cortical Columns
The Thousand Brains Theory is built upon Vernon Mountcastle’s pro-
posal that cortical columns have similar architectures and perform sim-
ilar functions. The first reference below is Mountcastle’s original essay 
where he proposed the idea of a common cortical algorithm. The sec-
ond reference is a more recent paper by Mountcastle in which he lists 
numerous experimental findings that support his proposal. The third 
reference, by Buxhoeveden and Casanova, is a relatively easy to read 
review. Although it is mostly about minicolumns, it discusses various 
arguments and evidence related to Mountcastle’s claim. The fourth ref-
erence, by Thomson and Lamy, is a review article on cortical anatomy. It 
is a thorough review of cellular layers and the prototypical connections 
between them. It is complicated, but it is one of my favorite papers.
Mountcastle, Vernon. “An Organizing Principle for Cerebral Function: 
The Unit Model and the Distributed System.” In The Mindful Brain, 
edited by Gerald M. Edelman and Vernon B. Mountcastle, 7–50. 
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1978.

Suggested Readings
Mountcastle, Vernon. “The Columnar Organization of the Neocortex.” 
Brain 120 (1997): 701–722.
Buxhoeveden, Daniel P., and Manuel F. Casanova. “The Minicolumn 
Hypothesis in Neuroscience.” Brain 125, no. 5 (May 2002): 935–951. 
Thomson, Alex M., and Christophe Lamy. “Functional Maps of Neo­
cortical Local Circuitry.” Frontiers in Neuroscience 1 (October 
2007): 19–42.
Cortical Hierarchy
The first paper below, by Felleman and Van Essen, is the one I men­
tioned in Chapter 1, which first described the hierarchy of regions in the 
macaque neocortex. I include it mostly for its historical interest. Unfor­
tunately, it is not open-access.
The second reference, by Hilgetag and Goulas, is a more current look 
at issues of hierarchy in the neocortex. The authors list various problems 
of interpreting the neocortex as a strict hierarchy.
The third reference, a paper by Murray Sherman and Ray Guillery, 
argues that the primary way two cortical regions talk to each other is 
through a part of the brain called the thalamus. Figure 3 in the paper 
nicely illustrates this idea. Sherman and Guillery’s proposal is often ig­
nored by other neuroscientists. For example, neither of the first two ref­
erences mention the connections through the thalamus. Although I did 
not talk about the thalamus in this book, it is so intimately connected to 
the neocortex that I consider it an extension of the neocortex. My col­
leagues and I discuss a possible explanation of the thalamic pathway in 
our 2019 “Frameworks” paper, which is discussed below.
Felleman, Daniel J., and David C. Van Essen. “Distributed Hierarchical 
Processing in the Primate Cerebral Cortex.” Cerebral Cortex 1, no. 1 
(January–February 1991): 1.
Hilgetag, Claus C., and Alexandros Goulas. “‘Hierarchy’ in the Organi­
zation of Brain Networks.” Philosophical Transactions of the Royal 
Society B: Biological Sciences 375, no. 1796 (April 2020).
Sherman, S. Murray, and R. W. Guillery. “Distinct Functions for Direct 
and Transthalamic Corticocortical Connections.” Journal of Neuro-
physiology 106, no. 3 (September 2011): 1068–1077.

­
motor? Towards a Unified View of the Dorsal Pathway in Vision 
and Audition.” Cortex 98 (January 2018): 262–268.
Dendritic Spikes
In Chapter 4, I discussed our theory that neurons in the neocortex make 
predictions using dendritic spikes. Here I list three review papers that 
discuss this topic. The first, by London and Häusser, is perhaps the eas-
iest to read. The second, by Antic et al., is more directly relevant to our 
theory, as is the third reference, by Major, Larkum, and Schiller.
London, Michael, and Michael Häusser. “Dendritic Computation.” An-
nual Review of Neuroscience 28, no. 1 (July 2005): 503–532.
Antic, Srdjan D., Wen-Liang Zhou, Anna R. Moore, Shaina M. Short, and 
Katerina D. Ikonomu. “The Decade of the Dendritic NMDA Spike.” 
Journal of Neuroscience Research 88 (November 2010): 2991–3001.
Major, Guy, Matthew E. Larkum, and Jackie Schiller. “Active Proper-
ties of Neocortical Pyramidal Neuron Dendrites.” Annual Review of 
Neuroscience 36 (July 2013): 1–24.

Suggested Readings
Grid Cells and Place Cells
A key part of the Thousand Brains Theory is that every cortical column 
learns models of the world using reference frames. We propose that the 
neocortex does this using mechanisms that are similar to what is used 
by grid cells and place cells in the entorhinal cortex and hippocampus. 
To get an excellent overview of place cells and grid cells, I recommend 
reading or listening to the O’Keefe and the Mosers’ Nobel lectures, in 
the order they gave them. The three of them worked together to give a 
coordinated set of lectures.
O’Keefe, John. “Spatial Cells in the Hippocampal Formation.” Nobel Lec-
ture. Filmed December 7, 2014, at Aula Medica, Karolinska Institu-
tet, Stockholm. Video, 45:17. www.nobelprize.org/prizes/medicine 
/2014/okeefe/lecture/.
Moser, Edvard I. “Grid Cells and the Enthorinal Map of Space.” Nobel 
Lecture. Filmed December 7, 2014, at Aula Medica, Karolinska Insti-
tutet, Stockholm. Video, 49:23. www.nobelprize.org/prizes/medicine 
/2014/edvard-moser/lecture/.
Moser, May-Britt. “Grid Cells, Place Cells and Memory.” Nobel Lec-
ture. Filmed December 7, 2014, at Aula Medica, Karolinska Institu-
tet, Stockholm. Video, 49:48. www.nobelprize.org/prizes/medicine 
/2014/may-britt-moser/lecture/.
Grid Cells in the Neocortex
We are only beginning to see evidence of grid-cell mechanisms in the 
neocortex. In Chapter 6, I described two fMRI experiments that showed 
evidence of grid cells in humans performing cognitive tasks. The first 
two papers—by Doeller, Barry, and Burgess, and Constantinescu, 
O’Reilly, and Behrens—describe these experiments. The third paper, by 
Jacobs et al., describes similar results from humans undergoing open-
brain surgery.
Doeller, Christian F., Caswell Barry, and Neil Burgess. “Evidence for 
Grid Cells in a Human Memory Network.” Nature 463, no. 7281 
(February 2010): 657–661.

Suggested Readings
Constantinescu, Alexandra O., Jill X. O’Reilly, and Timothy E. J. 
­Behrens. “Organizing Conceptual Knowledge in Humans with a 
Gridlike Code.” Science 352, no. 6292 (June 2016): 1464–1468.
Jacobs, Joshua, Christoph T. Weidemann, Jonathan F. Miller, Alec Sol-
way, John F. Burke, Xue-Xin Wei, Nanthia Suthana, Michael R. Sper-
ling, Ashwini D. Sharan, Itzhak Fried, and Michael J. Kahana. “Direct 
Recordings of Grid-Like Neuronal Activity in Human Spatial Navi-
gation.” Nature Neuroscience 16, no. 9 (September 2013): 1188–1190.
Numenta’s Papers on the Thousand Brains Theory
This book provides a high-level description of the Thousand Brains 
­Theory, but it does not go into many details. If you are interested in 
finding out more, you can read my lab’s peer-reviewed papers. They 
contain detailed descriptions of specific components, often including 
simulations and source code. All our papers are open-access. Here are 
the most relevant ones, with a brief description of each.
The following is our most recent paper, and also the easiest to read. It 
is the best place to start if you want to get a more in-depth description of 
the full theory and some of its implications.
Hawkins, Jeff, Marcus Lewis, Mirko Klukas, Scott Purdy, and Subu-
tai Ahmad. “A Framework for Intelligence and Cortical Function 
Based on Grid Cells in the Neocortex.” Frontiers in Neural Circuits 
12 (January 2019): 121.
This next paper introduced our proposal that most dendritic spikes act 
as predictions, and that 90 percent of the synapses on pyramidal neu-
rons are dedicated to recognizing contexts for predictions. The paper 
also described how a layer of neurons organized into minicolumns cre-
ates a predictive sequence memory. The paper explains many aspects 
of biological neurons that cannot be explained by other theories. It is a 
detailed paper that includes simulations, a mathematical description of 
our algorithm, and a pointer to source code.
Hawkins, Jeff, and Subutai Ahmad. “Why Neurons Have Thousands of 
Synapses, a Theory of Sequence Memory in Neocortex.” Frontiers in 
Neural Circuits 10, no. 23 (March 2016): 1–13.

Suggested Readings
Next is the paper where we first introduced the idea that every cor-
tical column can learn models of entire objects. This paper also intro-
duced the concept of column voting. The mechanisms in this paper are 
extensions of the predictive mechanisms introduced in our 2016 paper. 
We also speculate that grid-cell representations might form the basis for 
the location signal, though we had not yet worked through any details. 
The paper includes simulations, capacity calculations, and a mathemati-
cal description of our algorithm.
Hawkins, Jeff, Subutai Ahmad, and Yuwei Cui. “A Theory of How Col-
umns in the Neocortex Enable Learning the Structure of the World.” 
Frontiers in Neural Circuits 11 (October 2017): 81.
The following paper extends our 2017 paper by working through in 
detail how grid cells can form a representation of location. It explains 
how such locations can predict upcoming sensory input. The paper pro-
poses a mapping between the model and three of the six layers in the 
neocortex. The paper includes simulations, capacity calculations, and a 
mathematical description of our algorithm.
Lewis, Marcus, Scott Purdy, Subutai Ahmad, and Jeff Hawkins. “Loca-
tions in the Neocortex: A Theory of Sensorimotor Object Recog-
nition Using Cortical Grid Cells.” Frontiers in Neural Circuits 13 
(April 2019): 22.

Illustration Credits	
12	
Bill Fehr / stock.adobe.com	
14	
Adapted from “Distributed Hierarchical Processing in the 
Primate Cerebral Cortex,” by Daniel J. Felleman and David C. 
Van Essen, 1991, Cerebral Cortex, 1(1):1.	
16	
Santiago Ramón y Cajal 
	109	
Edward H. Adelson
	177	
Bryan Derksen, reprinted with permission under terms of the 
GNU Free Documentation License: https://en.wikipedia.org 
/wiki/en:GNU_Free_Documentation_License.

Jeff Hawkins is the cofounder of Numenta, a neuroscience 
research company, founder of the Redwood Neuroscience 
Institute, and one of the founders of the field of handheld 
computing. He is a member of the National Academy of 
Engineering and author of On Intelligence.
© Tri Nguyen / Tri Nguyen Photography

