How can I build a portfolio career?
It can be difficult to know how to incorporate different areas of interest into your working life. Abi
Rimmer speaks to experts about where to start
Abi Rimmer
“Think about what you enjoy”
Sarah Goulding, career coach and mentor for doctors
and NHS GP, says, “There’s an assumption that once
we’ve plumped for our specialities that’s all we want
to, or should, do. In reality there are many benefits
to a portfolio career and it was part of the reason I
chose general practice.
“The first step is to be nosey—what are other people
doing? What jobs make you a bit jealous? I’ve often
been gobsmacked by the variety of careers I’ve seen
when reading the obituaries section of The BMJ. Why
not set up a search on various job sites with a very
broad range—the vast majority won’t apply to you
but it ensures nothing intriguing slips by.
“The second step is to research a particular area or
two that pique your interest. There are often specialist
groups online with colleagues whose brains you can
pick. Don’t underestimate the benefits of
networking—a coffee or a brief phone call may
provide you not only with information but often
useful contacts. If a job or an opportunity isn’t
available now, it may well be in the future and people
are often happy to help and delighted you share the
same interests.
“Thirdly, if you don’t have a specific interest in mind,
think back to what you enjoyed at school or as a
medical student. There are no rules saying you must
have a portfolio composed entirely of medical jobs.
What elements of your life really fill you with joy and
enthusiasm? We’re often drawn to more logical and
fact based areas, but by allowing our creative sides
to flourish we can hugely increase wellbeing.
“Lastly, try to be flexible in your thinking. Our options
are rarely binary and if one line of pursuit doesn’t
work out there are myriad exciting others to delve
into. If you feel completely stuck, a discussion with
a trusted friend, mentor, or professional coach can
help you understand your motivations and move
forward with confidence.”
“Don’t be afraid to break the mould”
Will Owen, GP specialty trainee and specialty doctor
in paediatrics, says, “For the past two years I’ve split
my week between GP training, work as a paediatric
specialty doctor, helping lead a programme called
Next Generation GP, and spending a day with my two
year old daughter.
“Creating a portfolio career has been a brilliant way
of satisfying my need for variety in my work. I’ve also
found that I have more energy and I appreciate
clinical time with colleagues and patients more. It
also, inevitably, comes with some complexity; at
times developing a portfolio career has felt like
spinning many plates—of which I’ve certainly
dropped a few.
“But I have learnt a few things. Firstly, consider what
different roles or opportunities will give you—not
necessarily in terms of career progression but what
they add to your life, wellbeing, or energy levels.
“Be clear about the challenges—aside from the added
complexity of ‘life admin’ (keeping track of finances,
annual leave, study leave, and so on) I’ve also
experienced more self-doubt as a ‘jack of all trades,
master of none.’ This is compounded by the longer
time taken to gain clinical competencies and the
difficulty some others have in understanding
non-linear training paths.
“Find allies—when you have many different roles it
can impact on the time and focus you have for each
of them. Try to find supportive seniors, colleagues,
or friends who know a bit about your work balance
and can listen when things feel tricky.
“Build up a portfolio gradually and be
flexible—sometimes things all fall into place at once
but try to be realistic and not over-promise on how
much time and energy you can give to each part of
your week. Keep this under review; if you find the
balance isn’t working for you then change it.
“Protect time for yourself and your personal
relationships—this is usually the first thing to go
when we get busy. Having multiple roles comes with
increasing reasons to sacrifice time for ourselves or
our relationships and it’s important to be aware of
this.
“Finally, don’t be afraid to break the mould—training
programmes can feel very rigid but flexibility is
almost always possible and can bring so many
benefits, sometimes you just need to find the right
person to ask.”
“Find people to support you”
Harry Yong, emergency medicine education fellow,
Barts Health NHS Trust, says, “Passion is the key to
developing in any job, but especially in a career in a
non-clinical field. If you wish to develop a career
within research, governance, education, or any other
complementary field it’s of vital importance that you
have passion and enthusiasm for the work that you
are undertaking. It is this interest that will allow you
to endure setbacks, deadlines, and ultimately a lot
of work that you could otherwise avoid if you were
focused on a solely clinical career.
“The first thing to consider is what your interests are.
Do you enjoy teaching and educational activities? Do
you have a passion for research and is this laboratory
1
the bmj | BMJ 2020;370:m3426 | doi: 10.1136/bmj.m3426
CAREERS
The BMJ
Cite this as: BMJ 2020;370:m3426
http://dx.doi.org/10.1136/bmj.m3426
Published: 07 September 2020
 on 29 July 2022 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://www.bmj.com/
BMJ: first published as 10.1136/bmj.m3426 on 7 September 2020. Downloaded from 

or clinically based? Do you see areas of your clinical practice that
you wish to improve through audit or other governance projects?
“Knowing what areas enthuse you will enable you to have a
framework around which to attach different activities. While doing
this, always remember to keep in mind how your choices will be
relevant to your specialty.
“Next, think about who is available to support you; talk to
consultants, seniors, and medical school professors who might be
able to give advice or inform you about ongoing projects.
“Lastly, remember the importance of self-direction; no one is going
to offer you opportunities, and you will have to hunt them out for
yourself.
“Many universities and royal colleges offer formal postgraduate
qualifications in various subjects. Research and teaching
opportunities are often available through both medical schools and
individual hospitals, and all hospitals will have a governance lead
who oversees audit projects.
“Ultimately, you must identify what you enjoy, work out what
opportunities exist in this field, and then have the tenacity and
willingness to go after them.”
the bmj | BMJ 2020;370:m3426 | doi: 10.1136/bmj.m3426
2
CAREERS
 on 29 July 2022 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://www.bmj.com/
BMJ: first published as 10.1136/bmj.m3426 on 7 September 2020. Downloaded from 

