Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

Context Changes Everything
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

Context Changes Everything
How Constraints Create Coherence
Alicia Juarrero
The MIT Press
Cambridge, Massachusetts
London, England
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

© 2023 Massachusetts Institute of Technology
This work is subject to a Creative Commons CC-­BY-­NC-­ND license.
Subject to such license, all rights are reserved.
This book was set in Sabon by Westchester Publishing Services. 
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Names: Juarrero, Alicia, author.
Title: Context changes everything : how constraints create coherence /
  Alicia Juarrero.
Description: Cambridge, Massachusetts : The MIT Press, [2023] | Includes
  bibliographical references and index.
Identifiers: LCCN 2022030581 (print) | LCCN 2022030582 (ebook) | 
  ISBN 9780262545662 | ISBN 9780262374781 (epub) | ISBN 9780262374774 (pdf)
Subjects: LCSH: Complexity (Philosophy) | Causation.
Classification: LCC B105.C473 J83 2023 (print) | LCC B105.C473 (ebook) |
  DDC 117—dc23/eng/20230124
LC record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2022030581
LC ebook record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2022030582
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

This book is dedicated to Julia, Marama, Ana, Alejandro, Miguel, Kiri, 
Rewa, Mahina, and José Raúl, purveyors of context extraordinaire.
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

I
1	
What Went Wrong? The Backstory  3
Types, Kinds, and Essences  5
Primary and Secondary (Accidental) Properties  6
Interactions and Relations  10
Efficient Causality  13
Mereology  15
Physical Causal Closure and Overdetermination  16
2	
The Path Forward  21
II
3	
Constraints: An Introduction  35
What Are Constraints?  40
Spatial and Temporal Constraints  41
4	
Context-­Independent Constraints  49
Containers of Gas and Landscape Design  50
Vague and Ambiguous Constraints  54
Limited Message Variety  56
5	
Why Context Matters—­An Interlude  59
Science 2.0 and Medicine 2.0 Are All about Context 
  Dependence  59
The Indirect Effects of Context  62
Contents
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

viii    Contents
6	
Context-­Dependent Constraints  67
Enabling and Constitutive/Governing Constraints  71
Temporal Constraints  73
Cardinality and Indexicality, Ordinality and Placement  75
Top-­Down (Governing) Context-­Dependent Constraints  79
Coordination Dynamics Satisfy Second Law  84
7	
Catalysts, Loops, and Closure  87
Catalysts and Feedback Loops  87
Closure of Processes (Catalytic Closure)  90
Autocatalytic Closure  90
Constraint Closure  93
Statistical and Semantic Closure  96
Semantic Attractors  99
8	
An Abundance of Constraints  103
Repetition  104
Replication  105
Reproduction  107
Unity of Type in Species, Demes, and Memes  109
Density, Isolation, and Buffers  111
Isolation  112
Buffers and Other Shields  115
Motility and Migration—­The Relaxation of Constraints  117
Templates, Frameworks, Scaffolds, and Affordances  120
Scaffolding  122
Types of Scaffolds  124
9	
Persistence—­Delaying the Second Law  129
Persistence and Thermodynamics  130
The Principle of Persistence  135
Selection by Persistence  139
10	 Sedimentation and Entrenchment  143
Sedimentation, Memory, Records, and Registers  143
Entrenchment  145
Varieties of Entrenchment  148
Generative Entrenchment  151
Generative Entrenchment of Validated Constraints  153
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

Contents    ix
11	 Many-­to-­One Transitions, Effective and Analog Control  155
Tagging Emergent Properties  163
Analog Control  167
Analog Control and Energy Management  169
Multiply Realizable Domains Are Analog Spaces  174
12	 Of Holons, Holarchy, Heterarchy, and Hierarchy  177
Koestler’s Holons and Holarchies  177
Levels of Organization  183
Mereology Revisited  186
Extensional and Intensional Definitions  192
Control Hierarchy  194
III
13	 The Backstory, Today  197
Functionalism  200
Chinese Room Objection  201
Principle of Supervenience  202
Multiple Realizability  204
The 4E Approach Today  205
14	 Multiple Realization and Supervenience: A Philosophical 
Case Study about Constraints  211
Shapiro and Gillett on Multiple Realizability  211
Lange—­Because without Cause  216
Principles and Laws  216
15	 Empirical Research on Delayed Response: Neuroscience Case 
Studies about Constraints   223
Mark Churchland’s Team  224
Preparatory and Perimotor Neural Activity  225
A Further Study  227
16	 Concluding Remarks  233
Notes  239
References  247
Index  263
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

I
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

The controversy surrounding the concept of identity illustrates how phil­
osophical and scientific presuppositions that go without saying entangle 
us in never-­ending mazes.
In the history of ideas, claims that identity consists of a defining essence 
have a long backstory. In fact, one could arguably claim that it is among 
the oldest backstories in philosophy, a backstory that involves the paradox 
of the One and the Many. What makes different entities (e.g., dachs­
hunds, boxers, chihuahuas, Great Danes) the same, that is, dogs? What 
makes anything continue being the same thing? How is it that something 
can persist as itself—­despite changes wrought by either developmental 
processes, the environment, or internal malfunction?
Issues with identity are not new; the problem was first posed in the sixth 
century BCE. The classical version went as follows: If all the planks of the 
ship of Theseus are replaced over time, is it still “the ship of Theseus,” 
even when not one of the original planks remains? Does anything persist 
as the same thing, the ship of Theseus, despite such significant alterations? 
How is change compatible with remaining the same? What does same 
mean, in this context or any other?
In 2019, Chinese scientists inserted a human gene into the brains of 
eleven monkeys; those monkeys then outperformed normal monkeys in 
tests of short-­term memory. Even more striking, the modified monkeys’ 
brain developed into an organ more like a human’s than like that of 
the unmodified monkeys (Regalado 2019). Are these animals now partly 
human? In 2021, an international team of scientists injected human 
stem cells into primates (Subbaraman 2021). The interspecies chimeras 
grew for two weeks before being destroyed. If a human being’s body 
parts are gradually replaced with silicon components until no original 
organic material remains, would they still be human, or a cyborg? If all 
1
What Went Wrong? The Backstory
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

4    Chapter 1
my memories disappeared, or if my beliefs suddenly became entirely dif­
ferent, would I still be me? What is it to be me? Just as the Ship of Theseus 
is one of the oldest backstories in philosophy, tales of aliens taking over 
the bodies of earthlings are among the oldest themes in science fiction.1
Today’s controversy about identity is not just an old story; it is also 
an oft-­told story (Toulmin 1990; Juarrero 1999). However, the central 
theme of this book is not identity, nor will this book be solely a survey 
of these debates. The problem of identity happens to be a noteworthy 
philosophical topic that encapsulates in a single controversy three cat­
egories that have been egregiously responsible for framing our views of 
reality in a misleading manner. Our understanding of many concepts, not 
only those that arise with respect to identity, continues to be misdirected 
by outdated and erroneous ideas about three central issues:
•	 Are wholes different from aggregates?
•	 Are context and history part of the fabric of reality?
•	 How do cause and effect work?
The three questions are so deeply interwoven in the way we see things 
that a discussion of one inevitably brings to bear the others. The problem 
of wholes and aggregates is the problem of Types or Kinds and Essences, 
the problem of context and history is the problem of Interactions and 
Relations, and the problem of causes and effects is, well, the huge philo­
sophical problem of Causation.
The last one, Causation, is the most recalcitrant and pervasive of the 
three. It wraps around the other two: Do interactions among individ­
ual entities create real novelty in the form of coherent wholes? Can the 
context in which an event occurs have any influence either on whether it 
happens at all or on exactly what happens?
This chapter presents highlights from the history of these ideas. It 
describes how relations and interactions, context and history, came to be 
thought of as causally impotent; how seemingly coherent totalities were 
reduced to nothing but aggregates; and how the idea of cause and effect 
came to be restricted to energy-­transferring processes. These controver­
sies are problematic, not only because of what they have to say about the 
nature of identity; they mainly arise because of our deeply flawed views 
about causality and coherence—­about the causes of coherence. Once we 
understand what went wrong with these two notions, we can begin to rei­
magine a different and more inclusive interpretive framework that can also 
make room for identity as contextually embedded coherence and interde­
pendence. The book takes preliminary steps in that direction.
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

What Went Wrong?    5
Types, Kinds, and Essences
The fable of the Scorpion and the Frog shows how “identity” has tradi­
tionally been thought to capture the essence that uniquely distinguishes 
something from everything else—­everything else that something is not. 
The scorpion asks the frog to ferry it across the river safely. When the 
frog hesitates, fearful the scorpion would kill it, the scorpion protests 
that doing so would mean that both would drown. The frog accepts that 
reasoning. Halfway across the river the scorpion stings the frog. As they 
are both drowning, the dying frog asks the scorpion, “Why did you do 
that?” To which the scorpion replies, “I couldn’t help it. It’s my nature.” 
Thinking of identity in this way suggests that if certain properties, inter­
nal to the creature, were missing, it would no longer be itself because 
those properties define what it is to be a scorpion. They capture, that is, a 
thing’s fundamental essence and therefore its identity.
The idea of nature or essence as internal and standalone is notewor­
thy because of the unacknowledged assumptions it uncritically accepts. 
Essence as internal represents a refusal to acknowledge that interactions 
and relations play a role in a thing’s nature; it also refuses to recognize that 
relational properties like coordination, integration, and context embed­
dedness are real. It ignores both the past and current circumstances. It 
underpins, in short, a worldview that dismisses time and place—­context 
in general—­from reality. These become passive containers instead. Such 
failures make it impossible to understand coherence and identity.
That backstory goes as follows.
Beginning with Thales in the sixth century BCE, pre-­Socratic philoso­
phers embarked on a search for the essence and nature of reality. What 
made pre-­Socratics different from their precursors was their faith in 
reason and logic, as opposed to an unquestioning acceptance of mythic 
tales (Juarrero 1993). Is Water the foundation of reality, asked Thales? 
Is there more than one fundamental essence—­perhaps, air, wind, fire, as 
well as water? Maybe all four, as Empedocles proposed? Or is the essence 
of reality change (Heraclitus)? Or an unchanging Plenum (Parmenides)? 
Lucretius, the first recorded atomist, noted that whatever turns out to be 
fundamental must be in-­divisible—­a-­tom. Otherwise, it could be decom­
posed into more simple stuff and so would not be fundamental. The late 
Carl Sagan, host of the popular public television series Cosmos, lamented 
that the history of ideas went wrong when Socrates veered from this 
pre-­Socratic interest in cosmological and natural questions and turned 
instead to ethical and normative ones.
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

6    Chapter 1
Fast forward to the eighteenth century. Modern English atomist John 
Dalton noticed that chemicals could be combined into more complex sub­
stances or broken down into more fundamental elements. In a nod toward 
Lucretius, Dalton called the fundamental particles atoms and identified 
weight as their primary property. In that same century, French chemist 
Antoine Lavoisier added mass as a second primary property of atoms.
Primary and Secondary (Accidental) Properties
Modern science and philosophy consolidated the idea of primary proper­
ties as the ground of reality and therefore of identity; only primary prop­
erties constitute the essence of things. One of the features that allegedly 
makes primary properties primary is their ability to exist on their own, 
independent of others; they do not depend on anything else either to exist 
or to be perceived. Properties like atomic weight and mass—­those that 
underlie solidity, extension, and quantity—­are often listed as preeminent 
examples of primary properties. From this perspective, essence and iden­
tity are what might be called internalist concepts: they pick out proper­
ties that are internal to the entity in question; they are also objectively 
measurable and observer independent.
Once the internalist definition was adopted, concluding that interactions 
contribute nothing fundamental to reality followed. Relations with other 
entities in the environment and with the past bring context to bear, but 
because context was viewed as a container external to the thing’s essence, 
it too was set aside as irrelevant to identity. The philosophical conundrum 
posed by the measurement problem in quantum physics originates in this 
framing.
Contrast the seeming ontological independence and self-­sufficiency of 
atomic mass and weight with the context dependence of color and sound. 
It has been known since classical times (Democritus) that flavors, odors, 
color, sounds, and even temperature are inherently relational and con­
textual. Inserting a hand in a bucket of tepid water feels cold if it comes 
after inserting the hand in hot water, but it feels warm if it comes after icy 
water. Because they are not independent of perception, relational proper­
ties dependent on an observer were considered subjective.2 In the language 
of academic philosophy, properties that arise from interactions, especially 
with human observers, are secondary or accidental properties. For that 
very reason, they are also ontologically secondary, their reality derivative.
In natural philosophy, Kind traditionally refers to natural kinds and 
is often used synonymously with Type and Universals to mean classes of 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

What Went Wrong?    7
entities or processes defined by common primary properties.3 “It’s my [scor­
pion] nature” follows that reasoning. On this view, kinds and types pick out 
real, universal features in the world. Scorpionality, if you will, is real, the set 
of primary properties that makes scorpions scorpions. The elements of the 
periodic table are prototypes of natural kinds not least because they repre­
sent measurable and observer-­independent properties such as the number of 
protons in the nucleus. All instances of element X have Y number of protons 
in their nucleus. This primary property constitutes their essence.
It is important to note that, even in classical times, types, kinds, and uni­
versals were understood to be multiply realized: differently embodied tokens 
can realize the same type. Some actual scorpions are ground dwelling; others 
are tree dwellers, but as scorpions, they possess the same basic primary prop­
erties. Likewise, whether isosceles, equilateral, or scalene, actual triangles are 
tokens of the type triangularity. They all realize its essential, primary prop­
erties: three-­sided, enclosed, two-­dimensional figures whose interior angles 
sum to 180 degrees. They would not be triangles if they did not.
According to Plato, even if material tokens of types ceased to exist, if 
this triangle I drew in the sand got washed away with the tide, the essence 
of triangularity would continue to exist even if no longer instantiated. Pla­
tonic Forms such as Justice, Goodness, Truth, and Beauty as well as tri­
angularity and numbers were thought to exist in a transcendental realm, 
fixed and eternal. They were considered real even if no actual triangles, or 
written numbers, or actual cases of justice, goodness, truth, or beauty had 
ever existed.
So, Carl Sagan did not get it quite right: Socrates was not entirely deviat­
ing from the tradition of the pre-­Socratics. Platonic dialogues such as the 
Republic (about justice) and Meno (about knowledge acquisition) narrate 
Socrates’ attempts to elucidate and define the universal and eternal essences 
of justice, knowledge, truth, and goodness. Socrates’ efforts to articulate 
the inherent properties of universals are therefore not entirely unlike pre-­
Socratic attempts to discover the essential traits of natural phenomena.
Because types and forms can be realized in multiple instances or 
tokens, each different from the next, providing a full list of actual realiza­
tions does not capture a type’s essence; to do so, scholars must discover 
the full set of its primary properties. That is what real (as opposed to 
ostensive) definitions do. Even after Plato’s influence gave way to Aristo­
tle’s, and well before formulating natural laws became the central aim of 
science, classifying natural kinds such as types of rock (igneous, sedimen­
tary, metamorphic) or biological taxons such as vertebrates by discover­
ing their primary properties consumed most scientists’ time.
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

8    Chapter 1
Multiple realizability, also called degeneracy in biology, where it 
is ubiquitous, will play a key role in this story. The terms refer to the 
capacity of different events and processes to realize the same function 
or other higher-­level property. The main idea presented in this introduc­
tory chapter is that according to the received understanding of types 
and kinds, individual tokens of a given kind were thought to differ only 
in their secondary properties. Their essential, primary properties, those 
that identify them as a type of thing—­a given species, for example—­are 
inherent, universal, and unchanging throughout. As late as the nineteenth 
century, this was even thought to be so in nature; Darwin’s proposal that 
new species originated by evolving in response to selection was contro­
versial for that very reason.
*
*
*
The way philosophers thought about essences and types evolved over the 
course of the history of ideas. As just mentioned, Plato concluded they 
were real transcendent forms. Aristotle, on the other hand, did not agree 
that form and matter could exist independently. In opposition to Plato’s 
disembodied realm of forms, Aristotle focused on embodied Substance, 
the unity of in-­formed matter.
Living things are quintessential examples of Aristotelian in-­formed 
matter. In contrast to compacted masses of pebbles, for instance, organisms 
“hang together” in a unique way; they embody or realize a coherence that 
Aristotle postulated as the essence of substance.4 Aristotelean substances 
are also independent existents, the other hallmark of reality for both phi­
losophy and science.5 On this view, actual lions are the coherent unity of 
the form Lion with the appropriate matter. In comparison to colors, sounds, 
or flavors, actual lions do not require observers to exist. In lieu of the oth­
erworldly existence of Plato’s forms, the essence of Aristotelean substances 
was therefore embodied self-­sufficiency.
From both Plato and Aristotle’s realist perspective, forms and universals 
are real. It was not until later in the history of Western thought that uni­
versals or types came to be considered mere labels or tools with which we 
think and organize our concepts and actions, or with which we design and 
conduct scientific experiments. This perspective, known as nominalism, 
held that the generality of common nouns is our doing; properties that 
define common nouns do not refer to objective essences. In contrast to 
realism, nominalism argued that all that really exists are actual particulars.
With the rise of scientific method in the sixteenth century, observa­
tion and analysis were elevated over a priori reasoning and synthesis. 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

What Went Wrong?    9
In Novum Organum (New Method), English philosopher and political 
leader Francis Bacon proposed a new way of reasoning. In contrast to 
medieval Scholasticism’s focus on a priori reasoning, Bacon’s scientific 
method was based on induction, on inferring general conclusions from 
fine-­grained, precise observations. In Discourse on Method a century 
later, French philosopher and mathematician René Descartes laid out a 
technique for knowledge acquisition that returned to deduction. Never­
theless, it required thinkers to begin with the most elementary and there­
fore indubitable ideas instead of accepted beliefs or revealed truths. In 
either case (Baconian induction or Cartesian deduction), the proper way 
to acquire knowledge was by starting from the elements (bare observa­
tions or clear and distinct ideas) and then proceeding to reconstruct the 
whole.
Threats to coherence are already present in this approach. Before Des­
cartes, medieval thinkers like Christian Thomas Aquinas, Jewish Moses 
Maimonides, and Muslim Ibn Rushd (Averroes) followed Aristotle in the 
assumption that coherent substance—­unity of form and matter—­is the 
default basis of reality. What is the source of the coherence of embodied 
substance? Alas, Aristotle’s writings did not fully resolve the question of 
how embodied substance, in-­formed matter, is bound into coherent and 
unified wholes (Gill and Lennox 1994).
In contrast, influenced by modern atomists such as French thinker 
Pierre Gassendi and English experimentalist Robert Boyle, modern sci­
entists and philosophers prioritized analysis over synthesis, parts over 
the whole. In doing so, the philosophical problem of identity was trans­
formed from “How does essence in-­form matter and confer on it its iden­
tity?” into “How do primary properties cohere into complex wholes?”
Whence coherence? Or, more precisely, whence the cause of coherence?
In Descartes’ writings, Aristotelian embodied substance sundered into 
mind and matter, two distinct ontological domains, each with its own sub­
stance and each defined by its distinct primary property. Mind is defined 
by its primary property, res cogitans, whose essential trait is conscious­
ness, and matter, res extensa, by its primary property, spatial extension. 
Known as dualism, the theory maintained that both substances, mind 
and matter, were real.6 It is unsurprising, therefore, that by the middle 
of the seventeenth century, fears about whether coherence was even pos­
sible were being voiced. In his famous poem, An Anatomy of the World 
(1611), English poet and soldier John Donne lamented, “Tis all in pieces, 
all coherence gone.”
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

10    Chapter 1
But doubts about coherence did not begin in the seventeenth century. 
Philosophers as far back as Plato were sophisticated enough not to confuse 
form (an entity’s core type identity) with shape. Justice was a Platonic form, 
for example, although it obviously has no shape. If forms are transcendent, 
however, how are actual entities related to the form that makes them what 
they are, that is, that imbues them with their essential nature?
Plato’s famous allegory of the cave taught that physical objects are 
mere shadows of forms. Over the centuries, explaining how shadows or 
simulacra (material tokens) “partake in” or embody transcendent forms 
became a cottage industry. Plato thought of matter as a corrupting influ­
ence: when ideal forms get mixed in with matter, the result is a degraded 
reality. A few centuries later, and to avoid the Paulist and Augustinian 
disposition to label all matter corrupt after the Fall, Neo-­Platonists such 
as Plotinus identified Platonic forms with God and suggested that they 
emanate into matter. Forms somehow ooze into matter?7 Philosophy 
searched for a principle of coherence that binds transcendent forms to 
matter such as to generate coherent wholes.
The generation and preservation of coherence and its emergent prop­
erties is the central subject matter of this book.
Descartes’ proposal that mind and body are two separate and dis­
tinct substances, each capable of independent existence and character­
ized by nonoverlapping essences, raised additional questions. Juarrero 
1999 focused on how intentional causation and therefore purposive 
action (as opposed to reflex reaction) are even possible. How can two 
substances from entirely different ontological domains, the extended 
physical and the conscious nonphysical, interact at all? How can a non­
physical event like the intention to do X move the body such that the 
ensuing behavior carries out the content of that intention, doing X? 
Purposive action and the mind–­body problem became the crucible of 
coherence. This book focuses on mereological causation, that is, on how 
interacting entities generate wholes with novel properties and how those 
wholes, once they coalesce, guide behavior. In particular, it focuses on 
the manner of causation that generates and preserves parts–­whole and 
whole–­parts coherence.
Interactions and Relations
Hypotheses about coherent wholeness and its primary and secondary 
properties intersect with views about the status of interactions and rela­
tions. As noted earlier, context and interactions, including fluctuations 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

What Went Wrong?    11
and perturbations, were presumed not to affect essential primary proper­
ties of fundamental elements or substances. To repeat, whether these consist 
of mass and atomic weight or thought and extension, primary properties 
were allegedly eternal, fixed, and universal, and they inhered in the entity 
whose essence and identity they underpin. Neither context nor history, not 
to mention process, alteration, or flux, could change those fundamental 
building blocks of reality.8 “It’s my nature.” The essence of particles and 
substances (including minds) was internal, remained unaltered despite sec­
ondary modifications, and was capable of separate and independent exis­
tence. And, as always, relations and interactions with other particles or 
substances were considered neither essential nor foundational.
*
*
*
The field of chemistry is all about relations and transformations; chemists 
study interactions among molecules and charged particles. However, if 
relations and interactions are secondary, chemical compounds and chemi­
cal synthesis cannot then be fully real, qua chemical, as philosophers say. 
They must be nothing but aggregates of primary and essential properties 
of constituent physical elements. Chemical properties must be the acci­
dental effluvia of clumped particles.
On this view, then, the apparent unity of chemical compounds, or living 
things, is illusory; wholes (including organisms) are mere agglomerations, 
the sum of their elementary parts. Material aggregates do not generate 
coherence; they are just masses of physical stuff. They are nothing but 
macroscopic clumps of elementary particles. They might appear to possess 
qualitatively novel capacities and properties like oxidation, life, sensation, 
and perception or even mind and consciousness. In reality, however, those 
are mere side effects—­castoffs—­of aggregated masses of primary properties. 
Those seemingly emergent properties and powers are ontologically deriva­
tive. They bring with them no powers of their own.
The principle that coherence is nothing but impotent aggregation is still 
presumed to apply generally, not only in chemistry. It motivates the philo­
sophical perspective called reductionism, often characterized as “nothing 
but-­ism.” Reductionism maintains that because wholeness is nothing but 
particles and their secondary interactions, any seemingly novel properties 
of purportedly coherent wholes can be derived, in principle, if not in fact, 
from laws pertaining to its constituent elements. Colloquially, “Wholes are 
nothing but the sum of their parts.” On this view, descriptions of coherence 
are either convenient labels or epistemic simplifications to which scien­
tists resort because computing all the details of micro-­interactions among 
primary properties takes too long.
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

12    Chapter 1
In summary, reductionists maintain that, in principle, chemical, biologi­
cal, psychological, sociocultural, or ecological processes, reactions, combi­
nations, transformations, changes, and rearrangements of elements will all 
be fully accounted for by internal, context-­independent, and fully quan­
tifiable, essential—­that is, primary—­properties of fundamental particles.
The inevitable conclusion of the foregoing is that seemingly coher­
ent entities like biological organisms and chemical compounds are caus­
ally powerless as biological and chemical wholes; if apparently coherent 
“wholes” are mere aggregations, their seemingly emergent properties are 
powerless. In the jargon of philosophy, coherence and emergent proper­
ties that characterize that apparent coherence are epiphenomenal, that 
is, causally impotent as such. The heavy causal lifting is always and only 
done by the fundamental elementary particles (van Gulick 2004). Accord­
ingly, the arrow of explanation always looks downward, as the saying 
goes, because reality is grounded in the primary properties of elementary 
particles, which underwrite natural laws.
In short, misconceptions about causation cut across the previous con­
siderations. According to the standard physics-­based framework, as just 
described,
•	 Essences reside in internal and self-­sufficient primary properties capable 
of independent existence. This implies that context and history are not 
fundamental features of reality.
•	 “Wholes” that appear to display novel and emergent properties are, 
at bottom, nothing but the sum of those primary properties and their 
interactions.
It follows that causal powers reside exclusively in fundamental parti­
cles and their primary properties. Bottom-­up influences might bubble up 
from parts to aggregates, but with the following caveats: (1) any apparent 
coherence or wholeness is mere aggregation, and (2) seemingly emergent 
properties such as phenomenal awareness and feelings are, likewise, epi­
phenomenal characteristics of aggregated elementary particles.
Specifically, according to reductionism, our intuition that mental pro­
cesses such as intentions and beliefs have powers to actively bring about 
meaningful, purposive actions is illusory. Thoughts, feelings, and inten­
tions derive their powers and properties from biology; biology from those 
of chemistry; chemistry from physics. Properties that appear unique to 
biological organisms (such as being alive) or human beings (such as sym­
bolic language) can, in principle, be inferred from chemical processes that 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

What Went Wrong?    13
constitute them. Causal powers that seem to issue from those higher-­level 
properties can be derived from physical properties, at least in principle. It is 
not quite “turtles all the way down,” however. The turtle at the bottom (at 
the level of elementary physics) is special. The primary properties of a-­toms, 
reality’s constituents (read now quarks and electrons), are the real and most 
simple stuff that does the causal work and provides explanatory power. 
Ultimate causes reside in and issue from there. Meaning and purpose are 
impotent.
Such is the dream of a theory of everything, the promise of an equation 
that spells out the lawful correlations among microdetails and from which 
everything else can be derived and precisely predicted. It is this intellectual 
heritage, I submit, that prompts well-­known philosophers like Australian 
David Chalmers to espouse double-­aspect monism or its close relative, 
panpsychism, the view that even the fundamental constituents of reality 
must have a built-­in nonphysical aspect, mentality. Without literally build­
ing in consciousness into the most basic building blocks of reality from the 
start, hopes of showing how novel properties emerge from material stuff 
are doomed to failure because material stuff can only increase in quantity. 
The Cosmos does not actively create qualitative novelty. Full stop.
Efficient Causality
A particular understanding of cause-­and-­effect relations advanced by 
Newtonian science gave additional support to this worldview. By restrict­
ing cause–­effect relations to efficient cause, the ontological status of 
coherent wholes became even more suspect.
I turn now to the backstory on causality.
The first systematic treatise of causation was Aristotle’s Physics,9 which 
argued that everything must be explained in terms of four Causes. The first 
three are Material cause, the physical stuff from which something is made; 
Final cause, the purpose or goal the substance brings about; and Formal 
cause, the inherent essence that makes it that kind of substance and no 
other. Consider a potter shaping a pitcher or a carpenter making a chair. 
Material causes of the pitcher and chair are clay and wood, respectively. 
Final causes are pouring liquids and sitting. (In nature, the intrinsic tele­
ology or final cause of, say, acorns, is to become an oak. Teleology is built 
into nature.) Aristotle illustrated the fourth cause, Efficient cause, with 
descriptions of the potter’s hands transforming clay into a pitcher and the 
carpenter’s arm wielding saws or hammers10 on wood. More recently, the 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

14    Chapter 1
preferred illustration of efficient causes is cue sticks striking billiard balls. 
Efficient causes are energetic forces acting on matter.
With the advent of modern science and philosophy, final and formal 
causes (which Bacon disparaged as “metaphysics”) could be dismissed 
as “no part of science.” Empiricism held that material cause could be 
accounted for through empirical observation of primary properties, and 
purposive or final cause came to be viewed as an irrelevant leftover from 
the discredited belief that the ultimate drive of all living things is toward 
perfection and God. The ghostly concept of formal cause became otiose 
as nominalism took hold.
As a result, modern science turned to Aristotle’s efficient cause, the 
transfer of energy to matter with which forceful impacts bring about 
effects. After the sixteenth century, the term causality and its cognates 
came to mean exclusively efficient cause, the transfer of kinetic energy 
from an agent-­cause to a body. Since the advent of Newtonian mechanics 
in the seventeenth century, cause–­effect relations have been conceptualized 
solely in terms of motive forces. This perspective was amply rewarded with 
Newton’s Laws of Motion and justifiably so. I hasten to state unequivo­
cally that nothing in this work should be taken as a rejection of or argu­
ment against efficient causes or Newtonian science. When calculating 
planetary motions, however, adding a third planet yields a system that is 
chaotic and unpredictable. The laws of motion fail to predict their trajec­
tories. Newton himself was aware of this so-­called three body problem, an 
example of environmental influence completely transforming a system’s 
dynamics. The puzzle was an early hint that context should not be so 
readily dismissed, but modern science and philosophy ignored its warning.
*
*
*
By definition, efficient causes exist separately from their effects. Relying 
exclusively on this form of causation, however, brought with it other, less 
well-­known implications.
Aristotle’s reasoning about efficient causes went as follows: since causes 
and their effects cannot simultaneously exist both before (as cause) and after 
(as effect of) themselves, causes are spatiotemporally “other than” their 
effects. The potter’s actions start before they touch the clay. The motion of 
the cue stick begins before it hits the ball. The potter is spatiotemporally 
distinct from the pitcher; the cue stick is, likewise, “other than” the ball. 
The inevitable conclusion is that self-­cause and other forms of “circular 
causality” are impossible because causes and effects would have to exist 
simultaneously: before (as agents) and after (as effects), a contradiction.
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

What Went Wrong?    15
Conclusion: the view that reality rests on primary properties of ele­
mentary particles and that causality is exclusively efficient cause is at 
the root of modern science and philosophy’s failure to explain the causal 
powers of systemic properties. Efficient causality cannot account for how 
parts become interwoven into interdependencies that bind together coher­
ent wholes and persist despite turnover or deletion of component parts. 
Much less can it account for top-­down causation from the emergent fea­
tures of coherent wholes to those components or behavior.
Mereology
As noted, philosophers call relations from parts to wholes and wholes 
to parts mereology. According to the default ontological framework 
described (and that is still very much in place), parts cannot interact to 
produce wholes with strongly emergent properties—­that is, with proper­
ties that are not reducible to the sum of the parts. Efficient causes produce 
mere aggregates. Emergent characteristics of wholes, as wholes, such as 
coordination and synchronization, cannot influence components because 
they could only do so as efficient causes, which is impossible since parts 
and wholes are not spatiotemporally distinct. And since aggregates are 
epiphenomenal, mereological “causation” from clumped particles to com­
ponents is impossible (Campbell 1974; Kim 1989; Moreno and Mossio 
2016; also see Murphy, Ellis, and O’Connor 2009). These misconceptions 
about mereological relations have occasioned no end of problems, many 
still unrecognized.
Working from the assumption that all cause is efficient cause, therefore, 
philosophers and scientists have resisted the idea of recursive or circular 
causality ever since. The problems of identity and intentional causation 
were perhaps the most insistent philosophical topics that wouldn’t go 
away. Juarrero (1999) chronicled the epicyclic contortions to account for 
purposive behavior while refusing to accept recursive causality. 
How can two separate and distinct substances from different realms 
interact in terms of efficient causality? How can mind activate matter? 
Descartes identified the pineal gland as the site where mental events such 
as intentions trigger purposive action. With the advent of thermodynam­
ics in the nineteenth century, this maneuver ran into a different objection, 
this time involving modern science’s conservation laws and principle of 
physical closure.
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

16    Chapter 1
Physical Causal Closure and Overdetermination
Combine an exclusive reliance on efficient causality with the First Law of 
Thermodynamics, which holds that that the total amount of matter and 
energy in the universe is fixed. Matter can neither be created nor destroyed; 
it can be transformed (into energy) and back, but the total amount is always 
conserved. In combination, these two principles lead to a third, causal 
closure of the physical. This principle holds that (1) all states are physical 
states, and (2) all physical states are the effects of physical efficient causes. 
The unavoidable implication of these two premises is that proposing that 
the symbolic content of thoughts or beliefs can bring about changes in the 
physical realm violates conservation laws and causal closure.
The reasoning goes as follows: nonmaterial “causes” such as Aristo­
telian Formal and Final causes or Cartesian intentions would activate 
bodies by introducing themselves into the physical realm and activating 
them as efficient causes. In combination with the resolutely materialist 
presuppositions of the principle of physical closure, this insertion into the 
physical world would increase the universe’s total matter and energy and 
violate conservation in the process. Conclusion: (allegedly) nonphysical 
thoughts, intentions, and other mental events as such cannot bring about 
physical effects without violating causal closure.
Purposive causation by nonphysical intentions would also imply an 
overdetermined universe, likewise prohibited by causal closure. The argu­
ment here goes as follows: causal closure requires that all events (includ­
ing arms rising) be the effects of physical causes—­that is, they must result 
from the energy transfer of efficient causes. But if intentions are Cartesian 
mental events and my arm rises because I intended to raise it, the result­
ing behavior is qualitatively different than if my arm rose because of 
an involuntary neuromuscular spasm or because someone pushed me. 
Intentional causation transforms behavior into purposive action, with all 
the legal and moral implications that entails (Murphy and Brown 2007; 
Juarrero 1999).
But if intentions as meaningful mental states can bring about purpo­
sive action, the arm motion would be caused by both my intention to 
raise my arm and the neuromuscular processes required by the principle 
of causal closure. Such double causation overdetermines the universe. 
Recall that on the standard understanding of efficient causes, causes and 
effects must be logically and spatiotemporally distinct, so on this account, 
intentions must be other than neurophysiological processes, which would 
also violate causal closure.
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

What Went Wrong?    17
Conclusion: allegedly nonphysical mental events such as intentions, 
thoughts, and beliefs cannot cause actions as meaningful and purposive 
intentions to do X. These considerations reinforced the received view that 
systemic properties are epiphenomenal.
It follows from this reasoning that postulating top-­down (downward) 
causation, from intentions in virtue of emergent mental properties down 
to behavior (Campbell 1974), violates conservation laws and the princi­
ple of the closure of the physical. Western philosophy’s exclusive reliance 
on efficient cause and total dismissal of context bars naturalist accounts 
of mental states and mental causation at the root. By maintaining that 
identity rests on primary properties of fundamental material particles 
(while simultaneously excluding all forms of influence other than effi­
cient causality and insisting that relations and interactions with context 
are secondary and epiphenomenal), understanding how mind and body 
could possibly constitute a coherent whole, much less how identity can be 
preserved and persist despite changes, becomes impossible.
As framed by standard philosophy of science, naturalism closed off 
debate about the causes of coherence and therefore about identity and 
individuation. Without a principle that explains the formation of coher­
ent wholes from previously separate parts, natural science and philosophy 
of mind were also left without a way of accounting for either mereologi­
cal relations or interactions with the environment and influence from the 
past. Nothing can generate outcomes that are qualitatively different than 
mere aggregation without violating causal closure. Reductionism followed. 
Human beings are nothing but atoms clumped together in time and space.
*
*
*
Over the centuries, several ways of resolving this impasse were proposed. 
The early twentieth century witnessed a flurry of philosophers who espoused 
an approach labeled emergentism.11 In keeping with the reductionism 
required by natural philosophy, emergent properties were invariably deus 
ex machina contributions, literally injected from outside the physical realm 
into inchoate and passive matter. Emergentists such as French philosopher 
Henri Bergson were often labeled Vitalists in reference to the mysterious 
and externally provided “vital” force that they proposed animates living 
things. Natural scientists summarily ignored these proposals.
Other thinkers such as Scottish philosopher John Stuart Mill, Australian-­
born philosopher Samuel Alexander, French scientist Henri Poincaré, and 
Austrian biologist Ludwig von Bertalanffy cast about for a systems-­theoretic 
approach to account for novel properties of wholes. Michael Polanyi tried 
to have it both ways by arguing that although ultimate boundary conditions 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

18    Chapter 1
were set from without, once in place, they can generate life without outside 
influence. Charles Sanders Peirce, a practicing chemist, knew there was 
something more to chemical compounds than mere aggregation (Juarrero 
and Rubino 2010), but in the end gave up on finding an ontological answer 
and, in keeping with Kant’s epistemological turn, settled for a semiotic and 
“pragmaticist” account.
For the most part, however, the reductionist principle that aggregates 
are nothing but the sum of their parts and that seeming coherent wholes 
such as organisms like you and me are epiphenomenal, powerless to exer­
cise causality as anything other than masses of atomic primary proper­
ties, ruled the day. One can sympathize with John Donne’s lamentation 
that all coherence is gone.
But the problems of coherence and identity did not go away. Intui­
tively, it is difficult to shrug off the belief that there is some logic that 
holds organisms together over time despite perturbations. Organisms are 
organized; they present an internally coherent and persistent “hanging 
together” that is qualitatively different from mere aggregation. What 
makes coherent processes in general, including living things, cohere and 
persist as the same type of entity despite dramatic alterations? Suggest­
ing, as early complexity theorists proposed in the mid-­twentieth century 
(Prigogine and Stengers 1984; Maturana and Varela 1979; Pattee 1972a), 
that constrained and self-­organizing dynamics might generate coordina­
tion and complex organization with qualitatively novel properties went 
completely against the grain of the received framework. With very few 
exceptions (Collier and Muller 1998; Cilliers 1998; Collier and Hooker 
1999), mainstream philosophers of science disregarded complexity.
Meanwhile, the world moved on. Among the issues raised in identity 
politics today is the role contextual factors such as race, colonialism, class, 
culture, sexual orientation, and age play in personal identity. Environ­
mental and historical influences are implicated in making all living things 
what and who they are. In biology, the new field of epigenetics has shown 
that the dichotomy between nature and nurture is too simplistic. The 
even more recent research on the metagenome in the gut microbiome, not 
to mention lichens and mycorrhizae, raises even further questions about 
symbiotic wholes. Are human beings more symbiotic wholes than indi­
vidual organisms? Just asking this begs the question of this book’s central 
theme: what causes coherence? In any case, the physics-­based worldview 
from which our understanding of causes and effects, coherence, and iden­
tity derives continues to assign only secondary or accidental ontological 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

What Went Wrong?    19
status to context and history. It prioritizes separate and standalone exis­
tence over relations and interactions.
*
*
*
Mistrust in the dichotomy between essential and accidental properties 
surfaced in academic philosophy circles in the early twentieth century. 
Austrian philosopher Ludwig Wittgenstein and American philoso­
pher Willard Van Orman Quine independently held that the distinc­
tion between primary and secondary properties was untenable. As an 
example, there are no necessary and sufficient primary properties that 
make all games games.12 As students at Oxford University during World 
War II, Philippa Foot, Mary Midgely, Iris Murdoch, and G. E. M. Ans­
combe argued against the view that reality is wholly transcendent and 
that the faculty of moral intuition is independent of features in the world. 
These remarkable thinkers emphasized instead social, creative, spiritual, 
and biological forms of life as the source and weave of human life. Alas, 
the significance of their ideas is only now being recognized (Lipscomb 
2021; Cumhaill and Wiseman 2022).
Since the received view of essences and type of entities was predicated 
on primary properties, the next philosophical step was usually a retreat 
to nominalism, the theory mentioned earlier to the effect that any pre­
tense that types and kinds are real should be abandoned: common nouns 
like triangle or scorpion do not refer to real categories or to real entities 
marked by an internal principle of coherence; they are only linguistic 
units or epistemic cuts that frame our thoughts and investigations.
Remarkably, even though he was discussing the failure of essentialist 
definitions, the later Wittgenstein did not explicitly retreat to nominal­
ism. He proposed instead that language captures “forms of life,” a phrase 
often interpreted as the opening salvo of a social constructivist approach 
to language. Wittgenstein’s phrase suggests to me, as it did to Anscombe, 
Foot, Midgely, and Murdoch, not an outright retreat from realism but an 
attempt to reimagine the world from the point of view of relations and 
circumstances, context and history.
An opening to a contextual and relational ontology, in other words.
Dismissing the influence of context is the original sin whose imprint 
continues to permeate many of these philosophical and scientific debates. 
This book will argue that recognizing that context changes everything 
reopens a path toward rehabilitating coherence, identity, and causation—­
from parts to coherent wholes and from emergent coherent wholes to 
parts, including intentional causation. It proposes a realistic and naturalist 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

20    Chapter 1
philosophy based on the principle that nature self-­organizes and sorts 
itself into real but contextual coherent dynamics. Call its principle of 
coherence its constraint regime.
To be consistent, Platonic forms as well as final and formal causes 
must in consequence be reimagined in terms of interactional, extended, 
and context-­dependent interdependencies. Thus understood, relational 
types are real and coherent patterns of energy flow, structure, and activi­
ties that form locally from contextually constrained interactions among 
individuals and that, in turn, as coherent dynamics, constrain the indi­
viduals and circumstances from which they emerge. Reimagining cause-­
and-­effect relations, especially mereological relations between parts and 
wholes, and the influence of context and history on those relations, will 
be the hinge on which this reformulation turns. By taking context seri­
ously in this fashion, coherence and wholeness, as well as meaning, “shall 
be returned.”
This new interpretive framework makes room for a more expansive 
notion of identity and coherence based on interdependence and charac­
terized by resilience and robustness. And generated by constraints.
Even John Donne might approve.
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

Fortunately, the science of open systems far from equilibrium offers a 
new lens with which to rethink many of these issues. In particular, the 
dynamics of complex systems allow us to reframe our notions of cause 
and effect, wholeness, relations, context, and history. Ranging from tor­
nadoes and chemical reactions to living things, so-­called dissipative struc­
tures are open systems far from equilibrium that exchange matter, energy, 
and information with their environment. They self-­organize and act as 
coherent totalities in response to constraints. They persist as themselves 
in a paradoxical state of dynamic stability despite being in non-­thermal 
equilibrium. Borrowing concepts from nonlinear dynamics and complex­
ity theory will help clear a science-­grounded path along which our under­
standing of coherence and identity can be restored.
It is a trail that ventures into closed-­off areas that the accepted frame­
work barred philosophers and scientists from exploring. Rehabilitating 
the concept of coherence begins by taking context seriously.1 By working 
backward from the failures described in the Backstory, the path to coher­
ence requires restoring interactions and relations to their rightful place 
as coherence makers. It requires recognizing that context-­dependent 
constraints induce integration and that the ensuing coordination leaves 
marks on the interactants. Notably, these marks can best be understood as 
multiscale and multidimensional coherent dynamics, patterns of energy, 
matter, and information flow that transform erstwhile separate and iso­
lated elements into interdependent skeins. Having become interactants 
and relata, the erstwhile independent elements from which the coherent 
dynamics were generated are in-­formed by the constrained relations in 
which they are now embedded and on which they are now conditional. 
These interlocking relations become governing constraints that hold 
those coherent dynamics together and contribute to their persistence.
2
The Path Forward
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

22    Chapter 2
By forging interdependencies in this fashion, embedding in context 
changes everything.
If not as efficient causes, by what manner of causality do interactions, 
relations, and context bring about change? The arguments marshalled in 
this book will conclude that coherence, wholeness, and identity arise from 
the operations of constraints. In particular, enabling constraints explain 
coherence formation and its emergent properties. These new coherences 
take the form of interactional types. Recursive, iterated, and multiscale 
constraints also account for self-­organization, self-­cause, self-­maintenance, 
and self-­determination (Etxeberria and Umerez 2013). Likewise, persis­
tence, the temporal form of stability, also results from multiscale and mul­
tilevel constraints. This book will argue that because interactional types 
generated by constraints are multiply realizable, a novel form of mereologi­
cal causation emerges: top-­down causation as distributed control coded in 
analog form. These ideas encourage us to think identity anew, reimagined 
as resilient and robust—­and causally effective—­interdependencies gener­
ated and controlled by interlocking constraints.
I begin with a few intuitive examples of constraints.
*
*
*
In comparison with traffic lights and stop signs, traffic circles (round­
abouts) are known to reduce the likelihood and severity of accidents, espe­
cially collisions with pedestrians and T-­bone and head-­on collisions. How 
do roundabouts bring about those effects? Not in virtue of Newtonian 
forceful impacts—­that is what they are designed to prevent.
Roundabouts illustrate the workings of constraints. Consider how 
roundabouts alter pedestrian and driver behavior. Extensive studies of 
traffic circle design have shown that because traffic comes from only one 
direction, pedestrians keep track of oncoming vehicles more easily in a 
traffic circle. Drivers are also less confused than by the numerous inter­
sections and stop-­and-­go of traffic lights. Roundabouts slow down traffic 
entering the circle (in contrast to traffic lights, where drivers commonly 
speed up at yellow lights). They even let drivers perform U-­turns, which 
traffic signals often do not. None of these conditions is a forceful cause, 
and yet the constraints embodied in a roundabout’s design reconfigure 
the behavior of people caught up in them.
Consider a second example of how constraints affect traffic flow. 
Traffic flow depends on vehicular interactions. As density reaches an 
instability threshold, the behavior of drivers begins to correlate and inter­
dependencies among them appear. These interdependencies display novel 
properties. For example, if even a minor accident occurs, a stop-­and-­go 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

The Path Forward    23
pattern called “congestion shockwaves” forms from constraints contrib­
uted by the speed, flow, and density of vehicles on the road. Congestion 
shockwaves are population-­level properties generated by constraints. 
They make visible novel—­because relational—­features that emerge from 
interdependent behavior. These characteristics are qualitatively different 
from those of the individual vehicles separately. For example, congestion 
shockwaves propagate backward (upstream) from the site of the collision 
even though none of the vehicles move backward.
Contextual constraints that intertwine individuals with  one another 
generate coherent dynamics that influence those caught up in them. The 
workings of constraints explain how such coordination dynamics (Turvey 
1990; Kelso 2009) emerge and then affect the constituents caught up in 
them; the dynamics are simultaneously constraining and constrained. In 
response to constraints, vehicular motions become correlated and interde­
pendent, enacting the shockwave by moving in concert. The constraints 
that hold the shockwave coordination together ensure that the moving 
waveform persists long after the vehicles involved in the collision are towed 
away.
Constraints generating emerging traffic patterns are only one instance 
of constraints. The principles presented here are general. This book will 
argue that complex systems, living and nonliving, are coherent dynamics 
analogously generated by enabling constraints, as are convection cells like 
dust devils and hurricanes, as well as laser beams, synchronized pendu­
lums, superconductivity, and superfluidity. In biology, symbiosis, homeo­
stasis, and ecosystem stability describe such coordination dynamics. Social 
behavior and human cultures are exemplars of the workings of context-­
dependent constraints as well. Economic systems, also, are coherent wholes, 
interdependencies enabled by constrained interactions among producers, 
consumers, and traders of goods and services. These interdependencies, 
in turn (acting as governing constraints), modify the behavior of those 
caught up in that dynamic (Arthur, Beinhocker, and Stanger 2020). All 
are patterns of energy, matter, and information flow with emergent prop­
erties that result from interlocking enabling and governing constraints.
*
*
*
To repeat, complex systems are simultaneously constrained and con­
straining coordination dynamics. Operating on different materials under 
different circumstances and at different moments in time, each set of con­
straints underlies a distinctive variety of coherence with of its own quali­
tatively novel properties: convection cells rotate, laser beams cauterize, 
and homeostasis supports viability. Human beings reason and feel.
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

24    Chapter 2
Coherent dynamics forged by constraints thus embody and enact dis­
tinct relational types of phenomena as constrained patterns of energy 
flow with emergent properties. Interactional types of this sort are realized 
and embodied in a variety of tokens or realizations, depending on local 
and current constraints. As an example, family relations differ in different 
cultures; each is a different token realization of family dynamics gener­
ated by different local constraints, in particular conditions, over time.
As envisioned here, unlike the universal and fixed essences of Aristote­
lian and Cartesian substances, coherence is knitted together by contextual 
constraints and is realized far from equilibrium as a flexible and dynamic 
equilibrium called metastability, of which bicycle riding and tightrope 
walking are examples. Metastable dynamics exhibit steady-­state behav­
ior that nevertheless remains in nonequilibrium throughout—­thanks to 
constraints. As the traffic flow examples illustrate, qualitatively novel and 
context-­dependent properties of interdependencies resulting from con­
straints are characterized by robust and resilient patterns of long-­range 
and long-­term coordination. These persist and do not quickly thermal­
ize because, not despite of exchanges of matter, energy, and information 
with their environment and even while remaining in nonequilibrium 
throughout.
Critically, this book will argue that such coherent dynamics also have 
the power to exercise downward “causality,” from wholes to parts. Inter­
dependencies generated by constraints are not epiphenomenal; ask anyone 
caught up in one of those traffic congestion shockwaves. However, and 
this is the key point, although they influence their constituents top down, 
they do so as constraints, not efficient causes.
Cause and effect relations are therefore the central topic going forward. 
Catalysts and feedback loops, frameworks and scaffolds do not bring 
about effects as forceful  causes. Nor do rules and regulations. As sug­
gested above, some constraints enable phase transitions to coherent 
dynamics with emergent properties. But others lay down the coordinates 
of possibility space itself; they establish the boundaries of what is possible 
and what is not. Constraints such as the number of sides of a die, for 
example, limn the space of possibilities when throwing a pair of dice. 
Two six-­sided dice thrown simultaneously have a possibility space of 
thirty-­six possible outcomes. This boundary is determined by the number 
of sides on each die and the number of dice thrown. These factors are not 
forces; they are constraints. They have consequences as constraints, not as 
efficient causes. Analogously, direction, speed, and intersection design are 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

The Path Forward    25
constraints that change driver behavior, the care they take in navigating 
the roundabout, and so on.
Elements constrained to interact in certain ways produce qualitatively 
novel systemwide properties that loop down to affect those very parts. 
Pace modern science, the “causal” influence of constraints is corkscrew-­
like and mereological. Influence spirals from constrained interactions 
among individual drivers and pedestrians up to constrained and self-­
organized systemwide patterns of flow, and then back down, from sys­
temwide dynamic down to the individual drivers and pedestrians whose 
constrained behaviors induced the macroscopic pattern in the first place.
Mereological influence is real and as true in economic systems as in 
traffic congestion. Adam Smith’s so-­called invisible hand in economics 
is one such simultaneously constrained and constraining dynamic. Con­
strained actions among producers, consumers, and traders create a new 
relationally defined possibility space that, as the systemic constraint we 
call the “invisible hand,” simultaneously “governs” those individuals 
that populate that space. That does not make those individuals passive 
puppets; interactants are constraining as well as constrained. Complex 
dynamics like these are also inherently context and path dependent. 
Spatial configurations, timing, and even events that happened some time 
ago continue to make their influence felt in the present. For these dynam­
ics, history and context matter. Chapter 5 will describe how this influence 
is also felt in the domain of public health.
Constraints are multifaceted; they operate, simultaneously, across dif­
ferent scales and dimensions. They can be enabling, governing, multiply 
realizable, and context dependent and independent. Bottom-­up, enabling, 
context-­dependent constraints such as positive feedback, catalysts and 
autocatalysts, recursion, and iteration take systems to a threshold of 
instability and precipitate phase transitions to novel and coherent inter­
dependencies (to emergent and collective coordination dynamics).2 Once 
those interdependencies have coalesced, and acting as top-­down gov­
erning constraints through negative feedback, order parameters of that 
coordination dynamic preserve its coherence by stabilizing the system’s 
individual components and behavior to within the boundaries of their 
interdependencies.3
As constraints not directly involved in energy transfer, governing con­
straints of coherent interdependencies can do all that without violating 
causal closure, conservation laws, or overdetermining the natural uni­
verse. Taking context seriously therefore requires us to take a different 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

26    Chapter 2
form of causality as seriously as we take forceful causes. Causality as 
constraint.
*
*
*
As noted earlier, taking context, time, and constraint seriously implies 
that coordination dynamics are novel and real types of entities that form 
in response to constraints. Such interactional types are multiscale and 
multidimensional ontic regimes of interlocking constraints that transform 
separate flows of energy, matter, and information into mutually depen­
dent dynamic patterns; these are generic, temporal, local, and formed 
in response to contextual and historical constraints. Context-­dependent 
interactional types and kinds are also ontically indexical; their emergent 
features refer to the contextual constraints they embody.
The constraint regimes of coherent, self-­organizing, and autonomous 
types are realized, embodied, and enacted in individual tokens or realiza­
tions. In response to other, local, and timely constraints such as epigenetic 
influences, tokens of complex systems individuate over time. Components 
of a coherent dynamic do not blend or fuse into a higher-­level monolithic 
entity; they retain their identity as a certain type of entity even as they 
individuate over time to become more distinctly themselves.
From this perspective, identity and individuation must be reframed as 
fluid yet metastable and persistent dynamic interdependencies forged by 
constraints in particular contexts and historical moments. The collective 
properties that irreversibly emerge from such interactions among indi­
viduals are inherently relational, reflecting the contextually constrained 
interactions that generated them. Implications for the identity of persons 
and nation-­states alike are significant. Only isolated and closed entities are 
“independent”; in contrast, entities embedded in context constrain and 
are constrained by that context.4 They individuate.
Different components, circumstances, and constraints leave their mark 
on the dynamic overall. In different contexts, including different histories 
or the interactants’ psychosocial characteristics, different constraints—­or 
the same constraints arranged differently—­produce token behavior pat­
terns and realizations with distinct characteristics and effects. Matter 
matters. Forceful impacts matter. But contextual constraints also matter. 
In mammals, neurotransmitters like dopamine and serotonin enable com­
munication among neurons in the brain and possibly underpin awareness. 
But those same neurotransmitters infiltrate the gut, and there, dopamine 
protects against gastroduodenal ulcers. Different contexts or different 
constraints yield different results. Different paths specify distinct indi­
viduals, both synchronically and diachronically. An easy example: the 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

The Path Forward    27
exact shape and stability of actual snowflakes embody the conditions 
under which they were formed.
Contextual constraints integrate and organize all manner of energy, 
matter, and information flow. Constraints generate new coherent design 
patterns in the inanimate world as well as in living things—­to wit, atmo­
spheric dynamics, convection cells, and laser beams. Convection cells 
can appear in water, liquids, or gasses; they can be organized; and they can 
rotate clockwise or counterclockwise, depending on context. These coher­
ent patterns of energy and matter can be enacted or realized in a variety 
of pathways and arrangements. They can be informational, structural, or 
dynamic. Collective and coordination dynamics generated by constraints 
thus bring the living and nonliving under one principle. Each can be 
realized in different material substrates and become differently specified 
depending on context and history. Because they are path dependent, each 
trajectory is unique. But all are the outcomes of constraints in open condi­
tions far from equilibrium.
Consider homeostasis. It is not an organ; it is not a force. It is, ontically, 
a coordination pattern that arises from interlocking constrained processes 
among distinct biochemical, metabolic, neurological, and related  systems. 
Homeostasis is a mutually constrained and constraining dynamic with the 
emergent function of maintaining the organism’s metastability, which it 
carries out by regulating and controlling those component processes. As 
a result of that regulation and control, those individual processes in turn 
enact and realize homeostasis.
Phrased otherwise, enabling constraints generate the coherent dynamic 
that constitutes homeostasis by integrating and coordinating individual 
metabolic and other processes into a new topology, a new possibility 
space. Once set and operating as top-­down constraints, novel order 
parameters of that new possibility space adjust and modify component 
entities and processes such that the organism remains “in the service of” 
a given range of biological viability and optimality. Health is an emer­
gent normative metric against which those functional parameters are 
calibrated. The significant role of context in this entire process is evident.
Interactional types do not exist before interlocking constraints inte­
grate diverse energy streams into coherent interdependencies. Types are 
not things. Whether it is a traffic roundabout, laser beams, the recently 
identified integumentary system, symbiosis, or homeostasis, coherent dynam­
ics are mutually dependent relations generated by enabling context-­
dependent constraints. These interdependencies are real and powerful. 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

28    Chapter 2
They consist of interlocking constraints whose dynamic interface with 
the environment filters, calibrates, and transduces separate and individ­
ual (incoming and outgoing) flows of energy, matter, and information, at 
various time scales and levels of organization, into a unified totality. This 
weaving, tuning, and translating enmeshes the various components into 
coherent flow patterns of matter, energy, and information. These realize 
a metastable and dynamic equilibrium, as established by a newly inter­
woven constraint regime. Once formed, that systemic governing constraint 
regime preserves its metastability far from thermal equilibrium such that 
the coherent dynamic persists longer than its individual components and 
tokens. General and real patterns of events, processes, and behavior are 
induced by contextually constrained energy flows, along with new order 
parameters and norms such as health, viability, metastability—­and coher­
ence and identity.
Predator–­prey oscillatory patterns are also exemplars of interactional 
types. These cycles are metastable; they remain stable as a coordina­
tion dynamic whose constraint regime continues despite fluctuations in 
the number of individual organisms. Once formed as a metastable and 
persistent dynamic, the cyclic attractor of predator–­prey dynamics con­
strains those individuals entrained into it such that the coherence of the 
overall dynamic is preserved and remains steady yet far from equilibrium. 
This it does by regulating and modulating the proportion of predators to 
prey such that it persists within a given range. And so, the cycle remains 
coherent and persists because its overarching interlocking constraints are 
invariant and metastable despite fluctuations in the numbers of the indi­
vidual predators and prey.
A critical implication of this perspective is that multiple realizability 
is not disorder; it is evidence of the emergence of a complex form of 
order far from equilibrium. Such metastable patterns are interactional 
types as understood here, emergent contextually constrained and inter­
nally coherent patterns of energy flow. Coordination and synchronicity 
(Halpern 2020) are hallmarks of governing constraints at work. Phrased 
otherwise, governing constraints of roundabouts channel and select 
among possible driver and pedestrian behavior such that the organiz­
ing principle of the traffic circle is conserved. From superfluidity, oscil­
lating pendulum clocks, or coordinated and synchronized marching, to 
biological function and even social organization, contextually organized, 
emergent macrodynamics are real and coherent patterns of energy flows 
brought into being by the workings of constraints. Once those coherent 
dynamics coalesce, they can possess unique powers and properties—­to 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

The Path Forward    29
wit, the cauterizing power of lasers. Coherence brought about by con­
straints makes the difference.
The idea of context as used here spans time as well as space. Inter­
actional types generated by contextual constraints lack the universality 
and fixity of Platonic forms and Aristotelian substances. Instead, thanks 
to their contextually constrained origins, actual realizations are tokens of a 
given type, tailored and cued to and by the spatiotemporal context in which, 
and from which, they form. Token realizations are specified according to the 
moment as well as the place in which the governing constraints of their type 
operate and to which they are uniquely responsive. Consequently, complex 
patterns of energy flow that are contextually formed and path dependent 
both integrate and process meaningful information and respond, as the 
occasion requires, pros ton kairon (Juarrero 1999).
Constrained and persistent interdependencies such as envisioned here 
constitute the ground of identity. The universe sorts and partitions itself by 
organizing contextually coherent interdependencies, increasingly extended 
in space and time. These coherent interdependencies are not epiphenom­
enal; they have ontic power to bring about effects in virtue of the interlock­
ing constraints that generate and preserve them. Some of these constraints 
are inherited; others are enabled through decisions and actions. As men­
tioned, component energy flows are not fused or dissolved into larger 
wholes; encompassing constraint regimes are the outcomes of the enabling 
actions of individuals and their interactions. By entraining and synchroniz­
ing into interdependent totalities, behavior that is meaningful and appropri­
ate becomes possible. None of the terms used here—­partitioning, sorting, 
or hierarchy—­should be understood to carry connotations of exclusivity 
and divisiveness. They represent both enabling and integrating as well as 
stabilizing and constitutive constraints.
Empirical evidence of ubiquitous multiple realizability generated by 
context-­dependent constraints suggests that the cosmos possesses a deep 
capacity for integrating and thereby generalizing individual and separate 
energy flows into increasingly more encompassing, heterogenous, and 
differentiated context-­dependent dynamics. As chapter 6 will describe, 
integration takes place in time as well as space. Preference for contex­
tually constrained diachronic interdependencies—­persistence—­enables 
even more nuanced and context-­dependent output modulation.
The three most significant signposts on the path forward are therefore 
the following:
	1.	 Interactional type bring with them unexpected properties and powers; 
in particular, such interactional types are multiply realizable.
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

30    Chapter 2
	2.	 The multiple realizability of contextually constrained types under­
writes the capacity for top-­down control (from wholes to parts).
	3.	 Multiple realizability also supports the evolution of analog control. 
As a result, the output (or behavior) of interactional types persists over 
longer periods of time and is particularly responsive and tailored to 
context. The rest of the book describes these dynamics.
*
*
*
Chapter 3 introduces the general notion of constraint. Chapter 4 explores 
context-­independent constraints, those that take conditions away from 
equilibrium and lay out the canvas in which future complexification 
will occur. Chapter 5, “Why Context Matters,” is a topical reminder of 
the role of context in epidemiology; it serves as a prelude to chapter 6, 
which is devoted to context-­dependent constraints, those that take enti­
ties, events, and processes away from independence and link them into 
mutually interdependent coherent dynamics. These coherent dynamics 
constitute interactional, multiply realizable types.
Chapter 7 examines unique features of catalysts, autocatalysts, and feed­
back loops, three significant context-­dependent constraints. Chapter  8 
surveys a representative sample of other constraints, including “more-­
making,” isolation, buffering, scaffolding, density, and saturation. Chap­
ters 9 and 10 focus respectively on persistence and entrenchment, two 
important add-­on constraints that preserve coherence, especially in human 
organizations. Chapter 11 describes Many-­to-­One (Patten and Auble 1980) 
and “Set-­Superset” (Grobstein, in Pattee 1973) transitions as induced by 
constraint dynamics. This chapter also conjectures that multiply realizable 
coherent dynamics evolved a new form of constraint, analog control. Phase 
changes to coherent dynamics with analog decision-­making and control 
subtend the potential for effective behavior, that is, actions that are nuanced 
and appropriate to context.
The intersection between hierarchy theory and coherence making 
is examined in chapter 12. Multiply realizable coherent dynamics are 
distributed and unranked heterarchies; they also often take the form of 
holon-­like holarchies (Koestler 1967; Allen and Starr 1972; Salthe 1985, 
2001, 2012) with rate-­ and scale-­demarcated levels of organization relating 
to one another in terms of constraints, both bottom-­up and top-­down. 
Constraints operating between levels of such hierarchical organizations 
can influence processes and events despite not transferring kinetic energy; 
by operating as constraint, interlevel influences neither violate conservation 
laws or physical closure—­nor postulate an overdetermined universe.
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

The Path Forward    31
Part III examines these ideas as applied in contemporary philosophical 
and experimental work pertaining to these ideas. Chapter 13 updates the 
Backstory narrated in chapter 1, with special emphasis on the theories 
of functionalism and the 4E approach. Chapter 14 then examines philo­
sophical arguments about the role of constraints in supervenient relations 
and their explanation. The chapter closes with a call for constraint-­
conditioned effective science—­that is, for an expanded understanding of 
science that includes indexically defined principles that support counter­
factuals—­in specified contexts as enabled and governed by constraints. 
Delayed task experiments in neuroscience are examined in chapter 15. 
The studies described apply the statistical techniques of dimensionality 
reduction to tease out top-­down control by collective dynamics. Results 
confirm the self-­organization and in-­formation (in neurological space) 
of dynamic attractors with emergent, task-­defined properties capable of 
controlling behavior top down. Actions performed and controlled top-
down in this manner will realize the emergent properties of those attrac­
tors. Chapter 16 offers concluding remarks.
*
*
*
This is the path to coherence that taking context seriously leads us on: it 
is a path that reinstates coherence and meaningful information as real and 
causally effective. It does so by rethinking essences and universal types, not 
as internal primary properties, or as eternal and fixed substances. Instead, 
interactional types as envisioned here are contextually induced patterns—­
and patterns of patterns ­of constrained interdependencies ­of energy flows. 
Because they lock in to real features of the world, contextual constraints 
that generate such patterns embody and enact real-world characteristics and 
interdependencies of the context in which they operate. Recursive iteration 
of feedback, for example, effectively imports real features of the context and 
thereby transforms the process into one that embodies and further speci­
fies those features. Syntax and semantics become integrated as a dynamical 
coordination pattern.
It is important to reiterate that, in complexity theory, individuals 
matter; they are not pawns of collectives. Their actions matter; they are 
not simply reactions to external stimuli. Their behavior is in-­formed by 
the self-­organized dynamics that define them. That said, it is the work­
ings of enabling and constitutive constraints—­among individual enti­
ties, processes, and actions—­that generate novel properties. Values, ethics, 
and morals can emerge over evolutionary time as effects of coherence 
making among interacting human beings (Artigiani 2021). The behavior 
of individuals entrained into those systems enacts and embodies those 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

32    Chapter 2
interlocking constraints that both simultaneously produce and constrain 
them. Had different individuals acted differently, the character of the 
interdependencies they generated would be different. That said, drawn 
into a different sort of context, each of us would be different, would 
behave differently. The coevolution of individual and context generally, 
including humans and their organizations, makes each journey unique; in 
the process, each is individuated, uniquely so.
*
*
*
This will be a work of speculative metaphysics. It presents an unabash­
edly ontological worldview by proposing that, in response to constraints, 
the cosmos partitions and sorts flows of matter, energy, and information 
into real coherent dynamics, and not just in living things. Ranging from 
laser beams and superconductivity to biological homeostasis, cognition, 
and even human symbolic thought, values, and the cultures in which they 
become manifest, coherent interdependencies are generated by enabling 
context-­dependent constraints. These have real, effective, and emergent 
powers. Once formed, the interdependencies that enabling constraints 
weave together  are governed by interlocking constitutive constraints that 
define and shape the domain—­the possibility space—­of possible realizers.
Objections of nominalists, positivists, social constructionists, and the 
rest are noted. However, so long as natural philosophers shy away from 
claims to infallibility and hold, with Nobel laureate Ilya Prigogine, that 
“nature is too rich to be described in only one language,” synthetic specu­
lation with a realist bent is justified if it blazes a trail for further investiga­
tion and research.
Context Changes Everything hopes to offer a fresh take on natural 
philosophy with an interpretive framework that reexamines how we 
think of relations and interactions with our world and with history. It 
especially aims to rethink concepts of cause and effect. Examining these 
ideas through the lens of complexity theory reveals the outlines of a syn­
thetic and relational ontology with room for real coherence. Along the 
way, it pledges a renewed understanding of identity and individuation, as 
contextually embedded and coherent interconnectedness.
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

II
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

Mechanical forces jostle things about but the motions they cause are 
Markovian. They forget their past; they are reversible. Likewise, Newto­
nian space and time are featureless containers that do not affect the basic 
properties of events that take place in them. In that received framework, 
measuring instruments with which physical processes are studied are 
assumed to be passive and transparent registers that do not fundamen­
tally alter the entities and processes they record.
In the twentieth century, this pretty picture began to crack. Indubitable 
evidence that measuring quantum states necessarily alters the experimen­
tal outcome placed interactions, context, and time front and center.
Uncritically held assumptions about the role of context were first 
turned on their head by English physicist Thomas Young’s famous 1801 
double slit experiment that showed that light possesses a peculiar duality. 
Shining light through one slit onto a screen produced particle-­like spots 
of light; shining light through two slits produced a wave-­like interference 
pattern. What is light, really, a wave or a corpuscle? Far from reveal­
ing internal primary properties that remain unchanged regardless of the 
experimental setup, core properties of light differ depending on the inter­
action. Light appears one way in one context but different in another, 
depending on its interaction with the environment—­in this case, a mea­
suring apparatus. Instead of providing a faithful mirror of an essential 
and unchanging reality that is blind to interactions, the experimental 
context with which quantum states are measured alters results. Context 
leaks into the observed.
Over one hundred years later, German theoretical physicist Werner 
Heisenberg showed that one can know either an electron’s exact position 
or momentum, but never both simultaneously. The information transmit­
ted about the subatomic level is different depending on the experimental 
3
Constraints
An Introduction
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

36    Chapter 3
setup. Once again due to interference from the measuring instrument, 
Heisenberg’s uncertainty principle set a limit to knowledge about sub­
atomic particles.
The thought experiment that Nobel laureate Erwin Schrödinger 
described to Albert Einstein in a conversation was even more disconcert­
ing. The uncertainty principle might have set limits to knowledge, but 
Schrödinger was concerned with its ontological implications. Accord­
ing to the standard Copenhagen interpretation adopted in light of the 
uncertainty principle, quantum systems should be conceived as clouds 
of possibilities, superpositions of states whose actualization depends on 
measurement. Schrödinger noted, however, that according to this inter­
pretation, a real cat locked in a steel chamber and whose life or death 
depended on the state of a radioactive atom would be both alive and 
dead until a measurement is made.
Wave–­particle duality was a dramatic wakeup call for physicists, but 
to the chagrin of working scientists since, context dependence has repeat­
edly been shown not to be restricted to the quantum realm. Because living 
things are quintessentially context dependent, biology was the discipline 
most recalcitrant to being shoehorned into a Newtonian mold. Organ­
elles behave differently in a cell than isolated in a petri dish. Ontogenesis 
is heavily dependent on context. Epigenetic effects due to environmental 
interactions can alter gene expression and produce different phenotypic 
traits that persist even across several generations—­without modifying 
DNA sequences. And we all behave differently around our parents than 
with our friends.
Water offers a surprising example of the propensity to ignore context. 
Although it is essential for life, water is often treated as inert background. 
Recent studies have shown, however, that, far from being the inert medium 
in which chemicals are dissolved, water is an active agent in at least 40 
percent of the 6,500 known biochemical reactions. “Water exerted a huge 
influence on which chemicals survived and became a part of life, and 
which didn’t. . . . ​The surviving molecules were the ones that were soluble 
in water. . . . ‘That is how they were selected,’” Frenkel-­Pinter states (Mar­
shall 2021), implying a form of prebiotic selection by context.
Influences like these suggest that, lifted from the context in which they 
are naturally embedded, some events not only would not occur; they could 
not occur. Others would change dramatically. The keyword here is embed­
ded, a condition unlike being plunked into Newtonian time and space 
or jostled about by mechanical forces. In various guises, context depen­
dence is widespread. Nevertheless, settings, circumstances, conditions, 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

Constraints    37
and context in general continued to be ignored by the Academy. So-­called 
special sciences such as psychology, sociology, and economics were even 
refused the label “science” precisely because of their context dependence.
*
*
*
To avoid becoming trapped in the historical baggage that the term cause 
inevitably brings with it, Juarrero (1999) relied on the concept of con­
straint to characterize the influence of context. As the next few chapters 
will describe, constraints are critical to coherence making. Autocatalysts 
and feedback loops, for example, produce long-­range correlations and 
interweave patterns of matter and energy flow that display novel proper­
ties. And they do so as constraints, not mechanical impacts. This book will 
argue that interlocked interdependencies generated by constraints are the 
ground of coherent dynamics and their emergent properties. Moreover, 
constraints show that mereological powers and effects are real, bottom 
up, and top down, from parts to whole and wholes to parts.
This chapter introduces the general notion of constraint. Details of 
each variety of constraint are presented in the chapters that follow.
*
*
*
The late Canadian philosopher John Collier (2003a) identifies three pre­
requisites of complexity: a source of energy, gradients, and interactions 
that convert some of the energy influx made available by gradients to 
structure. (“Structure” includes “structures of process” [Earley 1981].)
Collier’s first requirement is “a source of energy.” It can be solar, geother­
mal, aeolic, hydraulic, chemical, biochemical, biomass, and so on. In the 
nineteenth century, the science of thermodynamics reintroduced the arrow 
of time, but it took the practical savvy of the Industrial Revolution to exploit 
constraints and extract work from energy flow for commercial purposes.
Harnessing energy is as important as the energy sources themselves; 
it allows energy to flow, and flow is necessary for order and structure to 
emerge. Collier’s first requirement, a “source of energy,” therefore implicates 
his second requirement, the presence of gradients, the first constraint.
In contrast to the concept of causation, the notion of gradients is unprob­
lematic. The primordial gradient, cosmic expansion, originated with the 
Big Bang. On Earth, the ultimate source of energy gradients, of course, is 
the sun. Hydrothermal gradients near deep-­sea vents are hypothesized to 
be sites where life on Earth might have originated. However, the full spec­
trum of energy is not equally available to all everywhere. Bats and dogs 
sense sound wavelengths that human beings cannot. Chemoautotrophs use 
energy from chemical compounds; photoautotrophs convert light energy 
to chemical energy. This major transition from anaerobic and extremophile 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

38    Chapter 3
microbes that rely on sulfate as their energy source to photosynthesizing 
cyanobacteria that produce oxygen was among the most significant of those 
innovations; had it not occurred, most plant and animal life would not exist.1 
The Industrial Revolution tapped fossil fuels; we do the same today with 
renewal energy sources. Microscopes, night scopes, telescopes, as well as 
computed tomography (CT) scans and magnetic resonance imaging, reveal 
energy spectra imperceptible to human senses directly. Different constraints 
that access different segments of the energy spectrum make a difference in 
the powers and properties they produce.
The second law is satisfied by the flow of energy along gradients. Transi­
tions in cosmic, biological, and social evolution innovate by accessing new 
gradients, tapping new energy sources, and creating new information in 
the process. Since the early days of mechanical engineering, inclined planes 
are the textbook example of constraint. The steeper the slope, the greater 
their potential energy. Some natural gradients like cosmic expansion dissi­
pate energy. Over time, the slope lessens and ultimately disappears. Cosmic 
expansion alone would quickly dissipate to thermal equilibrium without gen­
erating complexity. In contrast, nature’s second gradient, gravity, is centrip­
etal; it concentrates mass and energy. But gravity alone, too, would quickly 
implode in a massive black hole. By itself, neither cosmic expansion nor 
gravity produces coherence and coordination. Their coexistence throughout 
the cosmos, however, suggests the presence of other forms of constraints.
As understood here, then, gradients are only the first step toward 
coherence making and coordination dynamics. They are only one variety 
of constraints—­context-­independent constraints—­to which the next 
chapter will be devoted. Other context-­independent constraints such as 
buffers, isolation, and entrenchment will be explored in chapters 8–­10.
Complexity formation therefore requires more than just a gradient; to 
evolve more complex dynamics, matter and energy must be coordinated 
and organized into coherent patterns (Bejan and Lorente 2004, 2008). 
It was only in the second half of the twentieth century with the advent 
of computer simulation (Abraham and Shaw 1992; Conway 1970) 
that science began to understand how coordination can tap and store 
energy in a way that isolated entities cannot (Nicolis and Prigogine 1977; 
Conrad 1972). Coordination harnesses gradients by capturing energy 
and converting it into persistent structure and order (Turvey 1990; Kelso 
1995). Paradoxically, complex pattern formation in open systems far 
from equilibrium facilitates energy flow while simultaneously delaying 
heat death. Chapters 6–­8 provide a detailed analysis of this process.
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

Constraints    39
*
*
*
Collier’s third prerequisite, interactions, can also be subsumed under the 
general idea of constraint. By interactions, complexity theorists mean 
relations other than the reversible bumping and jostling of Newtonian 
forceful impacts. Collier notes that self-­organization is characterized by 
“unity relations,” the information-­carrying signature that signals a phase 
transition from unconstrained jostling to constrained coordination and 
order, such as the transformation from water vapor to the rigid structure 
of an ice crystal; from independent and separate photon streams into the 
coordinated alignment of laser beams; from algae and fungi to marvelous 
lichens; and from individual human beings to a distinct culture.
Constrained interactions leave a mark. They transform disparate 
manys into coherent and interdependent Ones. Constrained interactions, 
that is, irreversibly weave separate entities into emergent and meaningful 
coherent wholes. In doing so, they create and transmit novel information. 
That information is embodied in the coordination patterns formed by 
and embedded in context. Critically, coordination dynamics also leave 
imprints of the interaction on the interactants, which they change irre­
versibly. That imprint is new information (Shapere 1982).
The central question, of course, is What changes reversible bumping 
and jostling into interactions that leave a mark—­that create structure, 
order, and information? The answer, just implied, is constraints, but in this 
case, a different type of constraint, context-­dependent constraints (intro­
duced in chapter 6).2
*
*
*
Coherence might be a better term for the unity relations of complex systems 
like snowflakes, tornadoes, lichens, living things, homeostasis, ecosystems, 
human practices, and cultures. Each of these is nothing other than a coor­
dination pattern formed by different constraints with different stringencies, 
operating in different contexts. Critically, each of these overarching patterns 
is held together by a set of interlocking constraints; as a result, each displays 
qualitatively different emergent properties. Synchronization, coordination, 
and entrainment are instances of coherent organization, defined as a par­
ticular regime or logic of interlocking constraints. Coherence so understood 
marks a qualitatively novel form of organization and order that is absent 
in either isolated elements or clumped aggregates. Coherence is real; it is 
a relational and systemwide dynamic brought about by interdependence. 
All three of Collier’s prerequisites therefore implicate constraints and con­
strained interactions.
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

40    Chapter 3
The central insight of complexity theory is that constrained interac­
tions among numerous variables in open systems in nonequilibrium can 
precipitate transitions to novel forms of order characterized by system­
wide coherence, each with its own emergent properties. Coherence is not 
frozen and monolithic, block-­like solidity. Complex order is a multiply 
realizable dynamic of constrained and constraining interactions. Elements 
in complex systems do not dissolve into a homogeneous medium or fuse 
into undifferentiated blocks. Rather, coherence consists of articulated 
and heterogenous interdependencies and covariances into which diverse 
elements are entrained and which now govern their behavior. Phrased 
otherwise, integration into coherent coordination dynamics is a form of 
generalization (Dean 2020, 36:40), a partitioning (Ladyman and Ross 
2010) of reality into equivalence classes (Ellis 2016). Such coordination 
dynamics are contextually formed and multiply realizable.
Major transitions in evolution (Maynard Smith and Szathmary 1995) 
mark the generation of new coherences—­that is, of new and overarching con­
stitutive regimes that are the outcome of interlocking context-­independent 
and context-­dependent constraints. These contextually constrained interde­
pendencies (Allen and Starr 1982) are best understood as interactional types; 
they enact covarying and interlocking constraints that embody qualitatively 
novel—­because relational—­information. Pointedly, as subsequent chap­
ters will explain, because interactional types are formed through context-­
dependent processes, the information they carry and transmit is meaningful, 
not solely syntactical.
What are constraints and how do they generate coherent wholes? The 
next section delves more deeply into the general properties of constraints.
What Are Constraints?
Constraints are entities, processes, events, relations, or conditions that raise 
or lower barriers to energy flow without directly transferring kinetic energy.
Constraints bring about effects by making available, structuring, chan­
neling, facilitating, or impeding energy flow. Gradients and polarities, for 
example, are constraints; others include catalysts and feedback loops, 
recursion, iteration, buffers, affordances, schedules, codes, rules and reg­
ulations, heuristics, conceptual frameworks, ethical values and cultural 
norms, scaffolds, isolation, sedimentation and entrenchment, and bias 
and noise, among many others.
Some of the consequences of constraints are vectorial. Gradients, such 
as those of electromagnetic fields and complex attractors, for example, 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

Constraints    41
guide energy flow in a particular direction. Computer settings, the inter­
faces of eardrums and cell membranes, and buffers and scaffolds all filter 
and select input such that energy flow is facilitated, directed, impeded, 
accelerated, harmonized, integrated, and so on, in one direction rather than 
another. Filters and interfaces that select inputs to an open system are also 
constraints. They do not directly transfer energy; instead they establish the 
context and conditions in virtue of which energy flow is possible, eased, 
accelerated, impeded, standardized, harmonized, channeled, directed, and 
otherwise influenced. Catalysts that promote or impede the integration of 
previously separate energy streams also affect the speed and direction of 
reactions. Feedforward and feedback loops use directionality to import the 
world into the very interdependencies and covarying relations they weave.
Spatial and Temporal Constraints
Constraints can coexist at a variety of scales and dimensions. They can 
be spatial or temporal, and both can simultaneously interact to influence 
how particular events change. Temporal and spatial constraints often “go 
without saying.” And ignored.
Spatial configurational and design constraints are better known. The 
length of a playground’s seesaw in relation to the height of its base estab­
lishes distinct background constraints on where the children must sit 
given their weights. These constraints must be simultaneously satisfied if 
the children are to see-­saw at all. Spatial constraints turn the likelihood of 
this entity here conditional upon (and covarying with) that entity there. 
When constraints make place important, it becomes measured in terms 
of conditional probability.
Spatial constraints, that is, organize the world according to place or loca­
tion. Here, there, inside, out, up, and down are all products of constraints 
that encode relational spatial arrangements and configuration as conditional 
probabilities. Embryogenesis is guided by spatial constraints. Given the loca­
tion of a cell in a fertilized egg, it is more likely to develop into a muscle 
rather than a nerve cell. Organized spatial configuration is thus the outcome 
of constraint-­induced symmetry breaks that configure reality into local, 
internally coherent and noncommutative types of entities governed by dis­
tinctive constraint regimes. Novel properties and powers emerge as a result.
These features are unexpected—­downright bizarre, in fact—­according 
to standard physics where, as noted earlier, time is reversible, and space 
is a featureless container. The features would be  impossible if events are 
separate and do not interact.
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

42    Chapter 3
In analogous fashion, principles of symmetry in Renaissance architec­
ture stipulate that architectural features like turrets be placed in certain 
locations, but not in others, with some locations being more likely than 
others. Templates, blueprints, and scaffolds are other enabling constraints 
that assist in bringing about configurations or designs in space. Their 
constraints make possible or impossible, and direct, facilitate, or retard 
energy, matter, and information flow.
The term spatial will be used loosely throughout this book to include 
psychosociocultural situations such as economic conditions and social 
activities, as well as those physical, material, chemical, and biological condi­
tions in which events and processes take place. A culture or community’s 
traditions, as well as its morals and values, likewise specify activities that 
simultaneously constrain the attitudes and behaviors of members of that 
community. They specify where and how social practices must be performed.
Constraints that specify the exact sequence in which events must occur 
are temporal constraints. The term temporal can refer to interlocking con­
straints operating simultaneously at many time scales, cosmic, historical, 
evolutionary, or developmental. Temporal constraints make the likelihood 
of one event conditional upon one or more earlier ones. They include, for 
example, those interlocking constraints that span a species’ lineage and an 
organism’s genome and epigenetic profiles to guide development.
Adding temporal constraints to spatial ones immeasurably increases 
the potential for evolving greater complexity and an expanded capacity 
to evolve. And yet, despite their ubiquity in biology and human practice, 
temporal constraints in cosmology, physics, psychology, medicine, sociol­
ogy, and ecology might be even less understood than spatial constraints. 
Circadian and seasonal cycles of constraints on metabolism and endocrine 
processes point to an important role for time in biology and medical inter­
ventions. Dismissed as unscientific not so long ago, however, chronobiol­
ogy and chronopharmacology are only now being studied more rigorously.
Timing athletic training to estrogen and progesterone oscillations during 
the menstrual cycle, for example, appears to offer significant improvement 
in performance. Recently, oncology has also been studying the phases of 
tumors to determine if chronochemotherapy, timed in accordance with 
those phases or administered at a particular time of the day, might control 
tumor growth more effectively (Sancar and Van Gelder 2021). Bird, turtle, 
and salmon migration patterns are likewise calibrated to the progression of 
seasonal cues. Timing mismatches between annual migrations of birds and 
caribou on the one hand and on the other, those of plant sprouts or prey 
they feed on are examples of temporal constraints in action. As I write this, 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

Constraints    43
seventeen-­year cicadas have come out of hibernation in certain regions of 
the United States. The constraints that enable and govern these unusual, 
thirteen-­ and seventeen-­year cycles of the nineteen broods of periodic 
cicadas found only in North America are not yet fully understood.
Temporal constraints are at the heart of algorithms and protocols. Con­
straints themselves can concatenate: the activation of one constraint can 
become conditional upon the occurrence of an earlier one, for example. 
The general logic can be characterized as follows: given that X occurred, 
Y becomes necessary, impossible, or more or less likely. Given that X and 
Y have occurred in sequence, Z becomes overwhelmingly likely. Think­
ing of suffixes like -TION when playing hangman helps. Given -TIO, N 
becomes overwhelmingly likely.
As temporally constrained (not just haphazardly chunked) units, 
sequence of steps can bring about a degree of metastability that individual 
steps, performed alone or in a different order, cannot. Changing the order 
in which the steps of a recipe or an algorithm occur, or the duration of 
the interval between steps, changes the outcome. In consequence, entire 
sequences of events can themselves become organized units whose effects 
are qualitatively different from nonsequentially constrained events. The 
entire sequence itself changes the possibility space in which it occurs by 
becoming a constraint on subsequent events.
Childhood development is strongly influenced by temporally coded con­
straints. Studies of the effect of trauma in children indicate that there is a 
window of opportunity to correct negative consequences: those placed in 
healthy foster homes by age two showed cortisol levels like those of con­
trols, but those placed in foster homes after age two produced less cortisol 
and showed a blunted stress response (NewScientist, February 22, 2020). 
(Normal myelination is likewise negatively affected by trauma that persists 
after age two.) As an example from a different domain, constraint regimes 
are also an important subject of research in clinical administration (Zhou 
et al. 2005), where hospitals specify postdischarge clinical instructions con­
ditional on earlier sequences of inpatient events.
Temporal constraints are present in nonliving things as well. Surpris­
ingly, sequential order that makes a difference has been found even at the 
quantum level: Heisenberg’s matrices showed that different outcomes will 
occur depending on the order in which even quantum operators are imple­
mented (Rovelli 2018; Barbour 2020; Halpern 2020). 
In biology, time-­dependent constraints support the evolution of taxa 
such as prokaryotes, archaea, and eukaryotes along temporally constrained 
as well as anatomical axes. Hominidae, Homo erectus, Denisovans, 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

44    Chapter 3
Neanderthals, Cro-­Magnons, and Homo sapiens become “phylogenetically 
historical individuals” differentiated by distinctive interlocking context-­
dependent constraints, especially temporal ones.
Spatial and temporal constraints intertwine. Some constraints are 
hybrid—­that is, their influence spans both where and when. In the bio­
logical realm, the genetic code is the preeminent example of spatiotempo­
ral intertwining. Gene expression and regulation of developmental stages 
are instances of spatiotemporal constraints at work. We noted earlier that 
cellular differentiation in early embryogenesis, for example, is conditional 
upon the cell’s location in the fertilized egg. There is also recent evidence 
that phenotypic effects of genetic mutations are conditioned by earlier 
epistatic interactions, those where the effect of one gene is suppressed by 
the effects of a different already active gene. Since selection operates on 
phenotypic traits, we can conclude that history plays a significant role in 
the direction of evolution.
Even in the genome itself, messenger RNA (mRNA) molecules encode a 
set of instructions for how to assemble a protein by arranging amino acids 
in a certain order, given certain conditions. What mRNA encodes, if you 
will, is a schedule, a set of temporal constraints that establishes the order 
and context in which other cellular processes must assemble amino acids 
step by step. Critical to cell differentiation and ontogenesis in general, 
then, regulatory and modifier genes arrange and time the expression of 
structural genes, moment-­to-­moment, site-­by-­site
Analogously, cultural and religious constraints structure social space 
through prescriptions, proscriptions, taboos, and rituals. In human soci­
eties, many of these constraints involve food preparation and eating. 
Deuteronomy’s proscriptions concerning preparing and eating meat and 
dairy products together might well have originated as health-­related 
constraints. To ensure that they are strictly adhered to, constraints with 
potentially serious outcomes often become entrenched as religious com­
mandments and sociocultural rituals. To remove cyanogenic content from 
the cassava root and make it safe to eat, it must be prepared and cooked 
in a precise sequence of steps. These prescriptions transformed into reli­
gious practice for the Indigenous Tukanoans in the Colombian Amazon 
(Henrich 2016). The relation of practice to food safety might be forgot­
ten, but Tukanoans follow the proper sequence for cooking cassava . . . ​
well, religiously. These examples of constraints highlight their power to 
effect change in believers. Constraints are not epiphenomenal.
Timing is a temporal constraint. Seesaws were mentioned earlier; now 
consider playground swings. No matter how hard a child kicks, or how 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

Constraints    45
often, to increase swing height, what matters is when the child kicks. If 
they get the timing wrong, the swing will not swing. In addition to the 
kinetics involved, much of playground swing dynamics is a matter of 
timing, being or acting at the right place at the right time. In another 
example, research shows that gymnasts performing a full circle on a 
high bar are more likely to complete the 360° loop the later they inject 
energy into the swing from shoulder, hip, or knee (Irwin et al. 2021). Jazz 
syncopation is an interesting case in point: is it a complex constraint of 
musical composition, or is it instead a violation of a temporal (rhythmic) 
constraint?
Timing is just as critical in medical care, where context dependence is 
everything. Failing to administer CPR in a timely fashion, or withholding 
orange juice from patients in a diabetic coma brings about death as surely 
as a lethal injection. If the orange juice is consumed too late, the diabetic 
patient might well survive but will remain in a vegetative state.
Navigating by sound would be impossible without precise timing. Coded 
in terms of temporal relations (the interval length and pitch between two 
sounds), the timing code of our hearing system allows us to determine not 
only where sounds are coming from but also how quickly the source will 
reach us. (The code is much more precise in owls, which rely on it as they 
swoop down to catch a scurrying mouse [Humphries 2021].)
Because of modern science’s dismissal of temporal constraints, the 
classical Greek notion of Kairos, appropriate timing, has been lost to 
science. The plots of many Greek plays often turn on the violation of 
Kairos. In contrast, the Newtonian state of mind focuses exclusively on 
Chronos, the allegedly objective clock-­time understanding of time. But, 
as the three-­body problem of planetary motion mentioned earlier teaches 
us, thinking in terms of one size fits all laws can be . . . ​well, inappropri­
ate. This is particularly true concerning actions pertaining to legal issues, 
morals, and medical interventions; unlike eclipses, these are eminently 
context dependent and must be performed pros ton kairon (as the occa­
sion requires). Future chapters will argue that the flexibility to engage in 
appropriate (not hardwired) behavior at the right place and the right time 
evolved because it provides survival advantage.
As is well appreciated by ecologists and social scientists, the more 
contextually dependent the system, the less explanatory universal laws 
like Newton’s will be. Developmental biology is acutely aware of the 
spatiotemporally constrained nature of ontogenesis. But, except for the 
role of inertial frame in relativity physics, contextual constraints have not 
been central to our conceptual framework about cause–­effect relations. 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

46    Chapter 3
Context has been marginalized from much of physics and philosophy. 
Pun fully intended, it is time to bring it back by making room for the idea 
of effective science, principles that support counterfactuals within speci­
fied spatiotemporal contexts (see chapter 14).
Once again, a central theme of this book is that constraints are not effi­
cient causes. Timing the kick does not impart additional energy to the swing 
over and beyond the kick itself; neither does the exact spot where the child 
sits on the seesaw. Because it is not a thermodynamic process, timing is not 
subject to conservation laws. How constraints bring about effects therefore 
avoids charges of overdetermination and violation of physical closure.
*
*
*
By precipitating symmetry breaks and making entities and processes 
covary conditional on each other, constraints turn possibility spaces irregu­
lar. Constraints sculpt a rugged and multidimensional landscape, the possi­
bility and probability space of what can happen at all, what will most likely 
happen, and, when it cannot, can or must happen. This possibility space 
can be conceived on the analogy of an epigenetic landscape (see chapter 
4). The conditional probability of individual events changes because their 
constrained interactions deform possibility spaces and thereby bias what 
can and cannot happen next, what and when it must happen, and so on. 
Depending on their weight, children must sit at the right spot on the seesaw 
for it to seesaw, kicks on swings must be performed at the right moment, 
and a gymnast’s timing means the difference between success and failure. 
The coordinates and boundaries of a constrained space are encoded as 
probabilities: event with probability 0 = beyond that possibility space.
Analogous to the way spacetime curves and becomes a gravitational 
influence, spatiotemporal constraints transform possibility space into a 
rumpled canvas that can subtend subjectivity and the view from here and 
now. When coordinates and topology deform in response to constraints, 
place and moment suddenly matter. The view from inside a trough is dif­
ferent from the view from a hilltop. By warping possibility space in this 
fashion, local spatiotemporal constraints therefore also underpin the emer­
gence of perspective and subjectivity. The view from my here and now is not 
sub specie aeternitatis.
Because numerous constraints must be continuously satisfied on many 
dimensions and time scales simultaneously, possibility spaces also recon­
figure moment by moment in response to those multiple constraints, 
entrenched as well as current new ones. Possibility spaces are thus defined 
by their probability contour (Buchler 1977) or dynamic signature (Kelso 
1995). I call it its profile.
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

Constraints    47
From the perspective presented in this book, then, possibility spaces are 
not solely epistemic; they are real, bounded, and sculpted by constraints. 
These can be physical, chemical, linguistic, axiological, psychological, 
sociocultural, ecological, and so on; all can coexist or not, depending on 
the demands of multiple constraint satisfaction. Constraints encode the 
statistics and the meaning of the world in which a given complex system is 
enmeshed (Humphries 2021). They render contextually constrained rela­
tions path dependent. As a result, history and context continue to shape 
today’s possibility spaces, in biological lineages, ontogenetic development, 
cultural traditions, and individual actions. As an example, the fact that 
no new phyla have appeared since the Cambrian explosion suggests that 
boundaries and coordinates of biological possibility space became sedi­
mented during that period; it suggests the presence of very entrenched 
constraints. On the other hand, the emergence of oxygen-­producing bac­
teria changed the entire constraint regime of the planet; this shows that 
emergent entities can and do modify the canvas in which events play 
out as much as the landscape influences the individuals’ opportunities. 
Complex systems are not puppets.
*
*
*
This chapter described constraints in general, setting aside for the moment 
the differences between context-­independent and context-­dependent con­
straints. The next chapter focuses on context-­independent constraints. 
Context-­dependent constraints such as catalysts and feedback will be in 
the subject of chapters 6 and 7.
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

At thermal equilibrium, nothing is more probable than anything else; since 
there is no organization, neither is anything qualitatively different from 
anything else. Distinctions and thermal nonequilibrium—­that is, inhomo­
geneities in energy flow—­are prerequisites for coherence-­making, informa­
tion, communication, and work. 
Context-­independent constraints take conditions away from equilib­
rium.1 They render conditions, events, and processes that were equally 
likely no longer equiprobable (Gatlin 1972). They establish the boundar­
ies of uneven possibility landscapes (like fields) within which energy can 
flow and other constraints can emerge. Context-­independent constraints 
turn the space of possibilities in which a system’s events and processes 
play out nonuniform or inhomogeneous. They induce nonequilibrium. 
On a cosmic scale, gravitational and electromagnetic fields are examples 
of primordial context-­independent constraints at work.
As mentioned, gradients of inclined planes are examples of constraints. 
Slopes of gradients in general, including those of cosmic expansion and 
gravity, operate as context-­independent constraints. They establish nonuni­
form background conditions along which energy flows. Gradients in chemis­
try and biology are well understood. Polarities are constraints that organize a 
landscape such that energy flows only in certain directions. Anterior-­posterior 
polarities in biological development, for example, represent inhomogeneities 
that, once in place, function as context-­independent constraints that set the 
stage for subsequent processes. Sperm, eggs, and the epithelial cells of blas­
tulas start out with built-­in anterior-­posterior polarity. Future steps in onto­
genesis are strongly dependent on these preset inhomogeneities.2
Electrochemical gradients likewise establish the direction and speed of 
ionic flow across membranes. In a process known as chemotaxis, single-­
cell organisms orient their foraging according to concentration gradients 
of chemical substances. Diffusion gradients, in contrast, determine the 
4
Context-­Independent Constraints
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

50    Chapter 4
rate at which molecules disperse through a medium. A lot of brain activ­
ity, too, is about ion diffusion into and out of neurons. In maintaining the 
correct concentration gradient, neurons consume a significant percent­
age of the brain’s caloric use, pumping potassium into the cell body and 
keeping sodium out.
The point is a general one: conditions that promote or impede energy 
flow need not be material walls; they are inhomogeneities in possibility 
space. Inhomogeneity in possibility space is realized as different prob­
ability distributions3 of entities, events, and actions within that space. 
Gradients and fields, for example, bias whether, how much, and in what 
direction energy is more or less likely to flow. Attractors described by the 
Lorenz butterfly equations likewise sculpt the dynamics of phenomena 
like weather patterns;  they channel and direct processes caught up in 
them. Social organizations and cultures, too, are structured by analogous 
constraints that shape the practices and mores of their members. They 
strongly bias what their members will or will not do.
Context-­independent constraints are the set designers of fundamen­
tal possibility space within which subsequent events can occur. Meta­
phorically speaking, if a theater’s stage design has no door stage right, 
the chances of a director producing a play there whose script stipulates, 
“Exit, stage right,” on that set are zero. Analogously, the cosmos’s context-­
independent constraints shape the coordinates and initial conditions of 
cosmic ­possibility space; they initialize its prior probability distribution, 
so to speak,4 the default likelihood of possible events. As the product of 
context-­independent constraints, for example, the default probability space 
of a positively charged particle makes it highly unlikely that it will move 
toward the positive end of a battery or that unconstrained events will move 
from cold to hot regions of state space. The prior probability distribution 
of the possibility space ensures that. Discovering the context-­independent 
constraints of a particular domain gives scientists a prior probability distri­
bution on which to base a theory-­informed scientific program.
Containers of Gas and Landscape Design
The operation of context-­independent constraints can be illustrated with 
easily understood examples, the first a textbook example of gradients, the 
other two from landscape design.
Textbook examples of context-­independent constraints include the fol­
lowing: consider a canister containing gas molecules at equilibrium with 
the environment, a state analogous to white noise. Not only does homo­
geneity convey no information, but it also has no identity, no character. 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

Context-­Independent Constraints    51
The container walls might as well not be there. There is no-­thing there 
(Ladyman and Ross 2010). At equilibrium, energy flow is impossible, 
and work cannot be performed. Everything interesting, including identity 
and individuation, starts with inhomogeneity. A pendulum at rest is the 
equivalent of heat death.5
Inserting a partition into the container of gas at equilibrium and moving 
it from one end toward the opposite side creates an inhomogeneity. Gas 
molecules are now packed on one side of the partition; the rest of the con­
tainer is a near vacuum. Gradients can also be produced by heating the gas 
inside the container. Doing so produces a gradient with the cooler condi­
tions outside. Whether it is a board placed at an angle or a partitioned con­
tainer of gas, these examples illustrate how context-­independent constraints 
take actual conditions away from equilibrium. Planks angled at a slope or 
containers of gas at a higher temperature and pressure than the environ­
ment point to the presence of context-­independent constraints; these change 
the topology of possibility space, from uniform and homogeneous to non­
uniform and inhomogeneous.
*
*
*
Roman aqueduct engineers well understood the potential (in every sense 
of the word) of context-­independent constraints. Constructing and main­
taining the correct (1/1500) slope of aqueducts produced the disequi­
librium that supplied the famed Roman thermae with a reliable flow of 
water. Aqueducts sculpt the possibility space along which flow can be 
channeled and for which they serve as context-­independent constraint. 
They take conditions away from equiprobability; they are not forces that 
pump water through the channels.
The Renaissance gardens near Rome called Villa d’Este might be an 
even more impressive example of the deployment of context-­independent 
constraints on a natural landscape. Built in the sixteenth century by 
superb hydraulic engineers, Villa d’Este has fifty-­one fountains and nym­
phaeums, 398 spouts, 364 water jets, and 64 waterfalls, all supplied by 
over three-­fourths of a kilometer of canals and channels, and relying 
entirely on gravity—­not a pump in sight. The water ballets that delight 
visitors to this day depend on the context-­independent constraints set by 
gravity on the terrain. Superimposed against that backdrop, the garden’s 
network of channels and troughs then functions like the body’s vascular 
system, a local context-­independent constraint that regulates and directs 
the amount, direction, and manner of water flow that is even possible in 
certain locations but not others.
It took kinetic energy and efficient causes to construct Roman aque­
ducts and “bulldoze” the ground at Villa D’Este to create those gardens. 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

52    Chapter 4
It also took energy to insert and move a partition inside the container of 
gas molecules. The point about possibility landscapes, however, is that, 
once conditions are away from equiprobability (and Renaissance engineers 
understood the nonequilibrium introduced by gravity), the boundaries 
and topology do not themselves transfer energy as kinetic forces (as 
would be the case if Villa D’Este’s water flow were pump-­generated like 
our blood flow, which is heart-­pumped). Once the context-­independent 
constraints of the natural terrain and the hydraulic engineering infrastruc­
ture are in place, the inhomogeneous topology serves as a background 
spatiotemporal constant that influences subsequent events. In similar 
fashion, once the body’s vascular system is in place, the vesicles direct and 
channel blood flow but do not themselves directly transfer energy (Mossio 
2013; Moreno and Mossio 2015; Montevil and Mossio 2015). Like traffic 
roundabouts, the design and condition of arteries and veins nevertheless 
have consequences. But their “causal power” operates as constraint, not 
efficient cause.
Context-­independent constraints are configured into cellphone set­
tings. Parental controls on mobile devices and their log-­in credentials 
function in the same way. Those constraints set accessibility and timing 
requirements to which users’ actions must conform. They determine 
which data are admissible, which outputs are possible, and which are not. 
Years ago, computer platform designers had a rough time figuring out 
how to program timing coordination to ensure proper coordination of 
data and analytics across software packages (Sheehy 2015). The backend 
development of IT platform interfaces sets up the context-­independent 
constraints of the system’s possibility space. Such preset inhomogeneities 
are important constraints often taken for granted as well.
Were there no constraints, there would be no system—­only white 
noise. Cosmologically, constants such as the gravitational constant and 
Planck’s constant are deep background constraints that determine the 
basic characteristics of the universe. Others include conservation and 
symmetry laws, Pauli’s exclusion principle, and other fundamental 
context-­independent constraints that sculpt the universe’s basic inhomo­
geneities; they outline the boundaries and basic settings of its light cone. 
They determine the backdrop of constraints against which seesaws and 
playground swings can operate.
*
*
*
For living things, the edges and coordinates of the epigenetic landscape 
outlined in figure 4.1, together with the barely indented contour lines at 
the top (one wider and shallower hollow in the center flanked by low, 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

Figure 4.1
British developmental biologist Conrad Waddington (1905–­1975), who first coined the 
terms canalization and epigenetics, was well known for creating illustrations of epigenetic 
landscapes to explain and visualize development (not evolution). In this example, the verti­
cal axis represents (from top to bottom) the passage of time in the development of a fertil­
ized egg. Source: Thelen and Smith 1994, 124.
Gravity
Weight
bearing
Dynamic
balance
Newborn
stepping
Treadmill
stepping
Parallel
kicking
Single
kicking
Quad
rocking
Cruising
Walking
with
support
Skip
Hop
Leap
Jump
Gallop
Walking
Running
Stair climbing
Climbing
Creeping
Bear walk
Crab walk
Crawling
Temporal
organization
&
Dynamic
balance
Standing
with
support
Alternating
kicking
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

54    Chapter 4
mesa-­like hillocks), represent an organism’s inherited possibility space. 
For species, the constraints that define that landscape include constraints 
set much earlier by natural selection, as well as inherited epigenetic con­
straints just mentioned. They outline the axes and limits beyond which 
a phenotype’s initially set traits cannot be modified by additional, con­
textual constraints; they determine the fundamental kind of thing it is 
(Grene 1974).
Examples of these fundamental constraints also include the sequentially 
ordered instructions encoded in its genome. These ensure the organism’s 
unity of type is preserved. In evolutionary biology, unity of type (Brooks 
2010; Agosta and Brooks 2020) describes the inherited constraints of a 
species’ possibility space. Individual organisms stay true to type in virtue 
of their constraint regime—­that is, the set of interlocking constraints 
they inherit and embody (Agosta and Brooks 2020; Brooks and Wiley 
[1988] call it Hmax). Such lineage-­defining constraints configure the regula­
tory settings that delimit the range of potential phenotypes available to 
a blastocyst. Those inherited constraints establish the lineage’s context-­
independent constraints.
Waddington’s illustration encourages us to interpret development and 
evolution in terms of constraints: hillocks are constraints that establish bar­
riers to energy and information flow; hollows facilitate energy flow. Since 
energy flows from potential to kinetic, initial conditions in general (including 
at the birth of the universe itself) must be located on a hillock.6 Thinking of 
initial conditions in terms of context-­independent constraints can therefore 
account for boundaries of an embryo’s multidimensional possibility space 
as well as its initial conditions (the slight indentations and hillocks at the 
top of the illustration)—­both phylogenetically and ontogenetically. Local 
and progressively complex and differentiated troughs or chutes of prob­
ability are then sculpted over time by more local and context-­dependent 
constraints over the lifetime of the organism.
Vague and Ambiguous Constraints
On the face of it, the growing inhomogeneities and ruggedness depicted 
in Waddington’s landscapes appear to contradict the second law, which 
describes a tendency that goes from inhomogeneity to increasing homo­
geneity. The illustration above also suggests, however, that even initial 
fundamental constraints are not deterministic; they are vague, and they 
leave room for subsequent and more local and time-­dependent contextual 
constraints to further complexify future foci of order and organization. In 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

Context-­Independent Constraints    55
that respect, Waddington’s two-­dimensional illustrations are misleading.7 
Context-­independent constraints are best conceived as preset configuration 
settings of the dimensions, possibilities, and limits of multivariate and mul­
tidimensional landscapes. These are probability landscapes whose bound­
aries and initial conditions represent context-­independent constraints set 
by the organism’s lineage, parental, and epigenetic inheritance, those that 
define it as the kind of system it is. The coordinates and initial conditions 
of these fitness landscapes represent the boundaries of epigenetic or devel­
opmental possibility space as well as its initial conditions (depicted in the 
warping in the first contour lines).
Significantly, Waddington’s landscape also suggests that constraints 
responsible for those first shallow hollows and hillocks are multiply real­
izable. They bias but do not strictly determine8 from the outset which 
of the multiply realizable alternatives within that possibility space will 
be actually realized. Note in figure 4.1 that the stable pattern cruising 
becomes subsequently specified in a variety of subdynamics.
Thinking back on our discussion of identity, it would be surprising 
if context-­independent constraints were determinative. Strict one-­to-­one 
correspondence between unity of type and actual phenotype would leave 
no room for specification, individuation, or any sort of variation other 
than changes due to accidental mutations. It would certainly not allow 
the cosmos to evolve and complexify.
Instead, as understood here, the interplay between initial and subsequent 
constraints designs a sufficiently flexible “feasibility region” within which a 
variety of plotlines can play out. Those initial topological constraints differ­
entiate later on into more specified pathways (deeper channels separated 
by steeper hillsides). Initial constraints are therefore vague;9 their scope 
and reach are not entirely fixed.
Studies of the dynamics of cortical neurons confirm this approach. 
Excitatory input to cortical neurons is kept in balanced nonequilibrium 
by systematic inhibition, even across diverse conditions. That is, con­
straints that hold dynamic neurological equilibrium steady are adjustable, 
conditional on other counterbalancing constraints. For this persistent 
balancing act to be possible at all, innate and vague constraints must 
be ambiguous; that is, their governing constraints must permit multiple 
realizability. Such steady but flexible adjustments of neuronal excitation 
and inhibition enact a loosely balanced form of dynamic equilibrium 
(Ahmadian and Miller 2021). For such optimal balancing to be possible, 
a second variety of constraint, context-­dependent constraints, will be nec­
essary (see chapter 6).
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

56    Chapter 4
This chapter closes with a few words on the built-­in limitation of context-­
independent constraints that move systems to states of nonequilibrium.
Limited Message Variety
There is a principled limit to constraints that only take conditions away 
from randomness. Fields and gradients alone do not produce complex and 
persistent structures and dynamics. Likewise, more making and repeti­
tion (see chapter 8) are context-­independent constraints that maintain or 
reinforce balanced but nonequilibrium conditions. But uncountably more 
identical tokens of one type is no variety at all. In the end, then, context-­
independent constraints play a foundational role, but the possibility space 
they establish severely restricts message variety. At the limit, gradients, 
regularity, repetition, replication, and other such context-­independent con­
straints on their own reduce to one message (with probability 1). The pos­
sibility space would not become ruggedly complex and individuated with 
only context-­independent constraints.
Whence variants of the same type of phenomenon? As proposed by the 
modern synthesis, only random mutations produce variants—­but variants 
of what? Of a phenotypic trait that matters for survival. The operation of 
natural selection presupposes the presence of phenotypes that are tokens 
(variants) of a type of trait that matters for survival. However, random 
mutations alone cannot account for the unity of type of which the actual 
tokens’ particular traits are variants (Brooks 2010; Agosta and Brooks 
2020).
Whence coherence of type? The question is about ontology; their 
invariance and persistence over time make it highly doubtful that types 
are a mere epistemic construct.
Context-­independent constraints may improve fidelity of transmission 
in communications systems but, alone, cannot transmit complex messages 
(Shannon and Weaver 1949). Nor can they underlie complexification. 
Standing and default background conditions set by context-­independent 
constraints such as cosmic expansion and gravity take and keep con­
ditions away from equilibrium. Gradients like cosmic expansion would 
end in a uniform and homogeneous heat death. Left to itself, gravity 
too would implode into a massive black hole. Same, same, same, more, 
more, more, again, again, again is unchanging information repeated 
endlessly. Massings, clumpings, and clusterings in gravitational wells—­
accumulations generally—­cannot on their own become more complex. 
They cannot account for the persistent unity in multiplicity that tokens of 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

Context-­Independent Constraints    57
coherent types embody and enact. The idea to be explored in the follow­
ing chapters is that the universe’s complexity is generated by more than 
one sort of constraint, operating concurrently and interacting together.
This second sort of constraint is context dependent.
Context-­dependent constraints, on this account, operate against the 
backdrop of possibility space set by the primordial context-­independent 
constraints of gravity and cosmic expansion, polarities, charge, and so 
on. Context-­dependent constraints are defined as constraints that take 
particles of matter and streams of energy flow away from independence 
from one other. They weave together streams of matter and energy into 
the coherent and covarying pattern of a coordination dynamic. They 
make distinct entities and processes interdependent without fusing them 
into a monolithic entity.
Much of the rest of this book will be devoted to explaining how 
context-­dependent constraints knit together multiply realizable patterns 
of flow into a complex tapestry of reality.
In contrast to context-­independent constraints, context-­dependent 
ones generate complex forms of coherence such as multiply realizable 
interactional types, degeneracy, pluripotency, individuation, and evolv­
ability. Context-­dependent constraints also underlie metastability, an 
emergent property of complex dynamics. That is, nonliving and living 
complex systems alike embody and enact a dynamic form of stability 
despite remaining in nonequilibrium. Such metastability, as future chap­
ters will show, is an inherently flexible and adaptable but persistent form 
of balance; it also promotes resilience. The richly realizable and contextu­
ally constrained patterns of metastable energy flows cannot come about 
solely through context-­independent constraints and mechanical forces.
It is tempting to conjecture that context-­dependent constraints might 
have first appeared fortuitously in local gravitational wells at a critical 
density just before implosion into a black hole. Perhaps accelerated by 
density, the appearance of context-­dependent constraints might have pre­
vented implosion by irreversibly intertwining processes, events, and entities 
and thereby (meta)stabilizing them. Constraints of repulsion (electric fields 
with the same charge repel) and attraction might have rendered the con­
strained interactants relational. A recently discovered cosmic web of invis­
ible dark matter seems to function as a reticulum that structures cosmic 
expansion and galaxy formation (Yang et al. 2020). Might this network 
be another (and in this case hybrid) fundamental cosmic constraint that 
keeps conditions away from equilibrium while at the same time generating 
certain interdependencies? Or might the Pauli exclusion principle be the 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

58    Chapter 4
primordial context-­dependent constraint that keeps electrons in separate 
orbits and prevents them from collapsing into the lowest orbit? Critically, 
neither the web of dark matter nor the Pauli exclusion principle is a force; 
they are constraints.
*
*
*
Among the transformational changes wrought by context-­dependent 
constraints is the emergence of configurations, patterns of coherence and 
dynamics in nonequilibrium whose metastability and resilience allow them 
to persist as themselves, adapt, and evolve. This book proposes that con­
text-dependent constraints underlie identity and individuation, as interde­
pendence. Chapter 6 delves deeper into context-­dependent constraints.
Before that, however, chapter 5 provides an interlude that details the 
significance and complexity of context dependence in public health. In par­
ticular, it describes the nonlinearities and mereological relations of how 
infectious diseases spread, as well as the difficulties they pose to efforts to 
contain them.
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

Not all events are independent of context. The spread and severity of 
some diseases critically depend on the environment in which they unfold. 
As the COVID-­19 pandemic taught the world, in such cases, context mat­
ters. We are learning that the same is true for climate change. Context-­
independent diseases might have given biomedical research its early easy 
pickings. As we discover that more diseases are context dependent, we 
will need to attend more to the role of context in medical issues.
In January 2020, early indications surfaced in social media that a new 
virus might be spreading in Wuhan province. Because of South Korea’s 
previous experience with the MERS outbreak in 2015, the Korean popu­
lation was favorably disposed to follow public health advice and pre­
scriptions about this new threat. As a result, Korea experienced one of 
the lowest prevalence of COVID-­19 in the world. In contrast, the kissing 
and hugging culture of Mediterranean countries significantly contrib­
uted to the spread of COVID-­19 in Italy, Spain, and France, as did the 
widespread refusal to wear masks and respect social distancing in many 
parts of the world. Infections like COVID-­19 and MERS are context-­
dependent epidemics. Such dependence on context is responsible for indi­
rect health effects that can no longer be treated as irrelevant background. 
Contextual features that were previously taken for granted must urgently 
be foregrounded and addressed.
Science 2.0 and Medicine 2.0 Are All about Context Dependence
Individual cases of shingles are independent happenings; they are not 
dependent on context. Unlike COVID-­19, someone’s risk of contracting 
shingles does not depend on how many persons in the community are 
already infected. In epidemiology, incidence is defined as the likelihood that 
a given individual in a population will contract the disease. Prevalence 
5
Why Context Matters—­An Interlude
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

60    Chapter 5
refers to the proportion of persons in a population who have already con­
tracted the disease. In the language of epidemiology, shingles is a disease 
in which incidence is independent of prevalence.
Shingles is context independent, in other words.
Binary classification into context dependent and context independent 
can be misleading. In the case of Lyme disease, for example, incidence 
may be independent of prevalence among humans. That is, individuals are 
not at higher risk of contracting Lyme just because they are around other 
people who have it. Whether others in the community have contracted 
Lyme is irrelevant to the incidence of infection. Nevertheless, incidence 
of Lyme is still very much dependent on other features—­for example, 
on prevalence of ticks in that area in general—­and on the prevalence of 
infected ticks in particular. In turn, the number of ticks is dependent on 
the number of deer and other hosts that are prevalent in that area . . . ​
and so on.
Disease spread is not independent or dependent on context simply 
because incidence and prevalence are defined a certain way. Different 
answers to the same question, “What is my risk of contracting disease 
X?”—­but asked about different diseases—­indicate that independence or 
dependence on context is itself dependent on the scale and periodicity of 
that embedding context. It might be necessary to look further back in time 
and/or zoom out spatially to reveal the scale at which context dependence 
kicks in or washes out. Independence or dependence on contextual con­
straints at each of those scales and time frames, however, is real.
Context dependence is not subjective; it is objective, but relational—­
and induced by constraints. The uncritically held assumption that rela­
tional means subjective and therefore not fully real, as recounted in the 
first chapter, is an egregious legacy of Western philosophy’s claim that 
reality resides in internal, primary properties.
In contrast to shingles, the spread and prevalence of many infectious 
diseases (such as COVID-­19) are straightforwardly dependent upon con­
ditions in the environment, the current phase of the outbreak’s trajectory, 
and other similar factors. Context-­dependent diseases were recognized 
early in the history of epidemiology.1 As part of his 1916 study of the 
effects of quarantine on the transmission of malaria, British physician 
and Nobel laureate Sir Ronald Ross defined dependent happenings as 
those events where “the number affected per unit of time depends on 
the number already affected” (Ross 1916, 211). That is, an individual’s 
likelihood of becoming infected or not depends both on what is going 
on around them and the history of the outbreak. Epidemiologists are 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

Why Context Matters    61
interested in this problem because when incidence depends on preva­
lence as is the case in malaria and COVID-­19, public health campaigns 
(including those pertaining to inoculations, social distancing, and mask 
use) become part of the context and can generate their own effects, direct 
and indirect.
Epidemiologists define direct effects as the probability that the inter­
vention itself will produce a certain outcome—­for example, the probabil­
ity of becoming infected as an unintended reaction to inoculation. The 
reported effectiveness of a COVID-­19 vaccine brand or therapy is about 
its direct effects. Since most vaccines have some side effects, these are 
counted as direct effects of the vaccine itself. Direct effects are not mea­
sured in relation to underlying or preexisting conditions. They are the 
effects only of the intervention itself.
Conditional direct effects, in contrast, are defined as direct effects of 
clinical interventions (such as ventilator use and antibody treatment) as 
conditioned upon the fact that, for example, patients receiving the inter­
vention are already infected with, say, COVID-­19. Conditional direct 
effects are calculated as the probability that ventilator use on COVID 
patients, for example, lengthens the time between infection and death. 
This context-­dependent (conditional direct) effect became a critical issue 
early in the COVID-­19 outbreak when ventilator use, which ordinarily 
helps patients suffering from respiratory illnesses such as the flu or pneu­
monia, was found to make matters much worse in COVID-­19 patients.
The distinction between context dependent and context independent 
is a critical one for public health decision-­makers because the effects they 
produce are often counterintuitive.
As noted, because contracting shingles is context independent, the 
likelihood of contracting shingles is not affected by the prevalence of 
shingles in the population. Public health campaigns about shingles there­
fore need not concern themselves with issues such as social distancing or 
the percentage of the population that receives the vaccine. That is clearly 
not the case for context-­dependent diseases like COVID-­19.
COVID-­19 might have been a novel virus when it first broke out in 
early 2020, but public health agencies had dealt with context-­dependent 
epidemics in the past. In the early decades of the twentieth century, 
yellow fever was endemic throughout the Caribbean and much of the 
United States. Sewers are ideal breeding grounds for mosquitoes that 
carry yellow fever. The more mosquitoes in a heavily populated area, the 
more people will be bitten and the faster the disease will spread. When 
incidence depends on prevalence, reducing prevalence—­that is, changing 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

62    Chapter 5
the context—­can contain an epidemic. U.S. Army physician Major Walter 
Reed undertook a massive intervention effort to successfully eradicate 
the prevalence of yellow fever in Cuba. Notably, for our purposes, it was 
not an inoculation campaign (there was no approved vaccine for yellow 
fever at the time). Intervention targeted instead those enabling conditions 
implicated in incidence and prevalence. Some enabling constraints were 
removed; others instituted. Massive cleanup of open sewers, an educa­
tional campaign to improve hygiene, and targeted fumigation effectively 
contained the out-­of-­control epidemic on the island in the first years of 
the twentieth century. U.S. Army physician William Gorgas implemented a 
similar program during the construction of the Panama Canal. Without 
it, the strategic passageway between the Atlantic and Pacific oceans 
would not have been completed.
That is, even without the benefits of a vaccine, the spread of yellow 
fever was halted by focusing on those socioeconomic constraints that 
enable contagion and spread of both the disease and the misinformation 
about it. Today, yellow fever no longer poses a significant threat.
In such cases, contextual constraints are far from epiphenomenal; they 
have significant effects. Consequently, epidemiologists and public health 
decision-­makers must also examine indirect, total, and overall effects of 
public health interventions. These effects are not direct effects on patients; 
rather, they are the effects on individuals that occur because of the very 
success of public health campaigns themselves, from cleanup efforts to 
inoculation and social distancing campaigns.
The Indirect Effects of Context
As these examples show, the effectiveness of public health campaigns can 
have indirect effects on the prevalence of infection in the population at 
large. This is particularly true when the campaigns aim to change social 
behavior. The fact that context changes everything is most in evidence in 
indirect effects of context-­dependent phenomena.
Indirect effects of massive intervention programs such as vaccination 
campaigns are measured as “the difference between the outcome in an 
individual [or a household] not receiving the intervention in a popula­
tion with an intervention program, and the outcome in an individual 
[or a household] again not receiving the intervention—­but this time 
in a comparable population with no intervention program” (Halloran 
and Struchiner 1991, 335). Indirect effects are calculated as probabili­
ties conditioned upon the context (in this case, the intervention program 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

Why Context Matters    63
itself)—­for example, the percentage of a population that must receive the 
intervention for the indirect effect of herd immunity to kick in.
Effective public health campaigns indirectly but indubitably alter 
everyone’s risk, even the risk to unvaccinated individuals. They do so by 
changing the landscape of the disease dynamics. In other words, context-­
dependent influences bubble up through population-­level properties before 
looping back down to indirectly affect individuals. When interactions 
among individuals create a population-­level emergent dynamic such as 
herd immunity, the entire profile of the outbreak suddenly becomes con­
ditioned on this new property of the population. The likelihood that a 
given individual will contract the disease is now dependent, not only on 
their own proximity to others; it is also dependent on population-­level 
features of the communities in which they live and work.
Free riders and coasters take advantage of such mereological and indi­
rect effects. In populations where a widespread and effective immuni­
zation program reaches herd immunity, free riders really do get away 
with avoiding vaccination; their own risk of contracting the disease is 
dramatically lowered despite not using masks, practicing social distanc­
ing, or being inoculated themselves—­because others did get inoculated, 
are masked, and do practice social distancing. To phrase it crudely, no 
individual is a percentage; herd immunity is a property of the population 
as a whole, a property that is measured in percentages. But that emergent, 
population-­level property significantly mediates the way the disease plays 
out in individuals. Incidence suddenly depends on prevalence.
These are characteristically mereological (parts to whole and wholes 
to parts) dynamics. They are not confined to medicine; they are also at 
work in economic systems and convection cells, organisms and ecosys­
tems. They are typical of complex, context-­dependent dynamics, and 
their significant clinical effects should put an end to the controversy 
about whether systemwide properties are epiphenomenal or not. The 
Escher-­like way in which parts-­to-­wholes and wholes-­to-­parts dynamics 
intertwine, however, makes them difficult to comprehend.
Indirect effects can be even more convoluted than the free rider 
example. Epidemiologists keep track of overall effects of massive inter­
vention programs, which they define as “the difference in the outcome of 
an average individual in a population with an intervention program com­
pared to the outcome of an average individual in a comparable population 
without an intervention program” (Halloran and Struchiner 1991, 333; 
emphasis added). Overall effects measure an intervention’s effectiveness, 
on average. Effectiveness is an important population-­level parameter for 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

64    Chapter 5
epidemiologists and public health decision-­makers, not so much for indi­
viduals. Here is why.
Subtle differences in context (and how these are measured) can affect 
different individuals differently. In populations with large socioeconomic 
variations among subpopulations, the outcome of successful interven­
tion campaigns, on average, can mask significant variations among those 
groups: one subpopulation might show limited prevalence while another 
shows a much larger prevalence.
Context-­dependent dynamics are not one size fits all. As will become 
clearer in the discussion on hierarchy theory in chapter 12, because other 
(economic, social) constraints that are not directly related to the disease 
itself sort societies into qualitatively distinct subgroups, prevalence of 
context-­dependent infectious diseases will vary depending on the circum­
stances of each subpopulation and on the individual’s relation to that 
subpopulation. When context becomes part of the details of individual 
cases, comparing elderly residents of a care facility (who interact daily 
mostly with other elderly and weakened persons) with healthy twenty-­
year-­olds is tantamount to comparing two different populations.
For example, as is typical of contextually constrained phenomena, 
subpopulations can interact in asymmetric ways. When some subpopu­
lations provide most of the essential services to other subpopulations, 
the prevalence of disease in one or more groups (such as minorities, the 
aged, hypertensives, and so on) can asymmetrically alter the prevalence in 
another subpopulation (young, affluent professionals who can work and 
study from home). Because of these indirect and overall effects, sound bites 
that report the rate of COVID-­19 without adding context and nuance are 
downright misleading. Information so generic tells individuals nothing 
much about their own particular risk. Despite coexisting in the same 
town, the two contexts are sufficiently different to constitute two differ­
ent worlds. As we will see in subsequent chapters, they are two different 
attractors in a possibility space.
Communicating these subtle dependencies and contextualities is diffi­
cult. But because complexity and hierarchy theory are sciences that traffic 
in contextual constraints and not universals, they can reveal phenomena 
at much finer-­grained resolution. Complexity science and hierarchy theory 
focus on subtle individuating differences, not on commonalities and aver­
ages. In consequence, understanding complex dynamics can facilitate con­
text-sensitive and timely decision-­making and action.
Finally, epidemiologists must study so-­called total effects, a measure 
that combines direct and indirect effects of public intervention campaigns 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

Why Context Matters    65
in context-­dependent epidemics: this metric calculates “the effect of the 
intervention program generally combined with the effect of the intervention 
the individual in question personally receives” (Halloran and Struchiner 
1991, 333). The total effects revealed can be downright perverse.
Consider the history of mass inoculations to prevent mumps and 
rubella in children a few decades back. The indubitable effectiveness of 
those campaigns produced dramatic positive and direct effects: many 
fewer children contracted mumps and rubella.
Counterintuitively, however, undesirable and unintended, but predict­
able, indirect effects also followed precisely because those public health 
campaigns were remarkably successful. Because mumps and rubella com­
monly spread more rapidly among schoolchildren, campaigns to eradicate 
mumps and rubella primarily targeted children for inoculation. Success­
fully eradicating these infections in children, however, had the following 
undesirable consequences: the average age of first infection (a population-­
level parameter) went up because those who did contract measles and 
rubella a few years later were (by then) older adults who had not been 
vaccinated years before. Some had not lived in that community during the 
inoculation campaign, or might have just missed the age cutoff at the time. 
Tragically, since mumps, rubella, and other childhood diseases typically 
produce more complications in adults than in children, as average age of 
first infection went up, morbidity among those infected also spiked dra­
matically (because they were contracting the disease later in life).
Other even more complex mereological relations show up in cam­
paigns to contain context-­dependent diseases.
Among the counterintuitive dynamics that epidemiologists and public 
health officials must plan for is the following: consider today’s vaccines 
against diphtheria, tetanus, and pertussis (DTP). As is the case with 
COVID-­19 vaccines as of this writing, a booster shot a few weeks or 
months after the first DTP shot is required because the first shot alone does 
not provide full protection. Direct effects, of course, are always higher if 
every individual in the population receives the booster as well as the first 
shot. That said, in populations where the initial intervention campaign 
was widespread and effective, subsequent exposure to relatively few free 
riders can, counterintuitively, provide the equivalent of a booster shot to 
those who did not receive the second shot—­if exposure to the infected, 
unvaccinated person results in a mild reaction in the individual who only 
received the first shot. Enough free riders, on the other hand, can imperil 
the emergence of herd immunity. So, epidemiologists must even calculate 
the percentage of individuals in a population who are likely to be free 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

66    Chapter 5
riders and cheaters and compare it to the calculated percentage of the 
population required for the operation of herd immunity.
Indirect and total effects are not anomalies; they are real but top-­
down, mereological effects of a transformed collective dynamic (marked 
by a different periodicity and different parameters). It all depends on the 
role context plays in some disease dynamics. Explaining these kinds of 
dependent dynamics to the public is not an easy task.
*
*
*
How widespread are dependent happenings outside of infectious diseases? 
Recent research shows that individuals who have overweight friends and 
acquaintances are more likely to be overweight themselves—­even when 
other considerations are taken into account. Obesity might be like some 
infectious diseases, where incidence is also affected by prevalence. “Social 
contagion means that if more people around you are obese, then that 
may increase your own chances of becoming obese. Subconsciously, we 
are affected by what people around us are doing. If you move to a com­
munity where a sedentary lifestyle is the norm, we tend to adopt that 
pattern as well” (Datar and Nicosia 2018, 240). The context dependence 
of socioeconomic characteristics nests the availability of food choices, 
which nests eating habits, which nests food preference, and so forth. Con­
texts and constraints intertwine along many dimensions and scales.
Scientists have been studying the transmission process of infectious 
diseases for over a century. Whether social contagion of obesity is merely 
a metaphor that arises because of correlations and not causation is still 
an open question. The dynamics of social transmission is a new area of 
research (Centola 2018). In biology, research in epigenetics is beginning 
to throw new light on the way molecular processes can be altered for 
generations by collective dynamics that implicate the environment and 
their effects inherited without causing genetic mutation.
Perhaps the tragedy of COVID-­19, especially the role played by the 
spread of misinformation about mask usage, social distancing, and so on, 
will raise awareness of the fact that, for some health conditions, context 
changes everything. The next few chapters examine context-­dependent 
constraints and how they both open new possibilities and close off others.
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

Chapter 4 described gradients and fields as constraints that take or keep 
conditions away from equiprobability; context-­independent constraints 
like these make events in possibility space unequally likely. Unequal dis­
tribution in possibility space, as we saw, is a prerequisite of information 
and order. We turn now to context-­dependent constraints, those that take 
conditions away from independence (Gatlin 1972). These weave together 
events and processes such that their interactions become mutually con­
ditional on one another and on the history and context in which they 
formed. They now covary. The likelihood of events and processes influ­
enced by contextual constraints is measured with conditional probabil­
ity: X is more or less likely to happen, given the presence of constraint Y, 
in context Z. Chapter 5 used COVID-­19 as a heuristic of the importance 
of this sort of constraint, especially in light of the way it generates mereo­
logical looping, from individuals to population, and back.
*
*
*
The following are three examples of the emergence of long-­range cor­
relations generated in virtue of context-­dependent constraints. The first 
serves as a metaphor of phase transitions. The second illustrates inter­
dependent dynamics among oscillators. The third is the textbook case 
of self-­organizing, nonlinear, and far from equilibrium processes in the 
natural world. All three show how context-­dependent constraints, oper­
ating against a backdrop established by context-­independent constraints, 
weave global forms of order.
MacArthur fellow and theoretical biologist Stuart Kauffman1 offered 
a clever illustration of phase transitions to coherence by randomly tying 
physical elements like buttons together, two by two. At a certain point, 
an abrupt phase transition happens. Well before most buttons are tied 
to another, the buttons lift as one when any one of them is picked up. 
Initially separate and independent buttons have become bound together 
in a two-­dimensional mesh.2
6
Context-­Dependent Constraints
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

68    Chapter 6
Tying three buttons at a time or, in a simulation, on an average of 2.5 
buttons, or 1.7 at a time, produces no such transition. In some cases, the 
system becomes chaotic; in others, the buttons just remain randomly con­
nected. Two inputs per node, on the other hand, turns out to be a Goldi­
locks constraint; it is a context-­dependent constraint that enables a phase 
transition to a new state with new properties. The coherent network is 
the interdependencies established by those enabling constraints. And net­
works are inherently relational entities.
Remarkably, the transition occurs when only about 50 percent of the 
buttons are connected. The abrupt transformation from separate and 
distinct buttons to an intertwined mesh represents a nonlinear phase tran­
sition from individual things to a two-­dimensional, relational network. 
The architecture of the connectivity—­what is connected to what, when, 
how, and by how much—­suddenly becomes as important as the items 
connected. Context-­dependent constraints induce relations that matter as 
much as the particles they link.
In contrast to context-­independent constraints that take conditions 
away from equilibrium, context-­dependent constraints therefore take 
conditions away from independence (Gatlin 1972) by intertwining iso­
lated elements and processes; long-­range correlations and interdependen­
cies result. From these transitions there emerge novel, smeared out entities 
with different properties—­in this case, a web. Enabling constraints, in 
short, transform separate entities into coordination networks character­
ized by relations and organization.
The second example is a textbook case. In the seventeenth century, 
Dutch physicist Christiaan Huygens discovered that pendulum clocks 
on a shelf interact through vibrational oscillations whose transmission 
is facilitated by the shelf on which the clocks sit. By adjusting the ampli­
tude and speed of each bob, contextually constrained interactions trans­
form separate oscillations of individual bobs into a coordinated unit. 
They synchronize into a common and periodic, harmonic wave pattern 
with a different frequency. Metronomes mounted on a common plat­
form likewise entrain into a common wave pattern. These overarching 
wave patterns traced by coordination dynamics are longer and slower 
than the swings of the individual pendulums or metronomes. Different 
cycling rates at different scales of organization will play a key role in 
refashioning a new understanding of the boundaries of identity, as we 
will see later.
Convection patterns such as Bénard cells, dust devils, and tornadoes 
are the third example of the formation of interdependencies in response 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

Context-­Dependent Constraints    69
to constraints. Convection cells were among the first forms of dissipative 
structures studied (Bénard 1900; Rayleigh 1916). Consider a shallow pan 
of water or other viscous fluid at room temperature. At equilibrium water 
droplets move randomly,3 each molecule identical to its neighbor, from 
which it differs only externally and numerically. If the pan is uniformly 
heated from below, as the bottom becomes hotter, a temperature gradi­
ent appears in the liquid. At a certain gradient, small convection streams 
form as the water molecules become increasingly correlated. At first, these 
fluctuations are damped by the overall system, but increasing the heat 
takes the system to a threshold of instability. Beyond a critical threshold, 
the context will amplify random convection streams and drive the system 
over a tipping point. As context-­dependent constraints lock in, macro­
scopic molecular flows of 1020 water molecules moving in concert—­acting 
coherently—­suddenly appear. The system has abruptly switched from a 
regime of conduction to convection. As autocorrelated patterns of energy 
flow, these rolling columns of fluid break the symmetry of the pan of 
water. They are called Rayleigh–­Bénard convection cells. The behavior 
of each molecule is now dependent on the presence and behavior of the 
surrounding ones.
Coordination dynamics like these (produced by context-­dependent 
constraints on energy flows) form under far from equilibrium conditions. 
The initial links (such as a random convection stream) might be fortuitous. 
But if constrained interactions produce effects that are more metastable 
and increase energy flows overall, the context will amplify the dynamic 
and other couplings will no longer be fortuitous; they will become likely. 
The rolling hexagonal cells appear. The metastability of those cells itself 
becomes an encompassing constraint that self-­reinforces. (See chapter 9 
on stability as persistence.)
One can speculate that in the early moments of the cosmos, electrons 
packed in close proximity might have fortuitously and irreversibly become 
linked. Once connected, they displayed emergent and metastable geo­
metrical properties, the linear, planar, and tetrahedral configurations of 
electron-­pairs. Electron orbits of two nearby atoms, in turn, might have 
entrained in a constructive interference pattern, an even more metasta­
ble and self-­reinforcing waveform we know as a molecular orbital. Just 
as water molecules behave differently in the context of a rolling Bénard 
column, atoms behave differently in the context of molecular orbitals. 
Context constrains. On the far side of each of these phase transitions, 
constituents are no longer separate and independent entities; they become 
relata and components of a new systemwide interdependence. 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

70    Chapter 6
Coherence creation of this sort is best imagined as a “cusp catastrophe” 
bifurcation (Thom 1989), a phase transformation to a newly reconfigured 
topology—­a new possibility space characterized by a new constraint archi­
tecture with new properties. Because the enabling constraints in question 
are context dependent, they lock in the resulting intertwined energy flows 
and information to real-world traits. In each case, the new context woven 
together by constrained interactions among individual elements constitutes 
an emergent set of now context-­dependent and intertwined constraints. 
Because the enabling constraints in question are context-­dependent, they 
lock in the resulting intertwined energy flows and information to real-­
world characteristics. Consequently, the closed set of constraints embodies, 
enacts, and transmits meaningful information about that world as a new 
possibility space whose components, properties, and behavior carry that 
information in their traits.4 Interdependencies of this sort show that the 
cosmos satisfies the second law by generating coordination patterns and 
creating coherent dynamics that are metastable—­thanks to the operation 
of constraints.
Coherence-­making by constraints takes place in physical and biologi­
cal complex systems small and large, from Bénard cells to human orga­
nizations and institutions, from family units to entire cultures. Entities 
and events in economic and ecosystems are defined by such covarying 
relations generated by enabling constraints. These mutually dependent 
relations are held together by interlocking constraints that can be called 
constitutive-­governing constraints.
Adam Smith understood this bottom-­up and top-­down flow responsible 
for the interdependent (not merely aggregative) and persistent dynamic of 
economic systems. As mentioned in chapter 2, his famed “invisible hand” 
describes one such coordination dynamic induced by contextually con­
strained relations among individuals. Bottom-­up, individual interactions 
intertwined by enabling constraints generate a coordination pattern of rela­
tional behavior. Once the population-­level dynamic coalesces, the actions of 
individuals entrained in it change as a result of the resulting dynamic’s con­
stitutive constraints, as well as the history and circumstances that brought 
these about. Consequently, agents become consumers, producers, traders, 
and regulators; they act and respond differently to the embedding constitu­
tive constraints in which they are caught up. We call the constitutive con­
straints that define this coordination its invisible hand.
Smith identified beneficial economic consequences of the invisible 
hand. Oligopolies, however, show that such interdependencies can also 
have a negative aspect: when product prices set by one firm are dependent 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

Context-­Dependent Constraints    71
on prices set by the other, and vice versa, the interdependencies of their 
constraint regime enact a loop that is difficult to break. Another notable 
example of the negative consequences of constitutive constraints is the 
depletion of public resources like the sheep-­grazing area known as the 
“commons” or communal lobster-­fishing areas off Rhode Island. In these 
last two cases, the dynamic generated by individually innocuous actions 
is a harmful collective property, the so-­called tragedy of the commons. 
Failure to acknowledge mereological relations is one reason it took so 
long to recognize the real and powerful emergent properties of coordina­
tion dynamics.
Enabling and Constitutive/Governing Constraints
Keeping mereological relations of coordination dynamics straight is not 
always easy, as the COVID-­19 loops showed.
Some context-­dependent constraints are enabling constraints; others 
are constitutive (Mossio 2013; Moreno and Mossio 2016) or govern­
ing. Enabling constraints (Pattee 1973; Salthe 1985; Juarrero 1999) 
are context-­dependent constraints that irreversibly link and couple 
previously separate and entities at the same scale as the constraints. By 
lowering barriers to energy, matter, and information flows such that inde­
pendent entities become conditional on each other, enabling constraints 
drive parts-­to-­whole phase transitions to emergent coordination patterns, 
realized as mutually dependent relations.
Enabling constraints are nature’s mechanism for coherence-making, 
generalization, and emergence. The rolling columns of fluid that con­
stitute a Bénard cell are nothing other than interdependent, coherent 
dynamics generated by enabling constraints. Those coordinated and 
mutually dependent dynamics reflect the contextual constraints that 
induce and sustain them. For example, details like the speed and direction 
of flow will depend on the exact constraints under which each rolling cell 
formed. But coordinated and coherent dynamics have emergent proper­
ties their components severally do not, not least of which is their capacity 
to affect the properties and behaviors of those components that make 
them up. Phase locking, resonance, synchronization, and entrainment are 
emergent properties of coherently organized interdependent dynamics.
Enabling context-­dependent constraints are therefore constraints 
that make the probability of one event conditional upon another. In 
phase transitions marked by bursts of entropy, they irreversibly gener­
ate emergent and coherent, metastable patterns of matter and energy 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

72    Chapter 6
flow. By coherent I mean that interlocking and covarying interdependen­
cies brought about by enabling constraints hold systemwide patterns of 
mutual dependence together across spatiotemporal scales. They become 
autocorrelated, their interactions more tightly coupled, their feedback 
loops and relaxation times shorter, faster, and more regular than either 
with those of the environment within which they operate or with the 
elements of which the interactions are composed. The probability distri­
bution, phases, frequencies, cycling rates, and timing of individual pro­
cesses and events are woven together into multiscale, multidimensional 
tapestries of contextually embedded dynamics.5 By embedded I mean 
that the system, including its components and its context, are intertwined 
in simultaneously constraining and constrained relations on which they 
mutually depend and with which they covary. 
Complex systems ranging from convection cells to economic and 
ecosystems form and function in this fashion. As the pendulums, metro­
nomes, and convection cell examples illustrated, the exact architecture 
of constraint regimes that manifest as waves or rolling columns keeps 
the particular interdependencies going. The pendulums and metronomes 
swing as one; the convection cells rotate as a unit. Complex entities 
formed by context-­dependent constraints under conditions of nonequi­
librium are coherent and persistent. Those interdependencies satisfy the 
second law: energy, matter, and information flow with greater ease as 
coordinated interdependencies than separately.
*
*
*
It is a central claim of this book that such coherent structures and dynam­
ics constitute real and novel, interactional types of entities. Interactional 
types should not be reified; they are internally consistent, multiscale, 
mutual dependencies brought about by enabling constraints operating 
against a stable background set by context-­independent constraints as 
described in chapter 3. They are measured with conditional probabilities. 
Critically, they are multiply realizable in distinct tokens. Not all con­
straints may be simultaneously satisfied, but those actual economies, or 
Bénard cells, or ecosystems that do exist satisfy numerous constraints 
simultaneously; they are the outcomes of multiple constraint satisfaction, 
a process of continuous adjustment of rates, weights, timing, and so on 
that satisfies as many constraints as possible. 
Constraint satisfaction is an important form of “causality” that has been 
systematically ignored by modern science and philosophy. It can explain 
the generation and persistence of coherence. The effects of population-­level 
properties on components, members, and stages of those interdependencies 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

Context-­Dependent Constraints    73
are also real. In response to multiple constraint satisfaction, components 
acquire new relational roles and properties—­as members, periods, stages, 
and so on of a reconfigured dynamic with distinct population-­level prop­
erties. As the previous chapter explained, a handful of unvaccinated indi­
viduals acquire new roles:  they become shirkers and free riders because the 
likelihood that they will become infected suddenly drops to practically zero.
These terms capture real dynamics, they are not just convenient labels; 
they describe a real reconfigured probability distribution of events in possi­
bility space. The probability (Px) of individual event x abruptly transforms 
into a different probability, one conditioned on the full spatiotempo­
ral context in which it is embedded (Px/y, with y = embedding context). 
As members of a fully inoculated population, the risk of contagion for 
scofflaws drops precipitously because others have been vaccinated. The 
spatiotemporal context, what happened before and around them, has 
transformed the likelihood of what will happen to them next. Just as elec­
trons possess different properties and behave differently in the context 
of a molecule than in the context of a single atom, the unvaccinated few 
acquire a relational property with respect to infectious disease dynamics: 
they are now free riders, a type of entity described by conditional proba­
bilities. Disease incidence (the default likelihood Px that a given individual 
might become infected) abruptly changed to a probability conditioned on 
the characteristics of the population in which they are embedded. Inci­
dence suddenly switched to being dependent on prevalence.
Temporal Constraints
The spatial constraints of seesaws were mentioned earlier. In ontogenesis, 
too, spatial location of a pluripotent cell in the embryo biases the likeli­
hood of whether it will differentiate into muscle or bone. But enabling 
constraints governing developmental processes are time based as well; 
temporal constraints of cellular differentiation and protein folding are as 
significant as the spatial context in which each step takes place.
Temporal enabling constraints are contextual constraints that turn 
entities interdependent in time; the second event becomes conditional 
upon the first. If X occurs, Y then becomes much more likely, or much 
more likely to happen next, or sooner rather than later, or faster rather 
than slower. Suddenly, X and Y are no longer separate and independent: 
Y is conditional on X; X has become a temporal constraint on Y.
Chapter 2 mentioned timing constraints in sports and medical con­
texts. It also noted that our sense of hearing works in terms of a temporal 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

74    Chapter 6
code. Physical and psychological milestones in child development are 
temporally organized; they are tuned to certain intervals and ordered 
sequences. Timing is implemented by temporal constraints that change 
the likelihood of future processes and events. Rules and regulations, 
codes and protocols, and norms and ethical principles also commonly 
operate as temporal constraints; they are instructions or procedures that 
specify a precise temporal order in which to do what, when—­as well as 
where.
Often operating across several time scales simultaneously, temporal con­
straints bind together previously separate entities into complex diachronic 
interdependencies with emergent properties, coherent sequences in which 
what happened before biases what can and does happen when and next. 
As the sequence of cassava root preparation mentioned earlier illustrated, 
if a series of steps leads to greater stability, sequences as coherent units can 
form and be selected and repeated (Henrich 2016). The sequence as a unit 
reinforces because its order generates outputs that are more stable: it is 
why becoming an emergency medical technician is often a prerequisite for 
becoming a firefighter.
Another food preparation example (Henrich 2016) is illustrative. 
Without undergoing a particular sequence of processing steps, nardoo 
seed–­like spores are indigestible and contain an enzyme, thiaminase, that 
inactivates vitamin B1.6 Properly detoxified, however, nardoo is a main 
source of nutrients for Aboriginal hunter-­gatherers in Australia. Per­
formed in order, each step in the nardoo preparation process increases 
digestibility by breaking down thiaminase. The steps concatenate into 
a particular sequence which, as a unit, brings metastable results. Per­
formed in order, the entire food preparation process brings into being a 
social practice, a population-­level emergent property organized in time 
that yields adequate nutrition and is more metastable than had that exact 
series of steps not evolved into a coherent unit (Henrich 2016).
The full sequence itself, that is, becomes chunked into a context-­
independent constraint, a ritual or protocol of temporally coded seg­
ments. Temporally constrained sequences do not just start and stop; they 
do not track “one damn thing after another.” They are now organized 
into episodes, stages, or epochs, with beginnings, middles, and endings. 
Even toddlers understand the difference between a parent who just stops 
cold while reading a bedtime story, as opposed to one who stops reading 
at a logical resting point in the story. Each segment embodies and enacts 
an internally consistent logic that holds a set of conditional dependen­
cies together as a diachronic unit, a coherent, coordination dynamic 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

Context-­Dependent Constraints    75
organized in time, and characterized by emergent properties. That emer­
gent property is a meaningful narrative.
Complex systems are therefore historical, not merely temporal; they 
embody temporal constraints in their very logic. They carry their history on 
their backs, as it were. Mutual relations of temporal constraint intertwine 
individual cells, tissues, organs and their processes into path-­dependent 
complex systems. Self-­reinforcement due to combined temporal enabling 
constraints is also path-­dependent and historically constrained. On top 
of satisfying inherited context-­independent constraints, embryological 
and child-­development processes are also influenced by other more local 
and immediate spatiotemporally dependent constraints, each of which 
becomes active and is reinforced depending on timing and context. 
Changes that mark the onset of puberty must be held at bay during child­
hood, for example, and livers remember years of alcohol abuse. Historicity 
emerges with the formation of complex systems.
Cardinality and Indexicality, Ordinality and Placement
We noted that some constraints (as in gravity) can lead to clumping. 
Clumping makes for cardinal measures, but not complexity.7 Prior to the 
introduction of context-­dependent constraints, cardinality (quantity) was 
the only metric available. The clumps grow in size. More and less, bigger 
and smaller are about increasing magnitude, mass, or agglomeration, 
which are effects of context-­independent constraints such as gradients. In 
a linear world, no qualitative novelty would arise.
Spatial and temporal constraints, in contrast, produce indexical order­
ing. Indexically defined relations explicitly refer to the spatiotemporal 
context that generated them and the emergent properties that govern them 
(discussed further in chapters 11 and 12). Ordinality, the position of an 
event in a sequence, is an indexical property that emerges when temporal, 
context-­dependent constraints weave together a set of local interdepen­
dencies in time. The various conditional probabilities demarcate its spatio­
temporal order. First, second, and third, or before and after, are emergent 
ordinal properties of points in phase space structured by temporally orga­
nized constraints. Significantly, this distinction is possible only because 
individual steps in temporally constrained sequences are not independent 
of each other. The burst of entropy with which irreversible phase transi­
tions are paid marks a qualitative transition to a now temporally organized 
phase space. This new space represents a novel four-­dimensional landscape, 
a new distinct constraint regime organized by time as well as space. 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

76    Chapter 6
To recapitulate: classical thermodynamics demonstrated that temporal 
order is real. However, according to the received view of physics, micro­
events forget their origins and the path they traversed. Chapter 9 will 
argue that there is no continuity proper in classical thermodynamics. In 
contrast, context-­dependent constraints in open nonequilibrium condi­
tions link separate events by making them conditional on one another. 
Time as well as space is incorporated in those enabling constraints that 
generate coherence-­making and coherent sequences. Timing as well as 
place or situatedness becomes important. When context-­dependent con­
straints are in place, that is, organization matters, temporal as well as 
spatial. The step-­by-­step instructions of genes, procedures, protocols, 
recipes, and musical scores describe such temporal constraints.
Contextually constrained coordination dynamics as understood in 
complexity theory therefore carry the imprint of their past and their 
environment in their present structure and dynamics. They embody and 
reflect the trajectory they have traversed. Temporal constraints weave 
together coherent sequences into extended narrative plotlines, biological 
lineages, and the life spans of individual organisms as well as cultures, all 
the while remaining in nonequilibrium. Depending on the details of how 
those constraints are implemented locally, these temporally coordinated 
sequences are actualized as progressively individuated systems that, also 
thanks to path dependence, blaze unique trajectories whose dynamics 
reflect that history. Spatiotemporal constraints thus turn entities and tra­
jectories qualitatively distinct. To repeat, they are, for that reason, not only 
temporal; they are historical. Their past is etched into their present; their 
constraint dynamic leaves a mark on those they influence.
As examples: even raindrops, sleet, hailstones, powdered snow, and 
snow crystals are constrained trajectories that “condensated” (Burgauer 
2022a) into distinct physical structures. Their emergent characteristics 
make manifest the context and the moment in which they were created. 
To illustrate, graphite and diamonds are made of the same carbon 
atoms, but the different constraint architectures in which their atoms are 
arranged actualize, in their very structure, the different atmospheric con­
ditions such as temperature and pressure under which they were created. 
In consequence, their qualities are different.
Long-­lasting temporal constraints and the long-­range temporal depen­
dencies they induce also underpin persistent coherence, the temporal 
counterpart of stability (Pascal and Pross 2015; see chapter 9). Persistent 
coherence is apparent in musical scores. Recurring musical refrains tie 
together longer segments of music. No longer independent notes, they 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

Context-­Dependent Constraints    77
are now components of a more encompassing unit, a musical phrase, a 
cadence, or an arpeggio. These sequences are temporal interdependencies 
whose components constrain and are constrained by the longer-­term cor­
relations in which they are embedded and that persist throughout.
Melodies are therefore path-­dependent temporal wholes. Just as heri­
table constraints shape biological lineages over a longer time span than 
that of individual organisms, note order and tempo create melodies. 
Composers select notes for a musical score in light of those that came 
before and the overall composition in which those notes will appear. As 
an indication of the holistic yet differentiated nature of harmonies and 
melodies, expert musicians, for example, can hear other notes of a har­
monic chord and even anticipate the next notes and chords in a cadence. 
Not only do individual notes reverberate as a chord’s harmonics, but 
each note also continues to reverberate and resonate while the next notes 
of an arpeggio are played. Resonance can even expand. During a perfor­
mance, brainwaves of members of the audience synchronize with those 
of the performers (Martone 2020). Such effects appear on the far side 
of a phase change that has dramatically transformed two independent 
possibility spaces into a more complex and spatiotemporally extended 
constraint regime.
*
*
*
These examples make clear that enabling constraints generate coherent 
dynamics whose boundaries need not be tangible, material structures. 
Rate differences between the circular flow of warm air constrained by low 
pressure at the center of the vortex and its outer edge mark the bound­
aries of a tornado. (Recall that differences in pressure are constraints 
that demarcate gradients.) Rate differences between full predator–­prey 
cycles and the life span of the individual animals entrained in those cycles 
constitute the boundaries between parts and wholes. When enabling con­
straints weave together new coherences, autocorrelated dynamics are 
“lifted”—differentiated—­from the contextual backdrop from which they 
emerged. Hurricanes, for example, are coherent structures sufficiently 
distinct from their environment to be visible from space This notion of 
identity is quite different from the inherent essential traits of Aristote­
lian and Cartesian substances. It is grounded in persistent, extended, and 
dynamic interdependencies among individual entities; between entities 
and processes on the one hand and conditions in the environment on the 
other; and between all of these and the past.
Whenever such interdependencies coalesce, individual components 
become relata aligned in the service of the more encompassing whole.
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

78    Chapter 6
This is not to diminish the significance of efficient causes (such as the 
push that starts clock pendulums swinging in the first place). The point of 
these examples is to highlight conditions that serve as context-­dependent 
constraints and take previously separate entities, be they atoms or clocks, 
away from independence (Gatlin 1972). The shelf on which the clocks sit, 
for example, does not add energy; it facilitates the flow of oscillations. 
Coherence-­making and complexity formation at every scale are generated 
by a combination of both context-­independent and context-­dependent 
constraints. By irreversibly linking the probabilities of their occurrence, 
context-­dependent constraints transform individual oscillations into 
interdependent components of new and overarching type of entity—­
molecules or waves. Without the shelf, there could be no synchronization. 
Without the characteristics of electron orbits and their proximity to other 
atoms, molecules would not form. Once formed, however, new constraint 
architectures such as waveforms, molecules, and population dynamics 
shape new topologies, with new governing constraints, order parameters, 
and emergent properties.
Mutually constrained and constraining dynamics can be found in 
“small world” networks, vehicular traffic, crowds, economies (Arthur 
2020), ecosystems, and pedestrian dynamics (Gershenson 2020); they 
structure the universe along a different set of joints than does folk ter­
minology. We have seen how the propagation of vehicular congestion 
shockwaves and the spread of infectious diseases share analogous dynam­
ics that can be studied with simple contagion models (Saberi et al. 2020).
Synchronized and coordination dynamics display new properties and 
new powers. Marching in synchrony can collapse a bridge, which no 
individual soldier’s footfalls could. It is not even the aggregate number 
of footfalls that brings about the collapse; it is their synchronization, an 
emergent property of coherence making. Context-­dependent constraints 
thus enable new forms of order that are not merely epiphenomenal aggre­
gates; they can “change the go of things,” in Peirce’s words. Herd immu­
nity or the lack thereof is a case in point.
*
*
*
To recapitulate: Context-­dependent enabling constraints irreversibly pre­
cipitate interactions that leave a mark. The coherence of the emergent inter­
dependencies is that mark. Context-­dependent constraints therefore drive 
Collier’s third prerequisite of self-­organization, “unity relations.” In open, 
far from equilibrium conditions, where, as Collier (2003a) notes, there are 
(1) exchanges of matter and energy with the environment, (2) a source of 
energy, and (3) a gradient, superimposing context-­dependent constraints 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

Context-­Dependent Constraints    79
against a far from equilibrium background established by context-­
independent constraints drives conditions past an instability threshold. 
Irreversible phase transitions produce a new coordination dynamic (Nicolis 
and Prigogine 1977; Kelso 1995; Turvey 1990), realized as metastable, long-­
range, correlated patterns of energy flow (Bejan and Lorente 2004, 2008) 
away from equilibrium. The constraint architecture that constitutes these 
patterns can span spatial as well as temporal scales and manifest as syn­
chronic coherence and diachronic persistence (Pascal and Pross 2015). Each 
of these embodies spatially and temporally organized constraint regimes. 
Economic systems, cultures, and biological lineages are spatiotemporally 
organized relations generated by enabling context-­dependent constraints 
and held together by constitutive constraint regimes.
Top-­Down (Governing) Context-­Dependent Constraints
As just noted, the interlocking interdependencies of constraint architec­
tures can bring about mereological effects, top down. Remarkable new 
powers are among the emergent properties of the new relational landscape 
generated by enabling constraints. Laser beams cauterize wounds, which 
individual photons cannot. Molecules subtend the world of chemistry, 
which atoms on their own do not. A vaccinated population acquires pro­
tective powers, and entrained pendulums generate waveforms that regulate 
individual swings. Liquids with zero viscosity (superfluid) can flow without 
loss of kinetic energy; electrical resistance vanishes in superconductors.
Top-­down causality is possible because constitutive constraint archi­
tectures of complex interdependencies generated by enabling constraints 
do double duty as governing constraints. Top down, from the invisible 
hand’s coordination dynamics to its individual traders and firms, govern­
ing constraints in general exert control on their components and behavior 
in cascades of mutual constraint satisfaction, often as negative feedback 
loops. These cascades are typical of complex systems. They propagate 
information throughout the entire system as the effects of the nonlinear 
interactions that generated the coordination. That is how constraints tie 
together individual and population levels dynamics, parts, and wholes. 
In each case, governing constraints stabilize the possibility space within 
which the behavior of individual organelles, photon streams, or members 
of society must remain for the constrained global pattern to persist. While 
those governing constraints hold, the dynamic persists as an integral 
unit at the collective, systemwide level (despite significant changes at the 
component level). Unity of type endures. If overall economic conditions 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

80    Chapter 6
change (that is, if overall constitutive constraints of the economic 
system—­manifesting as price points, for example—­change), individual 
buyers and sellers adjust accordingly and the overall interdependen­
cies remain steady. The coordination displayed as an overall harmonic 
pattern of synchronized pendulums persists in response to the top-­down 
constraints the virtual governor applies to each pendulum’s amplitude 
and phase. As always, such correlated and constrained patterns of energy 
flow simultaneously satisfy and retard the second law.
In other words, governing constraints of context-­dependent coherent 
dynamics generated by enabling constraints keep mutually dependent 
relations coherent. They regulate component processes top down such 
that the overarching dynamic remains metastable. Collective proper­
ties of constitutive constraint regimes do so by raising or lowering barri­
ers to energy flow, adjusting timing and activation strength, as conditions 
warrant. These adjustments restrict the behavior of the system and of its 
components or stages to a subregion of the system’s overall possibility 
space (Salthe 1985, 2012; also see chapter 15). The emergent properties 
embodied in that constrained space are thereby preserved: synchrony, 
phase locking, coordination, and so forth hold and persist. In short, 
behavior controlled top down ensures it stays true to type as defined by 
the constitutive constraint regime that embodies its emergent properties.
Complex systems therefore regulate and control their constituents top 
down—­as governing constraints. Like virtual governors of laser beams 
and pendulum clocks, governing constraints as envisioned here are distrib­
uted mechanisms of control. They are embodied in the order parameters 
of the interdependencies and constitutive constraint regimes established by 
enabling constraints. As a result, actions that issue from and are governed 
by those constitutive constraints remain within its more confined region 
of state space.
Arising concomitantly with the closure of enabling (bottom-­up) 
context-­dependent constraints that integrate separate parts into coherent 
wholes, top-­down governing constraints (of those emergent wholes on 
their components) are therefore specificatory; they go from whole to parts, 
from general to particular, from constitutive constraint regime of the emer­
gent interactional type to its actualized tokens. In the marching example, 
the synchronization pattern itself not only can collapse the bridge; it also 
acts as a global governing constraint on the tempo of the individual sol­
diers’ cadence, whose steps become entrained into the beat. That is, the 
rhythm of the stepping is confined to that state space that constitutes the 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

Context-­Dependent Constraints    81
beat. Consequences in the real world show that these mereological influ­
ences are not epiphenomenal. Coherence as such has causal influence, just 
not as efficient cause.
Regulatory genes bring about change in an analogous manner. Indi­
vidual transcription factors regulate by governing gene expression, in 
context, such that realized phenotypes preserve unity of type, even while 
allowing local and contextually specified variations. If governing con­
straints weaken, or adaptive space runs out, type can disintegrate. That 
is, the interlocking constraints that confer type identity will degrade, its 
coherent interdependencies will dissipate, and unity of type will be lost.
*
*
*
Reinterpreted in terms of constraint, top-­down causation is real. Syn­
ergetics founder Hermann Haken (1996; Haken and Wunderlin 1988) 
describes lasers in unfortunate terminology as “slaving” their constituent 
photon streams. That is, coherent beams constrain component photon 
streams top down (from synchronized whole to components) such that 
the beam’s overall alignment persists and remains diachronically coher­
ent. Haken recently extended this idea to cities (Haken and Portugali 
2021), which are complex systems par excellence. The coherent dynam­
ics of cities arise from the way things (buildings, roads, rivers), energy, 
agents, and information are interlaced by constraints, including historical 
ones. As these become interdependent the city acquires a unique profile, 
an identity that embodies and enacts its history and context. During 
steady-­state periods, the interplay among those factors is governed by 
a few order parameters that constrain the behavior of its residents top 
down: they behave like New Yorkers! Those dynamics themselves can 
adapt and evolve, depending on context, however. In response to a crisis, 
cities either undergo dramatic phase changes and reconfigure into entirely 
novel constraint regimes. Or they collapse. These are the transformations 
that make the history books.
It is important to underscore that constitutive and governing con­
straints should not be reified; they are not spatiotemporally other than the 
components and constraints from which they were formed and which they 
control. Because they operate from whole to parts (from extant, coherent 
interdependencies to token components, or to next step), governing con­
straints are in fact second-­order context-­dependent constraints (Juarrero 
1999) that bring about specific effects and actions. They select and filter 
internal and external signals in light of their compatibility with existing 
governing constraints and accordingly restrict next steps from all possible 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

82    Chapter 6
realizations. (The anthropomorphic terms selection and filtering must be 
translated into the language of conditional probability: the likelihood of 
a particular event occurring given the requirements of multiple constraint 
satisfaction that describe the particular coherent dynamic in which it is 
entrained.)
Notably, governing constraints regulate, modulate, and otherwise 
control a coherent dynamic’s synchronization, coordination, and so on. 
They control behavior such that the boundaries of the dynamic’s possibil­
ity space are maintained; governing constraints also bias the likelihood 
of future events. In response to changing probability distributions, which 
in turn represent continuously adjusting constraints, constitutive con­
straints adaptively tweak their own profile—­contextually, in response to 
more local and timely constraints. They adjust component processes and 
behavior accordingly. But they do not engage in energy transfer directly.
This is most in evidence in physiology.  As noted in an earlier chapter, 
vessels of the circulatory system do not impart energy to the flow of 
blood or lymphatic fluid (Moreno and Mossio 2015; Montevil and 
Mossio 2015). Fluids that would ordinarily dissipate are instead confined 
to tubular flows along directed pathways. Blood and lymphatic vessels 
direct and literally canalize flow without adding energy to the processes 
as the heart does; vascular structure serves instead as top-­down govern­
ing constraint. Should these second-­order constraints (from virtual gov­
ernor to components) relax, fluid flow coordination would disintegrate, 
and the circulatory system would dissipate on its way to thermodynamic 
equilibrium and death.
In individual organisms, governing constraints crosscut metabolic, endo­
crine, neurological, biophysical, biochemical, and other functions. 
They secure the emergent property homeostasis (also at many scales) 
by continuously adjusting its values such that constraints that govern that 
overarching metastable function are satisfied. Homeostasis, in short, is a 
dynamic version of the body’s vasculature: an encompassing set of con­
stitutive constraints that stabilize, regulate, and modulate—­govern—­local 
processes, top down. Even in the absence of tissue damage, conditions of 
extreme cold, starvation, or predation will facilitate responses that protect 
against possible loss of homeostatic function. As the organism anticipates 
tissue damage, homeostatic regulation activates behavior like shivering such 
that, overall, the organism remains within its range of viability. I submit that 
human cognitive and value frameworks are likewise evolved versions of 
top-­down constraints; they, too, are second-order constraints that regulate 
and control behavior in terms of emergent properties.
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

Context-­Dependent Constraints    83
This is possible at all only because the interdependencies formed by 
enabling constraints are robust and persist. Parameters set by the interde­
pendencies govern behavior top down to ensure that persistence. Order 
parameters can be multiply satisfied—­“appropriate behavior” can be 
either fight or flight, depending on the agent’s history and in combination 
with the momentary context. In the case of homeostasis, its governing con­
straints damp or amplify local perturbations, oscillations, and variations 
as necessary, such that individual biochemical, metabolic, neuromuscular, 
and so forth processes covary and remain within the range of homeo­
stasis’s continuous function, as set by current local constraints as well as 
inherited ones. Because order parameters are multiply satisfiable, organ­
isms can then act appropriately, fight or flee, depending on their history as 
interpreted at that moment, under those conditions. Later on in evolution, 
governing constraints embodying values, ethics, and morals and acting as 
second-order constraints likewise regulate and produce actions that enact 
those axiological constraints.
To repeat: virtual governors of synchronized pendulums and metro­
nomes, of metabolic homeostasis, and of ecosystem and social dynam­
ics are therefore second-­order context-­dependent constraints that in a 
distributed manner regulate and modulate energy flow such that the 
overall coordination dynamic—­its unity of type—­is preserved. That is 
the manner of causality of top-­down influence. Standing causes in terms 
of long-­range correlations become possible if we think of top-­down cau­
sality as a second-­order context-­dependent constraint.
Readers familiar with complex attractors will recognize second-­order 
context-­dependent constraints. The Lorenz butterfly attractor constrains 
innumerable, nonrepeating trajectories; nevertheless, each run remains 
within the attractor’s basin despite the numerous and distinct trajectories. 
Likewise, biological species carve out progressively individuated regions in 
the genus’s multiply realizable possibility space, to which each variant spec­
imen of that species nevertheless conforms (Agosta and Brooks 2020). And 
even very different persons are somehow clearly recognizable as Americans 
when they travel abroad.
Whether enacting homeostasis, a newly learned skill, or values, consti­
tutive constraints shape new phase spaces and set the order parameters of 
emergent coordination dynamics. Then, acting as governing constraints, 
constitutive constraints operate as limiting constraints; they confine 
options to a subregion in state space. Like the narrowing chute of attrac­
tors in epigenetic landscapes, governing constraints carve stable basins of 
attraction to which the range of potential tokens and their behaviors (the 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

84    Chapter 6
actual clocks and phenotypes) are restricted. That is what virtual gover­
nors do. Governing constraints bring about these second-­order, top-­down 
effects despite being themselves products of bottom-­up (enabling) parts-­
to-­whole constraints. And to repeat, governing constraints are not other 
than the constitutive constraints of the complex system they govern.
Coordination Dynamics Satisfy Second Law
Constrained interdependence is energy efficient while simultaneously sat­
isfying the second law. Interdependencies generated by irreversible phase 
transitions to a new form of order are paid for by an overall entropy 
burst. Locally, however, the new coordination dynamic has a lowered rate 
of internal entropy production (negentropy). As an example, the increased 
metastability of covalent bonds is underpinned by a net decrease in the 
molecule’s kinetic energy. Molecular information is stored in the mol­
ecule’s coherent coordination structure and interdependent constraints 
that subtend that metastability.
As another example of energy efficiency, infant brains, which represent 
about 13 percent of their body weight, burn a whopping 60 percent or so 
of the calories the child consumes. During an infant’s first year of life, a 
combination of constrained development and experience trims and sculpts 
initially disorganized neural connections into networked pathways which 
are more energy efficient than the initial connections of the newborn. As 
a consequence of organization, the average adult’s brain consumes about 
20 percent of energy of the infant’s usage. By streamlining patterns of 
energy flow, neural development induces ordered interconnections that 
transform complication into energy-efficient complexity.
This is a general feature of complex systems, biotic and prebiotic. 
Whether we consider living organelles, nonliving chemical elements, or 
soldiers marching to the beat of a drum, entities on their own ordinarily 
have more alternatives than they do once entrained into a systemwide 
attractor (a cell, an enzyme, or a marching army). Following synchroni­
zation or entrainment, individual trajectories are confined by the second-­
order relational constraints of a more energy-efficient coherent structure 
or dynamic, of which they are now components.
“Trimming and shaping” during neurological development is therefore 
not a process of random removal. It is a directed process of selection that 
proceeds in response to inherited and experientially acquired constraints 
and in reference to the systemwide coherence which it generates and pre­
serves. The direction of fit is systematic and governed by constraints, top 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

Context-­Dependent Constraints    85
down; it issues from constitutive and governing constraints to appropri­
ate action (because it is so controlled).
The approach presented in this book views top-­down mereological cau­
sality as emerging concomitantly with coherence-­making and hierarchization 
in response to constraints. Because top-­down constraint is exercised in sat­
isfaction of the emergent properties of coherent wholes, coherence-­making 
also shifts decision-­making and action control upward, to the second-­order 
governing constraints of the interdependencies it generates. Consequently, 
explaining a phenomenon by reference to its fundamental particles becomes 
meaningless. When the explanandum is created by and embedded in contex­
tual constraints, the “arrow of explanation” points upward to the systemic 
whole as well as down to its components (Wimsatt 1974).
*
*
*
Governing or top-­down second order constraints were described in the 
previous pages as restrictive and limiting, but the last few paragraphs sug­
gested another side to governing constraints, more accurate adjectives for 
which would be constitutive and stabilizing. Because coherence making—­
the formation of a new type of entity—­underlies dynamic metastability, 
top-­down governing constraints are not a priori negative. Without the sta­
bilization they provide, exponential growth precipitated by enabling con­
straints would spin out of control like the positive loop gain that makes 
electronic speakers screech.8 Moreover, governing constraints hold together 
constitutive constraints over time and thereby allow the interdependen­
cies in question to persist as themselves far longer than otherwise. Without 
their stabilizing ratchet, evolution would be impossible. Interdependen­
cies would decohere and the second law would quickly disintegrate any 
incipient order. Governing constraints both stabilize and preserve achieved 
coherence ready for the next step.
As an example from social science, limitations and prohibitions enu­
merated and described in a nation-­state’s founding documents establish 
governing constraints on its member states and citizens (“Powers not 
delegated to the United States by the Constitution, nor prohibited by it to 
the States are reserved to the States respectively, or to the people.”). These 
constraints delineate a space of possibilities (Artigiani 1994) that limit 
what individual persons, or states, can or cannot legally do. These set­
tings increase the odds that residents, citizens, and states remain aligned 
overall as members of the body politic.
Belonging to a body politic also opens dimensions that afford different 
and qualitatively novel roles and opportunities for its members. Being rec­
ognized by the “community of nations” does the same for a nascent state. 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

86    Chapter 6
New rights and opportunities appear concomitantly with new responsi­
bilities and constraints. Without the emergent affordances offered by legal 
and judicial platforms through their enabling and governing constraints, 
individuals cannot be spouses, mayors, or conscientious objectors, for 
example. Nongovernmental organizations cannot form. Individuals cannot 
participate in a banking system. As Locke, Hobbes, and Rousseau well 
understood, such roles (and authorizing powers) are unavailable to a 
motley group of people prior to coalescing as a social organization of a 
particular sort (organization being defined in terms of those interlocking 
constraints that establish and stabilize its coherence).
Similarly, genetic material captured in an amino acid, amino acids 
captured in a protein, and mitochondria captured in cytoplasm have 
fewer degrees of freedom than as isolated biochemicals. Amino acids are 
constrained components of the coordination dynamic that constitutes 
a protein. The wider set of interdependencies (which we call proteins), 
however, acquires properties and functionalities the amino acids individu­
ally lack. Molecules have properties and powers that atoms singly do not. 
Full-­fledged organisms can access more dimensions and degrees of freedom 
than isolated RNA molecules can. Enabling constraints generalize; the new 
degrees of freedom these interlocking interdependencies afford are realized 
as emergent properties and powers. Traits and powers are not new things; 
they are condensates (Burgauer 2022a) or foci of constrained relations 
endogenously generated bottom-­up. In turn, and acting as second-­order 
governing constraints, they stabilize and specify but neither determine nor 
freeze behavior by restricting the tokens’ degrees of freedom to within that 
newly organized constraint regime.
Emphasizing this point reiterates the fact that authoritarian and arbi­
trary fiats of dictators, field marshals, and some CEOs are not the kind of 
top-­down or governing constraints envisioned here,9 which are naturally 
formed distributed and second-order constraints that arise from first-­order, 
contextual constraints on individual clocks, photon beams, biochemical 
reactions, and living things. Synchronized oscillating patterns of pendu­
lum clocks on a shelf, coherent laser beams, trophic ecological flow pat­
terns, circadian rhythms, the vascular system, and more recently mores and 
norms enacted in social practices and traditions are what we have in mind 
when we refer to top-­down governing constraints. 
The next few chapters focus on catalysts, autocatalysts, feedback loops, 
and a unique type of constraint, closure of constraint. This folding-­back-­
on-­itself characteristic of recursive and iterated loops of processes and 
constraints, of which autocatalytic cycles are a prime example, is central 
to the generation of coherent dynamics. It merits a separate chapter.
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

Catalysts and feedback loops play as important a role in economics (Arthur 
2020) and finance (Mazzucato 2020) as do biochemical catalysts and meta­
bolic loops in biology.
Although the damping and stabilizing power of negative feedback 
loops has long been understood, positive feedback like the disagreeable 
screech of unchecked positive feedback in audio systems was taken to 
be exclusively problematic. Discovering how feedforward, positive feed­
back, iteration, and recursion, acting as constraints, can precipitate phase 
transitions to coordination dynamics with emergent properties has been 
among the important contributions of complexity theory. A key point 
in our story, once again, is that context-­dependent constraints weave 
together interlocking interdependencies without directly injecting energy. 
The self-­reinforcing and coherence-­making powers of autocatalysis and 
feedback loops are central to extending the received understanding of 
causality with the notion of constraint.
Catalysts and Feedback Loops
Catalysts speed up chemical reactions by lowering barriers to energy 
flow and thereby facilitating irreversible interactions without being con­
sumed themselves. They lock in new interdependencies and create new 
constraint regimes. Catalysts enable coherent sequences and dynamics to 
emerge. Metaphorically, catalyst also describes persons or processes that 
clear the way for major transformations.
As always, catalysts are pertinent to our story because they function as 
context-­dependent constraints. They do not undergo permanent altera­
tion; they are conserved. Enzymes, which are catalysts, are responsible for 
most biological reactions, but neither as reactants nor products. Although 
most enzymes are proteins, some RNA molecules can function as enzymes 
as well. They too bring about effects as catalysts; they make available 
7
Catalysts, Loops, and Closure
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

88    Chapter 7
paths along which energy can flow; doing so facilitates other processes. In 
the presence of catalysts, certain reactions, in a certain direction, become 
more likely, happen faster, sooner, or more efficiently. As a result of these 
contextually constrained changes in the likelihood of their occurrence, 
flows of energy (or vehicles, or information) are accelerated and oriented 
toward certain directions and away from others. The reason super glue 
will bond to your fingertips if you are not careful is because trace amounts 
of acid on the skin function as a catalyst that quickly hardens the glue.
Folding-­back-­on-­themselves processes such as feedforward and feedback 
loops are also catalysts. Iteration and recursion are two such examples. Often 
used as a synonym of repetition, suggesting a simple context-­independent 
constraint, iteration feeds back information from the output of one run into 
the initial conditions of the next. Iteration thus acts as a temporal constraint 
that changes the likelihood of the next output. The process repeats. 
In recursive iteration, full sequences are fed back on themselves. This 
looping causes processes and sequences to become self-­referential; recursive 
iteration blurs the distinction between parts and wholes. As an example, 
software used to predict protein folding feeds output back into the system 
(Jumper et al. 2021). As a result, the overall dynamic itself becomes a tem­
plate, a catalyst that relies on context to guide folding.
In other words, iteration and recursion feed information from the 
context back into the next sequence as newly initialized conditions and 
constraints. Such looped and contextually constraining and constrained 
interactions effectively import spatial and temporal information about 
the world into those processes and their properties. As a result, the pro­
cesses become interdependent and covary with events in the world. In 
machine learning software, loops of backpropagation algorithms change 
the weights of middle-­layer connections such that they incorporate 
important, meaningful, and real-­world distinctions in their attractors 
and constraint regimes. Over time, the system’s input and output become 
increasingly tuned and calibrated to its context and its moment. Quali­
tatively new results emerge from such context dependence (Hinton and 
Shallice 1991; Juarrero 1999).
Attractors in possibility space have a vectorial quality. By extruding 
into the context, feedforward processes modify themselves in anticipation 
of expected conditions; the loops thus make the attractors anticipatory. 
Feedback and feedforward loops of energy flows (Rosen 1985; Hoffmeyer 
2017) that generate attractors as depicted in figure 4.1 establish pattern 
completion tendencies in dissipative structures, biotic and prebiotic alike. 
As we saw in the case of inflammation, they are even able to accommodate 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

Catalysts, Loops, and Closure    89
anticipated threats to the regulatory function of homeostasis. Terms like 
modify themselves and anticipate should be understood as changes in the 
probability distribution of events in possibility space.
Prairie grasslands offer an ecological case study of this sort of antici­
patory cooptation (Allen and Starr 1982; Gare 2019). Grasses compete 
with both flowering plants and grazing animals such as horses; competing 
with the former is the more energetically expensive of the two. By putting 
out apical meristems, a growth region at the tip of the roots and shoots, 
grasses set out an enabling constraint that makes horses more likely to 
graze. As a virtuous cycle is established, horses become integrated into a 
now more comprehensive constraint regime. Previously predators, horses 
are now folded into a more encompassing context, a new niche or habitat 
with new constitutive and governing constraints.
It is important to note that recursion and iteration are possible only 
after temporal dependencies (straightforward sequences) have already 
formed in response to enabling, context-­dependent constraints. That is, 
recursion and iteration are not possible without previously constrained 
ordinal relations. That said, however, when the last step of a sequence 
feeds back to become the first in the next iteration, the looping creates 
self-­referential configurations and nonlinearities. Nonlinearities generate 
multiscale and multidimensional interdependencies.
Iteration has these kinds of significant effects in olfaction, for example; 
emotions experienced when first exposed to a particular odor are fed back 
as initial conditions when that subject is next exposed to that scent. The 
earlier correlation acts as a constraint on the present sensory input and 
the odorant is experienced as a fragrance or a stench depending on the 
valence imprinted the first time (Freeman 1991a, 1991b; Barwich 2020). 
Over time, subsequent experiences with that odorant can feed back into 
the established dynamic and modify it accordingly, but the interdependence 
born of integrating different sense modalities into coherent units can persist, 
with modification, throughout a subject’s life. This contextual integration 
does not make the perception of a particular odor subjective and arbitrary; 
it makes it a real but relational, contextual property of a higher-­level coher­
ent dynamic (Barwich 2020) coded as a combination of two constraints, 
temporality and valence.
Iteration and recursion are therefore unlike simple recurrence, repeti­
tion, and replication described in the next chapter. Iteration and recur­
sion are hybrid constraints. Both take systems farther from equilibrium 
and therefore qualify as context-­independent constraints. But by feeding 
real world information back into the process, iteration and recursion also 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

90    Chapter 7
weave context, history, and the subject’s own actions into a more encom­
passing coordination dynamic—­the spatiotemporally more extended 
interdependencies ­of a new context. In this role, iteration and recursion 
function as context-­dependent constraints. Once recursive or iterative 
loops close thanks to integration by enabling constraints, real-­world spa­
tiotemporal information becomes embodied in a qualitatively distinct set 
of interlocking relations with novel properties.
In short: ever more complex and extended interdependencies form when 
ordinal relations fold back on themselves, when the output of a temporally 
coded sequence conditions the first step of the next iteration. By folding 
processes back on themselves, recursion and iteration generate multidi­
mensional interdependencies bound together into multiscale yet coherent 
wholes. It is these interdependencies that underpin covarying relations 
between parts and wholes. Temporal constraints of lineage and ontogenetic 
development intertwine in this manner. They illustrate how recursion, a 
feature that bedeviled modern science and philosophy, returns as a central 
driver of increased complexity and a source of emergent dynamics, prop­
erties, and powers. The next section delves deeper into autocatalysis and 
feedback loops as enabling context-dependent constraints.
Closure of Processes (Catalytic Closure)
Cycles of energy-­driven processes, such as the hydrologic (water) cycle, 
are well known. We focus now on cycles that implicate constraints more 
directly. The citric acid (Krebs) cycle is an eight-­step sequence that involves 
several enzymes (catalysts) in a series of chemical reactions.1 Iteration turns 
the sequence autocatalytic when the product of the last reaction catalyzes 
the first. By closing the loop, the cycle repeats and persists. Autocatalysis and 
feedback loops are therefore self-­reinforcing mechanisms; they self-­organize 
and self-­maintain. Water, adenosine triphosphate (ATP), and Krebs cycles 
are instances of process or reaction closure. Moreno and Mossio (2016) 
note that Stuart Kauffman calls the last two cases examples of catalytic 
closure. The remainder of the chapter focuses on autocatalysis and feedback 
loops as enabling context-dependent constraints.
Autocatalytic Closure
The Belousov–Zhabotinsky (BZ) chemical reaction takes single step auto­
catalysis one step further. Disregarding the actual chemicals involved, the 
BZ reaction can be schematized as follows (Jantsch 1980):
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

Catalysts, Loops, and Closure    91
A → X
B + X → Y + Q
X → P
Y + 2X → 3X
In this schema, chemical X catalyzes and is catalyzed by different reac­
tions. The fourth step, however, is noteworthy: the product of the reac­
tion, X, is also necessary to realize the reaction itself. This makes the 
fourth step autocatalytic. This reaction reproduces the conditions neces­
sary for catalysis to take place.
Most significantly, however, the BZ reaction realizes two intertwined 
autocatalytic cycles. In addition to the fourth step, the sequence “as a whole 
acts like a catalyst which transforms starting products into end products” 
(Jantsch 1980, 33). When the fourth step folds back on itself, that is, it 
also closes a second loop of constraints, one that folds back onto the first 
step in the cycle. This more encompassing autocatalytic hypercycle (Eigen 
1971) includes the first loop (the fourth step) as one of its components. By 
renewing itself continuously in a recursive process of individual reactions, 
the hypercycle itself becomes an enabling constraint that induces its own 
production and maintenance. Mereology with a vengeance.
In short, new regimes of multiscale interdependencies and correla­
tions emerge from recursively iterated autocatalytic constraints. Unlike 
convection cells (which depend on externally set boundary conditions), 
the BZ’s dynamic realizes a more complex and mereological set of inter­
locking interdependencies by endogenously regenerating the conditions 
and constraints necessary to form and self-­maintain. Its self-­reinforcing 
dynamics are less dependent on externalities, earning it the labels self-­
generating and self-­maintaining—­because self-­reinforcing.
Dissipative processes like the Rayleigh–­Bénard cells and BZ reactions 
described earlier are autopoietic. Chilean biologists Humberto Mat­
urana and Francisco Varela (1979) coined the term autopoiesis (self-­
organization) to describe the self-­production of cells, a sort of “collective 
autocatalysis plus spatial individuation”2 (McMullin 2000). Autopoiesis 
does not replicate as such. Instead, because the constraints are context 
dependent, it persists and individuates.
When sequences of reactions (including autocatalytic steps) become 
looped in this manner, the overall dynamic accelerates exponentially. 
Like other dissipative structures described earlier, exponential growth 
can drive the dynamic over a threshold of instability, precipitating a 
transition to a new phase characterized by long-­range and metastable 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

92    Chapter 7
correlations that are visible in novel properties. In Bénard cells, these 
appear as rotating columns of fluid; in the BZ reaction, they manifest as 
the signature population-­wide properties of colorful, spreading wave­
forms. The details of each convection cell and BZ reaction are distinct. 
Because they are path-­dependent, the exact pattern differs each time 
depending on minuscule differences in initial conditions as well as fluctu­
ations and perturbations encountered along the way. Contextually con­
strained path dependence underpins variation, but despite such multiple 
realizability, autocatalytic closure ensures that the macroscopic flow 
pattern (the rotating column or wave) persists overall by simultaneously 
self-­generating and self-­maintaining multiscale loops of self-­reinforcing 
constraints on constituent processes. They self-stabilize as a result.
The BZ chemical reaction is significant because, more so than physi­
cal convection cells, hyperloop-­creating constraints revive the specter of 
self-­cause, that bête noire of Western philosophy and science. The two 
autocatalytic cycles in the BZ reaction intertwine to self-­produce a set of 
mereological constraints. The hypercycle as a whole stabilizes and governs 
its individual reactions (including the locally autocatalytic fourth step) 
which, when combined, enable the hypercyle in the first place. This recur­
sive and Escher-­like “strange loop” (Hofstadter 1979) makes BZ hyper­
cycles exemplars of Kant’s self-­organizing self-­cause—­“a form of causality 
unknown to us” (Juarrero-­Roque 1985).3 BZ reactions illustrate how 
emergent and coherent wholes are dependent on the parts that generate 
them as well as how the behavior of those parts becomes dependent on 
the whole in which they are entrained. This integrated regime of mutu­
ally dependent hypercycles brings into existence a coherent dynamic and 
the conditions that make it possible; critically, this self-­reinforcement also 
shields that coherence from quick dissipation—­by keeping it away from 
thermalization. Both are essential for its persistence in time. The hypercycle 
persists as itself because its conserved constraint regime and component 
alignment retard the second law through organization.
*
*
*
In their various works, Montevil, Ruiz-­Mirazo, Moreno, and Mossio 
(Mossio 2013; Ruiz-­Mirazo and Moreno 2004; Montevil and Mossio 
2015; Moreno and Mossio 2016) maintain that self-­organization and auto­
poiesis in physical and chemical dissipative structures  still depend on the 
externally set (context-­independent) boundary conditions over which they 
have minimal influence. The constraint regimes they realize, that is, are not 
yet self-­constraining. As such, they are only precursors of full autonomy 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

Catalysts, Loops, and Closure    93
and self-­determination. For those two novel properties to appear, closure of 
constraints is necessary (Montevil and Mossio 2015; Moreno and Mossio 
2015).
Constraint Closure
In the several papers and books referenced earlier, Montevil, Moreno, and 
Mossio argue that a different sort of closure—­closure of constraints—­
supports a measure of agency that renders living things self-­determining 
and autonomous. They are autonomous because, by realizing endoge­
nously self-­determining and persistent loops of constraints, not simply loops 
of processes, they not only self-­assemble and self-­maintain in response to 
externally set constraints. They self-­constrain. It is in virtue of interdepen­
dencies bound together as loops of constraints, not just of processes, that 
living things also realize a novel form of constraint, constraint closure. 
The three authors claim that closure of constraint generates a novel type 
of phenomenon, Life (Mossio 2013; Montevil and Mossio 2015; Moreno 
and Mossio 2015).
Closure of constraint binds together several local and shorter cata­
lyzed reactions into an extended and catalyzing loop, all without inject­
ing additional energy into the process. The loop itself becomes a virtual 
governor, a second-­order constraint that catalyzes other more local con­
straints (not just other reactions) and thereby generates an extended 
and mutually interdependent dynamic, a hypercatalyst (not just a hyper­
cycle). This overarching dynamic becomes a self-­reinforcing govern­
ing and catalyzing constraint. In doing so, constraint closure turns the 
process self-­determining.
Self-­determination as self-­constraint is absent in systems characterized 
solely by process or catalytic closure4 for which externally set boundary 
conditions are still significant. As articulated by Montevil, Mossio, and 
Moreno, the word closure in closure of constraint refers to a specific 
mode of dependence between constraints whereby recursion in the chain 
[of constraints] “folds up and establishes mutual dependence” (Moreno 
and Mossio 2015, 20) among constraints. To wit:
Formally, “a set of constraints C realizes closure if, for each constraint Ci 
belonging to C:
Ci depends directly on at least one other constraint of C (Ci is dependent);
There is at least one other constraint Cj belonging to C which depends on Ci 
(Ci is enabling).” (Moreno and Mossio 2015, 20)
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

94    Chapter 7
“Closure refers to an organisation in which each constraint is involved 
in at least two different dependence relationships in which it plays a 
role of enabling and dependent constraint, respectively. The network of 
all constraints, which fit the two requirements, is . . . ​collectively able 
to self-­determine (or, more specifically, self-­maintain . . . ​through self-­
constraint)” (Moreno and Mossio 2015, 21).
Visually tracking the simultaneously constraining and constrained 
processes as illustrated in figure 7.1 lays bare their mereological interde­
pendencies. As can be appreciated, constraints can operate at different 
time scales. Constraints C1 – ­5 facilitate reactions on a brief time inter­
val. In contrast, the overarching loop of constraints that cycles through 
reactions involving C2 – C4 spans (and is conserved throughout) a longer 
interval, τ2 through τ4. It realizes a spatiotemporally extended, cycli­
cally repeating set of interdependencies. As a self-­generated and self-­
generating hypercatalyst, the cycle functions as a novel second-­order 
constraint that persists despite turnover in its components. Let us run 
through the steps.
In this schematic illustration, the sole independent constraint, C5, is an 
enabling constraint that shows that biological systems are open systems 
(Mossio, email communication 2021). Constraints C1 – ­4 are dependent con­
straints. As an individual catalyst, C4 directly depends on C2, on which C1, 
a by-­product, also depends. Catalyst C3 depends on C4 and C5.
Each of these constraints, however, is also a generative or enabling con­
straint: catalyst C4 generates C3, which generates C2, which in turn gen­
erates C4. Unlike the BZ reaction, no individual reaction in figure 7.1 is 
autocatalytic: no individual catalyst catalyzes a reaction that produces that 
catalyst. Collective autocatalysis is realized in the overarching cycle of con­
straints C2 – ­4 (outlined as a black oval). The illustration shows how the 
cycle as a whole constitutes a coherent unit, simultaneously a dependent 
and an enabling constraint. Its formation depends on a specific sequence 
of individual catalysts, C2 – ­4. Some are enabling; some are governing, but 
it takes the closure of the encompassing loop of constraints (when con­
straint C4 directly catalyzes C3) to regenerate the sequence of reactions on 
which the loop’s very formation depends. By generating and regenerating 
the constraint interdependencies that persist and delay dissipation, such 
recursive and multidimensional organizations display qualitatively differ­
ent properties than physical and chemical convection cells. Processes that 
realize self-constraint are self-determining. They represent a major transi­
tion in evolution (Maynard Smith and Szathmary 1995) brought about by 
recursively organized constraints.
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

Catalysts, Loops, and Closure    95
The received view of causality contends that wholes are nothing but 
aggregates and therefore epiphenomenal and that efficient causes are 
other than their effects. We cannot overemphasize the point that inter­
dependencies that realize closure of constraint are not spatiotemporally 
“other than” the local constraints, and yet as a coherent unit, the loop 
exerts constraining influences on its component reactions that individ­
ual constraints do not. The effect of its influence is the realization of a 
higher-­order dynamic with the novel property of self-­constraint. Clearly 
falsifying the classical prohibition against mereological self-­cause, inter­
dependence among constraints reveals a relation that is simultaneously 
constraining and constrained, from whole to parts and parts to whole.
A crucial point stands out with respect to autopoiesis, autonomy, self-­
constraint, and self-­determination as just characterized. As explained in 
the first chapter, the classical notion of independence centered on primary 
properties; it refused any role to interactions and relations with either the 
environment or history. In contrast, context-­dependent constraints in open 
systems far from equilibrium underpin self-­generating and self-­maintaining 
interactions and relations that are nevertheless enmeshed with the environ­
ment and history. 
Interdependence with spatiotemporal context is at the basis of autonomy, 
autopoiesis, self-­constraint, and self-­determination. These terms describe 
Figure 7.1
Schema of constraint closure. Source: Montevil and Mossio 2015, 186
A3
A2
A4
A5
τ5
τ4
τ3
τ2
τ1
C2
C3
C5
C4    C1
A1
B1
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

96    Chapter 7
processes that generate and maintain emergent systemwide organizations 
by virtue of constrained interactions among their components and with 
the real world. In contrast to classical essential traits, then, contextually 
constrained interactional types and their tokens as envisioned here are 
emphatically not independent of the rest of their world or their past. To 
the contrary, they integrate and realize various degrees of interdependence 
with the world and with history. They embody and enact coordination 
dynamics, niches, and habitats, as well as the umwelt of living things, but 
they are neither determined by nor absorbed into the context.
This mereological interplay is central to discussions about identity.
Statistical and Semantic Closure
As Moreno and Mossio note, American biologist Howard Pattee char­
acterized closure of constraints in two ways. Initially, he described it as 
statistical closure (Pattee 1973). The word statistical (in Pattee’s charac­
terization) refers to selective loss of detail with respect to the underlying 
dynamics. Pattee considers loss of detail a product of epistemic simplifi­
cation, which becomes necessary because of the impossibility of keeping 
track of a complex system’s myriad microdetails.
From the perspective presented in this book, in contrast, the “selective 
loss of detail” of epistemic classification tracks nature’s ability to generate 
coherence through constraints, coherences that embody emergent prop­
erties at each turn. Montevil, Moreno, and Mossio’s point is that Life 
is the property that emerges from the variety of generalization realized 
by constraint closure. Arnellos and Moreno (2022) meticulously track 
the emergence of specific functions like perception from the operation of 
particular constraint regimes at precise moments in time. The goal of this 
book has been more general, to describe the emergence and persistence of 
the constraint regimes themselves.
Consider our usual suspect, homeostasis. Describing a combination of 
metabolic, endocrine, neurological, and  other processes as implementing 
homeostasis glosses over the microdetails of the diverse and individual 
biochemical reactions that realize that dynamic. From the perspective 
of complexity, the apparent loss of detail captured by that term is not 
solely an epistemic or methodological issue; nor is it due to ignorance. 
This book has argued that the possibility space and parametrized con­
straint regime that constitute the overarching dynamic we call homeosta­
sis are real; the term simply compresses the myriad interdependencies of 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

Catalysts, Loops, and Closure    97
real and constrained interactions into a common noun that captures the 
salient parameters and emergent properties of those interdependencies.
When depicting contextually constrained open systems far from equi­
librium, I submit, statistical classifications and the common nouns used 
to describe them (homeostasis, chemistry, vorticity) identify coordination 
dynamics generated by context-­dependent constraints. Lasers, convec­
tion cells, chemical processes, homeostasis, and even meaningful human 
actions are not clumpings and de-­clumpings; the common nouns describe 
salient emergent features of overarching relational interactions generated 
by enabling, context-­dependent constraints; such interdependencies are 
characterized by novel relational properties and order parameters that 
constrain component processes and behavior.
In sum, I propose that contextually constrained interdependencies (inter­
actional types) can be epistemically simplified and described with common 
nouns only because those coordination properties and order parameters 
they identify are real, relational, and multiply realizable interdependen­
cies generated by contextual constraints. They possess emergent properties 
over and beyond the properties of their components. The nouns refer to the 
interlocking constraints of a range of tokens of the same type. The energetic 
streamlining effected by those interlocking constraints is why the mereo­
logical dynamic is also called “self-­simplifying” (Pattee 1972b).
In sum: what descriptors such as homeostasis and congestion shock­
wave—­or thoughts and feelings—­lose in detail about the microlevel 
they gain by identifying salient and systemwide properties of contextu­
ally formed coordination dynamics. These interdependencies and emergent 
properties are captured in new-­order parameters. The second-­order con­
straints those interdependencies embody constitute a new type of entity: 
they also serve as its governing constraints.
Moreno and Mossio also note that Pattee’s statistical classification—­
the loss of detail—­refers to control constraints, here called governing 
constraints. These second-order constraints have been described as a sys­
tem’s internal map and clock (Goodwin and Cohen 1969); they calibrate, 
regulate, modulate, and time the activation and suppression of compo­
nent processes (like pendulum clocks mentioned earlier) such that the 
emergent property is enacted. As a self-­contained and coherent hypercon­
straint formed in virtue of interlocking lower-­level constraints, the closed 
hyperloop C2 – 4 illustrated earlier, for example, constitutes a real govern­
ing (second-­order, context-­dependent) map and clock for the individual 
components and processes that comprise it, and for the actions they 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

98    Chapter 7
perform. As such, emergent properties can be said to govern the behav­
ior and actions of complex systems, top down. In analogous fashion, 
molecular dynamics set the map and clock of chemistry; cultural mores 
and traditions set the map and clock of social practices; and initialization 
sets the map and clock of IT platform interactions.
Acting as hyperconstraints, in other words, loops of constraint estab­
lish new spatiotemporal contexts within which component reactions are 
now embedded and which give them meaning. The context is, in effect, a 
new possibility space with a new map and clock. It is also a new hierar­
chical level of dynamical organization with novel properties governed by 
a distinct constraint regime. Statistical classification is therefore not only 
a “linguistic description” (Pattee 1978); it is a compressed characteriza­
tion of the governing constraints that hold interdependencies together—­
their self-­simplification into a coherent dynamic. And to reiterate, despite 
its novel properties and powers, the embedding context (the hyperloop 
in this case) is real but not “other than” the reactions that make it up. By 
calibrating and controlling the loop’s components, conditions, and timing, 
constraint closure keeps the multiply realizable interdependencies within 
a tolerated range of stability and viability—­it preserves unity of type. The 
real spatiotemporal context it establishes disambiguates and specifies those 
circumscribed possibilities.
*
*
*
A decade or so after his first comment on statistical closure, Pattee (1982) pro­
posed a different, semantic interpretation of what is now being called closure 
of constraints: semantic closure. Using the example of transfer RNA (tRNA), 
he noted that “semantic closure arises from the necessity that the transla­
tion molecules [tRNA] are themselves referents of gene strings” (Pattee 1982, 
333, quoted in Moreno and Mossio 2016, 21). Biosemiotics proposes that 
strings of genes acquire a symbolic role and become meaningful when tRNA 
“recognizes” and realizes the gene’s meaning (its reference) by synthesizing 
the appropriate protein. The label “appropriate” implies that the same func­
tional protein is degenerate: it can be synthesized from a variety of amino 
acid strings, depending on context, including timing. Mutatis mutandis, the 
same could be said for the context-­dependence emphasized in the theory 
called virtue ethics (MacIntyre 1981): actions are morally appropriate only 
in a given context. The same behavior physically described might not be 
ethical, in a different context.
Messenger RNA (mRNA)–­based COVID-­19 vaccines do not contain 
antigens; mRNA acts as instructions for constructing those antigens, 
under the right conditions. This last phrase is important: the most difficult 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

Catalysts, Loops, and Closure    99
part of developing the mRNA COVID vaccine was ensuring its protec­
tion and successful delivery to cells. Accomplishing this required adding 
a buffer that would protect the instructions until the right conditions 
are encountered. Timing and placement as set by the organism’s various 
maps and clocks change properties and powers. So whence the capacity 
to recognize “as appropriate under these conditions”? Complex systems 
have been described as energetically open but organizationally and infor­
mationally closed.5 How can Pattee’s interpretations of syntactical and 
semantic closure be simultaneously implemented?
Several chapters in this book have already proposed that coherence knit 
by context-­dependent constraints enacts and embodies real features of their 
world. Multiscale feedback processes import real and meaningful features 
of the world into the system’s constraint architecture; they do so by import­
ing the “statistics of their world” (Humphries 2021) into the dynamics of 
the interdependencies they generate. As a result, heritable constraints first 
set the unity of type that delimits a given possibility space (Brooks and 
Wiley 1988, Hmax). These constraints determine features that are conserved 
despite perturbations. Then, local conditions add context-­dependent con­
straints that circumscribe the range of currently viable tokens. Potential 
diversity becomes progressively specified and realized at each decision 
point. Those conditional probabilities import the real meaning to be rec­
ognized and synthesized at the right moment—­for example, the appropri­
ately functional protein, or the morally correct action. Genes are material 
embodiments of the constrained syntax and semantics of life. Moral norms 
and values are the symbolic embodiments of the constrained syntax and 
semantics of social organization (Artigiani 2021).
Interwoven context-­dependent constraints, in other words, fold in 
real-­world semantics into the very syntax (the constraint regime) govern­
ing the realization and path dependence of actual tokens (Juarrero 1999). 
Syntax and semantics, that is, are two aspects of a common process of 
integration and selection that are separable only at the population level. 
Chapter 15 describes neuroscience experiments that show how this inte­
gration is produced in the brain.
Semantic Attractors
Dyslexia provides an interesting case study for how syntax realizes seman­
tics by incorporating  the statistics of the world into a dynamic network. 
Over thirty years ago, cognitive scientists (Plaut and Shallice 1991; Hinton 
and Shallice 1991) trained artificial feedforward neural networks to read 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

100    Chapter 7
words using back-­propagation algorithms. These algorithms use iteration 
and recursion to reduce error by updating values of the initial conditions.
When the scientists lesioned the networks above the feedback loops, 
the networks’ output (its printout) committed surface dyslexia-­type 
errors, simple errors of transposition. Humans with surface dyslexia com­
monly transpose letters—­by reading or writing bed for bad, for example. 
Meaning is not implicated in such errors. However, when lesioned below 
the feedback units, the artificial neural networks made errors like those of 
human subjects with deep dyslexia: the printout spelled out words whose 
letters differed significantly from the letters which the software was pre­
sented, but the words preserved the input’s meaning. For example, when 
lesioned below the feedback loops, a trial run presented with the letters 
bed might print out cot; when shown the letters band, its output might 
be orchestra. That is, the weights and connections of the neural network’s 
middle layer preserved the meaning of the words in the input.
When asked to explain this astonishing output by a silicon-­based 
system, the authors hypothesized, “The network must have created a 
semantic attractor.” Attractors, as has been explained, are constrained 
dynamics that represent a set of values toward which the system tends 
to return. In this case, that set of values embodies and enacts semantics. 
On this account, then, meaning is therefore not a picture in a homun­
culus’s mind; nor is it an uninterpreted lookup table. Just as a snowflake’s 
structure embodies the real-­world conditions under which it was created, 
the weights and connections of a neural network’s dynamics established by 
contextual constraints are locked in to the regularities of its training set’s 
constraints. In this case, those regularities embodied real world meaning. 
The constraints of the neural network’s attractors therefore printed out 
words that conserved those real world regularities and preserved meaning.
Semantic attractors are not things; they do not control top down 
for meaning through energetic transfer. They initialize and reset start­
ing conditions and conditional probabilities that emerge and covary in 
response to ongoing real world constraints, those of the training data set 
and backprop algorithms. The conditional probabilities of these com­
bined constraints weight the middle layer such that the likelihood of 
certain outputs increases, and others decrease. These conditional prob­
abilities can be represented as hillocks and troughs in constraint space. 
Individual trajectories within the newly organized (semantic) constraint 
regime enact those conditional probabilities. In the example presented, 
these weights and connectivity capture the input’s real-­world meaning. 
Although multiply realizable, each actual run remains within the dynam­
ic’s basin of attraction—­the type’s constraint regime. If the network is 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

Catalysts, Loops, and Closure    101
lesioned downstream from the feedback loops that integrate the connec­
tion weights of its middle layer, the attractor’s output remains governed, 
top down, by the constraint regime of its overarching basin of attraction. 
As a result, the printout preserves the emergent properties (the type-­level 
meaning) and order parameters of the attractor. If the network is lesioned 
upstream from the feedback loops, no meaning is transmitted.
Biosemiotics avoids ontology (although see Garre 2019). From the per­
spective of complexity theory, however, feedback loops can be viewed as 
real and enabling because, as parts-­to-­whole (or bottom-­up) contextual 
constraints that lock in to real-­world interdependencies, they ontically par­
tition the possibility space of initially separate processes into coherent—­and 
real—­types of contextual and local dynamics, with emergent properties. As 
has been emphasized throughout this book, coherent constrained dynam­
ics are organized regions of state space realized as molecules, living things, 
and human organizations.
Loops of constraint and recursive processes also generate new and real 
forms of control or governance—­mereological constraints. Operating 
whole to parts (or top down), second-­order constraints of those types 
control behavior such that the network’s printout embodies the emergent 
properties of that constraint regime. Semantics, in this case, homeostatic 
metastability in others. In context, through cascades of negative feedback, 
second-­order constraints control component entities and processes top 
down such that these embody the constraint regime’s emergent properties 
and thereby remain invariant despite the variation of the actual token.
*
*
*
This chapter has shown how, in physical and chemical processes such 
as Bénard cells and BZ reactions, loops of constraint self-­organize, self-­
maintain, and persist. These are precursors of the more complex dynam­
ics of self-­determination and self-­constrained autonomy that will emerge 
with living things. The differentiated coherence of each of these complex 
interdependencies generated by constraints allows multiple energetic 
pathways to realize the same overarching set of governing constraints. 
Top-­down regulation by those governing constraints keeps the system’s 
behavior within its basin of attraction even as local context-­dependent 
constraints specify the details of realized tokens (the specific features of 
an individual organism) and tailor those details to actual circumstances. 
Multiple realizability thus makes a significant difference in the evolution 
of self-­organization, self-­maintenance, and self-­constraint; it produces 
astonishing transitions to new mechanisms of governance and control 
that are increasingly autonomous and self-­determining.
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

Coherence-­making by constraints is one thing. Coherence maintenance 
and persistence is another. As implemented by default governing con­
straints, maintenance and persistence presuppose relatively steady back­
ground conditions. For example, regular solar flares and neutron star 
collisions light years away do not threaten the planet’s atmospheric 
dynamics, whose governing constraints are metastable to such routine 
fluctuations. Earth “treats” those slower cycling rates as “constants” 
(Allen and Starr 1982; Salthe 1985, 2001).
But conditions inevitably change, and existing governing constraints 
that keep local systems in balance can become precarious, unable to 
maintain coherence. Interlocking constraints that realize metastability 
will decohere when either context-­independent or existing constitutive 
constraints are sufficiently perturbed. Interdependencies that were once 
stable and effective become threatened. Eventually, all coherence is threat­
ened by the second law and the inexorable march of time; unusually 
rapid and severe changes can render its governing constraints ineffective 
and even unresponsive to changing conditions. Any responses the system 
does manage to produce will likely be too slow, stale, and sluggish—­
mismatched to current conditions. Resulting decompensation is as true 
for human organizations as for natural ecosystems (Woods 2016, 2018).
Warning signs of impending disintegration appear. In natural and 
simulated systems alike, unusually large fluctuations and rapid oscilla­
tions presage an approaching instability. Trends in the earth’s climate 
offer stark evidence of the threat today: extreme wildfires and record 
temperatures and rainfall are indicative of the planet’s stressed governing 
constraints. Ecosystems become saturated and depleted. When existing 
governing constraints are no longer sufficiently coherent (or sufficiently 
adequate to current conditions) to preserve their interdependencies, 
organisms, ecosystems, and cultures alike cannot cope. The possibility of 
disintegration looms. Stars burn out. In living things, senescence sets in.
8
An Abundance of Constraints
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

104    Chapter 8
Changes in constraints at scales closer to those of the threatened system 
can directly alter its chances of survival. Supplementary constraints 
tacked on to default enabling and constitutive/governing constraints can 
reinforce existing organization and thereby support the system’s persis­
tence. They prolong its metastability in the face of strong instabilities.
Adding extra oomph to existing constraints of all stripes keeps gra­
dients from equilibrating and interlocking interdependencies from deco­
hering. Add-­on support like new varieties of memory and regulatory 
constraints can keep systems sufficiently stable and prolong their exis­
tence. Others constraints like “more-­making” (Eldredge 2015), buffers, 
and isolation can also keep systems from thermalizing by holding condi­
tions away from equilibrium. Density, motility, and migration (Agosta and 
Brooks 2020) are yet other constraints that access new energy gradients 
with fresh resources. Some of these add-­on constraints appeared only with 
the origin of life; others existed much earlier. Some are context inde­
pendent; others are context dependent. This chapter presents a cursory 
survey of common add-­on constraints that prolong persistence.
*
*
*
Repetition, replication, regularity, redundancy, and reproduction—­“more-­
making” (Eldredge 2015)—­are examples of such constraints.
The common prefix is not coincidental. Serving as context-­independent 
constraints, various forms of again, again, and again increase the numbers 
of those entities or processes in the state space. By increasing their per­
centage in the overall population, the resulting density deforms the state 
space and takes systems even further from equilibrium with the environ­
ment. More, more, more increases the likelihood that those systems will 
not quickly dissipate in the face of perturbations and fluctuations. It also 
increases the likelihood that their traits do not quickly degrade. 
Repetition
As a case in point, short nucleotide sequences often repeat in the genome. 
The gene for the flower of Gregor Mendel’s peas has two repeats in its pig­
mentation gene: each repeat codes for only one of the flowers’ two colors, 
white or purple. When the number of repeats varies, each repeat can repre­
sent an inherited allele. This reinforces the faithful persistence of that pure 
line trait. Repetition was also among the earliest human communications 
techniques to improve fidelity of transmission in a noisy medium. Native 
American smoke signals and the talking drums of the Yoruba people are 
long-­distance communication codes that date back to antiquity. By coming 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

An Abundance of Constraints    105
at evenly spaced intervals, regular (hence improbable) angular rotations of 
pulsars, for example, reveal the presence of two constraints, magnetic field 
and local density of matter. Lighthouse makers like the family of author 
Robert Louis Stevenson likewise understood that regular flashes of light 
convey information because they are regular. Repetition and regularity on 
their own do not impart energy; like timing, they preserve and transmit 
information by deviating from equiprobability and randomness. As con­
straints, they convey information of constraints.
In human organizations, too, regular reenactment of constrained 
behavior preserves social cohesion and adherence to religious and cul­
tural teachings. Yearly rituals and their attendant prescriptions and 
proscriptions keep cultures and religions alive by reinforcing existing 
constraints. Personal habits and routines also reinforce constraints. We 
misplace keys less often by leaving them on the same console. Practice 
might not make perfect, but it tends to consolidate it by preserving con­
stitutive constraints in nonequilibrium.
Mechanical engineers rely on a related mechanism,1 redundancy, to 
improve system reliability. By adding extra components that can compensate 
for any loss or damage to the main one, redundancy aims to secure fail-­
safe conditions and keep the system from disintegrating. If one signal does 
not get through or a component fails, another takes over. In both informa­
tion theory and engineering, then, more, more, more increases the likelihood 
that message transmission and functionality do not degrade. Redundant 
measures are, therefore, context-­independent constraints that keep systems 
away from equilibrium, despite perturbations. They shield coherence and 
functionality from equilibration. Redundancy is expensive, however, with 
diminishing returns. If the first signal gets through or the primary component 
works as intended, redundant units are superfluous and energetically costly.
Replication
Replication, making a copy of something, is a variety of repetition; it is 
another form of more making, a context-­independent constraint. Unlike 
redundancy, replication does not just add an extra existing copy; it 
makes new copies. Mitosis, for example, produces two identical daugh­
ter cells. By doubling the number of tokens at each turn, mitosis takes 
conditions even further from equilibrium.
Mitosis is not a random cut through a cell, like breaking up terrazzo 
flooring. As a form of asexual reproduction, mitosis qualifies as more-­
making because it duplicates an already coherent set of interdependencies. 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

106    Chapter 8
Daughter cells of mitosis are more of an already organized coherent whole, 
the parent cell. Mitosis, that is, replicates the constraint regime of a par­
ticular type of entity, an organized cell. In transmitting bound type-­level 
information from parent to an increasing number of daughters in subse­
quent generations, mitosis extends the reach of a distinct coherent con­
straint regime, a type. By duplicating an already coherent dynamic, mitosis 
prolongs an interactional type of entity into future generations.2
Cloning also makes another full organism like the original. Like mitosis, 
cloning replicates bound information by making more, more, more of the 
long-­range correlations and constraint regimes that give coherence to a 
type. However, cloned animals like Dolly, the sheep, are born with the 
biological age of the stem cell from which they were cloned. Clones, 
in other words, replicate not only the parent’s type identity; they also 
replicate at least some of the cloned organism’s individuated characteris­
tics. They carry the experiential record of the cloned organism’s context-­
dependent constraints into a new embodiment. They transmit not only 
the inherited constraint regime but its epigenetic one. Clones are never­
theless replicates because, in addition to inherited constraints acting as 
constants, they embody a memory or record of the earlier ontogenetic 
path in their cloned structure and dynamics. Their very being embodies 
and extends a coherent trajectory. Replicating a differentiated cell type 
as well as an individuated token are characteristic of path-­dependent 
processes operating simultaneously on different time scales.3
As instances of context-­independent constraints, repetition, regular­
ity, redundancy, and replication produce more tokens of the same type. 
None, however, directly increases type diversity or variety.4 As noted 
in chapter 4, innumerable identical tokens of one type of entity are no 
variety at all. As obsessive-­compulsive disorders demonstrate, diversity is 
not a cardinal measure. Cut off from contextual constraints that would 
ground them as meaningful, timely, and appropriate, repetitive habits and 
practices decoupled from context become compulsions.
This all changes with horizontal gene transfer (the lateral movement 
of genetic material between organisms, other than between an organism 
and its offspring) and the gene shuffling of sexual reproduction; these 
introduce novel context-­dependent constraints that generate emergent 
interdependencies with an expanded possibility space. This new variety 
of context-­dependent constraints does not replace earlier forms of more-­
making; it gets added on to them. Even transposons, sequences of DNA 
that jump from one site in the genome to another, jump to specific sites. 
They are context-­dependent, not random.
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

An Abundance of Constraints    107
Reproduction
Sexually reproducing organisms produce gametes (sperm and egg cells) 
through meiosis. Unlike daughter cells produced by mitosis, each of which 
carries the full information of the original, meiotic sequences yield four 
cells (sperms and eggs), each with half the chromosomes of one parent. 
These do not directly duplicate the full coherent organization of the 
original parent. Biologically, then, haploid germ cells are not replicates. 
Two haploid germ cells must combine to form an organism with the full 
complement of genes. Significantly, not only does the shuffling preserve the 
species’ lineage, but individuals born of sexual reproduction also realize a 
novel combination of traits. New variants are produced, not by random 
mutations but directly by the multiply realizable constraints of gene shuf­
fling; combined with the expanded possibility space afforded by horizon­
tal gene transfer between bacteria, and between unicellular eukaryotes, a 
wider range of traits and behavior that nevertheless remains true to type 
opens up.
At the phenotype level, that is, sexual reproduction and horizontal 
gene transfer introduce new context-­dependent constraints that can gen­
erate novel interactional types whose viability and life span are wider in 
scope and reach. These support the multigenerational constraint regimes 
we call lineages. They persist longer than their individual tokens. Con­
straints on both scales work in tandem. As a result, a population of 
sexually reproducing organisms has a more extended adaptive space in 
which to modify and survive (Kirschner and Gerhart 2005; Woods 2018). 
Subject to the limits of the possibility space set by the lineage’s type, 
sexual reproduction increases flexibility and viability.
Phrased otherwise: gene shuffling, the preeminent context-­dependent 
enabling constraint of sexual reproduction, does not make more of each 
parent, as mitosis does. By creating truly novel combinations (novel token 
interdependencies), gene shuffling breaks through the message variety trap 
of context-­independent constraints. By endogenously producing novel 
variants, sexual reproduction creates a coordination pattern with a larger 
possibility space. Combined with horizontal gene transfer, these constraints 
enable the formation of multiply realizable diachronic interactional types 
we call biological lineages; these conserve unity of type while simultane­
ously allowing increasingly diverse tokens.
*
*
*
Epigenetic modifications and the gut microbiome’s metagenome are 
further add-­on enabling constraints that extend metastable coordination 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

108    Chapter 8
dynamics: symbiosis, mutualism, commensalism, and parasitism are vari­
ations of context dependence and coherence making. Epigenetics and the 
gut microbiome do not replace mitosis in individual organisms any more 
than sexual reproduction did; indeed, it can be difficult to determine which 
came first. The immunoprotection that the microbiome in the mother’s 
birth canal confers on vaginally birthed infants is yet another example 
of interlocking context-­dependent constraints enabled by feedback loops 
at more than one spatiotemporal scale (mother’s and child’s lifespans). 
Spatial contextual constraints change the state space’s topology; they 
expand the coherent dynamics of interlocking constraints, extend con­
straint space, and allow its future exploration by actual organisms.
By increasing type diversity, reconfigured constraint regimes enhance 
their flexibility and, in consequence, their evolvability. Contextually con­
strained types, it will be recalled, are multiply realizable. Even today, 
some sexually reproducing species retain the potential to replicate asexu­
ally under certain conditions such as drought. Ordinary, temporally con­
strained transformations such as those from tadpole to frog, and from 
larvae to pupae to butterfly, are considered a single constraint regime that 
activates or inhibits processes in response to contextual cues. But these 
abrupt phase changes can also be considered distinct constraint regimes 
that alternate depending on cued contexts as much as different tokens of 
a persisting constraint regime.
The organism’s genome recodes bound information as instructions for 
processes at multiple scales. As described earlier, instructions are sets of 
spatiotemporally coded constraints that realize and maintain tokens of a 
type. No phenotype displays the full range of its lineage’s bound informa­
tion; actual living things realize only a context-­dependent subset of the 
lineage’s more encompassing type-­defining coherence (what Brooks and 
Wiley 1988 call Hmax). Governing constraints modularized in an organ­
ism’s genome preserve the species’ type by controlling gene expression 
such that phenotypes remain within the boundaries of that constraint 
framework. Regulatory genes governing developmental processes are 
specialized to that function and cued to actual contextual features to 
which they were evolutionarily entrained and to which they differentially 
respond. By simultaneously satisfying a number of constraints, however, 
regulatory genes can transmit and conserve bound information that 
describes a circumscribed possibility space.
By increasingly relying on the enabling powers of context-­dependent 
constraints such as gene shuffling, horizontal gene transfer, epistasis, and 
epigenetics (rather than on faithful more-­making alone), the dynamic 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

An Abundance of Constraints    109
of coherence-­making itself evolves. Epistasis makes the effect of a given 
mutation depend on the presence or absence of other genes and earlier 
mutations; epigenetics integrates environmental and behavioral influences 
without genetic mutations. Over evolutionary time, coherence making 
appears to increasingly incorporate context-dependent constraints like 
epistasis and epigenetics. As a result of these context-­dependent constraints 
acting together, evolvability and natural selection are facilitated. It seems 
evident that by facilitating novel forms of interaction, this process of com­
plexification accelerates and is likely responsible for the emergence of 
consciousness, symbolic thought and language, culture, industrialization, 
globalization, and other traits of the Anthropocene.
Unity of Type in Species, Demes, and Memes
“Species are strictly genealogical, evolutionary units.” By way of contrast to 
“economic units,” Eldredge’s term for processes that transfer energy, species 
can be considered more-­makers only if their historical constraints are effec­
tive, if they reproduce “heritable information ensconced in the germ line 
genome” (Eldredge 2015, 304–­305). In the terminology used here, species 
realize a lineage’s constraint regime by embodying and enacting heritable 
context-­independent information modularized both in the germ line and 
in epigenetically and epistatically sedimented constraints regulating gene 
expression. Once again, the information that persists in each case is enacted 
as unity of type (Brooks 2010), a distinct second-order constraint regime 
that becomes increasingly generic and flexible over evolutionary time.
Such constrained interdependencies can also be transmitted and pre­
served across generations of social organization. Memes are constraints 
that establish boundaries, coordinates, and attractors in mental and 
social space. We can understand their dynamics better by thinking of 
them as socially transmitted constraints that frame and bias (weight) cog­
nitive possibility spaces and their constraint architecture. They enable the 
reproduction and enactment of easily transmissible information about 
mental and social properties and parameters. The placement and traits 
of the mental and social attractors, including their ruggedness, change in 
response to the spread of memes.
Constraints enable memes and demes, subdivisions of populations 
that typically breed among themselves, to form and persist. No doubt 
geography served as the main enabling and restrictive constraint in the 
generation and conservation of demes, be they human, plant, or animal 
demes. Each set of coherent interdependencies that identifies a species, 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

110    Chapter 8
deme, or meme reflects a constraint regime turned context-­independent 
module of conserved interdependencies. Such interlocking interdepen­
dencies are not monolithic and blocklike. By quickly adapting to each 
local culture, memes can shape-shift to individuate lineages, cultures, and 
mindsets. But by highlighting just one or two features, one cartoon or 
pithy comment can capture and easily convey the complexity of those 
interdependencies. “That’s a Spartan lifestyle!” 
Gatlin (1972) identified the key to vertebrate evolution as keeping 
basic constraints fixed while simultaneously allowing the influence of 
context-­dependent constraints to expand dramatically. This theme and 
variation pattern seems to represent a general motif: enabling constraints 
precipitate a phase transition to a new possibility space, a constraint 
regime which itself becomes a new inhomogeneity that taps new gra­
dients. Sexual reproduction, lineages, demes, and even memes are evo­
lutionarily recent coherent dynamics that increasingly rely on context 
dependence to precipitate ever more extended and long-­lasting inter­
dependencies, with ever more complex tokens, in every more complex 
constraint spaces. Because all complex systems are constrained in path-­
dependent trajectories at multiple temporal scales, organisms become 
increasingly specified and individuated during their individual lifetimes. 
Epigenetics demonstrates that these modified and individuated traits can 
feed back into the dynamic and continue to influence it for some time.
Genes, species, and demes therefore qualify as more-­makers. Each repro­
duces a distinctive generic governing constraint regime that persists as an 
identifiable and coherent type of entity, with characteristic parameters, and 
embodied and enacted in a wide range of path-­dependent tokens. The con­
stitutive and governing constraint regime of genes is embodied in nucleic 
acid; it differs from that of social demes, where it is embodied in culture 
and traditions, which in turn differs from those for memes whose central 
enabling constraint is the web. Different material substrates provide dif­
ferent constraints; the enabling constraints that generate each emergent 
trait are different; they may operate on a variety of spatiotemporal scales; 
their properties and powers can be qualitatively different. But in each case, 
context-­dependent constraint regimes can evolve to become increasingly 
far-­reaching and/or long-­lasting; in turn, their realized tokens and pheno­
types become uniquely individuated in response to the particular path they 
traverse, the local context that affects them, and even the timing of each 
step of the process.
Some governing constraints (like those of demes) may be more far-­
reaching than those of genes; their attractors are wider. By being more 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

An Abundance of Constraints    111
flexible and ambiguous, they span more tokens, at more levels of orga­
nization. Others, like memes, may be more contagious, and the slope of 
their attractors is shallower, making dispersion and transmission easier. 
The walls of the attractors of yet others are more porous and perme­
able to surrounding attractors. They resonate more with others. This is 
particularly true if, as suggested earlier, the internet serves as context-­
independent vasculature of memetic culture: its global reach and speed 
are ideal channels that facilitate easy adoption, adaptation, and better fit 
in different contexts. Its network architecture is a powerful enabler; as 
a result, memes can quickly sculpt dramatically shape-­shifting attractors 
worldwide. Contagion models aim to capture the dynamics of that archi­
tecture, given a set of specified constraints.
In sum, by making more tokens of a coherent genetic lineage, sexual 
reproduction carries an existing coherent dynamic into the future. By 
making more tokens of a coherent deme or meme, social and cognitive 
constraints can prolong its constraint regime even longer. In each case, 
the interdependencies persist because increasingly flexible governing con­
straints exercise top-­down control over actual cases while allowing local 
context-­dependent constraints to individuate each token.
The rest of this chapter describes a number of other constraints.
Density, Isolation, and Buffers
In addition to gradients, catalysts, feedback, replication, redundancy, 
and reproduction, density, isolation, and buffers are constraints that also 
increase the stability of a system’s existing default governing constraints 
and thereby prolong its existence.
Density alone promotes clumping. Like gravity, it does not directly 
produce irreversible correlations, interactions, and interdependencies the 
way catalysts, feedback, and recursion do. But proximity and packing 
due to density might have made it more likely that context-dependent 
constraints would appear. Earlier I speculated that, cosmically, a local 
gravitational well’s density might have altered the likelihood that a new 
kind of constraint would arise. The fact that at the subatomic level forces 
and fields are interactions supports this conjecture. Constructive interfer­
ence of nearby atomic orbitals (Nordholm and Bacskay 2020) constitutes 
a new set of interdependencies, a new possibility space: molecules with 
the novel powers and properties of chemistry might have been the chance 
consequence of dense gravitational conditions at the atomic level. Alone 
they would have imploded into a black hole, but when combined with the 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

112    Chapter 8
Pauli exclusion principle, a constructive interference pattern that could 
act as a novel second-­order top-­down constraint might have emerged.
With fifteen billion neurons crammed into the rigid skull and 2.5 meters’ 
worth of chromosomes packed into each cell, there are analogous reasons 
to hypothesize that crowded conditions in biological systems might have 
similarly favored the appearance of context-­dependent constraints and gen­
erated new interdependencies among brain cells and with the environment.5 
Feedback from the environment through reentrant signaling in densely 
packed conditions, for example, might have correlated and intertwined 
neural processes. The resulting streamlining and pruning during early brain 
development in response to the infant’s actions, body weight, and other 
contextual constraints offers evidence of such dynamics. Some of these con­
strained correlations might have then gone on to become modularized as 
distinct types of structural neurons, of which there are at least one thousand.
Isolation
Darwin’s round-­the-­world trip on the HMS Beagle prompted him 
to focus, however, not on density and novel correlations due to close 
packing, but on the role of isolation in the formation of new species. 
Although it cannot retard genetic drift within a population, isolation sta­
bilizes the status quo by preventing the introduction of new and possibly 
destabilizing information. As a context-­independent constraint, isolation 
delays the homogenizing pressure of the second law by keeping condi­
tions away from equilibrium longer than otherwise.
Darwin’s genius was noticing that, long term, isolation can also occa­
sion divergent clusters of interdependencies and new constraint regimes.
Isolation comes in diverse forms. It can be geographical. Populations 
in geographically isolated locations, like the Galapagos Islands, or in 
remote continents, such as Australia, diverged from other populations 
of (what might have previously constituted) the same species. Fish in dif­
ferent lakes can evolve into distinct species. Darwin’s beloved finches are 
the textbook example of this process. In isolated conditions where the 
homogenizing role of genetic drift and gene shuffling is limited, selection 
of reproductively favored phenotypes (beak shape, size, and strength) 
will evolve into a distinct species whose interdependencies diverge from 
those of earlier populations. Geographic isolation can enable the forma­
tion of even more complex types.
Isolation and the accompanying species divergence keep the second 
law at bay longer than expected. In contrast, interbreeding brought about 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

An Abundance of Constraints    113
by isolation paves the way for the reemergence of latent constraints in 
recessive genes. When contextual changes weaken existing governing con­
straints, incestuous breeding that would not occur under normal condi­
tions might hasten the appearance of recessive traits. Possible realizations 
that were dormant resurface. The process, however, depends on the fact 
that the species, as a coherent type, is multiply realizable and variously 
embodied in actual tokens depending on contextual constraints.
Both species divergence and the resurfacing of latent traits appear to be 
evidence of an increasing role for context dependence over evolutionary 
time. The distinction between dominance and latency is context depen­
dent; it is conditioned on an embedding context with respect to which the 
genes in question are dominant or recessive, manifest or latent. Latency, 
that is, is defined with respect to an existing contextually constrained type 
induced not only by the enabling constraints that generate it and the govern­
ing constraints that preserve its coherence, but also by the current context 
within which those constraints effectively tailor and modify outcomes. 
Dominance and latency in biology therefore enact hybrid constraints, 
which combine context-­independent and context-­dependent characteris­
tics. Imposing or relaxing such constraints changes the landscape of condi­
tional probabilities and therefore the events within it.6 Because recessive is 
type-­defined, and types, in turn, are contextually generated, recessive phe­
notypes surface or not depending on circumstances. Under conditions of 
reproductive isolation, the reappearance of latent constraints reflects gene 
shuffling statistics that, in a less diverse possibility space, make it more 
likely that recessive phenotypes will reappear. Of those that do, fitting in 
with the new conditions will be adaptive; the stressed type, too, will cor­
respondingly evolve.
In isolated populations, resurfaced latent constraints and horizontal 
gene transfer can produce mixed outcomes. Some of these recessive phe­
notypes might have survival advantage and will be selected. But a higher 
prevalence of autosomal recessive disorders directly attributable to iso­
lation and interbreeding is also more likely. Communities such as the 
culturally and geographically isolated Old Order Amish exemplify this 
dynamic. Changing the ratio of dominant to recessive genes by altered 
constraints can place unity of type at risk.
The central point here is that conditions in which latent constraints 
reappear and isolated species diverge need not be the direct consequence 
of random mutations alone. Genetic as well as epigenetic and epistatic 
information is encoded in multiply realizable and constrained interdepen­
dencies at numerous spatiotemporal scales; these establish conditional 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

114    Chapter 8
probabilities for gene activation, inhibition, expression, and so on—­always 
conditional on context. Under certain conditions, those with a certain like­
lihood are dominant; under those same conditions, those marked by a 
different probability are recessive. Under entirely different conditions com­
pletely new phenotypes might appear without genetic modification. Actual 
phenotypes that are not metastable and fail to fit the context, of course, 
will not reinforce, repeat, or reproduce. The niche’s overarching govern­
ing constraints will not embrace them. But the capacity to span, adapt, 
and surface a range of variants allows constraint regimes themselves to 
coevolve in tandem with the extant realizations. In a multidimensional 
state space, the combinatorics of multiple constraint satisfaction can be 
mindboggling.
As the human genome project confirmed, these ideas imply that type–­
token relationships are not one to one. Multiple realizability of types, 
abiotic and biotic alike, implies a range of variant tokens that are actual­
ized or not conditional on context; it implies that interactional types span 
multiple paths to realizing the same emergent and collective properties.
Analogous dynamics also accelerate divergence in populations that are 
not geographically isolated. Differentiation keeps state space inhomoge­
neous, but differentiation due to isolation can come about due to ecologi­
cal reasons. Food preferences can cause insects to feed in distinct types of 
trees. Over time, those insect populations become distinct. Similarly, dif­
ferences in mating preferences even in mixed populations drive changes 
in the probability distribution of the various phenotypes. Distinct habi­
tats form. Over time, gene pools diverge and produce “genomic islands of 
divergence” (Turner et al. 2005).
Recent research on two species of birds that share the same nature 
preserve in Argentina confirmed sexual selection (Campagna and Turbek 
2021; Turbek et al. 2021). These two species of seedeater differ in plumage 
color and the details of their songs. Sharing 99.9 percent of their genes, 
brightly colored and tawny seedeaters interbreed freely in captivity. 
But they never interbreed in the wild. If they did, gene shuffling would 
homogenize their traits and prevent divergence. Whereas unconstrained 
sexual reproduction homogenizes a population, mating preferences and 
sexual selection are context-­dependent constraints that change the pro­
portion of latency to dominance. The evolution of mating preferences and 
sexual selection, in other words, indicates the emergence of a new context-­
dependent constraint. Once established, that new constraint regime is 
made manifest as new local troughs and hillocks in possibility space.
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

An Abundance of Constraints    115
One sort of isolation can contribute to another: geographic, cultural, 
religious, or informational isolation can significantly restrict the repro­
ductive pool from which mating preference selects. In the case of the Old 
Order Amish, the effective upshot of combining these various forms of 
isolation is reproductive isolation. Reproductive isolation brought about 
by mating preferences and other forms of sexual selection can also sedi­
ment and entrench differences, as will be discussed below.
As a reminder: these remarks are pertinent to our central concern, 
coherence-­making, for several reasons: (1) neither mating preferences, iso­
lation, density, nor sedimentation and entrenchment, as will be described 
below, are efficient causes, and yet they have consequences. They are con­
straints that generate, preserve, modify, and realize interlocking interde­
pendencies. (2) They have consequences as constraints depending on the 
spatiotemporal context in which the entity in question is enmeshed and 
embedded. Even more to the point: (3) the above dynamics are possible 
only because the governing constraints of coherent interdependencies are 
multiply realizable and were generated by enabling context-­dependent 
constraints.
Shielding organisms from gene shuffling and genetic drift generally 
results in species divergence. In addition to isolation, other constraints 
acting as shields include buffers and boundaries.
Buffers and Other Shields
For open systems that exchange matter, energy, and/or information with 
their environment, preserving coherence over time—­prolonging a complex 
system’s existence—­is a question of sustaining their constitutive and gov­
erning constraint regimes despite and throughout those exchanges. As 
has been repeatedly noted, constitutive constraints stabilize interdepen­
dencies in the face of fluctuations and perturbations; they carry out that 
stabilization as governing constraints.
By adding extra context-­independent constraints, buffers further sta­
bilize existing constraints and delay thermalization.
Buffers are conditions that alter possibility space such that energy 
flows more readily in one direction than another—­or does not flow at all. 
Buffers are not forces; they are add-­on constraints that reinforce exist­
ing governing constraints by shielding complex systems from intrusion 
by extraneous forces. Buffers prevent potentially destabilizing elements, 
events, or information from gaining access. More precisely, buffers are 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

116    Chapter 8
impediments to energy flow. Indirectly, they strengthen boundaries and 
interfaces and thereby improve the likelihood of a coherent system’s 
continued existence. Chemical buffers, for example, dilute the effects of 
threats to the system’s coherence. Buffers are thus extra constraints that, 
under precarious conditions, help preserve the status quo.
Buffers need not be physical. Rate differences between a system and 
the wider context in which it is embedded can also dynamically buffer 
systems from their environment. In ecosystems, buffer species are distin­
guished by different cycling rates than other species—­and the environ­
ment in which they exist. If predators can feed more readily on buffer 
species, either because there are more of them than of the usual prey, 
because they reproduce faster than the usual prey, or if there is a scarcity 
of the usual prey, rate differences protect the ecosystem’s overall balance. 
High reproduction rates also buffer against population crashes by adding 
a context-­independent constraint that allows lineages to temporarily 
outrun entropy. Again, rate differences are not efficient causes; they are 
constraints that generate and constitute distinct coherent dynamics.
Buffers can also be temporal. Audio lag time during live radio, televi­
sion, and even Zoom calls prevents inappropriate or potentially illegal 
comments from being broadcast. Likewise, buffers need not be exclu­
sively spatial. As we saw in the section on isolation, geographic isolation 
initially acts as a spatial buffer and brings with it its own constrained 
interactions; it can then do double duty as an informational buffer. But 
direct informational constraints such as censorship and limited access to 
sources of financial support or information also buffer the status quo 
from novelty that might destabilize the system’s informational closure.7
Buffers can emerge spontaneously in response to context-­dependent 
constraints. Early agent-­based models of urban dynamics showed how 
neighborhood segregation naturally arises from interactions constrained in 
particular ways (Schelling 1971; Hatna and Benenson 2012). Buffers are 
also common in computer coding, where data are buffered in a separate 
storage area for future editing. In chemistry, liquid–­liquid phase separa­
tions demonstrate the self-organization of buffers. Some chemical solutions 
also maintain their pH relatively stable by buffering against pH change. 
Stable pH conditions serve as a background constraint that allows enzymes 
that require precise pH levels to function.
The distinction between buffers and boundaries is hard to draw for open 
systems. The term buffer is traditionally used to refer to separations caused 
by material substrates. Expanses of ocean buffer the Galapagos from inva­
sive species. Mountain ranges and water obstacles (including artificial moats) 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

An Abundance of Constraints    117
are called buffers, as is the demilitarized zone on the Korean Peninsula. 
But buffers need not be materially based. Zoning regulations and financial 
redlining practices can deliberately include construction and financing rules 
that keep races separate and thereby consolidate segregation.
To summarize: isolation and buffers are constraints that support per­
sistence by protecting a system’s zone of metastability and continued 
existence, which they do by acting as shields against threatening input. 
Isolation and buffers bring about this added protection through context-­
independent constraints that guard existing coordination dynamics from 
environmental threats that might precipitate their dissipation. Feudal 
lords did the same with castle keeps and moats.
Once again, it is tempting to conjecture that the universe is characterized 
by a general trend, from rigid boundaries and physical gaps to interactive 
interfaces operating as gating constraints. Just as rigid walls of prokaryotes 
gave way to more permeable membranes of eukaryotes, so too moats and 
Great Walls of China gave way to . . . ​safe conduct letters of transit and 
visas? In each case there emerged dynamic interfaces that actively negotiate 
relations between the inside and the outside and thereby satisfy multiple 
constraints. If this conjecture were confirmed, it would be worthwhile to 
study the role context-­dependent constraints played in that trend. Increas­
ing complexity suggests increasing reliance on context dependence.
Motility and Migration—­The Relaxation of Constraints
Human and animal populations as well as convection cells can exhaust 
or deplete existing energy gradients that nourish them and which they 
tap to survive or persist. Such risks to enabling and governing constraints 
of existing coherent dynamics can destabilize their effectiveness; interde­
pendencies begin to decohere and disintegrate. Entire metastable dynam­
ics must adapt and evolve in the face of such threats; otherwise, extant 
governing constraints will inevitably weaken. Invasive species whose 
constraint regime offers a significantly better fit with current conditions 
can outcompete autochthonous but threatened ecosystems. They do not 
become buffer species; they wipe out native ones.
In contradistinction to reinforcing existing constraints, relaxing them 
might open the door to new enabling constraints. Motility, for example, 
opened8 new degrees of freedom when existing and restrictive constraints 
that kept plants in a fixed location were relaxed. Relaxing those constraints 
was tantamount to making room for the appearance of new enabling con­
straints. Affixed to a location, plants change their shape throughout their 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

118    Chapter 8
existence. Animals, in contrast, trade shape shifting for the ability to change 
location; as adults, their shape changes little. Different enabling constraints 
induce different interlocking constraints, which realize different forms of 
life. Beginning with chemotaxis, cellular locomotion is a novel form of life 
induced by the resulting phase transition enabled when barriers to energy 
flow were relaxed. New options emerged: moving toward a higher concen­
tration of a diffusible substance or away from it. The appearance of motility 
in living things became a new enabling constraint that opened possibility 
spaces with previously untappable free energy. It changed things completely.
In response to other context-­dependent constraints, some animals take 
motility one step further; they become migratory species, thereby expanding 
the spatiotemporal reach of their constraint regime. Migration can be either 
a one-­off phenomenon or seasonal. The latter is indicative of expanded 
governing constraints cued to context-­dependent signals such as ambient 
temperature or light, or the availability of resources. In response to gradi­
ents, migrating populations gravitate toward more favorable environments 
when their existing niche is threatened (Agosta and Brooks 2020).
From hominins over two million years ago to human migrations today, 
mass movement patterns are evidence of resource gradients operating 
as context-­independent constraints. Because they are embedded in an 
extended ecosystem dynamic, populations respond to contextual cues and, 
as a result, can precipitate mass migrations. They move toward improved 
resources and away from threats. Events in the U.S. southern border illus­
trate how stressful conditions at home, combined with the perception of 
accessible opportunity in the United States, provide multiple constraints 
that take a system far from equilibrium to a threshold of instability and 
then over it to new forms of interdependence.
Migration is directed toward adjacent possible areas where there are 
(or are perceived to be) available resources or fewer threats. All these 
terms must be understood as referring to spatiotemporal constraints and 
ultimately cashed out by thermodynamic considerations. In an era of air­
planes and now space tourism, even the term adjacent must be redefined. 
People will migrate to areas where they know others, often from the same 
village. Here, adjacent translates into known and culturally compatible 
overlap, not physical distance. The general point here is that contextual 
considerations contribute to outward as well as internal migration by 
relaxing and reconfiguring existing enabling constraints, including overall 
constraint regimes and the topology of possibility space. Top down, this 
reconfiguration changes the beliefs, dispositions, and behavior of indi­
viduals caught up in that dynamic.
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

An Abundance of Constraints    119
Outmigration renews a population’s possibility space. Once a popula­
tion migrates, its constraint regime imports close-­enough features of the 
new and previously unfamiliar habitat, whose own constraint regime will 
simultaneously intrude into the population’s earlier constraint regime 
and thereby co-­create a wider niche or adaptive space (Woods 2019). 
Both coevolve. The transformation of the sociocultural landscape of the 
southwestern U.S. border, or of Miami-­Dade County (Florida), over the 
past sixty years in response to migration flows provides a dramatic case 
study of this process. The oft-­heard phrase, “Miami is the capital of Latin 
America,” implies a wider set of financial and cultural interdependen­
cies whose governing, top-­down constraints (many of which are tacit) 
are affordances of the U.S. legal and political system. Its fiscal and juris­
prudential framework affords the metastability and overlapping habitat 
necessary for hemispheric trade relations. But both habitat and residents 
coadapt as a result.
It is not too far-­fetched to propose that the translational motion of hur­
ricanes and the oscillating waves of BZ reactions are physical and chemical 
precursors to animal motility in general and human and animal migration 
in particular. In contrast to their rotational motion, the forward, transla­
tional motion of hurricanes is sometimes called propagation, making the 
analogy with disease spread explicit. This is possible because the paths 
of migration, epidemics, and hurricanes are not random walks. They are 
enabled and governed by multiple constraints. The direction and speed of 
cyclones and hurricanes are vectorial coordination dynamics dependent 
on constraints; these generate a tendency to move toward warm areas and 
away from frigid air. Likewise, epidemics of infectious diseases will spread 
to areas with increased population density and low rates of inoculation or 
immunity, for example. People move to areas where they know others, or of 
safer conditions. The upshot, once again, is that enabling constraints gener­
ate patterns of matter, energy, and information flow; governing constraints 
then preserve the coherence and persistence of those patterns by exploring/
exploiting previously inaccessible regions of adaptive space. In turn, the 
dynamics expand spatiotemporally and last longer than they would in the 
absence of new coherent interdependencies or tacked-­on constraints such 
as buffers, isolation, and the capacity to move.
This reinforces the point that niches and habitats are not existing 
sites, prebuilt recesses in a wall waiting for fit organisms to show up 
and occupy them. Niches and habitats—­abiotic, natural, and social—­
are co-­constructed contexts; they are coordination dynamics interwo­
ven by constraints. Those interdependencies manifest as a contextually 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

120    Chapter 8
coherent type that underpins novel affordances for multiply realized 
tokens (Gibson 1975; Carello and Turvey 2002; Chemero 2003, 2009). 
Those interdependencies then select for actualization from among the 
range of options afforded by the new interactional type.
Failure to understand the dynamics of contextually constrained niche 
formation and modification will get a lot of the actual interdependencies 
wrong. Failure to appreciate the background constraints of entrenched 
economic, cultural, and political conditions against which context-­
dependent constraints operate will get yet other interdependencies wrong. 
Failure to recognize tacit constraints risks bottom-­up upheavals when 
governing constraints are unresponsive to context. As always, enabling 
and governing constraints intertwine simultaneously and over different 
scales, requiring multiple constraint satisfaction. Failure to track underly­
ing constraints responsible for the invariances gets the ontology wrong. If 
it is to have any hope of being effective, domestic and foreign policy must 
get these social constraint dynamics right.
Templates, Frameworks, Scaffolds, and Affordances
The concepts of scaffolds, frameworks, templates, and affordances high­
light important forms of constraint (Wimsatt 2007; Caporael, Griesemer, 
and Wimsatt 2014; Bickhard 1992; Carello and Turvey 2002). They 
describe specific varieties of constraints in social and biological settings. 
Some are context dependent; some are not. Some are enabling con­
straints; some are governing constraint regimes. All describe varieties of 
influence other than mechanical or forceful causes. They are constraints 
that inform cognitive and behavioral possibility spaces and guide real­
izations to completion. They do so by presetting and then continuously 
adjusting the likelihood of what is possible and what is likely.
Affordance theory (Gibson 1975; Turvey, Shockley, and Carello 1999; 
Chemero 2003) was among the first to view psychological capabilities in 
ecological terms. Affordances are relational properties that function as 
constraints by weaving together an organism’s capabilities and propensi­
ties and its world. Affordances are the products of enabling constraints 
that create novel interdependencies and opportunities. Like biological 
niches, they structure an organism’s psychological ecology, dispositions, 
and behavior patterns such that it can act more effectively in that world. 
To use a common example, for Westerners, chairs afford opportuni­
ties for sitting. For the Japanese, tatami mats afford opportunities for 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

An Abundance of Constraints    121
sleeping. Individuals embedded in those worlds recognize those items as 
affordances and act appropriately (Chemero 2003. Also see chapter 13 of 
this volume, the 4E approach).
Because they are formed by context dependent and ecological interde­
pendencies, affordances can activate in sequence in response to other tem­
poral and contextual constraints. Walking is not afforded to newborns, 
but it is to toddlers (Thelen and Smith 1994). Differentially activated 
constraints make possibility spaces even more complex and effective. 
Superior design is all about incorporating transparent affordances and 
enabling constraints into products and services, from software and busi­
ness development to commercial and industrial artifacts and communities 
of practice generally (Bloom 2015; Burgauer 2022b). Under the guidance 
of English American experimental psychologist Michael Turvey, UConn’s 
CESPA lab used the concept of affordances to design prosthetic devices 
that build in enabling constraints to improve perception and action.
*
*
*
The Oxford English Dictionary (OED) (June 2022) states that, used 
metaphorically, the concept of framework suggests the idea of “fitted 
arrangements.” In this sense, frameworks are like affordances and prin­
ciples of conceptual organization; they format behavior by presetting 
definitions, parameters, and category boundaries—­in short, by initializ­
ing cognitive and behavioral constraint spaces within which certain ideas 
and actions will be possible or viable, and others not. Conceptual frame­
works allow room for adjustments and arrangements before the fact; not 
so much afterward. Like IT platforms, conceptual frameworks initialize 
rules and parameters—­the background constants—­on which instructions 
and protocols rest. In short, frameworks are constitutive and governing 
constraints that structure, coordinate, standardize, and otherwise adjust 
relations among the concepts and assumptions they organize. As a result, 
these organize coherent conceptual landscapes.
Metaphorically speaking, frameworks are looser than molds and tem­
plates. Because molds and templates guide behavior to ensure a certain 
outcome, they incorporate motivational constraints, which frameworks 
do not, at least directly. Templates actively direct behavior while it 
occurs; they also limit the possibility of changing the template itself once 
the process has begun. Chapter 7 described how folding back onto itself 
creates templates for protein folding. Templates operate throughout the 
biotic world. Prions (proteins, initially thought to cause only harmful 
effects such as the neurological disorders Creutzfeldt-­Jakob disease and 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

122    Chapter 8
mad cow disease) have recently been found to empirically implement tem­
plate formation. Under certain conditions, a protein called CPEB folds back 
into a prion, which then grows a fibril that permanently alters synaptic 
structure. Described as self-­templating, this constraint-directed process 
is hypothesized to be responsible for a protein-­based inheritance mecha­
nism—­a form of long-­term memory that is independent of DNA (Brahic 
2021).
Scaffolding
Scaffolding has recently become the object of attention of practitio­
ners in fields as unrelated as theoretical biology and business manage­
ment. American architect Ann Pendleton-­Jullian (2020, 280) maintains 
that scaffolds are a more generalizable concept than frameworks. Both, 
however, inform. The following section draws heavily from foundational 
work on scaffolding by Wimsatt (2007); Wimsatt (2014) in Caporeal, 
Griesemer, and Wimsatt (2014); and Bickhard (1992).
Pioneered by Soviet social constructivist Lev Vygotsky and developed by 
American cognitive psychologist Jerome Bruner, the metaphor of instruc­
tional scaffolding was first applied to structured interactions between 
teacher and pupil to guide learning. The activity of scaffolding is a context-­
dependent constraint that, catalyst-­like, facilitates information, matter, and 
energy flow—­in a certain location, in a certain direction. Teacher-provided 
scaffolds offer points of equilibria and pathways that make the next step 
easier, smoother, or quicker for the pupil. In the formation phase, then, 
scaffolds operate as enabling constraints that assist in taking projects to 
completion. Scaffolds set up affordances and offer nearby points of equi­
librium (Bickhard 1992) or “zones of proximal development” (Vygotsky 
1978) that stabilize progress and make next steps more accessible.
The stabilizing power of scaffolds is key. Scaffolding’s simultaneously 
enabling and stabilizing constraints make it more likely that goal-­directed 
activity will reach conclusion. Scaffolding is therefore critical to the suc­
cessful completion of many complex projects. Without them, the project 
might not be finished; it might not even get off the ground. 
Whether taken as metaphorical or literally, ratchets are also scaffold­
ing mechanisms. The asymmetry of a ratchet’s gear teeth preserves and 
stabilizes each achieved step. By preventing backsliding and allowing 
movement only in the forward direction, ratchets make it easier to reach 
the next step. Ratchets and scaffolds thus reinforce sequential enabling 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

An Abundance of Constraints    123
constraints that make advancing easier by providing a steadily growing 
platform (Bickhard 1992) from which to launch the next step.
By affording nearby “points of stability” from which to continue 
building or growing in the right direction and at the right pace (Bick­
hard 1992), scaffolds and ratchets are also like affordances; they embody 
context-­dependent constraints that bias the likelihood of which future 
events become possible, can occur more readily, or be performed or 
structured in a particular way. They set up interdependencies whose joint 
probabilities prevent disruptive perturbations from waylaying long-­term 
projects. In doing so, they contribute to the formation and persistence of 
new interdependencies. They contribute to coherence-­making.
By characterizing scaffolds as “muting, blocking, or suspending selec­
tion pressures,” Bickhard 1992 implies an ecological perspective. Scaf­
folds afford guidance and progress only for those who are cued to the 
opportunities of a particular context and artifact. As mutually constraining 
and constrained processes, scaffolds are therefore afforded by the shared 
interdependent constraint regime in which both agent and scaffold operate. 
The adaptive space of teacher and student, for example, is already socially 
structured even before the two walk into the classroom. Similarly, Asia’s 
bamboo scaffolds in skyscraper construction take advantage of a plentiful 
and renewal resource, but only if builders are attuned to the requirement 
that bamboo must be pretreated against fungi and insects to function as 
scaffolds at all. 
Scaffolds and affordances therefore facilitate natural and cultural evo­
lution; they make stepwise progress easier by preselecting and biasing the 
user’s next steps. Cultural rituals and taboos do the same for members of 
a community; mourning and grieving traditions such as sitting shiva and 
ceremonial wakes no doubt serve that function as well. By weighting the 
possibility landscape, preset constraints allow members of a community 
not to rethink each step on their own. Coherence-­preservation is facilitated 
as a result.
When a coherent dynamic’s governing constraints weaken, its gear teeth 
destabilize and become unable to prevent it from degrading into thermal 
equilibrium. This understanding of context-­dependent constraints is con­
gruent with Bickhard’s statement that artificial tools and even entire cultural 
environments can be considered scaffolds that facilitate the construction 
of “a structure distributed in space” (Bickhard 1992); such constraints 
are affordances, “adjacents possible” that lower barriers to energy flow 
and thereby make next steps more accessible. Scaffolds and scaffolding, 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

124    Chapter 8
molds and templates are context-­dependent constraints with ratchet-­like 
properties.
By including temporal constraints, we can extend Bickhard’s insights 
to include scaffolds that aid completion of “structures distributed in 
time,” such as the constraints of ontogenetic development and lineages. 
(For differentially activated constraints, see generative entrenchment in 
chapter 10.) From regulatory genes to yearly family rituals or once-­in-­a-­
lifetime ones like baptism, temporal constraints generally provide time-
based scaffolding and affordances that help complete processes and keep 
social dynamics coherent. Recall the precise sequence of steps required to 
prepare cassava root and nardoo spores. Such metastable sequences are 
temporally coded sequences that, as scaffolds, lessen the effects of external 
insults; they also minimize having to figure out everything from scratch 
each time. In consequence, they mute selection pressures. Entrenched con­
straints stabilize those existing metastable sequences and dynamics. They 
also facilitate the appearance of other enabling constraints that generate 
major transformations. Entrenchment and modularity will be explored in 
more detail in chapters 10 and 12, respectively.
Types of Scaffolds
Like the term constraint, of which scaffolds are one realization, scaffold 
itself is ambiguous. It can refer to either a process or a result. The classical 
notion of scaffolds, of course, is artifact scaffolding, such as traditional 
architectural scaffolds, those externally manufactured and assembled 
objects that facilitate the construction of tall buildings. They bias the flow 
of energy and matter in a particular direction, in a particular sequence. 
Architectural scaffolds are thus prebuilt context-­independent constraints 
that take the possibility space away from equiprobability. Following Bick­
hard, national monuments and museum collections of material culture 
can also be considered scaffolds that promote cultural transmission. They 
encourage us to see history in a particular way.
Asking the right questions in the right order at the right time, on the 
other hand, is a pedagogical scaffold that does not produce an artifact. 
Other varieties include infrastructure scaffolding, such as transportation 
and utility networks, and developmental scaffolding, such as the Peace 
Corps and Teach for America organizations. Some of these produce an 
artifact; others do not. Capacity building is a combination of infrastruc­
ture and developmental scaffolding.
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

An Abundance of Constraints    125
Cellular cytoskeletons and vertebrate backbones, too, are context-­
dependent organic scaffolds. They provide stable, and therefore more 
durable, spatial configurations that serve as frames for the construction of 
organic structures. Their structural soundness and configurational stabil­
ity generate novel (vectorial?) enabling constraints that guide processes 
along the correct path on which to build or repair further stable struc­
tures. In the abiotic domain, metastability likewise prolongs constraint 
regimes and thereby allows future increases in complexity to occur.
For purposes of this book, then, scaffolding, scaffolds, affordances, 
frameworks, templates, and molds are significant for their role as con­
straints. They facilitate, bias, and guide behavior—­toward directed goals 
or end points, along precise sequences of stable steps. They embody implicit 
instructions, sequences of stepwise spatiotemporal constraints. Under 
precarious conditions, scaffolding also helps ongoing developmental pro­
cesses avoid dissolution and successfully reach finality or even get started. 
Once set up, scaffolds serve as background constants of possibility space. 
Scaffolds and scaffolding are thus hybrids of context-­independent and 
context-­dependent constraints.
The metaphorical use of the term scaffolding is commonly organized 
around the workings of architectural scaffolding. In consequence, it is 
often characterized as temporal and temporary resources that provide a 
platform from which to ratchet development generally, not only learning 
(Caporael, Griesemer, and Wimsatt 2014, 2). However, thinking of scaf­
folds generally as temporal and temporary (as is the case in architectural 
and learning scaffolding) is limiting. Not all scaffolds (as enabling con­
straints) are temporal or temporary; even external architectural scaffolds 
can become integrated into the structure they helped construct. Flying 
buttresses of Gothic cathedrals are one such example.
Cynefin founder David Snowden and architect Pendleton-­Jullian 
(2020) identify three additional types of scaffolding: keystone scaffolds, 
neural scaffolds, and nutrient lattices.
Arch construction is enabled by a particular form of architectural scaf­
folding, the keystone. Once in place, keystones become a permanent point 
of stability from which further construction can proceed. They become, in 
other words, permanent scaffolds for future growth. Nutrient lattices, on 
the other hand, are temporary. Applied to burn wounds in skin grafts, 
nutrients embedded in the lattices promote collagen production. As the 
body produces more collagen, “the connective tissue works its way up 
the artificial scaffolding, slowly building up new dermis. Over time, the 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

126    Chapter 8
artificial scaffolding dissolves away leaving no trace of the lattice.”9 This 
is an example of efficient causes (nutrients and metabolism) guided by 
scaffolds or affordance-­like constraints (lattices and collagen). 
Scaffolding that starts out as an external artifact and boundary condi­
tion can also become incorporated into the system itself without dissolv­
ing. Sometimes it is even integrated into the structure itself and becomes 
an internal constraint that confers stabilizing oomph and thereby con­
tributes to the structure’s persistence. For example, artificial bioactive 
lattices implanted to encourage bone growth do so as porous templates. 
As new growth infiltrates the interstices, the artificial lattice becomes 
permanently incorporated into new bone (Pendleton-­Jullian and Brown 
2016). The location, orientation, and size of a lattice’s pores—­their 
arrangement—­embody its template function; these are enabling con­
straints. Once woven into new bone, they become components of the 
constitutive/governing constraints of the skeletal system.
Boundaries between scaffold and system, between system and environs, 
and between constraints and overall niche reflect differences in constrained 
interdependencies. As the prairie grasslands example illustrated, when 
feedback loops extrude into the environment or, which amounts to the 
same thing, import the environment into the dynamics, the dichotomy of 
internal versus external becomes irrelevant to any definition of scaffolding. 
It is the informational import of scaffolds—­the constitutive or governing 
constraints that emerge from interwoven enabling constraints—­that con­
stitutes the effective interface between scaffold and scaffolded. It initial­
izes the gating criteria of that constraint space as well as the settings that 
control action.
Whereas scaffolds enable process completion, prosthetic devices 
such as crutches, hearing aids, and artificial limbs as well as prescrip­
tion eyeglasses and implanted lenses contribute to partial or full restora­
tion of function. They are restorative enabling constraints. Their design 
affords links whereby emergent properties such as locomotion, vision, 
and hearing can be reestablished. What begins as a context-­independent 
constraint becomes a context-­dependent constraint that integrates new 
pathways into the coherent dynamics and constraint regime that embody 
a function. Implanted, neuromorphic prostheses (a variety of neural scaf­
fold) that incorporate machine learning can become, with training and 
use, second nature, their deployment as effortless as the organic limb they 
replace.10 Nowadays, brain computer interfaces (sometimes referred to 
as “brain–­machine interfaces,” or BMIs, when the signals are recorded 
by implanted sensors) can control a robot arm in real time. Stentrodes, 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

An Abundance of Constraints    127
electrode arrays inserted into blood vessels in the brain, monitor neural 
activity in part of the cortex. In time, the information conveyed by those 
implants becomes seamlessly incorporated into the subject’s second-order, 
top-down constraint regime of motor activation: by thinking words or 
sentences that are then transcribed to a computer, patients can email, use 
apps, do online banking, and even turn the lights on and off in their house. 
Alternating between external and internal scaffolding is a common 
pattern in nature. The transition from external to internal can be a form of 
coopting, as when external constraints are brought onboard and their func­
tion is internalized. Moreno and Mossio (2016) characterize the process of 
internalizing or coopting previously external boundary conditions as shang­
haiing them and incorporating them as internal ones. When mitochondria 
were engulfed into bacteria, the former’s enabling constraints for energy 
production were effectively coopted. The resulting interdependencies and 
new governing constraints became a new type of organism, eukaryotes. In 
the process, the rigid wall of the earlier prokaryotes cells also transformed 
into the eukaryotes’ flexible but structurally integral combination of per­
meable cell membrane plus endoplasmic reticulum and cytoskeleton—an 
internal scaffold. As an active interface, this new structure is a constraint 
structure consisting of multifunctional microtubules, intracellular filaments 
that shape the cell, assist in intracellular transport, and even guide mitosis 
to ensure the cell’s coherent structure is correctly replicated. In effect, the 
microtubules have become internalized scaffold constraints that prevent the 
cell’s internal but mutually dependent components from equilibrating. As a 
curious aside: images of cell cytoskeletons are remarkably similar to images 
of the webs of cosmic dark matter mentioned earlier that appear to provide 
an invisible backbone that determines the hidden structure of the cosmos 
(Kruesi 2013).
We can suppose that, in analogous fashion, the external scaffolding of 
invertebrate exoskeletons (think marine seashells and horseshoe crabs) 
was shanghaied and evolved into the internal scaffolding of vertebrates, 
organisms with a more complex constitutive constraint regime. Even 
regulatory genes today are hypothesized to be modular encapsulations of 
what might have earlier been external constraints.
Once again, it is not entirely unreasonable to conjecture that such coop­
tation and shanghaiing of external constraints might represent a general 
trend that goes from externally set and rigid and impermeable boundary 
conditions of Bénard cells to endogenously generated and more malleable, 
porous, and internalized constraints whose most recent manifestation is 
the emergence of self-­constraint in living things.
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

128    Chapter 8
If so, closure of constraints in living things, as described earlier, consti­
tutes the emergence of a form of self-­scaffolding.
More-­making makes more tokens of a coherent type, but closure of 
constraints ratchets the process to one that self-­scaffolds as self-­constraint. 
Closure of constraints self-­constrains, self-scaffolds, self-­constructs, and 
self-­maintains interdependent processes in dynamic but steady nonequi­
librium. Moreno and Mossio (2016) note that the being of living things 
“is their doing.” The interweaving of these various forms of constraint 
integrates and preserves the interdependencies that define living things as 
the self-determining and autonomous variety of self-­organizing process.
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

Persistence can be described as stability over time (Pascal and Pross 2015). 
As realized in biological lineages and cultures, character traits, family 
resemblances, and social practices, constraint regimes endure longer than 
their moment to moment realizations. What persists are interlocking and 
covarying mutual dependencies held together by constitutive and gov­
erning constraints across spatial and temporal scales. This persistence 
holds even if the possibility landscapes that contain those interdependen­
cies turn increasingly rugged over the entity’s existence or lifespan. This 
rumpling of possibility space occurs in response to other more local and 
timely constraints. Earlier in this work, coherent interdependencies were 
referred to as realizing unity of type. What persists in individual realiza­
tions is not the material substrate of concrete particulars but the stored 
information embodied in constraint regimes. 
In the case of living things, that metastable information enacts inher­
ited genomic, epistatic, and epigenomic constraints. It is carried by the 
enabling and constitutive constraints that hold together as a configura­
tion in dynamic metastability. Earth’s metastability was generated and is 
preserved by a constraint regime that persists despite significant changes 
in its constituent details, such as the introduction of photosynthesis. Dis­
sipative structures are also metastable, and for the same reason: enabling 
constraints in open systems under conditions far from equilibrium first 
precipitate a phase transition; the interlocking constraints of the resulting 
constitutive regime then preserve its coherence despite perturbations and 
fluctuations. Previous chapters emphasized that such contextually con­
strained interactional types are not universal, eternal, and unchanging; 
they are local and temporary. But given the contextual constraints that 
generated them, and while their constitutive and governing constraints 
hold, they are real and effective. And they persist.
9
Persistence—­Delaying the Second Law
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

130    Chapter 9
Which sorts of constraints generate persistence? Previous chapters 
described processes and constraints that, upon reaching closure, inter­
weave mereological relations. We saw that the overarching hyperloop 
formed in constraint closure takes longer to complete than the individ­
ual reactions that constitute it. By folding reactions back on themselves, 
recursion, autocatalysis, and feedback loops reinforce, replicate, and 
reproduce those conditions, components, and reactions that preserve 
mereological relations and prevent decoherence. They also incorporate 
real features of their world into their very constraint regimes.
This chapter focuses on persistence as a product of temporal con­
straints. Chapter 10 surveys diverse forms of entrenchment, a temporal 
constraint that reinforces persistence.
Persistence and Thermodynamics
How do coherence and persistence fit in with thermodynamics?
As articulated by Clausius, the second law of thermodynamics states 
that it is impossible for a process only to transfer heat from a colder to a 
warmer body. The end point of any thermic process is a state of equilib­
rium with its environment, a permanent and unchanging condition.
The received interpretation of the second law as formulated by Aus­
trian physicist and philosopher Ludwig Boltzmann rests on a distinction 
between macro-­ and microstates. Macrostates are descriptions of large 
numbers of identical and independent particles, like molecules of gas. 
The temperature and pressure of a thermodynamic system, for example, 
can be realized by more than one microstate, the position and velocity of 
each molecule of gas.
The second law’s arrow of time describes probabilistic tendencies of 
macrostates. Consider gas molecules in an enclosed container divided into 
two reservoirs, one hot, the other cold. Such a highly improbable initial 
condition (most molecules confined to one end and few molecules in the 
rest) is the system’s initial macrostate. It lasts only while the partition 
between the two sides remains secure, or energy continues to be pumped 
in to keep the two sections separate. Once the partition is removed, the 
existing gradient inexorably dissipates.
Macrostates like this one that are realized by fewer configurations (two 
reservoirs) are less likely to occur than those with more configurations. The 
textbook heuristic is the following: throwing a pair of six-­sided dice will 
come up a total of 7 more often in the long run because more combinations 
realize macrostate 7 than other macrostates. Despite each throw of the dice 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

Persistence    131
being an independent event, long runs of double sixes or snake eyes are 
possible. Unlikely, but possible.
Macrostates with a more uniform distribution of microstates are more 
likely than inhomogeneous ones such as the initial condition where mol­
ecules are bunched over at one end of the container and a near vacuum at 
the other. Over time a tendency appears, from less likely (more inhomo­
geneous) macrostates to more likely (more uniform) ones.1 To illustrate: 
as more throws of the dice occur, 7 appears more often than double 6s 
or double 1s. In thermodynamic processes the distribution of molecules 
becomes increasingly uniform until it reaches the inevitable (most likely 
because most uniform, and therefore most stable) state of thermal equi­
librium. As required by the second law, the tendency’s overall direction, 
from least likely to most likely, is irreversible until the process reaches 
thermal equilibrium, the equivalent of white noise.
A tendency is a probabilistic measure. The statistical interpretation 
of the second law therefore equates more likely (macrostate probability) 
with more stable. And most stable with unchanging and therefore most 
lasting. Decades before Richard Dawkins repeated the quip, Herbert 
Simon (1969) riffed that this interpretation of the second law amounts to 
“the survival of the stable.”
What, exactly, does this lasting condition amount to? Once reached, 
thermal equilibrium lasts, but there is no-­thing that persists at thermal 
equilibrium (Ladyman and Ross 2010). White noise is no-­thing; equiprob­
ability is no-­macrostate. Macrostates that appear to pop up along the 
way to thermal equilibrium (like a long run of snake eyes) are statistical 
improbabilities. Since on this interpretation microstates are independent of 
each other, those macrostates do not represent covarying relations formed 
and preserved by interlocking context-­dependent constraints. Thermal 
equilibrium at the end lasts because the total absence of constraints ensures 
permanent no-­thingness. The path to thermal equilibrium is the process 
of progressive relaxation of arbitrarily and extraneously set context-­
independent constraints (Barbour 2020).
Riffing on Simon, the second law could therefore also be characterized 
as “the survival of no-­thing” since at thermal equilibrium there are no 
constraints and consequently no stored information that is qualitatively 
other than the aggregate or sum of the equally likely microstates. There 
is no stored information because there are no covarying interdependen­
cies. There are no covarying interdependencies because there are no 
constraints. Thermal equilibrium carries no information and can do no 
work. Unconstrained equilibrium (white noise) is a statistical description, 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

132    Chapter 9
but it is a macrostate in name only. There is no “it” that persists as itself 
over time (Ladyman and Ross 2010). Thermal equilibrium is not identi­
cal to persistence.
On the probabilistic interpretation of classical thermodynamics, equi­
librium is nonorder. To repeat: because there are no constrained interde­
pendencies, there is no organization, no structures, and no configurations. 
What is usually described as a process that goes from order to disorder 
is in fact only the progressive relaxation of an existing gradient whose 
source is unexplained (Barbour 2020)—­whether of the Big Bang or a 
closed box partitioned into two reservoirs. Left to itself, cosmic expansion 
diffuses until it reaches uniformity, the total absence of constraints. Left 
to itself—­that is, without energetic input that keeps the two reservoirs 
separate—­the gradient dissipates until the molecules of gas are uniformly 
distributed throughout the space. This form of dissipation is significantly 
unlike the constrained, order-­generating process of nonequilibrium dis­
sipative structures. The two processes are different because according to 
standard physics micro-­events are independent of one another and there 
are no relations—­and therefore no relations of continuity, covariance, or 
dependence, much less constraint—­between them.
Other than the stasis of thermal equilibrium, then, do the concepts of 
persistence and endurance have any meaning in classical thermodynam­
ics? To return to the dice example, since each throw is independent of 
the others, a long run of snake eyes is not an ontic entity that persists as 
itself. “A run of snake eyes” refers only to an observable statistical fluke. 
If persistence is defined as continuity of the same sort of thing despite 
changes in composition, is there any provision in classical thermodynam­
ics that accounts for the persistence of coherent entities—­entities that in 
some sense endure despite changes?
The second law of classical thermodynamics is blind to “configura­
tions,” that is, to real patterned energy flows (Bejan 2020). Energy does 
not organize into persistent configurations because there are no contextu­
ally constrained relations between states. Because no context-­dependent 
constraints make flows dependent on one another and weave them into 
internally coherent (because interdependent) dynamics, any such patterns 
that seem to arise and last are coincidental sequences of microevents. A 
run of snake eyes. They are not ontologically informed. It is not just that 
there are no persistent macrostates as such in classical thermodynam­
ics; there cannot be because each momentary microstate is independent 
of and uncorrelated from the rest.
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

Persistence    133
The second law is therefore silent about the generation of stable but 
nonequilibrium configurations of interdependent streams of energy flow, 
their persistence, or their evolution. The constructal law (Bejan and 
Lorente 2008; Bejan 2020) is meant to extend the second law by address­
ing precisely this issue, the formation, persistence, and evolution of 
designs or patterns of energy that flow, in a discernible direction, versus 
time. The new configurations satisfy the second law because patterns—­
constrained order—­facilitate energy flow.
This book has proposed that operating against a backdrop of context-­
independent constraints like thermal gradients, context-­dependent con­
straints are responsible for the generation of such patterns. Constraints 
naturally and irreversibly intertwine and organize independent and sepa­
rate particles and events into coarse-­grained types or patterns of energy, 
matter, and information flow with emergent properties. Contextually 
constrained relations and interactions set against the background estab­
lished by context-­independent constraints generate metastable and per­
sistent configurations—­real macrostates because of the interdependencies 
they weave among their components. In irreversible phase changes paid 
for by an overall increase in entropy, constraints interleave streams of 
matter, energy, and information flow such that overarching constraint 
regimes with qualitatively distinct properties arise. The coherence of 
those interlocking interdependencies embodies and enacts newly created 
information. That information manifests as the emergent properties of 
the constraint regimes.
In open systems far from equilibrium, that is, ordered configurations 
emerge out of nonorder and retard thermalization in virtue of the interplay 
of constraints. From the perspective presented in this book, configurational 
patterns—­their emergence, persistence, and evolution—­are the products of 
context-­dependent constraints, operating against the backdrop of context-­
independent constraints. As a result, identifiable, constrained, multiply 
realizable interdependencies can endure despite changes. They last as con­
stitutive constraint regimes with emergent properties.
Persistence under nonequilibrium conditions is implemented (top down) 
by the governing powers of constitutive constraints that confine token real­
izations to within the basin of attraction of an overarching coordination 
dynamic—­the attractor generated by constraints. As we saw in the illustra­
tion of epigenetic landscapes, since attractors are multiply realizable and 
generated in response to context-dependent constraints, they are not rigid 
monoliths; over time, their realized tokens explore the adaptive space of 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

134    Chapter 9
the attractor’s constraint regime. Coordination dynamics generated by 
constraints are true examples of the formation of macroscopic order out 
of nonorder.
This interpretive framework is therefore also about macro–­micro rela­
tions. The difference with the classical view, however, is that the latter’s 
statistical interpretation does not address constraints; it formulates no 
principle whereby microevents become interdependent with each other and 
real macrostates can form and persist as coherent entities, then adapt, and 
ultimately evolve. In contrast, the perspective presented here considers mul­
tiply realizable interdependencies to be real and irreversibly generated in 
open far from equilibrium conditions by intertwined context-­independent 
and context-­dependent constraints. The explanation of constraint closure 
presented in chapter 7 accounts for these mereological dynamics.
Interdependencies persist because, as contextually constrained coordi­
nation dynamics, their constraint regimes coarse-­grain nature into types 
of entities whose governing constraints are degenerate: they can be real­
ized by more than one microstate. Functions such as homeostasis and 
metabolism are examples of coarse-­grained or smoothed-­over constraint 
regimes. So are organisms and lineages; they can be realized by more 
than one microstate or configuration even as their unity of type persists. 
Mereological constraints therefore account for why and how organisms 
last longer than their cells, and lineages last longer than their specimens. 
Nature generates such multiply realizable types because they have more 
paths to persistence—­to metastability over time—­than do the individ­
ual tokens or components that realize those types. Multiple realizability 
therefore also supports evolvability, the capacity to evolve.
The cosmos, we can conjecture, tends to coherence-­making by con­
straints for the same reason that trajectories in the probabilistic inter­
pretation of classical thermodynamics go from hotter to colder: energy 
flows more easily when constraints align individual energy streams into 
more coarse-­grained dynamics through which to flow. Multiply realizable 
constrained ontic patterns also underpin the freedom to explore newly 
formed relational states (Bejan 2020). In short: interactional types are 
real, not mere observables. Their systemwide properties persist in reality 
because they are metastable; they are metastable because they embody 
contextually constrained interdependencies. Such mereological interde­
pendencies, formed by contextual constraints, are degenerate.
From the perspective presented in this book, the capacity for persistence is 
therefore the outcome of naturally occurring constraints—­not, as Boltzmann-­
inspired thermodynamics would have it, the absence of arbitrarily and 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

Persistence    135
exogenously initialized constraints. Local pockets of constrained and endur­
ing inhomogeneities in nonequilibrium are neither improbable and unex­
plained initial conditions nor observed coincidences. Interactional types or 
kinds of entities are real products of the organizing capacity of constrained 
energy flow. Types form and last longer—­as real, patterned configurations 
of energy flow—­than either their token realizations or the components and 
stages that make up those patterns (Nicolis and Prigogine 1977).
Interactional types as conceived here are not universal or eternal. They 
are induced by context-­dependent constraints and realize self-­reinforcing, 
persistent forms that are multiply realized as distinct path-­dependent his­
tories and trajectories. By originating from a combination of context-­
independent and context-­dependent constraints, coordination dynamics 
precede the origin of Life. Form is not synonymous with shape. Forms 
are context-­dependent constraint regimes with emergent properties and 
powers. They expand dramatically with chemistry and explode with the 
emergence of dissipative structures, living things, and biological lineages. 
On this view, conscious beings and the Anthropocene they have created 
are just the most recent iteration of this dynamic process.
The Principle of Persistence
Analogous to Bejan’s proposals, the principle of persistence also aims to 
extend the second law, from “survival of the thermally stable” to “Nature 
seeks persistent forms” (Pross 2012; Pross and Pascal 2013; Pascal and 
Pross 2015). Its authors claim that since persistence (stability in time, rather 
than the stasis of heat death) is the more general concept, it can embrace 
the unchangingness of thermal equilibrium as well as temporary and local 
pockets of form, those improbable macrostates in dynamic nonequilibrium 
that are realized in physicochemical and biological dissipative structures. 
The principle of persistence’s own arrow of time goes from less persistent 
and less probable macrostates to more persistent and therefore more prob­
able ones, with thermal equilibrium winning out in the end.
Pascal and Pross recognize that the concept of stability is utilized in two 
quite different senses, one that refers to heat death, the other to stability in 
time. As noted, in classical thermodynamics, persistence, strictly speaking, 
refers only to the absence of constraints—­heat death. There is no form or 
principle of identity at thermal equilibrium. There is no-­thing that persists 
as itself.
In contrast, persistence in open and nonequilibrium dynamical systems 
consists of self-­reinforcing and self-­maintaining dynamics that, thanks 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

136    Chapter 9
to constraints, hold fast despite changes at the microscale. Persistence 
in nonequilibrium open systems is realized as dynamic kinetic stability 
(DKS), not thermal equilibrium (Pascal and Pross 2015; Pross and Pascal 
2013). According to the two authors, the source of DKS’s persistence is 
exponential growth such as the growth driven by autocatalysis.
What, exactly, grows exponentially? The principle of persistence con­
siders stability in time to be the ability of certain replicating entities, “to 
make copies of themselves at a rate that results in a non-­equilibrium 
steady state population of replicating entities being maintained over 
time” (Pascal and Pross 2015, 16162). In living things, this translates to 
the ability to reproduce at a rate that outruns entropy or outcompetes 
other species (Pascal and Pross 2015), if only locally and temporarily. 
Pascal and Pross, correctly, include nonliving things such as physico­
chemical dissipative structures in the category of entities that can outrun 
entropy. They highlight the exponential growth of autocatalysis as the 
driver of DKS.
The authors also recognize that it is the “population of replicators that 
is stable/persistent rather than the individual replicators that make up the 
population at any given moment” (Pascal and Pross 2015, 16162; empha­
sis added). As has been noted above, lineages and populations persist 
relative to individual organisms, and organisms persist vis à vis individual 
cells. Mutatis mutandis, this is true of all open nonequilibrium dynamical 
systems that self-­organize in response to constraints. They are multiply 
realizable, and their token realizations can differ at the microscale despite 
the continued persistence of the self-­organized and coherent whole.
More precisely, then, it is the metastability of multiply realizable and 
coherent constraint regimes that outruns entropy and persists, at various 
scales. This is what Pascal and Pross aim to capture with the term dynamic 
kinetic stability (DKS). From the perspective of this book, DKS represents 
the persistence of coherence, that is, of multiply realizable interdependen­
cies brought about by intertwined enabling constraints and preserved by 
governing constraints under nonequilibrium conditions. Such continued 
coherence over time subtends DKS, which is fundamentally the product 
of enabling and governing capabilities of constraints.
The hypothesis proposed in this book, then, has been that individual 
physicochemical dissipative structures and biological systems alike tem­
porarily delay entropy by holding fast unity of type—­that is, by preserv­
ing multiply realizable interlocking interdependencies over time—­despite 
turnover of individual reactants and products, individual catalysts and 
elements, or individual organisms and cells. Bénard cells persist despite 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

Persistence    137
turnover in the individual water molecules; BZ reactions persist despite 
replacement of individual reactants. This is also so in the case of organ­
isms, of course: the removal and replacement of individual organs, the 
births and deaths of individual cells, and so on are an integral part of 
their multiply realizable dynamic. Cells, too, replicate cell type despite 
mitotic division, replacement of organelles, and so forth. And metabolism 
preserves homeostatic stability despite changes in glucose utilization, and 
so on. Throughout, the coherence—­the constraint regime—­persists.
If the point made in the previous section is correct, however, basing 
persistence on exponential replication and reproduction and thereby out­
running entropy production begs the question by presupposing the capac­
ity to replicate and reproduce unity of type tout court or, in Pascal and 
Pross’s terminology, form. As noted, form is not identical with shape. As 
described at the beginning of the book, Platonic forms were historically 
postulated to account for type identity—­for the capacity to persist as the 
same sort of thing throughout differences and modifications. Forms and 
Aristotelian and Cartesian substances were postulated as explanations of 
why spatiotemporally distinct tokens are alike despite differences. Absent 
Platonic forms, Aristotelian and Cartesian substances, or natural kinds, 
the principle of persistence must explain the generation and persistence 
of multiply realizable coherent dynamics, be they realized by autocata­
lytic replicators or living things.2
That is, the principle of persistence must account for DKS’s emer­
gence and metastability despite inevitable perturbations and fluctua­
tions. Otherwise, the principle presupposes the persistence it is trying 
to establish. All positive feedback including autocatalysis can spin out 
of control. So how do autocatalytic reactions or loops of feedback 
processes become stabilized into DKS that persists in nonequilibrium? 
Coherent, self-­reinforcing, and self-­stabilizing dynamics that preserve 
unity of type despite remaining in nonequilibrium cannot be presupposed 
in the explanation by stating that the puzzle of life lies in the types and 
nature of persistent systems such as some chemical systems present. On 
pain of petitio principii, it is precisely those types and nature that call for 
an explanation.
There are no types as such at thermal equilibrium, where, as noted 
earlier, stability and persistence refer to the absence of constraints. Interac­
tional types as described in this book can hold together and persist in open 
conditions far from equilibrium only as products of constraint, not their 
absence. Stating that “even replicative change that appears prebiotically . . . ​
manifests a logical and irreversible drive towards greater persistence” (Pross 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

138    Chapter 9
and Pascal 2015, 16163) begs the question of whence the original capacity 
for replicative change to make more of the same type of entity, whether of 
a physicochemical dissipative structures, predator–­prey cycles, or species 
of organisms, all without spinning out of control. As discussed earlier, rep­
lication and reproduction are more-­makers precisely because they are not 
cosmic runs of 6s: each replicate’s traits are not independent of those of the 
parent or the previous step. Subsequent steps and generations are condi­
tioned upon earlier ones. It is only because iterations of complex systems 
are context-­dependent and path-­dependent that each turn of the exponen­
tial spiral makes more of an already coherent structure. This is so for dis­
sipative structures generally, both abiotic and biological.
Exponential replication, in short, presupposes context-­dependent 
constraints.
Whether each microevent is independent of or interdependent with 
a previous step, both in time and place, marks a significant difference 
between classical thermodynamics and the coherence-­making by constraint 
inspired by complexity theory. Context-­dependent constraints are absent 
in the first and very much present in the second. The source of endurance 
of complex systems is the generation and maintenance of form—­that is, 
of coherent interdependencies held together by regimes of constraint. If 
persistence presupposes the capacity to preserve a coherent structure or 
dynamic that endures despite changes, proposing to expand the second 
law by postulating that the evolution of forms displays a direction from 
less to more persistent begs the question with respect to the generation and 
coherence of such persistent patterns of dynamic equilibrium—­especially 
since actual realizations of macrostates are not independent of each other.
Pascal and Pross (2015) note “the stability of such systems depends 
not just on the system but on factors outside the system” (16163). This 
book has proposed that the role of contextual constraints in generating 
DKS in the first place is that factor. BZ reactions and tornadoes persist 
in nonequilibrium conditions as coherent constraint regimes. Without 
the role of context-­dependent constraints in producing dynamic equi­
librium, DKS cannot be presupposed in explanations of persistence and 
form (interactional type, as it is labeled here). Doing so begs the question.
To summarize: exactly what persists at thermal equilibrium and as 
dynamic kinetic metastability are quite different: contextual constraints 
underpin dynamic kinetic stability under nonequilibrium conditions; and 
there are no constraints at all at thermal equilibrium. We can conclude that 
the principle of persistence begs the question and commits the fallacy of 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

Persistence    139
ambiguity along the way; persistence (as the authors use the term) spans 
both thermal stasis and dynamic stability far from equilibrium only if the 
term is used ambiguously.
Selection by Persistence
Advocates of the principle of selection by persistence present a differ­
ent understanding of the relation between stability and persistence. This 
hypothesis interprets persistence as the outcome of a continuous process of 
selection based on stability. Whence the criteria of selection on this view?
The modern synthesis, which merges Darwinian evolution with Men­
delian genetics, maintains that random DNA mutations are the sole 
source of variation from which selection then culls the reproductively 
advantaged. Over time, the fittest specimens come to predominate. On 
this view, phenotypes are the product only of accidental genetic mutations.
Since there are “no competing reproducing planets for natural selec­
tion to choose between” (Holmes 2019, 34), the modern synthesis breaks 
down at the level of Earth as a whole. What, then, accounts for the 
planet’s remarkable capacity for long-­term self-­regulation, a form of self-­
stabilization3—despite, as mentioned earlier, the appearance of photo­
synthesis, which dramatically changed the atmosphere? Earth’s relatively 
constant temperature range and overall levels of oxygen, carbon, nitro­
gen, and phosphorus have remained relatively steady over millions of 
years. Recent discoveries that Earth’s geologic activity appears to follow 
a 27.5-­million-­year cycle could be considered additional evidence that 
lasting geological patterns might not be statistical flukes; they hint at the 
possibility of constrained and evolvable dynamics (Rampino et al. 2021).
Evidence that Earth has managed to persist far longer than living 
things capable of adapting to their environment have been in existence 
suggests, in other words, that evolution by selection of the reproduc­
tively fit might be only one of several selection mechanisms at work in the 
cosmos. In contrast to the usual emphasis on random mutations, propo­
nents of selection by persistence maintain that rethinking selection more 
generally in terms of persistence over time can include abiotic processes 
as well as living things under one principle.
Once again, the idea of selection implies a macrostate–­microstate 
distinction; it implies a variety of specimens from which the embed­
ding context, a real and constrained macrostate, culls. Previous chap­
ters argued that interactional types span multiply realizable coordination 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

140    Chapter 9
dynamics. In consequence, culling is not a random lopping off. Remi­
niscent of the craft of tailoring, natural selection is a process of fitting 
together or rendering compatible an entity and its embedding context. 
This fitting together is carried out in back and forth cascades of feedfor­
ward and feedback loops, from the dynamic’s governing constraints (in 
virtue of which its constitutive constraints remain coherent) to those of 
the actual token.
Earth’s rocky shell, its abiotic atmosphere, hydrosphere and cryo­
sphere, are fitted together with living things to constitute the biosphere, a 
constrained and integrative, multiscale and multidimensional set of inter­
dependencies. Interfaces between the various levels of organization and 
dimensions of this complex ecosphere are the active sites where the fitting 
together process takes place; in the case of the planet, the biosphere serves 
as the interface between Earth’s geological strata and outer space. It actively 
selects and realizes actual tokens through cascades of top-down negative 
feedback loops, which change the probability distribution of individual 
events. Phrased differently, order parameters of the biosphere (be they the 
dynamic equilibrium of Earth’s temperature range, the relative reproductive 
fitness of living things, or even the distintegrating impact of human actions 
on the biosphere itself) describe the multiple constraints that the biosphere 
as interface must simultaneously satisfy. Only those potential tokens that 
satisfy that constraint regime are selected for persistence.
It is in this manner that constitutive and governing constraints of 
complex dynamic systems simultaneously stabilize and enhance metasta­
bility. They allow autocatalysis’s exponential growth to outrun entropy 
without spinning out of control. As noted, however, the stability of 
complex systems is not formless, unconstrained, and static thermal equi­
librium. Quite the contrary, it is a constantly varying metastability that 
thanks to a constitutive constraint regime persists as a coherent dynamic 
in nonequilibrium.
As just discussed, in classical thermodynamics, stability commonly refers 
to a system’s lowest energy state. In contrast, Earth’s overall dynamics 
have persisted for eons as a pocket of constrained metastability away from 
equilibrium with surrounding deep space. The validity of the hypothesis 
of selection by persistence therefore turns on a particular understanding 
of stability.
Its advocates (Lenton and Latour 2018) recognize that the planet’s 
atmospheric conditions are metastable despite being in nonequilibrium 
with space. Lenton proposes the following. Suppose Earth accidentally 
arrived at4 a configuration of elementary constituents that is particularly 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

Persistence    141
stable. Such a pattern would not only tend to persist and become self-­
reinforcing; it would also supersede destabilizing perturbations because 
stabilized states generate more stability. They do so because, whether phys­
ical, chemical, or biological, stable systems as such “not only persist; they 
get better at persisting over time” (Lenton, quoted in Holmes 2019, 35) by 
sequentially selecting among degrees of stability. Insofar as stable states 
“sequentially select” states that are even more stable (see also Henrich 
2016), the idea of selection by persistence therefore proposes a form of 
“sequential selection.”
The hypothesis thus postulates that the cosmos must have acciden­
tally reached a state that does not easily and reversibly wash out despite 
diversely realized configurations or undergoing regular perturbations or 
fluctuations. The hypothesis also proposes that particularly stable mac­
rostates beget and select even more stable states.5 Considering that the 
second law is “blind to configurations” (Bejan 2020) and does not coun­
tenance relations among microprocesses, however, how can primordial 
and improbable but real states not naturally wash out—­absent con­
straints? A primordial and improbable state that holds together either 
in a principled way, or due to an internal logic, is not contemplated in 
classical thermodynamics.
In response to critics who question the relative selective advantage of 
stability over regular and entropic destabilizing forces, proponents of the 
Stability as Persistence thesis maintain that any stability that persists must 
be robust,6 that is, able to withstand fluctuations and insults without de-­
cohering. What property might delay thermalization and thereby turn 
the state robust? Without using the terminology of degeneracy or mul­
tiple realizability, much less constraint, Lenton notes that certain features 
are required for robustness.
Robust systems have some degree of redundancy so the loss of any particular 
component (the extinction of a species, say) doesn’t critically compromise the 
whole. Second, they have diversity, which increases the odds that at least some 
species will be able to cope with unexpected changes. Third they have modu­
larity so that a failure of part of the system doesn’t bring down the whole 
thing. (Lenton, quoted in Holmes 2019, 36; emphasis added)
By emphasizing redundancy, diversity, and modularity, the stability 
as persistence hypothesis implicitly appeals to the notion of macro­
states. In light of the previous discussion, this requirement immediately 
prompts the question, “What mechanism generates real macrostates that 
are redundant, diverse, and modular?” Without an origin story for these 
three features, this hypothesis, too, begs the question.
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

142    Chapter 9
In contrast, the central thesis of this book, that constraints are the 
agents of coherence-­making, offers just such an origin story.
It is evident, then, that just as the advocates of the principle of per­
sistence used the term stability to mean DKS, advocates of selection by 
persistence use the term stability to mean metastability. The robustness 
required for persistence is a naturally emergent metric of diversely real­
izable constrained interdependencies. Such variety is not measured in 
numbers of identical tokens of the same type; it requires interdependen­
cies among interwoven but distinct constraint regimes (Brillouin 1962; 
Collier 2003b; Collier and Hooker 1999). Integration into a general type 
of entity in response to constraints lowers internal entropy production 
and realizes metastability. The more types and subtypes, the more paths 
to realization. The more deeply multiply realizable and degenerate, that 
is, the more metastable and robust.
Modularity, the third prerequisite of robustness identified by advocates 
of the selection by persistence hypothesis, is a common feature of coherence-­
making by constraints, especially in hierarchy formation. It contributes to 
a hierarchy’s capacity to evolve. Chapter 12 will return to modularity’s 
contribution to coherence-­making and hierarchy formation.
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

Constraints not only facilitate the emergence and persistence of coher­
ence; constraints can also sediment and even entrench, thereby strength­
ening the metastability that keeps established, coherent structures from 
going to thermal equilibrium. In contrast to scaffolding, which commonly 
aids in the successful completion of a dynamic process, sedimentation 
and entrenchment preserve existing equilibria in the face of perturba­
tions, actual or potential. Sedimented and entrenched constraints can be 
defined as constraints that are more difficult than usual to relax or oth­
erwise modify. Difficult here means it takes more energy to become dis­
lodged than to persist. It takes more energy to get over the hillock of the 
attractor in which a system is embedded and into a neighboring one.
Sedimented and entrenched constraints therefore strengthen exist­
ing governing constraints by making their attractors in possibility space 
deeper and more pervasive. In living things, sedimented and entrenched 
constraints reinforce habits and significantly increase the likelihood that 
only a smaller subset of possible behaviors or phenotypic traits becomes 
actual (Egbert and Barandiaran 2014). Sedimentation and entrench­
ment are therefore important add-­on, context-­independent constraints that 
reinforce default governing constraints and add extra oomph against 
thermalization. The long-­term price of doing so, however, can be less 
flexibility and a lowered responsiveness to context.
Sedimentation, Memory, Records, and Registers
Sedimentation confines realized diversity to a subset of empirical pos­
sibilities. It can be the product of add-­on constraints such as repetition 
discussed earlier. The concept of habitus described by French sociologist 
Pierre Bourdieu (1977, 1986) suggests sedimented constraints in the tacit 
and often unconscious but very ingrained skills and predispositions of 
10
Sedimentation and Entrenchment
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

144    Chapter 10
social class. They can be changed, but it takes added effort and work to 
do so.
The trajectories of Newtonian mechanics are Markovian. They are path 
independent; in their relentless march to equilibrium, they forget where 
they came from. In contrast, context-­dependent self-­organizing complex 
systems are path dependent. Because constraints generate path-­dependent 
dynamics, interdependencies woven together by contextual constraints are 
also forms of memory. The structures and dynamics of coherent interde­
pendencies thus embody records of their context and their history. As traces 
of their history become integrated into their present constraint regime and 
continue to influence it, complex systems remember (Rovelli 2018).
In short, sedimentation is a form of memory. Path dependence is a tem­
poral constraint that enables complex forms of memory such as records 
and registers to arise. Traces of factual information from the past persist 
in those records; in turn, those that continue to affect the present are 
sedimented constraints.
Memories can thus become incorporated into governing constraints 
on possibility space. By reinforcing an existing constraint regime, memo­
ries contribute to the persistence of existing dynamics. As records of real 
constraints, memories also weight and bias future events—­even as they 
are themselves updated in the process. Scars left by volcanoes in Iceland 
and moraines in Lake Louise, Canada, and Zermatt, Switzerland carry 
past conditions into the present. We now know that some of these geo­
logic traces continue to produce significant effects on today’s climate. 
They are among the planet’s memories; they also carry warnings about 
fast approaching thresholds of instability where adaptive space might 
run out.
Ordinarily, memories stabilize constitutive constraints but they can 
also prevent them from reconfiguring in light of new information. As 
an example, epigenetic processes such as higher neuronal methylation 
levels preserve and sediment information of trauma into future genera­
tions (Stenz et al. 2018). They harden the constraints of existing pos­
sibility space. As noted earlier, obsessive-­compulsive behavior betrays a 
constraint regime that lacks that capacity to be modified. Post-­traumatic 
stress disorder reflects a memory that has become a sedimented govern­
ing constraint that is difficult to modify to reflect current conditions.
Bound information in the human genome can be considered the sedi­
mented record and memory of phenotypes that were successful in earlier 
contexts. Reports that today’s human genomes retain traces of our Nean­
derthal and Denisovan ancestors should come as no surprise. Relatively 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

Sedimentation and Entrenchment    145
robust memories, traces, records, and registers can become context-­
independent constraints that keep conditions away from equilibrium; in 
doing so, they delay a system’s thermalization and preserve it as itself 
for a longer period before it ultimately succumbs to the second law. In 
situations where multiple constraints must be simultaneously satisfied, 
recessive genes that resurface due to interbreeding are likewise evidence 
of latent constraints. So-­called junk DNA might similarly represent a res­
ervoir of latent constraints that surface when other, less entrenched con­
straints are relaxed.
Organizations and societies share analogous dynamics with prebiotic 
ones. Customs, mores, values, traditions, institutional memories, and 
practices are sedimentations of bound information registered by earlier 
constraints, both context independent and context dependent. Woods 
(2016, 2018) suggests that hewing to established practices is a successful 
strategy for an organization under normal conditions. Under stressful 
and threshold conditions, on the other hand, organizations must position 
themselves at the edge of adaptive space to more easily spot new gradi­
ents or enabling constraints that might be tapped more quickly in the 
service of renewal and survival.
In sum, as is the case with all ratcheting mechanisms, memory traces 
and sedimentation are an evolved way of sustaining a coherent struc­
ture’s interdependencies. Path dependence drags memory into today’s 
constraint regime. Doing so delays dissipation; it preserves a system’s 
constitutive constraints. The past continues to indirectly influence—­but 
under normal conditions and thanks to the multiple realizability of top-­
down control, not necessarily determine—­the present.
Entrenchment
As default governing constraints extend their scope and reach through self-­
reinforcing mechanisms like cooptation, interactional types held fast by 
sedimented constraints can become even more metastable in space and 
time. Red tape seems to follow this pattern. Its tentacles have an inexorable 
tendency to self-­reinforce and spread; as a result, its stipulations become 
ever more encompassing and last even longer. Red tape entrenches.
Entrenched constraints are even more fixed than sedimented ones. 
In the service of preserving stability, entrenched constraints reinforce 
metastability by smoothing over short-­term fluctuations and perturba­
tions. By protecting existing systems from short-­term crises, entrench­
ment prolongs their persistence. As with the term scaffold, entrenchment 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

146    Chapter 10
and its cognates can refer not only to the implementation of constraints 
that entrench processes but also to entrenched phenomena themselves. In 
the social sciences, entrenchment can also refer to the intention that pro­
duces the entrenching artifact, the entrenching constraint, and even the 
entrenched artifact itself. As an example, the U.S. Constitution serves as an 
entrenched constraint in this double sense: it was intended to be difficult 
to alter while simultaneously including provisions through which to do so.
If sufficiently rigid and inflexible, entrenched constraints can freeze 
conditions altogether. In doing so, they will mimic context-­independent 
constraints by hardening the coordinates, constants, and attractors of 
the possibility landscape within which local context-­dependent con­
straints operate. Some temporal constraints, in contrast, can promote 
flexibility by becoming entrenched differentially; they might be in effect 
only upstream, for example, at the start of long-term projects. Wimsatt 
(2001, 2007) calls this sort of differential entrenchment generative 
entrenchment.
Why would constraints become entrenched at all? The following 
section draws heavily on superb and decades-­long work on entrenchment 
(Bickhard 1992; Wimsatt, 2001, 2007; Wimsatt in Caporael, Griesemer, 
and Wimsatt 2014; Barber 2016).
Why does entrenchment happen naturally? Earlier chapters of this 
book suggested that improved metastability favors persistence.
The insight motivating the Selection as Persistence hypothesis was that, 
even in the abiotic domain, governing constraints like those at work in 
the earth’s atmosphere and biosphere became entrenched in virtue of their 
contribution to dynamic stability; their interdependence entrenched into 
context-­independent constants that stabilized the earth’s constraint regime 
away from equiprobability. Entrenched constraints might have started out 
as context-­dependent constraints; their strong contribution to metastabil­
ity subsequently caused them to entrench, at which point they became 
context-independent constraints of an expanded dynamic. This book has 
maintained that this process is in evidence, mutatis mutandis, in atoms 
and molecules, physicochemical and biochemical reactions, and even in 
economies and ecosystems.
Cosmic constraints of the universe’s fundamental parameters are prime 
examples of entrenched constraints. Symmetry and conservation princi­
ples, to be discussed in chapter 14, are two fundamental and entrenched 
context-­independent constraints that preserve the universe’s basic inho­
mogeneities. Others mentioned earlier include the gradients of cosmic 
expansion and gravity, the many forms of polarities, the stability of the 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

Sedimentation and Entrenchment    147
atom’s nucleus and its electron orbits, and others like the Pauli exclu­
sion principle. These keep the cosmos together by holding universally. 
As a result, even prior to the origin of life, geological and atmospheric 
dynamics on Earth remained within a sufficiently steady range of values 
to persist metastably, neither imploding nor dissipating.
In the social sciences, arguments in favor of deliberate entrenchment 
often explicitly claim that the default stability of existing human conditions 
and institutions is precarious and in need of reinforcement. For example, 
family and social structures might need stabilization to ensure the commu­
nity’s emotional resilience and mental health. If a system’s governing con­
straints are not strong enough, decoherence and disintegration threaten; its 
viability as that entity might not hold. Hence the appeal of entrenchment.
Deliberate entrenchment might begin with damping, which even in the 
prebiotic realm limits natural fluctuations and prevents runaway accel­
eration, always a possibility given the role of positive feedback loops 
in generating coordination dynamics. Negative feedback damps fluctua­
tions; it diminishes the potential for runaway acceleration by reducing the 
amplitude of oscillations and the speed of feedback loops. Think shock 
absorbers, both economic and automotive. Damping is a constraint that 
prevents systems from getting too close to a threshold of instability. In 
situations where systems might be at risk if they relied only their default 
rules of change, reinforcing stability through the added constraint of 
damping might make all the difference in keeping them whole.
As we saw, in biochemistry buffering properties of chemical solutions 
allow some enzymes to continue to function. In human populations, 
Old Order Amish practices might have decohered and disintegrated 
had the group mixed with the general population. Entrenching religious 
and cultural constraints through the practices of shunning and isolat­
ing the population from interactions with the general culture might have 
been deemed necessary to the group’s survival. All of these are damping 
constraints.
The long-­term drawback of damped, buffered, and isolated systems 
is that these might remain viable only while damped, buffered, and iso­
lated. Their long-­term persistence is purchased at the price of staying 
same, same, same in the near term. Rigid varieties of entrenchment there­
fore usually provide only short-­term solutions; if those added constraints 
were relaxed, disintegration might quickly follow.
*
*
*
The value of entrenching constraints deliberately to preserve a system’s 
coherence is another matter. Arguments over the value of entrenchment 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

148    Chapter 10
itself are often based on the presupposition that the system in need of 
reinforcement is already valuable. In the social sciences, however, argu­
ments for deliberate entrenchment as a general principle are sometimes 
premised, not on entrenchment’s preservation of valuable emergent prop­
erties, but on the idea that stability as such is valuable and desirable. 
Retaining the U.S. Electoral College is often defended on those grounds.
Arguments defending stability as such can rationalize and even conceal 
their proponents’ real goals. Economic and social inequalities everywhere 
tend to rely on constraints that are self-­reinforcing: constraint regimes 
of existing economic and social spaces self-­reinforce through entrenched 
constraints that increase the likelihood that the existing dynamic will 
endure. Restrictions to voting access are another pernicious contemporary 
example of constraints that entrench inequalities. Aside from the obvious 
ethical objections to such practices, an often-­unrecognized consequence 
of extreme entrenchment is that, however much it might preserve current 
stability, it tends to inflexibility. The system becomes unresponsive to its 
inevitably changing context, its needs, and its long-­term interests. In the 
extreme, freezing constraints in place makes interdependencies fragile 
and brittle by restricting possibility space to one token realization. Crys­
tals are orderly structures, but they are brittle and cannot adapt or evolve. 
Here too, implications for public policy are evident.
The golden mean between stability and locking up therefore requires 
a variety of constraint that simultaneously preserves coherence and con­
trols for flexible metastability.
Varieties of Entrenchment
Wimsatt (2001, 2007, and in Caporael, Griesemer, and Wimsatt 2010) 
and Barber (2016) describe varieties of deliberate entrenchment to 
preserve social coherence. These varieties differ depending on whether 
entrenchment is conditioned on (1) the length of time that the entrench­
ment is constrained to last, (2) the units covered by the entrenchment 
rule, and (3) the form or manner of the entrenchment rule.
TIME. The length of the period during which entrenchment is active 
and the units to which its constraints apply describe the entrenchment’s 
reach. A shorter time constraint allows greater turnover. In contrast, the 
reach or scope of generation-­skipping inheritance trusts can govern benefi­
ciaries for a longer period than ordinary Last Wills and Testaments.
Time entrenchment preserves the status quo. Requiring that a given 
process spend more time in a certain state, slowing down modifications 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

Sedimentation and Entrenchment    149
in certain circumstances by adding wait times before change can begin, or 
even introducing a waiting period between the submission of a proposal 
and a decision, or between a decision and the start of its implementa­
tion, are all examples of temporal, entrenching constraints. As examples, 
in recent decades, jurisdictions in the United States removed provisions 
in divorce laws that required a yearlong delay between a petition of 
divorce and the actual granting of the decree. Before the Dobbs decision 
that overturned Roe v. Wade, several states introduced constraints that 
delayed access to abortion by requiring a consultation period, parental 
permission, and sonograms. The U.S. Senate’s filibuster rule was likewise 
designed to delay a vote on a resolution or a bill. Such changes in tempo­
ral constraints can have significant consequences.
UNIT. Entrenchment provisions can also increase or reduce the 
numbers of units governed by the entrenchment. The scope of the U.S. 
Navy Secretary’s authority is broader than that of a battleship com­
mander. Orders from the former apply to many more individuals than 
the latter. The U.S. Navy Secretary’s authority also has greater depth: 
it reaches more layers of organization (fleets, battle groups, task forces, 
etc.) than a platoon leader’s authority. Layers of organization will be dis­
cussed in the chapter on hierarchy formation.
Taken to extremes, context dependence has the potential to overfit, 
which renders systems brittle; they become extraordinarily fit, but in 
only in one context, for one unit. Entrenchment, in other words, tends 
to render systems unresponsive to changes in context. Overarching and 
overlapping regimes of enabling and governing constraints can balance 
entrenchment and context-­dependence by applying to different units.
In the political arena, entrenchment rules can protect entire regions 
and institutions (as units) from encroachment. The U.S. Electoral College 
just mentioned is an entrenchment measure ostensibly intended to protect 
low-­population regions. It is now reasonable to ask, however, whether 
the context in which that entrenching rule was meaningful has changed 
sufficiently since 1787 to make it no longer fit for purpose.
Requiring a supermajority on votes to limit the likelihood of a bill’s 
passage in the U.S. Congress was a different form of entrenchment, 
one aimed at protecting precarious but existing conditions against 
non-­overwhelming opposition; since then, political polarization has 
changed the context so much that the provision nowadays primarily 
reinforces partisanship, that is, the isolation of the two main politi­
cal units (the Democratic and Republican parties). Whether the U.S. 
Senate’s filibuster and supermajority requirements have outlived their 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

150    Chapter 10
stabilizing benefits is a timely question that highlights the entrenching 
potential of constraints.
FORM. This variety of entrenchment refers to the way entrenchment 
rules are made public. Some constraints entrench more transparently or 
tacitly depending on the form or manner in which they are made known. 
As a case in point, federal rules and regulations remain conditioned 
on their formal basis: maritime and administrative regulations cannot 
supersede the Constitution, for example. The form in which constraints 
are established can also determine not only the rates and extent of the 
entrenchment but also the scope of the general principles in terms of 
which the entrenchment will be governed: “keeping the sea lanes open” 
describes a narrower scope than “all men are created equal.”
The form or manner of publication of social norms often refers to 
their manner of dissemination. It can be expressed or tacit, for example. 
Expressly codified laws such as those governing hate speech may or may 
not last longer than tacit social norms, which are often highly effective 
mechanisms of entrenchment despite their unspoken character. Only 
those in the know might understand how tacit constraints work and 
therefore how to circumvent them to their benefit (Bourdieu 1977, 1986; 
Di Paolo et al. 2017). Those who lack that knowhow are often easily 
barred from education and other forms of social capital. Explicit rules, in 
contrast, have the advantage of transparency (Di Paolo 2017).
Entrenched constraints can crosscut categories. Crosscutting con­
straints can entrench practices and conditions across multiple time scales 
and spatial regions. Self-­imposed forms of entrenchment often serve that 
purpose. Irrevocable trusts mentioned earlier constrain successors long 
term: the further reach of their provisions significantly extends the dura­
tion of their governing constraints as well as the units subject to those 
constraints. If the trust also controls the distribution of estate funds, it can 
simultaneously protect and thwart profligate heirs, for whom those con­
straints become context-­independent constants, for instance.
In some cases, self-­imposed constraints freeze current conditions 
by barring future modifications; this can occur when self-­embracing 
entrenchment provisions incorporate meta or second-­order constraints 
that control how first-­order constraints can be altered. In a process that 
recalls the strange loops of constraint closure, this form of entrenchment 
can be set up by defining the default rules of the system recursively to 
include procedures by which the rules can be changed. Creating entrench­
ment rules that are revocable or amendable is one form of self-­embracing 
entrenchment that guards against excessive inflexibility and overfitting; 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

Sedimentation and Entrenchment    151
it also protects the capacity to evolve while at the same time safeguard­
ing systemic stability against short-­term perturbations. Clauses in the U.S. 
Constitution spell out the exact procedures by which amendments can 
be added. Sunset laws and government in the sunshine laws are yet other 
examples of self-­embracing, revocable constraints. Each of these repre­
sents different degrees of stringency and contributes to different degrees 
of flexibility.
Different varieties of entrenchment facilitate different forms and degrees 
of stability. Evolvability, the capacity to evolve, is incompatible with 
extreme entrenchment, and freezing undercuts resilience. Some entrenched 
constraints are intended to fix the minimal degree of stability that ensures 
viability. In the political realm, the Bill of Rights served that purpose, as 
did the Interstate Commerce and Freedom of Movement clauses in the 
1787 U.S. Constitution (Article 1, Section 8 and Article 4, respectively). 
These provided entrenching constraints that protected the young nation 
from disintegration into separate countries.
Minimal stability underpins robustness. But preserving minimal stabil­
ity alone often will not suffice if long-­term persistence in the face of more 
severe perturbations is not addressed. Additional amendments over and 
beyond the Bill of Rights became necessary to adapt to changing times. 
Evolvability, in other words, requires ongoing constraints that actively 
promote resilience, the capacity to survive by adapting. That is, evolv­
ability requires specific and ongoing constraints that allow the initial con­
straints to adapt.
In other words, constraints that not only underpin minimal stability 
but also promote resilience become necessary. This new sort of constraint 
has been called generative entrenchment (Barber 2016; Wimsatt 1986, 
2001).
Generative Entrenchment
Complex systems might become paralyzed by the multidimensional, multi­
scale demands imposed by enabling and governing constraints. Coordina­
tion becomes impossible. In contrast to redundancy, which aims to secure 
fail-­safe conditions and prevent failure altogether (an impossibility in a 
complex world), generative entrenchment instead offers safe-­to-­fail insur­
ance by enabling resilience, the ability to cope with local perturbations, 
fluctuations, and other insults (Juarrero 1991) through self-­modification. 
This capability requires the golden mean constraint mentioned earlier: 
constraints that ensure minimal stability of fundamental constraints 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

152    Chapter 10
while simultaneously promoting long-­term flexibility. The resilience such 
a constraint would confer on token and type alike would greatly enhance 
evolvability, the capacity to evolve.
One way generative entrenchment accomplishes this is through dif­
ferentially expressed constraints, temporal constraints that activate dif­
ferentially, in sequence, conditional upon timing and context. Generative 
entrenchment, for example, might impose rigid constraints early on in a 
long process while supporting more flexible downstream constraints that 
open new options and facilitate new interdependencies.
Consider the following example. Epigenetic disruptions such as trauma 
or starvation early in pregnancy often cause miscarriages. Generatively 
entrenched developmental constraints protect against that scenario by 
imposing stringent context-­independent constraints early in gestation; these 
ensure that the fundamental structure of the phyla’s morphological fea­
tures (its basic radial or bilaterally symmetrical body plan, for example), is 
strictly satisfied. Once that bauplan is secured, those inflexible constraints 
relax and others more responsive to current context are enabled. Muta­
tions and epigenetic influences later in developmental processes are often 
not seriously deleterious; indeed, it can be argued that the flexibility sup­
ported downstream during ontogenesis allows phenotypic possibility space 
to be explored and new structural and behavioral variations to be generated 
(Wagner 2014). Generative entrenchment thus narrows and even closes off 
options altogether early in a diachronically constrained dynamic while 
simultaneously facilitating unanticipated interactions and other enabling 
constraints to appear and operate downstream. The process makes room 
for flexibility, but ensures it only happens downstream.
Viewed at short range, generative entrenchment might appear to be 
a fragile strategy because “any attempt to change [constraints early in 
the process] leads to the collapse of existing structures that depend on it, 
so modifications don’t survive” (Wimsatt 2007, 134). In the long term, 
however, differentially expressed constraint regimes that enact generative 
entrenchment are self-­ratcheting mechanisms that promote resilience. 
Once each stage stabilizes, the system can explore and contextually probe 
local and current possibility space without running the risk of spinning 
out of control or falling apart. The activation of more relaxed constraints 
downstream then allows local and more timely constraints to construct 
new coherences and niches with emergent properties and powers—­as the 
current context affords. Generative entrenchment recalls Lila Gatlin’s 
(1972) thesis about vertebrates figuring out how to stabilize some con­
straints while allowing others to evolve.
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

Sedimentation and Entrenchment    153
Differentially implemented and generatively entrenching constraints 
underpin robustness and dynamic stability (Wimsatt 2007, 134–­135). 
They underpin evolvability, in other words. They promote robustness and 
resilience through the spatiotemporally differential activation and inhi­
bition of enabling and governing constraints, as the occasion requires. 
Think cooptation in prairie grassland ecosystems and in the metagenet­
ics of the gut microbiome. Generative entrenchment can  accommodate 
Stuart Kauffman’s (2014) “unprestatable” contingencies while staying 
true to type. It can also account for exaptations, which are not the 
outcome of mutations; they are functional properties that emerge as a 
newly coherent dynamic generated by contextual constraints operating 
in a different context, at a different moment in time. Stephen Jay Gould’s 
spandrels of San Marco (Gould and Lewontin 1979) configure the pos­
sibility space for a beautiful new artform to emerge even as entrenchment 
ensures the dome does not collapse.
Generative Entrenchment of Validated Constraints
A stronger and more significant argument for not only the persistence 
but also the growing spread of generative entrenchment in living things is 
that its constraints tend to stabilize only those emergent forms of coher­
ence that represent validated evolutionary transitions (Wimsatt 2007). In 
its capacity as aide-­mémoire, generative entrenchment recalls the origi­
nal reason for entrenchment and reaffirms the value of the entrenched 
(Wimsatt 2007).
The value of generative entrenchment, therefore, is that only those 
processes, constraints, and dynamics that have been validated as enabling 
and sustaining the capacity to evolve become generatively entrenched 
(Wimsatt 2007; Kirchner and Gerhart 2005). Only constraints that gener­
ate and maintain resilience become predominant over time—­because only 
validated forms of coherence are resilient and self-­reinforce evolvability.
In short, the capacity to evolve is likely to be conditional in no small 
measure on generatively entrenching forms of self-­constraint.
Stated otherwise, constraints become generatively entrenched only if 
they support resilience. Resilience confers selective advantage thanks to 
its capacity to persist as a coherent unit across a wide range of circum­
stances and to evolve over longer periods of time. The ratcheting charac­
ter of resilience, however, requires a generative and differentially activated 
constraint regime. Acting as a constant, such a constraint regime ensures 
minimal survival upstream while simultaneously relaxing restrictions on 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

154    Chapter 10
realizable possibility space downstream in response to more local and 
timely context-­dependent constraints. Generatively entrenching constraints 
are therefore responsive to context and support evolvability even as they 
underpin continuing coherence. Together, the constraints embodied in the 
genome and epigenome satisfy these requirements.
A central conclusion of this work is that, together with its emergent 
capacity for top-­down analog control (to be discussed in next chapter), 
coherence-­making through contextual constraints is a validated evolu­
tionary innovation that became generatively entrenched (recursively) 
because of its contribution not just to persistence but, actively, to resil­
ience and evolvability. Ensuring minimal stability while simultaneously 
opening future possibilities conditional on context is among the cosmos’s 
more recently evolved varieties of constrained coherence-­making.
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

Phase changes from separate and independent entities to coherent dynam­
ics are sometimes described as discontinuous Set-­to-­Superset (Grobstein 
1973) or Many-­to-­One transitions (Patten and Auble 1980). As reviewed 
in earlier chapters, catalysts and feedback loops, recursion, iteration, 
and various forms of closure are enabling constraints that induce such 
symmetry breaks. This chapter makes three key points: (1) Coherence-­
making by constraints brings about Many-­to-­One transformations. 
These Ones are the coordination patterns we have called interactional 
types. (2) Interactional types are emergent dynamics characterized by 
continuous properties. (3) Because continuous properties take a range of 
values, they support a new form of “causation”: analog processing and 
output control.
Integration, coordination, and streamlining intertwine separate enti­
ties into continuous dynamics. Synchronization, resonance, alignment, 
entrainment, phase-­locking, homeostasis, and other forms of metastable 
coherent dynamics are the products of enabling constraints that smooth 
separate and independent flows of energy into continuous configurations 
dilated in time and space. Coordination dynamics are the outcome of 
constrained interdependencies and are enacted as streamlined energy 
flows. From the physical, through the physicochemical, to living things, 
ecosystems, and social organizations, different constraints, implemented 
differently, result in different types of continuous relations with qualita­
tively novel emergent properties and behavior.
In nonscientific contexts, the concept of parameters refers to the col­
lective properties of such complex dynamics. These include vorticity, 
frequency, and different forms of metastability described earlier. Social 
parameters include social cohesion and economic equality. The Gini coef­
ficient, for example, measures the inequality in a society’s income dis­
tribution. Phase transitions from many-­disparate-­to-­coherent-­Ones can 
be considered discontinuous transitions to new possibility spaces—­new 
11
Many-­to-­One Transitions, Effective 
and Analog Control
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

156    Chapter 11
topologies—­that are characterized by novel and continuous parameters. 
Values at one level become variables in the next.
Order parameters best describe such systems. These are relatively low-­
dimensional variables that capture the significant emergent properties of 
those new interdependencies. Order parameters measure, for example, the 
degree of cohesion of a system’s interdependencies, a continuous prop­
erty that is qualitatively distinct from properties of the relata separately. 
Order here refers to the degree of coupling and mutual dependencies 
among a system’s components. Degrees of synchrony and metachrony, 
for instance, represent different interdependencies and, as a result, dif­
ferent degrees of coherence. As soldiers’ marching illustrates, intensity 
and relative phase correspond to degree of coherence. Partial synchrony 
reflects incomplete coherence; social polarization describes its almost 
total absence. Judges of synchronized swimming competitions evaluate 
performance in reference to such order parameters.
The discussion about self-­simplification in chapter 7 proposed that 
terms like social capital and economic development are not mere simplifi­
cations that discard detail for epistemic convenience. The collective prop­
erties, order parameters, and governing constraints of those emergent 
Ones are qualitatively distinct relational properties that differ from those 
of the many separate individuals that constitute the interdependencies. 
Seen through the lens of complexity theory, terms like homeostasis and 
social capital encode high-­dimensional data into intertwined and lower-­
dimensional constants. They are therefore best understood as “variables 
of a lower dimensional state space” that encode order parameters of real 
interdependencies formed by enabling constraints (Hinton and Salakhut­
dinov 2006. Also see chapter 15).
In living things, Many-­to-­One transitions are uncontroversial. Signals 
impinging on living things are calibrated and filtered in terms of order 
parameters that represent the organism’s integrity (its coherence) as well as 
how well those signals fit its current habitat or niche. Consequently, organ­
isms do not respond in the same way to the same physical input; different 
physical inputs can elicit the same output. To illustrate, interoceptive as well 
as sensory signals are adjusted by allostatic mechanisms1 with reference to 
parameters pertaining to viability and health, given those circumstances. 
In consequence, different metabolic and endocrinological processes reca­
librate and reset such that they continue to support the organism’s order 
parameters of viability and health, adaptability and evolvability.
Allostatic mechanisms, in other words, are governed by constraints 
that select, discard, harmonize, and calibrate processes such that they 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

Many-­to-­One Transitions, Effective and Analog Control    157
satisfy the multiple constraints set by overarching order parameters, 
which were in turn generated by enabling constraints. Combined, the 
multiple constraints of those parameters set the conditions of satisfac­
tion for the token realizations. Moment to moment, circumstance by cir­
cumstance, coordination dynamics that constitute homeostasis adjust the 
probability distribution of the relevant variables with a view to realizing 
the range of values that represent viability and health. Selection and inter­
pretation describe this multilayered process of multiple constraint satisfac­
tion. Timing, amplitude, activation, suppression, and so on of the various 
variables are recoded, recalibrated, and reset in real time in reference to the 
organism’s order parameters. Stated otherwise: governing constraints of 
homeostasis and allostasis tune and select signals with reference to metrics 
pertaining to the system’s overall order parameters, metastability and 
viability: “The [biological system] has in effect produced a Many-­to-­one 
input-­output function by reinterpreting the signals from its environment. 
That is, the [system] has made a model of effective (phenomenal) input Zt 
from potential (physical) input Z′t, based on its state at time t” (Patten 
and Auble 1980, 161; emphasis added).
For Patten and Auble, Many-­to-­One transitions in living things 
involve reinterpreting physical signals in terms of a model. Analogously, 
Pattee (1972a, 1982) describes effective output as response in terms of 
an abstraction. As mentioned earlier, the ability of living things to “sta­
tistically classify” in this way motivated the new field of biosemiotics, of 
which Pattee was a founding member.
What Patten and Auble call effective inputs and Pattee calls an abstrac­
tion are therefore raw physical signals recoded as variables that matter 
for those living things at that moment, to paraphrase South African cos­
mologist and Templeton award winner G. F. R. Ellis (2016, 2021). Trans­
forming physical signals into effective input is a process of contextual 
selection carried out with reference to a coherent set of interdependencies 
and affordances. Early English settlers on the American continent, for 
example, did not perceive large tree trunks as affording house building; 
only milled wood planks functioned as effective input. Scandinavian set­
tlers, in contrast, readily perceived whole logs as affordances for resi­
dential construction. Like habitats, such emergent affordances (Gibson 
1975) represent indexical properties that, as effective input, implicate the 
entire ecology in which signal and subject are embedded.
Order parameters thus describe the interdependencies and govern­
ing constraints of the encompassing One (the organism’s overarching 
constraint regime) they characterize. The organism’s effective input and 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

158    Chapter 11
output are tuned, not to a signal’s physical features alone, but to the 
organism’s constitutive constraints and in the service of their collective 
properties and order parameters. In other words, organisms register 
internal and external signals as recoded in terms of their contribution to 
the emergent properties of the organism’s overarching constraint regime. 
Processing information by recoding signals into self-­organized continu­
ous variables in this manner consumes less energy than digitally process­
ing each separate and individual raw physical signal every time. It is also 
more noise tolerant.
Brain development illustrates this pattern. In infancy, developmental 
constraints prune previously jumbled neurons into complex and stream­
lined networks. As depicted in Fig. 4.1, infants learn to walk in response 
to a combination of constraints, primarily gravity and the child’s 
increased weight. The consequence of such multiple constraint satisfac­
tion is that the infant’s jerky flailing becomes coordinated into a tod­
dler’s stepping pattern, characterized by new properties and powers. The 
new dynamic also shows lowered rates of internal entropy production 
(Thelen and Smith 1994). The emergent coordinated stepping pattern is 
thus the outcome of a phase transition from separate and uncorrelated 
jerky arhythmic movements to coordinated and rhythmic walking. Coor­
dinated and smooth walking enact the continuous order parameters of 
this new dynamic. All in response to constraints, in satisfaction of the 
second law.
We can conclude that coherence-­making generally is the generation 
of such Many-­to-­One functions. Fixed discrete relationships at one level 
become systemwide and continuous variables at the next integrative level 
(Allen and Starr 1982, 241). Coherence making thus brings into being a 
novel coherent One that must now be mapped in a relational, parametrized 
space. These relational properties, parameters, and powers are real and 
effective; they are not just the sum of internal primary properties. They 
represent novel relational constraints that matter for the system’s metasta­
bility and viability, and they exert their influence as constraints, not force­
ful impacts.
*
*
*
This work has repeatedly emphasized that Many-­to-­One phase transi­
tions have precursors in the abiotic realm. Many-­to-­One transformations 
generally integrate separate and discrete entities into generic and con­
tinuous, streamlined dynamics. Such transitions take place even among 
organisms in different kingdoms. Lichens are coherent Ones that emerge 
from the interdependence of algae and fungi. Even in the abiotic realm, 
streamlining and recalibrating in terms of order parameters results in more 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

Many-­to-­One Transitions, Effective and Analog Control    159
energy efficient and noise-­tolerant metastability. We have described it in 
convection cells, laser beams, and BZ reactions.
It is hard to believe that exactly what covalent bonds are, and how 
they form remains controversial to this day. Molecular orbitals depend on 
covalent bonds between their constituent atoms. One theory maintains 
that covalent bonds are constituted as constructive interference patterns 
between atomic orbitals (Nordholm and Bacskay 2020). Iterated resonance 
integrates the initially separate reverberations and oscillations of atomic 
orbitals into expanded patterns of constructive interference, the novel 
and coherent coordination dynamic we know as molecular orbits. Once 
entrained into this more encompassing dynamic, the motions of erstwhile 
separate components align in the service of the new collective dynamic. 
Rephrased, covalent bonds are coarsened interfaces of a more encompass­
ing, contextually constrained attractor or energetic pathway. Emergent 
Ones like these, whose continuous properties embody a distinct constraint 
regime, define a new domain, with new types, properties, and powers. 
Viewed through this lens, molecular orbitals are streamlined smoothings of 
the atomic orbitals of which they are composed. The order parameters 
of molecular orbitals control, top down, the behavior of their component 
atoms.
Analogous Many-­to-­One transformations also occur in social and 
ecological relations. In human organizations, enabling constraints such 
as bonding, bridging, and linking together of individuals and groups gen­
erate mutually constrained and constraining interdependencies that, as 
emergent Ones, constitute social networks, social norms, and social trust, 
each a new collective variable with its own set of order parameters. In 
turn, the degree of coherence among social networks, norms, and trust 
underpins distinct levels of systemwide social cohesion, economic devel­
opment, ethnic and racial tension, and social capital. Each of these terms 
compresses ever more complex interdependencies and order parameters 
formed by constrained interactions among the lower-­level processes; 
each also describes a higher-­level coordination dynamic, with novel and 
significant properties and powers. In each case, the new contextually 
constrained and contextually generated configurations reduce rates of 
internal entropy production while allowing energy to flow more easily 
overall. Many-­to-­One transformations everywhere are nature’s way of 
streamlining through coherence-­making by constraints, once again in sat­
isfaction of the second law.
Described as ecological fitting in the biotic realm, constraints adjust and 
integrate living things to their current environment—­in light of their past, 
as the occasion requires. They generalize by creating more encompassing 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

160    Chapter 11
constraint regimes. Intertwining and smoothing over disparate energy 
streams into shared coordination dynamics creates biological habitats 
and niches as well as molecules, each with emergent continuous proper­
ties. In each case, interfaces between entity and context coadjust input 
and output to the coherence of the extended, metastable dynamics.
The more complex the life cycle, the more overlapping and multidi­
mensional the constraint regime and the more expansive the possibility 
space, the more complex that emergent One becomes. Social animals like 
bees and primates process more complex information than simple, non­
social organisms, but all complex systems, abiotic and biotic alike, con­
tinuously generate and enact analogous interdependencies. Our failure to 
understand mereology is one reason why we have remained ignorant of 
the complex coherence of mycorrhizae, the symbiotic association between 
fungi and plants.
“Ecological contexts, for example, become synchronized with devel­
opment and reproductive activities,” states North American parasitolo­
gist Daniel Brooks (email communication 2021). He illustrates: Crithidia 
are parasites that ordinarily live in plant tissues. Because the intestines 
of plant-­feeding insects contain plant juices, they represent an overlap­
ping habitat2 with the original plant-­feeding Crithidia. Sufficient overlap 
between the constraint regimes of plant tissue and insect intestines 
allowed Crithidia to jump the gap to plant-­feeding insects themselves. 
Constraint overlap enables a novel set of interdependencies—­in this case, 
an expanded Crithidia–­insect niche or habitat.
In a process reminiscent of causal closure, strange loop-­like mereologi­
cal relations like these constitute and realize complex, multiscale inter­
twinings: in this case, the parasites circulate between the plants and the 
plant-­sucking insects. Are the plants an extension of the insect gut or does 
the insect gut represent an extension of the plant (Brooks, personal email 
communication 2021)?
As we saw earlier, by putting out meristems, grasses effectively coarse 
code and smooth over criteria for signal integration and coordination into 
a broader set of constrained interdependencies, with new order parame­
ters. Doing so generates a new Many-­to-­One function, a new interactional 
type. An analogous process can be described for chaparral, the oil-­laden 
succulent prone to burning (Allen and Starr 1982). Far from destroying 
an ecosystem, chaparral brush fires clear out the underbrush. (Note that 
chaparral does not bring about change as efficient cause: chaparral does 
not actively start, quench, or block fires.) By providing a path along which 
energy can flow more easily, chaparral instead facilitates the eruption of 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

Many-­to-­One Transitions, Effective and Analog Control    161
small brushfires; these occur more frequently thanks to chaparral’s oily 
composition. Critically, far fewer large and destructive wildfires break 
out as a result. Eventually, the enabling constraint provided by the pres­
ence of chaparral becomes integrated into the constitutive and governing 
constraint regime of a more metastable One—­in this case, an expanded 
ecosystem with new longer-­term generative properties that the earlier eco­
system lacked. The change occurs thanks not to efficient causes, but to 
effective input–­output relations generated by constraints.
It is not too farfetched, I submit, to note in this connection that the pos­
sibility space of interdependencies that define parenthood have likewise 
coarse-­grained in recent years, from an interface defined by bloodline-­
based criteria to one that is caring based—­a Many-­to-­One transfor­
mation like the Crithidia and chaparral examples. As constitutive and 
governing constraints of the interfaces between a society and its context 
become more coarse-­grained in response to more encompassing enabling 
constraints, affect and caregiving became parameters that “matter” as 
much as blood. A more encompassing set of interlocking constraints and 
interdependencies between biological parents and other childcare-­givers 
formed. These constitutive constraints underpin new order parameters 
and distinct metrics that now matter. Epistemic models and social regula­
tions change accordingly in response to these more encompassing and 
coherent interdependencies.
In sum, Many-­to-­One transitions in abiotic and biotic domains alike 
reshape possibility landscapes by extending the scope and reach of coordi­
nation dynamics, along with establishing new governing constraints and 
order parameters—­all in response to the workings of enabling, context-­
dependent constraints against a backdrop of context-­independent con­
straints. By coarsening the gating criteria of the interface between the 
original grasslands’ niche and horses, between Crithidia’s original plant-­
hosted niche and insects, between two atomic orbitals, or even between 
the relationships between adults and children, novel interdependencies, 
parameters, variables, and values continuously adjust such that their new 
and overarching constraints are simultaneously satisfied. A more expan­
sive One—­and more metastable domain—coheres. As a new identity that 
is more robust, multiply realizable, resilient, and persistent colaesces, the 
possibility landscape becomes more individuated and rugged.
Patten and Auble and Pattee’s notion of phenomenal experience as an 
interpretive model or abstraction can therefore be generalized as follows: 
models and other abstractions such as order parameters represent con­
straint regimes that filter, code, and calibrate internal as well as incoming 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

162    Chapter 11
signals in terms of systemwide and continuous relations of dependence. 
Those constraint architectures not only establish entry points into the 
existing dynamic; because they are contextually constrained, their order 
parameters also recalibrate and are recalibrated by and with each new set 
of signals and outputs. Consequently, the system’s overarching constraint 
regime’s architecture and order parameters continuously reconfigure and 
persist—as the constitutive and governing constraints that matter. Processes 
covary such that the constraint regime remains locked in to real-world dis­
tinctions and therefore persists.
Phase transitions from separate manys to coordination dynamics 
that are streamlined and smoothed coherent Ones—­epistemically or 
ontologically—­are therefore forms of generalization (Dean, personal 
email, 2021). Contextual constraints in open systems far from equilibrium 
generate new equivalence classes (Ellis 2016, 2021) with novel powers 
of top-­down control. Public policy, for example, represents a society’s 
recoding of individual events and processes into a coherent constraint 
regime of equivalence classes that matter to that society. Its constitutive 
and governing constraints are implemented through interfaces such as 
codes and rules that make sense of the overarching policy in context: 
they recode, filter, and translate signals (such as actual rates of immigra­
tion) in terms of the culture’s existing social and economic networks, its 
norms, and levels of trust. Translated into laws and regulations, these 
represent the society’s constitutive and governing constraints; they effec­
tively establish the variables that matter to it and that control its actions, 
top down, such as to maintain and preserve its existing constraint regime.
Effective input to any coherent dynamic therefore occurs when inter­
nal and external signals are calibrated and tuned to the order parameters 
of a set of interdependencies, current or anticipated. Those interdepen­
dencies sift, filter, calibrate, and harmonize incoming signals, entities, and 
processes with reference to their capacity for integration into the existing 
order parameters; effective inputs and outputs then covary with respect 
to those order parameters. This Many-­to-­One recoding occurs in syn­
chronized dynamics, constructive interference patterns, habitats, cultures, 
and interpretive frameworks. Accordingly, input must be standardized, 
transduced, and harmonized—­recoded—­for inclusion and selection in 
light of the dynamic’s interdependencies. Seen through this lens, Many-­
to-­One transformations predate the origin of life. They are the outcomes 
of constraint that harmonize and streamline energy flow by integrating 
spatiotemporal processes into context-­dependent coordination dynam­
ics characterized by continuous variables. When not only “stability” and 
“homeostasis,” but also “value, ethics, and morals” (Artigiani 2021) 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

Many-­to-­One Transitions, Effective and Analog Control    163
become the interdependencies that matter, ensuing behavior is more sen­
sitive to social context. Most important of all, the actions governed by 
those constitutive constraints will enact the novel emergent properties 
of those social parameters. Context- and path-dependent systems with 
emergent properties with the capacity for top-­down control show that 
a reductionist approach will ultimately fail. Patterns of interwoven con­
straints cut the world along a different set of joints.3 Actually navigating 
a reorganized space requires that organisms process the enabling and 
governing constraints that sculpt the transformed topology’s new attrac­
tors and specify its transition and selection rules. Epistemically, in other 
words, finding one’s bearings in a newly reconfigured or reconfiguring 
topological space is inevitably a process of sense-making through narra­
tive (Snowden 2015) and hermeneutics (Juarrero 1999).
*
*
*
Setting the gating criteria of more expansive (coarsened) interfaces in 
terms of new codes facilitates Many-­to-­One transitions. A code is a 
set of instructions or rules (constraints) that translates or transduces 
signals into a different format. Individual signals on one “side” of an 
interface are recoded into the format of the integrative dynamics on the 
“other side.” The genetic code, for example, translates molecular struc­
ture into biological function. Recent neuroscience experiments described 
in chapter 15 show how the cortex of macaque monkeys recodes indi­
vidual neuron responses into continuous waveforms of invariant phase 
and amplitude. Chemistry, too, is a new code that transduces physical 
entities into novel interdependencies with continuous properties. Like­
wise, values, ethics, and morals are evolutionarily recent codes that do 
the same. They translate and integrate signals in terms of the constraint 
regimes and order para­meters of human social organizations (Artigiani 
2021)—­which embody the variables that matter to a culture. This book 
has emphasized physicochemical and straightforwardly thermodynamic 
processes only to drive home the work’s goal of naturalizing metaphysics; 
the principles are meant to generalize to living things overall and human 
beings in particular.
Tagging Emergent Properties
Evolving interfaces that operate according to new codes facilitates 
multimodal and multidimensional integration and provides survival 
advantage. Many-­to-­One transitions recode signals as integrated and 
continuous relations. For social organizations, survival advantage is 
implemented in terms of emergent systemwide properties. Accordingly, 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

164    Chapter 11
criteria for group selection refer to patterns of behavior that contribute to 
the group’s survival and metastability, given the overall society in which 
that group operates. This section of the chapter will hypothesize that in 
the case of sentient beings, tagging the recoded integration as emergent 
phenomenal properties and then acting in response to those tags con­
siderably improves the organism’s effective decision-­making and action. 
The sequence might go as follows: Many-­to-­One codes facilitate phase 
transitions that integrate a coordination dynamic with novel properties. 
Tagging those emergent relational and continuous properties as feels 
(qualia), phenomenal images, and ethical norms would significantly con­
tribute to more effective decision-­making and actions for the organism as 
a member of society. Effective input and output newly coded and tagged 
in this manner would enhance metastability.
*
*
*
Many of the brain structures in the limbic system such as the amygdala 
(anatomical association nodes that integrate information from a variety of 
sources) translate incoming signals in terms of new codes. What would such 
codes look like? They begin, arguably, with the code of valence (Damasio 
2021). The limbic system in general integrates and recodes separate streams 
of information as valence, as the “positive or negative appraisal” of the 
effects of integration; henceforth, this evaluative parameter becomes the 
variable that matters.
I propose that tagging those axiological parameters as qualitative 
feels (qualia) further enhances effective decision-­making and behavioral 
control. Faster and more energy efficient to process, valence-­encoded dynam­
ics tagged as qualitatively distinct sensations would streamline energy flow 
and also satisfy the second law.
Complex contextual considerations recoded in terms of valence and 
perceived as feels, for example, can quickly reinterpret and transform an 
enjoyable friendly tickle to the negative experience of a perceived assault. 
Integrated information about the sources and meaning of particular experi­
ences, recoded and tagged as qualia, can transmit multimodal information 
about complex current conditions much faster and more comprehensively 
than cognitive processing alone. The faint sound of a doorknob turning 
unexpectedly at 4 a.m. will elicit the gut feeling of danger and awaken us 
when loud but regular airplane noise overhead does not. The emergent 
properties and constraint regime of the perception of danger are multiply 
realizable and continuous; they integrate factual, sensory, and evaluative 
aspects of an experience. Since continuous properties are noise tolerant, 
false positives are always possible, but overall, one can hypothesize that 
the benefits in terms of metastability would outweigh the negatives.
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

Many-­to-­One Transitions, Effective and Analog Control    165
In addition to the amygdala, the brain’s anterior cingulate cortex, thal­
amus, and insula also recode a combination of past records and current 
stimuli. The resulting continuous properties of that smoothed and stream­
lined dynamic likewise become tagged as varieties of negative qualia, fear, 
anger, or pain. In parallel, the ventral tegmentum on the floor of the mid­
brain and the nucleus accumbens, a region in the basal forebrain, recode 
stimuli in terms of positive valence (Damasio 2021) and tag the result 
phenomenally as, say, pleasurable, flavorful, or fragrant.
Next, top-­down control governed directly by qualia and phenomenal 
properties further facilitates decision-­making and action. That is, directly 
integrating these phenomenal tags with motor activation or inhibition 
centers further improves decision-­making and output control mechanisms 
for action. In this fashion, putrid odors link to regions of motor control 
to produce action; the feeling of fear is inextricably intertwined with the 
propensity for flight behavior. That is, behavior appropriate to a par­
ticular valence—­fight or flight, avoid or approach—­follows quickly and 
directly from such recoding, integration, and phenomenal tagging, tied 
to motor control. But only at this moment, under these conditions, given 
this history.
It is reasonable to hypothesize, therefore, that from Many-­to-­One tran­
sitions to continuous type-­level properties there evolved in living things 
a new form of selection and behavioral control that is implemented 
with direct reference to qualitative feels and phenomenal awareness. For 
example, decision-­making and action (1) carried out in reference to a con­
tinuous parameter, danger; (2) tagged as a qualitative feeling of fear; and 
(3) coupled with motor processes produce RUN! This intertwined skein 
of constraints improves survival advantage precisely because it speedily 
conveys information about a variable that matters—­namely, a threat to 
survival. No need to overthink the feel. Just run. In contrast, lack of such 
phenomenal awareness, as in anosognosia, the inability to feel pain, puts 
its sufferers’ lives at risk. Failure to integrate phenomenal awareness and 
feelings into motor processes would be otiose.
Damasio (2021) notes that interoception and proprioception might 
have been the earliest phenomenal properties with indexical properties to 
emerge from multimodal integration and coordination. By tagging inte­
grated information phenomenally, the qualitative proprioceptive feel of 
“the twisties” quickly enables gymnasts to correct the position of their 
body in space. This indexically coded “sixth sense,” which might even 
precede evaluation in terms of valence,4 provides a critical safety measure 
that prevents bad spills. Proprioception and interoception integrate the 
material conditions of the subject’s body, its location in space, as well as 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

166    Chapter 11
an individual’s sense of ownership of it in terms of the organism’s actual 
and continuing metastability (Damasio 2021).
Two of the most influential theories of consciousness today, the global 
workplace theory (GWT) (Koch 2004; Metzinger 2000) and integrated 
information theory (IIT) (Tononi 2008, 2012), take integration (of sensory 
data or Shannon information) as a necessary and/or sufficient condition 
for the emergence of conscious awareness and phenomenal feels. On the 
way to global integration, however, less comprehensive coherent struc­
tures, transduced by new codes and tagged with phenomenal properties, 
might have become modularized as network nodes and modules of the 
overall dynamic. Context-­dependent networks, that is, can become modu­
larized into context-­independent nodes that stabilize conditions and delay 
thermalization.
The mammalian brain’s early sensory cortices as well as its association 
cortices can be understood in that light. Having evolved later than the 
amygdala and the nucleus accumbens mentioned earlier, the fusiform 
gyrus, an anatomical structure in the temporal cortex, also filters dis­
crete visual stimuli and integrates them as faces (a continuous property) 
and tags them as a distinct three-­dimensional and emergent phenomenal 
image (another continuous property). Coding individuals in terms of gait 
(yet a third continuous parameter) might be an even more accurate way 
of recognizing individuals (Adam 2020). This is consistent with the fact 
that over a person’s lifetime, gait is more metastable than facial appear­
ance. Identifying individuals over long periods of time and over a long 
distance without direct contact suddenly becomes possible thanks to meta­
stable, multiply realizable, coherent dynamics.
Over time, chances of metastability and survival either improve with 
each evolutionary iteration or the system dissolves. The system either 
adapts and evolves, or disintegrates. Even the Mimosa pudica plant habitu­
ates and stops shrinking when it senses a familiar stimulus it has learned to 
categorize as nonthreatening. This is how anchoring, priming, and cueing 
occur in human perception and action. Attentional and change blindness 
errors are direct phenomenal outcomes of emergent coherent dynamics, 
their governing constraints, and effective input. Subjects are not con­
sciously aware of the gorilla because they were primed—­cued—­to perceive 
only effective input, that is, only those visual signals relevant to a task 
space intentionally and intensionally defined, following the bouncing ball. 
False negatives do happen. Like affordances, anchoring reconfigures the 
probability distribution of mental frameworks. In consequence, the behav­
ior satisfies the constraints of the emergent properties that define the task.
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

Many-­to-­One Transitions, Effective and Analog Control    167
Effective output is therefore output continuously updated and con­
trolled by new codes and governing constraints of coherent Ones in 
which the dynamic system is entrained. Actions performed by coherent 
Ones enact the bound information in the interlocking constraints that 
define its dynamic. Implemented as top-­down cascades of negative feed­
back loops, actions enact and preserve those governing constraints. As a 
result, actions effectively aim in a direction that prolongs that constraint 
regime’s existence—­toward heat and moisture in the case of tornadoes 
and towards carrying out the intention to perform a particular task, in 
ours. In this manner, teleonomy and teleology get built into constraint 
regimes thanks to enabling and constitutive constraints.
As the coordinating of mutual interdependencies becomes increas­
ingly complex, we can hypothesize that actions informed by ethical and 
moral values are performed analogously (Artigiani 2021). Evolving and 
recoding society’s order parameters in terms of symbols and aesthetic 
and moral values came to characterize human culture. They become the 
variables that matter. The feeling of moral disgust, for example, might be 
an evolutionary extension of the repugnance experienced when encoun­
tering putrid meat (Aznar 2021; Kurth 2021). Newly evolved norma­
tive parameters integrate and filter information with reference to those 
higher-­level variables that matter to a society’s constraint regime.5 Feel­
ings of pride and shame encode much more complex dynamics centered 
around social information. They identify those who experience those 
feelings as members of a community. In the process, recoding experi­
ences in terms of value codes and then acting for symbolic, religious, 
ethical, or patriotic reasons enhances social cohesion and group selection 
(Artigiani 2021). They better serve as coordination constraints. But only 
if the agents act for those reasons, that is, only if their actions issue top 
down from those higher order constraints. Failing to take into account 
such complex social, religious, patriotic, or tribal sentiments, feelings, 
and phenomenal experiences would, as noted earlier, get an agent’s or a 
culture’s constraint regime seriously wrong.
Analog Control
Since constraint regimes of coordination dynamics realize continuous 
order parameters, Many-­to-­One phase transitions suggest that analog 
decision-­making and effective output control might have provided sig­
nificant innovations for coherence-­maintenance and behavior. We turn to 
the topic of analog control next.
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

168    Chapter 11
British cybernetician Ross Ashby6 formulated the Law of Requisite 
Variety: “Any control mechanism must have at least as many states at its 
disposal as the thing it is trying to control” (Ashby 1958). In the real world, 
one-­to-­one cause–­effect relations of strict determinism are fragile and easily 
disrupted by severe perturbations or fluctuations. They do not generalize. 
At the other extreme, flexibility alone is not sufficient. With a third of their 
neurons spread out throughout their body and tentacles, octopi find coor­
dination unwieldy; from an evolutionary perspective, acting not just flex­
ibly but effectively—­from an integrated and coordinated space—becomes 
necessary. Even today, coordination and integration remain the primary 
obstacles for digital AI systems, including those enhanced with machine 
learning (Mitchell 2021). In living things, a central nervous system with 
a brain protected by a skull and capable of supporting context-­dependent 
coordination might have evolved in response to such ecological pressures. 
A central point of this book has been to emphasize the integrating, stabiliz­
ing, and coordinating functions of constitutive constraint regimes.
Analog control mechanisms facilitate such coordination as well. Let 
us see how.
*
*
*
The functionality of digital mechanisms like toggle switches, with one 
crisp output per discrete input, is neither robust nor resilient. Digital systems 
cannot scale up to satisfy Ashby’s concerns. This book has argued (1) that 
generating multiply realizable pathways while simultaneously ensur­
ing coordination and preservation of unity of type constituted a major 
transition in evolution for open systems in nonequilibrium. It also argued 
(2) that constitutive constraints allow top-­down control, as constraints, 
not efficient causes. The next section proposes that (3) processing and con­
trolling output in reference to continuous values supports a wider range 
of behavior. The notion of analog control will be used to make this point.
Analog artifacts and dynamics implement a Many-­to-­One logic. For 
example, by analyzing input as logical variables and not discrete voltage 
signals, fuzzy logic thermostats take continuous values between 0 and 1. 
Then, by calibrating their output to those continuous values, analog 
thermostats do not overshoot their mark and are more responsive than 
digital thermostats; their functionality is greatly improved. In real time, 
analog mechanisms are more context and task appropriate than digital 
mechanisms. To illustrate: integrating two previously independent vari­
ables into a continuous order parameter reveals an emergent (because 
relational) property that really matters to automobile drivers: whether 
the vehicle’s wheels will lock and cause skidding. Analog antilock brake 
systems (AABS) prevent skids by adjusting braking pressure in reference 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

Many-­to-­One Transitions, Effective and Analog Control    169
to values captured as analog order parameter wheel lock, a descriptor of 
the relation between braking and vehicle speed.
Because their settings and governing constraints refer to continuous, 
population-­level properties, analog-­coded top-­down control mechanisms 
can implement meaningful and appropriate output that preserves proper 
and effective function under a much wider range of conditions. Analog top-­
down control is therefore critical to sustaining long-­term coherent interde­
pendencies. By modulating a deep continuum of realizations, analog-­coded 
devices can satisfy parallel and multiple constraints over a longer period, 
under a wider set of circumstances.7 Top-­down control from coherent 
interdependencies to token realizations is executed by analog governing 
constraints: the order parameters of social organizations and long-­term 
intentions operate as governing constraint regimes encoded in terms of 
continuous properties such as social cohesion, values, and purpose.
Coordination mechanisms in analog form are well suited to execute 
complex top-­down control. Because the contextual constraints that gen­
erate interactional types are not only multiply realizable but also noise-­
tolerant and sensitive to initial and current conditions, mereological 
analog control (from the constraint regime of multiply realizable types 
to their components and behavior) can produce behavior that is more 
responsive to local circumstances, moment to moment. As illustrated by 
analog thermostats and antilock brakes, analog-­coded governing con­
straints of continuous constitutive regimes can implement nuanced and 
fine-­grained behavior, in real time and in a task-­appropriate manner.
In summary: (1) coherent interdependencies are described by order 
parameters that take continuous values. (2) This suggests that there 
evolved a form of analog decision-­making and output control in terms of 
continuous values.8 Because order parameters in terms of which output 
is regulated are contextually generated, analog top-­down control is also 
more timely and responsive to locally changing circumstances. (3) Con­
sequently, analog output control can implement standing causes even as 
it adjusts to changing current conditions. It can also generalize because it 
can accommodate learning. Because they are more coarse-­grained, con­
tinuous values are also more tolerant of error and therefore more robust 
and resilient than digital ones—­as well as more energy efficient.
We turn to the idea of energy management next.
Analog Control and Energy Management
This section proposes that the need for better energy management also favored 
the evolution of analog governing constraints. Complex ongoing monitoring 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

170    Chapter 11
and regulation of functions like homeostasis, not to mention the deliber­
ate planning and execution of long-­term projects in complex social settings 
(which would become energetically prohibitive with only digital control), are 
facilitated with analog decision-­making and control mechanisms.
British American mathematical theorist Freeman Dyson maintained that 
for living things to survive, control must be analog: “Controlling day to day 
or millisecond to millisecond behavior in the real world” would be crippled 
if (an organism) had to rely on digital mechanisms (F. Dyson 2001).
Freeman’s son, George, who inherited the analog mantle from his 
father, caricatured digital processing algorithms as “DO THIS with what 
you find HERE and go THERE with the result” (G. Dyson 2011, 277). 
Digital mechanisms must exactly specify HERE, THERE, and WHEN; conse­
quently, they are precise and fast but unavoidably brittle;9 they can neither 
generalize to other domains nor tailor specific responses to altered cir­
cumstances. They cannot learn. And because they must precisely control 
all components and processes through millions of individual and abso­
lutely accurate instructions per second, digital mechanisms also consume 
immense amounts of energy—­to wit, today’s server farms.
Most computers are still digital. Today’s supercomputers can perform 
one quadrillion operations per second. It is predicted that data centers, the 
internet of things, 5G connectivity, and other massive users of energy will 
consume up to a fifth of the world’s electricity by 2025.10 Speed compensates 
for energy usage, but about fifteen years or so ago, silicon-­based computers 
began to approach their efficiency limit despite improved techniques that 
pack more transistors into each chip. By way of contrast, it is estimated that 
our brains compute around 10 quadrillion operations per second (https://­
computers​.­howstuffworks​.­com​/­worlds​-­fastest​-­computer​.­htm), and although 
the brain is by far the body’s largest energy consumer, it is in no danger of 
overheating. Nor does it waste energy. How do our brains manage that feat?
“Analog decision-­making processes are far more robust when it comes 
to real time control” (G. Dyson 2019). Dyson son notes that today’s search 
engines and social networks are centered on the topology of the resulting 
networks and the pulse frequency of connections. “These analog networks 
may be composed of digital processors, but it is in the analog domain 
that the interesting computation is being performed. . . . [Social networks] 
encode and process information in terms of connection frequency and 
network architecture, what connects to what, the rate at which they connect” 
(G. Dyson 2011; emphasis added), the order in which they connect, and so 
on.11 These parametrized variables reveal the information that matters to 
the search engines and social networks. Such variables are continuous in 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

Many-­to-­One Transitions, Effective and Analog Control    171
the sense of embodying multiply realizable types; actual tokens of types can 
be more or less typical of an exemplar of which they are realized instances.
Dyson’s comments suggest that, in living things, selective pressure for 
effective input and output evolved analog decision-­making and control 
processes, including analog codes, filters, and interfaces. Analog algo­
rithms can be caricatured as, “DO THIS with the next copy of THAT that 
comes along,” with THIS and THAT encoded analogically, not as discrete 
and precisely localized signals or realizations but as templates that capture 
a smeared-­out pattern of relationships. As an example, Dyson notes that 
in the genetic code, which is analog, “That refer[s] to a molecular tem­
plate that identifies a larger, complex molecule by some smaller, identifiable 
part” (G. Dyson 2012, 177).12 Templates, as we saw, embody constraints 
that represent generic patterns or exemplars. In our terminology, they rep­
resent type-­identified parameters whose token realizations can be specified 
contextually, in different material substrates, moment to moment, by more 
local constraints, in a range of instantiations. It is the relational information 
bound together as a general pattern or exemplar and captured with a new 
code that matters. Nutrient medical lattices mentioned earlier regulate the 
rates and pattern of bone growth in this manner. The relations among ori­
entation, magnitude, and growth rate are the variables that matter in bone 
growth. This templating-by-lattice embodies an analog constraint process 
calibrated to an attractor’s parameter space. Analog-formatted governing 
constraint regimes with analog output underpin contextually nuanced regu­
lation and control.
More to the point today, Dyson notes that even in social media, 
“Streams of bits are being treated as continuous functions, the way 
vacuum tubes treat streams of electrons or neurons treat pulse frequen­
cies in the brain” (G. Dyson 2012, 280; emphasis added). As we have 
seen, frequencies, rates, and topological characteristics are systemwide 
features that take continuous values. It is in terms of these continuous 
variables—­the unified Ones or interactional types—­that “the interesting 
computations” are performed. By interesting computations, read consti­
tutive and governing constraints exercising control on behavioral output 
in top-­down cascades of multiple constraint satisfaction. Solutions that 
satisfy all constraints need only be located in the feasible, appropri­
ate region. Processing data in terms of those constraint regimes lowers 
the rate of internal entropy production and delays dissipation. Doing 
so enacts meaningful and task-­appropriate information. Constraint-­
programming languages and libraries are now widespread.
“Analog is back and here to stay,” writes George Dyson.
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

172    Chapter 11
Analog-­coded decision-­making and control operate in terms of con­
tinuous properties that capture unity of type, a feasible region in state 
space. Because they span multiply realizable and continuous values, 
analog-­controlled output can be continuously adjusted so that, overall, 
the order parameters of those types are satisfied and decision-­making is 
carried out in energy efficient and flexible fashion.
This is not to disparage the remarkable advantages of digital process­
ing, speed, and precision. Having information arrive quickly and error free 
at a decision-­making node affords significant adaptive advantage. Accord­
ingly, the initial stages of vision enact digitalized transformations. The 
retinotopic map in the brain’s primary cortex is a paint-­by-­the-­numbers 
sheet: each point on the map corresponds one-­to-­one to a point in two-­
dimensional space. Here, digitalization ensures quick transmission; it also 
makes quick one-­off responses possible. Neuronal spikes are also digital: 
crossed an activation threshold? Fired? Run! Otherwise, do not. Neuronal 
thresholds and spike are on/off switches and signals, all or nothing.
That said, there are drawbacks to digital processing and control: con­
verting an analog world to digital form gains crispness and speed but 
loses depth and richness; it loses the contextual nuance of relations, in 
other words. Reconverting the digital record back into analog form does 
not recover that loss, as fans of long-­playing vinyl records can attest. 
Reconversion will not bring back contextual—­and qualitative—­subtleties 
present in the original analog world and lost in digital conversion. The 
elder Dyson joked that this is one reason he would not want the contents 
of his mind uploaded to a digital computer: “Downloading human con­
sciousness into a digital computer may involve a certain loss of our finer 
feelings and qualities. That would not be surprising. I certainly have no 
desire to try the experiment myself” (F. Dyson 2001).
Empirical evidence confirms, however, that information processing and 
decision-­making even in the human brain do not happen in digital format 
alone. Neural spikes have an analog aspect: the amplitude and duration 
of those spikes encode nuanced distinctions. Speed is critical, but effec­
tive, long-­term sustenance and context sensitivity of complex projects are 
equally critical for decision-­making and output control in complex social 
environments where relations are the variables that matter. It is reason­
able to speculate that analog formatting evolved in response to selection 
pressures. And so, the brain also relies on reverberation, resonance, oscil­
lation, phase, amplitude, frequency, waveforms, and other analog-­coded 
configurations to process information and issue and control behavior. 
Complex waveforms, neurotransmitters, and hormones in the brain and 
the gut are evidence that analog control never went away. As an added 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

Many-­to-­One Transitions, Effective and Analog Control    173
bonus, analog control is better at managing the brain’s computational 
demands without overheating. No doubt this is because, as we have seen, 
constrained energy flow that reduces internal entropy production best 
delays the process of equilibration by organizing into types. Processing in 
terms of regions is cheaper than processing in terms of points. Degenerate 
and continuously realized patterns, designs, and configurations persist 
and remain coherent, sensitive to context, and timely despite internal and 
external change. Again, without overheating.
To paraphrase George Dyson, the real question is whether organic 
processes that reformat and recode information—­and produce complex 
behavior—­in terms of relations that matter are analog. It appears so. We 
saw it at work in homeostasis. The brain, too, it seems, encodes higher-­
order properties not only in its discrete neural spikes but in terms of their 
amplitude and duration. Frequency histograms of neuronal spike trains 
(the time intervals between spikes of a single neuron), the timing profile of 
neural spikes, and other features of neural sequences encoded as analog 
patterns also transmit higher-­order information (Humphries 2021). With 
respect to medical, legal, and ethical issues, sensitizing the learner to the 
nuances of the current context through apprenticeships and experiential 
learning is as important to acquiring new skills as declarative knowledge.
The brain, that is, is both analog and digital. The farther from sensory 
nerve endings, the more integrative and interpretive its association nodes 
become, until they reach the prefrontal cortex (PFC), where analog 
becomes predominant. Early on, the eardrum processes information in 
analog form: it converts analog soundwaves into analog vibration pat­
terns. Only later are those vibration patterns converted into digital nerve 
spikes. Even then, higher cortical centers such as the PFC that interpret 
those digital spikes subsequently reconvert them to analog format.
The PFC modulates executive functions such as planning and decision-­
making. It is the site where personality and character come together and 
complex cognitive actions are planned; it is where convergence of already 
highly processed (read integrated and reinterpreted) information, includ­
ing emotional, sensory, and cognitive information, is further recoded in 
terms of social expectations. These capabilities are almost in their entirety 
encoded in analog form.
Decision-­making and behavior control of higher-­order information 
in human beings, in other words, are often conducted by coding and 
recoding, integrating and reintegrating internal and external signals into 
increasingly general types of processes held together by analog-­coded 
interlocking constraints. These transmit meaningful path-­dependent 
information; they incorporate history and time. They remember, but they 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

174    Chapter 11
can also be modified by current context and as a result of learning. It is 
only because decision-­making and control processing are analog that, 
in context-­dependent, timely, and appropriate manner, organisms can 
increasingly regulate and direct attention, inhibit impulse, remember and 
anticipate, and, especially, act in a more flexible and long-­range manner 
(Wikipedia).13 Without burning out.
Multiply Realizable Domains Are Analog Spaces
We close with an example on how analog decision-­making and top-down 
control by unity of type—­from coherent One to actual tokens—­might 
have evolved.
Survival of the fittest (the idea of one exquisitely fit phenotype 
uniquely adapted to a fixed and pre-­existing niche) is a myth. Interpret­
ing natural selection in this manner implies that evolution tends toward 
one-­to-­one—­digital—­relations between genotype and phenotype, as well 
as between phenotype and a niche to which the organism is perfectly 
tuned. This logic allows no room for modification and adaptation in case 
of significant perturbations (other than accidentally, by random muta­
tions). There would be no principled way to generate resilient and flexible 
tokens of a general and coherent type. There would be even less room for 
learning and evolution.
Earlier sections of this chapter proposed that once transitions from 
many to One occur, effective output is modulated and regulated in an 
ongoing manner such that it remains within a constitutive attractor’s 
basin—­true to type. Contextually constrained interactional types that are 
analogically formatted and multiply realizable build in the possibility of 
adaptation and evolution.
The evolutionary hypothesis of “sloppy fitness” can accommodate this 
perspective.
Agosta and Brooks (2020) argue that niches and habitats are sloppy 
fitness spaces. Sloppy fitness spaces imply the presence of variants. It is 
important to reiterate that the term fit and its cognates were used during 
Darwin’s day to mean a process of mutual adjustment, something akin 
to a tailor fitting a customer with a new suit of clothes. Fitness space is 
called sloppy, then, because it can be differently realized under different 
conditions and yet persist as regulated by a lineage’s governing constraint 
regime, the species’ unity of type. Fitness solution space spans a feasible 
region, not a single point. We saw that process at work in Crithidia’s over­
lapping habitat with plant-­eating insects. Nature organizes fitness regions 
with enough room to maneuver a timely and appropriate fit. In human 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

Many-­to-­One Transitions, Effective and Analog Control    175
beings, knowledge is the cognitive, affective, and behavioral organization 
of concrete experiences into context-­dependent and context-­generated 
types and patterns. We would expect this to manifest as a constrained 
area in neural state space, not a particular neuron or even neural pattern.
Sloppy niches and habitats are therefore co-­generated interdependen­
cies that support token variants in a range of contexts. Thinking of niches 
and habitats in terms of mereological interdependencies explains how 
unity of type can be preserved even while token specimens are contin­
uously tailored and specified to the changing context. These consider­
ations imply that sloppy fitness space must represent a population-­level 
and analog-­controlled constraint regime. A type-identified region in state 
space. Ex hypothesi, the scope and reach of a species’ type-­defined fitness 
or possibility space (its potential phenotypic landscape) are always more 
expansive than the realized state space of particular organisms (Brooks 
and Wiley 1988, Hmax—­Hobs). Cognitively this means that once the toddler 
grasps the concept of dog, she can recognize a breed she has never seen 
before as a token of that type. The multiple realizability of contextually 
constrained interactional types underpins this capacity.
Generating fitness spaces that are flexible, multiply realizable (sloppy), 
and governed by analog constraints extends adaptive space, the capacity 
to regulate and control realizations, top down, in real time in response 
to context. It allows the fitting-­together process to be continuous and 
therefore responsive and tailored to context. By locating decision-­making 
and output control in analog-­encoded constraint regimes constructed in 
terms of unity of type, both a niche’s fitness space and its actual tokens 
will possess sufficient and endogenously produced wiggle room to fit 
together a richly complex habitat. Ashby would approve.
We can therefore join the Dysons in hypothesizing that over time, 
coherence-­making by constraints evolved layers of integrative dynam­
ics with distinctive forms of selective output control. In virtue of multi­
ply realizable, context-­dependent constraints, emergent self-­organizing, 
self-­maintaining, self-­constraining, and self-­determining dynamics there 
evolved new mechanisms of analog processing and output control. This 
form of processing and output control supervenes on precise and accu­
rate digital input–­output relations (see chapter 13 on supervenience).
With a richer range of options at its disposal, analog processing and 
control in terms of tagged qualia can also underlie increasingly complex 
behavior. Qualia and phenomenal awareness have survival value, in part, 
because of their analog character. Police officers often offer analog-­coded 
advice, “Trust your gut. If the situation does not look or feel right, it 
probably isn’t.” “Looking and feeling right” is an eminently contextual 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

176    Chapter 11
and analog-­coded constraint whose valence has been tagged with a gut 
feel. Phenomenal awareness of scenes coded in analog form—­as multi­
modal gestalts tagged with a particular feel and processed as affordances 
or warning signals—­allows subjects to scan a whole panoply of sensory, 
affective, and cognitive information simultaneously and faster. And act on 
the complex scene appropriately. “I can recognize it when I see it.” Nobel 
economist Daniel Kahneman’s distinction between fast and slow thinking 
might correlate with digital and analog-­controlled physiological processes.
Moving decision-­making and control to the level of constraint regimes 
(that embody type-­level properties and are tagged with phenomenal 
awareness and qualia) saves energy and avoids overfitting in the process. 
By avoiding overfitting, the logic of type-­defined possibility spaces formed 
by contextual constraints and governed with analog control confers a 
selective advantage on its token specimens.
Finally, what the elder Dyson refers to as our “finer feelings and quali­
ties” may well be those higher-­level affective and epistemic properties 
with analog control powers that emerge from the translation of discrete 
signals to an analogically coded and tagged set of interdependencies. 
Such multimodal integration and entrainment into a complex and analog 
attractor with emergent properties, including novel forms of phenomenal 
awareness and qualia, might be exactly what allows wine connoisseurs 
to perceive a far richer, relational, and context-­dependent range of inter­
dependent characteristics (tagged phenomenally as a wine’s terroir, for 
example) with reference to which they recognize and evaluate vintages.
We can conclude that, over evolutionary time, constraints evolved 
novel codes that transduce Many-­to-­One transformations into newly 
organized constraint regimes with the continuous properties of emergent 
order parameters. Tagged as qualitatively new properties, these governing 
constraints embody mechanisms of analog processing, decision-­making, 
and top-­down control.
*
*
*
English anthropologist Gregory Bateson (1960, 1972) might have been 
the earliest thinker to note that “alternating digital and analog levels” is 
typical of hierarchical organization. Because hierarchy theory is a theory 
of differences, not sameness (Salthe 2012), it is ideally suited to explain 
qualitative differentiation that arises from constraints. The next chapter 
examines how Many-­to-­One transitions create hierarchies with asym­
metric and qualitatively distinct levels of organization that interact in 
terms of constraints, not forces.
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

Koestler’s Holons and Holarchies
Intent on studying relations between individuals and societies from a real­
ist perspective, Hungarian British journalist and author Arthur Koestler 
(1967) coined the term holon to describe compositional or nested rela­
tions. He depicted holons as Janus-­like. Nation-­states, for example, face 
inward toward those persons, groups, and institutions that compose them. 
They simultaneously face outward toward the world in which they are 
situated and from whose perspective a particular nation-­state is one of 
many. In our terminology, holons are constrained and constraining interde­
pendencies between parts and the wholes they comprise as well as between 
those wholes and the context in which they are embedded. Complex sys­
tems such as dissipative structures are holons (Pattee 1973; Salthe 1985; 
Eldredge 2015).
Coherent dynamics generated by constraints are also holarchies 
(Koestler 1967) and heterarchies (McCulloch 1945). Like holon, these 
two terms were coined to differentiate the concepts involved from the 
common connotations of hierarchy. Holarchies are relations of interde­
pendence whose components are themselves holons. Holarchies integrate 
upward to more encompassing holons; they exercise control downward, 
on their component holons and behavior. Heterarchies are relations of 
interdependence in which no one unit or level controls the rest; unlike the 
classical understanding of hierarchy, heterarchies explicitly allow influ­
ences between entities at the same level of organization. This book uses 
the more common term hierarchy, but without the connotation of an 
absolute top and bottom; constraints, as explained here, can have effects 
at the same level of organization. As used here, therefore, hierarchy also 
refers to holons, holarchies, and heterarchies.
12
Of Holons, Holarchy, Heterarchy, 
and Hierarchy
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

178    Chapter 12
Consequently, rehabilitating the concept of hierarchy requires some 
clarification about what these coherent dynamics, so understood, are 
not. In business and the military, the term hierarchy often recalls inflex­
ible, stratified legacy organizations where recommendations from lower 
echelons are systematically ignored by managers and officials.1 On this 
standard interpretation of hierarchy, inflexible and one-­way, top-­down 
force and power relations are the defining characteristic of hierarchies—­so 
much so that rigid hierarchy comes across as a redundant description. Since 
mereological constraints play a significant role in this work, hierarchical 
control as understood here underscores why Chinese boxes and matry­
oshka dolls are not proper hierarchies: they are mere containers; they exert 
neither enabling nor constitutive constraints on either their contents or 
their embedding contexts.
Governing constraints and hierarchical top-­down control in complex 
systems are best conceptualized, therefore, on the analogy of ecosys­
tems, synchronized clocks, and the invisible hands of economic systems. 
Whether referring to organisms or human organizations, hierarchical 
control as understood here is like the influence of virtual governors that 
emerge bottom-­up from interactions among components. As described 
in previous chapters, virtual governors are distributed interlocking con­
straints that exercise top-­down control on their components and behav­
ior. They describe an ecosystem’s regulation of rates and ratios of flora 
and fauna. Or the way a firm’s culture and tacit rules frame employees’ 
attitudes, behavior, and dispositions, which change qualitatively as a 
result of the culture’s overarching constraint regime.
This way of thinking of hierarchical control rejects the notion of 
control hierarchies as the arbitrary top-­down dictates of rulers and other 
public officials. For that reason, examining the use of raw, top-­down 
political power to coerce and control individuals or groups is beyond 
the purview of this chapter. Although this is a real and serious threat to 
humankind that requires addressing and correcting, it is best understood 
as the exercise of force, not of constraints as understood here.
In short, the previous chapters proposed that natural hierarchy for­
mation and control are the outcomes of constraints. They are coordi­
nation dynamics generated by enabling constraints against a backdrop 
of context-­independent constraints; interlocking constitutive constraints 
serve as a coordination context that modulates, controls, and regulates 
components and behavior top down—­as analog governing constraints. 
Contextually dependent interdependencies are therefore holarchically 
organized regimes of constraint (Allen, O’Neill, and Hoekstra 1984). 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

Of Holons, Holarchy, Heterarchy, and Hierarchy    179
Ontically, they are spatiotemporal interdependencies that constrain and 
are constrained by their contextually intertwined components, as well as 
by the constraints of the context in which they are embedded. Although 
intralevel holarchical influences also generate these interdependencies, 
this chapter focuses on mereological relations between levels of hierar­
chical organization in contextually coherent dynamics.
*
*
*
Recognizing that systems of constraint are organized hierarchically is not 
news. However, because of the received understanding of mereological 
relations philosophers have rarely focused on relations between processes 
at different hierarchical levels. Hierarchy theorists like Pattee, Salthe, and 
Allen and Starr who regularly emphasize the role of constraints in rela­
tions between hierarchical levels stand out for that very reason.
Hierarchy theory provides two entrées for the approach presented in 
this work: (1) relations between levels of hierarchical organization are 
not energetic exchanges; they are relations of constraint. This is particu­
larly significant with respect to top-­down control from whole to parts. 
(2) Levels of hierarchical organization ordered by contextual constraints 
cannot be extensionally defined in terms of their reference. Properties 
and powers characteristic of each level are generated by specific enabling 
constraints. History plays a leading role in these constraints, as do spa­
tiotemporal constraints generally. The properties and powers of contex­
tually generated dynamics must therefore be defined intensionally, that 
is, in context. (3) Finally, philosophers have long puzzled over the power 
of the content of mental events and intentions to bring about actions 
that satisfy that content (Juarrero 1999). As characterized in chapter 1, 
those debates were framed by a flawed understanding of mereology and 
causation. Coherence-­making by constraints, reframed in light of hierar­
chy theory, allows the two to find common ground, as this chapter will 
describe.
*
*
*
Less than two years after Koestler published his treatise on holons, Nobel 
laureate Herbert Simon (1969) described the stabilizing benefits of hier­
archical organization. Arguably, Simon’s lecture formally launched hier­
archy theory as an academic field of study. Although his interests were 
centered on computing systems, he primarily addressed the contribution 
of modularity to hierarchical organizations.
Simon presented the watchmaker analogy in his now-­famous MIT 
Compton Lectures. Consider two watchmakers who manufacture pocket 
watches composed of one thousand pieces each. The first watchmaker 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

180    Chapter 12
crafts a new pocket watch each day from a supply of hairsprings, case 
screws, wheels, jewels, pinions, and so on. The second assembles modules 
of one hundred components each. Assume each watchmaker is regularly 
interrupted after 150 elementary parts have been assembled. Interrup­
tions cause any components “that do not yet form a stable system” to fall 
apart. Under these conditions, the first watchmaker will be hard-­pressed 
to complete a watch at all; not so the second watchmaker, who can rely 
on stable modules to stay on track. On average, this second watchmaker 
will manage to complete one watch after every eleven interruptions. 
Using modules in assembling a complex object prevents backsliding and 
having to restart the assembly from scratch (Simon 1973).
In contrast to individual springs and screws, modules are complex 
arrangements of interdependencies whose integrated processes and parts 
realize stable units. As mentioned earlier, modules are condensates of con­
strained interactions (Burgauer 2022a). Modules are therefore holons, 
assembled of individual and separate elementary parts with a view toward 
the extended interactions in which they are embedded.
Biological degeneracy is often realized through modularity; modules 
embody different paths along which the same function is actualized, a 
capacity made possible by the multiply realizable governing constraints of 
a system’s overarching dynamics. Neurological regions subtending cognitive 
function are eminently degenerate. But modules need not be physical: sub­
routines in computer programming are modularized constraints. Plug-­and-­
play modules are not just extra copies of a part. Material or not, modules 
are mini holons organized with a view to the realizing role they play in 
more encompassing holons. They can be materially different and yet can be 
plugged in and played without additionally reconfiguring the entire system.
One module can be replaced by another as long as it realizes the same 
effective input to a coherent structure. For example, watch escapement 
modules include a bearing on which the escapement wheel rotates; their 
qualitative character as escapement modules (an emergent property) is 
conditional on this friction-­reducing property. In the late 1960s, low-­cost 
quartz escapement modules replaced the classical and more expensive 
jewel-­based ones; this was possible only because quartz is in the same 
equivalence class as rubies with respect to friction reduction, an order 
parameter. The overall watch’s interdependencies, that is, filter or inter­
pret quartz modules as effective input just as well as jewel-­based ones. 
Slightly different tokens can likewise replace functionally equivalent 
ones. Human organs can be replaced with artificial ones because they are 
functionally defined and regulated modules.
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

Of Holons, Holarchy, Heterarchy, and Hierarchy    181
Modules counterbalance the conservative role of entrenching con­
straints. As the discussion on entrenchment showed, modules stabilize 
assembly processes, but as the escapement module illustrates, they also 
prevent systems from crystalizing into one rigid and brittle configuration. 
By securing one stage or level of hierarchical organization while simultane­
ously allowing other pathways to carry out the same function, modular 
flexibility supports easy repair and modification; modules prevent ongoing 
coherent interdependencies from distintegrating and decohering. In other 
words, modules encapsulate effective enabling constraints that facilitate 
the generation of resilient hierarchies.
Constraint-­generated coordination dynamics therefore lend them­
selves particularly well to modularly organized hierarchy formation. 
Although the term hierarchy often connotes spatially nested configura­
tions, temporal constraints also play a central role in hierarchy formation. 
As has been described, integration of separate entities into holons can be 
the product of temporally coded enabling constraints. The evolutionary 
sequence of vertebrates, mammals, and primates describes distinct stages 
of a hierarchy regulated by temporal constraints. Each stage is a stable 
module from which future specification proceeds (Salthe 2012); individ­
ual stages simultaneously constrain future steps and are constrained by 
earlier ones.
*
*
*
In contrast to the classical concept of hierarchy that assumes an organi­
zational top and bottom with control operating exclusively top down, 
holons, heterarchies, and holarchies are always tripartite or trilevel. As 
a contextually constrained coordination dynamic, each is embedded in 
(not just plopped into) a more encompassing holon whose governing 
constraints establish the embedding framework within which the focal 
holon or stage is situated and which regulates and modulates its compo­
nents. This embedding context is often taken for granted, which is why 
hierarchy theory underscores its significance. Most early hierarchy theo­
rists were biologists, where context reigns; some (Weiss 1971) expressed 
dismay at science’s continuing failure to take context into account.
Although scientific observations and methodology are naturally cen­
tered on a particular level of organization, Salthe (1985, 2001, 2012) sys­
tematically keeps the three hierarchical levels of developmental processes 
front and center in his writings. The holon of interest is the focal level. In 
addition to components, which comprise its lower levels, the focal level 
is also always embedded in a more encompassing holon, the structured 
context whose emergent properties and powers arise from the constrained 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

182    Chapter 12
relations among the entities at the focal level. Significantly, the context’s 
properties and powers are different from those of the focal level and its 
own embedding context. They are qualitatively different because they are 
relational; they reveal novel properties that emerge from the constrained 
interactions and relations among the components. They are real despite 
being relational. Western philosophy and modern science have taken for 
granted the ontological primacy of simple particles with primary prop­
erties. This assumption was first called into question by the entangled 
context-­dependent interactions at the quantum level. Advances in our 
understanding of ecology have brought context to the forefront.
Despite their context-­dependent texture, Koestler noted that, as units, 
holons exhibit self-­assertive tendencies that preserve and advance their 
individuality and quasi-­autonomous character (Koestler 1967, 343; Allen 
and Starr 1982). Chapter 7 showed that feedback loops as well as closure 
of processes and constraints generate such coherent dynamics; the asser­
tiveness Koestler describes is due to the enhanced metastability of those 
interdependent dynamics. Over time, they become autonomous and self-­
determining. But even in medicine, homeostasis’s governing constraints 
can compensate and keep the organism metastable as an identifiable 
coherent unit despite spleen and gallbladder removal, for example. 
Having component modules that are themselves holons strengthens and 
prolongs robustness and resilience in the abiotic and biotic domains alike.
Koestler’s anthropomorphic term self-­assertiveness is therefore best 
replaced with robust coherence. It is because of the enhanced metasta­
bility conferred by interlocking interdependencies among constraints at 
many scales that modules help watchmakers finish the job. Modules in 
nonliving and living things alike provide multiple paths to the realization 
of the emergent interdependencies that constitute a type of structure or 
function; this metastable flexibility, in turn, supports the integrity, resil­
ience, and persistence of holons over time.
Koestler’s neologism was short-­lived, but as this work has repeat­
edly pointed out, the minimally trilevel or triscale character of naturally 
formed hierarchies is central to coherence-­making by constraints. Allen 
and Starr adopt Koestler’s terminology; however, they consider holons 
to be solely epistemological constructs, “integrations of a set . . . ​and sets 
are a matter of ad hoc definition” (Allen and Starr 1982, 10). Here, in 
contrast, we presume that constraints that generate and maintain these 
interdependencies—and the interdependencies themselves—are real and 
context dependent.
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

Of Holons, Holarchy, Heterarchy, and Hierarchy    183
Levels of Organization
Watch modules and anatomical structures (cells, tissues, organs) show how 
some hierarchies can be treated as “nearly decomposable” into distinct 
levels of organization (Simon 1969). However, this matryoshka doll image 
of stratified units is misleading. As mentioned earlier, software subroutines, 
hypercycles, closure of constraint, and iterative recursion can confound the 
clean material separability of layers of constraint. Consequently, hierarchy 
theorists often analyze decomposability dynamically, as differences and 
changes in phases, rates, scales, amplitude, timing, and other such order 
parameters. Levels of hierarchical constraint dynamics such as cells, tissues, 
organs, or individuals, groups, and organizations for example, are separated 
by distinctive rates of processes that “continue, cycle, or go to completion at 
very different average rates when viewed from a fixed scale” (Salthe 1985, 
72). Such differences and changes present as identifiable hierarchical levels 
(Pattee 1973; Allen and Starr 1982; Eldredge 2015). In a multidimensional 
phase space, all can coexist.
Boundaries between levels of organization and constraint are therefore 
typically marked by sharp discontinuities in order parameters and average 
process and relaxation rates. Because they constitute more encompass­
ing and streamlined Ones, overarching hierarchical levels of organization 
are usually slower than their components or realizations. The smaller the 
“average rate constants” that define a set of interdependencies (Salthe 
1985, 72), the higher its organizational level. Stringent coupling between 
tokens of the same type is often implemented through shorter feedback 
loops. Prey interact more frequently with conspecifics, that is, with others 
that share the same set of interdependencies, than with predators. Tight 
feedback loops among members of a business development team help 
behaviors and processes coalesce as a unit. Fast iterations are also more 
responsive to current context because feedback from the environment 
quickly updates the conditional probabilities of the constitutive regime’s 
interdependent constraints with respect to the environment. By way of con­
trast, sharp discontinuities to longer feedback loops and governing con­
straints with a longer reach suggest a many-­to-­One transition to a more 
encompassing hierarchical level or to an earlier form of organization, devel­
opment, or evolution of which the more recent tokens are specifications.
Rephrased, embedding interdependencies are typically slower and 
longer continuous constraints than embedded ones, which the former 
smooth over. Ecosystem coordination dynamics, for example, are coarse-­
grained, longer and slower than those of its individual species.
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

184    Chapter 12
*
*
*
Relations between the faces of Janus, from focal level inward and down­
ward to its components, and outward and upward to its embedding 
context, are negotiated at permeable boundaries that mark these discon­
tinuities. To repeat, these boundaries or transition regions should not be 
thought of as exclusively gaps or walls; like eardrums, they are interfaces, 
active dynamic gates that recode, standardize, harmonize, and adjust 
rates, phases, amplitudes, and other properties between one level and the 
next, between each holon and the one lower or higher. Such processes of 
constraint satisfaction are regulated by those interdependencies that mark 
the holon’s coherence and self-­assertiveness. Acting as filters, codes, and 
gates between levels of organization, interfaces effectively sift, integrate, 
translate, transduce, and refract elements and dynamics at one phase or 
rate, but always in reference to constraints, elements, and processes at 
other levels. The constraints that define the interface adjust rates, timings, 
bufferings, and so forth such that the multiple constraints on each side 
are satisfied and the integrity of the whole remains both coherent and 
open to the environment.
As just noted, differences in strength, manner, speed, and degree of 
coupling commonly indicate the presence of a boundary or an interface 
between hierarchical levels. Degree of coupling generally shows sharp dis­
continuities with distance (temporal or spatial) and strength. In physics 
and chemistry, elements belonging to the same set of interdependencies 
share similar bond strengths. Bonds that hold nucleotides together are 
stronger than those that bind electrons to the nucleus. Intermolecular 
forces are much weaker than intramolecular covalent bonds. “It is pre­
cisely sharp gradation in bond strengths at successive levels that causes 
the system to appear hierarchic and to behave so” (Simon 1973, 9). Indi­
viduals tend to be less close with friends who now live far away than to 
those with whom they interact daily.
Constraints that result in tight coupling often generate local orga­
nized interdependencies we call clusters or hubs. Network hubs and 
cluster analysis of linkage relations like those of terrorist networks can 
reveal unmistakable evidence of the correlation in degree of information 
exchange, social coupling, and authority relations among its ­components. 
These parameters represent an encompassing hierarchical level whose 
interdependencies take longer to achieve closure. It becomes a new context 
whose rates and cycles streamline and smooth over the faster, lower-­
level processes entrained into that new holon. Network analyses can 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

Of Holons, Holarchy, Heterarchy, and Hierarchy    185
distinguish tribal cultures from urban ones by identifying the enabling 
and governing constraints that constitute a network’s profile.
To be clear: this work does not question that nuclear and molecular 
forces and bonds, for example, involve energetic exchanges. The goal of 
this chapter, rather, is to call attention to the significance of constraints 
such as rate and timing differences between inter-­ and intramolecu­
lar forces and bond strengths—­that is, to call attention to constraints, 
boundaries, and relations of dependence and influence between levels of 
hierarchical organization. Interlevel relations are negotiated by filters, 
gates, lenses, interface settings, governing constraints, and so on. All of 
these bring about changes without adding energy or being themselves 
permanently changed in the relation.
The faster the dynamic, the finer the filter; the slower the dynamics, the 
coarser the filter. The faster the dynamic, the narrower the criteria that 
control the lens or gate aperture; the slower the dynamic, the wider the 
criteria. The terms filters and lenses, of course, are metaphorical for con­
straints. Tissues, for example, are continuous and smoothed-­over, coher­
ent and type-­level interdependencies; they embody and enact multiply 
realizable regimes of constraint that are smeared out in space and last 
longer than those of their discrete and separate component cells, which 
view the context in which they are embedded as a constant. From the 
perspective of the organ, changes in the tissue are irrelevant so long as 
their characteristics, translated into effective input, can be smoothed over 
as supporting the organ’s function. If changes in the tissue are too small 
and fast, on the other hand, they can escape the organ’s notice (Allen and 
Starr 1982). A tumor results.
Because of their context dependence, parameters of control hierar­
chies are continuously adjusted through processes of multiple constraint 
satisfaction. Iterative and recursive processes tighten or loosen coupling, 
speed up or slow down rates, entrench or relax rules that control timing 
and phase, and so on. New information from current interactions with 
the environment becomes folded in to those adjustments. Conditional 
probabilities are updated and activation and inhibition settings are modi­
fied by cycles of multiple constraint satisfaction, without directing inter­
vening energetically in the process. Nevertheless, the system’s constitutive 
and governing constraints are preserved as a result. Its dynamic—whether 
biological or social—remains true to type and endures.
Recent research on inflammation is particularly interesting in this 
regard (Medzhitov 2021). Homeostatic equilibrium depends on a normal 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

186    Chapter 12
range of background constants such as ambient temperature and ade­
quate nutrition. Activation and suppression of inflammation is always 
in the service of homeostasis. For that reason, credible and immediate 
threats of starvation or frostbite can trigger anticipatory inflammation 
even in the absence of structural injury or pathogens. Threatened loss of 
homeostatic regulatory control, that is, can directly produce responses 
that restore regulatory control. Specifically, these responses include behav­
ioral changes such as acting sick—­lethargy, sleeping more, eating less, and 
so forth. Might obsessive-­compulsive and autoimmune disorders, post­
traumatic stress disorder, paranoia, and depression arise from similarly 
malfunctioning governing and constitutive constraint regimes that have 
lost their capacity for regulatory control? These might be cases where the 
modulating dimmer switch did not dial down. The central point here is 
that such pathological behavior can occur, not only in response to actual 
and meaningful physical signals but also as a result of malfunctioning or 
weak governing constraints—­that is, from overly entrenched governing 
constraints that failed to update its interdependencies to current interac­
tions with the environment. The thermostat itself malfunctioned.
Mereology Revisited
In short, constraints operating at one hierarchical level do not directly 
transfer energy to entities and processes at other levels of organization. 
This is especially significant with respect to whole-­to-­parts or top-­down 
control. It is important because causality by constraint allows hierarchi­
cal control2 constraints to implement top-­down causation without falling 
victim to overdetermination or violating causal closure.
Regulatory genes, for example, control the expression of genes that 
code for proteins that repress operator genes. The interface between regu­
lation and operation modulates outcomes top down by constraining the 
timing, levels, conditions of activation, and inhibition of structural genes. 
Regulatory genes implement modulation not by actively participating, 
for example, in actual protein construction the way structural genes do, 
but by controlling the timing, location, and amount of gene expression. 
They regulate as second-­order top-­down constraints.These processes of 
multiple constraint satisfaction are carried out as changes to the possibil­
ity space and to the probability distribution of events within it, with rela­
tions between hierarchical levels of organization consisting of coevolving 
process of constraint satisfaction. Bottom-­up, independent matter, 
energy and information flows are integrated by enabling constraints. The 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

Of Holons, Holarchy, Heterarchy, and Hierarchy    187
resulting coordination dynamic becomes a new and embedding hierar­
chical level of organization, a new context. Those embedding interde­
pendencies in turn then control their embedded components through 
ongoing second-­order top-­down constraints that keep the coordination 
dynamic whole.
*
*
*
In a witty illustration of top-­down hierarchical control by constraints, 
Allen, O’Neill, and Hoekstra (1984) describe a situation all too familiar 
to academics. No matter how heated a discussion among faculty members 
might become, how loud the voices, or whether they are in the same depart­
ment or not, in the end, they return to their offices unperturbed—­unless 
one of them is a department chair or dean with authority over others. 
Rate-­dependent energy transfers are always possible—­that is, forceful dis­
ruptions like yelling and even fisticuffs might break out—­but no control 
constraints are at work among individuals at the same hierarchical level.
Stronger and more frequent interactions among members of the same 
academic department than between professors and administrators confirm 
hierarchy theory’s axiom that processes at a given level of organization are 
best identified by their “significant mutual interactions” (Salthe 1985, 23). 
As noted earlier, strong coupling and autocorrelation among certain pro­
cesses and entities suggest they belong to the same hierarchical level. In 
contrast, looser coupling and fewer interactions suggest relations with 
processes at other levels; but it can also mean that interdependencies at a 
given level are not well organized (compare tropical storms with category 
4 hurricanes). Different hierarchical levels of organization such as the 
level of type-­defined interdependencies and that of the tokens that specify 
them relate to each other as constraints.
As Salthe puts it, dynamic processes at one level cannot interact ener­
getically with processes at another level (Salthe 1985, 73), if nothing 
else “because [faster] lower-­level dynamics would have been completed 
before feedback from the [slower] upper level arrived.” We saw it at 
work in constraint closure; hyperloops take longer to complete than the 
individual catalytic reactions of which they are composed. So too with 
administrators and faculty members; they are differentially defined and 
constrained by the rules, timing, scope, and reach of the various rights 
and responsibilities of their respective roles. The privileges and duties of 
each role go to completion at different rates: department chairs prepare 
annual budgets, deans supervise seven-­year tenure evaluations and uni­
versity presidents and chancellors oversee multiyear capital campaigns 
and ten-­year accreditation procedures.
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

188    Chapter 12
That these constraints are organized as relations of dependence is evi­
denced by the top-­down control administrators exercise on junior faculty 
members: they can speed up or delay tenure-­awarding procedures, for 
instance. In turn, top-­down constraints on a tenured professor’s capac­
ity to act might take the form of providing or restricting access to travel 
funds and teaching assistants. None of these modes of influence is a direct 
kinetic interventions in an affected trajectory (Salthe, personal commu­
nication 2021). Each is a deployment or removal of an obstruction or 
facilitating pathway, a change in the rules of the game, or of timing con­
straints. In short, introducing or modifying enabling or governing con­
straints, raising or lowering barriers to opportunities, and modifying 
pathways that change the playing field whereby duties and obligations, 
rights and benefits are divvied up are all ways in which interlevel con­
straints are exercised. Changing the capacity to act, that is, happens by 
introducing or removing, or tightening and relaxing constraints; trans­
formed constraint regimes reconfigure the possibility space and the con­
ditional probability of the events that carve its topology.
Pointedly, then, mereological relations among processes and entities at 
different hierarchical levels are relations of constraint, not efficient cause. 
Changes in constraints at one level bring about changes in properties and 
powers at a different hierarchical level, bottom up as well as top down. 
As an example of tacit bottom-­up constraints at work, a dean or depart­
ment chair’s usual top-­down control over faculty members is weakened 
if the latter can threaten to take their multimillion-­dollar grants to a 
competing institution. These relations do not describe energetic interac­
tions, but when those indirect enabling constraints appear, they blur hier­
archical levels and top-­down control is muted or lost—­all without any 
extra energy having been expended.
Relations from whole to parts are therefore “rate independent” (Salthe 
1985, 72) with respect to processes on which the whole acts as a con­
straint on its components. By rate independent, it is meant that, top 
down, governing constraints “inform and influence” components and 
realizations without participating in them dynamically (Salthe 1985, 82). 
The timing of the playground swing kick does not add energy to the 
kick. More generally, constraints exert mereological control by making 
the playing field more or less rugged, the gradient of its attractor more 
or less steep, by expanding or contracting the boundaries of possibility 
space, positioning a hillock or a chute nearby or moving it far away. A 
new protocol, for example, can change the topology of possibility space 
dramatically. Enabling and governing constraints can do this across a 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

Of Holons, Holarchy, Heterarchy, and Hierarchy    189
variety of dimensions and time scales. These include historical or tempo­
ral factors as well as spatial and cultural ones. We saw the roles played 
by buffers, isolation, and entrenchment. New amendments to a nation’s 
constitution were likewise described as changes of constraint that trickle 
down to considerable effect.
In general, then, governing constraints of hierarchies control top down 
by adjusting the constraints by virtue of which the lower level’s dynamics 
are regulated: by adjusting, for example, their sequential order, timing, 
frequency, activation, and inhibition and conditions under which they 
can or must happen, or the probability distribution of their realizations. 
These constraints are recalibrated at the interfaces between the hierarchi­
cal levels, by changing their filters and operational rules, regulations, and 
criteria and therefore, indirectly, the process of multiple constraint satis­
faction. When encountering mismatches between outside and inside, or 
between one hierarchical level and an adjacent one, active interfaces such 
as cell membranes and eardrums—­or divorce mediators—­fine tune con­
straints that control rates, frequencies, wavelengths, and format (digital, 
analog) of the input, the internal milieu, or both to make them compatible 
and facilitate interaction. Filtering and selection themselves, as we saw, are 
processes of multiple constraint satisfaction with a view toward integrabil­
ity into an effective constraint regime, not energetic exchange. The results: 
the pancreas releases more insulin (a catalyzing enzyme) in response to 
the need to manage a fudge brownie and maintain homeostasis. In social 
organizations, policy changes by the board or an effective leader, or rec­
ommendations by an agile coach, can bring about wholesale transforma­
tions by modifying the rules of the game.
There are limits to the influence of interlevel constraints. The asym­
metry between embedding holons and embedded ones can be destroyed 
by either excessively accelerating the dynamics of an embedding envi­
ronment or slowing down the rates of the focal-­level system beyond its 
tolerance range (Allen, O’Neill, and Hoekstra 1984). Think of tolerance 
range as the boundaries and coordinates of feasible space. As another 
example from academia: a number of community colleges in the United 
States now offer four-­year degrees; even more offer college credits to stu­
dents still enrolled in high school; liberal arts colleges have morphed into 
universities offering graduate degrees. Altering the defining cycling rates 
of each institution blurs their identities as coherent entities with mutual 
interlocking interdependencies. It also blurs the asymmetry between them. 
What was formerly a proper component (feeder?) holon becomes a near 
sister holon to its former context. When holons are absorbed into their 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

190    Chapter 12
embedding environment, they lose identity through dissolution. That 
said, some societies are quite skillful at coopting rebels and dissenters 
and absorbing them into their constraint regime (aka the establishment).
Lack of asymmetry in cycling rates between focal level and the context 
in which it is embedded, or between the focal level and its components, 
reflects the absence of control constraint by one on the other, regardless 
of signal amplitude. It also reflects an absence of qualitative differences 
between the two levels of organization. For example, when large multina­
tional corporations can shrug off billion-­dollar fines imposed by federal 
courts as the cost of doing business, their formally subordinate relation to 
the government becomes more like a relation between equals.
In contrast, facilitating energy flow to the focal holon by speeding 
up its endogenous cycling rates has different consequences. Constraints 
that enable such speeding up (like shorter loops of positive feedback, a 
steeper dynamic attractor, or new channels or gradients that deliver more 
resources to that holon) result in faster autocorrelation rates. Since embed­
ding holons typically smooth over differences among their components 
and treat them as continuous relations, speeding up rates of events at the 
component level can make them “invisible” to their embedding context, 
which no longer detects them as “components” (Allen and Starr 1982).
Examples from oncology are illustrative. Normal cells that start to 
replicate too fast soon die without nourishment. However, malfunction­
ing governing constraints on normal blood vessel formation and mainte­
nance might result in the runaway cell becoming vascularized. When this 
happens, the cell’s self-­assertive traits can slip the control of its embedding 
organ. Cancer ensues. Stopping vascularization to such tumors has been 
shown to resolve the problem as definitively as radiation intervention (an 
energetic intervention that kills those cells outright). The manner of reso­
lution of the two is different, however. Radiation therapy destroys cells 
with intense energy, a mechanical force intervention. Cutting off blood 
supply to the cells, on the other hand, does so by removing an enabling 
constraint. Differences in the modus operandi of enabling and governing 
constraints—­and between these and mechanical forces—­underlie asym­
metries and dependence relations between levels of organization, as well 
as between the organization and its environment.
Allen and Starr (1982) remark in passing that speeding up certain pro­
cesses in physical chemistry might have led to the origin of life. This new 
take on the origin of life suggests that overly assertive holons (perhaps due 
to the influence of autocatalysis, positive feedback, and constraint closure) 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

Of Holons, Holarchy, Heterarchy, and Hierarchy    191
might have slipped the control of geophysical constraints and acquired 
sufficient self-­determination and autonomy to loosen the physicochemi­
cal context’s control over them.3 Such exponential but stabilized growth 
of coherent interdependencies presupposes the operation of top-­down 
constraints.
As suggested by the prairie grasslands and chaparral examples, Allen 
and Starr (1982) also claim there are no regular perturbations in nature. 
Habituation and cooptation modify and adjust ecosystem constraint 
regimes in response to regular perturbations. In contrast, rare tsunamis 
and meteorite impacts are true perturbations, one-­off events to which 
coherent dynamics cannot be tuned and to which they cannot become 
anti-­fragile. These perturbations are external blows that impact existing 
ecosystems as efficient causes. Likewise, extreme cases of invasive species 
can simply wipe out existing ecosystems; entirely different constraint 
regimes and token realizations replace them. The damage such pertur­
bations wreak is real, but it is best understood as the effect of forceful 
impacts, not the workings of constraints.
Rate and phase differences between processes at different hierarchal 
levels of contextually constrained interdependencies thus reflect quali­
tative differences in properties and powers at each organizational level. 
Hierarchical levels of organization capture features that demarcate the 
kinds and types of entities realized by each set of constrained interdepen­
dences. Differences in constraints induce different levels of organization; 
different levels of organization represent different emergent qualities. Each 
hierarchical level is a set of interlocking constraints marked by uniquely 
individuated interdependencies. These become manifest as qualitatively 
novel emergent properties, powers, and behavior patterns. Constitutive 
constraints at each level of organization hold together qualitative distinc­
tions that make interlevel relations nonreciprocal and asymmetric. As an 
example, contextual constraints imposed by domestication facilitated the 
emergence of qualitative differentia between dogs and coyotes.
Some of these constitutive constraints are more obligate than others; 
they are entrenched. Others are more facultative and short-­lived. For 
example, constraints that differentiate domestic pigs from wild boars are 
quite fragile; they hold only within a narrow range of conditions. Within 
one generation, wild boar traits resurfaced in domestic pigs turned loose 
in the Florida Everglades. Nevertheless, no type can be understood absent 
the context and the constitutive constraints that hold the type’s coherence 
together. But given a specified context and the enabling constraints that 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

192    Chapter 12
generated the type, those interlocking interdependencies constitute real 
(if local and temporary) dynamics with qualitatively novel and emergent 
properties their components lack.
Extensional and Intensional Definitions
Different contextual constraints with different reach and scope generate 
qualitatively different interactional types. Tokens of those types embody 
and enact those qualitative distinctions. That is why meaningful and qual­
itative distinctions are disambiguated by context and in terms of the con­
stitutive constraints of their embedding context. When context-­dependent 
constraints generate indexicality (here, there, up, down, inside, out, before 
and after, in these circumstances but not those) qualitatively new properties 
emerge. These indicate that the coordinates, boundaries, and topography 
of the possibility space have transformed at multiple scales. Contextually 
constrained types and their tokens can only be explained in reference to 
newly emergent relational properties indexed to a particular context at a 
particular moment.
Hierarchical structuralism is therefore a theory of differences, not 
similarities, much less averages. But modern science traffics in averages, 
bell-­shaped curves, and eigenvalues. How does science handle qualitative 
distinctions or individuation, both of which depend on context?
According to modern science and philosophy, terms referring to events 
and processes must be capable of extensional definition. Their definition 
demarcates their reference. Extensionally defined terms can be substituted 
in statements without loss of truth value. For modern science and phi­
losophy, as chapter 1 described, extensional definitions were grounded in 
fundamental particles and anatomical structures; these were assumed to 
be determined by eternal, unchanging, and universal primary properties. 
Contextual differences were attributed to secondary properties and were 
considered ontically derivative. Western science and philosophy to this 
day still aspire to “the View from Nowhere” (Nagel 1986) and Spinoza’s 
sub specie aeternitatis perspective.
This appealing promise of transcendence, I submit, has a negative down­
side. It dismisses nature’s ontic capability for generalization, individuation, 
and creativity. In contrast, this book has argued that context is real and 
contextual constraints produce real effects, among which are creative 
emergence of new types of entities with uniquely individuated trajecto­
ries. When contextual constraints take priority as a system’s enabling and 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

Of Holons, Holarchy, Heterarchy, and Hierarchy    193
governing constraints, providing extensive definitions in terms of internal 
and universal properties becomes a nonstarter. Emergence and creativity, 
however, bring with them the unavoidable uncertainty that comes from 
context dependence’s capacity to generate types of entities that are, by 
definition, indexed to the context and multiply realizable. In consequence, 
the asymmetry between hierarchical levels of organization (Salthe 1991) 
formed by contextual constraints bars events, properties, and powers 
embedded within each level from extensional definition.
Specifically, contextually constrained interactional types (Ellis’s equiv­
alence classes; Ellis 2016, 2021) cannot be defined by way of their refer­
ence or denotation. As we saw in the discussion on effective input and 
output, interfaces of complex systems calibrate incoming physical signals 
in terms of their relevance to the system’s constitutive constraints and 
their order parameters (cohesion, fittingness, vorticity, valence, and so 
on). In context. Cohesion, fittingness, and the rest of these relational 
properties are eminently indexical and context-­dependent; they subtend 
the context-­dependent powers of those interdependencies.
In conclusion: hierarchy formation by constraints implies that orga­
nizational levels and their realizations must be intensionally defined in 
terms of novel qualities that arise at each level of dynamic organization in 
response to integration by contextual constraints (Ellis 2016, 2021; Salthe 
1991).
Many-­to-­One transitions in response to constraints therefore mark 
phase changes to hierarchically and indexically organized possibility land­
scapes where each point in space and time now has a neighborhood and 
reflects a moment. Points in hierarchical space must be defined intensionally, 
in terms of the contextual constraints and interdependencies in which each 
point is situated. It must be defined, that is, in terms of the holon, attractor, 
or coherent One—­in which it is embedded. When context matters, space 
is no longer a featureless container; it has become a place structured and 
limned by constraints. Points in time become positions and moments, steps 
and stages. Consequently, context-­dependent constraints that were assumed 
to go without saying must be foregrounded to fully explain the role they 
play in those rumpled possibility landscapes and dynamics. And therefore in 
the individuated landscape of each token in it. By focusing on asymmetries 
and differences in the interdependencies enabled by context-­dependent con­
straints, contextual constraints inevitably implicate intensional definitions. 
Thinking of universally applicable counterfactuals as the defining charac­
teristic of science becomes problematic. Chapter 14 returns to this subject.
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

194    Chapter 12
Control Hierarchy
Part III brings the backstory to the present day, where mereological and 
supervenience relations take front stage. The next chapter discusses mental 
causation by constraints that embody nontransitive intensional content, as 
suggested by the supervenience relation.
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

III
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

When we last left the backstory, Descartes had proposed the theory 
known as dualism, the sundering of reality into two domains, mind and 
body. As we saw, dualism could not account for top-­down causes without 
violating physical closure or espousing overdetermination. Neither could 
it explain coherent wholes or intentional, purposive action.
The early twentieth century witnessed the apogee of Skinnerian behav­
iorism, a reaction to dualism which I will not discuss since it is so well 
known. By midcentury, however, objections to behaviorism were strong 
and numerous. Empirical research cast doubts on the idea of mind as 
the impenetrable and/or unnecessary content of a Skinnerian black box. 
Attempts to blackbox cognitive processes and reduce sensations like phe­
nomenal feels to operant conditioning floundered (Rosenblueth, Wiener, 
and Bigelow 1943; Putnam 1967, 1975; Wright 1976; Goldman 1970; 
Roque 1987). By the mid-­1970s, a new academic discipline called cog­
nitive neuroscience turned to computer technology and brain imaging, 
especially attempts at brain mapping, for inspiration on the relations 
between mind and body.
Formulated by British philosopher J. J. C. Smart (1959) and Austrian 
American philosopher Herbert Feigl (1958), the psychoneural identity 
theory (also called identity theory) set the stage for this new approach 
by proposing the reductionist thesis that mental events and processes 
are identical to—­nothing but—­brain events. U. T. Place’s (1970) seminal 
article was titled “Is Consciousness a Brain Process?” In language typical 
of its day, the theory proposed that, for example, “mental event or process 
Ψ is identical to C-­fibers firing.”1 An inadequate understanding of identity, 
informed by the standard understanding of causality as energetic transfer, 
was to plague the identity theory as well as the two that followed, func­
tionalism and the supervenience thesis. Let us see how.
13
The Backstory, Today
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

198    Chapter 13
The earliest version of the identity theory proposed that mental events 
generally—­my thoughts now about my grandmother, for instance—­are 
identical with a certain neuronal firing pattern. The identity theory alleg­
edly applied to phenomenal feels as well. Pain—­my headache now—­is 
also identical to (nothing but) a certain neuronal firing pattern.
Type identity theory held that types of cognitive and sensory processes 
(such as thoughts, beliefs, pains) are identical to certain types of brain 
events. Headaches are identical to a type of brain event—­say, a C-­fibers-­
type brain process. Type identity would be falsified if two tokens of the 
same mental event (two instances of headaches) correlate with distinct 
types of neural or physical events—­for example, if my headache now cor­
relates to certain C-­fibers firing but your headache yesterday correlated 
with a different type of brain event, such as a neurotransmitter-­release-­
type event. Since C-­fibers firing and neurotransmitter releases are distinct 
types of brain processes, pain as a type of event (headaches, in this case) 
could not be identical to C-­fibers firing type events.
Evidence to that effect quickly appeared. Degeneracy popped up every­
where (Mason et al. 2014). Dramatic cases of patients with congenital 
hemibrain but who showed no obvious evidence of cognitive impairment 
raised serious doubts about any simple one-­to-­one identity between types 
of mental events and types of physical events such as brain processes. 
Neurological studies establishing the indubitable plasticity of the brain 
put paid to any claims to identity.
To circumvent this objection, the token identity theory replaced type 
identity. This weaker version of identity maintained that actual instances 
(tokens) of pain are identical with actual neural events. On a token-­
identity version of psycho-­neural identity, my particular headache today 
might be identical with a certain instance of C-­fibers firing, even if your 
particular headache yesterday was identical with a given neurotransmit­
ter process. There is nothing to an actual experience of pain over and 
above the token brain event with which it is identical.
Retreating to token identity lost the theory its credibility. Token identity 
could not explain why instances of the same type of pain, say headaches, 
might be identical with C-­fibers firing in one case but neurotransmitters 
in another. The alleged identity became even more questionable if those 
correlations (my pain with C-­fibers firing; yours with a neurotransmitter 
release) were not regular and lawlike.
To make matters worse, empirical results coming out of neuroscience 
at the time raised additional doubts about universal unipotentiality, the 
one-­to-­one identity between one brain and one mental event on which 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

The Backstory, Today    199
the identity was based. Brain mapping of amputees revealed that the 
region of the brain usually associated with the amputated limb could be 
coopted by a different function. Areas in the brain corresponding to one 
faculty can be taken over by another faculty if necessary and put to a dif­
ferent use. Regions of the brain dedicated to vision could be taken over 
by hearing or touch, for example. The identity theory could not account 
for such widespread plasticity.
Although some localization was discovered, clinical research soon 
focused on this dramatic plasticity, its pluripotentiality, and its often dis­
tributed architecture. Multiple realizability also appeared to be a common 
characteristic of biological organization. Certain neurotransmitter mole­
cules have a particular effect in the digestive tract but an entirely different 
effect in the brain. Also, complex neural networks were discovered to be 
widely distributed throughout the brain.2 Thoughts and beliefs—mental 
events generally—could not be easily and unequivocally identified one to 
one with local physical structures or processes.
Combined, these observations prompted the fundamental question, 
“What justifies identifying token mental events with a diverse array of 
brain events that seem to share no common or general feature with each 
other (other than being brain events)?”3 Since neither brain imaging nor 
other probes at the time had sufficient resolution to identify microneural 
processes exactly, both versions of the identity theory were left with the 
following unpalatable choice: either a double aspect theory, for which 
mental events are ontologically identical to physical events, but physi­
cal stuff has two qualitatively distinct aspects, physical and mental,4 or 
what might be called promissory physicalism, the pledge that once brain 
imaging techniques improved, the exact correlation between thoughts, 
intentions, or sensations and neural patterns would be elucidated. In 
recent years, the explosive power and granularity of brain mapping tech­
nology continued to up the ante on that pledge (but see Mitchell 2021).
And so, the themes presented in our introductory chapter reappear in 
the twentieth century in the guise of the philosophy of mind’s theories 
about type identity and token individuation (the identity theory called 
it token identity theory, not token individuation theory). What makes a 
particular event or process a token of a given type? And how can actual 
instances or specimens become increasingly individuated and therefore 
uniquely themselves, all the while continuing to belong to the same type? 
What constitutes and holds together a type of mental event like an inten­
tion, and how is it biologically realized, one to one? How is that even 
possible in cases of intentions like running for office, which take years 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

200    Chapter 13
if not decades to be realized? The standard assumption that universal 
and unchanging primary properties confer type identity makes this ques­
tion a critical one. Lacking an account of coherence that binds distinct 
individual and previously separate neurons into a unitary network with 
emergent properties while simultaneously allowing that network to indi­
viduate and differentiate over time as distinct tokens, both versions of the 
identity theory failed to account for emergent properties of interdepen­
dencies even among physical (neural) processes.
Like behaviorism before it, the token identity theory also egregiously 
failed to explain the emergent content of thoughts and intentions and 
the qualitative feel of sensations like a searing pain, a vivid color, or a 
haunting fragrance. As noted earlier, the subjectively felt properties of 
the latter were labeled qualia. Even if one-­to-­one correlation was estab­
lished between actual neural processes and particular qualitative feels 
such as the experience of seeing the vivid crimson of Don Juan roses, 
correlation alone would not explain what it is about those neural events 
that produces that qualitative experience of color—­or of a searing pain. 
It would fail to account for qualia. As formulated in a commonly used 
example, a blind neuroscientist who knew everything about the physical 
substrate that correlates with the color red would still not fully grasp 
everything about the experience of perceiving a Don Juan rose. Finally, 
the purported identity between neural processes and mental events also 
failed egregiously to account for subjective experience (the hard problem 
of conscious awareness in general and self-­consciousness in particular). 
Neither version of the identity theory could explain why certain neural 
patterns turned on the light of awareness nor account for how brain 
events can be about facts in the world. Much less could it explain recur­
sive self-awareness.
Functionalism
Inspired by the work of British mathematician Alan Turing on universal 
computing machines (Turing 1936), the burgeoning fields of computa­
tional devices and information theory transformed Anglo American phi­
losophy of mind. Specifically, the fact that devices can carry out the same 
information processing on different hardware suggested to philosophers 
that the multiple realizability of mental events might be reconceptual­
ized on the analogy between a computer’s hardware and its software—­in 
particular, on the fact that software can be instantiated in a variety of 
hardware. This theory came to be known as functionalism.
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

The Backstory, Today    201
According to functionalism, what makes an experience a mental state 
is not its internal and material substrate (its primary properties) but its 
function. On the analogy of software, function is realized as a series of 
if–­then relations (algorithms) that link physical inputs to outputs such 
as behavior. Functionalism thus updated behaviorism’s ideas about con­
ditioning with conceptual tools borrowed from information-­processing: 
mental events just are the algorithms running on a brain.
By decoupling the informational and functional aspect of mental events 
from its material realization—­in transistors, solid state chips, or organic 
matter—­functionalism decoupled feelings, emotions, thoughts and inten­
tions—mental processing generally—­from biological wetware. Whereas 
the identity theory’s emphasis on organic stuff had left no room for arti­
ficial intelligence, functionalism also pleased science fiction buffs: if the 
same software happens to be running on silicon chips instead of organic 
matter, we can conclude that the silicon device feels pain. Artificial Intel­
ligence as a serious field of research was born.
Claiming that the functional order and organization according to 
which actions are governed is more significant than the stuff the organi­
zation arranges conferred an unavoidably dualist tint to the theory. As a 
result, functionalism came to be referred to as property dualism by advo­
cates and detractors alike. It is noteworthy for our purposes, however, 
that one early critique of functionalism pointed out that it made no room 
for context (Dreyfus 1972).
Chinese Room Objection
The idea that input–­output relations can fully account for all higher-­level 
mental capacities, including emergent properties such as qualia, conscious­
ness, understanding, and so on, was soon challenged. The so-­called Chinese 
room argument of American philosopher John Searle (Searle 1980) is often 
considered the metaphorical coup de grâce to functionalism. Suppose 
you are locked in a room, and a sheet of paper with a question written 
in Chinese characters is passed to you under the door. By consulting a 
Mandarin-­English dictionary (which serves as an algorithm-­like lookup 
table), you respond with other characters. Searle’s point is that there is no 
reason to suppose that by enacting what is in effect a software program in 
this manner you understand the meanings of the interlocutor’s squiggles, 
or that your own squiggles convey an intended reply.
In short, functionalism’s failure to address understanding, meaning, 
the intensional and intentional content of mental events, qualia, and the 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

202    Chapter 13
hard problem of consciousness was as egregious as its predecessors’, the 
identity theory and behaviorism.
Intentional content with a t is what a mental event such as a thought 
or belief is about. But what is intensionality with an s with respect to 
mental events? In addition to qualia, among the novel properties of 
mental events is intensionality. As noted in the previous chapter, inten­
sional concepts and properties like here and now are those whose char­
acter is inherently context dependent. As an example of intensionality in 
belief statements, consider the following: Ann believes that John’s wife 
is cheating on him. Ann does not know that Mary is John’s wife. Under 
these circumstances, the term Mary cannot be substituted for John’s wife 
in the statement “Ann believes that John’s wife is cheating on him”—­
because Ann does not believe that it is Mary who is cheating on John.
And yet intensional content of mental events, such as Ann’s belief above, 
is at the heart of how intentions cause actions. Add a premise to the above 
case: suppose Ann believes that John is also cheating on his wife, and Ann 
tells Mary that. Since Ann did not intend to tell John’s wife that he is 
cheating on her, the two terms cannot be substituted salva veritate in these 
sentences either. Ann’s comment was informed by the intensional content 
of her beliefs, which, in this case, do not link Mary with John’s wife.
The implications for functionalism were clear: any functionalist 
account of intentional action must account for how purposive behavior 
is directed by mental content as conceived by the agent. Ann’s beliefs and 
intentions, and her comments, are conditional on her mindset, that is, on 
her conceiving of the person as John’s wife, not as Mary. Despite referring 
to the same individual, the terms cannot be substituted for one another 
without loss of truth value in sentences where these appear as the inten­
sional content of mental events.
Intensional content of mental events must be indexically defined 
because beliefs, thoughts, and intentions as generated by contextual con­
straints are perspectival. They are products of context-­dependent con­
straints. Any account of intentional causation must therefore account for 
the role of intensional content in purposive action.
Principle of Supervenience
Aiming for a nonreductive physicalism that could account for emergent 
mental properties like meaningful and intensional content as well as 
qualia, the Principle of Supervenience was formulated to buttress func­
tionalism and, in passing, further refute the identity theory.
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

The Backstory, Today    203
Advocates of the supervenience thesis acknowledged that mental 
events have remainder properties that do not match neuronal patterns 
defined extensionally. The intensional content of thoughts, beliefs, and 
the felt experience of color and pain cannot therefore be identical to 
either neuronal events or software packages.
Advocates of the new theory proposed instead that mental events 
supervene on brain events.
The supervenience thesis claimed to offer a nonreductive yet fully natu­
ralist approach that avoids the pitfalls of both the prevalent psychophysi­
cal identity theory and Cartesian dualism. Korean American philosopher 
Jaegwon Kim, who had earlier espoused the identity theory, was its best-­
known advocate. Because of the subjective, qualitative character of some 
mental events as well as their intensional content, mental events could no 
longer be considered identical to either dematerialized syntactical rela­
tions or neural processes tout court. Kim proposed instead that mental 
events are in an asymmetric relation of supervenience with brain events.
As American philosopher Donald Davidson first used the term in 1970, 
the supervenience thesis held that when one type of properties (Ψ)—­those 
that define mental events—­supervenes on another type of events and 
properties (Φ)—­physical ones—­there can be no changes in Ψ without a 
corresponding change in Φ. No two events can be alike in all underlying 
or subvening (physical) properties while at the same time differing in their 
emergent or supervening (mental) properties. An event “cannot change in 
some mental respects without a corresponding alteration in some physical 
respects.” Resolutely naturalist, the supervenience thesis held that mental 
processes are not identical to but depend on physical ones.
Davidson argued, however, that on pain of turning into another version 
of the identity theory, that dependence relation must be causal. ­Subvening 
neurological events must actively cause supervening mental properties 
(Davidson 1980). Suddenly, the problems of mereology reappeared. How do 
different subvening physical (brain) processes cause supervening thoughts 
and beliefs with intensional content, for example (Juarrero 1999)? And 
especially, what role does the intensional content of those mental events 
play with respect to causing purposive action? Can intentions cause actions 
in virtue of their supervening properties, their intensional content in this 
case? The problem of top-­down causation thus returned as well.
Recall that the received understanding of causal relations to this day 
maintains that causal power goes only one way, bottom-­up. Davidson 
and Kim took for granted that proper causes only operate as efficient 
causes, that cause and effect must be spatiotemporally distinct, and that 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

204    Chapter 13
causal power goes only from subvening properties to supervening ones. 
As merely aggregative sums of subvening brain events, moreover, mental 
events must be causally powerless because if the emergent properties of 
mental events as mental could bring about changes in the physical world, 
this top-­down causal influence would violate physical closure and overde­
termine the universe.
The only acceptable conclusion for the supervenience thesis was that 
the supervening properties of mental events might be real, but they are 
epiphenomenal, that is, impotent.
In a scathing critique, Kim (1989, 1998) labeled this crushing impli­
cation of the supervenience thesis “Descartes’ Revenge” because of its 
analogy with the fatal flaw of Descartes’ dualism described at the begin­
ning of this book. Supervenience’s dirty little secret was that avoiding 
overdetermination and violating causal closure unavoidably commits its 
advocates to epiphenomenalism and the disavowal of top-­down causality. 
Supervenience cannot explain acting purposively—because of the context-­
dependent intensional content (much less qualia) of an ­intention—without 
committing the same errors as substance dualism. Qualia and the intensional 
content of intentions can only be the impotent  effluvia of physical—­in this 
case neuronal—­processes.
In the end, Kim concluded that, pace purported claims of superve­
nience, mind and body are in fact identical after all (despite their distinct 
properties). To accentuate the pertinence of the supervenience debate for 
this work, I reiterate that the impasse between emergent properties and 
causality arises in the first place because philosophy has no general under­
standing either of the origin of mereological coherence or of top-­down 
causation from wholes to parts, or other than in terms of efficient causes.
Multiple Realizability
The plausibility of both functionalism and the supervenience thesis vis-­
à-­vis the token identity theory nevertheless rested as strongly on the fact 
of degeneracy as did the initial attempt to formulate the identity theory 
in terms of types, not tokens. Understanding coordination dynamics and 
hierarchies as constraint regimes generated by their constituents, each 
multiply realizable by the relata that comprise them is key to rethinking 
these problems.5 Multiple realization is not limited to neurological and 
information-­processing dynamics. As we have seen throughout this work, 
it is not even limited to living things, where it is called degeneracy.
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

The Backstory, Today    205
Multiple realizability appears to increase throughout the universe along­
side complexification. In a wide variety of fields in addition to the com­
putational and cognitive neurosciences, including empirical neuroscience, 
we have presented evidence that emergent properties such as autocatalytic 
cycles and convection cells can be variously realized. Phenotypes can vary, 
sometimes quite dramatically, depending on the context in which gene 
expression occurs. This provides evidence that realizations of a genome’s 
information content in a particular phenotype are not one to one. This 
is also clearly so with respect to the intensional content of beliefs and 
intentions. Even assuming schizophrenia has a strongly genetic com­
ponent, for example, paranoid schizophrenic patients in medieval times 
were not fearful of the CIA. The role of context in multiple realizability 
and intensional content must be accounted for. Furthermore, higher-­level 
(supervening) properties can persist despite dramatic changes in the under­
lying neurological realizations. Different neural patterns can realize the 
same thought; the same neural pattern can subtend different emotions—
depending on context. As noted earlier, persistence is grounded in the lack 
of one-­to-­one correspondence between changes in lower-­level events and 
particular functions or properties. Plasticity, degeneracy, and pluripotency 
are typical of the relations between types and tokens.
Remarkably, however, the most trenchant objections to the superve­
nience hypothesis initially challenged the claim that mental properties 
are degenerate at all (that is, multiply realizable). Of those questioning 
the multiple realizability premise itself, American philosophers Thomas 
Polger and Lawrence Shapiro (Polger and Shapiro 2016) are among the 
best known. Those arguments are discussed in detail in the next chapter, 
where the tendency to question anything but the underlying framework 
about causality and the reality of mereological relations is highlighted.
Before that, however, let us close this chapter by bringing the back­
story up to date with the 4E approach.
The 4E Approach Today
In 1975, Hilary Putnam published “The Meaning of ‘Meaning,’” where 
he argued that “the mind ain’t just in the head”; it is extended and dis­
tributed throughout the body. This take on the mind and cognition con­
trasted vividly at the time with the approach that held that the mind is 
entirely located inside the brain, where it mysteriously processes content­
ful representations and produces intentional actions.
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

206    Chapter 13
Clark and Chalmers’s (1998) article directly addressed the question, 
“Where does the mind stop and the rest of the world begin?” by intro­
ducing the philosophical thesis of active externalism: it is not that the 
mind ain’t just in the head and extends to the rest of the body. In fact, 
no principled separation can be drawn between mind, body, and envi­
ronment. Human activities incorporate objects in the environment into 
cognitive and affective processes; these, in turn, extrude into the devices 
and tools they design and deploy.
Earlier, Origins of the Modern Mind (Donald 1991) had presented evi­
dence that cognition and consciousness actively involve tool and technol­
ogy use. From paper and pencil to handheld calculators, such devices at 
first glance seem only to store and execute the products of the mind. In 
fact, Donald argued, a wide range of tools must be considered co-­creators 
and co-­implementers of mental activity. Our mind extrudes into the world 
through its embodiment in a panoply of devices; conversely, those devices 
become integrated into our cognitive and affective framework. It is evident 
that this idea is congruent with the one presented in this book.
In the past twenty-­plus years, this approach has grown into a move­
ment. Often labeled the 4E approach, it draws from complexity science 
and dynamical systems theory to describe cognition not only as embod­
ied throughout the human anatomy and physiology (Thelen and Smith 
1994) and extended into technology, tools, and other devices (Chemero 
2009). Ontically, it defines mental events as enactments of social practices 
and activities (De Jaegher and Di Paolo 2007, Noe 2010).
Sensorimotor Life (Di Paolo, Buhrmann, and Barandiaran 2017) 
explicitly refers to recursivity, reciprocal causality, and dynamics as central 
to the enacted mind. The authors note that human activities are “highly 
context-­sensitive and full of constraints of all kinds, including, but not 
limited to time pressures at multiple scales, context-­sensitive manipula­
tion of tools and artifacts, the need to coordinate actions with variable 
objects and other people . . . ​constraints on the capabilities and demands 
of the body” (Di Paolo, Buhrmann, and Barandiaran 2017, 4). Slaby and 
Gallagher (2014), too, extend the idea of enacted minds to institutions 
and organizations. They consider science, for example, to be a cognitive 
institution that “shapes our cognitive activity so as to constitute a certain 
type of knowledge, packaged with relevant skills and techniques” (33). 
One can consider the elaborate social practices of cassava and nardoo 
preparation to be instances of enactivist practices.
Radical enactivism goes even further: it posits that mental, cognitive, 
and affective processes are constituted in and through sense-­making 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

The Backstory, Today    207
activities. This version of the 4E approach conceptualizes cognitive and 
sensory processes as radically context dependent on activities: cognitive 
processes are nothing but the enactment of social practices. Specifically, 
this radical version casts doubt on the reality of mental representation and 
intensional content as such. From this perspective, the human self (Kyselo 
2014) in its entirety is also constituted as (nothing but) a “social exis­
tence” organized as self-­other activities “represented by a phase space . . . ​
whose attractors can be defined” (Kyselo and Tschacher 2014, 1).
There is significant agreement between the ideas developed here and 
4E’s insight that embedded and embodied human practices and activities 
provide the right framework for understanding minds and mental pro­
cesses. However, although the role of constraint in generating and preserv­
ing structured self-­other possibility spaces (such as sensorimotor habits, 
social practices, and schemes) is implied in most of the 4E publications, 
when constraint is mentioned at all, it is used almost exclusively in the 
stabilizing and restricting sense of constraint.
In contrast, this book has attempted to articulate the manner in which 
enabling constraints generate those very self-­other interdependencies and 
practices that are at the heart of the 4E approach. Context-­dependent con­
straints create the phase space, attractors, coherences, and mutual depen­
dencies that the 4E approach emphasizes. Constraints are also the source 
of the emergent properties of those interdependencies, among which, this 
book has maintained, are intensional content, qualia, and phenomenal 
awareness, which in turn and acting as governing constraints produce, 
regulate, and modulate socially required, task-appropriate, and context-­
sensitive behaviors.
This book has also attempted to explicitly rethink the “[recursive] cau­
sality unknown to us” that Kant argued was at the heart of purposive 
behavior by proposing a general framework of constraints for mereological 
relations. It has delved deeply into how constraints facilitate and impede 
information flows between those layers of natural and social hierarchical 
organization we call individuals, their habitats and worlds, and the social 
practices in which agents are embedded and which they co-­create in their 
enactments. I have done so by returning to the source of my original inter­
est in complexity theory: the parallels between Kant’s understanding of 
intrinsic teleology as self-­organization and the recursive causality at work 
in Prigogine’s dissipative structures (Juarrero-­Roque 1985).
Approached with the passkey of constraints and insights from biologi­
cally inspired hierarchy theory, far-from-equilibrium thermodynamics 
show that constraints are not efficient causes; they do not transfer energy 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

208    Chapter 13
directly and are therefore not vulnerable to charges of overdetermination 
or violation of causal closure. They are coherence makers and sustainers. 
Body–­social interdependencies, agent–­environment couplings, patterns 
of sensorimotor schemes and habits, and the array of interdependent 
activities at the center of the 4E approach are therefore best understood 
as the outcomes of bottom-­up enabling and generative constraints. They 
embody and enact new coherences and as such drive major transfor­
mations in evolution. In both the living and the nonliving worlds, con­
straints generate coordination dynamics with emergent properties. Once 
coalesced and acting as top-­down constitutive/governing constraints, the 
order parameters of those extended coordination dynamics stabilize, pre­
serve, and realize those interdependencies in the enactment of a variety of 
activities and practices. In cascades of negative feedback processes thanks 
to the nonlinearities that characterize far from equilibrium dynamical 
systems, governing constraints regulate and modulate energetic processes 
such that individuals can enact those social constraints as socially sanc­
tioned activities and practices.
Without the role of constraints in generating those multiply realizable 
interdependencies, the self-­sustaining mereological relations of “sensorim­
otor schemes and habits,” for example (Di Paolo, Buhrmann, and Baran­
diaran 2014), would remain unexplained. Accounting for how constraints 
take conditions away from equilibrium and/or away from independence 
gathers habits, repetitive drills, sedimentation, self-­sustaining interdepen­
dencies, and the rest of the conceptual tools of the 4E approach under the 
general framework of constraints. Without a role for constraints, phase 
transitions to new possibility spaces with emergent properties would 
remain unaccounted for. Finally, since as noneconomic entities constraints 
do not directly transfer energy, it is the conservation of constraints that 
accounts for the covarying behavior patterns and sensorimotor coordina­
tion on which the 4E approach is centered.
In short, Context Changes Everything has aimed to explain the sources 
of the 4Es, embeddedness, embodiment, enaction, and ecological coher­
ence and interdependence. It did so by examining the manner of causality 
whereby coupling and linkages that generate those 4Es come into being, 
persist, and even become sedimented and entrenched.
The claims made in this book are therefore more far reaching than 
those of the 4E approach. Rather than address the topic of mental rep­
resentation directly, Context Changes Everything focused on the role of 
emergent properties more generally. It proposed that enabling and/or 
constitutive/governing constraints are in place not only in living things 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

The Backstory, Today    209
capable of sensorimotor schemes. Physicochemical convection cells, plan­
etary atmospherics, lasers, and even homeostasis in eukaryotic cells are 
only a few examples of precursors mentioned in this work. Even prior 
to the emergence of aquatic life and land-based lichens and mycorrhiza, 
these constraints continued to complexify in hydrothermal deep-sea ocean 
vents. Each of these these transitions describes coordination dynamics 
that are the products of context-­independent and context-­dependent 
constraints. A continuum of constraints has evolved, beginning in the 
Big Bang and the creation of elementary particles, through galactic for­
mations and planetary atmospherics, to the emergence of increasingly 
symbiotic life and conscious awareness, and finally to the myriad social 
practices and activities that characterize the Anthropocene and which the 
4E authors highlight. Well before the origin of life, that is, constraints at 
work in the abiotic domain generated and governed precursors of the 
human self-social dynamics described as the 4Es.
Since embeddedness, sensorimotor habits and schemes, and other 4E 
concepts presuppose the existence of mereological relations of constraint 
between parts and wholes, let us now examine more closely the role of 
multiple realizability itself in bringing about functional dependencies.
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

This chapter analyzes two contemporary arguments about multiple real­
izability and the relation between supervening and subvening entities and 
processes. Lawrence Shapiro and Thomas Polger’s views (Shapiro 2000; 
Polger and Shapiro 2016) on functional multiple realizability are dis­
cussed first. I then examine Marc Lange’s (2017) logic of explanation as 
it pertains to natural phenomena that are alike.
*
*
*
The Principle of Supervenience turned on the relation between subven­
ing processes (also called realizers) and supervening (realized) properties 
generally, not only in the mind–­body realm. Its claims presupposed that 
the following questions had been answered in the affirmative: (1) Does 
multiple realization actually happen? (2) If so, do multiply realized (super­
vening) types identify real kinds? What qualifies as different tokens of 
the same kind? For example, Are camera eyes, like those of humans and 
octopi, and compound eyes, like those of insects, different realizations of 
the same kind of thing, eyes? Or are they two different kinds of things?
As we saw with the two versions of the identity theory, the classi­
cal question of type identity—­are types real or not?—­has reappeared. 
Or does reality, and, especially, causal power inhere only in ground-­level 
primary properties, making types mere epistemic classifications?
Shapiro and Gillett on Multiple Realizability
American philosopher Lawrence Shapiro reaffirms Davidson’s premise 
that only causally relevant properties, those that cause a thing or process 
to carry out a function, qualify as realizing properties. Kinds are defined 
in terms of type-­level properties. In the case of mousetraps and cork­
screws, those properties are functional: this device is a mousetrap if it 
performs the function of catching mice; that levered gizmo is a corkscrew 
because it carries out the function of uncorking bottles. It is only in virtue 
14
Multiple Realization and Supervenience
A Philosophical Case Study about Constraints
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

212    Chapter 14
of those causal powers that they are the type of thing they are, corkscrews 
or mousetraps.
Shapiro maintains that two entities are distinct token realizations of 
the same kind only if their causal mechanisms are different. Even intui­
tively, differently colored corkscrews do not count as different types of 
corkscrews. Tokens must realize the same functional type through differ­
ent causal mechanisms. Silicon and biological brains, for example, differ 
in material composition (one is made of organic neurons, the other of 
silicon wafers). But since electricity is what causes information processing 
in each, “There seems to be no more reason to count [silicon and biologi­
cal brains] as distinct realizations” of mental events (Shapiro 2000, 645) 
than if some neurons were stained gray and others purple.1
Shapiro justifies this conclusion by referring to Fodor’s principle that 
“what justifies a taxonomy, what makes a kind ‘natural,’ is the power and 
generality of the theories that are enabled when we taxonomize in that way” 
(Fodor 1981). Scientific theories discover similarities that enact lawful reg­
ularities; it is the scope and stringency of the natural laws they subtend, not 
mere correlation, that underwrite the power and generality of truly scien­
tific predictions. So, to qualify as multiple realizability, causal mechanisms 
of allegedly distinct realizations must “require different manipulations, 
[and be] described by different laws” (Shapiro 2000; emphasis added).
From this premise, Shapiro concludes that functional properties are 
either not (“all that”) multiply realizable, or there is nothing particularly 
interesting about higher-­level functional phenomena as such.
He reasons as follows: mammalian and octopus eyes share the same 
causal mechanism: light impinges on a single lens, projecting an inverted 
image onto a retina, which converts the image into an electrical signal. 
Because the single lens, retina, and electrical signaling mechanism is the 
same in both mammals and octopi, there are no causal differences in 
virtue of which octopus eyes and mammal eyes realize vision. There is a 
fortiori no difference in the natural laws that bring about vision in the 
two cases. Since a “virtually identical structure” (Putnam 1967, 1975) 
governed by the same natural law causes vision in each2 (Shapiro 2000; 
Polger and Shapiro 2016, chap. 3), mammal and octopus eyes are not 
multiple realizations of the same kind of thing, eyes.
If a predicate does not feature in a natural law, it does not pick out a 
real kind and so no multiple realization occurs. In philosophical jargon, 
only projectible properties appear in natural laws. By identifying traits 
governed by natural laws, projectible properties underwrite prediction; 
as such they support counterfactuals and can “be taken as guides to valid 
inductions.”3 That is what makes them real properties.
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

Multiple Realization and Supervenience    213
Shapiro argues that functional properties such as uncorking wine bottles 
and catching mice are not projectible because there are no natural laws that 
determine uncorking or mouse-­catching. He goes further. The “sciences” of 
economics, ecology, and so on are also bogus, and for the same reason: they 
deal in bogus kinds because no predicates in those sciences are projectible. 
There are no natural laws of economics or ecology. Consequently, there are 
no proper natural laws in the special sciences. Indeed, there are no natural 
laws that hold for higher-­level or purportedly functional properties as such.
The unavoidable implication for philosophy of mind is that think­
ing, intending, sensing, perceiving, and other higher-­order (mental) events 
are projectible traits only if those characteristics feature in natural laws. 
But no psychobehavioral laws exist that universally and deterministically 
link mental properties as such with particular actions. So mental prop­
erties do not pick out real ontic kinds. They are not real properties. “If 
two realizations contribute to a capacity in causally distinct ways then 
this must mean that there are no [lower-­level] laws common to both of 
them” (Shapiro 2000, 648; emphasis added); so each realization enacts 
a distinct natural law. Different corkscrews, mousetraps—­or mental and 
social processes —­might be functional isomorphs of one another, but 
they are not multiple realizations of real kinds.
American philosopher Carl Gillett (2003) describes this impasse as 
the clash of two opposing views on causal relations between realizer and 
realized. Under Shapiro’s flat realization view, as Gillett terms it, the fact 
that the lenses of mammals and octopi eyes are composed of different 
proteins and rely on different pigments is irrelevant. These features have 
no direct causal role in bringing about vision. The real causal mechanisms 
are the single lens, inverted image, retina, and electrical impulses, which 
mammals and octopi share. Shapiro (2000): “Sameness in the processes 
that result in the formation and analysis of an image screen” provides 
truth conditions for determining causal relevance. Differences in proteins 
and pigments must be screened off as causally irrelevant to the actual and 
virtually identical causal mechanism in both.
The flat view, that is, requires that properties and causal mechanisms of 
subvening realizers directly cause the realized and supervening properties. 
The combination of realizing components and processes (here a single lens 
projecting an inverted image on a retina, which converts it to electrical 
signals) is what causes vision. The flat view, in short, implies a bottom-
­up and strictly determinist one-­to-­one correlation between realizer and 
realized (which, as efficient causes, must also be separately identifiable). 
Because natural laws project microlevel properties, only one macrostate 
realization results from a given set of microstates.
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

214    Chapter 14
In contrast, the dimensioned realization view has a more expansive inter­
pretation of cause: on that view, the powers of the realized (functional) 
property result from the “powers of the realizers” (Gillett 2003, 595) even 
if the realizers “may and often do contribute no common powers includ­
ing those individuative of the realized property” (Gillett 2003, 602). As an 
example, individual neurons do not think or feel, yet thinking and feeling 
result from systemwide emergent properties of collective neuronal processes. 
The dimensioned realization view, in short, recognizes that, together, realiz­
ers can induce emergent qualitatively novel properties. Gillett (2016) notes 
that whereas physicists have long accepted that collective properties of 
nesting entities manifest emergent properties beyond those of their nested 
components, physicists still fail to recognize the active causal power of col­
lective properties to change the go of events.
Unlike Shapiro, therefore, proponents of the dimensioned realization 
view take octopus and mammal eyes to qualify as different realizations of 
the same kind of thing. American philosophers Jerry Fodor and Ned Block 
argue that differences in pigments and proteins of lenses in mammals and 
octopi make those two instances multiple realizations of a distinct type of 
entity, eyes. “What is important is that the properties/relations of different 
realizations, such as lenses composed of different pigments and proteins, 
nevertheless contribute powers that result in the powers individuative of 
having an eye” (Gillett 2003, 596). Unlike corkscrew color, which con­
tributes nothing to the device’s uncorking powers, differences in proteins 
and pigments in the eyes of mammals and octopi do contribute to realizing 
vision in the two cases.
Significantly for our purposes, Gillett also points out that under the 
dimensioned view, although realizers are not technically causes because 
they are not spatiotemporally distinct from the realized properties, com­
ponents can contribute powers that result in but do not literally (effi­
ciently) cause the emergent properties of the whole. On the dimensioned 
realization view, constituent parts and processes are labeled potential 
realizers, not causes, of the higher-­level property (Gillett 2003, 596, 601). 
The common set of powers of the realized property (Figdor 2010), goes 
beyond the powers of the realizers separately.
This contemporary disagreement about mereological causation revisits 
the entire history of the subject matter; the dimensioned view also makes 
room for the idea that enabling constraints generate multiply realizable 
supervening types with emergent properties (vision, in this example). 
Realizers of the same higher-­level property can differ at the microlevel, 
depending on context. Nevertheless, they remain variant tokens of the 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

Multiple Realization and Supervenience    215
same, type-­defined, emergent constraint regime. The deep dyslexia example 
presented a dimensioned realization view of meaningful causation.
Throughout the debate, Fodor, Block, Shapiro, and other contempo­
rary philosophers who study multiple realizability do not seriously con­
sider the possibility that a form of cause other than efficient cause might, 
mereologically, bring about emergent, higher-­level (realized or super­
venient) properties. Shapiro explicitly maintains that only lower-­level 
properties ground natural laws and guarantee their truth. He adheres to 
the received view that the explanatory arrow always points downward. 
From his perspective, only bottom-­up causal relations underpin scien­
tific explanations; only microlevel properties and causal mechanisms are 
projectible and support universal and determinate natural laws that hold 
across instances. It is only because identical causal mechanisms bring about 
vision in mammals and cephalopods (lenses, retinas, etc.) that the science of 
vision can study “optical principles that apply to light and lenses”4 gener­
ally, he maintains. These correlations hold true “in virtue of some deeper 
set of laws” (Shapiro 2000, 653).
Having concluded that no higher-­level functional properties are pro­
jectible or ground universal natural laws, Shapiro concedes, “There may 
be general statements about the higher levels that refer only to their capaci­
ties” (Shapiro 2000, 648), such as statements like “Lever corkscrews and 
rack-­and-­pinion corkscrews are both corkscrews,” and “Natural selection 
selects organisms that can maintain their body temperature over those that 
cannot.” Such propositions, however, are analytic and tautological, not 
proper natural laws. Their impoverished content is why most scientists aim 
to causally connect common lower-­level internal mechanisms, processes, 
and properties with supervening properties and functionality, he maintains. 
Proper sciences thus aim to discover laws that correlate internal mechanisms 
with supervening properties (Shapiro 2000; Polger and Shapiro 2016). Only 
fundamental properties cause supervening functions, and functions are the 
direct effect only of relevant lower-­level causal processes. Degeneracy or 
multiple realizability are therefore bogus ideas (See Figdor 2010 critique). 
All the heavy causal lifting is done by the subvening processes.
Gillett’s 2016 book, in contrast, is a plea for mutualism, the view that 
emergent properties even physicists if not philosophers recognize to be 
real are also not epiphenomenal (which most physicists still espouse). 
But Gillett himself does not address the manner of causality in virtue 
of which the emergent powers of what he calls collectives and system­
wide interdependencies might exercise that power on components and 
in behavior.
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

216    Chapter 14
Lange—­Because without Cause
Can Shapiro and Gillett’s positions be reconciled? Contemporary American 
philosopher Marc Lange (2007, 2017) argues that not all scientific expla­
nations appeal to causal force laws. Questions of the form, “Why are gravi­
tational and electrical interactions alike in conserving energy?”—­or more 
generally, why are X and Y alike with respect to Z?—­cannot be explained 
solely by deriving gravitational interactions from gravitational laws, and 
electrical interactions from laws governing electrical interactions. Indi­
vidually or jointly, such force explanations make no mention of why the 
two cases would be alike with respect to energy conservation.
The point is a general one: “Causal explanations do not unify two 
cases” from different fields (Lange 2017, 57). Neither do compound 
explanations such as combining appeals to gravitational and electric laws 
explain why two actual instances of gravity and electricity are alike with 
respect to energy conservation.5 In particular, separate and joint explana­
tions that make reference to forces cannot rule out the possibility that the 
two instances conserve energy just as a mere coincidence.
Whereas Polger and Shapiro dismiss appeals to noncausal relations, 
Lange argues that some scientific explanations do explain alikeness by 
reference to shared higher-­level constraints and more inclusive dimen­
sions (Lange 2017), not common efficient causes. Not only can shared 
constraints in a more encompassing dimension explain why X and Y hold 
independently (Lange 2017, 65), appeals to constraints in common can 
also explain why the individual force laws hold in the two cases (Lange 
2017, 61). Let us see why.
Principles and Laws
As noted, in the natural sciences the term law is commonly used to des­
ignate only those correlations that support counterfactuals; natural laws 
commonly identify force laws underwritten by projectible predicates. 
Natural laws so understood ground the “covering-­law model of expla­
nation” that contends that events are successfully explained if and only 
if they can be inferred from a natural law together with initial condi­
tion statements. It is for that reason that philosophers like Shapiro refuse 
to apply the labels lawful and scientific to the special sciences; they are 
dismissed because their purported laws lack the necessity and universal 
scope to support inferential predictions.
Lange contends that even in those cases where entailment holds, 
proofs deriving the explanandum from force laws would still not show 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

Multiple Realization and Supervenience    217
why two cases are alike with respect to a certain property despite being 
the outcome of different forces. Satisfactory explanations of the relation 
between the two cases must show not only why gravitational and electri­
cal interactions are alike in conserving energy, they must also show why 
their joint occurrence is not coincidental. Coincidences, to put it crudely, 
do not have a “common reason” (Lange 2017, 66) for happening. (Note 
use of reason in lieu of cause.) In contrast, specifying a real and “distinct 
class” of which the two cases in question are instances would identify a 
common reason for why the two cases are alike. By identifying that they 
are similar “in virtue of some context where the results exhibit this note­
worthy similarity” (Lange 2017, 280), explanations of this form would 
succeed in showing why distinct cases must be alike.
Lange emphasizes this is not merely an epistemic move. Epistemic and 
psychological considerations alone are insufficient to reveal what makes 
certain combinations of facts explanatory and not merely coincidental 
(Lange 2017, 287). Purported explanations are satisfactory depending on 
their ontic implications. In this example, reference to “energy conserva­
tion” moves the explanation to a shared ontic context in virtue of which 
the similarity is necessary. In mathematics, finding a shared “class of cases” 
might require moving to a third dimension and showing that the lower-­
dimensional outputs are alike by virtue of being instances of a class defined 
in that higher dimension—­by being realizers of a common constraint, that 
is. “Metaphysics must not foreclose [on why-­type] explanations . . . ​on pain 
of failing to do justice to the fact that science has rightly taken such pro­
posal seriously” (Lange 2017, 67).
This requires taking relations and context seriously. This book has 
claimed that enabling and governing constraint regimes whose interde­
pendencies weave together a common context within which individual 
instances are distinct realizations provide that why-­type explanation. 
Constraints, in short, provide the reason why distinctly realized entities 
are tokens of the same kind or type of thing.
*
*
*
Lange notes a second difference between shared constraints operating in 
a third dimension, on the one hand, and force explanations, on the other: 
constraining principles that apply to both domains explain the (force) 
laws in question by describing a common context that excludes some 
alternatives while including others in its common possibility space. The 
coordinates and boundaries of that shared context limn what is empiri­
cally possible and what is not. 
Possible force laws are force laws that satisfy constraints laid down in 
that third dimension. Logically possible force laws that cannot empirically 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

218    Chapter 14
satisfy those constraints are factually impossible (Lange 2017, 51). By 
underwriting “a certain distinctive kind of invariance under perturbations” 
(Lange 2017, 48), conservation principles—­the shared dimension—­serve 
as context-independent constraints on a shared space of empirically pos­
sible force laws, be they gravitational or electric.
That is, shared constraints from a common dimension define a more 
expansive possibility space where distinct but logically possible force laws 
can operate simultaneously. Conservation and symmetry principles—­
common dimensions of constraint in physics—­do just that; they set the 
boundaries or coordinates of what is simultaneously realizable empiri­
cally and what is not. They determine context-independent constraints. The 
International Monetary Fund does the same; it does not lend much money 
directly, nor does it negotiate with a country and its creditors. The IMF 
“draws the boundaries of possibility and policy” (Lustgarten 2022) within 
which other banks, investors, and rating agencies must operate. It does so 
by setting the common boundary constraints that would govern any natural 
realization.6 Lange’s third dimension thus corresponds to a shared back­
ground of context-­independent constraints. This shared possibility space 
outlines the context in which invariances can hold and persist.
Lange prioritizes natural over logical possibility and impossibility. He 
cashes out natural necessity and impossibility in terms of invariance: con­
servation and symmetry principles establish “a certain distinctive kind 
of invariance under counterfactual perturbations” (Lange 2017, 48). 
Conservation and symmetry “would still have been conserved even if the 
forces at work were different” (Lange 2017, 48), “even if there had been 
additional kinds of forces threatening to undermine its conservation” 
(Lange 2017, 72; emphasis added). Because conservation and symmetry 
principles are multiply realizable, they can account for laws that could 
logically be in effect (but factually are not).
In such cases, the arrow of explanation of necessity points upward to 
a common dimension of constraint.
*
*
*
How stringent must the invariance preserved by shared constraints be to 
qualify as scientific? Lange’s case study is about reconciling instances of 
electrical and gravitational interactions by reference to energy conservation. 
In his example, the common dimension refers to “great general principles 
which all [force laws] follow” (Lange 2017, 51). Principles of energy con­
servation and symmetry are indeed universal; they “sweep across”7 all other 
laws. By grounding “alikeness” in a universal and an unchanging dimen­
sion, they account for “why the [two cases] are alike in possessing certain 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

Multiple Realization and Supervenience    219
features” (Lange 2017, 51). Despite being realized by different force laws 
(gravity and electromagnetism), energy conserving is a projectible predicate; 
it features in a universal principle, a shared and universal constraint regime.
In contrast, our own examples of constraints such as feedback and 
catalysts do not universally “sweep across” conditions universally. Their 
context dependence prevents them from grounding counterfactuals uni­
versally.8 Is this a fatal objection to this book’s project? Association and 
correlation are not causation; something stronger is required to justify a 
“causal” claim. We have suggested that, within a specified context, con­
straint regimes of mutual dependencies effect covariance and thereby 
ensure an interactional type’s persistence. But must the counterfactuals in 
question hold universally?
I reject this assumption and the requirement of universally projectible 
predicates. Among the central claims of this book has been that context 
dependence is a feature (not a bug) that science (Science 2.0?) must incor­
porate into its conceptual framework. I reject the unstated premise that 
ontic kinds (which we have called interactional types) are solely under­
written by laws and principles that apply in all instances, anywhere and 
always. Requiring that all real events and processes refer to universal 
laws that support prediction under all conditions rules out, from the 
outset, any effective role for context dependence. That is the framework 
of modern science and philosophy. This approach was already tried with 
Platonic Forms, Aristotelian and Cartesian substances, and Laplacian 
laws that are allegedly unchanging and eternal regardless of context. It is 
a framework that works spectacularly well in many cases, such as with 
predicting the motion of two planetary bodies, for example. But there 
are cases, such as whirlpools and coupled pendulums, not to mention 
ecology, psychology, and other special sciences such as economics where 
it does not. In those fields, context changes everything.
In this connection, and in opposition to a Laplacian notion of natural 
law (equations that describe events at the most microscopic and funda­
mental level, from which all macrophenomena are held to follow and from 
which they can be deduced), Herbert Simon notes that a so-­to-­speak Men­
delian notion of natural law
takes as its ideal the formulation of laws that express the invariant relations 
between successive levels of hierarchic structure. It aims at discovering as 
many bodies of scientific law as there are pairs of successive levels. . . . . The 
fact that nature is [contextual, path dependent, nested, or] hierarchic doesn’t 
mean that phenomena at several levels—­even in the Mendelian view—­cannot 
have common mechanisms. (Simon, in Pattee 1971, 24–­25; emphasis added)
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

220    Chapter 14
Or, on a generous understanding of “mechanisms,” common constraints 
and shared contexts.
In the spirit of Simon’s comments, this book calls for expanding the 
framework of the natural sciences to include what might be called effec­
tive science, where alikeness, lawfulness, and counterfactuals identify 
invariances conditioned on multiple shared constraints in specified pos­
sibility spaces. Complex dynamical systems theory calls for a science that 
includes indexicals and their contextually situated properties.
Effective science would seek counterfactuals that hold conditional on 
a specified range of contexts: this focal heterarchical level, in this embed­
ding heterarchy, and realizable by a specified range of tokens. Figdor’s 
excellent paper on degeneracy in cognitive neuroscience (Figdor 2010) 
presents empirical research that points in that direction. Considering the 
uncountable dimensions along which neuroanatomy as well as neuro­
physiology can be mapped onto cognitive and other supervenient and 
emergent properties, a heterarchy-­inspired approach informed by Simon’s 
comments becomes a reasonable methodological alternative.
The thesis presented in this book is that overlapping constraint regimes 
exist for a range of organizational levels. The interdependencies that char­
acterize each level are as much the outcomes of context-­independent and 
context-­dependent, enabling and governing constraints as they are the 
effects of forces. Constraints generate indexical phenomena whose invari­
ances must be explained in terms of the contextual constraints shared by 
the explananda in question. Theories about inflammation, for example, 
would need to directly address three different but interrelated bodies of 
law about invariant relations formed by constraints that enable, stabilize, 
and regulate homeostasis as a whole: one set of homeostatic constraints 
would be concerned with structure, one with function, and one with 
functional regulation (Medzhitov 2021). In each pair of levels, the latter 
supervenes on but exerts governing constraints on the former. Malfunc­
tions of regulatory (governing) constraints can be expected to cascade 
down and decompensate functional constraints at the next level down. 
Malfunctions in functional constraints in turn can be expected to make 
structural constraints go out of kilter, with contextual constraints playing 
a significant role within and across all levels of organization.
On a positive note, previously unknown constraints shared by vastly 
different domains might be discovered through such a dimensioned and 
rich view of multiple realizability. Network theory, for example, has built 
on those insights to discover constraint architectures shared by widely 
diverse domains, from terrorist networks to disease transmission patterns. 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

Multiple Realization and Supervenience    221
The interpretive frame of coherence-­making by contextual constraints 
partitions the world along an entirely different set of joints. Discovering 
shared constraints might reveal a whole new world of interdependencies. 
It would reveal new dimensions that could explain why two instances 
from entirely different domains are alike. The following is an illustrative 
case study.
*
*
*
The remarkable errors produced by a neural network trained to read 
words were described earlier. Neural networks and human cases of dys­
lexia that commit the same type of errors refute Shapiro’s claim that the 
multiple realizability thesis is an a priori argument. These experiments 
provide empirical evidence of the operation of constraints at the heart of 
multiple realizability (Juarrero 1999; Moreno and Mossio 2015).
Facial recognition errors committed by both humans and software 
trained on similar databases offer a related empirical test case for this 
claim. People commonly misidentify faces of members of the other racial 
group when it is not represented in the training data set (Bothwell et al. 
1989; Castelvecchi 2020; Heyer et al. 2018). If both human cross-­racial 
identification and those of a neural network’s middle layers are enabled 
and governed by shared context-­dependent constraints, such errors can 
be explained as being alike with reference to the type-­identified attrac­
tors in which both are embedded. Attractors generated by comparable 
enabling constraints constitute a shared dimension with emergent prop­
erties in common that renders two cases ontically alike and not merely 
coincidental. With respect to that context, each instance is a distinct 
token of the same Kind of entity. In the facial identification use case, the 
attractor embodies a multiply realizable type with the emergent property 
of facial recognition. Realized tokens of this type would be embody those 
shared constraints that generated the attractor, whether silicon or human.
Constraint regimes define and embody emergent properties of type-­
level constitutive and governing constraints. On our account, then, 
constitutive constraint regimes that govern interdependencies of a coher­
ent dynamic describe a shared third dimension with respect to which 
token outputs are alike; they are tokens of that dynamic type. Attractors 
formed under the control of a shared constraint regime induced by analo­
gous enabling constraints also illustrate that properties of coordination 
dynamics and their regulatory constraints carve out reality at different 
joints from those of folk psychology. Neither our ordinary intuitions 
nor our classical views of types and kinds would have gathered humans 
and artificial neural networks under one class. But neither would our 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

222    Chapter 14
ordinary intuitions have classified humans and tornadoes as alike (as dis­
sipative structures).
The invariance in both cases is regulated by a more encompassing set 
of interdependencies, by the constraint regime of a shared domain that 
is contextually generated and emphatically not epiphenomenal. As sug­
gested by the attractor concept, self-­organized possibility space modifies 
a system’s actions once it is pulled into the attractor’s basin. Lesioning 
human and silicon neural networks below the feedback units—­below the 
constraint regime—­reveals the presence of top-­down control. It reveals, 
that is, the organization of complex attractors with effectively compara­
ble constraint architectures in the middle layer of both the neural network 
and in human association cortices. These interdependencies, generated by 
the enabling constraints of the training set, especially recursive feedback, 
can be said to sweep across biological and electromechanical laws and 
support their alikeness. Critically, however, because they are contextually 
constrained, the interdependencies hold only under these conditions, in 
this context, given that training set, and so on.
With contextual specifications spelled out front and center, the approach 
presented in this book explains why those constraints continue to hold 
even when different causal mechanisms and material substrates (silicon 
and wetware) are at work, or when lesioning the network or anatomi­
cal malfunction threatens to undermine its unity of type. This perspective 
offers a more richly dimensioned understanding of realization relations 
and multiple realizability. Its robustness supports counterfactuals, but 
only as conditional upon a specified context. Under those conditions, the 
concept of governing constraint regimes renders top-­down causation effec­
tive as meaningful, even if only for a range of realizations, under a range 
of conditions.
This work has proposed that we take seriously the possibility that real 
relations of constraint generate, constitute, and govern those interdepen­
dencies. In addition to looking inward toward components, the logic of 
explanation appropriate to complex dynamical systems must also look 
upward (Wimsatt 1974, 1976), to what Lange calls a shared dimension 
of constraint. Which dimension of constraint, I would add, can bring 
about effects—­even if not as efficient cause. Stated otherwise, explana­
tions of complex systems must look outward to context and backward to 
history in which those interdependencies were formed and in which they 
are embedded—­as well as inwards to the system’s components and local 
attractors that realize and specify its current possibility space.
Context changes everything.
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

Empirical observations processed with certain analytic tools support the 
hypotheses presented in previous chapters. This chapter describes two sets 
of neuroscience experiments on delayed responses in laboratory animals. 
The first suggests that after training (context-­dependent constraints), 
brains of macaque monkeys self-­organize a coherent neural subspace 
with task-­defined emergent properties. As revealed by a particular statis­
tical technique, this neural subspace structures, initializes, and controls 
the monkeys’ delayed response on each trial run such that it satisfies the 
task instructions, which vary each time. The second part of this chapter 
presents a related study that further explains the neural mechanisms that 
underpin delayed responses. Specifically, this second study concludes that 
self-­organized and task-­defined neural subspaces bring about behavior 
that is appropriate to the task at hand by organizing dynamic attractors 
in abstract neural state space. A combination of empirical research and 
simulations uncovers both the formation of such neural attractors and 
the constraints that control the monkeys’ delayed actions and success­
fully satisfy the task’s demands.
*
*
*
Neural activity preparatory to voluntary behavior has been of interest to 
neuroscientists attempting to elucidate the contents of the mind’s black 
box. The mind–­brain complex, however, did not readily give up its secrets 
to studies that relied on summing and averaging single-­neuron activity. 
In particular, when experimental conditions require the subjects to inte­
grate and coordinate distinct streams of information, data sets of single-­
neuron recordings, no matter how large, are so highly heterogeneous 
(both across neurons and across experimental conditions) that no obvious 
moment-­by-­moment correlation with sensory input or motor output can 
be detected. When carrying out complex but contextually constrained tasks 
requires “coordination across neurons,” single-­neuron recordings have 
15
Empirical Research on Delayed Response
Neuroscience Case Studies about Constraints
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

224    Chapter 15
proven particularly unsuitable, no matter how large the data sets or fast 
the processing runs (Cunningham and Yu 2014). When experiments require 
subjects to internally process a variety of stimuli before performing a task-­
defined behavior, data sets that sum and average individual neural responses 
provide no useful insight.
At first, the lack of clear-­cut input/output patterns in single-­neuron 
recordings was attributed to noise. Gradually, neuroscientists began to 
suspect that “this single-­neuron complexity may be the realization of a 
coherent and testable neural mechanism that exists only [as a dynamical 
system] at the level of the population” (Cunningham and Yu 2014, 1503; 
emphasis added). Testing this hypothesis called for a different approach. 
As neuroscientists turned to population-­level analyses, one class of sta­
tistical methods, dimensionality reduction, proved particularly useful in 
uncovering features of brain activity that could not be discerned with clas­
sical methods such as averaging responses across trials of single-­neuron 
recordings. Dimensionality reduction, a statistical technique that trans­
forms data from a high-­dimensional representation, yielded insights into 
integrative neurological patterns that subjects organize in response to the 
constraints of training and the contextual cues of each trial run. Dimen­
sionality reduction can extract those features that matter from noisy raw 
data.
Dimensionality reduction had previously been used to uncover neural 
mechanisms of monkeys performing tasks requiring attention. These 
studies, in contrast, focus on its application to instructed delay tasks, 
those that include an interval between stimulus presentation and the 
GO cue to initiate behavior. This delay period (after trial run instruc­
tion and stimulus presentation but prior to the initiation of motor activ­
ity) is called the preparatory period. Dimensionality reduction uncovered 
complex brain activity during that interval that was hidden in the chaos 
of single-­recording data sets.
Mark Churchland’s Team
The experimental conditions in both sets of experiments (Churchland, 
Cunningham, et al. 2012; Kaufman, Churchland et al. 2014; Mante, Sus­
sillo, et al. 2013) are similar. The reaching experiments are described 
first. Monkeys fitted with electrodes on their motor and premotor cor­
texes were trained to reach for and touch (or trace) the correct target on a 
monitor in response to instructions. Some runs required a straight reach, 
others required a curved reach, some required the monkey to trace out a 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

Empirical Research on Delayed Response    225
maze on a screen in a clockwise direction, and on other runs it required 
a counterclockwise reach. Critically, there was a randomly varying delay 
interval between the preparatory period and the cue to initiate motion.
Preparatory cortical activity (or motor preparation) was defined as 
neural activity during the delay period between the instruction and display 
on the one hand, and the GO cue, on the other. The central question 
investigated in all these studies is, What exactly does preparatory activity 
do and how does it segue into actual and task-­appropriate responses?
Preparatory and Perimotor Neural Activity
Recordings showed that individual neurons are uncorrelated during the 
early preparatory period. For approximately the first 200–­300 ms, not 
only does the temporal structure of recordings of individual neurons 
“var[y] widely across cells: some even increase their firing rate, some 
decrease, some arrive at an approximate plateau level, while others undu­
late” (Shenoy, Kaufman, et al. 2011, 38).
It was initially hypothesized that the combined activity of individual 
neurons during the preparatory period might represent a summing of 
all the physical dimensions that make up the full data set: distance to 
the target, direction of the target, or speed of arm motion to the target, 
the arm’s angle of rotation, and so on. However, this turned out not to 
be so. Few individual neurons appear tuned to these lower-­level para­
meters (Cunningham and Yu 2014; Churchland, Santhanam, et al. 2006; 
Shenoy, Kaufman, et al. 2011).
Instead, dimensionality reduction revealed population-­level neural 
activity that integrates a wide variety of specific factors to represent the 
task at hand. That is, during preparatory activity, the monkey constructs 
an abstract task space in neural space. This abstract space recodes noisy, 
high-­dimensional data into a low-­dimensional and complex neural space 
whose parameters capture salient aspects that covary with relevant ele­
ments of the task. The space also initializes (sets the initial conditions) for 
the subsequent perimotor stage of cortical activity, the interval between 
the GO cue and the actual initiation of movement. The task space orga­
nized during the preparatory period is therefore a “dynamical system 
[that] controls movement” (Churchland, Cunningham, et al. 2012, 51) 
in the sense that it is predictive of actual reaction times and movement.
Specifically, “Consider the space of all possible preparatory states (all 
possible Ps). For a given reach, there is presumably some small [contigu­
ous] subregion of space containing those values of P that are adequate 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

226    Chapter 15
to produce a successful [response]” (Shenoy, Kauffman, et al. 2011, 42). 
That is, it contains those values that would qualify as a successful per­
formance of the required task. Applying dimensionality reduction to 
massively disparate data sets of individual neural activity during the pre­
paratory period revealed this multidimensional but far smaller subregion 
of neural space (a task-­defined and structured preparatory space) within 
which subsequent behavior must be constrained to successfully execute 
the [response] and fulfill the experimental task’s demands. As evidenced 
in the neural activity during the perimotor period, correct responses then 
flow from this organized preparatory subregion in neural state space into 
appropriate behavior.
Surprisingly, Churchland’s team found that the population-­level activ­
ity of this organized space consists of rotating and continuous cyclic 
patterns of neural activity. That is, neural dynamics organized during pre­
paratory activity are rhythmic. The monkey’s brain is recoding signals in 
the frequency domain. Discovering this rotation was surprising because 
“the [the task-­appropriate responses required in the experiments] them­
selves are not rhythmic” (Churchland, Cunningham, et al. 2012, 51–­52).
From the perspective presented in this book, the rhythmic rotations are 
significant because they remain invariant throughout the trial run: “for 
each data set the neural state rotates in the same direction across condi­
tions (Churchland, Cunningham, et al. 2012, 53). The authors hypoth­
esize that the continuous properties of the rhythmic activity (such as 
direction of rotation, amplitude, and phase) capture salient and relevant 
properties of the task that covary across different experimental condi­
tions. They capture effective input, in our terminology. This conclusion is 
further supported by the fact that the properties of the rhythmic activity 
do not correspond to any physical features of the signals displayed. The 
continuous properties of the constructed task space appear to result “not 
from a multiphasic signal, but from how that signal is constructed” by the 
monkey (Churchland, Cunningham, et al. 2012, 55). These population-­
level patterns of neural activity, I submit, describe intensional content 
representing the task at hand (reaching for a target, looking at a target, 
determining if the relevant response is about dot color or dot motion, for 
example). It implies that the abstract space is eminently multiply realiz­
able and indexically ordered. Indeed, the authors conclude that “many 
features of the observed rotations make sense in terms of how the actual 
behavior (EMG, kinematics) might be generated in the remainder of the 
trial run, rather than in terms of the behaviors themselves” (Churchland, 
Cunningham, et al. 2012, 55; emphasis added).
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

Empirical Research on Delayed Response    227
Rotational invariance of population-­level neural activity suggests, in 
short, that in response to training, neural activity during the preparatory 
period creates a persistent constraint regime that represents task-­defined 
requirements and anticipates a range of possible movements from which 
a response will be selected depending on the details of the particular run. 
It represents the meaningful features of a contextually constrained and 
type-­defined task. The end state of the preparatory period then becomes 
the initial condition of perimotor activity for that trial run. “If this initial 
condition is known, subsequent states [the actual behavior on each trial 
run] can be predicted” (Churchland, Cunningham, et al. 2012, 53). That 
is, once the GO signal is given, the characteristics of the preparatory 
abstract space transition naturally through the perimotor neural activity 
into actual and task-­relevant behavior, be it a successful reach or, in a 
different experiment, a saccade (Shenoy, Kaufman, et al. 2011, 39). It is 
tempting to conclude from this experiment that, as Patten and Auble pro­
posed, the monkey’s cortex generates an abstract model with emergent 
properties that subsequently constrains actual muscle activity top down 
such that “individual unit responses . . . ​reflect the underlying dynami­
cal factors: the patterns present on each axis of [task-­defined] space” 
(Churchland, Cunningham et al. 2012, 54).
A Further Study
In a second set of studies of context dependence in delayed response, 
rhesus macaque monkeys were presented with a display of noisy ­signals—­in 
this case, differently colored light dots moving toward the left or right 
of a monitor. The monkeys were trained to discriminate between the 
light dots’ prevalent direction of motion (called the motion context) 
and their prevalent color (color context) in light of a contextual cue 
(task instruction) given prior to the beginning of each trial run. Cued 
to a color context, for example, the monkeys were trained to select 
the prevalent color, red or green, of the dots displayed; instructed to 
a motion context, the monkey had to select their prevalent direction of 
motion, toward the left or right. The monkeys reported their choices by 
saccade eye motions to one of two targets placed on either side of the 
monitor.
At the start of each trial, the monkeys were given instructions about 
the context for the upcoming run: whether the run would be about color 
or about motion. Once the contextual cue was provided, the display 
showed the target options on either side of the screen: red or green for 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

228    Chapter 15
a color context, right or left for motion. The placement of these targets 
varied randomly on each trial run (sometimes the correct prevalent color 
target was on the left; at other times, it was on the right).
The monkeys were then presented with a random but noisy display 
of light dots that were both moving and variously colored. After a few 
seconds’ delay (which, again, varied randomly), the GO cue was given.
The experiment demonstrated that the monkeys were able to dis­
criminate evidence relevant to the instructed context for the task at 
hand while largely ignoring irrelevant evidence. If the trial run’s cued 
context was about color, the monkeys largely ignored the dots’ direc­
tion of motion, regardless of their speed and uniformity. If the trial run 
was about motion, the monkeys largely ignored color, regardless of the 
display’s brightness or color uniformity. Strength of sensory input (how 
bright the color, for example) did not override relevance, indicating that 
the behavior was constrained top down, according to the relevant, task-­
defined contextual cue.
While monkeys performed this task, population-­level responses from 
neurons in a region of the prefrontal cortex (PFC) that selects and exe­
cutes eye movements, commands visuospatial attention, and integrates 
information “toward visuo-­motor decisions” were recorded. At the start of 
each run, population-­level neural activity converged to a starting baseline 
located near the center of the plots (as if to be positioned to respond cor­
rectly in either context). In the interval after the contextual cue (choose 
color!) and the target locations (red on right of screen, green on left) were 
presented but before the dot display was turned on, the monkeys’ neural 
activity quickly moved away from the earlier center baseline and lined up 
along a neuronal pattern the scientists labeled an axis of choice (Mante, 
Sussillo, et al. 2013, 79).
As in the various experiments conducted by Churchland’s team, Mante’s 
so-­called axis of choice is a structured, low-­dimensional subregion of the 
monkeys’ neural space. Specifically, Mante’s team established that this 
subregion is organized as a line attractor with the options for each choice 
context located on either end of the axis (green and red in runs with a 
color context, right and left in runs with a direction of motion context).
Mante, Sussillo, et al. hypothesized that the gradual repositioning of 
neural activity along an organized axis of choice is evidence that the pre­
paratory period integrates sensory input and contextual cues into a single 
domain that captures the particular trial run’s context; the monkeys’ 
brain activity organized the variables of the task into a coherent neural 
subregion that defines the requirements of the particular trial run and 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

Empirical Research on Delayed Response    229
task-­defined response options; the axis of choice spans the task variables, 
without the values.
The study confirmed this hypothesis: comparing population responses 
in the PFC across contexts revealed that a single, stable neural pattern 
integrates sensory evidence in terms of the choices for each particular 
trial run. The integration combines in one domain the properties relevant 
to that trial run (dot color, red or green, or prevalent motion toward the 
right side of the monitor or left).
Choice thus begins by structuring a contextually generated type-­
defined subregion of possibility space in the PFC: “This will be a color 
run,” or “this will be a direction of motion run,” for example. This low-­
dimensional subspace is organized as the line attractor labeled the axis of 
choice; it represents the task requirements and the variables for the task: 
{color [red, green]} or {direction of motion [rightward, leftward]}. This 
possibility space aligns the options from which to subsequently select.
Significantly for our purposes, the authors of the study note that the 
results imply that integration and selection are two aspects of a common 
process separable only at the population level. The study by Mante, Sussillo, 
et al. thus agrees with experiments conducted by Churchland’s team: it 
proves the construction of an organized neural space that is contextually 
generated, task-­defined, and multiply realizable, it spans possible behav­
iors that would satisfy that task. This neural space also defines the condi­
tions of satisfaction that will constrain actual behavior top down such 
that the response is task-­appropriate. In Lange’s terminology, the axis of 
choice describes a self-­organized third dimension, a regime of constraints 
that structures a task-­defined field, along with the possible range of values 
for that field. In the language of philosophical action theory, the attractor 
of the axis of choice might be considered the neural correlate of a prior 
intention to carry out the task of this trial run as instructed by the con­
textual cue.
Mante, Sussillo, et al. also and simultaneously recorded direct sensory 
responses to the motion and color displays. At the population level, PFC 
activity also showed that neural responses to sensory information alone 
oriented along two separate sensory attractors, one they called an axis of 
color, the other an axis of motion. Each of these sensory axes represented 
the order parameters of that run: they capture the significant properties 
(salience, cohesion) of the signals relevant to the contextual cue for that 
run. That is, they capture information about how strongly coherent the 
dot display was with respect to the context (color or motion), and how 
relevant to the contextual cue the features of the dot display were during 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

230    Chapter 15
a given trial run. Neural activity along the axis of motion, for example, 
was less strong during trial runs cued to a color context—­no matter how 
coherent the direction of motion or how bright the colors.
Interestingly, neural activity along these two sensory axes (motion and 
color) was momentary; neural activity returned to baseline when the display 
was turned off. Mante, Sussillo, et al. interpreted such transient sensory 
neural activity as providing only “momentary evidence . . . ​in favor of the 
two choices” (Mante, Sussillo, et al. 2013, 79), color or motion. In con­
trast, however, neural activity tuned along the axis of choice continued 
throughout the experiment until the actual response (saccade or reach) 
was completed. Unlike the sensory axes, the influence of the axis of 
choice appears to ensure that responses remain true to task by providing 
top-­down governing constraints for the correct response to that trial run. 
The persistence of the axis of choice in constraining responses despite the 
intervening delay period can be interpreted as the standing cause of the 
response.
*
*
*
Once the task at hand is identified and the corresponding subregion of 
neural state space is structured accordingly, how did the monkeys select 
one target rather than another? That is, how does neural activity (now 
constrained in a lower-­dimensioned space that is task-­defined) select the 
correct response for that task on that run (red and not green) and then 
perform the correct action—­looking toward the red target on the right 
rather than the green one on the left, say? In a simulation, Mante’s team 
found that a different vector participates in this final stage of the process.
When population responses across both axes are combined, the 
momentary information (red or green, right or left) registered along the 
sensory axes (for motion and color) and supporting a particular response 
for a given trial run arcs the neural population activity toward the correct 
answer—­that is, toward the relevant sensory axis, motion or color. That 
is, the orientation of the combined neural activity that represents the inte­
gration of information from both the axis of choice and the relevant 
sensory axis projects strongly in the direction of the relevant target on 
the screen and strongly orthogonal to the irrelevant one. It represents 
the phase transition from many separate streams of information into one 
coherent set of interdependencies.
Mante, Sussillo, et al. call this coherent and arced aligning of neural 
activity a selection vector. By integrating the run’s instructed contextual 
alternatives with the momentary sensory display of that trial run (as given 
by the relevant sensory axis), the selection vector encodes relevance, a 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

Empirical Research on Delayed Response    231
highly context-­dependent parameter. Unlike the orientation of the axis of 
choice, which is unaffected by the momentary recordings of the sensory 
stimuli along the sensory axes, the selection and performance of the actual 
response is therefore controlled by integrating both. Once the monkey must 
act, integrating all contexts simultaneously (the particular trial run con­
text’s axis of choice plus the current and momentary sensory information 
of the display) constructs and deforms a selection vector in neural state 
space—­and orients it toward the relevant target and away from the irrel­
evant one. From our perspective, projecting strongly parallel to the relevant 
signals but orthogonal to the irrelevant ones is evidence that the selection 
vector’s constraint regime integrates information on the display into those 
invariances previously established by the axis of choice (the constraints that 
govern the task at hand). In effect, a combination of context-­dependent 
constraints, organized as a selection vector, recodes momentary sensory 
information in terms of its relevance (for this run, given the task context).
Mante, Sussillo, et al. describe the influence of the selection vector as 
context-­dependent relaxation. “This mechanism explains how the same 
sensory input can result in movement along the line attractor in one 
context but not the other” (Mante, Sussillo, et al. 2013, 82). The process of 
context-­dependent integration that induces the selection vector explains 
why a particular saccade is performed—­toward the relevant target (dis­
played on one side of the monitor) and away from the other. And so, the 
correct (appropriate to this trial run) action is performed.
In contrast with the axis of choice, which determines effective input, the 
selection vector produces and regulates effective output. Applying dimen­
sionality reduction to population-­level responses thus confirmed the con­
struction and presence of what we have called here effective input and 
output in the monkeys’ motor cortex: population-­level responses revealed 
that “identical sensory stimuli . . . ​can lead to very different behavioral 
responses depending on context” (Mante, Sussillo, et al. 2013, 78). This is 
possible only because of the previous Many-­to-­One self-­organization of 
a type-­defined task space.
By conditioning selection and behavioral activation on instructional 
context, the selection vector might also be considered as the neural corre­
late of a proximate intention of action. Proximate intention integrates the 
intensional content of the intention with motivation to the appropriate 
behavior such that the intensional content is satisfied.
From the perspective of this book, Mante’s team shows how effective 
input and output are generated and acted on. First, and in response to the 
enabling constraints of training, neural activity induces a Many-­to-­One 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

232    Chapter 15
transformation by integrating sensory signals into a coherent set of con­
strained interdependencies. These organize a type-­defined abstract space 
that encodes continuous population-­level properties. Dimensionality 
reduction reveals population-­level neural activity that structures an index­
ically defined and abstract subregion of neural space. This neural space 
represents the interdependent type-­defined task requirements as perceived 
by the subject. The neural space is multiply realizable; it spans all possible 
behaviors that might be required to satisfy those constraints. Once inte­
grated into a coherent dynamic and in view of the constraints it embod­
ies, a specific behavior is then selected and acted on in response to more 
timely and local constraints (provided by the display pattern of each run 
and as determined by the selection vector’s orientation).
The studies by Mante et al. and Churchland et al. are congruent: the 
abstract subregion of neural state space organized during the perimotor 
period of Churchland et al.’s experiments corresponds to the line attrac­
tor of Mante, Sussillo, et al.’s axis of choice. In both cases, these are 
type-­defined subregions that encode multiply realizable task-­specified 
governing constraints that control for correct behavior while, top down, 
allowing it to vary depending on context.
From the perspective presented in this book, furthermore, combining 
the information represented by the axis of choice with sensory informa­
tion into a selection vector interlaces semantics and syntax into a coher­
ent set of interdependencies enabled and governed by the real-­world 
constraints of the training and trial run instruction. As embodied in 
population-­level neural patterns, the selection vector issues in meaning­
ful behavior constrained top down by indexically defined interdependen­
cies. The suite of delayed response experiments illustrates how enabling 
constraints (of training) generate coherent, multiply realizable neural 
dynamics with emergent (task-­defined) properties that evolve into and 
control task-­appropriate actions.
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

So where has this trail led us? The clearing we have opened—­and it is 
only a clearing, not the final destination—­is one where interdependencies 
woven together through multiple constrained interactions turn out to be 
as fundamental as the allegedly standalone things and indivisible par­
ticles that for millennia served as the ontic basis of Western philosophy 
and modern science. To fully understand the emergence of those interde­
pendencies, we looked to the notion of interlocking constraints to expand 
our ideas of cause and effect. Interlocking constraints reinstated mereo­
logical interactions and relations into our conceptual framework. Doing 
so also restored the possibility of true coherence and top-­down causation, 
from minds to bodies, from ecosystems to individual species.
The new world revealed through the lens of complexity is congruent 
with contemporary science. The one prerequisite: conditions must be open 
and away from thermal equilibrium. Context-­independent constraints 
take conditions far from homogeneity and equilibrium and establish back­
ground inhomogeneities. Doing so satisfies this first requirement. Next, 
context-­dependent constraints take conditions away from independence by 
making previously separate entities conditional upon one another. Working 
together in open conditions far from equilibrium, context-­independent 
and context-­sensitive constraints bring about mutually dependent interac­
tions and relations. The processes now covary because, acting as enabling 
conditions and constitutive/governing regimes, constraints have woven 
individual processes and particles into integral wholes. The book calls 
them interactional types. Parts and wholes, tokens and types, can finally be 
understood as two aspects of a shared and interdependent dynamic.
A new coherence.
Coherence is not other than individual particles and processes that 
comprise it; types are not other than the tokens that realize it. Compo­
nents do not fuse into blocklike things or blend together in an amorphous 
16
Concluding Remarks
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

234    Chapter 16
solvent; but neither are interdependencies unstructured tangled banks. 
Coherent dynamics that are coordinated across multiple scales and 
dimensions are not dominance hierarchies; they are distributed heterar­
chies and holarchies. They manifest as differentiated and heterogenous 
configurations of matter, energy and information held together at the 
same scale as well as across scales by principles of mutual constraint sat­
isfaction. Significantly, at each scale the interactants retain their integrity 
even as they contribute to the generation of an emergent whole. Each 
aspect of a differentiated coherent dynamic embodies and enacts a dis­
tinct set of constrained interdependencies with its own logic of emergent 
properties and powers.
Coherent parts-­to-­whole and whole-­to-­parts relations induced by con­
straints persist in the face of change. Their patterns are metastable, real­
ized as vectors of complex attractors; they define ecosystems, cultures, 
mindsets, values, and institutions. They are enacted in social practices 
and activities and are embodied in technologies and traditions. They span 
the planet’s geology, its atmosphere, its biosphere, and its human worlds.
As understood here, then, coherence generally is grounded in interde­
pendent relata conditioned by the past and the spatiotemporal context 
in which it is embedded—­which interdependence, paradoxically, con­
strained interactions among its constituents themselves induced. By con­
tinuously weaving together streams of energy, mass, and information into 
more comprehensive spatiotemporal dynamics, contextually constrained 
relations remember; because they are path dependent, they remember. 
They also specify, modulate, and regulate actual tokens. Records, regis­
ters, and memories become incorporated into yet more expansive inter­
dependencies that hold together in time as well as space. As complexity 
increases each turn of the spiral serves as a foundation, building block, 
memory, and precursor of the next production of wondrous new proper­
ties and powers.
Darwin’s survival of the fittest is as much a process of symbiosis making 
as it is a zero-­sum game.
Newly constituted coordination dynamics are effective; they are neither 
epiphenomenal nor puppets of their constraints. Among the most impor­
tant capabilities of coherence-­making by constraint is top-­down influence, 
from extended coherent invariances down to individual behavior. Once 
those coherent invariances involve the complex social organizations of 
human beings, principles, laws, rituals, myths, and traditions have effects 
just as forceful actions do, both at the individual and the systemic level—­
just not as forces. So do their emergent properties: thoughts, beliefs, 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

Concluding Remarks    235
intentions, values, and feelings. All exercise causality top down, from 
regimes of constraint that define emergent properties to their manifesta­
tion in actions, regulated as cascades of negative feedback and analog 
decision-­making and control. In consequence, the resulting behaviors and 
actions satisfy the truth conditions set by the emergent properties of those 
constraint regimes, including those pertaining to cognition and values.
Such real and meaningful top-­down causality is possible at all only 
because ongoing context and path dependence generates flexible, mul­
tiply realizable types that span diverse tokens. Emergent properties of 
contextually generated interdependencies are not transitive across scales 
or levels of organization; they do not commute. Interactional types as 
presented in this book are regimes of constraint that must be defined 
indexically; some must be defined intensionally. The emergent perspective 
from inside a contextually generated constraint regime is different from 
the view from outside. Revealed by the filter of constraint, real and effec­
tive order parameters can embody the emergent properties of perspective, 
point of view, and subjectivity. New codes and metrics (including valence, 
affect, and social and moral values) arise alongside new coherent patterns. 
Genetics, affect, symbolic language, and ethical norms are codes and 
metrics that transduce external information into the new interdependen­
cies on the inside. Practices and activities that realize that newly encoded 
information embody the emergent properties of those interdependencies.
*
*
*
From their earliest formation, mutually constrained and constraining 
worlds thus spiral through innumerable iterations of a common theme-­
and-­variation motif. Constrained interactions generate increasingly 
complex forms. Radically new properties and powers emerge as new 
interdependencies form. Those emergent properties and powers were not 
merely waiting to be revealed; evolution is not the unfurling of pre-­
established potentialities. Each new coherence is a genuine creation, the 
product of path-­dependent multiple constraint satisfaction under open 
nonequilibrium conditions. Coherence making thus brings about major 
transformations to emergent dynamics. Constraints make creativity pos­
sible; emergent coherent dynamics are the creative outcome of mutually 
constraining and constrained interactions. The price of such creativity 
and uniqueness is indetermination and uncertainty. I submit it is a price 
well worth paying.
Earlier chapters concluded that validated interdependencies persist 
and evolve because of their contribution to metastability. Epistemically 
and politically, keeping the conversation going (Rorty1982) is a validated 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

236    Chapter 16
enabling constraint that contributes to metastability. Both abiotic meta­
stability and keeping the conversation going presuppose open conditions 
such that continuous exchanges of matter, energy, and information with 
context are facilitated and preserved by enabling and constitutive con­
straints. In particular, validated coherence presupposes the presence of 
those context-­dependent constraints that enable the emergence of novel 
and flexible interdependencies while at the same time stabilizing and pre­
serving metastabiity.
Only constraint regimes that are self-­determining and self-­repairing 
are fluid, and can continuously update contextual information, promote 
adaptation and evolution, and remain metastable. These considerations 
imply that governing constraints of metastable dynamics must be dis­
tributed, multiply realizable, flexible, and resilient. They must actively 
encourage and preserve the diversity and multiple realizability of their 
components. Individuals must not be dissolved into a homogeneous solu­
tion; but they lose some of their complex and novel properties if they 
ignore the context from which they were emerged. They especially lose 
their integrity if they are unresponsive to the context in which they are 
currently embedded.
Only metastable constraint regimes yield validated coherence. This is 
as true for human beings and their communities as it is for Bénard cells 
and BZ reactions.
*
*
*
What can we conclude from all this? Tearing down happens naturally. 
Creating coherence is an energetically costly process: it takes a burst of 
entropy for context-­dependent constraints to irreversibly produce emer­
gent coordination dynamics. Innumerable identical tokens of the one type 
is a bogus form of diversity. It tends towards stasis and devolution. Uni­
formity in social contexts does not keep the conversation going. It takes 
ongoing background, enabling, and governing constraints to generate and 
maintain multiply realizable metastable interdependencies in nonequilib­
rium. Such constraints can enable and facilitate evolution and progress. 
This recursive “form of causality [previously] unknown to us”1 informs 
creativity and individuality, from atoms to humans and their organiza­
tions, from dust devils to international human organizations; their coher­
ence emerges from the interdependencies the mereological constraints 
themselves helped cocreate.
Neither puppets nor absolute sovereigns, human beings and the mate­
rial and social forms of life they induce are true co-­creators of their natural 
and social worlds. We serve as stewards of the metastability, coherence, 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

Concluding Remarks    237
and evolvability of both of these worlds. Matter matters. History matters. 
Social and economic policy matters. Most critically, however, because top-­
down causality as constraint makes room for meaning and value-­informed 
activities, our choices and actions matter tremendously. In acting, we reveal 
the variables and the values that really matter to us, individually and to 
the culture in which we are embedded. We must pay attention to what we 
pay attention to; to which options we facilitate and promote and which 
we impede and discard. We must pay particular attention to what we do.
The influence of constraints has been dismissed because they do not 
bring about change energetically. Because they can be tacit and entrenched, 
their Escher-­like characteristics also make them difficult to track. As 
background constants that go without saying, they have also been taken 
for granted. Foregrounding these enabling and governing conditions, so 
different from but as effective as forceful impacts, has been a central goal 
of this work.
Facilitating the emergence and persistence of validated coherence, of 
adaptable and evolvable interdependencies that can continue to form and 
persist in nature, among human beings and between nature and human­
kind, is among our most compelling responsibilities. Facilitating the 
emergence and preservation of a thoroughgoing resilience that affords to 
both the natural and the human worlds the conditions not only to persist 
but especially to evolve and thrive is the most pressing moral imperative 
facing humankind today.
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

Chapter 1
1.  The paragraph conflates two issues: type identity (What makes me a particu­
lar type of entity, a human being?) and individuation (What makes me uniquely 
me?). These will be disambiguated later.
2.  In Smellosophy, which is all about the context-­dependent and relational char­
acter of fragrance, Barwich makes the important distinction between subjective 
and relational. The latter is objective.
3.  Stanley Salthe at times uses the term kind in the sense of specification, a subset, 
as in “Great Danes are a kind of dog.”
4.  Ancient philosophers worried about such things. The possibility of reassem­
bling the dismembered limbs of saints (scattered in reliquaries throughout Chris­
tendom) would not pose a problem at the Second Coming. Gladiatorial contests, 
on the other hand, did pose a conceptual puzzle: once digested, unlucky gladiators 
become an integral component of the lion’s in-­formed matter.
5.  The fact that ecosystems are webs of trophic interdependencies and not inter­
nal primary properties undermines even this claim. Outside of their ecological 
niche, lions in the wild do not survive.
6.  Idealism proposed that Mind was the more fundamental. Materialism claimed 
that only physical stuff was real.
7.  Thinking of Formal cause in terms of a “Principle of Being” is open to the 
same objection.
8.  For that reason, the term evolution, which means the unfurling of preexisting 
potential, was used. Today, we distinguish between development and true evolu­
tion, the emergence of new defining traits.
9.  Aristotle, Physics 194 b17–­20 in The Complete Works. See also Posterior Ana­
lytics 71 b9–­11:94-­a20 in The Complete Works.
10.  Thanks to Trent Hone for the following observation: “hammer” is a multiply 
realizable type. Without modification, the term is usually interpreted to mean 
claw hammer, one realization of the type.
11.  See Juarrero and Rubino (2008) for an overview of Emergentism prior to 
1950. For an overview of contemporary Emergentism post 1950, see Bedau and 
Humphreys (2008).
Notes
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

240    Notes
12.  In the twentieth century, this issue was readdressed in terms of projectible 
predicates and support of counterfactuals (see chapter 14).
Chapter 2
1.  Time and history are included in context.
2.  Such phase transitions are transitions to new forms of order. Order parameters 
“measure the degree of order across the boundaries.”
3.  Order parameters describe systemwide interdependencies of complex systems. 
For example, degree of cohesion of a tornado or a culture is an order parameter 
that describes a systemwide property of its relations and interactions.
4.  Existentialism’s emphasis on innate freedom must be reframed as autono­
mous (self-­governed) interdependencies brought about by self-­constraint and self-­
determination. Freedom is not independence from external influences; it is self-­rule 
in community.
Chapter 3
1.  To this day, scientists have not discovered how mistletoe (whose genome is 
twenty-­four times the size of the human genome) taps the energy it needs to 
survive. This is particularly puzzling since mistletoe lacks the mitochondria living 
things rely on to produce adenosine triphospate (ATP).
2.  As suggested earlier in passing, context-­dependent constraints, working against 
a background of context-­independent constraints such as gradients, are respon­
sible for generating complex flow designs and patterns (Bejan 2020). These novel 
patterns tap otherwise inaccessible energy gradients. This is as true for galaxy and 
star formation, lightning discharges, and whirlpool eddies as for the organization 
of human societies. All order creation satisfies the second law; different varieties 
of order emerge with different varieties of constraints.
Chapter 4
1.  Juarrero (1999) described these constraints as context free. That characteriza­
tion was misleading; it elicited criticisms to the effect that nothing is entirely context 
free except the universe. This work instead uses context independent to mean what 
was previously meant by context free—­that is, distance from equilibrium. Context-
independent constraints set up possibility landscapes.
2. “The quality or condition inherent in a body that exhibits opposite properties 
or powers in opposite parts or directions or that exhibits contrasted properties or 
powers in contrasted parts or directions” (Merriam-­Webster).
3.  Probability distribution is the set of relative likelihoods that a variable will 
have a value in a given interval.
4.  I submit that radical sensemaking (Snowden 2015) calls for reimagining novel 
context-­independent constraints that can reshape a qualitatively novel and coher­
ent possibility space.
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

Notes    241
5.  You can only “play” fifty-­two-­card pickup with indistinguishable playing 
cards. “Fifty-­two-­card pickup” is therefore a joke, not a game.
6.  The past history hypothesis of the origin of the universe addresses this issue: 
if the universe must have originated in conditions of low entropy (a potential 
energy hill), what is the minimum height it could have been? How low must/can 
that entropy have been?
7.  For discussions about multidimensional epigenetic landscapes, see Jablonka 
and Lamb 2002.
8.  They do not strictly determine the future because we are in a multidimen­
sional landscape with multiple constraint satisfaction and top-­down governing 
constraints that constrain in virtue of their emergent properties and not mere 
energetic considerations.
9.  Vague concepts such as baldness and turquoise (the shade of color) have fuzzy 
boundaries, where they stop applying is unclear. Ambiguous concepts have two 
or more different meanings: “blue” can mean a color or a mood.
Chapter 5
1.  The rest of this chapter draws heavily from Halloran and Struchiner (1991).
Chapter 6
1.  See https://­www​.­pbs​.­org​/­lifebeyondearth​/­resources​/­intkauffmanpop​.­html​.
2.  Adding degrees of freedom is characteristic of these dynamics.
3.  In all cases, we refer to open systems that exchange matter and energy with 
their environment. However, not all are alike: the initial and boundary conditions 
of convection cells are externally set by the scientist conducting an experiment 
or, in the case of hurricanes, by the atmospheric conditions. This changes with 
the emergence of autocatalytic cycles, whose endogenous dynamics generate and 
regenerate the very conditions they require to form and persist.
4.  The transition also marks the appearance of a hierarchical form of organization.
5.  As always, context includes time and history as well as natural and psychosocio­
cultural conditions.
6.  As a curious aside, the adoption of one constraint (a social practice) impedes, 
top-­down, the activation of another constraint (an enzyme).
7.  This may turn out to be premature. Layered biofilms might show incipient orga­
nization, suggesting that stacking might be an early context-­dependent constraint.
8.  Pascal and Pross (see discussion in chapter 9) dismiss the need to stabilize expo­
nential growth. In our view, enabling constraints induce mereological dynamics, 
which are then stabilized by constitutive and governing constraints. Thanks to the 
nonlinearities involved, they keep actual tokens true to type through cascades of 
negative feedback from the overarching constraint regime to the token realizations.
9.  This distinction might have been what Jean Jacques Rousseau was seeking in 
his discussion of a general will.
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

242    Notes
Chapter 7
1.  Enzymes are catalysts that facilitate individual biochemical reactions.
2.  The latter requirement means the water cycle is not autopoietic.
3.  According to German philosopher Immanuel Kant, this recursive “form of 
causality unknown to us” is the foundation of end-­directed behavior (Juarrero-­
Roque 1985).
4.  I will ignore their claim that agency originates with life (see Salthe 2015 review 
of Biological Autonomy).
5.  Contrary to Shannon’s interpretation of information, Pattee (1982) considers 
semantic and informational synonymous.
Chapter 8
1.  Mechanism is used here, not in the sense of a machine part but in the sense of 
a process, or a way of acting and behaving that helps achieve a particular result.
2.  Exemplifying a precursor of teleology, mitosis is in the service of the Type for 
as long as governing constraints hold. Runaway cell division that characterizes 
cancer escapes that control and threatens the organism’s survival.
3.  I will not examine inherited constraints due to epigenetic influences or recom­
binant DNA; nor will I examine metagenomic constraints of the microbiome. 
My conjecture is that over time, these reconfigure effective input to the organism.
4.  The only source of variation would be epigenetic influences on an organism’s 
path-­dependent trajectory.
5.  With few exceptions such as reports of atypical behavior of caged organisms 
under crowded conditions, density and packing are rarely studied for either their 
enabling or restrictive capabilities. This even though, by increasing the likelihood 
of the appearance of context-­dependent constraints, cramped conditions can 
facilitate hybridization (Guo et al. 1991), a source of new species.
6.  Context dependence, including path dependence, makes exact prediction 
impossible; it is the ultimate source of Kauffman’s unprestatability.
7.  Authors of utopias understood the need to isolate perfect societies to increase 
their likelihood of survival (Juarrero 1991). Utopian literature is not part of 
South or East Asian cultures; Buddhism and Taoism are centered around flow 
and context, not unchanging and internal universal essences.
8.  Seed dispersion by birds and pollen dispersion by insects are early mechanisms 
that extend the range of a plant’s constraint regime; they are precursors to organ­
ismic motility. Research on mychorrizal networks (networks of matted fungal 
filaments that wrap around and penetrate tree roots) suggests the presence of 
symbiotic interdependencies between different kingdoms.
9.  See https://­cynefin​.­io​/­images​/­e​/­e5​/­CognitiveEdge_Scaffolding​.­pdf.
10.  Searle’s intention in action would apply to the prosthesis as it did to the 
original organic limb.
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

Notes    243
Chapter 9
1.  In isolated systems like the universe, inhomogeneity in the initial conditions 
is unaccounted for (Barbour 2020). In any case, left to themselves, only the final 
scene, once the play has run its course, lasts.
2.  Or explained away by a nominalist stance.
3.  Ice ages and desertification occur when those governing constraints weaken.
4.  As an origin story, stumbling upon a stable configuration is no different from 
evolution’s concept of random mutation. In our view, a combination of context-­
independent and context-­dependent constraints is a systematic source of meta­
stable configurations.
5.  As we have been arguing, this possibility presupposes the operation of con­
straints. But as noted, nontrivial and long-­lasting distinctions between macro-­ 
and microstates suggest the presence of governing constraints, not mere statistical 
improbability.
6.  The terms are ambiguous; by robustness, we mean a system’s ability to resist 
or withstand change without having to adapt. Resilience, in contrast, is used to 
mean a system’s ability to survive by adapting.
Chapter 11
1.  Allostasis describes the processes that adjust and harmonize individual dynam­
ics such as heart and blood pressure and maintain homeostasis, for example.
2. “Overlapping habitats” are emergent niches that result from “constructive 
interference” between two previously independent habitats.
3.  In recent decades, for example, network theory has shown that network and 
topological properties of terrorist networks and electrical grids alike can share 
similar constraint architectures (Barabasi, Newman, and Watts 2006).
4. “Parkour squirrels” seem to learn to adjust their position in midair in response 
to interoceptive and proprioceptive signals (Hunt et al. 2021).
5.  Although social organization emerges from the workings of contextually 
constrained interactions among individuals, once the society’s constraint regime 
coalesces, its order parameters establish a new context within which behavior will 
subsequently be controlled. Ethical and moral values are therefore context depen­
dent as second-­order context-­dependent constraints. They establish the context 
within which actions are performed and regulated.
6.  It is important to note that he was referring to biological self-­regulating pro­
cesses like homeostasis.
7.  In the prebiotic world, the description “long-­term projects” would have 
equated to top-­down analog control in terms of continuous metastable dynamics 
as described earlier.
8.  Consider your dining room chandelier’s light switch: a quick binary (digital) 
toggle turns it on or off. Analog dimmer switches, in contrast, support a continu­
ous range of brightness levels, as desired, under different conditions.
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

244    Notes
9.  This is the main stumbling block of AI, even including machine learning 
(Mitchell 2021). It does not generalize to other domains and as a result is brittle.
10.  Climate Home News, a part of the Guardian Environment Network, reported 
this in December 2017. https://­www​.­theguardian​.­com​/­environment​/­2017​/­dec​/­11​
/­tsunami​-­of​-­data​-­could​-­consume​-­fifth​-­global​-­electricity​-­by​-­2025​#­:~:text=4%20
years%20old​-­,‘Tsunami%20of%20data’%20could%20consume%20one%20
fifth,of%20global%20electricity%20by%202025&text=In%20an%20
update%20to%20a,world’s%20carbon%20emissions%20by%202025.
11.  Recent research on “infant metaphysics” (Thomas et al. 2022) reveals that 
young children’s willingness to share saliva with those with whom they have inti­
mate bonds suggests that they interpret their world in terms of thick relationships 
(“attachments, obligations, and mutual responsiveness”).
12.  Earlier in chapter 7, we noted Pattee’s analogous point about semantic 
interpretation.
13.  This account is compatible with theories of the mind being extended, embod­
ied, and enacted (Clark 1996; Chemero 2009; and Di Paolo, Buhrmann, and 
Barandiaran 2017). See chapter 13.
Chapter 12
1.  One noteworthy exception is Trent Hone’s (2018) account of information 
management in the U.S. Navy.
2.  Hierarchical theorists from the mid-­twentieth century use the term hierarchi­
cal control to refer to top-­down control.
3.  That understanding of the origin of life is congruent with the views presented 
by Montevil, Moreno, and Mossio mentioned earlier. Holons are coherent inter­
dependencies, so critiques of the principle of persistence presented in chapter 9 
stand.
Chapter 13
1.  C-­fibers were big at the time. Ironically, C-­fibers are afferent nerves in the 
peripheral sensory system—­not in the brain as such. Despite its significance to 
type identity, that detail was somehow never mentioned.
2.  This prompted American psychologist Karl Lashley to espouse totipotential­
ity, the (quickly discredited) capacity of any physical brain element (neurons) or 
process to produce any mental event.
3.  Since “brain events” referred to organic wetware, the psychoneural type iden­
tity theory was opposed by the AI community on the grounds that it barred even 
the possibility of silicon-­based intelligence.
4.  Chalmers holds a double aspect theory today.
5.  Carl Gillett (2016) argues that, unlike philosophers, physicists like Steven 
Weinberg and Bryan Laughlin routinely acknowledge causation by collectives that 
are not other than their components—­and of which Gillett offers the standard 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

Notes    245
examples such as lasers, homeostasis, superconductivity and coordinated march­
ing. However, Gillett does not directly address the causes of these collectives: 
what generates and differentiates them from mere clumps and masses, or confers 
on them their novel collective properties. In particular, he does not address the 
source of their capacity to preserve the collectivity—­the interdependences—­that 
distinguish them from agglomerations over time despite turnover of components.
Chapter 14
1.  The role of hormones in the brain’s information-­processing capacity makes 
this a highly questionable statement.
2.  At what level of granularity (Bechtel and Mundale 1999) is “causally relevant 
mechanism” defined? At what level of granularity must “causally relevant proper­
ties” bring about the same result but “in a different way”? Why single lens and 
retina in octopi and mammals . . . ​but not the compound eyes of arthropods?
3.  From the Oxford Dictionary of Philosophy, https://­www​.­oxfordreference​.­com​
/­view​/­10​.­1093​/­oi​/­authority​.­20110803100348986​.
4.  Note retreat from causal laws to “principles.”
5.  Formulating intertheoretic bridge laws from one (reducing) field of base enti­
ties to another (reduced) field of functional entities would be necessary (Darden 
1977). The relations between the entities in the reducing and reduced theory, we 
submit, would be relations of constraint.
6.  This is precisely the argument of small countries like Barbados, whose prime 
minister notes that focusing solely on the boundaries and coordinates of the 
global economy’s possibility space fails to take seriously the actual topology 
of micro contexts within that rugged landscape, where context-­dependent con­
straints like climate change’s influence on the severity and frequency of hurricanes 
wreak havoc on debt obligations.
7.  Lange uses Richard Feynman’s (1967, 59) term.
8.  Lange does mention spatial dimensionality: whereas Kant suggests inverse 
square laws that explain why space is three-­dimensional, Hertz proposed that 
inverse square laws are explained by three-­dimensional space: the latter’s con­
straints limit what laws exist: factual inverse square laws are those that are com­
patible with the constraints of three-­dimensional space.
Chapter 16
1.  Here I am referring to a concept explored by Immanuel Kant. For further dis­
cussion of this concept, see Juarrero-­Roque 1985.
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

Abbott, A. 2018. How the brain’s phase code might unlock the mysteries of per­
ception. Nature, December 11.
Abraham R., and C. Shaw. 1992. Dynamics: The geometry of behavior. New 
York: Basic Books.
Adam, D. 2020. Walk this way. NewScientist, September 10, 36–­40.
Agosta, S. J., and D. R. Brooks. 2020. Major metaphors in evolution: Darwinism 
then and now. New York: Springer.
Agosta, S., N. Janz, and D. R. Brooks. 2010. How specialists can be generalists: 
Resolving the parasite paradox and implications for emerging infectious diseases. 
Zoologia 27: 171–­162. https://­www​.­researchgate​.­net​/­publication​/­252628776_
How_Specialists_Can_Be_Generalists_Resolving_the_Parasite_Paradox_and_
Implications_for_Emerging_Infectious_Disease​.­ 
Ahmadian, Y., and K. Miller. 2021. What is the dynamical regime of cerebral 
cortex? Neuron 109:373–­391. https//­doi​.­org​/­10​.­1016​/­j​.­neuron​.­2021​.­07​.­031.
Allen, T. F. H., R. V. O’Neill, and T. W. Hoekstra. 1984. Interlevel relations in 
ecological research and management: Some working principles from hierarchy 
theory. USDA Forest Service Technical Report RM-­110.
Allen, T. F. H., and T. B. Starr. 1982. Hierarchy. Chicago: University of Chicago 
Press.
Anderson, Philip W. 1972. More is different. Science 177(4047):393–­396. https://­
doi​.­org​/­10​.­1126​/­science​.­177​.­4047​.­393.
Aristotle. 2022. The complete works. ATN Classics. ASIN: B08X4W3GVJ.
Arnellos, A., and A. Moreno. Cognitive functions are not reducible to biological 
ones: the case of minimal visual perception. Biology and Philosophy 37:1–­25.
Arthur, B. 2020. Why does economics need this different approach? In Complex­
ity economics: Dialogues of the applied complexity network, edited by B. Arthur, 
E. D. Beinhocker, and A. Stanger. Santa Fe, NM: SFI Press.
Arthur, B., E. D. Beinhocker, and A. Stanger, eds. 2020. Complexity economics: 
Dialogues of the applied complexity network. Santa Fe, NM: SFI Press.
Artigiani, R. 1994. Send me your refuse: The US Constitution as trash collector. 
American Journal of Semiotics 11(1/2):249–­276.
References
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

248    References
Artigiani, R. 2021. Shifting paradigms: Beyond modern science to complexity 
and ethics. Northern Plains Ethics Journal 9(1):1–­98.
Ashby, W. R. 1958. Requisite variety and its implications for the control of 
complex systems. Cybernetica (Namur) 1(2):1–­13.
Aznar, A. 2021. Why psychologists can’t decide if moral disgust is even a thing. 
NewScientist 3356. https://­www​.­newscientist​.­com​/­article​/­mg25133564​-­300​-­why​
-­psychologists​-­cant​-­decide​-­if​-­moral​-­disgust​-­is​-­even​-­a​-­thing​/.
Barabasi, A.-­L., M. Newman, and D. J. Watts. 2006. The structure and dynamics 
of networks. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Barandiaran, X. 2008. Mental life: A naturalized approach to the autonomy of cog­
nitive agents. PhD thesis, University of the Basque Country, Donostia-­San Sebas­
tian, Spain. https://­xabierbarandiaran​.­files​.­wordpress​.­com​/­2010​/­06​/­barandiaran​
-­2008​-­phd_thesis​.­pdf.
Barber, N. 2016. Why entrench? International Journal of Constitutional Law 
14(2):325–­350. https://­doi​.­org​/­10​.­1093​/­icon​/­mow030.
Barbour, J. 2020. The Janus point: A new theory of time. London: The Bodley Head.
Barwich, A. S. 2020. Smellosophy: What the nose tells the mind. Cambridge, MA: 
Harvard University Press.
Bateson, G. 1960. Mind and nature: A necessary unity. New York: Ballantine Books.
Bateson, G. 1972. Steps to an ecology of mind. New York: Ballantine.
Bechtel, W., and J. Mundale. 1999. Multiple realizability revisited: Linking cogni­
tive and neural states. Philosophy of Science 66:175–­207.
Bedau, M. and P. Humphreys, eds. 2008. Emergence: Contemporary readings in 
the philosophy of science. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Bejan, A. 2016. The physics of life: The evolution of everything. New York: 
St. Martin’s Press.
Bejan, A. 2020. Discipline in thermodynamics. Energies 13:2487.
Bejan, A., and S. Lorente. 2004. The constructal law and the thermodynamics of 
flow systems with configuration. International Society of Heat and Mass Transfer 
47(14–­16):3203–­3214.
Bejan, A., and S. Lorente. 2008. Design with constructal theory. New York: Wiley.
Bénard, H. 1900. Les tourbillons cellulaires dans une nappe liquide [Cellular 
vortices in a sheet of liquid]. Revue Générale des Sciences Pures et Appliquées 
11:1261–­1271, 1309–­1328.
Bich, L., M. Mossio, and A. M. Soto. 2020. Glycemia regulation: From feedback 
loops to organizational closure. Frontiers in Physiology 11:69. https://­doi​.­org​/­10​
.­3389​/­phys2020​.­00069.
Bickhard, M. 1992. Scaffolding and self-­scaffolding: Central aspects of develop­
ment. In Children’s development within social contexts, edited by L. T. Winegar 
and J. Valsiner, 33–­52. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Bloom, J. 2015. Cucumbers and fish—­what is called culture. https://­vimeo​.­com​
/­145109744.
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

References    249
Bonduriansky, R., and T. Day. 2020. Extended heredity: A new understanding of 
inheritance and evolution. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Bothwell, R.K., Brigham, J.C., Malpass, R.S. 1989. Cross-racial identification of 
faces. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin 15:19–25.
Bourdieu, P. 1977. Outline of a theory of practice. Cambridge: Cambridge Uni­
versity Press.
Bourdieu, P. 1986. Distinction. New York: Routledge Classics.
Brahic, M. 2021. The Jekyll and Hyde proteins. NewScientist 252:48–­50.
Brillouin, L. 1962. Science and information theory. New York: Academic Press.
Brooks, D. R. 2010. Sagas of the children of time: The importance of phylogenetic 
teaching in biology. Evolution: Education and Outreach 3:495–­498.
Brooks, D. R., and E. O. Wiley. 1988. Entropy as evolution. 2nd ed. Chicago, IL: 
University of Chicago Press.
Buchler, J. 1977. Notes on a contour of natural complexes. In Metaphysics of 
natural complexes, edited by J. Buchler. New York: SUNY Press.
Burgauer, M. 2022a. Condensates. Maturity Mapping. https://maturitymapping​
.com/constraintregimes.
Burgauer, M. 2022b. Practice theory. https://­maturitymapping​.­com.
Campagna, L., and S. Turbek. 2021. The geography of speciation in the Ibera 
seedeater. Science. https://­www​.­science​.­org​/­do​/­10​.­1126​/­comment​.­762207​/­full​/.
Campbell, D. 1974. Downward causation. In Studies in the philosophy of biology, 
edited by F. Ayala and T. Dobzhansky, 179–­186. Berkeley: University of California 
Press.
Caporael, L. R., J. R. Griesemer, and W. C. Wimsatt, eds. 2014. Developing scaf­
folds in evolution, culture, and cognition. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Carello, C., and M. T. Turvey. 2002. The ecological approach to perception. In 
Encyclopedia of cognitive science, edited by L. Nadel. London: Nature Publishing 
Group.
Castelvecchi, D. 2020. Beating biometric bias. Nature 587:347–349.
Centola, D. 2018. How behavior spreads: The science of complex contagions. 
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Chalmers, D. 1996. The conscious mind. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Chemero, A. 2003. An outline of a theory of affordances. Ecological Psychology 
15(2):181–­195.
Chemero, A. 2009. Radical embodied cognitive science. Cambridge, MA: MIT 
Press.
Chemero, A., and M. Turvey. 2007. Gibsonian affordances for roboticists. Adap­
tive Behavior 12:473–­480.
Churchland, M. M., J. P. Cunningham, M. T. Kaufman, J. D. Foster, P. Nuyujujian, 
S. I. Ryu, and K.V. Shenoy. 2012. Neural population dynamics during reaching. 
Nature 487(7405):51–­56. https://­doi​.­org​/­10​.­1038​/­nature11129.
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

250    References
Churchland, M. M., G. Santhanam, and K. V. Shenoy. 2006. Preparatory activity 
in premotor and motor cortex reflects the speed of the upcoming reach. Journal 
of Neurophysiology 96:3130–­3146.
Churchland, M. M., and K. V. Shenoy. 2007. Temporal complexity and heteroge­
neity of single-­neuron activity in premotor and motor cortex. Journal of Neuro­
physiology 97:4235–­4257.
Churchland, M. M., B. M. Yu, S. I. Ryu, G. Santhanam, and K. V. Shenoy. 2006. 
Neural variability in premotor cortex provides a signature of motor preparation. 
The Journal of Neuroscience 26:3697–­3712.
Churchland, M. M., B. M. Yu, M. Sahani, and K. V. Shenoy. 2007. Techniques 
for extracting single-­trial activity patterns from large-­scale neural recordings. 
Current Opinion in Neurobiology 17:609–­618.
Cilliers, P. 1998. Complexity and postmodernism: Understanding complex 
systems. London: Routledge.
Clark, A. 1996. Being there: Putting brain and world together again. Cambridge, 
MA: MIT Press.
Clark, A. 2019. Surfing uncertainty: Prediction, action, and the embodied mind. 
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Clark, A., and D. Chalmers. 1998. The extended mind. Analysis 58(1):7–­19.
Co, A. D., and M. P. Brenner. 2020. Tracing cell trajectories in a biofilm. Science 
369(3031):6488. https://­doi​.­org​/­10​.­1126​/­science​.­abd1225​.
Collier, J. 2003a. Fundamental properties of self-­organization. In Causality, emer­
gence, self-­organization, edited by V. Arshinov and C. Fuchs, 150–­166. Moscow: 
NIA-­Piroda.
Collier, J. 2003b. Hierarchical dynamical information systems with a focus on 
biology. Entropy 5:100–­124.
Collier, J. 2004. Self-­organization, individuation and identity. Revue Internatio­
nale de Philosophie 59:151–­172.
Collier, J. 2005. Change and identity in complex systems. Ecology and Society 
10(1):29. http://­www​.­ukzn​.­ac​.­za​/­undphil​/­collier.
Collier, J. 2010. A dynamical approach to identity and diversity in complex 
systems. In Complexity, difference and identity: An ethical perspective, edited by 
P. Cilliers. New York: Springer.
Collier, J., and C. Hooker. 1999. Complexly organised dynamical systems. Open 
Systems and Information Dynamics 6(3):241–­302. https://­doi​.­org​/­10​.­1023​/­A:100​
9662321079.
Collier, J., and S. J. Muller. 1998. The dynamical basis of emergence in natural 
hierarchies. In Emergence, complexity, hierarchy, organization, selected and 
edited papers from the Echo III Conference, edited by G. L. Farre and T. Oksala. 
Helsinki: Acta Polytechnica Scandinavica.
Conrad, M. 1972. The importance of molecular hierarchy in information pro­
cessing. In Towards a theoretical biology, edited by C. H. Waddington. Edin­
burgh: Edinburgh University Press.
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

References    251
Conrad, M. 1983. Adaptability: The significance of variability from molecule to 
ecosystem. New York: Plenum Press.
Conway, G. H. 1970. www​.­playthegameoflife​.­com​.­ Scientific American 223:120–­
123. https://­doi​.­org​/­10​.­1038​/­scientificamerican1070–120.
Crick, F., and C. Koch. 1990. Toward a neurobiological theory of consciousness. 
Seminars in Neuroscience 2:264–­275.
Cumhaill, C., and R. Wiseman. 2022. Metaphysical animals: How four women 
brought philosophy back to life. New York: Doubleday.
Cunningham, J. P., and B. M. Yu. 2014. Dimensionality reduction for large-­scale 
neural recordings. Nature Neuroscience 17(11):1500—­1509.
Damasio, A. 2021. Feeling and knowing: Making minds conscious. New York: 
Pantheon.
Darden, L. 1977. Interfield theories. Philosophy of Science 44:43–­64.
Datar, A., and N. Nicosia. 2018. Assessing social contagion in body mass 
index, overweight, and obesity using a natural experiment. JAMA Pediatrics 
172(3):239–­246.
Davidson, D. 1980. Mental events. In Essays on actions and events, 207–­225. 
Reprint, Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Dean, M. 2020. “Religion as physics.” https://u.pcloud.link/publink/show?code
=XZJ4QLXZtxvmhLoA6QjrUj2jtrw1bz5S4m47, video. UCLA Center for the 
Study of Religion, 36:40.
Dehaene, S., and L. Naccache. 2000. Towards a cognitive neuroscience of con­
sciousness: Basic evidence and a workspace framework. Cognition 79:1–37.
De Jaegher, H., and E. Di Paolo. 2007. Participatory sense-making: An enac­
tive approach to social cognition. Phenomenology and the Cognitive Sciences 
6(4):485–507. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11097-007-9076-9.
Demming, A. 2020. Analogue comeback. NewScientist, July 25, 37–­40.
Depew, D., and B. Weber. 1995. Darwinism evolving: Systems dynamics and the 
genealogy of natural selection. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Di Paolo, E., T. Buhrmann, and X. Barandiaran. 2017. Sensorimotor life: An 
enactive proposal. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Donald, M. 1991. Origins of the modern mind. Cambridge, MA: Harvard Uni­
versity Press.
Donne, J. 1611. An anatomy of the world. https://­www​.­bartleby​.­com​/­357​/­169​
.­html.
Dreyfus, H. 1972. What computers can’t do: The limits of artificial intelligence. 
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Dyson, F. 2001. Is life analog or digital? Edge​.­org​.­ https://­www​.­edge​.­org​
/­conversation​/­freeman_dyson​-­is​-­life​-­analog​-­or​-­digital​.
Dyson, G. 2011. What scientific concept would improve everybody’s cognitive 
toolkit? Edge​.­org​.­ https://­www​.­edge​.­org​/­response​-­detail​/­10105.
Dyson, G. 2012. Turing’s cathedral. New York: Vintage.
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

252    References
Dyson, G. 2019. edge​.­org​.­ https://­www​.­edge​.­org​/­conversation​/­george_dyson​-­child​
hoods​-­end.
Earley, J. 1981. Self-­organization and agency. In chemistry and process philoso­
phy. Process Studies 11:242–­258.
Edelman, G. 1987. Neural Darwinism. New York: Basic Books.
Edelman, G., and G. Tononi. 2000. A universe of consciousness: How matter 
becomes imagination. New York: Basic Books.
Egbert, M., and X. Barandiaran. 2014. Modeling habits as self-sustaining patterns 
of sensorimotor behavior. Frontiers in Human Neuroscience 8:1–15.
Eigen, M. 1971. Self-­organization of matter and the evolution of biological macro­
molecules. Die Naturwissenschaften 58(10):465–­523.
Eldredge, N. 2015. Eternal ephemera. New York: Columbia University Press.
Ellis, G. F. R. 2012. On the limits of quantum theory: Contextuality and the 
quantum-­classical cut. Annals of Physics 327:1890–­1932.
Ellis, G. F. R. 2016. How can physics underlie the mind? New York: Springer.
Ellis, G. F. R. 2021. Physical, logical, and mental top-­down effects. In Top down 
causation and emergence, edited by J. Voosholz and M. Gabriel. Cham, Switzer­
land: Springer.
Etxeberria, A., and J. Umerez. 2013. Organization. In Encyclopedia of systems 
biology, edited by W. Dubitsky, O. Workenhauer, H. Yokata, and H. Cho. New 
York: Springer. https://­doi​.­org​/­10​.­1007​/­978​-­1​-­4419​-­9863​-­7_77.
Feigl, H. 1958. The “mental” and the “physical.” In Concepts, theories and the 
mind-­body problem, edited by H. Feigl, M. Scriven, and G. Maxwell. Vol. 2. Min­
neapolis: Minnesota Studies in the Philosophy of Science.
Feynman, R. 1967. The character of physical law. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Figdor, C. 2010. Neuroscience and the multiple realization of cognitive functions. 
Philosophy of Science 77(3):419–­456.
Fodor, J. 1981. What psychological states are not. In Representations, 79–­99. 
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Freeman, W. J. 1991a. Nonlinear dynamics in olfactory information process­
ing. In Olfaction, edited by J. Davis and H. Eichenbaum. Cambridge, MA: MIT 
Press.
Freeman, W. J. 1991b. The physiology of perception. Scientific American, Febru­
ary, 78–­85.
Friston, K. The free-­energy principle: A unified brain theory. Nature Reviews 
Neuroscience 11:127–­138.
Friston, K., J. G. Tononi, G. N. Reeke, O. Spons, and G. M. Edelman. 1994. 
Value-­dependent selection in the brain: Simulation in a synthetic neural model. 
Neuroscience 59(2):229–­243.
Gardner, M. 1970. The fantastic combinations of John Conway’s new solitaire 
game “life” (PDF). Mathematical Games. Scientific American 223(4):120–­123. 
https://­doi​.­org​/­10​.­1038​/­scientificamerican1070​-­120.
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

References    253
Gare, A. 2019. Biosemiosis and causation. Defending biosemiotics through 
Rosen’s theoretical biology, or integrating biosemiotics and anticipatory systems 
theory. Cosmos and History 15(1):31–­90.
Gatlin, L. 1972. Information and the living system. New York: Columbia Uni­
versity Press.
Gershenson, C. 2020. Guiding the self-­organization of cyber-­physical systems. 
Frontiers in Robotics and AI, April 3, 2020. https://­doi​.­org​/­10​.­3389​/­frobt​.­2020​
.­00041.
Gibson, J. J. 1975. Affordances and behavior. In Reasons for realism: Selected 
essays of James J. Gibson, edited by E. S. Reed and R. Jones, 410–­411. Hillsdale, 
NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Gilbert, S. 1991. Epigenetic landscaping: Waddington’s use of cell fate bifurcation 
diagrams. Biology and Philosophy 6:135–­154.
Gill, M., and J. Lennox, eds. 1994. Self-­motion: from Aristotle to Newton. Prince­
ton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Gillett, C. 2003. The metaphysics of realization, multiple realizability, and the 
special sciences. Journal of Philosophy 100(11):591–­603.
Gillett, C. 2016. Reduction and emergence in science and philosophy. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press.
Goldman, A. 1970. A theory of human action. Englewood Cliffs: Prentice Hall.
Goodwin, B. C., and M. H. Cohen. 1969. A phase shift model for the spatial 
and temporal organization of developing systems. Journal of Theoretical Biology 
25(1):49–­107.
Gould, S.J., and R.C. Lewontin. 1979. The spandrels of San Marco and the Pan­
glossian paradigm: A critique of the adaptationist programme. Proceedings of the 
Royal Society of London B 205:581–­598.
Grene, M. 1974. The understanding of nature: Essays in the philosophy of 
biology. Dordrecht, Netherlands: Springer.
Grobstein, C. 1973. Hierarchical order and neogenesis. In Hierarchy theory: The 
challenges of complex systems, edited by H. H. Pattee. New York: Braziller.
Guo, P. Z., L. D. Mueller, and F. J. Ayala. 1991. Evolution of behavior by density-­
dependent natural selection. Proceedings of the National Academy of Science 
88(23):10905–­10906. https://­doi​.­org​/­10​.­1073​/­pnas​.­88​.­23​.­10905.
Haken, H. 1996. Slaving principle revisited. Physica D: Nonlinear Phenomena 
97:95–­103.
Haken, H., and J. Portugali. 2021. Synergetic cities: Information, steady state and 
phase transition. New York: Springer.
Haken, H., and A. Wunderlin. 1988. The slaving principle of synergetics—­an 
outline. In Order and chaos in nonlinear physical systems, edited by S. Lundqvist, 
N.H. March, and M.P. Tosi, 457–­463. Boston: Springer.
Halloran, M. E., and C. J. Struchiner. 1991. Study designs for dependent happen­
ings. Epidemiology 2(5):331–­338.
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

254    References
Halpern, P. 2020. Synchronicity: The epic quest to understand the quantum 
nature of cause and effect. New York: Basic Books.
Hatna, E., and I. Benenson. 2012. The Schelling model of ethnic residential 
dynamics: Beyond the integrated-­segregated dichotomy of patterns. Journal of 
Artificial Societies and Social Simulation 15(1):6. https://­jasss​.­soc​.­surrey​.­ac​.­uk​/­15​
/­1​/­6​.­html​.
Henrich, J. 2016. The secret of our success: How culture is driving human evolu­
tion, domesticating our species, and making us smarter. Princeton, NJ: Princeton 
University Press.
Heyer, R., C. Semmier, and A. Hendrickson. 2018. Humans and algorithms for 
facial recognition: The effects of candidate list length and experience on perfor­
mance. Journal of Applied Research in Memory and Cognition 7:597–609.
Hinton, G. E., and T. Shallice. 1991. Lesioning an attractor network: Investiga­
tions of acquired dyslexia. Psychological Review 98(1):74–­95.
Hinton, G. E., and R. R. Salakhutdinov. 2006. Reducing the dimensionality of 
data with neural networks. Science 313(5786):504–­507.
Hoffmann, P. 2012. Life’s ratchet: How molecular machines extract order from 
chaos. New York: Basic Books.
Hoffmeyer, J.-­H. 2017. Basic biological anticipation. In Handbook of anticipa­
tion, edited by R. Poli. Cham, Switzerland: Springer International.
Hoffmeyer, J.-­H. 2018. Causation, constructors, and codes. Biosystems 164:​
121–­127.
Hofstadter, D. 1979. Gödel, Escher and Bach. New York: Basic Books.
Holmes, B. 2019. The Goldilocks planet. NewScientist 24(3222):34–­37.
Hone, T. 2018. Learning war: The evolution of fighting doctrine in the U.S. Navy, 
1898–­1945. Annapolis, MD: Naval Institute Press.
Humphries, M. 2021. The spike: An epic journey through the brain in 2.1 seconds. 
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Hunt, H., J. Jinn, L. Jacobs, and R. Full. 2021. Acrobatic squirrels learn to leap 
and land on tree branches without falling. Science 373:697–­700.
Hutto, D., M. Kirchhoff, and E. Myin. 2014. Extensive enactivism: Why keep it 
all in? Frontiers in Neuroscience 8:706.
Irwin, G. G., K. R. Williams, D. G. Kerwin, H. von Lieresund Wilkau, and 
K. M. Newell. 2021. Learning the high bar longswing: II. Energetics and the emer­
gence of the coordination pattern, Journal of Sports Sciences 39(23):2698–­2705. 
https://­doi​.­org​/­10​.­1080​/­02640414​.­2021​.­1953829.
Jablonka, E., and M. J. Lamb. 2002. The changing concept of epigenetics. Annals 
of the New York Academy of Sciences 981(1):82–­96.
Jacobs, J. 1993. The death and life of great American cities. New York: Random 
House.
Jantsch, E. 1980. The Self-­organizing universe. Oxford: Pergamon.
Juarrero, A. 1991. Fail-­safe versus safe-­fail: Suggestions toward an evolutionary 
model of justice. Texas Law Review 69:1745–­1777.
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

References    255
Juarrero, A. 1992. The message whose message it is that there is no message (in 
special Comparative Literature issue on Foucault’s Pendulum, with commentary 
by U. Eco). Modern Language Notes (MLN) 107:892–­894.
Juarrero, A. 1993. Des racines modernes aux rhizomes post-­modernes (From 
modern roots to postmodern rhizomes). Diogene 163:29–­48.
Juarrero, A. 1999. Dynamics in action: Intentional behavior as a complex system. 
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Juarrero, A. 2004. Self-­organization, individuation and identity. Revue Interna­
tionale de Philosophie 59:151–­172.
Juarrero, A. and C. Rubino, eds. 2010. Emergence, complexity and self-­
organization: Precursors and prototypes. Boston: ISCE Publishing.
Juarrero-­Roque, A. 1985. Self-­organization: Kant’s concept of teleology and 
modern chemistry. The Review of Metaphysics 39:107–­135.
Jumper, J., R. Evans, A. Pritzel, et al. 2021. Highly accurate protein structure pre­
diction with AlphaFold. Nature 596:583–­589. https://­doi​.­org​/­10​.­1038​/­s41586​
-­021​-­03819​-­2.
Kauffman, S. 2014. Prolegomenon to patterns in evolution. Biosystems 123:3–­8. 
https://­doi​.­org​/­ 10​.­1016​/­j​.­biosystems​.­2014​.­03​.­004.
Kaufman, M. T., M. M. Churchland, S. Ryu, and K. V. Shenoy. 2014. Cortical 
activity in the null space: permitting preparation without movement. Nature 
Neuroscience 17(3):440–­448. https://­doi​.­org​/­10:1038​/­nn​.­3643.
Kelso, J. A. S. 1995. Dynamic patterns: The self-­organization of brain and behav­
ior. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Kelso, J. A. S. 2008. Synergies: Atoms of brain and behavior. In A multidisci­
plinary approach to motor control, edited by D. Sternad. Heidelberg: Springer.
Kelso, J. A. S. 2009. Coordination dynamics. In Encyclopedia of complexity and 
systems sciences, edited by R.A. Meyers. Berlin: Springer-Verlag.
Kim, J. 1989. The myth of nonreductive materialism. Proceedings and Addresses 
of the American Philosophical Association 63(3):31–­47.
Kim, J. 1998. Mind in a physical world. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Kirschner, M. W., and J. C. Gerhart. 2005. The plausibility of life: Resolving Dar­
win’s dilemma. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
Koch, C. 2004. The quest for consciousness: A neurobiological approach. Engle­
wood, CO: Roberts and Company Publishers.
Koestler, A. 1968. The ghost in the machine. New York: Macmillan.
Kruesi, Liz. 2013. The cosmos’ hidden scaffolding. Astronomy. https://­astronomy​
.­com​/­magazine​/­2013​/­07​/­the​-­cosmos​-­hidden​-­scaffolding.
Kurth, C. 2021. Disgust can be morally valuable. Scientific American. https://­
www​.­scientificamerican​.­com​/­article​/­disgust​-­can​-­be​-­morally​-­valuable​/.
Kyselo, M. 2014. The body social: An enactive approach to the self. Frontiers in 
Psychology 5:986.
Kyselo, M., and W. Tschacher. 2014. An enactive and dynamical systems theory 
account of dyadic relationships. Frontiers in Psychology 5:452.
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

256    References
Ladyman, J., and D. Ross, with D. Spurrett and J. Collier. 2010. Every thing must 
go. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Lange, M. 2007. Laws and meta-­laws of nature: Conservation laws and symme­
tries. Studies in History and Philosophy of Modern Physics 38:457–­481.
Lange, M. 2017. Because without cause: Non-­causal explanations in science and 
mathematics. New York: Oxford University Press.
Laughlin, R., and D. Pines. 2000. The theory of everything. Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences 97:28–­31.
Lenton, T., and B. Latour. 2018. Gaia 2.0. Science 361(6407):1066–­1068. https://­
doi​.­org​/­10​.­1126​/­science​.­aau0427.
Lenton, T. M., S. Daines, J. Dyke, A. Nicholson, D. Wilkinson, and H. Williams. 
2018. Selection for Gaia across multiple scales. Trends in Ecology and Evolution 
33(8):633–­645. https://­doi​.­org​/­10​.­1016​/­j​.­tree​.­2018​.­05​.­006.
Levins, R. 1973. The limits of complexity. In Hierarchy theory, edited by H. H. 
Pattee. New York: Braziller.
Lipscomb, B. J. B. 2021. The women are up to something: How Elizabeth Ans­
combe, Philippa Foot, Mary Midgley, and Iris Murdoch revolutionized ethics. 
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Lustgarten, A. 2022. The Barbados rebellion. New York Times Magazine. https://­
www​.­nytimes​.­com​/­interactive​/­2022​/­07​/­27​/­magazine​/­barbados​-­climate​-­debt​-­mia​
-­mottley​.­html.
MacIntyre, A. 2007. After virtue. Notre Dame, IN: University of Notre Dame Press.
Mante, V., D. Sussillo, K. V. Shenoy, and W. T. Newsome. 2013. Context-­dependent 
computation by recurrent dynamics in prefrontal cortex. Nature 503(7474):78–­
84. https://­doi​.­org​/­10​.­1038​/­nature12742​.
Marshall, M. 2021. How water makes life possible. NewScientist, January 23, 15.
Martone, Robert. 2020. Music synchronizes the brains of performers and their 
audience. Scientific American. https://­www​.­scientificamerican​.­com​/­article​/­music​
-­synchronizes​-­the​-­brains​-­of​-­performers​-­and​-­their​-­audience​/­​?­print=true.
Mason, P. H., J. F. Dominguez, B. Winter, and A. Grignolio. 2014. Hidden in 
plain view: Degeneracy in complex systems. Biosystems 128:1–­8. https://­doi​.­org​
/­10​.­1016​/­j​.­biosystems​.­2014​.­12​.­003.
Maturana, H., and F. Varela. 1979. Autopoiesis and cognition: The realization of 
the living. Dordrecht, Netherlands: D. Reidel Publishing.
Maury, C. P. J. 2018. Amyloid and the origin of life: self-­replicating catalytic amy­
loids as prebiotic informational and protometabolic entities. Cellular and Mole­
cular Life Sciences 75:1499–­1507. https:​/­doi​.­org​/­10​.­1007​/­s00018​-­18​-­2797​.­9.
Maynard Smith, J., and E. Szathmary. 1995. The major transitions in evolution. 
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Mazzucato, M. 2020. The value of everything. New York: Public Affairs Books.
McCulloch, W. 1945. A heterarchy of values determined by the topology of 
nervous nets. Bulletin of Mathematical Biophysics 7(2):89–­93.
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

References    257
McMullin, B. 1999. Some remarks on autocatalysis and autopoiesis. http://­www​
.­eeng​.­dcu​.­ie​/­​-­mcmullin​/.
McMullin, B. 2000. Remarks on autocatalysis and autopoiesis. Annals of the 
New York Academy of Sciences 901:163–­174.
Medzhitov, R. 2021. The spectrum of inflammatory responses. Science 
374(6571):1070–­1075. https://­doi​.­org​/­10​.­1126​/­science​.­abi5200.
Metzinger, T., ed. 2000. Neural correlates of consciousness: Empirical and con­
ceptual questions. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Mitchell, M. 2021. Why AI is harder than we think. arXiv:2104.12871v2 
[cs.AI].
Montevil, M., and M. Mossio. 2015. Biological organization as closure of con­
straints. Journal of Theoretical Biology 372:179–­191.
Moreno A., and M. Mossio. 2015. Biological autonomy: A philosophical and 
theoretical inquiry. New York: Springer.
Mossio, M. 2013. Closure, causal. In Encyclopedia of systems biology, edited by 
W. Dubitzky, O. Wolkenhauer, K.-­H. Cho, and H. Yokota, 415–­418. New York: 
Springer.
Murphy, N., and W. Brown. 2007. Did my neurons make me do it. Oxford: 
Oxford University Press.
Murphy, N., G. F. R. Ellis, and T. O’Connor, eds. 2009. Downward causation and 
the neurobiology of free will. New York: Springer.
Nagel, T. 1986. The view from nowhere. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Nicolis, G., and I. Prigogine. 1977. Self-­organization in nonequilibrium systems. 
New York: Wiley.
Noe, A. 2010. Out of our heads: Why you are not your brain, and other lessons 
from the biology of consciousness. New York: Hill and Wang.
Nordholm, S., and G. B. Bacskay. 2020. The basics of covalent bonding in terms of energy 
and dynamics. Molecules 25:2667. https://­doi​.­org​/­10​.­3390​/­molecules25112667.
Pascal, R., and A. Pross. 2015. Stability and its manifestation in the chemical and 
biological words. ChemComm 51:16160–­16165.
Pattee, H. H. 1972a. Laws and constraints, symbols and languages. In Towards 
a theoretical biology, edited by C. H. Waddington. Vol. 4. Edinburgh: Edinburgh 
University Press.
Pattee, H. H. 1972b. The evolution of self-­simplifying systems. In The relevance 
of general systems theory, edited by E. Laszlo, 31–­42. New York: Braziller.
Pattee, H. H. 1973. The physical basis and origin of hierarchical control. In Hier­
archy theory: The challenge of complex systems. New York: Braziller.
Pattee, H. H. 1978. Biological systems theory: Descriptive and constructive com­
plementarity. In Applied general systems research, edited by G. J. Klir, 511–­520. 
New York: Plenum.
Pattee, H. H. 1982. Cell psychology: An evolutionary approach to the symbol-­
matter problem. Cognition and Brain Theory 4:325–­341.
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

258    References
Patten, B., and G. Auble. 1980. Systems approach to the concept of niche. Syn­
these 43(1):155–­181.
Pearl, J. 2009. Causality: Models, reasoning and inference. Cambridge: Cam­
bridge University Press.
Pendleton-­Jullian, A. 2020. Coming of Age: From frameworks and theories of 
change to scaffolds for ecologies of change. In Cynefin: Weaving sense-­making into 
the fabric of our world, edited by R. Greenberg and B. Bertsch. Singapore: Cogni­
tive Edge.
Pendleton-­Jullian, A., and J. S. Brown. 2016. Pragmatic imagination. San Fran­
cisco: Blurb Press.
Perry, J. 2002. Identity, personal identity, and the self. Indianapolis, IN: Hackett.
Place, U. T. 1956. Is consciousness a brain process? British Journal of Psychology 
47:44–­50.
Plaut, D. C., and T. Shallice. 1993. Deep dyslexia: A case study of connectionist 
neuropsychology. Cognitive Neuropsychology 10:377–­500.
Polger, T. W., and L. A. Shapiro. 2016. The multiple realization book. New York: 
Oxford University Press.
Prigogine, I., and I. Stengers. 1984. Order out of chaos: Man’s new dialogue with 
nature. Toronto: Bantam.
Pross, A. 2012. What is life?: How chemistry becomes biology. New York: Oxford 
University Press.
Pross, A., and R. Pascal. 2013. The origin of life: What we know, what we can 
know and what we will never know. Open Biology 3. https://­doi​.­org​/­10​.­1098​
/­rsob​.­120190.
Putnam, H. 1967. Psychological predicates. In Art, mind, and religion, edited by 
W. H. Capitan and D. D. Merrill, 37–­48. Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press.
Putnam, H. 1975. The meaning of “meaning.” Language, Mind, and Knowledge 
7:131–­193.
Rampino, M. R., K. Caldeira, and Y. Zhu. 2021. The earth has a pulse: A 27.5 
Myr underlying cycle in coordinated geological events over the last 260 Myr. 
Geoscience Frontiers 12(6). https://­doi​.­org​/­10​.­1016​/­j​.­gsf​.­2021​.­101245​.
Ravilious, K. 2021. The last human. NewScientist 27:41.
Rayleigh, Lord. 1916. On the convective currents in a horizontal layer of fluid when 
the higher temperature is on the underside. Philosophical Magazine 32(192):529–­546.
Regalado, A. 2019. Chinese scientists have put human brain genes in 
monkeys—­and yes, they may be smarter. MIT Technology Review. https://­www​
.­technologyreview​.­com​/­2019​/­04​/­10​/­136131​/­chinese​-­scientists​-­have​-­put​-­human​
-­brain​-­genes​-­in​-­monkeysand​-­yes​-­they​-­may​-­be​-­smarter​/­​.
Ricci-­Tam, C., I. Ben-­Zion, J. Wang, J. Palme, and A. Li. 2021. Decoupling tran­
scription factor expression and activity enables dimmer switch gene regulation. 
Science 372(6539):292–­295. https://­doi​.­org​/­10​.­1126​/­science​.­aba​/­7582​.
Roque, A. J. 1987. Does action theory rest on a mistake? Philosophy Research 
Archives 13:587–­612.
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

References    259
Rorty, R. 1982. Consequences of pragmatism: Essays 1972–­1980. Minneapolis: 
University of Minnesota Press.
Rosen, R. 1985. Anticipatory systems. Pergamon Press.
Rosenberg, Alexander. 2001. On multiple realization and the special sciences. The 
Journal of Philosophy 98:365–­373.
Rosenblueth, A., N. Wiener, and J. Bigelow. 1943. Behavior, purpose and teleol­
ogy. Philosophy of Science 10:18–­24.
Ross, R. 1916. An application of the theory of probabilities to the study of a 
priori  pathometry, Part 1.  Proceedings of the Royal Society Series A 92(638):​
204–­230. 
Rovelli, C. 2018. The order of time. New York: Riverhead.
Rowlands, M. 2010. The mind embedded. In The new science of the mind: From 
extended mind to embodied phenomenology. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Ruiz-­Mirazo, K., and A. Moreno. 2004. Basic autonomy as a fundamental step in 
the synthesis of life. Artificial Life 10(3):235–­259.
Ryle, G. 1949. The concept of mind. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Saberi, M., H. Hamedmoghadam, M. Ashfaq, et al. 2020. A simple contagion 
process describes spreading of traffic jams in urban networks. Nature Communi­
cations 11:1616. https://­doi​.­org​/­10​.­1038​/­s41467​-­020​-­15353​-­2.
Salthe, S. 1991. Varieties of emergence. World Futures 21(2):69–­73.
Salthe, S. 1980. Robustness, reliability and multiple determinism in science: 
The nature and variety of a powerful family of problem-­solving heuristics. In 
Knowing and validating in the social sciences: A tribute to Donald T. Campbell, 
edited by M. Brewer and B. Collins. San Francisco: Jossey-­Bass.
Salthe, S. 1985. Evolving hierarchical systems. New York: Columbia University Press.
Salthe, S. 1993. Development and evolution: Complexity and change in biology. 
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Salthe, S. 2001. Summary of the principles of hierarchy theory. https://­www​.­nbi​
.­dk​/­~natphil​/­salthe​/­Summary_of_the_Principles_o​.­pdf.
Salthe, S. 2010. Maximum power and maximum entropy production: Finalities 
in nature. Cosmos and History: The Journal of Natural and Social Philosophy 
6(1):114–­121.
Salthe, S. 2012. Hierarchical structures. Axiomathes 22:355–­383. https://­doi​.­org​
/­10​.­1007​/­s10516​-­012​-­9185​-­0.
Salthe, S. N. 2015. What actually is a living system materially? Biological Theory 
11:50–­55. https://­doi​.­org​/­10​.­1007​/­s13752​-­015​-­0230​-­2.
Salthe, S. 2018. Perspectives on natural philosophy. Philosophies 3(23):35–­44. 
https://­doi​.­org​/­10:3390​/­philosophies3030023.
Sancar, A., and R. N. Van Gelder. 2021. Clocks, cancer and chronochemotherapy. 
Science 371(6524):42. https://­doi​.­org​/­10​.­1126​/­science​.­abb0738.
Sawyer, R. 2005. Social emergence: Societies as complex systems. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press.
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

260    References
Schelling, T. C. 1971. Dynamic models of segregation. Journal of Mathematical 
Sociology 1(2):143–­186.
Searle, J. 1980. Minds, brains and programs. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 
3:417–­457.
Shannon, C., and W. Weaver. 1949. The mathematical theory of communication. 
Champaign: University of Illinois Press.
Shapere, D. 1982. The concept of observation in science and philosophy. Philoso­
phy of Science 49(4):485–­525.
Shapiro, L. A. 2000. Multiple realizations. The Journal of Philosophy 97(12):635–­
654. https://­doi​.­org​/­10​.­2307​/­2678460.
Shaw, R. and M. T. Turvey. 1981. Coalitions as models for ecosystems: A realist 
perspective on perceptual organization.” In Perceptual organization, edited by 
M. Kubovy and J. Pomerantz, 343–416. Hillsdale: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Sheehy, J. 2015. There is no now. Communications of the ACM 58:36–­41.
Shenoy, K. V., M. T. Kaufman, M. Sahani, and M. M. Churchland. 2011. A 
dynamical systems view of motor preparation: Implications for neural prosthetic 
system design. Progress in Brain Research 192:33–­58.
Shiller, R. J. 2019. Narrative economics: How stories go viral and drive major 
economic events. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Simon, H. 1969. The architecture of complexity. In The sciences of the artificial. 
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Simon, H. 1973. The organization of complex systems. In Hierarchy theory: The 
challenge of complex systems, edited by H. H. Pattee. New York: Braziller.
Slaby, J., and G. Gallagher. 2015. Critical neuroscience and socially extended 
minds. Theory, Culture and Society 32(1):35–­59.
Smart, J. J. C. 1959. Sensations and brain processes. Philosophical Review 
68:141–­156.
Snowden, D. 2015. Naturalizing sensemaking. In Informed by knowledge: Expert 
performance in complex situation, edited by K. Mosier and U. Fischer, 223–­234. 
New York: Routledge.
Snowden, D. 2020. Cynefin: A tale that grew in the telling. In Cynefin: Weaving 
sense-­making into the fabric of our world, edited by R. Greenberg and B. Bertsch. 
Singapore: Cognitive Edge—­The Cynefin Co.
Snowden, D., and A. Pendleton-­Jullian. 2020. Scaffolding. https://­cdn​.­cognitive​
-­edge​.­com​/­wp​-­content​/­uploads​/­sites​/­7​/­2020​/­04​/­22082941​/­c​-­CognitiveEdge_
Scaffolding​.­pdf.
Steiner, P. 2019. Brain fuel utilization in the developing brain. Annals of Nutrition 
and Metabolism 19(75, suppl. 1):8–­18.
Stenz, L., D. S. Schechter, S. R. Serpa, and A. Paoloni-­Giacolino. 2018. Intergen­
erational transmission of DNA methylation signatures associated with early life 
stress. Current Genomics 19(8):665–­675.
Subbaraman, Ni. 2021. First monkey-­human embryos reignite debate over hybrid 
animals. Nature 592:497.
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

References    261
Thelen, E., and L. B. Smith. 1994. A dynamic systems approach to the develop­
ment of cognition and action. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Thom, R. 1989. Structural stability and morphogenesis: An outline of a general 
theory of models. Reading, MA: Addison-­Wesley.
Thomas, A., B. Woo, D. Nettle, E. Spelke, and R. Saxe. 2022. Early concepts of 
intimacy. Science 375(6578):311–­315.
Tononi, G. 2012. Phi: A voyage from the brain to the soul. New York: Pantheon.
Tononi, G. 2008. Consciousness as integrated information: A provisional mani­
festo. Biological Bulletin 215:216–­242.
Toulmin, S. 1990. Cosmopolis: The hidden agenda of modernity. New York: Free 
Press.
Turbek, S., M. Browne, A. S. Di Giacomo. 2021. Rapid speciation via the evolu­
tion of pre-­mating isolation in the Iberá Seedeater. Science 371:6536.
Turing, A. 1936. On computable numbers, with an application to the Entsche­
idungsproblem. Proceedings of the London Mathematical Society (Series 2) 
42:230–­265.
Turner, T. L., M. W. Hahn, and S. V. Nuzhdin. 2005. Genomic islands of specia­
tion in Anopheles gambiae. PLoS Biology 3:e285.
Turvey, M. 1990. Coordination. American Psychologist 45:938–­953.
Turvey, M. T., K. Shockley, and C. Carello. 1999. Affordance, proper function, 
and the physical basis of perceived heaviness. Cognition 17:B17–­B26.
Ulanowicz, R. 1997. Ecology: The ascendent perspective. New York: Columbia 
University Press.
van Gulick, R. 1993. Who’s in charge here and who’s doing all the work? In 
Essays on mental causation, edited by J. Heil and A. Mele, 233–­256. Oxford: 
Oxford University Press.
van Gulick, R. 2004. Higher-­order global states (HOGS): An alternative higher-­
order model of consciousness. In Higher-­order theories of consciousness: An 
anthology, edited by R. J. Gennaro. Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Van Orden, G. C., J. G. Holden, and M. T. Turvey. 2003. Self-­organization of 
cognitive performance. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General 132(3):331.
Varela, F., and E. Thomson. 2003. Neural synchronicity and the unity of mind: 
A neurophenomenological perspective. In The unity of consciousness: Binding, 
integration, and dissociation, edited by A. Cleermans. Oxford: Oxford University 
Press.
Voosholz, J., and M. Gabriel, eds. 2021. Top-­down causation and emergence. 
Cham, Switzerland: Springer.
Vygotsky, L. 1978. Mind in society: The development of higher psychological 
processes. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Waddington, C. 1968–­1972. Towards a theoretical biology. 4 vols. Edinburgh: 
Edinburgh University Press.
Wagner, A. 2005. Robustness and evolvability in living systems. Princeton, NJ: 
Princeton University Press.
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

262    References
Wagner, A. 2014. Arrival of the fittest: Solving evolution’s greatest puzzle. New 
York: Penguin.
Weiss, P. 1971. The basic concept of hierarchic systems. In Hierarchically orga­
nized systems in theory and practice, edited by P. Weiss. New York: Hafner.
Wheeler, J. A. 2000. Geons, black holes and quantum foam: A life in physics. Rev. 
ed. New York: W. W. Norton.
Wilson, C. 2020. The mystery of mistletoe’s missing genes. QuantaMagazine. 
https://­www​.­quantamagazine​.­org​/­the​-­mystery​-­of​-­misteltoes​-­missing​-­genes​
-­20201221​/.
Wimsatt, W. C. 1974. Reductive explanation: a functional account. Proceedings 
of the Biennial Meeting of the Philosophy of Science Association 1974:671–­710. 
http://­www​.­jstor​.­org​/­stable​/­495833.
Wimsatt, W. C. 1976. Reductionism, levels of organization, and the mind-­body 
problem. In Consciousness and the brain: A scientific and philosophical inquiry, 
edited by G. G. Globus, G. Maxwell, and I. Sarodnik. New York: Plenum.
Wimsatt, W. C. 2001. Generative entrenchment and the developmental systems 
approach to evolutionary process. In Cycles of contingency: Developmental 
systems and evolution, edited by S. Oyama, R. Gray, and P. Griffiths. Cambridge, 
MA: MIT Press.
Wimsatt, W. C. 2007. Reengineering philosophy for limited beings. Cambridge, 
MA: Harvard University Press.
Woods, D. D. 2016. Resilience as graceful extensibility. In IRGC resource guide 
on resilience. Lausanne: EPFL International Risk Governance Center. v29-­07-­
2016. https://­www​.­irgc​.­org​/­riskgovernance​/­resilience​/.
Woods, D. D. 2018. The theory of graceful extensibility. Environment Systems 
and Decisions 38:433–­457.
Wright, L. 1976. Teleological explanations. Berkeley: University of California 
Press.
Yang, T., M. Hudson, and N. Afshordi. 2020. How dark are filaments in the 
cosmic web. https://­arxiv​.­org​/­abs​/­2001​.­10943.
Yu, B. M., A. Afshar, G. Santhanam, S. I. Ryu, K. V. Shenoy, and M. Sahani. 2006. 
Extracting dynamical structure embedded in neural activity. Advances in Neural 
Information Processing Systems 18:1545–­1552.
Zhou, L., G. B. Melton, S. Parsons, and G. Hripcsak. 2005. A temporal constraint 
structure for extracting temporal information from clinical narrative. Journal of 
Biomedical Informatics 39:424–­439.
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

Abraham, R., 38
Abstraction, 157, 161
Accidental properties. See Secondary 
(accidental) properties
Active externalism, 206
Adam, D., 166
Add-on constraints, governing con­
straints reinforced by
buffers and other shields, 30, 40, 
104, 115–117, 189
density, 22–23, 30, 104, 111–112, 
242n6
gradients, 37–39, 40–41, 49–50, 56
isolation, 112–115
redundancy, 104–105, 111, 141, 151
regularity, 56, 104–106
repetition, 56, 88–90, 104–105
replication, 56, 105–106
reproduction, 105–109
Affordances, 40, 120–121, 123–125, 
157, 166, 176
Aggregations, 11–12, 17–18
Agosta, S. J., 54, 56, 83, 104, 118, 174
Ahmadian, Y., 55
Alexander, Samuel, 17
Algorithms
analog, 171
feedback loops in, 88, 99–100
functions, 200–201
temporal constraints in, 43
Alikeness (explained by constraint), 
216–222
Allen, T. F. H., 30, 40, 89, 103, 158, 
160, 178, 179, 182, 183, 187, 189, 
190, 191
Allostasis, 157, 243n1
Allostatic mechanisms, 156–157
Ambiguous context-independent 
constraints, 54–55, 241n9
Analog antilock brake systems 
(AABS), 168–169
Analog control, 155, 167–176
coherence-making and, 154, 
234–235
coordination mechanisms in, 
168–169
emergent properties and, 167–170
energy management and, 169–174
long-term projects as, 243n7
Many-to-One logic in, 167–169
multiply realizable domains as 
analog spaces, 30, 174–176
Anatomy of the World, An (Donne), 9
Anosognosia, 165
Anscombe, G. E. M., 19
Anterior-posterior polarities, 49
Antilock brake systems, 168–169
Apical meristems, 89
Appropriate behavior. See Behavior 
appropriate to task/context
Appropriate to (tailored to) context, 30
A priori reasoning, 8–10
Aqueducts, context-independent con­
straints illustrated by, 51
Index
Page numbers in italic indicate figures.
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

264    Index
Aquinas, Thomas, 9
Architectural scaffolds, 124–125
Aristotelian substances, 8–9, 29, 219
Aristotle, 7, 8, 9, 24, 29
Arnellos, A., 96
Arthur, B., 23, 87
Artifact scaffolding, 124
Artificial intelligence (AI), 168, 201, 
244n3, 244n9
Artigiani, R., 31, 98, 162, 167
Ashby, Ross, 168
Asymmetry, 122, 190, 193
Atmospheric conditions, 241n3
contextually constrained coordina­
tion dynamics, 76
selection by persistence hypothesis, 
139–142, 145
Atomic orbitals, 69, 111, 159, 161
Atomists, 5–6
Attraction, basin of, 100–101, 133
Attraction, constraints of, 57
Attractors, 64
deep dyslexia example, 100, 215
definition of, 100
generated by context-dependent 
constraints, 53
generated by feedback loops, 
88–89
line, 228–232
Lorenz butterfly, 50, 83
memes/demes, 109–111
multiply realizable, 133, 221–222
neural, 223, 229
radical enactivism and, 207
sedimented and entrenched con­
straints, 143, 146
self-organization of, 43
semantic, 99–101
Auble, G., 30, 155, 157, 161
Autocatalysis
as driver of dynamic kinetic stabil­
ity, 136–137
holons influenced by, 190
persistence and, 130
self-reinforcing and coherence-­
making properties of, 87, 90–94
Autocatalysts, 25, 30, 37, 86
Autonomy. See also Constraint closure
autonomous (self-governed) interde­
pendencies, 240n4
independence versus, 95–96
precursors of, 92, 101, 191
Autopoiesis, 91, 92, 95
Autopoiesis (self-organization), 22, 
39, 78, 91–92, 95
Averroes (Ibn Rushd), 9
Aznar, A., 167
Bacon, Francis, 9, 14
Bacskay, G. B., 111, 159
Barabasi, A.-L., 243n3
Barandiaran, X., 143, 206, 208, 
244n13
Barber, N., 146, 148, 151
Barbour, J., 43, 131, 132, 243n1
Barwich, A. S., 89, 239n2
Basin of attraction, 100–101, 133
Bateson, Gregory, 176
Bechtel, W., 245n2
Bedau, M., 239n11
Behavior appropriate to task/context, 
29–30. See also Delayed task 
experiments
analog-coded decision-making and, 
171–174
appropriate timing in, 45
axis of choice for, 228–229
governing constraints and, 82–84, 
98–99, 165–169, 207
indirect effects of context in, 64
notion of Kairos and, 45
preparatory neural activity affect­
ing, 223–227
proximate intention of action, 
231–232
selection vector influencing, 230–232
sensory axes influencing, 229–230
virtue ethics and, 98
Behaviorism, 197, 199–200
Beinhocker, E. D., 23
Bejan, A., 38, 79, 132, 133, 134, 135, 
141, 159, 240n2
Belousov–Zhabotinsky (BZ) chemical 
reaction, 90–92, 236
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

Index    265
Bénard, H., 69
Bénard cells, 68–72, 91–92, 101, 127, 
136–137, 236. See also Convection 
cells, Rayleigh–Bénard
Benenson, I., 116
Bergson, Henri, 17
Bertalanffy, Ludwig von, 17
Bickhard, M., 120, 122, 123, 124, 146
Biological systems. See also Homeo­
stasis; Public health, context depen­
dence in
affordances in, 120–121
catalysts in, 87–88
degeneracy in, 8, 57, 179–181, 
198–199, 204–205, 215, 220
density in, 111–112
efficient causality in, 52, 115, 125
embryogenesis, 41, 44
enabling constraints in, 86, 
107–111, 159–162
entrenchment in, 153
generative entrenchment in, 
151–153, 153
governing constraints in, 82–85, 
127, 190–192
hierarchical levels of organization 
in, 190–192
hybrid constraints in, 113–114
invasive species, 116, 117
isolation in, 112–115
latent constraints in, 113–114, 145
Many-to-One transitions in, 
156–161
metabolism, 42, 125, 134, 137
motility and migration in, 117–120
multiple realizability of, 199
as open systems, 94
persistence in, 129–144
replication in, 105–106
reproduction in, 107–109
scaffolding in, 122–128
stability in, 23
templates in, 120–122
top-down control in, 222
unity of type in species, 109–111
Biosemiotics, 98, 101, 157
Block, Ned, 214, 215
Bloom, J., 121
Boltzmann, Ludwig, 130
Bothwell, Robert K., 221
Bottom-up constraints. See Enabling 
constraints
Boundaries, constraints establishing, 
24–25. See also Order parameters
buffers, 115–117
context-dependent constraints, 
67–68, 77
context-independent constraints, 
43, 49, 52, 54–55
demes/memes, 109–111
extensional/intensional definitions, 
192–193
force laws, 218
frameworks, 40, 120–122
between levels of organization, 
183–186
reproduction, 108
scaffolds/scaffolding, 126
spatiotemporal constraints, 46–47
tolerance ranges, 189
Bourdieu, Pierre, 150
Boyle, Robert, 9
Brahic, M., 122
Brain development. See Neurological 
development
Brain–machine interfaces (BMIs), 126
Brain mapping, 197
Brain plasticity, 198–199, 205. See also 
Neurological development
Brillouin, L., 142
Brooks, D. R., 54, 56, 83, 104, 108, 
109, 118, 160
Brown, J. S., 126
Brown, W., 16
Bruner, Jerome, 122
Buchler, J., 46
Buffers and buffering, 30, 40, 104, 
115–117, 189
Buhrmann, T., 206, 208, 244n13
Burgauer, M., 76, 86, 121, 180
Campagna, L., 114
Campbell, D., 15, 17
Canalization, 53
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

266    Index
Caporael, L. R., 120, 122, 125, 146, 
148
Cardinality, 75–79
Carello, C., 120
Cartesian dualism, 203–204
Cartesian substances, 24, 77, 137, 
219
Cassava root preparation
cultural and religious constraints 
in, 44
as enactivist practices, 206
temporal constraints in, 74, 124
Castelvecchi, D., 221
Catalysis, 91
Catalysts, 24–25. See also 
Autocatalysis
autocatalysts, 25, 30, 37, 86
context dependence of, 219
definition of, 87
as enabling constraints, 155
enzymes as, 87–88, 90, 116, 147, 
242n1
features of, 30, 40–41, 86–90
types of, 88
Catalytic closure, 90–93
Catastrophe theory, 70–71. See also 
Cusp catastrophe bifurcation; Phase 
transitions
Causal closure of the physical, 16–17
Causally relevant properties, 211, 
245n2
Cause (causality, causation)
causal closure of the physical, 
16–17
circular, 14–15
efficient, 13–15, 16–17
final, 13–14, 16
formal, 13–14, 16, 239n7
material, 13–14
recursive, 15, 207
self-cause, 14, 22, 92, 95
standing, 83, 169, 230
top-down (see Top-down control)
Causes versus constraints
closure of constraint, 93–96, 95
overdetermination, 16–17, 46, 186, 
197, 204, 207
physical closure, 15, 16, 30, 46, 
197, 204
standing causes as constraints, 83, 
169, 230
top-down causality as constraint, 
80–81
Cellphone settings, context-indepen­
dent constraints illustrated by, 52
Cellular locomotion, 118
Centola, D., 66
C-fibers, 197–198, 244n1
Chalmers, D., 13, 206, 244n4
Chaparral, as context-dependent 
constraint, 160–161, 191
Chemero, A., 120, 121, 244n13
Chemoautotrophs, 37
Chemotaxis, 49, 118
Childhood development, temporally 
coded constraints in, 43, 73–74
Chinese room argument, 201–202
Chronobiology, 42
Chronochemotherapy, 42
Chronopharmacology, 42
Chronos, 45
Churchland, M. M., 224, 225, 226, 
227
Cilliers, P., 18
Circular causality, 15
Circulatory system, governing 
constraints in, 82
Cities, as constrained/constraining 
dynamics, 80–81
Citric acid (Krebs) cycle, 90
Clark, A., 206, 244n13
Clausius, 130
Cloning, 106
Closure
autocatalytic, 90–93
constraint, 86, 93–99, 95
physical, 15–17, 30, 46, 197, 204 
(see also Overdetermination)
process, 90
semantic vs. syntactic, 96–99
Clumping, 56, 75, 97, 111
Code
concept of, 40, 163, 235
genetic, 44, 163, 171, 186
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

Index    267
temporal, in hearing system, 45, 
73–74
valence, 89, 164–166, 176, 193, 235
Coevolution, 32
Cognitive neuroscience, 197, 220. See 
also Delayed task experiments
Cohen, M. H., 97
Coherence, 233–234. See also Infor­
mation creation
Aristotelian theory of, 8–9
complexity theory and, 40
flawed view of, 4
persistent, 76–77
reductionist view of, 11–13
robust, 182
Coherence maintenance, 103–104. 
See also Constraints
Coherence-making by constraints. 
See also Constraints; Entrenchment; 
Hierarchy; Many-to-One transi­
tions; Metastability; Modularity; 
Top-down control
complexity formation and, 37–39, 78
enabling constraints, 68–72, 77–79
energy costs of, 236
in far from equilibrium systems, 
26–30, 38–40
in far from equilibrium thermody­
namics, 95–96
as generalization, 40, 71–72
information creation as, 21–22
prerequisites for, 49
in supervenience relations, 31, 197, 
202–204, 211–215
Cohesion, degree of, 156, 240n2
Coincidences, 135, 217
Collective properties, 244n5. See also 
Order parameters
examples of, 155–158
identity and individuation and, 26
of nesting entities, 214
system behavior restricted by, 80
tragedy of the commons, 71
type–token relationships and, 114
Collier, J., 18, 37, 39, 78, 142
Commensalism, 108
Commons, tragedy of, 71
Complexity formation, 37–39, 78
Complexity theory, 18, 21–22, 31–32, 
40. See also 4E approach
Complex systems. See also Con­
straints; Metastability; Order 
parameters; Top-down control
closure of constraints and, 99
coordination dynamics of, 21–23, 
84–85
endurance of, 138
historical and temporal nature of, 75
mutual constraint satisfaction in, 
79, 234
path dependence of, 138, 144
stability of, 57, 140
tokens of, 26
unity relations in, 39, 78 (see also 
Coherence)
Concatenation of constraints, 43
Concentration gradients, 50
Conceptual frameworks, 24, 40, 
120–122
Condensates, 86, 180
Conditional direct effects, 61
Conditional probability, 41, 46, 67, 
72–75, 82, 99–100, 113, 183, 188
Conditions, initial
autocatalytic closure and, 92
constraints shaping, 50, 54–55
externally provided, 17, 241n3
iteration and recursion and, 88–89, 
100
unexplained, 135, 243n1
Configurations, 58, 132
Conrad, M., 38
Consciousness, theories of, 166–167
Constitutive constraints, 21–25, 
71–73, 236. See also Governing 
constraints
architectures, 79
concept of, 25, 70–73, 79–84
constitutive and stabilizing nature 
of, 85–86, 115, 140
coordination and synchronicity as 
hallmarks of, 28–29
emergent properties preserved by, 
100–101, 133–135, 148
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

268    Index
Constitutive constraints (cont.)
entrenchment and, 145–154
legal/judicial platforms as, 86
novel properties generated by, 31
sedimentation and, 143–145
top-down, 25, 79–84, 189
vague and ambiguous, 54–55
Constraint closure, 93–96
as hypercatalyst, 93–94
schema of, 95
semantic, 98–99
statistical, 96–98
Constraint-conditioned effective 
science, 31
Constraint regime. See also Governing 
constraints
concept of, 20, 26, 28, 220–222
metastability preserved by, 28–29
Constraints
affordances, 40, 120–121, 123–125, 
157, 166, 176
alikeness explained by, 216–222
boundaries established by, 24–25
buffers and other shields, 30, 40, 
104, 115–117, 189
catalysts (see Catalysts)
causes versus (see Causes versus 
constraints)
closure of (see Constraint closure)
concatenation of, 43
concept of, 30, 40–41, 233
constitutive (see Constitutive 
constraints)
context-dependent (see Context-
dependent constraints)
context-independent (see Context-
independent constraints)
crosscutting, 150
cultural and religious, 44, 105, 147
demes/memes, 109–111
density, 22–23, 30, 104, 111–112, 
242n6
differentially expressed, 152
dominant, 113
efficient causes contrasted with, 
22–24, 46, 52, 80–81, 113–117, 
168, 188, 207–208, 222
enabling (see Enabling constraints)
entrenchment, 30, 40, 145–154, 181
epigenetic, 18, 36, 52–55, 53, 66, 
108–110, 113–115
epistatic, 44, 109, 113–114, 129
factually impossible, 218
feedback loops, 24, 30, 37, 40–41, 
71–72, 79–80, 86–90
frameworks, 40, 120–122
gating, 117
governing (see Governing 
constraints)
gradients, 37–39, 40, 49–50, 56
hierarchical organization of (see 
Hierarchy)
hybrid, 113–114
hyperconstraints, 97–98
inherited, 54, 106, 242n4
intuitive examples of, 22–23
isolation, 112–115
iteration, 40, 88–90, 100
iteration and recursion and, 25, 31, 
40, 88–90, 100, 155
latent, 113–114, 145
malfunctions in, 220–221
motility and migration, 117–120
multifaceted nature of, 25
packing, 111–112, 242n6
persistence of (see Persistence)
proximity, 109–112
reach, 107, 161
redundancy, 104–105, 111, 141, 151
regularity, 56, 104–106
relaxation of, 117–120
repetition, 56, 88–90, 104–105
replication, 56, 105–106
reproduction, 105–109
restorative enabling, 126
scaffolds/scaffolding, 24, 30, 40, 
122–128
scope, 107
sedimentation, 40, 143–145
self-constraint, 72, 93, 101, 
127–128, 150–151, 175
shared dimension of, 222
as source of emergent properties 
(see Emergent properties)
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

Index    269
spatial, 41–46, 234
in supervenient relations (see 
Supervenience relations, role of 
constraints in)
templates, 120–122, 171
temporal, 41–46, 73–79, 181, 234
validated, 153–154, 235–236
Constructal law, 133
Context, as new hierarchical level of 
constraint, 98
Context dependence, 219. See also 
Context-dependent constraints
conditional direct effects, 61
dependent happenings, 60–61, 66
of hierarchy parameters, 185
path dependence, 76, 92, 99, 
144–145, 235, 242n7
in public health, 59–67
relational nature of, 60
Context-dependent constraints, 
23–30, 67–86, 236
autocatalysts, 25, 30, 37, 86
buffers and buffering, 30, 40, 104, 
115–117, 189
cardinality, 75–79
catalysts, 10, 25, 30, 87–90
concept of, 57–58, 67, 233
constitutive (see Constitutive 
constraints)
context-independent constraints 
versus, 57
designs/patterns generated by, 
240n2
emergent properties induced 
by, 22–24, 35–40, 71–78, 86, 
191–192, 207–208, 221–222
examples of, 67–71
feedback loops, 30, 37, 40–41, 
71–72, 79–80, 86–90
gene shuffling, 106–109, 113–115
governing (see Governing 
constraints)
horizontal gene transfer, 106–109, 
113
indexicality, 75–79, 192–193
isolation, 30, 40, 112–115, 147, 
243n1
iteration, 25, 31, 40, 88–90, 100, 155
legal/judicial platforms as, 86
ordinality generated by, 75–79
phase transitions and, 67–71
recursion, 88–90, 100
reproduction, 105–109
stacking, 241n7
temporal (see Temporal constraints)
Context-dependent epidemics, 59–62
Context embeddedness, 5, 36–37, 72, 
181–182, 205–209
Context-free constraints. See Context-
independent constraints
Context-independent constraints, 
23–30, 49–58
ambiguous and vague, 54–55, 241n9
buffers and buffering, 30, 40, 104, 
115–117, 189
concept of, 49–50, 233
context-dependent constraints 
versus, 57
entrenchment, 30, 40, 145–154, 181
general examples of, 50–54
gradients, 37–40, 49–50, 56
isolation, 112–115
limitations of, 56–57
operation of, 50–54
packing, 111–112, 242n6
proximity, 111–112
redundancy, 104–105, 111, 141, 151
regularity, 56, 104–106
repetition, 56, 88–90, 104–105
replication, 56, 105–106
sedimentation, 40, 143–145
Context-sensitive behavior. See Behav­
ior appropriate to task/context
Control. See Analog control; Digital 
control; Distributed control; Hierar­
chical control; Top-down control
Convection cells, Rayleigh–Bénard, 
69, 91–92
Convection patterns, 68–71
Conway, G. H., 38
Coordination dynamics. See Coherence
Cortical activity, 55, 225–230
Cosmic expansion, constraints of, 49, 
56–57, 69
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

270    Index
Counterfactuals, 31, 46, 193, 212, 
216, 219–222, 240n12
COVID-19, as context-dependent 
epidemic, 59, 60–62, 66, 98–99
Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease, 121
Crithidia, 160–161, 174
Crosscutting constraints, 150
Cultural/religious constraints, 44, 105, 
147
Cumhaill, C., 19
Cunningham, J. P., 224, 225, 226, 227
Cusp catastrophe bifurcation, 70–71
Cynefin, 125
Dalton, John, 6
Damasio, A., 164, 165, 166
Damping, 87, 147
Darden, L., 244n5
Darwin, Charles, 8, 112, 234
Datar, A., 66
Davidson, Donald, 203, 211, 2003
Dawkins, Richard, 131
Deduction, Cartesian, 9
Deep dyslexia, 100, 215
Degeneracy. See also Multiple 
realizability
concept of, 8, 57, 204–205
effective science and, 215, 220
identity theory and, 198–199
modularity and, 179–181
type-token distinction and, 205
Degree of cohesion, 156, 240n2
Degrees of freedom, 241n2
De Jaegher, H., 206
Delayed task experiments, 31, 223–232
constraint regime created by, 227
context-dependent relaxation in, 231
dimensionality reduction in, 31, 
223–226, 231–232, 245n1
enabling constraints in, 231–232
experimental conditions for, 
224–225, 227–228
Many-to-One transitions induced 
by, 231–232
preparatory/perimotor neural activ­
ity in, 225–227, 228–230
preparatory period, 223
proximate intention of action in, 
231–232
selection vector, 230–232
sensory axes and, 229–230
Demes, 109–111
Democritus, 6
Density, 22–23, 30, 104, 111–112, 
242n6
Dependent happenings, 60–61, 66
Descartes, René, 9, 10, 15, 197, 204
“Descartes’ Revenge,” 204
Designs, generated by context-depen­
dent constraints, 240n2
Development, constraints in, 52–54, 
53, 73–74
Developmental scaffolding, 124
Diachronic interdependencies, 29
Differentially expressed constraints, 
152
Diffusion gradients, 49–50
Digital control, 168–174, 176
Dimensionality reduction, 31, 
224–226, 231–232
Dimensioned realization view, 
214
Di Paolo, Ezequiel Di, 150, 206, 208, 
244n13
Direct effects, 61
Discourse on Method (Descartes), 9
Disease spread. See Public health, 
context dependence in
Dissipative structures. See also Far 
from equilibrium thermodynamics
concept of, 21–22, 207, 222
feedback loops and, 88
metastability of, 129
persistence and, 135–138
Rayleigh–Bénard cells and BZ reac­
tions, 69, 91–92
Distributed control, 22, 80
Diversity, 99, 106, 108, 141, 143–145, 
236
Dominant constraints, 113
Donald, M., 206
Donne, John, 9, 20, 245n1
Double-aspect monism, 13
Double aspect theory, 199
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

Index    271
Downward causality. See Top-down 
control
Dreyfus, H., 201
DTP (diphtheria, tetanus, and pertus­
sis) vaccine, 65
Dualism, 9, 197, 204
Cartesian, 203–204
property, 201
Dust devils, 23, 68–71, 236
Dynamical systems theory. See 4E 
approach
Dynamic kinetic stability (DKS), 
136–139, 142
Dyslexia, deep and surface, 99–100, 
221
Dyson, Freeman, 170, 172, 175, 176
Dyson, George, 170–171, 175
Ecological wholeness. See 4E approach
Economic systems, constraints and 
“invisible hand” in, 23, 25, 70–71, 
79, 178
Ecosystems. See also Constraints
buffers in, 115–117
buffer species, 116
coherence maintenance in, 103–104
coherence-making by constraints in, 
70–72, 78, 233–234
ecological fitting in, 159–161
efficient causality in, 160–161, 191
enabling constraints in, 159–162
entrenchment in, 146–147
hierarchical control in, 178, 191
hierarchical levels of organization 
in, 190–192
interdependencies in, 239n5
invasive species, 117
Many-to-One transitions in, 
159–163
mereological dynamics of, 63
multiple constraint satisfaction in, 
72–73
selection by persistence hypothesis, 
139–142, 145
unity relations of, 39
Effective input, 157–166, 171, 180, 
185, 193, 226, 231–232
Effective output, 167
Effective science, 31, 46, 220–221
Efficient causes/causality
in biological systems, 52, 115, 125
concept of, 13–17, 22, 46, 78, 95, 
203–204
constraints contrasted with, 22–24, 
46, 52, 80–81, 113–117, 168, 
188, 207–208, 222
in ecosystems, 160–161, 191
examples of, 51–52
mereological relations and, 215
multiple realizability and, 211–215
in supervenience thesis, 202–204, 
211–215
Egbert, M. D., 143
Einstein, Albert, 36
Eldredge, N., 104, 109, 177, 183
Electrochemical gradients, 49
Electromagnetic fields, as context-
independent constraints, 49
Ellis, G. F. R., 15, 40, 157, 162
Embeddedness. See Context 
embeddedness
Embodied mind, 205–206, 244n13
Embodied substance, 8–9
Embodiment, 4E approach to, 
205–209
Embryogenesis, 41, 44
Emergentism, 17–18, 239n11
Emergent properties
analog control and, 167–170
concept of, 10–13
as embedding context, 181–182
emergentism and, 17–18
epiphenomenal nature of, 15
identity theory’s failure to account 
for, 199–200
as induced by context-dependent 
constraints, 22–24, 35–40, 71–78, 
86, 191–192, 207–208, 221–222 
(see also Constraints)
multiple realizability of, 204–205, 
214–215
order parameters as, 155–158
preserved by constitutive con­
straints, 100–101, 133–135, 148
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

272    Index
Emergent properties (cont.)
as relational, 71, 75, 164, 168–169, 
171, 192–193
tagging as qualia, 163–167
top-down control by, 79–84, 96–98, 
204, 241n8
Empedocles, 5
Empirically possible force laws, 218
Enabling constraints, 159–162
affordances, 40, 123–125, 157, 166, 
176
in biological systems, 86, 107–111, 
159–162
catalysts (see Catalysts)
closure (see Closure)
coherence-making by, 68–72, 
77–79
concept of, 22–23, 27, 241n8
condensates, 86, 180
in delayed task experiments, 
231–232
dimensioned realization view, 215
in economic systems, 70–71
in far from equilibrium thermody­
namics, 207–208
feedback loops (see Feedback loops)
flat realization view, 213–214
interdependencies established by, 
156–157, 178–179, 192, 207–
208, 214–215, 221–222
iteration and recursion, 25, 31, 40, 
88–90, 100, 155
between levels of hierarchical 
organizations, 30
phase transitions precipitated by, 25
relaxation of constraints and, 
117–120
scaffolds/scaffolding, 24, 30, 40, 
122–128
in social systems, 159
in supervenience thesis, 203
tacit, 120, 188
templates, 120–122, 171
temporal, 41–46, 73–79, 181, 234
virtual governors, 133, 178
Enaction. See 4E approach
Enactivism, 206–207. See also 4E 
approach
Energy management. See also Ther­
modynamics, classical
analog control and, 169–174
context-dependent constraints and, 
67–71, 84–86
sources of energy, 37
Entrainment, 39, 72, 84, 155, 176
Entrenchment, 30, 40, 145–154
causes of, 146–147
damping, 87, 147
examples of, 146–147
generative, 146 (see also Evolvabil­
ity; Resilience)
self-embracing, 150–151
self-imposed, 150–151
in social systems, 148–154, 181
of validated constraints, 153–154
varieties of, 148–151
Entropy
buffers and, 116
coherence-making and, 236
internal entropy production, 
158–159, 171–174
origin of the universe and, 241n6
persistence and, 133, 136–142
phase transitions and, 71, 75, 84
Enzymes, as catalysts, 87–88, 90, 116, 
147, 242n1
Epidemics, context-dependent, 59–62
Epidemiology, role of context in, 30, 
59–62
conditional direct effects, 61
context-dependent versus context-
independent diseases, 59–62
dependent happenings, 60–61, 66
direct effects, 61
incidence, 59–63, 66, 73
indirect effects, 62–66
motility and migration, 119
prevalence, 59–66, 73
total effects, 64–66
Epigenetics
epigenetic modifications, 107–109
generative entrenchment in, 151–153
as heritable context-dependent 
constraint structure, 36, 52–55, 
53, 66, 108–110, 113–115
origins of term, 53
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

Index    273
Epiphenomenalism, 12, 204
Epistatic constraints, 44, 109, 
113–114, 129
Equilibrium, 28, 49, 124, 131–140, 
233. See also Far from equilibrium 
thermodynamics; Stability
Equiprobability, 49, 51–52, 67, 105, 
124, 131, 146
Equivalence classes, 40, 162, 193. 
See also Interactional types gener­
ated by constraints
Essence (of primary properties), 
3–4
internalist definition of, 6
pre-Socratic philosophers’ under­
standing of, 5–6
Ethical values. See Values
Etxeberria, A., 22
Eukaryotes, 43, 117, 127
Evolution, theory of
coherences, generation of, 40
constraints in, 43–44, 52–54, 53, 
110–115
development versus, 239n8
modern synthesis, 56, 139
sloppy fitness, 174–176
unity of type and, 54, 174–178
Evolvability, 134, 151–154
Exaptations, 153
Existentialism, 240n4
Existents, independent, 8
Extensional definition, 192–193. 
See also Intensionality
Externalism, active, 206
External scaffolding, 127
Factually impossible constraints, 
218
Fail-safe conditions, 105, 151–152
Far from equilibrium thermodynam­
ics. See also Dynamic kinetic stabil­
ity (DKS); Metastability
characteristics of, 21–22
coherence-making by constraints in, 
26–30, 38–40, 95–96, 233–234 
(see also Constraints)
nature of stability in, 24, 28–29, 
134–142
persistence under nonequilibrum 
conditions, 133–139
selection by persistence under, 
139–142
Feedback loops, 71–72
features of, 24, 30, 37, 40–41, 
86–90
top-down (governing) constraints, 
79–80
Feedforward, 41, 87–89, 99, 140
Feels. See Qualia (feels)
Feigl, Herbert, 197
Feynman, Richard, 245n7
Fields, 49–50. See also Context-inde­
pendent constraints
Figdor, C., 220
Final cause, 13, 16
Fitness, sloppy, 174–176
Flat realization view, 213–214
Focal level holons, 181–182
Fodor, Jerry, 212, 214, 215
Food preparation
constraints in, 44, 74, 124
as enactivist practice, 206
Foot, Philippa, 19
Force laws, 216–218
Formal cause, 13, 16, 239n7
Form entrenchment, 150–151
Forms, Platonic, 7, 10, 20, 29, 137, 
219
4E approach, 31, 121, 205–209
Frameworks, 24, 40, 120–122
Freedom, degrees of, 241n2
Freeman, W. J., 89
Free riders, 63, 65–66, 73
Functionalism, 31, 197
Chinese room objection to, 201–202
generative entrenchment, 146, 
153–154
theory of, 200–201
Fusiform gyrus, 166
Gallagher, G., 206
Gare, A., 89
Gas containers, context-independent 
constraints illustrated by, 50–51
Gassendi, Pierre, 9
Gating constraints, 117
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

274    Index
Gatlin, Lila, 49, 67, 68, 78, 110, 152
Generalization
coherence-making by constraints as, 
40, 71–72
constraint closure and, 86
Many-to-One transitions as, 
162–163
Generative entrenchment, 146, 
153–154. See also Validated 
constraints
Gene shuffling, as context-dependent 
constraint, 106–109, 113–115
Genetic code, 44, 163, 171, 186
Gene transfer, horizontal, as context-
dependent constraint, 106–109, 113
Genotype, as constitutive and govern­
ing constraint structure, 174
Geographical isolation, 112–113, 115
Gerhart, J. C., 107
Gershenson, C., 78
Gibson, J. J., 120, 157
Gill, M., 9
Gillett, Carl, 213, 214, 244n5
Gini coefficient, 155
Global workplace theory (GWT), 
166–167
Goodwin, B. C., 97
Gorgas, William, 62
Gould, Stephen Jay, 153
Governing constraints. See also 
Top-down control
add-on support to increase stability 
of (see Add-on constraints)
analog-coded control, 169–171
appropriate behavior and, 82–84, 
98–99, 165–169, 207
in biological systems, 82–85, 127, 
190–192
concept of, 21–25, 28–29, 70–73, 
79–86, 97–98, 241n8
constitutive and stabilizing nature 
of, 85–86, 115, 140
coordination and synchronicity as 
hallmarks of, 28–29
of emergent Ones, 156–158, 
161–163, 167–168
entrenchment and, 145–154
hierarchical control as, 178–186
of homeostasis, 27, 82–84, 170, 
173, 182, 185–186, 189, 209, 220
of inflammation, 185–186, 220
interdependecies preserved by, 31, 
207–209, 220, 235–237
legal/judicial platforms as, 85–86
malfunctions in, 186, 190, 220
of niches (habitats), 140
persistence and, 136, 140–142
rate independent, 188–192
rules and regulations as, 24, 40, 
150, 162, 189
sedimentation and, 143–145
stresses on, 103–104
vague and ambiguous, 54–55
Governors, virtual, 83, 178
Gradients, as context-independent 
constraints, 37–40, 50
concentration, 50
diffusion, 49–50
electrochemical, 49
messages of, 56
slopes of, 49
Grasslands case study, 89, 126, 161, 
191
Gravitational constant, 52
Gravity, constraints of, 49, 56–57
Grene, M., 54
Griesemer, J. R., 120, 122, 125, 146, 
148
Grobstein, C., 30, 155
Guo, P. Z., 242n6
Gut microbiome, 18, 107–109
Habitats. See Niches (habitats)
Habitus, 143–144
Haken, Hermann, 81
Halloran, M. E., 62, 63, 65, 241n1
Halpern, P., 28, 43
Hatna, E., 116
Hearing system, timing code of, 45, 
73–74
Heat death, 38, 51, 56, 135. See also 
Equilibrium; Stability; Thermody­
namics, classical
Heisenberg, Werner, 35
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

Index    275
Heisenberg’s uncertainty principle, 
35–36
Henrich, J., 44, 74, 141
Heraclitus, 5
Hermeneutics, 97, 163
Heterarchies, 30
definition of, 177
embedding context of, 181–182
hierarchies versus, 177–179
holarchies versus, 177–179
Heuristics, 40
Heyer, J. P., 221
Hierarchical control, 178, 186–192, 
244n2. See also Top-down control
Hierarchy
in biological systems, 190–192
boundaries between levels of, 
183–186
extensional definition, 192–193
formation of, 178–179
holarchy/heterarchy versus, 177–179
intensional definition, 192–193
interlevel relations in, 185, 191
intralevel relations in, 179
levels of organization in, 183–186
mereological relations among 
processes/entities in, 186–192
rigid, 178
stabilizing benefits of, 179–181
temporal constraints in, 181
top-down hierarchical control, 
186–192
Hierarchy theory, 30, 43, 64, 176, 
179, 181, 207
intensional/extensional definition 
and, 192–193
as theory of differences, 176
Hinton, G. E., 88, 99, 156
Hobbes, Thomas, 86
Hoekstra, T. W., 178, 187, 189
Hoffmeyer, J.-H., 88
Hofstadter, D., 92
Holarchies, 30
definition of, 177
embedding context of, 181–182
heterarchies versus, 177–179
hierarchies versus, 177–179
Holmes, B., 139, 141
Holons, 30, 244n3
definition of, 177
embedding context of, 181–182
focal level, 181–182
hierarchies versus, 177–179
mereological relations among 
processes/entities in, 186–192
modules as, 179–181
robust coherence of, 182
Homeostasis
coordination dynamics of, 23, 
155–157, 162–163
feedback loops and, 89
governing constraints, 27, 82–84, 
170, 173, 182, 185–186, 189, 
209, 220
persistence and, 134
statistical closure and, 96–97
unity relations of, 39
Hone, Trent, 239n10, 244n1
Hooker, C., 18, 142
Horizontal gene transfer, 106–109, 
113
Human genome project, 114
Humphreys, P., 239n11
Humphries, M., 45
Hunt, H., 243n4
Huygens, Christiaan, 68
Hybrid constraints, 113–114
Hybridization, 242n6
Hypercatalyst, constraint closure as, 
93–94
Hyperconstraints, 97–98
Hypercycles, 91–93, 183. See also 
Hyperloops
Hyperloops, 187
Ibn Rushd (Averroes), 9
Idealism, 239n6
Identity. See Unity of type
Identity politics, contextual factors 
in, 18
Identity theory, 197–200. See also 
Functionalism; Principle of 
Supervenience
double aspect theory, 199
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

276    Index
Identity theory (cont.)
history of, 3
multiple realizability and, 199
promissory physicalism, 199
psychoneural, 197
token identity, 198–200
type identity, 198–199, 244n3
Immunization programs, indirect 
effects of context in, 62–66, 98–99
Incidence, 59–63, 66, 73
Independent existents, 8
Indexicality
cardinality and, 75–79
intensional definition, 192–193
ordinality, 75–79
Indexical ordering, 75
Indirect effects, 62–66
Individuation, 17, 26, 32, 239n1. 
See also Identity theory
context-dependent constraints 
underlying (see Context-depen­
dent constraints)
in science, 192–193
token, 199–200
Induction, 9
Industrial Revolution, 37–38
Inertial frame, 45
Infant metaphysics, 244n11
Infectious diseases. See Public health, 
context dependence in
Inflammation, 88–89, 185–186, 220
feedback loops and, 88–89
governing constraints, 186, 220
Informational isolation, 115
Information creation, as coherence 
making, 21–22
In-formed matter, 8–9
Infrastructure scaffolding, 124
Inherited constraints, 54, 106, 242n4
Inhomogeneous possibility space, 
49–51
Inputs, effective. See Effective input
Integrated information theory (IIT), 
166–167
Integration, 155
concept of essence and, 5
induced by constraints, 21
Many-to-One recoding and, 162–168
multimodal, 176
selection and, 99, 229–231
spatiotemporal nature of, 29
Integumentary systems, 27
Intensional content, 202–205, 207, 
226, 231
Intensional definition, 192–193
Intensionality, 202
Intentional content, 201–202
Interactional types generated by 
constraints. See also Constraints; 
Many-to-One transitions
concept of, 22–30, 40, 72–73, 219, 
235
extensional/intensional definitions, 
192–193
interdependence of, 96–98
multiply realizable, 57, 114, 169 
(see also Multiple realizability)
persistence of (see Persistence)
Interactions, 4
Interdependence (constrained), second 
law of thermodynamics and, 84–86
Interfaces between hierarchical levels, 
183–186
Interlevel relations, 185, 191. See also 
Mereology
Internalist concepts, 6
Internal scaffolding, 127
Interoception, 165–166
Intralevel relations, 179
Invasive species, 116, 117, 191
Inverse square laws, 245n8
Invisible hand in economics, 25, 70–71, 
178. See also Economic systems
Irwin, G. G., 45
“Is Consciousness a Brain Process?” 
(Place), 197
Isolation, 30, 40, 112–115, 147, 243n1
Iteration, 25, 31, 40, 88–90, 100, 155
Jablonka, E., 241n7
Jantsch, E., 91
Juarrero, A., 4, 5, 10, 15, 16, 18, 29, 
37, 71, 88, 98, 151, 163, 179, 203, 
221, 239n11, 240n1, 242n8
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

Index    277
Juarrero-Roque, A., 92, 242n3
Jumper, J., 87
Kahneman, Daniel, 176
Kairos, 45
Kant, Immanuel, 18, 207, 242n3, 
245n1, 245n8
Kauffman, Stuart, 67, 90, 153, 242n7
Kaufman, M. T., 224, 225, 226, 227
Kelso, J. A. S., 23, 46, 79
Keystone scaffolds, 125
Kim, Jaegwon, 15, 203, 204
Kinds, 5–6, 239n3. See also Type; 
Universals
Kirschner, M. W., 107, 153
Koch, C., 166
Koestler, Arthur, 30, 177, 179, 182
Kruesi, Liz, 127
Kurth, C., 167
Kyselo, M., 207
Ladyman, J., 40, 51, 131, 132
Lamb, M. J., 241n7
Landscape design, context-indepen­
dent constraints illustrated by, 
51–52
Lange, Marc, 211, 216–219, 222, 229, 
245n8
Laplacian laws, 219
Lasers, constrained/constraining 
dynamics of, 81
Lashley, Karl, 244n2
Latent constraints, 113–114, 145
Latour, B., 140
Lattices, nutrient, 125–126, 171
Laughlin, Bryan, 244n5
Lavoisier, Antoine, 6
Lawfulness, 216
Law of Requisite Variety, 168
Laws, 216–222
as constraints, 86
definition of, 216
force, 216–218
inverse square laws, 245n8
Laplacian, 219
natural, 216, 220
requisite variety, 168
Lennox, J., 9
Lenton, T., 140, 141
Levels of organization, hierarchies, 
183–186
Lewontin, R. C., 153
Lichens, 18
Life, origin of, 190–191, 244n3
Light, duality of, 35
Lineages, biological, 107
Linearity, 75
Line attractors, 228–229, 231–232
Lipscomb, B. J. B., 19
Location, place versus, 193
Location versus place, 41
Locke, John, 86
Logically possible force laws, 217–218
Lorente, S., 38, 79, 133
Lorenz butterfly attractor, 50, 83
Lucretius, 5
Lyme disease, context dependence of, 
60
Machine learning, 88, 126, 168, 244n9
MacIntyre, A., 98
Macrostates, 130–132, 139–141, 243n5
Mad cow disease, 122
Maimonides, Moses, 9
Malaria, context dependence of, 60–61
Mante, V., 224, 228–232
Many-to-One transitions, 30, 39, 
155–156, 158–163
in abiotic realm, 158–159
analog decision-making and 
control, 167–176
in biological systems, 156–161, 
231–232
codes and, 163
coherence making of, 155–158
coordination dynamics of, 155–163
emergent properties, tagging as 
qualia, 163–167
as forms of generalization, 162–163
place versus location in, 193
in social and ecological systems, 
159–163
top-down control and, 162–163, 165
Markovian forces, 35, 144
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

278    Index
Marshall, M., 36
Martone, Robert, 77
Mason, P. H., 198
Material cause, 13–14
Materialism, 239n6
Maturana, Humberto, 18, 91
Maynard Smith, J., 40, 94
Mazzucato, M., 87
McCulloch, W., 177
McMullin, B., 91
Meaning, 205–206. See also 4E 
approach
“Meaning of ‘Meaning,’ The” 
(Putnam), 205
Medicine. See Public health, context 
dependence in
Medzhitov, R., 185, 220
Meiosis, 106
Memes, 109–111
Memory, 143–145, 234. See also 
Records; Registers
Mendel, Gregor, 104, 219
Meno (Plato), 7
Mereology. See also Cause (causality, 
causation); Top-down control
in Belousov–Zhabotinsky (BZ) 
chemical reactions, 91
concept of, 15, 186–187
definition of, 15
in economic systems, 25
efficient causality and, 188, 215
in epidemiology and public health, 
65–66
hierarchical levels and, 186–192 
(see also Interlevel relations)
misconceptions about, 15
self-simplification, 97
stabilization of, 241n8
supervenience relations, 31, 197, 
202–204, 211–215
MERS, as context-dependent epi­
demic, 59
Messages, context-dependent con­
straints of, 57
Messenger RNA (mRNA), 44, 
98–99
Metabolism, 42, 125, 134, 137
Metagenomic constraints, 18, 242n4
Metastability, 243n4
coherence making and, 85
concept of, 24, 26–28, 57, 
235–236
constraints preserving 
(see Constraints)
dynamic kinetic stability, 136–139, 
142
over time (see Persistence)
resilience and, 57–58
Metrics, 157, 161, 235
Metronomes, 68, 72, 83
Metzinger, T., 166
Microstates, 130–132, 139–140, 213, 
243n5
Midgely, Mary, 19
Migration, 117–120
Mill, John Stuart, 17
Miller, K., 55
Mind–body problem, 10, 211
Mistletoe, energy requirements of, 
240n1
Mitchell, M., 168, 199
Mitosis, 105–106, 242n3
Modern synthesis, 56, 139
Modularity, 141–142, 179–181
Molecular orbitals, 69, 159
Montevil, M., 52, 82, 92, 93, 96
Morals, 31, 42, 45, 83, 162–163. 
See also Values
More-making constraints, 30, 104
genes, species, and demes, 
109–111
redundancy, 104–105
regularity, 56, 104–106
repetition, 104–105
replication, 56, 105–106
reproduction, 105–109
Moreno, A., 15, 52, 71, 82, 90–98, 
127–128, 221
Mossio, M., 15, 52, 71, 82, 90–98, 
127–128, 221
Motility, 117–120
Muller, S. J., 18
Multidimensional landscapes, context-
independent constraints in, 55
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

Index    279
Multiple constraint satisfaction, 
72–73
coherence making from, 234–235
contextually constrained niche for­
mation and modification, 120
definition of, 72–73
hierarchies and, 184–187, 189
isolation and, 114
Many-to-One transitions and, 
157–158, 171
possibility spaces and, 47
top-down (governing) context-
dependent constraints, 79, 82, 
241n8
Multiple realizability. See also 
Degeneracy
analog decision-making and control 
and, 174–176
of biological systems, 199
in classical philosophy, 7–8
concept of, 8, 204–205
dimensioned realization view, 214
evolvability supported by, 30, 101, 
134
flat realization view, 213–214
functionalism’s reliance on, 
204–205
generated by context-dependent 
constraints, 25, 28–30, 55, 113
supervenience thesis and, 202–204, 
211–215
top-down control supported by, 30
type–token relationships, 114, 142, 
205
Multivariate landscapes, context-inde­
pendent constraints in, 55
Mundale, J., 245n2
Murdoch, Iris, 19
Murphy, N., 15, 16
Music
persistent coherence in, 76–77
temporal coding in, 73–75
Mutations, 44, 55–56, 107, 109, 113, 
139, 152–153, 174
Mutual constraint satisfaction, 79, 234
Mutualism, 108, 215
Mycorrhizae, 18, 160, 242n9
Nagel, T., 192
Nardoo preparation, constraints in, 
74, 124, 206
Narratives, sense-making through, 
74–75, 76, 97, 163
Naturalism, 17
Natural laws, 216, 220
Negentropy, 84
Neo-Platonists, 10
Network theory, 220–221, 243n3
Neural activity preparatory to vol­
untary behavior. See Delayed task 
experiments
Neural scaffolds, 125–126
Neurological development, 221–222. 
See also Delayed task experiments; 
Identity theory
brain plasticity, 198–199, 205
communication among neurons, 26
consciousness, theories of, 166–167
constraints governing, 84–85, 
111–112
cortical activity, 55
identity theory and, 197–200
ion diffusion, 50
Many-to-One transitions in, 158
pluripotentiality, 199
prefrontal cortex, 173, 228
totipotentiality, 244n2
unipotentiality, 198–199
Neuromorphic prostheses, 126
Neuronal spikes, 172–173
Neuroscience, cognitive, 197, 220
Neuroscience case study. See Delayed 
task experiments
Newman, M., 243n3
Newtonian mechanics, 14, 35, 45, 
144
Niches (habitats)
affordances compared to, 120–121
boundaries and, 126
catalysts and feedback loops in, 
87–90
generative entrenchment and, 
151–153
governing constraints of, 140
isolation of, 112–115
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

280    Index
Niches (habitats) (cont.)
Many-to-One transitions, 156, 
160–161
motility and migration, 117–120
overlapping habitats, 174–176, 
243n2
as sloppy fitness spaces, 174–176
Nicolis, G., 38, 79, 135
Nicosia, N., 66
Noe, A., 206
Noise, 40
Nominalism, 8, 14, 19, 32
Nonequilibrium conditions. See Far 
from equilibrium thermodynamics
Nonlinearities, 58, 89, 208, 241n8
Nordholm, S., 111, 159
Normativity, 5, 27, 167
Norms, social
in codes and metrics, 235
as constraints, 28, 40, 74, 86
Many-to-One transformations and, 
159, 162, 164
publication/dissemination of, 150
relationship with social organiza­
tion, 99
Novel token interdependencies, 107
Novum Organum (Bacon), 9
Nucleus accumbens, 165–166
Nutrient lattices, 125–126, 171
Obesity, context dependence of, 66
O’Connor, T., 15
Old Order Amish, isolation of, 113, 
115, 147
Olfaction, iteration in, 89
Oligopolies, interdependencies in, 
70–71
O’Neill, R. V., 178, 187, 189
On the Origin of Species (Darwin), 8
Ontically indexical types, 26
Ontogenesis, 36, 44–45, 49, 73, 152
Open systems, 241n3
biological systems as, 94
buffers in, 115–117
far from equilibrium dynamics, 
21–24, 27–29, 40, 95, 233, 
241n3
Ordering, indexical, 75
Order parameters
in biological systems, 140
concept of, 97, 101, 207, 235, 240n2
in delayed task experiments, 229
as governing constraint, 25–30, 78, 
80–84
in hierarchy formation, 183, 193
Many-to-One transitions and, 
156–163, 176
of social organizations, 167, 169
Ordinality, 75–79. See also 
Indexicality
Organelles, 36, 79, 84, 137
Origin of life, 190–191, 244n3
Origins of the Modern Mind 
(Donald), 206
Oscillators, interdependent dynamics 
among, 68
Output, effective, 167
Overdetermination, 16–17, 46, 186, 
197, 204, 207
Overlapping habitats, 174–176, 243n2
Packing, 111–112, 242n6
Panpsychism, 13
Parameters (order). See Order 
parameters
Parasitism, 108
Parmenides, 5
Pascal, R., 76, 79, 129, 135–138, 
241n8
Path dependence, 76, 92, 99, 144–145, 
235, 242n7
Pattee, H. H., 18, 30, 71, 96–99, 157, 
161, 177, 179, 183, 242n5, 244n12
Patten, B., 30, 155, 157, 161
Patterns, generated by context-depen­
dent constraints, 240n2
Pauli exclusion principle, 52, 57–58, 
112, 147
Pedagogical scaffolds, 124
Peirce, Charles Sanders, 18
Pendleton-Jullian, A., 122, 125, 126
Pendulum clocks, 28, 68, 80, 86, 
97–98
Perimotor neural activity, 225–230
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

Index    281
Persistence, 129–142
in classical thermodynamics, 
130–133, 135, 137–139 (see also 
Persistence)
constraints generating, 129–130
in far from equilibrium thermody­
namics, 133–139
macrostates, 130–132, 139–141, 
243n5
principle of, 29–30, 129–130, 
135–139
resulting from multiscale and multi­
level constraints, 22
selection by, 139–142
Persistent coherence, 76–77
Perspective. See Indexicality; 
Intensionality
Phase locking, 72, 80
Phase space, 75, 207
Phase transitions, 208
constraints enabling, 24–25, 67–71, 
240n2
coordination dynamics produced 
by, 79, 87
entropy and, 75, 84
Many-to-One (see Many-to-One 
transitions)
Set-to-Superset, 30, 155
Phenotypes, 55, 107–108, 139, 
144–145, 174, 205. See also 
Individuation
Photoautotrophs, 37
Physical causal closure, 15–17, 
30, 46, 197, 204. See also 
Overdetermination
Physicalism
nonreductive, 202
promissory, 199
Physics (Aristotle), 13
Place
indexicality and, 75, 192, 232
as intensionally defined position, 193
location versus, 41, 193
spatial constraints and, 41
Place, U. T., 197
Planck’s constant, 52
Plato, 7, 8, 10, 29
Platonic forms, 7, 10, 20, 29, 137, 219
Plaut, D. C., 99
Playground swing dynamics, 44–45
Plotinus, 10
Pluripotentiality of brain, 199. See 
also Brain plasticity
Poincaré, Henri, 17
Polanyi, Michael, 17
Polarities, 40, 49, 57, 124, 146
Polger, Thomas, 205, 211–215
Portugali, J., 81
Positivism, 32
Possible force laws, 217–218
Post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD), 
144
Prairie grasslands case study, 89, 126, 
161, 191
Predator–prey dynamics, 28
Prefrontal cortex (PFC), 173, 
228–229
Preparatory cortical activity, 225–227, 
228–230
Preparatory period, 224
Pre-Socratic philosophy, 5–6, 7
Prevalence, 59–66, 73
Prigogine, Ilya, 18, 32, 38, 79, 135
Prigogine’s dissipative structures, 207
Primary properties, 6–15, 19, 95, 158, 
182, 192, 199–200
Principle of Supervenience, 202–204, 
211–215
Principles, 216–222
Pauli exclusion, 52, 57–58, 112, 147
persistence, 135–139
supervenience, 202–204, 211–215
symmetry and conservation, 42, 
52, 146, 218–219 (see also 
Asymmetry)
teleology, 13, 167, 207, 242n3
uncertainty, 36
Prior probability, 50
Probability
conditional, 41, 46, 67, 72–75, 82, 
99–100, 113, 183, 188
prior, 50
Process closure, 90
Profiles, 46
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

282    Index
Projectibility
projectible predicates, 216, 219, 
240n12
projectible properties, 212–213
Prokaryotes, 43, 117, 127
Promissory physicalism, 199
Property dualism, 200–201
Proprioception, 165–166
Pross, A., 76, 79, 129, 135–138, 241n8
Proximate intention of action, 231–232
Proximity, 109–112
Psychoneural identity theory, 197
Public health, context dependence in
conditional direct effects, 61
context-dependent versus context-
independent diseases, 59–62
dependent happenings, 60–61, 66
direct effects, 61
indirect effects, 62–66
mereological effects, 65–66
motility and migration and, 119
total effects, 64–66
Putnam, Hilary, 205, 212
Qualia (feels), 207. See also Brain 
plasticity
as epiphenomenal, 175–176, 
200–204
tagging emergent properties as, 
163–167
Quine, Willard Van Orman, 19
Radical enactivism, 206–207
Rampino, M. R., 139
Rate differences (as boundaries), 77, 
116
Rate independent relations, 188–192
Rayleigh, Lord, 69
Rayleigh–Bénard convection cells, 69, 
91–92. See also Bénard cells
Reach, 107, 161
Realism, 8, 19
Realizability, multiple. See Multiple 
realizability
Realized properties. See also Multiple 
realizability
dimensioned realization view of, 
214–215
effectiveness as constraints (see 
Constraints; Top-down control)
as epiphenomenal, 31, 203–204, 
211, 213–215
flat realization view of, 213–214
Realizing processes, events, and prop­
erties. See also Enabling constraints
dimensioned realization view of, 
214–215
flat realization view of, 213–214
homeostasis as, 96–97
modularity and, 180
reductionism and, 11–13, 17–18, 
163, 197
in supervenience thesis, 203–204
Reciprocal causality, 206
Records, 143–145, 234
Recursion, 25, 40, 88–90, 100
Recursivity, 206
Reductionism, 11–13, 17–18, 163, 197
Redundancy, 104–105, 111, 141, 151
Reed, Walter, 62
Regalado, A., 3
Registers, 143–145, 234
Regularity, 56, 104–106
Regulation, as top-down governing 
constraint, 24, 40, 150, 162, 189
Regulatory genes, 81, 108, 124, 127, 
186–187
Religious/cultural constraints, 44, 105, 
147
Repetition, 56, 88–90, 104–105
Replication, 56, 105–106
Reproduction, 105–109
Republic (Plato), 7
Repulsion, constraints of, 57
Requisite Variety, Law of, 168
Resilience, 237
coherence characterized by, 20
concept of, 243n6
constraint regimes promoting (see 
Constraints)
generative entrenchment and, 
153–154
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

Index    283
in hierarchies, 182
stability versus, 57–58
Resonance, 72, 112, 172
Restorative enabling constraints, 126
Retinotopic map, 172
Robustness
concept of, 141–142, 222, 243n6
of holons, 182
robust coherence, 20, 182
stability and, 151, 153
Rorty, R., 235
Rosen, R., 88
Ross, D., 40, 51, 131, 132
Ross, Ronald, 60
Roundabouts, 22, 25
Rousseau, Jean-Jacques, 86, 241n9
Rovelli, C., 43, 144
Rubino, C., 18, 239n11
Ruiz-Mirazo, K., 92
Rules and regulations, as top-down 
governing constraint, 24, 40, 150, 
162, 189
Saberi, M., 78
Safe-to-fail, 151
Sagan, Carl, 5, 7
Salakhutdinov, R. R., 156
Salthe, Stanley, 30, 71, 80, 103, 176, 
177, 179, 181, 183, 187, 188, 193, 
239n3, 242n4
Sancar, A., 42
Santhanam, G., 225
Saturation, 30
Scaffolds/scaffolding, 24, 30, 40, 
122–128
mutually constrained and constrain­
ing dynamics in, 123–124
stabilizing power of, 122–124
types of, 124–128
Schelling, T. C., 116
Schrödinger, Erwin, 36
Science, effective. See Effective science
Scope, 107, 161
Searle, John, 201, 242n10
Secondary (accidental) properties, 
6–10, 19
Second Law of Thermodynamics, 
38, 84–86, 130–135. See also 
Persistence
Second-order, top-down govern­
ing constraints. See Governing 
constraints
Sedimentation, 40, 143–145
Seesaws, spatial constraints of, 46, 73
Selection by persistence, 139–142, 
145
Selection vectors, neuroscience case 
study, 230–232
Self-assertiveness, 182
Self-catalyzing constraints, 93, 189
Self-cause, 14, 22, 92, 95
Self-constraint, 72, 93, 101, 127–128, 
151, 175
Self-determination, 22, 93, 101, 236
Self-embracing entrenchment, 
150–151
Self-governed interdependencies, 
240n4
Self-imposed constraints, 150–151
Self-maintenance, 22, 101
Self-organization (autopoiesis), 22, 39, 
78, 91–92, 95
Self-referential processes, 88–89
Self-regulation, 139
Self-scaffolding, 128
Self-simplification, 97–98, 156. See 
also Many-to-One transitions
Self-templating, 122
Semantic attractors, 99–101
Semantic closure, 98–99
Semantics, 31, 99–100, 232
Semantics and syntax, intertwining of, 
99–101
Sensemaking, 240n4
Sensorimotor Life (Di Paolo, 
Buhrmann, and Barandiaran), 206
Sensory axes, in delayed task experi­
ments, 229–230
Sequences
as diachronic units, 74
as temporal constraints, 43, 73–77
Set-to-Superset transitions, 30, 155
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

284    Index
Sexual reproduction, context-dependent 
constraints in, 105–109, 111, 114
Shallice, T., 88, 99
Shannon, C., 56
Shapere, D., 39
Shapiro, Lawrence, 205, 211–216, 
221
Shared dimension of constraint, 222
Shaw, C., 38
Sheehy, J., 52
Shenoy, K. V., 225, 226, 227
Shields, 115–117
Shingles, context independence of, 
60, 61
Shockley, K., 120
Simon, Herbert, 131, 179, 180, 183, 
184, 219
Simulacra, 10
Skinnerian behaviorism, 197
Slaby, J., 206
Sloppy fitness, 174–176
Smart, J. J. C., 197
Smellosophy (Barwich), 239n2
Smith, Adam, 25, 70–71
Smith, L. B., 121, 158, 206
Snowden, David, 125, 163, 240n4
Social constructionism, 32
Social constructivism, 19
Social norms. See Norms, social
Social parameters, 155
Social practices
constraints in, 42, 85–86, 98, 
147–154, 159, 181, 206–209, 
234
entrenchment in, 148–154
Many-to-One transitions in, 
159–163
temporal coding in, 73–75
Socrates, 5, 7
Spatial constraints, 41–46, 234
Spatiotemporal intertwining, 44
Species, unity of type in, 109–111
Spinoza, Baruch, 192
Stability, 21–23. See also Persistence
in classical thermodynamics, 140
concept of, 135–139
dynamic kinetic, 136–139, 142
in far from equilibrium thermody­
namics, 24, 28–29, 134–142 
(see also Metastability)
persistent coherence, 76–77
temporal constraints and, 73–77
Stacking, 241n7
Standing causes, 83, 169, 230
Stanger, A., 23
Starr, T. B., 30, 40, 89, 103, 158, 160, 
179, 182, 183, 185, 190, 191
Statistical closure, 96–98
Stengers, I., 18
Stentrodes, 126–127
Stenz, L., 144
Stevenson, Robert Louis, 105
Streamlining, 84, 112, 155, 158. 
See also Many-to-One transitions
Struchiner, C. J., 62, 63, 65, 
241n1
Subbaraman, Ni, 3
Sub specie aeternitatis perspective 
(Spinoza), 192
Substances
Aristotelian, 8–9, 29
Cartesian, 24, 77, 137, 219
Subvening processes, as efficient 
causes, 203–204, 211–215
Supervenience, Principle of, 202–204, 
211–215
Supervenience relations, role of 
constraints in, 31, 197, 202–204, 
211–215
Supervening (supervenient) processes, 
as epiphenomenal, 31, 203–204, 
211–215, 220
Survival of the fittest, 174, 234
Sussillo, D., 224, 228, 229, 230, 231, 
232
Symbiosis, 23, 27, 108, 234
Symmetry and conservation princi­
ples, 42, 52, 146, 218–219. See also 
Asymmetry
Synchronicity, as hallmark of govern­
ing constraints, 28–29
Synchronization, 15, 39, 72, 78, 80, 
82, 84, 155
Syntax, 31, 99, 232
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

Index    285
Syntax and semantics, intertwining of, 
99–101
Szathmary, E., 40, 94
Task-appropriate behavior. See Behav­
ior appropriate to task/context
Task space, 166, 225–226, 231
Taxons, 7
Teleology, 13, 167, 207, 242n3
Teleonomy, 167
Templates, 120–122, 171
Temporal constraints, 41–46, 73–79, 
181, 234. See also Persistence
Thales, 5
Thelen, E., 121, 158, 206
Thermal equilibrium, 28, 49, 124, 
131–140, 233. See also Far from 
equilibrium thermodynamics
Thermodynamics, classical, 15, 207
context-dependent constraints and, 
84–86
first law of, 16
heat death and stasis, 38, 51, 56, 135
macrostate–microstate distinc­
tion in, 130–132, 139–140, 213, 
243n5
macrostates, 130–132, 139–141, 
243n5
nature of stability in, 140–141
persistence in, 130–135, 137–139 
(see also Persistence)
probabilistic interpretation of, 
130–133
second law of, 38, 84–86, 
130–135
statistical interpretation of, 131
temporal constraints in, 37, 76
Thermostats, analog, 168–169
Thom, R., 70
Thomas, A., 244n11
Time, stability over. See Persistence
Time entrenchment, 148–149
Timely behavior. See Behavior appro­
priate to task/context
Timing. See Temporal constraints
Token identity theory, 198–200, 204
Token individuation, 199–200
Tokens (as realized/actualized 
instances of Types), 7–8, 24, 26, 29, 
106
Tolerance ranges, 189
Tononi, G., 166
Top-down control, 79–85, 234–236, 
244n2
analog (see Analog control)
in biological systems, 222
by emergent properties, 79–84, 
96–98, 204, 241n8 (see also 
Emergent properties)
by governing constraints (see Gov­
erning constraints)
hierarchical levels of organization 
and, 178, 186–192
importance of, 234–235
Many-to-One transitions and, 
162–163, 165
multiple realizability underwrit­
ing capacity for, 17, 24, 30–31, 
222, 244n2 (see also Multiple 
realizability)
sedimentation and, 145
Top-down governing constraints. See 
Governing constraints
Tornadoes, 21, 39, 68–71, 138, 167, 
222
Total effects, 64–66
Totipotentiality, 244n2
Toulmin, S., 4
Traffic circles, 22–23, 25
Tragedy of the commons, 71. See also 
Mereology
Transfer RNA (tRNA), 98–99
Transitions. See Phase transitions
Transposons, 106, 242n2
Tschacher, W., 207
Tukanoans, 44
Turbek, S., 114
Turing, Alan, 200
Turner, T. L., 114
Turvey, M., 23, 79, 120, 121
Type. See also Interactional types 
generated by constraints
concept of, 4, 6–8
ontically indexical, 26
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

286    Index
Type (cont.)
persistence of (see Persistence)
tokens as realized/actualized 
instances of, 7–8, 24, 26, 29
type–token distinction, 114, 142, 
205, 211–212, 221–222
unity of (see Unity of type)
Type identity theory, 198–199, 239n1, 
244n3
Umerez, J., 22
Uncertainty principle, 36
Unipotentiality, 198–199
Unit entrenchment, 148–150
Unity of type, 54, 109–111, 129, 175. 
See also Repetition; Replication; 
Reproduction
definition of, 54–56
demes/memes, 109–111
preservation of, 81, 83, 98–99, 107
top-down causality and, 79
Unity relations, in self-organization, 
39, 78. See also Coherence
Universals, 6–8
Utopian literature, 242n8
Vaccination campaigns, 62–66, 98–99
Vague constraints, 54–55, 241n9
Valence, 89, 164–166, 176, 193, 235
Validated constraints, 153–154, 
235–236. See also Evolvability; 
Generative entrenchment
Values. See also Attractors
as codes, 163
as constraints, 40–42, 83, 145, 
243n5
emergence of, 31, 99
Van Gelder, R. N., 42
Van Gulick, R., 12
Varela, Francisco, 18, 91
Variables. See Order parameters
Variants, 56, 107, 114, 139, 174–175
Variation, 55, 92, 101, 110, 131, 139, 
242n5. See also Mutations
Vectorial consequences of constraints, 
40–41
Ventral tegmentum, 165
Villa d’ Este, context-independent 
constraints illustrated by, 51–52
Virtual governors, 83, 178
Virtue ethics, 98
Vitalism, 17
Vygotsky, Lev, 122
Waddington, Conrad, 53–55
Wagner, A., 152
Watchmaker analogy, 179–180
Watts, D. J., 243n3
Wave–particle duality experiments, 
35–36
Weaver, W., 56
Weinberg, Steven, 244n5
Weiss, P., 181
Wiley, E. O., 54, 108
Wimsatt, W. C., 85, 120, 122, 125, 
146, 148, 151, 152, 153, 222
Wittgenstein, Ludwig, 19
Woods, D. D., 103, 107, 119, 145
Wunderlin, A., 81
Yang, T., 57
Yellow fever, context dependence of, 
61–62
Young, Thomas, 35
Yu, B. M., 224, 225
Zhou, L., 43
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2133506/book_9780262374774.pdf by guest on 15 July 2023

