
BOOM
BUST
OLOGY


Vikram Mansharamani, PhD
John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
BOOM
BUST
OLOGY
BEFORE THEY BURST
SPOTTING FINANCIAL BUBBLES 

Copyright © 2011 by Vikram Mansharamani. All rights reserved.
Published by John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Hoboken, New Jersey.
Published simultaneously in Canada.
No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted 
in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical,  photocopying, recording, scanning, 
or otherwise, except as permitted under Section 107 or 108 of the 1976 United States 
Copyright Act, without either the prior written  permission of the Publisher, or authorization 
through payment of the  appropriate per-copy fee to the Copyright Clearance Center, Inc., 
222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, (978) 750-8400, fax (978) 646-8600, or on the Web 
at www.copyright.com. Requests to the Publisher for permission should be addressed to the 
Permissions Department, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 111 River Street, Hoboken, NJ 07030, 
(201) 748-6011, fax (201) 748-6008, or online at http://www.wiley.com/go/permissions.
Limit of Liability/Disclaimer of Warranty: While the publisher and author have used their 
best efforts in preparing this book, they make no representations or warranties with respect 
to the accuracy or completeness of the contents of this book and specifically disclaim any 
implied warranties of merchantability or  fitness for a particular purpose. No warranty may 
be created or extended by sales  representatives or written sales materials. The advice and 
strategies  contained herein may not be suitable for your situation. You should consult with a 
 professional where appropriate. Neither the publisher nor author shall be liable for any loss 
of profit or any other commercial damages, including but not limited to special, incidental, 
consequential, or other damages.
For general information on our other products and services or for technical support, please con-
tact our Customer Care Department within the United States at 
(800) 762-2974, outside the United States at (317) 572-3993 or fax (317) 572-4002.
Wiley also publishes its books in a variety of electronic formats. Some content that appears in 
print may not be available in electronic books. For more information about Wiley products, 
visit our web site at www.wiley.com.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data:
Mansharamani, Vikram, author.
  Boombustology : Spotting Financial Bubbles Before They Burst / 
 Vikram Mansharamani.
   p. cm
  Includes index.
  ISBN 978-0-470-87946-7 (hardback); ISBN 978-1-118-02857-5 (ebk); 
 ISBN 978-1-118-02855-1 (ebk); ISBN 978-1-118-02856-8 (ebk)
   1. Business cycles. 2. Financial crises. 3. Business forecasting. I. Title.
 HB3711.M354 2011
 338.542--dc22
 
2010045668
Printed in the United States of America
10  9  8  7  6  5  4  3  2  1

To my family, for their 
love and support


vii
Foreword 
xi
Preface 
Is There a Bubble in Boom–Bust Books? 
xvii
Acknowledgments 
xxiii
Introduction The Study of Financial Extremes: One-Armed 
Analysts, Secrets, Mysteries 
1
 
Secrets versus Mysteries
 
Different Problems Necessitate Different Approaches
 
Financial Booms and Busts as Mysteries
Part I Five Lenses
Chapter 1 
Microeconomic Perspectives: To Equilibrium or Not? 
9
 
“Random Walks” and Accurate Prices: The Efﬁ cient Market Hypothesis
 
Constant Instability and Inefﬁ ciency: The Theory of Reﬂ exivity
 
Reconciling Efﬁ ciency and Reﬂ exivity
Chapter 2 
Macroeconomic Perspectives: The Impact of 
Debt and Deflation on Asset Markets and Prices 
23
 
The Magnifying Power of Leverage
 
Collateral Rates and Debt Dynamics
 
Hyman Minsky’s Financial Instability Hypothesis
 
Debt Deﬂ ation and Asset Prices
 
The Austrian Business Cycle Theory
 
Integrating the Macro Lenses
Contents

Chapter 3 
The Psychology Lens: Homo economicus 
Meets Homo sapiens 
45
 
The Study of Irrationality Is Born
 
Heuristics Gone Wild: How Rules of Thumb Lead Us Astray
 
Our Flawed Brains: Other Cognitive Issues
 
The Certainty of Uncertainty
Chapter 4 
Political Foundations: Evaluating Property Rights, Price
Mechanisms, and Political Distortions 
69
 
Can Anyone Own Anything?
 
Prices: To Guide or Be Guided?
 
Political Distortions of Property and Price
Chapter 5 
Biological Frameworks: Epidemiology and Emergence 
85
 
Revealing the Maturity of an Unsustainable Boom
 
How Micro Simplicity Drives Macro Complexity
 
Emergent Behavior in Human Swarms
 
The Blind Leading the Blind
Part II Historical Case Studies
Chapter 6 
Tulipomania: A Bubble in Seventeenth-Century Holland 
103
 
The Uniqueness of Tulips
 
Fertile Soil for Bubble Formation
 
The Boombustology of Tulipomania
 
The Multilens Look
Chapter 7 
The Great Depression: From Roaring Twenties 
to Yawning Thirties 
117
 
Castles in the Sand
 
From Booming Twenties to Busted Thirties
 
The Boombustology of the Great Depression
 
The Multilens Look
Chapter 8 
The Japanese Boom and Bust: A Credit-Fueled 
Bubble Economy 
137
 
Japan(ese) as Different
 
An Overview of the Bubble Economy
 
The Boombustology of the Japanese Boom and Bust
 
The Multilens Look
viii 
Contents

 
Contents 
ix
Chapter 9 
The Asian Financial Crisis: The Mirage of a Miracle 
155
 
Boom Times in East Asia
 
Thailand Catches the Flu
 
The Boombustology of the Asian Financial Crisis
 
The Multilens Look
Chapter 10 The U.S. Housing Boom and Bust: The Homeowner’s 
Society Creates the People’s Panic 
173
 
 “Safe as Houses”
 
The Music Stops
 
The Boombustology of the U.S. Housing Boom and Bust
 
The Multilens Look
Part III Looking Ahead
Chapter 11 Spotting Bubbles before They Burst: A Method for
Identifying Unsustainable Booms 
193
 
Reﬂ exivity and Self-Fulﬁ lling Dynamics
 
Leverage, Financial Innovation, and Cheap Money
 
Overconﬁ dence
 
Policy-Driven Distortions
 
Epidemics and Emergence
 
Conclusions
Chapter 12 Boombustology in Action: Is China Next? 
217
 
Tendencies toward Equilibrium
 
Leverage, Cheap Money, and Potential Deﬂ ation
 
Conspicuous Consumption and Overconﬁ dence
 
Rights, Moral Hazard, and Political Distortion
 
Consensus, Silent Leadership, and Epidemics
 
The Unsustainable Chinese Story
Conclusion Hedgehogs, Foxes, and the Dangers of Making Predictions 
243
Notes 
247
About the Author 
265
Index 
267


xi
Vikram Mansharamani’s Boombustology serves an important pur-
pose in reminding us that narrow, model-driven approaches to 
understanding ﬁ nancial markets frequently fail. His subject, ﬁ nan-
cial crises, bedevils market modelers, because crises reside in the 
notoriously difﬁ cult-to-assess fat tails of distributions of security 
returns. Not only are the fat tails hard to parse, but their impact is 
disproportionate to their size. Extreme events, good and bad, do 
more to determine longrun results for investors than do the run-of-
the-mill events that fall in the center of distributions. Sensible inves-
tors pay close attention to low probability extreme negative events, 
like ﬁ nancial crises, that have the potential to wreak havoc with 
their portfolios.
Successful approaches to making investment decisions require 
more than applying state-of-the-art ﬁ nance theory. In the 25 years 
that I have had responsibility for managing Yale University’s endow-
ment fund, I have hired a large number of young professionals, 
most of them immediately after graduation from college. Many of 
my new hires have formal training in economics and ﬁ nance, with 
an emphasis on model-based approaches to understanding mar-
kets. The ﬁ nancial world presented in the classroom is populated 
by rational transactors armed with perfect information. Perhaps the 
most fundamental difference between the academic world where 
students learn about markets and the real world where analysts 
operate in markets is the real world’s population of ﬂ esh-and-blood 
economic actors.
After a prospective employee signs up for a stint with the 
Investments Ofﬁ ce, I supply him or her with a number of books 
that illustrate a common theme—the importance of actions of indi-
viduals in the functioning of our ﬁ nancial markets. The reading list 
includes Den of Thieves, James Stewart’s story of the junk bond scan-
dals of the 1980s; When Genius Failed, Roger Lowenstein’s depiction 
Foreword

xii 
Foreword
of the collapse of Long-Term Capital Management; Conspiracy of 
Fools, Kurt Eichenwald’s tale of the Enron fraud; and The Big Short, 
Michael Lewis’s account of the subprime mortgage crisis. These 
books describe, in a thoroughly engaging manner, individual behav-
ior that fails to correspond to the rational actions presupposed by 
academic modelers. Moreover, in each instance, the actions of all-
too-human individuals profoundly inﬂ uence the world’s ﬁ nancial 
markets.
Armed with the knowledge that making high-quality investment 
decisions requires a combination of rigorous ﬁ nancial modeling 
and informed market judgment, my colleagues in the Investments 
Ofﬁ ce stand well prepared to operate in markets. By employing the 
best that ﬁ nance theory offers, investors bring an analytical perspec-
tive to the table. By including an appreciation of the human ele-
ments of market behavior, investors exhibit a healthy skepticism of 
neatly packaged model results. The combination of analytical rigor 
and reasoned judgment informs not only the evaluation of bottom-
up security selection decisions, but also the analysis of top-down 
asset allocation studies.
In Boombustology, Vikram Mansharamani advocates a simi-
larly broad-based approach to understanding ﬁ nancial booms 
and busts, describing the ﬁ nancial world as seen through the ﬁ ve 
lenses of microeconomics, macroeconomics, psychology, politics, 
and biology. By employing an unusually diverse set of perspec-
tives to increase understanding of the character of ﬁ nancial crises, 
Mansharamani gives his readers a valuable set of guideposts to help 
them ﬁ nd a safe path through future market disruptions.
A ﬁ nancial crisis challenges even the most thoughtful decision-
making process. During my career at Yale, the endowment faced a 
number of major market dislocations—the market crash in October 
1987, the near collapse of the ﬁ nancial system in 1998, the bursting 
of the Internet bubble in 2000, and the ﬁ nancial debacle of 2008. 
In each instance, the extreme market moves produced pitfalls and 
opportunities. 
The crash in October 1987 highlighted the importance of a 
disciplined approach to maintaining asset allocation targets. On 
October 19, 1987, as many recall, stock markets around the world 
declined more than 20 percent. Less well remembered was the 
strong ﬂ ight-to-quality rally in U.S. Treasury securities. The decline 
in stock prices and increase in Treasury prices presented investors 

 
Foreword 
xiii
with an opportunity to buy stocks low and sell Treasuries high. In 
fact, as I describe in my book, Pioneering Portfolio Management, fear-
ful investors did the opposite, selling (now cheaper) stocks and buy-
ing (now more expensive) bonds. Did investors forget that buying 
high and selling low damages portfolio returns? In contrast, a dis-
ciplined rebalancing approach called for purchases of stocks and 
sales of bonds, positioning the portfolio for future success.
The 
September 
1998 
collapse 
of 
Long-Term 
Capital 
Management (LTCM) showed investors the importance of insulat-
ing portfolios, to greatest extent possible, from the actions of oth-
ers. Nearly all of the positions held by LTCM made fundamental 
economic sense. What made no sense whatsoever was the stagger-
ing level of leverage in the LTCM portfolio, which ran as high as 
250 to 1. Because of the underlying sensibility of LTCM’s positions, 
many other investors (including large numbers of hedge funds 
and the trading desks of Wall Street banks) put on similar trades. 
When LTCM experienced an unexpected loss, lenders began forc-
ing sales of positions. As LTCM liquidated its massive portfolio, 
spreads on their otherwise sensible trades widened; that is, cheap 
assets became cheaper and expensive assets became more expen-
sive. A substantial number of hedge funds suffered, as frightened 
investors rushed for the exits. In fact, the impact on portfolios 
exceeded the actual demand for liquidity, since hedge funds raised 
massive amounts of cash in anticipation of redemption demands. 
Funds that promised levels of liquidity to investors that were incon-
sistent with the investment horizon of underlying security positions 
found themselves forced to raise high levels of cash at the point 
of maximum opportunity. Investors in funds with sensible lockups 
and investors with separate accounts faced no such pressure to raise 
cash and positioned themselves to produce superior results. While 
no investor can avoid the short-term impact of adverse price moves, 
steadfast investors can maintain positions and beneﬁ t from the ulti-
mate return to fair value of both cheap and expensive securities.
The March 2000 bursting of the Internet bubble showed inves-
tors the rewards of persistence in the face of market headwinds. For 
a number of years prior to the collapse in prices, the market for 
Internet stocks exhibited unmistakable signs of speculative excess. 
The irrational increase in prices caused pain for investors who failed 
to participate in the mania and even greater pain for investors who 
bet on a return to rationality by taking short positions in Internet 

xiv 
Foreword
stocks. Yet, those investors who persevered with bets against specu-
lative excess not only beneﬁ ted from dramatic declines in Internet 
stocks, but also beneﬁ ted from superior performance of value-
 oriented securities held in the place of their speculative cousins.
The ﬁ nancial crisis of 2008 forced investors to confront the 
importance of liquidity. As markets seized up and ready access to 
funds disappeared, investors found that many formerly liquid assets 
(e.g., money market funds) became less liquid. Confronted with 
demands for liquidity to fund operations and to support portfo-
lio management activities, investors generated funds from sources 
not disruptive to the portfolio (e.g., external borrowing) and from 
sources disruptive to the portfolio (e.g., sales of illiquid partnership 
interests). The quest for liquidity, particularly from sources that 
did not disturb portfolio allocations, preoccupied many investors, 
especially those whose portfolios emphasized allocations to private 
equity and real assets. Better prepared investors, who had in-place 
liquidity and borrowing facilities, fared much better than those who 
scrambled to raise funds in the chill of the crisis.
The admittedly brief descriptions of lessons learned from past 
crises illustrate not only the difference in character of each of the 
crises, but also the importance of following sensible portfolio man-
agement principles throughout a period of market disruption, a 
time when many investors lose their bearings. In Boombustology, 
Vikram Mansharamani assists investors by rolling up his sleeves and 
applying his perspective to analyses of ﬁ ve past crises, ranging from 
Tulipmania in seventeenth-century Holland to the subprime mort-
gage catastrophe in twenty-ﬁ rst-century America. He may be correct 
that the crises share “many similar characteristics” (although I am 
often struck by their differences), but he is certainly correct that 
the study of crises is most useful “if it helps one to make money, 
avoid losses, or, ideally, both.” Where Mansharamani falls short in 
his quest to help his readers make money is in addressing the criti-
cal element of timing. 
The investment world fails to distinguish between early and 
wrong. Managers who underweighted Japan in the face of absurd 
valuations in the late 1980s suffered as Nikkei marched to ever 
higher levels, ultimately peaking at nearly 39,000 in December 
1989. Investors who recognized the bubble early incurred oppor-
tunity costs (by underweighting Japan) or direct costs (by short-
ing Japan). In all too many instances, investors locked in losses by 

 
Foreword 
xv
 abandoning correct, but out-of-favor, positions when the pain of 
losses became intolerable. In other instances, investors proﬁ ted 
from their anti-bubble bet, but reduced the proﬁ tability of their 
position by starting too soon. Precisely the same problem con-
fronted investors during the Internet bubble in the late 1990s. Early 
looks a lot like wrong.
In the introduction to his book, Vikram Mansharamani makes 
an interesting distinction between puzzles (for which a solution 
exists) and mysteries (for which a solution does not yet exist). Even 
though his work will not assist investors in dramatic fashion unless 
he addresses the core (perhaps, unsolvable) mystery of the timing 
of market crises, Mansharamani’s broad-based approach to examin-
ing ﬁ nancial crises helps investors by making these extraordinarily 
important market events less mysterious and more puzzle-like.
David F. Swensen
Chief Investment Ofﬁ cer
Yale University
New Haven, Connecticut
January 4, 2011


xvii
While I sincerely hope that Boombustology becomes a timeless 
classic for students, academics, policymakers, and investors alike, 
my current goal is considerably more modest. I have written this 
book because I believe it timely. The world is in the midst of an 
accelerating sequence of boom and bust cycles, and despite these 
developments, no organized, multidisciplinary framework exists 
for thinking about them. This book hopes to provide that frame-
work. Lacking such a framework, we are destined to a world of 
massive unintended consequences and the continual escalation of 
extremes—the ultimate outcome of which may be quite destructive 
to society and the socioeconomic–political world as we know it.
Might it be possible that our attempts to deal with apparent 
Japanese economic dominance resulted in the Japanese bust, which 
drove the Asian ﬁ nancial crisis, which drove the dot-com bubble, 
which resulted in the U.S. housing boom and bust, which is cur-
rently creating unsustainable debt loads at the government level 
around the world? Might it have been possible to identify these 
booms before they busted so as to prevent the numerous unin-
tended consequences that follow in the wake of our attempts to 
address each bust? This book will address these topics.
The market for books about ﬁ nancial booms and busts has itself 
boomed over the past several years, accelerated in no small part 
by the recent ﬁ nancial crisis. Why then does it make sense to add 
to the noise with another treatise on ﬁ nancial bubbles and crashes? 
Surely all previously written work has addressed any pertinent 
P R E F A C E
Is There a Bubble in Boom–Bust Books?

xviii 
Preface
issues. What can a practicing money manager and part-time college 
lecturer possibly add to the overﬂ owing bookstore business section?
The mere fact that this book exists and that you stand here read-
ing it answers these somewhat rhetorical questions. This book, which 
is a written version of a course that I have taught at Yale, provides a 
new perspective on ﬁ nancial booms and busts. The fact that I chose 
to design a course to teach at an undergraduate liberal arts college 
(rather than an undergraduate or graduate business school) is a telling 
statement about my perspective. Social occurrences are difﬁ cult to cat-
egorize as solely economic, psychological, political, or biological—they 
are, in fact, a complex concoction of all such phenomena. Why, then, 
should one limit oneself to a  simple unidisciplinary lens when studying 
ﬁ nancial markets, perhaps the most complicated of social phenomena?
Financial markets are extremely complex phenomena; competing 
within them with the handicap of a single lens seems in many ways 
illogical. Unfortunately, our entire society and educational infrastruc-
ture is designed toward specialization and single- discipline analysis. 
Even among the leading liberal arts schools, virtually all college stu-
dents are eventually channeled toward a disciplinary major such as 
economics, political science, psychology, history, literature, biology, or 
chemistry. While there are meaningful beneﬁ ts in developing exper-
tise, few multidisciplinary options are offered, let alone pursued. This 
is exacerbated in graduate and professional schools, and although 
such specialization is necessary and beneﬁ cial in most scientiﬁ c pur-
suits, it has the potential to be counterproductive in social pursuits.
Since I entered Yale University as a college freshman, I have 
resisted the tendency of the establishment to channel me into a 
particular discipline or “box.” Rather than merely study economics 
or political science, I majored in Ethics, Politics and Economics—
a multidisciplinary major offered at Yale and modeled after the 
program in Philosophy, Politics, and Economics at the University 
of Oxford. Incidentally, I double-majored with East Asian Studies, 
another multidisciplinary major.
Resisting the channel toward a specialization was tougher while 
pursuing a doctorate, but even here I think I managed to evade the 
“you must be a single-discipline expert” police that have permeated 
almost every corner of academia. I sought out PhD programs in the 
study of innovation and entrepreneurship, inherently multi-/inter-
disciplinary topics, and was accepted into one such program at the 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology. The degree I pursued was 

 
Preface 
xix
housed at the Sloan School of Management and was offered by a 
program called the Management of Technological Innovation and 
Entrepreneurship. My coursework included economics, psychology, 
political science, sociology, history, and law.
Even after completing my education and seeking positions in the 
money management business, the tendency for immediate speciali-
zation was ubiquitous. Virtually every ﬁ rm with which I interviewed 
wanted me to become an industry analyst focused on one or two indus-
tries. Several ﬁ rms suggested that it would be best to also focus on a 
singular geography as well. I soon determined that the established sys-
tem was based on a strong and widely held view that specialization in 
the ﬁ nancial markets was a source of advantage. In effect, the indus-
try had created a strong and pervasive culture of “siloed” thinking in 
which specialists were focusing on geographies and industries. It was, 
in the language of Isaiah Berlin, an industry of hedgehogs—people 
who knew “one big thing.” I instead became a fox.
In the course of forming my own investment philosophy and 
approach to thinking about the ﬁ nancial world, I developed a strong 
belief that a generalist approach (i.e., being a fox) was superior and 
that competitive insights were found not by competing against other 
experts but rather by looking between and across the silos. The say-
ing “To a man with a hammer, many things look like nails” is par-
ticularly pertinent to the money-management industry, as many 
industry analysts are organized in silos. There are times when the 
worst energy idea may be better than the best consumer idea, yet 
such insights get lost with expert-oriented approaches. Seeking to 
continue my multidisciplinary life into the money- management 
industry, I operate as a global generalist.
■ ■ ■
Before describing what the book is, let me begin by describing 
what it is not. It is not a book about making day-to-day investment 
decisions or about the proper investment approach for a particular 
market. It is not about market timing. Nor is it a book that presents 
a unique investment philosophy. Many ﬁ ne books have been writ-
ten about these topics. Rather, this book is about the context in 
which these decisions and philosophies are implemented. It is about 
deciphering the needle-moving extremes that have the potential to 
render many traditional investment approaches useless. Rather than 

xx 
Preface
providing you with a map of how markets may move, Boombustology 
hopes to provide you a seismograph that can help identify forthcom-
ing quakes.
Given my ﬁ rm belief that insight is found by looking across and 
through multiple disciplines, it should come as no surprise that 
this book provides a multidisciplinary framework for evaluating the 
extremely complex social phenomenon of ﬁ nancial market booms 
and busts. This book differs from other treatments of ﬁ nancial 
extremes in three primary ways: (1) it develops and utilizes a multi-
disciplinary perspective, based on the ﬁ ndings of economics, psy-
chology, and other disciplines; (2) it utilizes historical case studies to 
illustrate the power of multiple lenses; and (3) it summarizes these 
ﬁ ndings into a forward-looking framework useful in understand-
ing and identifying future ﬁ nancial extremes. Upon conclusion of 
this book, the reader will be left with a robust understanding of the 
dynamics that precede, fuel, and ultimately reverse ﬁ nancial market 
extremes. It is also hoped that the reader will be well versed in the 
numerous indicators that telegraph the existence of a bubble.
This book is based on a course I teach at Yale that emphasizes a 
liberal arts approach to thinking about booms and busts. The focus 
is upon asset class bubbles. The book mimics the course in that it 
is divided into three parts. The ﬁ rst focuses on the ﬁ ve lenses that 
I consider to be most useful in the study of booms and busts: micro-
economics, macroeconomics, psychology, politics, and biology. Why 
did I choose these lenses? Both micro- and macroeconomic lenses 
are too obvious to exclude and the recent emphasis on behavioral 
approaches necessitates its inclusion. Given the role of politics in 
developing the very foundation on which booms and busts develop, 
I included it as well. Space constraints limited me to ﬁ ve lenses, and 
I chose biology as the ﬁ fth to illustrate the power of a perspective 
external to the social sciences. I chose biology over physics as the 
economic emphasis on equilibrium is itself derived from physics.
Booms and busts that affect entire asset classes (versus those 
that might affect a particular industry or sector) are actually quite 
rare. As such, the second part of the book applies the ﬁ ve lenses to 
ﬁ ve case studies to generate a “bubble-spotting” theory. The cases 
chosen (Tulipmania, the Great Depression, the Japanese bubble, 
the Asian ﬁ nancial crisis, and the U.S. housing boom) were selected 
to represent variation in geography and time.
The third and ﬁ nal part of the book takes the lessons learned 
from Parts One and Two and develops a framework for proactively 

 
Preface 
xxi
thinking about and identifying ﬁ nancial bubbles before they 
burst. The theory generated in the book is summarized in a frame-
work presented in Part Three; I encourage researchers to test the 
 importance of each indicator.
Topics included in the course but not in the book are the ben-
eﬁ ts of booms and busts and the coincidence of frauds and swindles 
with busts. Both are excluded here because they are not explicitly 
about the topic of identifying bubbles. Frauds, swindles, and scams 
are not-infrequent occurrences in boom times, but because they are 
unfortunately not revealed until after a bust is well developed, they 
are a lagging (and therefore less useful) indicator.
■ ■ ■
Chapter 1 focuses on the microeconomics of booms and busts, 
paying special attention to the tendency of prices under various cir-
cumstances. Given the dominant microeconomic ideas of market 
efﬁ ciency and supply and demand–driven equilibrium, the chapter 
describes them and various alternatives. The theory of reﬂ exivity, 
developed by George Soros, is presented as a viable alternative to the 
equilibrium-seeking world of traditional microeconomics. The chap-
ter concludes with a reconciliation of the disequilibrium suggested 
by reﬂ exivity and the equilibrium assumed by microeconomics.
Chapter 2 focuses on credit cycles and ﬁ nancial instability. 
Three primary theories serve as the focus of the chapter: Irving 
Fisher’s debt-deﬂ ation theory of depressions, Hyman Minsky’s 
ﬁ nancial instability hypothesis, and the Austrian business cycle 
 theory. The chapter concludes with a framework for thinking about 
credit cycles and their impact on asset prices.
Chapter 3 is about the cognitive biases found in most human 
decision making. The behavioral lens presented in this chapter 
focuses on the representativeness and availability heuristics that 
have historically guided human decision making toward appropriate 
answers, but that, in today’s increasingly complex, uncertain, and 
interconnected world, have great potential to lead us astray. Other 
ﬁ ndings from the research on decision making are considered and 
presented, including biases caused by anchoring and insufﬁ cient 
adjustment, mental accounting, fairness, and existing endowments.
Chapter 4 focuses on the politics of property rights and the 
means through which a society determines the relative value of 
its goods (i.e., prices). The logic and ramiﬁ cations of politically 
motivated price ﬂ oors and price ceilings are considered, and the 

xxii 
Preface
 chapter concludes with a short discussion of tax policies and how 
they have the ability to impact asset prices by motivating (or disin-
centivizing) particular investment decisions by investors.
Chapter 5 attempts to take an emergent perspective from the 
study of biology and apply it to ﬁ nancial markets. Epidemics, herd 
behavior, and swarm logic/intelligence are the focus. The chapter 
focuses on two key lessons: how the study of epidemics and the dif-
fusion of diseases can inform our study of booms and busts—with 
speciﬁ c value in helping one understand the relative maturity of a 
bubble—and how group behavior can have a profoundly conform-
ing impact on its seemingly individualistic members.
Part Two of the book presents ﬁ ve historical cases and uti-
lizes the ﬁ ve lenses from Part One to evaluate them. Speciﬁ cally, 
Chapter 6 evaluates the Tulipmania of the 1630s, Chapter 7 applies 
the lenses to the Florida land boom of the mid-1920s and the 
Great Depression, Chapter 8 is about the Japanese boom and bust, 
Chapter 9 presents the Asian ﬁ nancial crisis, with special attention 
paid to Thailand as the epicenter of the events that unfolded, and 
Chapter 10 evaluates the U.S. housing boom and bust of the 2000s.
Chapter 11 summarizes the ﬁ ve lenses and the ﬁ ve cases in a 
matrix- style analysis that attempts to generate a generalized framework 
for identifying bubbles before they burst. Key indicators or signposts 
of a ﬁ nancial bubble are formulated, and a checklist-style evaluation 
emerges as a means to gauge the likelihood of an unsustainable boom.
Chapter 12 applies the framework of Chapter 11 to one of the most 
controversial investment considerations in the world today: China. 
While China has emerged to be one of the best economic growth sto-
ries of the past 30 years, there are reasons to pause and think this may 
not continue. At the risk of giving away the punch line, Chapter 12 
concludes that many indicators are highlighting an elevated probability 
that China is in the midst of a bubble that may burst. The Boombustology 
seismograph is picking up increased prequake rumbles.
The framework developed over the following pages has helped 
me navigate through recent ﬁ nancial booms and busts. I hope 
it will help you do the same, for in the wise words of Mark Twain, 
“Although history rarely repeats itself, it often does rhyme.”
Vikram Mansharamani
Brookline, MA
December 2010

xxiii
The ultimate origin of this book lies on a squash court in New 
Haven. After an exhausting and grueling squash match against a 
formidable competitor (I won), I sought his advice. “I’d like to put 
my PhD to work and perhaps teach a course here at Yale. What do 
you think?” His response set the wheels in motion: “I think it’s a 
great idea! See if you can teach it as a college seminar.” So it is that 
I must begin by thanking David Swensen for his encouragement 
and support in teaching a class at Yale. David is a ﬁ erce competitor, 
a loyal Yalie, a caring mentor, and overall class act. I feel extraordi-
narily lucky to have him as a friend. A course does not, however, a 
book make. Charley Ellis encouraged me to convert the course into 
a book and provided numerous introductions to facilitate its pub-
lication. Without his guidance and help, this book would not have 
been written. 
I thank the many students I have had the pleasure of teach-
ing. Over the course of my graduate education and subsequent 
years of teaching, I have met no group of students more motivated, 
insightful, intelligent, and analytical than the undergraduates at 
Yale University. They are, simply put, an absolute  pleasure to teach 
because they exhibit natural curiosity, analytical rigor, and intellec-
tual honesty. They have challenged me to think about this material 
more deeply and have helped reﬁ ne my thinking. 
My graduate education at MIT was an amazing experience that 
opened my eyes to a new way of thinking. I am particularly thank-
ful to Michael Cusumano, my dissertation committee chair, for his 
patience as I wandered between academic and nonacademic pur-
suits. Professor Harvey Sapolsky of the Security Studies Program 
was a constant friend and mentor.
From a professional perspective, I have had the pleasure of work-
ing with many ﬁ ne individuals over the past 20 years. Several have left 
major imprints on my way of thinking and have indirectly  inﬂ uenced 
Acknowledgments

xxiv 
Acknowledgments
the work presented here. While there are too many to mention, 
four of them selﬂ essly took time to provide me with feedback, guid-
ance, and encouragement as I wrote this book: Christopher Bodnar, 
Douglas Suliman, William Vens, and Matthew Vettel. I also particu-
larly thank Dee Keesler for encouraging my teaching efforts at Yale 
and providing a professional environment supportive of “fox” think-
ing. Additional gratitude is owed to Hank Blaustein for rapidly and 
creatively capturing the spirit of Chapter 12.
My parents, Shobha and Vishnu Mansharamani, deserve special 
thanks. Without their sacriﬁ ces (ﬁ nancial and otherwise), I likely 
would not have had the opportunities in life that I have had.
Any working professional with a young family knows that time 
is scarce. It should therefore come as no surprise that my great-
est debt of gratitude is to my family for their support in providing 
the time to write this book. Special acknowledgment is owed to my 
wife, Kristen Hanisch Mansharamani, who has tirelessly read every 
word. Her editorial capabilities have been tested repeatedly, initially 
through the writing of three graduate theses, and now through a 
book. Her dedication and commitment were steadfast. All errors 
remain hers. Actually, I think it is customary for me to take credit 
for the errors, but, as any spouse understands, blame is a matter of 
perspective!
Finally, I want to thank the editorial staff at John Wiley & Sons 
(especially Meg Freeborn, Claire Wesley, and Bill Falloon) for their 
persevering attention to detail and their unwavering commitment 
to my efforts, inconsistent as they may have been. 

BOOM
BUST
OLOGY


1
I N T R O D U C T I O N
The Study of Financial Extremes
ONE-ARMED ANALYSTS, SECRETS, MYSTERIES
Among the many noteworthy comments made by U.S. presidents 
over the years, perhaps one of the most pertinent with respect to 
the study of ﬁ nancial booms and busts was made by President Harry 
Truman: “Someone give me a one-armed economist!” The state-
ment, made in response to the constant “on the one hand . . . on the 
other hand” presentation of analysis to him by his advisors, captured 
the discomfort most decision makers have with ambiguity and uncer-
tainty. For better or worse, the world in which we now ﬁ nd ourselves 
is plagued with ambiguity and uncertainty. Globalization, economic 
interconnectedness, global warming, and international ﬁ nancial 
linkages are the reality of our sociopolitical-economic existence.
Boombustology takes President Truman’s memorable phrase and 
ﬂ ips it on its head. “Someone give me a ﬁ ve-armed analyst!” is my 
mantra. It is no longer enough for us to evaluate the bipolar possibili-
ties suggested by a two-armed individual. The world is more complex, 
more uncertain, more dynamic, and more volatile than ever before. 
It is no longer enough to evaluate developments via a single perspec-
tive. Ambiguities rule the day, and as reﬂ ected by the title of Robert 
Rubin’s insightful coauthored book, we live “in an uncertain world.”
The fall of the Soviet Union was a deﬁ ning moment of late 
twentieth-century world history, but it drove an existential reevalua-
tion for government organizations like the U.S. Central Intelligence 
Agency. The Agency literally had its entire existence questioned, 
with many calling for its immediate abolishment.1

2 
Boombustology
Rather than succumb to such pressure, the intelligence commu-
nity instead rigorously reevaluated its purpose in a new world facing 
new threats and plagued with innumerable uncertainties. Although 
much of this thinking has broad applicability to the world in which 
we live today, very little has surfaced in a manner applicable to the 
dynamic ﬁ nancial and economic uncertainties that have recently 
dominated popular attention.
Secrets versus Mysteries
One of the primary insights from this intelligence community intro-
spective analysis is that an inherent and profound difference exists 
between problems for which an answer exists and must be found 
versus problems for which no answer (yet) exists. The former case 
has been labeled a “puzzle” or “secret” while the latter case is con-
sidered a “mystery.” Two leading scholars on these distinctions 
in the U.S. intelligence community are Gregory Treverton and 
Joseph Nye. Both have highlighted the signiﬁ cant ramiﬁ cations of 
this seemingly simple distinction on the approach to generating 
intelligence.
Treverton eloquently explains the difference between secrets 
and mysteries in a Smithsonian Magazine article titled “Risks and 
Riddles.” In it, he says:
There’s a reason millions of people try to solve crossword 
puzzles each day. Amid the well-ordered combat between a 
puzzler’s mind and the blank boxes waiting to be filled, there 
is satisfaction along with frustration. Even when you can’t find 
the right answer, you know it exists. Puzzles can be solved; they 
have answers.
But a mystery offers no such comfort. It poses a question 
that has no definitive answer because the answer is contingent; 
it depends on a future interaction of many factors, known and 
unknown. A mystery cannot be answered; it can only be framed, 
by identifying the critical factors and applying some sense of 
how they have interacted in the past and might interact in the 
future. A mystery is an attempt to define ambiguities.2
Nye goes on to clarify the distinction in more explicit intelli-
gence community terminology:

 
The Study of Financial Extremes 
3
A secret is something concrete that can be stolen by a spy or 
discerned by a technical sensor, such as the number of SS-18 
missiles in the Soviet Union or the size of their warheads. A 
mystery is an abstract puzzle to which no one can be sure of the 
answer. For example, will Boris Yeltsin be able to control infla-
tion in Russia a year from now? No one can steal that secret 
from Yeltsin. He does not know the answer. He may not even 
be in office a year from now.3
The distinction these intelligence community scholars make 
between puzzles and mysteries has broad pertinence to ﬁ nancial 
markets. Consider the early 2007 New Yorker article “Open Secrets” 
written by Malcolm Gladwell. In it, Gladwell highlights the “perils 
of too much information” and how understanding the difference 
between puzzles and mysteries leads to a radical reinterpretation 
of the Enron scandal. Gladwell notes that the truth about Enron’s 
transactions was openly revealed in public ﬁ lings and all it took was 
a diligent Wall Street Journal reporter to unveil the issues at hand. 
The needed capability was not the ability to ﬁ nd particular infor-
mation, but rather the skill to assemble disparate data points into 
a clear image of the whole. The problem is not one of inadequate 
information, but instead one of too much information overwhelm-
ing the processing capabilities of “one-armed” analysts.
Different Problems Necessitate Different Approaches
Given that puzzles (i.e., problems for which there are indeed know-
able answers) and mysteries (i.e., problems for which there are not 
knowable answers) are fundamentally different, it should come as 
no surprise that they necessitate radically different approaches. 
Consider the relative importance of information and data gather-
ing in each problem.
In the case of a puzzle, the problem is simple: a lack of spe-
ciﬁ c information (i.e., the answer) drives the need for more and 
more data. More information may contain the answer, so the best 
approach to addressing a puzzle is to get more information. As 
mentioned by Treverton above, the Soviet Union was a puzzle. The 
American intelligence community simply needed to gather more 
data (via satellites, aerial photography, and human intelligence, for 
starters) to seek the answer.

4 
Boombustology
Mysteries, on the other hand, are less clear. Information is plen-
tiful, and additional data is unlikely to enhance understanding. In 
addressing mysteries, more information is likely to make the prob-
lem more difﬁ cult to understand. There is no answer per se in the 
form of speciﬁ c data. Rather, insight exists in how the data comes 
together. In describing the role of the intelligence analysts in the 
post-Soviet era, Nye noted that they are “people assembling a jigsaw 
puzzle who have some nifty nuggets inside a box but need to see 
the picture on the cover to see how they ﬁ t.”4 Finding the pieces is 
“puzzle work.” Forming the cover image is “mystery work.”
To understand mysteries, we need sophisticated analysis 
that looks across differing sources of data and evaluates existing 
 information through multiple lenses to uncover a probabilistic 
answer of how best to understand the mystery. It is only through 
the use of multiple lenses that we might be able to get a sense 
of the picture on the jigsaw puzzle box. One lens might only con-
sider color, another might consider the shapes of the pieces, noting 
the existence of straight edges, a third might focus on anticipated 
images that are being formed from the other lenses, and so forth.
Nye notes the problem of what I call single-lens analysis in high-
lighting how the perspectives of the State Department might mate-
rially differ from those of the Department of Defense:
In policy circles, the old adage is that where you stand depends 
on where you sit. In intelligence, what you foresee is often 
affected by where you work. The primary duty of departmen-
tal analysts is to respond to the needs of their organizations. 
Diplomats are supposed to negotiate solutions. Even in appar-
ently hopeless situations, they tend to press departmental 
analysts for the one chance in a hundred that might permit 
success. Generals are supposed to win battles. Even in  hopeful 
situations, they tend to press their intelligence analysts for esti-
mates of what they will have to face if worst comes to worst . . . 
The best solution to such human and bureaucratic problems 
is multiple points of view that are brought together in one 
place . . .5
Given insights that help elucidate mysteries exist within the 
mountains of already-available information and data, the key 

 
The Study of Financial Extremes 
5
to understanding mysteries lies in ﬁ ltering and data analysis. 
Further, as described by Nye, any one ﬁ lter is necessarily going to 
be biased—a reality that necessitates the need for multiple lenses. 
More information (i.e., solving puzzles) will only exacerbate these 
biases, whereas multiple perspectives will help ﬁ lter and extract 
insight from information (i.e., understanding mysteries).
Balancing the general’s desire for a worst-case scenario with the 
diplomat’s desire for a best-case scenario will lead to a more cali-
brated, reasoned, and balanced perspective on the reality of a situ-
ation. Likewise, as shall be argued below, ﬁ nancial booms and busts 
can be best understood when one balances an economist’s focus on 
efﬁ ciency with a psychologist’s focus on cognitive biases with the 
insights gained via the use of other lenses.
Financial Booms and Busts as Mysteries
Financial booms and busts are mysteries; they are, particularly from 
an a priori perspective, probabilistic events for which multidiscipli-
nary analysis is essential. Addressing ﬁ nancial booms and busts as a 
puzzle may not only prove to be without value, it may in fact have 
negative impacts and lead to gross misunderstandings.
Thinking of booms and busts as puzzles will lead to a greater 
emphasis on singular perspectives. It leads to an emphasis on depth 
of data versus breadth of information. It leads to deeper and more 
thorough understanding of particular information, but it misses 
the point that information is not the essential element. There are 
plenty of “dots” but connections between them are lacking. We 
need a framework for connecting the dots in a manner that helps 
extract insight from the tremendous amounts of information and 
data that are already available.
As noted by Gladwell, “A puzzle grows simpler with the addition 
of each new piece of information” while “mysteries require judg-
ment and the assessment of uncertainty.”6 Conceiving of ﬁ nancial 
booms and busts as a mystery necessitates the application of differ-
ent lenses to develop a probabilistic interpretation of the facts to 
better understand the situation.
This book provides a framework through which the applica-
tion of ﬁ ve key disciplines results in a more robust understanding 
of boom and bust mysteries. The ﬁ ve lenses are  microeconomics, 

6 
Boombustology
macroeconomics, psychology, politics, and biology. Almost by deﬁ -
nition, each lens is based on the underlying worldview and beliefs 
that each discipline is based on. By melding insights from and 
across these ﬁ elds, Boombustology will help you become a ﬁ ve-armed 
analyst. While the one-armed analyst sought by Truman might 
make for easier decisions, the ﬁ ve-armed analyst is likely to guide 
leaders toward better decisions.

I
P A R T
Five Lenses
Part One surveys ﬁ ve disciplines: microeconomics, macroeco-
nomics, psychology, politics, and biology. Each discipline, or lens, 
is presented as a useful tool in deciphering the mysteries of bubbles 
before they burst. Speciﬁ c topics emerging from these ﬁ ve lenses 
include equilibrium tendencies, reﬂ exivity, credit dynamics, over-
conﬁ dence, anchoring and adjustment, price mechanisms, prop-
erty rights, epidemics, and emergence.
7


9
TO EQUILIBRIUM OR NOT?
The most interesting, and profitable, times to be involved in 
investment management are when Mr. Smith’s invisible hand is 
visibly broken.
—Paul A. McCulley
In this opening chapter, we begin our discussion of the various 
lenses that prove useful in the study of booms and busts by focusing 
upon a critically important and far-reaching element of traditional 
microeconomic theory: supply and demand–driven ﬁ nancial equi-
librium. Two competing and seemingly contradictory theories are 
presented and discussed—the efﬁ cient market hypothesis and the 
theory of reﬂ exivity.
There are many ways in which to illustrate the concept of equi-
librium, but it is perhaps best analogized with a ball on a curved 
shape (see Figure 1.1). A situation in which equilibrium is possible 
is one in which over time, if left to its own devices, the ball will ﬁ nd 
one unique location. Overshooting and undershooting this unique 
location is self-correcting. A situation of disequilibrium, however, is 
one in which the ball is unable to ﬁ nd a unique location. A ball in 
such a state does not generate self-correcting moves that dampen 
its moves toward a theoretical “equilibrium” or resting spot; rather, 
Microeconomic Perspectives
1
C H A P T E R

10 
Boombustology
disequilibrium generates motion that is self-reinforcing and accel-
erates the ball’s move away from any stable state.
The application of these concepts to the ﬁ nancial arena is very 
straightforward. The concept of a stable point is best analogized with 
a price or valuation level in the ﬁ nancial arena. The general idea 
behind price equilibrium stems from the powerful forces of supply 
and demand. Inherent in most equilibrium-oriented approaches is 
a belief that higher prices generate new supply that tends to push 
prices down. Likewise, it is believed that lower prices generate new 
demand that tends to push prices up. In this way, deviations from an 
appropriate price level are self-correcting.
We begin with the traditional economic lens that adopts an equi-
librium-oriented view of the ﬁ nancial world. In addition to being based 
on intuitive supply (the higher the price, the more will be produced) 
and demand (the higher the price, the lower the demand) logic, the 
argument in favor of equilibrium is seductively simple. Following a 
discussion of the efﬁ cient market hypothesis and its implications for 
ﬁ nancial equilibrium, the chapter then turns to the theory of reﬂ exiv-
ity. Developed by billionaire George Soros, the theory states that mis-
perceptions about reality may become self-fulﬁ lling, driving prices to 
ever-greater distances from any supposed stability point.
The careful reader will complete this chapter with the tools to 
consider ﬁ nancial developments as being equilibrium-oriented or 
not—which in and of itself should prove valuable in the study of 
and participation in ﬁ nancial markets. The chapter concludes with 
a plausible framework for combining the usefulness of both equilib-
rium and reﬂ exivity lenses.
“Random Walks” and Accurate Prices: The Efficient Market Hypothesis
Adam Smith observed in 1776 that individual, selﬁ sh pursuits are 
able to achieve optimal group outcomes better than if individuals 
Figure 1.1 Equilibrium in Pictures

 
Microeconomic Perspectives 
11
selﬂ essly pursued what they each deemed best for the group. It was 
as if the self-interested individual is “led by an invisible hand to pro-
mote an end which was no part of his intention . . . [B]y pursuing 
his own interest, he frequently promotes that of society more effec-
tually than when he really intends to promote it.”1
Economic thinking has been profoundly inﬂ uenced by this 
early idea that selﬁ sh pursuits allocate scarce resources more efﬁ -
ciently than any individual might, despite the noblest of intentions. 
The laws of supply and demand drive the most efﬁ cient allocation 
of resources, and prices provide accurate signals for the increas-
ing (or decreasing) of supply, with demand rising as prices fall 
or falling as prices rise.2 An analogous construct in ﬁ nance is the 
efﬁ cient market hypothesis, a theory that posits prices of ﬁ nancial 
securities embody all known information and therefore only move 
randomly.
The early origins of the efﬁ cient market hypothesis can be 
traced back to George Rutledge Gibson, who in 1889 asserted 
that the prices of shares that were well known in an open mar-
ket embodied “the judgment of the best intelligence concerning 
them.”3 The statement captures one of the two key building blocks 
upon which the efﬁ cient market hypothesis was built, namely that 
prices “contain” or “embody” all available public information. This 
assertion, which was later developed with greater rigor and preci-
sion in the twentieth century, was combined with early econometric 
work asserting that security prices move in a random manner. This 
latter claim, developed primarily by MIT economist Paul Samuelson 
and University of Chicago economist Eugene Fama, essentially 
stated that stock prices were not predictable based on their prior 
movements.
Fama and Samuelson, who were both building upon an unpub-
lished dissertation by Louis Bachelier written in 1900 titled “The 
Theory of Speculation,” provided a compelling framework for 
understanding the behavior of stock prices through further concep-
tual development of the efﬁ cient market hypothesis.4 In particular, 
Fama extended, reﬁ ned, and further developed the theory by artic-
ulating three forms of efﬁ ciency that exist in the ﬁ nancial markets: 
weak, semi-strong, and strong.
Before describing each of these three forms of efﬁ ciency in 
greater detail, it is useful to consider the market conditions (i.e. 
assumptions) on which the theories of efﬁ ciency are based. In par-
ticular, the efﬁ cient market hypothesis requires that participants 

12 
Boombustology
(in the aggregate) are on average correct and that information is 
immediately and without friction incorporated by these partici-
pants. There is no explicit requirement that individuals be rational 
or even correct. The only requirement is that individual partici-
pants not systematically be irrational in the same manner. This 
means that any irrationality exhibited at the individual level must 
be offset by contrary irrationality among other individuals such that 
the “average” individual is not irrational.
As will be questioned below and again in Chapter 3, one of the 
root underlying assumptions or beliefs in efﬁ cient pricing is that 
all information is interpreted by all participants in exactly the same 
way. In reality, however, each individual participant may interpret 
data differently or come to unique conclusions about its impor-
tance. To say that all individuals have the same information does 
not necessarily imply that all individuals come to the same conclu-
sion. In fact, as described below, misinterpretations can compound 
upon themselves as differing conclusions from common data might 
reinforce themselves.
Now, let us turn to the three forms of efﬁ ciency. The weak 
form of market efﬁ ciency describes a situation in which prior 
security prices provide no predictive value with respect to 
future security prices. According to weak form efﬁ ciency, evaluat-
ing historical stock price movements proves futile in the search 
for outperformance in the long run. In the language of today’s 
ﬁ nancial analysts, weak form efﬁ ciency is a theory that technical 
analysis—the study of prior price movements as the basis to predict 
future price movements, independent of any fundamental develop-
ments—does not work. Weak form efﬁ ciency does not imply that 
fundamental analysis is not fruitful, just that price movements 
exhibit no predictable pattern. Stock prices stumble through time 
in what Fama describes as a “random walk.”5
The semi-strong form of market efﬁ ciency describes a scenario 
in which publicly available information fails to provide any predic-
tive value with respect to future security prices. Thus, semi-strong 
efﬁ ciency is really a statement about the rapidity of information 
incorporation. It implies that share prices instantaneously adjust 
to new information such that consistently proﬁ table trading on 
the revelation of such information is not possible. Semi-strong efﬁ -
ciency builds on the weak form’s belief that technical analysis is 
 useless and implies that fundamental analysis is also useless.6

 
Microeconomic Perspectives 
13
Finally, the strong form of the efﬁ cient market hypothesis sug-
gests that all information (private, public, and otherwise) is fully 
reﬂ ected within the prices of securities, and as such, prices are 
always correct in that there is no information that provides predic-
tive value with respect to future security prices.7 Table 1.1 summa-
rizes these three forms of efﬁ ciency.
Although the theory of market efﬁ ciency was clearly intended to 
be a simplifying construct and a model useful in helping to explain 
reality, it was extremely well received by those seeking to understand 
the volatile (and range-bound) equity markets of the 1960s and 
1970s. Speciﬁ cally, corporate America, Wall Street, and regulators 
greeted the efﬁ cient market hypothesis with a warm  reception—
resulting in its deep burrowing into the fabric of ﬁ nance.
Implications of Financial Efficiency
The rapid acceptance of the efﬁ cient market hypothesis in ﬁ nancial 
and regulatory communities was a result of its elegance. The seem-
ingly simple idea that security prices fully reﬂ ect all available infor-
mation meant that markets were “right,” and that price moves were 
accurate reﬂ ections of changing fundamentals. Although this logic 
imbued many facets of the ﬁ nancial industry, the most important 
manifestations of it are found in the realm of regulatory philosophy 
and money-management practices.
Table 1.1 The Three Forms of Market Efficiency
Weak
Semi-strong
Strong
Price Information
Prices move in 
random ways
Prices incorporate 
all publicly available 
information
Prices fully reflect all 
public, private, and 
other information
Role of Technical 
Analysis
Not useful
Not useful
Not useful
Role of Fundamental 
Analysis
Useful
Not useful
Not useful
Role of “Inside”/
Non-Public 
Information
Useful
Useful
Not useful
Method for generating 
outperformance
Traditional 
fundamental 
research 
Seeking a nonpublic 
“edge” 
None

14 
Boombustology
Time columnist Justin Fox, in The Myth of the Rational Market, 
 succinctly summarizes the impact of this warm reception:
It was a powerful idea, helping to inspire the first index funds, 
the investment approach called modern portfolio theory, the 
risk-adjusted performance measures that shape the money 
management business, the corporate creed of shareholder 
value, the rise of derivatives, and the hands-off approach to 
financial regulation that prevailed in the United States from 
the 1970s on.8
If one believes that security prices are right and completely 
reﬂ ect all available information and expectations, then there is 
absolutely no room for the consideration that prices are excessively 
depressed or overly ebullient. Bubbles do not exist in this world, 
and as such, asset prices are not and should not be a consideration 
for policymakers. Further, securities regulations need only focus 
on the creation of a level playing ﬁ eld vis-à-vis insider information, 
the protection of the public from untrue and unscrupulous mar-
keting, and the prevention of illegal manipulation. Matters such 
as margin rates, counterparty risk, disclosure requirements, and 
other mechanical considerations become secondary. This over-
arching philosophy that “markets know best” has been the guiding 
light behind much of western-style democratic capitalism since the 
1970s, due largely to the broad intellectual appeal and elegant sim-
plicity of the efﬁ cient market hypothesis.
Another dramatic implication was that efﬁ ciency obviates the 
need for active portfolio management, whereby investors attempt to 
outperform the market. After all, if security prices already reﬂ ect all 
available information and there is no predictive value in any informa-
tion, what value is there in conducting analysis using available infor-
mation? Better instead to simply “buy the whole market” in a passive 
manner and not pay the fees associated with active management. 
The growth of passive money management (primarily manifested 
in the rapid rise of index funds) has been enormous since the 1970s and 
at least partially reﬂ ects the mass appeal of this efﬁ ciency argument.
The Boom and Bust of Efficiency
The common sense critique of the efﬁ cient market hypothesis is best 
captured by the often-quoted joke about the economist and a friend 

 
Microeconomic Perspectives 
15
walking down the street. After stumbling upon a $100 bill lying on 
the ground, the economist’s friend reaches down to pick it up, mar-
veling at her good fortune. Before she actually picks it up, however, 
the economist says, “Don’t waste your efforts. If it were a genuine 
$100 bill, it would already have been picked up by someone else.”
The absolute domination of the efﬁ cient market hypothesis over 
economic affairs around the world cannot be overstated. In fact, 
the 1997 Nobel Prize in Economic Sciences was awarded to Robert 
C. Merton and Myron Scholes for “a new method to determine the 
value of derivatives.”9 At the very root of their contribution was a 
belief that rational, efﬁ cient pricing of assets was inevitable and 
prices would tend toward identiﬁ able equilibria. These two academ-
ics were also moonlighting as ﬁ nanciers helping to manage what at 
the time appeared to be one of the most successful hedge funds of 
all time, Long-Term Capital Management (LTCM).
LTCM employed a strategy of identifying small inefﬁ ciencies in 
which prices had deviated from their model-derived equilibrium 
price. The fund then used massive amounts of borrowed money to 
magnify their bets. In some instances, their bets were magniﬁ ed 
through the use of more than $100 of borrowed money for each $1 of 
invested capital.10 Although complicated, Nobel-prize winning, math-
ematically advanced formulas were behind the fund’s strategies, one 
basic underlying premise served as the foundation of their worldview 
on which the whole ﬁ rm’s approach was based: Prices tended toward 
identiﬁ able equilibria. The ﬁ rm had billions and billions of dol-
lars (some argue almost a trillion dollars) at risk behind a belief that 
prices operated according to the right-hand picture in Figure 1.1.
Despite the enormous leverage involved, LTCM had never had 
a monthly loss of greater than 3 percent prior to 1998.11 Global 
economic uncertainty driven by the Asian ﬁ nancial crisis and the 
Russian debt default, however, were enough to cause not one, but 
two days (August 21, 1998 and September 21, 1998) of more than 
$500,000,000 in losses.12 According to the LTCM equilibrium-
 oriented ﬁ nancial models, the likelihood of having one such day 
was 1 in 50 million. The likelihood of two such days was incalcula-
bly small. Needless to say, the revelation of the ﬂ awed framework, as 
well as the huge monetary losses, were shocking to the LTCM ﬁ nan-
cial wizards in Greenwich. Not surprisingly, author Michael Lewis 
described August 21, 1998 as “the worst day in the young history of 
scientiﬁ c ﬁ nance.”13

16 
Boombustology
The most ironic element of the story, of course, is that a team of 
efﬁ ciency-committed, Nobel prize–winning “equilibriumists” effec-
tively undermined their intellectual position by ﬁ rst demonstrating 
it was possible to generate excess returns (i.e., that markets were 
not in fact efﬁ cient) and then by blowing up due to massive market 
inefﬁ ciency.
More recently, Alan Greenspan, “a card-carrying member of 
the free market brigade”14 and Ayn Rand devotee, testiﬁ ed to the 
U.S. Congress that “I do have an ideology. . .that free, competitive 
markets are by far the unrivaled way to organize economies.”15 In 
response to later questioning about how his philosophy might rec-
oncile with regulation, his response was straightforward: “We’ve 
tried regulations. None meaningfully worked.”16 As a result of this 
philosophy, the Chairman of the Federal Reserve took an extraor-
dinarily (but not entirely) hands-off approach to the ﬁ nancial mar-
kets. I say “not entirely” because the very existence of a central bank 
is in fact contradictory to a free market perspective. By basically set-
ting the short-term interest rate in America, the Federal Reserve is 
effectively a central planner that dismisses supply and demand fun-
damentals in the money market and chooses a price for money that 
it deems appropriate. As we will see in Chapter 2, a small group of 
economists (collectively known as the Austrian school of econom-
ics) have argued that such meddling in the money markets is per-
haps the root cause of booms and busts.
Nevertheless, by the fall of 2008, amid one of the most severe 
economic downturns since the Great Depression, Greenspan indi-
cated to Congress that he had found a ﬂ aw in his model of how the 
ﬁ nancial world works. In fact, he went on to describe the greater 
impact of the credit crunch on the philosophy of market efﬁ ciency, 
saying, “The whole intellectual ediﬁ ce collapsed in the summer of 
last year.”17 For this devout free-marketeer and devotee of market 
efﬁ ciency, such a statement was equivalent to serving pork for lunch 
during Ramadan in the holy mosques of both Medina and Mecca.
Constant Instability and Inefficiency: The Theory of Reflexivity
George Soros, the hedge fund manager famous for speculating on 
the dynamics of ﬁ nancial markets, is more known for his ﬁ nancial 
wizardry than his philosophical musings. Nevertheless, his theory 
of reﬂ exivity provides a tremendously powerful lens through which 

 
Microeconomic Perspectives 
17
to (re)consider market efﬁ ciency. Using a “reﬂ exive” lens to view 
booms and busts proves quite  useful, and this section will explain 
the theory of reﬂ exivity and its primary implications for ﬁ nancial 
markets.
At its roots, Soros’ theory of reﬂ exivity is a theory on the limits 
of human knowledge. If this is not a grandiose enough topic, the 
underlying focus of the theory is on the determination of reality 
and truth in complex social phenomena (like ﬁ nancial markets). 
The theory is a product of his intellectual devotion to Karl Popper, 
the early twentieth-century Austrian philosopher and author of 
Open Society and Its Enemies.
Popper’s primary philosophical contributions relate to the asym-
metry in the development and falsiﬁ cation of theory. The funda-
mental problem of science, claimed Popper, is that it cannot prove 
anything. Rather, virtually all efforts to produce knowledge are based 
on induction and induction is inherently problematic. The “problem 
of induction,” relates to the fact that while all conﬁ rmatory evidence 
cannot prove a fact, one contrary piece of evidence can indeed fal-
sify a supposed fact. Thus, although the sun has risen and set every 
day (thereby leading to a theory that the sun is on a cycle of rising 
and falling every 24 hours), the mere fact that it has occurred does 
not mean that it will continue to occur. However, if the sun were to 
ever not rise and set in a 24-hour period, the theory would be proven 
false.18
Soros goes on to identify two primary “functions” in the social 
arena. The ﬁ rst, called the cognitive function is the act through 
which a participant observes the social situation in which he ﬁ nds 
himself. The second, the participating function, is the act by which 
participants participate in (and therefore affect) the social situa-
tion. The operation by which these two functions interact is reﬂ ex-
ivity. He summarizes: “Reﬂ exivity is, in effect, a two-way feedback 
mechanism in which reality helps shape the participants’ thinking 
and the participants’ thinking helps shape reality in an unending 
process in which thinking and reality may come to approach each 
other but can never become identical.”19 This delta between reality 
and thinking is known as the participants’ bias.
A key implication of this two-way feedback mechanism is that 
social phenomena have an indeterminacy not present in the 
 natural sciences. There is, according to Soros, no objective truth, 
and perceptions affect reality as much as reality affects perceptions. 

18 
Boombustology
While many have suggested that observers might affect the reality 
they seek to observe, Soros is unique in suggesting that observers 
actually change the reality that they are diligently trying to observe, 
and that this changed reality in turn affects their perception, creat-
ing a self-reinforcing cycle that compounds misperceptions.
Rather than suggesting an additional or alternative lens through 
which to view reality, Soros actually goes further to suggest that 
the scientiﬁ c method and the basis on which supposed knowledge 
has been generated is not applicable to the social sciences. Given 
that economics is the social science that most emulates the natural 
sciences (thought by many to be the result of “physics envy”), 
Soros is effectively attacking the supposed rigor of the economic 
approach. The theory of reﬂ exivity suggests that when it comes to 
events that have thinking participants, there is no such thing as 
objective knowledge. Participants act based on their beliefs, which 
are derived from observing the actions of participants, which are 
based on their own beliefs, and so on.
Soros bluntly stated his conclusion in a 1994 speech to the MIT 
Department of Economics: “Thinking participants cannot act on 
the basis of knowledge. Knowledge presupposes facts which occur 
independently of the statements which refer to them, but being a 
participant implies that one’s decisions inﬂ uence the outcome.”20 
Soros fully admits that reﬂ exivity does not occur in every case, but 
that when it does occur, the dynamics of the situation make tradi-
tional scientiﬁ c approaches (meaning those based on observation) 
less useful. Figure 1.2 demonstrates how reﬂ exivity is not merely a 
different way of observing, but rather a radically different process 
through which reality unfolds.
Figure 1.2 Natural vs. Social Science: Key Observational Distinctions
Natural Science
Event
Observer
Participant
Event
Scientific
Method
Reflexive
Dynamic
Social Science

 
Microeconomic Perspectives 
19
The key point, then, is that reﬂ exivity is signiﬁ cant because it 
describes a situation in which misperceptions can be self-reinforced 
into reality. For this to occur, a strong interaction between the par-
ticipant and the event must exist to transform the misperception 
into reality: “What renders reﬂ exivity signiﬁ cant is that it occurs 
only intermittently. If it were present in all situations all the time, it 
would merely constitute a different way of looking at events and not 
a different way for events to evolve.”21
Implications of Reflexivity
For Soros, a Hungarian-born Jew whose family had avoided Nazi 
persecution through wily tactics such as name changing and secre-
tive movements, it was virtually impossible to believe that truth was 
knowable or even useful as a concept. The implications of reﬂ exiv-
ity on ﬁ nancial markets are quite profound, particularly with regard 
to the existence of an equilibrium price. Soros describes these 
implications in his own words quite succinctly:
Instead of a tendency towards some kind of theoretical equi-
librium, the participants’ views and actual state of affairs enter 
into a process of dynamic disequilibrium, which may be self-
reinforcing at first, moving both thinking and reality in a cer-
tain direction, but is bound to become unsustainable in the 
long run and engender a move in the opposite direction.22
In fact, his 1994 testimony to the House Banking Committee 
eloquently summarizes his theory of reﬂ exivity and how it can occa-
sionally rear its head in ﬁ nancial markets:
I must state at the outset that I am in fundamental disagree-
ment with the prevailing wisdom. The generally accepted 
theory is that markets tend towards equilibrium and on the 
whole discount the future correctly. I operate using a differ-
ent theory, according to which financial markets cannot pos-
sibly discount the future correctly because they do not merely 
discount the future, they help to shape it. In certain circum-
stances, financial markets can affect the so-called fundamentals 
which they are supposed to reflect. When that happens, mar-
kets enter into a state of dynamic disequilibrium and behave 

20 
Boombustology
quite differently than what would be considered normal by 
the theory of efficient markets. Such boom/bust sequences do 
not arise very often, but when they do, they can be very dis-
ruptive, precisely because they affect the fundamentals of the 
economy.23
Soros goes on to claim that ﬁ nancial extremes are characterized 
by two primary components: a prevailing trend that exists in real-
ity and a misconception relating to it. He often uses real estate as 
an example to illustrate this point. The prevailing trend in reality is 
that there is an increased willingness to lend and a corresponding 
rise in prices. The misconception relating to this trend is that the 
prices of real estate are independent of the willingness to lend.24 
Further, as more banks become willing to lend, and the number of 
buyers therefore rises, the prices of real estate rise—thereby mak-
ing the banks feel more secure (given higher collateral values) and 
driving more lending.
The Reluctant Recognition of Reflexivity
George Soros has used his theory of reﬂ exivity to make billions of 
dollars for his investors and himself. This does not imply, however, 
that he has been completely accurate in his predictions. Rather, 
Soros has been good at managing risk. At the very root of his phi-
losophy is an understanding that he does not know (actually, that 
he cannot know) anything with 100 percent certainty.
Soros has been glaringly wrong (or perhaps just very early) 
in some of his predictions. In his 1998 book, The Crisis of Global 
Capitalism, Soros boldly predicted “the imminent disintegration of 
the global capitalist system.”25 In 2001, he later admitted during a 
seminar in New York that he “got carried away” and that he now 
has “egg on his face.”26 Despite the bold (and at the time wrong) 
prediction about the implosion of capitalism, recent events have 
turned in favor of his arguments. In fact, his 2008 testimony to 
Congress captures the essence of his current thinking:
The salient feature of the current crisis is that it was not caused 
by some external shock like OPEC raising the price of oil or a 
particular country or financial institution defaulting. The crisis 
was generated by the financial system itself. This fact—that the 

 
Microeconomic Perspectives 
21
defect was inherent in the system—contradicts the prevailing 
theory, which holds that financial markets tend toward equi-
librium and that deviations from the equilibrium either occur 
in a random manner or are caused by some sudden external 
event to which markets have difficulty adjusting. The severity 
and amplitude of the crisis provides convincing evidence that 
there is something fundamentally wrong with this prevailing 
 theory . . . Usually markets correct their own mistakes, but occa-
sionally there is a misconception or misperception that finds a 
way to reinforce a trend that is already present in reality and by 
doing so reinforces itself. Such self-reinforcing processes may 
carry markets into far-from-equilibrium territory. Unless some-
thing happens to abort the reflexive interaction sooner, it may 
persist until the misconception becomes so glaring that it has 
to be recognized as such . . .27
The fact that the theory of reﬂ exivity has been so effective at 
explaining the most impactful events in ﬁ nancial markets (i.e., the 
extremes) has been the basis of its recent, albeit reluctant, recog-
nition by practitioners and academics. While it has yet to be fully-
accepted, the glaring failures of the efﬁ ciency arguments over the 
past 20 years have resulted in an increasing openness to alternatives. 
Simply put, the existing efﬁ ciency framework is not always accurate, 
and reﬂ exivity helps ﬁ ll in the holes when it fails. Stability is not 
ensured by simple supply and demand dynamics. Rather, there are 
times in asset markets when higher prices generate more demand 
(not more supply) and when lower prices generate more supply 
(not more demand). As noted by Soros above, these self- reinforcing 
processes can generate instability from within the system.28
Reconciling Efficiency and Reflexivity
By attempting to reconcile the seemingly incompatible approaches 
of the efﬁ ciency and reﬂ exivity lenses, this chapter concludes by 
suggesting a contingent approach to using the lenses. Even though 
Soros adamantly opposes the logic of efﬁ ciency, he does concede 
that markets usually correct themselves. Thus, the efﬁ ciency argu-
ment for a stable equilibrium that results in events tending toward 
it seems viable—most of the time. However, it also seems likely that 

22 
Boombustology
events that occur far from equilibrium or are reinforced beyond a 
certain distance from that equilibrium are unlikely to return to it.
Figure 1.3 attempts to capture these two distinct phases using 
the balls and hills logic utilized earlier in the chapter. In the ﬁ gure, 
one can notice that events transpiring in the efﬁ ciency band will 
tend toward an equilibrium point. The same is not true, however, 
for the balls that have entered the realm of far-from-equilibrium 
reﬂ exive developments. These balls are unlikely to stabilize in any 
speciﬁ c condition unless assisted by an external force.
Most of the time, efﬁ ciency logic works and deviations from 
equilibria tend to self-correct. However, there are instances in which 
reﬂ exive dynamics are able to overcome the self-correcting force 
and create self-fulﬁ lling extremes. The investment implications of 
this efﬁ ciency/reﬂ exivity duality are that Adam Smith’s invisible 
hand, which normally drives an appropriate price discovery proc-
ess, occasionally breaks down. It is precisely when such dynamics 
take over that extremes become increasingly likely.
Figure 1.3 Reconciling Efficiency and Reflexivity
Equilibrium
Efficiency
Reflexivity
Reflexivity

23
THE IMPACT OF DEBT AND DEFLATION 
ON ASSET MARKETS AND PRICES
It may sometimes be expedient for a man to heat the stove with his 
furniture. But he should not delude himself by believing that he has 
discovered a wonderful new method of heating his premises.
—Ludwig von Mises
The chapter makes a leap to macro thinking from the micro con-
siderations of the last chapter. Though not shocking, it seems that 
what makes sense for the individual may not always make sense for 
the group. Highlighting how this paradox of aggregation operates, 
Paul McCulley notes:
Anybody who’s ever been a spectator at a crowded ball game 
has witnessed the difference between microeconomics and 
macroeconomics: from a micro perspective, it is rational for 
each individual to stand up to get a better view; but from a 
macro perspective, each individual acting rationally will pro-
duce the irrational outcome of everybody standing, but nobody 
having a better view.1
In economic spheres, this fallacy of composition can be more 
extreme and have more dramatic impacts on society. Speciﬁ cally, 
Macroeconomic Perspectives
2
C H A P T E R

24 
Boombustology
analysis conducted at an individual unit of analysis may not apply 
to groups.2 Consider home ﬁ nance. Though it may be reasonable 
for an individual bank to believe that it can foreclose and sell the 
house for a value in excess of the mortgage amount, this conclu-
sion is very suspect when considering millions of homes simultane-
ously being sold. This latter case will crash the market for homes 
and result in signiﬁ cantly lower prices.
The underlying premise evaluated in this chapter is that debt 
and the ampliﬁ cation of debt by deﬂ ation can have deleterious 
impacts on individuals, companies, and in aggregate, markets. 
Before diving into the conditions under which these effects can 
snowball in dramatic fashion, we ﬁ rst review the mechanics of debt. 
More speciﬁ cally, understanding leverage and how it impacts equity 
values is essential to grasping how debt exacerbates ups and downs 
into booms and busts. After describing the mechanisms through 
which debt ampliﬁ es returns, the chapter turns to a somewhat less 
traditional perspective on the role of money and credit in the crea-
tion of booms and busts—Hyman Minsky’s Financial Instability 
Hypothesis. We then explore Irving Fisher’s debt-deﬂ ation theory, 
as well as the Austrian Business Cycle Theory and conclude the 
chapter by integrating these perspectives into a single macroeco-
nomic framework.
The Magnifying Power of Leverage
Suppose you purchased a house for $100 (a real steal!). Because 
you didn’t have all the money needed to buy the house, you decide 
to take out a loan for a portion of the purchase price. The amount 
you put down will be your equity in the home, and mortgage value 
will be your debt. Now let us consider two separate scenarios. The 
ﬁ rst, called “Happy Times,” is one in which the value of your newly 
purchased home rises by 10 percent. The second, “Sad Times,” is a 
situation in which the price of your newly purchased home falls by 
10 percent.
What happens to your investment in each of these scenarios? 
Table 2.1 summarizes the impact on your investment for a range of 
down payments under each case. Four rows are highlighted to dem-
onstrate the impact of debt: 10 percent down, 20 percent down, 
50 percent down, and 100 percent payment in full.

 
Macroeconomic Perspectives 
25
In the scenario in which you do not borrow any money and 
pay for your house with $100 (i.e., 100 percent down), your invest-
ment return in each case is equal to the change in the asset value 
(i.e., 10 percent in home value  10 percent in equity value). 
As the amount of debt utilized increases, however, the return on 
your invested capital is a multiple of the return. For instance, 
if you purchased your home with $50 down and a $50 mortgage, 
then a 10 percent move in the house price equated to a 20 percent 
move in your equity value. Likewise, with 20 percent down, a 10 
percent move in the house price equates to a 50 percent move in 
your equity value. In each of these cases, the return on your equity 
is equal to a multiple of the return on the house. More precisely, 
the equity return is equal to
Return of asset  (1 / % Down)
In sum, debt ampliﬁ es your returns—you make more money 
when asset values rise, and you lose more money when asset val-
ues fall. Given the powerful ampliﬁ cation feature of debt, it should 
come as no surprise that some of the most persuasive arguments 
explaining boom and bust cycles are based on debt and debt cycles.
Table 2.1 Debt’s Amplification Power
Initial 
Value
Initial
Happy Times
Sad Times
% down
Equity
Value
  Debt
Equity
 Return
Value
  Debt
Equity
  Return
$100
  0%
$0
$110
$100
$10
Infinite $90
$100
($10)
Infinite
$100
 10%
$10
$110
$90
$20
100%
$90
$90
0
(100%)
$100
 20%
$20
$110
$80
$30
 50%
$90
$80
$10
 (50%)
$100
 30%
$30
$110
$70
$40
 33%
$90
$70
$20
 (33%)
$100
 40%
$40
$110
$60
$50
 25%
$90
$60
$30
 (25%)
$100
 50%
$50
$110
$50
$60
 20%
$90
$50
$40
 (20%)
$100
 60%
$60
$110
$40
$70
 17%
$90
$40
$50
 (17%)
$100
 70%
$70
$110
$30
$80
 14%
$90
$30
$60
 (14%)
$100
 80%
$80
$110
$20
$90
 13%
$90
$20
$70
 (13%)
$100
 90%
$90
$110
$10
$100
 11%
$90
$10
$80
 (11%)
$100
100%
$100
$110
$0
$110
 10%
$90
$0
$90
 (10%)

26 
Boombustology
Collateral Rates and Debt Dynamics
To understand debt dynamics in a more granular way, let us look at 
three different families: the Safe Smiths, the Optimistic Osbornes, 
and the Carefree Carrolls.3 As you meet each of these families, pay 
attention to their risk proﬁ les and how each fares under Happy 
Times and Sad Times. Here are some facts that apply to all three 
families:
All houses cost $100
Each family earns $25 per year before taxes ($15 after taxes)
Each family has nonmortgage expenses of $10 per year
Money available for mortgage payments each year is there-
fore $5
All mortgages are obtained from Local Bank ABC, must be 
refinanced or paid off at the end of five years, and are avail-
able with the terms shown in Table 2.2 thanks to a govern-
ment program guaranteeing access to home purchase 
finance
The Safe Smiths are a conservative bunch. Mr. and Mrs. Smith 
both work and the family lives within its means. Like all other fami-
lies in the neighborhood, the Safe Smiths purchased a home this year 
for $100. Although they have savings in excess of $100, they decided 
to purchase the home with $40 down and a $60 mortgage. Because 
they put 40 percent down and their mortgage amount is less than 
$100, the rate that they obtained for their mortgage was 4 percent. 
Their yearly interest payments to the bank are therefore $2.40, and 
if they are interested in paying off their mortgage in 30 years, their 
•
•
•
•
•
Table 2.2 Local Bank ABC Loan Rates
Loan Amount
Down Payment
$100
$100 
 0%
7.00%
7.50%
10%
6.25%
6.75%
20%
5.50%
6.00%
30%
4.75%
5.25%
40%
4.00%
4.50%
50%
3.25%
3.75%

 
Macroeconomic Perspectives 
27
annual payment (i.e., principal and interest) is equal to $3.44. Given 
they have $5 available for mortgage payments, the Safe Smiths sleep 
well at night and are not worried about their budget.
The Optimistic Osbornes are a bit more aggressive. They believe 
the future is bright, and are willing to plan on a better tomorrow. 
They haven’t saved as much as the Safe Smiths, but have enough 
capital for a 20 percent down payment. Thus, they take out an $80 
mortgage and the bank gives them a mortgage rate of 5.5 percent. 
Their yearly interest payments to the bank are $4.40, and if they are 
interested in paying off their mortgage in 30 years, their monthly 
payment is equal to $5.45. Like all other families in the neighbor-
hood, the Optimistic Osbornes only have $5 available for mortgage 
payments, so they opt for an “interest only” mortgage and agree to 
pay the $4.40 per year. The family is optimistic that Mr. Osborne 
may get a promotion (with an accompanying increase in salary) 
or that the house will appreciate in the near future. Even if they 
cannot begin paying the full $5.45 per year, the Osborne family is 
conﬁ dent that they can reﬁ nance the house once it has appreciated 
and get a lower interest rate on their mortgage.
Finally, the Carefree Carrolls are an optimistic lot who live solely 
in the present. They don’t think about the future and believe tomor-
row is always better than today, that house prices always go up, and 
that budgeting is a worthless task. The Carefree Carrolls love to con-
sume and have not saved very much over the years. As a result, they 
have no money for a down payment and must seek $100 of ﬁ nanc-
ing. Thanks to government programs encouraging homeownership, 
they are able to get the mortgage at a rate of 7.5 percent, with a ﬂ ex-
ible payment schedule. For the ﬁ rst three years of ownership, they 
are allowed to pay what they are able and any unpaid interest will be 
added to the principal of the loan. Their yearly interest payments 
to the bank are $7.50, and if they are interested in paying off their 
mortgage in 30 years, their annual payment is equal to $8.39. Given 
they only have $5 available for mortgage payments, the bank has 
arranged to let the Carefree Carrolls pay $5 and let $2.50 be added 
to the balance of the mortgage at the end of the year. The family is 
ecstatic they’re able to buy their new home and, given the stories 
they’ve heard of people making money in real estate, are looking 
forward to real estate riches.
Table 2.3 summarizes the ﬁ nancial obligation structures for 
these three families.

28 
Boombustology
To see how each family does in Happy Times and Sad Times, look 
at their ﬁ nancial conditions at the end of year one. To simplify the 
analysis, let’s assume that each family pays the entire $5 to the bank 
in year one, meaning that the Safe Smiths pay $2.40 in interest and 
the remaining $2.60 as principal repayment to the bank. Likewise, 
the Optimistic Osbornes pay $4.40 in interest and $0.60 as principal. 
The Carefree Carrolls will pay $5 towards interest, and borrow an 
additional $2.50 to pay interest. Table 2.4 summarizes each family’s 
equity return after one year in both Happy Times and Sad Times.
Let us now consider two new scenarios, Very Happy Times and 
Very Sad Times, in which house prices rise and fall, respectively, by 
25 percent over ﬁ ve years. How do each of the families fare? Again, 
for simplicity, let’s assume that each family pays only interest for 
the ﬁ ve years and applies all saved money (i.e., annual savings  
$5 minus the interest payment) to principal at the end of the ﬁ ve 
years. Table 2.5 summarizes the resulting outcomes for the families 
in both Very Happy Times and Very Sad Times.
Given that each party has a mortgage balance at the end of the 
ﬁ ve years and must reﬁ nance the loan, let’s examine the how each 
family’s down payment (i.e., the equity value) changed as a percent-
age of the home value, and the new resulting interest rate.
For the Safe Smiths, neither Very Happy Times nor Very Sad 
Times greatly affect their reﬁ nancing terms. In Very Happy Times, 
they can reﬁ nance at a rate of 3.25 percent because their down pay-
ment is now effectively 50 percent. In very sad times, they can 
reﬁ nance for 4.75 percent with their yearly interest payment due as 
$2.23, still comfortably below their $5 budget.
Table 2.3 Comparing the Safe Smiths, Optimistic Osbornes, and 
Carefree Carrolls
Safe Smiths
Optimistic Osbornes
Carefree Carrolls
Purchase Price
$100
$100
$100
Down Payment
$40
$20
$0
Mortgage
$60
$80
$100
Interest Rate
4.0%
5.5%
7.5%
Payments
Interest
$2.40
$4.40
$7.50
Principal  Interest
$3.44
$5.45
$8.39

 
Macroeconomic Perspectives 
29
The Optimistic Osbornes, however, are greatly affected by the 
difference between Very Happy Times and Very Sad Times. In Very 
Happy Times, they’re able to reﬁ nance to 4.75 percent (because 
their down payment is effectively 38 percent), leaving them with an 
interest payment of $3.88 and interest  principal payment scheme 
Table 2.4 Happy Times and Sad Times
Safe Smiths
Optimistic Osbornes
Carefree Carrolls
Happy Times
House Value
$110.00
$110.00
$110.00
Mortgage
$57.40
$79.60
$102.50
Equity Value
$52.60
$30.40
$7.50
Original Equity
$40
$20
$0
Return
31.5%
52.0%
infinite
Sad Times
House Value
$90.00
$90.00
$90.00
Mortgage
$57.40
$79.60
$102.50
Equity Value
$32.60
$10.40
($12.50)
Original Equity
$40
$20
$0
Return
18.5%
48.0%
infinite
Table 2.5 Very Happy Times and Very Sad Times
Safe Smiths
Optimistic Osbornes
Carefree Carrolls
Very Happy Times
House Value
$125.00
$125.00
$125.00
Mortgage
$47.00
$77.00
$112.50
Equity Value
$78.00
$48.00
$12.50
Original Equity
$40
$20
$0
Return
95.0%
140.0%
infinite
Very Sad Times
House Value
$75.00
$75.00
$75.00
Mortgage
$47.00
$77.00
$112.50
Equity Value
$28.00
($2.00)
($37.50)
Original Equity
$40
$20
$0
Return
30.0%
110.0%
infinite

30 
Boombustology
of $4.80 for a 30-year payoff (both of which are within their $5 
budget). In Very Sad Times, however, they must reﬁ nance at a rate 
of 7 percent, leaving them with interest payments of $5.39—meaning 
they must borrow more each year simply to make the payments.
For the Carefree Carrolls, Very Happy Times allow them to 
continue their lives effectively “as is.” They’re able to reﬁ nance at a 
lower rate of 6.75 percent, but due to the extra money they’ve bor-
rowed over the years, their yearly interest payment ($7.59) remains 
in excess of their $5 budget. Very Sad Times, however, are very sad 
indeed for the Carefree Carrolls. Because they have a loan amount 
that is far in excess of the house’s value, the bank is not willing to 
reﬁ nance the property and instead forecloses.
As these examples have shown, the relationship between debt, 
collateral (i.e., down payment or equity amount), and asset prices 
has the potential to create a toxic cocktail that can greatly improve 
or deteriorate one’s ﬁ nancial condition quite rapidly. The next sec-
tion turns to a theory—the Financial Instability Hypothesis—that 
suggests these relationships result in a cyclical ﬂ ow of credit that 
results in continuous ﬁ nancial instability.
Interest Rates and Asset Prices: Affordability-Based Valuation
Though it may seem obvious that lower interest rates make assets such as 
homes more affordable, they also have the potential to inﬂ ate asset prices. 
Consider the following example, in which a house is originally purchased for 
$100, when the cost of money (i.e., the interest rate) was 5 percent. For ease 
of calculation, let’s assume that the house was purchased with 100 percent 
ﬁ nancing and no money down.
In this case, the buyer’s annual payments in interest would be equal to 
$100  5 percent or $5. Now let us suppose that interest rates fall by 1 percent. 
One impact may be that a buyer might again pay $100 and have an annual 
carrying cost of $4, but another very possible impact is that the buyer’s budget 
of $5 is ﬁ xed, and he’s willing to now pay up to $5/4% or $125 for the home. 
Similarly, if interest rates rise by 1 percent, the buyer might be willing to pay 
$100 and have a higher carrying cost of $6 per year—or perhaps the buyer 
retains the $5 budget and is willing to pay only $5/6% or $83.
Clearly, interest rates can meaningfully affect asset valuations, particularly 
when buyers may be budget constrained.

 
Macroeconomic Perspectives 
31
Hyman Minsky’s Financial Instability Hypothesis
Hyman Minsky was an American economist and professor of eco-
nomics at Washington University in St. Louis, Missouri. A gradu-
ate of the University of Chicago and Harvard University (where 
he studied under Joseph Schumpeter and Wassily Leontief), 
Minsky was a relatively unacknowledged economist until after his 
death in 1996. “With long, wild, white hair, Minsky was closer to 
counterculture than to mainstream economics.”4 Although his ini-
tial research was focused on poverty, he was taken by a seemingly 
simple question: Could the Great Depression happen again?5 It 
was from this line of research that Minsky delved into the topic 
of ﬁ nancial crises and debt dynamics preceding, during, and sub-
sequent to them. The outcome of this effort was the Financial 
Instability Hypothesis.
Recently, Minsky’s theories have found a home among prac-
ticing ﬁ nanciers. In fact, UBS held a conference call in October 
2009 titled “Minsky for Beginners” for their institutional clients. 
Interest Rates and Corporate Investing
Corporations regularly make decisions regarding the projects in which to 
invest. As part of their decision-making processes, most businesses attempt 
to understand the ﬁ nancial returns likely to be generated by investing in the 
project. A key input in this analysis is the cost of funding, a variable directly 
inﬂ uenced by interest rates. All else being equal, corporations will have many 
more proﬁ table and ﬁ nancially worthwhile projects to take on when interest 
rates are lower than when they are higher.
Thus, interest rates affect the likelihood of investments taking place and 
lower interest rates make lower-return projects viable. The impact of rising 
rates, once projects are under way, however, can have disruptive impacts on 
many elements of a corporation, and in aggregate, on industries in which simi-
lar decision-making processes may exist.
Consider a steel mill that decides a $1 million investment in expansion 
makes sense because it generates a 10 percent return (based on current steel 
prices, etc.) while its cost of capital is 8 percent. However, if interest rates rise 
and the company’s cost of capital is now 11 percent, the project is no longer 
proﬁ table. In short, higher interest rates raise the hurdle for corporate invest-
ment decisions.

32 
Boombustology
During the call, George Magnus, former UBS chief economist, 
eloquently summarized the Financial Instability Hypothesis:
Minsky’s big contribution was the proposition that after long 
periods of economic stability, endogenous destabilizing forces 
in the economy begin to develop, forces that eventually lead to 
financial instability . . . [H]e argued that this happens through 
the progressively more interesting but then progressively more 
dangerous use of leverage.6
The roots of this internally produced instability, Minsky argues, 
are found in the three primary forms of debt structures that exist in 
a capitalist society, and their relative predominance in the system at 
various points in time. His three distinct income-debt relationships 
were labeled according to their respective ability (or inability) to 
pay interest and principal from normal cash ﬂ ows as hedge, specu-
lative, and Ponzi.7
Hedge ﬁ nancing takes place when one is able to pay back both 
the interest owed as well as the principal due via normal cash ﬂ ows. 
This approach is not particularly risky and is not subject to chang-
ing market conditions. The Safe Smiths in our preceding examples 
can be classiﬁ ed as hedge ﬁ nanciers.
Speculative ﬁ nancing is a bit riskier because it is an approach 
in which interest expenses are paid, but the principal must be reﬁ -
nanced upon maturity. According to Minsky, “the speculation is that 
reﬁ nancing will be available when needed.”8 Greater risk is borne 
as the availability of debt for reﬁ nancing may be available at mate-
rially different prices than originally envisioned. The Optimistic 
Osbornes began as speculative ﬁ nanciers.
Finally, Ponzi ﬁ nancing takes place when one is dependent on 
the availability of additional debt in order to pay interest on existing 
debt. Given the inability to pay interest expense out of cash ﬂ ows, 
the possibility of principal paydown is nonexistent in Ponzi ﬁ nanc-
ing structures. This structure is based on an operating assumption 
that values will continually rise, allowing for easier and more advan-
tageous reﬁ nancing terms. The Carefree Carrolls are Ponzi ﬁ nan-
ciers. Table 2.6 summarizes these three ﬁ nancing structures.
The Financial Instability Hypothesis that Minsky proposes 
is based on a shift in the mix of ﬁ nancing structures present in a 
society. In a working paper presented at Bard College, Minsky 

 
Macroeconomic Perspectives 
33
 eloquently summarized his theory, utilizing the language of equilib-
rium presented in the prior chapter:
It can be shown that if hedge financing dominates, then the 
economy may well be an equilibrium-seeking and -containing 
system. In contrast, the greater the weight of Ponzi finance, the 
greater the likelihood that the economy is a deviation-amplifying 
system.9
Shifting economic conditions further complicate the distinc-
tions of these ﬁ nancing structures, as hedge units could become 
speculative units or Ponzi units, and speculative units may well turn 
into Ponzi units in environments of degrading proﬁ tability.
Earlier, we observed a shift in the type of ﬁ nancing structure 
utilized by the Optimistic Osbornes depending on the state of asset 
prices. In Very Happy Times, the Optimistic Osbornes migrated 
from speculative ﬁ nanciers to hedge ﬁ nanciers. However, in Very 
Sad Times, they morphed from speculative to Ponzi ﬁ nanciers.
Minsky’s argument about constant instability is straightforward: 
“Over a protracted period of good times, capitalist economies tend 
to move from a ﬁ nancial structure dominated by hedge ﬁ nance 
units to a structure in which there is a large weight of units engaged 
in speculative and Ponzi ﬁ nance.”10 Thus, in a self-fulﬁ lling, reﬂ ex-
ive manner, ﬁ nancing units get more and more aggressive as the 
lack of failure justiﬁ es this tendency. Eventually, however, the weight 
becomes unbearable and the structure implodes. This procyclical 
tendency of credit to grow in riskiness during good times is very 
destabilizing, and something I call the Minsky Migration.
McCulley eloquently summarizes Minsky’s underlying point: 
“Put differently, stability can never be a destination, only a journey 
to instability.”11 McCulley coined the term the “Minsky Moment,” 
Table 2.6 Minsky’s Debt Descriptions
Hedge
Speculative
Ponzi
Cash Flow Adequate 
to Pay Interest?
Yes
Yes
No, interest must be paid 
for with new debt
Cash Flow Adequate 
to Pay Principal?
Yes
No, principal must be 
refinanced with new debt
No, principal must be 
refinanced with new debt

34 
Boombustology
representing that moment in time when the credit structure 
switches from getting more aggressive to less aggressive. After the 
Minsky Migration crosses the Minsky Moment, bad things happen. 
Speculative and Ponzi units begin to implode, and hedge units 
become vulnerable as the entire economy wobbles. Asset prices 
plunge as those units unable to obtain reﬁ nancing are forced to sell 
assets. This dynamic, which causes broad and great pain in an econ-
omy, is known as debt deﬂ ation.
Debt Deflation and Asset Prices
Irving Fisher12 is most known for his unfortunately timed statement 
in 1929, days before the stock market crash, that “stock prices have 
reached what looks like a permanently high plateau.” His insistence 
immediately after the crash and up until the economic contraction 
had acquired signiﬁ cant momentum that stock prices were destined 
to go higher, combined with the failure of a ﬁ rm he started, led 
most people to dismiss him and his ideas entirely. His debt-deﬂ ation 
theory, in which he argued that deﬂ ation increased the real value of 
debts, did not receive serious attention until well after his death.
Although Fisher was a devout believer in general equilibrium 
theory prior to the Great Depression, he quickly rejected the idea of 
a stable equilibrium by 1933, noting that “there may be an equilib-
rium which, though stable, is so delicately poised that, after depar-
ture from it beyond certain limits, instability ensues, just as, at ﬁ rst, a 
stick may bend under strain, ready all the time to bend back, until a 
certain point is reached, when it breaks.”13 In fact, Fisher stated that 
he believed the concept of equilibrium to be “absurd” and that “at 
most times there must be over- or under-production, over- or under-
consumption, over- or under-spending, over- or under-saving, over- or 
under-investment, and over- or under- everything else.”14
Once the Great Depression was in full force, Fisher developed a 
cycle theory of booms and busts: the debt-deﬂ ation theory of great 
depressions. Embodied in his book Booms and Depressions and suc-
cinctly summarized in a 1933 Econometrica journal article, the theory 
is based on the premise that overindebtedness and deﬂ ation are a 
toxic combination, regardless of other factors that may be present. 
Fisher admitted that overinvestment, overconﬁ dence, and over-
speculation were important considerations, but further noted that 

 
Macroeconomic Perspectives 
35
“they would have far less serious results were they not conducted 
with borrowed money.”15
At the root of the debt-deﬂ ation theory is an understanding that 
falling prices effectively increase the real value of debts, further bur-
dening already stressed borrowers like the Osbornes and the Carrolls. 
This process usually results in forced and  uneconomic selling of assets 
by overindebted companies and individuals, which results in further 
falling prices that results in an effective increase in real debt. Fisher 
summarizes the results of this process: “when overindebtedness is so 
great as to depress prices faster than liquidation, the mass effort to 
get out of debt sinks us more deeply into debt.”16
Many scholars today argue that the twentieth century had expe-
rienced two serious bouts of debt deﬂ ation: the Great Depression 
and Japan’s Lost Decade(s). Because data is signiﬁ cantly more 
available for the Japan case, recent (and ongoing) research on the 
Japan case has proven additive. In particular, Richard Koo’s for-
mulation of a two-stage business cycle is worth considering. In the 
normal course, notes Koo, businesses focus on proﬁ t maximization 
as is suggested by traditional economic theories. Following a highly 
leveraged boom, however, the power of debt-deﬂ ation dynamics 
drives companies to focus on deleveraging—even if at the expense 
of proﬁ t maximization. The result is a lack of demand for credit, 
and, as he observed in Japan, constant deleveraging despite interest 
rates of close to 0 percent.17 This part of the business cycle is one 
that Koo labels a “balance sheet” recession.
The debt-deﬂ ation theory to some extent mixes the dynamics 
of leverage with reﬂ exive tendencies. That is, selling begets more 
selling, and the self-fulﬁ lling fear of lower prices is ampliﬁ ed by lev-
erage. Debt-deﬂ ation theories emphasize what occurs after a bust—
inadequate demand driving deﬂ ation, which becomes particularly 
toxic when compounded with debt. The next section describes 
the Austrian business cycle theory, a similar theory (different in its 
emphasis on events prior to the bust) suggesting that overinvest-
ment and excess capacity create the bust.
The Austrian Business Cycle Theory
The Austrian School of Economics18 uses the banking function of 
connecting savers with borrowers as the basis upon which it builds 
a theory of boom and bust cycles. At its root, the theory posits 

36 
Boombustology
that excessive credit growth (driven by government intervention 
via interest rate policies, etc.) is the root of speculative booms and 
busts by generating unsustainable growth. The underlying belief is 
that “there is an economic and moral difference between legitimate 
ownership that comes from deferred consumption and premature 
ownership that is subsidized by the monetary system.”19
The Austrian business cycle theory is similar in many respects 
to Minsky’s ﬁ nancial instability hypothesis. According to the theory, 
artiﬁ cially low interest rates result in bad investments and over-
consumption, creating excess capacity and motivating businesses 
Fractional Reserve Banking and Money Creation
Banking institutions serve many roles, the most important of which is the deploy-
ment of funds from savings into productive investments. To do this, many banks 
collect deposits from individuals and institutions (the savers), before lending 
those same funds on to other individuals and institutions (the borrowers).
Because savers may demand their money back from a bank at any time, 
banks need to keep cash on hand to meet this potential need. If the banks kept 
$100 on reserve for every $100 deposited with them, there would be no excess 
capital to lend out to the borrowers. Further, such a full-reserve approach would 
be inefﬁ cient in that very few savers ask for their capital to be returned in a short 
time. Fractional-reserve banking is a solution to these problems and is the domi-
nant form of banking practiced today. In it, banks keep only a fraction of deposits 
on reserve and also maintain the commitment to meet the demands of any saver 
requesting a return of his capital. This process expands the supply of money in 
the system, primarily by allowing deposited capital to multiply.
To understand how money is created, let’s use a simple example in which 
$1000 is deposited into Bank 1 and the mandated reserve requirement is 
10 percent. This means that Bank 1 will keep $100 on reserve and will lend out 
$900. But that $900 is going to end up in other banks. Those other banks will 
keep $90 on reserve and lend out $810 . . . which ends up in other banks. If 
we assume this process stops after 10 cycles (it need not), then approximately 
$6500 will exist in bank deposits. After 25 cycles, the aggregate deposits will be 
more than $9250. Ultimately, total deposits will reach $10,000, or 10 times the 
initial deposit. To generalize, simple math will demonstrate that the money mul-
tiplier is exactly [1 / (Reserve Requirement)].Thus, if the reserve requirement 
is 25 percent, then total deposits will eventually reach 4 the initial deposit or 
$4000. Similarly, a 50 percent reserve requirement will result in 2 the initial 
deposit or $2000. The accompanying ﬁ gure graphically demonstrates this pro-
cess of money multiplication and how it varies by reserve requirement.

 
Macroeconomic Perspectives 
37
Money Multiplication via Fractional Reserve Banking
$10,000
$8,000
$6,000
$4,000
$2,000
$0
10% Reserve
25% Reserve
50% Reserve
The use of fractional reserve banking creates a meaningful vulnerability 
for banks—the risk that many savers simultaneously may ask for their capital. 
Although in practice this happens quite rarely, a severe shock to conﬁ dence 
can result in bank runs in which the amount of money being demanded by 
savers exceeds the reserves held by the bank. For this reason, many govern-
ments have created a deposit insurance scheme, hoping to create the conﬁ -
dence needed to avoid bank runs.
Note: For a more complete description of the money-creation process via fractional 
reserve banking, the reader is encouraged to consult Modern Money Mechanics: A 
Workbook on Bank Reserves and Deposit Expansion published by the Federal Reserve 
Bank of Chicago. The publication was originally authored by Dorothy M. Nichols in 1961 
and was later revised and updated by Anne Marie Gonczy in 1992.
and individuals to under-save. Because central banks monopolize 
money creation (see box on Fractional Reserve Banking and Money 
Creation) and therefore affect the credit cycle, Austrian economists 
suggest that central banks lie at the origin of ﬁ nancial bubbles.
Underlying Beliefs: Macroeconomics and Capital Structure
The Austrian school has three underlying beliefs that are particu-
larly pertinent to our discussion of booms and busts: (1) equil-
brium is a nonsensical construct, (2) aggregation is not possible, 
and (3) interest rates help determine preferences for consumption 

38 
Boombustology
today vs. consumption in the future.20 To begin, they reject the idea 
of equilibrium. Noble-prize winning Austrian economist Friedrich 
Hayek succinctly captured the perspective that equilibrium is the 
exception by stating “before we can even ask how things might go 
wrong, we must ﬁ rst explain how they could ever go right.”21
Another Austrian tenet is that aggregates are nonsensical con-
structs because individuals have unique tastes and time horizons 
that cannot be summed into singular demand curves. Llewellyn 
Rockwell, founder of the Ludwig von Mises Institute, eloquently 
captures the spirit of this second point by noting that “every actor 
in the economy has a different set of values and preferences, differ-
ent needs and desires, and different time schedules for the goals he 
intends to reach.”22
Though there are many ways of interpreting this belief, the 
most popularized manner23 of presenting the heterogeneity of 
capital decisions (the most relevant for our boom–bust focus) is 
the stages of production triangle, also known as the Hayekian trian-
gle in honor of Hayek. Figure 2.1 presents a simpliﬁ ed version of it 
with ﬁ ve production stages.
Examples of production stages that might be early (i.e., stage 
1) include basic research and development and other capital allo-
cation decisions that might be years from impacting a ﬁ rm’s bot-
tom line. These earlier stages are truly “investment” stages in which 
today’s proﬁ ts are foregone in return for the expectation of future 
proﬁ ts. Likewise, examples of late-stage production functions 
include inventory and working capital management. These are pro-
duction functions that are temporally proximate to consumption.
Because the dynamics that affect capital allocation decisions 
in early stages differ from the dynamics affecting later stages, 
Austrians believe that a simple aggregation is inappropriate. The 
Figure 2.1 The Hayekian Triangle and Stages of Production
Consumption
Production Stages
1
2
3
4
5

 
Macroeconomic Perspectives 
39
slope of the triangle’s hypotenuse can be thought of as an indicator 
of the interest rate. Steep triangles imply high interest rates, and a 
corresponding minimization of long-run (i.e., stage 1) investments. 
Flat triangles imply low interest rates with corresponding emphasis 
on long-run investments. In many ways, the slope can be thought 
of as a proxy for the time value of money and therefore the hurdle 
rate for investment decisions.
The third Austrian belief of relevance to us is that consump-
tion and investment trade off against each other (unlike the tradi-
tional economic interpretation that economic output is the result 
of consumption plus investment plus government spending plus 
net exports). Thus, investment is deﬁ ned as foregone consump-
tion, and likewise, consumption is foregone investment. Given that 
this consumption vs. investment framework necessitates a trade-off 
between the suppliers of funds and the demanders of funds, we are 
effectively talking about the market for money. The clearing price 
of the money is the interest rate.
Malinvestment and Overconsumption: Central Banks and Money Creation
Market-clearing interest rates, note the Austrians, allow for the opti-
mal allocation of resources between consumption and investment. 
The following diagram summarizes how the interest rate (i.e., the 
price of money that allows the supply of saving and the demand 
for investment capital to be matched) drives the trade-off on the 
consumption/investment frontier. The various stages of production 
then align with the consumption for an appropriate allocation of 
corporate resources. Figure 2.2 summarizes these relationships.
The involvement of central banks in setting the price of money 
is confusing and causes problems, assert the Austrians. Central 
banks in democratic capitalist societies24 are motivated to keep inter-
est rates below their appropriate level, and the result on  investment 
decisions is an inappropriate increase in long-run investments. By 
long-run, we are describing capital investments that do not provide 
a payback for a signiﬁ cant period of time. Research and develop-
ment, plant expansions, and the like would be good examples of 
long-run investments. Increasing a sales force might be considered 
a short-run investment.
From the perspective of the corporate entity making invest-
ment decisions, it appears that the savings are greater than they in 

40 
Boombustology
fact are. This distorted perspective arises due to the primary mech-
anism through which central banks manipulate interest rates—
 management of the money supply. To reduce interest rates, central 
banks can “manufacture” money by either lowering the interest rate 
by mandate or lowering required reserve ratios.
Likewise, inappropriately low interest rates cause consumption 
to be higher than would be the case with an appropriate rate. From 
the perspective of the saver, it appears that there is less demand for 
capital than is actually the case. With a lower opportunity cost 
for consuming, entities choose to consume at a level above one that 
would naturally occur at an appropriate interest rate. The result of 
this higher consumption is that corporate investment decisions are 
shifted increasingly toward short-run production stages. Because 
demand is robust, inventories are built, and so on. Figure 2.3 sum-
marizes how inappropriately low rates result in both malinvestment 
(top half) and overconsumption (bottom half).25
Eventually, bad investments and/or overconsumption must 
be addressed and an overly “consumed” society is found with too 
much debt (due to the low cost of money) and a need to increase 
savings. At this point, the bust portion of the cycle begins as sav-
ings increase (either via actual savings or via debt repayment), 
consumption slows, and proﬁ t maximization is deemed subservi-
ent to balance sheet repair typical of Koo’s balance sheet reces-
sions.26 Signiﬁ cant excess capacity from overinvestment results in 
Figure 2.2 How Interest Rates Drive Investment and Consumption Decisions
Interest Rate
Savings
Investment
Investment
THE MONEY
MARKET
Consumption
Production Stages
1
2
3
4
5

 
Macroeconomic Perspectives 
41
Production Stages
1
2
3
4
5
Interest Rate
Savings
Investment
Consumption
Investment
1
2
3
4
5
Malinvestment
Market clearing rate drives appropriate consumption
and investment
Inappropriately low rate creates perception of higher
supply of savings and increases investments
Malinvestment Driven by an Inappropriately
Low Interest Rate
Production Stages
1
2
3
4
5
Interest Rate
Consumption
Investment
Overconsumption
Market clearing rate drives appropriate consumption
and investment
Inappropriately low rate creates perception of lower
demand for investments and increases consumption
Overconsumption Driven by Inappropriately
Low Interest Rates
2
3
4
5
Figure 2.3 Overconsumption and Overinvestment Driven by Inappropriately Low Interest Rates
 deﬂ ationary forces, which increases the real value of debt. Austrians 
believe that this process must be free to run its course, independ-
ent of bailouts and other government intervention, in order to 
purge the system.
As is clear from the above diagrams and descriptions of the 
relationships that result in malinvestment and overconsumption, 

42 
Boombustology
Austrians believe the root cause of the boom–bust cycle is inap-
propriately low interest rates. One mechanism through which cen-
tral banks such as the Federal Reserve control interest rates is via 
deposits held at their member banks. So, the Federal Reserve cre-
ates money and then deposits it into banks. Through the money 
multiplier effect described above, these deposits are multiplied as 
banks lend capital to those seeking it. Simple supply and demand 
dynamics (i.e., more supply) drive the cost of money (i.e., the inter-
est rate) down as a result of the money-creation process. The unlim-
ited capability of the Federal Reserve’s “printing press,” combined 
with the multiplicative power of fractional reserve banking, enables 
the Fed to effectively set short-term interest rates.27
Austrians note the inherent contradiction of economists who 
claim the “market knows best” working at the Fed. In many ways, 
the Federal Reserve operates as a central planning organization 
more typically found in communist/socialist societies.28 Austrians 
believe knowledge is inherently difﬁ cult to obtain (not unlike 
Soros’s belief regarding social science) and that any intervention 
into markets is inherently distortive. This belief regarding the U.S. 
central bank is perhaps best captured by U.S. congressman and 
2008 presidential candidate Ron Paul, who notes: “After decades of 
experience in grappling with Fed ofﬁ cials in committee meetings 
and of lunches and private discussions with Fed chairmen, a life-
time of reading serious economic literature, and a profound aware-
ness of the dangers to liberty in our time, I know there is absolutely 
no hope for the Fed to conduct responsible monetary policy.”29
 Integrating the Macro Lenses
Although some of the lenses presented in this Chapter are not fully-
accepted by economists, they provide powerful tools through which 
to recognize, evaluate, and understand booms and busts. Further, 
despite their seemingly disparate foci, the Austrian cycle, Financial 
Instability Hypothesis, and debt-deﬂ ation theory can be integrated 
into one coherent theoretical construct.
Figure 2.4 notes the interaction of these components into an 
integrated macroeconomic lens for the evaluation of ﬁ nancial 
extremes. As shown by the circular ﬂ ow, the cyclical nature of debt 
is at the heart of the framework, with debt and its magnifying power 
as the primary drivers of the cycle.

 
Macroeconomic Perspectives 
43
Figure 2.4 Credit Cycles Drive Constant Instability
Increasing use of Ponzi
and speculative finance
Malinvestment and
overconsumption
Minsky
Moment
Monetary
Stimulus
Debt
Deflation
Austrian
Cycle
Minsky
Migration
Profit maximization
secondary to balance
sheet repair
Balance sheet
recession ensues
Money creation;
inappropriately low
interest rates
As we turn to the next chapter, the focus of our lens-building 
efforts turns to psychology and the cognitive biases that often affect 
human decision-making processes.


45
HOMO ECONOMICUS MEETS HOMO SAPIENS
Investing is not a game where the guy with the 160 IQ beats the guy 
with the 130 IQ . . . Once you have ordinary intelligence, what you 
need is the temperament to control the urges that get other people 
into trouble in investing.
—Warren Buffett
The third discipline through which we evaluate ﬁ nancial booms 
and busts is psychology. We can gain a fresh perspective by focusing 
on actual, rather than theoretical, human behavior. One of the key 
underlying assumptions of most economic lenses is that humans are 
rational individuals. Although the term rational is one that might be 
interpreted in many ways, it generally refers to proﬁ t-maximizing, 
self-interested, and optimized decision making. According to such 
“rational choice” logic, humans accurately weigh costs and beneﬁ ts 
to make the most economically rewarding decisions.
The framework of rational choice and rational action theories 
has had a dominating inﬂ uence over most of the social sciences in 
recent years, stemming in large part from the success it achieved 
in inﬂ uencing the economics discipline. According to John Scott 
at the University of Essex, “what distinguishes rational choice the-
ory is that it denies the existence of any kinds of actions other than 
the purely rational and calculative.”1 In fact, rational choice logic 
The Psychology Lens
3
C H A P T E R

46 
Boombustology
goes further to describe individual preferences in terms of utility 
 functions—functions that are transitive (i.e., if A is preferred to B 
and B is preferred to C, then A is preferred to C), complete (i.e., 
for any choice between options X and Y, an individual will either 
prefer X, prefer Y, or be indifferent between the two), and invari-
able (if L is preferred to M, then M is not preferred to L).2
To illustrate completeness, consider the choices made by a 
woman named Sara. If Sara is presented a choice between apples 
and oranges, she will choose an apple, an orange, or be happy with 
either. She will not answer, as a three-year-old might, with “I want 
strawberries.” Suppose that Sara chooses the orange. But before she 
is able to peel the orange, she’s given the option of strawberries. 
She can now choose the orange, the strawberries, or be indifferent 
between the two. She chooses the strawberries.
Sara has now revealed her preferences to us in a manner that 
means strawberries are preferred to oranges, and oranges are pre-
ferred to apples. According to rational choice theory, Sara has also 
revealed that strawberries are preferred to apples (even though 
she did not explicitly make such a choice). From an academic 
research perspective, these simplifying assumptions of complete-
ness and transitivity provide a robust foundation for the applica-
tion of scientiﬁ c methods, regardless of their accuracy.3 By enabling 
the modeling of human choice into equations and formulas, these 
assumptions enable physics-like “rigor.”
It is only relatively recently that psychologists have demonstrated 
that humans may not be “rational” in the sense described above. In 
fact, according to one behavioral perspective, it seems that “human 
beings are motivated by cognitive biases of which they are largely 
unaware (a true invisible hand if ever there was one).”4 Through 
hundreds of empirical studies, psychologists have found that people 
often make suboptimal decisions for a variety of reasons, including 
incomplete accounting of costs and beneﬁ ts, partial risk understand-
ing, and ﬂ awed assumptions regarding the probabilities of various 
outcomes. As psychologists and economists began to share ideas, a 
burgeoning new ﬁ eld of study was born: behavioral economics.
If ever an entire discipline and ﬁ eld can be traced back to the 
pioneering work of one or two people, then behavioral economics 
provides a great example. Princeton professor Daniel Kahneman and 
the late Amos Tversky are the original pioneers of research that has 
now become known as behavioral economics. In 2003, addressing 

 
The Psychology Lens 
47
the American Economic Association, Kahneman reﬂ ected on the 
original confusion that motivated his research:
My first exposure to the psychological aspects of economics was 
in a report that Bruno Fey wrote on that subject in the early 
1970s. Its first or second sentence stated that the agent of eco-
nomic theory was rational and selfish, and that his tastes did not 
change. I found this list quite startling, because I had been pro-
fessionally trained as a psychologist not to believe a word of it.5
This chapter uses ﬁ ndings from recent research in this new ﬁ eld 
to demonstrate that we are all plagued by predictable and consist-
ent biases that affect our decision making in a manner that directly 
conﬂ icts with our supposed rationality. In the study of booms and 
busts, it is essential to understand why people behave the way they 
do. Some of the research ﬁ ndings presented in this chapter helps 
us understand why irrationality may be the norm, rather than the 
exception, making booms and busts more likely than stability. This 
chapter connects the dots between the observation of booms and 
busts and the individual actors that create them.
The Study of Irrationality Is Born
Take a moment to complete the test shown in Table 3.1, as origi-
nally presented by J. Edward Russo and Paul Shoemaker in Winning 
Decisions: Getting it Right the First Time.6 For each question, write your 
best estimate of the correct answer in column marked “Estimate.”
Upon completion of this exercise, go back and use the next two 
columns to place a range around your point estimate. Don’t modify 
your original estimate. Try to make the range as narrow as possible, 
but wide enough that you have 90 percent conﬁ dence that the cor-
rect answer lies within the range. To truly appreciate the value of 
this chapter, complete the exercise before proceeding any further.
Table 3.2 provides the correct answers. Check and see how many 
of the answers lie within the ranges you provided. Use the “?” col-
umn to mark an “X” for those you missed and a “✓” for those you 
got correct. Count the number of ✓s. Is it less than 9? A number of 
less than 9 indicates overconﬁ dence, as the instruction was to state a 
range within which you believed with 90 percent conﬁ dence that the 
answer lay. This means you should be correct 9 times out of 10.

48 
Boombustology
Table 3.1 A Simple Knowledge Test
Question
Estimate
?
 1.  What is the weight of an empty Airbus A340–600? 
(kg or tons)
 2.  In what year did John Steinbeck win the Nobel Prize 
for Literature?
 3.  What is the distance from the Earth to the Moon? 
(km or miles)
 4.  What is the air distance from Madrid to Baghdad? 
(km or miles)
 5.  In what year was the construction of the Roman 
Colosseum completed?
 6.  What is the height of the Aswan High Dam? 
(meters or feet)
 7.  In what year did Magellan’s crew complete the first 
naval circumnavigation of the globe?
 8.  In what year was Mohandas K. 
Gandhi born?
 9.  What is the surface area of the Mediterranean Sea? 
(square km or miles)
10.  What is the gestation period of the great blue whale? 
(days)
Source: From Winning Decisions by J. Edward Russo and Paul J.H. Schoemaker, copyright© 2002 by J. Edward 
Russo and Paul J.H. Schoemaker. Used with permission of Doubleday, a division of Random House, Inc.
Although many might argue that the exact questions are some-
what arbitrary and therefore only test random knowledge, the test 
has proven robust as a test of metaknowledge7 and overconﬁ dence. 
As noted by Russo and Shoemaker,
Of the more than two thousand American, Asian and European 
managers to whom we have given a ten-question quiz like this 
one, less than 1 percent met the challenge. Most fail to be even 
in their range (not the point estimate) for four to seven ques-
tions out of ten.8
Few people are able to do well at this test. I have personally 
given this test to hundreds of undergraduates, MBA students, man-
agers, colleagues, and others both inside and outside the United 
States. Most score between 3 and 6 correct answers. Although this 
may seem to be aberrational, it is actually quite reﬂ ective of a consist-
ently biased human decision-making process. Humans appear to be 

 
The Psychology Lens 
49
routinely overconﬁ dent and unaware of their own knowledge limita-
tions. As you might imagine, the inability to estimate accurately and 
other such behavioral biases throws quite a wrench into the study of 
“rational” individuals and their behavior during booms and busts. In 
addition to exploring how we make decisions, the rest of the chapter 
explores why we consistently produce less-than-optimal decisions.
Heuristics Gone Wild: How Rules of Thumb Lead Us Astray
Beginning in the early 1970s, Amos Tversky and Daniel Kahneman 
started empirically analyzing how people make decisions in uncer-
tain situations. What they found was interesting, and at ﬁ rst glance, 
contradictory to the economic perspective of rational actors. Rather 
than accurately weighing the costs and beneﬁ ts (including the 
probabilities of each) of each decision made (like a supercomputer 
might), humans tended to rely on a handful of heuristics or “rules 
of thumb” to simplify the complexity of a cost/beneﬁ t analysis for 
each decision. In most circumstances, “these heuristics are quite 
useful, but sometimes they lead to severe and systematic errors.”9
The simple example used by Tversky and Kahneman does an 
excellent job of illustrating the power of a heuristic and its ability to 
mislead us in a consistent manner:
The apparent distance of an object is determined in part by 
its clarity. The more sharply the object is seen, the closer it 
appears to be. This rule has some validity, because in any given 
scene the more distant objects are seen less sharply than nearer 
objects. However, the reliance on this rule leads to systematic 
errors in the estimation of distances . . .10
By employing a heuristic such as “sharpness  nearness,” we ﬁ nd 
that we are prone to overestimate distances in conditions of poor 
visibility and underestimate distances when visibility is good. Thus, a 
normally useful rule of thumb (clarity as a measure of distance) can 
systematically mislead one into inaccurate estimation of distances.
Signiﬁ cant research over the past 40 years has focused on 
what might be deemed the two primary heuristics utilized by most 
human decision makers that tend to bias our decisions. Although 
we humans likely employ dozens, if not hundreds, of other heuris-
tics, these two rules of thumb tend to be consistently problematic in 
terms of our ability to make good decisions. More speciﬁ cally, they 

50 
Boombustology
each result in biases to our decision-making processes that drive 
suboptimal outcomes due to consistently poor estimation of the 
probabilities and values needed for rational optimization.
We now turn to a discussion of the representativeness heuristic 
and the availability heuristic, as well as a brief exploration of the 
cognitive biases that they each cause. Although the implications of 
these ﬁ ndings for our study of booms and busts should be obvious, 
the chapter wraps up by highlighting several ramiﬁ cations perti-
nent to our study of booms and busts.
Representativeness
The representativeness heuristic is a rule of thumb we all use to 
form a conclusion when presented data that looks like other data 
that we know to be true. Not dissimilar to the concept of stereotyp-
ing, in which we assume one member of a group must be like the 
image we have of the group, the representativeness rule of thumb 
Table 3.2 Answers to the Simple Knowledge Test
Question
Answer
 1.  What is the weight of an empty Airbus A340–600? 
(kg or tons)
218,000 kg or 240 tons
 2.  In what year did John Steinbeck win the Nobel Prize 
for Literature?
1962
 3.  What is the distance from the Earth to the Moon? (km 
or miles)
384,400 km or 238,850 miles
 4.  What is the air distance from Madrid to Baghdad? 
(km or miles)
4,308 km or 2,677 miles
 5.  In what year was the construction of the Roman 
Colosseum completed?
A.D. 80
 6.  What is the height of the Aswan High Dam? (meters 
or feet)
114 m or 375 ft
 7.  In what year did Magellan’s crew complete the first naval 
circumnavigation of the globe?
1522
 8.  In what year was Mohandas K. Gandhi born?
1869
 9.  What is the surface area of the Mediterranean Sea? 
(square km or miles)
2,510,000 sq km or 970,000 
sq miles
10.  What is the gestation period of the great blue whale? 
(days)
335 days
Source: From Winning Decisions by J. Edward Russo and Paul J.H. Schoemaker, copyright © 2002 by 
J. Edward Russo and Paul J.H. Schoemaker. Used with permission of Doubleday, a division of Random 
House, Inc.

 
The Psychology Lens 
51
is one in which we use identiﬁ able clues to cognitively label an indi-
vidual observation as representative of a class of observations.
For example, suppose you are walking down a street in 
Boston and meet a person who is thin, athletic looking, wearing 
sneakers, and is asking for directions. Suppose further that it hap-
pens to be two days before the Boston Marathon. It is highly likely 
that you will assume that this person is an athlete visiting Boston 
to run the marathon. Likewise, if you meet a disheveled-looking, 
absent-minded and poorly dressed older individual carrying a disor-
derly stack of papers near a college campus, you might hypothesize, 
with good reason, that the person is a professor.
Though these rapid conclusions drawn from limited data may 
be accurate, they need not always be. In fact, let’s turn to an exam-
ple (based upon Tversky and Kahneman’s work) in which the 
 representativeness heuristic might lead you astray. Suppose a col-
league describes an individual (let’s call him Stanley) as being “shy, 
withdrawn, extremely helpful, detail oriented, meek yet tidy, and 
extremely interested in structure.”11 Now suppose you are asked 
to guess what this person does for a living (farmer, car salesman, 
secretary, artist, physician, librarian, etc.) and to order the list of 
possibilities from most to least likely. For lots of people, Stanley is 
thought to be a librarian.
The process by which most people would order the list is based 
on the similarity of the description to their stereotyped image of each 
occupation. Although using this heuristic may be efﬁ cient in deter-
mining the identiﬁ cation of the person’s occupation, it unfortunately 
creates numerous biases and may therefore generate incorrect conclu-
sions. The biases emanating from this heuristic occur because repre-
sentativeness allows little room for the necessary probability-affecting 
variables that should inﬂ uence our thinking. Five primary cognitive 
biases12 emerge from our extensive use of the representativeness rule 
of thumb. Let us now turn to each and discuss them in turn.
Inattention to Base Rates The fact that Stanley resembles our image of 
a librarian absolutely overwhelms our awareness of base rates. Base 
rates are the frequency with which a type occurs in a population. 
In our example above, if we knew nothing about Stanley and were 
asked to rank his likely profession, we would probably turn to our 
knowledge of base rates to determine the ranking. So, given that 
not many individuals are actually librarians, the probability of 
Stanley being a librarian would likely fall. Likewise, the probability 

52 
Boombustology
Stanley is a physician would perhaps rise (given there are more phy-
sicians in the world than librarians).
Thus, it seems that our brains overweight representativeness 
(i.e., similarity of description) and underweight the generic proba-
bility of an occurrence. The result of our brain’s reliance on the rep-
resentativeness heuristic is that our decision-making processes suffer 
from a cognitive bias in which we underweight or even dismiss sta-
tistical likelihoods (e.g. the number of physicians is many times the 
number of librarians in America) that should inform our thinking.
Insensitivity to Sample Size Tversky and Kahneman13 asked undergradu-
ates to answer the following question:
A certain town is served by two hospitals. In the larger 
hospital about 45 babies are born each day and in the 
smaller hospital about 15 babies are born each day. As you 
know, about 50% of all babies are boys. However, the exact 
percentage varies from day to day. Sometimes it may be higher 
than 50%, sometimes lower.
For a period of 1 year, each hospital recorded the days on 
which more than 60% of the babies born were boys. Which hos-
pital do you think recorded more such days?
A. The larger hospital
B. The smaller hospital
C. About the same (i.e., within 5%)
More than 50 percent of respondents indicated “C” was their 
choice, with the remaining respondents evenly split between “A” 
and “B.” According to statistical theory, however, the larger the sam-
ple, the less likely it is to “stray” from an average. If this is not obvi-
ous, think about the probability of getting 75 percent “heads” while 
ﬂ ipping a coin. Surely it must be easier to get 3 heads when ﬂ ipping 
a coin 4 times than it would be to get 3,000 heads when ﬂ ipping a 
coin 4,000 times, right? Tversky and Kahneman note that this “fun-
damental notion of statistics is evidently not part of people’s reper-
toire of intuitions.”14
Again, we ﬁ nd that our cognitive processes are biased in 
a manner that leads to suboptimal decision making. We tend to 
 extrapolate our thinking across all scenarios, disregarding the likeli-
hood of deviations that might exist due to limited sample sizes.

 
The Psychology Lens 
53
Misconceptions of Likelihood (The Gambler’s Fallacy) Consider the following 
question from Bazerman and Moore’s spectacular review of the aca-
demic literature on behavioral decision making.15
You and your spouse have had three children together, all of 
them girls. Now that you are expecting your fourth child, you 
wonder whether the odds favor having a boy this time. What is 
the best estimate of your probability of having another girl?
A. 6.25% (1 in 16), because the odds of getting four girls 
in a row is one out of 16
B. 50% (1 in 2), because there is roughly an equal chance 
of getting each gender
C. A percentage that falls between these two estimates 
(6.25% and 50%)
Most respondents chose either A or C, believing that the prob-
ability of having another girl must be low. Speciﬁ cally, our brains 
want us to assume that random deviations will be offset over time. 
However, as noted by Bazerman and Moore, “the problem with this 
reasoning is that the gender determination of each new baby is a 
chance event; the sperm that determines the baby’s gender does 
not know how many other girls the couple has.”
The situation is not dissimilar to the thinking of a gambler at 
a roulette wheel. Having just witnessed 5 consecutive red numbers 
emerge, he is convinced that the probability of the next number 
being black is higher than it actually is. In fact, depending on the 
type of roulette wheel, the probability will always be either 18 out of 
37 or 18 out of 38. These likelihoods do not change.
This miscalculation of chance is driven by our brain’s desire 
for order, even when there may be randomness. Tversky and 
Kahneman correctly summarize: “Chance is commonly viewed as a 
self-correcting process in which a deviation in one direction induces 
a deviation in the opposite direction to restore the equilibrium. In 
fact, deviations are not ‘corrected’ as a chance process unfolds, they 
are merely diluted.”16
Dismissing the Powers of Regression Even though most humans believe 
that randomness from an underlying statistic is likely to be quickly 
corrected, for some reason we do not believe that performance 
regresses. When professional athletes do really well, we are  willing to 

54 
Boombustology
assume that it is due to skill. When one mutual fund does well while 
others falter, we are willing to assume that it is due to skill. A well-
cited example is taken from Kahneman and Tversky’s early work on 
the psychology of prediction in which poor performers were pun-
ished and good performers were rewarded. Despite these interven-
tions, the poor performers improved, while the good performers 
deteriorated. The authors suggest that interventions may have had 
absolutely nothing to do with performance and that simple regres-
sion to the mean drove the outcomes.17 By relying too greatly on a 
single data point (and believing it to be highly representative), our 
brains lead us to overestimate the capabilities of high performers and 
to underestimate the capabilities of low performers.
Conjunction Fallacy One rule of statistics is that the probability of a 
subset cannot be more than the probability of the whole set. Thus, 
the probability of being a blond woman from Boston must neces-
sarily be less than or equal to the probability of being a woman, 
the probability of being blond, and the probability of being from 
Boston. It is not possible that there is a 50 percent chance of being 
a blond woman from Boston and a 5 percent chance of being from 
Boston. Even if only 5 percent of the population is from Boston, 
then if all Bostonians are female and blond, the probability of being 
a blond woman from Boston will also equal 5 percent. However, if 
some portion of Bostonians is not female, or blond, then the prob-
ability of being (a) blond, (b) female, and (c) from Boston will be 
less than 5 percent.
The representativeness heuristic, however, plays games with our 
probabilistic assessments. If we went on to describe the woman just 
mentioned as having a heavy New England accent in which she pro-
nounces words like car as “cah,” our brains would act as if we placed 
a greater probability of the person being a Bostonian woman than 
being a woman. Consider the following example from Bazerman 
and Moore18:
Linda is thirty-one years old, single, outspoken, and very smart. 
She majored in philosophy. As a student, she was deeply con-
cerned with issues of discrimination and social justice, and she 
participated in antinuclear demonstrations. Rank the following 
eight descriptions in order of the probability (i.e., likelihood) 
that they describe Linda.

 
The Psychology Lens 
55
A. Linda is a school teacher in an elementary school.
B. Linda works in a bookstore and takes yoga classes.
C. Linda is active in the feminist movement.
D. Linda is a psychiatric social worker.
E. Linda is a member of the League of Women Voters.
F. Linda is a bank teller.
G. Linda is an insurance salesperson.
H. Linda is a bank teller who is active in the feminist 
movement.
Most respondents to this question ranked C as more likely than 
H and H as more likely than F. This means that people in this study 
believed it more likely that Linda was a feminist bank teller than a 
bank teller. Given that the feminist descriptor actually narrows the 
universe (as feminist bank tellers are a subset of feminists and a subset 
of bank tellers), it is impossible for the probability of being a feminist 
bank teller to exceed that of being a bank teller (or being a feminist).
Because the description of Linda is more representative of a 
feminist bank teller than that of a bank teller, use of the representa-
tive heuristic leads us to a logical inconsistency in that we place a 
higher likelihood on a less-likely occurrence.
Availability
The second primary bias-inducing rule of thumb is the availability 
heuristic. As eloquently summarized by Tversky and Kahneman, 
“there are situations in which people assess the frequency of a class 
or the probability of an event by the ease with which instances or 
occurrences can be brought to mind.”19 Thus, the availability heu-
ristic is one in which personal experience and personal knowledge 
of events is more heavily weighted than an objective person might 
consider appropriate. Because our minds will more easily recall 
events of greater frequency, the availability heuristic is generally use-
ful in that events with greater frequency are usually more likely. The 
breakdown occurs because “availability is affected by factors other 
than frequency and probability”20 and is more heavily weighted 
toward events that are easily remembered or more memorable.
Thus, vividness and memorability (which are unrelated to fre-
quency) are overweighted in terms of our assessment of probability. 
This results in a consistent and predictable set of cognitive biases. As 
succinctly summarized by Bazerman and Moore, “We too easily assume 

56 
Boombustology
that our available recollections are truly representative of the larger 
pool of events that exists outside of our range of experience.”21 The 
two primary decision-making biases that emanate from use of the avail-
ability heuristic are biases due to the ease of recall and biases due to 
the retrievability of the image or event. We now turn to each of them.
Ease-of-Recall Bias Because recent and vivid experiences tend to be 
more prominent in our cognitive processing, we tend to believe 
they occur more frequently than they actually do. Consider the fol-
lowing problem, presented by Bazerman and Moore22:
Please rank order the following causes of death in the United 
States between 1990 and 2000, placing a 1 next to the most com-
mon cause, a 2 next to the second most common cause, etc.
__Tobacco
__Poor diet/physical inactivity
__Motor vehicle accidents
__Firearms (guns)
__Illicit drug use
Now please estimate the number of death caused by each 
of these five causes between 1990 and 2000.
According to the Journal of the American Medical Association,23 
the most common cause of death on the list is tobacco, followed 
by poor diet/physical inactivity. The next three causes of death are 
motor vehicle accidents, ﬁ rearms, and illicit drug use. Although few 
respondents actually correctly ranked the frequency of these causes, 
even fewer were able to accurately describe the relative frequencies. 
The list below gives the raw data for actual deaths.
 
Tobacco 
435,000
 
Poor diet 
400,000
 
Motor vehicles 
43,000
 
Firearms 
29,000
 
Drugs 
17,000
Because the last three causes are more vivid and easily recalled 
(perhaps due to media attention that increases their vividness in our 
memories), most of us tend to overestimate the frequency of their 
occurrence, while underestimating the likelihood of the  less-vivid 

 
The Psychology Lens 
57
causes. The availability of memorable stories about drug, ﬁ rearms, 
and motor accident–related deaths is driven by more prominent 
and vivid stories about them. Thus, we tend to believe our imme-
diately recent experience is more reﬂ ective of reality than it may in 
fact be. 
Retrievability-Based Biases A retrievability bias occurs when we over-
estimate the probability of an event because our memory struc-
tures make it more retrievable. For instance, try to answer the 
following question relatively rapidly: Are there more words that 
begin with the letter “a” or words in which the letter “a” is the 
third letter?
Most people believe there are more words beginning with the 
letter “a” than words in which the third letter is “a.” Reality, how-
ever, is quite different. Roughly 6 percent of English words begin 
with the letter “a” while almost 9 percent have the letter “a” as the 
third letter. For most people, it is easier to recall words that begin 
with the letter “a.” Because our memory structures allow for greater 
retrievability of words beginning with the letter “a,” we overestimate 
their frequency.24
An example used by Tversky and Kahneman concerns the rela-
tive fame of people:
Subjects heard a list of well-known personalities of both sexes 
and were subsequently asked to judge whether the list con-
tained more names of men than of women. Different lists were 
presented to different groups of subjects. In some of the lists, 
the men were relatively more famous than the women, and 
in others, the women were relatively more famous than the 
men. In each of the lists, the subjects erroneously judged that 
the class (sex) that had the more famous personalities was the 
more numerous.25
Thus, we tend to believe whatever is more retrievable from our 
experience set is more frequent, when actual frequency has very lit-
tle to do with our ability to retrieve actual data. Unfortunately, the 
media tends to exacerbate this problem by highlighting events that 
either sell newspapers or generate loyal watchers, rather than sta-
tistically representative stories. Thus, despite the fact that very few 
graduate students become billionaires, the story of Google founders 

58 
Boombustology
Larry Page and Sergey Brin has received tremendous attention—
likely leading to a perception that successful graduate student-
turned-entrepreneurs are more likely than the data might suggest. 
Might this inspire graduate students to pursue riskier ventures than 
they should? Or perhaps venture capitalists are more likely to fund 
long shots because of such biases?
Our Flawed Brains: Other Cognitive Issues
In addition to these two primary rules of thumb and their numer-
ous accompanying biases, there are a host of other cognitive issues 
that disrupt our ability to be economically rational in our optimi-
zation efforts. Several such issues are discussed below, with a brief 
mention of how they may each affect boom–bust cycles.
The Power of Irrelevance: Anchoring and Adjustment
Recall the 10 questions you answered in Table 3.1, ranging in topic 
from distances to years to areas. In most cases, you were asked to 
estimate an unknown number. Chances are high that after you 
came up with your best point estimate, the number you wrote in 
the “Estimate” column, you created an insufﬁ ciently wide range 
around that number. Such insufﬁ cient adjustment complicates our 
assessment of what we think we know. As you might guess, the rami-
ﬁ cations of anchoring and adjustment have profound implications 
for the analysis of individual securities prices.
When attempting to estimate an unkown quantity, most of 
us usually begin with an initial guesstimate and then adjust the 
value appropriately to reﬂ ect modiﬁ cations we deem appropriate. 
In most cases, we tend to “anchor” on our initial guesstimate and 
subsequently make insufﬁ cient or inadequate adjustments. The 
 following example is taken from Tversky and Kahneman:
In a demonstration of the anchoring effect, subjects were 
asked to estimate various quantities, stated in percentages (for 
example, the percentage of African countries in the United 
Nations). For each quantity, a number between 0 and 100 was 
determined by spinning a wheel of fortune in the subjects’ 
presence. The subjects were instructed to indicate whether that 
number was higher or lower than the value of the  quantity, and 

 
The Psychology Lens 
59
then to estimate the value of the quantity by moving upward 
or downward from the given number. Different groups were 
given different numbers for each quantity, and these arbi-
trary numbers had a marked effect on estimates. For example, 
the median estimates for the percentage of African countries 
in the United Nations were 25 and 45 for groups that received 
10 and 65, respectively, as starting points. Payoffs for accuracy 
did not reduce the anchoring effect.26
This is quite a profound ﬁ nding. People are inﬂ uenced by know-
ingly random numbers when asked to determine an unknown quan-
tity. This is hardly the stuff of “rational” humans. If a stock were 
trading for $300 per share, despite what your own analysis might sug-
gest, you’re less likely to think it is worth $100 per share than if the 
stock were currently trading at $150. Why? Because the $300 price 
provides a powerful anchor that prevents us from placing an appro-
priately large range around possible values. It also creates a mind-
set that focuses on adjustments to current values, rather than the 
absolute values themselves. Think of how much attention is paid to 
the relative performance of mutual funds or other asset classes over 
time. Does it really matter if a stock fund was up 75 percent in 2009 if 
it were down 95 percent in 2008? Might such performance compari-
sons be counterproductive? In times of excess, such anchoring can 
be extremely powerful motivation for non-economic behavior.
Framing and Preference Reversal
Is how you ask a question more important than what you ask? Surely 
what you ask is more important than how you ask it, right? Perhaps 
not. Original research conducted by Kahneman and Tversky on 
prospect theory suggests otherwise. Some of their groundbreaking 
work on the topic demonstrated that how a question is asked can 
often impact the answer received. Consider the following example, 
taken from their 1981 article titled “The Framing of Decisions and 
the Psychology of Choice.”27
Imagine that the United States is preparing for the outbreak of 
an unusual Asian disease, which is expected to kill 600 people. 
Two alternative programs have been proposed. Assume that the 

60 
Boombustology
exact scientific estimates of the consequences of the programs 
are as follows:
If Program A is adopted, 200 people will be saved.
If Program B is adopted, there is a 1/3 probability that 600 
people will be saved and a 2/3 probability that no people will 
be saved.
Which of the two programs would you favor?
For those who responded to this question, more than 70 per-
cent were risk-averse enough to take the sure thing of saving 200 
lives, despite the equivalent probability-weighted value. Tversky and 
Kahneman then rephrased the descriptions of the program conse-
quences. For this second group, they were given the same preface 
and then the following options:
If Program 1 is adopted, 400 people will die.
If Program 2 is adopted, there is a 1/3 probability that 
nobody will die and a 2/3 probability that 600 people will die.
Which of the two programs would you favor?
For this set of options, almost 80 percent of respondents chose 
Program 2. Mathematically, Program A and Program 1 are equiva-
lent, while Program B and Program 2 are equivalent. Despite these 
characteristics, a signiﬁ cant reversal of preference took place simply 
by changing the manner in which the question was asked. Why?
Cutting straight to the punch line, it turns out that most 
humans are risk averse when facing choices about gains and risk 
seeking when facing choices about losses. Basically, we’re willing to 
lock in a sure gain (a win is a win, we don’t necessarily need the 
largest win), but we hate the idea of a sure loss (so we’re willing to 
gamble against larger possible losses).28 Because Programs A and B 
were described in terms of gains, most respondents were risk averse 
and sought to lock in the gains of 200 saved lives. However, when 
faced with a different framing of the problem, one based on the 
sure loss of 400 lives, respondents were willing to risk a loss of 600 
lives rather than lock in a sure loss of 400.
The fact that people are able to change their preferences 
between identical options depending on how the question is 
asked violates a fundamental belief of rational choice theory—the 
belief that preferences are invariable—because if preferences vary, 

 
The Psychology Lens 
61
it becomes extraordinarily difﬁ cult to model human behavior. 
Consider the following example, which notes the power of “free.”
In a recent study, people were offered a choice of either buy-
ing a Hershey’s Kiss for a penny or a Lindt chocolate trufﬂ e for 
15 pennies. A large majority of respondents (greater than 70 per-
cent) chose the Lindt trufﬂ e. However, when given the choice was 
between a free Hershey’s Kiss or a 14-cent Lindt trufﬂ e, almost 70 
percent of respondents chose the Hershey’s Kiss.29
How “Fairness” Impacts Decisions
As I write this section of the book, a major water pipe break in 
Weston, Massachusetts has created a “boil water order” for all cus-
tomers of the Massachusetts Water Resource Authority who live 
east of Weston. Emergency water supplies held in the Sudbury 
Aqueduct, the Chestnut Hill Reservoir, and the Spot Pond 
Reservoir were activated, so that much of the greater Boston area 
continued to have water for bathing, ﬂ ushing, and ﬁ re protection. 
However, the water ﬂ owing to most of Boston was deemed unsafe 
for drinking unless boiled for at least one minute.
As might be expected, this resulted in a “run” on bottled water. 
Within hours of the warning notice, grocery stores in the greater 
Boston area were sold out of bottled water. With such a demand 
shock to the system, you might imagine that stores that did have 
water (or could get it quickly) would be able to raise prices quite 
dramatically (after all, more than 2 million Massachusetts resi-
dents were suddenly searching for bottled water). However, this 
did not happen. Why not? What might public reaction have been if 
Walmart, Costco, or BJ’s had raised the price of water 500 percent 
in response to overwhelming demand? From a simple economi-
cally rational perspective, such a price increase is not unwarranted 
and would be a logical output of most supply and demand–driven 
 models—yet it did not happen. Why not?
In a series of questions given to respondents in the mid-1980s, 
Kahneman, Knetsch, and Thaler demonstrated that  fairness affects 
how we make decisions.30 They posed a series of questions to vari-
ous respondents on the topic of price changes. Two categories of 
questions were presented, one reﬂ ecting a need on the part of the 
companies to protect their proﬁ ts (i.e., a situation in which costs 
had risen) and the other in which companies were  exploiting 

62 
Boombustology
increased market power due to a shift in demand. The ﬁ ndings 
were remarkably consistent in acknowledging the need for a return 
on capital (i.e., it is acceptable to protect proﬁ ts) and the non-
necessity of exploitation due to a supply or demand shock (i.e., 
proﬁ teering).
One of the more interesting types of questions asked in the 
academic research on fairness is an “ultimatum” question.31 It 
goes something like this. You and a random person are greeted by 
a third person seeking to give away money (let’s just say $10,000). 
The person indicates that your newfound friend will propose a split, 
and that you will have to agree to the split in order for the two of 
you to receive the money. If you disagree, then neither of you will 
receive anything and he will move on to two other random people. 
You and your “friend” agree to play, and she then proposes the fol-
lowing split: $9,900 for her, $100 for you. Do you accept?
Most people reject the offer. From a strictly economically rational 
perspective, $100 is more than $0 so you would be better off accept-
ing the offer. Why reject this offer? There are two primary ways to 
consider this action: You have agreed to pay $100 to punish your 
“friend” for being unfair, or you are unwilling to accept an unfair 
deal. If humans exhibit even some desire for fairness (as appears to 
be the case), the microeconomic assumption of self-interested indi-
viduals falls apart. The ramiﬁ cations of fairness on the formation and 
subsequent deﬂ ation of asset bubbles is likely to be quite high.
Mental Accounting: Why a Dollar Is Not a Dollar
A dollar in one’s wallet is valued the same as a dollar on one’s 
dresser and a dollar in one’s car, correct? Recent research suggests 
this may not be the case. A phenomenon called mental account-
ing is humorously (and accurately) depicted in the following story, 
taken from Belesky and Gilovich.32
By the third day of their honeymoon in Vegas, the newlyweds 
had lost their $1,000 gambling allowance. That night in bed, 
the groom noticed a glowing object on the dresser. Upon 
closer inspection, it was a $5 chip they had saved as a souve-
nir. Strangely, the number 17 was flashing on the chip’s face. 
Taking this as an omen, he donned his green bathrobe and 
rushed down to the roulette tables, where he placed the $5 chip 
on the square marked 17. Sure enough, the ball hit 17 and the 

 
The Psychology Lens 
63
35–1 bet paid $175. He let his winnings ride, and once again 
the ball landed on 17, paying $6,125. And so it went, until the 
lucky groom was about to wager $7.5 million. Unfortunately, 
the floor manager intervened, claiming that the casino didn’t 
have the money to pay should 17 hit again. Undaunted, the 
groom taxied to a better-financed casino downtown. Once 
again he bet it all on 17—and once again it hit, paying more 
than $262 million. Ecstatic, he let his millions ride—only to 
lose it all when the ball fell on 18. Broke and dejected, the 
groom walked the several miles back to his hotel.
“Where were you?” asked his bride as he entered their 
room.
“Playing roulette.”
“How did you do?”
“Not bad. I lost five dollars.”
This story, which highlights the issue of mental accounting bet-
ter than any other I’ve heard, illustrates one of the many behavioral 
biases that affect gamblers. The truly rational person will treat each 
dollar she has in her pocket as her dollar, not to be trivially dis-
posed of or imprudently risked. Surely then it wouldn’t matter how 
the dollar got into her pocket, would it? As the story above illus-
trates, however, the idea of “house money” contradicts this concept. 
Economist Richard Thaler has demonstrated several other similar 
mental accounts that fundamentally violate the concept that money 
should be thought of as fungible.33
The classic and most commonly utilized demonstration of men-
tal accounting is visible in the following questions. Answer them 
as honestly as possible. Suppose you arrive at a concert and realize 
that you lost your ticket, which had cost $200. Fortunately, similar 
seats are available for $200. Do you buy another ticket? Now for the 
second question: Suppose you arrive at a concert to buy a ticket, 
but realize that you lost $200 in the parking lot on the way to the 
ticket booth. Fortunately, you happen to have enough money to still 
buy the ticket. Do you go ahead and buy it?
Most people answering questions like this tend to answer no to 
the ﬁ rst question and yes to the second question. Why is that? Well, 
it seems that individuals consider the ﬁ rst scenario (buying two tick-
ets) to be equivalent to spending $400 on entertainment, which 
may exceed one’s budget. The second scenario, however, is treated 

64 
Boombustology
differently because there is a $200 loss and a $200 entertainment 
expense. Although related and unfortunate, they fall in separate 
mental accounts.
Such mental accounts create massive complications in the study 
of booms and busts if investors have made a great deal of money in 
the bubble formation stage. Might investors be less logical/rational 
if they are playing with “house money”? What if you had purchased 
a stock for $5 and it was now trading for $50. Would you sell your 
whole position, or perhaps only 10 percent of it? By selling 10 per-
cent of your position, you are now effectively playing with “house 
money” and might be more willing to let it ride than rational 
 decision making might suggest.
The Endowment Effect: Why It’s Worth More to You if You Already Have It
Another effect that has been repeatedly demonstrated among 
behavioral studies of decision making is called the endowment 
effect. This label is used to describe the impact that ownership has 
on perceived value, or more speciﬁ cally, the difference between 
our willingness to pay (WTP) and our willingness to accept (WTA) 
a price for a good. Rational agents do not suffer from a differ-
ence between these two prices, something noted by the use of the 
term indifference to describe the curves that graphically illustrate 
trade-offs.
In actuality, however, people value what they have more highly 
than if they did not have it. Consider the following example, taken 
from Kahneman, Knetsch, & Thaler, in which the professors con-
ducted a now-famous study using coffee mugs.34 They presented 
mugs to members of a Cornell undergraduate class and asked them 
each to evaluate the mug. Then they told some students that the 
mug was theirs to keep. Finally, they asked everyone in the class to 
place a price on the mug. Those who owned the mug would decide 
the price at which they would sell the mug (WTA) and those who 
did not own the mug would decide the price at which they would 
buy the mug (WTP). The average WTA was over $5 and the  average 
WTP was slightly more than $2. This difference between the WTA 
and the WTP illustrates the endowment effect.35 In numerous stud-
ies, the ratio between selling prices and buying prices has been 
demonstrated to be between 2 and 5 times.36

 
The Psychology Lens 
65
The ramiﬁ cations of the endowment effect, particularly when 
combined with other biases and cognitive effects, can have dramatic 
impacts on the ﬁ nancial markets. If people value what they own at 
up to 5 the price they would willingly buy the same good, you can 
imagine how severe the bust phase of a boom–bust cycle might be 
once forced selling results in prices falling dramatically. How likely 
are you to part with an asset when willing buyers are offering prices 
that are well below your perceived value of the asset?
The Congruence Heuristic and the Confirmatory Bias
The congruence heuristic37, also known among academic psycholo-
gists as the positive hypothesis testing heuristic, is one in which our 
thinking process is systematically skewed in a manner to validate 
hypotheses as true, rather than testing them.
Consider the approach most people take to a question asking if 
something about a group of people is true. The ﬁ rst step (usually) 
is to recall individuals you may know who are in the group. The sec-
ond step is to ask if those individuals ﬁ t the criteria being asked. 
Based on your answer to the second question, you conclude you 
have a reasonable answer. For example, think about how you might 
answer the question of “Are couples living in rural settings more 
likely to have bigger families than couples living in urban settings?”
Optimal decision-making processes, however, have to do with 
evaluating four separate groups: rural couples with big families, 
rural couples with small families, urban couples with big families, 
and urban couples with small families. Only after considering all 
four sets can we accurately assess the frequency of each occurrence 
relative to each other. However, most people seeking to answer the 
question will immediately attempt to think about rural families they 
know and compare them with urban families they know (actually 
also falling prey to the availability bias in the process).
Again, it is easy to see how this limited “research” process that 
our brains conduct leads us astray in ﬁ nancial markets. Particularly 
when combined with other cognitive effects (the endowment effect, 
anchoring, etc.), we can easily imagine situations in which we are 
too slow to acknowledge evidence that contradicts our own views 
regarding a stock or bond, and it is only reluctantly that we would 
alter our assessments of its value. On an aggregated basis, this effect 

66 
Boombustology
can have a massive impact when applied to millions of participants 
simultaneously.
The Certainty of Uncertainty
Given that making decisions in uncertain environments is a cer-
tainty of life, it is critical that we understand the ways that our 
brains miscalculate and misinterpret data. For the purposes of stud-
ying booms and busts, however, the primary insights of this chapter 
are summarized in Table 3.3.
As highlighted in the table, the numerous biases that plague 
human decision-making processes have the potential to severely dis-
tort the rationality of individual actors. Although all of these biases 
(and others) are important in seeking a better understanding of 
ﬁ nancial extremes, the cases presented in Part II will show a greater 
emphasis on the concept of overconﬁ dence. In many ways, the idea 
of “this time is different” (a phrase that often typiﬁ es the boom 
phase of a cycle) is the ultimate manifestation of  overconﬁ dence. 
As we shall see in later chapters, however, the availability bias, 
anchoring and insufﬁ cient adjustment, and other decision- making 
ﬂ aws also rear their ugly heads in ways that consistently lead to 
Table 3.3 Human Irrationality and Financial Booms and Busts
Bias/Effect
Investment Implication/Example
Base Rate Insensitivity
Google as representative of startup success
Sample Size Insensitivity
“Couldn’t have been random”
Likelihood Misestimation
Patterns must correct; “odds now in my favor”
Regression Dismissal
Belief in trend, “grow to the moon”
Conjunction Fallacy
Misextrapolation of small to big
Recall 
College dropout entrepreneurs = Bill Gates, 
Mark Zuckerberg
Retrievability
False belief in rarity of an occurrence
Anchoring/Adjustment
Stock is $300, surely correct value can’t be $100.
Framing
Upside/downside confusion
Mental Accounting
“House money” effect; reluctance to sell; “Let it ride”
Fairness
Righteousness versus profit-maximization
Endowment
Reluctance to sell; illiquidity
Congruence
Self-validation of conclusions, misinterpreted as “testing”

 
The Psychology Lens 
67
 nonrational decisions. It is this consistency of the biases that proves 
problematic, for if humans were inconsistently irrational, individual 
irrationality would offset other individual irrationality, resulting in 
a population that was rational.
Let us now turn to the political lens to understand how prop-
erty rights and the price mechanism can lay the very basic founda-
tions on which booms and busts thrive.


69
EVALUATING PROPERTY RIGHTS, PRICE 
MECHANISMS, AND POLITICAL DISTORTIONS
If you put the government in charge of the Sahara Desert, in five 
years there’d be a shortage of sand.
—Milton Friedman
When a collection of individuals agrees to form a society, they 
have many options in determining how to organize themselves. The 
political philosophy of the group will be manifested in its political-
economic systems and the range of possible solutions is wide. This 
chapter focuses on two key decisions that relate to a society’s vul-
nerability to boom and bust cycles. First, we evaluate the different 
philosophies relating to property rights. A society’s choice to allow 
private property to exist and to protect such property with corre-
sponding rights is an essential prerequisite for  market- determined 
prices to be “discovered” via supply and demand dynamics. Further, 
without private property rights, the idea of booms and busts may be 
moot, as the state owns everything.1
The chapter evaluates the mechanism through which a soci-
ety chooses to determine the prices of goods, and the roles that 
those prices play in the allocation of scarce resources. Although sig-
niﬁ cant gradations exist between the extremes, two primary price 
determination methodologies are considered: ﬁ rst, supply and 
Political Foundations
4
C H A P T E R

70 
Boombustology
demand–driven price “discovery” processes that take place through 
the interaction of buyers and sellers, and second, central planning–
driven price dictation in which the prices of goods and services are 
set or inﬂ uenced by government bureaucrats. Again, the political 
choice of determining a pricing methodology has signiﬁ cant rami-
ﬁ cations for the relative fertility of booms and busts. Market-deter-
mined prices are inherently more volatile than state-mandated 
prices; as such, they create the conditions in which economic dis-
locations have the potential to snowball into extreme price move-
ments. Societies that have state-mandated prices are unlikely to 
have extreme price volatility; rather, they may suffer from extreme 
ﬂ uctuations in the availability of goods.
Respected property rights and market-determined prices 
are two essential ingredients for booms and busts to take place. 
Political processes in societies having these preconditions are likely 
to exacerbate ﬁ nancial extremes. Speciﬁ cally, politically deter-
mined price ﬂ oors and price ceilings can confuse price discovery 
processes, and tax policies are prone to either inﬂ ate or depress 
the demand (and supply) for certain goods, sometimes quite dra-
matically. Let us now turn to the issues of property and prices.
Can Anyone Own Anything?
According to the Concise Encyclopedia of Economics, property rights 
are deﬁ ned as:
the exclusive authority to determine how a resource is used, 
whether that resource is owned by the government or by indi-
viduals. . . . Private property rights have two other attributes 
in addition to determining the use of a resource. One is the 
exclusive right to services of the resource . . . [and the other is] 
the right to delegate, rent, or sell any portion of the rights by 
exchange or gift at whatever price the owner determines (pro-
vided someone is willing to pay that price).2
Private property rights thus have three primary characteristics: 
exclusive rights to determine how the property is used, exclusive 
rights to the services of such property, and exclusive rights to sell or 
exchange the property.
The spectrum of possible property rights ranges from com-
plete and total state ownership of all property to complete and 

 
Political Foundations 
71
total private ownership of all property. Private property rights are 
a hallmark of capitalism, and the lack of private property rights 
(i.e., state ownership of all assets) is typiﬁ ed by communism. In 
fact, Karl Marx succinctly captured the essence of communism 
in the Communist Manifesto when he wrote “The theory of the 
Communists may be summed up in the single sentence: Abolition 
of private property.”3
At the root of this objective was a belief that private prop-
erty rights enabled the accumulation of inequality to compound 
over time, ultimately leading to disparities of wealth so large as to 
threaten systemic collapse. Without private property rights, and in 
a society in which everything was owned by the state, it would be 
possible to achieve another socialist ideal: a harmonious society in 
which everyone worked hard to make sure that everyone had what 
they needed. As noted by Marx and Engels, such an ideal state 
would be summarized by the slogan, “From each according to his 
ability, to each according to his needs!”4
Although the complete lack of property rights characterizes 
one extreme of the property rights spectrum, the other extreme 
is one in which laissez faire capitalism provides for complete private 
property rights. Property rights are essential for a market mecha-
nism to work. Without property rights, the incentive to drive proﬁ ts 
or generate economic returns relies not on economic self-interest, 
but rather on psychological factors—if it exists at all. If such an eco-
nomic incentive did not exist, prices would not be determined by 
market forces—thereby negating the powerful information content 
they might otherwise contain. Let’s consider how political decisions 
to restrict or remove property rights have affected the price mecha-
nism by examining recent nationalization efforts in Venezuela.
Tenaris, the world’s leading producer of steel tubes and pipes 
for the oil and gas industry, had a facility in Venezuela in which 
they had invested substantial capital. The facility had been perform-
ing relatively well economically, and its prospects for future proﬁ ts 
were bright. Then, on May 22, 2009, the Venezuelan government 
informed the management of Tenaris that they would be nationaliz-
ing the company’s assets and they would belong to the state.5 What 
impact might nationalization have on the price mechanism for steel 
assets in Venezuela? By establishing that private property rights 
were not respected, the government of Venezuela sent a very clear 
message to the global investment community. Would a reasonable 

72 
Boombustology
person or company invest in a country where the rights to their 
investment might not be respected? Not surprisingly, global inves-
tors seem to have lost their appetite to invest in Venezuela.
Lest we think that nationalizations only take place in countries 
controlled by commodity-enriched dictators, Table 4.1 highlights 
a handful of nationalizations that have taken place since the year 
2000, excluding those nationalizations that might be better char-
acterized as bailouts in which the company or industry might have 
gone bust without the bailout.
Although nationalization is the most extreme form of a change to 
property rights once granted, equally problematic approaches might 
include poorly deﬁ ned property rights, or property rights that are sub-
ject to some limitations. A good example of poorly deﬁ ned property 
rights might exist in areas of territorial ambiguity. For instance, the 
Spratly Islands in Southeast Asia are a collection of islands that were 
claimed by no fewer than six nations. Vietnam, the Philippines, Brunei, 
Malaysia, China, and Taiwan all claimed ownership of the territorial 
waters. In the mid-1990s, when it was believed the islands might be sit-
ting on top of signiﬁ cant oil reserves, gunboats actually exchanged ﬁ re. 
Crestone Energy, a Denver-based energy company, had secured what 
they believed were legitimate rights to drill for oil from the Chinese 
government. The Vietnamese government disputed this right, claim-
ing territorial sovereignty over the area. When Vietnam later sent a rig 
into the area, the Chinese responded with a gunship and a naval block-
ade of the rig to prevent it from receiving needed supplies. 
Likewise, ﬁ shing rights in the Grand Banks were not clearly 
delineated, resulting in competitive overﬁ shing by both U.S. and 
Canadian ﬁ shermen that ultimately made ﬁ shing in the region 
commercially unviable.
Table 4.1 Selected Nationalizations since 2000
Country
  Year
Target
Bolivia
2006
Natural gas industry
Germany
2008
Federal print office
New Zealand
2001, 
2008
Rail networks
United Kingdom
2001
Rail networks
United States
2001
Airport security services

 
Political Foundations 
73
Property rights with limitations are another case of distortion 
by government interference. Consider the fate of Unocal, a U.S. 
oil and gas company that tried to sell itself to CNOOC, one of the 
Chinese national oil companies. The U.S. government effectively 
blocked the transaction. Consider also the fate of London-based 
port operator Peninsular & Oriental Steam Navigation Company 
(P&O) in the sale6 of their assets (which included U.S. port opera-
tions) to DP World, an investment company controlled by the gov-
ernment of Dubai in the United Arab Emirates. Political forces and 
public uproar resulted in the Emiraties agreeing to divest of the 
U.S. ports in order to get the transaction completed.
These three property rights “modiﬁ ers” (nationalization, ambi-
guity, and limitation) have a dramatic impact on the likelihood of 
booms and busts. By mitigating investor desires to participate in 
markets that lack clearly deﬁ ned and well-respected property rights, 
it appears that all modiﬁ cations to property rights in fact dampen 
the possibility of booms and busts. It seems extraordinarily unlikely 
that frenzied buying of companies will take place in Venezuela after 
Hugo Chavez nationalized various industries. Likewise, areas of ter-
ritorial disputes and property rights ambiguity are likely to deter 
many investors and limit the risks they are willing to bear. Finally, 
the ability to exit from investments free and clear of last-minute 
modiﬁ cation of terms by the government appears a necessary 
condition for the formation of bubbles. Without this ability, open-
ended, believable stories of justiﬁ ed price extremes would meet 
resistance.
There is also the possibility that ﬁ nancial booms and busts can 
be enabled via the granting of property rights where they were pre-
viously absent. A glance at prices in the privatized housing markets 
of (former) communist nations (i.e. China, Russia) begins to dem-
onstrate the possibilities.
Prices: To Guide or Be Guided?
If property rights are present (and respected), the next logical ques-
tion for a society might be “How should we determine the price of 
an item and who should be involved in the process?” Although a 
seemingly trivial and innocuous question, this question strikes at 
the heart of different political philosophies ranging from laissez 
faire capitalism to communism (and everything in between).

74 
Boombustology
Surely it makes sense that an intricate, hand-woven sweater 
made of cotton that has been spun into yarn, dyed various colors 
through inks generated by ﬁ nding and squeezing appropriate fruits 
and vegetables that have proven to generate such pigments, and 
ﬁ nally woven into a wonderfully attractive pattern is worth more 
than a couple of leaves that have been picked up off the ground 
and stuck together with the sap of local, readily available trees, 
right? The intricate sweater has taken a great deal of time to con-
struct, thereby embodying a great deal of labor. Such logic implies 
the leaf clothing is easier to make, and should therefore have a 
lower price. The earliest theories of price and value were based on 
calculations of the amount of labor that went into the good or serv-
ice. This approach to thinking about prices dates back at least to 
Adam Smith, who wrote:
The real price of every thing, what every thing costs to the man 
who wants to acquire it, is the toil and trouble of acquiring it. 
What every thing is really worth to the man who has acquired 
it, and who wants to dispose of it or exchange it for something 
else, is the toil and trouble which it can save to himself, and 
which it can impose upon other people.7
Adam Smith goes on to further distinguish between “value in 
use” and “value in exchange,” noting the seeming paradox between 
the value of water and the value of a diamond:
Nothing is more useful than water, but it will purchase scarce 
any thing; scarce any thing can be had in exchange for it. A 
diamond, on the contrary, has scarce any value in use; but a 
very great quantity of other goods may frequently be had in 
exchange for it.8
It turns out that supply–demand dynamics do a reasonably 
good job of explaining this paradox. By focusing on the marginal 
value (i.e., what would one additional unit be worth) of each good, 
it becomes easier to understand why each good is priced the way it 
is. How much would you consider paying for one additional cup of 
water in your life each year? Most people would not pay very much 
because, in most parts of the world, water is plentiful. In com-
menting on the water–diamond paradox presented in The Wealth 

 
Political Foundations 
75
of Nations, Nobel prize–winning economist Joseph Stiglitz noted 
“water has a low price not because the total value of water is low—it 
is obviously high, since we could not live without it—but because 
the marginal value. . .is not very high.”9
There are two fundamentally different methods through which 
society can generate prices for its goods and services: market 
mechanisms through which supply-and-demand dynamics deter-
mine a price, or central planning in which prices are dictated by 
government bureaucrats. These two methods generate different 
perspectives on the role of prices in a society’s allocation of scarce 
resources. The market-oriented approach to price determination is 
generally utilized in societies that seek to have prices guide invest-
ment and consumption decisions. The central planning approach 
has historically been used by societies in which the government 
guides prices in a quest to maintain social or economic stability.
The Market-Oriented Approach
Let us ﬁ rst turn to the market-oriented approach to price deter-
mination. In addition to being deemed efﬁ cient and effective, an 
important argument made in favor of market-determined prices is 
that prices contain tremendous information about the appropriate 
allocation of scarce property: “Market prices condense, in as objec-
tive a form as possible, information on the value of alternative uses 
of. . .property.”10
Suppose an entire block of central midtown Manhattan sud-
denly became available for sale today. For simplicity’s sake, let’s say 
it’s between 53rd and 54th Street, and between 5th and 6th Avenue. 
There is no skyscraper on it, no pavement, just some overgrown 
grass and a rickety old fence. The price at which this block will sell 
is a reﬂ ection of all the alternative uses for the block and is there-
fore “informationally rich” and useful in guiding the appropriate 
investment decisions related to the block’s use. Should a pig farmer 
purchase the block and arrange to construct the world’s most mod-
ern pig-slaughtering facility on it? Perhaps an entrepreneur should 
buy it and build an underwater basket-weaving training facility on 
the block?
Though there is nothing wrong with investing to create a pig-
slaughtering or underwater basket-weaving facility on this block, we 
might agree that neither of those uses for the land is the “best” use 

76 
Boombustology
of the land. Surely a commercial real estate developer will recog-
nize the value he might create through the building of an ofﬁ ce 
tower or residential condominium building and outbid our pro-
spective pig farmer. In fact, it is highly likely that the person or ﬁ rm 
that sees the highest value for the land (perhaps a hotelier enters 
the scene and outbids our residential condo developer) will bid the 
price up to a point where the land will be used in an economically 
optimal manner.
If the land sale takes place as an auction, with the opening bid 
starting at $1.00, it is easy to see how the rising price will eliminate 
inappropriate investments on the land and effectively select the 
investment on the land that will maximize its value or use. Ten-year-
old Johnnie takes the bus in from New Jersey to attend the auction 
and believes a lemonade stand would thrive on that block. He bids 
$9.28, the amount of money in his piggy bank. He is outbid by a 
young couple from a third-world country thinking that this plot of 
land might suit them to build a small house for themselves in which 
they could start a family (with a bid of $25,000). Next comes along 
an entrepreneurial college student who wants to convert the block 
into a training center for the homeless. Believing learning is most 
effective in an environment similar to one’s home, he proposes 
to not build anything (with a bid of $100,000). After him comes a 
parking lot company that believes a shortage of parking lots would 
justify high prices to park on this block, and proposes an invest-
ment to create a three-story parking garage (it bids $500,000). Our 
underwater basket-weaving school builder is next, bidding a cool $1 
million, beaming with conﬁ dence that she will be addressing one of 
Manhattan’s largest unmet needs.
Next come the folks from the pork industry, armed with projec-
tions of the sausage revival that is expected to imminently displace 
chicken breasts on grocery shelves. They limit their bid to $10 mil-
lion, knowing that the facility will cost a pretty penny to construct 
in such an inconvenient location. Following our pig farmers are 
the executives of Cheapo Motel, Inc. They see the global economic 
recession driving more and more travelers (business and leisure 
alike) to seek “clean beds, by the hour if necessary.” Their projec-
tions justify a bid of $50 million. The penultimate bidder is a com-
mercial ofﬁ ce developer. He thinks he can build a 30-ﬂ oor tower 
and ﬁ ll it with ofﬁ ce tenants. After estimating construction and 
operating costs, he believes he can pay $250 million for the land 

 
Political Foundations 
77
and still generate a proﬁ t. The ﬁ nal bidder is a hotel development 
company that believes it can build the city’s ﬁ nest six-star hotel and 
convince Seasons Carlton (one of the world’s best hospitality com-
panies) to manage it. At an estimated occupancy rate of 97 percent 
and average daily rate assumption of $750 per night, the company 
justiﬁ es a bid of $1 billion. The gavel falls: “Sold.”
As this process demonstrated, the price of the property informed 
bidders of potential uses. It ensured that a pig- slaughtering facility did 
not end up in midtown Manhattan, and channeled our underwater 
basket-weaving school to the suburbs. Ultimately, it was the price of the 
property that resulted in the allocation of the scarce land to its most 
“valuable” use. Because market-determined prices are dynamic, it is 
conceivable that the property may in time ﬁ nd a more valued use.
Suppose for a moment that scientists at the Massachusetts 
Institute of Technology, in close cooperation with the National 
Institutes of Health and the Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention, determine that natural pork, if cooked within four 
hours of slaughtering, has meaningful life-extending health qualities 
by materially reducing cholesterol, lowering blood pressure, improv-
ing metabolism, generating muscle mass, and increasing memory 
and overall brainpower. Upon completion of this research, profes-
sors at Johns Hopkins Medical School determine that such pork, 
when combined with a diet of hummus and red wine, removes the 
need for any and all pharmaceutical treatments for cholesterol, high 
blood pressure, diabetes, and a host of other common ailments. Not 
surprisingly, the price of “local pork” skyrockets from $5 to $1,000 
per pound—supported by its qualiﬁ cation for health insurance 
reimbursements. Most consumers (depending on their medical cov-
erage) are now entitled to three servings of local pork a week for the 
cost of their medical co-payment (typically between $10 and $20).
Given these dynamics, our aforementioned pork-slaughtering 
executives return to Manhattan and present an offer to our real-
estate developer. Perhaps due in part to the lack of local pork offer-
ings in New York City, many businesses had moved to New Jersey to 
improve employee welfare. As a result, rents in Manhattan are down 
materially. These new market conditions enable our pig men to buy 
the block from our real-estate developer, knock down the building, 
and build their pork-slaughtering facility. Within two years, the facility 
is recognized as the most proﬁ table pork slaughterhouse in the world 
by the Global “Local Pork for Health” Slaughterhouse Federation.

78 
Boombustology
The dynamics described above would not have been possi-
ble without informationally rich price signals. The higher pork 
prices provided a valuable incentive for our pork men to invest in 
Manhattan. The lower rents led our real-estate developer to sell. 
These decisions were informed and facilitated by the knowledge 
and information embedded in prices. In a nutshell, this is the basic 
argument in favor of market-determined prices.
The Price-Dictation Method
The argument against market-derived prices is one that funda-
mentally believes prices are ﬁ ckle and subject to irrational whims. 
As such, interpreting information that is supposedly embedded in 
prices is a fool’s game. For this reason, centrally planned econo-
mies that generate prices from government decisions do not look 
to markets or supply–demand dynamics for price generation.
In the former Soviet Union and other socialist economies, prices 
were set by decree. In some cases, governments attempted to model 
out what an appropriate market-determined price might be and then 
dictated that as the price. Stiglitz notes the futility of such an approach:
Even if the government was successful in deciding on an appro-
priate price, it could do so only after a lengthy bureaucratic 
process. But economic conditions were changing while the 
bureaucrats were deliberating, which means the government-
announced price was rarely the same as the market price.11
By setting prices that were either too high or too low, govern-
ment interference with market-determined prices resulted in both 
shortages (when prices were set too low, resulting in excess demand 
or inadequate supply) and oversupply (when prices were too high, 
resulting in inadequate demand or excess supply). Not surprisingly, 
government interference tended to also produce black markets in 
which illegal transactions were taking place at prices negotiated 
between sellers and buyers. Despite these problems, the political 
process of setting prices via central planning was adopted by many 
countries in the twentieth century.
Government Meddling with the Price Mechanism
Representative governments are often beholden to popular sentiment 
in a manner that makes them highly likely to respond to  outcries 

 
Political Foundations 
79
relating to unfair prices. There are many ways to deal with seem-
ingly unfair prices, the most rapid of which is to simply apply a price 
ceiling (or ﬂ oor) on the price of the good or service and require all 
citizens to adhere to the mandated price. Not unlike the communist 
approach, such a method is prone to creating excess supply or excess 
demand and inadequate demand or inadequate supply. If one thinks 
of prices as the symptoms and underlying supply and demand funda-
mentals as the cause, mandating a price is addressing the symptom 
but not acknowledging its cause.
Price Floors and Price Ceilings Governments tend to utilize price con-
trols and price ceilings because they provide an easy-to-implement 
method of assuring citizens that they will be able to afford goods 
and services, or that an important supplier/constituent will be 
given a fair price for his production. Rather than addressing the is-
sues that may be driving the price to be higher or lower than their 
constituents might like (i.e., too much production or supply in the 
case of low prices or too much demand or inadequate supply in the 
case of high prices), governments ﬁ nd it easier to simply mandate 
a price via decree. When prices in a society are generally free to 
move (and interpreted as providing valuable resource allocation in-
formation), but certain prices are constrained from moving com-
pletely freely, however, unintended consequences arise with respect 
to both the supply and demand. In short, as governments interfere 
with the price mechanism, both producers and consumers react to 
the artiﬁ cial price signals. The end result is suboptimal resource al-
location and a higher likelihood of booms and busts.
Perhaps the most common example of a price ﬂ oor that 
adversely affects price discovery is the policy of mandating minimum 
wages. Although the labor market is generally one that utilizes supply 
and demand fundamentals to determine prices (i.e., wages), govern-
ment intervention constrains the free movement of prices. By set-
ting a price for unskilled labor that is higher than the price justiﬁ ed 
by supply and demand fundamentals, the policy of minimum wages 
incentivizes more workers to enter the workforce while simultane-
ously discouraging companies from hiring as many workers as they 
may in fact seek at a market price. The result is higher unemploy-
ment than might exist without such a policy. This perverse outcome 
is unfortunately often exacerbated at times of economic hardship 
when the political expediency of raising the minimum wage gener-
ates short-term political gain at the expense of employment.

80 
Boombustology
In terms of price ceilings, the most often cited example is rent 
control. Although price ceilings are able to ensure that consumers 
can afford to rent a home, the unintended consequence of such 
a policy is a shortage of available rental units. This is the simple 
result of having more people trying to rent apartments than there 
are apartment owners willing to rent their units. Owners have 
no incentive to increase the supply of rental units because they 
are not compensated for doing so. Rent control is a particularly 
intractable problem to overcome because the political value in the 
short run (citizens pay less for housing) is accompanied by a long-
term cost (the supply of rental apartments is not increased). Thus, 
although well intended, rent control actually creates artiﬁ cial scar-
city and magniﬁ es (rather than mitigates) the problem. Might this 
policy then result in more home buyers than might otherwise be 
the case as the supply of rental units becomes inadequate? What 
impact does such a policy have for the likelihood of housing 
booms and busts?
Tax Policies The section of the U.S. Tax Code titled “Election to ex-
pense certain depreciable business assets” (Title 26, Subtitle A, 
Chapter 1, Subchapter B, Part VI, Section 179) effectively paid for 
a portion of my 2004 purchase of a BMW X5. Why is it that the U.S. 
government paid for a portion of my vehicle purchase?
As it turns out, Section 179 is commonly known among tax 
accountants as the “SUV deduction.” Originally intended to help 
farmers needing to purchase expensive vehicles, the deduction 
applied to vehicles with a gross weight above 6000 lbs. Global auto-
mobile manufacturers studied these laws and, surprise surprise, 
my BMW X5 had a gross vehicle weight of 6005 lbs. I guess the 
Germans were nervous enough to add a bit of an extra weight to 
accommodate those who might opt not to have a CD player and 
such. Because I was running my own business at the time, I was able 
to expense virtually the entire amount of the vehicle against my 
income for that year. This was equivalent to the federal government 
paying approximately 40 percent of my car’s cost.
When speaking with the sales representatives at various dealer-
ships during my car search process, I learned of what various sales-
men had termed the “mad December dash” in which all sorts of 
business-owning executives come into the showroom and are willing 

 
Political Foundations 
81
to pay full price for 6000lb SUVs. Virtually every year,  dealerships 
sell out of these cars during the last week of the year. As you might 
imagine, such a policy artiﬁ cially inﬂ ates demand for certain cars 
by effectively subsidizing their purchase. What might these cars cost 
if such a deduction did not exist? What is the real demand for a 
$100,000 Hummer?
Are Booms and Busts a Capitalist Phenomenon?
Given the fact that asset booms and busts are driven by prices that rise 
and fall more rapidly than might otherwise be expected, it should come as 
no surprise that booms and busts appear to be a phenomenon more fre-
quently found in democratic capitalist economies. Alan Greenspan succinctly 
captured the essence of this distinction in noting the absence of boom and 
bust sequences in the most socialist of all economic systems in the twentieth 
 century—the Soviet Union: “I do not recall bubbles emerging in the former 
Soviet Union.”*
Does this imply that booms and busts are a solely capitalist event? Is it 
possible to have booms and busts in socialist economies? Given the apparent 
necessity of two basic political constructs (property rights and unconstrained 
market prices) for the enablement of booms and busts, and the fact that fully 
socialist states prevent these two constructs from existing, it indeed appears 
that booms and busts are a capitalist phenomenon.
The fact that many capitalist societies have also adopted representative 
governments such as democracies provides a further complication to our polit-
ical analysis. Myopic representatives often place short-term political objectives 
in front of more-prudent longer-term-oriented policies. The result is often a 
distortion of the basic price mechanism that guides production and consump-
tion decisions. This distortion, in turn, exacerbates the tendency of the system 
to swing between extreme states.
The case of democratic socialism—and hybrids between the traditional 
extremes of authoritarian socialism (communism) and democratic  capitalism—
is more interesting and complicated. As demonstrated by the recent cases of 
Greece, Italy, Spain, and Portugal, states that fall toward the middle of the spec-
trum (i.e., democratic socialists) appear equally prone to booms and busts. 
Might this be because socialist tendencies create entitlements that eventually 
outstrip the ability of the state and its citizens to generate the resources needed 
to support those same entitlements?
*Alan Greenspan, “We Need a Better Cushion against Risk.” Financial Times supple-
ment on “The Future of Capitalism” (March 27, 2009).

82 
Boombustology
This example is just one illustration of how government tax pol-
icies can dramatically affect supply and demand dynamics. Similar 
inﬂ uences can be found with tax breaks for hybrid automobiles, as 
well as the much-discussed mortgage interest deduction (which we 
shall discuss in a case study of the housing boom in a later chap-
ter). Hundreds of examples exist (electric vehicles, window replace-
ments, solar energy installations, biofuel facilities, etc.), and unlike 
property rights interferences, which tend to dampen the likelihood 
of booms and busts, government interference with the price mech-
anism tends to amplify the likelihood of booms and busts.
Political Distortions of Property and Price
Political decisions regarding property rights and prices are at 
the foundation of a market’s receptivity to boom and bust cycles. 
Without private property rights, the incentives to proﬁ t are less obvi-
ous, thereby tempering—if not eliminating—ﬁ nancial extremes. 
Just as the removal of property rights (think of Venezuela’s nation-
alizations) dampens investor enthusiasm and decreases, if not 
eliminates, the likelihood of bubbles forming, the introduction of 
property rights where they previously did not exist (think of China’s 
housing reform program of the late 1990s) creates a particularly 
fertile ground on which bubbles may grow. In many ways, private 
property rights are a measure of a society’s willingness to allow suc-
cessful investors and speculators to keep their winnings.
Modifying or constraining property rights through price ceil-
ings and ﬂ oors has a ripple-through effect on the market dynamics 
(i.e., supply and demand) that determine prices. As described pre-
viously through the example of minimum wages, price ﬂ oors tend 
to keep prices artiﬁ cially high and therefore incentivize supply and 
dis-incentivize demand. Likewise, price ceilings such as rent control 
tend to keep prices artiﬁ cially low and incentivize demand and dis-
incentivize supply. The result is that politically motivated or man-
dated price distortions usually exacerbate, rather than mitigate, the 
problems they seek to address.
It is easy to see how these policies can increase the likelihood of 
booms and busts occurring. Might consistent underinvestment due 
to price ceilings result in an eventual supply shortage that is too 
large to ignore? Could the genuine supply shortage create hoarding 
mentalities that further exacerbate the problem? How might prices 

 
Political Foundations 
83
react in such an environment? Likewise, might price ﬂ oors drive 
overinvestment that generates excess supply? Might overproduction 
result in bloated inventory levels that will eventually become too 
large to ignore? What might happen to prices then?
Just as price ceilings and ﬂ oors distort supply and demand 
drivers, so too do taxes have a confounding effect. By effectively 
subsidizing or penalizing particular consumption and investment 
behavior, taxes alter underlying demand or supply. One of the most 
well-known tax policies to do that is the mortgage-interest deduc-
tion in the United States. By effectively paying a portion of the inter-
est owed on a mortgage, the U.S. government has lowered the cost 
of home ownership and increased demand for homes. Although 
Chapter 10 will address this speciﬁ c topic in greater depth, the bot-
tom line is obvious: by increasing demand for housing, the policy 
has the potential to magnify booms (and therefore busts) in the U.S. 
housing market.
In the next chapter, we turn to biology as a lens through which 
we might gain some insights for our study of booms and busts. In 
particular, two biologically inspired constructs are emphasized as 
speciﬁ cally helpful: the use of an epidemic lens to understand a 
boom’s relative maturity, and the application of an emergence lens 
to comprehend the processes through which uninformed individu-
als might form a consensus.


85
EPIDEMIOLOGY AND EMERGENCE
Even completely rational people can participate in herd behavior 
when they take into account the judgment of others, and even if 
they know that everyone else is behaving in herdlike manner. The 
behavior, although individually rational, produces group behavior 
that is, in a well-defined sense, irrational.
—Robert Shiller
This chapter provides two biological lenses through which to 
study booms and busts: an epidemic lens and an emergence lens. 
The epidemic lens, as described next, has use in helping us to 
determine the relative maturity of a boom and the potential immi-
nence of a bust. The emergence lens provides a powerful explana-
tory framework through which to understand how groups can be 
misled into an uninformed consensus.
Scientists and medical professionals alike have been study-
ing the dynamics of epidemics for hundreds of years. The basic 
framework utilized by these practitioners has been one focus-
ing on infection rates. Many variables complement this focus, but 
if we recognize human behavior typical of a boom as “feverish,” 
then the analogy becomes more obvious. Although the “infection 
rate” (for example, how quickly people believe the world is differ-
ent) is not very useful by itself, combining it with the rate at which 
Biological Frameworks
5
C H A P T E R

86 
Boombustology
people are either “cured” of their disease or die from it, exponen-
tially increases its value to us. The chapter brieﬂ y touches on these 
dynamics before turning to the idea of emergence.
Emergence is the study of seemingly chaotic efforts by large 
groups of animals that tends to produce extremely robust and 
adaptive order. Herds and swarms are among the most prominent 
of such phenomena in the biological arena, but examples exist in 
urban planning and other domains. This chapter brieﬂ y discusses 
herd and swarm behavior in social insects and animals before evalu-
ating these dynamics in humans. We close the chapter by consider-
ing the ramiﬁ cations of these tendencies for ﬁ nancial markets.
Revealing the Maturity of an Unsustainable Boom
Epidemiology is the study of diseases and their transmission across a 
population. If we think about markets as being composed of individ-
uals who are either affected or not affected by a particular “disease” 
(i.e., infatuation with the new thing), the basic terminology of epi-
demics has a striking pertinence to the study of booms and busts.
Epidemiologists have developed extraordinarily complex and 
intricate models of disease transmission. The most basic elements 
of all these models, however, are the infection rate and the removal 
rate. The infection rate is the rate at which the disease is transmitted 
from infected individuals to those who are susceptible to infection. 
The removal rate is the rate at which infected people are removed 
from the population of transmitters, either because they die or 
because they have recovered and are now immune to the  disease. 
Although relapses may prove possible, for purposes of our discus-
sion, we assume that those who contract the disease either die or 
recover into an immune state.
To better understand how these two rates interact, let us con-
sider three primary scenarios: (1) infection rate  removal rate  
0, (2) infection rate  removal rate  0, and (3) removal rate  
infection rate  0.
Our ﬁ rst scenario, in which the infection rate is greater than 
the removal rate and the removal rate is 0 percent, produces an 
epidemic that eventually infects 100 percent of the population. The 
pace at which the disease spreads will depend on the infection rate. 
Graphically, any scenario that involves a removal rate of 0 percent 
will follow a logistic curve, as in Figure 5.1. As can be seen in the 

 
Biological Frameworks 
87
graph, the initial percentage of the population that is infected rises 
slowly at ﬁ rst. Because the removal rate is set to 0 percent, the pop-
ulation is infected at the infection rate. As summarized by Robert 
Shiller in Irrational Exuberance:
Although the rate is nearly constant at first, the absolute num-
ber of people recorded as contracting the disease rises faster 
and faster: as more and more people become contagious, 
more and more people become infected . . . but the rate of 
increase starts to decline as the pool of yet-to-be-infected sus-
ceptible individuals begins to be depleted.1
Eventually, 100 percent of the population is infected, as seen by 
the ﬂ at line at the upper right of the graph.
The second scenario is one in which the infection rate is greater 
than the removal rate, but the removal rate is greater than zero. In 
this case, the cumulative distribution of the infected population will 
resemble a bell curve. The graphical depiction of the infected pop-
ulation will rise from zero slowly and then accelerate before peak-
ing and returning to zero. Although 100 percent of the population 
might still get infected in reality due to random factors, it is highly 
likely the peak will occur before 100 percent of the population is 
affected. Figure 5.2 below summarizes this scenario.
The third scenario in which the removal rate is greater than 
the infection rate which is greater than 0 percent is particularly 
uninteresting as it provides for no epidemic. People are cured 
more quickly than the disease is spread, resulting in no cumulative 
Figure 5.1 Infection Rate  Removal Rate  0%
Infected Percentage of 
Population
Time

88 
Boombustology
 infection of the population. The best analogy for this situation is a 
noncontagious disease.
Though the formal academic application of epidemic models 
to ﬁ nancial markets has not gained signiﬁ cant traction, there has 
been some research conducted on word-of-mouth dissemination of 
ideas. Ideas, however, are not nearly as consistent as biological dis-
eases and are subject to transmission errors via what Shiller calls a 
“mutation rate.”2 Shiller goes on to note that the transmission of 
ideas is similar to the children’s game of telephone in which an 
original idea is so distorted via transmission as to be laughable after 
several transmissions. Further, alternative newsworthy items (such as 
a murder, car crash, or death of a major celebrity) may in fact affect 
the infection rate in a manner that deﬂ ects attention from the idea 
being transmitted. Thus, the relative prominence of an idea and 
the attention it therefore receives will affect its transmission rate.
Despite these concerns, the overarching objective of presenting 
this lens is to provide a vocabulary for thinking about the spread of 
ideas through a population during speculative bubbles. The framework 
of infection, removal, and mutation rates provides a useful conceptual 
method of understanding. Although Shiller is clear in describing the 
limitations of applying an epidemic model to idea diffusion through a 
population, he highlights the usefulness of the framework for thinking 
about speculative manias, emphasizing the need for a transmittable 
story:
Word of mouth may function to amplify public reaction to news 
events or to media accounts of such events. It is still  necessary to 
Infected Percentage of 
Population
Time
Figure 5.2 Infection Rate  Removal Rate  0%

 
Biological Frameworks 
89
consider the infection rate relative to the removal rate in order 
to understand the public impact of any new idea or concept, 
since most people’s awareness of any of these is still socially 
mediated. Thus the likelihood of any event affecting market 
prices is enhanced if there is a good, vivid, tellable story about 
the event. . . . Word-of-mouth communications, either positive 
or negative, are an essential part of the propagation of specula-
tive bubbles.3
Ultimately, the usefulness of an epidemic lens is its ability to 
help gauge the approximate maturity of an unsustainable boom. 
Just as a bubble that is relatively more progressed (i.e., closer to 
the point of bursting) will have more of its population infected, 
so too will an earlier stage bubble have a large “yet-to-be-infected” 
and susceptible population. Because it is very difﬁ cult to gauge 
with any precision the percentage of the population that is infect-
able or that has been infected, red ﬂ ags or indicators that reveal 
approximations are useful. For example, a growth in amateur 
or beginner investors into a particular asset class is very telling. 
After all, we must assume that expert investors have already been 
infected, and if amateur investors are now infected, who is left to 
infect? Thus, by gauging the prevalence of newcomers to an asset 
party, one can get an approximate sense of the bust’s imminence.
How Micro Simplicity Drives Macro Complexity
In many biological examples, group actions that appear ordered 
and deliberate emanate from uncoordinated individuals. How is it 
that these collections of social animals appear to operate in a seam-
less manner typical of a single organism? The study of complex bio-
logical systems has been the focus of signiﬁ cant research and has 
spawned a niche industry of “emergence” scholars. Despite being 
a relatively new area of rigorous research, early studies on the topic 
were taking place in the 1970s, albeit without the label of emer-
gence. One of the ﬁ rst studies on this topic involved the behavior 
of Atlantic pollock.4 University of Miami biologist Brian Partridge 
took it upon himself to gather schools of 20–30 ﬁ sh (each about 
3 feet long and weighing 40–50 pounds) and have them swim in a 
circular tank (33 feet in diameter) while he observed them from 

90 
Boombustology
above, while spinning himself in a manner that kept him geospa-
tially above the moving ﬁ sh. Each ﬁ sh was labeled in a manner that 
allowed him to track individual behavior.
The movement of each individual ﬁ sh was then analyzed by 
reviewing more than 10,000 frames of ﬁ lm and Partridge’s real time 
observations. After completing such painstaking research, Partridge 
and his research team concluded that individual pollock followed 
two simple rules to move as if they were a single unit: it was as 
if they were being told to “swim behind the ﬁ sh directly in front 
of you” and “swim at a speed that keeps pace with the ﬁ sh next to 
you.” As simplistic as these two rules seem, they appear adequate 
to explain how the school manages to react when threatened by a 
predator or seeking to avoid an obstacle in the water.
During the summer of 2010, I decided (don’t ask me why 
because I’m not sure I know the answer!) to compete in an interna-
tional distance triathlon. In an effort to provide a “unique experi-
ence” to the athletes, the race director decided to send hundreds 
of swimmers into the ocean at once. Over the course of the roughly 
1-mile swim, I found myself often stuck in a group of swimmers. If 
I sped up, I found I ran into other athletes. If I slowed down, oth-
ers were running into me. When I tried to move to the left, I hit 
another swimmer. The same occurred while trying to move right. 
Eventually, I decided to settle into following the rules that Partridge 
and his team found drove the ﬁ sh in a school . . . and was shocked 
by the overwhelming sense of peace that overcame my efforts when 
this occurred. Not surprisingly, several observing friends noted that 
“it looked like a school of ﬁ sh were swimming together. . . . The 
whole group of you managed to turn and zigzag for no apparent 
reason, but almost as if someone were directing you all to do so.” 
Knowing full well that none of us were coordinating anything, I was 
impressed by the sense of group order that came out of what I knew 
was utter chaos at the individual level.
As it turns out, swarms are examples of emergent complexity 
that originates from the following of simple rules on the part of its 
members. No group consciousness that forces the subservience of 
individual action is required. As an example of how simple rules 
exercised by individuals might create group behavior that appears 
complex to external observers, consider the popular human wave 
at a ballgame. As noted in The Perfect Swarm, “The wave might look 
to a visiting Martian like a complicated exercise in logistics, but its 

 
Biological Frameworks 
91
dynamic pattern emerges from a simple rule: Stand up and put 
your hands in the air (and put them down again) as soon as you 
see your neighbor doing it.”5
To better understand how such emergent order occurs, we turn 
to the behavior of several social insects6—locusts, bees, and ants—
that have demonstrated the ability to generate coherent, organized, 
methodical group behavior, despite the seeming improbability of 
doing so with billions of individual members. After discussing how 
group complexity emerges from individual simplicity in insects, we 
consider the manifestation of this phenomenon in human behav-
ior. Let us now begin by understanding locust behavior.
Locusts
Of the more than 12,000 known species of grasshoppers, fewer than 
20 are classiﬁ ed as locusts.7 Nevertheless, locust plagues—written 
about since biblical times—continue to affect more than 10 percent 
of the world’s population.8 For this reason (as well as scientiﬁ c curi-
osity), scientists have been very interested in understanding their 
behavior.
Locusts are different from other grasshoppers in one major 
and very important way: Their behavior changes radically when 
placed into crowded situations. Grasshoppers tend to disperse if 
placed in close proximity to each other, but locusts tend to syn-
chronize their movements. The conversion from chaotic crowd to 
orchestrated swarm occurs as the locusts ﬁ nd themselves in dense 
quarters. Research has shown that young locusts will move chaoti-
cally until the density of their crowd approaches seven locusts per 
square foot, at which point they begin marching in sync with each 
other.9
As it turns out, most marching is a quest for food, and given 
the extraordinary volumes of food—daily intake equivalent to their 
body weight—that locusts consume,10 cannibalism is not uncom-
mon.11 This desire not to be eaten provides the motivation to keep 
moving. Although this might have seemed obvious to our pollock-
watching biologist, it is a useful third rule to explicitly articulate: 
“Avoid hitting the member directly in front of you or being hit 
by the member behind you.” Given this avoidance desire, why don’t 
the locusts simply disperse? The best way to avoid being eaten is to 
avoid your fellow hungry locusts, right?

92 
Boombustology
As noted by Len Fisher,
Normally shy and solitary, the close proximity of other 
locusts. . . stimulates them to produce the neuro-modulator 
serotonin, which not only makes them gregarious, but also 
stimulates other nearby locusts to generate serotonin as well. 
The ensuing chain reaction soon has all the locusts in the vicin-
ity seeking each other’s company.12
Literal party animals! A physiological response then creates 
more mobile locusts that begin moving in swarms, initially on the 
ground and then in the air. Just as the serotonin, which is released 
in escalating amounts as the serotonin in close-by locusts rises,13 
drives the desire to be with each other, so too does such intense 
partying make the locusts hungry—thereby assuring some healthy 
distance between each of them. As the party progresses, it gathers 
more members, until dense swarms of around one hundred billion 
(100,000,000,000!) locusts cover areas of up to 500 square miles.14
Although locusts are helpful in demonstrating how group behav-
ior emerges from seeming chaos through the individual member’s 
application of three simple rules (avoidance, alignment, and attrac-
tion), they fail to show us how a swarm makes decisions and develops 
a group logic that is different from an individual’s logic. To see how 
decision making in swarms takes place, let us now turn to bees.
Bees
Bees are social insects that tend to follow the three simple swarm 
rules as they travel in groups. Where they differ, however, is in the 
group’s ability to head directly for a particular target (for a new 
hive, or a food source) identiﬁ ed by scout bees. How is it that a 
group of uninformed bees in a swarm are able to efﬁ ciently ﬁ nd 
their way to a target? Although much has been written about the 
famous “waggle dance”15 that scout bees conduct in their hives to 
communicate the direction and distance to a target,16 recent evi-
dence suggests this communication is not sufﬁ cient to explain the 
swarm’s behavior. Fisher notes:
The dance is performed in a hive that is almost as dark as some 
discos, so only those bees nearby (about 5 percent of the total) 
see the dance. The majority doesn’t see it, so most bees begin 

 
Biological Frameworks 
93
flying in complete ignorance. Those that have seen the dance 
aren’t even out in front, showing the others the way. They are 
in the middle of the swarm, flying with the rest.17
Given the lack of obvious leadership in the swarm, efﬁ cient 
direction of the group toward a target seems a highly unlikely out-
come. To better understand what might be going on, scientists 
used cameras to capture individual bee movement behavior to see 
if they might identify some possible explanation for the group’s 
ﬂ ight pattern.18 By photographing the bees from below and leaving 
the camera’s aperture open for a short time, researchers were able 
to produce a “map” of a bee swarm in motion in which each bee’s 
movement was a short line. Most of the lines were short and curved, 
but a handful of the tracks were a bit longer (indicating greater rel-
ative speed) and pointed straight at the target. Those speedy bees 
heading straight for the target were labeled “streakers” by the scien-
tists and provide the answer to our question.
It turns out that if a group is following the three simple rules 
of swarm behavior (avoidance, alignment, and attraction), these 
informed bees are able to take an unsuspecting group of ignorant 
bees rapidly and efﬁ ciently to their target. By moving a bit faster 
than the group, the informed bees exert a silent leadership that the 
uninformed bees follow.19
Fisher eloquently summarizes this ﬁ nding:
In other words, it needs only a few anonymous individuals who 
have a definite goal in mind, and definite knowledge of how 
to reach it, for the rest of the group to follow them to that 
goal, unaware that they are following. The only requirements 
are that the other individuals have a conscious or unconscious 
desire to stay with the group and that they do not have conflict-
ing goals.20
Ants
This methodology of the few informed animals leading a group 
directly toward a target is not the only form of emergent swarm 
intelligence that has been observed in social insects. Ants have 
proven to be equally effective at ﬁ nding direct routes to food 
sources and other targets, yet their methodology is entirely differ-
ent from that pursued by the bees.

94 
Boombustology
Research conducted on a colony of Argentine ants at the 
University of Brussels speciﬁ cally sought to understand why it was 
that ants were able to efﬁ ciently and directly travel to their targets.21 
Scientists working in the Department of Behavioral Ecology created 
a forked path between the ant colony and a source of food. One 
path was approximately twice as long as the other path. They found 
that although the initial ants chose randomly, within a few minutes 
the whole colony was utilizing the shorter route. How and why did 
that happen?
The answer is actually quite simple, and once understood, the 
efﬁ ciency of ants makes a great deal of sense. Ants emit a chemi-
cal substance called a pheromone, which attracts other ants. More 
pheromone attracts more ants more intensely, and pheromone dis-
sipates with time. Thus, the ant that took the short path ended up 
getting back quicker and producing an option for other ants that 
has at least twice22 the pheromone of the longer path. Because of 
the greater pheromone on that trail, the next ant is highly likely to 
choose the shorter path. Even ants that take the longer trail to the 
food will be more likely, again due to the higher pheromone levels, 
to return via the shorter route and to further increase the pherom-
one levels on that route. Within minutes, the pheromone levels on 
the shorter trail overwhelm those on the longer trail to the point 
that the entire colony begins using the shorter path to the food. 
Here again, we ﬁ nd that individual adherence to basic rules lies at 
the root of this collective behavior: “The colony’s efﬁ cient behavior 
emerges from the collective activity of individuals following two very 
basic rules: lay pheromone and follow the trails of others.”23
The other interesting ﬁ nding from the study of ants is that 
emergent behavior with silent leadership (even if random or unin-
tended) was able to efﬁ ciently guide the swarm of ants to a target. 
Thus, the idea of the queen bee or queen ant has been refuted by 
research in favor of group-driven behavior, with signiﬁ cant implica-
tions for group decision making in animal groups.24
Emergent Behavior in Human Swarms
We now turn to the study of a particularly social and group- oriented 
animal, the human being. Historically, animal decision-making 
processes have been studied from a “simple rules” perspective 
whereas human decision-making processes have been focused on 

 
Biological Frameworks 
95
complex utility functions. Unfortunately, the two disciplines have 
not cross-pollinated their research efforts until very recently. The 
next section provides highlights emerging from this multidiscipli-
nary research.
Swarm Processes and Group Dynamics
As we transition from social insects to humans, swarm logic is more 
robust and transferable than most might believe. Although the 
case studies later in the book will illustrate how swarm logic among 
investors might exacerbate booms and busts, this section of the 
chapter will brieﬂ y touch on the research that has been conducted 
on humans as social animals and in which group decision-making 
processes are the focus. Unlike Chapter 3, which focused on how 
individuals make decisions, this section will focus on how groups 
make decisions and how individuals within them affect and are 
affected by group dynamics.
We begin by reviewing some recent research conducted by 
biologists, zoologists, and ecologists, and mostly published in 
journals not typically read by economists, ﬁ nanciers, or social sci-
entists. Several of these studies were conducted to determine if 
humans act similarly to social insects in their approach to mak-
ing group decisions. A recent issue of the Philosophical Transactions 
of the Royal Society of London was dedicated to the topic of “Group 
Decision Making in Humans and Animals.”25 The ﬁ ndings, though 
not entirely shocking, have profound implications for our study of 
booms and busts.
One particularly interesting piece of research26 published 
as part of this collection of papers was about an experiment con-
ducted on groups of college volunteers. Several students were told 
to walk anywhere in the room, as long as they stayed within one 
arm’s length of another student, which effectively created both the 
avoidance and the attraction criteria needed for swarm conditions. 
Communication was prohibited, but around the room were several 
targets in the form of uniformly placed letters. Prior to the experi-
ments, one or two students in the group were given secret instruc-
tions to head toward one of the targets. By the time the experiment 
was stopped, most groups had ended up at the target letters given 
to the informed students. The unsuspecting students had been 
“led” there by a small minority of focused and informed leaders.

96 
Boombustology
Although it is interesting to learn that uninformed human 
groups can be led by covert but informed leaders, the world is often 
ﬁ lled with multiple leaders often targeting different objectives. 
Because of this fact, researchers began investigating the behav-
ior of uninformed groups in situations including multiple leaders 
with conﬂ icting targets. A recent article in the scientiﬁ c journal 
Animal Behavior summarizes the research (which is based on a simi-
lar research design to the one just mentioned, but utilizing two 
informed students who were given differing objectives): “When 
conﬂ icting directional information was given to different group 
members, the time taken to reach the target was not signiﬁ cantly 
increased; suggesting that consensus decision making in conﬂ ict 
situations is possible, and highly efﬁ cient.”27
Basically, the same experiments were conducted with two indi-
viduals given differing objectives. The groups were no slower in 
reaching the targets, and quite rapidly made decisions about the 
appropriate course to be pursued. The implications of this  ﬁ nding 
on the study of booms and busts are enormous. If  unsuspecting 
group members (think ordinary investors) can be led in any direc-
tion by a relatively small number of conﬁ dent (regardless of whether 
such conﬁ dence is merited) members, one can imagine how such 
conﬁ dence might feed upon itself to generate a boom-like scenario.
Famous research conducted by Stanley Milgram28 in the late 
1960s demonstrated the power of silent leadership in groups.29 
Professor Milgram arranged to have people on the street stop and 
stare up at a window on the sixth ﬂ oor of a tall building. Len Fisher 
eloquently summarizes the ﬁ ndings of the research: “With just one 
person staring up, 40 percent of passers-by stopped to stare with 
them. With two people, the proportion rose to 60 percent, and 
with ﬁ ve it was up to 90 percent.”30
If nothing else, the research conﬁ rms the ability of a few people 
to guide the behavior of a much larger mass. Note that this experi-
ment actually demonstrated the ability of a few to mislead the many, 
an outcome that has signiﬁ cant pertinence to the study of booms 
and busts.
Intentional misleading may not even be a motivation of the 
group’s pioneers, but the idea that initial decisions matter is sig-
niﬁ cant. Consider the following informal experiment I ran after 
having read a great deal about bee logic and the ability of silent 
leaders to generate consensus. After landing at the Las Vegas 

 
Biological Frameworks 
97
 airport (an airport with which I have a bit too much familiarity), 
I was the ﬁ rst person to get off the plane. I decided to get off the 
plane and head right (the opposite direction of the main termi-
nal), walking briskly and with the conviction of a knowledgeable 
passenger. Despite signs pointing in the opposite direction, I was 
amused to see that the next 10–15 passengers that got off the plane 
immediately turned right and followed the “crowd.” I repeated this 
experiment on eight other ﬂ ights over the next six months in vari-
ous airports, all with similar results. It deﬁ nitely seemed that bee 
logic applied to humans! The key lesson of this ad hoc research 
was that humans have a tendency to conform to the behavior of the 
seemingly knowledgeable group member.
The next section demonstrates how initial decisions made with-
out meaningful reason might be interpreted by later deciders to 
have been based on careful analysis and contemplation. By placing 
greater weight on early decisions made during a chain of decisions, 
information cascades may develop and create outcomes that seem 
to defy explanation.
Information Cascades and Herd Behavior
Imagine, for example, that two equally good restaurants open on 
the same street adjacent to each other.31 They are very similar in 
every way, including cuisine, price, and ambience. Suppose now 
a young couple comes by and must decide on which restaurant to 
choose. Given that both restaurants are empty at this point, they 
have very limited information with which to make a choice. After 
perusing both menus, they ﬂ ip a coin. Heads they go to restaurant 
A, tails they go to Restaurant B. They ﬂ ip the coin and end up in 
Restaurant A. The second couple that comes by now has the same 
information as the ﬁ rst, as well as the fact that it appears the ﬁ rst 
couple chose Restaurant A. Unable to decide based on the restau-
rants’ menus and atmospheres, they opt for Restaurant A, assum-
ing the ﬁ rst couple must have chosen for a good reason. Likewise, 
a family of ﬁ ve comes by, and seeing Restaurant A fuller than 
Restaurant B, they choose Restaurant A. This process might con-
tinue until Restaurant A is full, while Restaurant B remains empty.
As stated at the outset, the two restaurants are virtually identi-
cal, so how is it that one received all the business, and the other 
remained empty the whole night? Given customers made their 

98 
Boombustology
Career Risk, Herd Behavior, and Client-Driven Bubbles
John Maynard Keynes noted in Chapter 12 of his General Theory of 
Employment, Interest and Money that “worldly wisdom teaches us that it is 
better for reputation to fail conventionally than to succeed unconventionally.” 
Boston-based money manager Jeremy Grantham of GMO has built on this 
logic to replace the word “reputation” with “your career.” Describing the phe-
nomenon as “career risk,” Grantham notes that herd behavior and consen-
sus investing is the norm not because professional investors do not recognize 
ﬁ nancial extremes, but rather that the risks to their careers for unconventional 
decisions are asymmetric. Failing with the crowd is accepted and succeeding 
with a crowd is expected, but failing on your own is likely to lead to termina-
tion. Succeeding on your own is likely to allow you to keep your job, perhaps 
with a promotion. In short, the likelihood of losing your job is small while stick-
ing with the crowd and signiﬁ cant when deviating from the crowd. Why take 
such unnecessary career risks?
Might such behavior create investor herds that fuel bubbles? What are 
the costs of being a contrarian investor? Consider the fate of Grantham’s ﬁ rm 
GMO during the bull market of the late 1990s. While many crowd-followers 
accumulated assets, GMO stuck to their belief that markets were overvalued. 
They invested assets accordingly. Although eventually proven right, the ﬁ rm 
watched assets in its International Intrinsic Value strategy fall by more than 75 
percent (from ~$2.8bn to ~$650mm) between 1996 and 2001 as clients ﬁ red 
GMO.*
Andrew Smithers, author of Valuing Wall Street: Protecting Wealth in 
Turbulent Times, eloquently summarized the dilemma facing fund managers 
in a short piece he wrote on March 13, 2000, near the absolute peak of the 
technology bubble, in which he highlights the role of clients:
Most fund managers are aware the market has gone bananas. What they do 
not and cannot know is when the madness will end. If they are going to stand 
out for sanity, they must have stalwart clients who will back their judgment 
even if the result is poor performance over a number of years. Unfortunately, 
such clients are rare. It is, therefore, more reasonable to blame the clients than 
the fund managers.**
* David Swensen, Pioneering Portfolio Management: An Unconventional Approach to 
Institutional Investment. Revised and Updated Edition (New York, NY: The Free Press, 
2009).
** Andrew Smithers, “Lemming Like Fund Managers and Dotty Markets.” The Evening 
Standard (London) (March 13, 2000).

 
Biological Frameworks 
99
 decisions based on the decisions of those prior to them, an 
 information cascade took place through which information—rel-
evant or not, but embedded in the choices made by others—inﬂ u-
enced the actions of those who followed.
It is believed that such information cascades serve as the basis of 
herd behavior and have deep evolutionary value. If the leading buf-
falo in a herd suddenly stops and moves right, it may be because he 
has seen a lion. If 50 buffalos do that, it would likely be unwise for 
the 51st buffalo to dismiss this data. When it comes to the rational-
ity of markets, however, such herd behavior can be quite distortive 
of market prices.
The Blind Leading the Blind
The biological lenses presented in this chapter have broad applica-
bility to the study of booms and busts. Although the epidemic frame-
work is a useful tool for evaluating the relative maturity of a boom 
and the corresponding imminence of a bust, it is only valuable in 
providing an approximate sense of timing. By no means can it gen-
erate the precision needed by active risk managers. It yields virtually 
no insight on a day-to-day basis and is unlikely to prove useful in tim-
ing the bursting of a bubble with precision. Nevertheless, thinking 
about ﬁ nancial euphoria as a disease that has the potential to spread 
through an entire population proves quite useful in gauging the rel-
ative maturity of a boom. The most telling signs of a mature boom 
that is rapidly approaching the bust phase are a rapid growth in the 
number and type of participants, as well as the increasingly prevalent 
participation of unsophisticated or amateur investors.
The implications of the emergence phenomenon for our study 
of booms and busts are quite dramatic. The applicability of informa-
tion cascades and the restaurant example discussed above are easily 
understood: Seemingly irrelevant decisions take on greater meaning 
than originally anticipated and have the potential to snowball into 
herdlike behavior of uninformed individuals. If everybody else is 
making money investing in housing, why shouldn’t I? Clearly they’ve 
done the analysis and everyone can’t be wrong, can they? Yet eve-
ryone relying on the fact that everyone else has “done their home-
work” can create a dynamic in which random decisions made earlier 
in the chain acquire unwarranted and unintended signiﬁ cance.

100 
Boombustology
The jump to silent leadership from information cascades is not 
a particularly large leap. The connection occurs via the (seemingly) 
informed individuals, and just as actually informed individuals like 
our streaker bees can accurately lead a group of uninformed indi-
viduals, so too can silent leadership by seemingly informed (but 
actually uninformed) individuals lead groups astray. Recall my ad 
hoc experiment at the Las Vegas airport. Not only did my seem-
ingly informed status (likely conveyed by the deﬁ nitiveness of my 
direction and focus of my efforts) lead others astray, this silent lead-
ership snowballed in a small cascade. Like ant pheromone, each 
additional person that followed me provided “guidance” to exiting 
passengers to follow the crowd. Surely not everyone would be walk-
ing in the wrong direction, would they?
The fact that many uninformed individuals can be so easily mis-
led by other uninformed (but acting as if informed) individuals is 
a powerful ﬁ nding. Suddenly, irrational group behavior is more 
understandable. If random events (such as the selection of a restau-
rant) have the potential to snowball into information cascades that 
create (without reason) completely lopsided outcomes, the implica-
tions become quite clear and important: Efﬁ ciency and stability can 
easily be replaced by positive feedback dynamics that drive instabil-
ity and tipping away (rather than toward) an equilibrium point.
This chapter concludes Part I of the book and the presentat-
ion of the ﬁ ve lenses that we will use in our case studies that begin 
in Part II. Let us now turn to Tulipomania and the ﬁ rst demon-
stration of the lenses in action.

II
P A R T
Historical Case Studies
Each of the ﬁ ve lenses presented in Part One—microeconomic, 
macroeconomic, psychological, political, and biological—might 
be used on its own to solve puzzles. But the application of the 
ﬁ ve lenses in concert is suited to addressing mysteries. Part Two 
illustrates the power of a multilens approach through ﬁ ve short 
case studies. From tulips in Holland to ﬁ nancial crises in Asia 
to McMansions in America, there is no part of the world that has 
proven exempt from ﬁ nancial turmoil. Part Two demonstrates how 
a multilens  perspective might have helped observers to understand 
these  bubbles before they burst.
101


103
A BUBBLE IN SEVENTEENTH-CENTURY HOLLAND
Speculation, it has been noted, comes when popular imagination 
settles on something seemingly new in the field of commerce or 
finance. The tulip, beautiful and varied in its colors, was one of the 
first things so to serve.
—John Kenneth Galbraith
During the 1630s in the Netherlands, a series of events occurred 
that have been popularized as one of the ﬁ rst recorded ﬁ nancial 
bubbles. Tulip bulbs escalated in price to the point that particularly 
rare bulbs traded for sums equivalent to several decades of an aver-
age salary.1 More concerning than this rapid rise in the prices of 
rare bulbs, however, was a similarly rapid—albeit less  dramatic—rise 
in the price of common tulip bulbs for which there were no mean-
ingful supply constraints. Between November 1636 and January 
1637, many tulip prices rose by a factor of 10.
After providing a basic overview of tulips and what made them 
particularly unique in seventeenth-century Holland, the chapter 
discusses the social, political, and economic context of the times. 
Finally, the chapter evaluates Tulipomania via the microeconomic, 
macroeconomic, psychological, political, and biological lenses—
illustrating how the multilens approach presented in Part I can be 
used to evaluate the likelihood of ﬁ nancial bubbles forming and 
bursting.
Tulipomania
6
C H A P T E R

104 
Boombustology
The Uniqueness of Tulips
The tulip is not native to Western Europe. The ﬁ rst noteworthy 
shipment of tulips from the eastern Mediterranean (where they had 
been growing in the wild) to western Europe arrived in 1562 on a 
ship that had arrived in Antwerp from Constantinople.2 A year later, 
in 1563, tulips were brought to Holland by a botanist.3 Cultivation 
of tulips is believed to have begun in earnest in 1593 when Flemish 
botanist Charles de l’Ecluse accepted a position at the University of 
Leiden to establish the Hortus Academicus.4
Tulips grow from bulbs, but can reproduce by either seeds in 
the ﬂ ower or buds that form on the mother bulb. If handled with 
the appropriate care, buds can directly produce another bulb. After 
a ﬂ ower blooms, usually for a week or two in April or May, the origi-
nal mother bulb disappears. In its place will be the primary bud, in 
the form of a functioning bulb. Other buds may also be on this new 
bulb. It is estimated that bulb-based reproduction is able to gener-
ate a replacement rate of between 100–150 percent, implying that 
meaningful supply growth is severely constrained. Reproduction 
via seed is a longer and slower process, but one likely to produce 
greater volume given the high seed count per ﬂ ower. Seed-based 
reproduction takes 7–12 years to produce a bulb.5
According to Michael Dash, author of Tulipomania, one of the 
most thorough histories written of the bubble and its context,
It is impossible to comprehend the tulip mania without under-
standing just how different tulips were from every other flower 
known to horticulturalists in the 17th century. . . . The colors 
they exhibited were more intense and more concentrated than 
those of ordinary plants . . .6
The vivid colors, unique patterns, and unusual ﬂ ames on the 
petals of a tulip are generated when a mosaic virus “breaks” the 
ﬂ ower. This is an important fact because the virus (and correspond-
ing ﬂ ower coloration and design pattern) is only reproduced via 
bud-based reproduction. Seed-based reproduction does not repro-
duce the virus, and hence results in bulbs that may or may not 
later be broken into a pattern and color scheme that may or may 
not be deemed desirable. The virus also impacts the bulb’s health. 
Although it may improve the visual appeal of the ﬂ ower, the virus 
adversely affects the bulb’s ability to reproduce.7

 
Tulipomania 
105
As the popularity of the tulips began to rise, they were classiﬁ ed 
into four primary categories, based on their coloration8:
Colouren – solid red, yellow, or white
Rosen – red or pink on a white background
Violetten – purple or lilac on a white background
Bizarden – red, brown, or purple on a yellow background
Further, many tulips were given grandiose names, often pre-
ﬁ xed with Admirael or Generael. The most famous and sought-after 
variety was known as Semper Augustus.
Because of the tulip bulb’s need to be in the ground for 
much of the year, physical tulip bulbs could only be uprooted and 
exchanged between May and September. To accommodate the 
need for speculators to trade these bulbs throughout the year, con-
tracts were developed and notarized for purchasers to commit to 
buying (and sellers to commit to selling) bulbs at an arranged price 
at the end of the growing season. Because these futures contracts 
did not require full payment, they effectively enabled purchasers to 
obtain economic and ﬁ nancial exposure to tulip prices with lever-
age. According to bubbleologist Don Rapp,
Many sales were made on contracts in which the buyers put 
up little cash, but paid a down payment in kind, with personal 
goods, and promised to pay the seller a large cash payment 
after the buyer took possession (based on the expectation that 
he could sell the bulbs to another buyer at a higher price). . . . 
Thus, buyers were highly leveraged.9
Until 1630 or so, most bulbs were sold by the pound. By the 
1630s, the rapid price escalation was drawing the attention of ﬁ nan-
cial investors and the bulbs became desirable not only for their rare 
beauty, but for their ability to increase in value and be sold for a 
proﬁ t. By offering the prospect of rapid riches, the tulips became 
an excellent mechanism through which to speculate. As noted by 
British journalist Charles Mackay in 1841,
It was deemed a proof of bad taste in any man of fortune to be 
without a collection of them. . . . The rage for possessing them 
soon caught the middle classes of society, and merchants and 
•
•
•
•

106 
Boombustology
shopkeepers, even of moderate means, began to vie with each 
other in the rarity of these flowers and the preposterous prices 
paid for them.10
Although data is quite limited on the actual trading activity 
in the bulbs, several of the recorded transactions are noteworthy. In 
1633, three rare bulbs were purchased for the equivalent of a farm-
house. The frenetic pace of trading escalated for approximately four 
years more, when, possibly representing the peak, a rare Violetten 
Admirael van Enkhuizen bulb sold for 5,200 guilders, an all-time 
record. A bill of sale from one transaction indicated that one Viceroy 
bulb was exchanged for “two lasts of wheat, two lasts of rye, four fat 
oxen, eight fat swine, twelve fat sheep, two hogsheads wine, four tuns 
beer, two tons butter, one thousand pounds cheese, one bed (com-
plete), one suit clothes, and one silver cup.”11 Quite the exchange 
for a single tulip bulb! During the 1636–1637 period, some bulbs 
were changing hands 10 times a day.
Eventually, the bubble burst “at a routine bulb auction, when, 
for the ﬁ rst time, the greater fool refused to show up and pay. 
Within days, panic spread across the country. Despite the efforts 
of traders to prop up demand, the market for tulips evaporated. 
Flowers that had commanded 5,000 guilders a few weeks before 
now fetched one-hundredth that amount.”12
Fertile Soil for Bubble Formation
The 1630s were an extremely unique time in Holland. The coun-
try was embarking on its own golden age of peace and prosper-
ity having just won itself independence from Spain. Much of the 
effort and many of the resources that had been channeled into 
the military struggle for independence were now being produc-
tively deployed for commercial and economic purposes. The lucra-
tive East Indies trade was dominated by Amsterdam, where it was 
thought that per-voyage proﬁ ts of 400 percent were not uncom-
mon. According to economist Peter Garber,
From 1620 to 1645, the Dutch established near monopolies on 
trade with the East Indies and Japan, conquered most of Brazil, 
took possession of the Dutch Caribbean islands, and founded New 
York. . . . Spain ceased to be the dominating power in Europe, 

 
Tulipomania 
107
and the Netherlands, though small in  population and resources, 
became a major power center because of its complete control 
over international trade and international finance. The Dutch 
were to seventeenth century trade and finance as the British were 
to nineteenth century trade and finance. . . . At the time of the 
tulip speculation, the Netherlands was a highly commercialized 
country with well-developed and innovative financial markets 
and a large population of sophisticated traders.13
To celebrate this new era of prosperity, grand estates were 
erected across Amsterdam, most of which were surrounded by 
ﬂ ower gardens. According to Mark Frankel, in his review of 
Tulipomania, “the Dutch population seemed torn by two contradic-
tory impulses: a horror of living beyond one’s means and the love 
of a long shot.”14
This bifurcated approach to thinking of prosperity was a direct 
result of the unprecedented commercial success the country had 
experienced following its war with Spain, as well as its recent experi-
ence with the bubonic plague. From 1635 to 1637, contemporaneous 
with the formation of the tulip bubble, the Netherlands was ravaged 
by the plague.15 Although data from the period is not complete, the 
following data points illustrate the magnitude of the problem:
Almost 18,000 people (more than one-seventh of the popula-
tion) were killed in Amsterdam in 1636.
More than 14,500 people died in Leiden (more than a third 
of the last available population estimate from 1622)
Between August 1636 and November 1636, more than 14 per-
cent of Haarlem died from the plague.
This context of tremendously good times (and corresponding 
ﬁ nancial innovations) with an ominous overlay of disease, uncer-
tainty, and death proved a potent mixture for speculative desire 
among the Dutch. Mackay captures the spirit of speculation in the 
air, highlighting the social mood on both the boom and subsequent 
bust phases of Tulipomania:
The demand for tulips of a rare species increased so much 
in the year 1636 that regular marts for their sale were  established 
•
•
•

108 
Boombustology
on the Stock Exchange of Amsterdam, in Rotterdam, Harlaem, 
Leyden, Alkmar, Hoorn, and other towns. . . . Many individuals 
were suddenly rich. . . . Every one imagined that the passion for 
tulips would last forever, and that the wealthy from every part 
of the world would send to Holland, and pay whatever prices 
were asked of them. . . . Nobles, citizens, farmers, mechan-
ics, seamen, footmen, mid-servants, even chimney-sweeps and 
old clotheswomen, dabbled in tulips. People of all grades con-
verted their property into cash and invested it in flowers . . .
At last, however, the more prudent began to see that his 
folly could not last forever. Rich people no longer bought the 
flowers to keep them in their gardens, but to sell them again 
at cent per cent profit. It was seen that somebody must lose 
fearfully in the end. As this conviction spread, prices fell, and 
never rose again. Confidence was destroyed, and a universal 
panic seized upon the dealers. . . . Defaulters were announced 
day after day in all the towns of Holland. Hundreds who, a few 
months previously had begun to doubt that there was such a 
thing as poverty in the land suddenly found themselves the 
possessor of a few bulbs, which nobody would buy, even though 
they offered them for one-quarter of the sums they had paid 
for them. . . . Many who, for a brief season, had emerged from 
the humbler walks of life, were cast back into their original 
obscurity. Substantial merchants were reduced almost to beg-
gary, and many a representative of a noble line saw the fortunes 
of his house ruined beyond redemption.16
There are lots of theorized reasons for the bust phase of 
Tulipomania, ranging from regulatory intervention to a simple 
exhaustion of “greater fools.” Professor Earl Thompson at the 
University of California has suggested that the primary reason for 
the boom and subsequent bust was due to regulatory changes that 
effectively converted futures contracts into option contracts and 
thereby created asymmetric reward for limited risk.17
To understand why such a change might have a dramatic dif-
ference in the price purchasers might be willing to pay, it is best 
to think of tulip futures as actually paying full price today for a 
tulip bulb to be delivered in the future. At the time of delivery, the 
owner of the future contract will be entitled to the gain or loss from 
his original purchase price. For instance, if I agree to buy a Semper 

 
Tulipomania 
109
Augustus bulb from you today at a price of $25,000 for delivery in 
nine months, I effectively own the bulb today at that price. If the 
price of the bulb goes up, I do not have to pay more and the gains 
are mine to keep. Likewise, if the price falls, I suffer the losses of 
having paid the higher price. I have indeed bought the bulb (to 
be delivered in the future) for $25,000 and am subject to both the 
gains and losses that emanate from price movements.
If, instead, I choose to purchase an option contract on the 
bulb with a price of $25,000, then I have acquired the right—but 
not the obligation—to purchase the bulb in the future. If the price 
is above $25,000, I am likely to purchase the bulb. If how ever, the 
price falls, then I can simply walk away from the deal and forfeit the 
money I paid to acquire the option. Given that options offer dispro-
portionate (in theory, unlimited) gain with limited loss potential 
(your maximum loss is the price you paid to get the option), it is 
easy to understand why—particularly in a rapidly rising price envi-
ronment—options might prove a more attractive manner through 
which to speculate.
Thompson argues that regulatory changes that effectively con-
verted futures contracts into option contracts in November 1636 
account for the massive upward surge, while the February 1637 
revision to this change accounts for the bust: “The contract price of 
tulips in early February 1637 reached a level that was about 20 times 
higher than in both early November 1636 and early May 1637 . . . 
and it was simply a period during which the prices in futures con-
tracts had been legally, albeit temporarily, converted into options 
exercise prices.”
The Boombustology of Tulipomania
Having brieﬂ y described Tulipomania, we now turn to evaluating the 
events of the time through the ﬁ ve primary lenses presented in Part I 
of the book. Each lens considers relevant facets of Tulipomania. The 
objective of this section is to paint a multidisciplinary picture of the 
boom and bust sequence that characterized this bubble.
Microeconomics
The primary focus of the microeconomic lens discussed in Chapter 1 
was the tendency of a ﬁ nancial phenomenon to move toward or away 
from an equilibrium price. Though we have limited data from the 

110 
Boombustology
time, the price action of tulips over the 1636–1637 period does not 
suggest a tendency toward equilibrium. Rather, the fact that prices 
rose 10 for rare bulbs over a period of several weeks at the peak 
of the mania suggests that a reﬂ exive process with positive feedback 
loops may have been at work. In fact, this may even have been the 
case as early as 1630.
According to George Soros, a reﬂ exive situation is one in which 
perception not only reﬂ ects the so-called fundamentals but also 
affects the fundamentals. Was this the case in the tulip markets of 
1630s Holland? Although data is limited, the evidence we do have 
suggests that it might have been the case. Consider the fact that “a 
trader at Harlaem paid one half of his fortune for a single root, not 
with the design of selling it again at a proﬁ t, but to keep in his own 
conservatory for admiration of his acquaintance.”18 Is this a case of 
prices reﬂ ecting or affecting demand? 
Even economist Peter Garber, who has suggested that the price 
behavior of rare tulip bulbs resembles the price behavior of other 
rare bulbs and is inherently a reﬂ ection of supply and demand 
fundamentals, concedes that the price behavior of common bulbs 
“deﬁ es explanation.”19 By deﬁ nition, any situation in which the 
laws of supply and demand are suspended (even temporarily) may 
be deemed one that does not tend toward equilibrium. Further, 
although it is clear that an excess of buyers drove prices higher, 
it seems conceivable that the higher prices generated additional 
demand, a dynamic that usually indicates the presence of a bubble.
Holland’s Liquidity and Money
In an interesting article titled “The Dutch Monetary Environment 
during Tulipomania,” Doug French described the impact of 
increased money supplies on tulip prices.20 Because of its glo-
bal economic dominance, the Netherlands became the recipi-
ent of massive capital inﬂ ows. The stability of banking systems in 
Amsterdam, notes French, created “the impetus that channeled 
large amounts of precious metals being discovered in the Americas, 
and to a lesser degree in Japan, toward Amsterdam.”21 In addition 
to these voluntary ﬂ ows of precious metals toward Holland, pre-
cious metals also came to Amsterdam as a result of Dutch seizure 
of Spanish vessels possessing wealth en route from the Western 
Hemisphere.

 
Tulipomania 
111
Data from French’s article tells the story. Table 6.1 is the best 
proxy we have for the growth of money supply that was occurring 
in the Netherlands—mint output. Table 6.2 demonstrates the bal-
ances and metal stock at the Bank of Amsterdam. Given the impor-
tance of reserves in the money creation process, the noticeable 
growth in mint output helps explain the increase in the Bank of 
Amsterdam’s total balances. Might this increase of money in circu-
lation have found its way into the supply and demand equation of 
tulips, thereby affecting their prices?
Table 6.1 Total Mint Output in Seventeenth-Century Southern Netherlands (Guilders)
Years
Gold
Silver
Copper
Total
% Change
1628–1629
153,010
2,643,732
4,109
2,800,851
1630–1632
364,414
8,838,411
6,679
9,209,503
228%
1633–1635
476,996
16,554,079
17,031,075
84%
1636–1638
2,917,826
20,172,257
23,090,083
36%
1639–1641
2,950,150
8,102,988
11,053,138
–52%
1642–1644
2,763,979
1,215,645
47,834
4,027,458
–63%
Source: Jan a Van Houtte and Leon Van Buyten (1977), as quoted in “The Dutch Monetary Environment 
during Tulipomania” by Doug French.
Table 6.2 The Bank of Amsterdam’s Balance Sheet Balloons (currency: Florins)
Year
Total Balances
% change
Metal Stock
% change
1630
4,166,159
3,105,449
1631
3,784,047
–9%
2,976,742
–4%
1632
3,636,079
–4%
3,281,113
10%
1633
4,272,224
17%
3,866,890
18%
1634
3,995,666
–6%
3,474,527
–10%
1635
3,860,342
–3%
3,416,112
–2%
1636
3,992,338
3%
3,486,306
2%
1637
5,680,522
42%
5,315,576
52%
1638
5,593,750
–2%
5,256,606
–1%
1639
5,802,729
4%
5,446,002
4%
Source: J. G. Van Dillen, History of the Principal Public Banks. New York NY: Augustus Kelley, 1964, as 
quoted in Doug French, “The Dutch Monetary Environment during Tulip Mania.” The Quarterly Journal of 
Austrian Economics, Vol 9, No 1, Spring 2006.

112 
Boombustology
Although it is extremely difﬁ cult, given data constraints, to 
accurately identify the destination of this new money, it seems possi-
ble that the increase in money at least partially affected the demand 
for tulips and their prices. Similarly, it is also possible that the rapid 
gains in tulip prices generated additional deposits that increased 
the money supply.
Further, because many of the tulips were traded via early 
derivative contracts resembling today’s futures contracts (due to 
the growing season constraints), the entire system was built on a 
precarious foundation of leverage. Data to conﬁ rm this hypothe-
sis is lacking, but the fact that most of the transactions required 
speculators to put a fraction of their purchase price down led to 
signiﬁ cant embedded leverage. Further, if speculators were buying 
bulbs (on leverage) with the intention of selling them at higher 
prices, and not having the ﬁ nancial ability to service or repay the 
amount that they were basically borrowing, they were effectively 
engaging in a form of Ponzi ﬁ nance. Such arrangements, as high-
lighted by Minsky’s ﬁ nancial instability hypothesis in Chapter 2, 
are inherently destabilizing and highlight an increasingly immi-
nent correction.
The Psychological State of Tulipjobbers
Given the end of the war with Spain and the impact of the bubonic 
plague on the residents of seventeenth-century Holland, resi-
dents were likely in a particularly vulnerable psychological state. 
The uncertainty of life due to rampant disease generated a short-
term orientation and focus on the present and immediate future. 
Longer-term thinking was considered wasted thought. Alongside 
these reminders of mortality, however, overconﬁ dence was ubiq-
uitous during this golden age of the Netherlands’ economic his-
tory. In short, economic optimism combined with the heightened 
uncertainty of life to generate and strengthen a gambling tendency, 
thereby magnifying bubble possibilities.
Might the ﬁ nancial extremes have taken place without these 
conditions? Although such counterfactuals are mere intellectual 
speculation and there is no way to actually know what might have 
occurred under such “what if” scenarios, it seems unlikely that 
the bubble would have formed and ballooned as rapidly and as 

 
Tulipomania 
113
 dramatically as it did in the absence of economic overconﬁ dence or 
disease-inspired fatalism.
Mackay’s account of the events captures the psychological con-
ditions that prevailed among the general population: “Everyone 
imagined that the passion for the tulips would last forever.”22 Given 
recent economic successes in the country, participants in the tulip 
market were likely affected by many of the psychological biases dis-
cussed in Chapter 3, including anchoring on the last price, insuf-
ﬁ cient adjusting of a range around the anchor, and believing 
regression in prices was unlikely. Might it have been possible that 
newfound riches from the East Indies were being treated as house 
money and gambled in the tulip market? Perhaps gains from tulips 
were themselves considered house money. Finally, the illiquidity 
that arose in the market for tulip bulbs might have been an expres-
sion of the endowment effect in action. Is it conceivable that sellers 
were over-valuing what they owned, thereby preventing market-
clearing transactions from taking place?
Political and Regulatory Considerations
A large part of the conﬁ dence generated among the Dutch was 
driven by the political and economic successes they had been expe-
riencing as a country. The winning of independence from the 
Spanish, combined with massive innovation and virtual domination 
of world trade, made the population extremely conﬁ dent: perhaps 
overconﬁ dent.
A counterfactual scenario is again worth considering. If the 
Dutch had still been ﬁ ghting a war with Spain and resources that 
were channeled toward economic progress were instead being 
channeled toward military actions, would the Dutch have been as 
conﬁ dent as they were? Although it is impossible to tell, it does not 
seem that they would have been as conﬁ dent.
Perhaps most pertinent to our study of Tulipomania, however, 
is the regulatory and political dynamics that drove individual specu-
lators. Speciﬁ cally, the conversion of futures contracts into option 
contracts is the most signiﬁ cant feature. Such a policy change is a 
modiﬁ cation of property rights, and as noted in Chapter 4, such 
meddling by governments dramatically impacts the supply and 
demand dynamics that drive price determination.

114 
Boombustology
Underlying the conversion was a political process in which many 
of Holland’s inﬂ uential elites, speculators who included politicians, 
had lost a great deal of money in the October–November 1636 
tulip price correction. Because the losses were borne by  leveraged 
(professional) speculators, tulip growers—many of whom had 
made a fortune during the prior price surge—became the object of 
resentment. Not surprisingly, politicians (many of whom had per-
sonally lost money) met with the enraged public to help address 
the issue. The solution discussed: Convert the futures contracts into 
call option contracts.
These efforts to support prices instead created a buying frenzy. 
The debate that ensued between tulip growers and speculators 
focused almost exclusively on the option premium to be paid. 
Although public ofﬁ cials and speculators (often one and the same) 
had initially suggested the option premium be priced at 0 percent 
of the original futures contract price, the growers pushed back. 
Thompson summarizes the political dynamic between planters and 
buyers with respect to the option price:
The public officials were suggesting 0%. However, the plant-
ers were not totally lacking in political power. Although, after 
lengthy deliberations, the planters subsequently announced that 
they would, as accepted, accede to the conversion of their con-
tracts and accept a price equal to a mere 10% of the  contract 
price, they demanded a later conversion date than the October 
date that had been publicly supported by most of the govern-
ment officials. In particular, the planters announced, again on 
February 24th, that they would convert only those contracts that 
had originated after November 30th, a date by which virtually 
all traders knew that the ostensible futures prices would be con-
verted into option exercise prices, with a 0–10% price for the 
option to be subsequently determined by Holland’s legislatures 
and courts.23
By effectively ﬁ ddling with the supply and demand–driven price 
discovery process, regulators exacerbated the boom by encouraging 
more “swing for the fences” style speculation. Not surprisingly, this 
is precisely what seems to have occurred when they considered con-
verting futures contracts to options contracts.

 
Tulipomania 
115
More than Botanical Biology
The two key insights from a biological perspective relate quite well 
to the Tulipomania phenomenon: The epidemic lens provides an 
interesting framework through which to gauge the maturity of the 
boom, and the swarm logic of leadership by example provides an 
explanation of how so many people could be misled into such inap-
propriate pricing.
Let’s begin with the epidemic logic. A key lesson from 
Chapter 5 was that the participation of amateur investors heralded 
the beginning of the end. Just as the involvement of professional 
ﬁ nanciers in a market is rarely alarming as it represents their nor-
mal course of activities, the involvement of amateurs and histori-
cal nonparticipants is very concerning as it indicates the pool of 
 vulnerable and potentially infectable individuals is dwindling. 
Thus, the involvement of “nobles, citizens, farmers, mechanics, 
seamen, footmen, maid-servants, even chimney sweeps and old 
clotheswomen”24 in the tulip markets is particularly troublesome 
and indicates a signiﬁ cantly advanced (perhaps peaking?) stage of 
the boom.
The second biological lens of relevance to Tulipomania is 
emergence, or more speciﬁ cally, the impact of seemingly informed 
leadership on group behavior. Here again, Mackay’s account of 
the events is informative. In particular, references to the participa-
tion in Tulipomania of “Councellor Herwart, a man very famous 
in his day for his collection of rare exotics”25 indicated a willing-
ness on the part of uninformed members of the speculative swarm 
to follow the movement of such informed individuals. Further, the 
fact that “many learned men, including Pompeius de Angelis, and 
the celebrated Lypsius of Leydan, the author of the treatise ‘De 
Constantia,’ were passionately fond of tulips”26 further validates 
the view that silent leadership of seemingly informed individu-
als contributed to the development of a group consensus. (Given 
limited data from the time, there is no better gauge of seemingly 
informed status than fame, and these descriptions imply fame.)
The Multilens Look
The purpose of this chapter was not to be exhaustive in its treat-
ment of Tulipomania or any facet of the period. Rather, it was to 

116 
Boombustology
Table 6.3 The Five-Lens Approach to Tulipomania
Lens
Notes
Microeconomics
Higher prices induced buyers
Lower prices induced sellers
Macroeconomics
Hot money inflows provided cheap capital
Financial innovation (leverage via futures contracts)
Psychology
Political-economic inspired overconfidence
Conspicuous consumption / trophy bulbs
“New era” thinking (golden age)
Politics
End of war
Government meddling in property rights, distorting price mechanism
Biology
Amateur investors
Silent leadership
demonstrate the power of a multidisciplinary framework through 
which to analyze bubbles. A summary of the Tulipomania discus-
sion is listed in Table 6.3. The next chapter will similarly illustrate 
the power of the ﬁ ve-lens framework during the Great Depression.

117
FROM ROARING TWENTIES TO YAWNING THIRTIES
Optimism built on optimism to drive prices up. Then came the 
crash and the eventual discovery of the severe mental and moral 
deficiencies of those once thought endowed with genius and their 
consignment, at best, to oblivion, but, more grimly, to public 
obloquy, jail, or suicide.
—John Kenneth Galbraith
The Great Depression began in October 1929 with the U.S. stock 
market crash and quickly became a severe worldwide economic con-
traction.1 Before the Great Crash, however, a signiﬁ cant boom and 
bust sequence took place in Florida, one that revealed the specula-
tive tendencies of the time. In this chapter, we’ll discuss the Florida 
land boom that took place during the mid-1920s and the rapid 
ascent of the stock market in the late 1920s before evaluating the 
events via the ﬁ ve lenses presented in Part I of the book.
Castles in the Sand
The great Florida real estate bubble of the 1920s was a revelatory 
mani festation of the speculative tendencies that were sweeping 
through America following World War I. Conﬁ dence was running 
high, and by the mid 1920s, an unsustainable boom in Florida land 
was underway. In fact, to many, the rapid boom and bust of Florida 
The Great Depression
7
C H A P T E R

118 
Boombustology
real estate was thought to be like castles built in sand. It only took 
high tide to wash them away. One of the most prominent develop-
ers of the times, Carl Graham Fisher, was also a promoter of the 
Indy 500 and helped create some of the ﬁ rst transcontinental roads. 
Fisher was one of the primary reasons that Florida transformed into 
the hottest market during a great bull market. Fisher successfully 
converted portions of South Florida into a heavenly combination of 
golf, polo, deep sea ﬁ shing, luxury hotels, and glamour.
Although property fever spread throughout Florida, migrating 
up the state’s east coast and west coast, Miami represented ground 
zero of the speculative tendency. Consider the following passage 
from a chapter titled “Home, Sweet Florida” in the book Only 
Yesterday, written in 1931:
There was nothing languorous about the atmosphere of tropi-
cal Miami during the memorable summer and autumn of 1925. 
Miami had become one frenzied real estate exchange. There 
were said to be 2,000 real estate offices and 25,000 agents mar-
keting house-lots or acreage. . . . The city fathers had been 
forced to pass an ordinance forbidding the sale of property 
in the street, or even the showing of a map, to prevent inor-
dinate traffic congestion. . . . A traveler caught in a traffic jam 
counted the license-plates of eighteen states among the sedans 
and flivvers waiting in line. Hotels were overcrowded. People 
were sleeping wherever they could lay their heads, in sta-
tion waiting-rooms or in automobiles. The railroads had been 
forced to place an embargo on imperishable freight in order to 
avert the danger of famine; building materials were now being 
imported by water and the harbor bristled with shipping. Fresh 
vegetables were a rarity, the public utilities of the city were try-
ing desperately to meet the suddenly multiplied demand for 
electricity and gas and telephone service, and there were recur-
rent shortages of ice.2
Not exactly a description of sparsely attended Sunday afternoon 
open houses in suburban settings! As the description reveals, there 
was an intense ﬂ urry of activity that had drawn many from near and 
far and swirled them into a speculative frenzy. The other prevalent 
component of the times was the effective use of leverage via the 10 
percent down payments made to “buy” land. This facilitated sales 

 
The Great Depression 
119
and postponed the tiresome formalities of recording deeds, etc. An 
executive of the Retail Credit Company of Atlanta described the 
sales process quite succinctly:
Lots are bought from blueprints, they look better that way. . . . 
Reservations are accepted. This requires a check for 10 per 
cent of the price of the lot the buyer expects to select. On the 
first day of sale, at the promoter’s office in town, the reserva-
tions are called out in order, and the buyer steps up and, from a 
beautifully drawn blueprint, with lots of dimensions and prices 
clearly shown, selects a lot or lots, get a receipt in the form of 
a “binder” describing it, and has the thrill of seeing “SOLD” 
stamped on the blue-lined square which represents his lot, a 
space usually fifty by a hundred feet of Florida soil or swamp.3
Allen continues his description of the speculative frenzy, noting 
that few actually intended to purchase the land:
The binder, of course, did not complete the transaction. But 
few people worried much about the further payments which 
were to come. Nine buyers out of ten bought their lots with 
only one idea, to resell, and hoped to pass along their binders 
to other people at a neat profit before even the first payment 
fell due at the end of thirty days.4
Allen cites seven primary causes for the speculative land boom 
that took place in Florida during the mid-1920s: (1) the climate, (2) 
accessibility to the populous northeast United States, (3) the auto-
mobile, which Allen notes “was making America into a nation of 
nomads, teaching all manner of men and women to explore their 
country . . .” (4) abounding national conﬁ dence inspired by years 
of economic prosperity under the Coolidge administration, (5) the 
backlash against “the very routine and smoke and congestion and 
twentieth century standardization of living” that created a desire 
for country club living, (6) the success of Southern California’s 
resort-image developments, and (7) the belief that Florida offered 
a chance to develop sudden wealth (i.e., one could get rich quick!).
Eventually, however, the greater fools stopped showing up and 
the boom turned into a bust. The land boom began to collapse dur-
ing the late spring and summer of 1926 when binder-holders began 

120 
Boombustology
defaulting on the payments they were supposed to make. Rapp 
notes how the embedded leverage combined with other develop-
ments, including two hurricanes, to put the ﬁ nishing touches on 
the bust:
Many of those with paper profits found that the properties they 
owned were preceded by a series of purchases and sales, all at 
10% down, and as many of these defaulted, the only options 
were to either hold onto the land at a great loss, or default. 
The land was often burdened with taxes and assessments that 
amounted to more than the cash received for it, and much of 
the land was blighted with a partly constructed development. 
As the deflation expanded, two hurricanes added the finish-
ing touches to the bursting bubble. The hurricanes left four 
hundred dead, sixty-three hundred injured, and fifty thousand 
homeless.5
Following the bust, Henry Villard described the images he saw 
as he drove into Miami in The Nation:
Dead subdivisions line the highway, their pompous names half-
obliterated on crumbling stucco gates. Lonely white-way lights 
stand guard over miles of cement sidewalks, where grass and 
palmetto take the place of homes that were to be. . . . Whole 
sections of outlying subdivisions are composed of unoccupied 
houses, past which one speeds on broad thoroughfares as if tra-
versing a city in the grip of death.6
Allen highlights the economic impact on Miami by citing bank 
clearings data (see Table 7.1). After rising steadily during the early 
1920s and crossing $1bn in 1925, bank clearings steadily fell.
Table 7.1 Miami Bank Clearings
Year
Bank Clearings
1925
$1,066,528,000
1926
$632,867,000
1927
$260,039,000
1928
$143,364,000
1929
$142,316,000

 
The Great Depression 
121
Noting that this economic distress took place during “the very 
years when elsewhere in the country prosperity was triumphant,” 
Allen eloquently summarizes the Florida land bust: “Most of the 
millions piled up in paper proﬁ ts had melted away, many of the mil-
lions sunk in developments had been sunk for good and all, the vast 
inverted pyramid of credit had toppled to earth, and the lesson of 
the economic falsity of a scheme of land values based upon grandi-
ose plans, preposterous expectations, and hot air had been taught 
in a long agony of deﬂ ation.”7
From Booming Twenties to Busted Thirties
It is impossible to understand the Great Depression without under-
standing the Roaring Twenties. The economic boom of the 1920s 
is perhaps as signiﬁ cant a development in the history of booms as 
the Great Depression is in the history of busts. While lots of atten-
tion has been given to the Great Depression, it seems unlikely that 
it would have been as signiﬁ cant without the less-addressed boom 
of the 1920s.
There are numerous factors that help explain the 1920s boom. 
To begin, not unlike the Dutch military successes, the United 
States and its allies had just won the First World War, and not 
unlike the Dutch following their victory over Spain, American 
conﬁ dence was running high. WWI had helped the country accel-
erate its transition from an agricultural economy to an industrial 
nation. The Federal Reserve system, which had been created in 
1913, was seen by many as the solution to the business cycle prob-
lem (i.e., the Federal Reserve would be able to steer the economy 
with such precision that booms, busts, and blowups would never 
again occur).
Mass production had been gaining prominence and reduced 
the costs of many goods, productivity soared8 while unit costs sank, 
and several industries appeared poised to change the world. In par-
ticular, cars and radios were the “new thing” of the day, and there 
seemed to be limitless demand for these goods. Automobiles were 
increasingly commonplace, and by the 1920s, more than 50 percent 
of Americans owned cars.9 Transportation was being revolutionized, 
and trains and cars provided the means for domestic commerce to 
boom with increasingly lower frictional costs. Taxes were low, con-
sumer optimism ran high, and electricity  distribution was now so 

122 
Boombustology
widespread that most Americans were “on the grid.” Most indus-
tries (agriculture being a primary exception) were booming as con-
sumption and investment were supported by a massive tailwind of 
hope and optimism.
According to John Kenneth Galbraith, the real economic gains in 
the 1925–1929 period were substantial. GNP was up 13 percent 
in ﬁ ve years, auto production was up 23 percent in three years, 
industrial production was up 64 percent in seven years. He says, 
“Throughout the twenties, production and productivity per worker 
in manufacturing industries increased by about 43 percent. Wages, 
salaries, and prices all remained relatively stable.”10
Although economic progress was indeed substantial and based 
on genuine increases in productivity, asset prices—speciﬁ cally, the 
stock market—eagerly reﬂ ected these developments and likely 
more. It is hard to know when exactly the stock market began to dis-
tance itself from the extraordinary fundamental developments and 
entered the realm of speculative excess, but Galbraith eloquently 
notes that “early in 1928, the nature of the boom changed. The 
mass escape into make-believe, so much a part of the true specula-
tive orgy, started in earnest. . . . The time had come, as in all peri-
ods of speculation, when men sought not to be persuaded of the 
reality of things but to ﬁ nd excuses for escaping into the new world 
of fantasy.”11
Galbraith goes on to note how the market’s quiet winter months 
of 1928 were followed by stock prices rising “not by slow, steady 
steps, but by great vaulting leaps.”12 Figure 7.1 demonstrates the 
magnitude of the leaps by plotting the real S&P Composite Index 
divided by the 10-year moving average of real earnings. By using 
inﬂ ation-adjusted numbers and a 10-year earnings period, the data 
measure how expensive the market is relative to corporate proﬁ t-
generating abilities and is not subject to single year surges (or 
depressions) in proﬁ ts. Note the chart goes back to 1881 and stops 
in October 1929, right before the market crash.
Lest you think that the index was the only manifestation of 
the market’s upward jaunt, Table 7.2 summarizes the movement 
in share price of 12 very popular and widely held stocks between 
March 3, 1928 and September 3, 1929.
The beginning of the economic bust is widely believed to be the 
October 1929 crash of the stock market. Although most students of 
the Great Depression focus on the events of Tuesday, October 29, 

 
The Great Depression 
123
Figure 7.1 Real S&P Composite Index as a Multiple of 10-Year Moving Average Earnings, January 
1881–October 1929
Source: Robert Shiller. Data accessed via www.econ.yale.edu/~shiller/data
35.00
P/E Ratio
30.00
25.00
20.00
15.00
10.00
5.00
0.00
1881
1882
1884
1885
1887
1888
1890
1892
1893
1895
1896
1898
1900
1901
1903
1904
1906
1907
1909
1911
1912
1914
1915
1917
1919
1920
1922
1923
1925
1926
1928
Table 7.2 The Big Bull Market
Company
Opening Price (3/3/28)
High Price* (9/3/29)
% Change
American Can
77
181 7/8
136.2%
AT&T
179 ½
335 5/8
86.9%
Anaconda Copper
54 ½
162
197.3%
Electric Bond & Share
89 ¾
203 5/8
126.9%
General Electric
128 ¾
396 ¾
208.2%
Montgomery Ward
132 ¾
466 ½
251.4%
New York Central
160 ½
256
59.5%
Radio (RCA)
94 ½
505
434.4%
Union Carbide
145
413 5/8
185.3%
US Steel
138 1/8
279 1/8
102.1%
Westinghouse
91 5/8
313
241.6%
Woolworth
180 ¾
251
38.9%
Source: Frederick Lewis Allen, Only Yesterday: An Informal History of the 1920s (New York, NY: Harper & 
Row, 1931).
* Adjusted to reflect the effects of stock splits and rights issues.

124 
Boombustology
1929, much can be learned by studying the three prior trading 
 sessions—back to and including the prior Thursday.
On Black Thursday, as October 24, 1929 has since been known, 
the market entered a serious state of panic—with no immediate or 
palpable cause. Historian Edward Chancellor notes, “Unlike former 
stock market panics, it was not preceded by tightness in the money 
market. No banking, brokerage, or industrial failures served as a 
 trigger—and yet panic there was.”13 Many stocks were dropping 
more than several percentage points between trades, and the mar-
ket appeared to be in the midst of a complete meltdown—until calm 
was restored by JP Morgan and others who jointly entered the market 
and began publicly buying to support share prices. By the end of the 
day, the Dow Jones Industrial Average had recovered most of its losses 
and closed down 6 points to 299. Nearly 13 million shares had been 
traded on the NYSE, which was almost triple the “normal” volume.
Friday was a relatively calm day, and many brokers worked 
through the weekend to catch up on trades and to calculate mar-
gin calls that needed to be sent out to clients. The market fell 38 
points to 260 on Monday, and by Tuesday, the market was in com-
plete panic. Chancellor describes the events as follows: “On the 
ﬂ oor of the Stock Exchange, a broker grabbed a messenger by his 
hair, another ﬂ ed the ﬂ oor screaming like a madman, jackets were 
torn, collars dislodged, and clerks in their frenzy lashed out at each 
other. . .. On Black Tuesday, the glamour stocks of the bull market 
suffered the worst damage.”14 Table 7.3 summarizes the magnitude 
of the one-day fall among these glamour stocks.
The slide into depression that followed the stock market crash 
was likely caused by numerous factors, including (but deﬁ nitely not 
Table 7.3 The Rapid Fall of Glamour Stocks
Stock
10/28/29
10/29/29
% Change
Radio (RCA)*
40.25
26.00
–35.4%
GSTC
60
35
–41.7%
Blue Ridge
10
3
–70.0%
United Corp
26
19.30
–25.8%
First National
$5,200
$1,600
–69.3%
National City
$455
$300
–34.1%
* Adjusted for splits

 
The Great Depression 
125
limited to) the presence of bank failures15, “sticky wages,”16 adher-
ence to the gold standard17, the unsustainable growth of consumer 
credit,18 and high leverage levels among consumers, corporations 
and other organizations.19
Allen cites seven economic diseases that plagued businesses 
around the world and contributed to the conversion of the Great 
Crash in America into the global Great Depression: (1) overproduc-
tion of capital and goods, (2) artiﬁ cial commodity prices, (3) collapse 
of silver prices and the corresponding drop in purchasing power of 
Asian consumers, (4) the international ﬁ nancial derangement caused 
by the shifting of gold to France and the United States, (5) unrest in 
foreign countries, (6) the self-generating and vicious feedback loops 
of conﬁ dence that affected the economy, and (7) “the profound psy-
chological reaction from the exuberance of 1929” and correspond-
ing destruction of consumer and corporate conﬁ dence.
The full impact of the Great Depression that followed the stock 
market crash of 1929 is hard to understand for Americans born 
and raised following the end of World War II. Robert Samuelson 
summarized the massive impact it had on the American economy, 
the world economy, and the world that emerged after the Great 
Depression:
The Great Depression of the thirties remains the most impor-
tant economic event in American history. It caused enormous 
hardship for tens of millions of people and the failure of a 
large fraction of the nation’s banks, businesses, and farms. It 
transformed national politics by vastly expanding government, 
which was increasingly expected to stabilize the economy and 
to prevent suffering. Democrats became the majority party. 
In 1929 the Republicans controlled the White House and 
Congress. By 1933, the Democrats had the presidency and, with 
huge margins, Congress (310–117 in the House, and 60–35 in 
the Senate). President Franklin Roosevelt’s New Deal gave birth 
to the American version of the welfare state. Social Security, 
unemployment insurance, and federal family assistance all 
began in the thirties.
It is hard for those who did not live through it to grasp the 
full force of the worldwide depression. Between 1930 and 1939 
U.S. unemployment averaged 18.2 percent. The economy’s 
output of goods and services (gross national product) declined 

126 
Boombustology
30 percent between 1929 and 1933 and recovered to the 1929 
level only in 1939. Prices of almost everything (farm products, 
raw materials, industrial goods, stocks) fell dramatically. Farm 
prices, for instance, dropped 51 percent from 1929 to 1933. 
World trade shriveled: between 1929 and 1933 it shrank 65 
percent in dollar value and 25 percent in unit volume. Most 
nations suffered. In 1932 Britain’s unemployment was 17.6 per-
cent. Germany’s depression hastened the rise of Hitler and, 
thereby, contributed to World War II.20
The Boombustology of the Great Depression
Applying the ﬁ ve disciplinary lenses developed in Part I of the book 
proves fruitful in trying to understand the 1920s and 1930s from a 
bubble-spotting perspective. Let us now begin by evaluating the (lack 
of) equilibrium tendencies during the Florida real estate boom and 
the Roaring Twenties, as well as the subsequent Great Depression.
Disequilibrium Tendencies
How is it that individuals and institutions that found it logical and 
rational to pay one price for a security one day would not be will-
ing to pay 50 percent of that price the next day? Surely, such devel-
opments do not occur in a totally “efﬁ cient” market. In fact, the 
tendency toward equilibrium is one of the major tenets of microeco-
nomics that seems to have broken down during both the  booming 
1920s and the busted 1930s.
The procyclical nature of leverage enabled consumers to buy 
more during good times as credit was easily obtained in a rising 
market. Financial innovations such as installment purchases (i.e., 
buy now, pay later) effectively increased consumer demand as the 
market boomed. When such credit contracted, not only did such 
credit-fueled buying slow, but so too did normal buying demand 
disappear as it had been “brought forward” into the 1920s by access 
to this credit.
Perhaps the most obvious example of the self-reinforcing nature 
of the times is found in Florida. Allen captures the essence of the 
dynamic quite eloquently in describing the fate of an individual 
who experienced both the boom and bust as well as the accompa-
nying joy and pain: “One man who had sold acreage early in 1925 
for twelve dollars an acre, and had cursed himself for his situation 

 
The Great Depression 
127
when it was resold later in the year for seventeen dollars, and then 
thirty dollars, and ﬁ nally sixty dollars an acre, was surprised a year 
or two afterward to ﬁ nd that the entire series of subsequent pur-
chases was in default, that he could not recover the money still due 
him, and that his only redress was to take his land back again.”21 
Thus, just as higher prices induced more buyers, so too did lower 
prices generate more sellers. Not surprisingly, this dynamic gener-
ally failed to produce an equilibrium.
The economic bust that followed the Great Crash had a very 
reﬂ exive component to it, with a very self-reinforcing element to 
the dynamics of business during the 1930s. As described in Only 
Yesterday, “each bankruptcy, each suspension of payments, and each 
reduction of operating schedules affected other concerns, until it 
seemed almost as if the business world were a set of tenpins ready 
to knock one another over as they fell; each employee thrown out 
of work decreased the potential buying power of the country.”22 
Again, the snowballing effect here seems to resemble a reﬂ exive 
dynamic connected by conﬁ dence.
Inappropriate Interest Rates
Recall that one of the primary beliefs of the Austrian school of eco-
nomics is that inappropriately cheap money results in malinvestment 
and overcapacity, which must be “cured” via capital destruction, 
deﬂ ation, and a general working-through of the excesses. Austrian 
economists believe that the meddling of central banks in setting 
the price of money distorts the economy and exacerbates the like-
lihood of booms and busts. Could this criticism be applied to the 
Great Depression? What role did the price of money play during 
the 1920s and 1930s?
According to Chancellor, “The Federal Reserve in Washington—
the institution that had supposedly abolished panics—had inadvert-
ently ignited the stock market boom by lowering rates in 1925.” 
This was explicitly intended to help Britain manage the accelerat-
ing outﬂ ows of gold after their return to the prewar gold standard. 
Although this action might have been useful to the Brits, it had an 
extraordinary effect (i.e., increasing it) on the American appetite 
for risk.
Although such low-priced money found its way into increased 
corporate capital expenditures and increased consumer purchasing 

128 
Boombustology
of both durable and consumable goods, one of its most powerful 
outlets was via margin loans used to enable the purchase of addi-
tional securities. Margin loans, which enable the purchase of ﬁ nan-
cial securities with borrowed money, had grown concomitantly with 
the stock market’s climb. By October 1928, credit extended by banks, 
brokerage ﬁ rms, and other ﬁ nancing sources to investors had risen 
to nearly $16 billion, which equated to approximately 18 percent of 
the total stock market capitalization of the entire market.23
If inappropriately low rates had created the boom that mani-
fested itself most evidently in the stock market, might more “nor-
mal” but higher rates be responsible for the bust that immediately 
followed the Great Crash? According to Shiller, “On February 14, 
1929, the Federal Reserve Board raised the rediscount rate from 5 
percent to 6 percent for the ostensible purpose of checking specu-
lation. In the 1930s, the Fed continued the tight monetary policy 
and saw the initial stock market downturn evolve into the deepest 
stock market decline ever, and a recession into the most serious 
U.S. depression ever.”24
Perhaps the supply of money might help account for the boom–
bust sequence. Figure 7.2 summarizes total money supply from June 
1921 through June 1929. Might some of this money have found its 
way into asset markets?
Although it is very difﬁ cult to establish causality, it does appear 
that money supply was correlated with asset prices. These procycli-
cal liquidity conditions likely exacerbated underlying boom and 
bust tendencies as asset prices correlated with the money supply.
The Psychological State of the Time
The psychological state of market participants during the 1920s 
was characterized by optimism and conﬁ dence inspired by self-
 reinforcing virtuous market developments. Might some of this 
optimism and conﬁ dence have translated into a sense of overcon-
ﬁ dence and investor invincibility? Consider the following passage 
from Only Yesterday:
As people in the summer of 1929 looked back for precedents, 
they were comforted by the recollection that every crash of 
the past few years had been followed by a recovery, and that 
every recovery had ultimately brought prices to a new high 
point. Two steps up, one step down, two steps up again—that 

 
The Great Depression 
129
was how the market went. If you sold, you had only to wait for 
the next crash (they came every few months) and buy in again. 
And there was really no reason to sell at all: you were bound to 
win in the end if your stock was sound. The really wise man, it 
appeared, was he who ‘bought and held on.’25
“New era” thinking was clearly present, as noted by the promi-
nent emergence of the automobile and radio industries. Aerospace 
and movie production played supporting roles among investors’ 
foci. The automobile soon replaced the railroads as the engine of 
commerce and “it transformed the culture and geography of the 
nation; roads were surfaced, highways built, and garages erected to 
accommodate the increasing number of passenger cars, which rose 
from seven million to twenty-three million during the 1920s.”26 Not 
surprisingly in this climate, General Motors’ share price increased 
by more than 10 times between 1925 and 1928.
The radio, launched by Westinghouse in 1920, also began to 
fascinate the investor with unlimited possibilities of information 
dissemination. The industry was dominated by Radio Corporation 
Figure 7.2 Total Money Supply during the 1920s
Source: Murray Rothbard, America’s Great Depression (Auburn, AL: Ludwig von Mises Institute, 2000) 
Table 1, 92.
$75
$40
May-17
Sep-17
Jan-18
May-18
Sep-18
Jan-19
May-19
Sep-19
Jan-20
May-20
Sep-20
Jan-21
May-21
Sep-21
Jan-22
May-22
Sep-22
Jan-23
May-23
Sep-23
Jan-24
May-24
Jan-25
May-25
Sep-24
$45
$50
$55
$60
$65
$70

130 
Boombustology
of America (RCA), often referred to by investors of the time as 
“Radio.” Known as the “General Motors of the Air” by investors,27 
Radio climbed from under $2 per share in 1921 to over $110 by 
1929. In 1929, it was the most heavily traded stock on the New York 
Stock Exchange.
Aerospace also provided a believability to the new era  thinking 
of the times, spurred in large part by Charles Lindbergh’s solo 
crossing of the Atlantic in 1927, and the replacement of silent 
 movies with “talkies” captured investor imagination.
The vision of the future held by most Americans in 1929 was 
one of unbridled optimism, a vision that likely generated and vali-
dated the (over)conﬁ dence that permeated investor sentiment. In 
describing the average American, Allen said he
visioned an America set free from poverty and toil. He saw a 
magical order built on the new science and new prosperity: 
roads swarming with millions upon millions of automobiles, 
airplanes darkening the skies, lines of high-tension wire carry-
ing from hilltop to hilltop the power to give life to a thousand 
labor-saving machines, skyscrapers thrusting above one-time 
villages, vast cities rising in great geometrical masses of stone 
and concrete roaring with perfectly mechanized traffic—and 
smartly dressed men and women spending, spending with the 
money they had won by being far-sighted enough to foresee, 
way back in 1929, what was going to happen.28
As an additional manifestation of the (over)conﬁ dence of the 
times, 40 Wall Street reigned as the tallest building in the world in 
1929, only to be outdone by the Chrysler Building in 1930, which 
itself was unseated from the throne by the Empire State Building 
eleven months later. Chapter 11 will develop this “tallest building” 
indicator a bit further. John Kenneth Galbraith succinctly and elo-
quently summarized the spirit (and literal construction activity!) of 
the times and the dynamic it imposed on prices: “Optimism built 
on optimism to drive prices up.”29
Political and Regulatory Conditions
A large part of consumer, business, and national conﬁ dence sprang 
from the ending of WWI and the redeployment of industrial efforts 
toward commercial, rather than military, ends. The Coolidge 

 
The Great Depression 
131
administration was particularly hands-off in its approach to han-
dling markets, and prosperity was widespread.
Prohibition also played a role in the Florida land boom. 
Although unintended, the government’s prohibition of the manu-
facture and sale of intoxicating beverages led money to ﬂ ow to 
Florida, what William Johnson Frazer called “one of the countries 
leakiest spots on the country’s dry border.” The result was a surge in 
revenue that was deposited in Florida banks, which, due to banking 
regulation at the time (i.e., banks had been granted state charters 
and mandated to conduct business only within the state), effectively 
mandated that they lend this money out within Florida.
Every aspiring politician yearns for an opportunity to blame 
incumbents and the existing system for the ills faced by society, 
and the Great Crash and economic slowdown that followed pro-
vided such an opportunity. The early 1930s typify this spirit, and 
Roosevelt’s 1932 campaign for the presidency touted the failure of 
market economics and Wall Street’s self-seeking greed. In fact, his 
inaugural address captures this spirit:
Let me assert my firm belief that the only thing we have to fear 
is fear itself—nameless, unreasoning, unjustified terror which 
paralyzes needed efforts to convert retreat into advance. . . . In 
such a spirit on my part and on yours we face our common dif-
ficulties. They concern, thank God, only material things. Values 
have shrunken to fantastic levels; taxes have risen; our ability to 
pay has fallen; government of all kinds is faced by serious cur-
tailment of income; the means of exchange are frozen in the 
currents of trade; the withered leaves of industrial enterprise 
lie on every side; farmers find no markets for their produce; 
the savings of many years in thousands of families are gone. 
More important, a host of unemployed citizens face the grim 
problem of existence, and an equally great number toil with 
little return. Only a foolish optimist can deny the dark realities 
of the moment.
Yet our distress comes from no failure of substance. We 
are stricken by no plague of locusts. Compared with the per-
ils which our forefathers conquered because they believed and 
were not afraid, we have still much to be thankful for. Nature 
still offers her bounty and human efforts have multiplied it. 
Plenty is at our doorstep, but a generous use of it languishes in 

132 
Boombustology
the very sight of the supply. Primarily this is because the rulers 
of the exchange of mankind’s goods have failed, through their 
own stubbornness and their own incompetence, have admit-
ted their failure, and abdicated. Practices of the unscrupulous 
money changers stand indicted in the court of public opinion, 
rejected by the hearts and minds of men.
True they have tried, but their efforts have been cast in the 
pattern of an outworn tradition. Faced by failure of credit they 
have proposed only the lending of more money. Stripped of 
the lure of profit by which to induce our people to follow their 
false leadership, they have resorted to exhortations, pleading 
tearfully for restored confidence. They know only the rules of a 
generation of self-seekers. They have no vision, and when there 
is no vision the people perish.
The money changers have fled from their high seats in the 
temple of our civilization. We may now restore that temple to 
the ancient truths. The measure of the restoration lies in the 
extent to which we apply social values more noble than mere 
monetary profit.
Happiness lies not in the mere possession of money; it lies 
in the joy of achievement, in the thrill of creative effort. The 
joy and moral stimulation of work no longer must be forgotten 
in the mad chase of evanescent profits. These dark days will be 
worth all they cost us if they teach us that our true destiny is 
not to be ministered unto but to minister to ourselves and to 
our fellow men.
Consider the biblical overtones invoked by using “money chang-
ers” rather than “speculators” and the overwhelming sense that 
someone must be blamed. Chancellor notes that “in place of mar-
ket forces came federal welfare, housing and work programmes, 
bank deposit insurance, prices and incomes policies, minimum 
wage legislation, and a number of other measures. Speculation, 
whether in stocks, bonds, land, or commodities, was no longer to 
play such a key role in economic life.”30
The sweeping set of government programs were organized 
around the three Rs of relief, recovery, and reform. The eco-
nomic policies of the Roosevelt administration were based on get-
ting Americans back to work and alleviating economic hardships 

 
The Great Depression 
133
(i.e., relief), helping the American economy to recover toward full 
potential, and providing a new regulatory framework, complete 
with appropriate government authorities, to oversee the econ-
omy and prevent a repeat of the Great Depression. The New Deal 
 policies produced a plethora of new government programs and 
agencies, including major programs such as Social Security and the 
Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) as well as the crea-
tion of the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC).
Although such regulatory reform was designed to promote sta-
bility and prevent future hardships, it laid the roots of future trou-
bles by creating issues of moral hazard through deposit insurance, 
a potentially unsustainable program of entitlements such as Social 
Security, labor market distortion via price ﬂ oors (i.e., minimum 
wages), and the general growth of the government. The magnitude 
and impact of these programs by themselves suggest the 1920s and 
1930s boom–bust sequence threatened the very fabric of the U.S. 
capitalist system. Though property rights were never directly threat-
ened, the intention of Social Security and other programs was to 
redistribute from those who had, to those who needed.
Epidemic Thinking, Silent Leadership
One of the most important elements of a boom–bust sequence that 
helps one identify where in the cycle one might be is, to use lan-
guage from epidemiology, the population of unaffected or unex-
posed individuals. When one hears that everyone, including those 
not traditionally active or invested in the market, is “in the market,” 
then one might naturally (and accurately) assume that the boom 
cycle is far along and very mature (perhaps approaching expira-
tion), with a limited population of infectable participants.
Consider Allen’s description of the market in 1929:
Grocers, motormen, plumbers, seamstresses and speakeasy wait-
ers were in the market. Even the rebellious intellectuals were 
there: loudly as they might lament the depressing effects of 
standardization and mass production upon American life, they 
found themselves quite ready to reap the fruits thereof. . . . The 
Big Bull Market had become a national mania. . . . The specula-
tive fever was infecting the whole country. Stories of fortunes 
being made overnight were on everybody’s lips.31

134 
Boombustology
Further, the development of ﬁ nancial products such as invest-
ment trusts to meet the desires of ordinary individuals to get 
involved in the market boomed: “During the ﬁ rst nine months of 
1929, a new investment trust appeared for every working day and 
the industry issued over two and a half billion dollars worth of 
securities to the public.”32 These two elements—namely the broad 
involvement in the market and the tremendous boom in products 
designed to meet the needs of the previously uninvested—clearly 
tip the scales in favor of a very mature boom.
The epidemic lens also yields some insight into the aftermath 
of the Great Depression and subsequent speculative tendencies. 
The magnitude of the bust was such that a large percentage of the 
American population was negatively affected (some might say 
scarred) by the economic and ﬁ nancial implosion. Perhaps this 
“immunized” most citizens from the speculative fever that drives 
booms and busts? Might this be the reason that the United States 
did not have any major ﬁ nancial bubbles for decades after the 
Great Depression?
The logic of swarm leadership described in Chapter 5 is also 
helpful in understanding the 1920s and 1930s. For instance, the 
Florida land boom had lots of “informed” investors that drew 
the attention of the uninformed masses. John Martin, then gov-
ernor of Florida, was quoted as having said “marvelous as is the 
 wonder-story of Florida’s recent achievements, these are but heralds 
Table 7.4 The Five-Lens Approach to the Great Depression
Lens
Notes
Microeconomics
Reflexive credit/collateral tendencies
Higher prices induced buyers
Lower prices induced sellers
Macroeconomics
Inappropriately cheap money
Financial innovation (leverage via “binders”)
Psychology
New era thinking (new industries)
World’s tallest skyscrapers (40 Wall, Chrysler, Empire State Building)
Politics
End of war
Prohibition inspired money flows
Re-regulation, blame game
Biology
Amateur Investors (“national mania”)
Silent Leadership (Florida governor, JP Morgan)

 
The Great Depression 
135
of the dawn. . .” and S. Davies Warﬁ eld, president of the Seaboard 
Air Line Railway, supposedly talked of Miami’s population exceed-
ing 1 million within the next ten years.33 Such informed members 
were able to lead the swarm of uniformed investors into the mid 
1920s Florida land boom.
The list of similarly informed individuals that led the unin-
formed into the Great Crash is too long to mention, but the most 
famous quote is from Yale University professor Irving Fisher, who 
stated, “Stock prices have reached what looks like a permanently 
high plateau” just weeks before the stock market crash in 1929.
The Multilens Look
This discussion of the Great Depression was intended to demon-
strate the power of a multidisciplinary framework through which to 
analyze ﬁ nancial extremes. A summary of the discussion is listed in 
Table 7.4. The next chapter will similarly illustrate the power of this 
ﬁ ve-lens framework during the Japanese boom and bust.


137
A CREDIT-FUELED BUBBLE ECONOMY
The militaristic hubris that took Japan blindly into the Second 
World War found its counterpart in the speculative hubris of the 
Bubble Economy. History was repeating itself, except this time a 
stock market farce replaced the tragedy of war.
—Edward Chancellor
During the 1980s, Japan experienced an extraordinary specula-
tive boom that resulted in a bust that has plagued the island nation 
for the last 20 years. This chapter describes the events that trans-
pired during the 1980s and some of the resulting extremes wit-
nessed in the course of unbridled speculation. The impact of the 
bust, which continues as this book is being written, is brieﬂ y consid-
ered as well, and the boom and bust are then evaluated via the ﬁ ve 
lenses presented in Part I.
Japan(ese) as Different
Japanese society emphasizes harmony. The primary religions 
in Japan, Buddhism and Shintoism, are heavily oriented toward col-
lectivism. The heavy inﬂ uence of Confucian ideals also strengthens 
the primacy of group harmony over individual success. Further, the
Japanese, not unlike many other homogenous groups, genuinely 
think of themselves as unique and different from other societies 
The Japanese Boom and Bust
8
C H A P T E R

138 
Boombustology
and cultures. The Japanese hold a deep belief that they are unlike 
other races, religions, or frankly, humans. This belief is not one 
restricted to behavior, for as noted in Devil Take the Hindmost: A 
History of Financial Speculation, it actually begins with a notion that 
Japanese physiology is unique:
Japanese intestines were said to be different from those of 
Westerners and therefore unsuited to foreign beef and rice. 
It was even claimed that American skis were useless in Japan 
because the snow was different. At other times, pointing out 
such differences became a barely concealed expression of 
Japanese cultural nationalism and xenophobia: the Japanese 
brain was said to have a heightened sensitivity to the sounds of 
nature and a more intricate understanding of social relation-
ships. The Japanese distrusted Western-style rationalism as 
being incompatible with the preservation of social harmony. . . .
Japanese reason was described as “wet,” like the cloying rice of 
the national diet (which formed the glue of the community), 
while Western reason was “dry” and individualistic. Even in the 
ethical sphere, the Japanese were said to be different. They did 
not feel guilt, only shame on public revelation of misdeeds. At 
the root of all these differences, both real and spurious, lay a 
profound distrust of individualism, which found its counter-
part in a strong attachment to community and deference to 
authority.1
This deep cultural focus on community (relative to the Western 
focus on individuals) manifests itself throughout Japan’s political-
economic systems. Although the West has historically2 focused on 
a limited role for government in business, markets, and industry, 
the Japanese believed in an active role for government in deliver-
ing administrative guidance to companies and industries. Likewise, 
although Westerners distrust monopolies, Japanese seek industrial 
champions. Finally, Western distinctions between business mat-
ters and individual relationships have no counterpart among the 
Japanese. In Japan, relationships and social harmony supersede vir-
tually all else.
Many Japanese assert that their society is less selﬁ sh and more 
long-term-oriented than the West. Perhaps due to their feudal roots3 
and collectivist culture, hierarchy reigned supreme. Samurai values 

 
The Japanese Boom and Bust 
139
emphasized frugality, and savings rates were high. Administrative 
guidance helped channel these savings into the most appropriate 
investments. Market share was deemed a better objective than prof-
its as it aligned the organization toward long-term success.
Given the limited individual role in virtually all matters eco-
nomic, a long-term orientation, cultural values oriented around 
frugality and thrift, and a system designed around governmental 
guidance, Japan was a highly unlikely place for a speculative bub-
ble to form. Yet a speculative bubble driven by individualistic short-
term pursuit of proﬁ ts is exactly what Japan experienced in the 
mid- to late 1980s. The collective shock to Japan of the bubble and 
its subsequent bursting was monumental and continues to be felt 
today.
An Overview of the Bubble Economy
Japan had been absolutely devastated by the Second World War. In 
the aftermath, during which the United States and other nations 
provided meaningful economic support, Japan implemented 
numerous policies to promote savings. These savings, it can be 
argued, ultimately enabled banks to feel more “ﬂ ush” and therefore 
effectively encouraged the expansion of credit—credit that fueled 
much of Japan’s economic growth after the war.
The massive economic transformation that transpired between 
1953 and 1973 generated tremendous conﬁ dence in the country. 
According to Paul Krugman, “in the space of two decades a largely 
agricultural nation became the world’s largest exporter of steels 
and automobiles, greater Tokyo became the world’s largest and 
arguably most vibrant metropolitan area, and the standard of liv-
ing made a quantum leap.”4 As a further illustration (albeit less 
direct) of the resignation that “Japan had won,” Krugman went on 
to author The Age of Diminished Expectations in which he effectively 
stated the United States was potentially losing the economic race to 
government/private partnerships like Japan.
The Land Boom and Trophy Properties
During the 1980s, Japan’s economy grew by leaps and bounds. The 
period was characterized by fast growth, low unemployment, and 
big proﬁ ts. Although these conditions were highly supportive of ris-
ing asset prices, the property market raced ahead at unsustainable 

140 
Boombustology
rates. The property bubble reached truly extraordinary heights, 
particularly when compared with America, and ultimately served as 
the foundation of the entire ”Bubble Economy,” as it has since been 
known. Consider the following facts, as summarized by journalist-
turned-strategist Christopher Wood:5
America is twenty-five times bigger than Japan in terms of 
its physical area. Yet Japan’s property market at the end 
of 1989 was still reckoned by sober people in the government’s 
Management and Coordination Agency to be worth over 
¥2,000 trillion, or four times the estimated ¥500 trillion value 
of American property. This is truly history’s greatest accumu-
lation of wealth in one country. It creates ludicrous anoma-
lies. In early 1990 Japan in theory was able to buy the whole of 
America by selling off metropolitan Tokyo, or all of Canada by 
hawking the grounds of the Imperial Palace.6
Crazy as the absolute land valuations might seem, the actively 
traded market that developed for golf course memberships is per-
haps more noteworthy as another extreme of the land bubble. 
Wood’s commentary captures the spirit of the times better than any 
other:
Not surprisingly, given the national obsession with golf, this 
became a ludicrously overheated market in the late 1980s. An 
estimated 1.8 million people own golf club memberships in 
Japan; the prices of these memberships, which are traded like 
securities, range from a few million yen up to the ¥250 million 
range. At the peak, Japan’s 1,700 golf courses were estimated to 
have a total membership market value of some $200 billion.7
There are three primary reasons that land values in Japan were 
so high: physical scarcity, feudal tradition, and government policies. 
The following discussion will examine these three causal factors of 
the property bubble in greater detail, but for now, it is important to 
note that they created a market that was not particularly liquid.
Very few transactions (compared to what one might expect 
from such a highly valued market) actually took place. Although 
this might mean such high property values were meaningless, the 

 
The Japanese Boom and Bust 
141
fact that they served as collateral for a signiﬁ cant portion of bank 
lending meant that prices, regardless of their true “accuracy,” were 
very meaningful. In addition to supporting loans, much of the 
credit created through and supported by Japanese property price 
gains ultimately found its way into various assets and foreign prop-
erty investments.
Trophy properties in the United States soon dominated the 
attention of the Japanese. New York’s Rockefeller Center and 
the Exxon Building were two prized properties for which the Japanese 
paid handsomely. Japan’s Mitsui Real Estate Company paid $625 mil-
lion for the Exxon building on Sixth Avenue, well above Exxon’s 
$310 million asking price, solely to be listed in the Guinness Book of 
World Records.8 In 1990, a medium-sized Japanese company purchased 
America’s most famous golf course, Pebble Beach, for $831 million. 
Hawaii also became a target for Japanese investor interest. Between 
1985 and early 1991, Japanese investors purchased or ﬁ nanced 
the building of all but two of the main hotel resorts in Hawaii.9 The 
Grand Hyatt Wailea Resort and Spa on Maui (which opened its doors 
in 1991) was built for a total cost of over $600 million, which equated 
to a per room investment of over $760,000. According to Anthony 
Downs, former chairman of the Real Estate Research Corporation 
and a current Senior Fellow at the Brookings Institution, the hotel 
needed to charge over $700 per room per night (in the 1990s) and 
maintain occupancy of at least 75 percent in order to just break even.
The Art Market Meets the Bubble Economy
As the Japanese infatuation with property was bubbling to ever-
higher heights, their interest in art gained tremendous momentum. 
Edward Chancellor’s description summarizes the phenomenon 
extraordinarily well: “In the 1980s, the combination of ambitious 
Western auctioneers, promoting art with every trick in the book, and 
Japanese speculators, their wallets swollen with bubble proﬁ ts, cre-
ated the most extravagant art market on record.”10 Peter Watson, in 
his book From Manet to Manhattan: The Rise of the Modern Art Market, 
described the 1988–1990 period, driven primarily by Japanese buy-
ers, as “the most sensational that the art world has ever seen.”
The New York Times reported on the results of a Christie’s art 
auction that took place in late March 1987 in London.11 In the 

142 
Boombustology
highest price ever paid for a painting, van Gogh’s Still Life: Vase with 
Fifteen Sunﬂ owers had been sold to an unidentiﬁ ed foreign buyer for 
$39.9 million, well above the previous auction record for a painting 
of $10.4 million for Andrea Mantegna’s Adoration of the Magi. The 
foreign buyer was later identiﬁ ed as Yasuo Goto of Yasuda Fire & 
Marine, a Japanese insurance company.
On November 30, 1989, Tomonori Tsurumaki, a Japanese real 
estate developer, won an auction for Picasso’s Pierrette’s Wedding (Les 
Sotheby’s Stock as a Bubble Indicator?
As one of the world’s leading art auction houses, Sotheby’s has been a ben-
eﬁ ciary of booms in the art market. Might the stock serve as a useful indica-
tor of bubble conditions? Take a look at the following chart, noting that it has 
experienced four peaks in an otherwise generally ﬂ at line. The ﬁ rst peak rep-
resents the Japanese bubble economy. The next peak occurred when Internet 
wealth exploded, and the 2007 boom was one in which hedge fund managers, 
Russian billionaires, and others participated. The current peak is one being 
dominated by Chinese art buyers. Is China in bubble terrain?
Sotheby’s Stock Price as a Bubble Indicator
Internet 
Sotheby’s
$60
$50
$40
$30
$20
$10
5/13/1988
5/13/1989
5/13/1990
5/13/1991
5/13/1992
5/13/1993
5/13/1994
5/13/1995
5/13/1996
5/13/1997
5/13/1998
5/13/1999
5/13/2000
5/13/2001
5/13/2002
5/13/2003
5/13/2004
5/13/2005
5/13/2006
5/13/2007
5/13/2008
5/13/2009
5/13/2010
$
Hedge Funds
Emerging Markets
China
Japan
Source: Bloomberg Finance L.P.

 
The Japanese Boom and Bust 
143
Noces de Pierrette) that took place at the Paris auction house Drouot. 
Tsurumaki was bidding from the New Otani hotel in Tokyo while 
he was hosting a party launching his newest real estate development 
project—a $500 million auto racing resort to be called “Nippon 
Autopolis.” After winning the Picasso, Tsurumaki noted that “One 
highlight of Autopolis will be a museum featuring works by such 
famous artists as Monet, Renoir, Chagall, and Magritte—and now, of 
course, this world famous Picasso.”12 The height of the Japanese art 
craze was reached when Ryoei Saito, chairman of Daishowa Paper 
Manufacturing, paid $82.5 million for van Gogh’s Portrait of Dr. Gachet 
and over $78 million for Renoir’s Le Moulin de la Galette in May 1990. 
He then proceeded to shock the art world by stating he would cre-
mate the paintings along with his body upon his death.13
The Stock Market Goes Vertical
Not surprisingly, Japanese investors found a receptive and fertile 
opportunity to speculate in the stock market. In attempting to sum-
marize the magnitude of the stock market bubble, Krugman noted 
that “at the beginning of 1990, the market capitalization of Japan—
the total value of all the stocks of all the nation’s companies—was 
larger than that of the United States, which had twice Japan’s popu-
lation and more than twice its gross domestic product.”
Before describing the phenomenon in greater depth, a quick 
glance at Figure 8.1 demonstrates the tremendous boom the Japanese 
stock market experienced during the 1980s.
As is clear from the increasingly vertical move in share prices 
in the late 1980s in Japan, speculative juices were ﬂ owing rapidly. 
One stock that captures the spirit of the times perhaps better than 
any other is Nippon Telegraph and Telephone (NTT), the national 
 telephone company. After being privatized in 1985 to  encourage 
competition, NTT shares were ﬂ oated to the public in several 
tranches. By November 1987, when the company did a further list-
ing of shares valued at over $38 billion, the company had a total 
market valuation of approximately $300 billion. To provide some 
context for this ﬁ gure, the New York Times suggested at the time that 
NTT was worth more than the stock markets of Switzerland and 
France combined.14 Incidentally, Chancellor noted that NTT was 
worth more than the entire value of the West German and Hong 

144 
Boombustology
Kong stock markets, combined. Sufﬁ ce it to say, NTT was a very 
highly valued company!
On top of this already ebullient market, the fact that most 
Japanese companies owned land provided justiﬁ cation for highly 
priced shares as professional and amateur analysts alike highlighted 
the “hidden” real estate values that were not fully reﬂ ected in ofﬁ cial 
ﬁ nancial statements. Such land and property valuation was common-
place. Chancellor notes “even NTT was valued primarily for its land 
assets rather than as a telecommunications company. Propelled by 
its extensive landholdings, the market value of Tokyo Electric Power 
increased by a greater value than that of all the stocks listed on the 
Hong Kong Stock Exchange.”15 Even airlines were considered land 
plays, with All Nippon Airways rising to 1,200 times earnings and 
Japan Airlines at 400 times (it was thought to have less land).
To eliminate the noise originating from individual extremes, 
let us take a look at some of the valuations placed by the market 
on various sectors. Table 8.1 highlights the heights to which several 
sectors rose.
Figure 8.1 Japan’s Nikkei 225 Index in the 1980s
Source: Bloomberg Finance L.P.

5,000
1/1/1980
1/1/1981
1/1/1982
1/1/1983
1/1/1984
1/1/1985
1/1/1986
1/1/1987
1/1/1988
1/1/1989
1/1/1990
10,000
15,000
20,000
25,000
30,000
35,000
40,000
45,000

 
The Japanese Boom and Bust 
145
Bursting of the Bubble
In aggregate, the asset price boom that took place in Japan dur-
ing the late 1980s was perhaps the world’s most spectacular (and 
ephemeral) wealth creation event (up to that date).16 As asset 
markets sprinted to unsustainable levels, Japanese authorities 
grew increasingly concerned and attempted to dampen specu-
lative behavior. The Bank of Japan’s incoming governor feared 
high housing prices might erode social harmony. (Separately, it is 
interesting to note that such social harmony was so highly valued 
by society that banks began designing products to allow such har-
mony to coexist with lofty valuations. One such product, according 
to Kindelberger and Aliber, was a hundred-year, three-generation 
mortgage!) In 1989, the Bank of Japan issued new regulations limit-
ing the growth of real estate loans to the growth rate of total loans 
and began raising rates. The Bank of Japan raised the interest rate 
from 2.5 percent in May 1989 to 6.0 percent in August 1990 over 
the course of ﬁ ve incremental policy actions—undoing the reduc-
tion of interest rates from 5 percent in January 1986 to 2.5 percent 
by February 1987.17
Figure 8.2 below, taken from Richard Koo’s The Holy Grail of 
Macroeconomics: Lessons from Japan’s Great Recession, visually demon-
strates the magnitude of the correction in the stock market, land 
market, and even the golf course market.
Given the magnitude of the wealth created and the unsustain-
able heights to which asset prices had risen, the bursting of the 
bubble economy was inevitably going to have a massive ﬁ nancial 
and economic impact on corporations, investors, consumers, and 
perhaps most importantly, the banks that had fueled the surge 
Table 8.1 Selected Sector Valuations
Sector
Average P/E
Textiles
103
Fishery & Forestry
319
Services
112
Marine Transportation
176
Source: Robert Zielinski and Nigel Holloway, Unequal Equities: Power 
and Risk in Japan’s Stock Market (New York, NY: McGraw Hill, 1992).

146 
Boombustology
and accepted inﬂ ated assets as collateral. Kindelberger and Aliber 
eloquently summarize the bust:
Once the rate of growth of bank loans slowed, some recent 
buyers of real estate developed a cash bind; their rental income 
was still smaller than the interest payments on their mortgages, 
but they could no longer obtain the cash needed . . . from new 
loans. Some of these investors then became distress sellers. The 
combination of the sharp reduction in the rate of growth of 
credit for real estate and these distress sales caused real estate 
prices to decline; the cliché that the price of land always rises 
was tested and found to be false.
Stock prices and real estate prices began to decline at the 
beginning of 1990; stock prices declined by 30% in 1990 and 
an additional 30% in 1991. The stock price trend in Japan 
was downward . . . and at the beginning of 2003, stock prices 
in Japan were at the same level they had been 20 years earlier, 
even though the real economy was much larger. . .
Now the perpetual motion machine began to work in 
reverse. Property sales led to declines in property prices. The 
decline in real estate prices and stock prices meant that bank 
Figure 8.2 Bursting of the Bubble Economy
Source: Richard Koo, The Holy Grail of Macroeconomics (Singapore: John Wiley & Sons, 2009). Reprinted 
with permission of John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
140
(1990100)
0
85
Sources: Tokyo Stock Exchange, Japan Real Estate Institute, Nikkei Sangyo Shimbun
86 87 88 89 90 91 92 93 94 95 96 97 98 99 00 01 02 03 04 05 06 07
TOPIX
Land Prices in Six Major Cities (Commercial)
Golf Course Memberships
20
40
60
80
100
120

 
The Japanese Boom and Bust 
147
capital was declining; banks were now much more constrained 
in making loans. . . .
Bankruptcies increased, and the banks and other financial 
institutions incurred large loan losses. Those nonbank financial 
institutions that specialized in making real estate loans were in 
great distress.18
The Boombustology of the Japanese Boom and Bust
The Japanese boom and bust sequence exhibited many unique ele-
ments and took place in the most unlikely of locations—an admin-
istratively guided economy in which thrift and long-term thinking 
combined with market share prioritization over proﬁ ts and the desire 
for social harmony at the expense of individual success. The application 
of the ﬁ ve lenses in this context will build the framework’s relevance 
across the cultural spectrum and will help with the formulation of a 
generic framework through which to think about booms and busts.
The Reflexive Foundation of the Asset Boom: Land as Collateral
At the very root of the bubble economy was a tremendous boom 
and bust sequence in the property market. Land was, simply put, 
the foundation upon which the entire rickety system was built. 
By lowering rates to 2.5 percent in 1986, the Bank of Japan threw 
fuel on the already-burning speculative ﬁ re. Consider the reﬂ exive 
dynamic eloquently described by Wood:
This sparked a liquidity boom to beat all others. At its center lay 
the economy’s main engine of credit creation, the banks. They 
were able to use a rising stock market to literally create bank 
capital and thus boost their lending. That extra credit was fun-
neled back into two main markets (shares and property), boost-
ing the value of banks’ favored collateral (shares and property) 
against which to lend still more money.19
Further, the utter dominance of property as a source of collateral 
(some estimates indicate that real estate may have served as the back-
ing for around 80 percent of all loans outstanding in Japan20) virtually 
assured that any dynamic that transpired (boom in the case of rising 
prices or bust in the case of falling prices) was surely going to tend 
away from any equilibrium condition that might theoretically exist.

148 
Boombustology
Nevertheless, one might argue that the origin of the boom was 
a sound economic success story in which corporate Japan began 
growing proﬁ ts as they took market share from global competitors. 
Over time, however, this initial fundamental development trans-
formed into a reﬂ exive, self-fulﬁ lling and self-sustaining asset boom 
that ultimately exceeded its own capabilities and imploded upon 
itself.
The Effects of Macroeconomic Policy
Because of a savings-oriented culture and the Bank of Japan’s deci-
sion to lower the ofﬁ cial discount rate from 5 percent to 2.5 per-
cent between January 1986 and February 1987, banks were ﬂ ush 
with cash and money was close to free. As noted in the previous sec-
tion, this reduction of rates ignited a liquidity boom that fed upon 
itself in an unrivaled manner.
Another factor that proved to be quite important was the deregu-
lation and liberalization of the ﬁ nancial sector that enabled Japanese 
banks to increase the amount of loans guaranteed by property. 
Although this was initially a result of international lobbying to enable 
foreign banks to compete for Japanese business, the largest beneﬁ ci-
aries of the liberalization process were probably the Japanese banks.
A third factor was the Japanese yen. Because of external inﬂ u-
ences on the Japanese government to moderate the rate of Japanese 
currency appreciation, the Bank of Japan was active in the foreign 
exchange markets by constantly selling yen. Although the direct 
result of these efforts was a slower appreciation in the yen, the indi-
rect result of it was a ﬂ ooding of the system with yen. According to 
Kindelberger and Aliber:
The result of extensive intervention was that money supply 
in Japan began to increase at an exceptional rate—that is, 
the monetary base was increasing. The increase in reserves of the 
Japanese banks meant that they were able to increase their 
loans at a rapid rate.21
Was the Japanese government’s desire to control the currency 
the ultimate reason for many of these boom–bust oriented policies? 
Though it is not clear, it does seem stopping and/or slowing a ris-
ing yen, and the pressure that it puts on export industries in the 

 
The Japanese Boom and Bust 
149
country, was the target of policy efforts. Might the government have 
sought to induce speculation in a quest to get asset markets to sup-
port real economic activity?
The following quote, attributed to an unnamed executive at the 
Bank of Japan, suggests that asset price inﬂ ation may in fact have 
been the Bank of Japan’s goal:
We intended first to boost the stock and property markets. 
Supported by this safety net—rising markets—export-oriented 
industries were supposed to reshape themselves so they could 
adapt to a domestic-led economy. This step was then supposed 
to bring about an enormous growth of assets over every eco-
nomic sector. This wealth effect would in turn touch off per-
sonal consumption and residential investment, followed by an 
increase of investment in plant and equipment. In the end, 
loosened monetary policy would boost real economic growth.22
The Psychology of Conformity
In discussing the observation made by Charles Mackay in 
Extraordinary Popular Delusions and the Madness of Crowds that “men 
think in herds, go mad in herds, but only recover their senses one 
by one,”23 Wood notes that “as a group culture that discourages 
individualistic thinking, the Japanese are even more vulnerable 
than most to this decidedly human trait.”24 The cultural values that 
dominated pre-1980s Japan were uniquely communal in that social 
harmony was valued more highly than individual happiness. In a 
society focused on conformity and not being different, the mere 
introduction of the slightest differences can be quite destabilizing.
An analogy with preschool appears apt here. My daughter goes 
to a Montessori school in Boston. Virtually all the kids in her class 
(they’re mostly 3-, 4-, and 5-year-olds) simply go with the ﬂ ow. With 
the exception of the random tantrum that inevitably arises among 
children of this age, the group is quite harmonious. However, there 
are some key moments during the day when an individual opin-
ion snowballs rapidly into group thinking. Arriving one afternoon 
shortly before snack time to pick up my daughter, I patiently (and 
covertly) observed the classroom dynamic. The teacher was about to 
put out some fruit and crackers when one young boy yelled, “I don’t 
like crackers.” In an almost comical sequence of events that left the 

150 
Boombustology
teacher confused, probably frustrated, and deﬁ nitely busy, all the 
other kids started agreeing. Nobody wanted crackers, despite the fact 
that I have seen virtually all of the kids voraciously eating crackers on 
other afternoons. It was as if a domino had fallen, knocking over all 
other opinions.
Not unlike this pre-primary classroom, Japan—a consensus-
oriented, thrifty society focused on long-term economic develop-
ment—found itself rapidly pursuing conspicuous consumption (in 
the form of art and trophy properties) and short-term individual 
gain despite harmful long-term implications.
Just as this harmonious society found itself drifting rapidly 
toward overconﬁ dence and economic hubris during the boom phase 
of the cycle, so too did the bust phase of the cycle lead to a consen-
sus of dejection, underconﬁ dence, and utter despair. In referencing 
the dishonor that spread among Japan’s ﬁ nancial services employees 
during the 1990s and onward, Wood notes that “this demoralization 
matters because it can become self-feeding. In a consensus society 
where there are few contrarians, yesterday’s collective euphoria can 
too easily degenerate into tomorrow’s collective panic.”25
As this collectivist, consensus-oriented approach to life com-
bined with the extraordinary conﬁ dence that emerged as a result 
of Japan’s postwar economic success, textbook versions of cognitive 
biases soon emerged and were clearly recognizable. Might a soci-
ety that had experienced great economic success (such success that 
books such as Japan as Number One were published) develop a collec-
tive sense of overconﬁ dence? Would the availability bias lead to the 
extrapolation of most recent trends (land prices have been rising 
for a long time) into future projections (land prices will continue 
rising for a long time)? Might the public stories of grandiose glo-
bal accomplishment such as the purchase of Rockefeller Center or 
prized Picasso paintings be seen as representative of Japanese socie-
ty’s new global economic status more than as examples of conspicu-
ous consumption? In thinking about contractions, might anchoring 
and insufﬁ cient adjustment lead to the belief that a multiyear asset 
price deﬂ ation was particularly unlikely?
Political and Regulatory Conditions
Although the number of political and regulatory factors that inﬂ u-
enced the boom and subsequent bust are too numerous to fully 

 
The Japanese Boom and Bust 
151
describe here, there are several policies that seem vital to under-
standing the bubble economy. Given the root cause of the bubble 
economy was an unsustainable, credit-fueled rise in property prices, 
this section will focus on two main types of political and regulatory 
considerations that directly affected property prices: tax policies 
and ﬁ nancial de-regulation and credit controls.
In terms of tax policies, two taxes likely inﬂ uenced the incen-
tives to own property. The ﬁ rst tax, which might be deemed penal 
property taxation, was designed to discourage short-term trading of 
 properties. The policy was straightforward, albeit very distortionary: 
“If land is sold within two years of its purchase, then 150 percent of 
the capital gain is added to the seller’s annual income and taxed 
accordingly. If sold within ﬁ ve years, then 100 percent of the gain 
is added to income and taxed.”26 What effect might this have on 
purchasers who owned real estate that appreciated rapidly in the 
ﬁ rst ﬁ ve years of ownership? What might such taxes do to the trad-
ing volume and liquidity of these assets? By distorting the supply of 
housing that was available for purchase each year, these policies cre-
ated a false sense of scarcity, resulting rapidly rising prices. Further, 
this impact might also have created “house money” effects in which 
owners were not as disturbed or concerned about initial housing 
losses.
Another Japanese tax that seemed to affect real estate prices 
by artiﬁ cially increasing the demand for property was the inherit-
ance tax. The tax had a marginal rate structure in which mortgages 
were fully deductible from assessed property values, and property 
assessments (for tax purposes) were often well below market values 
(as is the case in much of America). Thus, it was possible to create 
negative asset value by purchasing a property with signiﬁ cant lev-
erage. This negative value could offset other positive asset values 
and thereby reduce the tax burden. Citing this as a “well-known 
bequest strategy,” Takatoshi Ito described the process as follows: 
“Those who were planning a bequest to their heirs were alarmed as 
their real estate values went up. In order to avoid high taxes, they 
purchased more real estate with high leverage, so that they could 
lessen the bequest tax burden. The higher prices generated more 
demand. . .[which may] have created an upward spiral in prices.”27
Financial deregulation might also have contributed to 
the upward property price spiral, and its subsequent reversal. 
Initially due to pressure to open up the banking sector to foreign 

152 
Boombustology
 competition (the Americans wanted the  ability to compete for busi-
ness in Tokyo on comparable terms to the Japanese ability to com-
pete for business in New York), Japanese ﬁ nancial deregulation was 
ultimately about decreasing administrative guidance.
As noted by Kindelberger and Aliber, “interest rate ceilings on 
deposits and loans were raised. Window guidance became much 
less extensive. The restrictions on the foreign investments of 
Japanese ﬁ rms were relaxed.”28 The overarching philosophy is best 
summarized as follows: “Traditional banks were safe, but also very 
conservative; arguably, they failed to direct capital to its most pro-
ductive uses. The cure, argued reformers, was both more freedom 
and more competition: let banks lend where they thought best, and
allow more players to compete for public savings.”29 As a result 
of this deregulation wave, banks began increasing the amount of 
money they lent against property.
Eventually, the rapid rise in asset prices caught the attention 
of policy makers. In an effort to deﬂ ate the bubble, the govern-
ment began reversing some of these pro-compeititon policies. 
Credit policies were reconsidered, with the idea that slowing access 
to property ﬁ nancing might defuse the rising inequality resulting 
from skyrocketing prices. The government implemented credit 
controls in April 1990 stipulating that any increase in bank lending 
for property must be smaller than the increase in a bank’s overall 
loan book. Given the high percentage of lending that had been col-
lateralized using property prior to this mandate, credit effectively 
stopped ﬂ owing toward property. Deregulation of the bond market 
also ensured that this mandate had teeth as corporate nonproperty 
borrowing (a very traditional role for Japanese banks) was slowly 
shifting away from banks to the bond market, a trend that acceler-
ated concomitantly with ﬁ nancial deregulation.30 The market rap-
idly swung from “an illiquid market where no one wants to sell (the 
traditional condition of this land-worshipping society) to an equally 
illiquid market where no one wants to buy.”31
Housewives, Preschool, and Pollock
The two lenses of Chapter 5 are quite powerful in evaluating the
Japanese bubble economy. The epidemic model provides a view 
of the bubble economy’s maturity and the relative proximity of a 
bust. The Far Eastern Economic Review noted in 1988 that “stocks 

 
The Japanese Boom and Bust 
153
have become a national street-level preoccupation” and near the 
top of the best-seller list was a Japanese comic book about the econ-
omy and the stock market.32 By the late 1980s, more than 22 mil-
lion people were investing in the stock market, up from around 
13–14 million in the mid 1980s. Nomura Securities, the largest of 
the domestic brokerage ﬁ rms, had more than 5 million customers, 
mainly Japanese housewives, who regularly invested with Nomura 
salesmen. Speculation was encouraged, and through broker “guid-
ance,” more than a third of stocks held in private accounts were 
held in margin accounts.33
Given the high proportion of the infectable population that 
appeared infected, an imminent slowdown of infections seemed 
likely. In fact, the rapid acceleration in the number of broker-
age accounts opened by individual investors was a spectacular 
early warning indicator of the beginning of the end of the bubble 
economy.
Any consensus-oriented collection of individuals is highly 
prone—like the bees in a swarm—to the silent leadership of a 
seemingly informed individual. Consider the earlier preschool 
example, in which the establishment of the “we don’t like crack-
ers” conclusion in the classroom is not dissimilar to the movement 
of ants described in Chapter 5. The investment climate in Japan 
through the middle of the 1980s was a stable equilibrium with eve-
ryone “tied,” in an opinion sense, to everyone else. Social harmony, 
conformity, and consensus ruled the day. For whatever reason, once 
the balance tipped34 toward the pursuit of immediate individual 
gain, the whole swarm of formerly long-term-oriented social beings 
became speculators. The cohesive power of communal thinking 
that had stabilized Japanese society for so long was now creating 
a speculative frenzy. The result was a spectacular manifestation of 
herd behavior in speculation, despite the view that gambling was a 
Chinese vice from which the Japanese were immune:
The Japanese were particularly susceptible to the lure of the 
stock market. . .[because] they have a tendency to exhibit herd-
like behavior when pursuing a certain activity, whether at work 
or play. This was said to stem from the communal demands of 
rice farming, which had fostered a national shudankizoku ishiki 
(group consciousness). During the war, Japan was portrayed 
in government propaganda as “one hundred million hearts 

154 
Boombustology
beating as one.” After the October crash, the president of a 
securities house boasted that Japan had survived the period of 
volatility because it was “a consensus society—a nation that likes 
to move in one direction.”35
Being a consensus society is deﬁ nitely a two-edged sword, for if 
consensus were organized around a stable equilibrium, all would 
be well. However, if the accepted perspective was one of disequilib-
rium, short-termism, or speculative behavior, then instability would 
dominate and the former stability would evaporate.
The Multilens Look
As the discussion above has demonstrated, the ﬁ ve lenses presented 
in Part I were able to shed light on the bubble economy of Japan in 
the late 1980s and the subsequent bust during the 1990s in a man-
ner not possible with the use of only one lens. Table 8.2 summarizes 
the ﬁ ve lens approach to thinking about the “Bubble Economy.” The 
next chapter utilizes the ﬁ ves lenses to evaluate the Asian ﬁ nancial 
crisis that emerged in the mid 1990s and the contagion effects it had 
on the rest of the world.
Table 8.2 The Five-Lens Approach to the Japanese Boom and Bust
Lens
Notes
Microeconomics
Reflexive credit/collateral dynamic
Higher prices induced buyers
Lower prices induced sellers
Macroeconomics
Inappropriately cheap money
Financial innovation (100 year mortgages)
Psychology
New era thinking (economic power)
Conformity-driven social harmony
Conspicuous consumption (trophy art)
Economic overconfidence
Politics
Supply/demand distortions (penal property taxation)
De-regulation of the banking industry
Credit regulations that distorted incentives
Biology
Amateur investors (housewives)
Silent Leadership (communal philosophies)
Popular Media (Japan as Number One)

155
THE MIRAGE OF A MIRACLE
The great Asian slump is one for the record books. Never in the 
course of economic events—not even in the early years of the 
Depression—has so large a part of the world economy experienced so 
devastating a fall from grace.
—Paul Krugman
In many ways the seeds of economic success in Asia were sown in 
the early aftermath of World War II. In an effort to rebuild soci-
eties and generate long-term economic growth, many Asian coun-
tries adopted export-oriented development policies designed to 
utilize their abundant (and therefore cheap) labor to meet global 
demands. Combined with increased opportunities for trade, the 
economic strategies caught a massive tailwind in the early 1990s 
and asset markets took notice, rising to lofty heights. The result-
ing bubble eventually collapsed in 1997 and 1998, with the ripple 
effects being felt around the world.
Boom Times in East Asia
The early to mid-1990s were a spectacular time for many East Asian 
economies (Japan, as we have just learned, was an exception). 
The Asian Financial Crisis
9
C H A P T E R

156 
Boombustology
A 1993 book titled the East Asian Miracle: Economic Growth and Public 
Policy, began with this summary:
East Asia has a record of high and sustained economic growth. 
From 1965 to 1990 the twenty-three economies of East Asia 
grew faster than all other regions of the world. Most of this 
achievement is attributable to seemingly miraculous growth in 
just eight economies: Japan; the “four Tigers”—Hong Kong, 
the Republic of Korea, Singapore, and Taiwan, China; and the 
three newly industrializing economies of Southeast Asia—
Indonesia, Malaysia, and Thailand.1
Against this backdrop of economic performance, it is not sur-
prising that booms might develop across the region’s asset markets. 
According to Robert Barbara, “the booms were initially sensible, 
reﬂ ecting sound investment opportunities. The dynamics were 
straightforward. The collapse of the former Soviet Union and 
China’s newfound willingness to interact with capitalist nations 
supercharged trade and capital ﬂ ows between the developed world 
and emerging Asian economies.”2
Rapid growth was taking place throughout the entire region, 
albeit with slightly nuanced and different driving factors in each 
country. South Korea, which had been devastated by the war, 
embarked on a remarkable period of economic growth that utilized 
high savings rates, cheap labor, an inexpensive currency, and strong 
industrial policy to produce products needed by global consum-
ers and corporations. Singapore, which was literally a swamp in the 
1950s, embarked on a strategy to become a corruption free, rule-of-
law oriented outpost in a land of crony capitalists and in so doing, 
elevated itself to ﬁ rst-world status. Deng Xiaoping’s rise to power in 
China resulted in an economic revival that opened the country up 
to international trade and global investment, as well as an economic 
reform agenda more typically found in capitalist nations. For many 
years following this policy shift, China grew its GDP in excess of 10 
percent per year. Hong Kong transformed into a regional, if not 
global, ﬁ nancial center. Manufacturing activity surged in Thailand, 
Indonesia, and Malaysia as globalization took hold, trade barriers 
were lowered, and protectionism retreated.
Many stock markets in the region rose at rapid rates. In 1993, 
for instance, many East Asian countries saw their stock markets 
double in value, with growth continuing into 1994. Figure 9.1 

 
The Asian Financial Crisis 
157
graphs the performance of the Philippine, Thai, Malaysian, and 
Indonesian markets in 1993. Real estate prices rose throughout the 
region as the optimistic outlook combined with inexpensive capi-
tal to create signiﬁ cant demand. In sum, Asian economies and asset 
markets boomed.
In essence, what occurred was simple: Abundant capital com-
bined with cheap labor to produce competitive economies. The 
developed world (or more precisely, the rich world) got excited 
about these prospects and began pouring money (primarily dollars) 
into the East Asian markets. As a result, many Asian currencies appre-
ciated quite rapidly and banks and local corporations borrowed sig-
niﬁ cant sums of U.S. dollars (i.e., not local currency). Kindelberger 
and Aliber note the importance of the interconnections that began 
to form between East Asian countries and the developed world:
China, Thailand, and the other East Asian countries were on 
the receiving end of outsourcing by American, Japanese, and 
European firms that wanted cheaper sources of supply for 
established domestic markets. Rapid economic growth was 
Figure 9.1 The Performance of Selected Asian Stock Markets in 1993
Source: Bloomberg Finance L.P.
0
1/1/1993
4/1/1993
7/1/1993
10/1/1993
1/1/1994
50
100
150
200
250
300
Thailand
Malaysia
Indonesia
Philippines

158 
Boombustology
both the result and cause of the inflow of foreign capital, espe-
cially from Japan. Japanese investment initially took the form 
of construction of manufacturing plants to take advantage of 
lower labor costs . . . from there a large part of the production 
would be exported, some to the United States, some to Japan, 
and some to third countries. . . . The buzzword was export-led 
growth, which was almost always based on a low value for the 
countries’ currency in the foreign exchange market.3
The system fed upon itself, and soon Americans were outsourc-
ing jobs to Korea, and in turn the Koreas were outsourcing jobs to 
China and Indonesia, where labor was even cheaper. In many ways, 
the whole chain was based on two primary enabling factors in the 
production country: inexpensive labor, and cheap currencies. As 
part of this “game,” countries sought to constantly keep their cur-
rencies undervalued. In fact, on January 1, 1994, the Chinese gov-
ernment effectively devalued their currency relative to the U.S. 
dollar by ~50 percent. Might this action have provided a tremen-
dous boost to Chinese exporters (at the expense of other Southeast 
Asian exporters)? In fact, it’s possible that the 1994 Chinese deval-
uation may have in fact been one of the primary catalysts for the 
Asian ﬁ nancial crisis.
“Ground zero” in this Asian export-oriented game was Thailand. 
It typiﬁ ed everything about the boom and also served as the catalyst 
for the regional bust. Let us now turn to Thailand to understand 
what occurred within it and how it illustrates the boom dynamics of 
the region.
Thailand Catches the Flu
On the surface, it seems odd that a country like Thailand could be 
responsible for a global economic meltdown that resulted in debt 
defaults in Russia, the collapse of perhaps the world’s largest hedge 
fund, and economic and currency contractions to rival the larg-
est in history. In The Return of Depression Economics, Paul Krugman 
explains:
The world economy is almost inconceivably huge, and in the 
commercial scheme of things, Thailand is pretty marginal. 
Despite rapid growth in the 1980s and 1990s, it is still a poor 
country; all those people have a combined purchasing power 

 
The Asian Financial Crisis 
159
no greater than that of the population of Massachusetts. One 
might have thought that Thai economic affairs, unlike those of 
an economic behemoth like Japan, were of interest only to the 
Thais, their immediate neighbors, and those businesses with 
a direct financial stake in the country. But the 1997 devalua-
tion of Thailand’s currency, the baht, triggered a financial ava-
lanche that buried much of Asia.4
It was the devaluation of the Thai baht that eventually 
snowballed into a global mess, but before the bust, there had 
been a great boom. From 1985 to 1996, Prime Minister Prem 
Tinsulanonda enacted policies that opened the doors of the econ-
omy to the outside world. During this time, Thailand was one of 
the world’s fastest growing economies and averaged annual GDP 
growth of 9.4 percent. Cheap labor, ﬁ scal conservatism, and natural 
resources formed a powerful cocktail that modernized the formerly 
 agricultural-dominated economy into a manufacturing-led, export-
oriented powerhouse.
Foreign capital came to Thailand in droves in the early 1990s, 
and with its arrival, the country’s ﬁ nancial self-sufﬁ ciency began to 
rapidly erode. Although it had basically self-funded its growth from 
domestic savings through the early 1990s5, Thailand grew increas-
ingly dependent on foreign capital, most of which was being lent in 
U.S. dollars.6
Several factors contributed to the rapid inﬂ ow of capital into 
Thailand during the early to mid-1990s, including several external 
factors. To begin, the resolution of the Latin American debt crises 
and the fall of the Soviet Union made investing in riskier places 
in the world more fashionable. Second, the sharp drop of interest 
rates in the developed world drove investors on a global search for 
better yields. Third, development agencies like the International 
Monetary Fund and the World Bank began rapidly increasing their 
funding into emerging Asian countries like Thailand. And ﬁ nally, 
there was the rapid growth of emerging markets funds (due in 
no small part to the name change—see “Third World Becomes 
Emerging Markets”) that began allocating capital in a diversiﬁ ed 
manner to developing countries like Thailand, Malaysia, Indonesia, 
and the like.
As foreign inﬂ ows began coming into Thailand in greater 
and greater volumes, the stock market rose simultaneously. Might 

160 
Boombustology
this have been a sign that capital was being recycled into specula-
tive investing in shares? Krugman describes the phenomenon as 
follows:
As more and more loans poured in from abroad, then, the 
result was a massive expansion of credit, which fueled a wave 
of new investment. Some of this took the form of actual con-
struction, mainly office and apartment buildings, but there was 
a lot of pure speculation too, mainly in real estate, but also in 
stocks.7
“Third World” Becomes “Emerging Markets”
We often hear of countries such as China and Brazil referred to as emerging 
markets. This was not always the case. In perhaps one of the greatest market-
ing coups of all time, former investment banker Antoine van Agtmael managed 
to rename the less developed countries of the world the “emerging” markets. 
He did so after struggling to raise a diversiﬁ ed fund to invest in what were then 
known as third world countries. Van Agtmael recounts the experience he had 
after a prospective client (Francis Finlay of JP Morgan) said to him, “This is a 
very interesting idea . . . but you will never sell it using the name ‘Third World 
Equity Fund’!”
I immediately knew he had a point. We had the goods. We had the data. We 
had the countries. We had the companies. What we did not have, however, 
was an elevator pitch that liberated these developing economies from the 
stigma of being labeled as “Third World” basket cases, an image rife with neg-
ative associations of ﬂ imsy polyester, cheap toys, rampant corruption, Soviet 
style tractors, and ﬂ ooded rice paddies. Over the weekend, I disappeared into 
one of the mental isolation spells that my wife and children so heartily dislike, 
but which I often ﬁ nd oddly productive. Racking my brain, I at last came up 
with a term that sounded more positive and invigorating: Emerging Markets. 
“Third World” suggested stagnation. “Emerging Markets” suggested progress, 
uplift, and dynamism.
Van Agtmael went on to found a ﬁ rm (Emerging Markets Management) 
focused exclusively on investing in emerging markets and he continues to run 
the ﬁ rm today.
Source: Antoine van Agtmael, The Emerging Markets Century: How a New Breed of 
World-Class Companies Is Overtaking the World (New York, NY: The Free Press, 2007).

 
The Asian Financial Crisis 
161
As the credit-fueled boom continued, non-bank ﬁ nance compa-
nies sprung up everywhere. These institutions were usually control-
led by a relative of a government ofﬁ cial and were believed to have 
implicit government guarantees—enabling them to raise money 
at advantageous rates from respected banks and foreign lenders. 
These ﬁ nance companies could then re-lend the capital to risk-
ier projects or speculative ventures at higher rates to capture the 
spread. The implication of these relationships is that the govern-
ment would backstop any losses, but that gains would accrue only 
to the ﬁ nance company. Such “crony capitalism,” as this system was 
later named, was widespread in Asia. Some have argued that this 
crony capitalism was in fact a very rational way of doing business as 
it enabled transactions in the absence of strong contract law.8
In the winter of 1996, against this backdrop of inefﬁ cient capi-
tal allocation via relationship lending practices, a dramatic concern 
emerged that began to spook foreign investors. Consumer ﬁ nance 
companies began reporting large losses. Might this have been a man-
ifestation of the 1994 Chinese devaluation that decreased the com-
petitiveness of Thai exports (relative to Chinese exports)? Many of 
these companies had been set up by large domestic banks to circum-
vent regulations that prevented them from growing their consumer 
lending practices as rapidly as they would like. Foreign inﬂ ows began 
to slow, and eventually reversed.9 Although capital inﬂ ows into the 
emerging Asian countries had been approximately $93 billion in 
1996, by 1997 that number had turned into an outﬂ ow of approxi-
mately $12 billion.10
Eventually, the outﬂ ow of currency created downward pressure 
on the currency, something the government sought to prevent. On 
July 2, 1997, after expending signiﬁ cant reserves in an attempt to 
defend the currency, the Thai baht was allowed to depreciate and 
moved from a price of 25 baht per U.S. dollar to more than 55 baht 
per dollar in early 1998. Such a currency move could have a dev-
astating effect on those with misalignment between their earning 
currency and their borrowing currency; to illustrate the point, con-
sider the following hypothetical example.
Mr. T is a Thai businessman who decides to borrow $10,000,000 
to expand his business. He doesn’t need dollars, but because the 
rate to borrow them is cheaper and the bank is willing to lend to 
him at a good rate, he takes the $10 million loan and converts it 
to Thai baht. At the time, 25 baht  1 US$, so he gets 250 million 

162 
Boombustology
baht for his loan. He is not concerned about the loan because his 
business is healthy (but his earnings are all in baht). His business 
continues to grow, and Mr. T uses the cash ﬂ ow to reinvest in the 
business rather than to repay the loan. Then disaster strikes. For sim-
plicity of math, let’s say that the baht is now worth 50 baht  1 US$. 
Now, in order to repay the $10 million loan, Mr. T must come up 
with 500 million baht. The loan value doubled in local currency 
terms, effectively bankrupting Mr. T.
This is exactly what happened to thousands of individual entre-
preneurs, banks, and big businesses in Thailand during the Asian 
ﬁ nancial crisis. Because foreign capital sources feared that they 
might not get paid back, they all retrenched and began recalling 
capital whenever possible, thereby creating an effective bank run 
on Thailand. Everyone wanted their money back at the same time, 
creating a self-fulﬁ lling vicious cycle of selling assets at depressed 
values to repay loans, but also further depressing values in the proc-
ess. The largest Thai ﬁ nance company, Finance One, which was 
worth over $5.5 billion at one point, collapsed completely.11
To complicate the situation, in order to prevent the currency 
from continuing to fall, Thai authorities began to sharply raise 
interest rates to attract capital. Although the strategy worked to 
stabilize the currency (the baht was trading at ~36 baht  1 U.S. 
dollar by the end of 1998), it increased the cost of doing business 
and slowed the economy so dramatically it entered a recession, with 
GDP shrinking by approximately 2.2 percent in 1998. Needless to 
say, conﬁ dence in the Thai economy was shattered. This loss of con-
ﬁ dence led to less economic activity, which fulﬁ lled fears of a slow-
ing economy, which hurt companies, banks, and consumers, which 
led to lower conﬁ dence. The feedback loop was nasty.
But the question remains: How and why did the problems in 
Thailand create a ﬁ nancial tsunami that engulfed so many other, 
seemingly unrelated countries and organizations? Although 
Thailand’s trading partners would be hurt because of the economic 
slowdown in Thailand, an important new mechanism through 
which Thailand’s contagious disease spread were the same emerg-
ing markets funds that had enabled its boom. When bad news and 
ﬁ nancial losses came in from Thailand, fund managers needed to 
reduce holdings throughout the region to meet redemption 
requests from investors. Regardless of how countries may have 

 
The Asian Financial Crisis 
163
 differed, they were linked in the  portfolios of these fund managers 
and hence were all vulnerable to self- validating panics.
To illustrate this concept in action, consider the following sim-
pliﬁ ed scenario. A fund manager has chosen to invest in ﬁ ve coun-
tries and has spread his money equally between them (20 percent 
of the portfolio to each). Now, because of economic hardships in 
Country A, the stock market of Country A has fallen 50 percent. 
Now, instead of having 20 percent in each of ﬁ ve countries, our 
fund manager has 11.1 percent in Country A and 22.2 percent of 
his portfolio in each of the other countries. Assuming he wants 
to return to his prior country weightings, he must now sell shares 
of companies in Country B, Country C, Country D, and Country 
E—despite the fact that these countries have not had the same 
economic difﬁ culties as Country A. This contagion effect is fur-
ther complicated by the risk that our fund manager faces investor 
redemptions, in which case he might indiscriminately be selling all 
countries. Thus, even though the spark started in Country A, the 
ﬂ ames might eventually engulf all ﬁ ve countries.
Through such capital market linkages, the panic spread from 
Thailand and eventually engulfed most of Asia, Russia, most other 
emerging markets, and the famed U.S. hedge fund Long-Term 
Capital Management. To appreciate the magnitude of the capital 
markets impact, particularly when combined with currency impacts, 
consider Figure 9.2, which illustrates the performance of the Jakarta 
Stock Exchange Composite Index from January 1, 1995 through 
December 31, 1999 in U.S. dollar and Indonesian rupiah terms. 
Note that the U.S. dollar–denominated chart reﬂ ects what most 
emerging markets managers experienced. Peak to trough declines 
during this period were 65 percent in local currency terms and 
93 percent in U.S. dollar terms. Over the 5-year period displayed in 
the chart, the index actually rose 44 percent in Indonesian rupiah 
terms (granted, the currency fell a great deal) but fell more than 
55 percent in U.S. dollar terms.
The Boombustology of the Asian Financial Crisis
Given the complexity of the East Asian ﬁ nancial crisis in terms of 
number of countries, governments, nongovernmental organiza-
tions, and currencies involved, it is impossible in several pages to 

164 
Boombustology
utilize the ﬁ ve lenses of Part I in a comprehensive manner. Instead, 
this section will highlight a handful of illustrative issues.
The Reflexivity of Confidence
As the rapid transmission of bank losses into a reversal of foreign 
fund ﬂ ows and a self-validating panic demonstrated, the events in 
Asia during 1997 and 1998 were highly reﬂ exive. They were not self-
correcting in the traditional sense of efﬁ ciency. The primary cause 
of this reﬂ exivity was the use of borrowed money that was collateral-
ized by assets—assets which had their values inﬂ ated by the excess 
purchasing power generated through borrowed money. Because 
these are not self-correcting dynamics, they become quite disrup-
tive and tend toward disequilibria.
The dynamics leading to disequilibrium can be summarized as a 
self-reinforcing, self-validating reﬂ exive feedback loop that connects 
what I label the ﬁ ve Cs—conﬁ dence, collateral, credit, conditions, 
and capital, as shown in Figure 9.3. During the boom phase of the 
cycle, conﬁ dence inspires credit, credit improves collateral values, 
which generates conﬁ dence and better economic conditions via 
increased activity. The improved conditions drive more  conﬁ dence 
Figure 9.2 Indonesian Stock Market, 1995–1999
Source: Bloomberg Finance L.P.
180
0
1/1/1995
1/1/1996
1/1/1997
1/1/1998
1/1/1999
1/1/2000
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
JCI-IDR
JCI-USD

 
The Asian Financial Crisis 
165
and attract capital, which results in greater availability of credit. The 
greater availability of credit broadens the universe of acceptable col-
lateral, which generates better conditions, and on it goes.
Unfortunately, the world discovered that these highly intercon-
nected and reinforcing ﬁ ve Cs can also work in reverse. So, during 
the bust phase of the cycle, reduced conﬁ dence led to less credit, 
credit contraction hurt collateral values, which hurt conﬁ dence 
and conditions. Deteriorating conditions further hurt conﬁ dence, 
which caused capital to ﬂ ee, while further reducing access to credit. 
The contraction in credit tightens collateral standards, which fur-
ther hurts conditions, and so on.
A classic example of a positive feedback loop and the role of signal 
strength can be found with a microphone in an auditorium. If the sig-
nal is too strong, then the speakers will generate noise sufﬁ ciently loud 
enough that the microphone will pick it up, with the speakers amplify-
ing that feedback even more, generating even greater feedback, and 
so on. If the signal is dampened by other noises or interference of any 
sort, then the signal strength does not multiply. If, however, the feed-
back loop combines with a strong signal, the result is that utterly offen-
sive nails-on-a-chalkboard, toe-curling screeching noise.
If conﬁ dence is the root of our signal, then the shock to one’s 
conﬁ dence is what tips the balance and turns our virtuous cycle 
into a vicious one. How intensely might Mr. T’s conﬁ dence have 
been shaken when he woke up one day and found he was  effectively 
Figure 9.3 The Five Cs
Economic Activity
Willingness to Borrow
Currency Value
Interest Rates
Willingness to Lend
Price of Credit
External Flows
FDI vs. “Hot” Money
CAPITAL
CONFIDENCE
CONDITIONS
COLLATERAL
CREDIT
Asset Values
Eligible Assets

166 
Boombustology
bankrupt? Quite seriously, I assume. How intensely might the for-
eign bank’s conﬁ dence have been shaken when it learns that it 
lent money out to borrowers that suddenly appear highly unlikely 
to repay, even though last month those very same loans appeared 
quite safe? Again, one can only assume quite severely. Thus, the 
highly iterative and self-reinforcing loop is very reﬂ exive and can 
lead the system to extremes of instability, rather than any resem-
blance of a calm equilibrium.
Miracle or Myth?
In an aptly timed essay published in Foreign Affairs at the end of 1994, 
Paul Krugman warned that Asia’s economic success was more likely 
to be a mirage than a miracle. His essay, “The Myth of Asia’s Miracle,” 
began by describing the supposed economic success story of the Soviet 
Union. He describes how the idea of central planning and the priori-
tization of collective objectives over individual pursuits was considered 
by some as a better alternative to Western market-dominated individu-
alism. Of course, his writing of such thoughts in 1994 after the Soviet 
Union had imploded upon itself was intentional.
His example provided a powerful reminder that growth by 
itself is meaningless, but rather, one needs to consider the sources 
of economic growth and their sustainability. The Soviet Union, 
claimed Krugman, was able to outgrow the United States in the 
1950s and 1960s not because it had a more sustainable system, 
but rather because it had been very efﬁ cient at mobilizing inputs. 
Productivity, he noted, holds the key to long-term sustainable 
growth.
In order to fully appreciate Krugman’s argument and its appli-
cability to the East Asian story, we need to understand the basics of 
growth accounting. The term was ﬁ rst introduced by MIT professor 
Robert Solow in a 1957 paper published in the Review of Economics 
and Statistics. The basic framework suggested that there are two pri-
mary sources of growth: a change in inputs and a change in the pro-
ductivity of those inputs. Inputs can further be broken down into 
capital and labor. Isolating each of these three variables (capital, 
labor, and total productivity) helps to understand how each affects 
economic growth.
Suppose for a moment that a country has 100 people and only one 
revenue-generating activity—picking apples. Fifteen of the  people are 

 
The Asian Financial Crisis 
167
too old to work, and ﬁ fteen are too young, so the working population 
is 70 people. Suppose on any given day, only 30 of those 70 are actu-
ally working. One very obvious way to grow the output of the economy 
is to have some of the 40 idle workers begin working. If the average 
worker can pick 1,200 apples a year, then our initial output was 36,000 
apples. Now after adding additional workers (suppose another three 
workers join the effort), our production will grow to 39,600 apples, 
representing 10 percent growth. In this case, because the input of 
labor grew by 10 percent and output grew by 10 percent, we can say 
100 percent of our growth is accounted for by labor inputs.
Now suppose we are able instead to purchase some machines 
(cost  1,200 apples per machine, paid for 100 percent from sav-
ings) that help us gather more apples per worker. The machine 
(a handheld apple-picking arm extender that eliminates the need 
for climbing trees) is able to help each worker pick 1,320 apples 
per year. Assuming that we have added no new workers, but that 
each worker now has the machine, annual production will rise to 
39,600 apples—exactly 10 percent higher than previously. But how 
can we account for this new growth, since it comes at a cost of the 
machines? One method is to weight the cost of the machine by 
the return it generates and consider that our capital investment. In 
our case, the machine costs 1,200 apples and generates 120 apples 
per year of additional production. Capital thus produced a 10 per-
cent return. In this example, because capital grew by 10 percent 
and output grew by 10 percent, we can say that 100 percent of our 
growth is accounted for by capital inputs.
Finally, let us consider a third scenario in which our 30 workers 
neither get additional colleagues in the ﬁ elds or new equipment to 
help them. Instead, they are able to grow output by simply increas-
ing their productivity. In this case, 100 percent of the growth in out-
put can be accounted for by efﬁ ciency gains.
Because neither capital nor labor inputs can be grown indeﬁ -
nitely, growth from inputs is ultimately unsustainable. Krugman 
argued in 1994 that the supposedly miraculous growth rates of Asia 
were destined to fall. They were unsustainable because they were 
based on growth of inputs. He highlights the case of Singapore:
Between 1966 and 1990, the Singaporean economy grew at a 
remarkable 8.5% per annum, three times as fast as the United 
States; per capita income grew at 6.6%, roughly doubling every 

168 
Boombustology
decade. This achievement appears to be some kind of eco-
nomic miracle. But the miracle turns out to have been based on 
perspiration rather than inspiration: Singapore grew through a 
mobilization of resources that would have done Stalin proud. 
The employed share of the population surged from 27 to 51 
percent. The educational standards of that work force were 
dramatically upgraded: while in 1966 more than half the work-
ers had no formal education at all, by 1990 two-thirds had com-
pleted secondary education. Above all, the country had made 
an awesome investment in physical capital: investment as a 
share of output rose from 11% to more than 40%…
Singapore’s growth has been based largely on one-time 
changes in behavior that cannot be repeated. Over the past 
generation the percentage of people employed has almost dou-
bled; it cannot double again. A half-educated work force has 
been replaced by one in which the bulk of workers has high 
school diplomas; it is unlikely that a generation from now most 
Singaporeans will have PhDs. And an investment share of 40% 
is amazingly high by any standard; a share of 70% would be 
ridiculous. So one can immediately conclude that Singapore is 
unlikely to achieve future growth rates comparable to those of 
the past.12
Similar stories, albeit less extreme, can be found across Asia. 
Because money was being thrown at countries like Thailand by exter-
nal investors and the ﬁ ve Cs were in a virtuous phase, capital was easy 
to come by. Combined with the overconﬁ dence developed through 
the prior years of spectacular economic performance, it is conceiv-
able that money was allocated to projects with unrealistic return 
expectations. In an outcome that would not have shocked Austrian 
economists, malinvestment seemed not only likely, but inevitable.
“Hasn’t Happened” Is Not “Can’t Happen”
One of the great ﬁ nancial industry disclaimers is that “past per-
formance is no guarantee of future results.” I’ve always found this 
statement a bit odd, even misleading. Perhaps it should be modi-
ﬁ ed to “past performance is not related to future performance” 
or “insofar as past performance indicates a replicable skill and 

 
The Asian Financial Crisis 
169
the future looks like the past, then we might think it possible that 
future results might or might not resemble past results,” or some-
thing like that. In any case, just because something has happened, 
doesn’t mean it will continue to happen. Likewise, just because 
something has not happened, does not mean it cannot or will not 
happen. In fact, underestimation of the probability of events that 
have not happened is a common cognitive bias. It is the natural 
result of employing an availability heuristic. Obviously, images and 
stories of an event that has not happened are less available.
Many Thai individuals, companies, banks, and government ofﬁ -
cials did not spend much time thinking about the currency mis-
matches that plagued their ﬁ nancial structures. Given the role that 
such mismatches played in the rapid unraveling of the economy, let 
us consider how the decision-making biases discussed in Chapter 3 
might have affected Thai thinking.
From a psychological perspective, why were major move-
ments in the currency not seen as possible by lenders or borrow-
ers? Perhaps it was because the Thai currency had been very stable 
prior to the crisis. Perhaps it was because there was not any avail-
able data on Thai currency volatility. (Surely, however, foreign lend-
ers would have been aware of the recent Mexican depreciation.) 
Perhaps they were anchored on the current ratio of ~25 baht per 
dollar and made insufﬁ cient adjustments for the range of likely out-
comes. Might lenders and borrowers alike have thought the baht 
might move by ~10 percent?
There are clearly dozens upon dozens of questions that one can 
ask about the decision-making processes that led to the currency 
mismatch, but one thing remains certain—the decision to borrow 
in dollars while earning in baht created vulnerabilities, risks that 
were inappropriately considered (likely for one of the many psycho-
logical reasons discussed in Chapter 3) in the course of making that 
decision.
Another indicator of overconﬁ dence (as well as excess liquidity 
and loose monetary conditions driven by foreign inﬂ ows) was the 
construction of Malaysia’s Petronas Towers. The twin skyscrapers, 
which were completed in 1997 and almost perfectly marked the top 
of Asian ﬁ nancial markets prior to the Asian ﬁ nancial crisis, were 
the tallest buildings in the world. Chapter 11 will discuss the sky-
scraper indicator in greater detail.

170 
Boombustology
Crony Capitalism as Cultural Coping
Although there are hosts of political issues and policies that one can 
consider through a political lens, this section will focus on the idea of 
rights and prices (the two primary elements presented in Chapter 4). 
Let us begin with property rights, which are, across most emerging 
markets, less well developed than those in the United States or the 
“ﬁ rst” world. Nevertheless, property rights did exist in many emerg-
ing Asian countries, but were signiﬁ cantly less well protected and 
infringements on them less well enforced. How might individuals 
and companies attempt to cope with such an environment?
One way to gain greater comfort in your claim for certain prop-
erty is to have strong relationships (even blood-based relationships, 
i.e., family) with those with whom you might end up having a dis-
pute. Harvard University Professor Dwight Perkins summarizes the 
issue at hand:
Societies made up of self-contained villages or autonomous 
feudal estates do not have to worry much about the security 
of economic transactions. The village elders or the feudal lord 
can enforce whatever rules they choose. However, when trade 
takes place over long distances, local authority can no longer 
guarantee that a transaction will be carried out in accordance 
with a given set of rules. . . . A general authority must provide 
security along the road or river; each individual trader should 
not have to provide it on his own . . .
In Europe and North America, the required security was 
supplied by laws backed up by a judiciary that over time became 
increasingly independent of the other functions of government. 
This development of the rule of law backed up by an independ-
ent judiciary took place over centuries, and the process was well 
along by the eighteenth century. . . . There was no comparable 
development of this kind of legal system in East and Southeast 
Asia. There was, however, the development of long-distance 
commerce both within and between economies in Asia, and 
that commerce had to have something that substituted for the 
rule of law. That substitute drew on one of the strengths of East 
Asian culture: close personal relationships based on family ties, 
as well as ties that extended beyond the family.13
Thus, it seems at least reasonably likely that the lack of strong 
institutional structures to enforce property rights led to the mass 

 
The Asian Financial Crisis 
171
adoption of lending based on noneconomic considerations. 
Perhaps the simple lack of well-deﬁ ned property rights should have 
been an alarm bell for foreign lenders.
In terms of price considerations, perhaps the greatest 
 government-inspired distortions took place in the currency mar-
kets. Given the export-oriented nature of most of the region’s econ-
omies, most governments worked to keep their currencies cheap 
relative to their trading partners. The result of these efforts was an 
increase in the country’s relative dependence on exports as cheap 
currencies supported exporter proﬁ ts. Likewise, it hurt import-
ers and therefore discouraged the generation of domestically ori-
ented industries. The managed foreign exchange rates also drove, 
as discussed previously in the example involving Mr. T, signiﬁ cant  
currency mismatches in the ﬁ nancial structures of domestic com-
panies. Thus, by interfering with the price mechanism’s efforts to 
determine the price of a currency, many Southeast Asian govern-
ments magniﬁ ed their vulnerability to currency volatility.
Asian Harmony vs. Western Individualism
Our epidemic lens provides little value here. As is evident by the 
now common reference to the East Asian ﬁ nancial crisis (not boom 
or bubble), the story here is really one of a bust. Sure, stories exist 
of property prices and stock prices going through the roof, but 
there are few stories of taxi-drivers, housewives, and gardeners 
investing in the market. Rather, it was a story of global capital ﬂ ows 
(some might argue “hot money”) that ﬁ lled the void and provided 
the fuel for the boom to take place.
The emergence lens, however, does provide insight. As we 
found in our study of the Japanese boom and subsequent bust, 
Asian philosophies tend to be less individualistic and more com-
munal. They emphasize social harmony and group cohesion over 
individual pursuits. The impact of this pack mentality is that mar-
kets become highly tippable in one direction or another. Just as was 
discussed in the previous chapter about Japan, so too is the swarm/
herd framework applicable with respect to Asia. We won’t recount 
the same logic here, but it might make sense to review Chapter 8 in 
light of the East Asian scenario. It will seem eerily pertinent.
Another “herd” that emerged during the early 1990s was the 
group of fund managers focused on emerging markets. Inherent 

172 
Boombustology
in their design as diversiﬁ ed managers was a linkage and coupling 
of very different economies into one bucket. Further, given they 
merely allocate other people’s money, these fund managers became 
herdlike in their behavior because of client ﬂ ows. Thus, in good 
times (think early 1990s), ﬂ ows into their funds would likely be 
positive and the herd would stampede in—bringing capital along. 
However, if the herd changed direction, the stampede would occur 
in the opposite direction, with capital ﬂ ight from the country.
In discussing the Asian crisis, Michael Lewis described this 
phenomenon bluntly: “The collapse of the Thai baht in July 1997 
caused the people who had invested in places that reminded them a 
bit of Thailand (South Korea, the Philippines, Indonesia, Malaysia) 
to take their money and go home.”
The Multilens Look
Given the East Asian ﬁ nancial crisis was really a set of many differ-
ent crises that fell like dominoes, this chapter attempted to focus on 
the case of Thailand as representative of the situation. The ﬁ ve-lens 
approach to thinking about the events that unfolded yields some 
striking similarities to other booms and busts. Table 9.1 provides a 
quick summary of the chapter via the lenses discussed.
Table 9.1 The Five-Lens Approach to the Asian Financial Crisis
Lens
Notes
Microeconomic
Pro-cyclical capital flows
Reflexivity of confidence
Macroeconomic
Hot money inflows providing cheap capital
Financial innovation (finance companies to hide leverage)
Moral hazard motivated lending
Psychology
Anchoring on currency values, insufficient adjustment
World’s tallest skyscraper (Petronas Towers)
New era thinking (“miracles” and “tigers”)
Politics
Crony capitalism inspired moral hazard
Political focus on undervalued currencies
Biology
Silent Leadership (communal philosophies)
Herd of emerging markets funds

173
THE HOMEOWNER’S SOCIETY CREATES 
THE PEOPLE’S PANIC
It’s the English speaking world’s favorite economic game: property. 
No other facet of financial life has such a hold on the popular 
imagination. No other asset-allocation decision has inspired so 
many dinner-party conversations. The real estate market is unique. 
Every adult, no matter how economically illiterate, has a view on its 
future prospects.
—Niall Fergusson
The global credit crunch that began with a hiccup in the U.S. 
subprime markets in February 2007 and snowballed into great-
est economic contraction since the Great Depression is still under 
way as this book is being written. Although it is often risky to write 
about events as they unfold, I have nevertheless chosen to do 
so— recognizing that the chapter will necessarily focus upon a dis-
cussion of the boom with a cursory mention of the bust. While the 
impact of this boom and bust sequence on the rest of the world is 
yet to be fully understood, the events that have transpired so far 
have tremendous value in our study of bubbles before they burst.
“Safe as Houses”
In his book The Ascent of Money: A Financial History of the World, 
Niall Fergusson explains what property ownership can mean to 
The U.S. Housing Boom and Bust
10
C H A P T E R

174 
Boombustology
 individuals as well as the world of ﬁ nance. For very good reasons, 
investing in housing seems like a safe bet:
“Safe as Houses”: the phrase tells you all you need to know about 
why people all over the world yearn to own their own homes. 
But that phrase means something more precise in the world 
of finance. It means that there is nothing safer than lending 
money to people with property. Why? Because if they default on 
the loan, you can repossess the house. Even if they run away, the 
house can’t. As the Germans say, land and buildings are “immo-
bile” property. So it is no coincidence that the single most impor-
tant source of funds for a new business in the United States is a 
mortgage on the entrepreneur’s house. Correspondingly, finan-
cial institutions have become even less inhibited about lending 
money to people who want to buy property.1
The ending of the Internet, media, and telecom boom of 2000 
resulted in an unprecedented asset bubble implosion in the United 
States. In an effort to stimulate the economy, monetary policy 
became extraordinarily loose, with a host of unintended conse-
quences. Krugman describes leadership at the Federal Reserve as 
follows: “Greenspan acted like a parent who sternly warns teenagers 
against overdoing it but doesn’t actually stop the party, and stands 
ready to act as designated driver when the fun is over.”2 And so it 
was that the Greenspan Fed lowered rates in the aftermath of the 
Internet bubble’s bursting, and proceeded to hold them at low lev-
els for an extended period of time.
Writing in 2005, economist Robert Shiller, co-creator of the 
widely followed Case-Shiller housing price index whose March 2000 
publication of Irrational Exuberance proved extraordinarily well 
timed in predicting the Internet bust—predicted a housing bust. 
He noted that “the market for real estate, particularly individual 
homes, would seem likely to display speculative booms from time 
to time, since the psychological salience of the prices of the places 
we see every day and the homes we live in must be very high, and 
because home prices are such a popular topic of conversation.”3 
Just as he meticulously dismissed popular explanations for why 
the Internet boom was different and would not bust, so too did he 
address the numerous rationalizations explaining why the housing 
boom would not bust. He notes:

 
The U.S. Housing Boom and Bust 
175
One such explanation is that population pressures have built 
up to the point that we have run out of land, and that home 
prices have shot up as a result. But we didn’t just run out of 
land since the late 1990s: population growth has been steady 
and gradual. Another theory is that the things that go into 
houses—the labor, the lumber, the concrete, the steel—are in 
such heavy demand that they have become very expensive. But 
construction costs are not out of line with long-term trends. 
Another glib explanation is that the boom is due to the interest 
rate cuts implemented in many countries in an effort to deal 
with a weak global economy. But while low interest rates are 
certainly a contributing factor, central banks have cut interest 
rates many times in history, and such actions never produced 
such concerted booms.4
To understand the magnitude of the bubble that was created in 
the U.S. housing market, consider the charts (using data compiled 
by Shiller going back to 1890) that show the U.S. home price index 
(a proxy for the real, inﬂ ation-adjusted values of homes) compared 
to the long-run drivers of housing costs, namely the cost of building 
materials and the demand (i.e., population) for housing.
As visible in Figure 10.1, inﬂ ation in building materials and 
labor does not adequately explain the sudden and rapid rise of 
Figure 10.1 Shiller’s Home Price Index vs. Building Cost Index
Source: www.econ.yale.edu/~shiller/data.htm
Home Price Index (LHS)
250
200
150
100
50
250
300
350
400
450
500
200
150
100
50
0
1890
1897
1904
1911
1918
1925
1932
1939
1946
1953
1960
1967
1974
1981
1988
1995
2002
0
Building Cost Index (RHS)

176 
Boombustology
the home price index. Might demand for housing be the culprit? 
Figure 10.2 plots that same home price index against the U.S. 
population.
As seen in Figure 10.1 and Figure 10.2, U.S. home prices very 
clearly had appreciated at a rate faster than that of the fundamen-
tal housing market drivers. Between 1890 and 2005, when this chart 
was produced, housing prices were up 85 percent in real terms, far 
greater than the appreciation in building costs. Likewise, prices 
grew more rapidly than population, and the additional cost of 
money (i.e., interest rates) does not amount to much of a cost pres-
sure on housing. In 2006, these ﬁ gures clearly indicate an unsus-
tainable boom in progress.5
The Music Stops
In July 2007, the chief executive ofﬁ cer of Citigroup, Chuck Prince, 
granted an interview to the Financial Times. During the interview, 
he was asked about the potentially excessive housing market lend-
ing that Citigroup was conducting, particularly in light of early 
indications of problems in the subprime market. In a now famous 
response that captures the competitive risk taking that took place 
among virtually all participants in the housing ﬁ nance markets, 
Prince noted, “When the music stops, in terms of liquidity, things 
will be complicated. But as long as the music is playing, you’ve 
Figure 10.2 Shiller’s Home Price Index vs. Population
Source: www.econ.yale.edu/~shiller/data.htm
Home Price Index (LHS)
Population (RHS)
250
200
150
100
50
300
400
500
600
700
200
100
0
1890
1897
1904
1911
1918
1925
1932
1939
1946
1953
1960
1967
1974
1981
1988
1995
2002
0

 
The U.S. Housing Boom and Bust 
177
got to get up and dance. We’re still dancing.”6 Unfortunately for 
Citigroup and the rest of the housing ﬁ nance complex, the music 
deﬁ nitely stopped at some point in 2007 or 2008, and inappropri-
ately undertaken risks were blatantly exposed—resulting in what 
has been to date one of the worst economic contractions and credit 
crunches of all time.
The magnitude of the pullback at the time of this writing 
(it’s not clear if the decline is over) is best captured by the above-
 referenced home price index. Professor Robert Shiller maintains 
the data and updates it quarterly. Figure 10.3 includes the most 
recent data as of September 2010.
The “canaries in the coal mine” of the housing boom were the 
subprime lenders, many of which began keeling over in early 2007. 
A March 2007 article in BusinessWeek noted, “After years of easy prof-
its, the $1.3 trillion subprime mortgage industry has taken a violent 
turn: at least 25 subprime lenders, which issue mortgages to bor-
rowers with poor credit histories, have exited the business, declared 
bankruptcy, announced signiﬁ cant losses, or put themselves up 
for sale.”7 After signiﬁ cant losses due to subprime exposure were 
reported during the summer of 2007 by hedge funds managed by 
Bear Stearns, the matter snowballed into a global problem by the 
fall of 2007 when French bank BNP Paribas indicated that it could 
Figure 10.3 Shiller’s Home Price Index, 1890–2010
Source: www.econ.yale.edu/~shiller/data.htm
250
200
150
100
50
0
1890
1896
1902
1908
1914
1920
1926
1932
1938
1944
1950
1956
1962
1968
1974
1980
1986
1992
1998
2004
2010

178 
Boombustology
not accurately value assets in three of its asset-backed securities 
(ABS) funds because of exposure to U.S. subprime assets.
In order to fully understand how and why the housing bust 
accelerated and spread, it’s important to understand the dynam-
ics of the “shadow banking” system and how it differs from tradi-
tional banking operations. To do so, we need to take a step back 
and understand the process of securitization and how it applies to 
the mortgage industry.
Securitization is a process by which a pool of assets (such as 
mortgages or credit card loans) is divided into several pieces known 
as collateralized debt obligations (CDOs). For instance, if 5,000 
mortgages, each of $500,000, are put into one structure, the entire 
pool has assets worth $2,500,000,000 (assuming all mortgages are 
considered good.). Let’s also suppose that the pool is divided into 
250 individual securities, each worth $10,000,000. Because each 
security has a claim against the whole pool (and not against 20 spe-
ciﬁ c mortgages), the securities created in this process are seemingly 
less risky and more diversiﬁ ed. Investors such as pension funds may 
be able to get $10 million of exposure to mortgages without the 
concentration risk of having 20 direct obligations. Further, because 
securitization allows for the allocation of cash ﬂ ows coming from the 
mortgages in any manner desired, each tranche (piece of the pool) 
need not be treated equally. Thus, senior tranches may be shielded 
from the ﬁ rst losses. This unique element allows for signiﬁ cant struc-
turing ﬂ exibility and enabled the creation of seemingly very secure 
tranches out of arguably very insecure pools of mortgages.
The ramiﬁ cations of securitization were numerous. First, it nec-
essarily broke the symbiotic relationship between lender and bor-
rower. Whereas banks would historically keep the mortgages on 
the books and service the loan directly (maintaining a relationship 
with the borrower), securitization enabled the separation of mort-
gage origination and mortgage servicing. Thus, originators no 
longer had a vested interest in the long-term viability of a borrower, 
resulting in deﬁ nitively lower lending standards. At the very least, 
it allowed banks to issue more loans than their balance sheet might 
otherwise allow as they were able to securitize loans made with bank 
capital and thereby continue lending to more customers with recy-
cled resources.
Secondly, securitization made dealing with problem loans par-
ticularly difﬁ cult. Because mortgages are in a pool that had their 

 
The U.S. Housing Boom and Bust 
179
cash ﬂ ows allocated according to prearranged dynamics, no one 
party is responsible for a particular mortgage. Whereas a delin-
quent borrower might previously have been able to negotiate 
directly with the bank holding her mortgage, securitization made 
such negotiations and potential loan modiﬁ cations almost impos-
sible. The result is likely to be more foreclosures and forced sales in 
a falling market.
The third and ﬁ nal element of the shadow banking system is 
that it is effectively part of the global capital market, and is there-
fore subject to the whims and vagaries typical of capital markets. 
For instance, a successful securitization requires there to be willing 
buyers of the securitized products. If capital markets become unre-
ceptive, or downright hostile, to further securitization, as they did 
in 2008, then the shadow banking system is likely to shut down and 
generate dynamics comparable to banking failures.
At the end of the day, shadow banking is just another form of 
credit provisioning as it allows borrowers to obtain money from 
lenders. When the system broke down following the subprime mar-
ket implosion, the results were felt far and wide. Banks that had 
previously depended on the shadow banking market to take loans 
off their hands were stuck with more loans than they desired, the 
secondary market in collateralized obligations slowed dramatically, 
and fearful originators stopped lending. The whole system came to 
a screeching halt with a dramatic contraction in the availability of 
credit. The resulting impact upon commerce, housing markets, and 
other asset classes was severe.
The Boombustology of the U.S. Housing Boom and Bust
Because the events relating to the boom–bust sequence of the U.S. 
housing market are still unfolding, this section does not attempt to 
be comprehensive, but instead highlights issues representative of 
insights that may be gleaned through a multidisciplinary lens.
Reflexivity Relationships Between Credit and Collateral
One of the primary factors that drove the boom in mortgage lending 
was that “loans are made on the basis of the value of the property, 
not on the ability of the borrower to repay,”8 resulting in a powerful 
reﬂ exive dynamic. Had lenders constrained their issuance of loans 
to those able to repay (i.e., adopting income or cash ﬂ ow–based 

180 
Boombustology
lending criteria), it’s unlikely a reﬂ exive dynamic would have been 
as drastic, even if it did take hold. Nevertheless, because asset-based 
lending was the order of the day, a virtuous cycle ensued during the 
boom phase and turned into a vicious cycle during the bust phase. 
Although related impacts from this dynamic were evident in capital 
ﬂ ows, conﬁ dence, and economic conditions, the primary impact was 
found in the relationship between collateral and credit.
Cheap Money  Expensive Housing
The relationship between the cost of money (i.e., the interest rate 
a buyer might pay) and the value of an asset that can be bought 
with that money (i.e., a house) is perhaps most obvious in those 
assets that are typically bought with a high percentage of borrowed 
money. Housing provides the clearest example of this phenomenon 
at work. See Chapter 2 for a referesher.
Consider the following situation. A house is sold for $400,000 
to a buyer who secures a mortgage for 80 percent of the purchase 
price ($320,000) at an interest rate of 10 percent. For ease of calcu-
lation, let’s assume that the mortgage is interest only. In this case, 
the monthly payments would equal $320,000  10% / 12 months  
$2,667. Now if interest rates were to fall to 5 percent, those same 
payments would fall by 50 percent, with the new monthly required 
payments equal to $320,000  5% / 12 months  $1,333.
Although lower interest rates have tremendous power to lower 
mortgage payments, the connection with house prices—which 
may be less obvious—is equally powerful. Suppose now that a per-
son had a budget of $2,667 per month. How much could he afford 
to pay for the same house with the lower mortgage rates? Simple 
algebra facilitates this calculation: $2,667  12 months / 5%  
$640,000 of loan amount. Add to this loan amount the original 
down payment of $80,000 and we see that the lower interest rate 
might increase the amount that our buyer can afford to pay to 
$720,000—assuming no minimum down payment percent.
Given the dynamics between interest rates and housing prices, 
then, it should come as no surprise that monetary policy, which 
brought interest rates down to 1 percent by 2002, ignited a seri-
ous property boom. By manipulating the cost of money down to 
highly stimulative levels to encourage economic activity, the Federal 
Reserve unintentionally created tremendous upside pressure on 
the prices of highly leveraged assets such as houses.

 
The U.S. Housing Boom and Bust 
181
Further, it might make sense to revisit Hyman Minsky’s ﬁ nancial 
instability hypothesis and the role of ﬁ nancing structures in gener-
ating instability. In particular, there appears to be a remarkable sim-
ilarity between Minsky’s description of Ponzi ﬁ nance and the terms 
on which some mortgages were underwritten. Stories of mortgages 
with 1-year teaser rates abound. Likewise, it now appears that many 
loans were taken by individuals who had neither the ability to serv-
ice the debt nor pay it back with income. They were “banking” 
(pun intended) on the value of the home rising, thereby allowing 
them to either sell the property at a proﬁ t or to cash out adequate 
money to pay the mortgage. Such ﬁ nancing structures are inher-
ently unstable, as discussed in Chapter 2.
“House Values Don’t Go Down”
The phrase “it takes two to tango” is highly applicable when it 
comes to the U.S. housing boom and bust. Ambitious homeowners-
to-be were eager to “lever up” in a quest to buy the largest, most 
expensive home they could purchase, and eager lenders were will-
ing to design various mortgage products to meet their needs. The 
seemingly symbiotic relationship was taken to extremes by both 
lenders willing to lend more money than a borrower could afford, 
and borrowers willing to borrow more than they could repay. 
Both parties were operating under an extraordinarily ﬂ awed 
 assumption—namely, that house values simply do not fall.
Before we dive into the social psychology of home ownership 
and its virtues, we should consider some of the mortgage innova-
tions that emerged prior to the housing boom and fueled it to lofty 
heights. In particular, the emergence and rapid growth of subprime 
loans (loans made to those with problematic credit histories), adjust-
able rate mortgages (mortgages that have ﬂ oating interest rates that 
can go up over time—many of which were accompanied by very low 
initial teaser rates), interest-only mortgages (loans in which the bor-
rower did not have to repay any principal), and stated-income loans 
(mortgages that required no documentation of income) greatly 
enlarged the pool of available homebuyers by increasing access to 
credit. Down payment assistance programs further enlarged the uni-
verse of homebuyers by providing capital for down payments.
Media reports about the housing boom and seemingly ubiqui-
tous dinner party conversations about the rapidly rising prices of 

182 
Boombustology
homes also contributed to the belief that house prices don’t fall. 
The cover of Time magazine in 2005 highlighted the role of hous-
ing in wealth creation and how low interest rates were making the 
housing market more affordable to more people. Its headline tells 
the whole story: “Home $weet Home: Why We’re Going Gaga Over 
Real Estate.” As if that wasn’t enough, Boston magazine’s cover 
story (see Figure 10.4) in May 2006 (quite possibly the absolute 
top of the real estate market) was titled “Buy! Buy! Buy! The Smart 
Real Estate Moves Right Now.” Unfortunately, no one appeared 
to be questioning whether it was even smart to be invested in real 
estate.
In addition to the obvious sense of overconﬁ dence that existed 
among U.S. home buyers in 2005 and 2006, it seems as if even cau-
tious home buyers suffered from cognitive biases such as anchor-
ing and insufﬁ cient adjustment. Sure, the logic went, house prices 
could fall a bit, but not meaningfully enough to matter. This logic 
is textbook insufﬁ cient adjustment. Likewise, the fact that these 
adjustments were made from lofty current prices (i.e., that buyers 
anchored on them) made the adjustments even less useful for even 
cautious buyers.
Homes for Everyone!
Another critical factor in the U.S. housing boom and bust was 
political encouragement for every American to own a home. In a 
well-written article that shed light on the role of government in the 
housing boom and bust, Peter Wallison, the Arthur F. Burns Fellow 
in Financial Policy Studies at the American Enterprise Institute, 
noted that “the crisis has its roots in the U.S. government’s efforts 
to increase homeownership, especially among minorities and other 
underserved or low-income groups, and to do so through hidden 
ﬁ nancial subsidies rather than direct government expenditures.”9
How exactly did the government go about promoting home-
ownership? Wallison argues that the “Community Reinvestment Act, 
Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, penalty-free reﬁ nancing of home loans, 
tax preferences granted to home equity borrowing, and reduced capi-
tal requirements for banks that hold mortgages and mortgage-backed 
securities” all contributed to a system that grew to be increasingly vul-
nerable as lending standards fell to accommodate these and other 
government efforts.

 
The U.S. Housing Boom and Bust 
183
The Community Reinvestment Act (CRA), originally enacted in 
1977, underwent a major revision in 1995, the impact of which was 
immediately felt in homeownership rates. CRA was adopted to pre-
vent discrimination in access to capital and encouraged banks to 
Figure 10.4 Cover of Boston Magazine
Source: © 2006 Metro Corp. Reproduced with permission.

184 
Boombustology
focus on community needs. After the 1995 revisions were enacted, 
homeownership jumped from the stable 64 percent level it had been 
for several decades to over 69 percent by 2005.
Freddie and Fannie were two government entities designed to 
purchase loans from banks in an effort to encourage additional 
mortgage lending. In this sense, these entities were the original 
securitizers of mortgages and effectively created the secondary mar-
ket in mortgages. As pressure mounted during the Clinton admin-
istration to increase the availability of housing ﬁ nance, Freddie and 
Fannie responded. Wallison notes,
By 1997, Fannie was offering a 97 percent loan to value mort-
gage, and by 2001, it was offering mortgages with no down pay-
ment at all. By 2007, Fannie and Freddie were required to show 
that 55 percent of their mortgage purchases were LMI (low to 
moderate income) loans and, within this goal, that 28 percent 
of all purchases were from underserved areas (usually inner cit-
ies) and 25 percent were purchases of loans to low-income and 
very-low-income borrowers.10
Clearly, these were the least creditworthy borrowers in the sys-
tem, perhaps explaining why proﬁ t-oriented banks had not pre-
viously paid attention to them as potential borrowers. It was only 
after the securitized market took off, and government mandates 
were clear, did those banks begin paying attention to this group of 
potential customers.
The ﬁ nal area of political inﬂ uence on the housing market that 
deserves discussion is that of tax policies. Speciﬁ cally, the mortgage 
interest deduction has effectively served as a subsidy to homeown-
ers, with the largest subsidies going to the homeowners with the 
largest mortgages (presumably associated with the largest incomes). 
To see the subsidy in action, let’s compare the difference between a 
person who has a $2000 per month rent payment and one who has 
a $2200 a month mortgage payment, of which $2000 is interest and 
is therefore deductible. Because the renter is not able to deduct 
his rent payments, his after-tax cost of housing remains $2000 per 
month. The homeowner with mortgage, however, is able to deduct 
(subject to certain limitations) the interest from his taxable income. 
Assuming the homeowner is in a 30 percent tax bracket, his after-
tax cost of housing will be $2000  (1 – 30%)  $200  $1600. This 
basically equates to a governmental handout of $600 per month to 

 
The U.S. Housing Boom and Bust 
185
our homeowner. Further, given that $200 of this $1600 payment is 
for repayment of principal, the rent equivalent is $1400 per month, 
$600 per month less expensive than our renter.
In an eloquent New York Times Magazine article titled “Who 
Needs the Mortgage Interest Deduction?” Roger Lowenstein 
describes the logic of the mortgage interest deduction as follows:
Some fellow in the Treasury Department had long ago decided 
it would be a good thing for families like ours not to suf-
fer through our lives as tenants. In fact, he (whoever he was) 
decided it would be good for our neighbors and for society in 
general if we could be owners and not just dwellers. In early 
America, only those who owned property were eligible to vote, 
and the notion that tenants were only provisional citizens, or 
at least had a lesser stake in things, has somehow endured. 
According to studies, people who own their homes take bet-
ter care of them; they fix the roof more often and plant more 
lilacs. They join more clubs and community groups; they vote 
more often; they move around less often; and their kids do bet-
ter in school. The government is subsidizing my house so I will 
do more gardening. Or something like that.11
Further, because interest on home equity loans and lines of 
credit are also deductible, homeowners are encouraged to take out 
second and sometimes third mortgages against a property to fund 
(over)consumption. As noted by Wallison,
Interest on consumer loans of all kinds—for cars, credit cards, 
or other purposes—is not deductible for federal tax purposes, 
but interest on home equity loans is deductible no matter what 
the purpose of the loan or the use of the funds. As a result, 
homeowners are encouraged to take out home equity loans to 
pay off their credit card or auto loans, or to make purchases 
that would ordinarily be made with credit cards, auto loans, or 
ordinary consumer loans.12
By encouraging the use of home equity ﬁ nancing for consump-
tion purposes, the government promotes lower equity values in 
homes—thereby inadvertently enhancing the likelihood of defaults 
and foreclosures during a real estate downturn.

186 
Boombustology
Epidemics and Emergence
The fact that the subprime market served as the last untapped uni-
verse of potential homebuyers to access the housing market indi-
cates that their increasing participation in the housing market was 
an indicator of the boom’s maturity. In the spectrum of mortgage 
quality, prime loans are considered the safest and are offered to the 
most creditworthy borrowers. Following prime, there is a category 
known as Alt-A loans, which are offered to borrowers without full 
documentation, with lower collateral values, and with lower credit 
scores. Subprime is the riskiest of the mortgages and was offered 
to borrowers who had historically been deemed uncreditworthy.13 
Figure 10.5 highlights the growth in subprime and Alt-A lending 
that took place during the ﬁ nal stages of the housing boom.
In addition to the absolute growth in the number of subprime 
and Alt-A loans issued (as evidenced in Figure 10.5), the absolute dol-
lar amount of the risky loans (deﬁ ned as subprime and Alt-A) grew 
exponentially, as seen in Figure 10.6. Figure 10.6 also demonstrates 
how these risky loans became an increasingly large share of all mort-
gage originations, having risen from under 10 percent in 2002 to 
almost 34 percent by 2006. Within this category, it is interesting 
Figure 10.5 Rapid Growth in Number of Subprime and Alt-A Loans
Source: General Accounting Office report accessed via www.gao.gov/new.items/d09848r.pdf
Loans (in millions)
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0
2000
Cohort year
2001
Alt-A
Subprime
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007

 
The U.S. Housing Boom and Bust 
187
Figure 10.6 Exponential Growth in Risky Loans
Source: The 2010 Mortgage Market Statistical Annual, Volume 1 (Bethesda, MD: Inside Mortgage Finance 
Publications, 2010).
Risky Loans % (LHS)
Risky Loans (RHS)
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
35.0%
$1,800.0
$0.0
$300.0
$600.0
$900.0
$1,200.0
$1,500.0
0.0%
5.0%
10.0%
15.0%
20.0%
25.0%
30.0%
Figure 10.7 Membership in the National Association of Realtors, 1987–2007
Source: D. McCormick, Field Guide to NAR Membership Statistics, 1908–Present. Accessed electronically via 
www.realtor.org/library/library/fg003.
1,500,000
500,000
1987
1989
1991
1993
1995
1997
1999
2001
2003
2005
2007
600,000
700,000
800,000
900,000
1,000,000
1,100,000
1,200,000
1,300,000
1,400,000

188 
Boombustology
Figure 10.8 Membership in the National Association of Realtors, 1916–1936
Source: D. McCormick, Field Guide to NAR Membership Statistics, 1908–Present. Accessed electronically via 
www.realtor.org/library/library/fg003.
25,000
20,000
15,000
10,000
5,000
0
1916
1918
1920
1922
1924
1926
1928
1930
1932
1934
1936
to note that the riskiest of loans, subprime, grew during the same 
period from approximately 5 percent of the total mortgage market 
in 2002 to over 20 percent of the mortgage market by 2006.14
From the data, it deﬁ nitely appears that most of the eligible buy-
ers (i.e., prime, creditworthy borrowers) had already been infected, 
thereby leaving the “disease” only to infect the  historically un-
 creditworthy. Obviously, the available universe of infectable potential 
homebuyers was rapidly shrinking. By enabling the most amateur of 
investors to enter the housing markets, the boom in subprime lending 
was a useful indicator of the housing bubble’s maturity and imminent 
burst. The fact that TV shows like “Flip This House” were in competi-
tion with other TV shows like “Flip That House” further validates the 
maturity of the boom. If ordinary, television–watching non-specula-
tors enter the housing investment business, who is left to infect?
The popularity of real estate not only grew as an invest-
ment activity, it also grew (unsustainably) as a professional activ-
ity. Figure 10.7 displays the number of members in the National 
Association of Realtors (NAR). Given the licensing requirements 
of the profession, NAR membership is a reasonable proxy for the 
number of real estate salespersons in the United States.
Lest we get lulled into thinking that NAR membership only 
rises, consider Figure 10.8, which illustrates NAR membership 

 
The U.S. Housing Boom and Bust 
189
before, during, and after the Florida land boom. As is clear from 
the chart, membership clearly does fall. Given our anchoring and 
insufﬁ cient adjustment biases, how many observers believe that 
NAR membership could decline by an additional 500,000?
The emergence perspective on the U.S. housing bubble does 
not seem to offer many vivid lessons, with the possible exception 
of Donald Trump’s revival as a cult ﬁ gure among young ambitious 
business professionals. In addition to his bestselling books about 
thinking like a real-estate billionaire and his popular TV show “The 
Apprentice,” Trump had a more subtle effect on the seemingly unin-
formed swarm. His personal wealth creation in real estate had been 
enormous and included the launch of a Vegas casino resort and 
some of the most prominent real estate developments in major cities. 
Surely if The Don was investing it was safe for Joe Six-Pack to invest.
The Multilens Look
The U.S. housing boom and bust is a classic case of a credit-
fueled reﬂ exive bubble formed by the interaction of the ﬁ ve Cs 
described above. However, an equally supportive role was played 
by government policies in supporting the ﬁ ve Cs through both 
the creation of a securitization market and the encouraging of 
homeownership and home ﬁ nance. Table 10.1 summarizes the 
ﬁ ve lens view of the U.S. housing boom and bust.
Table 10.1 The-Five Lens Approach to the U.S. Housing Boom and Bust
Lens
Notes
Microeconomic
Reflexive credit/collateral dynamic
Higher prices induced buyers
Lower prices induced sellers
Macroeconomic
Financial innovation (subprime, Alt-A, etc.)
Securitization enabled “shadow banking”
Ponzi finance via teaser rates, etc.
Psychology
New era thinking (housing demand)
Anchoring on prices, insufficient adjustments
Politics
Tax policies encouraging homeownership for all
Moral hazard (government role in mortgage finance: Fannie, Freddie)
Supply/demand distortions (Community Reinvestment Act, mortgage 
interest deduction)
Biology
Amateur Participants (Subprime, NAR members)
Silent Leadership (Donald Trump)
Popular Media (Flip This House, Flip That House)


III
P A R T
Looking Ahead
Part One presented various disciplinary lenses through which 
to evaluate ﬁ nancial extremes, and Part Two illustrated the use of 
those lenses on ﬁ ve historical cases. Part Three brings together the 
lenses of Part One and the case study evidence of Part Two into 
a framework for identifying bubbles before they burst. The real 
power and usefulness of the multilens approach lies in its applica-
tion to unresolved mysteries, and so the last chapter evaluates the 
likelihood the boom in China is a bubble about to burst.
191


193
A METHOD FOR IDENTIFYING 
UNSUSTAINABLE BOOMS
When a person with money meets a person with experience, the 
person with experience winds up with the money and the person 
with the money ends up with the experience.
—Harvey MacKay
Although studying booms and busts provides signiﬁ cant fodder 
for academic discussions and intellectual debates, it is perhaps most 
useful if it helps one to make money, avoid losses, or, ideally, both. 
In order to be useful, then, our study of booms and busts must pro-
vide tools for proactively understanding if one is investing in an 
unsustainable boom with the corresponding risks of an imminent 
bust. As mentioned in the preface, this book does not provide a 
map of the market. It also does not attempt to provide any insight 
into market timing. Rather, it provides a probabilistic framework for 
understanding the likelihood of being in a bubble. The underlying 
belief of this approach is that, although asset markets may be well 
behaved and efﬁ cient most of the time, they do on occasion stray to 
extremes. These extremes matter a great deal, and this chapter pro-
vides a seismograph to identify the tremors that precede a quake.
Many an academic has made a career out of explaining events 
from a historical perspective. Few practitioners have had the luxury 
of living in a world of 20/20 vision comparable to that provided by 
Spotting Bubbles before They Burst
11
C H A P T E R

194 
Boombustology
hindsight. As such, this chapter provides a tool—in the form of a 
checklist—that individuals and institutions might use to spot bub-
bles before they burst. Findings of the previous chapters have been 
coalesced into a framework to recognize unsustainable booms.
The booms and busts discussed in Part II demonstrate many 
similar characteristics. Most exhibited reﬂ exive dynamics, excessive 
and unsustainable leverage, overconﬁ dence and biased decision 
making, policies distorting price-discovery processes, and herdlike 
behavior. This chapter summarizes each of these characteristics 
and concludes with a checklist of the common indicators associated 
with being in the midst of bubble.
Reflexivity and Self-Fulfilling Dynamics
The ﬁ rst lens presented in Chapter 1 focused on the forces of supply 
and demand and questioned whether they generate an equilibrium. 
This physics-inspired approach to microeconomics suggests that sup-
ply and demand meet to create a stable price. A rise in prices gen-
erates supply, which in turn offsets the price rise. Likewise, similar 
logic suggests that a fall in prices generates demand, which provides 
upward pressure on prices. Chapter 1 concluded that although sup-
ply and demand dynamics usually generate a stable equilibrium, 
they occasionally do not. There are instances in which higher prices 
stimulate additional demand, not additional supply—a situation 
that often characterizes a boom. Likewise, busts might be character-
ized by situations in which lower prices stimulate additional supply, 
not demand. The theory of reﬂ exivity provides an alternative to the 
equilibrium-oriented efﬁ cient market hypothesis.
The ﬁ ve Cs framework captures the essence of the reﬂ exive 
dynamics that dominate most boom and bust sequences. By deﬁ -
nition, booms and busts are events that deviate signiﬁ cantly from 
equilibrium, and it is often highly likely that reﬂ exive dynamics are 
responsible for these deviations. Because the ﬁ ve Cs framework 
has broad applicability to the study of booms and busts, we instead 
focus in this section on more speciﬁ c reﬂ exivity signposts that 
involve an interplay with credit and leverage—namely, the preva-
lence of asset-based lending and the simultaneous growth of credit 
volumes and asset prices.
During the course of the ﬁ ve case studies presented, the most 
prominent examples of reﬂ exive dynamics at work involved the 
self-reinforcing, pro-cyclical dynamic between credit and collateral. 

 
Spotting Bubbles before They Burst 
195
This often occurred in times of extreme optimism when lenders 
modiﬁ ed their lending criteria from income-oriented toward asset-
focused approaches. When the primary criteria for extending credit 
switches from income-based affordability to collateral value, watch 
out. This is a spectacular early warning sign of a powerful reﬂ exive 
dynamic being unleashed.
Because increased collateral values inspire more credit, reﬂ ex-
ive dynamics can often be identiﬁ ed by the concomitant growth of 
credit and collateral values. If credit is rising rapidly along with asset 
prices, there is a high probability that reﬂ exive dynamics are under 
way. These dynamics were prominent in the Florida, Japan, and 
U.S. housing cases studied in previous chapters. As these dynamics 
unfolded, they were accompanied by a similar boom in conﬁ dence 
at banks as they felt they were increasingly secure in their loans, not 
realizing that when the music slowed (if not stopped), then they 
would suddenly ﬁ nd that they were less intelligent than they them-
selves once thought.
A change in lending standards and a simultaneous growth in 
lending and asset prices are both indicators of what might also be 
termed easy or loose money. Let’s review selected events that tran-
spired in the cases to evaluate the prevalence of reﬂ exive dynamics 
and their interactions with loose money.
Tulipomania
The tulip mania discussed in Chapter 6 exhibited many of the char-
acteristics typical of a reﬂ exive dynamic. Higher prices generated 
more demand, and, following the bursting of the bubble, lower 
prices generated more supply. Aside from these price-based indica-
tors of reﬂ exive dynamics, there appears to have been the possibil-
ity of foreign inﬂ ows (i.e., hot money) into the Netherlands as it 
became the ﬁ nancial center of the world. Foreign capital inﬂ ows 
seeking higher returns often cause the very returns they are seek-
ing, thereby creating a very unstable situation.
The Great Depression
The Florida land boom that preceded the Great Depression provides 
a spectacular example of the two reﬂ exivity indicators in action. As is 
typical in most property-related booms, credit provided the fuel for 
the asset boom with banks. Liquidity was rampant and credit ubiq-
uitous. Remember the total U.S. money supply during the 1920s? 

196 
Boombustology
One can also note that credit was expanding at the same time as 
asset prices were rising and although evidence on the methodology 
of bank approvals is hard to come by, it seems conceivable that banks 
were ﬁ nding comfort that as asset prices rose, the collateral pledged 
against their loans made the loans (seem) less risky. It was only once 
the music stopped that banks realized their comfort was unwarranted.
The Japanese Boom and Bust
Given that land was the centerpiece of the Japanese boom and 
bust sequence, it should come as no surprise that reﬂ exive credit 
and collateral dynamics were present. The mere existence of mort-
gage products with a 100-year term (see the following section on 
ﬁ nancial innovation) indicate that leverage was being extended 
on terms other than ability to repay as banks could not have reason-
ably expected individuals to live long enough to repay their loans. 
Many of these loans simply must have been extended by banks oper-
ating under the assumption that asset values would protect them 
against this inability to repay the loan from income. Further, Japanese 
credit grew rapidly during the 1980s, simultaneous with the boom in 
asset prices. It seems highly unlikely that this was coincidental.
The Asian Financial Crisis
The Asian Financial Crisis was in many ways a story of hot money 
inﬂ ows and outﬂ ows. The reﬂ exive dynamic created by such money 
ﬂ ows was not dissimilar to those generated in other unsustainable 
booms. Money came into East Asia seeking higher returns, but the 
very arrival of such money at least partially created those returns. As 
long as the ﬂ ows continued, the story remained in tact. Once the 
money ﬂ ows stopped, and reversed, the virtuous cycle rapidly turned 
vicious. This is exactly the dynamic that took place in Thailand and 
the rest of Southeast Asia during the Asian Financial Crisis.
The U.S. Housing Boom and Bust
The housing boom that took place in the early to mid-2000s in the 
United States was a period that deﬁ nitively exhibited telltale signs 
of reﬂ exive dynamics. To begin, the multitude of mortgage inno-
vations that took place were speciﬁ cally designed to extend lever-
age and mortgage power to those who had been previously unable 
to access such credit. Such innovations included subprime, Alt-A, 

 
Spotting Bubbles before They Burst 
197
and NINJA (No-Income, No-Job or Assets) loans. Securitization 
(see the following ﬁ nancial innovation section) was the enabling 
force behind banks willing to look beyond historical warning signs 
(i.e., bad credit in the case of subprime and Alt-A mortgages, or 
unemployment in the case of NINJA loans) of potential losses. By 
not having to (directly) worry about the ramiﬁ cations of extending 
inappropriate credit, banks felt empowered to change the historical 
basis upon which mortgages were extended. Additional conﬁ dence 
was gained by rapidly rising collateral values. Further, it should 
come as no surprise that the amount of outstanding credit rose 
alongside asset values.
Red Flags of Reflexivity
Two of the primary criteria for identifying the onset of destabilizing 
reﬂ exive dynamics in asset markets thus seem to be the modiﬁ ca-
tion of the standards by which credit has historically been granted 
(i.e., affordability) toward collateral-based lending and the simul-
taneous growth in credit and asset values. A third indicator is the 
presence and growth of “hot money” inﬂ ows seeking outsized 
returns, which usually enable the very returns sought. Table 11.1 
summarizes these indicators.
Leverage, Financial Innovation, and Cheap Money
Chapter 2 introduced several non-traditional macroeconomic 
approaches to thinking about booms and busts. Speciﬁ cally, the
dynamics of debt and the ability of a borrower to repay form 
the heart of Hyman Minsky’s ﬁ nancial instability hypothesis. The 
nasty impact of deﬂ ation on debt (increasing the real burden of 
debt) was then considered before evaluating the Austrian school 
Table 11.1 Signs Revealing Reflexive Dynamics toward Disequilibrium
Indicator
Examples
Change in Criteria Used to Evaluate 
and Extend Credit from Income-Oriented 
Toward Collateral-Focused
100-year mortgages issued during the 
Japanese property boom
Concomitant Growth in Credit and 
Collateral Value
Simultaneous boom in mortgage values and 
housing prices during the U.S. housing boom
“Hot Money” Inflows Seeking (and creating) 
Outsized Returns
Foreign capital flowing into the Netherlands, 
Foreign capital flowing into Thailand

198 
Boombustology
of economics and their “cheap money as the root of all evil” expla-
nation for boom and bust cycles.
A common adage about banking and leverage captures the spirit 
of the boom and bust dynamic quite eloquently: “If you owe the
bank $100 and can’t pay, then you have a problem. If you owe 
the bank $100 million and can’t pay, then the bank has a problem.” 
Financial innovation, which often creates effective leverage, is an 
enabling culprit in the credit game and when combined with cheap 
money, creates a dynamic that is particularly fragile and prone to 
instability. Credit is inherently destabilizing, and misunderstood 
credit can be lethal. In a recent article titled “Financial Innovation 
and Financial Fragility,” Nicola Gennaioli and two colleagues noted 
the following sequence of events through which ﬁ nancial innovation 
can become destabilizing:
Many recent episodes of financial innovation share a com-
mon narrative. It begins with a strong demand from investors 
for a particular, often safe, pattern of cash flows. Some tradi-
tional securities available in the market offer this pattern, but 
investors demand more (so prices are high). In response to 
demand, financial intermediaries create new securities offering 
the sought after pattern of cash flows, usually by carving them 
out of existing projects or other securities that are more risky. 
By virtue of diversification, tranching, insurance, and other 
forms of financial engineering, the new securities are believed 
by the investors, and often by the intermediaries themselves, 
to be good substitutes for the traditional ones, and are conse-
quently issued and bought in great volumes.
At some point, news reveals that new securities are vulner-
able to some unattended risks, and in particular are not good 
substitutes for the traditional securities. Both investors and 
intermediaries are surprised by the news, and investors sell 
these “false substitutes,” moving back to the traditional secu-
rities with the cash flows they seek. As investors fly for safety, 
financial institutions are stuck holding the supply of the new 
securities (or worse yet, having to dump them as well in a fire 
sale because they are leveraged). The prices of traditional secu-
rities rise while those of the new ones fall sharply.1
Although the quote above is clearly referencing the AAA-rated 
debt derivatives which were a false substitute for U.S. Treasuries, we 

 
Spotting Bubbles before They Burst 
199
should not lose track of the fact that ﬁ nancial innovation has the 
ability to create instability. Indeed, whether it was the development 
of futures contracts in 1630s Holland or the sliced and diced mort-
gage-backed securities of the 2000s makes no difference: ﬁ nancial 
innovation often embeds or conceals leverage.
Tulipomania
The structure of the tulip market in the 1630s was one based on 
futures. Because the actual tradable bulb market only existed for sev-
eral months, most trading that took place in tulip bulbs took place 
in derivative markets that effectively enabled (via down payments 
that enabled control of larger values) leverage. Richard Bookstaber, 
while reviewing the perils of ﬁ nancial innovation, notes that the 
Tulipomania “reached full bloom only with the innovation of for-
ward contracts and the leverage these contracts afforded, which 
allowed traders to buy and sell commodities they did not own, had 
no intention of owning, and indeed did not even have the money 
to purchase outright.”2 Further, ubiquitous money and liquidity (see 
Table 6.1) provided monetary fuel for tulip prices.
The Great Depression
Here again, the use of effective leverage was prevalent. It was the 
“pay only 10 percent to get economic exposure to 100 percent of 
an asset” mind-set. By simply putting down a deposit that was 90 
percent less than the actual price, speculators in Florida were able 
to achieve 10 leverage on the price movement of the proper-
ties they had supposedly committed to purchasing. Not dissimilar 
to the Bookstaber quote above, it was later revealed that many of
these properties were held by individuals who had no intention 
of owning them and likely lacked adequate resources to own them 
outright. The result, like the events that had transpired almost 290 
years prior, was identical. The house of cards, which was built on a 
precarious foundation of extreme leverage, eventually imploded.
In a series of articles published in the Saturday Evening Post, 
Garet Garrett described the bubble of the 1920s as follows: “An 
ephemeral, whirling, upside-down pyramid, doomed in its own 
velocity. Yet it devours credit in an uncontrollable manner, more 
and more to the very end; credit feeds its velocity.”3 From broker-
age margin provided to eager speculators to credit fueling the pur-
chases of automobiles, radios, and other new devices, much of the 

200 
Boombustology
boom of the 1920s took place with borrowed funds. Ultimately, 
as noted in “Whirlwinds of Speculation,” a 1931 article published 
in The Atlantic magazine, the credit fueled its own demise by pro-
ducing a supply response in the “units of speculation” (i.e., stocks, 
bonds, and developments in Florida) creating the inevitable crash.
Finally, the lowering of interest rates in 1925 to assist the British 
in ﬁ ghting the outﬂ ow of gold from their country was unintended 
fuel on top of the already existing speculative ﬁ re. This spurred 
credit growth, and by the early 1930s, U.S. existing credit to GDP 
reached an all-time high of 299 percent.4
The Japanese Boom and Bust
Macroeconomic policy during the Japanese boom was marked by 
tremendous growth in credit. In fact, it has only been in the years 
following the bust that the magnitude of the credit overhang has 
been made patently evident. By encouraging the use of credit to 
facilitate asset-gain wealth effects, the monetary authorities of 
Japan were hoping to alleviate the pain that would likely be felt 
by exporters due to currency appreciation. The result was a cheap 
money credit explosion that resulted in the ﬁ nal vertical ascent of 
Japanese asset markets.
The lethal combination of debt and deﬂ ation has since plagued 
the island nation and resulted in what has been labeled by Richard 
Koo as a balance sheet recession. Traditional economic incentives 
like proﬁ t maximization were effectively brushed aside in a quest 
for balance sheet repair. This act of deleveraging generated a reﬂ ex-
ive dynamic of its own, in which debt deﬂ ation ﬁ rmly took hold.
The Asian Financial Crisis
Perhaps the most dramatic innovation that enabled the inﬂ ow of
portfolio investments into Southeast Asia was the emergence 
of emerging markets funds. As highlighted in Chapter 9, the fact 
that increasing pools of global capital were organized into common 
funds focused on emerging economies enabled the rapid trans-
mission of economic hardships in one country into capital ﬂ ight 
from another. As fund managers began taking signiﬁ cant losses in 
Thailand, they found themselves overly exposed to other countries 
and hence began selling them as well. Further, redemptions by the 
fund’s investors led to a general selling pressure across all emerging 
markets as fund managers indiscriminately sold stocks in an effort 
to meet requests for the return of capital.

 
Spotting Bubbles before They Burst 
201
Although the topic of cultural homogeneity and crony cap-
italism will be touched on below, it is worth noting here that the 
development of ﬁ nancial intermediaries such as the Thai ﬁ nance 
companies spurred the disbursement of credit. The crony capi-
talism that led to inefﬁ cient and risky lending made for the ulti-
mate in moral hazard. Banks and others freely lent inappropriate 
amounts of capital to connected individuals with the belief that 
relationships in the government would ultimately protect them. 
Thus, capital ﬂ owed more freely than it otherwise might have.
The U.S. Housing Boom and Bust
If one had to focus on only one cause of the U.S. housing boom 
and bust, it would likely be the ease of leverage and credit that 
enabled a slew of individuals—unable to afford the homes they 
 purchased—to enter the market and thereby bid up the prices of 
real estate. There were many contributing factors to this plot, but 
central to it are the innovations in securitization and collateraliza-
tion that created the mortgage-backed securities, collateralized 
debt obligations, and a host of other credit-derived securities that 
were served up to yield-hungry global investors seeking the comfort 
of highly rated and supposedly safe securities.
Another enabling factor in the housing boom was the inap-
propriately low interest rates that were in effect to combat the 
ramiﬁ cations of the Internet bubble bursting. By keeping rates 
extraordinarily low for an extended period of time, the U.S. Federal 
Reserve unintentionally fueled the next bubble, a far larger and 
wide-reaching credit-fueled housing boom with signiﬁ cantly greater 
ramiﬁ cations.
Finally, the predominant role played by government-sponsored 
enterprises such as Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac in the housing 
markets created a sense of comfort on the part of those buying 
housing securities guaranteed by these organizations. After all, the 
U.S. government would not allow a default on mortgage-backed 
securities, would it?
Signs of Unsustainable Credit Conditions
The signposts for unsustainable credit conditions fall under three 
primary indicators: ﬁ nancial innovations that enhance or enable 
leverage, inappropriately (and often unintended) cheap money, 
and the issuance of credit to non-creditworthy borrowers due to 

202 
Boombustology
Skyscrapers as a Bubble Indicator
One of the ﬁ rst skyscrapers was designed and built in 1887 by Bradford Lee 
Gilbert. It was designed to solve a problem of space: He had an unusually 
shaped 6.5 meter plot on Broadway in Manhattan. His solution: Maximize 
space for occupancy by building vertically. The press ridiculed the idea, fear-
ing that the 160-foot structure might fall over should a strong wind arrive. 
Friends, lawyers, and engineers suggested repeatedly that Gilbert abandon the 
idea, warning that if the building did fall over, the legal bills would ruin him. To 
overcome the skepticism, Gilbert took the top two stories of the building for his 
personal ofﬁ ces.*
From that project forward, the skyscraper has come to symbolize so 
much more than creativity. It has become a symbol of success, or one’s literal 
ascent toward the heavens. It became “the great architectural contribution of 
modern capitalistic society and is even one of the yardsticks for twentieth-cen-
tury superheroes.”†
Nevertheless, because skyscrapers are rarely built by their anticipated 
tenants with cash, they are inherently speculative ventures. In many ways, 
the tallest skyscrapers under construction are an indicator of where money 
is easiest, speculative juices are ﬂ owing most briskly, and conﬁ dence is high. 
Noting this relationship in a fascinating piece of research, Dresdner Kleinwort 
property analyst Andrew Lawrence developed what he calls “the Skyscraper 
Index” as an indicator of forthcoming economic contractions.‡ Consider the 
following buildings, all of which were the world’s tallest at the time of their 
completion, and their associated economic contractions:
World’s Tallest Skyscrapers and Related Busts
Building
Location (Completed)
Spire Height
Financial Crisis
Singer
New York (1908)
187 meters
Panic of 1907
Metropolitan Life
New York (1909)
247 meters
Panic of 1907
40 Wall Street
New York (1929)
283 meters
Great Depression
Chrysler
New York (1929)
319 meters
Great Depression
Empire State
New York (1931)
443 meters
Great Depression
World Trade Center
New York (1973)
526 meters
70’s Stagﬂ ation
Sears Tower
Chicago (1974)
527 meters
70’s Stagﬂ ation
Petronas Towers
Kuala Lumpur (1997)
452 meters
Asian Financial Crisis
Taipei 101
Taipei (2004)a
509 meters
Tech Bubble
Burj Dubai
Dubai (2008/2009)b
828 meters
Global Credit Crunch

 
Spotting Bubbles before They Burst 
203
implicit government guarantees (moral hazard–inspired lending). 
See Table 11.2 for a summary.
Overconfidence
Chapter 3 evaluated several decision-making biases that consistently 
impact rational behavior. Several rules of thumb were considered, 
and other forms of individual-level behavior that appear contrary to 
Thus, we might consider the construction of skyscrapers to be symptomatic 
of bubble conditions, namely easy money and overconﬁ dence. Thorton sum-
marizes the common pattern quite eloquently: “First, a period of easy money 
leads to rapid expansion of the economy and a boom in the stock market…
credit fuels a substantial increase in capital expenditures . . . This is when the 
world’s tallest buildings are begun.”§
* Phil Anderson, “A Recession Indicator That’s Hard to Miss,” Moneyweek (February 11, 2008).
† Mark Thornton, “Skyscrapers and Business Cycles,” The Quarterly Journal of Austrian Economics
(Vol 8, No 1, Spring 2005), 51–74.
‡ Andrew Lawrence, “The Skyscraper Index: Faulty Towers!” Property Report, Dresdner Kleinwort 
Benson Research (January 15, 1999).
§Mark Thornton, “Skyscrapers and Business Cycles,” The Quarterly Journal of Austrian Economics
(Vol 8, No 1, Spring 2005).
Table 11.2 Signs Revealing Leverage Excesses
Indicator
Examples
Financial Innovation(s) that 
enhance or enable leverage
Forward contracts for tulips, 10% down binders during 
the Florida land boom, 100-year mortgages in Japan, 
pooled funds for diversified emerging markets investing, 
securitization and the boom in credit derivatives
Cheap/Excessive Money
1925 lowering of interest rates to facilitate British gold 
retention, Japanese engineered asset boom to mitigate 
currency-driven export slowdown, lowering rates to 
combat bursting of the Internet bubble
Moral Hazard–Motivated Lending
Crony capitalism, Fannie/Freddie
Source: Mark Thornton, “Skyscrapers and Business Cycles,” The Quarterly Journal of Austrian 
Economics (Vol 8, No 1, Spring 2005); www.skyscraperpage.com; Phil Anderson, “A Recession 
Indicator That’s Hard to Miss,” Moneyweek (February 11, 2008).
a Taipei 101 was ﬁ nanced and construction begun in 1999, quite near the peak of the technology boom.
b It is interesting to note that the uncompleted Burj Dubai tower was classiﬁ ed as the world’s tall-
est structure on July 21, 2007, perhaps the peak of the U.S. market before the ensuing ﬁ nancial 
meltdown.

204 
Boombustology
economic theory were evaluated. Overconﬁ dence surfaced as per-
haps the most relevant of the decision-making issues that emerge 
as a product of anchoring, insufﬁ cient adjustment, and reliance on 
the availability and representativeness heuristics.
Among the manifestations of overconﬁ dence, perhaps the most 
revealing is the belief in the onset of a new era where the belief 
“this time is different” pervades popular sentiment. This new era 
belief often gains traction because there is believability to the story 
that things are genuinely different. Classic manifestations of this 
new-era inspired conﬁ dence often include conspicuous consump-
tion and the purchase of trophy assets and art.
Tulipomania
The 1600s in Amsterdam felt like it was indeed the beginning of 
a new era. As noted in Chapter 6, the political economic context 
supported such a view and the virtual domination of world trade 
by the Dutch basically conﬁ rmed this new-era belief for even the 
most ardent of doubters. Holland had just won a hard fought 
war, was reaping fantastic economic gains from the redeploy-
ment of resources from military pursuits to commercial endeav-
ors, and was now reaping the economic rewards of a dominating 
position in world trade. This perspective, combined with the con-
spicuous display of rare bulbs and the broad participation of ama-
teur investors, provided ample evidence of a broad, Holland-wide 
(over)conﬁ dence in the existence of a new era. Indeed, to many 
participants and observers, the time seemed to have come for a 
Dutch domination of the world in matters of economic and non-
economic consideration. Why wouldn’t the world’s wealthy ﬂ ock to 
Amsterdam to procure bulbs of the most beautiful ﬂ ower?
The Great Depression
The Western world had just won World War I and new technolo-
gies were promising a new era in American convenience and mod-
ern living. Just as the war had accelerated the mobilization of rural 
resources into industrial efforts, the ending of the war resulted in 
the redeployment of resources from military to economic pursuits. 
Automobiles and radios, both newly accessible by the presence of 
previously unavailable consumer credit, promised a different life in 
the years and decades ahead. Roads were connecting previously far-
away places and a burgeoning aerospace industry enabling human 

 
Spotting Bubbles before They Burst 
205
ﬂ ight was being formed. Lindbergh’s solo crossing of the Atlantic 
Ocean made this new-era belief all the more real.
In a spectacular manifestation of the conﬁ dence (and hubris) 
of the times, speculative and competitive juices were ﬂ owing rapidly 
in the development of New York City’s skyscrapers. Shortly after 40 
Wall Street was completed and deemed the world’s tallest tower, the 
Chrysler building chose to erect a spire tall enough to claim the 
title. Not to be outdone, the Empire State Building opened shortly 
thereafter, transferring the “world’s tallest tower” title for a third 
time in less than three years.
The Japanese Boom and Bust
The postwar economic miracle exhibited by the transformation 
of a completely devastated Japan into a world-leading economic 
superpower provided the new era belief so representative of over-
conﬁ dence. The comparisons of real estate values in Japan and the 
United States, several of which were detailed in Chapter 8, high-
light one manifestation of this conﬁ dence.
Trophy asset purchases such as those described in Chapter 8 also 
typify the extreme overconﬁ dence that accompanied the Japanese 
economic success story. Paying hundreds of millions of dollars more 
than asking price for a trophy building in Manhattan simply to get 
into the Guinness Book of World Records is the quintessential embodi-
ment of overconﬁ dence and hubris. Equally reﬂ ective of the times 
was the Japanese role in driving the art market to new heights.
The 1979 publishing of Harvard professor Ezra Vogel’s book 
Japan as Number One provided an argument that a new era of pros-
perity was coming. Although the book seemed correct in the 1980s, 
it has since come to represent folly. Interestingly, Jon Woronoff 
published a compelling Japan as (Anything But)Number One in 1991, 
very close to the top of the Japanese bubble. But as is so often the 
case in situations of overconﬁ dence, contrary evidence to the pre-
vailing “wisdom” was not well received at the time.
The Asian Financial Crisis
For a decade-long period leading up to the mid-1990s, Thailand 
was one of the fastest growing economies in the world. Similar 
dynamics took place across many of the Southeast Asian emerging 
economies. Despite the fact that much of this increase in economic 
output came from a growth in inputs, virtually no commentators 

206 
Boombustology
(Paul Krugman being a notable exception) were willing to question 
the region’s economic sustainability. Popular books on the subject 
included the World Bank’s The East Asian Miracle and Ezra Vogel’s 
Four Little Dragons. With such global infatuation with the export-led 
development model and the success of Southeast Asia, overconﬁ -
dence was effectively preordained.
Another manifestation of overconﬁ dence was the rampant and 
widespread currency mismatches that left Thai (and other)  borrowers 
extremely vulnerable to currency movements. By  earning in local cur-
rency but borrowing in U.S. dollars (or other currencies), currency 
depreciations created a debt–deﬂ ation-like dynamic in which the 
effective (i.e., local currency–valued) amount of debt ballooned. The 
dynamics that inspired so many borrowers to undertake such a risk 
are at least partially clariﬁ ed through a behavioral decision-making 
lens. As noted in Chapter 9, perhaps the likelihood of currency moves 
was underestimated due to a lack of recently available data regarding 
adverse currency moves (i.e., availability bias). Or perhaps the analogy 
of another country borrowing in a different currency proved more 
vivid (i.e., representative bias). Regardless, it does seem that borrower 
beliefs underweighted the probability of  adverse outcomes.
As a ﬁ nal indicator of overconﬁ dence (and easy money), 
Malaysia took the crown for the world’s tallest skyscraper with the 
completion of the twin Petronas Towers in Kuala Lumpur in 1997.
The U.S. Housing Boom and Bust
Aided in great part by low-cost ﬁ nancing and increasingly ﬂ exible 
mortgage terms, many homebuyers and investor participants in 
the U.S. housing boom and bust were operating under the false 
belief that “real estate prices don’t fall.” Despite the elevated levels 
of objective measures of value (measures such as median price to 
median income, percent of income for debt service, etc.), many bor-
rowers (and lenders for that matter) failed to note the rising risks.
Consider the art market of 2006, considered by many to be 
the year during which the U.S. housing market peaked. The three 
highest prices ever paid for paintings took place during 2006 art 
auctions. In June of 2006, cosmetics magnate Ronald Lauder paid 
a record-breaking $135 million for a Gustav Klimt painting. Only 
months later, a new record was set when U.S. hedge fund mogul 
Steven A. Cohen of SAC Capital paid roughly $137.5 million for a 
de Kooning painting titled “Woman” in November 2006.5

 
Spotting Bubbles before They Burst 
207
It’s Different This Time
Table 11.3 provides a summary of ways in which overconﬁ dence can 
signal the presence of an unsustainable boom.
Policy-Driven Distortions
Chapter 4 introduced a political lens. Two big-picture issues dom-
inated the discussion: property rights and the price mechanism. 
After establishing the need for protected property rights, the 
chapter considered the ways government actions meddle with 
the price mechanism—namely, mandated prices and tax distor-
tions affecting buy/sell decisions. Price ceilings and ﬂ oors were 
also addressed.
Most tax or price-affecting policies are meant to incentivize a 
certain politically desirable behavior. Unfortunately, most policies 
are accompanied by unintended consequences, many of which 
distort the price mechanism and therefore negatively affect the 
stability of asset markets. Three primary signposts highlight an 
increased likelihood of an unsustainable boom. The ﬁ rst, moral 
hazard, effectively creates a dynamic in which lenders are willing 
to underweight the risk of failure because they believe (rightly or 
wrongly) that governments do not have the political will to allow 
the failure of certain key stakeholders. The second involves active 
government manipulation of supply and demand dynamics via 
price controls, tax policies, and/or direct government actions. The
third indicator, shifting regulations, is usually a sign of ﬂ ux in 
the rules of play vis-à-vis business that allows for the emergence of 
a new paradigm and industry structure by destabilizing established 
industrial patterns.
Let us now turn to each of the cases to brieﬂ y consider the 
policy distortions that manifested themselves as the unsustainable 
boom was under way.
Table 11.3 Overconfidence Indicators
Indicators
Examples
Conspicuous 
Consumption
Trophy purchases, record art prices, world’s tallest skyscrapers
New-Era Thinking
War victories (Spain, WWI); economic champion status (Japan, East 
Asian miracle), technological developments (radio, car, airplane)

208 
Boombustology
Tulipomania
Recall from Chapter 6 that the political dynamic of having prominent 
public ofﬁ cials suffering substantial personal ﬁ nancial losses led to a 
modiﬁ cation of the “rules” and the proposed conversion of futures 
contracts (in which the buyer had purchased the asset for future deliv-
ery) into call options (in which the buyer had the right but not the 
obligation to purchase the asset in the future). By modifying property 
rights as transactions were taking place, government inspired investor 
reevaluations of the risk–reward trade-offs.
It was this action that whipped speculation into a powerful fury 
and led to the last upward surge in tulip prices. Thus, proposed 
political legislation and the subsequent political theater in which 
planters and buyers negotiated prices were among the key causal 
factors driving the extreme volatility in tulip prices.
The Great Depression
The ﬂ ow of money into Florida during the land boom may in fact 
have been the unintended consequence of Prohibition. Banks 
were ﬂ ush with money from the brisk commerce in liquor that 
was present in Florida due to its somewhat porous borders with 
countries that did not prohibit alcohol. In many ways, one can 
therefore think of American money ﬂ ying into Florida as a form 
of interstate “hot money” that, due to the fact that many of the 
banks had state (rather than national) charters, resulted in exces-
sive lending within Florida. Might some of this capital have helped 
fuel the Florida land boom?
Although several policy distortions, such as the adherence 
to the gold standard, confounded policy actions during the early 
stages of the Great Depression, few policy distortions were respon-
sible for the onset of the bubble. Many policy shifts took place in 
the aftermath of the bust that laid the groundwork for future busts 
(consider the fact that the homeownership society was a political 
goal set out during the 1930s in America, or that FDIC insurance 
on bank deposits—a prototypical example of policy-induced moral 
hazard—was a policy that emerged from the Great Depression).
The Japanese Boom and Bust
Chapter 8 described in detail the punitive taxation on short-term 
real estate sales in Japan. By artiﬁ cially suppressing supply from 
hitting the market and decreasing the effectiveness of the price 

 
Spotting Bubbles before They Burst 
209
mechanism due to depressed liquidity, policy makers had inad-
vertently provided pricing support while intending to minimize 
speculative short-term trading. It was precisely by seeking to min-
imize speculation that they created price dynamics that attracted 
speculators and led to dangerously high levels of debt and real 
estate values. Additional complications arose from the inheritance 
tax and the demand it created for highly-leveraged transactions, as 
discussed in Chapter 8. Given that Japanese tax policies effectively 
decreased supply and increased demand, might the government 
have inadvertently fueled the real estate boom?
Further, the rapid deregulation of the ﬁ nancial sector led to sig-
niﬁ cant competition in risk-taking by banks. Credit boomed in no 
small part because of these shifting regulations. Further, credit con-
trols speciﬁ cally implemented to cool the housing market contrib-
uted to the ultimate bursting of the property bubble.
The U.S. Housing Boom and Bust
Among the many policy distortions that ended up fueling the ﬁ re of 
the U.S. housing boom and bust were the mortgage interest deduc-
tion and an overarching political belief that homeownership was 
a right to which every American was entitled. The involvement of 
government-sponsored enterprises such as Fannie Mae and Freddie 
Mac further bolstered the belief that the government was prepared 
to underwrite mortgages to facilitate the conversion of this objective 
into reality. The Community Reinvestment Act (CRA) went on to 
further encourage lending to the least creditworthy of borrowers.
A virtuous (which later turned vicious) cycle soon ensued, 
with Freddie and Fannie issuing bonds to global investors seeking 
effective U.S. government guarantees with greater reward than 
U.S. Treasuries. The proceeds of these offerings were then used to 
purchase mortgage-backed securities. This facilitated banks lend-
ing more money, knowing a ready and willing market existed for 
unloading the mortgages to pseudo-government entities. This ena-
bled banks to worry less about the quality of the mortgages because 
they were not going to bear the risk of default or nonpayment. 
Thus, the whole house of cards was built on a belief that the gov-
ernment would not tolerate a failure of Freddie or Fannie.
Further fueling the housing boom were advantageous tax poli-
cies available to those who utilized mortgages to ﬁ nance the pur-
chase of their property. Because interest is deductible against earned 

210 
Boombustology
income, the net result of mortgage interest deductibility is a subsidy 
to homeowners in the form of reduced taxes. Thus, in the case of 
an individual in a 35 percent tax bracket (and assuming no other 
special circumstances), the government agreed to pay 35 percent 
of the individual’s interest payments.
Unintended Consequences of Policy Developments
Table 11.4 summarizes the ﬁ ndings of this subsection. Although 
policy is usually a politically motivated outcome of legislative 
processes, it is unfortunately often accompanied by unintended 
 consequences—many of which are likely to enhance the probability 
of booms and busts.
Table 11.4 Policy Distortion Indicators
Indicators
Examples
Supply/Demand 
Manipulation
150% property transaction tax, inheritance tax, mortgage interest 
deduction, Community Reinvestment Act
Regulatory Shift
Conversion of futures contracts into call options, Prohibition-related “hot 
money” inflows into Florida, de-regulation of Japanese banking sector
Epidemics and Emergence
The biological framework presented in Chapter 5 focused on two 
primary lenses—epidemics and emergence. The power of the epi-
demic lens is in its ability to shed light on the relative maturity of 
a boom (i.e., to provide some guidepost as to how imminently the 
sustainability of the boom will be questioned). The participation of 
amateur investors provides that guidepost, as it is analogous to the 
ﬁ nal stages of an epidemic (who else is left to be infected?).
The emergence of group order (and consensus) from seem-
ingly chaotic individual efforts and beliefs was the second biological 
perspective introduced in Chapter 5. The behaviors of locusts, bees, 
and ants illustrated how swarm logic via silent leadership can lead 
to consensus and herdlike behavior. Although it probably goes with-
out saying, such herd mentality increases the likelihood of rapid 
changes in sentiment (and therefore the prices in asset markets).
Tulipomania
As discussed in Chapter 6, a telltale indicator of the boom’s unsus-
tainable progression was found in the mass participation of “nobles, 

 
Spotting Bubbles before They Burst 
211
citizens, farmers, mechanics, seamen, footmen, maid-servants, even 
chimney sweeps and old clotheswomen”6 in the tulip markets. 
Further, the involvement of prominent—and therefore seemingly 
knowledgeable—individuals in the market for tulips provided the 
impetus for beelike silent leadership of the speculating swarm.
The Great Depression
According to Allen, participation in the stock market in 1929 was 
characterized not only by professional and traditional investors, but 
also by “grocers, motormen, plumbers, seamstresses, and speak-
easy waiters.”7 Allen goes on to note how the “Big Bull Market had 
become a national mania. . .. The speculative fever was infecting 
the whole country. Stories of fortunes being made overnight were 
on everybody’s lips.” If the entire population of potential investors 
was already active in the market, who else might be attracted to it so 
as to help propel it higher?
The silent leadership of seemingly informed individuals in 
leading the uninformed is perhaps best demonstrated by Yale pro-
fessor Irving Fisher who is unfortunately8 most remembered for 
noting that “stocks have reached what looks like a permanently 
high plateau” just weeks before the 1929 stock market crash. 
Further, the involvement of JP Morgan and others on the Thursday 
before the market crash helped bring a swarm of speculators “back 
to the honey” that afternoon.
The Japanese Boom and Bust
Once again, we ﬁ nd the relative maturity of the Japanese boom 
revealed quite blatantly in 1988 with a notation by the Far Eastern 
Economic Review that “stocks have become a national street-level pre-
occupation.” The broad participation of Japanese housewives in 
the market also indicated that the universe of individuals yet to be 
infected had dramatically shrunk.
Further, the consensus-oriented nature of Japanese society led 
to a particular susceptibility to herd behavior. Combined with popu-
lar media such as the economy-focused comic book bestseller or the 
publication of Japan as Number One, the collectivist Japanese instincts 
were channeled into a herd focused exclusively on upside. Just as 
the dramatic shift from a long-term oriented savings-focused society 
into a collective of speculators demonstrated emergent group behav-
ior, so too did the rapid dejection that ensued following the bust.

212 
Boombustology
The Asian Financial Crisis
Although the epidemic model did not provide immediate or obvi-
ous stories to highlight the maturity of the boom, the opening of 
many capital markets to “hot money” or portfolio inﬂ ows might be 
seen as one extreme form of infection. If global risk appetites had 
clearly extended to the least developed economies of the world, 
how much greater might risk appetite grow?
As for herd behavior emanating from consensus beliefs, here 
too the Asian philosophical mind-set is a factor as it has been 
deemed to be more collectivist and consensus oriented than the 
individualistic Western models. If everyone else was borrowing in 
U.S. dollars, why shouldn’t I? Further, collective conﬁ dence was 
surely bolstered by the publication of books such as the World 
Bank’s The East Asian Miracle.
The most important form of herd behavior, however, might have 
originated from outside the region with the proliferation of emerg-
ing markets funds. By diversifying exposure to many countries in a 
common pool, managers would indiscriminately sell if one country 
suffered economic woes. Further, because emerging markets manag-
ers were compared against a common benchmark (such as the MSCI 
Emerging Markets Index), many behaved quite similarly in effec-
tively replicating the index and mimicking each other. Emerging 
markets funds thus became an efﬁ cient mechanism through which 
the economic woes of one country were transmitted to others.
The U.S. Housing Boom and Bust
An epidemic interpretation of the U.S. housing boom logically 
begins with a focus on the quality of mortgages (i.e. prime vs. sub-
prime). In the quest to “infect” more and more potential home-
owners with mortgages, several ﬁ nancial innovations enabled 
the participation of a greater population of infectable individu-
als. Using this lens, subprime and other mortgages to individuals 
with poor credit history represent the epidemic equivalent of a 
very mature stage. The rapid rise of risky mortgages as a percent-
age of total mortgage lending, as shown in Chapter 10, provided 
powerful evidence that the pool of potential participants was being 
exhausted. After those with good and bad credit histories have 
mortgages, to whom else might a mortgage be sold? Further evi-
dence of the boom’s maturity was found in  the boom in real estate 
salespeople.

 
Spotting Bubbles before They Burst 
213
From a consensus-oriented perspective, the political goals of 
broad homeownership were manifested into a common belief that 
everyone had a right to buy a home. Further, history suggested 
that home prices did not fall nationally and as such, money was 
to be made. Low interest rates provided a spectacular tailwind to 
this belief, and soon shows like “Flip This House” and “Flip That 
House” were popular on television. Magazine covers highlighted 
the ease with which real estate fortunes were being made, and the 
formerly bankrupt property mogul Donald Trump reemerged, this 
time writing bestselling books such as How to Get Rich.
Maturity and Consensus
Table 11.5 lists several indicators related to the biological lens. 
The table attempts to provide speciﬁ c examples illustrating the 
evidence.
Table 11.5 Indicators of Emergence and Epidemics
Indicators
Examples
Amateur Investors
Chimney sweeps, old clotheswomen, grocers, motormen, plumbers, 
Japanese housewives, subprime borrowers
Silent Leadership
Pompeius de Angelis, JP Morgan, Irving Fisher
Popular Media
Japan as Number One, The East Asian Miracle, “Flip This House,” 
“Flip That House”
Conclusions
There seems to be a great deal of overlap when it comes to the 
various signposts that telegraph an unsustainable boom. Table 11.6 
summarizes the various indicators and their frequency. The shaded 
lines are deemed particularly important as those indicators were 
present in each of the studied cases.
Several preliminary conclusions emerge from this framework. 
First, although reﬂ exive dynamics relating to conﬁ dence seem 
ever present, a reﬂ exive dynamic between collateral values and 
access to credit seems particularly problematic. Thus, asset-based 
lending without regard to affordability is reminiscent of Minsky’s 
Ponzi ﬁ nancing. Second, excessive money is a big warning sign as 
capital seeks a home. Combined with leverage-enhancing ﬁ nancial 
innovations and moral hazard, easy money creates a toxic com-
bination of lofty asset prices and an unsustainable foundation. 

214 
Boombustology
Third, overconﬁ dence in the form of “this time is different” and 
new era thinking seems consistently present and somehow pro-
vides a believability to the otherwise clear extremes. Conspicuous 
consumption in the form of trophy asset purchases and the world’s 
tallest skyscraper seemed consistent as well. Fourth, policy distor-
tion manifests itself in numerous ways, but most problematically 
in the belief that a meaningful fall in asset values or the failure of 
certain institutions is politically unacceptable. While such perspec-
tives usually surface in excessive lending and risk-taking (i.e., easy 
money), regulatory shifts and the unintended consequences of tax 
policies also seem to exacerbate the likelihood of unsustainable 
Table 11.6 Boombustology Road Map
Tulipomania
Great 
Depression
Japanese Boom 
and Bust
Asian Financial 
Crisis
U.S. Housing 
Boom and Bust
#
Reflexive Dynamics
Credit Criteria
X
X
X
3
Collateral/Credit
X
X
X
X
X
5
Hot Money
X
X
2
Leverage/Deflation
Financial 
Innovation
X
X
X
X
X
5
Cheap / Excessive 
Money
X
X
X
X
X
5
Moral Hazard
X
X
X
X
X
5
Overconfidence
Conspicuous 
Consumption
X
X
X
X
X
5
New-Era Thinking
X
X
X
X
X
5
Policy Distortion
Supply/Demand 
Manipulation
X
X
X
X
4
Regulatory Shift
X
X
X
X
4
Consensus/Herd
Amateur Investors
X
X
X
X
X
5
Silent Leadership
X
X
X
X
X
5
Popular Media
X
X
X
3

 
Spotting Bubbles before They Burst 
215
booms. Finally, the participation of amateur or marginal partici-
pants in an asset boom seems quite revelatory in determining the 
relative maturity of the boom and approaching bust. Silent lead-
ership (either informed or uninformed) was consistently present 
with respect to forming consensus thinking and herd behavior, 
and popular media usually revealed this collective thinking.
The frequency data in Table 11.6 also provides additional 
insight into the relative importance of the indicators. Within the 
ﬁ ve lenses, leverage appears to be the most important, and should 
be weighted heavily in any analysis of forthcoming busts, for as 
noted by one of the most successful bubble hunters of all time, 
James Chanos, “Most of the time that there are bubbles that burst, 
they can be laid at the feet of excess credit creation.”9


217
IS CHINA NEXT?
There are two kinds of forecasters: Those who don’t know and those 
who don’t know they don’t know.
—John Kenneth Galbraith
This chapter evaluates what appears to be a likely bubble in 
China. The term likely implies that a Boombustology-style, multiple lens 
analysis has led me to conclude that the odds of a bust in China are 
high. As I described in the Introduction, mysteries are inherently 
difﬁ cult to comprehend and understand, but probabilistic assess-
ments of various outcomes can prove to be quite useful. This chap-
ter uses the lenses discussed in Part I and the framework developed 
in Chapter 11 to gauge the probability of a Chinese bust.
Although China appears to be in the midst of an unsustainable 
boom, the timing of a bust is extraordinarily difﬁ cult to predict. One 
need only think of Gordon Chang’s engaging and well-written, but 
early, book titled The Coming Collapse of China that was published in 
2001. Since then, Chinese asset markets have boomed, yet many 
of Chang’s arguments remain valid. Was Chang early or wrong? A 
common saying captures the treacherous nature of prediction: 
“Economists have predicted nine of the last ﬁ ve recessions.” The 
fact that we live in such an uncertain world, however, does not imply 
Boombustology in Action
12
C H A P T E R

218 
Boombustology
that one cannot evaluate the probabilities of particular events tran-
spiring. It merely means we cannot make predictions with virtual 
certainty.
Further, signiﬁ cant evidence is building that individuals are par-
ticularly poor at predicting or forecasting matters in their areas of 
expertise.1 As an East Asian Studies major who once spoke Chinese 
well and worked at the U.S. Embassy in Beijing, it is with great trep-
idation, then, that I proceed with this chapter. Further hesitation 
comes from my acknowledgment that I too am human and suffer 
from the overconﬁ dence that plagues all of us.
China is a booming economy that has been one of the world’s 
fastest growing economies for years. Industrialization, urbanization, 
modernization, and entrepreneurship all appear to be on steroids 
in the world’s most populous nation, resulting in what has become 
a relative consensus among global investors that China will con-
tinue growing at 8 percent for the foreseeable future, providing 
much needed support to the global economy.
By almost any metric, economic progress in China over the past 
several decades has been phenomenal. GDP per capita, literacy 
rates, health care, infant mortality, life expectancy, and national 
wealth have all improved remarkably. However, as the famous dis-
claimer reads on most mutual fund advertisements, “past perform-
ance is no guarantee of future performance,” and indeed, this 
appears to be the case with respect to China’s progress.
Many of the indicators highlighted in Chapter 11 are raising 
red ﬂ ags. Reﬂ exive dynamics seem underway, particularly between 
real estate prices and the credit supporting them. Money appears to 
be inappropriately cheap, with resulting overinvestment and capital 
misallocation. Returns on invested capital are falling. Conﬁ dence 
appears very lofty, with trophy-seeking behavior popping up in the 
art and wine markets. Construction of several of the world’s larg-
est skyscrapers is underway in China today. Let us not forget that 
China is also a communist state, with signiﬁ cant distortions to the 
price mechanism. Government-mandated lending and moral haz-
ard appear rampant. Finally, many of the biologically-inspired indi-
cators, such as amateur investor participation, silent leadership, and 
popular media attention, support the view of a Chinese bubble. Let 
us now evaluate these developments in greater detail via the lenses 
presented in Part I.

 
Boombustology in Action 
219
Tendencies toward Equilibrium
What dynamics have been driving the current Chinese boom and 
are they sustainable? Although it is impossible to provide a certain 
answer to this question, the discussion that follows suggests that 
cheap money has driven a massive credit-fueled investment boom 
that will eventually reverse. These dynamics do not appear likely to 
produce a stable equilibrium.
Perhaps the best indicator of a debt-fueled asset boom driven by 
reﬂ exive tendencies is the simultaneous rise of debt levels with asset 
prices. Consider the following two charts taken from recent NBER 
research published in July 2010 about the property markets in 
China. Figure 12.1 shows outstanding loan balances in China, high-
lighting the massive growth in mortgage debt that has taken place 
over the past 10 years—with a particularly pronounced growth in 
mortgage lending over the 2007–2010 period. Likewise, Figure 12.2 
Figure 12.1 Outstanding Loans in China, 2000–2010
Source: Jing Wu, Joseph Gyourko, & Yongheng Deng, “Evaluating Conditions in Major Chinese Housing 
Markets,” NBER Working Paper Series, Working Paper #16189 (Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of 
Economic Research, July 2010).
6.0
7.0
Trillions of RMB
5.0
4.0
3.0
2.0
1.0
0.0
00Q1
00Q3
01Q1
01Q3
02Q1
02Q3
03Q1
03Q3
04Q1
04Q3
05Q1
05Q3
06Q1
06Q3
07Q1
07Q3
08Q1
08Q3
09Q1
10Q1
09Q3
Developer Loans
Residential Mortgages

220 
Boombustology
demonstrates what has occurred to property prices on a price to 
income basis. If a concomitant rise in both leverage and asset prices 
is evidence of a reﬂ exive dynamic under way, then the data pre-
sented in these two ﬁ gures suggests that China is in the midst of a 
reﬂ exive debt-fueled housing boom.
Another reﬂ exive dynamic that seems to be under way includes 
the belief that both the Chinese currency and land prices can only 
move in one direction—up. These beliefs have proven to be highly 
supportive, validating, and fulﬁ lling of each other. Because both 
Chinese and global investors believe that the currency can only 
appreciate, there is a desire to park money in Chinese-denominated 
assets. Chinese capital controls limit the free ﬂ ow of capital, leaving 
local investors with few viable investment destinations. As a result, 
many Chinese recycle their proﬁ ts into domestic investments. See 
“Limited Options for Investing: Alternating Bubbles?”
Instead of parking excess capital in U.S. Treasuries, the Chinese 
have been ﬁ nding yuan investments in which to leave their money.2 
However, the Chinese stock market bust in 2007–2008 was scar-
ring to most Chinese speculators and drove them to the property 
market. The belief that property prices are unlikely to fall has its 
Figure 12.2 Price to Income Ratios for Several Chinese Cities
Source: Jing Wu, Joseph Gyourko, & Yongheng Deng, “Evaluating Conditions in Major Chinese Housing 
Markets,” NBER Working Paper Series, Working Paper #16189 (Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of 
Economic Research, July 2010).
Beijing
Chengdu
Hangzhou
Shanghai
Shenzhen
Tianjin
Wuhan
Xian
0.0
5.0
10.0
15.0
20.0
25.0
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010

 
Boombustology in Action 
221
origins in China’s rural economic roots. Not too long ago, China 
was a primarily agricultural country and land was the single most 
important asset. Land obsession is still a deep reality in today’s 
Chinese culture.3
Signs of bubbly conditions in Chinese property seem ubiquitous. 
On one February day, a Shanghai investor purchased 54 apartments. 
Separately, a villa sold for more than US$30 million in late 2009. 
Even more spectacularly, the New York Times noted that developers 
in Tianjin “have created a $3 billion ‘ﬂ oating city,’ a series of islands 
built on a natural reservoir, featuring villas, shopping malls, a 
water amusement park and what they say will be the world’s largest 
indoor ski resort.”4 Andy Xiang, a Shanghai-based real estate inves-
tor, noted “the speed you buy a house here is faster than you buy 
vegetables.”5 In one case, more than 800 people lined up around 
a sports stadium—some waiting in a downpour for six hours or 
more—with the hope of purchasing one of the 220 units in a new 
Shanghai development.6
Further, if equilibrium-seeking dynamics were under way, it 
would be highly unlikely to see excess capacity and rising prices. In 
the land of mean-reverting, supply and demand–driven price equi-
librium, it would be impossible to have empty apartments and rising 
apartment values. Yet that is precisely what we see in China. In addi-
tion to property prices rising rapidly (in some cases by 8–10 percent 
per month), there are reports of as many as 65 million urban elec-
tricity meters that are registering zero consumption over a recent 
six-month period of time.7 Although Chinese authorities have tried 
to downplay such reports, anecdotal evidence of empty apartments 
has become commonplace. On the commercial property front, 
reports vary from the ofﬁ cial vacancy statistic of around 22 percent 
to one local distressed investor’s vacancy estimate of 50 percent.
Despite such high vacancy rates, hedge fund manager Jim 
Chanos believes that there was roughly 2.6 billion square meters 
(which equates to approximately 30 billion square feet) of nonresi-
dential (i.e., ofﬁ ce) real estate under construction in January 2010. 
In a speech he gave that same month at Oxford University, he noted, 
“There is a 5 foot by 5 foot ofﬁ ce cubicle being built for every man, 
woman, and child in China.” Needless to say, the equilibrium-seeking 
tendency of Chinese property markets seems to be temporarily sus-
pended. When it does ﬁ nally kick in and begin working, the mean 
reversion tendency and force will be violent and create a bust that 
has the potential to drag banks and the economy with it. Further, 

222 
Boombustology
given the importance of Chinese construction in driving many com-
modity markets, there is a reasonable chance that such a bust will 
also drag with it many commodity producers and processors.
Leverage, Cheap Money, and Potential Deflation
The Mundell-Fleming model developed in the 1960s states that it is 
impossible for a country to simultaneously maintain a ﬁ xed exchange 
rate, independent monetary policy, and allow for free capital move-
ment.8 China has attempted to maintain a ﬁ xed exchange rate 
with the U.S. Dollar and also retain its monetary independence. 
Limited Options for Investing: Alternating Bubbles?
Chinese laws, based on traditional beliefs that inﬂ ows into the country are good 
and outﬂ ows are bad, severely limit the overseas investment options available 
to wealthy Chinese citizens. As a result, two primary venues dominate Chinese 
thinking when the wealthy plan to invest: the domestic stock market and the 
domestic property market.
Given the relatively recent (it peaked in late 2007) and meaningful cor-
rection in the Chinese stock market, investors began to question the safety of 
the stock market. It is not surprising, then, that investor interest in property 
grew dramatically between 2007 and 2010.
Christina Larson of the New America Foundation noted that “stock mar-
kets in China are unstable and immature, and there are few tax incentives 
for philanthropy. As a result, the wealthiest in China are faced with a problem 
unimaginable a generation ago: what to do with their money.”* For many, the 
answer is real estate, an asset that at least appears to be a store of value.
As the Chinese authorities work diligently to cool the property market, 
might they unwittingly be creating an unsustainable stock market boom? 
Although such a possibility is not to be ruled out, early details of the ofﬁ cial 
12th Five-Year Plan include a focus on creating options for Chinese citi-
zens wishing to invest overseas. In early 2011, Wenzhou became the ﬁ rst 
Chinese city to allow individual residents to make direct overseas investments.  
According to Yuan Zhigang, dean of the Fudan University school of econom-
ics, “by allowing individuals to directly buy assets overseas, the government is 
creating a new channel to disperse excessive liquidity in the country, underlin-
ing the strong inﬂ ationary pressure the government faces this year.”# Might the 
relaxing of capital controls spur the simultaneous deﬂ ation of both the Chinese 
property and stock markets?
* Christina Larson, “Bubble, Bubble, China’s in Trouble: The Mad Scramble for Chinese 
Real Estate,” Foreign Policy (May 2010).
# “Wenzhou tests individual DOI to cool inﬂ ation.” China Daily, January 11, 2011, page 14.

 
Boombustology in Action 
223
Capital accounts are not freely convertible. Despite the allure of 
this approach, there is limited evidence supporting its success. As 
described by Sebastian Edwards, the Chief Economist for Latin 
America at the World Bank from 1993 to 1996, “the blunt fact is 
that capital controls are not only ineffective . . . but also breed cor-
ruption and inﬂ ate the costs of managing investment.”9. In fact, the 
IMF’s 2010 Global Financial Stability Report noted that capital “con-
trols tend to lose effectiveness as market participants ﬁ nd ways to 
circumvent them . . . many studies ﬁ nd no effect of controls on the 
volume of inﬂ ows . . .”
By linking their currency to the U.S. dollar, the Chinese have 
effectively outsourced their monetary policy to the United States. 
The country can choose to manage either its currency (through 
interest rates and/or capital ﬂ ows) or its interest rates, but not both. 
Attempting to manage both would create opportunities for arbi-
trage, which would rapidly eliminate the opportunity. So, although 
the pegged currency may have historically made sense, it no longer 
appears to do so. Historically, when the Chinese economy was very 
dependent on trade with the United States, the United States and 
Chinese economies were basically synchronized. If the U.S. econ-
omy was doing well, then so too did the Chinese economy, as U.S. 
imports of Chinese goods likely rose. If the U.S. economy was in the 
doldrums, then Chinese exports were likely down.
This synchronicity of the Chinese and U.S. economies meant 
that a common monetary policy worked and was logical. If the 
United States began to overheat as economic conditions created 
inﬂ ationary pressures, similar conditions would likely exist in China. 
The Federal Reserve would then probably raise interest rates, 
providing an appropriate monetary response to both countries. 
Likewise, if the U.S. economy was struggling, the Federal Reserve 
might lower interest rates in a bid to increase economic activity—
providing appropriate medicine for two similarly sick patients. The 
system made sense. It worked. However, over time, China and the 
United States have become increasingly less interconnected as 
China has increased its trade with the rest of Asia and the world.
As the United States suffers through the worst economic slow-
down it has endured since the Great Depression, the U.S. Federal 
Reserve has been issuing massive doses of economic adrenaline 
in the form of very stimulative monetary policies. Through the 
veins of a ﬁ xed exchange-rate system and a Chinese yuan that is 
pegged to the U.S. dollar, this adrenaline is being transmitted to 

224 
Boombustology
the Chinese economy. The only problem is that the Chinese patient 
was not as dangerously ill as the United States economy was when 
the medicine was administered. The outcome is extraordinarily easy 
money in China (and for that matter, in all countries that either 
peg or manage their currency to the U.S. dollar). Thus, while the 
United States ﬁ ghts deﬂ ation and struggles to maintain low real 
interest rates, Chinese real rates are remarkably negative.
To understand why negative real interest rates are a recipe for 
an asset boom, one need only think of the fact that negative real 
rates mean that investors get paid to borrow from a bank and park 
the money in any asset that grows in nominal terms (i.e., an asset 
that has its price move with inﬂ ation). Accomplished hedge fund 
manager Jim Chanos recently highlighted the unsustainability of 
Chinese credit-fueled asset markets in an interview on ﬁ nancial news 
channel CNBC: “Bubbles are identiﬁ ed by credit excesses, not valua-
tion excesses, and there’s no bigger credit excess than in China.”10
The sheer volume of lending in China is staggering. According 
to the BCA Research, “in the past two years, China’s new credit 
creation has amounted to US$2.7 trillion—an amount equal to 
4.4 percent of global GDP, or as much as the size of the U.S. credit 
expansion in the mid-2000s.”11 Hedge fund manager Hugh Hendry 
has noted that a majority of this lending has taken place since 
the beginning of 2009, highlighting that the $1.9 trillion of lend-
ing that took place between January 2009 and May 2010 (the ﬁ rst 
16 months of the Chinese stimulus program) was bigger than the 
economies of South Korea, Taiwan, and Hong Kong—combined.12
Although Beijing has tried to slow the rate of credit growth dur-
ing the second half of 2010 (with analysts applauding their recent 
success), recent research from Fitch indicates meaningful growth in a 
Chinese shadow banking industry has more than offset this supposed 
slowdown in credit growth. The report notes that recent inﬂ ationary 
pressures seem to have taken market participants by surprise, likely 
due to “the widespread misconception that the acceleration in lend-
ing in 2009 was a short-lived anomaly and that monetary conditions 
began to normalize in 2010.”13 The report goes on to concede that 
headline credit (i.e., bank lending) data points to a slowdown, but 
highlights that “actual credit ﬂ ows in China remain as high as in 2009: 
lending has not moderated, it has merely found other channels.”14
This scenario of massive credit ﬂ owing and easy money is pre-
cisely the foundation of an Austrian school prototypical unsustain-
able boom. Excess investment and overconsumption will result in 

 
Boombustology in Action 
225
too much capacity and an eventual bust. If money is inappropriately 
priced, it is likely to be inappropriately allocated. Peking University 
professor of ﬁ nance Michael Pettis notes that “low interest rates 
(along with their cousin, socialized credit risk) are the main causes 
of capital misallocation and excess capacity in China.”15
One manifestation of cheap money is the existence of inefﬁ -
cient enterprises. Consider recent analysis conducted by Hong Kong 
Institute for Monetary Research on the economic strength of China’s 
state-owned-enterprises (SOEs). The authors note that their ﬁ ndings 
“show that if SOEs were to pay a market interest rate, their existing 
proﬁ ts would be entirely wiped out.”16 For reference, it is thought 
that non-bank SOEs control more than 33 percent of China’s assets17 
and have a disproportionately high impact on both labor and capital 
markets. The impact of “market interest rates” would have a devastat-
ing impact upon the Chinese economy.
The other obvious manifestation of excessively low interest rates 
is misallocation of capital. When thinking about overinvestment 
and the potential for a bust, the steel industry exempliﬁ es overca-
pacity. According to Worldsteel, the trade group representing the 
global steel industry, Chinese steel production has grown from 23 
million tons in 1977 to a run rate of approximately 650 million tons 
during the ﬁ rst half of 2010. This growth has taken the Chinese 
steel industry’s share of global steel production from around 3 per-
cent in 1977 to almost 50 percent by 2010.18 Figure 12.3 summa-
rizes the growth in reported Chinese production as well as Chinese 
steel’s share of global production.
If we take a moment to break down the sources of demand for 
Chinese steel, one ﬁ nds a potentially reﬂ exive relationship with 
the property market described above. In fact, according to Bank of 
America/Merrill Lynch, 53 percent of all Chinese steel demand was 
for construction purposes.19 Although such data is hard to come 
by, anecdotal evidence suggests that up to 20 percent of Chinese 
steel production is being used to construct more steel mills! Truly a 
reﬂ exive dynamic if ever there was one.
Further, although the data regarding Chinese steel capacity 
is inconsistent across different sources, most believe that utiliza-
tion has been running between 65 and 75 percent. For instance, 
the Wall Street Journal reported in 2009 that there existed 200 mil-
lion tons of excess capacity20, while UBS analysis conducted in early 
2010 suggested there was about 175 million tons of excess capacity.21 
To put these numbers in context, 175 million tons of annual steel 

226 
Boombustology
production is more than the production of South Korea and 
Japan— combined! Steel does not appear to be an outlier; similar 
grandiose statistics can be found for the size of the Chinese cement 
(greater than the rest of the world, combined) and aluminum 
industries.22
Another example of unsustainable building can be found 
with the inner Mongolian district of Kangbashi, the urban center 
of Ordos City. Due to massive coal deposits in the area, Ordos is 
today the second wealthiest city (on a per capita basis) in China. 
Despite having a functioning (albeit somewhat less modern than 
ideal) downtown area, the government decided to utilize stimulus 
spending to build an entire new downtown area. The district, which 
is effectively completed, remains basically empty and uninhabited.
Thought by many to be a modern ghost town, Time magazine 
recently noted that Kangbashi is “ﬁ lled with ofﬁ ce towers, adminis-
trative centers, government buildings, museums, theaters, and sports 
ﬁ elds—not to mention acre on acre of subdivisions overﬂ owing with 
middle-class duplexes and bungalows. The only problem: the district 
was originally designed to house, support, and entertain 1 million 
Figure 12.3 Chinese Steel Production (MM tons) and Global Market Share
Source: Steel Statistical Yearbooks, published by the International Iron and Steel Institute and Worldsteel 
Assocation; Yearbooks from 1980 through 2009 accessible via www.worldsteel.org.
Chinese Steel Production
as a % of Global Production
Chinese Steel Production
China % of World
China (RHS)
50.00%
100,000
-
200,000
300,000
400,000
500,000
600,000
700,000
800,000
900,000
45.00%
40.00%
35.00%
30.00%
25.00%
20.00%
15.00%
10.00%
5.00%
0.00%
1977
1979
1981
1983
1985
1987
1989
1991
1993
1995
1997
1999
2001
2003
2005
2007
2009

 
Boombustology in Action 
227
people, yet hardly anyone lives there.”23 Firsthand accounts from 
recent visitors to the city are eerie: “Only a handful of cars drive 
down Kangbashi’s multilane highways, a few government ofﬁ ces are 
open during the day and an occasional pedestrian, appearing like a 
hallucination, can be seen trudging down a sidewalk, like a lone sur-
vivor of some horror-movie apocalypse.”24
Overinvestment in China has also been supported by ﬁ nancial 
innovations such as “local investment companies” and “local gov-
ernment funding vehicles” that have enabled municipalities to skirt 
around regulations designed to prevent them from accessing credit. 
According to recent research, outstanding debt in these vehicles 
(which appear off the balance sheets of Chinese banks) may be as 
high as $1.7 trillion, or almost 35 percent of China’s GDP.25 Most 
of this money, according to Northwestern professor Victor Shih, 
has likely channeled itself into local development projects, some 
of which seem unlikely to be economically viable. “A soccer sta-
dium in the middle of nowhere is not going to generate much cash 
ﬂ ow . . . and without massive central government subsidies, I think 
many of these projects will not generate enough cash even to pay 
interest on their loans.”26 Sounds like Minsky’s Ponzi ﬁ nancing.
A ﬁ nal example of the overinvestment boom can be found with 
the South China Mall, labeled by Abu Dhabi’s The National newspa-
per as the “Mall of Misfortune.” Built in Southern China in what 
were agricultural lands as recently as 2003, the South China Mall is 
the largest mall in the world with the ability to accommodate ~1,500 
businesses. The 7 million square foot complex was described by PBS 
as being “Disneyland, Las Vegas, and Mall of America rolled into 
one. There are carnival rides, mini-parks, canals and lakes amid clas-
sic Western-style buildings.”27 Although completed in 2005–2006, 
a PBS documentary noted in late 2009 that the mall had 10 or 12 
operating tenants.28 Originally planned to have 70,000 visitors a day, 
the mall has not come anywhere near achieving this objective. Paul 
Allen of Bloomberg visited the mall in early 2011 and described the 
scene as having “shuttered shops, never occupied by a single tenant, 
dusty escalators that lead to ﬂ oor upon ﬂ oor of emptiness . . .”29 
Despite these obvious problems, Kun Liu, president of the mall, 
noted that a further expansion is in the works, with more than 
200,000 square meters (~2 million square feet) to be developed.30
When pondering how such a real estate failure might have 
taken place, Dick Groves, a retail consultant in Hong Kong, noted 
that, “When it’s easy to get ﬁ nancing without having to convince 

228 
Boombustology
China’s Growth: How Sustainable?
As eloquently described by Paul Krugman in his 1994 Foreign Affairs article 
titled “The Myth of Asia’s Miracle,” mobilization of resources cannot continue 
indeﬁ nitely. Growth derived from growth of inputs (capital and/or labor) is ulti-
mately unsustainable as it eventually yields to diminishing returns. Economic 
growth slows, and the extrapolation of past input-driven growth trends are rap-
idly deemed inaccurate. Might China’s past growth have been based on such 
input-driven growth?
Let us begin by evaluating what has been happening vis-à-vis capital in 
China. The best measure of capital-derived growth is a country’s investment 
rates. The following chart demonstrates that China’s ﬁ xed asset investment (as 
a percentage of GDP) over the past 15 years has surged. Clearly, growth in 
capital has been an important contributor to Chinese growth. Unfortunately, 
such investment only provides one-time gains to GDP growth leading to an 
ever-increasing appetite to invest. MIT professor Yasheng Huang describes 
this reality as “Beijing’s addiction to investment-driven growth.”* How likely 
is it that such investment-driven growth can continue without the creation of 
growth-limiting (or bust-inducing) overcapacity?
50%
10%
15%
20%
25%
30%
35%
40%
45%
1952
1954
1956
1958
1960
1962
1964
1966
1968
1970
1972
1974
1976
1978
1980
1982
1984
1986
1988
1990
1992
1994
1996
1998
2000
2002
2004
2006
2008
2010
Chinese Investment as a Percent of GDP
Source: CEIC

 
Boombustology in Action 
229
someone of the project’s feasibility, and without having to show 
preleasing commitment, you can start to get into trouble.”31 PBS 
captured the essence of the South China Mall story by describing 
it as “a cautionary tale of capitalist hubris.”32 Just in case you might 
think the South China Mall is a one-off example, consider the 
When it comes to labor, the outlook is not much better. According to Bijal 
Shah, the urban labor force grew at an annualized 7.5 percent annual rate 
between 2000 and 2010.† A major driver of this growth in labor was migration-
driven urbanization. How likely is it that this migration process will continue 
at the same rate? The Economist analyzed the demographics of Qilin, a rural 
town about 38 miles northwest of Chongqing. By 2007, urban opportunities 
had drawn many from Qilin; “those left behind are mostly school-age children 
and the middle-aged and elderly, who would have little chance of ﬁ nding jobs 
in urban areas.”‡ Shah’s research highlights that the number of 15–24-year-
olds—those most likely to migrate—is falling from 230 million to 180 million 
between 2010 and 2015. Given the high percentage of this population that 
has already moved to cities, demographic realities and continued high migra-
tion rates are very likely to be incompatible.
Evidence also exists that China may be more urbanized than commonly 
believed. Although China is approximately 50 percent urbanized, this statistic 
is based upon a Chinese deﬁ nition of an “urban center” as an area with popu-
lation density of at least 1,500 people per square kilometer. According to such 
standards, Houston, TX (the fourth largest city in America with a population of 
more than 2.2 million) would not qualify as a city! Using Chinese deﬁ nitions, 
the United States has a very compelling urbanization opportunity. More likely, 
however, is the reality that China is more urbanized than thought.
Such data on the outlook for continued growth of capital and labor led recent 
research presented in the Journal of Chinese Economic and Business Studies to 
bluntly conclude that “growth in China has largely been driven by factor inputs.”§ 
Such growth is ultimately unsustainable. As analysts work diligently to estimate future 
Chinese economic growth, might they be overestimating such growth because the 
origins of historical growth were heavily inﬂ uenced by growth of inputs? Might 
the Chinese growth story be less sustainable than widely believed?
* Yasheng Huang, “Chinomics: The Fallacy of the Beijing Consensus,” The Wall Street 
Journal (June 19, 2010).
† Bijal Shah, “Why China’s Growth Rate May Halve,” Cycles Strategy, MainFirst Bank 
AG research report (October 8, 2010).
‡ “China’s Chicago: A Giant City in the Southwest Is a Microcosm of China’s Struggle to 
Move Millions from Rural to Urban Areas,” The Economist (July 26, 2007).
§ Yanrui Wu, “The Role of Productivity in China’s Growth: New Estimates,” Journal of 
Chinese Economic and Business Studies (Vol 6, No 2, May 2008).

230 
Boombustology
fact that more than 500 new malls have been built in China in the 
last ﬁ ve years, according to the Mall China Information Center.
Recent academic work has connected the overinvestment that is 
generated by cheap money—examples of which were just shared in 
this section—with overconﬁ dence. In a recent study of Chinese com-
panies, researchers found that overconﬁ dent managers overinvested, 
particularly when there was easy money.33 Let us now turn to other 
indicators of overconﬁ dence, namely conspicuous consumption.
Conspicuous Consumption and Overconfidence
The New York Times noted in April 2010 that Chinese inﬂ uence 
on the art market was rising rapidly, analogizing China’s soaring 
ﬁ nancial power and impact on the art markets to “a hurricane car-
rying off all that lies in its path.”34 Although the article focused 
primarily on the Chinese inﬂ uence on Chinese art, the implica-
tions for the global art market were soon felt in New York. China 
Daily noted on May 24, 2010, that “the art world is at fever pitch 
after an anonymous telephone bidder, now believed to be Chinese, 
paid a world record $106.4 million for a work by Pablo Picasso at a 
Christie’s sale in New York earlier this month.”35
In case you think this purchase might be a random, one-time 
event, consider recent comments by Ken Yeh, chairman of Christie’s 
Asia, noting that “China’s billionaire art buyers are creating some-
thing of an electric atmosphere in the art world.”36 Yeh highlighted 
that the surge in Chinese interest has been noted by up to 20 buy-
ers who have suddenly embarked on a mission to buy Western art. 
Traditional buyers have noted this newfound buying pressure, ﬁ nd-
ing it frustrating when seeking to purchase art. Morgan Long, head 
of art services at The Fine Art Fund, noted that funds “have come 
across frantic bidding from people from the Chinese mainland. We 
haven’t been able to buy anything we wanted at the prices we were 
looking for.”37
A November 2010 auction held in London captured the elec-
tricity of the Chinese art appetite quite well. An 18th century vase, 
dating from the period of emperor Qianlong, which had been 
found in a dusty old attic, was purchased at auction for $70 million 
by a buyer from mainland China.38
A similar appetite seems to be forming with respect to Chinese 
desires for wine.39 During an October 2010 wine auction, three 

 
Boombustology in Action 
231
bottles of Chateau Laﬁ te’s 1869 were sold for the record-setting 
price of US$230,000 per bottle (more than 30 times pre-auction 
estimates) to an undisclosed Asian buyer. Immediately following 
the sale, however, Sotheby’s head of international wine Serena 
Sutcliffe highlighted that “there’s a lot of speculation why the Chinese 
like Laﬁ te so much,” revealing the buyer’s nationality as Chinese.40
Might speculative juices in China be constrained to the art and 
wine markets? Evidence from a host of other markets suggests not. 
Consider the fact that the best performing commodity in China in 
2009 was garlic. As noted by The Guardian, “it is tastier than property, 
more pungent than gold, and rising in value faster than either. An 
astonishing market surge has seen Chinese speculators pile into gar-
lic deals, causing prices to rocket between 10- and 30-fold in the last 
18 months.”41 Rare teas have been equally exciting to Chinese specu-
lators. Dahongpao tea, grown only in a small mountainous region of 
Fujian province, is a noteworthy case. Prices for Dahongpao tea have 
risen more than tenfold between 2009 and 2010 and recent prices 
have approached £1,000 per kilogram.42 Or consider the fact that 
“mutton fat” jade, so named for its marbled white appearance, now 
sells for more than $3,000 per ounce, more than double the price 
of gold. This represents a ten-fold increase from a decade ago, for 
“rocks” that had 20 years ago been used to ﬁ ll sandbags to control 
ﬂ ood waters!43 Finally, in early 2011, a Chinese buyer paid $200,000 
for a racing pigeon (a world record) at a Belgium auction. The bird, 
named “Blue Prince,” was one of 218 birds that fetched $1.8 million 
at the auction.44
Perhaps the Chinese fascination with art, wine, jade, garlic, 
tea, and pigeons is a coincidental phenomenon with no relation to 
national overconﬁ dence and/or conspicuous consumption. Although 
deﬁ nitely possible, consider Chinese buying intentions recently in 
professional sports. In early August 2010, it was reported that the 
$200bn China Investment Corporation, the government’s over-
seas investment vehicle, was behind a bid to buy Liverpool Football 
Club.45 Further, in 2009, the Chinese were reported to have pur-
chased a minority stake in the Cavaliers Operating Company, the 
corporate entity that owns the Cleveland Cavaliers and operates the 
Quicken Loans Arena.46
Trophy asset purchases have been done more discreetly with 
use of intermediaries such as private equity ﬁ rms, state-owned 
enterprises, and other indirect methods under the umbrella of state 

232 
Boombustology
capitalism. Perhaps as a reaction to the public relations nightmare 
of China National Offshore Oil Company’s (CNOOC) attempted 
purchase of Unocal, the Chinese have opted to interface with tro-
phy assets on a more discreet basis. Consider the fact that Chinese 
entities currently own Volvo (purchased from Ford) and a large 
stake in Blackstone, the successful U.S. investment ﬁ rm.
Although overinvestment (see preceding section) is a telltale 
sign of managerial overconﬁ dence, Chinese conﬁ dence can be 
reﬂ exively validated into overconﬁ dence through popular media 
noting “it’s different this time” or by announcing the arrival of a 
new era. It is precisely with this logic that Martin Jacques’s well-
written, thoroughly researched, and thought-provoking book 
When China Rules the World is so concerning. By providing a believ-
able story as to why it’s different this time and how we are about to 
embark on a “changing of global leadership,” the book has a very 
“toppy” feel to it and is eerily reminiscent of Japan as Number One.
A ﬁ nal indicator of (over)conﬁ dence and easy money com-
ing together in a potentially unsustainable manner can be found 
by looking at our skyscraper indicator. Although surpassing the 
Burj Dubai is an unlikely event in the near future, a simple look 
at the world’s tallest buildings currently under construction pro-
vides insight into where speculative juices are ﬂ owing, credit is easy, 
and conﬁ dence is high. According to Skyscraperpage.com, 5 of 
the 10 largest buildings under construction as of this writing are in 
China.47 By 2015, Chinese skyscrapers will occupy spots #2, 3, 5, 9, 
and 10 of the top 10 tallest buildings in the world.48
Rights, Moral Hazard, and Political Distortion
Charles Goodhart, former advisor to the Bank of England and 
Emeritus Professor at the London School of Economics, has noted 
that economic indicators lose their informational content if used 
as a target of economic policy. Known as “Goodhart’s law,” this 
perspective captures one of the primary problems in China today. 
Whereas GDP had historically been a useful indicator (i.e., it was 
an outcome of economic activity), it has now become a policy tar-
get subject to manipulation in the quest to achieve the “number.” 
Economic activity no longer drives GDP; rather, GDP drives 
 economic activity.

 
Boombustology in Action 
233
What might the impact of “GDP targeting” be upon economic 
activity? Consider the fact that government-mandated lending has 
driven local governments to demolish usable roads and dynamite 
functioning bridges in a quest to develop projects through which 
to deploy investment dollars and generate GDP.49 These actions, 
while illogical to most observers, actually make a great deal of sense 
from the perspective of incentives at the local level—not only does 
the creation of new infrastructure generate economic activity (i.e., 
GDP), but so too does the act of destruction! Given that local ofﬁ -
cials are often evaluated on GDP growth in their geography, such 
infrastructure destruction and re-creation might also accelerate 
one’s climb up the communist party’s ladder.
The tension between local objectives of rapid growth and the 
national desire for sustainability of growth has recently resulted 
in Beijing pronouncements asking the provinces to “slow down.” 
In early January 2011, Zhang Ping, director of the National 
Development and Reform Commission, asked China’s provinces 
to lower growth targets and to consider environmental impacts. 
Stratfor analysts noted that “the top technicians in control of the 
country’s ﬁ nancial system face the dilemma of making force-
ful demands to slow the economy at the risk of driving it into the 
ground—or continuing with small adjustments and thereby reveal-
ing their weak will and emboldening the provincial warlords.”50 
Further, the analysts note that “the provinces show no self-restraint 
because they are proﬁ ting from the easy credit and endless eco-
nomic boom . . .”51
In his provocative book The Next 100 Years: A Forecast for the 21st 
Century, George Friedman of Stratfor notes China may be a paper 
tiger by the year 2020. One of his central arguments rests on the 
contradiction of the political reality (communist, centrally man-
aged) with the economic perception (market oriented), and the 
enormous misallocation of capital that may be taking place:
China appears to be a capitalist society with private property, 
banks, and all the other accoutrements of capitalism. But it is not 
truly capitalist in the sense that the markets do not determine 
capital allocation. Who you know counts for much more than 
whether you have a good business plan. Between Asian systems 
of family and social ties and the communist systems of political 

234 
Boombustology
relationships, loans have been given out for a host of reasons, 
none of them having much to do with the merits of the busi-
ness. As a result, not surprisingly, a remarkably large number of 
these loans have gone bad—“nonperforming” in the jargon of 
banking. The amount is estimated at somewhere between $600 
billion and $900 billion, or between a quarter and a third of 
China’s GDP, a staggering amount.52
How might this have occurred? As our study of previous booms 
and busts found, moral hazard and a belief in government back-
ing often leads to signiﬁ cant conﬁ dence on the part of depositors, 
with a correspondingly robust conﬁ dence manifested within banks 
through brisk and voluminous lending. When thinking about the 
presence of moral hazard in China and its banking system, one 
need only stop to think about the all-powerful role of the govern-
ment in terms of owning, running, and regulating most of the large 
ﬁ nancial institutions in the country. In addition, the communist, 
top-down approach to managing most matters implies not only that 
traditional moral hazard (i.e., depositors willing to give their money 
to any bank, conﬁ dent that the government will protect them in the 
event of a bank failure) exists, but one might go so far as to suggest 
the Chinese system creates moral hazard on steroids.
In addition to de facto deposit insurance that banks need not 
pay a premium for, the China Banking Regulatory Commission 
also imposes several constraints (such as a capital adequacy ratio, 
a debt–assets ratio, and limitations on nonperforming loans) on 
Chinese banks intended to ensure their safety, liquidity, and so 
forth. Further, regulators visit, audit, and monitor banks to ensure 
banks are in compliance with these requirements.
Northwestern University professor Victor Shih notes the implicit 
deposit guarantee and “intrusive regulations make the system less 
secure, not more.”53 Shih notes, “Proﬁ ts from risky behavior can be 
so high that banks are willing to share some of the spoils with cor-
rupt regulators who can help them circumvent bothersome rules.” 
He then follows up his argument with recent examples involv-
ing corruption related to lending practices; in one case, bankers 
bribed police to arrest auditors investigating a bank’s books, and 
in another case, the vice president of a large commercial bank was 
convicted of receiving bribes to grant loans against lending policies 
and regulations.

 
Boombustology in Action 
235
Noting that such behavior is tougher to pull off in states with a 
free media, independent judiciary, and rule of law, Shih concludes 
that “small crises are not allowed to emerge to inform the public of 
accumulating systemic risks,” thereby allowing the covert building 
of large problems.
In addition to such politically motivated bank lending and 
the moral hazard that accompanies it, even the casual observer of 
Chinese property markets cannot help but be overwhelmed by the 
magnitude of policy intervention that affects supply and demand 
dynamics. Just over the past 10 years, for instance, property-
related policy objectives in China have shifted from stimulating 
demand (1998–1999) to stabilizing supply (2002–2004) to sup-
pressing demand (2005–2007) to simulating demand (2008) to 
suppressing demand (2009–2010).54 For instance, in 1998, hous-
ing reform allowed for the transfer of property-use rights to non-
government entities and individuals, and to stimulate demand, in 
1999 mortgages with a 30-year term were introduced and down 
payment requirements lowered from 30 to 20 percent. By 2005, 
however, the required down payment was raised back to 30 per-
cent and lending rates rose six times in 2007 alone. However, by 
the time the global economy began slowing in 2008, the Chinese 
authorities felt the need to lower the down payment requirement 
to 20 percent again, as well as to reduce property transaction-
related taxes.
Lots of policies have been implemented since 2010 in an effort 
to control the property market, including policy restrictions on 
developers, limitations on banks’ lending to the sector, and so 
forth. Even within the realm of down payment mandates, house-
holds purchasing property of greater than 90 sq. meters (~1000 
square feet) must put down at least 30 percent, and those purchas-
ing a second home need to put down at least 50 percent. Further, 
in an effective acknowledgment of extraordinary speculative inter-
est, Chinese authorities stated that mortgages would not be allowed 
for the purchase of third homes in certain geographies.55 Third 
homes! The People’s Bank of China also raised the deposit reserve 
ratio multiple times to cool lending activities, and nonlocal (i.e., 
foreign) participation in the property market was prohibited.56 In 
an additional effort to cool property markets, Beijing telegraphed 
that it plans to introduce property taxes in 2011 to curb speculative 
buying.57

236 
Boombustology
In aggregate, the government’s multiple means of attempting 
to restrict speculation in the property market has led Deutsche 
Bank’s chief China economist Jun Ma to note that these actions 
were driven by “strong public discontent with housing affordability” 
and in aggregate, the cooling measures are “the most draconian in 
history.”58
Consensus, Silent Leadership, and Epidemics
Like most Asian cultures and most Asian nations, China comprises a 
quite homogenous group of people. Although variations exist, most 
citizens are Han Chinese and think of themselves as similar. Asian 
cultural values are still said to be quite consensus-oriented and tend 
to shun individualistic behavior or accomplishment. As noted in 
the case studies presented in Chapters 8 and 9, a social harmony–
 seeking, consensus-oriented society is one that is particularly prone 
to swarm and herd behavior.
China’s stock market, effectively closed to foreign investors by 
regulatory mandates, has more investors than any other market in 
the world. There are more than 124 million brokerage accounts.59 
Former Morgan Stanley chief economist Andy Xie, now a fund 
manager in Shanghai, has noted how prevalent the stock market 
has become as a topic of conversation among ordinary Chinese 
citizens. In one conversation with a bartender, Xie found that his 
bartender was convinced that the Communist party would make 
sure that the Shanghai market would rise to over 8,000 points (it 
was 2,600 at the time) in the next ﬁ ve years. The logic was as reveal-
ing as the conviction expressed: “Look, the Hong Kong market is at 
20,000 . . . Shanghai at 8,000 would be very reasonable.” It is worth 
noting, however, that because of the relatively recent (2007–2008) 
stock market bust in China, investors still recall the possibility of 
prices falling. When it comes to real estate and property prices, 
however, the Chinese seem not to be seriously entertaining the idea 
that prices can meaningfully fall.
An August 2010 cover story of Bloomberg Markets magazine pro-
ﬁ led Zhang Xin, the billionaire real estate developer who founded 
Soho China, one of the country’s most successful real estate compa-
nies. The essence of her message: “I don’t see any bubbles. . . . The 
next few months will be a fantastic time to buy.”60 If knowledgeable 
investors such as she are bullish on Chinese real estate, surely the 

 
Boombustology in Action 
237
uninformed will consider deferring to her judgment. In this way, 
large groups of investors can be led as a swarm into buying assets 
at perhaps exactly the wrong time. In addition to specialized media 
such as Bloomberg providing high-proﬁ le, consensus- generating 
stories, the publishing of popular media such as the Martin Jacques 
book can have a substantial effect on directing consensus beliefs. 
Perhaps the countrywide real estate obsession is driven by the fact 
that few Chinese real estate investors have experienced a bust. 
Might this collective (lack of) experience generate a herdlike 
behavior among the inexperienced?
It should come as no surprise, then, that with such silent leader-
ship, speculative juices in the property market are ﬂ owing in full 
force. For instance, Xie notes the preponderance of housemaids 
running out and buying property. As noted above, Beijing took 
notice of the massive property price escalation across major cities 
and has dramatically increased regulations against those purchas-
ing second (as well as third!) homes. Throughout the country, indi-
viduals seem to have developed an earnest belief that property is a 
safe bet. If housemaids are now real estate speculators, an epidemic 
lens might suggest that the disease is very close to having maximum 
infection. Might the real estate speculative frenzy be approaching 
its ﬁ nal hours?
Perhaps more concerning, however, than the “property is a sure 
thing” belief on the part of individual investors is the “property is 
a sure thing” belief on the part of large, state-owned businesses in 
mundane industrial sectors. The New York Times reported in August 
2010 that approximately 82 percent of all land auctions in Beijing 
have been won by big state-owned companies outbidding private 
real estate developers.61 Further, research from the National Bureau 
of Economic Research published in July 2010 suggests that Beijing 
may be among the frothiest of China’s real estate markets. Between 
2003 and the ﬁ rst quarter of 2010, Beijing real estate prices rose 
between 350 and 900 percent.62
Defense equipment manufacturers, salt miners, railway groups, 
oil companies, chemical processers, shipbuilders, and telecom 
companies are all active in the property development  business—
industrial activity that seems eerily similar to that of Japanese cor-
porations in the late 1980s. Anhui Salt Industry Corporation is 
currently developing Platinum Bay, a complex of luxury high-rise 
apartment condominiums. China Ordinance Group, a defense 

238 
Boombustology
contractor, recently paid $260 million for land upon which it plans 
to build a residential and retail development. Sino Ocean, a large 
state-owned shipbuilder, recently paid $1.3 billion in December 
2009 and March 2010 for land in Beijing upon which to build resi-
dential communities.
Su Chuanbo, marketing manager for Anhui Salt’s Platinum Bay 
development, suggested in the New York Times that the central gov-
ernment had been encouraging state-owned enterprises to become 
more proﬁ table. Given that real estate development was “incredibly 
lucrative,” he implied it was quite logical for them to be entering 
such an attractive business.63
The government has recently taken notice of this phenomenon, 
with the State Assets Supervision and Administration Commission 
ordering 78 companies to dispose of or spin off their real estate 
divisions. Despite these efforts, experts believe that more than 90 
of the 125 state-owned companies entirely under Beijing’s control 
still have actively operating real estate efforts.64 Considering these 
facts via an epidemic lens is quite concerning: industrial compa-
nies are entering the real estate development business, develop-
ers are rapidly producing signiﬁ cant supply, and housemaids have 
already bought properties. Who might be left to purchase more 
real estate?.
Finally, in a reﬂ ection of the national obsession with real estate, a 
TV series called “Snail House” airing on many major stations became 
“the hottest primetime soap opera in China.”65 The primary theme 
of the show: real estate and the burdens of rapidly rising prices on a 
young family.66 In a story titled “The Soap Opera of China’s Housing 
Boom,” The Financial Times provided a quick summary:
The most talked-about television programme in China at the 
moment is a soap opera called Snail House, which offers the viewer 
sex, corruption, and political intrigue. Really, however, it is about 
house prices. One character becomes the mistress of a party offi-
cial to help her buy a flat, while another young couple struggles 
unsuccessfully to raise the deposit for an apartment in a city that 
looks suspiciously like Shanghai. . .67
Given the immense popularity of the show and the potential it 
had to create social unrest, Chinese authorities took it off the air at 
the end of 200968—thereby providing strong conﬁ rmatory evidence 

 
Boombustology in Action 
239
for the thesis that the housing frenzy had infected a large percent-
age of the population.
The Unsustainable Chinese Story
As indicated at the outset of this chapter, making predictions about 
the timing of a boom turning into a bust is inherently risky business. 
It is impossible be certain exactly when a boom will bust. However, 
as noted by fund manager and bubbleologist Jeremy Grantham, “In 
dealing with the soft sciences of economics and ﬁ nance, certainty is 
too high a hurdle.”69 With this spirit in mind, this chapter applied 
the Boombustology framework to one of the most important invest-
ment questions of today: Is the Chinese boom sustainable? Given 
data available at the time of this writing, the odds point to “No!” 
Table 12.1 summarizes the ﬁ ndings of this chapter.
According to historian Edward Chancellor, “China’s real estate 
market, and indeed its economy and ﬁ nancial system, have been 
shaped by a belief that past rates of economic growth will con-
tinue into the future. This assumption justiﬁ es more investment, 

240 
Boombustology
Table 12.1 Troubling Indicators Point to a Forthcoming China Bust
China
Notes
Reflexive Dynamics
Credit Criteria
X
Stimulus-induced/mandated lending
Collateral/Credit
X
Concomitant rise in property prices and credit
Hot Money
Universal expectations of rising currency, offset by 
capital controls
Leverage/Deflation
Financial Innovation
X
Local government funding vehicles to allow 
municipalities to borrow for development
Cheap / Excessive 
Money
X
Negative real interest rates
Moral Hazard
X
State-owned banks, mandated lending
Overconfidence
Conspicuous 
Consumption
X
Art, wine, jade, garlic, pigeons, world’s tallest 
skyscrapers under construction
New-Era Belief
X
Economic champion status, When China Takes Over 
the World
Policy Distortion
Supply / Demand 
Manipulation
X
Supply of bank loans mandated by the state and 
controlled by regulatory fiat
Regulatory Shift
X
Down payment requirements, mandates that 
developers pay 50% of land prices up front
Consensus / Herd
Amateur Investors
X
Bartender chitchat, maids buying real estate, state-
owned enterprise activity in real estate
Silent Leadership
X
Bloomberg Markets story about Soho China developer
Popular Media
X
“Snail House” as prime-time TV hit
which spurs the growth, leading to more investment . . . China has 
become a ﬁ eld of dreams; a build-and-they-will-come economy.”70
When China decelerates, the ramiﬁ cations on both China and 
the global economy are likely to be quite dramatic. Noting the dif-
ﬁ culty of converting an investment-oriented economy to one driven 
by consumption, Michael Pettis stated “the world needs to prepare 
itself for a decade during which, if all goes well, China grows at a 
still respectable but much lower rate of 5–7 percent.”71 Bloomberg 
columnist William Pesek notes that “for a nation at China’s level 

of development, 5 percent growth is crisis territory. The chances of 
social unrest would explode . . . putting the onus on the govern-
ment to take drastic measures to boost growth.”72
Given these facts, it should come as no surprise that Vitaliy 
Katsenelson has compared the Chinese economy to the runaway 
bus in the movie Speed.73 Just as the movie’s bus needs to maintain a 
certain speed to prevent the explosion of an on-board bomb, so too 
must China continue growing at high single digit rates to prevent 
social unrest,74 an explosion in bad loans, and potentially destruc-
tive debt-deﬂ ation driven by overcapacity.
With respect to the impact on the external world, consider 
the interconnections that China has developed with the rest of 
Asia through increased regional trade, or the impact that Chinese 
development has had on commodities markets. A material slow-
down in China would have massive implications for the econo-
mies of Australia, Indonesia, Russia, Brazil, Canada, Norway, South 
Africa, and other nations that generate a large percentage of their 
economic activity and growth from feeding the Chinese growth 
machine.
Further, in a balance sheet–constrained world in which devel-
oped countries struggle to generate meaningful economic growth, a 
Chinese bust is the equivalent of the sole locomotive pulling the glo-
bal economic train breaking down, or worse yet, derailing. The magni-
tude of the impact alone necessitates careful and continued vigilance, 
even if timing the bust exactly is not possible. At the very least, one 
should understand that the Boombustology seismograph is generating 
signiﬁ cant activity. Simply knowing a quake is forthcoming will hope-
fully help you navigate its arrival.
 
Boombustology in Action 
241


243
C O N C L U S I O N
Hedgehogs, Foxes, and the 
Dangers of Making Predictions
The fox knows many things, but the hedgehog knows one big thing.
Archilochos
Within the fragments of ancient Greek poetry found among 
archaeological remnants was the short but insightful line by the 
poet Archilochos, quoted above.1 In the 2,700 or so years since 
those words were written, the distinction between foxes and hedge-
hogs has been used countless times, perhaps made most recently 
famous by Isaiah Berlin’s entertaining essay titled “The Hedgehog 
and the Fox,” which was written in 1953.
Berlin expands on the ancient Greek poet’s insight to develop 
the difference between the ideological hedgehog and generalist fox:
There exists a great chasm between those, on one side, [the 
hedgehogs] who relate everything to a single central vision, 
one system, less or more coherent or articulate, in terms of 
which they understand, think and feel—a single, universal, 
organizing principle in terms of which alone all that they are 
and say has significance—and, on the other side, those [the 

244 
Boombustology
foxes] who pursue many ends, often unrelated and even con-
tradictory, connected, if at all, only in some de facto way, for 
some psychological or physiological cause, related by no moral 
or aesthetic principle.2
The basic underlying logic of Boombustology has been that, when 
it comes to spotting ﬁ nancial bubbles before they burst, it is better 
to be a fox. Foxes are more suited to attack mysteries. Hedgehogs, 
with their depth of understanding, are more effective in solving 
puzzles.
Ultimately, one adopts a framework for thinking about uncertain 
future events in the hope that one might be able to gain insight into 
the probabilities of various scenarios. Is there any way to tell if foxes 
are genuinely better than hedgehogs in making predictions? Actually, 
recent research conducted by Philip Tetlock does just that. Tetlock 
conducted a 20 year study of 284 professional  forecasters and asked 
them to predict the probability of various occurrences both within 
and outside of their areas of expertise. By 2003, Tetlock had accumu-
lated data on more than 80,000 forecasts.
The results indicate that experts are less accurate predictors 
than nonexperts vis-à-vis predictions in their area of expertise.3 Two 
members of the faculty at The Wharton School note that this ﬁ nd-
ing “assaults common sense with evidence.”4 Tetlock himself uses 
the language of hedgehogs and foxes to summarize his results:
If we want realistic odds on what will happen next, coupled 
with a willingness to admit mistakes, we are better off turning 
to experts who embody the intellectual traits of Isaiah Berlin’s 
prototypical fox—those who “know many little things,” draw 
from an eclectic array of traditions, and accept ambiguity and 
contradiction as inevitable features of life—than we are turning 
to Berlin’s hedgehogs—those who “know one big thing,” toil 
devotedly within one tradition, and reach for formulaic solu-
tions to ill-defined problems.5
Tetlock’s conclusion that those with the ability to incorporate 
new information, to update their beliefs, and to adapt to a chang-
ing reality by employing multiple perspectives are better predictors 
provides strong support for the Boombustology approach.

 
Hedgehogs, Foxes, and the Dangers of Making Predictions 
245
The frameworks presented in this book are explicitly designed to 
avoid the “one big thing” approach and to generate a “many  little 
things” approach. Idealogical reliance on any single lens might 
prove, as suggested by Tetlock, detrimental to one’s ability to navigate 
uncertain, vague, or poorly-deﬁ ned situations. The multidisciplinary 
approach presented in this book mitigates the likelihood of falling 
into the “hedgehog trap.”
The ﬁ ve-lens methodology of identifying bubbles before they 
burst is built on the philosophical foundations of liberal education. 
Richard Levin, president of Yale University, noted that “it is not sub-
ject-speciﬁ c knowledge but the ability to assimilate new information 
and solve problems that is the most important characteristic of a 
well-educated person.”6 He goes on to explain the rationale for this 
belief: “The logic behind this approach is that exposing students 
to multiple disciplines gives them alternative perspectives on the 
world, which prepares them for new and unexpected problems.”7  
Given that few ﬁ nancial bubbles are “expected” or are certain, a lib-
eral arts approach is ideally suited to thinking about such ambigu-
ous developments.
As you utilize the frameworks presented in this book, remember 
that the only thing that appears certain is uncertainty. Remember 
that the dynamic, interconnected world in which we live is likely to 
present situations that transcend the tools provided by single dis-
ciplinary lenses. Remember that there are inherent differences 
between puzzles and mysteries. Last, but not least, remember that 
despite the allure of “it’s different this time” explanations, it’s usu-
ally not different.


247
Introduction The Study of Financial Extremes
 1. Some U.S. senators suggested that the fact that the CIA had missed the 
 implosion of the Soviet Union had cost U.S. taxpayers hundreds of millions 
of dollars in unnecessary military expenditures that could have been used for 
other purposes. This was reason enough, they claimed, to fold the CIA into 
the State Department.
 2. Gregory F. Treverton, “Risks and Riddles.” Smithsonian Magazine ( June 2007).
 3. Joseph Nye, “Peering into the Future,” Foreign Affairs ( July/August 1994).
 4. Ibid.
 5. Ibid.
 6. Malcolm Gladwell, “Open Secrets: Enron, Intelligence, and the Perils of Too 
Much Information,” The New Yorker (January 2007).
Chapter 1 Microeconomic Perspectives
 1. Adam Smith, The Wealth of Nations, Book IV, Chapter II, Paragraph IX, 
Accessed via http://www.econlib.org/library/smith/smWN.html
 2. Paul Samuelson, Economics: An Introductory Analysis (New York: McGraw Hill, 
1967).
 3. Justin Fox, The Myth of the Rational Market (New York: HarperCollins, 2009), xiii.
 4. The dissertation was eventually published; see Davis and Etheridge, Louis 
Bachelier’s Theory of $peculation: The Origins of Modern Finance (Princeton: 
Princeton University Press, 2006).
 5. Eugene Fama, “Efficient Capital Markets: A Review of Theory and Empirical 
Work” (paper presented at the 28th annual meeting of the American Finance 
Association in New York City, December 28–30, 1969). The paper was later 
published in the Journal of Finance 25, no. 2 (May 1970).
 6. Eugene Fama, “Efficient Capital Markets: A Review of Theory and Empirical 
Work,” Journal of Finance 25, no. 2 (May 1970).
 7. Ibid.
 8. Justin Fox, The Myth of the Rational Market (New York: HarperCollins, 2009), xiv.
 9. The Sveriges Riksbank Prize in Economic Sciences in Memory of Alfred Nobel; 
accessed via http://nobelprize.org/nobel_prizes/economics/laureates/1997/
 10. Roger Lowenstein, When Genius Failed: The Rise and Fall of Long-Term Capital 
Management (New York: Random House, 2000); Robert Rubin et al., “Hedge 
Notes

248 
Notes
Funds, Leverage, and the Lessons of Long-Term Capital Management: Report 
of The President’s Working Group on Financial Markets,” published on April 
28, 1999; accessed via www.ustreas.gov/press/releases/reports/hedgefund.pdf.
 11. Peter Coy and Suzanne Woolley, “Failed Wizards of Wall Street,” BusinessWeek 
(September 21, 1998).
 12. Michael Lewis, “How the Eggheads Cracked,” New York Times Magazine 
( January 24, 1999).
 13. Ibid.
 14. Raj Patel, The Value of Nothing: How to Reshape Market Society and Redefine 
Democracy (New York: Picador, 2009) 4.
 15. As quoted by Representative Henry Waxman during Alan Greenspan’s testi-
mony to the Government Oversight Committee, October 23, 2008.
 16. Alan Greenspan, testimony to the Government Oversight Committee, October 
23, 2008.
 17. Ibid.
 18. Karl Popper, The Open Society and Its Enemies (Princeton: Princeton University 
Press, 1971).
 19. George Soros, Speech given to the MIT Department of Economics World 
Economy Laboratory Conference in Washington, DC, April 26, 1994.
 20. Ibid.
 21. George Soros, The Soros Lectures at the Central European University (New York: 
Public Affairs, 2010).
 22. George Soros, speech given to the MIT Department of Economics World 
Economy Laboratory Conference in Washington, DC, April 26, 1994.
 23. George Soros, testimony before the U.S. House Banking Committee, April 13, 
1994.
 24. George Soros, testimony before the U.S. House of Representatives Committee 
on Oversight and Government Reform, November 13, 2008.
 25. George Soros, The Crisis of Global Capitalism: Open Society Endangered (New York: 
Public Affairs, 1998).
 26. Andrew Cave, “‘I got it wrong’ on collapse of global capitalism, says Soros.” 
The Telegraph (February 23, 2001).
 27. George Soros, testimony before the U.S. House of Representatives Committee 
on Oversight and Government Reform, November 13, 2008.
 28. In the language of professional economists, such instability is endogenously 
generated and does not require any exogenous shock to be created.
Chapter 2 Macroeconomic Perspectives
 1. Paul A. McCulley, “The Shadow Banking System and Hyman Minsky’s 
Economic Journey,” PIMCO’s Global Central Bank Focus (May 2009).
 2. George Cooper, The Origin of Financial Crises: Central Banks, Credit Bubbles, and 
the Efficient Market Fallacy (New York: Vintage Books, 2008).
 3. Please note that by naming my aggressive borrowers the “Carefree Carrolls,” 
I am in no way attempting to diminish the role of aggressive lenders that 
 convince unsuspecting borrowers into assuming more debt than might be 

 
Notes 
249
prudent. In fact, one could easily replace the “Carefree Carrolls” with the 
“Duped Daltons” in this chapter.
 4. Stephen Mihm, “Why Capitalism Fails,” The Boston Globe (September 13, 2009).
 5. In fact, in a collection of his essays was titled Can IT Happen Again? Boston Globe 
writer Stephen Mihm eloquently noted that “it” was, “like Harry Potter’s nem-
esis Voldemort, the thing that could not be named: The Great Depression.”
 6. George Magnus, “Minsky for Beginners (Transcript),” UBS Emerging Economic 
Focus (October 12, 2009), 2.
 7. Hyman Minsky, Can IT Happen Again? Essays on Instability and Finance 
(Armonk, NY: ME Sharpe, 1982).
 8. Ibid.
 9. Hyman Minsky, “The Financial Instability Hypothesis” (working paper, Jerome 
Levy Economics Institute of Bard College, May 1992. No 74).
 10. Ibid.
 11. Paul A. McCulley, “The Shadow Banking System and Hyman Minsky’s 
Economic Journey,” PIMCO’s Global Central Bank Focus (May 2009).
 12. Fisher, a member of the Yale College class of 1888, was awarded the first ever 
PhD in economics from Yale University in 1891.
 13. Irving Fisher,“The Debt-Deflation Theory of Great Depressions,” Econometrica 
(1933).
 14. Ibid.
 15. Ibid.
 16. Ibid.
 17. Richard Koo, The Holy Grail of Macroeconomics: Lessons from Japan’s Great 
Recession (Singapore: John Wiley & Sons, 2009).
 18. So named because of the predominantly Austrian economists (Ludwig von 
Mises, Friedrich Hayek, and others) who pioneered much of the early work.
 19. Llewellyn Rockwell, “Why Austrian Economics Matters More Than Ever.” 
Talk delivered to the Mises Institute Supporters Summit, November 1, 2008, 
Auburn, AL.
 20. Roger W. Garrison, Time and Money: The Macroeconomics of Capital Structure 
(New York, NY: Routledge, 2001).
 21. Friedrich von Hayek, “The Pretence of Knowledge.” Nobel Prize Lecture, 
delivered upon accepting the Sveriges Riksbank Prize in Economic Sciences in 
Memory of Alfred Nobel on December 11, 1974; accessed via http://nobelprize
.org/nobel_prizes/economics/laureates/1974/hayek-lecture.html.
 22. Llewellyn Rockwell, “Why Austrian Economics Matters More Than Ever.” 
Talk delivered to the Mises Institute Supporters Summit, November 1, 2008, 
Auburn, AL.
 23. The clearest visualizations of Austrian belief are provided by Auburn 
University professor Roger Garrison in Time and Money: The Macroeconomics 
of Capital Structure (New York, NY: Routledge, 2001). Many of the figures in 
the section about the Austrian business cycle theory are based on Garrison’s 
frameworks.
 24. The one notable exception took place when Paul Volker raised rates quite 
dramatically to contain inflation. While it is possible to imagine a democratic 

250 
Notes
capitalist society keeps rates at their appropriate level or higher, in practice this 
has proven quite difficult to do for any extended period of time as it has the 
potential to result in a significant political backlash against elected officials.
 25. Roger W. Garrison, Time and Money: The Macroeconomics of Capital Structure 
(New York, NY: Routledge, 2001).
 26. Richard Koo, The Holy Grail of Macroeconomics: Lessons from Japan’s Great 
Recession (Singapore: John Wiley & Sons, 2009).
 27. Murray M. Rothbard, The Case against the Fed (Auburn, AL: Ludwig von Mises 
Institute, 2007).
 28. Ron Paul, End the Fed (New York, NY: Grand Central Publishing, 2009).
 29. Ibid.
Chapter 3 The Psychology Lens
 1. John Scott, “Rational Choice Theory” in Browning, Halcli & Webster, 
Understanding Contemporary Society: Theories of the Present. (London, UK: Sage 
Publications, 2000).
 2. Steven Green, “Rational Choice Theory: An Overview” (working paper, Baylor 
University, May 2002).
 3. Friedrich A. von Hayek, “The Pretence of Knowledge.” Nobel Prize Lecture, 
December 11, 1974; accessed via http://nobelprize.org/nobel_prizes/
economics/laureates/1974/hayek-lecture.html.
 4. Dan Ariely, “The End of Rational Economics,” Harvard Business Review (July-
August 2009): 78–84.
 5. Daniel Kahneman, “A Psychological Perspective on Economics,” The American 
Economic Review 93, no. 2 (May 2003):162.
 6. J. Edward Russo and Paul Shoemaker, Winning Decisions: Getting it Right the First 
Time (New York, NY: Currency Books, 2002) 79–80.
 7. Metaknowledge is knowledge about one’s knowledge. In some senses, it’s a test 
of how calibrated an individual may be in knowing what they know and know-
ing what they don’t know.
 8. J. Edward Russo and Paul Shoemaker, Winning Decisions: Getting it Right the First 
Time (New York, NY: Currency Books, 2002) 80.
 9. Amos Tversky and Daniel Kahneman, “Judgment Under Uncertainty: 
Heuristics & Biases,” Science (1974).
 10. Ibid.
 11. Example modified from an example provided in Tversky and Kahneman, 
“Judgment Under Uncertainty: Heuristics & Biases,” Science (1974).
 12. By bias I mean a predictable and consistent misestimation of either probabili-
ties or values.
 13. Amos Tversky and Daniel Kahneman, “Judgment Under Uncertainty: 
Heuristics & Biases,” Science (1974).
 14. Ibid.
 15. Max Bazerman and Don Moore, Judgment in Managerial Decision Making 
(Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons, 2008).
 16. Amos Tversky and Daniel Kahneman, “Judgment Under Uncertainty: 
Heuristics & Biases,” Science (1974).

 
Notes 
251
 17. Daniel Kahneman and Amos Tversky, “On the Psychology of Prediction,” 
Psychological Review 80, no. 4 ( July 1973).
 18. Max Bazerman and Don Moore, Judgment in Managerial Decision Making 
(Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons, 2008).
 19. Amos Tversky and Daniel Kahneman, “Judgment Under Uncertainty: 
Heuristics & Biases,” Science (1974).
 20. Ibid.
 21. Max Bazerman and Don Moore, Judgment in Managerial Decision Making 
(Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons, 2008).
 22. Ibid.
 23. As cited in Bazerman and Moore, Judgment in Managerial Decision Making 
(Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons, 2008).
 24. Amos Tversky and Daniel Kahneman, “Availability: A Heuristic for Judging 
Frequency and Probability,” Cognitive Psychology 5, no. 2 (1973): 207–232.
 25. Ibid.
 26. Amos Tversky and Daniel Kahneman, “Judgment Under Uncertainty: 
Heuristics & Biases,” Science (1974).
 27. Amos Tversky and Daniel Kahneman, “The Framing of Decisions and the 
Psychology of Choice,” Science 211, no. 4481 ( Jan 1981): 453–458.
 28. Daniel Kahneman and Amos Tversky, “Prospect Theory: An Analysis of 
Decision Under Risk,” Econometrica 47, no. 2 (March 1979) 263–291.
 29. Dan Ariely, “The End of Rational Economics,” Harvard Business Review 87, 
no. 7/8 (July-August 2009): 78–84. As an additional illustration of how free 
goods create confusing behavior, consider the fact that I witnessed one of my 
colleagues (a well-paid hedge fund investor) literally dropping everything, 
walking several blocks, and pretending to be a random person walking by a 
promotion booth that was handing out free sample boxes of pasta. (Note: The 
pasta was available for under $2 at any grocery store.)
 30. Daniel Kahneman, J. L. Knetsch, and Richard H. Thaler, “Fairness as a 
Constraint on Profit Seeking: Entitlements and the Market,” American Economic 
Review 76, no. 4 (1986).
 31. Richard H. Thaler, The Winner’s Curse: Paradoxes and Anomalies of Economic Life 
(Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1992), Chapter 3: “The Ultimatum 
Game.”
 32. Gary Belsky, and Thomas Gilovich, Why Smart People Make Big Money Mistakes 
and How to Correct Them: Lessons from the New Science of Behavioral Economics 
(New York, NY: Fireside, 1999), 31–32.
 33. Richard H. Thaler, Quasi-Rational Economics (New York, NY: Russell Sage 
Foundation, 1994), Part 1: “Mental Accounting and Consumer Choice.”
 34. Daniel Kahneman, J. L. Knetsch, and Richard H. Thaler, “Anomalies: 
The Endowment Effect, Loss Aversion, and Status Quo Bias,” The Journal of 
Economic Perspectives 5, no.1 (Winter 1991): 193–206.
 35. Peter Ubel, Free Market Madness: Why Human Nature is at Odds with Economics—
And Why it Matters (Boston, MA: Harvard Business School Press, 2009).
 36. Daniel Kahneman, J. L. Knetsch, and Richard H. Thaler, “Experimental Tests 
of the Endowment Effect and the Coase Theorem,” Journal of Political Economy 
98, no. 6 (Dec 1990): 1325–1348.

252 
Notes
 37. So named by Baron, Beattie, and Hershey, “Heuristics and Biases in Diagnostic 
Reasoning: Congruence, Information, and Certainty,” Organizational Behavior 
and Human Decision Processes, 98,88–110.
Chapter 4 Political Foundations
 1. The author acknowledges that it is possible to argue that socialist systems in 
which the state owns all assets are subject to terminal busts as occurred in the 
former Soviet Union. Such terminal busts that destroy entire political eco-
nomic organizational systems are beyond the scope of discussion in this book.
 2. Armen Alchian, “Property Rights,” The Concise Encyclopedia of Economics, 2008, 
Library of Economics and Liberty. Accessed May 16, 2010 via www.econlib
.com/library/Enc/PropertyRIghts.html
 3. Karl Marx, “The Communist Manifesto,” as published in Robert C. Tucker, The 
Marx Engels Reader, 2nd ed. (New York, NY: WW Norton & Company, 1978).
 4. Karl Marx, “Critique of the Gotha Program,” as published in Robert C. Tucker, 
The Marx Engels Reader, 2nd ed. (New York, NY: WW Norton & Company, 
1978), 531. Needless to say, such an approach has deleterious effects upon 
individual incentives to succeed.
 5. Press release dated May 22, 2009 from Tenaris management.
 6. A sale that had been properly pre-cleared through the Committee on Foreign 
Investments in the United States.
 7. Adam Smith, An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of The Wealth of Nations. 
Accessed electronically via www.econlib.org/library/Smith/smWN.html
 8. Adam Smith, An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of The Wealth of Nations, 
Book I, Chapter IV. Accessed electronically via www.econlib.org/library/Smith/
smWN.html.
 9. Joseph Stiglitz, Economics (New York, NY: WW Norton & Company, 1993).
 10. Donald Boudreaux, “Information and Prices,” The Concise Encyclopedia of 
Economics. 2008. Library of Economics and Liberty; accessed May 17, 2010 via 
www.econlib.com/library/Enc/InformationandPrices.html.
 11. Joseph Stiglitz, Economics (New York, NY: WW Norton & Company, 1993).
Chapter 5 Biological Frameworks
 1. Robert Shiller, Irrational Exuberance (New York, NY: Broadway Books, 2000).
 2. Ibid.
 3. Ibid. Emphasis in original.
 4. Brian Partridge, “Internal Dynamics and the Interrelations of Fish in Schools,” 
Journal of Physiology 144 (1981): 313–325.
 5. Len Fisher, The Perfect Swarm: The Science of Complexity in Everyday Life (New 
York, NY: Basic Books, 2009).
 6. Social insects are those species that, when considered as a group, possess the 
following three characteristics: (1) flexibility to changing circumstances, (2) 
robustness to individual failure, and (3) self-organization free from central 
control or local supervision.

 
Notes 
253
 7. Len Fisher, The Perfect Swarm: The Science of Complexity in Everyday Life (New 
York, NY: Basic Books, 2009).
 8. Stephen Simpson and Gregory Sword, “Locusts,” Current Biology 18 (2008): 
364–366.
 9. J. Buhl et al., “From Disorder to Order in Marching Locusts,” Science 312 
(2006): 1402–1406.
 10. For more information, see Simpson and Sword, “Locusts,” Current Biology 18 
(2008): 364–366.
 11. Sepidah Bezazi et al., “Collective Motion and Cannibalism in Locust Migratory 
Bands,” Current Biology 18 (2008): 735–739.
 12. Len Fisher, The Perfect Swarm: The Science of Complexity in Everyday Life (New 
York, NY: Basic Books, 2009).
 13. Michael Anstey et al., “Serotonin Mediates Behavioral Gregarization Under-
lying Swarm Formation in Desert Locusts,” Science 323 (2009): 627–630.
 14. Stephen Simpson and Gregory Sword, “Locusts,” Current Biology 18 (2008): 
364–366.
 15. A waggle dance is one in which scout bees shake their abdomen and  waggle 
their bodies in a figure eight pattern. The direction of the dance points 
toward a future hive destination or a source of food. The speed of the waggles 
provides an indication of distance to the destination.
 16. Although this was first studied by Karl von Frisch, who was awarded a Nobel 
Prize in Medicine for this work, more recent evidence comes from the work 
of John Riley et al., “The Flight Paths of Honeybees Recruited by the Waggle 
Dance,” Nature 435 (2005): 205–207.
 17. Len Fisher, The Perfect Swarm: The Science of Complexity in Everyday Life (New 
York, NY: Basic Books, 2009).
 18. M. Beekman et al., “How Does an Informed Minority of Scouts Guide a 
Honeybee Swarm as It Flies to Its New Home?” Animal Behavior 71 (2006): 
161–171.
 19. D. Couzin et al., “Effective Leadership and Decision Making in Animal Groups 
on the Move,” Nature 455 (2005): 513–516.
 20. Len Fisher, The Perfect Swarm: The Science of Complexity in Everyday Life (New 
York, NY: Basic Books, 2009).
 21. S. Goss et al., “Self-Organized Shortcuts in the Argentine Ant,” Naturwissen-
schaften 76 (1989): 579–581.
 22. I say “at least twice” because of the way dissipation and evaporation happens 
over time. If the evaporation removes 50 percent of the pheromone by the 
time the ant makes a round trip, then the shorter trail will have three times 
the pheromone as the longer path.
 23. Eric Bonabeau and Christopher Meyer, “Swarm Intelligence: A Whole New 
Way to Think About Business,” Harvard Business Review (May 2001): 107–114.
 24. Steven Johnson, Emergence: The Connected Lives of Ants, Brains, Cities, and 
Software (New York, NY: Scribner, 2001).
 25. For a good overview of the research presented in the issue, please see Larissa 
Conradt and Christian Lists’s “Group Decisions in Humans and Animals: A 
Survey,” Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society – Biological Sciences 364 
(2009): 719–742.

254 
Notes
 26. John R. G. Dyer, Andres Johansson, Dirk Helbing, Iain Couzin, and Jens 
Krause, “Leadership, Consensus Decision Making and Collective Behavior in 
Humans,” Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society – Biological Sciences 364 
(2009): 781–789.
 27. Dyer et al., “Consensus Decision Making in Human Crowds,” Animal Behavior 
75 (2008): 461–470.
 28. Stanley Milgram is most famous for research on individual adherence to 
authority. His famous experiments involved the fictional administration of 
pain and tested the participants’ abilities to defy orders from an authority 
when their concerns against doing so arose. The experiments demonstrated 
a surprising willingness in individuals to follow orders, even when they had 
tremendous reservations about doing so.
 29. Stanley Milgram et al., “Note on the Drawing Power of Crowds of Different 
Sizes,” Journal of Personal and Social Psychology 13 (1969): 79–82.
 30. Len Fisher, The Perfect Swarm: The Science of Complexity in Everyday Life (New 
York, NY: Basic Books, 2009).
 31. The example is a modified version of a similar story presented in Robert 
Shiller, Irrational Exuberance (New York, NY: Broadway Books, 2000).
Chapter 6 Tulipomania
 1. Donald Rapp, Bubbles, Booms and Busts: The Rise and Fall of Financial Assets (New 
York, NY: Copernicus Books, 2009).
 2. John K. Galbraith, A Short History of Financial Euphoria (New York, NY: Penguin 
Books, 1990).
 3. Donald Rapp, Bubbles, Booms and Busts: The Rise and Fall of Financial Assets (New 
York, NY: Copernicus Books, 2009).
 4. Michael Dash, Tulipomania: The Story of the World’s Most Coveted Flower (New 
York, NY: Crown Publishers, 2000), 59–60.
 5. Peter Garber, Famous First Bubbles: The Fundamentals of Early Manias 
(Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2000).
 6. Michael Dash, Tulipomania: The Story of the World’s Most Coveted Flower (New 
York, NY: Crown Publishers, 2000).
 7. Peter Garber, Famous First Bubbles: The Fundamentals of Early Manias 
(Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2000).
 8. Peter Garber, “Tulipmania,” Journal of Political Economy, 97, no. 3 (1989): 59.
 9. Donald Rapp, Bubbles, Booms and Busts: The Rise and Fall of Financial Assets (New 
York, NY: Copernicus Books, 2009).
 10. Charles Mackay, Extraordinary Popular Delusions and the Madness of Crowds (New 
York, NY: John Wiley & Sons, 1996).
 11. “The Tulip Mania,” Harper’s New Monthly Magazine LII, no. CCCXL (April 
1876); accessed via http://en.wikisource.org/wiki/The_Tulip_Mania.
 12. Mark Frankel, “When the Tulip Bubble Burst” (Book Review of Tulipomania: 
The Story of the World’s Most Coveted Flower), BusinessWeek (April 24, 2000).
 13. Peter Garber, Famous First Bubbles: The Fundamentals of Early Manias 
(Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2000).

 
Notes 
255
 14. Mark Frankel, “When the Tulip Bubble Burst” (Book Review of Tulipomania: 
The Story of the World’s Most Coveted Flower), BusinessWeek (April 24, 2000).
 15. Peter Garber, Famous First Bubbles: The Fundamentals of Early Manias 
(Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2000).
 16. Charles Mackay, Extraordinary Popular Delusions and the Madness of Crowds (New 
York, NY: John Wiley & Sons, 1996).
 17. Earl A. Thompson, “The Tulipmania: Fact or Artifact?” Public Choice 130, no. 2 
(2007).
 18. Charles Mackay, Extraordinary Popular Delusions and the Madness of Crowds (New 
York, NY: John Wiley & Sons, 1996).
 19. Peter Garber, “Tulipmania,” Journal of Political Economy, 97, no. 3 (1989): 536.
 20. Doug French,“The Dutch Monetary Environment During Tulipmania,” The 
Quarterly Journal of Austrian Economics 9, no. 1: 3–14.
 21. Ibid.
 22. Charles Mackay, Extraordinary Popular Delusions and the Madness of Crowds (New 
York, NY: John Wiley & Sons, 1996).
 23. Earl A. Thompson, “The Tulipmania: Fact or Artifact?” Public Choice 130, no. 2 
(2007).
 24. Charles Mackay, Extraordinary Popular Delusions and the Madness of Crowds (New 
York, NY: John Wiley & Sons, 1996).
 25. Ibid.
 26. Ibid.
Chapter 7 The Great Depression
 1. This chapter is merely intended to be illustrative of the five lenses presented, 
not a comprehensive review of the Great Depression. Other treatments of the 
era are more thorough, and the curious reader is pointed toward them.
 2. Frederick Lewis Allen, Only Yesterday: An Informal History of the 1920s (New 
York, NY: Harper & Row, 1931).
 3. Ibid.
 4. Ibid.
 5. Donald Rapp, Bubbles, Booms and Busts: The Rise and Fall of Financial Assets (New 
York, NY: Copernicus Books, 2009).
 6. Frederick Lewis Allen, Only Yesterday: An Informal History of the 1920s (New 
York, NY: Harper & Row, 1931).
 7. Ibid.
 8. Some scholars, including Irving Fisher of Yale University, cited the work 
of Professor Paul Nystrom of Columbia University to justify the belief that 
America had entered a new level of productivity because of Prohibition, which 
began in 1920. By some estimates, eliminating alcohol might save $7bn of 
lost productivity.
 9. Donald Rapp, Bubbles, Booms and Busts: The Rise and Fall of Financial Assets (New 
York, NY: Copernicus Books, 2009).
 10. John Kenneth Galbraith, The Great Crash 1929 (Boston, MA: Houghton 
Mifflin, 1954).

256 
Notes
 11. Ibid.
 12. Ibid.
 13. Edward Chancellor, Devil Take the Hindmost: A History of Financial Speculation 
(New York, NY: Plume, 1999).
 14. Ibid.
 15. For more detailed analysis, see Milton Friedman and Anna Jacobson Schwartz, 
The Great Contraction: 1929–1933 (Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of 
Economic Research, 1963).
 16. For more detailed analysis, see Ben S. Bernanke and Kevin Carey, “Nominal 
Wage Stickiness and Aggregate Supply in the Great Depression,” in Ben S. 
Bernanke, Essays on the Great Depression (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University 
Press, 2000).
 17. For more detailed analysis, see Ben S. Bernanke and Harold James, “The 
Gold Standard, Deflation and Financial Crisis in the Great Depression: An 
International Comparison,” in Ben S. Bernanke, Essays on the Great Depression 
(Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2000); and Barry Eichengreen, 
Golden Fetters: The Gold Standard and the Great Depression (New York, NY: Oxford 
University Press, 1992).
 18. For more detailed analysis, see Edward Chancellor, Devil Take the Hindmost: A 
History of Financial Speculation (New York, NY: Plume, 1999).
 19. For more detailed analysis, see Richard C. Koo, The Holy Grail of Macro-
economics: Lessons from Japan’s Great Recession (Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons, 
2009).
 20. Robert Samuelson,“The Great Depression,” The Concise Encyclopedia of Eco-
nomics, 1st ed.; accessed via www.econlib.org/library/Enc1/GreatDepression
.html.
 21. Frederick Lewis Allen, Only Yesterday: An Informal History of the 1920s (New 
York, NY: Harper & Row, 1931).
 22. Ibid.
 23. Edward Chancellor, Devil Take the Hindmost: A History of Financial Speculation 
(New York, NY: Plume, 1999).
 24. Robert Shiller, Irrational Exuberance, 2nd ed. (New York, NY: Broadway Books, 
2005).
 25. Frederick Lewis Allen, Only Yesterday: An Informal History of the 1920s (New 
York, NY: Harper & Row, 1931).
 26. Edward Chancellor, Devil Take the Hindmost: A History of Financial Speculation 
(New York, NY: Plume, 1999).
 27. Ibid.
 28. Frederick Lewis Allen, Only Yesterday: An Informal History of the 1920s (New 
York, NY: Harper & Row, 1931).
 29. John Kenneth Galbraith, A Short History of Financial Euphoria (New York, NY: 
Penguin Books, 1990).
 30. Edward Chancellor, Devil Take the Hindmost: A History of Financial Speculation 
(New York, NY: Plume, 1999).
 31. Frederick Lewis Allen, Only Yesterday: An Informal History of the 1920s (New 
York, NY: Harper & Row, 1931).

 
Notes 
257
 32. Edward Chancellor, Devil Take the Hindmost: A History of Financial Speculation 
(New York, NY: Plume, 1999).
 33. Frederick Lewis Allen, Only Yesterday: An Informal History of the 1920s (New 
York, NY: Harper & Row, 1931).
Chapter 8 The Japanese Boom and Bust
 1. Edward Chancellor, Devil Take the Hindmost: A History of Financial Speculation 
(New York, NY: Plume, 1999).
 2. The author concedes that this fact may be changing as this book is written.
 3. Japan had remained a feudal society with no individual rights until the mid-
1800s. The entire economy was closed off to the outside world and virtually 
everything was hierarchically controlled.
 4. Paul Krugman, The Return of Depression Economics and the Crisis of 2008 (New 
York, NY: WW Norton, 2009).
 5. Perhaps the best account of the spectacular excess that characterized Japan in 
the 1980s is found in a book written by a financial journalist at The Economist 
named Christopher Wood. His book, The Bubble Economy: Japan’s Extraordinary 
Speculative Boom of the ‘80s and the Dramatic Bust of the ‘90s was written in 1993 
and accurately predicted much of what transpired during the time since it was 
written.
 6. Christopher Wood, The Bubble Economy: Japan’s Extraordinary Speculative Boom of 
the ‘80s and the Dramatic Bust of the ‘90s (Jakarta, Indonesia: Solstice Publishing, 
1993).
 7. Ibid.
 8. Charles P. Kindelberger and Robert Aliber, Mania, Panics, and Crashes: A 
History of Financial Crises (Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons, 2005).
 9. Christopher Wood, The Bubble Economy: Japan’s Extraordinary Speculative Boom of 
the ‘80s and the Dramatic Bust of the ‘90s ( Jakarta, Indonesia: Solstice Publishing, 
1993).
 10. Edward Chancellor, Devil Take the Hindmost: A History of Financial Speculation 
(New York, NY: Plume, 1999).
 11. Francis Clines, “Van Gogh Auction Sets Record: $39.9 Million,” The New York 
Times (March 31, 1987).
 12. Rita Reif, “Japanese Developer Buys Picasso at Record Price,” The New York 
Times (December 1, 1989).
 13. David Usborne, “Missing Van Gogh Feared Cremated with its Owner,” The 
Independent ( July 27, 1999).
 14. Vartanig Vartan, “Big Stock Sale By Japanese,” The New York Times (November 
9, 1987).
 15. Edward Chancellor, Devil Take the Hindmost: A History of Financial Speculation 
(New York, NY: Plume, 1999).
 16. Later episodes (including the Internet boom) rivaled it, but at the time, the 
Japanese boom might have been the greatest one on record.
 17. Takatoshi Ito, “Retrospective on the Bubble Period and its Relationship to 
Developments in the 1990s” in Gary Saxonhouse and Robert Stern, Japan’s 

258 
Notes
Lost Decade: Origins, Consequences, and Prospects for Recovery (Malden, MA: 
Blackwell Publishing, 2004).
 18. Charles P. Kindelberger and Robert Aliber, Mania, Panics, and Crashes: A 
History of Financial Crises (Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons, 2005).
 19. Christopher Wood, The Bubble Economy: Japan’s Extraordinary Speculative Boom of the 
‘80s and the Dramatic Bust of the ‘90s ( Jakarta, Indonesia: Solstice Publishing, 1993).
 20. Ibid.
 21. Charles P. Kindelberger and Robert Aliber, Mania, Panics, and Crashes: A 
History of Financial Crises (Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons, 2005).
 22. Cited by Tomohiko Taniguchi, “Japan’s Banks and the Bubble Economy of the 
Late 1980s.” Princeton University, Center for International Studies, Working 
Paper no. 4, Program on U.S. Japan Relations, 1993.
 23. Charles Mackay, Extraordinary Popular Delusions and the Madness of Crowds (New 
York, NY: John Wiley & Sons, 1996).
 24. Christopher Wood, The Bubble Economy: Japan’s Extraordinary Speculative Boom of 
the ‘80s and the Dramatic Bust of the ‘90s (Jakarta, Indonesia: Solstice Publishing, 
1993).
 25. Ibid.
 26. Ibid.
 27. Ito, Takatoshi. “Retrospective on the Bubble Period and its Relationship to 
Developments in the 1990s.” in Saxonhouse, Gary and Stern, Robert. Japan’s 
Lost Decade: Origins, Consequences, and Prospects for Recovery. Malden, MA: 
Blackwell Publishing, 2004.
 28. Charles P. Kindelberger and Robert Aliber, Mania, Panics, and Crashes: A 
History of Financial Crises (Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons, 2005).
 29. Paul Krugman, The Return of Depression Economics and the Crisis of 2008 (New 
York, NY: WW Norton, 2009).
 30. Fukao, Mitsuhiro. “Japan’s Lost Decade and its Financial System.” in 
Saxonhouse, Gary and Stern, Robert. Japan’s Lost Decade: Origins, Consequences, 
and Prospects for Recovery. Malden, MA: Blackwell Publishing, 2004.
 31. Christopher Wood, The Bubble Economy: Japan’s Extraordinary Speculative Boom of 
the ‘80s and the Dramatic Bust of the ‘90s ( Jakarta, Indonesia: Solstice Publishing, 
1993).
 32. Edward Chancellor, Devil Take the Hindmost: A History of Financial Speculation 
(New York, NY: Plume, 1999).
 33. Ibid.
 34. Gladwell, Malcolm. The Tipping Point: How Little Things Can Make a Big 
Difference. New York, NY: Little Brown & Company, 2000.
 35. Edward Chancellor, Devil Take the Hindmost: A History of Financial Speculation 
(New York, NY: Plume, 1999).
Chapter 9 The Asian Financial Crisis
 1. World Bank, The East Asian Miracle: Economic Growth and Public Policy (New 
York, NY: Oxford University Press, 1993).
 2. Robert Barbara, The Cost of Capitalism: Understanding Market Mayhem and 
Stabilizing our Economic Future (New York, NY: McGraw Hill, 2009).

 
Notes 
259
 3. Charles P. Kindelberger and Robert Aliber, Mania, Panics, and Crashes: A 
History of Financial Crises (Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons, 2005).
 4. Paul Krugman, The Return of Depression Economics and the Crisis of 2008 (New 
York, NY: WW Norton, 2009).
 5. Ibid.
 6. Timothy Geithner, “Reflections on the Asian Financial Crisis.” Speech at the 
Trends in Asian Financial Services Conference, Federal Reserve Bank of San 
Francisco, June 20, 2007.
 7. Paul Krugman, The Return of Depression Economics and the Crisis of 2008 (New 
York, NY: WW Norton, 2009).
 8. Dwight Perkins, “Law, Family Ties, and the East Asian Way of Business,” in 
Lawrence Harrison and Samuel Huntington, eds,, Culture Matters: How Values 
Shape Human Progress (New York, NY: Basic Books, 2000).
 9. Charles P. Kindelberger and Robert Aliber, Mania, Panics, and Crashes: A 
History of Financial Crises (Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons, 2005).
 10. Janet Yellen, “The Asian Financial Crisis Ten Years Later: Assessing the Past 
and Looking to the Future.” Speech to the Asia Society of Southern California, 
February 6, 2007.
 11. David Liebhold, “Thailand’s Scapegoat?” Time 154, no. 25 (December 27, 
1999).
 12. Paul Krugman, “The Myth of Asia’s Miracle,” Foreign Affairs (November/
December 1994).
 13. Dwight Perkins, “Law, Family Ties, and the East Asian Way of Business,” in 
Lawrence Harrison and Samuel Huntington, eds,, Culture Matters: How Values 
Shape Human Progress (New York, NY: Basic Books, 2000).
Chapter 10 The U.S. Housing Boom and Bust
 1. Niall Fergusson, The Ascent of Money: A Financial History of the World (New York, 
NY: Penguin Press, 2008).
 2. Paul Krugman, The Return of Depression Economics and the Crisis of 2008 (New 
York, NY: WW Norton, 2009).
 3. Robert Shiller, Irrational Exuberance, 2nd ed. (New York, NY: Broadway, 
2005).
 4. Ibid.
 5. Just so the reader does not think I am revising my version of history, I thought 
I might share a bit of my personal housing story with you. Upon seeing Robert 
Shiller’s data on the housing market in early 2005, I immediately went about 
selling my apartment in Boston’s Beacon Hill Neighborhood. My wife and I 
then proceeded to rent an apartment for the next four years and only recently 
purchased a condo in Brookline, MA.
 6. Chuck Prince, Interview with the Financial Times, July 5, 2007.
 7. Mara Der Hovanesian and Matthew Goldstein, “The Mortgage Mess Spreads,” 
BusinessWeek (March 5, 2007).
 8. Christopher Dodd, Opening statement on “Mortgage Market Turmoil: Causes 
and Consequences,” U.S. Senate Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban 
Affairs. March 22, 2007.

260 
Notes
 9. Peter Wallison, “Cause and Effect: Government Policies and the Financial 
Crisis,” Financial Services Outlook (November 2008). Washington, DC: American 
Enterprise Institute.
 10. Ibid.
 11. Roger Lowenstein, “Who Needs the Mortgage Interest Deduction?” New York 
Times Magazine (March 5, 2006).
 12. Peter Wallison, “Cause and Effect: Government Policies and the Financial 
Crisis,” Financial Services Outlook (November 2008). Washington, DC: American 
Enterprise Institute.
 13. Frank J. Fabozzi, The Handbook of Mortgage Backed Securities (New York, NY: 
McGraw Hill, 2001).
 14. Mara Lee, “Subprime Mortgages: A Primer.” National Public Radio story 
that was summarized on the NPR website. Lee cites Inside Mortgage Finance 
for her subprime data. Accessed via www.npr.org/templates/story/story.php?
storyID9085408.
Chapter 11 A Method for Spotting Unsustainable Booms
 1. Nicola Gennaioli, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert W. Vishny, “Neglected Risks, 
Financial Innovation, and Financial Fragility.” NBER Working Paper Series, 
Working Paper #16068 (Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic 
Research, June 2010).
 2. Richard Bookstaber, A Demon of Our Own Design: Markets, Hedge Funds, and The 
Perils of Financial Innovation (Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons, 2007).
 3. Garet Garrett, “Anatomy of the Bubble,” A Bubble that Broke the World (Boston, 
MA: Little Brown & Company, 1932).
 4. Christopher Wood, “Global and Asia Investment Strategy.” Presentation to the 
17th Annual CLSA Investors Forum, Hong Kong, September 2010.
 5. Carol Vogel, “Landmark De Kooning Crowns Collection,” The New York Times 
(November 18, 2006).
 6. Charles Mackay, Extraordinary Popular Delusions and the Madness of Crowds (New 
York, NY: John Wiley & Sons, 1996).
 7. Frederick Lewis Allen, Only Yesterday: An Informal History of the 1920s (New 
York, NY: Harper & Row, 1931).
 8. Unfortunate because he contributed a great deal to our understanding of 
booms and busts, most notably via his debt-deflation theories.
 9. James Chanos, Speech at the University of Oxford. Accessed via http://youtu.
be/99HNFCn5RP8.
Chapter 12 Boombustology in Action
 1. J. Scott Armstrong, “The Seer Sucker Theory: The Value of Experts in 
Forecasting,” Technology Review (June/July 1980): 16–24; Philip Tetlock, Expert 
Political Judgement (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2005).
 2. Andy Xie, “I’ll Tell You When Chinese Bubble Is About to Burst,” Bloomberg 
(April 25, 2010).
 3. Ibid.

 
Notes 
261
 4. David Barboza, “Market Defies Fear of Real Estate Bubble in China,” The New 
York Times (March 4, 2010).
 5. Ibid.
 6. Luo Jun, “Sizzling Shanghai Homes Defy Tax, Bubble Concerns.” Bloomberg 
News, December 17, 2009.
 7. Andy Xie, “Fear Empties Flats in China’s Property Bubble,” Caixin online 
(August 3, 2010), accessed via http://english.caing.com/2010-08-03/
100166589.html.
 8. Robert A. Mundell, “Capital Mobility and Stabilization Policy under Fixed and 
Flexible Exchange Rates.” Canadian Journal of Economic and Political Science, 
Vol 29, No. 4, 1963; Marcus J. Fleming. “Domestic Financial Policies Under 
Fixed and Floating Exchange Rates.” IMF Staff Papers No 9, 1962.
 9. Sebastian Edwards, “A Capital Idea? Reconsidering a Quick Fix.” Foreign 
Affairs, May/June 1999.
 10. David Barboza, “Contrarian Investor Sees Economic Crash in China,” The New 
York Times ( January 7, 2010).
 11. Arthur Budaghyan, “Don’t Fight the PBOC.” BCA Emerging Markets Research, 
November 16, 2010.
 12. Kevin Hamlin, “Hugh Hendry Shorts China, Betting on 1920s Style Crash” 
Bloomberg Businessweek, November 26, 2010.
 13. Charlene Chu, Chunling Wen, and Hiddy He. “Chinese Banks: No Pause 
in Credit Growth, Still on Pace with 1999.” FitchRatings, December 2, 2010; 
Charlene Chu, Chunling Wen, and Hiddy He. “Chinese Banks: Informal 
Securitization Increasingly Distorting Credit Data.” FitchRatings. July 14, 2009.
 14. Ibid.
 15. Michael Pettis, “QE2 and the Titanic” accessed via http://mpettis.com.
 16. Giovanni Ferri and Li-Gang Liu. “Honor Thy Creditors Before Thy 
Shareholders: Are the Profits of Chinese State Owned Enterprises Real” Hong 
Kong Institute for Monetary Research, working paper dated April 2009.
 17. Gao Xu, “State Owned Enterprises in China” East Asia & Pacific on the 
rise, Accessed via http://blogs.worldbank.org/eastasiapacific/state-owned-
enterprises-in-China-how-profitable-are-they.
 18. Steel Statistical Yearbook, 2009. Brussels, Belgium: Worldsteel Committee 
on Economic Studies, 2010; accessed via www.worldsteel.org; “Crude Steel 
Production by Month” links on www.worldsteel.org.
 19. Merrill Lynch Equity Research, Metals and Mining Industry Primer, April 22, 
2010. Authored by Kuni Chen, Jason Fairclough, Felipe Hirai, Nik Oliver, 
Oscar Cabrera, Christopher Brown, and Sean Heymann.
 20. Chuin-Wek Yap and Andrew Batson, “China Steps Up Its Drive to Shrink its 
Role as Top Global Steelmaker,” The Wall Street Journal (December 4, 2009).
 21. UBS investment research. Metal Guru Vol 55. UBS Securities Japan Ltd. 
Authored by Atsushi Yamaguchi, Yong-Suk Son, Hubert Tang, Navin Gupta, 
Katsuya Takeuchi, and Hisami Enomoto. March 23, 2010.
 22. Pivot Capital Management report: “China’s Investment Boom: the Great Leap 
into the Unknown.” 2009.
 23. Bill Powell, “Inside China’s Runaway Building Boom,” Time (April 5, 2010); 
accessed online via www.time.com/magazine/article/0,9171,1975336,00.html.

262 
Notes
 24. Ibid.
 25. Dexter Roberts, “Where China Hides Its Debt: Cities Can’t Borrow Much, 
Specially Designed Companies Can,” Bloomberg Businessweek (July 29, 2010).
 26. Ibid.
 27. As noted in the PBS video posted at www.pbs.org/pov/utopia/.
 28. Ibid.
 29. “Dongguan’s Ghost Mall Haunts China’s Property Boom,” accessed via www
.bloomberg.com/video/65822094.
 30. Ibid.
 31. Michael Donohue, “Mall of Misfortune,” The National (June 12, 2008); accessed 
via www.thenational.ae/article/20080612/REVIEW/206990272/1042
 32. www.pbs.org/pov/utopia/
 33. Wang Xia, Zhang Min, and Yu Fusheng, “Managerial Overconfidence and 
Over-investment: Empirical Evidence from China,” Frontiers of Business Research 
in China, 2009, vol. 3, no. 3, 453–469.
 34. Souren Melikan, “Chinese Bidders Conquer Market,” The New York Times 
(April 2, 2010).
 35. Andrew Moody, “Chinese Take the Art Market by Storm,” China Daily (May 24, 
2010).
 36. Ibid.
 37. Ibid.
 38. John F. Burns, “This Old Thing? It’s Worth Only, Oh, Close to $70 Million.” 
The New York Times, November 12, 2010.
 39. Rob Gifford, “Wild for Wine, China Pumps Up Demand, Prices.” December 
12, 2010. Accessed via www.npr.org/2010/12/12/131973813.
 40. Scott Reyburn, “Lafite Sets Auction Wine Record at $230,000 a Bottle.” 
Bloomberg Businessweek, October 29, 2010.
 41. Tania Branigan, “Garlic bubble leaves bad taste in Chinese mouths.” The 
Guardian, July 30, 2010; accessed via http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/
2010/jul/30/garlic-chinese-commodity-bubble.
 42. Peter Foster, “Tea bubble brews in China.” The Telegraph, October 1, 2010.
 43. Andrew Jacobs, “Jade from China’s West Surpasses Gold in Value.” The New 
York Times, September 20, 2010.
 44. Robert Frank, “Pay $200,000 for a Pigeon?” The Wall Street Journal, January 
15, 2011.
 45. “Reds to Buy the Reds? Chinese Government Backs Bid to Take Over Liverpool 
FC,” The Daily Mail (August 5, 2010); accessed via www.dailymail.co.uk/news/
article-1300558/Communist-China-funds-bid-buy-Liverpool-Football-Club.html.
46. “Chinese Investors to Buy Into Cavs,” ESPN.com; accessed via http://sports.
espn.go.com/nba/playoffs/2009/news/story?id4202661.
 47. “World Skyscraper Construction, 2010.” Accessed via http://skyscraperpage.
com/diagrams/searchID202.
 48. “World’s Tallest Buildings, 2015.” Accessed via http://skyscraperpage.com/
diagrams/searchID201.
 49. Tim Wang, “Whither China’s Construction Boom?” Forbes, May 21, 2009.
 50. “Beijing Tells the Provinces to Slow Down.” Geopolitical Diary, Stratfor.com 
email, January 7, 2011.

 
Notes 
263
 51. Ibid.
 52. George Friedman, The Next 100 Years: A Forecast for the 21st Century (New York, 
NY: Anchor Books, 2010).
 53. Victor Shih, “Moral Hazard and China’s Banks: Beijing Could Face Its Own 
Banking Crisis Unless More Market Discipline Is Introduced,” The Wall Street 
Journal Asia ( June 29, 2010).
 54. Jinsong Du et al., China Property Policy Outlook 1: “Property Tax: Would it 
Crash the Market?” Credit Suisse Hong Kong Ltd. June 14, 2010.
 55. Robert Fong, “2010: 2008 All Over Again?” Presentation at DB Access Asia 
Conference, May 2010, Singapore.
 56. Chris Brooke, “Asia Real Estate Market: Boom or Bubble?” CB Richard Ellis 
Presentation at the DB Access Asia Conference, May 2010.
 57. Stephanie Wong and Bonnie Cao, “Shanghai Prepares Property Tax to Curb 
‘Speculative’ Buyers Raising Prices” Bloomberg News, January 17, 2011.
 58. Jun Ma, “China: Soft or Hard Landing?” Deutsche Bank AG report. May 2010.
 59. Andy Xie, “China’s Stock Market Has Become a Poor Man’s Casino,” Bloomberg 
News (May 23, 2010).
 60. William Mellor, “Beijing Billionaire Who Grew Up with Mao Sees No Housing 
Bubble,” Bloomberg Markets (August 2010).
 61. David Barboza, “State-Owned Bidders Fuel China’s Land Boom,” The New York 
Times (August 1, 2010).
 62. Ilan Noy, “China’s Real Estate Bubble.” UHERO, November 22, 2010.
 63. David Barboza, “State-Owned Bidders Fuel China’s Land Boom,” The New York 
Times (August 1, 2010).
 64. Ibid.
 65. Scott Tong, “Chinese Soap Opera Highlights Housing Issue,” broadcast on 
National Public Radio, January 19, 2010. Accessed via http://marketplace
.publicradio.org/www_publicradio/tools/media_player/popup.php?
namemarketplace/pm/2010/01/19/marketplace_cast2_20100119_64.
 66. Su Feng, “Hit TV Series Strikes Chord with China’s ‘House Slaves’,” The 
Wall Street Journal (November 26, 2009); accessed via http://blogs.wsj.com/
chinarealtime/2009/11/26/hit-tv-series-strikes-chord-with-chinas-house-
slaves/.
 67. Geoff Dyer,“The Soap Opera of China’s Housing Boom,” Financial Times, 
January 6, 2010.
 68. Ibid.
 69. Jeremy Grantham, “Feet of Clay: Alan Greenspan’s Contribution to the Great 
American Equity Bubble.” GMO Special Topic Report, October 2002; accessed 
via www.gmo.com.
 70. Edward Chancellor. “China’s Red Flags.” GMO White Paper, March 2010; 
accessed via www.gmo.com.
 71. Michael Pettis. “Get Ready for Lower Chinese Growth.” Financial Times, July 
29, 2009.
 72. William Pesek. “China’s ‘Treadmill to Hell’ Is Worth Mind Game.” Bloomberg, 
December 5, 2010.
 73. Vitaliy Katsenelson. “China—The Mother of All Grey Swans” presentation to 
Casey’s Gold and Resource Summit, October 3, 2010.

264 
Notes
 74. Part of this social unrest might originate from the unmet expectations of 
China’s rapidly growing pool of unemployed college graduates. According to 
the New York Times, Chinese universities graduated more than 6 million stu-
dents in 2009, up from around 800,000 in 1998. Many graduates have strug-
gled to find appropriate jobs. See Andrew Jacobs. “China’s Army of Graduates 
Struggles for Jobs.” The New York Times, December 11, 2010.
Conclusion Hedgehogs, Foxes, and the Dangers of Making Predictions
 1. Fragment 201, trans. Douglas E. Gerber. Greek Iambic Poetry: From the Seventh to 
Fifth Centuries BC (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1999).
 2. Isaiah Berlin, The Hedgehog and the Fox (Chicago, IL: Elephant Paperbacks, 
1953).
 3. Philip Tetlock, Expert Political Judgment: How Good Is It? How Can We Know? 
(Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2005).
 4. Adrian Tschoegl and J. Scott Armstrong, “Review of Tetlock’s Expert Political 
Judgment,” International Journal of Forecasting (2007), 339–342.
 5. Philip Tetlock, Expert Political Judgment: How Good Is It? How Can We Know? 
(Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2005), 2.
 6. Richard Levin, “Top of the Class: The Rise of Asia’s Universities,” Foreign 
Affairs (May/June 2010).
 7. Ibid.

265
Vikram Mansharamani is an experienced global equity inves-
tor based in Boston, Massachusetts. He is also a Lecturer at Yale 
University where he teaches a popular seminar called “Financial 
Booms and Busts.” Dr. Mansharamani has experience in venture 
capital, investment banking, and management consulting. He has 
been a board member of numerous for-proﬁ t and nonproﬁ t organ-
izations, and currently serves as chairman of Torit Language Center 
Montessori in Boston. Dr. Mansharamani earned a PhD and MS 
from the Sloan School of Management at MIT, an MS in Political 
Science from MIT, and a BA from Yale University. He currently lives 
in Brookline, Massachusetts.
About the Author


267
100 year mortgage, 154, 197, 203
A
adjustment irrelevance, 58–59
Alchian, Armen, 70
Aliber, Robert, 141, 146–148, 152, 
157–158, 161
Allen, Frederick Lewis, 118–121, 125–130, 
133–134, 211
ambiguity, 73
anchoring irrelevance, 58–59
Anderson, Phil, 203
ants, 93–94
Antsey, Michael, 92
Archilochos, 241
Ariely, Dan, 61
Armstrong, J. Scott, 218, 242
art market
Chinese, 229–230
Japan, 141–142
The Ascent of Money: A Financial History of the 
World, 173–174
asset prices
debt deflaiton and, 34–35
interest rates and, 30
asset-backed securities, 178
Austrian School of Economics, 35–36
B
Bachelier, Louis, 11
Barbara, Robert, 156
Barboza, David, 221, 223–224, 236
base rates, 51–52
Bazerman, Max, 53–54, 56
Beekman, M., 93
Bees, 92–93
Belesky, Gary, 62–63
Benazi, Sepidah, 91
Berlin, Isaiah, 241–242
bias
confirmatory, 65–66
ease-of-recall, 56–57
retrievability-based, 57–58
biology lens, 210
China, 234–237
East Asia, 171–172, 211–212
Great Depression, 133–134, 211
indicators, 213–215
Japan, 152–154, 211
tulipomania, 114–115, 210
U.S. housing bust, 186–189, 212–213
Black Thursday, 124
Black Tuesday, 124
Bonabeau, Eric, 94
Bookstaber, Richard, 198
boom
East Asia, 155–158
mature, 99–100
Booms and Depressions, 34–35
Boudreaux, Donald, 75
Brooke, Chris, 234
bubble economy, Japan, 139–147
bubble indicator
skyscrapers, 202–203
Sotheby’s stock, 143
bubbles, tulips, 106–109
Budaghyan, Arthur, 224
Buffett, Warren, 45
Buhl, J., 91
business cycle theory, 35–42
C
capital structure, macroeconomics and , 
37–39
Cave, Andrew, 20
ceilings, prices, 79–80
central banks, 39–42
Central Intelligence Agency. See CIA
Chancellor, Edward, 124, 128–130, 132, 134, 
137–138, 141, 144, 153–154, 237
Index

268 
Index
Chang, Gordon, 217
Chanos, Jim, 215, 221, 223
cheap money, 197–201, 222–229
China
Biology lens, 234–237
outstanding loans, 219
political distortion, 231–234
sustainable growth, 228–229
Chinese economy, U.S. and, 223
Chinese, steel production, 225
Chu, Charlene, 224
CIA, 1–2
Clines, Francis, 141–142
cognitive issues, 58–66
collateral rates, 26–30
The Coming Collapse of China, 217
Community Reinvestment Act (CRA), 184
confirmatory bias, 65–66
congruence heuristic, 65–66
conjunction fallacy, 54–56
conspicuous consumption, 229–231
Cooper, Gerge, 24
corporate investing, interest rates and, 31
Couzin, D., 93
Couzin, Iain, 96–97
Coy, Peter, 15
CRA. See Community Reinvestment Act
credit, 201
credit cycles, as instability drivers, 42–43
The Crisis of Global Capitalism, 20
D
Dash, Michael, 104
debt, 222–229
amplification power, 24–25
East Asia, 200
Great Depression, 199
Japan, 199–200
tulipomania, 198
U.S. housing bust, 200–201
debt deflation, asset prices and, 34–35
debt dynamics, 26–30
decisions, fairness and, 61–62
deflation, 222–229
demand-supply, 74
Devil Take the Hindmost: A History of Financial 
Speculation, 138
disequilibrium, 9–10
Dodd, Christopher, 179
Donohue, Michael, 227
Du, Jinsong, 233
Dyer, Geoff, 237
Dyer, John R.G., 96–97
dynamics, self-fulfilling, 194–197
E
ease-of-recall bias, 56–57
East Asia
biology lens, 171–172, 211–212
boom, 155–158
debt, 200
macroeconomics, 166–168
microeconomics, 164–166
multilens, 172
overconfidence, 205–206
politics, 170–171
psychology, 168–169
East Asian Miracle: Economic Growth and Public 
Policy, 156
economy, China and U.S., 223
efficiency, 12, 14–16
 reflexivity and, 21–22
efficient market hypothesis, 9, 11–12
emergence lens, 86
emergent behavior, 94–99
emerging markets, 160
endowment effect, 64–65
epidemic, 86–89
epidemic lens, 85–86
equilibrium, 9–10
China, 219–222
excess capacity, 41
Extraordinay Popular Delusions and the Madness 
of Crowds, 149
F
Fabozzi, Frank J., 186
fairness, 61–62
Fama, Eugene, 11–13
Feng, Su, 237
Fergusson, Niall, 173–174
Ferri, Giovanni, 224
financial innovation, 197–201
financial instability hypothesis, 31–34
Fisher, Irving, 34–35
Fisher, Len, 90–93, 96
floors, price, 79–80
Florida land boom, 117–121, 195
Foug, Robert, 234
Fox, Justin, 11, 14
fractional reserve banking, 36–37
framing, 59–61
Frankel, Mark, 106–107
Frazer, William Johnson, 131

 
Index 
269
French, Doug, 110–111
Friedman, George, 232
Friedman, Milton, 69
Fukao, Mitsuhiro, 152
Fusheng, Yu, 227
G
Galbraith, John Kenneth, 103–104, 117, 122, 
130, 217
gambler‘s fallacy, 53
Garber, Peter, 104–107, 110
garlic, 231
Garrett, Garet, 199
Garrison, Roger, 37–38, 40
Geithner, Timonty, 159
Gennaioli, Nicola, 197–198
Gibson, George Rutledge, 11
Gifford, Rob, 230
Gilovich, Thomas, 62–63
Gladwell, Malcolm, 3, 5–6, 153
Goldstein, Matthew, 177
Goodhard, Charles, 231
Goss, S., 94
government pricing, 78–82
Grantham, Jeremy, 98, 237
Great Depression
Biology lens, 133–134, 211
debt, 199
macroeconomics, 127–128
microeconomics, 126–127
multilens, 135
overconfidence, 204
policy distortions, 208
politics, 130–133
psychology, 128–130
reflexive dynamics, 195
Green, Steven, 46
Greenspan, Alan, 16, 174
group dynamics, swarm processes and, 
95–97
growth, Chinese, 228–229
H
Hamlin, Kevin, 224
Hayek, Fredrich von, 38
He, Hiddy, 224
hedge financing, 32
Helbing, Dirk, 96–97
herd behavior, information cascades and, 
97–99
heuristic, 48–58
 congruence, 65–66
The Holy Grail of Macroeconomics: Lesson’s from 
Japan’s Great Recession, 145
housing, U.S., 173–179
Hovanesian, Mara Der, 177
Huang, Yasheng, 229
I
indicators
biology, 213–215
overconfidence, 206–207
policy distortions, 210
indifference, 64
information cascades, herd behavior and, 
97–99
inheritance tax, 151, 209, 210
instability
drivers, 42–43
financial, 31–34
interest rates
as investment drivers, 40
asset prices and, 30
corporate investing and, 31
investing, options, 222
irrationality, 47–49, 66
irrelevance
adjustment, 58–59
anchoring, 58–59
Ito, Takatoshi, 145, 151
J
Jacques, Martin, 231
jade, 231
Japan, 137–139
art market, 141–142
biology lens, 152–154, 211
debt, 199–200
land boom, 139–141
macroeconomics, 148–149
microeconomics, 147–148
multilens, 154
overconfidence, 205
policy distortions, 208–209
politics, 150–152
psychology, 149–150
reflexive dynamics, 195–196
stock market, 142–145
trophy properties, 139–141
Japan as Number One, 150
Japan’s bubble economy, 138–147
Johansson, Andres, 96–97
Johnson, Stephen, 94
Jun, Luo, 221

270 
Index
K
Kahneman, Daniel, 46–47, 49–62, 64–65
Kangbashi, 226
Katsenelson, Vtialiy, 239
Keynes, John Maynard, 98
Kindelberger, Charles P., 141, 146–148, 152, 
157–158, 161
Knetsch, J.L., 61–62, 64–65
Koo, Richard, 35, 40, 145
Krause, Jens, 96–97
Krugman, Paul, 139, 152, 158–160. 166–168, 
174, 228
L
land boom
Florida, 117–121, 195
Japan, 139–141
Larson, Christina, 222
Lawrence, Andrew, 202–203
LCTM. See Long-Term Capital 
Management
leaders, 99–100
Lee, Mara, 186–188
leverage, 24–25, 197–201, 222–229
Levin, Richard, 243
Lewis, Michael, 15
Liebhold, David, 162
likelihood misconceptions, 53
limitation, 73
liquidity, 110–112
Liu, Li-Gang, 224
loans, outstanding, 219
locusts, 91–92
Long-Term Capital Management (LCTM), 15
Lowenstein, Roger, 15, 185
M
Ma, Jun, 234
Mackay, Charles, 105–108, 110, 113, 115, 
149, 210
Mackay, Harvey, 193
macro complexity, 89–94
macro lenses, 42–43
macroeconomics
Great Depression, 127–128
capital structure and, 37–39
East Asia, 166–168
Japan, 148–149
tulipomania, 110–112
U.S. housing bust, 180–181
Magnus, George, 32
malinvestment, 39–42
market efficiency, forms, 13–14
market-oriented pricing, 75–78
Martin, John, 134
Marx, Karl, 71
mature boom, 99–100
McCulley, Paul A., 9–23, 33–34
Melikan, Sourne, 230
Mellor, William, 235
mental accounting, 62–64
Meyer, Christopher, 94
micro simplicity, 89–94
microeconomics
East Asia, 164–166
Great Depression, 126–127
Japan, 147–148
U.S. housing bust, 179–180
tulipomania, 110
Mihm, Stephen, 31
Milgram, Stanley, 96
Min, Zhang, 227
Minsky moment, 34
Minsky, Hyman, 31–34, 181, 227
Mises, Ludwig von, 23
money creation, 39–42
money multiplication, 36–37
Moody, Andrew, 230
Moore, Don, 53–54, 56
mortgage interest deduction, 82–83, 
184–185, 189, 209–210
multilens
East Asia, 172
Great Depression, 135
Japan, 154
tulipomania, 115–116
U.S. housing bust, 189–190
mysteries, 4–5
financial booms and busts as, 5–6
secrets vs., 2–3
The Myth of the Rational Market, 14
N
National Association of Realtors, 187
nationalization, 73
natural science, vs. social, 18
NINJA. See No-Income, No-Job or Assets
No-Income, No-Job or Assets (NINJA), 197
Noy, Ilan, 236
Nye, Joseph, 2–5
O
Only Yesterday, 118, 128–130
Open Society and Its Enemies, 17

 
Index 
271
Ordos, 226
overconfidence, 202–207, 229–231
East Asia, 205–206
Great Depression, 204
indicators, 206–207
Japan, 205
tulipomania, 204
U.S. housing bust, 206
overconsumption, 39–42
P
Partridge, Brian, 89–90
Patel, Raj, 16
Paul, Ron, 42
Perkins, Dwight, 161, 170
Pesek, William, 238
Pettis, Michael, 224, 238
policy distortions, 207
China, 231–234
Great Depression, 208
indicators, 210
Japan, 208–209
price, 82–83
tulipomania, 207–208
U.S. housing bust, 209
politics
East Asia, 170–171
Great Depression, 130–133
Japan, 150–152
tulipomania, 113–114
U.S. housing bust, 182–186
pollock, 89–90
ponzi financing, 32
Popper, Karl, 17
Powell, Bill, 226
preference reversal, 59–61
prices, 73–82
ceilings, 79–80
floors, 79–80
political distortions, 82–83
tax policies, 80–82
pricing
government, 78–82
market-oriented, 75–78
Prince, Chuck, 176–177
prohibition, 131
property rights, 70–73
psychology
East Asia, 168–169
Great Depression, 128–130
Japan, 149–150
tulipomania, 112–113
U.S. housing bust, 181–182
puzzles. See secrets
R
racing pigeon, 231
Rapp, Donald, 103–105, 10–121
rational choice theory, 45–47
reflexive dynamics
Great Depression
indicators, 196–197
Japan, 195–196
U.S. housing bust, 196
reflexivity, 16–21, 194–197
efficiency and, 21–22
regression, 53–54
Reif, Rita, 142
representativeness, 50–51
retrievability-based bias, 57–58
The Return of Depression Economics, 158–159
Reyburn, Scott, 230
Roaring Twenties, 121–126
Roberts, Dexter, 227
Rockwell, Llewellyn, 36, 38
Roosevelt, Franklin D., 131–132
Rothbard, Murray M., 42
Rubin, Robert, 15
rules of thumb, 49–58
Russo, Edward J., 47–48
S
sample size, insensitivity, 52
Samuelson, Paul, 11
Samuelson, Robert, 125–126
Scott, John, 45–46
secrets, 3–5
mysteries vs., 2–3
securitization, 178–179
Shah, Bijal, 229
Shih, Victor, 233
Shiller, Robert, 85–89, 128, 174–175, 177
Shleifer, Andrei, 197–198
Shoemaker, Paul, 47–48
Simpson, Stephen, 91–92
skyscraper, as bubble indicator, 202–203
Smith, Adam, 10–11, 74
Smithers, Andrew, 98
“Snail House”, 238, 241
social science, vs. natural, 18
Soros, George, 10, 16–21
Sotheby’s, 143, 230
South China Mall, 227
speculative financing, 32

272 
Index
steel production, China, 225
Stiglitz, Joseph, 74–75, 78
stock market, Japan, 142–145
supply-demand, 74
swarm processes, group dynamics and, 
95–97
Swensen, David, 98
Sword, Gregory, 91–92
T
tax policies, 80–82
tea, 231
Tenaris, 71
Tetlock, Philip, 242
Thailand, 158–163
Thaler, Richard H., 61–65
theory of reflexivity, 9, 16–21
third world, 160
Thompson, Earl, 108, 114
Thornton, Mark, 203
thumb, rules of, 49–58
Tong, Scott, 237
Treverton, Gregory, 2–3
trophy properties, Japan, 139–141
Truman, Harry S., 1
Tschoegl, Adrian, 242
tulipomania
biology lens, 114–115, 210
debt, 198
macroeconomics, 110–112
microeconomics, 110
multilens, 115–116
overconfidence, 204
policy distortions, 207–208
politics, 113–114
psychology, 112–113
tulips, 104–106
bubble, 106–109
Tversky, Amos, 46–47, 49–60
U
U.S. economy, China and, 223
U.S. housing bust
biology, 186–189, 212–213
debt, 200–201
macroeconomics, 180–181
microeconomics, 179–180
multilens, 189–190
overconfidence, 206
policy distortions, 209
politics, 182–186
psychology, 181–182
reflexive dynamics, 196
Ubel, Peter, 65
uncertainty, 66–67
unsustainable boom, 86–89
China, 237–239
Usborne, David, 142
V
Vartan, Vartanig, 143
Villard, Henry, 120
Vishny, Robert W., 197–198
Vogel, Carol, 206
von Hayek, Fredrich, 46
W
Wallison, Peter, 182–184, 185
Wang ,Tim, 232
The Wealth of Nations, 74–75
Wen, Chunling, 224
When China Rules the World, 231
willingness to accept (WTA), 
64–65
willingness to pay (WTP), 64–65
wine market, Chinese, 230
Wood, Christopher, 140–141, 147, 
149–152, 199
Woolley, Suzanne, 15
WTA. See willingness to accept
WTP. See willingness to pay
Wu, Yanrui, 229
X
Xia, Want, 227
Xie, Andy, 220–221, 234–236
Xu, Gao, 224
Y
Yap, Chuin-Wek, 226
Yeh, Ken, 230
Yellen, Janet, 161

