 
 
Pg. 1 
 
 
Working memory is not fixed capacity: More active storage 
capacity for real-world objects than simple stimuli 
 
Timothy F. Brady1, Viola Störmer2, George A. Alvarez2 
 
 
1 Department of Psychology 
University of California, San Diego 
San Diego, CA, 92093, USA 
 
2 Department of Psychology 
 Harvard University 
Cambridge, MA, 02138, USA 
 
 
 
 
Classification:  
SOCIAL SCIENCES : Psychological and Cognitive Sciences 
BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES : Neuroscience 
 
Keywords: visual short-term memory, contralateral delay activity, visual memory 
 
 
Please address correspondence to:  
Timothy F. Brady 
Department of Psychology 
University of California, San Diego 
McGill Hall, Room 5322 
San Diego, CA 92093 
Email: timbrady@ucsd.edu 
 

 
 
Pg. 2 
Abstract 
Visual working memory is the cognitive system that holds visual information active to make it resistant 
to interference from new perceptual input. Information about simple stimuli – colors, orientations – is 
encoded into working memory rapidly: in under 100ms, working memory ‘fills up’, revealing a stark 
capacity limit. However, for real-world objects, the same behavioral limits do not hold: with increasing 
encoding time, people store more real-world objects and do so with more detail. This boost in 
performance for real-world objects is generally assumed to reflect the use of a separate episodic long-
term memory system, rather than working memory. Here we show that this behavioral increase in 
capacity with real-world objects is not solely due to the use of separate episodic long-term memory 
systems. In particular, we show that this increase is a result of active storage in working memory, as 
shown by directly measuring neural activity during the delay period of a working memory task using 
EEG. These data challenge fixed capacity working memory models, and demonstrate that working 
memory and its capacity limitations are dependent upon our existing knowledge. 
 
Significance Statement 
Visual working memory is the cognitive system that holds visual information in an active state, making it 
available for cognitive processing and protecting it against interference. Here, we demonstrate that 
visual working memory has a greater capacity than previously measured. In particular, we use EEG to 
show that, contrary to existing theories, enhanced performance with real-world objects relative to 
simple stimuli in short-term memory tasks is reflected in active storage in working memory, and is not 
entirely due to the independent usage of episodic long-term memory systems. These data demonstrate 
that working memory and its capacity limitations are dependent upon our knowledge. Thus, working 
memory is not fixed capacity; instead, its capacity is dependent on exactly what is being remembered. 
 
 

 
 
Pg. 3 
\body 
Visual working memory is a system used to actively store and manipulate visual sensory information1. 
This memory system is severely limited in capacity2, and these capacity limits are closely related to 
measures of intelligence and academic achievement3,4, suggesting that working memory may be a core 
cognitive ability that underlies, and constrains, our ability to process information across domains5. 
To date, the vast majority of studies on visual working memory have focused on memory for simple 
stimuli like colored squares, oriented lines or novel shapes; all stimuli about which participants have no 
background knowledge or expectations. These simple, meaningless stimuli are assumed to best assess 
the core capacity of working memory because they have no semantic associations and are repeated 
from trial-to-trial, which minimizes participant’s ability to use other memory systems, like episodic visual 
long-term memory. Episodic visual long-term memory is the process of forming memory traces and later 
retrieving them without continued active maintenance, and can be used at any time-scale (even with 
brief delays). Contributions from this system, which operates best with conceptually meaningful stimuli 
and when there is little interference from items repeating across trials6–8 is thought to be minimal in 
working memory tasks that use simple, meaningless stimuli.  
In experiments using simple stimuli, working memory is often estimated to have a fixed capacity (of 
approximately 3-4 items worth of information) no matter how long participants are given to encode 
those items9. In particular, participants’ memory performance remains at the same limit regardless of 
whether the stimuli are presented for 200ms or for several seconds during encoding10. This is consistent 
with the theoretical proposal that the primary function of visual working memory is to span across 
saccades so that important items can be located after the eyes have moved11, which requires a memory 
system that can be “filled up” within the span of a single eye fixation.  
However, by contrast to the fixed capacity and fast encoding that is observed with simple stimuli, similar 
tasks with real-world objects have found that participants remember more items with more time, 
without an obvious capacity limit12–14. In addition, familiarity or stored knowledge can also increase 
working memory capacity estimates15–18. Furthermore, paradigms where interference is minimized with 
real-world objects also show that participants can remember a very large number of objects, also 
without reaching a fixed capacity limit19. These differences in capacity estimates  for simple stimuli and 
real-world objects could simply be due to the fact that working memory operates equally well on both 
stimulus types, but real-world objects and other familiar stimuli can additionally benefit from the high-

 
 
Pg. 4 
capacity episodic long-term memory system. Alternatively, it is possible that, at least to some extent, 
the active working memory system has a different (and higher) capacity for real-world stimuli than for 
simple stimuli. 
Most researchers have generally assumed that lack of process-purity explains these differences in 
memory capacities for real-world objects relative to simple stimuli; in particular, using complex, 
meaningful stimuli and allowing for long encoding times or long retention times are thought to destroy 
the process-purity of working memory tasks and allow for the usage of episodic long-term memory 
systems20. None of the existing studies of memory for real-world objects were able to directly examine 
whether the increase in memory performance was due to increases in the active storage of information 
in working memory, or to the use of other memory systems, such as episodic long-term memory. 
In the present study we used electrophysiological recordings to directly test whether or not the 
maintenance of real-world objects relies on the same active working memory system as simple stimuli, 
in particular colors. Visual working memory is associated with persistent neural activity in frontal and 
parietal regions21,22, which may reflect either actual information storage23 or attentional refreshing 
mechanisms required to maintain information storage in lower-level regions24; in either case, such 
activity is directly associated with active maintenance of working memory representations. In humans, 
one particularly strong marker of active working memory maintenance is the contralateral-delay activity 
(CDA), a sustained negative deflection in the event-related potential (ERP) that occurs during the 
retention period over the hemisphere contralateral to the to-be-remembered items and is typically 
largest over parietal-occipital scalp sites25–28. The CDA provides a neural signature of active storage in 
working memory29: Its magnitude increases with the number of items participants hold in working 
memory27 and decreases when items are dropped from working memory28,30; the CDA correlates with 
individual’s memory capacity27; most importantly, the CDA disappears when items have been 
consolidated into episodic long-term memory31. Thus, the CDA is a measure of how much information is 
actively maintained in visual working memory at each moment rather than the encoding or 
consolidation into episodic long-term memory systems27,30,31.  
In the present study, by using this electrophysiological marker of active maintenance, we directly assess 
the role of visual working memory in storing real-world objects. In a first experiment, we vary how long 
participants have to encode either simple stimuli (colors) or real-world objects in a working memory 
task, and find a behavioral advantage for real-world objects at long encoding times (Experiment 1). We 
then examine whether the increase in memory performance for real-world objects at longer encoding 

 
 
Pg. 5 
times was due to encoding in episodic long-term memory systems, or whether it would be reflected in 
active working memory maintenance, as indexed by the CDA25,27,28. If the CDA amplitude increased with 
increasing behavioral performance, this would suggest that this additional accumulation of information 
was a result of active storage in visual working memory rather than an artifact of people using a 
different memory system (e.g., episodic long-term memory). Next, we directly compare active memory 
maintenance (i.e., CDA amplitude) for colors vs. real-world objects at long encoding times. We find that 
the behavioral advantage for real-world objects with additional encoding time is supported by the active 
working memory system, relative to performance at short-encoding times (Experiment 2) and relative to 
memory for colors (Experiment 3). 
Results 
Experiment 1: Increased encoding time improves memory for real-world objects but not colors. In our 
first experiment, we asked participants to remember either real-world objects or simple colors while 
doing a simultaneous verbal task (rehearsing 2 digits) to ensure that visual memory, not verbal memory, 
was used.  Participants were asked to remember a set of either colors or real-world objects and then 
given a forced-choice comparison testing memory for a single item after a brief delay. Our main 
manipulation was to vary how long participants had to encode the stimuli, to assess how encoding time 
affects performance for simple stimuli vs. for real-world objects (Figure 1A).  
Participants performed well on the digit task, entering both digits correctly on 93% of trials (± 2.6% 
S.E.M.). Memory performance for each stimulus type is shown in Figure 1B. Replicating previous 
work9,10, we found that 200ms was sufficient time to encode color. Little to no additional information 
was accumulated over the remaining 1800ms (the slope from 200ms to 2000ms was not significantly 
different from zero (t(11)=0.61, p=0.555). By contrast, the number of objects worth of information 
remembered increased reliably from 200ms to 2000ms (t(11)=4.38, p=0.001), as did the number 
remembered with detail (t(11)=3.38, p=0.006).  
Comparing only the conditions that estimate how many items are remembered at all (e.g., the large 
change conditions; Figure 1B middle column), there was a significant interaction between the estimated 
capacity for objects and estimated capacity for colors as a function of additional encoding time (e.g., 3 
encoding times x 2 stimuli kinds; F(2,71)=4.72, p=0.019), indicating that the capacity for objects reliably 
increased but the capacity for colors did not. Thus, real-world objects and colors are differentially 
affected by encoding time, with only real-world objects continuing to benefit from more encoding time. 

 
 
Pg. 6 
At our longest encoding time (2 seconds), participants had an estimated capacity of more than 4 objects 
worth of information (4.7 ± 0.22; significantly greater than 4, t(11)=3.35, p=0.006), and remembered 
27% more about objects than colors (4.7 vs 3.7; t(11)=2.50; p=0.030).  
The color results replicate existing work showing no improvement with additional encoding time for 
simple stimuli9,10 or complex but meaningless stimuli15. However, the non-fixed capacity19 and the 
continued encoding with additional time in the case of real-world objects raises the question whether 
this increase in behavioral performance is supported by active working memory, or whether it resulted 
from the use of a separate episodic long-term memory system. Thus, in a second and third experiment, 
we examine the CDA, the electrophysiological measure of how much information is being actively held 
in mind in visual working memory, while participants remember real-world objects. In Experiment 2, we 
focus on memory for real-world objects. In particular, we ask whether the increase in information stored 
with additional encoding time is a result of active storage, or whether this is due to encoding in episodic 
long-term memory. In Experiment 3, we compare memory for real-world objects and colors. In 
particular, we ask whether the greater capacity for real-world objects than for colors (at long encoding 
times) is reflected in greater active storage for real-world objects than for colors. 
 
Experiment 2: Encoding time advantages for real-world objects result from active storage. As encoding 
time increases, participants remember more details about real-world objects over a short delay (e.g., 
Figure 1B; green line). In this experiment, we tested whether these details were actively stored using the 
contralateral delay activity (CDA).  In general, memory capacities tend to be lower in CDA experiments 
due to the extra demands of the task (ignoring half of the items on the screen; maintaining fixation for 
long durations; avoiding blinks or eye movements). However, existing evidence shows that the CDA 
nonetheless provides an excellent proxy for more typical working memory situations27. Thus, in the 
following experiments we will focus on the differences between the conditions in both behavior and 
CDA amplitude, rather than the absolute performance level. 
We showed participants real-world objects for either 200ms or 1000ms while recording event-related 
brain activity in response to the memory display.  We asked participants to hold in mind either those 
objects to the left or right of the fixation cross without moving their eyes, and then, after a short delay, 
asked participants to do detailed object comparisons to assess how many objects they could remember 
with sufficient detail to distinguish between two exemplars of the same category (see Figure 2A). The 

 
 
Pg. 7 
CDA was measured as the contralateral-minus-ipsilateral difference wave over parietal-occipital 
electrode sites during the retention interval (300 to 700ms after the memory display disappeared; see 
gray box in Figure 2B). 
In line with the results of Experiment 1, there was a behavioral performance advantage, with greater 
capacity after a 1000ms encoding time than after a 200ms encoding time (2.44 vs 1.99; t(11)=6.09, 
p<0.001) though, as expected, overall capacity was lower with the greater task demands of the EEG 
experiment. Our main question of interest was whether the increase in capacity as a result of more 
encoding time was reflected in the CDA component. In fact, the CDA was reliably greater after 1000ms 
encoding time than after 200ms encoding time (t(11)=2.53, p=0.028; see Figure 2). Thus, the increased 
memory capacity for real-world objects with longer encoding time is reflected in active working memory 
maintenance systems over the parietal-occipital cortex, suggesting that the additional information 
accumulated with longer encoding time is actively stored.  
Experiment 3: More real-world objects than colors can be actively maintained in working memory. 
Experiment 2 shows that the accumulation of more detailed information about a set of real-world 
objects with longer encoding time is supported by active working memory processes, as reflected in the 
CDA component. Another important question is whether the greater capacity we observe for real-world 
objects relative to simple stimuli, like colors, is also supported by active storage. In particular, at long 
encoding times, participants are able to remember more real-world objects than simple colors, despite 
the fact that the real-world objects are more complex (see Figure 1). Is this additional information a 
result of storage in visual working memory systems or is it a result of the task being contaminated by the 
use of episodic long-term memory systems? 
To address this question, we showed participants either 5 objects or 5 colors for 1000ms followed by a 
short delay and a 2-alternative forced choice test designed to measure the total number of objects 
about which information could be encoded (e.g., the foils consisted of objects or colors that were as 
distinct as possible from the encoded stimulus). In line with the results of Experiment 1, participants 
performed better at remembering objects than colors at this 1000ms encoding time (3.18 vs. 2.86; 
t(17)=2.36, p=0.031), though, as expected, overall fewer objects and colors were remembered with the 
greater task demands of the EEG experiment (see the Supporting Information for a discussion of this 
issue).  

 
 
Pg. 8 
We found that the greater memory capacity for real-world objects than colors was reflected in the CDA 
amplitude. As in Experiment 2, the CDA component was measured during the retention interval as the 
contralateral-minus-ipsilateral difference over parietal-occipital scalp sites. The CDA was reliably greater 
for remembering 5 objects than for remembering 5 colors (t(17)=2.26, p=0.037; see Figure 3). This 
indicates that the additional real-world objects that are remembered beyond the limit on color memory 
are actively stored in visual working memory systems, rather than being an artifact of the use of the 
episodic long-term memory system. 
An important alternative interpretation of these results is that this difference in CDA does not really 
reflect more objects being stored (as seen in behavioral performance), but is instead a main effect, 
where objects always generate a larger CDA than colors regardless of how many are stored. To address 
this possibility, we also included a condition where participants had to remember only 3 colors or 3 
objects, which are both within the capacity limit we would expect for simple stimuli. We did not find a 
CDA difference between the 3 colors and 3 objects condition (t(17)=0.53, p=0.602), and in fact, the CDA 
was numerically larger for 3 colors than for 3 objects (-0.70 vs -0.60; SEM: ±0.26; ±0.17; see Supporting 
Information). This confirms that the CDA is not always larger for objects than for colors as a result of the 
perceptual encoding of the stimuli themselves. 
Discussion 
The present results show that visual working memory capacity is not fixed for real-world objects. 
Instead, visual working memory representations continue to accumulate information for longer when 
real-world objects are remembered than when simple colors are remembered. As a result, more real-
world objects can be stored than simple colors in visual working memory when sufficient encoding time 
is given. These higher capacities for real-world objects are reflected in active storage in visual working 
memory, because they elicit continued activity in the occipital-parietal regions throughout the delay 
period, in particular the contralateral delay activity (CDA). The amplitude of the CDA has been shown to 
reflect the amount of information actively stored in visual working memory25,27,28 and is not influenced 
by storage or consolidation into episodic long-term memory systems31. Thus, the present data reveal 
that the benefits for real-world objects in short-term memory tasks are not simply due to contributions 
of separate episodic long-term memory systems, but reflect enhanced active working memory storage 
for meaningful, real-world stimuli. Overall, this suggests that visual working memory does not always 
comprise the fixed capacity previously described based on studies using simple stimuli, but is a flexible 
system that varies in capacity depending on stimulus type.    

 
 
Pg. 9 
Relationship between working memory and episodic long-term memory 
The current data do not rule out the idea that real-world objects also lead to better episodic long-term 
memory representations than simple stimuli do (in addition to being better represented in active 
working memory systems). It is possible – in fact, likely – that participants are maintaining active 
working memory representations of the objects, and are also forming episodic long-term memory 
representations that will be available even after a significant delay32–34. It is well known that episodic 
long-term memory encoding and retrieval are more successful for meaningful stimuli and on stimuli that 
do not repeat trial-to-trial6–8. Thus, our data suggest a commonality between active visual working 
memory processes and episodic long-term memory systems: both may benefit from conceptually 
distinct stimuli about which participants have existing knowledge.  
Conceptual vs. perceptual complexity 
Our data show that visual working memory actively maintains more information about real-world 
objects than simple colors. Is this a result of the additional conceptual information in these stimuli, or 
the result of their additional perceptual complexity? Existing data suggests that it is the conceptual 
information that is relevant, as is the case in long-term memory6,35,36. In particular, with complex but 
meaningless objects like 3D cubes and polygons, participants cannot remember more than a 1 or 2 
objects, even with long encoding times15,37, unless ensemble coding processes are used to combine 
information across objects38. Thus, perceptual complexity without conceptual meaning actually leads to 
lower storage capacity. Furthermore, the behavioral capacity for complex-but-meaningless objects is 
about 2 objects, which is the same point at which the CDA plateaus for these objects even with 
increased encoding time39, and is significantly less than the capacity for colors.  
Relationship between working memory and existing semantic long-term memory representations 
(knowledge) 
The CDA correlates with how much information is being actively maintained in visual working memory, 
and is absent when participants remember auditory information40 or when visual information is readily 
available in episodic visual long-term memory31. Since the CDA does not reflect episodic visual long-term 
memory, the current data suggest that visual working memory is enhanced by access to a different kind 
of non-episodic information. For example, it is possible that real-world objects activate stored 
perceptual or semantic knowledge about different categories of objects (i.e., representations that are 
not tied to a particular episode). This account is consistent with views that suggest that visual working 

 
 
Pg. 10 
memory is based on the activation of existing long-term memories41. Under this account, the CDA, and 
more generally parietal and frontal working memory activity, might reflect not the information storage 
itself, but instead the attentional refreshing mechanism that serves to keep active and shield from 
interference the long-term memory traces currently being stored in visual working memory. This idea is 
consistent with evidence suggesting that the brain regions involved in processing perceptual 
representations of different stimulus categories contain information about which items are in 
memory24,42,43.  Thus, one possibility for why participants can actively store more information in visual 
working memory for real-world objects than for simple color stimuli is that a wider variety of long-term 
memory representations and perceptual representations are relevant and can be refreshed for real-
world objects than for simple stimuli. This may reduce interference and allow for more information to 
be remembered. 
Importantly, the attentional refreshing mechanism involved in visual working memory is not the same as 
the attentional mechanisms used to perform other visual tasks, although both have a common parietal 
focus44. For example, during the delay period of a visual working memory task, participants are relatively 
unaffected by having to perform other attentional demanding tasks if they do not tap into working 
memory per se45. 
Conclusions 
By measuring active  storage using the CDA, we found that working memory accumulates information 
over a greater time scale for real-world objects than has been shown for simple colors, and that more 
real-world objects than simple colors can be stored in working memory. These results demonstrate that 
working memory capacity is systematically underestimated by using simple stimuli about which we have 
no existing knowledge. Our findings also raise important questions about the functional role of the 
visual working memory system. In particular, they raise doubts that the entire function of visual working 
memory can be to guide eye-movements11, as the system appears to continue to accumulate 
information on a much longer time scale than typical fixation durations.  
 
Materials and Methods 
Participants 

 
 
Pg. 11 
All studies were approved by the Institutional Review Board at Harvard University. All participants read 
and signed an informed consent before the studies. The final samples of Experiment 1 and Experiment 2 
consisted of 12 participants recruited from the Harvard University and Cambridge, MA communities. An 
additional participant was run in Experiment 1 but excluded because their performance did not differ 
from chance on average across all of the conditions. An additional participant was run in Experiment 2 
but excluded due to excessive artifacts in the EEG (> 30% of trials had to be excluded due to eye 
movements and muscle movement artifacts).  
The final sample of Experiment 3 consisted of 18 participants recruited from the Harvard University and 
Cambridge, MA communities. Data from an additional four participants had to be excluded due to 
excessive artifacts in the EEG (>30% of trials rejected; three participants because of horizontal eye 
movements and one participant because of muscle movements), and an additional one participant 
because behavioral performance did not differ from chance on average across all conditions.  
All participants (age range 18-28 years) had normal or corrected to normal color vision, assessed with 
Ishihara’s test for color deficiencies. All participants gave written informed consent prior to the 
experiment. 
Procedure 
Experiment 1. Experiment 1 was a behavioral visual working memory task where encoding time was 
varied for both colors and objects. Participants saw 6 colors or 6 objects for 200ms, 1000ms or 2000ms, 
followed by a 1000ms delay. After the delay, a single item was cued and then tested in a 2-alternative 
forced-choice (2AFC) format. For colors, the test consisted of a forced-choice between the original color 
and a novel color that was categorically distinct and did not appear on the original display. For objects, 
there were two conditions: in one case, an object was tested against another categorically distinct 
object (e.g., a bell you had seen vs. a cookie; see Figure 1). This was designed to measure how many 
objects participants remembered. In another condition, an object was tested against another exemplar 
from the same category (e.g., one pitcher vs. another pitcher; see Figure 1). This was designed to 
measure how many objects participants remembered with detail.  Each condition (encoding time x 
stimulus type) was performed in a single block of 33 trials, with the order of the 9 blocks randomized 
across participants. 
While participants performed each trial, they did a concurrent verbal interference task to prevent them 
from verbally encoding the objects and colors. In particular, on each trial they were shown 2 digits and 

 
 
Pg. 12 
asked to covertly rehearse those digits throughout the trial. At the end of the trial, after the memory 
test, they typed the digits.  
Experiment 2. Experiment 2 was designed to measure the contralateral delay activity (CDA), while 
participants remembered real-world objects.  It required participants to complete a 2AFC memory test 
with the foils being objects from the same category, and thus required detailed memory 
representations. The experiment manipulated encoding time (200ms vs. 1000ms), enabling us to assess 
how many objects could be stored with detail and how this changed with longer encoding times.  
Participants completed 440 total trials. On each trial, 3 objects were presented in a semi-circle in each 
visual hemifield, and participants were cued to memorize either the objects on the left or on the right of 
fixation and to ignore the other objects. The to-be-ignored objects consisted of the to-be-remembered 
stimuli from a different trial. Thus, across trials, the exact same visual displays were presented on the to-
be-remembered side and the to-be-ignored side, thus equating all perceptual information so that any 
brain differences between the cued and uncued side were due to differences in memory processes, not 
perceptual processing. 
The cue indicating which side of the screen to remember was an arrow pointing either left or right that 
appeared at the center of the screen 1000ms before the presentation of the objects. Participants were 
instructed to keep their eyes in the center of the screen throughout each trial, until the test display 
appeared. Trials with horizontal eye movements were excluded from the analysis (see 
Electrophysiological recordings and analysis). On half of trials, the objects were shown for 200ms, and 
on the other half of trials for 1000ms. These trial types were intermixed, so participants did not know 
how long the objects would remain visible on each trial.  After the objects were presented for this 
encoding duration, there was a 700ms delay interval and then a cue indicating which of the 3 
memorized objects would be tested; the cue was visible for 500ms. Finally, the forced-choice test was 
presented and remained visible until the participant made a selection. One of the two forced choice 
options was always the same object that had been visible at the cued location and one was always a foil 
object from the same category. The 2AFC was presented such that the spatial mid-point of the two 
choices was centered on the location that the to-be-remembered object had appeared. Trials were 
broken up into 8 blocks of 55 trials each.  
Experiment 3. Experiment 3 was designed to measure the CDA while participants remembered either 3 
or 5 real-world objects or 3 or 5 colored squares.  After a brief delay, participants were required to 

 
 
Pg. 13 
complete a 2AFC memory test with either objects or colors that were as distinct as possible from the 
encoded objects/colors, thus providing an estimate of how many objects or colors can be held in visual 
working memory.  
Participants completed 440 total trials, divided into 8 blocks of 55 trials each. In each block, participants 
remembered either 3 objects, 5 objects, 3 colors or 5 colors for the entire set of 55 trials. On each trial, 
the to-be-remembered stimuli were presented in a single visual hemifield and a matched set of stimuli 
were presented in the other visual hemifield; this matched set of stimuli was from the same condition 
(e.g., 3 colors) and represented the to-be-remembered stimuli from a different trial, thus ensuring that 
the exact same visual displays were presented as to-be-remembered and to-be-ignored across trials. 
When 3 stimuli were presented in each hemifield, they were presented in a semi-circle around fixation. 
When 5 stimuli were presented in each hemifield, the two additional stimuli were presented larger 
(approximately M-scaled46) and in more peripheral locations (see Figure 3). Participants were cued to 
memorize the to-be-remembered stimuli with an arrow cue at fixation that appeared at the center of 
the screen 1000ms before the presentation of the stimuli. Just like in Experiment 2, participants were 
instructed to keep their eyes in the center of the screen throughout each trial. Which side of fixation the 
to-be-remembered stimuli were presented on varied randomly across trials within a block. Following the 
arrow cue, the stimuli were presented for 1000ms, followed by an 800ms delay period and then a 
500ms cue indicating which of the 3 or 5 memorized stimuli would be tested. Finally, the forced-choice 
objects or colors were presented and remained visible until the participant made a selection.  
In the object blocks, the foil object at test was chosen from a different category than the shown object, 
ensuring that no detailed information about the object was required to succeed at the memory task, 
and thus providing an overall estimate of how many objects could be remembered. In the color blocks, 
stimuli were chosen from a circle (radius 59°) cut out of the CIE L*a*b* color space, centered at L = 
54, a = 18 and b= –8. The foil color in the 2AFC was always 180 degrees in color space from the originally 
shown color, providing the maximum possible separation and thus requiring the least-possible detail to 
succeed at the memory task. The initially presented set of 3 or 5 colors were restricted by forcing all of 
the colors to be separated by a minimum distance of 15° in color space, limiting the impact of 
perceptual grouping and ensemble encoding47.  
Behavioral analysis 

 
 
Pg. 14 
In each experiment, we calculated capacity (the number of objects remembered, K) using the standard 
form for a 2-alternative forced choice test with N items to-be-remembered. In particular, participants 
can correctly answer the 2AFC comparison test (p; percent correct) either because they remember the 
tested object, which should occur on 
𝐾
𝑁 of the trials; or can answer correctly on trials they do not 
remember the tested object (on 
𝑁−𝐾
𝑁  of the trials) if they guess correctly (chance = 50%). Thus, the 
equation for percent correct is:  𝑝= 
𝐾
𝑁 1.0 + 
𝑁−𝐾
𝑁 0.50. Solving for K and simplifying gives the formula 
for capacity: 𝐾= 𝑁(2𝑝−1). This tells us how many objects or colors participants remembered with the 
required precision; in other words, how many objects were remembered well enough to distinguish 
them from a novel object or from another exemplar from the same category. 
Electrophysiological recordings and analysis 
EEG was recorded continuously from 32 Ag/AgCL electrodes mounted in an elastic cap and amplified by 
an ActiCHamp amplifier (BrainVision). Electrodes were arranged according to the 10-10 system. The 
horizontal electrooculogram was acquired using a bipolar pair of electrodes positioned at the external 
ocular canthi, and the vertical oculogram was measured at electrode FP1, above the left eye. All scalp 
electrodes were referenced to an electrode on the right mastoid online, and were digitized at a rate of 
500Hz. Continuous EEG data was filtered offline with a bandpass of 0.01-112.Hz. Trials with horizontal 
eye movements, blinks, or excessive muscle movements were excluded from the analysis. Artifact 
rejection was performed for individual trials on epochs starting 200ms before the memory display onset 
until the onset of the forced-choice display. Artifact-free data was re-referenced to the average of the 
left and right mastoid.  
Event-related potentials (ERPs) were time-locked to the onset of the memory display in all experiments, 
and ERPs from artifact-free epochs were averaged and digitally low-pass filtered (-3dB cutoff at 25 Hz) 
separately for each subject. ERPs elicited by the memory display were averaged separately for each 
condition and were then collapsed across to-be-remembered hemifield (left, right) and lateral position 
of the electrodes (left, right) to obtain waveforms recorded contralaterally and ipsilaterally to the to-be-
remembered side. For each participant, mean CDA amplitudes were measured with respect to a 200-ms 
pre-stimulus period at four lateralized posterior electrodes (PO3/PO4/PO7/PO8), consistent with 
existing data on the location of the CDA25. For all experiments, the measurement window for the CDA 
started 300ms after the offset of the memory display and lasted for 400ms, until the cue indicating the 
memory test item. Thus, for Experiment 2 the CDA amplitude was measured between 500 to 900ms for 

 
 
Pg. 15 
the short encoding time condition, and between 1300 to 1700ms for the long encoding time condition 
with respect to the onset of the memory display. For Experiment 3, the CDA amplitude was measured 
between 1300 to 1700ms with respect to the onset of the memory display. The resulting mean 
amplitudes were statistically compared using paired t-tests and ANOVAs. Signal processing was 
performed with Matlab (the MathWorks) using EEGLAB and ERPLAB toolboxes48,49. Topographical maps 
of the CDA were constructed by spherical spline interpolation50. 
 
 
 
 

 
 
Pg. 16 
References 
1. 
Baddeley, A. Working Memory: Theories, Models, and Controversies. Annu. Rev. Psychol. 63, 1–
29 (2012). 
2. 
Cowan, N. The magical number 4 in short-term memory: a reconsideration of mental storage 
capacity. Behav. Brain Sci. 24, 87–114 (2001). 
3. 
Alloway, T. P. & Alloway, R. G. Investigating the predictive roles of working memory and IQ in 
academic attainment. J. Exp. Child Psychol. 106, 20–9 (2010). 
4. 
Fukuda, K., Vogel, E., Mayr, U. & Awh, E. Quantity, not quality: The relationship between fluid 
intelligence and working memory capacity. Psychon. Bull. Rev. 17, 673–679 (2010). 
5. 
Brady, T. F., Konkle, T. & Alvarez, G. A. A review of visual memory capacity: Beyond individual 
items and toward structured representations. J. Vis. 11, 4 (2011). 
6. 
Konkle, T., Brady, T. F., Alvarez, G. A. & Oliva, A. Conceptual distinctiveness supports detailed 
visual long-term memory for real-world objects. J. Exp. Psychol. Gen. 139, 558 (2010). 
7. 
Wickens, D. D., Born, D. G. & Allen, C. K. Proactive inhibition and item similarity in short-term 
memory. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior 2, 440–445 (1963). 
8. 
Wiseman, S. & Neisser, U. Perceptual organization as a determinant of visual recognition 
memory. Am. J. Psychol. 87, 675–681 (1974). 
9. 
Luck, S. J. & Vogel, E. K. The capacity of visual working memory for features and conjunctions. 
Nature 390, 279–81 (1997). 
10. 
Bays, P. M., Marshall, L. & Husain, M. Temporal dynamics of encoding , storage , and reallocation 
of visual working memory. J. Vis. 11, 1–15 (2011). 
11. 
Hollingworth, A., Richard, A. M. & Luck, S. J. Understanding the function of visual short-term 
memory: transsaccadic memory, object correspondence, and gaze correction. J. Exp. Psychol. 
Gen. 137, 163–181 (2008). 
12. 
Brady, T. F., Konkle, T., Oliva, A. & Alvarez, G. A. Detecting changes in real-world objects: The 
relationship between visual long-term memory and change blindness. Commun. Integr. Biol. 2, 1 
(2009). 
13. 
Melcher, D. Persistence of visual memory for scenes. Nature 412, 401 (2001). 
14. 
Melcher, D. Accumulation and persistence of memory for natural scenes. J. Vis. 6(1), 8 (2006). 
15. 
Alvarez, G. A. & Cavanagh, P. The capacity of visual short-term memory is set both by visual 
information load and by number of objects. Psychol. Sci. 15, 106–111 (2004). 
16. 
Brady, T. F., Konkle, T. & Alvarez, G. A. Compression in visual working memory: Using statistical 
regularities to form more efficient memory representations. J. Exp. Psychol. Gen. 138, 487–502 
(2009). 
17. 
Curby, K. M., Glazek, K. & Gauthier, I. A visual short-term memory advantage for objects of 
expertise. J. Exp. Psychol. Hum. Percept. Perform. 35, 94 (2009). 
18. 
Kaiser, D., Stein, T. & Peelen, M. Real-world spatial regularities affect visual working memory for 
objects. Psychon. Bull. Rev. (2015). 
19. 
Endress, A. D. & Potter, M. C. Large capacity temporary visual memory. J. Exp. Psychol. Gen. 143, 
548–65 (2014). 

 
 
Pg. 17 
20. 
Lin, P. & Luck, S. Proactive interference does not meaningfully distort visual working memory 
capacity estimates in the canonical change detection task. Front. Psychol. 3, 42 (2012). 
21. 
Goldman-Rakic, P. S. Cellular basis of working memory. Neuron 14, 477–485 (1995). 
22. 
Buschman, T. J., Siegel, M., Roy, J. E. & Miller, E. K. Neural substrates of cognitive capacity 
limitations. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 108, 11252–11255 (2011). 
23. 
Bettencourt, K. & Xu, Y. Decoding the content of visual short-term memory under distraction in 
occipital and parietal areas. Nat. Neurosci. 19, 150–157 (2016). 
24. 
D’Esposito, M. & Postle, B. The cognitive neuroscience of working memory. Annu. Rev. Psychol. 
66, 115–152 (2015). 
25. 
McCollough, A. W., Machizawa, M. G. & Vogel, E. K. Electrophysiological measures of maintaining 
representations in visual working memory. in Cortex 43, 77–94 (2007). 
26. 
Robitaille, N., Grimault, S. & Jolicœur, P. Bilateral parietal and contralateral responses during 
maintenance of unilaterally encoded objects in visual short‐term memory: Evidence from 
magnetoencephalography. Psychophysiology 46, 1090–1099 (2009). 
27. 
Vogel, E. K. & Machizawa, M. G. Neural activity predicts individual differences in visual working 
memory capacity. Nature 428, 748–751 (2004). 
28. 
Vogel, E. K., McCollough, A. W. & Machizawa, M. G. Neural measures reveal individual 
differences in controlling access to working memory. Nature 438, 500–503 (2005). 
29. 
Luria, R., Balaban, H., Awh, E. & Vogel, E. The contralateral delay activity as a neural measure of 
visual working memory. Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev. 
30. 
Williams, M. & Woodman, G. F. Directed forgetting and directed remembering in visual working 
memory. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition 38, 1206–1220 
(2012). 
31. 
Carlisle, N. B., Arita, J. T., Pardo, D. & Woodman, G. F. Attentional Templates in Visual Working 
Memory. J. Neurosci. 31, 9315–9322 (2011). 
32. 
Hollingworth, A. Constructing visual representations of natural scenes: the roles of short- and 
long-term visual memory. J. Exp. Psychol. Hum. Percept. Perform. 30, 519–37 (2004). 
33. 
Hollingworth, A. The relationship between online visual representation of a scene and long-term 
scene memory. J. Exp. Psychol. Learn. Mem. Cogn. 31, 396–411 (2005). 
34. 
LaRocque, J., Eichenbaum, A. & Starrett, M. The short-and long-term fates of memory items 
retained outside the focus of attention. Mem. Cognit. 43, 453–468 (2015). 
35. 
McWeeny, K., Young, A., Hay, D. & Ellis, A. Putting names to faces. Br. J. Psychol. 78, 143–146 
(1987). 
36. 
Bower, G. H., Karlin, M. B. & Dueck, A. Comprehension and memory for pictures. Mem. Cognit. 3, 
216–220 (1975). 
37. 
Olsson, H. & Poom, L. Visual memory needs categories. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 102, 8776–
80 (2005). 
38. 
Brady, T. F. & Alvarez, G. A. No evidence for a fixed object limit in working memory: Spatial 
ensemble representations inflate estimates of working memory capacity for complex objects. J. 
Exp. Psychol. Learn. Mem. Cogn. (2015). 
39. 
Luria, R., Sessa, P., Gotler, A., Jolicoeur, P. & Dell’Acqua, R. Visual short-term memory capacity for 

 
 
Pg. 18 
simple and complex objects. J. Cogn. Neurosci. 22, 496–512 (2010). 
40. 
Lefebvre, C. et al. Distinct electrophysiological indices of maintenance in auditory and visual 
short-term memory. Neuropsychologia 51, 2939–2952 (2013). 
41. 
Postle, B. R. The cognitive neuroscience of visual short-term memory. Curr. Opin. Behav. Sci. 1, 
40–46 (2015). 
42. 
Harrison, S. A. & Tong, F. Decoding reveals the contents of visual working memory in early visual 
areas. Nature 458, 632–635 (2009). 
43. 
Serences, J. T., Ester, E. F., Vogel, E. K. & Awh, E. Stimulus-specific delay activity in human primary 
visual cortex. Psychol. Sci. 20, 207–214 (2009). 
44. 
Esterman, M., Chiu, Y.-C., Tamber-Rosenau, B. J. & Yantis, S. Decoding cognitive control in human 
parietal cortex. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 106, 17974–17979 (2009). 
45. 
Fougnie, D. & Marois, R. Distinct capacity limits for attention and working memory: Evidence 
from attentive tracking and visual working memory paradigms. Psychol. Sci. 17, 526 (2006). 
46. 
Rovamo, J., Virsu, V. & Näsänen, R. Cortical magnification factor predicts the photopic contrast 
sensitivity of peripheral vision. Nature 271, 54–56 (1978). 
47. 
Brady, T. F. & Alvarez, G. A. Contextual effects in visual working memory reveal hierarchically 
structured memory representations. J. Vis. (2015). 
48. 
Lopez-Calderon, J. & Luck, S. J. ERPLAB: an open-source toolbox for the analysis of event-related 
potentials. Front. Hum. Neurosci. 8, 213 (2014). 
49. 
Delorme, A. & Makeig, S. EEGLAB: An open source toolbox for analysis of single-trial EEG 
dynamics including independent component analysis. J. Neurosci. Methods 134, 9–21 (2004). 
50. 
Perrin, F., Pernier, J., Bertrand, O. & Echallier, J. F. Spherical splines for scalp potential and 
current density mapping. Electroencephalogr. Clin. Neurophysiol. 72, 184–187 (1989). 
51. 
Crevits, L., van Lith, G. & Viifvinkel-Bruinenga, S. On and off contribution to the combined 
occipital on-off response to a pattern stimulus. Ophthalmologica. 184, 169–173 (1982). 
52.       Cohen, M., Rhee, J. & Alvarez, G. Limits on perceptual encoding can be predicted from known 
receptive field properties of human visual cortex. J. Exp. Psychol. Hum. Percept. Perform. 42, 67–
77 (2016). 
53. 
McCarthy, G. & Wood, C. C. Scalp distributions of event-related potentials: an ambiguity 
associated with analysis of variance models. Electroencephalogr. Clin. Neurophysiol. 62, 203–208 
(1985). 
 
 
 

 
 
Pg. 19 
Figures 
 
Figure 1. Effects of encoding time on colors vs. real objects. A) Participants saw either colors or objects and 
saw them for either 200ms or 1000ms or 2000ms each. While they performed each trial, they also performed 
a verbal interference task (rehearsing 2 digits). B) The number of colors, objects, and objects with detail 
remembered as a function of encoding time. Note that the zero encoding time point is theoretical, since 
people cannot remember anything if they did not see any stimuli. The number of colors remembered (left) 
plateaus with less than 200ms encoding time; the number of objects (center) remembered and number of 
detailed objects remembered (right) both continue to increase with more encoding time. 
 
 
Figure 2. Active storage of detailed object representations. A) Participants were cued to remember the 
objects on either the left or right side of the screen. The objects were presented for 200ms in the short 
encoding time condition and 1000ms in the long encoding time condition. After a brief delay, a forced-choice 
comparison assessed detailed object memory. B) Contralateral-minus-ipsilateral waveforms for the short 
(top) and long (bottom) encoding time conditions. The CDA is measured from 300ms after offset until the cue 
appears (gray shaded rectangle; labeled CDA). C) Mean CDA amplitude for short and long encoding times. 
Error bars represent within-subject standard errors of the mean. 
 

 
 
Pg. 20 
 
 
Figure 3.  More active storage for objects than colors. A) ERP waveforms for showing the contralateral-minus-
ipsilateral waveforms, separately for when participants are asked to remember 5 colors (in blue) or 5 objects 
(in red). B) Mean CDA amplitude for the 5 colors and 5 objects conditions. Error bars represent within-subject 
standard errors of the mean. 
 

