Diversity and Commonality in Animals
Brain Evolution
by Design
Shuichi Shigeno
Yasunori Murakami
Tadashi Nomura Editors
From Neural Origin to Cognitive
Architecture

Diversity and Commonality in Animals
Series editors
Takahiro Asami
Matsumoto, Japan
Hiroshi Kajihara
Sapporo, Japan
Kazuya Kobayashi
Hirosaki, Japan
Osamu Koizumi
Fukuoka, Japan
Masaharu Motokawa
Kyoto, Japan
Kiyoshi Naruse
Okazaki, Japan
Akiko Satoh
Hiroshima, Japan
Kazufumi Takamune
Kumamoto, Japan
Hideaki Takeuchi
Okayama, Japan
Michiyasu Yoshikuni
Fukuoka, Japan

The book series Diversity and Commonality in Animals publishes refereed volumes
on all aspects of zoology, with a special focus on both common and unique features
of biological systems for better understanding of animal biology. Originating from
a common ancestor, animals share universal mechanisms, but during the process of
evolution, a large variety of animals have acquired their unique morphologies and
functions to adapt to the environment in the struggle for existence. Topics covered
include taxonomy, behavior, developmental biology, endocrinology, neuroscience,
and evolution. The series is an ofﬁcial publication of The Zoological Society of
Japan.
More information about this series at http://www.springer.com/series/13528

Shuichi Shigeno • Yasunori Murakami •
Tadashi Nomura
Editors
Brain Evolution by Design
From Neural Origin to Cognitive Architecture
123

Editors
Shuichi Shigeno
Stazione Zoologica Anton Dohrn
Naples, Italy
Yasunori Murakami
Ehime University
Matsuyama, Japan
Tadashi Nomura
Kyoto Prefectural University of Medicine
Kyoto, Japan
ISSN 2509-5536
ISSN 2509-5544
(electronic)
Diversity and Commonality in Animals
ISBN 978-4-431-56467-6
ISBN 978-4-431-56469-0
(eBook)
DOI 10.1007/978-4-431-56469-0
Library of Congress Control Number: 2016962454
© Springer Japan KK 2017
This work is subject to copyright. All rights are reserved by the Publisher, whether the whole or part of
the material is concerned, speciﬁcally the rights of translation, reprinting, reuse of illustrations, recitation,
broadcasting, reproduction on microﬁlms or in any other physical way, and transmission or information
storage and retrieval, electronic adaptation, computer software, or by similar or dissimilar methodology
now known or hereafter developed.
The use of general descriptive names, registered names, trademarks, service marks, etc. in this publication
does not imply, even in the absence of a speciﬁc statement, that such names are exempt from the relevant
protective laws and regulations and therefore free for general use.
The publisher, the authors and the editors are safe to assume that the advice and information in this book
are believed to be true and accurate at the date of publication. Neither the publisher nor the authors or
the editors give a warranty, express or implied, with respect to the material contained herein or for any
errors or omissions that may have been made.
Printed on acid-free paper
This Springer imprint is published by Springer Nature
The registered company is Springer Japan KK
The registered company address is: Chiyoda First Bldg. East, 3-8-1 Nishi-Kanda, Chiyoda-ku, Tokyo
101-0065, Japan

Preface
The present book is a new, detailed examination to explain how elegant brains
have been shaped by simple principles in evolution. Classic comparative studies
have revealed great diversity of neural networks and complex behaviors in many
animal groups. The recent integrative molecular, developmental, physiological, and
psychological approaches, however, have revealed unexpected commonality in the
basic structures and functions across animal phylogeny. The structural frameworks
of the nervous systems and brains are often replicated in artiﬁcial intelligence or
machines constructed by human activities, suggesting that functional similarities
provide a common design for information processing systems through biophysical
constraints.
The book introduces the origin of neurons with the single-cell creatures without
neurons and then goes on to primordial types in invertebrates such as cnidarians,
ﬂatworms, molluscs, insects, and chordates, with a great abundance of the brains
of vertebrates: ﬁsh, reptiles, birds, and mammals, including whales and humans.
Recently, a number of research investigations of diverse and minor organisms have
been conducted, and we need to keep up to date. Each chapter provides professional
and detailed topics about brain evolution; however, this book as a whole is arranged
along a simple concept to ﬁnd something of common design. Also, non-organisms
such as models and materials are covered to explore the designs in the origin and
evolutionary processes, but they are not comprehensive. The topics are provided in
a timely manner because novel techniques emerged rapidly, for example, as seen in
next-generation sequencers and omics (e.g., genomics, proteomics, metabolomics,
and connectomics) approaches. With the explosion of big data, the neural-related
genes and molecules are now on the radar.
Importantly, now the neural networks have been taken notice of. For instance,
Europe’s AC1 billion science and technology projects, such as the Human Brain
Project, were launched in 2013 to analyze brain connectomics. The big interdisci-
plinary plan, the Blue Brain Project, also aims to understand the small mammalian
brain. Furthermore, with the rise of recently advanced artiﬁcial neural networks,
there is enthusiasm for the development of neural network models. The views of
brain evolution provide an essential opportunity to generate ideas for novel neuron-
v

vi
Preface
and brain-inspired computation. For that reason, this book will show the reader how
to extract meaningful neural structures in nature.
For undergraduates, graduate students, and professional scientists who seek a
deeper understanding, this volume demonstrates how to ﬁnd the basic principles
shaping brains that provided higher cognitive functions in the course of evolution.
Our ambition is that the book will stimulate students, particularly young scientists,
to delve into problems remaining in this discipline. Many authors were selected
from young Japanese scientists, and this work is part of a series of publications of
the Zoological Society of Japan.
Naples, Italy
Shuichi Shigeno
Matsuyama, Japan
Yasunori Murakami
Kyoto, Japan
Tadashi Nomura

Contents
Part I
The Origins of Neurons and Networks
1
Physical Ethology of Unicellular Organisms ............................
3
Shigeru Kuroda, Seiji Takagi, Tetsu Saigusa,
and Toshiyuki Nakagaki
2
Molecular Characteristics of Neuron-like Functions
in Single-Cell Organisms ..................................................
25
Shingo Maegawa
3
Back Through Time: How Cnidarians and Basal
Metazoans Shed Light on Ancient Nervous Systems ...................
45
Hiroshi Watanabe
Part II
The Rise of Diverse Brain Types
4
Functional Speciﬁcation of a Primitive Bilaterian Brain
in Planarians ................................................................
79
Takeshi Inoue
5
The Computation and Robustness of the Mini-Cognitive
Centers of Terrestrial Mollusks: An Exquisite Outcome
of Brain Evolution .......................................................... 101
Ryota Matsuo
6
Insect Brains: Minute Structures Controlling Complex Behaviors ... 123
Michiyo Kinoshita and Uwe Homberg
7
Identifying Vertebrate Brain Prototypes in Deuterostomes............ 153
Takehiro G. Kusakabe
8
Genome and Transcriptome-Wide Research of Brain Evolution ..... 187
Atsushi Ogura
vii

viii
Contents
Part III
Cognitive Systems
9
The Origin of Vertebrate Brain Centers ................................. 215
Yasunori Murakami
10
Adaptive Radiation and Vertebrate Brain Diversity: Cases
of Teleosts.................................................................... 253
Naoyuki Yamamoto
11
Molecular Proﬁling Reveals Insight into Avian Brain
Organization and Functional Columnar Commonalities
with Mammals .............................................................. 273
Kazuhiro Wada, Chun-Chun Chen, and Erich D. Jarvis
12
The Neocortex and Dorsal Ventricular Ridge: Functional
Convergence and Underlying Developmental Mechanisms............ 291
Wataru Yamashita and Tadashi Nomura
13
Molecular Investigations of the Structure
and Development of the Brain of Carnivores............................ 311
Yohei Shinmyo, Tomohisa Toda, Kosuke Masuda,
Yoshio Hoshiba, Haruka Ebisu, Naoyuki Matsumoto,
and Hiroshi Kawasaki
14
Evolution of the Mammalian Brain with a Focus
on the Whale Olfactory Bulb .............................................. 329
Takushi Kishida
15
The Evolution and Function of Sleep..................................... 343
Yu Hayashi and Chih-Yao Liu
16
Prefrontal Anatomical Architecture and Top-Down
Behavioral Control in Human and Nonhuman Primates .............. 367
Yosuke Morishima
Part IV
Models and Designs
17
Organisational Principles of Connectomes: Changes
During Evolution and Development ...................................... 387
Roman Bauer and Marcus Kaiser
18
Muscular-Hydrostat Computers: Physical Reservoir
Computing for Octopus-Inspired Soft Robots........................... 403
Kohei Nakajima
19
Brain Evolution as an Information Flow Designer: The
Ground Architecture for Biological and Artiﬁcial General
Intelligence .................................................................. 415
Shuichi Shigeno

Part I
The Origins of Neurons and Networks

Chapter 1
Physical Ethology of Unicellular Organisms
Shigeru Kuroda, Seiji Takagi, Tetsu Saigusa, and Toshiyuki Nakagaki
Abstract In this chapter, some behaviours of unicellular organisms that appear
to be smart or intelligent are reported. Two topics are the focus from two major
groups of eukaryotic unicellular organisms, amoebae and ciliates: (1) anticipatory
capacity of periodic environmental events in an amoeba and (2) environment-
induced development of a new type of behaviour in a ciliate. A mechanism of these
behaviours is discussed, based on a mechanical equation of motion. Ethology (the
science of animal behaviour) of unicellular organisms is recently being studied from
a physical point of view. We propose to call this kind of study fphysical ethologyg.
Physical ethology may give us some hints about the origin of primitive intelligence.
Keywords Ciliate
•
Learning
•
Adaptability
•
Primitive
intelligence
•
Membrane excitability • Ethology • Nonlinear dynamics
1.1
Introduction
The cell is the building block of all organisms, which can be the minimum set of
life, because the cell is not alive if it is divided into subsystems: this implies that all
essence to be common throughout the entire range of organisms must be found in
a cell. So, the cell is the interface between an assembly of merely materials and the
functional states of living systems.
In fact, many kinds of smart behaviour that look like a primitive form of intel-
ligence in some sense have been reported and compared with so-called intelligent
behaviours in higher animals (Jennings 1906; Bray 2009; Eisenstein 1975; Corning
and Von Burg 1973; Trewavas 2003, 2005).
S. Kuroda () • T. Nakagaki
Physical Ethology Laboratory, Research Institute for Electronic Science, Hokkaido University,
Sapporo 001-0020, Japan
e-mail: nakagaki@es.hokudai.ac.jp
S. Takagi
Faculty of Complex and Intelligent Systems, Future University Hakodate, Hakodate, Japan
T. Saigusa
Department of Cellular Physiology, Institute of Nephrology, Niigata University, Niigata, Japan
© Springer Japan KK 2017
S. Shigeno et al. (eds.), Brain Evolution by Design, Diversity and Commonality
in Animals, DOI 10.1007/978-4-431-56469-0_1
3

4
S. Kuroda et al.
Although the list of such behaviours is getting longer and longer, the mechanism
of the smartness is being studied from a mechanical point of view. This is an attempt
to understand an origin of organismic smartness in nature and is an exciting problem
to be tackled by truly interdisciplinary science in this century. Here, we wish to shed
light on the attempt.
Two of the impressive examples are maze solving (Nakagaki et al. 2000, 2001;
Tero et al. 2006, 2007) and anticipating periodic events (Saigusa et al. 2008) by
amoebae. Physarum, which recently has become a focus as an interesting model
organism, is a huge amoeba that constructs a transport network of information
and materials and mimics an anthropogenic network of public transportation. This
description implies that there may be a common nature of network formation shared
by man and Physarum (Tero et al. 2010).
The other example of smart behaviour is the environment-induced development
of new types of behaviour in a ciliate (Kunita et al. 2014). In the behaviour of a
ciliate, swimming activity is regulated by membrane potential (Naitoh 1990), and
an equation of motion for the membrane potential is described by the reaction–
diffusion equation of the Hodgkin–Huxley type, which was originally proposed for
the squid neuron. Because of the similarity of excitability of membrane potential,
the ciliate is often studied as a model system of neuronal activity (Eisenstein 1975;
Naitoh 1990).
So far, the attempts to seek for a physical origin of smart behaviours are just at
the beginning, but this line of study, which we propose to name physical ethology,
is exciting and promising for the future.
In this chapter, as an introduction to the physical ethology of a cell, we describe
in more detail one of the symbolic topics rather than the original report already
studied: “Physarum anticipates periodic events” (Saigusa et al. 2008). Although a
mathematical model for anticipatory behaviour was proposed and discussed, we do
not repeat it here. [Please see the reference (Saigusa et al. 2008) for explanation of
the model, which supplies the main body of this chapter.]
After that, we brieﬂy mention one more topic of the swimming behaviour of
ciliates because the cilia are the other main character of Protozoa as well as the
amoebas. A new kind of smart behaviour in ciliates, reported recently in 2014
(Kunita et al. 2014), is described in short as a summary. The mechanism is reduced
to the dynamics of membrane potential that controls the beating activity of the cilia.
So, this is another typical example of physical ethology.
At the end of this chapter, some concluding remarks are given on the possible
origin of intelligent behaviour that has emerged at the level of a single cell.

1
Physical Ethology of Unicellular Organisms
5
1.2
Anticipatory and Recall Behaviour in Response
to Periodic Stimulation in the Plasmodia of Physarum
polycephalum
1.2.1
Overview and Background
We report on adaptive responses to periodic stimulation in Physarum polycephalum
(Mycetozoa), which exhibits primitive anticipatory and recall behaviour. The
behaviour studied here involved the spontaneous periodic slowdown of migration
just after a series of periodic stimulations had been experienced (anticipatory
behaviour). This slowdown subsequently disappeared but then reappeared after a
single stimulation (recall behaviour). The behaviour displayed was characterized
by the following features. (1) The anticipatory slowdown depended on the size
of the body. (2) The response varied across different parts of the body. (3) Recall
behaviour appeared even in organisms that had failed to display anticipation earlier.
(4) The cellular rhythm of the contraction movement was much slower during
both the spontaneous slowdown (anticipation) and recall behaviour than during free
locomotion; the same response was shown during the slowdown directly induced
by external stimulation. The results obtained here give new insight about how this
ability of anticipation and recall emerges at the cell level.
The repetition of a particular event often leads to the formation of memory and
learning in organisms. For example, after mice were fed several times at regular
intervals, they learned to anticipate the next feeding time (Roberts and Church 1978;
Church 1978; Meck et al. 1984). When bees were given nectar at 9:00 a.m. every
day, they gathered at the scheduled time even if nectar was not given (Gould and
Gold 1988). These are elegant examples of anticipatory behaviour towards periodic
events.
In 2008 we reported that such behaviour can be observed even in a single cell,
despite the absence of any brain or nervous system (Saigusa et al. 2008). Similar
behaviours could be observed in other protozoa (Brepharisma) and a plant (Chara)
(Kunita et al. 2013), but the anticipatory behaviours in these species were not
so clear as statistical ﬂuctuations were large and the organisms often failed the
anticipation. Thus, further characterization is needed as this ﬁnding is interesting
from an evolutionary point of view and gives a hint as to the cellular origin of
primitive intelligence (Ball 2008).
The anticipatory behaviour reported in the paper by (Saigusa et al. 2008) is as
follows. The plasmodium of the true slime mould Physarum polycephalum moves
rapidly under favourable conditions, but stops moving when experiencing less
favourable conditions. Plasmodia exposed to unfavourable conditions (low temper-
ature and low humidity), presented in three consecutive pulses at constant intervals,
were found to reduce their locomotive speed in response to each episode. When
subsequently subjected to favourable conditions, the plasmodia spontaneously
reduced their locomotive speed at the point in time when the next unfavourable
episode would have occurred. This ﬁnding implies that the plasmodia can anticipate
impending environmental change. After this behaviour had been evoked several

6
S. Kuroda et al.
times in the course of favourable conditions, the locomotion of the plasmodia
returned to normal; however, the anticipatory response could subsequently be
induced again by a single unfavourable pulse, implying recall of the memorized
periodicity.
To focus on deviation and ﬂuctuation of response, we added new experiments
and analysed the deviation by reexamining a large set of data that included not only
the new data but also the previous data (Saigusa et al. 2008); this is the ﬁrst point to
be considered here.
The second point is dependency on the internal conditions of the cell. In
general, behavioural responses to environmental conditions depend on the internal
conditions of the cell, but little is known about it. So, we will test the possible factors
of cellular conditions: size of body, spatial inhomogeneity in parts of a large body,
and effects on rhythmic contraction of the cell.
We study further details of the anticipatory behaviour and report several new
ﬁndings and insights.
1.2.2
Materials and Methods
Organisms and Culture The plasmodium of Physarum polycephalum (wild type)
was cultured using oat ﬂakes on an agar plate in a rectangular plastic dish
(25  35 cm2) at 26 ıC and humidity of 90 % according to conventional methods.
Observation of Locomotion Velocity Under Periodic Changes in Atmospheric
Temperature and Humidity The tip portion of the large cultured organism was
cut out and placed at the end of a narrow rectangular area (0.5 28 cm) on the
agar plate, hereafter referred as an arena, as shown in Fig. 1.1a. The wet weight of
the plasmodial mass that was initially placed in the arena varied from 5 to 40 mg,
depending on the particular experiment. The arena containing the specimen was kept
in the dark in an incubator (KCL-10000; Eyela) in which the atmospheric humidity
and temperature were controllable. The migrating organism was illuminated from
below by a matrix of infrared LEDs and viewed by a CCD camera. Under the
culture conditions used, the plasmodium started to move towards the other end of
the arena approximately half an hour later and was allowed to move freely for 4 h.
The atmospheric temperature and humidity were then changed to 23 ıC and 60 %
for 10 min, conditions that represent the stimulation. This stimulation was repeated
three times at intervals of £ (£ D 30, 40, 50, 60, 70, 80, 90 min). The position of the
extending front of the migrating plasmodium was measured every 10 min; typical
time courses of the tip position are shown in Fig. 1.1b.
Typical Response Analysed in This Study, Originally Reported in 2008 (Saigusa
et al. 2008) A typical time course of speed and acceleration of migration as well
as the time course of temperature and humidity are shown in Fig. 1.1c, as reported
in the previous papers. According to the terminology used in the previous paper, the
periodic stimulations were numbered from S1 to S2 and S3 (indicated by gray bars),

1
Physical Ethology of Unicellular Organisms
7
(b)
(a)
(c)
Number of lane
(d)
1 2 3 4 5 6 ...
75
100
125
150
175
-60
0
60
Tip position [mm]
Time [mims]
C1
C2
b’
a’
b
a
22
24
26
60
80
100
[°C]
[%]
-0.4
0
0.4
0
0.2
0.4
0
60
120
180
240
300
360
420
480
  Speed
 [cm/10min]
Time [mins]
Temperature
  Acceleration
[cm/(10min)2]
Humidity
S1
S3
S2
C3
C2
C1
Fig. 1.1 Schematic illustration of experimental setups used to study Physarum. (a) Illustration of
migration along a narrow lane from bottom to top. Arrow indicates the frontal tip of the organism,
the position of which was used to calculate locomotion speed. Arena size was 0.5  28 cm2.
(b) Typical plot of tip position with respect to time. The plot has been cut into sections of
60 min that are stacked vertically; each section includes the preceding 60 min (plotted as negative
time) to help recognize periodic responses. For instance, the line a–b is identical to a0–b0. The
column colored grey indicates the times at which stimulation occurred. (c) Typical time course
for locomotion speed in response to periodic stimulation. Black arrows indicate spontaneous
slowdown (SPS) at times when the next stimulation would have occurred if continued periodically.
The wet weight of the initially inoculated organism was 15 mg. Speed and acceleration were
averaged every 10 min. Sn and Cn were timing of actual stimulation and the following periodic
timing (no stimulation). This response was originally reported in the previous paper (Saigusa et al.
2008). (d) Setup for the ‘comb’ experiment in which the arena was shaped like a comb with 12
teeth into which the plasmodium could extend a pseudopod-like protrusion. The migration speed
was measured along every tooth. Tooth size was 0.5  25 cm2
and the following periodic points in time (no stimulation was applied) were C1, C2,
C3, and so on (indicated by dashed rectangles). In C1 and C2 only, the locomotion
speed often decreased spontaneously, so this response was called spontaneous in-
phase slowdown (SPS) hereafter.
An Arena with Comb-like Shape Designed for Testing Inhomogeneity
of Response Over the Whole Body Another arena in the form of a comb that
consisted of many parallel slender corridors with a common base was prepared
(Fig. 1.1d). The large plasmodium was placed in the base and started to extend
along the many corridors while remaining as a single entity.

8
S. Kuroda et al.
Spatiotemporal Observation for Rhythmic Contraction According to the con-
ventional method (Takagi and Ueda 2008), we measured contractile activity in the
plasmodium. The plasmodium was illuminated by the 20  20 matrix of infrared
light emission diode (wave length, 920 nm) from below, and was viewed from
above by the black-and-white CCD camera (spatial resolution, 480 640; time
resolution, 1/30 s). As the gray level of the video image reﬂected the thickness
of the plasmodium that changed periodically with accompanying to active rhythmic
contraction, a darker pixel indicated a thicker part of plasmodium. The relationship
between optical density on the image and the real thickness of organism was
standardized by the calibration. We used the standard free software for image
analysis Image J that was prepared by the National Institutes of Health (USA). A
spatiotemporal pattern of oscillation periods was visualized as shown in Fig. 1.6.
1.2.3
Results
Effect of Body Size on Anticipatory Behaviour Figure 1.2 shows averaged time
courses of the migration speed. The plasmodia that were initially inoculated varied
in wet weight, and the difference in body size was classiﬁed into three groups:
5–9 mg (n D 27), 10–19 mg (n D 68), and 20–40 mg (n D 21). The initial speed
before stimulation was similar for all three groups but differed after stimulation.
Although the group with large body size recovered its previous migration activity
after stimulation, the groups of medium and small body size did not move as fast
as before stimulation. This ﬁnding implies that stimulation caused serious damage
to the smaller organisms. In the group with body size from 5 to 9 mg wet weight,
0
0.2
0.4
Speed [cm/10 mins]
0
60
120
180
240
300
360
420
480
Time [mins]
S1
S2
S3
C1
C2
C3
Fig. 1.2 Conﬁrmation of anticipatory behaviour in Physarum obtained by measuring averaged
speed of locomotion. Different body masses were initially inoculated for the three time courses
shown: small (5–9 mg, n D 27, lower line with rectangular symbols), medium (10–9 mg, n D 68,
middle line with circular symbols), and large (20–56 mg, n D 21, upper line with triangular
symbols). Anticipatory behaviour is observed at C1 and C2. Mean ˙ standard error of mean.
Statistical signiﬁcance of difference was tested by pairwise t test with Bonferroni correction (a
method of multiple comparison). The p value was less than 0.001 between the small and the large,
and between the medium and the large, at the time points of C1 and C2, and between all pairs at C3

1
Physical Ethology of Unicellular Organisms
9
some plasmodia did not migrate at all after the ﬁrst stimulation (data not shown).
Such cases were excluded from the results shown in Fig. 1.2 and 21 experiments
when ﬁnally averaged. When stronger stimulation was applied (for example, 18 ıC
and 50 % humidity), even larger plasmodia were damaged by a single stimulation.
The spontaneous slowdown response that was observed depended on a bal-
ance between body size and the magnitude of the environmental perturbations.
Anticipatory behaviour was shown in all three groups at the times of the fourth
(C1) and ﬁfth (C2) virtual stimulations. The anticipatory response was clearer for
smaller plasmodia because the ratio of the migration speeds in the two phases
of slowdown and recovery was higher than for larger plasmodia. The smaller
organisms demonstrated clearer anticipation but suffered more serious damage. The
anticipation capacity thus depends on both internal and external conditions.
Response in Local Parts of the Body Figure 1.3 shows time courses of the migra-
tion acceleration for the comb-shaped plasmodium (see Materials and Methods for
details). The lane numbers indicate different parts of the body corresponding to
different ‘teeth’ of the comb-shaped arena. After stimulation had been applied at
times S1, S2, and S3, anticipatory behaviour was expected at times C1, C2, and C3.
Anticipatory behaviour was indeed observed as the overall tendency (black squares
indicate deceleration). However, the expected response was not always observed in
individual lanes. For example, it was absent in lanes 1–3, 7, and 10 at C1, and present
in lanes, 6, 8, 9, and 11. The varying behaviour between different local parts of the
body implies that the anticipatory response is subject to ﬂuctuations and uncertainty.
This comb-type experiment was repeated three times, and similar inhomogeneity of
response was observed in local parts of the body.
Response to Different Periods of Stimulation Figure 1.4 shows the occurrence of
spontaneous slowdown in response to various periods of stimulation in the range 30–
90 min. In all cases, the periodic stimulation was applied three times (S1, S2, and S3)
and the time axis was set to zero where the last stimulation (S3) was given. The ﬁrst,
second, and third occasions of virtual stimulation are indicated by C1, C2, and C3,
respectively. At C1, the statistical occurrence of slowdown was high (10 %–50 %)
for all periods of stimulation. The baseline occurrence of slowdown in the absence
of stimulation was approximately 10 %. At C2, a high occurrence of slowdown
60
120
180
240
300
360
420
0
Time [mins]
Ac
n
oita
r
ele
c
)
ni
m
0
1
(/
m
c[
2]
2.0
4.0
~
~
2.0
-
2.0
~
2.0
-
4.0
-
S1
S2
S3
C1
C2
C3
Numb
o
r
e
f
n
al
e
1
12
Fig. 1.3 Acceleration as a function of time for different lanes of the comb-shaped arena. The grey
squares indicate positive acceleration and the dark squares indicate braking

10
S. Kuroda et al.
-300
-200
-100
0
300
200
100
30
40
50
60 
70
80
90
Time after the final stimulation [mins]
Period [mins]
C1C2 C3
S3
S2
S1
40
30
20
0
10
100
Statistical occurrence of
spontaneous slowdown [%]
Fig. 1.4 Anticipatory response for stimulation periods ranging from 30 min to 90 min. The grey
scale indicates the statistical occurrence of spontaneous slowdown. Zero time was deﬁned as
the time when the last stimulation S3 was applied. Spontaneous slowdown was deﬁned to occur
when acceleration 0.2 mm/(10 min). The numbers of repeated experiments for each stimulation
period were 36 (30 min), 46 (40 min), 34 (50 min), 121 (60 min), 40 (70 min), 67 (80 min), and
39 (90 min). The wet weight of the organism was 10–19 mg. Data that were already used in the
previous paper (Saigusa et al. 2008) were included in this analysis while we supplemented new
data of 97 repeats to make this new analysis of ﬂuctuation sufﬁciently reliable. We analyzed all the
data, not only the previous ones but also the new data
was still observed although the timing of the response was sometimes shifted a
little earlier or later. At C3, the anticipatory response was no longer signiﬁcant as
the timing greatly ﬂuctuated. In each experiment for a given stimulation period,
there was a degree of deviation in the time at which spontaneous slowdown was
observed. The anticipatory responses were often advanced or delayed by as much as
a quarter of a period, which can be seen as a characteristic of this type of behaviour.
Nevertheless, there is a clear tendency towards a high probability of occurrence
along line C1 in Fig. 1.4. We conclude that anticipatory spontaneous slowdown
occurred for a wide range of periods from 30 min to 90 min.
Recall Behaviour With and Without Anticipatory Behaviour Figure 1.5 shows
time courses of slowdown occurrence and averaged speed in response to a single
stimulation that was applied 5 h after the series of three periodic stimulations.
After the anticipatory response at C1, the locomotion speed quickly returned to the
value that it had before the sequence of stimulations. A further single stimulation
was then given at S4. In response, spontaneous slowdown was displayed at C6,
which corresponds to the period of stimulation previously applied for S1–S3 (1 h).
This response implies that the organism had stored a memory of the periodicity
somewhere in its body that was later retrieved. This type of behaviour can be
seen as a primitive form of recall. The white bars and circles in Fig. 1.5 indicate
the responses of a group of organisms that showed anticipatory behaviour at C1,
whereas the black bars and circles represent the group that failed to display this
behaviour. Recall behaviour was observed even for the group that failed anticipatory
behaviour, although the response was slightly weaker than that of the successful
group. Thus, recall was not restricted to individuals that succeeded in showing
anticipatory behaviour, which implies that storing a memory is a process that occurs

1
Physical Ethology of Unicellular Organisms
11
0
0.2
0.4
0
60
120
180
240
300
360
420
480
540
600
660
720
Time [mins]
Speed [cm/10min]
success of SPS 
failure of SPS
S1
S2
S3
S4
C1
C2
C3
C4
C5
C6
(b)
0
20
40
0
60
120
180
240
300
360
420
480
540
600
660
720
success of SPS
failure of SPS
Occurence of 
slowdown [%]
Time [mins]
(a)
38%
24%
100%
0%
100
S1
S2
S3
C1
C2
S4
C6
C3
C4
C5
Fig. 1.5 Recall behaviour in response to stimulation S4 applied after the anticipatory response has
disappeared, studied by measuring the statistical occurrence of slowdown (a) and averaged speed
(b) over 40 repeats. The criterion for spontaneous slowdown was acceleration 0.2 mm/(10 min).
The wet weight of the organism was 15 mg. The data of the success of SPS shown in Fig. 1.5b
were the same as those previously published (Saigusa et al. 2008). The number of repeats was 40,
and this number of repeats was the sum of the new data and the previous experiments (Saigusa et
al. 2008). Mean ˙ standard error of mean. Statistical signiﬁcance of difference was tested by t test.
The p value was not observed to be less than 0.01 between the success and the failure groups at the
time points of C1, C2–C5, and C6
in the body of both groups. Despite ﬂuctuations in the times at which anticipation
and recall took place, it is clear that Physarum is able to store meaningful
information in the form of time memory.
Modulation of Rhythmic Contraction During Spontaneous Slowdown Fig-
ure 1.6 shows a typical time course of the rhythmic contraction that occurred when
the organism showed anticipatory behaviour. The plasmodium usually displays
periodic cycles of contraction and relaxation over the entire body with an average
period £ of approximately 1 min, as shown by the spatiotemporal plot of the
oscillation period in Fig. 1.6a. The oscillation period of the entire body became
70 s longer when stimulation was applied at S1, S2, and S3. During the spontaneous
slowdown of locomotion speed at C1, slower oscillations were observed (£ 90 s),
but this increase in period was smaller than that at S1, S2, and S3. Figure 1.6b, c
shows the time courses of the oscillation period, averaged over the entire body, and
of the locomotion speed, respectively. An increase in the period of the contraction
rhythm was clearly observed at C1 in Fig. 1.6b. A minimum in the time course of
the speed was also observed at C1 (Fig. 1.6c), as occurred at S1, S2, and S3. That is,

12
S. Kuroda et al.
80
90
100
-0.2
 0
 0.2
 0.4
 60
 150
 180
 240
 300
 360
 420
 480
 60
 120
Space [cm]
Period [sec]
Speed [mm/min]
Time [mins]
 90
 0
(a)
(b)
(c)
100 120 140 160 180
60
80
Period [sec]
S1          S2          S3          C1          C2         C3
Fig. 1.6 Modulation of cellular rhythm in response to periodic stimulation. (a) Period of rhythmic
contraction as a function of time. (b) Time course of contraction period, averaged over frontal part
of organism (1 cm from extending tip). (c) Speed of locomotion with respect to time: a typical
response in all three repeats. Body weight initially inoculated was 10–19 mg
the rhythmic contraction slowed down whenever the locomotion speed decreased,
whether induced by external stimulation or as a result of spontaneous anticipatory
behaviour. This result implies that the elementary process of anticipatory response
involves not only the overall behaviour of locomotion but also the local kinetics of
biochemical oscillatory reactions. Figure 1.7 shows the changes in oscillation period
(Fig. 1.7a) and locomotion speed (Fig. 1.7b) associated with the recall behaviour at
C6 (the experimental conditions were the same as in Fig. 1.5.). In the time course
of the contraction period, a maximum similar to that observed for the anticipatory
response was displayed at C6. The time course of the locomotion speed showed
a maximum between S4 and C6 and a minimum at the beginning of C6. That
is, a slowdown in both contraction rhythm (maximum of period) and locomotion
(minimum of speed) occurred during the recall behaviour around C6. In this sense,
the recall behaviour was similar to both the anticipatory behaviour and the slowdown
induced by external stimulation.

1
Physical Ethology of Unicellular Organisms
13
 60
90
 120
 540
 600
 660
 720
 780
-0.2
 0
 0.2
 0.4
Time [mins]
Speed [mm/min]
Period [sec]
(a)
(b)
C5           S4           C6           C7
Fig. 1.7 Modulation of contraction rhythm during recall response. (a) Time course of contraction
period after stimulation S4. (b) Time course of locomotion speed: a typical response in all three
repeats. Body weight initially inoculated was 10–19 mg
1.2.4
Discussion
Further Examination of Data and Conﬁrmation of Dependency of Applied
frequency Although the previous paper shows just the ﬁndings of the anticipatory
behaviour and, in particular, information on dependency of applied periodicity is
very limited, the current paper shows a more consistent analysis of data, in which
not only the new data but also the previous data of the experiment are included.
Figure 1.4 gives an overall picture of anticipatory response in the parameter space
that was spanned by the applied periodicity and time. The anticipatory response
was observed to show a deviation of time to spontaneous slowdown around the
correct time points C1 and C2, but the anticipatory response was clearly observed
around C1 when we looked through a series of periodicity. The time deviation of
SPS increased as the time progressed from C1 to C3. Around C3, the anticipatory
response was no longer observed. When we consider justiﬁcation for the physical
mechanism proposed for the anticipatory behaviour, statistical distribution of the
deviation may give us helpful information.
As shown in Fig. 1.5a, the plasmodia that failed the ﬁrst anticipation (0 % at C1)
were able to succeed in the second and third anticipation (approximately 30–40%
at C2 and C3). This is remarkable. It is interesting to check whether this response is
reproduced by the previously proposed mathematical model.

14
S. Kuroda et al.
Size Effect In general, it is known that the larger plasmodium is more resistive
against sudden changes in environmental conditions such as temperature and
humidity. For instance, although one large organism can survive against a drop
in humidity although some part of the large body is necrotic, a much smaller
one cannot survive against the same drop in humidity. This difference may be
because loss of water vapour from the surface of the body is relatively higher in
smaller organisms: the surface–volume ratio increases as the body size decreases,
in principle. So, we expect that smaller organisms tend to be more sensitive to the
periodic environmental change. If body size, however, is smaller than the critical
size, the organism can die or try to transform to a resting stage such as the spore
and sclerotium. The anticipatory behaviours observed here obey a balance between
maintenance of vegetative stage (plasmodium) and morphological transformation to
resting stage (spore and sclerotium). It is reasonable that a smaller plasmodium is
sensitive to the periodic changes in humidity and temperature as facing to higher
risk of survival.
Inhomogeneity of Response in a Whole Body We discuss the result that the
anticipatory response was not homogeneous in the whole body but differed from
part to part: one part might be successful while another part is not. According to
the implication of the previously published model for the anticipatory response in
Physarum (Saigusa et al. 2008), the capacity is based on the chemical kinetics of
a complicated network of biochemical reactions. It is reasonable that biochemical
reactions are very similar over the body but states of reaction do not always
synchronize because chemical diffusion and protoplasmic streaming may not be
always sufﬁcient for maintaining perfect synchronization throughout the body. In
fact, some chemicals such as ATP, Ca2C, and NAD(P)H show inhomogeneous
distribution in the body and moreover such inhomogeneity is actively related to the
development of amoeboid behaviour in Physarum (Nakamura and Kamiya 1985;
Ueda et al. 1990; Ueda 1993; Yoshiyama et al. 2010). So, spatial differences of
anticipatory response may result from the inhomogeneity of dynamic states of
reaction kinetics.
Recall with No Anticipation In the results shown in this paper, the plasmodium
that failed the anticipatory response sometimes succeeded in the recall behaviour.
According to the mathematical model previously proposed (Saigusa et al. 2008),
the core process in kinetic motion of biochemical reactions in the plasmodium is
that two kinds of phase synchronization take place: synchronization (or formation
of phase cluster, in other words) between biochemical oscillators that have the same
natural frequency (the same biochemical species, for instance), and synchronization
between the these phase clusters that have a slightly different natural frequency. The
second synchronization is related to recall behaviour whereas the ﬁrst one is related
to storing the memory of periodicity. As these two synchronization phenomena
can be separable, we may expect that recall is possible without anticipation. It is
interesting that this possibility could be examined in the conventional mathematical
model for anticipatory and recall behaviours in the future.

1
Physical Ethology of Unicellular Organisms
15
The plasmodia that failed the ﬁrst anticipation (0 % at C1; Fig. 1.5a) were able to
succeed the second and third anticipation (approximately 30–40% at C2 and C3).
This is remarkable. It is interesting to check whether this response is reproduced by
the previously proposed mathematical model.
Effects on Contraction Rhythms In this paper, information on intracellular states
was shown for the ﬁrst time: modulation of intracellular rhythm. The contraction
rhythm (the typical period is 1–2 min) was modulated in response to the envi-
ronmental changes and the same modulation was conﬁrmed in the spontaneous
slowdown of anticipatory and recall behaviours. Because this rhythmicity was much
faster than we had considered in the mathematical modelling (applied periods
were 30–90 min) in the previous paper (Saigusa et al. 2008), the information
from this result does not help to examine the model justiﬁcation directly. At
least, we can extract the message that oscillatory activity in the plasmodium was
modulated in relationship to development of anticipatory and recall behaviours.
Further observation and examination of frequency modulation at a slower time scale
is interesting in future studies to clarify the physical mechanism of the anticipatory
and recall behaviour at cellular level.
Possible Approach to Physical Mechanism We have conﬁrmed the previous
ﬁnding (Saigusa et al. 2008) by reexamining not only new data but also the previous
data together. Physarum exhibits anticipatory and recall behaviour in response to
periodic changes in environmental conditions. Humans have a similar capacity.
Our study implies that this type of capacity is not speciﬁc to a single species
but rather may be found in multiple species distributed over a wide range of the
phylogenetic tree. Therefore, the underlying mechanism should be considered as
a common process. One approach to studying such a mechanism is to search for
speciﬁc genes and proteins that are involved, but an alternative approach is the
modelling of physical dynamics. According to the latter, a simple and general model
can be proposed: anticipatory and recall behaviour is reproduced by the collective
motion of independent oscillators with a wide range of natural frequencies. This is a
possible model for the anticipatory behaviour, but another set of model equations
is also proposed (Tachikawa 2010). Although the discussions on the possible
physical mechanism are still ongoing, it is remarkable that higher capacities such
as anticipation and recall are created by the simple and general model of differential
equations. The study of how protozoa anticipate periodic events hints at the origin
of time memory from an evolutionary point of view.
Evaluation Method for Memory Capacity for Complexity of Time Sequence
In this report, the stimulation was applied in regularly periodic fashion. The time
sequence of the stimulation could be made more complex. For instance, possible
sequences are (1) alternative changes in the stimulation magnitude, strong and weak,
over a regular period; (2) double-frequencystimulations such as alternating long and
short stimulation periods; and (3) a chaotic sequence of stimulations. According to
the ideas presented here, we may be able to design a standard test to assess the
capacity of time memory throughout the phylogenetic tree that will be performed in
the future.

16
S. Kuroda et al.
1.3
Electric Control of Behaviour in Paramecium
Paramecium is a genus of popular unicellular ciliated protozoa that you can ﬁnd
easily in the pond near your ofﬁce. Their average length and width are about 200 m
and 60 m, respectively. Although they have a simpler body plan than ours, their
behaviours are so rich that we can be glued to the microscope for long moments.
They have many cilia (about 10,000) on their body surfaces, and they swim by
ciliary beating that is spatiotemporally coordinated through the entire body so that
they form a metachronal wave.
They can change their swimming directions by changing the directions of the
effective stroke of ciliary beating. Ordinarily, in a uniform environment, they swim
forwards. However, when they encounter an obstacle, they swim backwards for a
while by reversing the direction of the effective stroke of ciliary beating (reversal of
ciliary beating), and after swinging their anterior end, they begin to swim forward
in a new direction. This behaviour is called avoiding reaction (Jennings 1906).
The relationships between the behaviour and electrophysiological property of
Paramecium has been intensively studied for more than 50 years. During normal
forward swimming, they have an internally negative resting potential that is pro-
vided by the intracellular high KC and low Ca2C concentrations. It was known that
the increase in intraciliary concentration of free calcium ion ([Ca2C]i) is necessary
for the reversal of ciliary beating, and it is produced by depolarization of the cellular
membrane (Naitoh and Eckert 1969; Naitoh and Kaneko 1972).
The appearance of the avoiding reaction behaviour is explained as follows: When
the organism collides a obstacle at the front end, the mechanosensitive Ca2C channel
opens. The resulting depolarization that occurred around the receptors spreads
immediately to the entire body including cilia. The depolarization of the ciliary
membrane opens the voltage-sensitive Ca2C channels on the membrane so that Ca2C
ﬂows into the cilia from the outside of the body. The increase of [Ca2C]i provides
the reversal of ciliary beating so that the organism begins to swim backwards. The
ciliary reversal is continued during [Ca2C]i over a certain critical concentration
(Naitoh and Kaneko 1972). The relaxation of the [Ca2C]i leads it to resume the
forward swimming. These data shows that an excitable cellular membrane in the
protozoan acts as a receptor of the external stimulus and a transmitter between
the receptor and the effector, whereas those are enacted by neural systems in
eumetazoans, including human beings (Fig. 1.8).
What kinds of adaptability can be shown by Paramecium? If they exist, we
can expect to understand them from the point of view of the membrane potential
phenomena and their succeeding biochemical reaction. Actually, various behaviours
in Protozoa have been reported since 100 years ago (Jennings 1906; Smith 1908;
Bramstedt 1935; Applewhilte 1979). Smith (Smith 1908) found a novel behaviour
of Paramecium in a dead-ended capillary tube. In this experiment, the organism was
put into a narrow tube of which the width was smaller than its length, enough not
to be able to turn by the avoiding reaction. In the beginning, the organism swims
forward towards the closed end. After colliding with the tube end at its front part,

1
Physical Ethology of Unicellular Organisms
17
Fig. 1.8 Signal transmission by electrogenesis in (1) Eumetazoa and (2) Protozoa
it swims backward about its own length and resumes swimming forwardly; this is
a part of the ordinary avoidance reaction and was repeated at least a dozen times.
Finally, after some struggling, the organism succeeded to change its body direction
by bending the body into a U-shape.
How do they behave when they encounter a more difﬁcult situation? Recently
we reported another novel behavior of Paramecium in a dead-ended capillary tube
(Kunita et al. 2014). We used a narrower tube so that Paramecium cannot change
its body direction by bending its body. The typical behaviour is as follows: After
the organism was put into the tube, as in Smith’s experiment, the ordinary avoiding
reaction appeared at the closed end. That is, the organism approached a forward end
and repeated back-and-forth swimming with a short distance (<0.5 mm). After that,
for about 1 min, the distance of backward swimming gradually increased and ﬁnally
reached a maximum distance (3–4 mm). It continued the long-distance backward
swimming for a few minutes. We called the emergent long-distance backward
swimming ‘long-term backward swimming (LBS),’ whereas that in the ordinary
avoiding reaction is short-term backward swimming (SBS).
1.3.1
Paramecium Model
What is a underlying mechanism of the emergence of LBS? Naitoh (Naitoh 1990)
has reported that a long-term application of outward current to the paramecium
provided long-lasting backward beating of cilia even after the early inward Ca2C
current disappeared. Naitoh suggested the long-lasting backward swimming is

18
S. Kuroda et al.
caused by a small-amplitude long-lasting inward Ca2C current that ﬂows into the
same Ca2C channel for the early inward Ca2C current. Based on such previous
studies, we exploited a Paramecium model using a conductance-based model and
attempt to demonstrate the LBS.
Ciliary Membrane Let us begin with modelling of the ciliary membrane based on
a conductance-based model. The total ciliary membrane current (IM) is the sum of
the capacitive (Ic) and the ionic currents (Ii), and so:
IM D Ic C Ii D Cm
dE
dt C Ii;
(1.1)
where E is the potential difference between the between the outside and the inside
of the membrane and the outward current is deﬁned as positive current. The
resting equilibrium potential (Er) is realized during ordinary forward swimming.
For simplicity of notation, we use V D E  Er instead of E in the following. It is
known that the voltage-sensitive Ca2C channel and also the voltage- sensitive KC
channel are located primarily in the ciliary membrane whereas they are not found
in the somatic membrane (Dunlap 1977; Machemer and Ogura 1979; Eckert and
Brehm 1979). Then, the ionic current Ii is given by
Ii D ICa C IK C IL
(1.2)
D gCa .V; t/ .V  VCa/ C gK .V; t/ .V  VK/ C gL .V  VL/ ;
(1.3)
where ICa and IK are Ca2C and KC currents, respectively; IL is a relatively small
voltage-independent conductance of undetermined ions; and VCa, VK, and VL are
the equilibrium potential for the respective ions. We use the following conductance
formula, which was proposed by Naitoh (Naitoh 1979; Naitoh and Sugino 1984).
gCa .V; t/ D gCam.V; t/5 
1  .1  h .V; t//5
;
(1.4)
gK .V; t/ D gKn .V; t/ :
(1.5)
Here, each gate variable m, h, or n 2 [0, 1] develops by dz=dt D ˛z.V/ .1  z/ 
ˇz.V/z, where ˛z (V), ˇz (V) are the pair of voltage-dependent reaction rates (z D m,
h, n) that were determined by reference to the measurement data available from
(Hirano et al. 2005).1 In the following, time, potential, current density, conductance,
1The
expression
of
the
functions
for
the
voltage-dependent
reaction
rates
(˛,
ˇ)
were determined by reference to the measurement data available from (Hirano et al.
2005)
as
follows:
’m
(V) D 0.39(46.40  V)/(exp(0.039(46.40  V))  1),
ˇm
(V) D 0.65
exp(V/15),
˛h
(V) D 0.05
exp(V/50),
ˇh
(V) D 1.0(exp(0.032(V  39.29)) C 1),
˛n(V) D 0.038(58.58  V)/(exp((58.58  V)/8.17)  1),
ˇn(V) D 0.10
exp(V/68).
However
the ˛h was determined ad hoc, because its data were not available. The constant values in this
paper were set as follows (Naitoh 1990; Hirano et al. 2005). Er D 30, ECa D C116, EK D 41,

1
Physical Ethology of Unicellular Organisms
19
capacity and concentration are given in ms, mV, A/cm2, mS/cm2, F/cm2, and
M, respectively.
Mechanical Stimulation at the Dead-End and Depolarization A mechanical
stimulation at the capillary dead end induces a depolarizing receptor potential
from the mechano-sensitive channels distributed on the anterior part of the somatic
membrane. This potential change in the local membrane area spreads to the entire
membrane almost instantaneously (Dunlap 1977) as a result of the successive
induction of the outward capacitive current passing through the non-depolarized
adjacent membrane. In our model, the resultant current on the ciliary membrane is
implemented as IM D Imech(>0) in (1) when the organism is at the capillary dead end
(x D 0); otherwise, IM D 0.
Relationship Between Intraciliary Ca2C Concentration and Swimming Veloc-
ity The swimming velocity (v) against the intraciliary free Ca2C concentration
([Ca2C]i) has been obtained in chemically skinned cells (Naitoh and Kaneko 1972),
where [Ca2C]i during normal forward swimming is 102 M and the sign of the
swimming velocity switch is near 1 M. Figure 1.9b shows the [Ca2C]i versus
v graph that is used in the simulation and was determined by reference to the
experimental data in (Naitoh and Kaneko 1972), but the velocity (v) was rescaled
by a factor of ten because the velocity of the normal forward-swimming specimen
is expected to be 1–2 mm/s (Kunita et al. 2014).
Estimation of Intraciliary Ca2C Concentration In contrast to the membrane
potential, calcium ions cannot traverse between cellular body and cilia because
of cytoplasm buffer action (Naitoh 1990). Extraciliary Ca2C passes only through
the ciliary membrane. On the other hand, the Ca2C are exported to the outside
by calcium pumps on the ciliary membrane. So, we assumed that [Ca2C]i is
approximately determined by the contributions of Ca2C channels and Ca2C pumps
on the ciliary membrane and is simply estimated by the following equation:
d

Ca2C
i
dt
D  ICa  I0
Ca
2F  103 sv 

Ca2C
i  ŒCa0
i
1 C

Ca2C
i  ŒCa0
i =Km
pu
(1.6)
where F is Faraday constant [C/mol], sv is a constant proportional to the surface-to-
volume ratio of the cilium, and p[ms1] is a rate constant depending on the Ca2C
pump performance. Km [M] is the concentration at which the pump operates at
half its maximum rate, and I0
Ca and Ca2C0
i are the small constants of Cai Ca2C
current and [Ca2C]i during the ordinary forward swimming, respectively.
EL D 25,V• D E•  Er. gCa
D 0:67, gCa
D 1:34, gL
WD

g1
Ca .0/VCa C g1
K .0/VK

=VL,
Cm D 1.0. Ca K

20
S. Kuroda et al.
Fig. 1.9 A demonstration of the emergent behaviour (LBS) by the Paramecium model in the
narrow dead-end capillary tube. (a) Experimental setting. The Paramecium is conﬁned in the
glass capillary tube (0.08 mm diameter, 40–50 mm length) of which the end was closed with
mineral oil (Kunita et al. 2014). (b) Intraciliary Ca2C concentration versus swimming velocity.
v D v1 C (v1  v1)/(1 C b[Ca]a) (mm/s) where v1 D 1.40, v1 D i 0.60, a D 2.0,
b D 2.91  107. (c) Time courses of the position of Paramecium (upper panel), membrane poten-
tial (middle panel), and intraciliary Ca2C consecration. The vertical lines through the three panels
indicate the timings when the organism reached the dead end (x D 0) with forward swimming.
Imech D 5, Km D 1  102, pu D 1.0  102, and sv D 10  area/vol, where area/vol D 2.0  108
(cm2/l) is the surface:volume ratio of a cilium (Machemer 1974). (d) A bifurcation diagram of
the backward distance (dLBS) during the LBS period depending on the sensitivity to mechanical
stimulation (Imech). (e) Time courses of the position of the Paramecium model with Imech D 6.6
(upper panel) and 7.7 (lower panel). In all simulations, the time constant of the slow-inactivated
Ca2C channel was set to be 2000 times that of the ordinary channel

1
Physical Ethology of Unicellular Organisms
21
Slow Ca2C Current Induced by Repetitive Stimulation The small-amplitude,
long-lasting inward Ca2C currents mentioned by Naitoh (1990) are assumed to be
recruited by repetitive collisions at the forward end of the capillary tube. This is
implemented in our model in that an ordinary Ca2C channel on the ciliary membrane
is modiﬁed to a slow inactivated one with a probability ıp every time an action
potential happens, although it becomes normal again exponentially over time.2
Simulation Results Figure 1.9c shows an example of the time course of the
position and the ciliary electrophysiological states of the Paramecium model. The
organism showed LBS after SBS (t < 50s) via a gradual increase of the backward
swimming distance (upper panel of Fig. 1.9c). The shift from SBS to LBS was
caused by the interaction between the organism and environment via the collision-
induced recruitment of the slow-inactivated ciliary Ca2C channel. Because the
temporal position and the electrochemical states of the organism are determined
by both the internal dynamics (Eqs. 1.1–1.6) and the history of the collision with
the tube end, the model behaviour can be more diverse than that derived from
only the internal dynamics. Our model includes several parameters of which values
may vary through the specimen or environmental uncertain factors. Imech is one
of such parameters and it relates to the sensitivity to mechanical stimulations.
Figure 1.9d shows dependence of backward distances after emergence of LBS
on Imech. As an increase of Imech, various qualitative changes occurred, including
doubling of the backward distances, sudden occurrence of a new long backward
distance, intervening of SBS-like behaviour, and so on. Such a bifurcation diagram
suggests the behaviour during LBS can vary from simple to complex and vice versa
dependent on specimens and environmental details. Actually, several variants of
the LBS behaviour were observed in our experiments. However, the quantitative
analysis of such aspects are still not developed. Further investigation is left for future
studies.
1.4
Comparative Remarks in Single-Celled Organisms
and Higher Organisms
Although the capacity of memory and learning is generally assumed to be limited
to higher organisms, a number of studies have suggested that these attributes can
also be displayed by unicellular organisms (Bray 2009; Eisenstein 1975; Corning
and Von Burg 1973; Reid et al. 2012, 2013; Hinkle and Wood 1994) as well as by
nonliving systems such as spin echo and electronic circuits (Pershin et al. 2009;
2In the simulation, the ıp assumed to be proportional to ns(n  ns)/n2 so that ns grows and saturates
in a sigmoidal manner, where n is the total number of the Ca2C channels and ns is the number of the
modiﬁed channels. The update equation for p D ns/n is given as p(t) D (p(ti) C kpp(ti)(1  p(ti)))
exp((t  ti)/ p) C p", where ti is the most recent collision time, 0 < kp  1 is a growth rate,  p is
a relaxation time constant, and p" is a sufﬁciently small positive constant.

22
S. Kuroda et al.
Chung and Choe 2009). This perception is supported by the fact that unicellular
organisms have survived successfully for billions of years. It is thus reasonable
to expect a primitive form of memory and learning in the most elementary living
systems. The study of the extent to which this capacity is possessed by unicellular
organisms, and the manner by which it is realized, is interesting with respect to the
evolutionary origin of intelligence.
Acknowledgments This research was supported by JSPS KAKENHI grant no. 26310202, and
by a Grant-in-Aid for Scientiﬁc Research on Innovative Area ‘Fluctuation and Structure’ (no.
25103006) and ‘Cross talk between moving cells and microenvironment’ (no. 25111726) from
Mext Japan, and by Strategic Japanese-Swedish Research Cooperative Program, Japan Science
and Technology Agency (JST).
References
Applewhite P (1979) Learning in protozoa. In: Biochemistry and physiology of protozoa, vol 1.
Academic Press, New York, pp 341–353
Ball P (2008) Cellular memory hints at the origins of intelligence. Nature (Lond) 451:358
Bramstedt F (1935) Dressurversuche mit paramecium caudatum und stylonychia mytilus. Z Vergl
Physiol 22:490–516
Bray D (2009) Wetware: a computer in every living cell. Yale University Press, New Haven
Chung JR, Choe Y (2009) Emergence of memory-like behavior in reactive agents using external
markers. In: 21st IEEE international conference on tools with artiﬁcial intelligence, pp 404–408
Church RM (1978) The internal clock. In: Hulse SH, Fowler H, Honing WK (eds) Cognitive
processes in animal behavior. Erlbaum, Hillsdale
Corning WC, Von Burg R (1973) Protozoa. In: Corning WC, Dyal JA, Willows AOD (eds)
Invertebrate learning. Plenum Press, New York, pp 49–122
Dunlap K (1977) Localization of calcium channels in paramecium caudatum. J Physiol 271:119–
133
Eckert R, Brehm P (1979) Ionic mechanisms of excitation in Paramecium. Annu Rev Biophys
Bioeng 8:353–383
Eisenstein EM (1975) Aneural systems and neurobiology: a point of view. In: Eisenstein EM (ed)
Aneural organisms in neurobiology. Plenum Press, New York, pp 1–4
Gould JL, Gold CG (1988) The honey bee (Scientiﬁc American Library, vol 186). Freeman,
San Francisco
Hinkle DJ, Wood DC (1994) Is tube-escape learning by protozoa associative learning. Behav
Neurosci 108:94–99
Hirano A, Tsuji T, Takiguchi N, Ohtake H (2005) Modeling of the membrane potential change of
paramecium for mechanical stimuli. Trans SICE 41:351–357
Jennings H (1906) Behavior of the lower organisms. Indiana University Press, Bloomington
Kunita I, Sato S, Saigusa T, Nakagaki T (2013) Ethological response to periodic stimulation in
Chara and Brepharisma. In: Natural computing and beyond, Proceedings in Information and
Communications Technology (PICT), vol 6. Springer, New York, p 3–3
Kunita I, Kuroda S, Ohki K, Nakagaki T (2014) Attempts to retreat from a dead-
ended long capillary by backward swimming in Paramecium. Front Microbiol 5:270.
doi:10.3389/fmicb.2014.0027
Machemer H (1974) Frequency and directional responses of cilia to membrane potential changes
in Paramecium. J Comp Physiol 92:293–316

1
Physical Ethology of Unicellular Organisms
23
Machemer H, Ogura A (1979) Ionic conductances of membranes in ciliated and deciliated
paramecium. J Physiol 296:49–60
Meck WH, Church RM, Olton DS (1984) Hippocampus, time, and memory. Behav Neurosci
98:3–22
Naitoh Y (1979) Membrane currents in voltage clamped Paramecium and their relations to ciliary
motion. Acta Protozool 18:1–6
Naitoh Y (1990) Behavior of unicellular animals (in Japanese). University of Tokyo Press, Tokyo
Naitoh Y, Eckert R (1969) Ionic mechanisms controlling behavioral responses of Paramecium to
mechanical stimulation. Science 164:964–965
Naitoh Y, Kaneko H (1972) Reactivated triton-extracted models of Paramecium: modiﬁcation of
ciliary movement by calcium ions. Science 176:523–524
Naitoh Y, Sugino K (1984) Ciliary movement and its control in Paramecium. J Protozool 3:31–40
Nakagaki T, Yamada H, Tóth A (2000) Maze-solving by an amoeboid organism. Nature (Lond)
407:470
Nakagaki T, Yamada H, Tóth A (2001) Path ﬁnding by tube morphogenesis in an amoeboid
organism. Biophys Chem 92:47–52
Nakamura S, Kamiya N (1985) Regional difference in oscillatory characteristics of Physarum
plasmodium as revealed by surface pH. Cell Struct Funct 10:173–176
Pershin YV, La Fontaine S, Di Ventra M (2009) Memristive model of amoeba learning. Phys Rev
E 80:021926
Reid CR, Latty T, Dussutour A, Beekman M (2012) Slime mold uses an externalized spatial
memory to navigate in complex environments. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 109(43):17490–17494
Reid CR, Beekman M, Latty T, Dussutour A (2013) Amoeboid organism uses extracellular
secretions to make smart foraging decisions. Behav Ecol 24(4):812–818
Roberts S, Church RM (1978) Control of an internal clock. J Exp Psychol Anim Behav Process
4:318–337
Saigusa T, Tero A, Nakagaki T, Kuramoto Y (2008) Amoebae anticipate periodic events. Phys Rev
Lett 100:018101
Smith S (1908) The limits of educability in Paramecium. J Comp Neurol Psychol 18:499–510
Tachikawa M (2010) A mathematical model for period-memorizing behavior in Physarum
plasmodium. J Theor Biol 263:449–454
Takagi S, Ueda T (2008) Emergence and transitions of dynamic patterns of thickness oscillation of
the plasmodium of the true slime mold Physarum polycephalum. Physica D 237:420–427
Tero A, Kobayashi R, Nakagaki T (2006) Physarum solver: a biologically inspired method for
road-network navigation. Physica A 363:115
Tero A, Kobayashi R, Nakagaki T (2007) Mathematical model for adaptive transport network in
path ﬁnding by true slime mold. J Theor Biol 244:553–564
Tero A, Takagi T, Saigusa T, Ito K, Bebber DP, Fricker MD, Yumiki Y, Kobayashi R, Nakagaki T
(2010) Rules for biologically-inspired adaptive network design. Science 327:439–442
Trewavas A (2003) Aspects of plant intelligence. Ann Bot 92:1–20
Trewavas A (2005) Green plants as intelligent organisms. Trends Plant Sci 10:413–419
Ueda T (1993) Pattern dynamics in cellular perception. Phase Transit 45:93–104
Ueda T, Nakagaki T, Yamada T (1990) Dynamic organization of ATP and birefringent ﬁbrils during
free locomotion and galvanotaxis in the plasmodium of Physarum polycephalum. J Cell Biol
110:1097–1102
Yoshiyama S, Ishigami M, Nakamura A, Kohama K (2010) Calcium wave for cytoplasmic
streaming of Physarum polycephalum. Cell Biol Int 34:35–40

Chapter 2
Molecular Characteristics of Neuron-like
Functions in Single-Cell Organisms
Shingo Maegawa
Abstract Single-cell organisms can respond to stimuli from the environment,
including chemical and tactile stimuli, to survive and propagate. Thus, single-
cell organisms appear to show neuron-like functions. In this review, I investigate
neuron-like functions in bacteria (Escherichia coli) and ciliates (Paramecium and
Tetrahymena). In E. coli, six chemotaxis-speciﬁc (che) genes have been identiﬁed as
critical in the ability of organisms to react to stimuli from the environment. The che
genes encode signaling molecules to transmit information from receptors to motor
proteins that regulate some E. coli behavior. Thus, the Che proteins are thought
to form a “central processing unit (CPU)”-like complex in E. coli. The eukaryotic
single-cell organisms Paramecium and Tetrahymena have also been employed for
understanding the molecular mechanisms underlying ciliate behaviors. Paramecia
uptake calcium ions and show membrane excitation when they receive a repulsive
stimulus, similar to neurons. In addition, the calcium ions function as the second
messengers through calmodulin activity and regulate the concentration of cAMP
in cilia. Increment changes in cAMP concentration in the cilia result in changes in
their beating pattern, which alters the behaviors of paramecia. Moreover, our recent
results indicate that the neurotransmitter serotonin is involved in physical functions
in Tetrahymena thermophila. These results indicate clearly that bacteria and ciliates
are equipped with neuron-like functions. The discussion addresses whether single-
cell organisms have intelligence, emotion, and mind.
Keywords Bacteria • Ciliates • Behavior • Signal processing • Central process-
ing unit • Learning
S. Maegawa, Ph.D. ()
Department of Intelligence Science and Technology, Graduate School of Informatics, Kyoto
University, Kyoto, Japan
Kyoto University, Yoshida Honmachi, Sakyo, Kyoto 606-8501, Japan
e-mail: shingo@i.kyoto-u.ac.jp
© Springer Japan KK 2017
S. Shigeno et al. (eds.), Brain Evolution by Design, Diversity and Commonality
in Animals, DOI 10.1007/978-4-431-56469-0_2
25

26
S. Maegawa
2.1
What is a “Neuron-like” Function?
In vertebrates, neurons are essential for processing sensory information from the
environment to regulate physiological conditions and behaviors. Accordingly, a
“neuron-like” function is the ability to process information from the environment
and to evoke a speciﬁc response. Organisms live in many types of environments.
Some of these environments are unstable, such as deserts or deep-sea environ-
ments, and may be severe. However, unique organisms are able to inhabit these
environments and survive. Organisms in any environment must sense, recognize,
and adjust to dynamic environmental changes to survive and propagate. However,
many questions remain as to the evolution of organism abilities to respond to the
environment.
Single-cell organisms can regulate physiological conditions and their behaviors
in response to stimuli from the environment (Fig. 2.1), even without a cellular net-
work such as the central nervous system found in vertebrates. In fact, several studies
have shown that single-cell organisms such as bacteria, ciliates, and slime molds
can sense and adapt to the environment and display learning and memory. Here,
I especially introduce about the molecular mechanisms of neuron-like function
in prokaryotes (Escherichia coli) and eukaryotes (Paramecium and Tetrahymena),
including molecular mechanisms of the transduction of environmental signals.
E. coli
P. caudatum
stimulus 1
stimulus 2
stimulus 3
stimulus 4
stimulus 5
Environmental stimuli
Specific behavioral responce
 to specific stimulus
     Attraction
     Repellusion
signal processing 
single cellular organisms
Fig. 2.1 Neuron-like function in single-celled organisms. Single-celled organisms such as
Escherichia coli and Paramecium caudatum can receive external stimuli from the environment
and demonstrate speciﬁc behavioral responses (attraction or repulsion) to a speciﬁc stimulus. In
this chapter, the signal-processing pathway starting from external stimuli to speciﬁc behavioral
response is deﬁned as a neuron-like function of single-cell organisms

2
Molecular Characteristics of Neuron-like Functions in Single-Cell Organisms
27
2.2
Neuron-like Functions in Prokaryotes
2.2.1
Swimming Behaviors in Bacteria
Bacteria swim freely in freshwater or saltwater to obtain nutrients. Observations
of bacterial swimming patterns indicate the presence of switching mechanisms for
smooth swimming and a tumbling behavior when they receive no speciﬁc stimuli
(Berg 1975; Berg and Brown 1972). After the tumbling behavior, bacteria usually
swim smoothly in a random orientation (Berg 1971; Berg and Brown 1972). The
tumbling behavior is important to change the direction of swimming in bacteria
(Fig. 2.2). This random reorientation from each tumbling is thought to enable
bacteria to explore the surrounding environment in a random pattern (Berg 1971;
Berg and Brown 1972).
In the late nineteenth century, German researchers described that bacteria swim
toward external stimuli and environments that are optimal for survival and away
from environments that are dangerous (Koshland 1980). Evidence indicates that
bacteria can receive external stimuli and display speciﬁc behaviors to speciﬁc
stimuli (Koshland 1980). In addition, bacteria can regulate the tumbling behavior.
For example, bacteria suppress the tumbling behavior when they approach a
preferable environment. In contrast, bacteria may enter a dangerous environment if
the tumbling behavior is not evoked (Koshland 1980; Macnab and Koshland 1972).
Thus, the regulation of the frequency of the tumbling behavior is sufﬁcient to bias
the random walk of bacteria and enable swimming toward preferable environments
or escaping from danger.
Smooth swimming
Tumbling
Smooth swimming
Fig. 2.2 Two modes of swimming of Escherichia coli. In a bacterium demonstrating smooth
swimming, the ﬂagella rotate counterclockwise and are fastened together. With time, the bacterium
shows tumbling behavior by a stochastic process to randomly choose a new direction of swimming.
Importantly, the ﬂagella move clockwise during tumbling. After tumbling, a bacterium swims
smoothly again. Thus, bacterial swimming is regulated by the direction of rotation of the ﬂagella

28
S. Maegawa
2.2.2
Sensory and Motor Systems in Bacteria
Several genetic studies have been conducted to understand the mechanisms under-
lying the chemotactic response in bacteria. The results revealed that bacteria possess
receptors for external stimuli and a motor apparatus for regulating swimming
behavior. Five chemoreceptors that capture external stimuli, such as amino acids,
carbohydrates, and oxygen, were identiﬁed (Bibikov et al. 1997; Boyd et al. 1983;
Kondoh et al. 1979; Manson et al. 1986; Reader et al. 1979). These receptors are
components of the bacterial “sensory” system, similar to human eyes, ears, etc.
The bacterial motor apparatus is the ﬂagella on the bacteria cell surface (Depam-
phi and Adler 1971; Iino 1969; Macnab and Koshland 1974). Observation of the
swimming pattern of E. coli demonstrates that ﬂagella are held close when bacteria
swim smoothly to one direction, but are spread wide apart when bacteria undergo
the tumbling behavior (Fig. 2.2) (Macnab and Koshland 1974). In addition, ﬂagella
move in a counterclockwise (CCW) rotation similar to a propeller when a bacterium
swims smoothly. In contrast, when evoking the tumbling behavior, ﬂagella turn to
move clockwise (CW), which results in disruption of the bundle of the ﬂagella
(Fig. 2.2) (Larsen et al. 1974). Taken together, these results demonstrate that bacteria
sense external stimuli with speciﬁc receptors and regulate the rotation of their
ﬂagella, which results in swimming forward or changing direction randomly. These
observations imply the presence of central processing units (CPUs) that bridge the
receptors and ﬂagella.
2.2.3
Exploring the CPU in E. coli
A computer CPU integrates all information from inputs and returns processed
results as outputs to peripheral devices such as displays and speakers. The CPU is
often compared to the human brain because of the similarity in functions. In terms
of processing and integrating all information from the environment and returning
speciﬁc outputs, bacteria can be considered to have a CPU because they can process
sensory information and return outputs as behaviors (Falke et al. 1997; Parkinson
2004).
To explore the molecular components of bacterial CPUs, Warrick and coworkers
isolated Salmonella mutants that exhibited no speciﬁc response to any chemical
(Warrick et al. 1977). One group of mutants exhibited continuous tumbling in
chemical gradients. In contrast, another group of mutants showed only smooth
swimming in chemical gradients. The mutant genes were identiﬁed as three groups
of genes forming signal transduction pathways in bacteria. The ﬁrst group of
genes encodes chemical receptors, as expected. These receptors bind to speciﬁc
ligands, which indicates that the genes function in sensing the environment, similar
to human peripheral sensory neurons. The second group of genes encodes the
proteins required for the formation of ﬂagella and the motor apparatus mentioned

2
Molecular Characteristics of Neuron-like Functions in Single-Cell Organisms
29
in the previous section. These proteins are clearly essential for locomotion through
bacterial swimming, a muscle-like function in bacteria. The last group of genes
encodes the proteins that bridge the bacterial sensory system to the bacterial
locomotive apparatus, the bacterial CPU.
2.2.4
Che Proteins Are Components of the CPU in E. coli
Six genes were identiﬁed from the mutant screening as encoding components of
the CPU in E. coli (Fig. 2.3; Table 2.1) (Bourret and Stock 2002; Hazelbauer et al.
2008; Warrick et al. 1977). The genes are required for transmitting information from
receptors to ﬂagella to regulate attractive or repellent behaviors in bacteria. Thus,
the genes were called chemotaxis-speciﬁc (che) genes. One of the genes encodes
the CheA protein (Smith and Parkinson 1980). CheA is a histidine protein kinase
that transfers phosphoryl groups from ATP to the histidine residues of target proteins
(Hess et al. 1988a). CheA is activated by autophosphorylation,and then transfers the
phosphoryl groups onto another che gene product, CheY (Hess et al. 1988b; Wylie et
al. 1988). Phosphorylated CheY interacts with ﬂagellar motor proteins to enhance
the probability of CW rotation (Kuo and Koshland 1987). As already mentioned,
CW rotation results in tumbling and changing the direction of swimming. When
bacteria receive attractants, CheA is not activated, resulting in the inhibition of
CheY. Thus, bacteria can suppress the tumbling behavior. The regulation of CheA
and CheY activity underlies the molecular mechanism of the bacterial CPU.
An additional che gene product is CheW, which associates receptor complexes
(Borkovich et al. 1989; Borkovich and Simon 1990; Ninfa et al. 1991). CheW
integrates receptor activity to regulate CheA activation. The enzyme CheZ is a
protein phosphatase for CheY (Hess et al. 1987). The activity of CheZ is important
to inhibit CheY activity and facilitates short-period tumbling in bacteria.
The remaining two enzymes, CheB and CheR, are regulators for receptors. Both
enzymes function to modify glutamate residues in chemoreceptors. CheR is an S-
adenisylmethionine-dependent methyltransferase that converts the carboxy groups
of speciﬁc glutamate residues into uncharged methyl esters (Springer and Koshland
1977). In contrast, CheB is an esterase, reverting the glutamate modiﬁed by CheR
(Stock and Koshland 1978). Modiﬁcation of speciﬁc glutamate residues affects the
afﬁnity of receptors to their ligands (Levit and Stock 2002; Okumura et al. 1998;
Sourjik and Berg 2002). Methylated receptors show lower afﬁnity to their ligands.
These mechanisms seem to be important to adjust the sensitivity of receptors. In
addition, CheB is activated by phosphorylated CheA (Hess et al. 1988b; Lupas
and Stock 1989; Stewart et al. 1990), which indicates that the activation of signal
transduction starting from CheA removes the methyl group from the glutamate
residues of receptors, resulting in an increment change of afﬁnity of receptors to

30
S. Maegawa
cytoplasmic membrane
periplasm
cytoplasm
Receptors
CheA
CheW
P
CheY
P
Flagellar motors 
     tumbling 
CheZ
P
CheR
CheB
+CH3
Fig. 2.3 The bacterial “CPU” is composed of Che proteins. A complex of CheA and CheW
interacts with receptors in the cytoplasm. When CheA is phosphorylated and activated, the
activated CheA transfers the phosphoryl group onto CheY. Phosphorylated CheY can regulate
ﬂagellar motors to increase the probability of the clockwise rotation of ﬂagella (i.e., induce the
tumbling behavior). CheZ is a phosphatase for CheY, indicating that CheZ can inhibit CheY
activity and change the swimming mode from tumbling to smooth swimming. CheB and CheR
regulate receptor sensitivity through the addition or removal of methyl groups to the glutamate
residues of receptors. In addition, CheB is activated by CheA, indicating a feedback loop. When
bacteria sense attractants, CheA activation is inhibited. Then, CheY is also inhibited, causing the
inhibition of tumbling. Suppression of the tumbling behavior results in long smooth swimming to
approach the center of the attractants
ligands. Thus, there is a feedback regulation of the sensitivity of receptors, which
represents the molecular mechanism of adaptation in bacteria. Taken all these results
together, bacteria appear to have network-type feedback loops to regulate their
behavior.

2
Molecular Characteristics of Neuron-like Functions in Single-Cell Organisms
31
Table 2.1 Summary for gene products regulating signal transduction in bacteria
Gene product
Functions
References
CheA
Histidine protein kinase
Smith and Parkinson (1980)
Integration of all information from receptors
Hess et al. (1988a)
CheY
Regulator of ﬂagella motors
Hess et al. (1988b)
Wylie et al. (1988)
CheW
Regulator of CheA activity
Borkovich et al. (1989)
Ninfa et al. (1991)
CheZ
Protein phosphatase
Hess et al. (1987)
Inhibitor of CheY
Che R
Methyltransferase
Springer and Koshland (1977)
Modiﬁer of receptors
Stock and Koshland (1978)
Che B
Esterase
Stock and Koshland (1978)
Modiﬁer of receptors
Lupas and Stock (1989)
2.2.5
Is the Bacterial CPU Common to Eukaryotes?
Is this mechanism underlying bacterial signaling pathways conserved in eukaryotes?
To answer this question, genes homologous to the che genes in prokaryotes should
be identiﬁed in eukaryotes. However, there are only a couple of studies examining
homologous che genes in eukaryotes (Chang et al. 1993; Ota and Varshavsky 1993).
Genes encoding the histidine protein kinase, such as cheA, have been isolated from
yeast (Ota and Varshavsky 1993) and plants (Chang et al. 1993). Thus, similar
pathways in eukaryotes may be conserved, but the pathways may not have important
roles in eukaryotic cells because no apparent homologous genes were found based
on database search in humans, mice, zebraﬁsh, and Drosophila. In fact, serine and
threonine protein kinases are major kinases in signal transduction in eukaryotic
cells, suggesting that serine and threonine protein kinases became major players
during evolution (Kennelly and Potts 1996). However, the basic logic for the
regulation of sensitivity through networks based on feedback loops appears to have
been conserved during evolution.
2.3
Neuron-like Functions in Eukaryotes
2.3.1
What Happens in Eukaryotic Single-Cell Organisms?
Eukaryotic single-cell organisms can sense their environment and evoke speciﬁc
responses, similar to bacteria. From the late nineteenth century, ciliates such as
Paramecium sp., Tetrahymena sp., and Euplotes sp. have been used to investigate
behaviors (Vanhouten 1994).

32
S. Maegawa
Paramecia have been used as a eukaryotic model organism to investigate the
molecular mechanisms regulating their behavior, as well as to understand essential
biological processes such as gene expression (Allen and Gibson 1972; Kung et al.
1975; Sommerville and McTavish 1982). Large numbers of paramecia can be
grown, which allows them to be a good model system. In addition, induction and
isolation of mutants can be accomplished within one laboratory. Thus, many genes
responsible for the regulation of behaviors in Paramecium have been identiﬁed to
better understand the molecular mechanisms of its “neuron-like” function.
2.3.2
Swimming Behaviors and Chemotaxis in Paramecium
Paramecia swim smoothly until they sense a physical obstacle by touch or repel-
lants (Fig. 2.4) (Nakatani 1970; Vanhouten 1978). Once paramecia receive the
information of touch or repellents, they show backward swimming and waving of
the anterior part of the cell (Naitoh and Eckert 1969a, b). Paramecia choose their
orientation randomly, and then start smooth swimming.
Paramecia can sense external stimuli and respond with speciﬁc behaviors.
Paramecia are, in general, attracted to bacterial metabolites such as acetate, folate,
glutamate, and biotin (Bell et al. 1998; Preston and Vanhouten 1987; Vanhouten
1994; Yang et al. 1997). In contrast, GTP and quinidine act as repellents to
paramecia (Clark et al. 1993, 1997; Preston et al. 1990).
2. touch
3. backword swimming
4. randam choice of direction
1. smooth swimming
5. smooth swimming
obstacle
Fig. 2.4 Two modes of swimming in paramecia A paramecium swims smoothly to one direction.
The paramecium shows backward swimming when it senses an obstacle or repellant. The
paramecium then shows waving of cilia to choose randomly a new direction of swimming.
Thus, a paramecium can maneuver around an obstacle or avoid high concentrations of repellants.
A paramecium suppresses direction change and increases swimming speed when it senses an
attractant. Please note that bacteria and paramecia have similar strategies for swimming behavior

2
Molecular Characteristics of Neuron-like Functions in Single-Cell Organisms
33
Interesting observations have been reported on the effects of acetic acid on
paramecia (Bell et al. 2007; Johnson 1929). Acetic acid is an attractant for
paramecia at low concentrations. However, highly concentrated acetic acid has
a repulsive effect on paramecia. Thus, paramecia can become trapped within a
ring-shaped area surrounding the highest concentration of acetic acid when they
swim in a gradient of acetic acid. A bubble of carbon dioxide has a similar effect.
These phenomena can be explained as follows. First, paramecia can sense a low
concentration of acetic acid as an attractant. As they approach an area of a higher
concentration of acetic acid, the escape behavior is induced. After the escape,
paramecia sense that the concentration of acetic acid is decreasing. Thus, paramecia
can become trapped in an area between low acetic acid concentration as an attractant
and high acetic acid concentration as a repellant. These observations clearly indicate
that speciﬁc chemicals evoke speciﬁc behaviors in Paramecium, suggesting that
paramecia have signal-processing mechanisms.
Tetrahymena is also attracted to proteins, peptides, and amino acids (Leick and
Hellunglarsen 1992). Moreover, one report demonstrated that a neurotransmitter,
“-endorphin, was an attractant to Tetrahymena (Oneill et al. 1988). The effects of
neurotransmitters on ciliates are discussed later.
2.3.3
Regulation of Behaviors During Chemotaxis
in Paramecia
As already mentioned, there are two characteristic behaviors in chemotaxis of
paramecia: approach and escape. Several reports demonstrated that the swimming
speed of paramecia increases when they approach an attractant, and that the
escape behavior including backward swimming is suppressed during approach
(Eckert et al. 1972; Hemmersbachkrause et al. 1992; Vanhouten et al. 1982). In
contrast, the swimming speed of paramecia decreases when they sense a repellent,
and then they show backward swimming and changes in swimming direction.
This regulation resembles the mechanisms in bacteria just described. Differences
between Paramecium and E. coli are observed in the regulation of swimming speed
and backward swimming in paramecia before reorientation. Both Paramecium and
E. coli seem to regulate the probability of reorientation to a corresponding external
stimulus.
2.3.4
Sensory System and Motor Apparatus
Naitoh and Eckert (1969a, b) demonstrated that paramecia reverse the ciliary beat
as an avoidance behavior when stimulated by touching with a needle in the anterior
part, and that Paramecium showed an increment of ciliary beat as an attractive

34
S. Maegawa
behavior when it was stimulated in the posterior part. These results suggest that
different areas of the Paramecium body evoke different behaviors to the same
stimulus. Each body part may be responsible for each different stimulus, similar to
the human body and brain. In addition to the touch response, paramecia have speciﬁc
receptors for attractants or repellents. These receptors are essential components for
the sensory system in paramecia. The localization of receptors is also important for
the regulation of the behaviors already described.
Cilia, which are the motor apparatus, consist of several proteins. The detailed
structure and beating mechanisms of motile cilia have been reviewed in detail
previously (Doughty and Dryl 1981; Wiederhold 1976). Microtubules and dynein
are important for active beating. In fact, NiCl2, an inhibitor of dynein ATPase, can
inhibit ciliary beating in paramecia (Larsen and Satir 1991; Naitoh 1966). Naitoh
and coworkers demonstrated that paramecia extracted with Triton X-100 can swim
in the presence of ATP and that reversal of ciliary beating can be induced by adding
Ca2C and ATP (Naitoh and Kaneko 1972). The results indicate that the cilia can
be regulated by ATP as an energy source and Ca2C, suggesting that paramecia can
regulate behavior by controlling the concentration of Ca2C. Of course, the potassium
ion also has a crucial role in ciliary beating (Preston and Vanhouten 1987).
2.3.5
The Molecular Mechanisms Bridging Receptors
and Cilia in Paramecium
The molecular mechanisms underlying signal transduction from receptors to cilia
are not fully understood. However, evidence suggests that the signal transduction
pathway in paramecia is similar, in part, to those in neurons.
Paramecia used to be referred to as a swimming neuron because they show
dynamic change in the electrical characteristics of the cell membrane during chemo-
taxis (Eckert et al. 1972; Naitoh et al. 1972; Vanhouten 1979). Paramecia show
depolarization when they are stimulated with repellents, decreasing attractants, or
simple physical stimuli such as touch (Naitoh 1966; Naitoh and Eckert 1973).
Paramecia swim backward when they face stimuli that can evoke the depolarization.
After the backward swimming, they change direction randomly, and swim away
from the stimulus. In contrast, paramecia show hyperpolarization when they detect
attractants, resulting in an increment change of swimming speed and the suppression
of backward swimming (Preston and Vanhouten 1987; Van Houten et al. 2000).
Interestingly, the mechanisms of membrane potential and ﬁring in paramecia are
essentially the same as those in neurons (Adoutte et al. 1981; Naitoh et al. 1972;
Nakaoka and Ooi 1985; Oka et al. 1986).
Receptors for cAMP and glutamate have been identiﬁed as attractants and
characterized (Bell et al. 1998; Ramoino et al. 2014; Vanhouten et al. 1991). Both
these receptors bind speciﬁcally to the ligand and seem to release calcium and
potassium ions from paramecia through calcium and potassium ion pumps (Adoutte

2
Molecular Characteristics of Neuron-like Functions in Single-Cell Organisms
35
et al. 1981; Doughty and Dryl 1981). Thus, attractants such as cAMP and glutamate
hyperpolarize membranes through these mechanisms. In contrast, paramecia change
the permeability of the cell membrane for Ca2C, resulting in depolarization (Naitoh
and Kaneko 1972; Nakaoka and Ooi 1985). The Ca2C-dependent action potential
controls the angle and frequency of ciliary beating (Machemer 1976).
The structures of receptors in paramecia are similar to those in vertebrates. The
isolated receptor for glutamate is closely related to the human umami receptor,
a G-protein-coupled receptor (Van Houten et al. 2000). In addition, activities
downstream of the receptors are closely related to signal transduction pathways
in vertebrates. The hyperpolarization of the cell membrane in paramecia triggers
increment changes of the intracellular, especially intraciliary, concentration of
cAMP (Hennessey et al. 1985; Schultz et al. 1992). Taken together, it is likely that
activation of the receptor for glutamate results in activation of adenylate cyclase to
synthesize cAMP. This cAMP increases the frequency of ciliary beating (Bonini and
Nelson 1988).
The next indication for the similarity of paramecia to neurons is the identiﬁcation
of calmodulin in cilia (Maihle et al. 1981) and that guanylate cyclase is activated by
Ca2C-calmodulin (Klumpp et al. 1983). In addition, endogenous kinases activated
by cAMP have been identiﬁed (Van Houten et al. 2000). Thus, Ca2C and cAMP
seem to function as second messengers to regulate ciliary beating. However, the
molecular mechanisms that enable Ca2C to induce reversal of ciliary beating remain
unclear.
Taken together, these ﬁndings indicated that paramecia have signal-processing
pathways that are closely related to those observed in neurons in vertebrates and
that calcium ions and cAMP are important mediators of signaling from receptors to
cilia.
2.3.6
Memory and Learning in Ciliates
Memory and learning are important functions of the human brain. Is there an
equivalent to our memory and learning in paramecia? To answer this question,
several investigations have been carried out and reported. Jensen (Jensen 1957a,
b) reported the training of paramecia with a platinum needle covered with bacteria.
After several training sessions, paramecia approached a bare platinum needle with-
out bacteria; these observations provided evidence for classical conditioned learning
in paramecia. In addition, two papers reported similar results from experiments
for trial-and-error learning in paramecia (French 1940; Hanzel and Rucker 1972).
These studies suggest that paramecia can learn and hold memory for a short period.
However, several criticisms have been raised concerning their experimental designs
and interpretation. Recently, Armus et al. (2006) trained paramecia with cathodes
(attractant, unconditioned stimulus) and light (conditioned stimulus). Their results
demonstrate that paramecia are attracted to a lighted area without the cathode after
six repeated training sessions, suggesting that paramecia may be able to learn and

36
S. Maegawa
maintain memory. However, the molecular mechanisms involved in these processes
remain unclear. Further studies are required for elucidating the mechanism of
learning in Paramecium.
2.3.7
Neurotransmitters and Hormones in Ciliates
Glutamate is a well-known neurotransmitter in the brain. Glutamate also has
important functions as an attractant in paramecia. In addition, ”-animobutyric acid
(GABA) affects swimming behavior in paramecia (Bucci et al. 2005). Bucci et al.
(2005) demonstrated that pharmacological treatments of paramecia with agonist or
antagonist of the GABAA receptor alter the swimming behavior. Moreover, parame-
cia release GABA into their environment by neuronal-like exocytosis (Ramoino
et al. 2010). The reason for GABA release by paramecia is unclear. Taken together,
these results show that paramecia can respond to the neurotransmitters glutamate
and GABA.
Tetrahymena can react physiologically to serotonin, histamine, and insulin
(Csaba and Lantos 1973, 1975). Interestingly, Tetrahymena synthesizes adreno-
corticotropic hormone (ACTH), “-endorphin, serotonin, and triiodothyronine (T3)
in response to stress from formaldehyde and high temperatures, suggesting that
Tetrahymena may show a general response to the stressors (Csaba and Pallinger
2008). Thus, Paramecium and Tetrahymena may utilize neurotransmitters and
hormones to regulate their behavior and adaptation in general.
2.3.8
Serotonin Is Involved in Physiological Functions
in Tetrahymena
As mentioned, serotonin was detected in Tetrahymena by an antibody against
serotonin even under normal growth conditions (Csaba and Pallinger 2008). Binding
sites for serotonin are located on the surface of the cell membrane of Tetrahymena
(Csaba and Lantos 1973), suggesting that Tetrahymena has receptor(s) for serotonin.
Serotonin is an important neurotransmitter in the human brain that is synthesized in
the raphe and may be related to depression (Stockmeier 1997). In addition, whole-
genome sequencing revealed that Tetrahymena has a gene encoding tryptophan
hydroxylase (TPH), which is a rate-limiting enzyme for serotonin biosynthesis
(Eisen et al. 2006). These ﬁndings suggest that serotonin is produced in paramecia
and Tetrahymena and that the synthesized serotonin has biological and physiological
functions in ciliates.
Speciﬁc signals corresponding to serotonin have been observed in Tetrahymena
when starved (Fig. 2.5c, d). A speciﬁc inhibitor of TPH, para-chlorophenylalanine
(PCPA), inhibits serotonin synthesis (Fig. 2.5e, f). These results demonstrate that

2
Molecular Characteristics of Neuron-like Functions in Single-Cell Organisms
37
Fig. 2.5 Serotonin is synthesized in Tetrahymena thermophilaImmunological staining of sero-
tonin in a Tetrahymena cell. Starvation results in serotonin synthesis (c, d). The presence of
4-chlorophenylacetic acid (PCPA, an inhibitor of tryptophan hydroxylase) inhibits the synthesis
of serotonin (e, f). No signiﬁcant staining was observed without anti-serotonin antibody (a, b). a,
c, e Differential interference contrast (DIC) images. b, d, f Fluorescent images

38
S. Maegawa
Fig. 2.6 Inhibition of serotonin synthesis causes smaller food vesicles in Tetrahymena ther-
mophilaTetrahymena show four or ﬁve food vesicles (red vesicles in the panel) when starved
(a). During starvation, PCPA was applied to inhibit serotonin synthesis. The treatment of PCPA
did not affect the number of food vesicles, but reduced the volume of food vesicles (b, d,
e). Supplementation of serotonin partially rescued the phenotype (c, d, e). Food vesicles were
visualized with red ink. The average of the number of food vesicles (indicated in d) is (n D 10).
Volumes of food vesicles were estimated by the diameter of the food vesicles in the images, and
the average of estimated volumes of food vesicles is shown in (e) (n D 10). n.s. not signiﬁcant. *;
p < 0.05 (n D 10)
TPH is responsible for serotonin synthesis in Tetrahymena. In addition, exposure of
Tetrahymena to a speciﬁc inhibitor of tryptophan hydroxylase results in a smaller
food vesicle (Fig. 2.6b, e) and a slower initiation of mating behaviors compared with
nontreated controls (Fig. 2.7d, e, f), even if the inhibitor did not affect the number
of food vesicles (Fig. 2.6d) and meiosis (Fig. 2.7). Supplementation of serotonin
can rescue the volume of the food vesicle (Fig. 2.6c, e) and the mating behavior
(Fig. 2.7). These results indicate that tryptophan hydroxylase in Tetrahymena
functions to produce serotonin, and that synthesized serotonin is required for food
uptake and initiation of conjugation. Human patients suffering from depression

2
Molecular Characteristics of Neuron-like Functions in Single-Cell Organisms
39
b
d
e
f
a
c
g
h
i
2 h
4 h
6 h
control
PCPA
PCPA
+
serotonin
Fig. 2.7 Inhibition of serotonin synthesis also affects timing of conjugation Tetrahymena usually
start conjugation when they are exposed to starvation and they ﬁnd conjugation partners having
different conjugation types. After 2 h, two cells showed conjugation in the control group (a). The
conjugated cells showed elongated small nuclei (white arrowheads in b), indicating that meiosis
started at 4 h after starvation. Several small nuclei were observed in the conjugated cells at 6 h after
starvation. In contrast to the control group, PCPA treatment results in a delay of conjugation (d,
e, f). Importantly, the conjugation processes, such as elongated small nuclei, were detected (white
arrowheads in f). Supplementation of serotonin with PCPA completely suppressed the delay (g, h,
i). Nuclei were visualized with Hoechst 33342. The dashed white line in all panels indicates the
outline of cells
show less social activity, less appetite, and less sexual desire (Blundell 1992;
Stockmeier 1997). If the phenotype observed in Tetrahymena is similar to human
depression, serotonin may have evolutionally conserved functions for survival of
organisms. Thus, serotonin might affect the “mind” in ciliates.
2.4
Are Neuron-like Functions in Single-Cell Organisms
an Indication of Emotion or Mind?
In the late nineteenth century, Herbert Spencer Jennings began analyzing the
behavior of protozoa. He sought to understand emotion and/or mind in animals, as
revealed in his paper entitled “The psychology of a protozoan” (Jennings 1899).

40
S. Maegawa
Of course, emotion and mind cannot be measured and examined directly with
biological methods in animals because we cannot communicate and interview the
animals. Nevertheless, emotion and mind in bacteria and ciliates can be considered
philosophically.
As described previously, bacteria and ciliates can respond to external signals and
make “decisions” to approach or escape the signals. If the function of emotion and
mind is to respond to external signals and to determine behavior, bacteria and ciliates
seem to have well-established emotion and mind. Based on these criteria for the
function of emotion and mind, bacteria, ciliates, yeast, invertebrates, vertebrates,
and plants should possess emotion and mind.
If bacteria and ciliates merely show a reﬂex to external stimuli, then it is difﬁcult
to explain human behaviors. Human behaviors can be considered as complex
reﬂexes if emotion and mind are not considered. Of course, an estimation of emotion
and mind in humans can be attained through questioning, and we can measure
emotion and mind by interviewing examinees. However, the mechanisms of emotion
and mind in the brain are too difﬁcult to understand only within one scientiﬁc
ﬁeld. We can only fully reveal the mechanisms of emotion and mind in the brain
by aligning expertise and knowledge from the ﬁelds of biology, neurophysiology,
psychology, computer science, and informatics. Thus, in the future, emotion and
mind may be understood in humans and other living organisms, including bacteria
and ciliates.
References
Adoutte A, Ling KY, Forte M, Ramanathan R, Nelson D, Kung C (1981) Ionic channels of
Paramecium: from genetics and electrophysiology to biochemistry. J Physiol 77:1145–1159
Allen S, Gibson I (1972) Genome ampliﬁcation and gene expression in ciliate macronucleus.
Biochem Genet 6:293–313
Armus HL, Montgomery AR, Jellison JL (2006) Discrimination learning in paramecia (P.
caudatum). Psychol Rec 56:489–498
Bell WE, Karstens W, Sun Y, Van Houten JL (1998) Biotin chemoresponse in Paramecium. J Comp
Physiol A Sens Neural Behav Physiol 183:361–366
Bell WE, Preston RR, Yano J, Van Houten JL (2007) Genetic dissection of attractant-induced
conductances in Paramecium. J Exp Biol 210:357–365
Berg HC (1971) How to track bacteria. Rev Sci Instrum 42:868–871
Berg HC (1975) Chemotaxis in bacteria. Annu Rev Biophys Bioeng 4:119–136
Berg HC, Brown DA (1972) Chemotaxis in Escherichia coli analyzed by 3-dimensional tracking.
Nature (Lond) 239:500–504
Bibikov SI, Biran R, Rudd KE, Parkinson JS (1997) A signal transducer for aerotaxis in
Escherichia coli. J Bacteriol 179:4075–4079
Blundell JE (1992) Serotonin and the biology of feeding. Am J Clin Nutr 55:155–159
Bonini NM, Nelson DL (1988) Differential regulation of Paramecium ciliary motility by cAMP
and cGMP. J Cell Biol 106:1615–1623
Borkovich KA, Simon MI (1990) The dynamics of protein-phosphorylation in bacterial chemo-
taxis. Cell 63:1339–1348

2
Molecular Characteristics of Neuron-like Functions in Single-Cell Organisms
41
Borkovich KA, Kaplan N, Hess JF, Simon MI (1989) Transmembrane signal transduction in
bacterial chemotaxis involves ligand-dependent activation of phosphate group transfer. Proc
Natl Acad Sci USA 86:1208–1212
Bourret RB, Stock AM (2002) Molecular information processing: lessons from bacterial chemo-
taxis. J Biol Chem 277:9625–9628
Boyd A, Kendall K, Simon MI (1983) Structure of the serine chemoreceptor in Escherichia coli.
Nature (Lond) 301:623–626
Bucci G, Ramoino P, Diaspro A, Usai C (2005) A role for GABA(A) receptors in the modulation
of Paramecium swimming behavior. Neurosci Lett 386:179–183
Chang C, Kwok SF, Bleecker AB, Meyerowitz EM (1993) Arabidopsis ethylene-response gene
ETR1: similarity of product to 2-component regulators. Science 262:539–544
Clark KD, Hennessey TM, Nelson DL (1993) External GTP alters the motility and elicits an
oscillating membrane depolarization in Paramecium tetraurelia. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
90:3782–3786
Clark KD, Hennessey TM, Nelson DL, Preston RR (1997) Extracellular GTP causes membrane-
potential oscillations through the parallel activation of Mg2C and NaC currents in Paramecium
tetraurelia. J Membr Biol 157:159–167
Csaba G, Lantos T (1973) Effect of hormones on Protozoa: studies on phagocytotic effect of
histamine, 5-hydroxytryptamine and indoleacetic acid in Tetrahymena pyriformis. Cytobiologie
7:361–365
Csaba G, Lantos T (1975) Effect of insulin on glucose uptake of protozoa. Experientia (Basel)
31:1097–1098
Csaba G, Pallinger E (2008) A general response to stressors by the unicellular Tetrahymena: effect
of stress on the hormone levels. Cell Biochem Funct 26:797–800
Depamphi ML, Adler J (1971) Attachment of ﬂagellar basal bodies to cell envelope: speciﬁc
attachment to outer, lipopolysaccharide membrane and cytoplasmic membrane. J Bacteriol
105:396–407
Doughty MJ, Dryl S (1981) Control of ciliary activity in Paramecium: an analysis of chemosensory
transduction in a eukaryotic unicellular organism. Prog Neurobiol 16:1–115
Eckert R, Friedman K, Naitoh Y (1972) Sensory mechanisms in Paramecium. 1. Two components
of electric response to mechanical stimulation of anterior surface. J Exp Biol 56:683
Eisen JA, Coyne RS, Wu M, Wu D, Thiagarajan M, Wortman JR, Badger JH, Ren Q, Amedeo P,
Jones KM et al (2006) Macronuclear genome sequence of the ciliate Tetrahymena thermophila,
a model eukaryote. PLoS Biol 4:1620–1642
Falke JJ, Bass RB, Butler SL, Chervitz SA, Danielson MA (1997) The two-component signaling
pathway of bacterial chemotaxis: a molecular view of signal transduction by receptors, kinases,
and adaptation enzymes. Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol 13:457–512
French JW (1940) Trial and error learning in Paramecium. J Exp Psychol 26:609–613
Hanzel TE, Rucker WB (1972) Trial and error learning in Paramecium: replication. Behav Biol
7:873
Hazelbauer GL, Falke JJ, Parkinson JS (2008) Bacterial chemoreceptors: high-performance
signaling in networked arrays. Trends Biochem Sci 33:9–19
Hemmersbachkrause R, Briegleb W, Hader DP (1992) Swimming behavior of paramecium:
ﬁrst results with the low-speed centrifuge microscope (NIZEMI). Life Sciences and Space
Research, vol xxiv (1). Gravitat Biol 12:113–116
Hennessey T, Machemer H, Nelson DL (1985) Injected cyclic-AMP increases ciliary beat
frequency in conjunction with membrane hyperpolarization. Eur J Cell Biol 36:153–156
Hess JF, Oosawa K, Matsumura P, Simon MI (1987) Protein phosphorylation is involved in
bacterial chemotaxis. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 84:7609–7613
Hess JF, Bourret RB, Simon MI (1988a) Histidine phosphorylation and phosphoryl group transfer
in bacterial chemotaxis. Nature (Lond) 336:139–143
Hess JF, Oosawa K, Kaplan N, Simon MI (1988b) Phosphorylation of three proteins in the
signaling pathway of bacterial chemotaxis. Cell 53:79–87
Iino T (1969) Genetics and chemistry of bacterial ﬂagella. Bacteriol Rev 33:454

42
S. Maegawa
Jennings HS (1899) The psychology of a protozoan. Am J Psychol 10:503–515
Jensen DD (1957a) Experiments on learning in Paramecia. Science 125:191–192
Jensen DD (1957b) More on learning in Paramecia. Science 126:1341–1342
Johnson WH (1929) The reactions of Paramecium to solutions of known hydrogen ion concentra-
tion. Biol Bull 57:199–224
Kennelly PJ, Potts M (1996) Fancy meeting you here! A fresh look at “prokaryotic” protein
phosphorylation. J Bacteriol 178:4759–4764
Klumpp S, Kleefeld G, Schultz JE (1983) Calcium calmodulin-regulated guanylate cyclase of
the excitable ciliary membrane from Paramecium: dissociation of calmodulin by La-3C:
calmodulin speciﬁcity and properties of the reconstituted guanylate cyclase. J Biol Chem
258:2455–2459
Kondoh H, Ball CB, Adler J (1979) Identiﬁcation of a methyl-accepting chemotaxis protein for the
ribose and galactose chemoreceptors of Escherichia coli. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 76:260–264
Koshland DE (1980) Bacterial chemotaxis in relation to neurobiology. Annu Rev Neurosci 3:43–75
Kung C, Chang SY, Satow Y, Vanhouten J, Hansma H (1975) Genetic dissection of behavior in
Paramecium. Science 188:898–904
Kuo SC, Koshland DE (1987) Roles of CHeY and CHeZ gene products in controlling ﬂagellar
rotation in bacterial chemotaxis of Escherichia coli. J Bacteriol 169:1307–1314
Larsen J, Satir P (1991) Analysis of Ni2C-induced arrest of Paramecium axonemes. J Cell Sci
99:33–40
Larsen SH, Reader RW, Kort EN, Tso WW, Adler J (1974) Change in direction of ﬂagellar rotation
is basis of chemotactic response in Escherichia coli. Nature (Lond) 249:74–77
Leick V, Hellunglarsen P (1992) Chemosensory behavior of Tetrahymena. Bioessays 14:61–66
Levit MN, Stock JB (2002) Receptor methylation controls the magnitude of stimulus–response
coupling in bacterial chemotaxis. J Biol Chem 277:36760–36765
Lupas A, Stock J (1989) Phosphorylation of an N-terminal regulatory domain activates the CHeB
methylesterase in bacterial chemotaxis. J Biol Chem 264:17337–17342
Machemer H (1976) Interactions of membrane-potential and cations in regulation of ciliary activity
in Paramecium. J Exp Biol 65:427–447
Macnab RM, Koshland DE (1972) Gradient-sensing mechanism in bacterial chemotaxis. Proc Natl
Acad Sci USA 69:2509
Macnab R, Koshland DE (1974) Bacterial motility and chemotaxis: light-induced tumbling
response and visualization of individual ﬂagella. J Mol Biol 84:399–406
Maihle NJ, Dedman JR, Means AR, Chafouleas JG, Satir BH (1981) Presence and indirect
immunoﬂuorescent localization of calmodulin in Paramecium tetraurelia. J Cell Biol 89:695–
699
Manson MD, Blank V, Brade G, Higgins CF (1986) Peptide chemotaxis in Escherichia coli
involves the tap signal transducer and the dipeptide permease. Nature (Lond) 321:253–256
Naitoh Y (1966) Reversal response elicited in nonbeating cilia of Paramecium by membrane
depolarization. Science 154:660
Naitoh Y, Eckert R (1969a) Ciliary orientation: controlled by cell membrane or by intracellular
ﬁbrils. Science 166:1633
Naitoh Y, Eckert R (1969b) Ionic mechanisms controlling behavioral responses of Paramecium to
mechanical stimulation. Science 164:963
Naitoh Y, Eckert R (1973) Sensory mechanisms in Paramecium. 2. Ionic basis of hyperpolarizing
mechanoreceptor potential. J Exp Biol 59:53–65
Naitoh Y, Kaneko H (1972) Reactivated Triton-extracted models of Paramecium: modiﬁcation of
ciliary movement by calcium ions. Science 176:523
Naitoh Y, Eckert R, Friedman K (1972) Regenerative calcium response in Paramecium. J Exp Biol
56:667
Nakaoka Y, Ooi H (1985) Regulation of ciliary reversal in Triton-extracted Paramecium by calcium
and cyclic adenosine monophosphate. J Cell Sci 77:185–195
Nakatani I (1970) Effects of various chemicals on the behavior of Paramecium caudatum. J Fac
Sci Hokkaido Univ Ser VI Zool 17:401–410

2
Molecular Characteristics of Neuron-like Functions in Single-Cell Organisms
43
Ninfa EG, Stock A, Mowbray S, Stock J (1991) Reconstitution of the bacterial chemotaxis signal
transduction system from puriﬁed components. J Biol Chem 266:9764–9770
Oka T, Nakaoka Y, Oosawa F (1986) Changes in membrane potential during adaptation to external
potassium ions in Paramecium caudatum. J Exp Biol 126:111–117
Okumura H, Nishiyama SI, Sasaki A, Homma M, Kawagishi I (1998) Chemotactic adaptation
is altered by changes in the carboxy-terminal sequence conserved among the major methyl-
accepting chemoreceptors. J Bacteriol 180:1862–1868
O’Neill JB, Pert CB, Ruff MR, Smith CC, Higgins WJ, Zipser B (1988) Identiﬁcation and
characterization of the opiate receptor in the ciliated protozoan, Tetrahymena. Brain Res
450:303–315
Ota IM, Varshavsky A (1993) A yeast protein similar to bacterial two-component regulators.
Science 262:566–569
Parkinson JS (2004) Signal ampliﬁcation in bacterial chemotaxis through receptor teamwork. ASM
News 70:575
Preston RR, Vanhouten JL (1987) Chemoreception in Paramecium tetraurelia: acetate and folate-
induced membrane hyperpolarization. J Comp Physiol A Sens Neural Behav Physiol 160:525–
535
Preston RR, Saimi Y, Kung C (1990) Evidence for two KC currents activated upon hyperpolariza-
tion of Paramecium tetraurelia. J Membr Biol 115:41–50
Ramoino P, Milanese M, Candiani S, Diaspro A, Fato M, Usai C, Bonanno G (2010) Gamma-
amino butyric acid (GABA) release in the ciliated protozoon Paramecium occurs by neuronal-
like exocytosis. J Exp Biol 213:1251–1258
Ramoino P, Candiani S, Pittaluga AM, Usai C, Gallus L, Ferrando S, Milanese M, Faimali M,
Bonanno G (2014) Pharmacological characterization of NMDA-like receptors in the single-
celled organism Paramecium primaurelia. J Exp Biol 217:463–471
Reader RW, Tso WW, Springer MS, Goy MF, Adler J (1979) Pleiotropic aspartate taxis and serine
taxis mutants of Escherichia coli. J Gen Microbiol 111:363–374
Schultz JE, Klumpp S, Benz R, Schurhoffgoeters WJC, Schmid A (1992) Regulation of adenylyl
cyclase from Paramecium by an intrinsic potassium conductance. Science 255:600–603
Smith RA, Parkinson JS (1980) Overlapping genes at the CHeA locus of Escherichia coli. Proc
Natl Acad Sci USA Biol Sci 77:5370–5374
Sommerville J, McTavish C (1982) The effect of temperature change on gene expression in
Paramecium primaurelia. Biochim Biophys Acta 698:158–166
Sourjik V, Berg HC (2002) Receptor sensitivity in bacterial chemotaxis. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
99:123–127
Springer WR, Koshland DE (1977) Identiﬁcation of a protein methyltransferase as CheR gene
product in bacterial sensing system. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 74:533–537
Stewart RC, Roth AF, Dahlquist FW (1990) Mutations that affect control of the methylesterase
activity of CheB, a component of the chemotaxis adaptation system in Escherichia coli. J
Bacteriol 172:3388–3399
Stock JB, Koshland DE (1978) Protein methylesterase involved in bacterial sensing. Proc Natl
Acad Sci USA 75:3659–3663
Stockmeier CA (1997) Neurobiology of serotonin in depression and suicide. Neurobiol Suicide
Bench Clin 836:220–232
Van Houten JL, Yang WQ, Bergeron A (2000) Chemosensory signal transduction in Paramecium.
J Nutr 130:946S–949S
Vanhouten J (1978) Two mechanisms of chemotaxis in Paramecium. J Comp Physiol 127:167–174
Vanhouten J (1979) Membrane potential changes during chemokinesis in Paramecium. Science
204:1100–1103
Vanhouten J (1994) Chemosensory transduction in eukaryotic microorganisms: trends for neuro-
science. Trends Neurosci 17:62–71
Vanhouten J, Martel E, Kasch T (1982) Kinetic analysis of chemokinesis of Paramecium. J
Protozool 29:226–230

44
S. Maegawa
Vanhouten JL, Cote BL, Zhang J, Baez J, Gagnon ML (1991) Studies of the cyclic adenosine-
monophosphate chemoreceptor of Paramecium. J Membr Biol 119:15–24
Warrick HM, Taylor BL, Koshland DE (1977) Chemotactic mechanism of Salmonella
typhimurium: preliminary mapping and characterization of mutants. J Bacteriol 130:223–231
Wiederhold ML (1976) Mechanosensory transduction in sensory and motile cilia. Annu Rev
Biophys Bioeng 5:39–62
Wylie D, Stock A, Wong CY, Stock J (1988) Sensory transduction in bacterial chemotaxis involves
phosphotransfer between ChE proteins. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 151:891–896
Yang WQ, Braun C, Plattner H, Purvee J, VanHouten JL (1997) Cyclic nucleotides in glutamate
chemosensory signal transduction of Paramecium. J Cell Sci 110:2567–2572

Chapter 3
Back Through Time: How Cnidarians and Basal
Metazoans Shed Light on Ancient Nervous
Systems
Hiroshi Watanabe
Abstract The origin of neurons and the evolution of the central nervous system
(CNS) are not well understood. The physiological nature of primitive neurons has
not been elucidated, and whether the CNSs of extant bilaterians originated with
an array of nerve nets or with a primordial neuronal aggregation is unknown. The
nervous systems of cnidarians, the closest sister branch to bilaterians, manifest
similarities to bilaterian nervous systems, including developmental mechanisms
and cellular features. For example, the cnidarian neurons are electrically excitable,
communicating with other neurons or muscles via chemical synapses, and forming
diffuse neural networks with signiﬁcant condensations along the main body axis.
Recent genomic and gene expression data from cnidarians and other basal meta-
zoans have provided hints to reconstruct the evolutionary history of neurons and
the CNS. Genes involved in neuronal physiological functions are conserved among
bilaterians, cnidarians, and even sponges. The latter possess sensory cells, but not
neurons, providing insights into the origin of neurons. Accumulating evidence
shows that cnidarians develop a neural condensation, a “semi-centralized nervous
system (semiCNS),” composed of multiple neuronal cell types. Although the
development and function of cnidarian nervous systems, especially the semiCNS,
remain largely unexplored, numerous molecular signatures shared by cnidarians and
bilaterians help us to understand early processes of neural centralization.
Keywords cnidarians • ctenophores • placozoans • sponges • Evolution • Pro-
toneuron • Nervous system
H. Watanabe ()
Evolutionary Neurobiology Unit, Okinawa Institute of Science and Technology Graduate
University, 1919-1 Tancha, Onna-son, Kunigami, Okinawa 904-0495, Japan
e-mail: hiroshi.watanabe@oist.jp
© Springer Japan KK 2017
S. Shigeno et al. (eds.), Brain Evolution by Design, Diversity and Commonality
in Animals, DOI 10.1007/978-4-431-56469-0_3
45

46
H. Watanabe
3.1
Introduction
The anatomically and functionally organized network of a nervous system serves
the operational center for animal behaviors. Regionalized condensations of neurons,
including the brain of bilaterians, have essential roles for cognitive functions in
which neurons process information about ambient stimuli and sometimes store it as
individual experiences.
At a very early stage of animal evolution, neurons may have originated as
unspecialized cells with sensory, neurosecretory, and contractile functions. These
ancestral, multifunctional cells became segregated into distinct cell types with
either speciﬁc sensory, neuronal, or contractile function (Mackie 1970). Neurons
formed extended cellular processes, or neurites, connecting to a speciﬁc neighboring
cells via synapses. This “neural” system seems to have evolved for a rapid and
speciﬁc signal transmission from sensory cells to a certain speciﬁc cell clusters
such as a contractile units of muscles and a ciliomotor systems. In contrast to cell–
cell communication mediated by undirected diffusion of signaling chemicals, the
directed and restricted mode of synaptic communication between connected neurons
allows animals to execute coordinated body movements in response to speciﬁc
environmental contexts.
The origin of the nervous system is one of the most exciting questions in biology.
There has long been interest in the use of basal metazoans, animal lineages that
diverged early in animal evolution, including poriferans, placozoans, ctenophores,
and cnidarians (Fig. 3.1)—to understand the early evolutionary processes of animal-
speciﬁc traits such as the nervous system. In recent years, thanks to sequencing
of the basal metazoan genomes, evolutionary biologists have made spectacular
advances in unveiling primitive neuronal components. Recent ﬁndings in the basal
metazoans have also raised several important questions, including whether a nervous
system arose only once, or multiple times, and whether neural condensations
in bilaterian and cnidarian branches reﬂect a homologous ancestral nature or
a paraphyletic neural characteristics. Answers to these questions are pivotal in
reconstructing the molecular and cellular features of the nervous systems that
existed in ancestral metazoans.
In this chapter, I ﬁrst provide an overview of genetic repertoires of “neural”
components found in basal metazoan genomes and anticipate the genetic and
cellular natures of primordial neurons. I then focus on molecular and anatomical
features and on physiological functions of the nervous systems in extant cnidarians.
Finally, I discuss the nature of primordial neural assemblies that may have been
present before divergence of the Cnidaria and Bilateria.

3
Back Through Time: How Cnidarians and Basal Metazoans Shed Light...
47
Fig. 3.1 Images of basal metazoans. (a) Ephydatia ﬂuviatilis (Porifera). (b) Trichoplax adhaerens
(Placozoa). (c) Bolinopsis mikado (Ctenophora). (d) Nematostella vectensis (Cnidaria). [Pho-
tographs courtesy of Dr. Noriko Funayama (E. ﬂuviatilis), Dr. Hiroaki Nakano (T. adhaerens),
and Ms. Noriko Ishikawa (B. mikado)]
3.2
Neural Gene Repertoires in Basal Metazoans
3.2.1
Poriferans
The phylum Porifera (sponges) comprises basal metazoans that do not possess bona
ﬁde neurons. Transcriptomic and genomic data from all four classes of poriferans
(Hexactinellida, Demospongiae, Homoscleromorpha, and Calcarea) revealed that
this basal metazoan lineage possesses surprisingly complex gene components
believed to have been involved in the development and function of nervous systems
(Table 3.1) (Simionato et al. 2007; Riesgo et al. 2014). Genomic analyses of
Amphimedon queenslandica (Demospongia) have identiﬁed poriferan homologues
for bilaterian neural genes such as SoxB, Lhx, and proneural basic helix-loop-helix
(bHLH) transcription factors, Elav/Musashi-like RNA-binding protein (RBP) genes,
and Notch signaling molecules (Richards et al. 2008; Larroux et al. 2008; Srivastava
et al. 2010a; Fortunato et al. 2012; Richards and Degnan 2012). AmqbHLH1, a
bHLH transcription factor gene that seems to belong to the atonal-related protein
(Arp) superfamily, is expressed in globular cells of parenchymella larvae of A.

48
H. Watanabe
Table 3.1 Molecular and cellular features of sensory cells and neurons of metazoan animals
Porifera
Placozoa
Ctenophora
Cnidaria
Bilateria
Neurosecretory cells
C
C
C
C
C
Neurons


C
C
C
Transcription factor genes
Proneural bHLH
(expr./func.)
C (sensory
cells/n.d.)
C (n.d./n.d.)
C (n.d./n.d.)
C (sensory cells
and neu-
rons/differentiation)
C (sensory cells
and neu-
rons/differentiation)
SoxB (expr./func.)
C (sensory
cells/n.d.)
C (n.d./n.d.)
C (neurons/n.d.)
C (neu-
rons/differentiation)
C (neu-
rons/differentiation)
Neural synapses
Electric synapse
(gap junctions)



Ca
C
Synapses


C
C
C
Peptides
Conserved
neuropeptides
b
C
c
C
C
Peptide-gated ion
channels
C
C
C
C
C
Chemical transmitters
Chemicals
Glu, GABA, Gly
NA, AD, 5-HTd
n.d.e
Glu, GABA
Glu, GABA, Gly,
DA, NA, AD, 5-HT,
Ach
Glu, GABA, Gly,
DA, NA, AD, 5-HT,
Ach
Genes
GAD, AAAH,
AADC, DBH,
AChE
GAD, AAAH,
AADC, DBH,
AChE
GAD, AAAH,
AChE
GAD, AAAH,
AADC, DBH,
ChAT, AChE
GAD, PH, TH,
TpH, AADC, DBH,
AANAT, HIOMT,
ChAT, AChE
Neural function


C
C
C
aGap junctions between small number of neurons have been found only in hydrozoans, but not the other cnidarian classes
bAlthough no neuropeptides have been identiﬁed in poriferan genomes, cnidarian LWamide neuropeptide treatment has been found to trigger settlement of poriferan larvae
(Whalan et al. 2012)
cAlthough none of the evolutionary conserved neuropeptides (e.g., RFamide and LWamide) have so far been identiﬁed from ctenophore genomes, neuronal FMRFamide
immunoreactivity has been observed (Jager et al. 2011)
dChemical transmitters known to modulate the contracting behavior of poriferan species
eTrichoplax genome encodes genes involved in synthesis and vesicular transport of several chemical transmitters (NA, AD) (Srivastava et al. 2008)

3
Back Through Time: How Cnidarians and Basal Metazoans Shed Light...
49
queenslandica (Fig. 3.2). The globular cells, putative sensory cells in sponges,
are located in the outer epithelium along the larval primary axis. Richards and
colleagues found that the AmqbHLH1 gene is coexpressed with genes for the
Notch/Delta signaling pathway during cellular differentiation (Richards et al. 2008;
Richards and Degnan 2012). In addition to the globular cells, the A. queenslandica
larvae bear distinct sensory cells in anterior and posterior regions. In the anterior
region, sensory ﬂask cells develop in the outer epithelium to regulate larval
metamorphosis (Nakanishi et al. 2015). A ciliated pigmented ring of photo-sensitive
sensory cells develops at the posterior end of the larvae (Leys and Degnan 2001).
Although genes speciﬁc to ﬂask cells have not yet been found, pigmented ring cells
express a number of genes that are involved in bilaterian sensory cell development,
for example, proneural Achaete-Scute homolog (Ash), SoxB2, Pax2/5/8, and Lhx
(Fig. 3.2) (Larroux et al. 2006; Richards et al. 2008; Srivastava et al. 2010b; Degnan
et al. 2015). Clear homologues of SoxB genes have been identiﬁed in the two
demosponge species, A. queenslandica (Larroux et al. 2006, 2008) and Ephydatia
muelleri, and in a calcareous sponge, Sycon ciliatum (Fortunato et al. 2012). In
S. ciliatum and A. queenslandica, the SoxB genes are expressed in cruciform cells
(putative sensory cells or their precursors) during larval development (Fortunato
et al. 2012). Cruciform cells also express Elav and Musashi, as well as Pax and
Six transcription factors involved in formation of bilaterian eyes and other sensory
organs (Fortunato et al. 2014).
Phylogenetic analyses of poriferan genes have shown to be rich in molecular
components involved in formation of the postsynaptic density (PSD) (Sakarya et
al. 2007; Alié and Manuel 2010; Srivastava et al. 2010a; Riesgo et al. 2014).
Genomes of all four poriferan classes contain PSD genes, with little variation among
species, suggesting that these genes existed in the common poriferan ancestor. It
should be noted that poriferan homologues for PSD components Dlg, Homer, Grip,
Cript, and Gkap are coexpressed dominantly or exclusively in the sensory globular
cells of Amphimedon parenchymella larvae (Sakarya et al. 2007). Concurrent
expression of multiple postsynaptic gene homologues may support the existence
of a macromolecular complex (Sakarya et al. 2007; Emes et al. 2008; Ryan and
Grant 2009). The existence of PSD genes in poriferan genomes, however, does not
necessarily connote the appearance of functional PSD in the common poriferan
ancestor, because a signiﬁcant number of PSD genes have also been identiﬁed
even in unicellular organisms such as choanoﬂagellates (Alié and Manuel 2010;
Burkhardt et al. 2014; Burkhardt 2015). Indeed, no clear morphological feature
consistent with a PSD or a synapse has been observed in sponges.
These ﬁndings suggest that the genetic mechanisms giving rise to both sensory
cells and neurons have a deep evolutionary root (Fig. 3.3). However, genetic and
signaling mechanisms regulating early commitment and later differentiation of the
poriferan sensory cells still remain largely unknown. Additionally, functional and
molecular dissection of the PSD protein complex in the poriferan sensory cells will

50
H. Watanabe
Fig. 3.2 The larval body plans of basal metazoans and expression patterns of neural markers.
Regionalized expression of neural marker genes along the primary body axis of three basal
metazoan larvae. In Porifera, the blue line indicates neurogenic gene expression in photosensitive
pigmented ring cells. The dashed green and dashed yellow lines denote sensory globular cells
and ﬂask cells, respectively. The red lines in Ctenophora and Cnidaria indicate posterior neural
aggregations from their diffuse nervous systems. The dashed pink line in Cnidaria shows pervasive
expression of neural marker genes. Ctenophores possess a diffuse nervous system, whereas no
expression of neural marker genes has been shown. The dashed red line in Cnidaria indicates
expression of neural markers for aboral nervous system. ANS aboral nervous system, ASO apical
sensory organ, AT apical tuft, DNS diffuse nervous system, GC gastric cavity, FCs ﬂask cells, GCs
globular cells, semiCNS semi-centralized nervous system, PF polar ﬁeld, PS-PRCs photo-sensitive
pigment ring cells
help us to explain how the “post”synaptic proteins are implicated in function of the
sensory (usually “pre”synaptic) cells.
3.2.2
Placozoans
The phylum Placozoa contains at least 19 groups of disc-shaped marine inverte-
brates, a 1- to 2-mm in diameter. They are simple metazoans with two epithelial
layers and some cell types interspersed in between, but they lack neurons. Recent
studies on Trichoplax have described six somatic cell types comprising ciliated
dorsal and ventral epithelial cells, lipophil cells, ﬁber cells, crystal cells, and gland
cells (Smith et al. 2014).
Homologues of neurogenic SoxB, Lhx, and group A bHLH transcription factors
related to Ash or Arp and to most components of synaptic vesicles and PSD,
including synaptotagmin, have been identiﬁed in the genome of the placozoan,
Trichoplax adhaerens (Fig. 3.3) (Srivastava et al. 2008; Gyoja 2014). Although
the physiological functions and genetic signatures of placozoan cell types are
largely unknown, immunostaining using anti-FMRFamide antibody revealed that
this simple animal lacking neurons deploys RFamidergic neurosecretory cells in the

3
Back Through Time: How Cnidarians and Basal Metazoans Shed Light...
51
Fig. 3.3 Two scenarios of neuronal evolution. Key genetic and physiological innovations under-
lying neural organization in metazoan evolution. Rectangles and ellipses indicate acquisition of
selected gene families and physiological and cellular properties, respectively. The presence of
neurosecretory cells and neurons with neurites and synapses are shown to the right, respectively.
The emergence of postulated ancestral cell types is shown in hexagons. (a) In the conventional
metazoan tree, the “porifera-sister hypothesis,” “proto-neurons” may have existed in the common
metazoan ancestor. This postulates that ancestral cells may have resembled the neurosecretory cells
lacking neurites and synapses that are seen in modern poriferans and placozoans. Genes for gluta-
matergic and peptidergic systems may already have been deployed for cell–cell communications
in the common metazoan ancestor. After the common ancestor of Ctenophora/Cnidaria/Bilateria
branched off, gap junctions (innexins), neurites, and synapses evolved. (b) In the ctenophora-sister
hypothesis, one assumption is that gap junctions and these neuronal characteristics were deployed
in the common metazoan ancestor. In this scenario, glutamatergic and probably peptidergic proto-
metazoan nervous systems, gap junctions, neurites, and synapses have been lost in poriferan and
placozoan lineages

52
H. Watanabe
marginal body region (Schuchert 1993a). Smith and colleagues have demonstrated
that in the ciliated gland cells, an FMRFamide-like neuropeptide is coexpressed
with synaptic vesicle proteins such as syntaxin, SNAP-25, and synapsin, suggesting
neurosecretory functions of this cell type (Smith et al. 2014). Expression and
function of the neurogenic transcriptional factors in the gland cells remain to be
explored.
3.2.3
Ctenophores
Ctenophores, collectively known to as comb jellies, are a group of neuron-bearing
marine invertebrates with controversial ancestry. They are thought to be genetically
less complex, because ctenophore genomes only have a few Wnt and homeobox
genes and apparently do not seem to encode any of the micro-RNA homologues
that have been identiﬁed to date in cnidarians and bilaterians (Fortunato et al. 2015;
Maxwell et al. 2012). Recent phylogenomic analyses and comparisons of genetic
repertoires suggest that this orphan animal lineage is a sister group to all other extant
metazoans (the ctenophora-sister hypothesis) (Fig. 3.3b) (Dunn et al. 2008; Ryan et
al. 2013; Moroz et al. 2014; Whelan et al. 2015a). Other phylogenetic analyses,
however, proposed that ctenophores and cnidarians form a clade with bilaterians
in the Eumetazoa (animals with nerve and muscle cells) (Fig. 3.3a) (Philippe et
al. 2009, 2011; Pick et al. 2010). With increasing transcriptomic and genomic data
from basal metazoan species, systematic errors that can cause mis-positioning of
basal metazoan taxa are now under careful scrutiny (Pisani et al. 2015; Whelan
et al. 2015a, 2015b). Nevertheless, understanding the ctenophoran nervous system
at the molecular and cellular level is essential to reconstruct the ancestral nervous
systems.
Ctenophores have nerve nets with mesogleal ﬁbers and tentacular nerves. These
nerve nets exhibit numerous condensations associated with the apical sensory
organs/polar ﬁelds and tentacle bulbs (Harbison 1985). Ctenophore genomes, as
well as poriferan genomes, contain homologues of neurogenic transcription factors
including Lhx, bHLH, Six, and SoxB, as well as neural RBP genes, Elav and
Musashi, that are involved in early neural development of bilaterians. Poriferans and
ctenophores have some genes for axon guidance molecules, including semaphorin,
plexin, and an ephrin receptor, while others, such as netrin and Unc-5, are absent
from the genomes of both phyla (Srivastava et al. 2010a; Ryan et al. 2013; Moroz et
al. 2014). Most of the genes involved in the formation of bilaterian PSDs have been
identiﬁed in both ctenophoran and poriferan genomes, but they lack certain genes,
such as Erbin and Neuroligin (Srivastava et al. 2010a; Riesgo et al. 2014; Ryan et al.
2013; Moroz et al. 2014). These comparative genomic data indicate that certain axon
guidance molecules and scaffolding proteins were absent in the common ancestor
of these basal metazoans.
Glutamate appears to be the best transmitter candidate for ctenophoran neu-
romuscular transmission (Table 3.1) (Moroz et al. 2014). Ctenophoran genomes

3
Back Through Time: How Cnidarians and Basal Metazoans Shed Light...
53
possess a gene related to glutamate decarboxylase (GAD) that synthesizes ”-
aminobutyric acid (GABA). There is no clear genetic evidence supporting synthesis
of any other bilaterian neurotransmitters. Immunohistochemical and biochemical
analyses using Pleurobrachia bachei have failed to detect conventional neurotrans-
mitters [e.g., monoamines and acetylcholine (ACh)] (Hay-Schmidt 2000; Moroz
et al. 2014). While these data could be interpreted to mean that the ctenophoran
nervous system evolved independently (Moroz et al. 2014), a substantial set of neu-
ronal marker genes in the nervous systems of ctenophores and cnidarians/bilaterians
imply a common evolutionary origin (Watanabe et al. 2014a; Marlow and Arendt
2014; Jékely et al. 2015). For example, SoxB and Lhx transcription factors and
RFamide-like neuropeptides are expressed in neurons in the apical region of
ctenophores (Fig. 3.2) (Jager et al. 2008, 2011; Simmons et al. 2012). In accordance
with this hypothesis, ctenophores, cnidarians, and bilaterians, but not poriferans or
placozoans, have neuronal synapses (Fig. 3.3) (Hernandez-Nicaise 1973).
The lack of unambiguous evidence for neurotransmitter use by ctenophores
could argue for an independent origin of the ctenophoran nervous system; however,
nonneural chemical transmitter localization and functions are observed among
cnidarians and bilaterians. And in poriferans, many of the transmitters are involved
in modulation of contractile behavior (see following). Thus, the absence of chemical
neurotransmission may not be a reliable basis for falsifying the homology of nervous
systems in early branching metazoans.
3.2.4
Protoneurons: An Ancestral Neurosecretory Cells?
Many primary ciliated larvae of marine invertebrates possess the apical sensory
neurosecretory cells expressing RFamide and Wamide neuropeptides (Lacalli 1983;
Dickinson and Croll 2003; Nielsen 2005; Tessmar-Raible et al. 2007; Byrne et
al. 2007; Conzelmann et al. 2011, 2013; Conzelmann and Jékely 2012). Sensory
neurosecretory cells have repeatedly been considered in different evolutionary
contexts as ancestral neuronal cells or “protoneurons” (Vígh and Vígh-Teichmann
1982; Tessmar-Raible et al. 2007; Sakarya et al. 2007; Richards et al. 2008;
Jékely et al. 2015). Since vertebrate and invertebrate deuterostomes possess an
assembly of ciliated sensory neurosecretory cells contacting the cerebrospinal
ﬂuid in the lumen of the CNS (vertebrates) or ambient seawater (invertebrates),
ciliated sensory neurosecretory cells have been regarded as a phylogenetically
old neurosecretory cell type, the “protoneuron” (Vígh and Vígh-Teichmann 1982;
Vigh et al. 2004). Detailed molecular and cellular dissections of the developing
apical neurosecretory cell cluster of annelid larvae have suggested that the sensory
neurosecretory cells already existed in the common bilaterian ancestor (Tessmar-
Raible et al. 2007; Conzelmann et al. 2013; Tosches and Arendt 2013; Marlow et
al. 2014; Nielsen 2015). RFamidergic sensory neurosecretory cells have also been
identiﬁed in cnidarian planula larvae (Plickert 1989; Leitz and Lay 1995; Gajewski
et al. 1996). Although peptidergic neurophysiological features of the ctenophoran

54
H. Watanabe
nervous system remain highly understudied, a rich neural gene repertoire, including
peptide-gated ion channels (PGICs) in poriferan, placozoan, and ctenophoran
genomes indicate that the conceptual protoneuron might be traced back to the
sensory neurosecretory cell types that may have existed in the common metazoan
ancestor (Fig. 3.3) (Smith et al. 2014; Jékely et al. 2015). This idea is supported
by the fact that the RFamide neuropeptides are expressed exclusively in cnidarian
nervous systems and placozoan neurosecretory gland cells. Since conventional
chemical neurotransmitters don’t seem to be neuron-speciﬁc in cnidarians, it would
be useful to identify neuropeptides in neurons and sensory cells in sponges and
ctenophores.
3.3
Cnidarian Nervous Systems
The Cnidaria is a large and successful phylum containing more than 9,000 species,
and in phylogenetic terms, it represents the closest sister group to all bilaterians. The
Cnidaria is divided into two major lineages: the Anthozoa (corals, sea anemones,
and sea pens) and the Medusozoa, consisting of four classes: Hydrozoa (hydras
and marine hydrozoans), Cubozoa (box jellyﬁsh), Scyphozoa (true jellyﬁsh), and
Staurozoa (stalked jellyﬁsh). Cnidarians usually have a life cycle containing a
polyp stage and a medusa (jellyﬁsh) stage (Bridge et al. 1992, 1995; Odorico and
Miller 1997; Schuchert 1993b; Collins 2002; Collins et al. 2006). The Anthozoa
are thought to retain ancestral characteristics, including 1) polyps that never
metamorphose into medusae, 2) few derived genomic features, and conserved
mitochondorial genome structure (circular in anthozoans and bilaterians, but linear
in medusozoans), 3) nematocysts (the cnidarian-speciﬁc stinging apparatus) that are
less elaborate and diversiﬁed than those of medusozoans (Pantin 1966; Willmer
1990; Bridge et al. 1995; Medina et al. 2001; Collins 2002; Dunn et al. 2008).
The privileged phylogenetic position of the Cnidaria as the closest sister group to
the Bilateria has made these animals one of the most useful models for deciphering
the genetic basis for the early evolution of sophisticated nervous systems, such
as the central nervous system (CNS). In addition to the phylogenetic position
of the Cnidaria, transcriptomic and genomic data from various cnidarian species,
including the anthozoans Nematostella vectensis and Aiptasia sp. (sea anemones),
Acropora digitifera and Acropora millepora (stony corals), and the hydrozoans
Hydra magnipapillata, Cladonema paciﬁcum, and Clytia hemisphaerica, have made
the Cnidaria even more useful for comparative and functional molecular studies of
the evolution of neurodevelopmental events (Kortschak et al. 2003; Technau et al.
2005; Putnam et al. 2007; Shinzato et al. 2011; Watanabe et al. 2014b; Baumgarten
et al. 2015).
Comparative genomic analyses of neural genes using Nematostella vectensis
(Anthozoa) and Hydra magnipapillata (Hydrozoa) have revealed extensive con-
servation of the neural gene repertoire, not only between these distantly related
cnidarian species, but also among other metazoan lineages. In general, cnidarian

3
Back Through Time: How Cnidarians and Basal Metazoans Shed Light...
55
genomes possess a nearly complete set of homologous genes involved in bilate-
rian neurotransmission and neurodevelopmental processes, including neurogenesis,
neuronal speciﬁcation, and neural network formation (Fig. 3.3; Table 3.1) (for more
detail, see Watanabe et al. 2009; Galliot et al. 2009; Galliot and Quiquand 2011).
Chemical synapses, in which signal transmission is effected by neuropeptides
and small chemicals (acetylcholine, monoamines, and amino acids), are essential
for both slow and fast transmission. Neuropeptides are related to peptide hor-
mones and are often involved in slow transmission in bilaterian nervous systems.
Among cnidarians, neuronal cells, mainly ganglionic neurons, have been shown
to possess synapses with lucent-core and dense-core vesicles (Davis et al. 1968;
Kinnamon and Westall 1981; Westfall and Kinnamon 1978, 1984; Kass-Simon and
Pierobon 2007; Pierobon 2012). Small chemical neurotransmitters are generally
packaged in small, lucent-core synaptic vesicles that are clustered in presynaptic
terminals. Neuropeptides are generally stored in large, dense-cored vesicles that are
distributed at presynaptic terminals and also along neuronal processes (for review,
see Pierobon 2012; Fujisawa and Hayakawa 2012). These observations suggest that
neurotransmission and neuromodulation mediated by both chemical transmitters
and neuropeptides are involved in cnidarian neurotransmission.
3.3.1
Peptidergic Nervous Systems
Neuropeptides serve essential and pleiotropic neural functions in both cnidarians
and bilaterians. The cnidarian nervous system is rich in neuropeptides, including the
short amidated neuropeptides, RFamide and LWamide (Fujisawa 2008; Watanabe et
al. 2009). These neuropeptides emerged before the Cnidaria/Bilateria evolutionary
split (Jékely 2013). Among cnidarians, RFamide has been studied most extensively.
The ﬁrst sign of Rfamide expression can be detected in some cells of embryonic
epithelium at the blastula stage (Marlow et al. 2009; Richards and Rentzsch 2014).
Here, it contributes to formation of a loose plexus of the neurons at the base of
the ectoderm. At the planula stage, RFamide-positive neurons are well developed
around the anterior (aboral) region of hydrozoan and scyphozoan larvae (Fig. 3.4)
(Martin 1988, 1992; Plickert 1989; Leitz and Lay 1995; Gajewski et al. 1996;
Gröger and Schmid 2001; Seipel et al. 2004; Nakanishi et al. 2008; Marlow et al.
2009). In the more basal cnidarian group, sea anemones, the RFamidergic neurons
form a neural cluster at the oral region in addition to the nerve net (Fig. 3.4)
(Marlow et al. 2009; Watanabe et al. 2014a). Oral and pharyngeal development of
the RFamidergic neurons at polyp and medusae stages has widely been observed
among cnidarian phyla (Grimmelikhuijzen 1985; Plickert 1989; Grimmelikhuijzen
et al. 1988, 1991; Koizumi et al. 1992; Mackie and Stell 1984; Mackie et al. 1985;
Anderson et al. 2004). It probably constitutes a plesiomorphic neural character of
cnidarians. The oral arrangemet of the RFamidergic neurons in cnidarian polyps
can be anatomically divided into a hypostomal accumulation of neuronal perikaria
and ring-shaped neurite bundles (nerve ring) that formed between the hypostome

56
H. Watanabe
Fig. 3.4 Semicentralization of the cnidarian oral/blastoporal nervous system. (a) Lateral and oral
views of neural subsystems expressing RFamide or GLWamide neuropeptides of Nematostella
planula larvae. Note that these neural populations are localized mainly around the pharynx.
GLWamidergic neurons exhibit an additional bias along the secondary axis, which is orthogonal
to the primary oral–aboral axis. Dotted white circles in lower panels indicate the blastopore. Bars
in upper panels (lateral view) 100 m; bars in lower panels (oral view) 50 m. (b) Schematic
views of regionalization of RFamidergic (RFamideC) and LWamidergic (LWamideC) neurons
in the cnidarian life stages. Blastoporal condensation of these neurons develops in the planula
larva stage of Nematostella (Anthozoa). The sensory function of the apical organ/tuft is not clear
yet. Among medusozoans such as hydrozoans, neurons are developed predominantly in the aboral
(or apical) region of the planula larvae. During the polyp and medusa stages, the oral/pharyngeal
neural condensations become more conspicuous and nerve rings develop around the mouth opening
(polyp) or at tentacle bases (medusa). NR nerve ring, M manubrium, INR inner nerve ring, ONR
outer nerve ring
and tentacle bases (Mackie and Stell 1984; Mackie et al. 1985; Grimmelikhuijzen
et al. 1988, 1991; Koizumi et al. 2014). These distinct neural architectures found
in polyps could be related to a neuronal condensation at the manubrium (pharynx)
and the nerve ring at the bell margin in medusae (Fig. 3.4). Neural expression of
LWamide neuropeptide has also been demonstrated in a wide variety of cnidarian
species (Leitz and Lay 1995; Schmich et al. 1998a; Mitgutsch et al. 1999; Takahashi
et al. 2003; Watanabe et al. 2014a). In addition to the RFamidergic nervous system,
LWamidergic neurons develop in the oral/pharyngeal neural condensation, and
during the medusa stage, the nerve ring around the bell margin (Fig. 3.4) (Schmich
et al. 1998a; Koizumi et al. 2014; Watanabe et al. 2014a). These expression patterns
suggest that RFamide and LWamide have critical functions in the oral nervous
system.
Activity of peptidergic neurons is required for various coordinated behaviors in
cnidarians. Myoactivities of cnidarian neuropeptides have been well characterized
in polyps. The RFamide neuropeptide family is believed to regulate the myoactivity
and modulatory role of muscle contraction (McFarlane et al. 1987, 1991; Shimizu
and Fujisawa 2003; Fujisawa 2008). A Hydra LWamide neuropeptide (Hym-248)
is reported to directly induce relaxation of myoepithelial cells in the body column
and tentacles (Takahashi et al. 2003). In addition to the myoactivity control, the
RFamidergic and LWamidergic neurons have pivotal roles in medusozoans in
positive and negative phototactic behavior (Katsukura et al. 2004; Plickert and

3
Back Through Time: How Cnidarians and Basal Metazoans Shed Light...
57
Schneider 2004). The cnidarian nervous system forms synaptic connections with
both epitheliomuscular cells and neighboring neurons (Westfall et al. 1971, 2002;
Westfall 1973, 1987; Westfall and Kinnamon 1978, 1984; Kinnamon and Westfall
1982). Dense-core, neuropeptide-containing vesicles accumulate in the presynaptic
area in nerve terminals and at en passant synapses (Koizumi et al. 1989; Westfall
and Grimmelikhuijzen 1993; Westfall et al. 1995), indicating that localized release
of neuropeptides at synapses serves directed and restricted signal transmission. This
idea ﬁnds support in the unidirectional neural conduction and partial contraction of
tentacles in Hydra (Rushforth and Hofman 1972; Shimizu 2002). These ﬁndings,
taken together, indicate that in cnidarians, the structural organization of the nervous
system is indispensable for neural regulation of behavior during all life stages.
3.3.2
Classical Chemical Neurotransmitters
Although the cnidarian nervous system is rich in neuropeptides, accumulating
physiological, biochemical, and ultrastructural evidence suggest that classical neu-
rotransmitters and neuromodulaters are also involved in neural function (Pierobon
2012). Cnidarian genomes possess a number of genes showing signiﬁcant similarity
to bilaterian genes for synthesis and degradation of classical chemical neurotrans-
mitters, including acetylcholine (ACh), monoamines, GABA, and nitric oxide (NO).
Homology searches of bilaterian genes for the chemical neurotransmitter receptors
and transporters have identiﬁed a large number of putative cnidarian counterparts
(Watanabe et al. 2009; Anctil 2009; Marlow et al. 2009; Chapman et al. 2010; Oren
et al. 2014). Since many of these genes probably existed in the common poriferan
and cnidarian ancestor, they seem to have deep evolutionary roots with non-neural
functions. However, physiological and immunohistological data imply that small
chemical transmitters and modulators play roles in the cnidarian neural functions.
Glutamate is the most common excitatory neurotransmitter among bilaterians.
The Nematostella genome has a large number of genes for metabotropic and
ionotropic glutamate receptors (mGluR and iGluR, respectively) (Anctil 2009).
Among four classes of the iGluRs, including NMDA, AMPA, Delta, and kainate
receptors, Nematostella genes show greater similarity to the NMDA and AMPA
classes. Immunohistochemical studies indicate that the cnidarians have several
neuronal and sensory cell populations expressing iGluR-like proteins (Kass-Simon
and Scappaticci 2004). Glutamate accumulates in processes of these neural cells
(Martin 2004; Delgado et al. 2010). Glutamate and its agonists, NMDA, AMPA, and
kainite, appear to have an excitatory functions in control of epitheliomuscular cell
contraction and discharge of the nematocysts (Kass-Simon et al. 2003; Scappaticci
et al. 2004; Scappaticci and Kass-Simon 2008). Other excitatory neurotransmitters,
such as serotonin, dopamine, and adrenaline, as well as neuromodulatorymolecules,
including NO and carbon monoxide (CO), are involved in cnidarian neural functions
(Kass-Simon and Pierobon 2007; Pierobon 2012). Cnidarians possess homologues
to bilaterian genes such as choline acetyltransferase (ChAT), acetylcholinesterase

58
H. Watanabe
(AChE), and nicotinic ACh receptor subunits (Anctil 2009). ACh induces muscu-
loepithelial contraction in cnidarians (Lentz and Barrnett 1961; Scappaticci and
Kass-Simon 2008).
The Nematostella genome includes receptors for inhibitory transmitters, GABA
and glycine. Sequences of GABAb and glycine receptors show a higher degree
of similarity to bilaterian receptors than do GABAa sequences, which are more
distantly related to their bilaterian counterparts and which lack certain amino
acid residues important for GABA binding (Anctil 2009). Immunohistochemical
analyses for GABA have demonstrated the neuronal localization of this transmitter
in sea anemones and cubozoan medusae (Martin 2004; Marlow et al. 2009; Delgado
et al. 2010), implying a role in cnidarian neural function. This idea is supported by
data from the sea fan, Eunicella cavolini (Anthozoa), in which GABA signaling
molecules such as GAD, the enzyme that produces GABA, the vesicular GABA
transporter (VGAT), and the GABAb receptor are expressed in neuronal cells
(Girosi et al. 2007). Glycine and taurine, a glycine receptor agonist, also localize
in cnidarian neurons. A taurine-like immunoactivity in the ganglia and sensory
neurons was reported from anthozoan and scyphozoan species (Carlberg et al.
1995; Anctil and Minh 1997; Nakanishi et al. 2008). Neurophysiological functions
of glycine and taurine have been analyzed in Hydra, and both chemicals are
involved in the peristaltic contraction of the epitheliomuscular cells and in the
chemosensory response (Pierobon et al. 2001; Ruggieri et al. 2004; Kass-Simon and
Pierobon 2007). An interesting ﬁnding is that taurine can function as an excitatory
neuromuscular transmitter in cnidarians (Carlberg et al. 1995; Anctil and Minh
1997). Taken together, it appears that these classical neurotransmitters had already
been used in the nervous system before the Cnidaria/Bilateria cladogenesis (Fig. 3.3;
Table 3.1).
3.3.3
Nonneural Functions of Classical Transmitters
While a large variety of ultrastructural, biochemical, and neurophysiological data
from cnidarians indicates that the conventional neurotransmitters and neuromodula-
tors are involved in neural control of cnidarian behavior, nonneural localization and
functions of these chemicals have also been reported (for review, see Kass-Simon
and Pierobon 2007). Glutamate, for instance, has been detected in nonneural cells
in the oral/pharyngeal region of sea anemones (Anctil and Carette 1994; Oren et al.
2014). Expression patterns of genes for GAD and AChE suggest that GABA and
ACh can also be metabolized in nonneuronal epithelial cells (Denker et al. 2008;
Takahashi and Hamaue 2010; Oren et al. 2014). Nonneuronal metabolism of ACh
is likely because the gene encoding the choline transporter (ChT) was expressed in
epithelium of Hydra polyps that were depleted of all neural cells (Chapman et al.
2010).
Interestingly, molecular evidence suggests that receptors for glutamate and
GABA were present before plants and animals diverged (Lam et al. 1998; Moroz

3
Back Through Time: How Cnidarians and Basal Metazoans Shed Light...
59
2001). Glutamate and GABA act as important chemical messengers in organisms
lacking neurons, such as poriferans, plants, and even unicellular protists, in which
these molecules are involved in contraction, feeding, sensory systems, and develop-
ment (Lam et al. 1998; Moroz 2001; Bouche et al. 2003; Davenport 2002; Elliott and
Leys 2010). Clearly, glutamine- and GABA-based transmission systems predated
the development of the nervous systems (Fig. 3.3) (Parker 1910; Jones 1962; Pavans
de Ceccatty 1974a, 1974b, 1979; Mackie 1970, 1979, 1990; Nickel 2004). In
poriferans, some classical transmitters control contraction behaviors regulated by
contractile cells, such as myocytes/actinocytes (Boury-Esnault and Rützler 1997)
and/or pinacocytes (Nickel et al. 2011). mGluRs and iGluRs have been identiﬁed
in poriferan genomes (Perovic et al. 1999; Srivastava et al. 2010a; Riesgo et al.
2014; Burkhardt et al. 2014). Glutamate treatment of adult poriferans induced
contraction and propagation of a stereotypical behavior, inﬂating and deﬂating the
canal system (Ellwanger et al. 2007; Elliott and Leys 2010). Recent phylogenetic
studies have demonstrated that poriferans have genes involved in synthesis of
monoamines (dopamine, adrenaline, and serotonin) and ACh, that include GAD,
DOPA decarboxylase, tryptophan hydroxylase (TpH), and dopamine “-hydroxylase
(DBH) (Srivastava et al. 2010a; Riesgo et al. 2014). Consistent with the existence
of the GAD and TpH/DBH genes, GABA and serotonin have been detected in
poriferans, where they stimulate and modulate contractions (Ellwanger and Nickel
2006; Ellwanger et al. 2007; Ramoino et al. 2007, 2011; Elliott and Leys 2010).
Genomic and transcriptomic analyses have tentatively identiﬁed genes for the
synthesis, degradation, and transport of classical transmitters in basal metazoans;
however, sequence data for these enzymes are not sufﬁciently conclusive to conﬁrm
their substrates and catabolites, thereby decreasing the reliability of transmitter
prediction, especially in lower metazoans. For example, in cnidarian genomes, genes
related to bilaterian choline/carnitine acetyltransferase subfamiles have been found.
However, detailed analyses of the amino acids involved in substrate discrimination
have obscured whether the catalytic efﬁciency of these cnidarian enzymes favors
choline more than carnitine as a substrate (Chapman et al. 2010). One should
exercise great caution when considering genes of the aromatic amino acid hydrox-
ylase (AAAH) family, including TH and TpH, and of the methyltransferase family,
including phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase (PNMT). Since a large genetic
repertoire for chemical neurotransmitter sysnthesis exists in poriferans, more
detailed sequence analysis of these basal metazoan homologues and biochemical
examination of their real catabolites will help us to understand the ancient means of
intercellular communication and the evolutionary history of neurotransmitters.
3.3.4
Electrical Synapses and Gap Junctions
In addition to chemical neurotransmission, there are electrical synapses in hydrome-
dusae that ﬁre synchronously,serve pacemaker functions and coordinate contraction
of the epitheliomuscular cells (Campbell et al. 1976; Passano and McCullough

60
H. Watanabe
1963; Shimizu and Fujisawa 2003; Takaku et al. 2014). Electric synapses are
specialized and physically connected transcellular channels enabling rapid bidirec-
tional communication between two neighboring cells. In Hydra, gap junctions form
between ectodermal cells and between endodermal cells, and mediate electrical
coupling of these epitheliomuscular cells (Hand and Gobel 1972; Wood 1977, 1979;
Fraser et al. 1987). In medusae, striated muscle-like cells, forming the innermost
layer of the bell that are not directly connected to neurons, are coordinated so that
contraction occurs by epithelial conduction through gap junctions (Mackie 1990).
Electron microscopic studies have shown that in hydrozoans certain neurons are
connected with gap junctions (Westfall et al. 1980; Takaku et al. 2014).
Gap junctions are formed by two unrelated gene families, innexins in pro-
tostomes and connexins in deuterostomes (Phelan 2005; Scemes et al. 2007).
Although connexins do not exist in the cnidarian genomes sequenced to date,
17 and 8 genes encoding innexins have been identiﬁed in the genomes of the
hydrozoans, Hydra and Clytia (Chapman et al. 2010), respectively. In Hydra,
innexin-1 is expressed in ectodermal epithelial cells, suggesting that the innexin-1
is a component of the ectodermal gap junctions (Alexopoulos et al. 2004; Chapman
et al. 2010). Recently, characterization of innexin-2 has shown that it forms neural
gap junctions and coordinates spontaneous contraction of the body column (Takaku
et al. 2014). In hydromedusae, expansion of innexin genes has probably been
accompanied by synchronous epithelial conduction via gap junctions (Mackie and
Passano 1968; Spencer 1974; Anderson 1980).
In contrast to hydrozoans, anthozoans and scyphozoans do not seem to have gap
junctions and no empirical evidence has so far suggested any neuronal electrical
coupling in their nervous systems (Mackie et al. 1984; Mackie 1990). Only one
innexin/pannexin-like gene is present in the Nematostella genome, and it is absent
in the other anthozoan, Acropora digitifera (Shinzato et al. 2011), suggesting that
the innexin genes in hydromedusae have undergone independent expansions after
their divergence from other cnidarian lineages. The existence of electrical synapses
between neurons is therefore not a common feature in Cnidaria. Although poriferans
and placozoans do not have proteins that form gap junctions, the ctenophore
genomes encode multiple innexin genes (Moroz et al. 2014). These gene products
probably form many gap junctions in ciliated cells of the apical organ and in
endodermal cells of the comb plates (Satterlie and Case 1978). This suggests that
gap junctions were established between epithelial cells, but not neurons, before the
Cnidaria and Ctenophora diverged.
3.4
Anatomical and Physiological Features of the Cnidarian
Nervous System
The Cnidaria are often used in textbooks to show a primitive nerve net, a neuronal
network connected by a mesh of neurite processes. In the freshwater polyp, Hydra
(Hydrozoa), which shows the simplest body plan and nervous system among

3
Back Through Time: How Cnidarians and Basal Metazoans Shed Light...
61
cnidarian polyps, neurons are connected to other neurons and to the epitheliomuscu-
lar cells, forming a diffuse neural meshwork throughout the animal body (Westfall
et al. 2002). The nerve net is composed of sensory cells and interneuronal ganglion
nerve cells. Sensory cells have elongated cell bodies with a ciliary cone at the
apical end. Ganglion cells extend neurites at the basal end of epithelial cells (Davis
et al. 1968; Kinnamon and Westall 1981; Westfall and Kinnamon 1978; 1984).
Immunohistochemical studies of neuropeptides have demonstrated that the nerve
plexus is composed of neuronal subtypes expressing distinct neuropeptides that are
distributed in a polarized way with respect to the body axis (Koizumi et al. 2004).
In addtion to the diffuse nervous system, cnidarians also possess regionally
restricted and condensed nervous systems (Figs. 3.2, 3.4). A cluster of neurosecre-
tory cells with sensory functions develops on the aboral (apical) side, mainly among
lecithotrophic (yolk-feeding) larvae. In the oral region, a neuronal accumulation
with organized neurite fasciculations, called a “nerve ring” or “oral nervous
system,” has been observed in planktotrophic (plankton-feeding) larvae and polyps
(Koizumi 2007; Koizumi et al. 2014; Watanabe et al. 2009; Marlow et al. 2009;
Layden et al. 2012). Although anthozoans bear neuronal condensation at the oral
region (mouth and pharynx), ring-shaped neural architecture is observed more
clearly in hydrozoans at the base of the oral tip (hypostome) of polyps, as in Hydra
oligactis; it is most evident at the bell margin of medusae. In cubozoan medusae,
the nerve ring connects to the elaborate visual sensory system at the tentacle bulbs
(Mackie 1990; Koizumi et al. 2014).
3.4.1
Aboral Nervous Systems and Apical Sensory Organs
The apical sensory organ, an anterior cluster of ciliated sensory neurosecretory cells
(Richter et al. 2010), has widely been observed in the ciliated larvae of marine inver-
tebrates (Lacalli 1983; Nielsen 2005; Tessmar-Raible et al. 2007; Conzelmann et al.
2011; Dickinson and Croll 2003; Byrne et al. 2007). In primary larvae of marine
invertebrates, the apical organ comprises sensory cells with neurosecretory charac-
ters, and is assumed to help control of larval swimming behavior and metamorphosis
(Chia and Bickell 1978; Chia and Koss 1979; Hadﬁeld et al. 2000; Conzelmann and
Jékely 2012; Conzelmann et al. 2013). In annelids, an apical sensory cell cluster
comprises neurosecretory cell types expressing several neuropeptides, including
RFamide and Wamide (Conzelmann et al. 2011, 2013; Conzelmann and Jékely
2012). These neuropeptides regulate swimming depth and settlement of pelagic
larvae (Conzelmann et al. 2011, 2013). Similarly, in cnidarians, the aboral ectoderm
of planula larvae harbors RFamidergic and LWamidergic sensory cells (Plickert
1989; Leitz and Lay 1995; Gajewski et al. 1996). These ciliated neuropeptide-
positive cells are thought to have a sensory neurosecretory function. Although
sensory functions of the apical tuft/organ formed at the aboral pole of the planula
larvae remain obscure, RFamidergic and LWamidergic sensory neurons in the aboral
half in various cnidarian larvae appears to be involved in the metamorphosis of free-

62
H. Watanabe
swimming planula larvae into benthic polyps (Chia and Bickell 1978; Chia and Koss
1979; Leitz et al. 1994; Gajewski et al. 1996; Takahashi et al. 1997; Schmich et al.
1998b; Iwao et al. 2002; Hatta and Iwao 2003; Katsukura et al. 2003, 2004; Erwin
and Szmant 2010; Takahashi and Hatta 2011). Since settlement and metamorphosis
of cnidarian pelagic larvae are induced by marine bioﬁlms (Müller 1969; Morse
and Morse 1991; Leitz and Wagner 1992), neuropeptide-expressing sensory cells
are probably implicated in perception of environmental signals from suitable sites
on the benthos. The aboral neurosecretory system of cnidarian larvae appears also
to allow orientation toward light for coordinating the diurnal cycle of migration.
RFamide and LWamide peptides are involved in control of the creeping behavior of
planulae toward a light source (positive phototaxis), as the phototaxis of the planulae
was drastically suppressed or promoted by exogenous RFamide peptide or LWamide
peptide, respectively (Katsukura et al. 2004; Plickert and Schneider 2004).
3.4.2
Oral/Pharyngeal Nervous Systems
Immunohistochemical analyses of neuropeptide-expressing neurons have shown
that, in addition to their aborally localized neurosecretory cells, cnidarians develop
elaborate nerve structures in the oral region. Because the basic cnidarian body
plan shows radial symmetry with a single mouth opening, the oral nerve plexus
sometimes shows an annular architecture called ‘nerve ring’ (Figs. 3.2, 3.4)
(Grimmelikhuijzen and Spencer 1984; Grimmelikhuijzen 1985; Koizumi et al.
1992; Mackie and Meech 2000; Yi-Chan et al. 2001; Mackie 2004; Garm et al.
2006, 2007; Satterlie 2011). The highest level of morphological and physiological
elaboration of the nerve ring has been observed especially at the bell margin of
medusae (Koizumi et al. 2014). A nerve ring comprising neuronal subsets with
distinct neurophysiological functions was found in most medusae investigated so
far. The nerve ring of Aglantha digitale (Hydrozoa), for example, has been divided
into at least seven subsystems with distinct physiological properties (Mackie and
Meech 1995a, 1995b, 2000; Mackie 2004). Communication among the subsystems
allows complex behavioral control, including swim contractions of the medusae
(Mackie and Meech 1995b). Several medusae bear a nerve ring connected to a
sophisticated eye-bearing sensory complex at the base of the tentacles (Singla 1974;
Yamamoto and Yoshida 1980; Singla and Weber 1982; Laska and Hündgen 1982;
Nilsson et al. 2005). Visually guided behavioral patterns are observed in these
cnidarian classes, and especially in cubomedusae, these patterns are quite complex
(Hartwick 1991; Hamner et al. 1995; Matsumoto 1995). Ring-like neurite bundles
and a neuronal condensation at the oral side have been reported from polyps and
even from planula larval stages (Matsuno and Kageyama 1984; Grimmelikhuijzen
1985; Koizumi 2007; Marlow et al. 2009; Watanabe et al. 2014a). Immunostaining
of neuropeptides and gene expression analyses of neurogenic genes demonstrate that
neuronal differentiation starts in the blastula epithelium and progressively increases
on the oral side during larval developmental stages. This oral neurogenic domain

3
Back Through Time: How Cnidarians and Basal Metazoans Shed Light...
63
develops into a semi-centralized nervous system (semiCNS) on the oral side of the
planula larvae and primary polyps that comprises several subsystems (Fig. 3.4).
The cnidarian oral nervous system is therefore regarded as a considerable degree
of neuronal condensation and has been regarded as the beginning of the bilaterian
CNS (Holland 2003; Davis et al. 1968; Koizumi 2007; Tosches and Arendt 2013;
Holland et al. 2013; Marlow et al. 2014; Watanabe et al. 2014a; Nielsen 2015). More
detailed comparisons of the bilaterian CNS and the cnidarian semiCNS are needed,
however.
3.5
Development of Cnidarian Nervous Systems
Cnidarian homologues for the proneural bHLH genes, Ash and Arp, as well as
SoxB genes, have been identiﬁed in a wide range of cnidarian species and are
expressed in the neural cell progenitors (Grens et al. 1995; Müller et al. 2003;
Hayakawa et al. 2004; Lindgens et al. 2004; Seipel et al. 2004; Magie et al. 2005;
Simionato et al. 2007; Layden et al. 2012; Watanabe et al. 2014a). In Nematostella,
a series of gene function analyses of these neurogenic transcription factors and
Elav1 have unveiled genetic mechanisms essential for differentiation of ectodermal
and endodermal neurons. The ﬁrst sign of neurogenesis in Nematostella is the salt-
and-pepper-like expression of the neurogenic transcription factors NvSoxB2c (also
called NvSoxB2 or NvSoxB(2)), NvAth-like (NvArp3), and NvAshA, and various
neural markers, including NvElav1 and Rfamide, in blastula epithelium (Magie et al.
2005; Marlow et al. 2009; Layden et al. 2012; Nakanishi et al. 2012; Richards and
Rentzsch 2014; 2015). The patterns of NvSoxB2c and NvAshA expression suggest
that the early embryonic epithelium of Nematostella has the potential to generate
various neuronal cell types that form a diffuse nerve net (Fig. 3.2) (Magie et al.
2005; Layden et al. 2012). Gene function analyses indicate that they are required
for the development of NvElav1-positive neuronal populations in the endoderm and
NvRfamide-positive cells in the lateral ectoderm (Nakanishi et al. 2012). During
gastrulation, the expression of transcription factors, such as NvRx and NvAshA, is
localized mainly in the aboral half of the embryos, indicating that these genes may
be involved in development of the sensory cells/neurons in the aboral region. The
genetic mechanism responsible for development of the aboral nervous system is
still unclear. Six3 is a homeodomain transcription factor with a central role in the
development of anterior sensory and neural structures in bilaterians (Steinmetz et al.
2010). In Nematostella, the NvSix3/6 gene is expressed in the aboral region where
the aboral sensory cells and neurons develop, suggesting that the NvSix3/6 has
an evolutionarily conserved role in demarcating the anterior neurosensory region,
both in Cnidaria and Bilateria (Sinigaglia et al. 2013). Although an inhibition of
the NvSix3/6 gene in Nematostella embryos did not have a signiﬁcant effect on
NvRfamide expression, its possible involvement in expression of aboral neural genes
NvRx and NvAshA has not been explored.

64
H. Watanabe
In addition to their aborally-biased nervous systems, the oral region of
Nematostella larvae expresses a number of neurogenic genes and markers (Fig. 3.2)
(Magie et al. 2005; Shinzato et al. 2008; Marlow et al. 2009; Nakanishi et al.
2012; Layden et al. 2012; Watanabe et al. 2014a). The blastopore region of the
gastrulae develops into a prominent oral neurogenic domain, showing dominant or
exclusive expression of NvSoxB2 homologues, NvAsh and NvArp homologues, and
NvMusashi and NvRfamide. Early neurogenic markers for, and later differentiation
of, neuropeptide-expressingneurons in the oral nervous system are severely reduced
or absent in the embryos injected with morpholino antisense oligonucleotides
against early oral neurogenic transcription factors such as NvSoxB2a, NvAshB, and
NvAth-like/NvArp3 (Watanabe et al. 2014a), which suggests that the blastoporal
side of the early embryos has a distinct neurogenic capacity. It has been shown that
the development of the oral nervous system is dependent on “-catenin and bone
morphogenetic protein (BMP) signaling pathways. The function of these signaling
activities in development of the cnidarian oral nervous system is highly reminiscent
of their functional patterning of the bilaterian the CNS (Watanabe et al. 2014a).
3.6
Outlook
Accumulating molecular and cellular evidence has led many researchers to propose
that the Urbilateria, the last common bilaterian ancestor, had a condensed nervous
system with more or less speciﬁc anatomical and/or physiological features (Hirth et
al. 2003; De Robertis 2008; Tomer et al. 2010; Strausfeld 2010; Strausfeld and Hirth
2013; Bailly et al. 2013; Holland et al. 2013), whereas others favor the idea that the
bilaterian CNS started with a diffuse nerve net (Gerhart et al. 2005; Pani et al. 2012;
Arendt et al. 2016). Since the Cnidaria is the closest sister group to bilaterians, it
is important to decipher molecular and cellular features of diffuse and regionalized
components of the cnidarian nervous system. Expression analyses of CNS genes in
Nematostella suggest that the aboral sensory system and the oral nervous system of
cnidarians are related to the anterior part of the bilaterian brain, including sensory
organs, and the posterior part of the brain with trunk nervous systems, respectively
(Tosches and Arendt 2013; Marlow et al. 2014; Arendt et al. 2016). Recent gene
function data suggest that rudimentary centralization of the oral nervous system
might be an antecedent characteristic of the bilaterian CNS (Watanabe et al. 2014a).
However, more detailed functional analyses of CNS genes in the Cnidaria are
required to better explain how the ﬁrst step in nervous system centralization may
have been accomplished. Studies on nervous systems of cnidarians and ctenophores,
as well as the sensory systems of poriferans and placozoans, are also strongly needed
to reconstruct the early evolution of the nervous system.
Acknowledgments I am grateful to Thomas W. Holstein and Osamu Koizumi for critical and
helpful comments on the manuscript, and to Noriko Funayama, Hiroaki Nakano, and Noriko
Ishikawa for providing the beautiful photographs of basal metazoans. I am deeply indebted to

3
Back Through Time: How Cnidarians and Basal Metazoans Shed Light...
65
Annika Guse, Elizabeth A. Hambleton, and Steven Douglas Aird for correcting my English. I
apologize to all researchers whose work could not be cited owing to space constraints. I, alone am
responsible for any errors or controversial views.
References
Alexopoulos H, Böttger A, Fischer S et al (2004) Evolution of gap junctions: the missing link?
Curr Biol 14:R879–R880
Alié A, Manuel M (2010)
The backbone
of the post-synaptic
density originated
in
a unicellular ancestor of choanoﬂagellates
and metazoans. BMC Evol Biol 10:34.
doi:10.1186/1471-2148-10-34
Anctil M (2009) Chemical transmission in the sea anemone Nematostella vectensis: a
genomic perspective. Comp Biochem Physiol Part D Genomics Proteomics 4:268–289.
doi:10.1016/j.cbd.2009.07.001
Anctil M, Carette JP (1994) Glutamate immunoreactivity in non-neuronal cells of the sea anemone
Metridium senile. Biol Bull 187:48–54. doi:10.2307/1542164
Anctil M, Minh CN (1997) Neuronal and nonneuronal taurine-like immunoreactivity in the sea
pansy, Renilla koellikeri (Cnidaria, Anthozoa). Cell Tissue Res 288:127–134
Anderson PA (1980) Epithelial conduction: its properties and function. Prog Neurobiol 15:161–
203
Anderson PA, Thompson LF, Moneypenny CG (2004) Evidence for a common pattern of
peptidergic innervation of cnidocytes. Biol Bull 207:141–146. doi:10.2307/1543588
Arendt D, Denes AS, Jékely G et al (2008) The evolution of nervous system centralization. Philos
Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 363:1523–1528. doi:10.1098/rstb.2007.2242
Arendt D, Tosches MA, Marlow H (2016) From nerve net to nerve ring, nerve cord and brain-
evolution of the nervous system. Nat Rev Neurosci 17:61–72. doi:10.1038/nrn.2015.15
Bailly
X,
Reichert
H,
Hartenstein
V
(2013)
The
urbilaterian
brain
revisited:
novel
insights into old questions from new ﬂatworm clades. Dev Genes Evol 223:149–157.
doi:10.1007/s00427-012-0423-7
Baumgarten S, Simakov O, Esherick LY et al (2015) The genome of Aiptasia, a sea
anemone
model for coral symbiosis. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 112:11893–11898.
doi:10.1073/pnas.1513318112
Bouche N, Lacombe B, Fromm H (2003) GABA signaling: a conserved and ubiquitous mecha-
nism. Trends Cell Biol 13:607–610
Boury-Esnault N, Rützler K (1997) Thesaurus of sponge morphology. Smithson Contrib Zool
596:1–55. doi:10.5479/si.00810282.596
Bridge DC, Cunningham W, Schierwater B et al (1992) Class-level relationships in the phylum
Cnidaria: evidence from mitochondrial genome structure. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 89:8750–
8753
Bridge D, Cunningham CW, DeSalle R et al (1995) Class-level relationships in the phylum
Cnidaria: molecular and morphological evidence. Mol Biol Evol 12:679–689
Burkhardt P (2015) The origin and evolution of synaptic proteins – choanoﬂagellates lead the way.
J Exp Biol 218:506–514. doi:10.1242/jeb.1102
Burkhardt P, Grønborg M, McDonald K et al (2014) Evolutionary insights into premetazoan
functions of the neuronal protein homer. Mol Biol Evol 31:2342–2355. doi:10.1093/mol-
bev/msu178
Byrne
M,
Nakajima
Y,
Chee
FC,
Burke
RD
(2007)
Apical
organs
in
echinoderm
larvae:
insights
into
larval
evolution
in
the
Ambulacraria.
Evol
Dev
9:432–445.
doi:10.1111/j.1525-142X.2007.00189.x
Campbell RD, Josephson RK, Schwab WE, Rushforth NB (1976) Excitability of nerve-free hydra.
Nature (Lond) 262:388–390. doi:10.1038/262388a0

66
H. Watanabe
Carlberg M, Alfredsson K, Nielson SO et al (1995) Taurine-like immunoreactivity in the motor
nerve net of the jellyﬁsh Cyanea capillata. Biol Bull 188:78–82. doi:10.2307/1542069
Chapman JA, Kirkness EF, Simakov O et al (2010) The dynamic genome of Hydra. Nature (Lond)
464:592–596. doi:10.1038/nature08830
Chia FS, Bickell L (1978) Mechanisms of larval settlement and the induction of settlement and
metamorphosis: a review. In: Chia FS, Rice ME (eds) Settlement and metamorphosis of marine
invertebrate larvae. Elsevier, New York, pp 1–12
Chia FS, Koss R (1979) Fine structural studies of the nervous system and the apical organ in the
planula larva of the sea anemone Anthopleura elegantissima. J Morphol 160:275–298
Collins AG (2002) Phylogeny of medusozoa and the evolution of cnidarian life cycles. J Evol Biol
15:418–431
Collins AG, Marques AC, Jankowski T et al (2006) Medusozoan phylogeny and character
evolution clariﬁed by new large and small subunit rDNA data and an assessment of the utility
of phylogenetic mixture models. Syst Biol 55:97–115. doi:10.1080/10635150500433615
Conzelmann M, Jékely G (2012) Antibodies against conserved amidated neuropeptide epitopes
enrich the comparative neurobiology toolbox. Evo Devo 3:23. doi:10.1186/2041-9139-3-23
Conzelmann M, Offenburger SL, Asadulina A et al (2011) Neuropeptides regulate swim-
ming
depth
of
Platynereis
larvae.
Proc
Natl
Acad
Sci
USA
108:E1174–E1183.
doi:10.1073/pnas.1109085108
Conzelmann M, Williams EA, Krug K et al (2013) The neuropeptide complement of the marine
annelid Platynereis dumerilii. BMC Genomics 14:906. doi:10.1186/1471-2164-14-906
Davenport R (2002) Glutamate receptors in plants. Ann Bot 90:549–557. doi:10.1093/aob/mcf228
Davis LE, Burnett AL, Haynes JF (1968) Histological and ultrastructural study of the
muscular and nervous system in Hydra. 2. Nervous system. J Exp Zool 167:295–331.
doi:10.1002/jez.1401670304
De Robertis EM (2008) The molecular ancestry of segmentation mechanisms. Proc Natl Acad Sci
USA 105:16411–16412. doi:10.1073/pnas.0808774105
Degnan DM, Adamska M, Richards GR et al (2015) Sponges. In: Wanninger A (ed) Evolutionary
developmental biology of invertebrates, vol 1. Springer , New York, pp 65–106
Delgado LM, Couve E, Schmachtenberg O (2010) GABA and glutamate immunoreactivity in
tentacles of the sea anemone Phymactis papillosa (LESSON 1830). J Morphol 271:845–852.
doi:10.1002/jmor.10838
Denker E, Chatonnet A, Rabet N (2008) Acetylcholinesterase activity in Clytia hemisphaerica
(Cnidaria). Chem Biol Interact 175:125–128. doi:10.1016/j.cbi.2008.03.004
Dickinson AJG, Croll RP (2003) Development of the larval nervous system of the gastropod
Ilyanassa obsoleta. J Comp Neurol 466:197–218. doi:10.1002/cne.10863
Dunn CW, Hejnol A, Matus DQ et al (2008) Broad phylogenomic sampling improves resolution
of the animal tree of life. Nature (Lond) 452:745–749. doi:10.1038/nature06614
Elliott GR, Leys SP (2010) Evidence for glutamate, GABA and NO in coordinating behaviour
in the sponge, Ephydatia muelleri (Demospongiae, Spongillidae). J Exp Biol 213:2310–2321.
doi:10.1242/jeb.039859
Ellwanger K, Nickel M (2006) Neuroactive substances speciﬁcally modulate rhythmic body
contractions in the nerveless metazoon Tethya wilhelma (Demospongiae, Porifera). Front Zool
3:7. doi:10.1186/1742-9994-3-7
Ellwanger K, Eich A, Nickel M (2007) GABA and glutamate speciﬁcally induce contractions in the
sponge Tethya wilhelma. J Comp Physiol A Neuroethol Sens Neural Behav Physiol 193:1–11.
doi:10.1007/s00359-006-0165-y
Emes RD, Pocklington AJ, Anderson CN et al (2008) Evolutionary expansion and anatomical spe-
cialization of synapse proteome complexity. Nat Neurosci 11:799–806. doi:10.1038/nn.2135
Erwin PM, Szmant AM (2010) Settlement induction of Acropora palmata planulae by a GLW-
amide neuropeptide. Coral Reefs 29:929–939. doi:10.1007/s00338-010-0634-1
Fortunato SA, Adamski M, Bergum B et al (2012) Genome-wide analysis of the sox family in the
calcareous sponge Sycon ciliatum: multiple genes with unique expression patterns. Evo Devo
3:14. doi:10.1186/2041-9139-3-14

3
Back Through Time: How Cnidarians and Basal Metazoans Shed Light...
67
Fortunato SA, Leininger S, Adamska M (2014) Evolution of the Pax-Six-Eya-Dach network: the
calcisponge case study. Evodevo 5:23. doi:10.1186/2041-9139-5-23
Fortunato SA, Adamski M, Adamska M (2015) Comparative analyses of developmental transcrip-
tion factor repertoires in sponges reveal unexpected complexity of the earliest animals. Mar
Genomics 24:121–129. doi:10.1016/j.margen.2015.07.008
Fraser SE, Green CR, Bode HR et al (1987) Selective disruption of gap junctional communication
interferes with a patterning process in hydra. Science 237:49–55. doi:10.1126/science.3037697
Fujisawa T (2008) Hydra peptide project 1993–2007. Dev Growth Differ 50:S257–S268.
doi:10.1111/j.1440-169X.2008.00997.x
Fujisawa T, Hayakawa E (2012) Peptide signaling in Hydra. Int J Dev Biol 56:543–550.
doi:10.1387/ijdb.113477tf
Gajewski M, Leitz T, Schlossherr J et al (1996) LWamides from cnidaria constitute a
novel family of neuropeptides with morphogenetic activity. Dev Genes Evol 205:232–242.
doi:10.1007/BF00365801
Galliot B, Quiquand M (2011) A two-step process in the emergence of neurogenesis. Eur J
Neurosci 34:847–862. doi:10.1111/j.1460-9568.2011.07829.x
Galliot B, Quiquand M, Ghila L et al (2009) Origins of neurogenesis, a cnidarian view. Dev Biol
332:2–24. doi:10.1016/j.ydbio.2009.05.563
Garm A, Ekström P, Boudes M et al (2006) Rhopalia are integrated parts of the central nervous
system in box jellyﬁsh. Cell Tissue Res 325:333–343. doi:10.1007/s00441-005-0134-8
Garm A, Poussart Y, Parkefelt L et al (2007) The ring nerve of the box jellyﬁsh Tripedalia
cystophora. Cell Tissue Res 329:147–157. doi:10.1007/s00441-007-0393-7
Gerhart J, Lowe C, Kirschner M (2005) Hemichordates and the origin of chordates. Curr Opin
Genet Dev 15:461–467. doi:10.1016/j.gde.2005.06.004
Girosi L, Ferrando S, Beltrame F et al (2007) Gamma-aminobutyric acid and related molecules in
the sea fan Eunicella cavolini (Cnidaria: Octocorallia): a biochemical and immunohistochemi-
cal approach. Cell Tissue Res 329:187–196. doi:10.1007/s00441-007-0408-4
Grens A, Mason E, Marsh JL et al (1995) Evolutionary conservation of a cell fate speciﬁcation
gene: the hydra achaete-scute homolog has proneural activity in Drosophila. Development
(Camb) 121:4027–4035
Grimmelikhuijzen CJ (1985) Antisera to the sequence Arg-Phe-amide visualize neuronal central-
ization in hydroid polyps. Cell Tissue Res 241:171–182. doi:10.1007/BF00214639
Grimmelikhuijzen CJ, Spencer AN (1984) FMRFamide immunoreactivity in the nervous system of
the medusa Polyorchis penicillatus. J Comp Neurol 230:361–371. doi:10.1002/cne.902300305
Grimmelikhuijzen CJ, Hahn M, Rinehart KL et al (1988) Isolation of pyroGlu-Leu-Leu-Gly-Gly-
Arg-Phe-NH2 (Pol-RFamide), a novel neuropeptide from hydromedusae. Brain Res 475:198–
203. doi:10.1016/0006-8993(88)90219-3
Grimmelikhuijzen CJ, Graff D, Koizumi O et al (1991) Neuropeptides in coelenterates: a review.
Hydrobiologia 216(217):555–563. doi:10.1007/978-94-011-3240-4_78
Gröger H, Schmid V (2001) Larval development in Cnidaria: a connection to Bilateria? Genesis
29:110–114. doi:10.1002/gene.1013
Gyoja F (2014) A genome-wide survey of bHLH transcription factors in the placozoan Trichoplax
adhaerens reveals the ancient repertoire of this gene family in metazoan. Gene (Amst) 542:29–
37. doi:10.1016/j.gene.2014.03.024
Hadﬁeld MG, Meleshkevitch EA, Boudko DY (2000) The apical sensory organ of a gastropod
veliger is a receptor for settlement cues. Biol Bull 198:67–76. doi:10.2307/1542804
Hamner WM, Jones MS, Hamner PP (1995) Swimming, feeding, circulation and vision in the
Australian box jellyﬁsh, Chironex ﬂeckeri (Cnidaria, Cubozoa). Mar Freshw Res 46:985–990.
doi:10.1071/MF9950985
Hand AR, Gobel S (1972) The structural organization of the septate and gap junctions of Hydra. J
Cell Biol 52:397–408
Harbison GR (1985) On the classiﬁcation and evolution of the Ctenophora. In: Conway Morris
S, George JD, Gibson R, Platt HM (eds) The origins and relationships of lower invertebrates.
Oxford University Press, Oxford, pp 78–100

68
H. Watanabe
Hartwick RF (1991) Observations on the anatomy, behaviour, reproduction and life cycle of the
cubozoan Carybdea sivickisi. Hydrobiologia 216(217):171–179. doi:10.1007/BF00026459
Hatta M, Iwao K (2003) Metamorphosis induction and its possible application to coral seedlings
production. In: Saxena N (ed) Recent advances in marine science and technology, 2002. Japan
International Science and Technology Federation, Akasaka, pp 465–470
Hayakawa E, Fujisawa C, Fujisawa T (2004) Involvement of hydra achaete-scute gene CnASH in
the differentiation pathway of sensory neurons in the tentacles. Dev Genes Evol 214:486–492.
doi:10.1007/s00427-004-0430-4
Hay-Schmidt A (2000) The evolution of the serotonergic nervous system. Proc R Soc Lond B Biol
Sci 267:1071–1079
Hernandez-Nicaise ML (1973) The nervous system of ctenophores. III. Ultrastructure of synapses.
J Neurocytol 2:249–263
Hirth F, Kammermeier L, Frei E et al (2003) An urbilaterian origin of the tripartite brain:
developmental genetic insights from Drosophila. Development (Camb) 130:2365–2373
Holland ND (2003) Early central nervous system evolution: an era of skin brains? Nat Rev
Neurosci 4:617–627. doi:10.1038/nrn1175
Holland LZ, Carvalho JE, Escriva H et al (2013) Evolution of bilaterian central nervous systems:
a single origin? Evodevo 4:27. doi:10.1186/2041-9139-4-27
Iwao K, Fujisawa T, Hatta M (2002) A cnidarian neuropeptide of the GLWamide family induces
metamorphosis of reef-building corals in the genus Acropora. Coral Reefs 21:127–129.
doi:10.1007/s00338-002-0219-8
Jager M, Queinnec E, Chiori R et al (2008) Insights into the early evolution of SOX genes
from expression analyses in a ctenophore. J Exp Zool B Mol Dev Evol 310:650–667.
doi:10.1002/jez.b.21244
Jager M, Chiori R, Alié A et al (2011) New insights on ctenophore neural anatomy: immunoﬂu-
orescence study in Pleurobrachia pileus (Müller, 1776). J Exp Zool B Mol Dev Evol
316B:171–187. doi:10.1002/jez.b.21386
Jékely G (2013) Global view of the evolution and diversity of metazoan neuropeptide signaling.
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 110:8702–8707. doi:10.1073/pnas.1221833110
Jékely G, Papsand J, Nielsen C (2015) The phylogenetic position of ctenophores and the origin(s)
of nervous systems. Evodevo 6:1. doi:10.1186/2041-9139-6-1
Jones
WC
(1962)
Is
there
a
nervous
system
in
sponges?
Biol
Rev
37:1–50.
doi:10.1111/j.1469-185X.1962.tb01602.x
Kass-Simon G, Scappaticci AA (2004) Glutamatergic and GABAnergic control in the tentacle
effector systems of Hydra vulgaris. Hydrobiologia 530/531:67–71
Kass-Simon G, Pierobon P (2007) Cnidarian chemical neurotransmission, an updated overview.
Comp Biochem Physiol A146:9–25. doi:10.1016/j.cbpa.2006.09.008
Kass-Simon G, Pannaccione A, Pierobon P (2003) GABA and glutamate receptors are involved
in modulating pacemaker activity in hydra. Comp Biochem Physiol A Mol Integr Physiol
136:329–342. doi:10.1016/S1095-6433(03)00168-5
Katsukura Y, David CN, Grimmelikhuijzen CJ et al (2003) Inhibition of metamorphosis by
RFamide neuropeptides in planula larvae of Hydractinia echinata. Dev Genes Evol 213:579–
586. doi:10.1007/s00427-003-0361-5
Katsukura Y, Ando H, David CN et al (2004) Control of planula migration by LWamide
and
RFamide
neuropeptides
in
Hydractinia
echinata.
J
Exp
Biol
207:1803–1810.
doi:10.1242/jeb.00974
Kinnamon JC, Westall JA (1981) A three-dimensional serial reconstruction of neuronal distribu-
tions in the hypostome of Hydra. J Morphol 168:321–329. doi:10.1002/jmor.1051680308
Kinnamon JC, Westfall JA (1982) Types of neurons and synaptic connections at hypostome–
tentacle junctions in Hydra. J Morphol 173:119–128. doi:10.1002/jmor.1051730110
Koizumi O (2007) Nerve ring of the hypostome in hydra: is it an origin of the central nervous
system of bilaterian animals? Brain Behav Evol 69:151–159. doi:10.1159/000095204

3
Back Through Time: How Cnidarians and Basal Metazoans Shed Light...
69
Koizumi O, Wilson JD, Grimmelikhuijzen CJ et al (1989) Ultrastructural localization of RFamide-
like peptides in neuronal dense-cored vesicles in the peduncle of Hydra. J Exp Zool 249:17–22.
doi:10.1002/jez.1402490105
Koizumi O, Itazawa M, Mizumoto H et al (1992) Nerve ring of the hypostome in hydra. I. Its struc-
ture, development, and maintenance. J Comp Neurol 326:7–21. doi:10.1002/cne.903260103
Koizumi
O,
Sato
N,
Goto
C
(2004)
Chemical
anatomy
of
hydra
nervous
system
using antibodies against hydra neuropeptides: a review. Hydrobiologia 530(531):41–47.
doi:10.1007/s10750-004-2636-x
Koizumi O, Hamada S, Minobe S et al (2014) The nerve ring in cnidarians: its presence and
structure in hydrozoan medusae. Zoology (Jena) 118:79–88. doi:10.1016/j.zool.2014.10.001
Kortschak RD, Samuel G, Saint R et al (2003) EST analysis of the cnidarian Acropora millepora
reveals extensive gene loss and rapid sequence divergence in the model invertebrates. Curr Biol
13:2190–2195. doi:10.1016/S0960-9822(03)00872-8
Lacalli TC (1983) The brain and central nervous system of Müller’s larva. Can J Zool 61:39–51.
doi:10.1139/z83-004
Lam HM, Chiu J, Hsieh M et al (1998) Glutamate-receptor genes in plants. Nature (Lond)
396:125–126. doi:10.1038/24066
Larroux C, Fahey B, Liubicich D et al (2006) Developmental expression of transcription factor
genes in a demosponge: insights into the origin of metazoan multicellularity. Evol Dev 8:150–
173. doi:10.1111/j.1525-142X.2006.00086.x
Larroux C, Luke GN, Koopman P et al (2008) Genesis and expansion of metazoan transcription
factor gene classes. Mol Biol Evol 25:980–996. doi:10.1093/molbev/msn047
Laska G, Hündgen M (1982) Morphologie und Ultrastruktur der Lichtsinnesorgane von Tripedalia
cystophora Conant (Cnidaria, Cubozoa). Zool Jb Anat 108:107–123
Layden MJ, Boekhout M, Martindale MQ (2012) Nematostella vectensis achaete-scute homolog
NvashA regulates embryonic ectodermal neurogenesis and represents an ancient compo-
nent of the metazoan neural speciﬁcation pathway. Development (Camb) 139:1013–1022.
doi:10.1242/dev.073221
Leitz T, Lay M (1995) Metamorphosin A is a neuropeptide. Dev Genes Evol 204:276–279.
doi:10.1007/BF00208495
Leitz T, Wagner T (1992) The marine bacterium Alteromonas espejiana induces metamorphosis of
the hydroid Hydractinia echinata. Mar Biol 115:173–178. doi:10.1007/BF00346332
Leitz T, Morand K, Mann M (1994) Metamorphosin A: a novel peptide controlling development
of the lower metazoan Hydractinia echinata (Coelenterata, Hydrozoa). Dev Biol 163:440–446.
doi:10.1006/dbio.1994.1160
Lentz TL, Barrnett RJ (1961) Enzyme histochemistry of Hydra. J Exp Zool 147:125–149.
doi:10.1002/jez.1401470204
Leys SP, Degnan BM (2001) Cytological basis of photoresponsive behavior in a sponge larva. Biol
Bull 201:323–338. doi:10.2307/1543611
Lindgens D, Holstein TW, Technau U (2004) Hyzic, the Hydra homolog of the zic/odd-paired
gene, is involved in the early speciﬁcation of the sensory nematocytes. Development (Camb)
131:191–201
Mackie GO (1970) Neuroid conduction and the evolution of conducting tissues. Q Rev Biol 45:19–
332
Mackie GO (1979) Is there a conduction system in sponges? In: Boury-Esnault N, Levi C (eds)
Biologie des Spongiaires. CNRS, Paris, pp 145–151
Mackie GO (1990) The elementary nervous system revisited. Am Zool 30:907–920
Mackie GO (2004) Central neural circuitry in the jellyﬁsh Aglantha: a model “simple nervous
system”. NeuroSignals 13:5–19. doi:10.1159/000076155
Mackie GO, Meech RW (1995a) Central circuitry in the jellyﬁsh Aglantha digitale. I. The relay
system. J Exp Biol 198:2261–2270
Mackie GO, Meech RW (1995b) Central circuitry in the jellyﬁsh Aglantha digitale. II. The ring
giant and carrier systems. J Exp Biol 198:2271–2278

70
H. Watanabe
Mackie GO, Meech RW (2000) Central circuitry in the jellyﬁsh Aglantha digitale. III. The rootlet
and pacemaker systems. J Exp Biol 203:1797–1807
Mackie GO, Passano LM (1968) Epithelial conduction in hydromedusae. J Gen Physiol 52:600–
621
Mackie GO, Stell WK (1984) FMRF-amide-like immunoreactivity in the neurons of medusae. Am
Zool 24:36A
Mackie GO, Anderson PAV, Singla CL (1984) Apparent absence of gap junctions in two classes of
Cnidaria. Biol Bull 167:120–123
Mackie GO, Singla CL, Stell WK (1985) Distribution of nerve elements showing FMRF-amide-
like immunoreactivity in hydromedusae. Acta Zool 66:199–210
Magie CR, Pang K, Martindale MQ (2005) Genomic inventory and expression of Sox
and Fox genes in the cnidarian Nematostella vectensis. Dev Genes Evol 215:618–630.
doi:10.1007/s00427-005-0022-y
Marlow H, Arendt D (2014) Evolution: ctenophore genomes and the origin of neurons. Curr Biol
24:R757–R761. doi:10.1016/j.cub.2014.06.057
Marlow HQ, Srivastava M, Matus DQ et al (2009) Anatomy and development of the nervous
system of Nematostella vectensis, an anthozoan cnidarian. Dev Neurobiol 69:235–254.
doi:10.1002/dneu.20698
Marlow H, Tosches MA, Tomer R et al (2014) Larval body patterning and apical organs are
conserved in animal evolution. BMC Biol 12:7. doi:10.1186/1741-7007-12-7
Martin VJ (1988) Development of nerve cells in hydrozoan planulae: II. Examination of sensory
cell differentiation using electron microscopy and immunocytochemistry. Biol Bull 175:65–78.
doi:10.2307/1541957
Martin VJ (1992) Characterization of a RFamide-positive subset of ganglionic cells in the
hydrozoan planular nerve net. Cell Tissue Res 269:431–438
Martin VJ (2004) Photoreceptors of cubozoan jellyﬁsh. Hydrobiologia 530(531):135–144.
doi:10.1007/s10750-004-2674-4
Matsumoto GI (1995) Observations on the anatomy and behaviour of the cubozoan Carybdea
rastonii Haacke. Mar Freshw Behav Physiol 26:139–148
Matsuno T, Kageyama T (1984) The nervous system in the hypostome of Pelmatohydra robusta:
the presence of a circumhypostomal nerve ring in the epidermis. J Morphol 182:153–168.
doi:10.1002/jmor.1051820204
Maxwell EK, Ryan JF, Schnitzler CE et al (2012) MicroRNAs and essential components of the
microRNA processing machinery are not encoded in the genome of the ctenophore Mnemiopsis
leidyi. BMC Genomics 13:714. doi:10.1186/1471-2164-13-714
McFarlane ID, Graff D, Grimmelikhuijzen CJ (1987) Excitatory actions of Antho-RFamide, an
anthozoan neuropeptide, on muscles and conducting systems in the sea anemone Calliactis
parasitica. J Exp Biol 133:157–168
McFarlane ID, Anderson PA, Grimmelikhuijzen CJ (1991) Effects of three anthozoan neuropep-
tides, Antho-RWamide I, Antho-RWamide II and Antho-RFamide, on slow muscles from sea
anemones. J Exp Biol 156:419–431
Medina M, Collins AG, Silberman JD et al (2001) Evaluating hypotheses of basal animal
phylogeny using complete sequences of large and small subunit rRNA. Proc Natl Acad Sci
USA 98:9707–9712. doi:10.1073/pnas.171316998
Mitgutsch C, Hauser F, Grimmelikhuijzen CJ (1999) Expression and developmental regulation of
the hydra-RFamide and hydra-LWamide preprohormone genes in Hydra: evidence for transient
phases of head formation. Dev Biol 207:189–203. doi:10.1006/dbio.1998.9150
Moroz L (2001) Gaseous transmission across time and species. Am Zool 41:304–320.
doi:10.1093/icb/41.2.304
Moroz LL, Kocot KM, Citarella MR et al (2014) The ctenophore genome and the evolutionary
origins of neural systems. Nature (Lond) 510:109–114. doi:10.1038/nature13400
Morse DE, Morse ANC (1991) Enzymatic characterization of the morphogen recognized by
Agaricia humilis (scleractinian coral) larvae. Biol Bull 181:104–122. doi:10.2307/1542493

3
Back Through Time: How Cnidarians and Basal Metazoans Shed Light...
71
Müller WA (1969) Auslösung der Metamorphose durch Bakterien bei den Larven von Hydractinia
echinata. Zool Jb Anat 86:84–95
Müller P, Seipel K, Yanze N et al (2003) Evolutionary aspects of developmentally regulated
helix-loop-helix transcription factors in striated muscle of jellyﬁsh. Dev Biol 255:216–229.
doi:10.1016/S0012-1606(02)00091-X
Nakanishi N, Yuan D, Jacobs DK et al (2008) Early development, pattern, and reorganization of
the planula nervous system in Aurelia (Cnidaria, Scyphozoa). Dev Genes Evol 218:511–524.
doi:10.1007/s00427-008-0239-7
Nakanishi N, Renfer E, Technau U et al (2012) Nervous systems of the sea anemone Nematostella
vectensis are generated by ectoderm and endoderm and shaped by distinct mechanisms.
Development (Camb) 139:347–357. doi:10.1242/dev.071902
Nakanishi N, Stoupin D, Degnan SM et al (2015) Sensory ﬂask cells in sponge larvae regulate
metamorphosis via calcium signaling. Integr Comp Biol (pii: icv014). doi: 10.1093/icb/icv014
Nickel M (2004) Kinetics and rhythm of body contractions in the sponge Tethya wilhelma
(Porifera: Demospongiae). J Exp Biol 207:4515–4524. doi:10.1242/jeb.01289
Nickel M, Scheer C, Hammel JU et al (2011) The contractile sponge epithelium sensu lato–body
contraction of the demosponge Tethya wilhelma is mediated by the pinacoderm. J Exp Biol
214:1692–1698. doi:10.1242/jeb.049148
Nielsen
C
(2005)
Larval
and
adult
brains.
Evol
Dev
7:483–489.
doi:10.1111/j.1525-142X.2005.05051.x
Nielsen C (2015) Larval nervous systems: true larval and precocious adult. J Exp Biol 218:629–
636. doi:10.1242/jeb.109603
Nilsson DE, Coates MM, Gislén L et al (2005) Advanced optics in a jellyﬁsh eye. Nature (Lond)
435:201–205. doi:10.1038/nature03484
Odorico DM, Miller DJ (1997) Internal and external relationships of the Cnidaria: implications of
primary and predicted secondary structure of the 50-end of the 23S-like rDNA. Proc Biol Sci
264:77–82. doi:10.1098/rspb.1997.0011
Oren M, Brikner I, Appelbaum L et al (2014) Fast neurotransmission related genes are expressed
in non nervous endoderm in the sea anemone Nematostella vectensis. PLoS One 9:e93832.
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0093832
Pani AM, Mullarkey EE, Aronowicz J et al (2012) Ancient deuterostome origins of vertebrate brain
signalling centres. Nature (Lond) 483:289–294. doi:10.1038/nature10838
Pantin CFA (1966) Homology, analogy and chemical identity in the Cnidaria. In: Rees WJ (ed)
The Cnidaria and their evolution. Academic Press, New York, pp 1–15
Parker GH (1910) The reactions of sponges with a consideration of the origin of the nervous
system. J Exp Zool 8:765–805. doi:10.1002/jez.1400080102
Passano LM, McCullough CB (1963) Pacemaker hierarchies controlling the behaviour of hydras.
Nature (Lond) 199:1174–1175. doi:10.1038/1991174a0
Pavans de Ceccatty M (1974a) Coordination in sponges. The foundations of integration. Am Zool
14:895–903
Pavans de Ceccatty M (1974b) The origin of the integrative systems: a change in view derived from
research on coelenterates and sponges. Perspect Biol Med 17:379–390
Pavans de Ceccatty M (1979) Cell correlations and integration in sponges. Colloq Int CNRS,
Biologie des Spongiaires 291:123–135
Perovic S, Krasko A, Prokic I et al (1999) Origin of neuronal-like receptors in metazoa: cloning of
a metabotropic glutamate/GABA-like receptor from the marine sponge Geodia cydonium. Cell
Tissue Res 296:395–404. doi:10.1007/s004410051299
Phelan P (2005) Innexins: members of an evolutionarily conserved family of gap-junction proteins.
Biochim Biophys Acta 1711:225–245. doi:10.1016/j.bbamem.2004.10.004
Philippe H, Derelle R, Lopez P et al (2009) Phylogenomics revives traditional views on deep
animal relationships. Curr Biol 19:706–712. doi:10.1016/j.cub.2009.02.052
Philippe H, Brinkmann H, Lavrov DV et al (2011) Resolving difﬁcult phylogenetic questions: why
more sequences are not enough. PLoS Biol 9:e1000602. doi:10.1371/journal.pbio.1000602

72
H. Watanabe
Pick KS, Philippe H, Schreiber F et al (2010) Improved phylogenomic taxon sampling noticeably
affects nonbilaterian relationships. Mol Biol Evol 27:1983–1987. doi:10.1093/molbev/msq089
Pierobon
P
(2012)
Coordinated
modulation
of
cellular
signaling
through
ligand-gated
ion channels in Hydra vulgaris (Cnidaria, Hydrozoa). Int J Dev Biol 56:551–565.
doi:10.1387/ijdb.113464pp
Pierobon P, Minei R, Porcu P et al (2001) Putative glycine receptors in Hydra: a biochemical and
behavioural study. Eur J Neurosci 14:1659–1666. doi:10.1046/j.0953-816x.2001.01792
Pisani D, Pett W, Dohrmann M et al (2015) Genomic data do not support comb jellies
as the sister group to all other animals. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 112:15402–15407.
doi:10.1073/pnas.1518127112
Plickert G (1989) Proportion-altering factor (PAF) stimulates nerve cell formation in Hydractinia
echinata. Cell Differ Dev 26:19–27. doi:10.1016/0922-3371(89)90780-6
Plickert G, Schneider B (2004) Neuropeptides and photic behavior in Cnidaria. Hydrobiologia
530(531):49–57. doi:10.1007/s10750-004-2689-x
Putnam NH, Srivastava M, Hellsten U et al (2007) Sea anemone genome reveals ancestral
eumetazoan gene repertoire and genomic organization. Science 317:86–94. doi:10.1126/sci-
ence.1139158
Ramoino P, Gallus L, Paluzzi S et al (2007) The GABAergic-like system in the marine demosponge
Chondrilla nucula. Microsc Res Tech 70:944–951. doi:10.1002/jemt.20499
Ramoino P, Ledda FD, Ferrando S et al (2011) Metabotropic ”-aminobutyric acid (GABAB)
receptors modulate feeding behavior in the calcisponge Leucandra aspera. J Exp Zool A Ecol
Genet Physiol 315:132–140. doi:10.1002/jez.657
Richards GS, Degnan BM (2012) The expression of delta ligands in the sponge Amphimedon
queenslandica suggests an ancient role for notch signaling in metazoan development. Evodevo
3:15. doi:10.1186/2041-9139-3-15
Richards GS, Rentzsch F (2014) Transgenic analysis of a SoxB gene reveals neural progen-
itor cells in the cnidarian Nematostella vectensis. Development (Camb) 141:4681–4689.
doi:10.1242/dev.112029
Richards GS, Rentzsch F (2015) Regulation of Nematostella neural progenitors by SoxB, Notch
and bHLH genes. Development 142:3332–3342. doi:10.1242/dev.123745
Richards GS, Simionato E, Perron M et al (2008) Sponge genes provide new insight
into
the
evolutionary
origin
of
the
neurogenic
circuit.
Curr
Biol
18:1156–1161.
doi:10.1016/j.cub.2008.06.074
Richter S, Loesel R, Purschke G et al (2010) Invertebrate neurophylogeny: suggested terms and
deﬁnitions for a neuroanatomical glossary. Front Zool 7:29. doi:10.1186/1742-9994-7-29
Riesgo A, Farrar N, Windsor PJ et al (2014) The analysis of eight transcriptomes from all
poriferan classes reveals surprising genetic complexity in sponges. Mol Biol Evol 31:1102–
1120. doi:10.1093/molbev/msu057
Ruggieri RD, Pierobon P, Kass-Simon G (2004) Pacemaker activity in hydra is modulated
by glycine receptor ligands. Comp Biochem Physiol A Mol Integr Physiol 138:193–202.
doi:10.1016/j.cbpb.2004.03.015
Rushforth NB, Hofman F (1972) Behavioral and electrophysiological studies of Hydra. III.
Components of feeding behavior. Biol Bull 142:110–131. doi:10.2307/1540250
Ryan TJ, Grant SGN (2009) The origin and evolution of synapses. Nat Rev Neurosci 10:701–712.
doi:10.1038/nrn2717
Ryan JF, Pang K, Schnitzler CE et al (2013) The genome of the ctenophore Mnemiopsis leidyi and
its implications for cell type evolution. Science 342:1242592. doi:10.1126/science
Sakarya O, Armstrong KA, Adamska M et al (2007) A post-synaptic scaffold at the origin of the
animal kingdom. PLoS One 2:e506. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0000506
Satterlie RA (2011) Do jellyﬁsh have central nervous systems? J Exp Biol 214:1215–1223.
doi:10.1242/jeb.043687
Satterlie RA, Case JF (1978) Gap junctions suggest epithelial conduction within the comb plates
of the ctenophore Pleurobrachia bachei. Cell Tissue Res 193:87–91

3
Back Through Time: How Cnidarians and Basal Metazoans Shed Light...
73
Scappaticci AA, Kass-Simon G (2008) NMDA and GABA B receptors are involved in controlling
nematocyst discharge in hydra. Comp Biochem Physiol A Mol Integr Physiol 150:415–422.
doi:10.1016/j.cbpa.2008.04.606
Scappaticci AA, Jacques R, Carroll JE et al (2004) Immunocytochemical evidence for an NMDA1
receptor subunit in dissociated cells of Hydra vulgaris. Cell Tissue Res 316:263–270
Scemes E, Suadicani SO, Dahl G et al (2007) Connexin and pannexin mediated cell–cell
communication. Neuron Glia Biol 3:199–208. doi:10.1017/S1740925X08000069
Schmich J, Rudolf R, Trepel S et al (1998a) Immunohistochemical studies of GLWamides in
Cnidaria. Cell Tissue Res 294:169–177. doi:10.1007/s004410051167
Schmich J, Trepel S, Leitz T (1998b) The role of GLWamides in metamorphosis of Hydractinia
echinata. Dev Genes Evol 208:267–273. doi:10.1007/s004270050181
Schuchert
P
(1993a)
Trichoplax
adhaerens
(phylum
Placozoa)
has
cells
that
react
with
antibodies
against
the
neuropeptide
RFamide.
Acta
Zool
74:115–117.
doi:10.1111/j.1463-6395.1993.tb01227.x
Schuchert P (1993b) Phylogenetic analysis of the Cnidaria. J Zool Syst Evol Res 31:161–173.
doi:10.1111/j.1439-0469.1993.tb00187.x
Seipel K, Yanze N, Schmid V (2004) Developmental and evolutionary aspects of the basic helix-
loop-helix transcription factors Atonal-like 1 and Achaete-scute homolog 2 in the jellyﬁsh. Dev
Biol 269:331–345. doi:10.1016/j.ydbio.2004.01.035
Shimizu H (2002) Feeding and wounding responses in Hydra suggest functional and structural
polarization of the tentacle nervous system. Comp Biochem Physiol 131:669–674
Shimizu H, Fujisawa T (2003) Peduncle of Hydra and the heart of higher organisms share a
common ancestral origin. Genesis 36:182–186. doi:10.1002/gene.10213
Shinzato C, Iguchi A, Hayward DC et al (2008) Sox genes in the coral Acropora millepora:
divergent expression patterns reﬂect differences in developmental mechanisms within the
Anthozoa. BMC Evol Biol 8:311. doi:10.1186/1471-2148-8-311
Shinzato C, Shoguchi E, Kawashima T et al (2011) Using the Acropora digitifera genome
to understand coral responses to environmental change. Nature (Lond) 476:320–323.
doi:10.1038/nature10249
Simionato E, Ledent V, Richards G et al (2007) Origin and diversiﬁcation of the basic helix-loop-
helix gene family in metazoans: insights from comparative genomics. BMC Evol Biol 7:33.
doi:10.1186/1471-2148-7-33
Simmons DK, Pang K, Martindale MQ (2012) Lim homeobox genes in the ctenophore Mnemiopsis
leidyi: the evolution of neural cell type speciﬁcation. EvoDevo 3:2. doi:10.1186/2041-9139-3-2
Singla CL (1974) Ocelli of hydromedusae. Cell Tissue Res 149:413–429
Singla CL, Weber C (1982) Fine structure of the ocelli of Polyorchis penicillatus (Hydrozoa:
Anthomedusae) and their connection with the nerve ring. Zoomorphology 99:117–129.
doi:10.1007/BF00310304
Sinigaglia C, Busengdal H, Leclère L et al (2013) The bilaterian head patterning gene six3/6
controls aboral domain development in a cnidarian. PLoS Biol 11:e1001488. doi:10.1371/jour-
nal.pbio.1001488
Smith CL, Varoqueaux F, Kittelmann M et al (2014) Novel cell types, neurosecretory cells, and
body plan of the early-diverging metazoan Trichoplax adhaerens. Curr Biol 24:1565–1572.
doi:10.1016/j.cub.2014.05.046
Spencer AN (1974) Non-nervous conduction in invertebrates and embryos. Am Zool 14:917–929
Srivastava M, Begovic E, Chapmann J et al (2008) The Trichoplax genome and the nature of
placozoans. Nature (Lond) 454:955–960. doi:10.1038/nature07191
Srivastava M, Simakov O, Chapman J et al (2010a) The Amphimedon queenslandica genome and
the evolution of animal complexity. Nature (Lond) 466:720–726. doi:10.1038/nature09201
Srivastava M, Larroux C, Lu D et al (2010b) Early evolution of the LIM homeobox gene family.
BMC Biol 8:4. doi:10.1186/1741-7007-8-4
Steinmetz PR, Urbach R, Posnien N et al (2010) Six3 demarcates the anterior-most developing
brain region in bilaterian animals. Evodevo 1:14. doi:10.1186/2041-9139-1-14

74
H. Watanabe
Strausfeld NJ (2010) Brain homology: Dohrn of a new era? Brain Behav Evol 76:165–167.
doi:10.1159/000322150
Strausfeld NJ, Hirth F (2013) Deep homology of arthropod central complex and vertebrate basal
ganglia. Science 340:157–161. doi:10.1126/science.1231828
Takahashi T, Hamaue N (2010) Molecular characterization of hydra acetylcholinesterase and its
catalytic activity. FEBS Lett 584:511–516. doi:10.1016/j.febslet.2009.11.081
Takahashi T, Hatta M (2011) The importance of GLWamide neuropeptides in cnidarian develop-
ment and physiology. J Amino Acids 2011:424501. doi:10.4061/2011/424501
Takahashi T, Muneoka Y, Lohmann J et al (1997) Systematic isolation of peptide signal molecules
regulating development in hydra: LWamide and PW families. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
94:1241–1246
Takahashi T, Kobayakawa Y, Muneoka Y et al (2003) Identiﬁcation of a new member of the
GLWamide peptide family: physiological activity and cellular localization in cnidarian polyps.
Comp Biochem Physiol 135:309–324. doi:10.1016/S1096-4959(03)00088-5
Takaku Y, Hwang JS, Wolf A et al (2014) Innexin gap junctions in nerve cells coordinate
spontaneous contractile behavior in Hydra polyps. Sci Rep 4:3573. doi:10.1038/srep03573
Technau U, Rudd S, Maxwell P et al (2005) Maintenance of ancestral complexity and non-
metazoan genes in two basal cnidarians. Trends Genet 21:633–639
Tessmar-Raible K, Raible F, Christodoulou F et al (2007) Conserved sensory-neurosecretory cell
types in annelid and ﬁsh forebrain: insights into hypothalamus evolution. Cell 129:1389–1400.
doi:10.1016/j.cell.2007.04.041
Tomer R, Denes AS, Tessmar-Raible K et al (2010) Proﬁling by image registration reveals
common origin of annelid mushroom bodies and vertebrate pallium. Cell 142:800–809.
doi:10.1016/j.cell.2010.07.043
Tosches MA, Arendt D (2013) The bilaterian forebrain: an evolutionary chimaera. Curr Opin
Neurobiol 23:1080–1089. doi:10.1016/j.conb.2013.09.005
Vígh B, Vígh-Teichmann I (1982) The cerebrospinal ﬂuid-contacting neurosecretory cell: a
protoneuron. In: Farner DS, Lederis K (eds) Molecules cells systems. Plenum Press, New York,
pp 458–460
Vigh B, Manzano e Silva MJ, Frank CL et al (2004) The system of cerebrospinal ﬂuid-
contacting neurons. Its supposed role in the nonsynaptic signal transmission of the brain. Histol
Histopathol 19:607–628
Watanabe H, Fujisawa T, Holstein TW (2009) Cnidarians and the evolutionary origin of the nervous
system. Dev Growth Differ 51:167–183. doi:10.1111/j.1440-169X.2009.01103.x
Watanabe H, Kuhn A, Fushiki M et al (2014a) Sequential actions of “-catenin and Bmp pattern the
oral nerve net in Nematostella vectensis. Nat Commun 5:5536. doi:10.1038/ncomms6536
Watanabe H, Schmidt HA, Kuhn A et al (2014b) Nodal signalling determines biradial asymmetry
in Hydra. Nature (Lond) 515:112–115. doi:10.1038/nature13666
Westfall JA (1973) Ultrastructural evidence for a granule-containing sensory-motor-interneuron in
Hydra littoralis. J Ultrastruct Res 42:268–282. doi:10.1016/S0022-5320(73)90055-5
Westfall JA (1987) Ultrastructure of invertebrate synapses. In: Ali MA (ed) Nervous systems in
invertebrates. Plenum Press, New York, pp 3–28
Westfall JA, Grimmelikhuijzen CJ (1993) Antho-RFamide immunoreactivity in neuronal synaptic
and nonsynaptic vesicles of sea anemones. Biol Bull 185:109–114. doi:10.2307/1542134
Westfall JA, Kinnamon JC (1978) A second sensory-motor-interneuron with neurosecretory
granules in Hydra. J Neurocytol 7:365–379
Westfall JA, Kinnamon JC (1984) Perioral synaptic connections and their possible role in the
feeding behavior of Hydra. Tissue Cell 16:355–365. doi:10.1016/0040-8166(84)90055-7
Westfall JA, Yamataka S, Enos PD (1971) Ultrastructural evidence of polarized synapses in the
nerve net of Hydra. J Cell Biol 51:318–323
Westfall JA, Kinnamon JC, Sims DE (1980) Neuro-epitheliomuscular cell and neuro-neuronal gap
junctions in Hydra. J Neurocytol 9:725–732

3
Back Through Time: How Cnidarians and Basal Metazoans Shed Light...
75
Westfall JA, Sayyar KL, Elliott CF et al (1995) Ultrastructural localization of antho-RWamides
I and II at neuromuscular synapses in the gastrodermis and oral sphincter muscle of the sea
anemone Calliactis parasitica. Biol Bull 189:280–287. doi:10.2307/1542145
Westfall JA, Elliott CF, Carlin RW (2002) Ultrastructural evidence for two-cell and three-cell
neural pathways in the tentacle epidermis of the sea anemone Aiptasia pallida. J Morphol
251:83–92. doi:10.1002/jmor.1075
Whalan S, Webster NS, Negri AP (2012) Crustose coralline algae and a cnidarian neuropeptide
trigger larval settlement in two coral reef sponges. PLoS One 7:e30386. doi:10.1371/jour-
nal.pone.0030386
Whelan NV, Kocot KM, Moroz LL et al (2015a) Error, signal, and the placement of
Ctenophora, sister to all other animals. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 112:5773–5778.
doi:10.1073/pnas.1503453112
Whelan NV, Kocot KM, Halanych KM (2015b) Employing phylogenomics to resolve the relation-
ships among cnidarians, ctenophores, sponges, placozoans, and bilaterians. Integr Comp Biol
pii: icv037. doi:10.1093/icb/icv037
Willmer P (1990) Invertebrate relationships: patterns in animal evolution. Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge, MA
Wood RL (1977) The cell junctions of hydra as viewed by freeze-fracture replication. J Ultrastruct
Res 58:299–315
Wood RL (1979) The ﬁne structure of the hypostome and mouth of hydra. II. Transmission electron
microscopy. Cell Tissue Res 199:319–338
Yamamoto M, Yoshida M (1980) Fine structure of ocelli of an anthomedusan, Nemiopsis doﬂeini,
with special reference to synaptic organization. Zoomorphology 96:169–181
Yi-Chan JL, Gallin WJ, Spencer AN (2001) The anatomy of the nervous system of the hydrozoan
jellyﬁsh, Polyorchis penicillatus, as revealed by a monoclonal antibody. Invertebr Neurosci
4:65–75. doi:10.1007/s101580100008

Part II
The Rise of Diverse Brain Types

Chapter 4
Functional Speciﬁcation of a Primitive
Bilaterian Brain in Planarians
Takeshi Inoue
Abstract The mammalian brain is remarkably complex in function as well as
morphology, and therefore understanding the original evolutionary function and
primitive principles of brain function is an important and classical challenge. The
planarian is an emerging new model of the nervous system as well as regenerative
biology because it belongs to an evolutionarily early group possessing a central
nervous system (CNS), including a brain with simple architecture. Recently, it
has been revealed that the planarian brain is divided into several functional and
structural domains as deﬁned by the discrete expression of homeobox genes and
a surprisingly complex set of genes, and is composed of several types of neurons
distinguished by their neurotransmitters and neural modulators, which are conserved
with those used by vertebrates. Furthermore, the planarian brain functions as an
information-processing center to produce distinct behavioral traits in response to a
variety of signals arising from the external environment. This chapter summarizes
recent insights into cellular and molecular mechanisms that regulate planarian brain
formation and function. The relative simplicity of the planarian brain, combined
with its molecular accessibility, planarian complex behavioral traits, and advances in
planarian stem cell biology associated with the planarian extraordinary regenerative
capacity, provide a unique opportunity to unravel molecular and cellular mecha-
nisms underlying fundamental brain function and brain evolution.
Keywords Planarian • Platyhelminthes • Central nervous system (CNS) •
RNAi • Behavior • Stem cell • Neoblast • Regeneration
T. Inoue ()
Department of Biophysics, Graduate School of Science, Kyoto University,
Kitashirakawa-Oiwake, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8502, Japan
Department of Life Science, Faculty of Science, Gakushuin University, Mejiro1-5-1, Toshima-ku,
Tokyo 171-8588, Japan
e-mail: takeshi.inoue@gakushuin.ac.jp
© Springer Japan KK 2017
S. Shigeno et al. (eds.), Brain Evolution by Design, Diversity and Commonality
in Animals, DOI 10.1007/978-4-431-56469-0_4
79

80
T. Inoue
4.1
What Is a Planarian?
Freshwater planarians are free-living members (class Turbellaria) of the phylum
Platyhelminthes, that is, the ﬂatworms. The Platyhelminthes are located in an
important position with respect to the evolution of metazoans (Hyman 1940; Egger
et al. 2009). They are widely recognized as being among the simplest organisms
possessing three tissue layers (triploblasts), bilateral symmetry, cephalization, and
complex organ systems. Among the metazoans, planarians are representatives of
the order Tricladida, a designation that is based on the three main branches that
comprise their digestive system. Planarians have characteristic organs along the
anteroposterior axis, such as a pair of eyes and auricles, and a brain with simple
architecture in the anterior head (Fig. 4.1a). A pharynx in the middle portion of the
body acts as a mouth and anus, and an intestinal tract instead of a blood vascular
system spreads and supplies nutrients throughout the body (Fig. 4.1a, b).
One of the most notable characteristics of planarians is their high regenerative
ability (Fig. 4.1c). They can regenerate whole animals, including a functional brain,
from tiny fragments from almost any part of their bodies after amputation (Agata
and Watanabe 1999; Newmark and Sanchez Alvarado 2002; Agata et al. 2003;
Reddien and Sanchez Alvarado 2004; Umesono and Agata 2009; Umesono et al.
2011; King and Newmark 2012; Elliott and Sanchez Alvarado 2013; Rink 2013), an
ability that has have been the focus of intense study by many biologists for almost
250 years. An early worker on planarians described them as “almost immortal under
the edge of the knife” (Dalyell 1814). The ﬁrst description of planarian regeneration
was published in 1767 (Pallas et al. 1767). Later, Charles Darwin, famous as the
author of The Origin of Species, was also interested in the regenerative ability
of planarians (Darwin 1844), and Thomas Hunt Morgan, known as the originator
of Drosophila genetics, showed that planarians can regenerate completely when
cut in half transversely or longitudinally, as can fragments that are derived from
cutting the worm into small pieces (Morgan 1898). The robust regenerative abilities
of planarians are based on a population of pluripotent stem cells called neoblasts,
which are the only mitotic somatic cells in adults and are distributed throughout the
body in planarians (Fig. 4.1d) (Baguna and Slack 1981; Baguna et al. 1989; Sanchez
Alvarado 2007; Shibata et al. 2010; Reddien 2013). Therefore, many biologists
have been deeply interested in the molecular and cellular mechanisms underlying
the nature of the neoblasts (Shibata et al. 1999; Newmark and Sanchez Alvarado
2000; Reddien et al. 2005a, b; Guo et al. 2006; Yoshida-Kashikawa et al. 2007;
Hayashi et al. 2010; Rouhana et al. 2010; Tasaki et al. 2011b, a; Shibata et al. 2012;
Wagner et al. 2012; Rouhana et al. 2014; Scimone et al. 2014; van Wolfswinkel et al.
2014; Shibata et al. 2016), the anteroposterior polarity (Petersen and Reddien 2008;
Gurley et al. 2008; Iglesias et al. 2008; Rink et al. 2009; Petersen and Reddien 2009;
Yazawa et al. 2009; Adell et al. 2009; Petersen and Reddien 2011; Umesono et al.
2013; Liu et al. 2013; Sikes and Newmark 2013; Roberts-Galbraith and Newmark
2013; Reuter et al. 2015; Lander and Petersen 2016; Scimone et al. 2016), brain
regeneration (Cebria et al. 2002c; Kobayashi et al. 2007; Felix and Aboobaker 2010;

4
Functional Speciﬁcation of a Primitive Bilaterian Brain in Planarians
81
Fig. 4.1 Body structure and regenerative ability of the planarian Dugesia japonica. (a) Planarian
Dugesia japonica. A pair of eyes and auricles are observed in the dorsal side of the head region. A
pharynx is present in the central portion of the body and acts as a mouth and anus. (b) Schematic
illustration of main organs of planarian. Intestinal tract occupies almost the entire mesenchymal
space and delivers nutrition instead of a blood circulatory system. Stem cells (neoblasts, 30 % of
total cells) are distributed throughout the entire mesenchymal space of the body with the exception
of the pharyngeal region and the region anterior to the eyes. Planarian CNS is composed of a
bilobed brain with nine lateral branches on each outer side in the anterior region of the ventral
side and a pair of ventral nerve cords (VNCs) along the body. The brain is located on the dorsal
side, in contrast to the VNCs. (c) The planarian has a robust capacity for regeneration. Even a tiny
fragment cut from any part of the body can regenerate an entire individual planarian with the same
anteroposterior and dorsoventral body patterning within 1 week. (d) Planarian regenerative ability
is strictly dependent on their neoblasts. During regeneration, the neoblasts give rise to all types of
cells, somatic cells such as neurons in the brain and muscle cells in the pharynx, and also germline
cells

82
T. Inoue
Cowles et al. 2013, 2014; Fraguas et al. 2014), and organ regeneration (Zayas et al.
2010; Lapan and Reddien 2011; Scimone et al. 2011; Lapan and Reddien 2012;
Chen et al. 2013; Barberan et al. 2016), in planarians. These ﬁelds of planarian
biology have advanced remarkably in the past two decades, and the insights gained
from planarian studies in vivo show possible new directions for future regenerative
medicine, such as reactivation of dormant stem cells in adult mammalian tissues.
4.2
Structural and Cellular Aspects of the Planarian Brain
In addition to planarian regenerative ability, they possess another important bio-
logical feature; that is, planarians belong to an evolutionarily early group that
acquired a central nervous system (CNS). The planarian CNS is composed of
two morphologically distinct structures: a bilobed brain, composed of about 2.0–
3.0  104 neurons in an adult planarian of about 8 mm in length, with nine branches
on each outer side in the anterior region of the animal, and two longitudinal ventral
nerve cords (VNCs) along the body (Fig. 4.1b). These two structures had long been
considered to be a united structure, but recent anatomical and molecular studies
clearly indicated that the brain is actually a structure independent from the VNCs
(Agata et al. 1998; Tazaki et al. 1999). The brain is composed of a cortex of nerve
cells in its outer region and a core of nerve ﬁbers in its inner region (Fig. 4.2a). A
pair of eyes is located on the dorsal side at the level of the third lateral branch of
the brain (Agata et al. 1998; Sakai et al. 2000), and the axons of the visual neurons
form an optic chiasma and directly project to the dorsomedial region (visual center)
in the brain (Fig. 4.2b) (Agata et al. 1998; Sakai et al. 2000; Okamoto et al. 2005).
On the other hand, axons of chemosensory neurons in the lateral branch neurons
project to the ventrolateral region of the brain (Fig. 4.2b) (Okamoto et al. 2005;
Inoue et al. 2015). These morphological features of the brain structure suggested
that external stimuli sensed by various organs, and the information thus acquired
by sensory neurons, might be accumulated inside the brain, and then processed and
integrated to transduce the signals into the activity of motor neurons.
In spite of the marked differences between vertebrates and invertebrates, the
planarian CNS exhibits many morphological features similar to the vertebrate CNS,
such as multipolar neurons and dendrites possessing structures resembling dendritic
spines (Sarnat and Netsky 1985). In Drosophila and vertebrates, it has been shown
that the expression of Drosophila cephalic gap genes empty spiracles (ems) and
orthodenticle (otd), or their respective vertebrate homologues Emx1/2 and Otx1/2,
speciﬁes the brain region during development (Kammermeier and Reichert 2001).
Similarly, molecular analysis has revealed that the planarian Dugesia japonica
orthologues of otd/Otx-related homeobox genes DjotxA and DjotxB, and orthopedia
(otp)-related homeobox gene Djotp, which are considered to be common regulatory
genes involved in regional organization of the brain, are expressed speciﬁcally in
distinct regions of the brain (Fig. 4.2c) (Umesono et al. 1997, 1999), and that
the planarian brain is divided into several functional and structural domains as

4
Functional Speciﬁcation of a Primitive Bilaterian Brain in Planarians
83
Fig. 4.2 The brain structure of the planarian. (a) The planarian brain visualized by in situ
hybridization for Djsyt mRNA in green (somas) and visualized by immunostaining against DjSYT
protein in magenta (nerve ﬁbers). (b) Lateral branches of the planarian brain visualized with G-
protein “-subunit (green) immunostaining and visual neurons visualized with arrestin (magenta)
immunostaining. Axons of visual neurons form the optic chiasm and project to the medial region of
the brain indicated by asterisks. Chemosensory neurons are located in nine lateral brain branches
whose dendrites elongate toward the outer region of the head (I–IX) and whose axons project to
the lateral region of the brain, indicated by a diaphanous white arc. (c) Schematic illustration of
the discrete expression pattern of the brain-speciﬁc homeobox genes. These expression domains
represent functional regions in the brain. Photosensory and chemosensory neurons are present in
the DjotxA- and Djotp-expressing domains, respectively. (d) Neural subtypes in the brain showing
serotonergic neurons (white), GABAergic neurons (green), dopaminergic neurons (magenta), and
other neural cells (cyan). The planarian brain is more sophisticated than previously thought
deﬁned by the discrete expression of many other neuron-speciﬁc genes (Cebria et al.
2002b, c; Mineta et al. 2003). Photosensory and chemosensory neurons are present
in the DjotxA- and Djotp-expressing domains, respectively (Fig. 4.2c). Furthermore,
the planarian brain is composed of many distinct neuronal populations, such
as dopaminergic, serotonergic, octopaminergic, cholinergic, ”-aminobutyric acid
(GABA)ergic, and glutamatergic neurons, which form distinct neuronal networks
in the brain (Fig. 4.2d) (Nishimura et al. 2007a, b, 2008a, b, 2010). In addition
to these neurotransmitters of monoaminergic and aminergic neurons, many types
of neuropeptides may also function in the planarian CNS (Collins et al. 2010).
Interestingly, the genes encoding rate-limiting enzymes of these neurotransmitters
are expressed in discrete neurons (Fig. 4.2d). These observations suggest that the
relatively simple planarian brain is nevertheless well organized and underpinned by
a surprisingly complex set of regulatory genetic events.

84
T. Inoue
4.3
Ongoing Search for Neural Stem Cells and Glial Cells
in Planarians
In both mammals and Drosophila, neurons arise from neural stem cells and neural
progenitor cells (neuroblasts) committed to the neuronal fate and possessing the
potential to divide. Although all planarian neurons are known to be differentiated
from neoblasts, how the neural fate and neural subtypes in a planarian are speciﬁed
remains unknown.
Musashi encodes an evolutionarily highly conserved RNA-binding protein
known to be expressed in the neural lineage, including neural stem cells and
neural progenitor cells, across the animal kingdom (Okano et al. 2002). Although
three musashi family genes (DjmlgA, DjmlgB, DjmlgC) have been identiﬁed in
planarians, all of them are predominantly expressed in terminally differentiated
neurons, not in proliferating cells, including putative neural stem cells (Higuchi et
al. 2008). Furthermore, neither single nor combinatorial knockdown experiments of
these genes by RNAi affected the gross number of neurons during brain regeneration
(Higuchi et al. 2008).
In contrast, sox genes that encode transcription factor proteins containing the
SRY (sex-determining region Y) box have important functions in the maintenance
of mammalian neural stem cells. Although ﬁve sox family genes (Smed-soxP1–
Smed-soxP5) were identiﬁed in the planarian, all these genes were expressed in
piwi-expressing neoblasts, and RNAi experiments clearly demonstrated that Smed-
soxP1 functions in the regulation of self-renewal of planarian neoblasts (which can
give rise to all differentiated cells), not in speciﬁc progenitors with neural cell fate
(Wagner et al. 2012; Wenemoser et al. 2012). Rather, it is expected that there is
an evolutionary association between the functions of Smed-soxP1 in planarians
and those of Sox genes, such as Sox2, in other organisms, including in ES cells.
Functions of the other sox genes have not yet been detected in planarian neoblasts
or neural stem cells.
However, more recently four other sox genes categorized in the SoxB group
were obtained from another species of planarian, Schmidtea polychroa (Spol-
soxB1-1, Spol-soxB1-2, Spol-soxB2-1, Spol-soxB2-2), and expression analysis dur-
ing embryogenesis suggested that the Spol-soxB1-1 and Spol-soxB1-2 genes are
expressed in putative neural progenitor cells and Spol-soxB2-1 and Spol-soxB2-
2 genes are expressed in neural subpopulations of the central and peripheral
nervous systems (Monjo and Romero 2015). Furthermore, it was found that several
conserved transcription factors associated with the neural lineage are expressed
in a small population of neoblasts during head regeneration (Cowles et al. 2013;
Scimone et al. 2014; Cowles et al. 2014). These observations suggest that the gene
regulatory network for maintenance of neural stem cells and neural speciﬁcation
is at least partially conserved across metazoans. Although it was reported that
Smed-soxB promotes differentiation of an anterior subset of visual neurons (Lapan
and Reddien 2012), the possible functions of soxB genes for neurogenesis and
maintenance of neural stem cells in planarian remain obscure. Further functional

4
Functional Speciﬁcation of a Primitive Bilaterian Brain in Planarians
85
analysis should reveal the molecular and genetic system for neurogenesis in
planarians in the near future.
Glial cells in the brain are the other important cells differentiated from neural
stem cells in vertebrates as well as invertebrates (Homem and Knoblich 2012;
Kohwi and Doe 2013). Fine structural analysis using electron microscopic studies
have suggested that there are glial-like cells in planarians (Morita and Best 1966).
In Drosophila, glial cells missing (gcm) encodes an evolutionarily conserved
transcription factor that functions for lineage speciﬁcation by promoting glial cell
fate during embryogenesis (Cattenoz and Giangrande 2013). Although gcm-related
gene in D. japonica (Djgcm) shows high conservation with Drosophila gcm, Djgcm
is not expressed in the neural lineage in either intact or regenerating animals
(Umesono and Agata 2009). Therefore, the existence and possible features of glial
cells in planarians remain obscure.
4.4
Neural Pathways in the Brain Regulating Behaviors
in Planarians
Planarians display various behaviors in response to external stimuli. Since very
early planarian studies, the ecology and behavior of planarians have been examined
(Dalyell 1814; Moseley 1874; Parker and Burnett 1900). Raymond Pearl reported
precise observations of planarian movements, including reactions to food, to
chemicals, and to mechanical stimuli, and behaviors such as electrotaxis, thig-
motaxis, rheotaxis, hydrotaxis, thermotaxis, and phototaxis (Pearl 1903). Since
then, phototaxis, mediated by the eyes acting as light-sensing organs, has been
the main focus of attention because of its association with morphologically well-
characterized organs (Walter 1907; Taliaferro 1920). In addition, the auricles are
thought to be important for chemoreception (Cole and Allison 1930; Pigon et al.
1974; Ferrero and Bedini 1989), and thickened ciliated cells connected to neural
cells of the branches of the brain exist in the epithelium of the auricle (MacRae
1967; Okamoto et al. 2005; Inoue et al. 2015).
Recently, tractable and quantitative assays have been established for planarian
behaviors such as phototaxis, thermotaxis, chemotaxis, and thigmotaxis/kinesis
(Fig. 4.3a), and therefore these behaviors can now be quantiﬁed in detail for
parameters such as velocity, distance, orientation, location, and time (Inoue et al.
2004; Takano et al. 2007; Blackiston et al. 2010; Talbot et al. 2014; Inoue et al. 2014,
2015). These behavioral analyses combined with the RNAi technique (Sanchez
Alvarado and Newmark 1999; Rouhana et al. 2013) of neural-related genes have
enabled us to gain some understanding of the molecular mechanisms that regulate
neural function and behaviors. Studies on netrin of both Dugesia japonica and
Schmidtea mediterranea and their receptor homologues (DjnetB, Djunc5A, Smed-
netrin2, Smed-netR) and planarian slit and its receptor robo homologues (Djslit,
DjroboA, Smed-slit, Smed-roboA) revealed that wiring and proper remodeling of the

86
T. Inoue
Fig. 4.3 Planarian behaviors are regulated by neural activity in the brain. (a) Characteristic
planarian behaviors. Planarians show phototaxis, chemotaxis, thermotaxis, and thigmotaxis/kinesis
in response to their light, food, temperature, and the surface under them, respectively. (b) Ready-
knock experiment in planarian brain cells. Immunohistochemical detection of DjSYT protein,
which is involved in synaptic transmission, in brain neurons of normal head-regenerated animals
7 days after decapitation (Control). Severe reduction of DjSYT protein was observed in the
newly regenerated brain cells (Djsyt(RNAi)), although the brain was regenerated normally, as
indicated by Hoechst staining in blue. However, strong signals of the DjSYT protein were still
detected in the preexisting VNCs in the trunk region. (c) Heat map view of phototactic and
chemotactic behavior of control and Djsyt(RNAi) planarians in the ﬁeld exposed to light or
chemoattractant concentration-gradient ﬁeld. Circle indicates start area, and cross indicates the
highest concentration of chemoattractant. Djsyt(RNAi) planarians showed random movement,
whereas control planarians showed evasive behavior away from the light in the phototaxis assay
and moved to and stayed in the region having the highest concentration of chemoattractant in the
chemoattractant-gradient ﬁeld. Neural activity in the brain is required for planarian behaviors
neural network are essential for its neural function, and these guidance molecules
are required for formation of the optic chiasma, and for formation of the connection
between visual neurons and the brain, and the connection between the VNCs
essential for proper photosensing and locomotion (Cebria and Newmark 2005;
Cebria et al. 2007; Cebria and Newmark 2007; Yamamoto and Agata 2011).
Planarian homologues of immunoglobulin superfamily cell adhesion molecule
(DjCAM) similarly function in the fasciculation of axons essential for locomotion
in response to external stimuli (Fusaoka et al. 2006). In addition, synaptic recycling
regulated by clathrin, adapter protein-2 (AP-2), and dynamin was shown to be
required for planarian movement (Inoue et al. 2007; Talbot et al. 2014).

4
Functional Speciﬁcation of a Primitive Bilaterian Brain in Planarians
87
Furthermore, conditional gene knockdown was achieved by utilizing the com-
bination of RNAi and the regenerative ability of planarians in a procedure named
“Regeneration-dependent conditional gene knockdown (Readyknock)” (Fig. 4.3b)
(Takano et al. 2007). Readyknock experiments provided clear molecular evidence
that the planarian brain acts as an information-processing center to produce
planarian behaviors in response to environmental stimuli, such as phototaxis,
chemotaxis, thermotaxis, and thigmotaxis/kinesis, as shown by inhibition of brain
neural activity by Readyknock of neuron-speciﬁc genes Djsnap-25 and of Djsyt,
encoding a planarian synaptosome-associated protein of 25 kDa that is a component
of SNARE (soluble N-ethylmaleimide-sensitive fusion protein attachment protein
receptor) complex, and planarian synaptotagmin, respectively, which are effector
proteins for synaptic transition (Fig. 4.3c) (Takano et al. 2007; Inoue et al. 2014,
2015).
As planarian genes encoding rate-limiting enzymes, such as glutamic acid decar-
boxylase (GAD), tyrosine hydroxylase (TH), and tryptophan hydroxylase (TPH),
for the biosynthesis of neurotransmitters such as GABA, dopamine, and serotonin,
respectively, are expressed in discrete cells (Fig. 4.2c), interference with one gene
leads to inhibition of the corresponding neural function. Analyses of these genes
revealed neuronal subtypes and neural pathways involved in sensing external stimuli
and related characteristic behaviors (Fig. 4.4). For example, GABAergic neurons
Fig. 4.4 Neural networks controlling planarian behaviors. Planarians receive various signals
from the environment, through independent types of sensory neurons such as visual neurons,
thermosensory neurons, and chemosensory neurons. Signals received by sensory neurons are
processed by neurons in the brain, such as GABAergic neurons and serotonergic neurons.
Thereafter, the various signals are integrated via certain neural networks in the brain to decide
a planarian behavioral strategy. Subsequently, the planarian behaves suitably in response to its
environmental conditions by controlling its motor neurons

88
T. Inoue
distributed in the visual center in the brain are involved in processing the signals
received from visual neurons to enable proper phototaxis (Nishimura et al. 2008b).
Although serotonergic neurons are distributed throughout the body, including in the
brain and VNCs (Nishimura et al. 2007b), studies on brain-speciﬁc DjTPH(RNAi)
using the Readyknock method demonstrated that serotonergic neurons in the brain
are required for processing of thermosensing signals from TRPM family gene-
expressing thermosensing neurons to elicit cryophilic thermotaxis (Inoue et al.
2014). Planarian behavior is regulated in both cilia- and muscle-dependent manners
(Rompolas et al. 2010), and dopaminergic neurons coordinate muscle-mediated
locomotion (Nishimura et al. 2007a), whereas trunk serotonergic neurons regulate
cilia-mediated locomotion (Currie and Pearson 2013), and cholinergic neurons
regulate the motor function of body wall muscles (Nishimura et al. 2010).
4.5
Higher Brain Function in Planarians
In the 1950s, when it was generally thought that invertebrates do not have higher
brain function, James V. McConnell showed planarian capability of learning and
memory using classical conditioning with light and electrical shock (Fig. 4.5a)
(Thompson and McConnell 1955). In that experiment, when a planarian was trained
by repeatedly being given both electrical shock and light stimulation, planarians
began to react to the light stimulus alone. Utilizing the planarian high regenerative
ability, McConnell also showed that regenerated planarians that had been trained
before amputation retained memory. This phenomenon was analyzed from various
angles, and ﬁnally McConnell reported a “memory transfer” paradigm based on the
results of “cannibalism” studies, in which a naïve planarian showed the acquisition
of a conditioned response when the planarian was fed the body parts of a planarian
that had learned a classical conditioning task (McConnell 1962). As a result,
McConnell hypothesized that “RNA” is a memory-transferring molecule that can
transfer memories from trained to untrained organisms (McConnell 1962, 1964).
Although many researchers tried to conﬁrm this phenomenon of memory transfer,
they failed to replicate the result. Therefore, McConnell’s successful studies of
planarian learning, combined with the confusing issue of “memory transfer,” are
still controversial, and the phenomenon has not been veriﬁed since then.
The recently widely used methods of RNA-mediated gene expression modiﬁ-
cation show some striking parallels to the nearly forgotten method of “memory
transfer through RNA” proposed by McConnell, and recent studies show that
synaptic plasticity affected by local protein synthesis in neuronal dendritic spines
is involved in learning and memory (Greenspan 2003; Bramham and Messaoudi
2005; Bramham and Wells 2007; Costa-Mattioli et al. 2009; Sossin and Lacaille
2010), but it seems most likely that the effects of McConnell’s RNA were not
the result of transfer of memory itself. Future studies using tractable quantitative
behavioral, molecular, and cellular techniques to analyze the neural pathways of

4
Functional Speciﬁcation of a Primitive Bilaterian Brain in Planarians
89
Fig. 4.5 Planarian higher brain function. (a) Classical conditioning experiments (reproduced from
Thompson and McConnell 1955). If electrical shock is repeatedly given to a planarian after
exposure to light, the planarian begins to react to the light stimulus alone. The graph shows the
proportion of turns, contractions, and the combination of turns and contractions in planarians
exposed only to light as related to the number of light-shock training trials. (b) Integrative behavior
in planarian in response to simultaneous stimulation which light and chemoattractant. A planarian
was placed in the center (indicated by a circle). Chemoattractant (CA) was dropped into the
position indicated by a cross. When the chamber was illuminated from one side with 400 lux,
the planarians immediately moved away from the light. When chemoattractant was added and the
chamber was then exposed to 400 lux of light planarians showed chemotaxis but not negative
phototaxis, even though they had been exposed to sufﬁcient light to show phototaxis if light had
been the sole stimulus. When planarians in a chamber containing chemoattractant were exposed to
800 lux of light, some planarians showed negative phototaxis, whereas others showed chemotaxis.
When the planarians in the chamber were exposed to 1600 lux of light plus chemoattractant, they
showed negative phototaxis and also showed a statistically signiﬁcant failure to show chemotaxis.
This planarians do not show a simple, direct response to a stimulus, but rather integrate external
stimuli and then behave suitably in response to the overall conditions
planarian brain functions should be able to resolve the debate about the issue of
McConnell’s observations on inheritance of memory.
Recently, the ﬁrst molecular and neuronal evidence that planarian shows
decision-making behavior depending on the stimulus conditions by integrative
brain function was reported (Figs. 4.4, 4.5) (Inoue et al. 2015). In that experiment,
when planarians were exposed to light and chemoattractant simultaneously, the
planarians showed chemoattractive behavior regardless of the direction of the light,
although this intensity of light when presented by itself was sufﬁcient to induce
evasive behavior away from the light. In contrast, when the light intensity was
increased and the same dose of chemoattractant was presented, planarians showed
negative phototaxis behavior instead of chemoattractive behavior. These results
demonstrated that planarians decide on a behavioral strategy from among several
possible candidate behavioral strategies. Furthermore, it was shown that planarians
that had speciﬁcally lost neural activity in the brain as a result of Readyknock of
synaptotagmin in the brain lost such decision-making behavior (Inoue et al. 2015).

90
T. Inoue
4.6
Evolutionarily Early Binocular Visual System
in Planarians
The ontogeny and architecture of the eyes of vertebrates and invertebrates are
fundamentally different, which has caused discussion about whether the eyes of
vertebrates and invertebrates trace back to a common eye precursor or whether they
are of independent evolutionary origin. However, recent studies showing similarities
in the expression of transcription factors and other developmental molecular cues
indicate a common origin of light-sensitive systems in all animals. It was also shown
that planarian eyes share genetic similarity with vertebrate eyes, and planarian eyes
express otx, sine oculis, six1/2, eyes-absent, and many other genes involved in
phototransduction (Umesono et al. 1999; Pineda et al. 2000; Mannini et al. 2004;
Lapan and Reddien 2012). These observations suggest that photoreceptor cells were
presumably present in the Urbilateria, which may have used transcription factors
for eye formation and GPCRs for phototransduction (Arendt 2003; Gehring 2004;
Nilsson 2009).
Planarian eyes are composed of only two cell types: pigment cells are arranged
into a semicircular eyecup, and visual bipolar neurons are composed of cell bodies,
axons, and dendrites, with their cell bodies located outside the eyecup along the
anteroposterior axis (Fig. 4.6a) (Carpenter et al. 1974; Asano et al. 1998). Dendrites
from the visual neurons are enclosed by the pigment eyecup to form a rhabdomeric
structure (Hesse 1897; Press 1959; Kishida 1967), and the axons of the visual
Fig. 4.6 Binocular visual system in planarian. (a) Schematic drawing of architecture of planarian
eye. PE pigment eyecup, CB cell bodies, Rh rhabdomere, A axons. One representative visual
neuron is indicated in green. (b) Planarian eyes are composed of a pigment eyecup and visual
neurons. Cell bodies of visual neurons were visualized in blue by in situ hybridization for
expression of the rhodopsin gene, axons, and cell bodies of visual neurons were visualized in
green by immunostaining of arrestin, pigment eyecups were visualized in red by immunostaining
of TPH, and brain neurons were visualized in white by Hoechst staining

4
Functional Speciﬁcation of a Primitive Bilaterian Brain in Planarians
91
neurons project directly to the brain (Agata et al. 1998; Sakai et al. 2000; Okamoto et
al. 2005). The planarian eye is non-dioptric and cannot focus light to form an image,
and instead its visual neurons might sense the light direction from one side only as a
result of shielding by its pigment cells against the light from the opposite direction.
Interestingly, although the architecture of eyes is diverse among organisms (Gehring
2004), animals as evolutionarily early as cnidarians, with pigment-cup ocelli, had
acquired both pigment and photosensory capacity in a single cell (Nordstrom et
al. 2003), and even some dinoﬂagellates possess photoreceptor and pigment-cup
structures in a single cell (Greuet 1965; Gehring 2014), indicating that detection of
the direction of light by shielding against light coming from the opposite side with
pigment, rather than detection of light intensity, might have been the evolutionarily
fundamental and initial adaptive function of photosensing.
For determining the direction of light, an animal can compare the light intensity
perceived during its own movements in different directions. Although the binocular
visual system now has important roles in stereoscopic vision or providing a wide
ﬁeld of view, a binocular visual system may have initially been evolutionarily
acquired to sense the light coming from a wider range orientations than would be
possible with a single eye with pigment. Planarians possess the primitive bilaterally
symmetric eyes with simple architecture and display striking negative phototaxis
through neural wiring between the eyes and the brain with hemidecussation
(Fig. 4.6b) (Walter 1907; Taliaferro 1920; Agata et al. 1998; Inoue et al. 2004;
Takano et al. 2007; Gehring 2014), retaining this symmetry even in the case of
a multiocular planarian species (Kuchiiwa et al. 1991). These ﬁndings suggested
that the acquisition of a binocular visual system processing multiple inputs in the
planarian might be correlated with much higher throughputs in the brain to enable
robust recognition of the direction of a light source.
4.7
Evolutionary Implications of ndk Function
The evolution of the CNS remains a controversial issue in biology. Platyhelminthes
have been considered the most basal animals that acquired a CNS, although
molecular phylogenetic analysis and synapomorphies of stem cell-related characters
produce conﬂicting results regarding the position of the Acoela in the tree of life
(Egger et al. 2009). Therefore, planarians may provide unique opportunities for
investigating the evolutionary origin of the CNS from a diffuse nervous system.
To track the evolutionary transition from a diffuse nervous system to the CNS in
bilaterians, this section focuses on the role of nou-darake (ndk; meaning “brains
everywhere” in Japanese), a gene speciﬁcally expressed in the head regions includ-
ing the brain cells. ndk(RNAi) caused ectopic brain formation in the planarian trunk
region (Fig. 4.7) (Cebria et al. 2002a). Interestingly, the ectopic brain was gradually
expanded to posterior regions. ndk encodes a putative ﬁbroblast growth factor
(FGF) receptor-like protein lacking a tyrosine kinase domain in the intracellular
region, and the ectopic brain formation by ndk(RNAi) was suppressed by combined

92
T. Inoue
Fig. 4.7 Capture model of ndk function. A predicted brain-formation activator (green) can
stimulate the differentiation of brain neurons, but may be captured by NDK and consequently
not able to diffuse outside the head region. Excess brain activators are trapped by NDK, but
they can diffuse to the posterior region of the body in nou-darake RNAi planarians. However,
in ndk(RNAi)/FGFR1(RNAi)/FGFR2(RNAi) triple-knockdown planarians, ectopic brains were not
formed in the trunk region because of the lack of expression of FGFR in the neoblasts. In this
model, the existence of a third FGFR molecule (DjFGFR3), which has not yet been identiﬁed,
must be postulated for this capture model to form a brain in the head region
inhibition of two planarian FGF receptor genes (DjFGFR1 and DjFGFR2), which
are expressed in planarian neoblasts (Ogawa et al. 1998, 2002), indicating that NDK
negatively regulates a brain-inducing circuit based on FGF signaling outside the
head region in a non-cell-autonomous manner (Fig. 4.7). Indeed, ERK activation
in the anterior region regulates head formation during regeneration in planarians,
and ndk expression acts as an outcome of an ERK signaling in the differentiating
head blastema (Umesono et al. 2013). These observations give rise to the following
hypothesis about NDK function in brain formation in the head region: NDK may
regulate the diffusion range of brain activators (FGF or FGF-like molecules) from a
putative source in the head region to the rest of the body through direct interaction
with brain activators (Fig. 4.7). It may be able to bind an FGF-like brain activator
molecule, but not stimulate differentiation of the brain neurons. Loss of function of
ndk would allow these factors to travel to more posterior regions, and thus activate
FGF receptors outside the head region to trigger ectopic brain formation.
Interestingly, ndk is evolutionarily conserved with vertebrates (Trueb 2011), and
a Xenopus orthologue of ndk (XFGFRL1/Xndk) is expressed in the anterior region
at the late gastrula stage and dramatically increased at the early neurula stage in an
anterior mesendodermal region. Importantly, XFGFRL1 binds FGFs to antagonize
FGF signaling in Xenopus embryos (Steinberg et al. 2010), and ectopic expression

4
Functional Speciﬁcation of a Primitive Bilaterian Brain in Planarians
93
of planarian ndk mRNA inhibited Xenopus gastrulation by interfering with Xbra
expression (Cebria et al. 2002a). It is tempting to speculate that regulation of
FGF signaling via an evolutionarily conserved NDK function might have a pivotal
role in centralizing neurons in certain regions (Umesono and Agata 2009). Further
studies are required to unravel the molecular mechanisms of formation of the CNS,
including the brain.
4.8
Conclusions and Future Prospects
It is hypothesized that brain evolution may have been accompanied by the evo-
lutionary emergence of stem cell systems, including neural stem cells that could
give rise to a variety of neural cell types (Agata et al. 2006; Umesono and Agata
2009). Planarians have well-characterized somatic stem cells that are their only
mitotic cells and which give rise to all cell types during regeneration, and therefore
knowledge about the stem cell system of planarians might enable us to understand
brain morphogenesis as well as brain evolution in vivo. Recently, combinatory
analyses of quantitative planarian behavioral assays and molecular techniques such
as RNAi have provided evidence about the mechanisms of brain formation and brain
function in planarians. Further functional analysis of the planarian brain will provide
new insights into the fundamental principles of the evolution of centralization of the
nervous system and brain function, including higher brain function.
Acknowledgments I thank Dr. Kiyokazu Agata, Dr. Yoshihiko Umesono, Dr. Kaneyasu
Nishimura, Mr. Taiga Yamashita, Mr. Hajime Hoshino, Mr. Yoshitaro Akiyama, Dr. Seira
Shimoyama and Dr. Norito Shibata for collaboration in the planarian brain project, and Elizabeth
Nakajima for critical reading of the manuscript.
References
Adell T, Salo E, Boutros M, Bartscherer K (2009) Smed-Evi/Wntless is required for beta-
catenin-dependent and -independent processes during planarian regeneration. Development
136(6):905–910. doi:10.1242/dev.033761
Agata K, Watanabe K (1999) Molecular and cellular aspects of planarian regeneration. Semin Cell
Dev Biol 10(4):377–383. doi:10.1006/scdb.1999.0324
Agata K, Soejima Y, Kato K, Kobayashi C, Umesono Y, Watanabe K (1998) Structure of the
planarian central nervous system (CNS) revealed by neuronal cell markers. Zool Sci 15(3):433–
440. doi:10.2108/zsj.15.433
Agata K, Tanaka T, Kobayashi C, Kato K, Saitoh Y (2003) Intercalary regeneration in planarians.
Dev Dyn 226(2):308–316. doi:10.1002/dvdy.10249
Agata K, Nakajima E, Funayama N, Shibata N, Saito Y, Umesono Y (2006) Two different
evolutionary origins of stem cell systems and their molecular basis. Semin Cell Dev Biol
17(4):503–509. doi:10.1016/j.semcdb.2006.05.004
Arendt D (2003) Evolution of eyes and photoreceptor cell types. Int J Dev Biol 47(7–8):563–571

94
T. Inoue
Asano Y, Nakamura S, Ishida S, Azuma K, Shinozawa T (1998) Rhodopsin-like proteins in
planarian eye and auricle: detection and functional analysis. J Exp Biol 201(9):1263–1271
Baguna J, Slack JMW (1981) Planarian neoblasts. Nature 290(5801):14–15
Baguna J, Salo E, Auladell C (1989) Regeneration and pattern formation in planarians. III.
Evidence that neoblasts are totipotent stem cells and the source of blastema cells. Development
107(1):77–86
Barberan S, Fraguas S, Cebria F (2016) The EGFR signaling pathway controls gut progenitor
differentiation during planarian regeneration and homeostasis. Development 143(12):2089–
2102. doi:10.1242/dev.131995
Blackiston D, Shomrat T, Nicolas CL, Granata C, Levin M (2010) A second-generation device
for automated training and quantitative behavior analyses of molecularly-tractable model
organisms. PLoS One 5(12), e14370. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0014370
Bramham CR, Messaoudi E (2005) BDNF function in adult synaptic plasticity: the synaptic
consolidation hypothesis. Prog Neurobiol 76(2):99–125. doi:10.1016/j.pneurobio.2005.06.003
Bramham CR, Wells DG (2007) Dendritic mRNA: transport, translation and function. Nat Rev
Neurosci 8(10):776–789. doi:10.1038/nrn2150
Carpenter KS, Morita M, Best JB (1974) Ultrastructure of the photoreceptor of the planarian Duge-
sia dorotocephala. I. Normal eye. Cell Tissue Res 148(2):143–158. doi:10.1007/BF00224579
Cattenoz PB, Giangrande A (2013) Lineage speciﬁcation in the ﬂy nervous system and evolution-
ary implications. Cell Cycle 12(17):2753–2759. doi:10.4161/cc.25918
Cebria F, Newmark PA (2005) Planarian homologs of netrin and netrin receptor are required for
proper regeneration of the central nervous system and the maintenance of nervous system
architecture. Development 132(16):3691–3703. doi:10.1242/dev.01941
Cebria F, Newmark PA (2007) Morphogenesis defects are associated with abnormal nervous
system regeneration following roboA RNAi in planarians. Development 134(5):833–837.
doi:10.1242/dev.02794
Cebria F, Kobayashi C, Umesono Y, Nakazawa M, Mineta K, Ikeo K, Gojobori T, Itoh M, Taira M,
Sanchez Alvarado A, Agata K (2002a) FGFR-related gene nou-darake restricts brain tissues to
the head region of planarians. Nature 419(6907):620–624. doi:10.1038/nature01042
Cebria F, Kudome T, Nakazawa M, Mineta K, Ikeo K, Gojobori T, Agata K (2002b) The expression
of neural-speciﬁc genes reveals the structural and molecular complexity of the planarian central
nervous system. Mech Dev 116(1-2):199–204
Cebria F, Nakazawa M, Mineta K, Ikeo K, Gojobori T, Agata K (2002c) Dissecting planarian
central nervous system regeneration by the expression of neural-speciﬁc genes. Dev Growth
Differ 44(2):135–146
Cebria
F,
Guo
T,
Jopek
J,
Newmark
PA
(2007)
Regeneration
and
maintenance
of
the planarian midline is regulated by a slit orthologue. Dev Biol 307(2):394–406.
doi:10.1016/j.ydbio.2007.05.006
Chen CC, Wang IE, Reddien PW (2013) pbx is required for pole and eye regeneration in planarians.
Development 140(4):719–729. doi:10.1242/dev.083741
Cole WH, Allison JB (1930) Chemical stimulation by alcohols in the barnacle, the frog and
Planaria. J Gen Physiol 14(1):71–86
Collins JJ 3rd, Hou X, Romanova EV, Lambrus BG, Miller CM, Saberi A, Sweedler JV, Newmark
PA (2010) Genome-wide analyses reveal a role for peptide hormones in planarian germline
development. PLoS Biol 8(10), e1000509. doi:10.1371/journal.pbio.1000509
Costa-Mattioli M, Sossin WS, Klann E, Sonenberg N (2009) Translational control of long-lasting
synaptic plasticity and memory. Neuron 61(1):10–26. doi:10.1016/j.neuron.2008.10.055
Cowles MW, Brown DD, Nisperos SV, Stanley BN, Pearson BJ, Zayas RM (2013) Genome-wide
analysis of the bHLH gene family in planarians identiﬁes factors required for adult neurogene-
sis and neuronal regeneration. Development 140(23):4691–4702. doi:10.1242/dev.098616
Cowles MW, Omuro KC, Stanley BN, Quintanilla CG, Zayas RM (2014) COE loss-of-function
analysis reveals a genetic program underlying maintenance and regeneration of the nervous
system in planarians. PLoS Genet 10(10), e1004746. doi:10.1371/journal.pgen.1004746

4
Functional Speciﬁcation of a Primitive Bilaterian Brain in Planarians
95
Currie KW, Pearson BJ (2013) Transcription factors lhx1/5-1 and pitx are required for the main-
tenance and regeneration of serotonergic neurons in planarians. Development 140(17):3577–
3588. doi:10.1242/dev.098590
Dalyell JG (1814) Observations on some interesting phenomena in animal physiology, exhibited
by several species of planariae, illustrated by colored ﬁgures of living animals. Museum of
Comparative Zoology–Biodiversity Heritage Library digitization project. Archibald Constable,
Edinburgh. doi:10.5962/bhl.title.10135
Darwin C (1844) Brief descriptions of several terrestrial Planariæ, and of some remarkable marine
species, with an account of their habits. J Nat Hist 14(91):241–251
Egger B, Steinke D, Tarui H, De Mulder K, Arendt D, Borgonie G, Funayama N, Gschwentner R,
Hartenstein V, Hobmayer B, Hooge M, Hrouda M, Ishida S, Kobayashi C, Kuales G, Nishimura
O, Pﬁster D, Rieger R, Salvenmoser W, Smith J, Technau U, Tyler S, Agata K, Salzburger W,
Ladurner P (2009) To be or not to be a ﬂatworm: the acoel controversy. PLoS One 4(5):e5502.
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0005502
Elliott SA, Sanchez Alvarado A (2013) The history and enduring contributions of planari-
ans to the study of animal regeneration. Wiley Interdiscip Rev Dev Biol 2(3):301–326.
doi:10.1002/wdev.82
Felix DA, Aboobaker AA (2010) The TALE class homeobox gene Smed-prep deﬁnes the
anterior compartment for head regeneration. PLoS Genet 6(4):e1000915. doi:10.1371/jour-
nal.pgen.1000915
Ferrero EA, Bedini C (1989) Chemoreception in Turbellaria. Exp Biol 48(3):141–148
Fraguas S, Barberan S, Iglesias M, Rodriguez-Esteban G, Cebria F (2014) egr-4, a target of
EGFR signaling, is required for the formation of the brain primordia and head regeneration
in planarians. Development 141(9):1835–1847. doi:10.1242/dev.101345
Fusaoka E, Inoue T, Mineta K, Agata K, Takeuchi K (2006) Structure and function of primitive
immunoglobulin superfamily neural cell adhesion molecules: a lesson from studies on pla-
narian. Genes Cells 11(5):541–555. doi:10.1111/j.1365-2443.2006.00962.x
Gehring WJ (2004) Historical perspective on the development and evolution of eyes and photore-
ceptors. Int J Dev Biol 48(8-9):707–717. doi:10.1387/ijdb.041900wg
Gehring WJ (2014) The evolution of vision. Wiley Interdiscip Rev Dev Biol 3(1):1–40.
doi:10.1002/wdev.96
Greenspan RJ (2003) RNA and memory: from feeding to localization. Curr Biol 13(4):R126–R127
Greuet C (1965) Structure ﬁne de lócelle d’Erythropsis pavillardi Hertwig, ptéridinien Warnowi-
idae Lindemann. CR Acad Sci Paris 261:1904–1907
Guo T, Peters AH, Newmark PA (2006) A Bruno-like gene is required for stem cell maintenance
in planarians. Dev Cell 11(2):159–169. doi:10.1016/j.devcel.2006.06.004
Gurley KA, Rink JC, Sanchez Alvarado A (2008) Beta-catenin deﬁnes head versus tail identity
during planarian regeneration and homeostasis. Science 319(5861):323–327. doi:10.1126/sci-
ence.1150029
Hayashi T, Shibata N, Okumura R, Kudome T, Nishimura O, Tarui H, Agata K (2010)
Single-cell gene proﬁling of planarian stem cells using ﬂuorescent activated cell sorting
and its “index sorting” function for stem cell research. Dev Growth Differ 52(1):131–144.
doi:10.1111/j.1440-169X.2009.01157.x
Hesse R (1897) Untersuchungen über die organe der lichtempﬁndung bei niedern thieren.II. Die
Augen der Plathelminthen, insonderheit der Tricladen Turbellarien. Zeit Wiss Zool 62:527–582
Higuchi S, Hayashi T, Tarui H, Nishimura O, Nishimura K, Shibata N, Sakamoto H, Agata K
(2008) Expression and functional analysis of musashi-like genes in planarian CNS regenera-
tion. Mech Dev 125(7):631–645. doi:10.1016/j.mod.2008.03.002
Homem CC, Knoblich JA (2012) Drosophila neuroblasts: a model for stem cell biology. Develop-
ment 139(23):4297–4310. doi:10.1242/dev.080515
Hyman LH (1940) Native and introduced land planarians in the United States. Science
92(2379):105–106. doi:10.1126/science.92.2379.105

96
T. Inoue
Iglesias M, Gomez-Skarmeta JL, Salo E, Adell T (2008) Silencing of Smed-betacatenin1
generates
radial-like
hypercephalized
planarians.
Development
135(7):1215–1221.
doi:10.1242/dev.020289
Inoue T, Kumamoto H, Okamoto K, Umesono Y, Sakai M, Sanchez Alvarado A, Agata K (2004)
Morphological and functional recovery of the planarian photosensing system during head
regeneration. Zool Sci 21(3):275–283. doi:10.2108/zsj.21.275
Inoue T, Hayashi T, Takechi K, Agata K (2007) Clathrin-mediated endocytic signals are
required for the regeneration of, as well as homeostasis in, the planarian CNS. Development
134(9):1679–1689. doi:10.1242/dev.02835
Inoue T, Yamashita T, Agata K (2014) Thermosensory signaling by TRPM is processed by
brain serotonergic neurons to produce planarian thermotaxis. J Neurosci 34(47):15701–15714.
doi:10.1523/JNEUROSCI.5379-13.2014
Inoue T, Hoshino H, Yamashita T, Shimoyama S, Agata K (2015) Planarian shows decision-
making behavior in response to multiple stimuli by integrative brain function. Zool Lett 1(1):7.
doi:10.1186/s40851-014-0010-z
Kammermeier L, Reichert H (2001) Common developmental genetic mechanisms for patterning
invertebrate and vertebrate brains. Brain Res Bull 55(6):675–682
King RS, Newmark PA (2012) The cell biology of regeneration. J Cell Biol 196(5):553–562.
doi:10.1083/jcb.201105099
Kishida Y (1967) Electron microscopic studies on the planarian eye. I. Fine structures of the normal
eye. Sci Rep Kanazawa Univ 12(1):75–110
Kobayashi C, Saito Y, Ogawa K, Agata K (2007) Wnt signaling is required for anteroposterior
patterning of the planarian brain. Dev Biol 306(2):714–724. doi:10.1016/j.ydbio.2007.04.010
Kohwi M, Doe CQ (2013) Temporal fate speciﬁcation and neural progenitor competence during
development. Nat Rev Neurosci 14(12):823–838
Kuchiiwa T, Kuchiiwa S, Teshirogi W (1991) Comparative morphological studies on the visual
systems in a binocular and a multi-ocular species of freshwater planarian. Hydrobiologia
227:241–249
Lander R, Petersen CP (2016) Wnt, Ptk7, and FGFRL expression gradients control trunk positional
identity in planarian regeneration. Elife 5:e12850. doi:10.7554/eLife.12850
Lapan SW, Reddien PW (2011) dlx and sp6-9 control optic cup regeneration in a prototypic eye.
PLoS Genet 7(8):e1002226. doi:10.1371/journal.pgen.1002226
Lapan SW, Reddien PW (2012) Transcriptome analysis of the planarian eye identiﬁes ovo as a spe-
ciﬁc regulator of eye regeneration. Cell Rep 2(2):294–307. doi:10.1016/j.celrep.2012.06.018
Liu SY, Selck C, Friedrich B, Lutz R, Vila-Farre M, Dahl A, Brandl H, Lakshmanaperumal N,
Henry I, Rink JC (2013) Reactivating head regrowth in a regeneration-deﬁcient planarian
species. Nature 500(7460):81–84. doi:10.1038/nature12414
MacRae EK (1967) The ﬁne structure of sensory receptor processes in the auricular epithelium of
the planarian, Dugesia tigrina. Z Zellforsch Mikrosk Anat 82(4):479–494
Mannini L, Rossi L, Deri P, Gremigni V, Salvetti A, Salo E, Batistoni R (2004) Djeyes absent
(Djeya) controls prototypic planarian eye regeneration by cooperating with the transcription
factor Djsix-1. Dev Biol 269(2):346–359. doi:10.1016/j.ydbio.2004.01.042
McConnell JV (1962) Memory transfer through cannibalism in planarians. J Neuropsychiatry
3(suppl 1):S42
McConnell JV (1964) On the turning of worms: a reply to James and Halas. Psychol Rec 14:13–20
Mineta K, Nakazawa M, Cebria F, Ikeo K, Agata K, Gojobori T (2003) Origin and evolutionary
process of the CNS elucidated by comparative genomics analysis of planarian ESTs. Proc Natl
Acad Sci USA 100(13):7666–7671. doi:10.1073/pnas.1332513100
Monjo F, Romero R (2015) Embryonic development of the nervous system in the planarian
Schmidtea polychroa. Dev Biol 397(2):305–319. doi:10.1016/j.ydbio.2014.10.021
Morgan TH (1898) Experimental studies of the regeneration of Planaria maculata. Arch Entwickl
Org 7(2-3):364–397. doi:10.1007/bf02161491

4
Functional Speciﬁcation of a Primitive Bilaterian Brain in Planarians
97
Morita M, Best JB (1966) Electron microscopic studies of Planaria. 3. Some observa-
tions on the ﬁne structure of planarian nervous tissue. J Exp Zool 161(3):391–411.
doi:10.1002/jez.1401610307
Moseley HN (1874) On the anatomy and histology of land planarians of Ceylon; with account
for their habits, and a description of two new species, and with notes on the anatomy of some
European aquatic species. Philos Trans R Soc Lond 10:105–171
Newmark PA, Sanchez Alvarado A (2000) Bromodeoxyuridine speciﬁcally labels the regenerative
stem cells of planarians. Dev Biol 220(2):142–153. doi:10.1006/dbio.2000.9645
Newmark PA, Sanchez Alvarado A (2002) Not your father’s planarian: a classic model enters the
era of functional genomics. Nat Rev Genet 3(3):210–219. doi:10.1038/nrg759
Nilsson DE (2009) The evolution of eyes and visually guided behaviour. Philos Trans R Soc Lond
B Biol Sci 364(1531):2833–2847. doi:10.1098/rstb.2009.0083
Nishimura K, Kitamura Y, Inoue T, Umesono Y, Sano S, Yoshimoto K, Inden M, Takata
K, Taniguchi T, Shimohama S, Agata K (2007a) Reconstruction of dopaminergic neural
network and locomotion function in planarian regenerates. Dev Neurobiol 67(8):1059–1078.
doi:10.1002/dneu.20377
Nishimura K, Kitamura Y, Inoue T, Umesono Y, Yoshimoto K, Takeuchi K, Taniguchi T, Agata K
(2007b) Identiﬁcation and distribution of tryptophan hydroxylase (TPH)-positive neurons in the
planarian Dugesia japonica. Neurosci Res 59(1):101–106. doi:10.1016/j.neures.2007.05.014
Nishimura K, Kitamura Y, Inoue T, Umesono Y, Yoshimoto K, Taniguchi T, Agata K (2008a)
Characterization of tyramine beta-hydroxylase in planarian Dugesia japonica: cloning and
expression. Neurochem Int 53(6-8):184–192. doi:10.1016/j.neuint.2008.09.006
Nishimura K, Kitamura Y, Umesono Y, Takeuchi K, Takata K, Taniguchi T, Agata K
(2008b) Identiﬁcation of glutamic acid decarboxylase gene and distribution of GABAer-
gic nervous system in the planarian Dugesia japonica. Neuroscience 153(4):1103–1114.
doi:10.1016/j.neuroscience.2008.03.026
Nishimura K, Kitamura Y, Taniguchi T, Agata K (2010) Analysis of motor function modu-
lated by cholinergic neurons in planarian Dugesia japonica. Neuroscience 168(1):18–30.
doi:10.1016/j.neuroscience.2010.03.038
Nordstrom K, Wallen R, Seymour J, Nilsson D (2003) A simple visual system without neurons in
jellyﬁsh larvae. Proc Biol Sci 270(1531):2349–2354. doi:10.1098/rspb.2003.2504
Ogawa K, Wakayama A, Kunisada T, Orii H, Watanabe K, Agata K (1998) Identiﬁcation of a
receptor tyrosine kinase involved in germ cell differentiation in planarians. Biochem Biophys
Res Commun 248(1):204–209. doi:10.1006/bbrc.1998.8915
Ogawa K, Kobayashi C, Hayashi T, Orii H, Watanabe K, Agata K (2002) Planarian ﬁbroblast
growth factor receptor homologs expressed in stem cells and cephalic ganglions. Dev Growth
Differ 44(3):191–204
Okamoto K, Takeuchi K, Agata K (2005) Neural projections in planarian brain revealed by
ﬂuorescent dye tracing. Zool Sci 22(5):535–546. doi:10.2108/zsj.22.535
Okano H, Imai T, Okabe M (2002) Musashi: a translational regulator of cell fate. J Cell Sci 115(pt
7):1355–1359
Pallas PS, Dwight J, Gurney JH, Lea I, Richmond CW, Tucker MB, Philadelphia. AoNSo, ﬁlius.
CFVe, Library of Congress (1767) Spicilegia zoologica: quibus novae imprimis et obscurae
animalium species iconibus, descriptionibus atque commentariis illustrantur/cura P.S. Pallas,
vol fasc. 1–10. Prostant apud Gottl. August. Lange, Berolini. doi:10.5962/bhl.title.39832
Parker GH, Burnett FL (1900) The reactions of planarians with and without eyes to light. Am J
Physiol 4:373–385
Pearl R (1903) The movements and reactions of fresh-water planarians: a study in animal
behaviour. Q J Microsc Sci 46(184):509–714
Petersen CP, Reddien PW (2008) Smed-betacatenin-1 is required for anteroposterior blastema
polarity in planarian regeneration. Science 319(5861):327–330. doi:10.1126/science.1149943
Petersen CP, Reddien PW (2009) Wnt signaling and the polarity of the primary body axis. Cell
139(6):1056–1068. doi:10.1016/j.cell.2009.11.035

98
T. Inoue
Petersen CP, Reddien PW (2011) Polarized notum activation at wounds inhibits Wnt func-
tion to promote planarian head regeneration. Science 332(6031):852–855. doi:10.1126/sci-
ence.1202143
Pigon A, Morita M, Best JB (1974) Cephalic mechanism for social control of ﬁssioning in
planarians. II. Localization and identiﬁcation of the receptors by electron micrographic and
ablation studies. J Neurobiol 5(5):443–462. doi:10.1002/neu.480050506
Pineda D, Gonzalez J, Callaerts P, Ikeo K, Gehring WJ, Salo E (2000) Searching for the prototypic
eye genetic network: sine oculis is essential for eye regeneration in planarians. Proc Natl Acad
Sci USA 97(9):4525–4529. doi:10.1073/pnas.97.9.4525
Press N (1959) Electron microscope study of the distal portion of a planarian retinular cell. Biol
Bull 117(3):511–517. doi:10.2307/1538864
Reddien PW (2013) Specialized progenitors and regeneration. Development 140(5):951–957.
doi:10.1242/dev.080499
Reddien PW, Sanchez Alvarado A (2004) Fundamentals of planarian regeneration. Annu Rev Cell
Dev Biol 20:725–757. doi:10.1146/annurev.cellbio.20.010403.095114
Reddien PW, Bermange AL, Murﬁtt KJ, Jennings JR, Sanchez Alvarado A (2005a) Identiﬁcation
of genes needed for regeneration, stem cell function, and tissue homeostasis by systematic gene
perturbation in Planaria. Dev Cell 8(5):635–649. doi:10.1016/j.devcel.2005.02.014
Reddien PW, Oviedo NJ, Jennings JR, Jenkin JC, Sanchez Alvarado A (2005b) SMEDWI-2
is a PIWI-like protein that regulates planarian stem cells. Science 310(5752):1327–1330.
doi:10.1126/science.1116110
Reuter H, Marz M, Vogg MC, Eccles D, Grifol-Boldu L, Wehner D, Owlarn S, Adell T, Weidinger
G, Bartscherer K (2015) Beta-catenin-dependent control of positional information along the
AP body axis in planarians involves a teashirt family member. Cell Rep 10(2):253–265.
doi:10.1016/j.celrep.2014.12.018
Rink JC (2013) Stem cell systems and regeneration in Planaria. Dev Genes Evol 223(1-2):67–84.
doi:10.1007/s00427-012-0426-4
Rink JC, Gurley KA, Elliott SA, Sanchez Alvarado A (2009) Planarian Hh signaling regulates
regeneration polarity and links Hh pathway evolution to cilia. Science 326(5958):1406–1410.
doi:10.1126/science.1178712
Roberts-Galbraith RH, Newmark PA (2013) Follistatin antagonizes activin signaling and acts with
notum to direct planarian head regeneration. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 110(4):1363–1368.
doi:10.1073/pnas.1214053110
Rompolas P, Patel-King RS, King SM (2010) An outer arm dynein conformational switch is
required for metachronal synchrony of motile cilia in Planaria. Mol Biol Cell 21(21):3669–
3679. doi:10.1091/mbc.E10-04-0373
Rouhana L, Shibata N, Nishimura O, Agata K (2010) Different requirements for conserved
post-transcriptional regulators in planarian regeneration and stem cell maintenance. Dev Biol
341(2):429–443. doi:10.1016/j.ydbio.2010.02.037
Rouhana L, Weiss JA, Forsthoefel DJ, Lee H, King RS, Inoue T, Shibata N, Agata K, Newmark PA
(2013) RNA interference by feeding in vitro-synthesized double-stranded RNA to planarians:
methodology and dynamics. Dev Dyn 242(6):718–730. doi:10.1002/dvdy.23950
Rouhana L, Weiss JA, King RS, Newmark PA (2014) PIWI homologs mediate Histone
H4 mRNA localization to planarian chromatoid bodies. Development 141(13):2592–2601.
doi:10.1242/dev.101618
Sakai F, Agata K, Orii H, Watanabe K (2000) Organization and regeneration ability of spontaneous
supernumerary eyes in planarians: eye regeneration ﬁeld and pathway selection by optic nerves.
Zool Sci 17(3):375–381. doi:10.2108/jsz.17.375
Sanchez Alvarado A (2007) Stem cells and the planarian Schmidtea mediterranea. C R Biol 330(6-
7):498–503. doi:10.1016/j.crvi.2007.05.005
Sanchez Alvarado A, Newmark PA (1999) Double-stranded RNA speciﬁcally disrupts gene
expression during planarian regeneration. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 96(9):5049–5054
Sarnat HB, Netsky MG (1985) The brain of the planarian as the ancestor of the human brain. Can
J Neurol Sci 12(4):296–302

4
Functional Speciﬁcation of a Primitive Bilaterian Brain in Planarians
99
Scimone ML, Srivastava M, Bell GW, Reddien PW (2011) A regulatory program for excretory
system regeneration in planarians. Development 138(20):4387–4398. doi:10.1242/dev.068098
Scimone ML, Kravarik KM, Lapan SW, Reddien PW (2014) Neoblast specialization in
regeneration of the planarian Schmidtea mediterranea. Stem Cell Rep 3(2):339–352.
doi:10.1016/j.stemcr.2014.06.001
Scimone ML, Cote LE, Rogers T, Reddien PW (2016) Two FGFRL-Wnt circuits organize the
planarian anteroposterior axis. Elife 5:e12845. doi:10.7554/eLife.12845
Shibata N, Umesono Y, Orii H, Sakurai T, Watanabe K, Agata K (1999) Expression of vasa(vas)-
related genes in germline cells and totipotent somatic stem cells of planarians. Dev Biol
206(1):73–87. doi:10.1006/dbio.1998.9130
Shibata
N,
Rouhana
L,
Agata
K
(2010)
Cellular
and
molecular
dissection
of
pluripotent adult somatic stem cells in planarians. Dev Growth Differ 52(1):27–41.
doi:10.1111/j.1440-169X.2009.01155.x
Shibata N, Hayashi T, Fukumura R, Fujii J, Kudome-Takamatsu T, Nishimura O, Sano S, Son
F, Suzuki N, Araki R, Abe M, Agata K (2012) Comprehensive gene expression analyses
in pluripotent stem cells of a planarian, Dugesia japonica. Int J Dev Biol 56(1-3):93–102.
doi:10.1387/ijdb.113434ns
Shibata N, Kashima M, Ishiko T, Nishimura O, Rouhana L, Misaki K, Yonemura S, Saito K, Siomi
H, Siomi MC, Agata K (2016) Inheritance of a nuclear PIWI from pluripotent stem cells by
somatic descendants ensures differentiation by silencing transposons in planarian. Dev Cell
37(3):226–237. doi:10.1016/j.devcel.2016.04.009
Sikes JM, Newmark PA (2013) Restoration of anterior regeneration in a planarian with limited
regenerative ability. Nature 500(7460):77–80. doi:10.1038/nature12403
Sossin WS, Lacaille JC (2010) Mechanisms of translational regulation in synaptic plasticity. Curr
Opin Neurobiol 20(4):450–456. doi:10.1016/j.conb.2010.03.011
Steinberg F, Zhuang L, Beyeler M, Kalin RE, Mullis PE, Brandli AW, Trueb B (2010) The
FGFRL1 receptor is shed from cell membranes, binds ﬁbroblast growth factors (FGFs),
and antagonizes FGF signaling in Xenopus embryos. J Biol Chem 285(3):2193–2202.
doi:10.1074/jbc.M109.058248
Takano T, Pulvers JN, Inoue T, Tarui H, Sakamoto H, Agata K, Umesono Y (2007) Regeneration-
dependent conditional gene knockdown (Readyknock) in planarian: demonstration of require-
ment for Djsnap-25 expression in the brain for negative phototactic behavior. Dev Growth
Differ 49(5):383–394. doi:10.1111/j.1440-169X.2007.00936.x
Talbot JA, Currie KW, Pearson BJ, Collins EM (2014) Smed-dynA-1 is a planarian nervous
system speciﬁc dynamin 1 homolog required for normal locomotion. Biol Open 3(7):627–634.
doi:10.1242/bio.20147583
Taliaferro WH (1920) Reactions to light in Planaria maculata, with special reference to the
function and structure of the eyes. J Exp Zool 31(1):59–116. doi:10.1002/jez.1400310103
Tasaki J, Shibata N, Nishimura O, Itomi K, Tabata Y, Son F, Suzuki N, Araki R, Abe M, Agata
K, Umesono Y (2011a) ERK signaling controls blastema cell differentiation during planarian
regeneration. Development 138(12):2417–2427. doi:10.1242/dev.060764
Tasaki J, Shibata N, Sakurai T, Agata K, Umesono Y (2011b) Role of c-Jun N-terminal kinase
activation in blastema formation during planarian regeneration. Dev Growth Differ 53(3):389–
400. doi:10.1111/j.1440-169X.2011.01254.x
Tazaki A, Gaudieri S, Ikeo K, Gojobori T, Watanabe K, Agata K (1999) Neural network in
planarian revealed by an antibody against planarian synaptotagmin homologue. Biochem
Biophys Res Commun 260(2):426–432. doi:10.1006/bbrc.1999.0933
Thompson R, McConnell JV (1955) Classical conditioning in the planarian, Dugesia doroto-
cephala. J Comp Physiol Psychol 48(1):65–68
Trueb B (2011) Biology of FGFRL1, the ﬁfth ﬁbroblast growth factor receptor. Cell Mol Life Sci
68(6):951–964. doi:10.1007/s00018-010-0576-3
Umesono Y, Agata K (2009) Evolution and regeneration of the planarian central nervous system.
Dev Growth Differ 51(3):185–195. doi:10.1111/j.1440-169X.2009.01099.x

100
T. Inoue
Umesono Y, Watanabe K, Agata K (1997) A planarian orthopedia homolog is speciﬁcally
expressed in the branch region of both the mature and regenerating brain. Dev Growth Differ
39(6):723–727
Umesono Y, Watanabe K, Agata K (1999) Distinct structural domains in the planarian brain deﬁned
by the expression of evolutionarily conserved homeobox genes. Dev Genes Evol 209(1):31–39.
doi:10.1007/s004270050224
Umesono Y, Tasaki J, Nishimura K, Inoue T, Agata K (2011) Regeneration in an evolutionarily
primitive brain: the planarian Dugesia japonica model. Eur J Neurosci 34(6):863–869.
doi:10.1111/j.1460-9568.2011.07819.x
Umesono Y, Tasaki J, Nishimura Y, Hrouda M, Kawaguchi E, Yazawa S, Nishimura O, Hosoda
K, Inoue T, Agata K (2013) The molecular logic for planarian regeneration along the anterior-
posterior axis. Nature 500(7460):73–76. doi:10.1038/nature12359
van Wolfswinkel JC, Wagner DE, Reddien PW (2014) Single-cell analysis reveals functionally
distinct classes within the planarian stem cell compartment. Cell Stem Cell 15(3):326–339.
doi:10.1016/j.stem.2014.06.007
Wagner DE, Ho JJ, Reddien PW (2012) Genetic regulators of a pluripotent adult stem cell
system in planarians identiﬁed by RNAi and clonal analysis. Cell Stem Cell 10(3):299–311.
doi:10.1016/j.stem.2012.01.016
Walter
HE
(1907)
The
reactions
of
planarians
to
light. J
Exp
Zool
5(1-3):35–162.
doi:10.1002/Jez.1400050104
Wenemoser D, Lapan SW, Wilkinson AW, Bell GW, Reddien PW (2012) A molecular wound
response program associated with regeneration initiation in planarians. Genes Dev 26(9):988–
1002. doi:10.1101/gad.187377.112
Yamamoto H, Agata K (2011) Optic chiasm formation in planarian I: cooperative netrin- and robo-
mediated signals are required for the early stage of optic chiasm formation. Dev Growth Differ
53(3):300–311. doi:10.1111/j.1440-169X.2010.01234.x
Yazawa S, Umesono Y, Hayashi T, Tarui H, Agata K (2009) Planarian Hedgehog/Patched
establishes anterior-posterior polarity by regulating Wnt signaling. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
106(52):22329–22334. doi:10.1073/pnas.0907464106
Yoshida-Kashikawa M, Shibata N, Takechi K, Agata K (2007) DjCBC-1, a conserved DEAD box
RNA helicase of the RCK/p54/Me31B family, is a component of RNA–protein complexes in
planarian stem cells and neurons. Dev Dyn 236(12):3436–3450. doi:10.1002/dvdy.21375
Zayas RM, Cebria F, Guo T, Feng J, Newmark PA (2010) The use of lectins as markers for differ-
entiated secretory cells in planarians. Dev Dyn 239(11):2888–2897. doi:10.1002/dvdy.22427

Chapter 5
The Computation and Robustness
of the Mini-Cognitive Centers of Terrestrial
Mollusks: An Exquisite Outcome of Brain
Evolution
Ryota Matsuo
Abstract Terrestrial mollusks (slugs and snails) have brains with highly evolved
and intriguing characteristics. These characteristics are comparable, or far superior,
to those of the mammalian brain. The ﬁrst ability is the capacity to acquire
sophisticated olfactory memories, which probably allows them to survive in their
terrestrial environments. A specialized structure in the brain, called the procere-
brum, functions as a higher olfactory center, and enables the slugs and snails to
accomplish complex olfactory tasks. The second characteristic is the presence of
many polyploid neurons in the brain, although this is not a speciﬁc feature of the
terrestrial slugs or snails but prevails widely in gastropod animal species. Polyploidy
is observed primarily in motor and endocrine neurons innervating peripheral organs
that continue to grow in the adult. Polyploidization seems to occur to meet the
increasing demand for macromolecules in these neurons to innervate and control
the growing peripheral organs. The third characteristic is an ability to regenerate
an injured part of the central nervous system spontaneously. One clear example is
the spontaneous regeneration of an amputated tentacle: the regenerated tentacle is
equipped with all the elements of the original one. The procerebrum also exhibits
structural and functional regeneration following injury, which is accomplished by
enhancing ongoing neurogenesis in the adult.
Keywords Limax • Procerebrum • Olfactory learning • Endoreplication • Poly-
ploidy • Neurogenesis • Regeneration
R. Matsuo ()
Fokuoka Women’s University, Fukuoka, Japan
e-mail: matsuor@fwu.ac.jp
© Springer Japan KK 2017
S. Shigeno et al. (eds.), Brain Evolution by Design, Diversity and Commonality
in Animals, DOI 10.1007/978-4-431-56469-0_5
101

102
R. Matsuo
5.1
Introduction
The brain of the gastropod mollusks has long served as a model system for the
study of synaptic plasticity, learning/memory, and nerve regeneration. One of the
advantages in the use of gastropods is the feasibility of investigating neuronal
properties in in vitro preparations. Another advantage is the large size of the cell
bodies of the neurons, which allows various artiﬁcial manipulations for studying the
functions of genes and proteins. Many researchers, therefore, have been engaged in
the use of the sea hare Aplysia, which has as few as several tens of thousands of
large neurons in its central nervous system (CNS) (Bailey et al. 1996).
Beside the simplicity of the brains of the marine gastropods, terrestrial pulmonate
gastropod species, such as the slug Limax and the snails Helix and Achatina,
have a very sophisticated brain, composed of more than hundreds of thousands of
neurons. These animals have successfully adapted their way of life to the terrestrial
environment, possibly in part because of their higher intellectual capacity as well
as their well-developed olfaction. Their brains also show neuronal DNA polyploidy
and exquisite regenerative capability, both of which have never been realized in the
human brain.
In this chapter, I ﬁrst review what has been demonstrated during the study of
olfactory function and learning capability in Limax and Helix (Sect. 5.2), followed
by an overview of the structure and function of their brains, focusing on the tentacles
and higher olfactory center, the procerebrum (Sect. 5.3). DNA polyploidization,
an unusual property intrinsic to the gastropod brain, is then introduced (Sect. 5.4).
Finally, I describe and discuss the regenerative ability of the tentacles and the brain
following physical injury (Sect. 5.5).
5.2
Olfactory Learning in Limax
5.2.1
Olfactory Associative Learning
Olfaction is an important sensory modality for the terrestrial slugs and snails. They
rely primarily on olfaction to sense their surroundings in their daily lives. In 1975,
Gelperin reported that the terrestrial slug Limax can acquire odor-aversion memory
if it is exposed to CO2 gas immediately following the intake of some speciﬁc food
(e.g., mushrooms) (Gelperin 1975). The slugs avoided this food thereafter when
they detected its odor, whereas they did not avoid the food odor that was not paired
with the aversive stimulus (CO2). Therefore, the slugs distinguish the learned odor
from the other and form an odor-speciﬁc aversive memory. Following this report,
various modiﬁed protocols have been developed for the behavioral study of odor-
aversion learning in Limax and Helix (Sahley et al. 1981a; Maximova and Balaban
1984; Nakaya et al. 2001). In some of these, a single paired presentation of the CS
(odor) and US (aversive stimulus) was sufﬁcient to establish a long-term memory
(i.e., a protein synthesis-dependent memory phase) (Matsuo et al. 2002). In most of

5
The Computation and Robustness of the Mini-Cognitive Centers...
103
the studies, the formation of odor-aversion memory was assessed by an increase in
the latency until reaching the odor source.
Slugs can also acquire olfactory appetitive association learning by receiving a
paired presentation of some odor and an attractive stimulus, or by simply letting the
slugs eat some novel food. As a result of the appetitive learning, the behavior of
the slugs was changed in the face of the conditioned odor. The memory formation
was judged by an increased preference for the conditioned odor over the other, as
assessed by the relative increase of time spent over the odor source (Sahley et al.
1990), the reduced latency until reaching the odor source (Yabumoto et al. 2008), or
an increase in the probability of exhibiting eating behavior (Sekiguchi et al. 2010).
It has been reported that the slugs can acquire more difﬁcult learning tasks. They
understand the logical relationship between stimuli presented sequentially (Sahley
et al. 1981b). In the second-order conditioning, a potato odor (CS2) is presented in
combination with a carrot odor (CS1) that was aversively conditioned in advance by
paired presentation with a bitter taste of quinidine sulfate (US). As a result, the slugs
come to avoid not only the carrot odor but also the potato odor, suggesting that they
could relate CS2 to the US through CS1. In “blocking”, the slugs were conditioned
with the carrot odor (CS1) by paired presentation with quinidine taste in phase 1.
Then, the carrot odor and potato odor (CS2) were presented with quinidine taste in
phase 2. However, this does not lead the slugs to avoid the potato odor, indicating
that the CS1 is sufﬁcient to predict the occurrence of the US and this blocked the
further conditioning to the CS2. Such a blocking phenomenon was initially reported
in rats by Kamin (1969). The slugs, therefore, can perform logically complex tasks
sufﬁciently well and are as smart as mammals.
5.2.2
Memory Consolidation and Reconsolidation
The olfactory memory of the slugs is consolidated in a protein synthesis-dependent
manner, as in most other animals. If a protein synthesis inhibitor anisomycin is
systemically injected into the body cavity 30 min before the conditioning, memory
retention does not persist for more than 2 days. At 24 h after the conditioning,
however, they still retain and retrieve the aversive memory (Matsuo et al. 2002).
When the extent of the protein synthesis inhibition is low, the memory is lost at an
even later time point (3 or more days after the conditioning (Matsuo et al. 2002;
Yasui et al. 2004; Suenaga and Matsuo 2016). Based on these observations, the
long-term memory can be considered the phase later than 2 days after memory
formation in slug; this is in clear contrast to the results obtained in other animal
species wherein the protein synthesis inhibitors impair memory retention at 24 h
after conditioning (Flood et al. 1972; Bull et al. 1976; Montarolo et al. 1986; Tully et
al. 1994; Pedreira et al. 1996). There is currently no explanation for this peculiarity
of the slug. Future investigations should focus on how the slugs retain the memory
for more than 24 h without or with only a low amount of newly synthesized protein
in the brain following the conditioning.

104
R. Matsuo
In addition to memory consolidation, memory reconsolidation has received the
attention of neuroscientists, especially since the discovery of the “reconsolidation
failure” by protein synthesis inhibitors administered into the amygdala immediately
following the memory retrieval in rats (Nader et al. 2000). Nader et al. (2000)
demonstrated that the protein synthesis inhibition in the amygdala immediately
following the retrieval of the tone-dependent fear memory abolishes that memory
even if it already has been fully consolidated, whereas Milekic and Alberini (2002)
have reported that the effectiveness of this manipulation gradually declines in rats
as time passes after the initial conditioning in inhibitory avoidance tasks. There
has been extensive discussion of this discrepancy ever since these reports were
published (Dudai and Eisenberg 2004; Lee 2009; Nader and Einarsson 2010).
On the other hand, the phenomenon of memory reconsolidation failure itself
had been reported long before the discovery by Nader et al. (2000). In these
classical studies, memory reconsolidation failure was caused by memory retrieval
in combination with an electroconvulsive shock (Misanin et al. 1968), rapid
cooling (Mactutus et al. 1979), or a systemic injection of anisomycin (Judge and
Quartermain 1982), instead of infusion of a protein synthesis inhibitor into the
speciﬁc brain area (Nader et al. 2000; Debiec et al. 2002). In the terrestrial slug
Limax, rapid cooling immediately after the retrieval of an odor-aversion memory
abolishes the memory; this effect is temporally graded according to the increase
in the interval between the initial conditioning and the memory retrieval/cooling
(Yamada et al. 1992; Sekiguchi et al. 1997), similar to a report by Milekic and
Alberini (2002). These facts indicate that slugs and mammals share common neural
underpinnings in memory reconsolidation. Although the cooling (hypothermia) and
protein synthesis inhibition do not seem to target the identical molecular steps
leading to the memory stabilization (Fulton et al. 2008; see also the discussion
in Matsuo 2015), the temporal change of memory states will be more thoroughly
investigated using Limax because of the greater ease of handling and feasibility of
using large sample sizes amenable to statistical analysis.
5.3
Structure and Function of the Cognitive Center of Limax
5.3.1
Structure of the Brain
The brain of terrestrial slugs and snails is located in the head and circumscribes
the esophagus (therefore, the brain is sometimes referred to as “circumesophageal
ganglia”), a feature common to all gastropod mollusks. In comparison with other
molluscan animals, however, the brains of the terrestrial slugs and snails contain far
larger numbers of neurons within the brain (>105 neurons). This difference is mostly
ascribable to the presence of the olfactory center, called the procerebrum (PC).
Because terrestrial slugs and snails depend on olfaction to monitor their surrounding
environment, a large number of neurons are devoted to the processing of olfactory
information. In fact, approximately half the total neurons in the brain are found in
the PC (Chase 2000).

5
The Computation and Robustness of the Mini-Cognitive Centers...
105
Fig. 5.1 Structure of the brain of the terrestrial slug Limax. Right panel is a cartoon of the
procerebrum (PC); below it is a typical local ﬁeld potential (LFP) oscillation recorded on the
surface of the PC. Olfactory input comes into the TM layer of the PC. The small circles in the CM
are the nonbursting (NB) neurons and the ovals are the bursting (B) neurons. For simplicity, an
inferior tentacular nerve is not drawn. TM terminal mass, CM cell mass, IM internal mass
The PC, which is located on both lateral sides of the cerebral ganglia (Fig. 5.1), is
ontogenetically different from the rest of the cerebral ganglion in that it derives from
a distinct ectodermal invagination during embryonic development (Chase 2000).
The PC consists of three structurally distinct layers: the cell mass (CM), terminal
mass (TM), and internal mass (IM) layers. In the CM layer, a large number of cell
bodies of small interneurons are found in dense arrangements. The TM layer and IM
layer are under the cell mass layer and consist of nerve ﬁbers derived from the small
neurons in the CM layer. This layered structure is reminiscent of the cortical brain
structure of vertebrates. In the TM layer, the interneurons of the PC receive olfactory
inputs from the tentacles. Although the structural features have been investigated to
a lesser extent for the IM layer, this layer seems to be involved in the output to the
other parts of the brain as well as participating in reciprocal interactions among the
PC neurons (Ratté and Chase 1997, 2000).
Although the PC neurons are seemingly a homogeneous neuronal population,
there are known to be at least two distinct types of neurons that can be distinguished
based on their electrophysiological properties. The majority are nonbursting (NB)
neurons, and the minority are termed bursting (B) neurons. The B neurons comprise
less than 10 % of the total number of PC neurons and exhibit periodic, spontaneous
bursting activity. On the other hand, the NB neurons (>90 %) do not exhibit periodic

106
R. Matsuo
bursts, but instead show infrequent ﬁrings, possibly caused by inputs from the
olfactory nerves (Kleinfeld et al. 1994; Watanabe et al. 1998). The B neurons release
glutamate periodically ( 0.7 Hz) and suppress the activity of the NB neurons around
them (Watanabe et al. 1999; Matsuo et al. 2009). Although not yet conclusively
demonstrated, the NB neurons seem to generate nitric oxide and also to use
acetylcholine as a neurotransmitter (Fujie et al. 2005; Matsuo and Ito 2009; Matsuo
et al. 2014a). At the morphological level, the NB neurons have small cell bodies
and extend their protrusions into the TM and IM layers, whereas the B neurons
have relatively larger cell bodies and project laterally within the CM layer (Fig. 5.1)
(Watanabe et al. 1998). However, such a dichotomy may be an oversimpliﬁcation.
At the molecular level, the PC is composed of a more heterogeneous neuronal
population, as indicated by the expression of nicotinic acetylcholine receptor
subtypes (Matsuo et al. 2014a) or Phe-Met-Arg-Phe(FMRF)amide (Kobayashi et
al. 2010). Moreover, the PC neurons exhibit various projection patterns to the other
areas of the brain or to the other PC neurons (Chase and Tolloczko 1989; Ratté and
Chase 1997). The complexity of the PC may be comparable to that of the cerebral
cortex of the mammalian brain and seems to be sufﬁcient to serve a mnemonic
function, as described in the previous section.
The ventroposterior part of the circumesophageal ganglia (D brain) is called the
subesophageal ganglia. In Limax, the subesophageal ganglia is composed of three
pairs of ganglia (pleural, parietal, and pedal ganglia) and one visceral ganglion
(Fig. 5.1). In other gastropod animal species (e.g., Aplysia, Lymnaea), the ganglia
are separated spatially from each other in the body, and they are connected with
bundles of nerves. Contrastingly, in Limax and Helix all the ganglia, including the
cerebral ganglia (except for the buccal ganglia located on the surface of the buccal
mass), assemble into a spatially more compact structure and fuse into one wherein
the boundary between the constituent ganglia is blurred. Such a “cephalized” brain
structure is one of the characteristics of the terrestrial pulmonates. In subesophageal
ganglia, there are many large neurons. Most of them seem to be sensory, motor,
or endocrine neurons, in clear contrast to the cerebral ganglia where a substantial
part of the constituent neurons (i.e., PC neurons) are interneurons devoted to
olfactory computations. The neurons with large cell bodies in the subesophageal
ganglia contain polyploid genomic DNA within their nuclei, as described later
in Section 5.4.
5.3.2
Structure and Function of the Tentacles
The slugs and snails (Stylommatophora) have two pairs of tentacles, that is, superior
and inferior tentacles (Fig. 5.2a); these are also called the posterior and anterior ten-
tacles, respectively. Both tentacles serve as olfactory and mechanosensory organs.
The superior tentacle is different from the inferior tentacle in that it is equipped with
an eye. Therefore, the superior tentacle also functions as a photosensory organ.

5
The Computation and Robustness of the Mini-Cognitive Centers...
107
Fig. 5.2 Tentacles of stylommatophoran pulmonates. (a) A terrestrial slug, Limax valentianus,
showing the two pairs of tentacles. (b) The structure of a superior tentacle
Odor molecules bind to as yet unidentiﬁed olfactory receptors expressed in the
sensory neurons of the olfactory epithelium, which is located at the tip of the
tentacles. Some of the olfactory sensory neurons in the epithelium send afferent
projections directly to the PC, whereas others make synapses once or twice at

108
R. Matsuo
the tentacular ganglion (the primary olfactory center located beneath the olfactory
epithelium) before reaching the PC (Chase and Tolloczko 1993). The tentacular
ganglion shares several common features with the PC, in that both contain multiple
small globular neurons and exhibit ﬁeld potential oscillation that is modiﬁed by
olfactory inputs (Ito et al. 2001; Inokuma et al. 2002, and see Sect. 5.3.3). The
structural features of the tentacular ganglia are very similar between those in the
superior and inferior tentacles, but several differences have been reported (see Ito et
al. 2000; Matsuo et al. 2011a for details). Not all the afferents in the tentacular nerve
bundle (in the superior tentacle) project to the TM layers of the PC; some bypass
the PC and go into the other parts of the cerebral ganglion, although what kinds of
modalities (olfactory or mechanosensory) are conveyed by these nerves is not clear
(Makinae et al. 2008; Matsuo et al. 2014a). The visual information from an eye,
on the other hand, is conveyed through an optic nerve, a nerve bundle with a small
diameter running in parallel with the thicker tentacular nerve bundle (Fig. 5.2b).
Besides the detection of light by an eye, are there any functional differences
between the superior and inferior tentacles? Chase and Croll (1981) reported that
in the snail Achatina the superior tentacles are necessary for anemotaxis (upwind
movement in the air containing odor molecules) and also for orienting to a distant
odor source in still air. On the other hand, the inferior tentacles are involved in
following the mucous slime trail of other snails. In the snail Helix, the inferior
and superior tentacles function during acquisition and retrieval, respectively, of
appetitive food attraction memory (Friedrich and Teyke 1998). However, in the
odor-aversion learning in Limax previously described, no functional difference was
observed between the superior and inferior tentacles (Yamagishi et al. 2008). The
memory acquired in the presence of both pairs of tentacles can be successfully
retrieved with only one pair of tentacles. Furthermore, the slugs can acquire and
retrieve the memory using either pair of tentacles. The two pairs of tentacles
are therefore redundant and functionally equivalent with respect to odor-aversion
learning (Yamagishi et al. 2008). It has not, however, been investigated yet whether
the slugs can retrieve the odor-aversion memory with a pair of tentacles that were
not used during the memory acquisition session. The answer awaits future studies.
Another interesting feature of the tentacular function is that the ascending pro-
jection to the cerebral ganglion is essentially ipsilateral: this has been demonstrated
not only at the histological level (Kawahara et al. 1997; Kimura et al. 1998b) but
also at the functional level. An appetitive food attraction memory acquired using
unilateral tentacles cannot be retrieved with the tentacles on the other side of the
head in Helix (Friedrich and Teyke 1998). The PC and the tentacle on the same
side must be intact for odor-aversion learning to be formed in Limax (Matsuo et
al. 2010a). There are supposed to be some physiological cross-interactions between
the left and the right PCs or the cerebral ganglia through the cerebral commissure
(Teyke et al. 2000; Matsuo et al. 2010a). The ipsilateral ascending projection and
some bilateral cross interactions are also proposed in the optical information ﬂow
into the cerebral ganglion through an optic nerve, which is running in parallel along
an olfactory nerve bundle within the superior tentacle (Matsuo et al. 2014b).

5
The Computation and Robustness of the Mini-Cognitive Centers...
109
5.3.3
Local Field Potential Oscillation and the Role
of the Procerebrum in Olfactory Learning
In 1990, Gelperin and Tank reported the rhythmic (0.7 Hz) activity of the local
ﬁeld potential (LFP) recorded on the surface of the PC (Gelperin and Tank 1990).
This cortical electroencephalogram-like activity is produced by the synchronous
activity of the constituent PC neurons. The minority B neurons exhibit periodic
bursts, and thereby suppress the majority NB neurons around them (Kleinfeld et al.
1994; Watanabe et al. 1998). The LFP oscillation, therefore, reﬂects the synchronous
outward currents generated in the local population of NB neurons. When the
production of nitric oxide (probably generated by NB neurons) is pharmacologically
suppressed, the LFP oscillation diminishes by a not yet fully understood mechanism
(Gelperin 1994). At the same time, this manipulation abolishes the ability of the slug
to discriminate similar odors (Teyke and Gelperin 1999; Sakura et al. 2004).
Another interesting feature is that the LFP wave propagates from the apical to the
basal part of the PC. The phase difference between the apical and the basal regions
of the PC is modulated by an application of odors to the olfactory epithelium on
the tentacle (Delaney et al. 1994). The oscillatory frequency of LFP is also subject
to change during odor detection (Gervais et al. 1996). Especially, an aversively
or appetitively learned odor evokes the change in the oscillatory frequency of
the LFP (Kimura et al. 1998c; Inoue et al. 2006; Samarova and Balaban 2006).
Thus far several neuromodulatory transmitters have been identiﬁed that directly
change the frequency of LFP oscillation by exogenous application: Dopamine,
serotonin, glutamate, acetylcholine, and histamine increase the frequency (Gelperin
et al. 1993; Watanabe et al. 2001; Inoue et al. 2001; Matsuo et al. 2009, 2014a,
2016a), whereas FMRFamide and octopamine decrease it (Kobayashi et al. 2010;
Matsuo et al. 2016b). In fact, these transmitters are present endogenously within
the PC (glutamate, acetylcholine, FMRFamide) or are used as neurotransmitters
by projection nerves coming from outside the PC (dopamine, serotonin, histamine,
octopamine) or from the tentacular nerves (acetylcholine, FMRFamide).
It is still not fully understood how the LFP oscillation and wave propagation
contribute to olfactory information processing, but it has been proposed that these
activities might function in assigning the space on the seemingly uniform cluster of
multiple small PC neurons for the representation of the speciﬁc odors in a timing-
dependent manner (Gelperin 1999). This suggestion means that the efﬁcacy of
synaptic transmission of olfactory input to NB neurons is dependent on the phase
of ongoing LFP oscillation (Inoue et al. 2000) because the LFP wave reﬂects the
coherent inhibitory currents generated in the local population of NB neurons. This
condition is in clear contrast to the olfactory information processing system of
insects’ antennal lobe and the mammalian olfactory bulb, where the speciﬁc odor
information is represented in built-in structural compartments (i.e., glomeruli).

110
R. Matsuo
The idea of the involvement of the PC in olfactory leaning has also been
supported by the fact that the PC is labeled with a ﬂuorescent molecule, Lucifer
Yellow, injected into the body cavity just following the odor-aversion conditioning
in Limax (Kimura et al. 1998b; Ermentrout et al. 2001). The labeling occurs
speciﬁcally only when Lucifer Yellow was injected following CS–US pairing, and
does not occur when the CS and US are delivered separately in time (i.e., no
memory is formed). Although the physiological meaning of such labeling is not
clear, this observation implies an enhanced neuronal activity in a spatially restricted
area of the PC during the memory formation because Lucifer Yellow has been
used as a neuronal activity marker in other experimental systems (Wilcox and
Franceschini 1984). Interestingly, either one of the bilateral PCs is labeled following
conditioning, but the two PCs are never labeled bilaterally.
Sekiguchi et al. (2010) recently found that the position of Lucifer Yellow labeling
along the apical–basal axis depends on the valence of the odor (i.e., whether it is
appetitively or aversively conditioned). They introduced a “van der Pol oscillator
model” to explain this observation. In their model, multiple mutually interacting
oscillators were assumed for respective CM and TM layers along the apical-to-
basal axis of the PC, and only the TM layer was supposed to receive olfactory input.
Lucifer Yellow were proposed to be incorporated only in the position where the
phase difference between the CM and TM layers disappeared (i.e., synchronized).
Their model could also replicate various other behaviors of the LFP oscillation
in the PC, such as an odor input-dependent change in the oscillatory frequency
(Gervais et al. 1996; Kimura et al. 1998c; Inoue et al. 2006; Samarova and Balaban
2006). We should, however, interpret their model cautiously because it was based
on assumptions, some of which have not yet been experimentally demonstrated.
The importance of the PC in olfactory learning has been demonstrated more
directly in a lesion experiment (Kasai et al. 2006). If the PC is surgically destroyed,
the slugs cannot acquire an odor-aversion memory. Post-learning lesioning of the PC
also abolished the retention or retrieval of the memory. The PC lesioning, however,
did not result in the complete loss of the odor-sensing ability. These results strongly
suggest the involvement of the PC in mnemonic function. Further studies presented
data supporting the idea that either the right or left PC is used at any one time during
odor learning. Unilateral PC destruction resulted in a mild learning deﬁcit, and the
learning score was intermediate between the slugs with bilateral PC destruction and
those with a sham operation (Matsuo et al. 2010a). This result is consistent with
the prediction based on the idea of unilateral use of the PC and agrees well with
the observation of unilateral PC labeling with Lucifer Yellow injected immediately
after conditioning (Kimura et al. 1998b; Ermentrout et al. 2001, see earlier).
It has not yet been understood what kind of neuronal plasticity underlies
the mnemonic role of the PC. Recently, however, Sakura and Watanabe (2015)
successfully induced an LTP-like change in the synaptic strength between NB and
B neurons with high-frequency stimulation to the tentacular nerve (which conveys
olfactory information to the PC). The importance of such synaptic plasticity is still
elusive, and further investigation is awaited.

5
The Computation and Robustness of the Mini-Cognitive Centers...
111
It is highly probable that the PC is the convergent site of the CS (odor informa-
tion) and the US (aversive stimulus such as a bitter taste) during olfactory aversive
conditioning. However, it is not unclear how the US information is transmitted to
the PC, or which neurotransmitter carries the US information. Serotonin is one
candidate, as in the case of the classical conditioning of gill withdrawal in Aplysia
(Bailey et al. 1996), because serotonergic innervation into the PC has been reported
from the cells located in the other part of the cerebral ganglion (Inoue et al. 2004;
Elekes et al. 2012), and the depletion of serotonin impairs odor-aversion learning in
Limax (Shirahata et al. 2006). Of course, there is no denying the possibility that other
neurotransmitters, such as dopamine, histamine, or FMRFamide, are responsible
for carrying the US information to the PC, taking into account that the nerves
containing these neurotransmitters have projections into the PC (Makino and Yano
2010; Kobayashi et al. 2010; Matsuo et al. 2016a). Moreover, it is not known what
is the primary neurotransmitter that carries olfactory information into the TM layer
of the PC, although at least FMRFamidergic ﬁbers run within the tentacular nerve
into the TM layer of the PC to some extent (Matsuo et al. 2010b; Kobayashi et al.
2010).
From the aspect of brain evolution, it is very intriguing to discuss the origin of
the PC. When compared to the mammalian brain, the PC resembles the olfactory
bulb in that neurogenesis ensues in the adult in both structures. Furthermore, both
structures exhibit changes in the oscillatory activity of the ﬁeld potential in response
to odor detection (Kimura et al. 1998a; Chabaud et al. 2000; Chase 2000; Ravel
et al. 2003; Inoue et al. 2006). At the level of the connectivity, however, the PC
seems to correspond to the olfactory cortices (e.g., piriform cortex) because it is
the secondary olfactory center (but also the PC receives afferent projections as the
primary and tertiary center to some extent; see Chase and Tolloczko 1993). Recently,
it was shown in the mouse that the mammalian piriform cortex is involved in the
learned response to odor (Choi et al. 2011). The olfactory bulb–piriform cortex–
amygdala pathway is, therefore, responsible for the aversion to learned odors,
whereas the more direct olfactory bulb–cortical amygdala pathway is involved in
detecting innately aversive odors (Root et al. 2014); this is reminiscent of the fact
that slugs can avoid innately aversive odorants (such as garlic) without a PC (Kasai
et al. 2006).
5.4
Neuronal Polyploidization in the Brain of Limax
5.4.1
Body Growth-Dependent DNA Endoreplication in Brain
Neurons
The brain of gastropods contains numerous giant neurons. In some cases, the
diameter of the cell body is more than 1 mm (Moroz and Kohn 2010). The amount of
genomic DNA in such neurons far exceeds that of somatic diploid cells. It has been

112
R. Matsuo
estimated that the giant motor neurons of Aplysia, such as the R2 motor neuron,
contain 200,000 times the amount of the haploid genome (Lasek and Dower 1971).
Such ampliﬁed genomic DNA is generated through repeated DNA replication
without cell division, that is, DNA endoreplication.DNA endoreplication is believed
to occur to enhance the ability to synthesize macromolecules (proteins and the
products of enzymatic reactions) in neurons, to meet the demand during the body
growth of an animal. This belief would especially hold in the case of motor neurons
because they directly innervate the tissues and organs that grow very large in
gastropod animals (Gillette 1991).
To quantitatively examine the relationship between body growth and the neuronal
DNA endoreplication, Yamagishi et al. (2011) studied the adult Limax. They divided
the slugs into three groups. In the ﬁrst group, the slugs were fed ad libitum for
44 days and body growth was enhanced (growth-promoted group). In the second
group, the amount of the food was regulated so that the slugs grew at a normal
rate (control group). In the third group, the slugs were completely starved for
the same period (growth-suppressed group). As a result, the body weight of the
growth-promoted slugs became nearly ten times that of the growth-suppressed
slugs, and the body weight of the control group was intermediate. Brain volumes
also differed; and there was a positive correlation between body weight and brain
volume. The enlargement was especially prominent in the subesophageal ganglia
where there are many motor and endocrine neurons. At the level of the neuron,
cell body size was also enlarged, as shown by the increase in the volume of
the cell body of the visceral giant cell (VGC), which is the largest peptidergic
motor neuron located in the visceral ganglion of Limax (Matsuo et al. 2011b). The
frequency of DNA endoreplication, which was quantiﬁed by counting the number of
nuclei incorporating 5-bromo-20-deoxyuridine (BrdU, a marker molecule for DNA
synthesis), also increased in the brains of the growth-promoted slugs. The amount
of mRNAs was also elevated concomitantly per a single neuron. These results
support the idea proposed by Gillette (1991), in which body growth-dependentDNA
endoreplication seems to be an adaptive response of the brain neurons to adjust
to the increasing demand for macromolecule synthesis during body growth. The
ampliﬁcation of genomic DNA is an interesting strategy, considering that a change
in the rate of transcription and other posttranscriptional regulation is the primary
means of regulation in vertebrates for adjustment of the synthesis of biomolecules.
5.4.2
DNA Endoreplication Is Whole-Genome Polyploidization
The incorporation of BrdU in itself does not tell us anything about the mode
of the DNA ampliﬁcation. It is possible that the whole genome is replicated
repeatedly (D polyploidy), but another possibility is that one or several necessary
loci of the genome are speciﬁcally ampliﬁed (D polyteny). To distinguish between
these two possibilities, the relative copy numbers of various genomic loci were
quantiﬁed with real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR) (Yamagishi et al. 2012).

5
The Computation and Robustness of the Mini-Cognitive Centers...
113
There was no difference in the copy numbers among nine different genomic loci,
irrespective of their transcriptional activities. Moreover, BrdU molecules were
incorporated uniformly into the whole genomic regions of the endoreplicated DNA
when analyzed in the magniﬁed image of the large nuclei (Matsuo et al. 2012;
Yamagishi et al. 2012). Therefore, it is highly probable that whole-genomic regions
are equally replicated during endoreplication, as suggested by the experiment with
Fleugen staining in the terrestrial snail Succinea (Anisimov 2005). In contrast, the
PC neurons were demonstrated to be diploid, similar to most of the other somatic
cells in the body (Yamagishi et al. 2012).
Why do neurons amplify whole genomic regions, most of which are useless for
a single neuron? It would be actually difﬁcult to evolve a mechanism of locus-
speciﬁc genome ampliﬁcation for each neuron because the sets of transcribed genes
differ from neuron to neuron. Although the locus-speciﬁc DNA ampliﬁcation might
be an energetically more economical way of enhancing macromolecule synthesis,
polyploidization must be an easier strategy because a neuron has only to skip the M-
phase of the cell cycle to double the genomic DNA (Edgar and Orr-Weaver 2001).
Locus-speciﬁc DNA ampliﬁcation also requires the presence of speciﬁc replication
origins in the gnome near the genes to be ampliﬁed. Furthermore, there would be
little need to ﬁne-tune the relative transcriptional activities among genes after the
DNA ampliﬁcation if the neuron proportionally enhances its morphological and
functional parameters through polyploidization. Of course, DNA polyploidization
and gene-speciﬁc transcriptional regulation may be mutually compatible, and can
coexist in the same neuron.
5.4.3
Target Innervation and Neuronal Polyploidization
Body growth-dependent neuronal polyploidization implies that the brain neurons
somehow sense the need to enhance the rate of macromolecule synthesis to meet
the needs of the growing body. What kind of external signal dictates the initiation
of DNA endoreplication? Neurons, especially motor and sensory neurons, might
receive any retrograde signal from their growing target organs to trigger the initia-
tion of DNA synthesis. Another possibility is that neurons might sense a favorable
condition for body growth through the nutritional state of their surrounding body
ﬂuid (e.g., continued high glucose or insulin levels).
To distinguish these two possibilities, Matsuo et al. (2013) exploited the “brain
transplantation” technique. A brain isolated from one animal is transplanted into
the body cavity of another animal in this technique, sometimes used in gastropods
(Cheng and Galloway 1970; Roubos 1976; Murphy and Kater 1980; Gomot et
al. 1990). In this condition, a recipient slug has two “brains” in its body. One
of them is an endogenous host brain innervating normally its whole part of the
body, and the other transplant brain is devoid of target innervation. What happens
to these two brains if the growth of the host slug is promoted by food supply?
Assuming that some retrograde signal is necessary to initiate DNA endoreplication,

114
R. Matsuo
it is predicted that only the host brain can undergo body growth-dependent DNA
endoreplication. In contrast, if the enriched nutrition in the body ﬂuid is sufﬁcient,
DNA endoreplication would be enhanced in both brains because they are both under
the same body ﬂuid condition of the host. The result was that the frequency of DNA
endoreplication (measured as the number of BrdUC neurons) was elevated only in
the endogenous host brain but was unchanged in the transplant brain (Matsuo et
al. 2013). Therefore, neuronal DNA endoreplication seem to be triggered by some
retrograde signal from the innervating targets, although the identity of the signal is
not yet known.
The requirement of target innervation was further supported by a nerve dissection
experiment in the endogenous brain. When one of the posterior pedal nerves was
surgically cut, the frequency of DNA endoreplication was substantially reduced
in the pedal ganglion ipsilateral to the dissected nerve (Matsuo et al. 2013).
Taken together, these experiments suggest that neurons in the brain undergo DNA
endoreplication by responding to some unidentiﬁed signal from the target tissues
that are undergoing rapid growth.
5.5
Regenerative Ability of the Central Nervous System
of Limax
5.5.1
Regeneration of the Tentacles
The regenerative ability of tentacles was reported in slugs and snails a long time
ago. If the superior tentacle is surgically removed, all the elements of the tentacle,
including the eye, are spontaneously regenerated during the life of the slug or snail
(Eakin and Ferlatte 1973; Chase and Kamil 1983; Flores et al. 1983). Tentacle
removal in Limax reduces the oscillatory frequency of the LFP in the PC, probably
because of the loss of the afferent innervation of the tentacular nerves to the PC.
As the tentacle regenerates, the innervation of olfactory afferents is also restored,
and oscillatory frequency concomitantly returns to the normal frequency within
9 weeks (Matsuo et al. 2010b). The regenerated tentacles are functionally sound
and are sufﬁcient to function in an olfactory learning task, such as olfactory aversive
learning (Matsuo et al. 2010b; Koga et al. 2016).
Regeneration of the tentacles would be advantageous for the survival of slugs
and snails because the tentacle has very important roles in the animal’s life as a
multimodal sensory organ, including olfaction, mechanosensation, and vision (the
last is applicable only to the superior tentacle). Tentacle regeneration is one example
of the spontaneous regenerative ability of neuronal structures. However, a more
striking manifestation of regenerative ability has been discovered in the brain of
Limax, as described next.

5
The Computation and Robustness of the Mini-Cognitive Centers...
115
5.5.2
Neurogenesis and Regeneration of the Procerebrum
In slugs and snails, new neurons are continuously added to the PC even in the adult
(Zakharov et al. 1998; Watanabe et al. 2008). Neurogenesis occurs in the apical
region of the PC, and the older neurons are slowly pushed forward toward the basal
region (Fig. 5.3). Therefore, the age of a neuron is reﬂected in its position along
the apical-to-basal axis of the PC. Such a neurogenic property is reminiscent of the
olfactory bulb or hippocampus in mammals. In this context, it is intriguing that the
PC is involved in both olfactory information processing and memory formation.
Although it has not been known how adult neurogenesis contributes to the normal
function of the PC, it seems to be involved at least in the regeneration of the PC
following injury. If the PC is surgically lesioned, the ability to acquire and retrieve
olfactory aversion memory is abolished, as described earlier (Kasai et al. 2006).
However, the slugs can normally acquire an olfactory aversion memory if a 31-day
recovery period is given after the surgery (Matsuo and Ito 2008). Further analysis
has revealed that the PC recovers its size spontaneously, and the oscillation of the
LFP is also restored. Neurogenic activity seems to be enhanced because the number
of BrdU-positive neurons increased in the injured PC when BrdU was injected into
the body of the slug 7 days after the surgery (Matsuo et al. 2010c).
Recoverability of the PC also provides insight into the locus of memory storage.
A memory acquired 7 days or 14 days before the surgery could not be retrieved
even if a 32-day recovery period was given, whereas the recovered PC can serve a
mnemonic role at this time because the slugs can acquire and retrieve a new odor-
aversion memory 31 days after the surgery, as mentioned. This observation indicates
that the surgical lesioning of the PC irreversibly abolished the memory that had
probably been stored as a change in synaptic strength between the tentacular nerves
and NB neurons, or between PC neurons. The PC is, therefore, the storage site
of odor-aversion memory. Of course, it has been suggested that the tentacles are
Fig. 5.3 Neurogenesis in the PC of an adult slug. (a) Neurogenesis occurs in the apical region
of the PC (highlighted in red). Newborn neurons push the older neurons to the basal direction.
(b) Newly generated PC neurons (arrow) with nuclei labeled with BrdU that was injected into the
body of the slug 24 days earlier. (c) A ﬂuorescence image of DAPI of (b). Bar 100 m

116
R. Matsuo
also involved in memory storage and that the memory engram is distributed as the
neuronal circuits encompassing both the tentacular ganglion and the PC (Inoue et
al. 2004; Koga et al. 2016).
5.5.3
Evolution of the Regenerative Ability of the Brain
As illustrated here, gastropods are capable of regenerating an injured or lost part
of the CNS, even in the adult (Moffett 1995), but the regenerative ability of the
adult CNS is not a privilege of gastropods. Some urodele amphibians (newts and
salamanders) can regenerate injured spinal cord and retinal ganglion cells in the
adult (Butler and Ward 1967; Keefe 1973). The adult teleost ﬁsh Apteronotus also
can regenerate retinal ganglion cells and cerebellum spontaneously (Hitchcock and
Raymond 1992; Zupanc 1999; Zupanc and Sîrbulescu 2011). Adult neurogenesis
is involved in such regeneration in most of these cases, but the presence of adult
neurogenesis itself is not sufﬁcient for the regeneration to occur in the CNS. It is well
known that neurogenesis ensues in adult mammals in some parts of the brain, such
as the hippocampus and olfactory bulb. The regenerative ability of the mammalian
brain, however, is very limited. It would be necessary to enhance the neurogenic
activity in response to injury for adult neurogenesis to sufﬁce for functional and
structural recovery (discussed in Ferretti 2011; Matsuo and Ito 2011), as in the PC
of the slug (see earlier).
In addition to the presence of adult neurogenesis and its enhancement following
injury, other physiological, ecological, and anatomical conditions must be relevant
for the evolution of the regenerative capacity of the CNS (see discussion in
Hulsebosch and Bittner 1980). Particularly, the following three conditions may be
important: (1) a potential risk to suffer injury to a given part of the CNS during
the animal’s life, (2) the importance of this part of the CNS for the survival and/or
reproductive success of the animal, and (3) the injury to this part is not fatal. These
conditions may hold in the case of the tentacle of Limax. Otherwise, other parts of
the CNS may also be at a potential risk of the damage caused by invasions of, for
example, parasitic microbes.
Of course, it is essentially impossible to demonstrate experimentally the regen-
erative ability of the brain from an injury that is fatal to the animal. However, the
“brain transplantation” technique (see Sect. 5.4.3) may be a good tool to tackle
this problem and to prove the validity of that condition (3) because researchers can
examine the potential regenerative ability of the isolated brain during incubation in
the other animal’s body cavity using this technique. Thus, even if a certain injury to
the CNS is fatal to the slug, the potential regenerative ability can be examined for a
long time if the injured brain is transplanted into the body cavity of another animal.
Therefore, it is expected that the relationship between the fatality of an injury to any
part of the brain and its regenerative capacity can be studied systematically using
this technique, and this is one of the advantages of using the pulmonates for the
study of neuronal function and its evolution.

5
The Computation and Robustness of the Mini-Cognitive Centers...
117
5.6
Outlook and Conclusion
As seen in this chapter, terrestrial slugs and snails can demonstrate olfactory learn-
ing and perform complex logical operations such as second-order conditioning and
blocking. The brain of these terrestrial pulmonates displays exquisite recoverability
from an injury and increases the genomic DNA in neurons in the face of an
increasing demand for macromolecules. These excellent abilities and the robustness
of their brains are comparable, or even superior, to those of humans. It is likely we
have not yet unveiled all the exquisite features of their brains, acquired during the
long history of evolution. There remain vast frontiers to be explored in the ﬁeld of
the neurobiology of the terrestrial slugs and snails.
References
Anisimov AP (2005) Endopolyploidy as a morphogenetic factor of development. Cell Biol Int
29:993–1004
Bailey CH, Bartsch D, Kandel ER (1996) Toward a molecular deﬁnition of long-term memory
storage. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 93:1344–1352
Bull R, Ferrera E, Orrego F (1976) Effects of anisomycin on brain protein synthesis and passive
avoidance learning in newborn chicks. J Neurobiol 7:37–49
Butler EG, Ward MB (1967) Reconstitution of the spinal cord after ablation in adult Triturus. Dev
Biol 15:464–486
Chabaud P, Ravel N, Wilson DA, Mouly AM, Vigouroux M, Farget V, Gervais R (2000) Exposure
to bahaviourally relevant odour reveals different characteristics in rat central olfactory pathways
as studied through oscillatory activities. Chem Senses 25:561–573
Chase R (2000) Structure and function in the cerebral ganglion. Microsc Res Tech 49:511–520
Chase R, Croll RP (1981) Tentacular function in snail olfactory orientation. J Comp Physiol
143:357–362
Chase R, Kamil R (1983) Morphology and odor sensitivity of regenerated snail tentacles. J
Neurobiol 14:43–50
Chase R, Tolloczko B (1989) Interganglionic dendrites constitute an output pathway from the
procerebrum of the snail Achatina fulica. J Comp Neurol 283:143–152
Chase R, Tolloczko B (1993) Tracing neural pathways in snail olfaction: from the tip of the
tentacles to the brain and beyond. Microsc Res Tech 24:214–230
Cheng TC, Galloway PC (1970) Transplantation immunity in mollusks: the histocompatibility of
Helisoma duryi normale with allografts and xenografts. J Invertebr Pathol 15:177–192
Choi GB, Settler DD, Kallman BR, Bhaskar ST, Fleischmann A, Axel R (2011) Driving opposing
behaviors with ensembles of piriform neurons. Cell 146:1004–1015
Debiec J, LeDoux JE, Nader K (2002) Cellular and systems reconsolidation in the hippocampus.
Neuron 36:527–538
Delaney KR, Gelperin A, Fee MS, Flores JA, Gervais R, Tank DW, Kleinfeld D (1994) Waves and
stimulus-modulated dynamics in an oscillating olfactory network. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
91:669–673
Dudai Y, Eisenberg M (2004) Rites of passage of the engram: reconsolidation and the lingering
consolidation hypothesis. Neuron 44:93–100
Eakin RM, Ferlatte MM (1973) Studies on eye regeneration in a snail, Helix aspersa. J Exp Zool
184:81–96
Edgar BA, Orr-Weaver TL (2001) Endoreplication cell cycles: more for less. Cell 105:297–306

118
R. Matsuo
Elekes K, Battonyai I, Kobayashi S, Ito E (2012) Organization of the procerebrum in terrestrial
pulmonates (Helix, Limax) reconsidered: cell mass layer synaptology and its serotonergic input
system. Brain Struct Funct 218:477–490
Ermentrout B, Wang JW, Flores J, Gelperin A (2001) Model for olfactory discrimination and
learning in Limax procerebrum incorporating oscillatory dynamics and wave propagation. J
Neurophysiol 85:1444–1452
Ferretti P (2011) Is there a relationship between adult neurogenesis and neuron generation
following injury across evolution? Eur J Neurosci 34:951–962
Flood J, Bennett E, Rosenzweig M, Orme A (1972) Inﬂuence of training strength on amnesia
induced by pretraining injections of cycloheximide. Physiol Behav 9:589–600
Flores V, Salas PJI, Saavedra JP (1983) Electroretinographic and ultrastructural study of regener-
ated eye of the snail Cryptomphalus aspersa. J Neurobiol 14:167–176
Friedrich A, Teyke T (1998) Identiﬁcation of stimuli and input pathways mediating food-attraction
conditioning in the snail, Helix. J Comp Physiol A 183:247–254
Fujie S, Yamamoto T, Murakami J, Hatakeyama D, Shiga H, Suzuki N, Ito E (2005) Nitric oxide
synthase and soluble guanylyl cyclase underlying the modulation of electrical oscillations in a
central olfactory organ. J Neurobiol 62:14–30
Fulton D, Kemenes I, Andrew RJ, Benjamin PR (2008) Time-window for sensitivity to cooling
distinguishes the effects of hypothermia and protein synthesis inhibition on the consolidation
of long-term memory. Neurobiol Learn Mem 90:651–654
Gelperin A (1975) Rapid food-aversion learning by a terrestrial mollusk. Science 189:567–570
Gelperin A (1994) Nitric oxide mediates network oscillations of olfactory interneurons in a
terrestrial mollusc. Nature 369:61–63
Gelperin A (1999) Oscillatory dynamics and information processing in olfactory systems. J Exp
Biol 202:1855–1864
Gelperin A, Tank DW (1990) Odour-modulated collective network oscillations of olfactory
interneurons in a terrestrial mollusc. Nature 345:437–440
Gelperin A, Rhines LD, Flores J, Tank DW (1993) Coherent network oscillations by olfactory
interneurons: modulation by endogenous amines. J Neurophysiol 69:1930–1939
Gervais R, Kleinfeld D, Delaney KR, Gelperin A (1996) Central and reﬂex neuronal responses
elicited by odor in a terrestrial mollusk. J Neurophysiol 76:1327–1339
Gillette R (1991) On the signiﬁcance of neuronal giantism in gastropods. Biol Bull 180:234–240
Gomot P, Gomot L, Marchand CR, Colard C (1990) Extirpation and transplantation of the brain of
the snail Helix aspersa: a study of the survival of the animal and implant. Can J Zool 68:1505–
1512
Hitchcock PF, Raymond PA (1992) Retinal regeneration. Trends Neurosci 15:103–108
Hulsebosch CE, Bittner GD (1980) Evolution of abilities to regenerate neurons in central nervous
systems. Am Nat 115:276–284
Inokuma Y, Inoue T, Watanabe S, Kirino Y (2002) Two types of network oscillations and their odor
responses in the primary olfactory center of a terrestrial mollusk. J Neurophysiol 87:3160–3164
Inoue T, Watanabe S, Kawahara S, Kirino Y (2000) Phase-dependent ﬁltering of sensory
information in the oscillatory olfactory center of a terrestrial mollusk. J Neurophysiol 84:1112–
1115
Inoue T, Watanabe S, Kirino Y (2001) Serotonin and NO complimentarily regulate generation of
oscillatory activity in the olfactory CNS of a terrestrial mollusk. J Neurophysiol 85:2634–2638
Inoue T, Inokuma Y, Watanabe S, Kirino Y (2004) In vitro study of odor-evoked behavior in a
terrestrial mollusk. J Neurophysiol 91:372–381
Inoue T, Murakami M, Watanabe S, Inokuma Y, Kirino Y (2006) In vitro odor-aversion condition-
ing in a terrestrial mollusk. J Neurophysiol 95:3898–3903
Ito I, Nakamura H, Kimura T, Suzuki H, Sekiguchi T, Kawabata K, Ito E (2000) Neuronal
components of the superior and inferior tentacles in the terrestrial slugs, Limax marginatus.
Neurosci Res 37:191–200
Ito I, Kimura T, Ito E (2001) Odor responses and spontaneous oscillatory activity in tentacular
nerves of the terrestrial slug, Limax marginatus. Neurosci Lett 304:145–148

5
The Computation and Robustness of the Mini-Cognitive Centers...
119
Judge ME, Quartermain D (1982) Characteristics of retrograde amnesia following reactivation of
memory in mice. Physiol Behav 28:585–590
Kamin LJ (1969) Predictability, surprise, attention, and conditioning. In: Church R, Campbell BA
(eds) Punishment and aversive behavior. Appleton-Century-Crofts, New York, pp 279–296
Kasai Y, Watanabe S, Kirino Y, Matsuo R (2006) The procerebrum is necessary for odor-aversion
learning in the terrestrial slug Limax valentianus. Learn Mem 13:482–488
Kawahara S, Toda S, Suzuki Y, Watanabe S, Kirino Y (1997) Comparative study of neural
oscillation in the procerebrum of the terrestrial slugs Incilaria bilineata and Limax marginatus.
J Exp Biol 200:1851–1861
Keefe JR (1973) An analysis of urodelian retinal regeneration. I. Studies of the cellular source of
retinal regeneration in Notophthalmus viridescens utilizing 3H-thymidine and colchicine. J Exp
Zool 184:185–206
Kimura T, Toda S, Sekiguchi T, Kirino Y (1998a) Behavioral modulation induced by food odor
aversive conditioning and its inﬂuence on the olfactory responses of an oscillatory brain
networks in the slug Limax marginatus. Learn Mem 4:365–375
Kimura T, Suzuki H, Kono E, Sekiguchi T (1998b) Mapping of interneurons that contribute to food
aversive conditioning in the slug brain. Learn Mem 4:376–388
Kimura T, Toda S, Sekiguchi T, Kawahara S, Kirino Y (1998c) Optical recording analysis of
olfactory response of the procerebal lobe in the slug brain. Learn Mem 4:389–400
Kleinfeld D, Delaney KR, Fee MS, Flores JA, Tank DW, Gelperin A (1994) Dynamics of
propagating waves in the olfactory network of a terrestrial mollusk: an electrical and optical
study. J Neurophysiol 72:1402–1419
Kobayashi S, Hattori M, Elekes K, Ito E, Matsuo R (2010) FMRFamide regulates oscillatory
activity of the olfactory center in the slug. Eur J Neurosci 32:1180–1192
Koga Y, Matsuo Y, Matsuo R (2016) Olfactory memory storage and/or retrieval requires the
presence of the exact tentacle used during memory acquisition in the terrestrial slug Limax.
Zool Sci 33:78–82
Lasek RJ, Dower WJ (1971) Aplysia californica: analysis of nuclear DNA in individual nuclei of
giant neurons. Science 172:278–280
Lee JLC (2009) Reconsolidation: maintaining memory relevance. Trends Neurosci 32:413–420
Mactutus CF, Riccio DC, Ferek JM (1979) Retrograde amnesia for old (reactivated) memory: some
anomalous characteristics. Science 204:1319–1320
Makinae H, Makino Y, Obara T, Yano M (2008) Speciﬁc spatio-temporal activities in the cerebral
ganglion of Incilaria fruhstorferi in response to superior and inferior tentacle nerve stimulation.
Brain Res 1231:47–62
Makino Y, Yano M (2010) Investigating the underlying intelligence mechanisms of the biological
olfactory system. Adv Artif Intell 2010, 478107
Matsuo R (2015) Consolidation and reconsolidation of olfactory memory in the terrestrial
pulmonates. In: Memory consolidation. Nova, New York, pp 53–64
Matsuo R, Ito E (2008) Recovery of learning ability after the ablation of the procerebrum in the
terrestrial slug Limax valentianus. Acta Biol Hung 59(suppl):73–76
Matsuo R, Ito E (2009) A novel nitric oxide synthase expressed speciﬁcally in the olfactory center.
Biochem Biophys Res Commun 386:724–728
Matsuo R, Ito E (2011) Spontaneous regeneration of the central nervous system in gastropods. Biol
Bull 221:35–42
Matsuo R, Hitomi T, Watanabe S, Kirino Y (2002) Delayed-onset amnesia caused by protein
synthesis inhibition in odor-taste associative memory of the terrestrial slug Limax valentianus.
Neurosci Lett 334:201–205
Matsuo R, Kobayashi S, Watanabe S, Namiki S, Iinuma S, Sakamoto H, Hirose K, Ito E (2009)
Glutamatergic neurotransmission in the procerebrum (olfactory center) of a terrestrial mollusk.
J Neurosci Res 87:3011–3023
Matsuo R, Kawaguchi E, Yamagishi M, Amano T, Ito E (2010a) Unilateral memory storage in the
procerebrum of the terrestrial slug Limax. Neurobiol Learn Mem 93:337–342

120
R. Matsuo
Matsuo R, Kobayashi S, Tanaka Y, Ito E (2010b) Effects of tentacle amputation and regeneration
on the morphology and activity of the olfactory center of the terrestrial slug Limax valentianus.
J Exp Biol 213:3144–3149
Matsuo R, Kobayashi S, Murakami J, Ito E (2010c) Spontaneous recovery of the injured olfactory
center in the terrestrial slug Limax. PLoS One 5, e9054
Matsuo R, Kobayashi S, Yamagishi M, Ito E (2011a) Two pairs of tentacles and a pair of
procerebra: optimized functions and redundant structures in the sensory and central organs
involved in olfactory learning of terrestrial pulmonates. J Exp Biol 214:879–886
Matsuo R, Kobayashi S, Morishita F, Ito E (2011b) Expression of Asn-d-Trp-Phe-NH2 in the brain
of the terrestrial slug Limax valentianus. Comp Biochem Physiol B 160:89–93
Matsuo R, Yamagishi M, Ito E (2012) Analysis of DNA endoreplication in the brain neurons in the
terrestrial slug Limax valentianus. Acta Biol Hung 63(suppl 2):171–178
Matsuo R, Yamagishi M, Wakiya K, Tanaka Y, Ito E (2013) Target innervation is necessary for
neuronal polyploidization in the terrestrial slug Limax. Dev Neurobiol 73:609–620
Matsuo R, Kobayashi S, Wakiya K, Yamagishi M, Fukuoka M, Ito E (2014a) The cholinergic
system in the olfactory center of the terrestrial slug Limax. J Comp Neurol 522:2951–2966
Matsuo Y, Uozumi N, Matsuo R (2014b) Photo-tropotaxis based on projection through the cerebral
commissure in the terrestrial slug Limax. J Comp Physiol A 200:1023–1032
Matsuo R, Fukata R, Kumagai M, Kobayashi A, Kobayashi S, Matsuo Y (2016a) Distribution and
modulatory effect of histaminergic neurons on the oscillatory activity in the olfactory center of
the terrestrial slug Limax. J Comp Neurol 524:119–135
Matsuo R, Tanaka M, Fukata R, Kobayashi S, Aonuma H, Matsuo Y (2016b) Octopaminergic
system in the central nervous system of the terrestrial slug Limax. J Comp Neurol 524:3849–
3864
Maximova OA, Balaban PM (1984) Neuronal correlates of aversive learning in command neurons
for avoidance behavior of Helix lucorum L. Brain Res 292:139–149
Milekic MH, Alberini CM (2002) Temporally graded requirement for protein synthesis following
memory reactivation. Neuron 36:521–525
Misanin JR, Miller RR, Lewis DJ (1968) Retrograde amnesia produced by electroconvulsive shock
after reactivation of consolidated memory trace. Science 160:554–555
Moffett S (1995) Neural regeneration in gastropod molluscs. Prog Neurobiol 46:289–330
Montarolo PG, Goelet P, Castellucci VF, Morgan J, Kandel ER, Schacher S (1986) A critical period
for macromolecular synthesis in long-term heterosynaptic facilitation in Aplysia. Science
234:1249–1254
Moroz LL, Kohn AB (2010) Do different neurons age differently? Direct genome-wide analysis of
aging in singe identiﬁed cholinergic neurons. Front Aging Neurosci 2, article 6
Murphy AD, Kater SB (1980) Sprouting and functional regeneration of an identiﬁed neuron in
Helisoma. Brain Res 186:251–272
Nader K, Einarsson EO (2010) Memory reconsolidation: an update. Ann NY Acad Sci 1191:27–41
Nader K, Schafe GE, Le Doux JE (2000) Fear memories requires protein synthesis in the amygdala
for reconsolidation after retrieval. Nature 406:722–726
Nakaya T, Kawahara S, Watanabe S, Lee D, Suzuki T, Kirino Y (2001) Identiﬁcation and
expression of a novel gene in odour-taste associative learning in the terrestrial slug. Genes
Cells 6:43–56
Pedreira ME, Dimant B, Maldonado H (1996) Inhibitors of protein and RNA synthesis block
context memory and long-term habituation in the crab Chasmagnathus. Pharmacol Biochem
Behav 54:611–617
Ratté S, Chase R (1997) Morphology of interneurons in the procerebrum of the snail Helix aspersa.
J Comp Neurol 384:359–372
Ratté S, Chase R (2000) Synapse distribution of olfactory interneurons in the procerebrum of the
snail Helix aspersa. J Comp Neurol 417:366–384
Ravel N, Chabaud P, Martin C, Gaveau V, Hugues E, Tallon-Baudry C, Betrand O, Gervais R
(2003) Olfactory learning modiﬁes the expression of odour-induced oscillatory responses in

5
The Computation and Robustness of the Mini-Cognitive Centers...
121
the gamma (60–90 Hz) and beta (15–40 Hz) bands in the rat olfactory bulb. Eur J Neurosci
17:350–358
Root CM, Denny C, Hen R, Axel R (2014) The participation of cortical amygdala in innate, odour-
driven behavior. Nature 515:269–273
Roubos EW (1976) Neuronal and non-neuronal control of the neurosecretory caudo-dorsal cells of
the freshwater snail Lymnaea stagnalis (L.). Cell Tissue Res 168:11–31
Sahley C, Gelperin A, Rudy JW (1981a) One-trial associative learning modiﬁes food odor
preferences of a terrestrial mollusc. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 78:640–642
Sahley C, Rudy JW, Gelperin A (1981b) An analysis of associative learning in a terrestrial mollusc.
J Comp Physiol 144:1–8
Sahley C, Martin KA, Gelperin A (1990) An analysis of associative learning in a terrestrial mollusc
Limax maximus. II. J Comp Physiol 167:339–345
Sakura M, Watanabe S (2015) Olfactory oscillation and role for learning and discrimination of
odors in the terrestrial slug. In: Memory consolidation. Nova, New York, pp 65–74
Sakura M, Kabetani M, Watanabe S, Kirino Y (2004) Impairment of olfactory discrimination
by blockade of nitric oxide activity in the terrestrial slug Limax valentianus. Neurosci Lett
370:257–261
Samarova E, Balaban P (2006) Changes in frequency of spontaneous oscillations in procerebrum
correlate to behavioral choice in terrestrial snails. Front Cell Neurosci 3, article 8
Sekiguchi T, Yamada A, Suzuki H (1997) Reactivation-dependent changes in memory states in the
terrestrial slug Limax ﬂavus. Learn Mem 4:356–364
Sekiguchi T, Furudate H, Kimura T (2010) Internal representation and memory formation of odor
preference based on oscillatory activities in a terrestrial slug. Learn Mem 17:372–380
Shirahata T, Tsunoda M, Santa T, Kirino Y, Watanabe S (2006) Depletion of serotonin selectively
impairs short-term memory without affecting long-term memory in odor learning in the
terrestrial slug Limax valentianus. Learn Mem 13:267–270
Suenaga Y, Matsuo R (2016) Length of the memory retention period depends on the extent of
protein synthesis in the terrestrial slug Limax. Neurosci Lett 630:222–227
Teyke T, Gelperin A (1999) Olfactory oscillations augment odor discrimination not odor identiﬁ-
cation by Limax CNS. Neuroreport 10:1061–1068
Teyke T, Wang JW, Gelperin A (2000) Lateralized memory storage and crossed inhibition during
odor processing by Limax. J Comp Physiol A 186:269–278
Tully T, Preat T, Boynton SC, Del Vecchio M (1994) Genetic dissection of consolidated memory
in Drosophila. Cell 79:35–47
Watanabe S, Kawahara S, Kirino Y (1998) Morphological characterization of the bursting and
nonbursting neurones in the olfactory centre of the terrestrial slug Limax marginatus. J Exp
Biol 201:925–930
Watanabe S, Kawahara S, Kirino Y (1999) Glutamate induces Cl and KC currents in the olfactory
interneurons of a terrestrial slug. J Comp Physiol A 184:553–562
Watanabe S, Inoue T, Murakami M, Inokuma Y, Kawahara S, Kirino Y (2001) Modulation of
oscillatory neural activities by cholinergic activation of interneurons in the olfactory center of
a terrestrial slug. Brain Res 896:30–35
Watanabe S, Kirino Y, Gelperin A (2008) Neural and molecular mechanisms of microcognition in
Limax. Learn Mem 15:633–642
Wilcox M, Franceschini N (1984) Illumination induces dye incorporation in photoreceptor cells.
Science 225:851–854
Yabumoto T, Takanashi F, Kirino Y, Watanabe S (2008) Nitric oxide is involved in appetitive but
not aversive olfactory learning in the land mollusk Limax valentianus. Learn Mem 15:229–232
Yamada A, Sekiguchi T, Suzuki H, Mizukami A (1992) Behavioral analysis of internal memory
states using cooling-induced retrograde amnesia in Limax ﬂavus. J Neurosci 12:729–735
Yamagishi M, Ito E, Matsuo R (2008) Redundancy of olfactory sensory pathways for odor-aversion
memory in the terrestrial slug Limax valentianus. J Exp Biol 211:1841–1849
Yamagishi M, Ito E, Matsuo R (2011) DNA endoreplication in the brain neurons during the body
growth of an adult slug. J Neurosci 31:5596–5604

122
R. Matsuo
Yamagishi M, Ito E, Matsuo R (2012) Whole genome ampliﬁcation in large neurons of the
terrestrial slug Limax. J Neurochem 122:727–737
Yasui K, Matsuo R, Kirino Y (2004) Onset of amnesia is delayed with a decreased inhibition of
protein synthesis during odor-taste associative learning in the terrestrial slug Limax valentianus.
Zool Sci 21:1163–1166
Zakharov IS, Hayes NL, Ierusalimsky VN, Nowakowski RS, Balaban PM (1998) Postembryonic
neurogenesis in the procerebrum of the terrestrial snail, Helix lucorum L. J Neurobiol 35:271–
276
Zupanc GK (1999) Neurogenesis, cell death and regeneration in the adult gymnotiform brain. J
Exp Biol 202:1435–1446
Zupanc GK, Sîrbulescu RF (2011) Adult neurogenesis and neuronal regeneration in the central
nervous system of teleost ﬁsh. Eur J Neurosci 34:917–929

Chapter 6
Insect Brains: Minute Structures Controlling
Complex Behaviors
Michiyo Kinoshita and Uwe Homberg
Abstract Insects are the largest taxon of arthropods, characterized by a segmented
body plan. They comprise the most abundant and diverse group of animals. Many
insects show highly complex adaptive behaviors, including learning abilities, social
interactions, and spatial orientation skills that, in simpliﬁed version, are reminiscent
of the abilities of vertebrates and even humans. In contrast to their sophisticated
behavior, their brain, however, is minute and simple compared to that of humans.
Because of these features, many insects have become models for studies of the
neuronal basis underlying speciﬁc behaviors.
The insect body is divided into three parts: the head, the thorax with wings and
legs, and the abdomen. In most species, each part contains relatively autonomously
operating neural circuits, which have functions in local sensing and motor control.
The head contains the antennae, the compound eyes, the ocelli, various sense organs
on the mouth parts, and, as part of the nervous system, the brain. The brain processes
this multitude of sensory input and provides multisensory integration. In addition, it
controls movements of the antennae and mouth parts and induces suitable behaviors
by modifying the activity of the thoracic and abdominal nervous systems, which,
likewise, provide sensory input and feedback to the brain. This chapter introduces
the organization of the insect brain and then focuses on neural circuits underlying
ﬁve aspects of insect behavior that are relatively well understood.
Keywords Sensory systems • Insect brain • Motion vision • Circadian clock •
Learning and memory • Orientation • Courtship
M. Kinoshita ()
Laboratory of Neuroethology, SOKENDAI, The Graduate University for Advanced Studies,
Shonan Village, Hayama 240-0193, Japan
e-mail: kinoshita_michiyo@soken.ac.jp
U. Homberg
Department of Biology, Animal Physiology, University of Marburg, D-35032 Marburg, Germany
© Springer Japan KK 2017
S. Shigeno et al. (eds.), Brain Evolution by Design, Diversity and Commonality
in Animals, DOI 10.1007/978-4-431-56469-0_6
123

124
M. Kinoshita and U. Homberg
6.1
Overview of the Insect Brain
The brain is the major part of the central nervous system in vertebrates and most
invertebrates and is usually placed in the head. The obvious differences between
vertebrate and invertebrate brains are their size and shape. In general, vertebrate
brains are much bigger than those of invertebrates: the number of neurons is 105 to
106 for insect brains, 7  107 for a small mammal such as the mouse, and 1011 for
humans (Menzel 2001; Herculano-Houzel et al. 2006; Azevedo et al. 2009).
Even though the shape and organization differ considerably between the ver-
tebrate and insect brain, molecular genetic analysis suggests similarity in genetic
patterning mechanisms in the formation of the brain in fruit ﬂy and mouse (Arendt
and Nübler-Jung 1996; Lichtneckert and Reichert 2005). Similarly, the role of the
brain in processing sensory information, integrating multisensory modalities, and
inducing behavior by controlling the motor system is similar in vertebrates, insects,
and other invertebrates.
Insect species are highly abundant and diverse, impressively illustrating their
phylogenetic success. Each species is adapted for a speciﬁc habitat, which results
in a rich diversity of morphology, body size, physiology, and behavior (Chittka and
Niven 2009; Strausfeld 2012). Considerable variations also exist in the organization
of the brain. Neuropil morphology, such as shape, volume, and relative position in
the brain, is highly species dependent, even though comparable brain neuropils can
be found across taxa (Strausfeld 2012). This diversity in insect brain organization
has resulted in different nomenclatures for different species, such as ﬂies, bees,
locusts, moths, beetles, cockroaches, and others (Strausfeld 1976; Mobbs 1985;
Kurylas et al. 2008; el Jundi et al. 2009b; Dreyer et al. 2010; Strausfeld 2012).
Recently, Ito et al. (2014) introduced a unifying systematic nomenclature for insect
brain structures using the brain of the fruit ﬂy Drosophila melanogaster as a model.
The insect brain consists of six neuromeres, which are arranged in two different
ways. In hemimetabolous insects such as locusts and cockroaches, but also in beetles
(holometabolous), the brain is separated into the cerebral ganglia (CRG) and the
gnathal ganglia (GNG) (Fig. 6.1a, left). The CRG, containing the protocerebrum
(PR), deutocerebrum (DE), and tritocerebrum (TR), lie above the esophagus
(ES), whereas the mandibular (MN), maxillary (MX), and labial (L,B) ganglia,
comprising the GNG, are below the esophagus and are separated from the CRG
through connectives. In many holometabolousinsects, such as ﬂies, bees, and moths,
however, the CRG and GNG are fused into one ganglionic mass (Fig. 6.1a right, b).
Each neuromere contains neuropils deﬁned as synapse-rich areas and a cell body
rind surrounding the neuropils.
The CRG consist of the cerebrum between two visual processing centers, the
optic lobes (OL). The cerebrum contains several prominent neuropils (Fig. 6.1c):
the antennal lobe (AL), the mushroom body (MB), the lateral horn (LH), the
anterior optic tubercle (AOTU), and the antennal mechanosensory and motor center
(AMMC) in each brain hemisphere, and the central complex (CX) connected to
two lateral complexes in the center. Other areas, separated by ﬁber bundles and

6
Insect Brains: Minute Structures Controlling Complex Behaviors
125
OL
AL
MB
CX
GNG
AL
OL
MB
CX
a
b
c
e
d
OL
MB
AL
LH
CX
CRG
GNG
fly, bee, moth etc
CRG
GNG
locust, cockroach etc.
VLNP
AMMC
d
m
AOTU
Fig. 6.1 Overview of insect brains. (a) Arrangement of cerebral ganglia (CRG) and gnathal
ganglia (GNG) in many hemimetabolous (left) and holometabolous (right) insects. (b) 3D confocal
scanning image of the Drosophila brain. d dorsal, m medial. Scale 50 m ((a, b) Modiﬁed from
Ito et al. (2014), with kind permission). (c) 3D reconstruction of the ﬂy brain, frontal view. (d) The
cerebral ganglia of the locust brain, posterior view. Scale 600 m ((c, d) adapted from Kurylas
et al. 2008, with kind permission). (e) 3D standard of the honeybee brain. Scale 200 m. (Adapted
from Brandt et al. (2005), with kind permission). See text for explanation of abbreviations
the prominent neuropils, are named based on relative position in the cerebrum,
such as the superior (SNP), ventrolateral (VLNP), inferior, ventromedial, and
periesophageal neuropils (Fig. 6.1c).
The relative position, shape, and volume of neuropils differ among insect brains
and are related to the size and shape of the head and species-speciﬁc differences in

126
M. Kinoshita and U. Homberg
the relative importance of different sensory systems (Farris 2015). In large insects
such as the desert locust, the optic lobes are connected through a slender optic stalk
with the cerebrum, and the whole brain appears stretched horizontally compared to
the compact brain of the small fruit ﬂy (Fig. 6.1d) (Kurylas et al. 2008). The neuraxis
inside the insect head is bent upward, but in some taxa, such as ﬂies, butterﬂies,
and moths, is even tilted backward, partly reﬂecting a change in the position of
the antennae, which in moths are not used as sensors exploring the ground but are
held upward for wind-carried odor detection. As a consequence, the orientation of
the cerebrum including MB and CX in ﬂies, moths, and butterﬂies is rotated by as
much as 90ı in comparison to the brain of locusts and honeybees (Fig. 6.1). Finally,
the size of different brain areas varies species speciﬁcally depending on the relative
importance of different sensory modalities. This dictum applies most obviously to
sensory brain areas such as the OLs, which are large in day-active dragonﬂies and
butterﬂies, but relatively small in nocturnal cockroaches, and the ALs, which are
large in cockroaches and moths but virtually nonexistent in dragonﬂies. Finally,
central brain areas can vary in size, most dramatically seen in MBs: these are huge
in social bees and ants, probably reﬂecting the importance of odors in foraging and
social interactions requiring particularly high memory storage capacity.
6.1.1
Sensory Processing Regions in the Brain
The head contains a multitude of sensory organs and sensilla, including the ocelli
and compound eyes, chemoreceptors on the antennae and mouth parts, a large
variety of mechanoreceptors on the head capsule, mouth parts and antennae, and
hygro- and thermoreceptors on the antennae. Sensory cells of the eyes and ocelli, the
antennae, and parts of the head capsule project to the cerebral ganglia, and gustatory
information is largely conveyed to the gnathal ganglia. Among these sensations,
this section focuses on the most prominent neuropils involved in processing visual,
olfactory, and mechanosensory signals.
Two light-receptive organs, the compound eyes and the ocelli, contain photore-
ceptors and convey visual signals to the optic lobe (compound eye) or directly to
the central brain (ocelli) for further processing (Strausfeld 1970; Strausfeld 1976).
The ﬂy optic lobe (Fig. 6.2a) contains, from the retina, the lamina (LA; not shown
in Fig. 6.2a), the medulla (ME), and the lobula complex. The lobula complex is
subdivided further into the lobula (LO) and the thin lobula plate (LOP), which is
attached to the posterior side of the LO (Fig. 6.2a, left top). In the lamina, pho-
toreceptor axons form, together with lamina interneurons, units called cartridges.
Fly LA cartridges contain photoreceptor axons from seven neighboring ommatidia,
which is called neural superposition (Strausfeld 1989), whereas photoreceptor axons
from single ommatidia innervate a single lamina cartridge in many other insect
laminae (Ribi 1987; Takemura et al. 2005). The lamina cartridges appear as thin
columnar structures along the axis of axons. This cartridge structure also exists
in the ME, which, in addition, has a pronounced layered organization across the

6
Insect Brains: Minute Structures Controlling Complex Behaviors
127
a
b
c
AL
LH
AL
AOTU
AME
LOP
NO
NO
GNG
GNG
VLN
VLN
VLN
OL
AME
d
m
p
a
p
a
p
a
Fig. 6.2 Arrangement of prominent neuropils in the ﬂy brain. (a) Neuropils for primary sensory
processing. Inset shows dorsal view of the optic lobe. a anterior, d dorsal, m medial, p posterior.
(b) The mushroom body. Inset shows lateral view of the mushroom body. (c) The central complex
with the lateral accessory lobe (LAL) and bulb (BU). Inset shows lateral view of the central
complex (Images taken from Ito et al. (2014), with kind permission). See text for explanation
of abbreviations
cartridges. The ME of Drosophila contains ten layers (Fischbach and Dittrich 1989).
In many insects, a thick layer in the middle of the ME, the so-called serpentine layer,
separates the distal and proximal ME. In addition, a small neuropil, the accessory
medulla (AME), lies at the anterior edge of the ME (Fig. 6.2a). The organization

128
M. Kinoshita and U. Homberg
of the lobula complex is highly species speciﬁc. In the locust and praying mantis,
the LO is composed of four or ﬁve substructures (Gouranton 1964; Leitinger et al.
1999), whereas in the bee it consists of a single ganglionic mass (Mobbs 1985; Paulk
et al. 2008). Organization into cartridges and layers is common in the distal LO but
is no longer present in proximal aspects or at the output side of the lobula complex.
The number of layers in the ME and LO is species speciﬁc. The cartridge structure in
the LA, ME, and LO indicates that retinotopic processing occurs in these neuropils.
In general, light information is processed in the optic lobe and is transferred
to the central brain for integration with other sensory modalities or to the motor
control system. Processing in the LOP strongly contributes to motion vision related
to optomotor responses (Hausen and Egelhaaf 1989; Borst and Euler 2011), whereas
the LO processes visual cues such as color, small object movement, and shape
(Yang et al. 2004; Paulk et al. 2008; Dunbier et al. 2012; Okamura and Strausfeld
2007). Many neural tracts project from the ME and lobula complex to the cerebrum,
and some of them continue as commissures to the contralateral optic lobe. Among
neuropils in the cerebrum, the anterior optic tubercle (AOTU) receives visual
information. In locusts, bees, and butterﬂies the AOTU consists of two major
subunits, the upper and lower unit (Homberg et al. 2003a; Pfeiffer and Kinoshita
2012; Heinze and Reppert 2012). Additional smaller subunits appear to be present
in certain insects, such as the monarch butterﬂy (Heinze and Reppert 2012). In
Drosophila three subunits of the AOTU were identiﬁed based on the arborizations
of visual projection neurons (Otsuna and Ito 2006).
Odorant information, characterized by a mixture of different volatile com-
pounds, is ﬁrst processed in the AL, located anteroventrally in the cerebrum
(Fig. 6.2a). Olfactory receptor cells detect volatile compounds and send their axons
to spheroidal condensations of neuropils, termed glomeruli, in the AL (Schachtner
et al. 2005; Galizia 2014). Olfactory receptor cells expressing the same receptor
molecule(s) send converging axons to the same glomerulus, thus providing a
characteristic odor-response proﬁle to each glomerulus (Galizia 2014). Processed
olfactory information is conveyed from the AL by projection neurons to other
brain areas, notably the MB and LH (Galizia and Rössler 2010). The number of
glomeruli is species speciﬁc: 160 in the honeybee, about 60 in moths and butterﬂies
(Schachtner et al. 2005), and 205 in the American cockroach (Watanabe et al. 2010).
Male moths tracking sexual pheromones produced by females have particular,
enlarged male-speciﬁc glomeruli, called macroglomerular complex (Rospars and
Hildebrand 1992; Kazawa et al. 2009). The ALs are large in nocturnal insects
and ﬂower foragers relying on ﬂoral odors, whereas certain aquatic insects such
as whirligig beetles lack ALs (Lin and Strausfeld 2013).
The antenna is usually covered with a large variety of mechanoreceptors, serving
a variety of functions (Staudacher et al. 2005). Particularly prominent mechanore-
ceptors in the second antennal segment, the pedicel, form a mechanosensory organ
called Johnston’s organ that senses deﬂections and vibrations of the antennal
ﬂagellum. As such it has a variety of functions and has a role in gravity perception
(honeybees, ﬂies), detection of water surface vibrations (whirligig beetle; Kolmes
1983), wind and air vibrations for ﬂight control (moths; Sane et al. 2007), and

6
Insect Brains: Minute Structures Controlling Complex Behaviors
129
hearing (mosquitoes, ﬂies, bees; Matsuo and Kamikouchi 2013). Its mechanorecep-
tors project into the antennal mechanosensory and motor center (AMMC) located
lateral from the esophagus and above the GNG (Fig. 6.2a, c).
6.1.2
High-Order Brain Regions in the CRG
The mushroom bodies (MBs) and the central complex (CX) with the lateral
complexes (LXs) are prominent neuropils in the cerebrum. The MBs are paired
structures in the dorsal cerebrum, whereas the CX spans the brain midline, framed
by the MB lobes.
The MB is constructed by intrinsic neurons, termed Kenyon cells, and is divided
into three regions: the calyx (CA), pedunculus (PE), and lobes (Fig. 6.2b). In ﬂies,
the cup-shaped CA faces the posterior edge of the brain, the cylinder-like PE extends
anteriorly, and the bifurcated lobes, the vertical lobe (VL), and the medial lobe (ML)
are located in the anterior brain (Tanaka et al. 2008). These three regions in general
correspond to the dendritic region, axon, and terminals of Kenyon cells. In the CA
Kenyon cells receive sensory input, most prominently from antennal-lobe projection
neurons, but in many species also from visual and gustatory ﬁbers, whereas their
main output sites are in the lobes.
The structure of the MB varies considerably among different insect species
(Strausfeld et al. 1998; Strausfeld 2012). In butterﬂies, moths, cockroaches, bees,
and ants, the CA is a double cup-shaped structure, whereas in secondarily anosmic
species, such as backswimmers and damselﬂies, it is highly reduced or may even be
completely absent (Strausfeld et al. 1998; Farris 2013). Inputs of different sensory
modalities normally segregate in the CA (Gronenberg 1999; Ehmer and Gronenberg
2002; Kinoshita et al. 2015; Nishino et al. 2012). Two lobes, a VL and an ML,
are present in most insects (Brandt et al. 2005; Sjöholm et al. 2006; Mobbs 1985;
Fukushima and Kanzaki 2009; Kurylas et al. 2008), but only a single spherical lobe
has been identiﬁed in butterﬂies (Heinze and Reppert 2012; Kinoshita et al. 2015).
The MB in Lepidoptera has a secondary peduncle connected to the dorsal lobe
(Sjöholm et al. 2006; Homberg et al. 1988; Fukushima and Kanzaki 2009; Heinze
and Reppert 2012; Kinoshita et al. 2015). In the PE and lobes, Kenyon cells form
concentric or laminar layers and make contacts with efferent and a smaller number
of afferent neurons (Farris 2011).
Even though the CA receives inputs of multisensory modalities (Farris and
Roberts 2005), the olfactory input is dominant in many insects. Olfactory infor-
mation is conveyed by projection neurons from the antennal lobe to the CA
and the lateral horn (LH). Therefore, the MB has been regarded primarily as a
center for olfactory signal processing, speciﬁcally olfactory learning and memory
(Strausfeld et al. 1998; Menzel 2014). However, the CA of honeybees, ants,
and butterﬂies receive substantial visual input in addition to olfactory input. In
bees, grasshoppers, and crickets, gustatory information also enters the CA (Farris
2008). Whirligig beetles have a distinct MB, which is dominated by visual input

130
M. Kinoshita and U. Homberg
(Lin and Strausfeld 2012). The shape and volume of the MB is highly diverse
among species, which may relate to differences in foraging ecology, mating
behavior (Farris and Roberts 2005), or other aspects of behavioral ecology requiring
different amounts of memory storage capacity (Menzel 2014).
The CX lies in the center of the cerebrum and consists of four neuropils
(Fig. 6.1c). The protocerebral bridge (PB), fan-shaped body (FB, also termed upper
division of the central body, CBU), and ellipsoid body (EB, also termed lower
division of the central body, CBL) are arranged from posterior to anterior whereas
the paired noduli (NO) lie ventrally from the FB and EB (Fig. 6.2c, inset). The paired
lateral accessory lobes (LAL) and bulbs (BU), comprising the LXs, are connected to
both sides of the EB (Fig. 6.2c). These six neuropils are intimately interconnected
by interneurons forming distinct neural circuits (Heinze and Homberg 2008; Wolff
et al. 2015). The PB, FB, and EB are further subdivided into 16 slices (the PB
of Drosophila into 18 slices), numbered 1–8 (1–9) from the midline to the lateral
edges of both sides (Heinze and Homberg 2008; Wolff et al. 2015). The FB and
EB, in addition, have a layered organization. The NO are also divided into subunits,
usually four that are stacked on top of each other (Ito et al. 2014). The LAL consists
of subregions (Ito et al. 2014), whereas the BU is composed of micro-glomeruli
(Träger et al. 2008; Seelig and Jayaraman 2013).
The regular arrangement of slices and layers in the CX is highly conserved
among insect species (el Jundi et al. 2009a; Heinze et al. 2012; el Jundi et al. 2014).
The bulb is, in monarch butterﬂies, bumblebees, and locusts, further divided into
two areas (Heinze et al. 2012; Pfeiffer and Kinoshita 2012; el Jundi et al. 2014).
Evidence from locusts, ﬂies, cockroaches, bees, and monarch butterﬂies suggests
that the CX is dominated by visual input and has a key function in spatial orientation
and memory during ﬂight and walking (Pfeiffer and Homberg 2014).
6.2
Neural Networks Underlying Behaviors
This section outlines the neural networks and computations underlying ﬁve aspects
of insect behavior: optomotor responses, olfactory learning and memory, sky
compass navigation, circadian clock, and mating behavior. All of these are essential
components of animal behavior across most taxa, suggesting that algorithms
underlying those behaviors may be shared among many species.
One of the most important roles of the nervous system is to detect sensory signals
from the environment, process this information, and, ﬁnally, induce appropriate
behavior for a particular situation. Neural networks across several neuropils usually
contribute to these tasks. To understand the neural operations involved, researchers
traditionally studied a particular behavior of a favorable species such as the
houseﬂy, honeybee, locust, or cockroach, using behavioral assays, neuroanatomy,
and electrophysiology. As the development of genetic tools, imaging, and in vivo
patch recordings progressed, Drosophila became the widely used model system in
insect neuroscience. New gene-editing techniques (TALEN, CRISPR) and RNAi

6
Insect Brains: Minute Structures Controlling Complex Behaviors
131
may help to further studies on non-model insects, revealing increasing comparative
and evolutionary insights into the organization and functioning of the insect nervous
system in the future.
6.2.1
Optomotor Responses
Motion vision is an important fundamental function of the visual system. It serves
a role in course control during self-motion, but also allows an animal to track other
moving animals or objects. Directionally selective motion sensitivity is computed
in the retina of mammals and in the optic lobes of insects (Borst and Helmstaedter
2015), and several models have been proposed underlying directional selectivity in
motion vision (Barlow and Hill 1963; Reichardt 1987; Borst and Euler 2011; Borst
and Helmstaedter 2015).
Optomotor responses are relatively simple behaviors based on motion vision and
achromatic signal processing and have been studied in detail in ﬂies. For studying
optomotor responses, ﬂies are tethered in the center of a striped drum (Fig. 6.3a).
When the drum rotates clockwise or counterclockwise, the ﬂy tries to rotate its body
to follow the movement of the stripes (Fig. 6.3b). This behavior is important for
body stabilization and course control during ﬂight (Borst et al. 2010; Srinivasan
2011) and is elicited by optic ﬂow stimulation, that is, by movement of the whole
environment around the ﬂy.
The lobula plate (LOP) in the ﬂy brain has a key role in optic ﬂow detection
and optomotor responses. In Musca and Calliphora the LOP is innervated by 50 or
more large ﬁeld tangential neurons that are sensitive to optic ﬂow stimulation and
contribute critically to optomotor responses (Hausen and Egelhaaf 1989). These
LOP tangential neurons are directionally selective: that is, motion in the preferred
direction excites these neurons and motion in the opposite direction (null direction)
inhibits them (Fig. 6.3c). Neurons sensitive to the four cardinal directions of motion
(front to back, back to front, upward, downward) are organized in four layers of the
LOP. The most thoroughly studied cell types are neurons of the horizontal system
(HS), sensitive to horizontal motion from front to back, and neurons of the vertical
system (VS) that are largely sensitive to downward motion (Fig. 6.3d). In Musca
and Calliphora, the HS system consists of three neurons in the most anterior layer
of the LOP with dendrites extending across dorsal, medial, and ventral regions
(shown in blue in Fig. 6.3d), whereas the VS system consists of ten neurons, whose
arborizations innervate narrow vertically extending regions in the most posterior
layer of the LOP (shown in red; Fig. 6.3d). Axonal projections of these neurons
make contact with neck motor neurons or descending neurons in the ventral lateral
protocerebrum of the brain (blue and red arrowheads, respectively; Fig. 6.3d)
(Strausfeld 1989). The descending neurons convey information to ﬂight motor and
locomotor circuits in the thoracic ganglia, largely through indirect connections
(Strausfeld et al. 1984).

132
M. Kinoshita and U. Homberg
Fig. 6.3 Neural pathways
underlying optomotor
responses in ﬂies. (a) A ﬂy
tethered to a torque meter
inside a rotating striped drum.
(b) Optomotor yaw response
to clockwise and
counterclockwise rotation of
the drum (Modiﬁed from
Borst et al. 2010, with kind
permission). (c) Response of
a directionally selective
motion sensitive neuron. Grey
bar motion stimulus
(Modiﬁed from Borst and
Haag 2002, with kind
permission). (d) Morphology
of LOP tangential neurons
(Modiﬁed from Hausen and
Egelhaaf 1989, with kind
permission). Me medulla,
LOP lobula plate, HS
horizontal system, VS vertical
system. (e) Elementary
motion detector (EMD)
(Modiﬁed from Reichardt
1987, with kind permission).
Neuronal cell types in the
optic lobe involved in
optomotor responses. M
multiplication, L lamina
monopolar cell, LA lamina,
Mi medulla intrinsic neuron,
Tm transmedullary cell, T
bushy T cell (Modiﬁed from
Borst and Helmstaedter 2015,
with kind permission)
LA
ME
LO
LOP
Clockwise
Counter-
clockwise
Time (s)
Torque (10
Nm)
-10
d
HS
ME
LOP
VS
Null
Preferred
Time (s)
0
4 0
4
-70
10
membrane potential
(mV)
e
EMD
c
b
a

6
Insect Brains: Minute Structures Controlling Complex Behaviors
133
The physiological properties of direction selectivity in the LOP tangential
neurons can be explained by the Hassenstein–Reichardt model of elementary motion
detectors (EMD) (Fig 6.3e, inset) (Reichardt 1987). When a striped pattern moves
from left to right, the light part stimulates successively input 1 and 2, which
are spatially separated. The signal from input 1, delayed (£) through a temporal
ﬁlter, and the non-delayed signal from input 2 simultaneously reach the next
stage of nonlinear multiplication (M), which results in selectivity for rightward
motion, but no response for leftward motion. In the correlation model, two mirror
symmetrical units serve opposite directional signals [excite (C) and inhibit ()] to a
summation stage and, thereby, produce opposite responses to the oppositely directed
movements.
Extensive recent research using fruit ﬂy mutants identiﬁed the neuronal circuits
in the optic lobe underlying the key elements of the EMD (Borst and Helmstaedter
2015). Motion is processed in two parallel processing pathways in the optic lobe,
one for light edge movement (ON pathway) and the other for dark edge movement
(OFF pathway) (Fig. 6.3e). The moving striped pattern ﬁrst stimulates ommatidial
arrays with photoreceptors in each ommatidium receiving light. The photoreceptors
have synapses with different types of lamina monopolar cells (LMC). The ﬁrst type
of LMC (L1) is sensitive to a moving light edge (ON signal), whereas dark edge
movement excites the other types of LMC (L2–L4, OFF signal; only L2 shown
in Fig. 6.3e) (Joesch et al. 2010), indicating that light and dark edges are already
processed separately in the lamina. These LMCs project to distal medulla layers
and synapse upon intrinsic medulla cells (Mi1) and transmedullary cells (Tm1-3)
projecting directly to the lobula (Takemura et al. 2013). The Mi1 and Tm3 cells
are sensitive to light edge movement and Tm1 and Tm2 neurons are sensitive to
dark edge movement. For producing direction selectivity with light edge movement,
Mi1 produces a signal delay and Tm3 produces a non-delayed signal. In the pair
of Tm1 and Tm2 detecting the dark edge, Tm1 produces the delay (Behnia et al.
2014). These delayed and non-delayed signals in those medulla neurons are the key
input elements of the EMD. The Mi1 and Tm3 cells, then, make synaptic contacts
with bushy T cells (T4) in the most proximal medulla layer, whereas Tm1 and
Tm2 cells terminate on T5 cells in a distal lobula layer. T4 and T5 respond in a
directionally selective manner and can be regarded as the multiplication stage of
the EMD. T4 and T5 each consist of four neurons that respond maximally to one
of the four cardinal directions of motion and project to one of the four layers of
the LOP (Maisak et al. 2013). T4 and T5 cells responding to front-to-back motion
provide excitatory input to horizontal motion-sensitive neurons in the anterior two
layers of the LOP, and T4 and T5 cells responding to downward motion contact
vertical motion-sensitive neurons in the posterior two layers. Neurons responsible
for the inhibitory null directions have not been identiﬁed but are assumed to be
local inhibitory interneurons signaling between adjacent LOP layers with oppositely
tuned direction selectivity (Borst and Helmstaedter 2015).
Comparison of data from mammals and ﬂies impressively revealed that in both
systems motion detection follows highly similar rules and processing stages. In both
systems it is based on parallel ON and OFF pathways, correlation of signals with

134
M. Kinoshita and U. Homberg
different temporal dynamics, and convergence of these signals at the next stage
in four parallel pathways corresponding to the four principal directions of motion
(Borst and Euler 2011; Borst and Helmstaedter 2015).
6.2.2
Olfactory Learning and Memory
Animals change their behavior based on experience resulting in memory formation.
Studies on the neural mechanisms of learning and memory formation ranging from
analysis of synaptic plasticity in the sea hare Aplysia to studies of mammalian
brain areas involved in memory formation, such as the hippocampus, amygdala, and
cerebellum, increasingly show that mechanisms of synaptic plasticity underlying
different forms of memory such as short- and long-term memory are widely shared
in the animal kingdom (Kandel 2001; Roberts and Glanzman 2003; Glanzman
2010). In insects, a focus of research has been on the mechanisms of olfactory
learning and memory especially in honeybees, crickets, locusts, cockroaches, and
fruit ﬂies (Menzel and Giurfa 2001; Mizunami et al. 2009; Watanabe et al. 2011;
Stopfer 2014; Owald and Waddell 2015; Mizunami et al. 2015).
Flower-foraging honeybees have excellent capabilities for learning visual and
olfactory cues of ﬂowers by association with nectar (von Frisch 1950; Giurfa 2003).
In appetitive classical conditioning in the laboratory, a harnessed honeybee receives
a drop of sucrose solution as reward (unconditioned stimulus, US) shortly after
presentation of a particular odor A (conditioned stimulus, CSC; Fig. 6.4a). After
a single learning trial, the bee extends its proboscis without reward when the
same odor is presented again (Fig. 6.4a, right). Local cooling of the mushroom
body calyces (CAs) inhibits olfactory memory formation, whereas injection of
octopamine into the mushroom body (MB) substitutes for the sugar water reward
(Menzel and Erber 1978; Hammer and Menzel 1998). These experiments together
with others indicate that the MB have a key role in olfactory learning and that
octopaminergic neurons act in association between the US and the CS (Hammer
and Menzel 1998).
Olfactory information is provided to the CAs of the MB by projection neurons
from the antennal lobe (AL) via two different tracts (Fig. 6.4b, blue line). Mushroom
body Kenyon cells integrate olfactory information with other sensory modalities.
For associative odor learning in bees, the ventral unpaired median cell of the
maxillary neuromere 1 (VUMmx1 neuron) provides information of the US (sucrose)
to the MB (Fig. 6.4b, red line and inset) (Hammer 1993). VUMmx1 has its cell body
at the midline of the gnathal ganglia (Fig. 6.4b) and dendrites in the dorsal GNG (not
shown in Fig. 6.4b inset). It responds to sucrose stimulation and has axonal terminals
in the AL, the CA, and the lateral horn, which covers all major olfactory brain areas.
Hammer discovered that electrical stimulation of VUMmx1 substitutes for the US
(sucrose) in association of the CS (odor) and the US (Hammer 1993). Taken together
with the fact that VUMmx1 is an octopaminergic neuron (Schröter et al. 2007),

6
Insect Brains: Minute Structures Controlling Complex Behaviors
135
Fig. 6.4 Odor learning and memory in the honeybee and fruit ﬂy. (a) Classical olfactory
conditioning of the proboscis extension reﬂex in the honeybee. CSC conditioned stimulus. (b)
Neural pathways for odor learning (left) and morphology of the ventral unpaired median cell
of the maxillary neuromere 1, VUMmx1 (right) (Modiﬁed from Menzel and Giurfa 2001 and
Hammer and Menzel 1995, with kind permission). AL antennal lobe, CA calyx of the mushroom
body, CB central body, MB mushroom body, OL optic lobe, PE peduncle, PNs projection neurons,
LH lateral horn. (c) Olfactory pathway (left) and dopaminergic neuron clusters for learning and
memory (right) in the Drosophila mushroom body. Each protocerebral posterior lateral (PPL)
neuron innervates a different compartment in the ’, ’0-lobe, and the heel or the CA; PAM neurons
innervate different compartments in the “, “0-, and ”-lobe. Most PPL1 and some PAM neurons have
projections to a similar zone in the contralateral MB (shown as dotted lines with arrowheads). LNs
local interneurons of the AL, ORNs olfactory receptor neurons, PAM protocerebral anterior medial
(Modiﬁed from Perisse et al. 2013a, b, and Waddell 2013, with kind permission)

136
M. Kinoshita and U. Homberg
VUMmx1 contributes to associative odor learning by transmitting octopamine to
the projection neurons in the olfactory pathway and to the CA of the MB.
In addition to octopamine, dopamine also has a role in associative odor learning
(Mizunami et al. 2009; Unoki et al. 2005; Liu et al. 2012; Aso et al. 2012; Burke
et al. 2012). Especially in fruit ﬂies, dopaminergic (DA) neurons contribute to both
appetitive and aversive learning as in mammals (Aso et al. 2012; Liu et al. 2012;
Burke et al. 2012; Perisse et al. 2013a, b; Guven-Ozkan and Davis 2014; Owald
and Waddell 2015). In associative odor learning, ﬂies learn in a T-maze assay to
associate a particular odor (CS) with either a weak electric shock (punishment) or
sucrose or water (reward) as unconditioned stimuli (US).
The CS pathway in the ﬂy brain is basically the same as that in honeybees
(Fig. 6.4c, left). Odor information (CS) is transferred to the CAs by projection
neurons, which make synapses with the dendrites of intrinsic mushroom body
neurons (Kenyon cells). The MB consists of three types of the Kenyon cells,
’/“-, ’0/“0-, and ” neurons, corresponding to different subregions in the lobes.
These subregions are further divided into several compartments by innervation of
different DA neurons and mushroom body output neurons (Owald and Waddell
2015; Yamagata et al. 2015).
The US information is conveyed to the lobes of the MB by extrinsic DA
neurons. The DA neurons are deﬁned by three different regions of cell bodies:
the protocerebral anterior medial (PAM) and the protocerebral posterior lateral 1
and 2ab (PPL1, PPL2ab) clusters. These neurons mainly extend their processes to
restricted compartments in the lobes of the MB, the heel, or the CA (Fig. 6.4c, right).
Some PPL neurons mediate electric shock stimulation to the MB in odor learning
(Waddell 2013; Aso et al. 2012). The PAM cluster provides mostly appetitive
reinforcing signals such as sugar and water stimulation (Burke et al. 2012; Liu
et al. 2012; Lin et al. 2014), but also aversive reinforcement (Aso et al. 2012). In
addition, the US component of sugar is mediated by octopaminergic (OA) neurons
(not shown in Fig. 6.4c) upstream of the DA neurons (Burke et al. 2012). VUMmx1-
like OA neurons were also found in the ﬂy brain (Busch et al. 2009), and mediate
appetitive learning not only in the MB but also at the level of AL projection neurons
(Keene and Waddell 2007). Other MB-associated neurons, such as the serotonergic
dorsal paired medial neurons (DPMn) and the GABAergic anterior paired lateral
neurons (APLn) innervate all lobes of the MB (DPMn) or the whole MB (APLn).
The motivational state inﬂuences appetitive memory also through DA neurons
innervating the MB (Krashes et al. 2009).
The Drosophila MB is also crucial for visual and gustatory learning (Vogt
et al. 2014; Kirkhart and Scott 2015). Recent studies on MB outputs interestingly
suggest that the MB also inﬂuences naive odor responses, independent of learning or
memory (Lewis et al. 2015). Olfactory networks in insects and vertebrates share a
number of similarities (Hildebrandt and Shepherd 1997; Leinwand and Chalasani
2011; Li and Liberless 2015), which may be best illustrated by the common
chemotopic organization of processing units, the olfactory glomeruli, at the ﬁrst
stage of olfactory processing in the AL (insect) and olfactory bulb (vertebrates),
sparse coding in secondary processing areas (piriform cortex, mushroom bodies),

6
Insect Brains: Minute Structures Controlling Complex Behaviors
137
but may even extend to mechanisms of olfactory learning involving DA neurons in
rodents as in Drosophila (Rosenkranz and Grace 2002).
6.2.3
Sky Compass Orientation
Many animals navigate over long distances in search for food, mating partners,
or otherwise favorable habitats. Such traveling over long distances requires mech-
anisms of orientation based on environmental cues including sky compass cues,
landmarks, olfactory cues, and even geomagnetic signals (Alerstam et al. 2001;
Yamamoto et al. 2013; Lohmann et al. 2004; Biro et al. 2007).
Sky compass orientation refers to a spatial orientation behavior based on celestial
cues. Except for the stars and the Milky Way, these cues are deﬁned by the position
of the sun or the moon (Gould 1998; Srinivasan 2011). Direct sunlight, which is
unpolarized, is scattered in the atmosphere, resulting in a pattern of polarized light
(POL), a spectral gradient, and an intensity gradient across the sky (Fig. 6.5a)
(Coemans et al. 1994; Srinivasan 2011; el Jundi et al. 2014). The polarization
pattern is characterized by electric ﬁeld vectors arranged tangentially to concentric
circles around the sun and a degree of polarization ranging from 0 % (direct
sunlight) to a maximum of up to 75 % at an angular distance of 90ı from the sun.
Long-wavelength light is dominant in the sky, in particular around the sun, but
its contribution relative to short-wavelength light decreases toward the anti-solar
azimuth (Coemans et al. 1994). In addition, light intensity is highest around the sun
and decreases with increasing distance from the sun.
After von Frisch demonstrated that homing honeybees relying on a sun compass
orientation can read the sun‘s horizontal direction (azimuth) from the polarization
pattern of the sky (von Frisch 1974), spatial orientation based on a sky compass
using sky polarization and other celestial cues has been demonstrated in several
insect species, including ants, monarch butterﬂies, and dung beetles (Rossel and
Wehner 1984, 1986; Wehner 2003; Wehner and Müller 2006; Stalleicken et al.
2005; Dacke et al. 2003; el Jundi et al. 2015). These results suggest that celestial
cues indicating spatial directions are represented somewhere in the insect brain.
The identiﬁcation of polarized-light sensitive neurons (POL neurons), arranged in a
compass-like fashion in the locust brain, suggests that the central complex together
with the lateral complex serves a role as an internal sky compass (Vitzthum et al.
2002; Heinze and Homberg 2007; Homberg et al. 2011). Figure 6.5b shows the
morphologies of two tangential POL neurons in the lower division of the central
body (CBL) of the locust central complex (CX). The neurons have dendrites in small
areas in the lateral complex, the lateral and medial bulb (LBU, MBU), and send
axons to a particular layer of the CBL. As illustrated for one of the two neurons
(TL2), these neurons show polarization opponency, when stimulated with light
through a rotating polarizer, resulting in E-vector-dependent sinusoidal modulation
of spiking activity with excitatory and inhibitory responses at orthogonal E-vector
orientations (Fig. 6.5b, bottom) (Vitzthum et al. 2002). These POL neurons also

138
M. Kinoshita and U. Homberg
Fig. 6.5 (a) Visual cues for compass orientation in the sky (Modiﬁed from el Jundi et al. 2014,
with kind permission). For explanation, see text. (b) Morphology of tangential neurons in the
lower division of the central body (CBL) of the locust brain and response of a TL2 neuron to
dorsal illumination of the locust though a rotating polarizer. Background activity of the neuron
was at 10 imp/s (not shown). CBU upper division of the central body, LAL lateral accessory lobe,
LBU lateral bulb, MBU medial bulb, PB protocerebral bridge, TL tangential neuron of the CBL
(Modiﬁed from Vitzthum et al. 2002, with kind permission). (c) Neuronal pathways involved in
sky compass orientation in the locust. AME accessory medulla, AOTU anterior optic tubercle, CX
central complex, dLA dorsal rim area in the lamina, dME dorsal rim area in the medulla, LA lamina,
LAL lateral accessory lobe, LO lobula, MB mushroom body, ME medulla, POTU posterior optic
tubercle, PB protocerebral bridge. Bar 200 m (Modiﬁed from (el Jundi and Homberg 2010, with
kind permission)
respond to unpolarized light from a particular azimuth, likely representing direct
sunlight.
In the locust brain (Fig. 6.5c), celestial polarization and spectral information is
integrated in several steps in the optic lobe and is then fed to the CX (el Jundi et al.
2014). Photoreceptors in a specialized dorsal rim area of the eye are highly sensitive
to the oscillation plane of polarized light and, furthermore, share the same spectral
sensitivity (locust, blue sensitive) (Homberg et al. 2011; Schmeling et al. 2015).
Their axons project to speciﬁc small areas in the lamina and medulla (the dorsal
lamina, dLA, and the dorsal medulla, dME). A particular type of medulla tangential
neurons has dendritic ramiﬁcations in the dME, probably receiving polarized light
input, and a process extending along the dorsoventral axis of the medulla, where it
might receive azimuth-dependent spectral information from photoreceptors in the

6
Insect Brains: Minute Structures Controlling Complex Behaviors
139
remaining eye region (Homberg et al. 2003a). These tangential neurons send axonal
ﬁbers to the lower unit of the AOTU. AOTU neurons are sensitive to polarized blue
light from zenithal directions and, in addition, show azimuth-dependent UV-green
spectral opponency, when stimulated with unpolarized light spots from about 45ı
elevations (Kinoshita et al. 2007; Pfeiffer and Homberg 2007). One type of AOTU
neurons, called TuLAL, feeds integrated celestial cues into the LBU and MBU
(Pfeiffer et al. 2005; Pfeiffer and Homberg 2007). Their postsynaptic targets are
TL neurons innervating the lower division of the central body (Fig. 6.5b). Columnar
neurons transmit the celestial signals to the 16 slices of the protocerebral bridge
(PB). Here, a topographic representation of celestial E-vectors covering roughly
2  180ı is established across the slices by multi-columnar neurons (Heinze and
Homberg 2007). Neurons connecting the PB slices to the LAL constitute the outputs
from the CX. Finally, descending neurons transfer the sky compass information to
the wing and leg motor control centers in the thoracic ganglia (Träger and Homberg
2011).
A second pathway from the optic lobe (Fig. 6.5c, shown in blue) targets the
CX via the PB (el Jundi and Homberg 2010). Medulla neurons with large dendritic
ﬁelds including the dME make contact with the accessory medulla (AME) (el Jundi
et al. 2011). AME projection neurons send axons to the POTU, which is connected
by multi-columnar neurons to the PB. In ﬂies and cockroaches, the AME is the
site of the internal circadian clock (Helfrich-Förster et al. 1998). Therefore, this
pathway might feed time information from the endogenous circadian clock to the
sky compass network to compensate for daytime-dependent shifts in solar azimuth.
The network for processing celestial cues in the locust is highly conserved among
different insect species, as illustrated by data from monarch butterﬂies, bumblebees,
and dung beetles, even though some physiological properties of the constituent
neurons may be species speciﬁc (Heinze and Reppert 2011; el Jundi et al. 2015;
Pfeiffer and Kinoshita 2012).
6.2.4
Circadian System
As an adaptation to the universal 24-h period of night and day, insects, similar to
virtually all organisms, have an internal circadian clock roughly matching the 24-h
periodicity on earth (Panda et al. 2002). The internal clock is entrained to the 24-
h periodicity by external light or temperature cycles but shows a species-speciﬁc
free running period under constant conditions. The internal circadian system allows
animals to anticipate the day–night change, provides a temporal organization to all
body functions, and is essential for a time-compensated sun compass orientation
(see Sect. 6.2.3).
Circadian rhythms in fruit ﬂies can be measured in behavioral laboratory assays.
Fruit ﬂies are placed in small tubes, their locomotor activity is measured by an
infrared optical sensor, and the resulting signals are recorded over days in double-
plotted actograms (Fig. 6.6a). Under a cycle of 12 h light and 12 h darkness

140
M. Kinoshita and U. Homberg
Fig. 6.6 Neural basis of the
circadian clock.
(a) Double-plotted actogram
of a wild-type fruit ﬂy. On
day 10 (arrow), the light
regime changes from a
12:12 h light–dark cycle (LD)
cycle to DD (constant
darkness, black arrow). The
actogram shows morning (red
arrowhead) and evening (blue
arrowhead) activities
(Modiﬁed from
Helfrich-Förster 2004, with
kind permission). (b) Clock
neurons expressing the
PERIOD protein in the fruit
ﬂy brain. AL antennal lobe,
aME accessory medulla, CX
central complex, DN dorsal
neurons, LN lateral neurons,
lLNv large ventrolateral
neurons, MB mushroom body,
POT posterior optic tract, dpr
dorsal protocerebrum, s-LNv
small ventrolateral neurons
(Modiﬁed from
Helfrich-Förster 2004, with
kind permission).
(c) PER-expressing neurons
in the cockroach brain. G
group of cells, Pr
protocerebrum, De
deutocerebrum, OL optic lobe
(From Tomioka and
Matsumoto 2010, with kind
permission)
b
c
De
G-VI
G-II
G-D
G-III
G-IV
Pr
OL
G-I
G-V
L
D
LD
DD
AME
l-LNv
POT
DN2
MB
CX
s-LNv
Medulla
LNd
dpr
DN3
AL
DN1

6
Insect Brains: Minute Structures Controlling Complex Behaviors
141
(LD), the ﬂies’ activities increase around the time after ‘lights on’ (red arrowhead
in Fig. 6.6a) and before ‘lights off” (blue arrowhead in Fig. 6.6a), which refers
to morning and evening activity, respectively (Helfrich-Förster 2000): this is the
common activity pattern in crepuscular insects. In constant darkness (DD) the
two activity components are fused and become unimodal. Behavioral assays with
eyeless mutants indicate the importance of the optic lobe for maintenance of these
activity patterns adjusted to the light regime. Studies on clock gene mutants revealed
that two oscillators with different periods contribute to the morning and evening
activities (Stoleru et al. 2004; Rieger et al. 2006).
Clock neurons in fruit ﬂies that express per (period) and other clock genes are
concentrated the optic lobe and in the dorsal and lateral protocerebrum. They were
named the large and small ventrolateral neurons (l-LNv, s-LNv), the dorsal, and the
lateral neurons (DN1–3, LNd) in accordance with the position of their cell bodies
(Fig. 6.6b) (Helfrich-Förster 2004). The DNs make three clusters: two lie relatively
anteriorly (DN1,2), and a third lies more lateral posteriorly (DN3). The l-LNv and
s-LNv contain a neuropeptide, pigment-dispersing factor (PDF, shown as red in
Fig. 6.6b). The l-LNv have large dendritic ﬁelds in the distalmost layer of the entire
medulla and the accessory medulla and project to the contralateral optic lobe via the
posterior optic tract. The s-LNv also arborize in the accessory medulla and project
to the dorsal protocerebrum (Helfrich-Förster et al. 1998). The s-LNv are essential
for controlling circadian activity rhythms under DD conditions and release PDF
rhythmically from their terminals. The l-LNv, in contrast, mediate light input from
the compound eye to the clock and probably feed light information to the s-LNv.
Mutants with per gene expression conﬁned to a particular group of neurons showed
that the s-LNv control the morning activity and LNd control the evening activity
(Stoleru et al. 2004; Helfrich-Förster 2014). The PDF neurons and the LNd are,
therefore, pacemaker neurons for controlling circadian motor activity in fruit ﬂies.
PDF receptors are expressed on most clock neurons, including the PDF-positive
s-LNv, a ﬁfth PDF-negative s-LNv, half the LNd, and 7 of 17 DN1. These
neurons also express cryptochrome,a blue light-sensitive photopigment that directly
contributes to light entrainment of the clock. The s-LNv and half the DN1,2 appear
to control the morning activity by the fact that PDF speeds up the clock whereas
the ﬁfth s-LNv, the remaining half of DN1,2, and half of LNd may contribute to
the evening activity by the effect that PDF slows down the clock (Helfrich-Förster
2014).
Clock neurons expressing clock genes were identiﬁed in a number of other
insects (Sandrelli et al. 2008; Tomioka and Matsumoto 2010). Neurons immunore-
active for PDF in other insects are homologous to the ﬂy PDF neurons and have
been characterized quite well in cockroaches. The brain of the cockroach Blatella
germanica contains seven groups of PER-expressing neurons (Fig. 6.6c). Three of
them, containing colocalized PDF, are in the optic lobe (shown in red; Fig. 6.6c).
Three other groups are in the dorsal protocerebrum and one group lies in the
deutocerebrum (shown in blue and green, respectively; Fig. 6.6c). The cell bodies
of PDF neurons in the cockroach Rhyparobia maderae (formerly Leucophaea
maderae) are at the anterior edge of the medulla, arborize in the accessory medulla

142
M. Kinoshita and U. Homberg
as the master clock, the lamina, distal medulla, and send their axons toward
wide areas in the cerebrum, where they probably induce the circadian rhythm in
locomotion (Homberg et al. 2003b; Stengl and Arendt 2016). The branching pattern
of PDF neurons in the cerebrum is diverse depending on species. Some PDF neurons
in locusts project from the accessory medulla to the CX, possibly serving as time
compensation of the internal sky compass (see Sect. 6.2.3).
6.2.5
Courtship Behavior and Sexual Dimorphism of the Brain
Reproductive success of an animal strongly depends on selecting the right partner.
Species-speciﬁc mating behaviors, therefore, serve to recognize conspeciﬁcs, deter-
mine their sex, and communicate with the partner using several different sensory
modalities. Usually, the behavior of males differs from that of females during
mating, corresponding to sexual differences in brain structure and function (Cachero
et al. 2010).
The courtship behavior of Drosophila melanogaster consists of six discrete steps
(Fig. 6.7a) (Greenspan and Ferveur 2000). When a male ﬂy ﬁnds a female, the male
ﬁrst orients his body axis toward the female and chases her (orientation). He then
touches her abdomen with his forelegs (tapping). After following her, he opens and
vibrates one of his wings, producing a courtship song (singing). In response, the
female may stop walking, indicating her receptivity. The male then approaches the
female from the back and licks her genitalia (licking), and eventually tries to mount
her, bending his abdomen ventrally (attempt copulation). When the female accepts
the male, she raises her wings and opens her vaginal plate for copulation.
As in other animals, a variety of sensory cues, including visual, olfactory,
gustatory, and auditory, contribute to continue from one step to the next during
courtship behavior (Yamamoto et al. 1997; Dickson 2008). For example, hydro-
carbons on the body act as aphrodisiacs for the opposite sex and are sensed through
the gustatory and olfactory system. Male ﬂies transfer a pheromone (cis-vaccenyl
acetate, cVA), produced in their accessory gland, to the female during copulation,
and thereby reduce her sexual attractiveness to other males. The male courtship
song contains two components, sine songs and pulse songs, which are species
speciﬁc. Female ﬂies, therefore, can use the song to discriminate conspeciﬁc males.
Sensory signals during mating are, therefore, detected by a variety of sensory organs
and, after processing in the optic lobe (vision), antennal lobe (olfaction), antennal
mechanosensory and motor center (hearing, touch), and the gnathal ganglion
(gustation) are transferred to the central brain for initiating a particular behavior
(Fig. 6.6b).
Neural circuits underlying courtship behavior in the fruit ﬂy were identiﬁed
by tracing neurons expressing the fruitless (fru) gene. Fruitless mutant males
show either abnormal courtship or complete lack of courtship behavior and often
form male–male courtship chains (Ito et al. 1996; Ryner et al. 1996). The fru
gene acts together with the doublesex (dsx) gene in the sex-determination cascade

6
Insect Brains: Minute Structures Controlling Complex Behaviors
143
a
b
Orientation
DC1
d
c
e
Female
Male
ORNs
DN1
DA1
Y-shaped 
dendritic 
branch
5 neurons
30 neurons
P2b
P1
Antenna
Leg
Eye
Brain
AL
OL
AMMC
Tapping
Singing
Licking
Attempted 
copulation
Copulation
Labellum
horsetail-like
structure
ipsilateral 
projection
LH
GNG
Fig. 6.7 Mating behavior and mating-related neurons in Drosophila. (a) Sequence of courtship
behavior (Modiﬁed from Yamamoto et al. 2014, with kind permission). (b) Sensory inputs for
courtship behavior. AL antennal lobe, AMMC antennal mechanosensory and motor center, OL optic
lobe. (c) Sexual dimorphism of the medially located neurons just above the antennal lobe (mAL).
(d) Pathway for male-speciﬁc pheromone processing. (e) Pathway for the initiation of courtship
song ((b–e) Modiﬁed from Yamamoto and Koganezawa 2013, with kind permission)
(Ito et al. 1996; Ryner et al. 1996). Both Fru and Dsx proteins are putative tran-
scription factors. Sex-speciﬁc splicing of the fru gene occurs in the brain under the
control of the promoter P1, one of four promoters resulting in male-speciﬁc Fru
(M) proteins but no counterpart proteins in females (Yamamoto and Koganezawa
2013); this leads to male-speciﬁc neural circuitry underlying courtship behavior
and the development of a male-speciﬁc muscle, the muscle of Lawrence (Usui-
Aoki et al. 2000). About 2000 fru-expressing neurons are widely distributed in
the sensory, central, and motor system. About one third of these neurons show
sex-speciﬁc morphological differences (Cachero et al. 2010; Yu et al. 2010). One
of the best studied examples of sexual dimorphic fru-expressing interneurons is
a cluster of cells located medially above the antennal lobe (mAL) (Kimura et al.
2005). The mAL neurons consist of 30 neurons in the male brain, but in females
the mAL cluster contains only 5 cells. In males, mAL neurons send processes to the

144
M. Kinoshita and U. Homberg
ipsilateral and contralateral GNG and a third ﬁber to the contralateral protocerebrum
of the brain. In females, the mAL neurons lack the process to the ipsilateral side
of the GNG, and their processes in the contralateral GNG have a Y-shaped form
(Fig. 6.7c). This sexual dimorphism in the mAL neurons is induced by the Fru
protein.
Knowledge about the circuits involved in courtship behavior from the sensory
input to the motor output is still limited. An olfactory circuit contributing to a
particular aspect of courtship consists of only four types of neuron detecting the
male-speciﬁc pheromone cVA (Ruta et al. 2010). The cVA is transferred to the
female during copulation and inhibits courtship behavior in a second male. A
sexual dimorphic glomerulus of the antennal lobe, called DA1, receives input from
cVA-speciﬁc olfactory receptor neurons (ORNs). The projection neurons from the
DA1 target the lateral horn via the mushroom body similar to other antennal-lobe
projection neurons and connect to neurons in the dorsal cluster1 (DC1), which is
male speciﬁc. The DC1 then transmits the cVA-induced signal to a descending
neuron, DN1, which projects toward the thoracic ganglion (Fig. 6.7d). Three of
the four cell types involved, the ORNs, the DA1 projection neurons, and the DC1
interneurons, express the Fru protein.
A circuit including the male-speciﬁc P1 cluster likely contributes to induce the
courtship song because females that had received a masculinized P1 clone exhibited
male-type behavior (Kimura et al. 2008). In the P1 neurons, fru and dsx genes are
coexpressed. The P1 cluster consists of 20 neurons. Their cell bodies lie in the dorsal
posterior brain near the mushroom body and their branches extend bilaterally into
both hemispheres of the protocerebrum (Fig. 6.7e). The P1 neurons can be activated
by visual stimuli and by touching the female abdomen with the male’s forelegs.
Thus, the P1 neurons receive multimodal sensory information (Koganezawa et al.
2010; Kohatsu et al. 2011). The information in the P1 is apparently transmitted to
descending neurons (not shown in Fig. 6.7e) in the lateral protocerebrum. These
descending neurons project to the thoracic ganglion, containing the motor control
center producing courtship song through wing vibrations.
6.2.6
Conclusions
Considerable advances during the past decades, especially in understanding the
functional organization of the brain of Drosophila, have led to detailed knowledge
on neuronal networks underlying a variety of behavioral elements, such as optomo-
tor responses, as well as complete behavioral sequences, such as courtship behavior.
For many of the network architectures and operations, striking similarities have
been found between vertebrates and insects, pointing at commonly achieved optimal
solutions or even suggesting common deep evolutionary origins. Similarities are
highly evident when considering neural networks and mechanisms underlying par-
ticular elements of behavior such as optomotor responses (Borst and Helmstaedter
2015), circadian control (Helfrich-Förster 2004), or neural plasticity underlying

6
Insect Brains: Minute Structures Controlling Complex Behaviors
145
memory formation (Glanzman 2010), and even point to strikingly similar network
properties underlying more complex tasks such as spatial orientation (Seelig and
Jayaraman 2013, 2015). Not surprisingly, however, differences across species are
pronounced when considering behaviors that are highly species speciﬁc such as
courtship behavior, which involves sequences of behavioral actions between the two
mating partners that partly serve to recognize a conspeciﬁc and distinguish it from
mates of related species. Nevertheless, even here, common principles might emerge
when analyzing sexual differences in brain organization underlying mating behavior
in different animal taxa (Forger and de Vries 2010).
References
Alerstam T, Gudmundsson GA, Green M, Hedenstrom A (2001) Migration along orthodromic sun
compass routes by arctic birds. Science 291:300–303
Arendt D, Nübler-Jung K (1996) Common ground plans in early brain development in mice and
ﬂies. Bioessays 18:255–259
Aso Y, Herb A, Ogueta M, Siwanowicz I, Templier T, Friedrich AB, Ito K, Scholz H, Tanimoto H
(2012) Three dopamine pathways induce aversive odor memories with different stability. PLoS
Genet 8, e1002768
Azevedo FA, Carvalho LR, Grinberg LT, Farfel JM, Ferretti RE, Leite RE, Jacob Filho W, Lent R,
Herculano-Houzel S (2009) Equal numbers of neuronal and nonneuronal cells make the human
brain an isometrically scaled-up primate brain. J Comp Neurol 513:532–541
Barlow HB, Hill RM (1963) Selective sensitivity to direction of movement in ganglion cells of the
rabbit retina. Science 139:412–414
Behnia R, Clark DA, Carter AG, Clandinin TR, Desplan C (2014) Processing properties of ON and
OFF pathways for Drosophila motion detection. Nature 512:427–430
Biro D, Freeman R, Meade J, Roberts S, Guilford T (2007) Pigeons combine compass and
landmark guidance in familiar route navigation. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 104:7471–7476
Borst A, Euler T (2011) Seeing things in motion: models, circuits, and mechanisms. Neuron
71:974–994
Borst A, Haag J (2002) Neural networks in the cockpit of the ﬂy. J Comp Physiol A 188:419–437
Borst A, Helmstaedter M (2015) Common circuit design in ﬂy and mammalian motion vision.
Nature Neurosci 18:1067–1076
Borst A, Haag J, Reiff DF (2010) Fly motion vision. Annu Rev Neurosci 33:49–70
Brandt R, Rohlﬁng T, Rybak J, Krofczik S, Maye A, Westerhoff M, Hege HC, Menzel R (2005)
Three-dimensional average-shape atlas of the honeybee brain and its applications. J Comp
Neurol 492:1–19
Burke CJ, Huetteroth W, Owald D, Perisse E, Krashes MJ, Das G, Gohl D, Silies M, Certel S,
Waddell S (2012) Layered reward signalling through octopamine and dopamine in Drosophila.
Nature 492:433–437
Busch S, Selcho M, Ito K, Tanimoto H (2009) A map of octopaminergic neurons in the Drosophila
brain. J Comp Neurol 513:643–667
Cachero S, Ostrovsky AD, Yu JY, Dickson BJ, Jefferis GS (2010) Sexual dimorphism in the ﬂy
brain. Curr Biol 20:1589–1601
Chittka L, Niven J (2009) Are bigger brains better? Curr Biol 19:R995–R1008
Coemans MA, Vos Hzn JJ, Nuboer JF (1994) The relation between celestial colour gradients and
the position of the sun, with regard to the sun compass. Vision Res 34:1461–1470
Dacke M, Nilsson DE, Scholtz CH, Byrne M, Warrant EJ (2003) Animal behaviour: insect
orientation to polarized moonlight. Nature 424:33

146
M. Kinoshita and U. Homberg
Dickson BJ (2008) Wired for sex: the neurobiology of Drosophila mating decisions. Science
322:904–909
Dreyer D, Vitt H, Dippel S, Goetz B, el Jundi B, Kollmann M, Huetteroth W, Schachtner J (2010)
3D standard brain of the red ﬂour beetle Tribolium castaneum: a tool to study metamorphic
development and adult plasticity. Front Syst Neurosci 4:3
Dunbier JR, Wiederman SD, Shoemaker PA, O’Carroll DC (2012) Facilitation of dragonﬂy target-
detecting neurons by slow moving features on continuous paths. Front Neural Circuits 6:79
Ehmer B, Gronenberg W (2002) Segregation of visual input to the mushroom bodies in the
honeybee (Apis mellifera). J Comp Neurol 451:362–373
el Jundi B, Homberg U (2010) Evidence for the possible existence of a second polarization-vision
pathway in the locust brain. J Insect Physiol 56:971–979
el Jundi B, Heinze S, Lenschow C, Kurylas A, Rohlﬁng T, Homberg U (2009a) The locust standard
brain: a 3D standard of the central complex as a platform for neural network analysis. Front
Syst Neurosci 3:21
el Jundi B, Huetteroth W, Kurylas AE, Schachtner J (2009b) Anisometric brain dimorphism
revisited: implementation of a volumetric 3D standard brain in Manduca sexta. J Comp Neurol
517:210–225
el Jundi B, Pfeiffer K, Homberg U (2011) A distinct layer of the medulla integrates sky compass
signals in the brain of an insect. PLoS One 6, e27855
el Jundi B, Pfeiffer K, Heinze S, Homberg U (2014) Integration of polarization and chromatic cues
in the insect sky compass. J Comp Physiol A 200:575–589
el Jundi B, Warrant EJ, Byrne MJ, Khaldy L, Baird E, Smolka J, Dacke M (2015) Neural coding
underlying the cue preference for celestial orientation. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 112:11395–
11400
Farris SM (2008) Tritocerebral tract input to the insect mushroom bodies. Arthropod Struct Dev
37:492–503
Farris SM (2011) Are mushroom bodies cerebellum-like structures? Arthropod Struct Dev 40:368–
379
Farris SM (2013) Evolution of complex higher brain centers and behaviors: behavioral correlates
of mushroom body elaboration in insects. Brain Behav Evol 82:9–18
Farris SM (2015) Evolution of brain elaboration. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci
370:20150054
Farris SM, Roberts NS (2005) Coevolution of generalist feeding ecologies and gyrencephalic
mushroom bodies in insects. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 102:17394–17399
Fischbach K-F, Dittrich APM (1989) The optic lobe of Drosophila melanogaster. I. A Golgi
analysis of wild-type structure. Cell Tissue Res 258:441–475
Forger NG, de Vries GJ (2010) Cell death and sexual differentiation of behavior: worms, ﬂies, and
mammals. Curr Opin Neurobiol 20:776–783
Fukushima R, Kanzaki R (2009) Modular subdivision of mushroom bodies by Kenyon cells in the
silkmoth. J Comp Neurol 513:315–330
Galizia CG (2014) Olfactory coding in the insect brain: data and conjectures. Eur J Neurosci
39:1784–1795
Galizia CG, Rössler W (2010) Parallel olfactory systems in insects: anatomy and function. Annu
Rev Entomol 55:399–420
Giurfa M (2003) Cognitive neuroethology: dissecting non-elemental learning in a honeybee brain.
Curr Opin Neurobiol 13:726–735
Glanzman DL (2010) Common mechanisms of synaptic plasticity in vertebrates and invertebrates.
Curr Biol 20:R31–R36
Gould JL (1998) Sensory bases of navigation. Curr Biol 8:R731–R738
Gouranton J (1964) Contribution a l’étude de la structure des ganglions céréböides de Locusta
migratoria migratorioides. Bull Soc Zool Fr 89:785–797
Greenspan RJ, Ferveur JF (2000) Courtship in Drosophila. Annu Rev Genet 34:205–232
Gronenberg W (1999) Modality-speciﬁc segregation of input to ant mushroom bodies. Brain Behav
Evol 54:85–95

6
Insect Brains: Minute Structures Controlling Complex Behaviors
147
Guven-Ozkan T, Davis RL (2014) Functional neuroanatomy of Drosophila olfactory memory
formation. Learn Mem 21:519–526
Hammer M (1993) An identiﬁed neuron mediates the unconditioned stimulus in associative
olfactory learning in honeybees. Nature 366:59–63
Hammer M, Menzel R (1995) Learning and memory in the honeybee. J Neurosci 15:1617–1630
Hammer M, Menzel R (1998) Multiple sites of associative odor learning as revealed by local brain
microinjections of octopamine in honeybees. Learn Mem 5:146–156
Hausen K, Egelhaaf M (1989) Neural mechanisms of visual course control in insects. In: Stavenga
DG, Hardie RC (eds) Facets of vision. Springer, Berlin/Heidelberg, pp 391–424
Heinze S, Homberg U (2007) Maplike representation of celestial E-vector orientations in the brain
of an insect. Science 315:995–997
Heinze S, Homberg U (2008) Neuroarchitecture of the central complex of the desert locust:
intrinsic and columnar neurons. J Comp Neurol 511:454–478
Heinze S, Reppert SM (2011) Sun compass integration of skylight cues in migratory monarch
butterﬂies. Neuron 69:345–358
Heinze S, Reppert SM (2012) Anatomical basis of sun compass navigation. I: The general layout
of the monarch butterﬂy brain. J Comp Neurol 520:1599–1628
Heinze S, Florman J, Asokaraj S, el Jundi B, Reppert SM (2012) Anatomical basis of sun compass
navigation. II: The neuronal composition of the central complex of the monarch butterﬂy. J
Comp Neurol 521:267–298
Helfrich-Förster C (2000) Differential control of morning and evening components in the activity
rhythm of Drosophila melanogaster: sex-speciﬁc differences suggest a different quality of
activity. J Biol Rhythms 15:135–154
Helfrich-Förster C (2004) The circadian clock in the brain: a structural and functional comparison
between mammals and insects. J Comp Physiol A 190:601–613
Helfrich-Förster C (2014) From neurogenetic studies in the ﬂy brain to a concept in circadian
biology. J Neurogenet 28:329–347
Helfrich-Förster C, Stengl M, Homberg U (1998) Organization of the circadian system in insects.
Chronobiol Int 15:567–594
Herculano-Houzel S, Mota B, Lent R (2006) Cellular scaling rules for rodent brains. Proc Natl
Acad Sci USA 103:12138–12143
Hildebrandt JG, Shepherd GM (1997) Mechanisms of olfactory discrimination: converging
evidence for common principles across phyla. Annu Rev Neurosci 20:595–631
Homberg U (2008) Evolution of the central complex in the arthropod brain with respect to the
visual system. Arthropod Struct Dev 37:347–362
Homberg U, Montague RA, Hildebrand JG (1988) Anatomy of antenno-cerebral pathways in the
brain of the sphinx moth Manduca sexta. Cell Tissue Res 254:255–281
Homberg U, Hofer S, Pfeiffer K, Gebhardt S (2003a) Organization and neural connections of
the anterior optic tubercle in the brain of the locust, Schistocerca gregaria. J Comp Neurol
462:415–430
Homberg U, Reischig T, Stengl M (2003b) Neural organization of the circadian system of the
cockroach Leucophaea maderae. Chronobiol Int 20:577–591
Homberg U, Heinze S, Pfeiffer K, Kinoshita M, el Jundi B (2011) Central neural coding of sky
polarization in insects. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 366:680–687
Ito H, Fujitani K, Usui K, Shimizu-Nishikawa K, Tanaka S, Yamamoto D (1996) Sexual orientation
in Drosophila is altered by the satori mutation in the sex-determination gene fruitless that
encodes a zinc ﬁnger protein with a BTB domain. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 93:9687–9692
Ito K, Shinomiya K, Ito M, Armstrong JD, Boyan G, Hartenstein V, Harzsch S, Heisenberg M,
Homberg U, Jenett A, Keshishian H, Restifo LL, Rössler W, Simpson JH, Strausfeld NJ, Strauss
R, Vosshall LB (2014) A systematic nomenclature for the insect brain. Neuron 81:755–765
Joesch M, Schnell B, Raghu SV, Reiff DF, Borst A (2010) ON and OFF pathways in Drosophila
motion vision. Nature 468:300–304
Kandel ER (2001) The molecular biology of memory storage: a dialogue between genes and
synapses. Science 294:1030–1038

148
M. Kinoshita and U. Homberg
Kazawa T, Namiki S, Fukushima R, Terada M, Soo K, Kanzaki R (2009) Constancy and variability
of glomerular organization in the antennal lobe of the silkmoth. Cell Tissue Res 336:119–136
Keene AC, Waddell S (2007) Drosophila olfactory memory: signal genes to complex neural
circuits. Nat Rev 8:341–354
Kimura K, Ote M, Tazawa T, Yamamoto D (2005) Fruitless speciﬁes sexually dimorphic neural
circuitry in the Drosophila brain. Nature 438:229–233
Kimura K, Hachiya T, Koganezawa M, Tazawa T, Yamamoto D (2008) Fruitless and doublesex
coordinate to generate male-speciﬁc neurons that can initiate courtship. Neuron 59:759–769
Kinoshita M, Pfeiffer K, Homberg U (2007) Spectral properties of identiﬁed polarized-light
sensitive interneurons in the brain of the desert locust Schistocerca gregaria. J Exp Biol
210:1350–1361
Kinoshita M, Shimohigasshi M, Tominaga Y, Arikawa K, Homberg U (2015) Topographically
distinct visual and olfactory inputs to the mushroom body in the swallowtail butterﬂy, Papilio
xuthus. J Comp Neurol 523:162–182
Kirkhart C, Scott K (2015) Gustatory learning and processing in the Drosophila mushroom bodies.
J Neurosci 35:5950–5958
Koganezawa M, Haba D, Matsuo T, Yamamoto D (2010) The shaping of male courtship posture
by lateralized gustatory inputs to male-speciﬁc interneurons. Curr Biol 20:1–8
Kohatsu S, Koganezawa M, Yamamoto D (2011) Female contact activates male-speciﬁc interneu-
rons that trigger stereotypic courtship behavior in Drosophila. Neuron 69:498–508
Kolmes SA (1983) Ecological and sensory aspects of prey capture by the whirligig beetle Dineutes
discolor (Coleoptera: Gyrinidae). J New York Entomol Soc 91:405–412
Krashes MJ, DasGupta S, Vreede A, White B, Armstrong JD, Waddell S (2009) A neural
circuit mechanism integrating motivational state with memory expression in Drosophila. Cell
139:416–427
Kurylas AE, Rohlﬁng T, Krofczik S, Jenett A, Homberg U (2008) Standardized atlas of the brain
of the desert locust, Schistocerca gregaria. Cell Tissue Res 333:125–145
Leinwand SG, Chalasani SH (2011) Olfactory networks: from sensation to perception. Curr Opin
Gen Dev 21:806–811
Leitinger G, Pabst MA, Kral K (1999) Serotonin-immunoreactive neurones in the visual system of
the praying mantis: an immunohistochemical, confocal laser scanning and electron microscopic
study. Brain Res 823:11–23
Lewis LP, Siju KP, Aso Y, Friedrich AB, Bulteel AJ, Rubin GM, Grunwald Kadow IC (2015) A
higher brain circuit for immediate integration of conﬂicting sensory information in Drosophila.
Curr Biol 25:2203–2214
Li Q, Liberless SD (2015) Aversion and attraction through olfaction. Curr Biol 25:R120–R129
Lichtneckert R, Reichert H (2005) Insights into the urbilaterian brain: conserved genetic patterning
mechanisms in insect and vertebrate brain development. Heredity (Edinb) 94:465–477
Lin C, Strausfeld NJ (2012) Visual inputs to the mushroom body calyces of the whirligig beetle
Dineutus sublineatus: modality switching in an insect. J Comp Neurol 520:2562–2574
Lin C, Strausfeld NJ (2013) A precocious adult visual center in the larva deﬁnes the unique optic
lobe of the split-eyed whirligig beetle Dineutus sublineatus. Front Zool 10:7
Lin S, Owald D, Chandra V, Talbot C, Huetteroth W, Waddell S (2014) Neural correlates of water
reward in thirsty Drosophila. Nat Neurosci 17:1536–1542
Liu C, Placais PY, Yamagata N, Pfeiffer BD, Aso Y, Friedrich AB, Siwanowicz I, Rubin GM,
Preat T, Tanimoto H (2012) A subset of dopamine neurons signals reward for odour memory
in Drosophila. Nature 488:512–516
Lohmann KJ, Lohmann CM, Ehrhart LM, Bagley DA, Swing T (2004) Animal behaviour:
geomagnetic map used in sea-turtle navigation. Nature 428:909–910
Maisak MS, Haag J, Ammer G, Serbe E, Meier M, Leonhardt A, Schilling T, Bahl A, Rubin GM,
Nern A, Dickson BJ, Reiff DR, Hopp E, Borst A (2013) A directional tuning map of Drosophila
elementary motion detectors. Nature 500:212–216
Matsuo E, Kamikouchi A (2013) Neural encoding of sound, gravity, and wind in the fruit ﬂy. J
Comp Physiol A 199:253–262

6
Insect Brains: Minute Structures Controlling Complex Behaviors
149
Menzel R (2001) Searching for the memory trace in a mini-brain, the honeybee. Learn Mem 8:53–
62
Menzel R (2014) The insect mushroom body, an experience-dependent recoding device. J Physiol
Paris 108:84–95
Menzel R, Erber J (1978) Learning and memory in bees. Sci Am 239(1):80–87
Menzel R, Giurfa M (2001) Cognitive architecture of a mini-brain: the honeybee. Trends Cogn Sci
5:62–71
Mizunami M, Unoki S, Mori Y, Hirashima D, Hatano A, Matsumoto Y (2009) Roles of
octopaminergic and dopaminergic neurons in appetitive and aversive memory recall in an
insect. BMC Biol 7:46
Mizunami M, Hamanaka Y, Nishino H (2015) Toward elucidating diversity of neural mechanisms
underlying insect learning. Zool Lett 1:8
Mobbs PG (1985) Brain structure. In: Kerkut GA, Gilbert LI (eds) Comparative insect physiology,
biochemistry and pharmacology, vol 5. Pergamon Press, New York, pp 299–370
Nishino H, Iwasaki M, Yasuyama K, Hongo H, Watanabe H, Mizunami M (2012) Visual and
olfactory input segregation in the mushroom body calyces in a basal neopteran, the American
cockroach. Arthropod Struct Dev 41:3–16
Okamura JY, Strausfeld NJ (2007) Visual system of calliphorid ﬂies: motion- and orientation-
sensitive visual interneurons supplying dorsal optic glomeruli. J Comp Neurol 500:189–208
Otsuna H, Ito K (2006) Systematic analysis of the visual projection neurons of Drosophila
melanogaster. I. Lobula-speciﬁc pathways. J Comp Neurol 497:928–958
Owald D, Waddell S (2015) Olfactory learning skews mushroom body output pathways to steer
behavioral choice in Drosophila. Curr Opin Neurobiol 35:178–184
Panda S, Hogenesch JB, Kay SA (2002) Circadian rhythms from ﬂies to human. Nature 417:329–
335
Paulk AC, Phillips-Portillo J, Dacks AM, Fellous JM, Gronenberg W (2008) The processing
of color, motion, and stimulus timing are anatomically segregated in the bumblebee brain. J
Neurosci 28:6319–6332
Perisse E, Burke C, Huetteroth W, Waddell S (2013a) Shocking revelations and saccharin
sweetness in the study of Drosophila olfactory memory. Curr Biol 23:R752–R763
Perisse E, Yin Y, Lin AC, Lin S, Huetteroth W, Waddell S (2013b) Different Kenyon cell
populations drive learned approach and avoidance in Drosophila. Neuron 79:945–956
Pfeiffer K, Homberg U (2007) Coding of azimuthal directions via time-compensated combination
of celestial compass cues. Curr Biol 17:960–965
Pfeiffer K, Homberg U (2014) Organization and functional roles of the central complex in the
insect brain. Annu Rev Entomol 59:165–184
Pfeiffer K, Kinoshita M (2012) Segregation of visual inputs from different regions of the compound
eye in two parallel pathways through the anterior optic tubercle of the bumblebee (Bombus
ignitus). J Comp Neurol 520:212–229
Pfeiffer K, Kinoshita M, Homberg U (2005) Polarization-sensitive and light-sensitive neurons
in two parallel pathways passing through the anterior optic tubercle in the locust brain. J
Neurophysiol 94:3903–3915
Reichardt W (1987) Evaluation of optical motion information by movement detectors. J Comp
Physiol A 161:533–547
Ribi W (1987) Anatomical identiﬁcation of spectral receptor types in the retina and lamina of the
Australian orchard butterﬂy, Papilio aegeus aegeus D. Cell Tissue Res 247:393–407
Rieger D, Shafer OT, Tomioka K, Helfrich-Förster C (2006) Functional analysis of circadian
pacemaker neurons in Drosophila melanogaster. J Neurosci 26:2531–2543
Roberts AC, Glanzman DL (2003) Learning in Aplysia: looking at synaptic plasticity from both
sides. Trends Neurosci 26:662–670
Rosenkranz JA, Grace AA (2002) Dopamine-mediated modulation of odour-evoked amygdala
potentials during pavlovian conditioning. Nature 417:282–287
Rospars JP, Hildebrand JG (1992) Anatomical identiﬁcation of glomeruli in the antennal lobes of
the male sphinx moth Manduca sexta. Cell Tissue Res 270:205–227

150
M. Kinoshita and U. Homberg
Rossel S, Wehner R (1984) Celestial orientation in bees: the use of spectral cues. J Comp Physiol
A 155:605–613
Rossel S, Wehner R (1986) Polarization vision in bees. Nature 323:128–131
Ruta V, Datta SR, Vasconcelos ML, Freeland J, Looger LL, Axel R (2010) A dimorphic pheromone
circuit in Drosophila from sensory input to descending output. Nature 468:686–690
Ryner LC, Goodwin SF, Castrillon DH, Anand A, Villella A, Baker BS, Hall JC, Taylor BJ,
Wasserman SA (1996) Control of male sexual behavior and sexual orientation in Drosophila
by the fruitless gene. Cell 87:1079–1089
Sandrelli F, Costa R, Kyriacou CP, Rosato E (2008) Comparative analysis of circadian clock genes
in insects. Insect Mol Biol 17:447–463
Sane SP, Dieudonné A, Willis M, Daniel TL (2007) Antennal mechanosensors mediate ﬂight
control in moths. Science 315:863–866
Schachtner J, Schmidt M, Homberg U (2005) Organization and evolutionary trends of primary
olfactory brain centers in Tetraconata (Crustacea C Hexapoda). Arthropod Struct Dev 34:257–
299
Schmeling F, Tegtmeier J, Kinoshita M, Homberg U (2015) Photoreceptor projections and
receptive ﬁelds in the dorsal rim area and main retina of the locust eye. J Comp Physiol A
201:427–440
Schröter U, Malun D, Menzel R (2007) Innervation pattern of suboesophageal ventral unpaired
median neurones in the honeybee brain. Cell Tissue Res 327:647–667
Seelig JD, Jayaraman V (2013) Feature detection and orientation tuning in the Drosophila central
complex. Nature 503:262–266
Seelig JD, Jayaraman V (2015) Neural dynamics for landmark orientation and angular path
integration. Nature 521:186–191
Sjöholm M, Sinakevitch I, Strausfeld NJ, Ignell R, Hansson BS (2006) Functional division of
intrinsic neurons in the mushroom bodies of male Spodoptera littoralis revealed by antibodies
against aspartate, taurine, FMRF-amide, Mas-allatotropin and DC0. Arthropod Struct Dev
35:153–168
Srinivasan MV (2011) Honeybees as a model for the study of visually guided ﬂight, navigation,
and biologically inspired robotics. Physiol Rev 91:413–460
Stalleicken J, Mukhida M, Labhart T, Wehner R, Frost B, Mouritsen H (2005) Do monarch
butterﬂies use polarized skylight for migratory orientation? J Exp Biol 208:2399–2408
Staudacher E, Gebhardt MJ, Dürr V (2005) Antennal movements and mechanoreception: neurobi-
ology of active tactile sensors. Adv Insect Physiol 32:49–205
Stengl M, Arendt A (2016) Peptidergic circadian clock circuits in the Madeira cockroach. Curr
Opin Neurobiol 41:44–52
Stoleru D, Peng Y, Agosto J, Rosbash M (2004) Coupled oscillators control morning and evening
locomotor behaviour of Drosophila. Nature 431:862–868
Stopfer M (2014) Central processing in the mushroom bodies. Curr Opin Insect Sci 6:99–103
Strausfeld NJ (1970) The optic lobes of Diptera. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B 258:135–223
Strausfeld NJ (1976) Atlas of an insect brain. Springer, Berlin
Strausfeld NJ (1989) Beneath the compound eye: neuroanatomical analysis and physiological
correlates in the study of insect vision. In: Stavenga DG, Hadie RC (eds) Facets of vision.
Springer, Heidelberg/Berlin, pp 317–359
Strausfeld NJ (2012) Arthropod brains. Belknap Press/Harvard University Press, Cambridge
Strausfeld NJ, Bassemir U, Singh RN, Bacon JP (1984) Organizational principles of outputs from
dipteran brains. J Insect Physiol 30:73–93
Strausfeld NJ, Hansen L, Li Y, Gomez RS, Ito K (1998) Evolution, discovery, and interpretations
of arthropod mushroom bodies. Learn Mem 5:11–37
Takemura SY, Kinoshita M, Arikawa K (2005) Photoreceptor projection reveals heterogeneity of
lamina cartridges in the visual system of the Japanese yellow swallowtail butterﬂy, Papilio
xuthus. J Comp Neurol 483:341–350
Takemura SY, Bharioke A, Lu Z, Nern A, Vitaladevuni S, Rivlin PK, Katz WT, Olbris DJ, Plaza
SM, Winston P, Zhao T, Horne JA, Fetter RD, Takemura S, Blazek K, Chang LA, Ogundeyi O,

6
Insect Brains: Minute Structures Controlling Complex Behaviors
151
Saunders MA, Shapiro V, Sigmund C, Rubin GM, Scheffer LK, Meinertzhagen IA, Chklovskii
DB (2013) A visual motion detection circuit suggested by Drosophila connectomics. Nature
500:175–181
Tanaka NK, Tanimoto H, Ito K (2008) Neuronal assemblies of the Drosophila mushroom body. J
Comp Neurol 508:711–755
Tomioka K, Matsumoto A (2010) A comparative view of insect circadian clock systems. Cell Mol
Life Sci 67:1397–1406
Träger U, Homberg U (2011) Polarization-sensitive descending neurons in the locust: connecting
the brain to thoracic ganglia. J Neurosci 31:2238–2247
Träger U, Wagner R, Bausenwein B, Homberg U (2008) A novel type of microglomerular synaptic
complex in the polarization vision pathway of the locust brain. J Comp Neurol 506:288–300
Unoki S, Matsumoto Y, Mizunami M (2005) Participation of octopaminergic reward system and
dopaminergic punishment system in insect olfactory learning revealed by pharmacological
study. Eur J Neurosci 22:1409–1416
Usui-Aoki K, Ito H, Ui-Tei K, Takahashi K, Lukacsovich T, Awano W, Nakata H, Piao ZF, Nilsson
EE, Tomida J, Yamamoto D (2000) Formation of the male-speciﬁc muscle in female Drosophila
by ectopic fruitless expression. Nat Cell Biol 2:500–506
Vitzthum H, Müller M, Homberg U (2002) Neurons of the central complex of the locust
Schistocerca gregaria are sensitive to polarized light. J Neurosci 22:1114–1125
Vogt K, Schnaitmann C, Dylla KV, Knapek S, Aso Y, Rubin GM, Tanimoto H (2014) Shared
mushroom body circuits underlie visual and olfactory memories in Drosophila. Elife 3, e02395
von Frisch K (1950) Bees: their vision, chemical senses and language. Cornell University Press,
Ithaca/London
von Frisch K (1974) Decoding the language of the bee. Science 185:663–668
Waddell S (2013) Reinforcement signalling in Drosophila: dopamine does it all after all. Curr Opin
Neurobiol 23:324–329
Watanabe H, Nishino H, Nishikawa M, Mizunami M, Yokohari F (2010) Complete mapping of
glomeruli based on sensory nerve branching pattern in the primary olfactory center of the
cockroach Periplaneta americana. J Comp Neurol 518:3907–3930
Watanabe H, Matsumoto CS, Nishino H, Mizunami M (2011) Critical roles of mecamylamine-
sensitive mushroom body neurons in insect olfactory learning. Neurobiol Learn Mem 95:1–13
Wehner R (2003) Desert ant navigation: how miniature brains solve complex tasks. J Comp Physiol
A 189:579–588
Wehner R, Müller M (2006) The signiﬁcance of direct sunlight and polarized skylight in the ant’s
celestial system of navigation. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 103:12575–12579
Wolff T, Iyer NA, Rubin GM (2015) Neuroarchitecture and neuroanatomy of the Drosophila
central complex: A GAL4-based dissection of protocerebral bridge neurons and circuits. J
Comp Neurol 523:997–1037
Yamagata N, Ichinose T, Aso Y, Placais PY, Friedrich AB, Sima RJ, Preat T, Rubin GM, Tanimoto
H (2015) Distinct dopamine neurons mediate reward signals for short- and long-term memories.
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 112:578–583
Yamamoto D, Koganezawa M (2013) Genes and circuits of courtship behaviour in Drosophila
males. Nat Rev Neurosci 14:681–692
Yamamoto D, Jallon JM, Komatsu A (1997) Genetic dissection of sexual behavior in Drosophila
melanogaster. Annu Rev Entomol 42:551–585
Yamamoto Y, Shibata H, Ueda H (2013) Olfactory homing of chum salmon to stable compositions
of amino acids in natal stream water. Zool Sci 30:607–612
Yamamoto D, Sato K, Koganezawa M (2014) Neuroethology of male courtship in Drosophila:
from the gene to behavior. J Comp Physiol A 200:251–264
Yang EC, Lin HC, Hung YS (2004) Patterns of chromatic information processing in the lobula of
the honeybee, Apis mellifera L. J Insect Physiol 50:913–925
Yu JY, Kanai MI, Demir E, Jefferis GS, Dickson BJ (2010) Cellular organization of the neural
circuit that drives Drosophila courtship behavior. Curr Biol 20:1602–1614

Chapter 7
Identifying Vertebrate Brain Prototypes
in Deuterostomes
Takehiro G. Kusakabe
Abstract Vertebrates have a dorsal tubular central nervous system (CNS), the
anterior part of which is a complex and highly organized brain. The invertebrate
chordates (tunicates and cephalochordates) also have a CNS derived from the
dorsal neural tube, but it is far simpler than the vertebrate CNS. The nervous
system of ambulacrarians (hemichordates and echinoderms), the sister group of
chordates, consists of a nerve net and multiple nerve cords with no discrete
brain. Despite the poorly centralized organization of the ambulacrarian nervous
system, genomics and molecular developmental biological studies have suggested
that the major developmental programs that pattern the vertebrate brain already
existed in the common ancestor of chordates and ambulacrarians. The CNS of
cephalochordate amphioxus is a nerve cord with little anterior concentration, but has
neuronal circuits with similarities to those of the vertebrate diencephalon-midbrain-
hindbrain. The tadpole larva of the tunicate ascidian has a brain with sensory
and motor control systems that shares many features with the vertebrate brain,
including the retinal/hypothalamic territory, a locomotor central pattern generator,
neural crests, and cranial placodes. Given the many shared characteristics among
chordates, the CNS of invertebrate chordates should provide a unique platform to
study the developmental and evolutionary bases underlying the emergence of the
complex CNS of vertebrates.
Keywords Hemichordate • Echinoderm • Tunicate • Ascidian • Cephalochor-
date • Neurotransmitter • Locomotor neural circuit • Neural crest • Cranial
placode
T.G. Kusakabe ()
Institute for Integrative Neurobiology & Department of Biology, Faculty of Science and
Engineering, Konan University, 8-9-1 Okamoto, Higashinada-ku, Kobe 658-8501, Japan
e-mail: tgk@center.konan-u.ac.jp
© Springer Japan KK 2017
S. Shigeno et al. (eds.), Brain Evolution by Design, Diversity and Commonality
in Animals, DOI 10.1007/978-4-431-56469-0_7
153

154
T.G. Kusakabe
7.1
Phylogeny and Body Plans of Deuterostomes
Currently, ﬁve groups of deuterostomes are recognized as phyla or subphyla:
Vertebrata, Tunicata (Urochordata), Cephalochordata, Hemichordata, and Echin-
odermata (Nielsen 2012; Satoh et al. 2014) (Fig. 7.1). The Vertebrata, Tunicata,
and Cephalochordata have long been recognized as the subphyla of the phylum
Chordata, yet Satoh and colleagues (2014) recently proposed the superphylumstatus
of Chordata, consisting of three phyla: Vertebrata, Tunicata, and Cephalochordata
(Satoh et al. 2014). Molecular phylogenetic studies using large data sets have
suggested that tunicates and vertebrates are the closest subphyla among chordates
(Bourlat et al. 2006; Delsuc et al. 2006); the clade consisting of tunicates and verte-
brates is called Olfactores (Jefferies 1991). Molecular phylogeny and genomics have
unambiguously demonstrated that echinoderms and hemichordates form a clade
called Ambulacraria, with similarities in coelomic systems and larvae (Metchnikoff
1881; Wada and Satoh 1994; Halanych 1995; Cameron et al. 2000; Perseke et al.
2013).
Ambulacraria has also been proposed to be a superphylum (Satoh et al. 2014).
The adult body plans of echinoderms and hemichordates are fairly different. The
vertebrates
tunicates
Olfactores
echinoderms
hemichordates
Ambulacraria
Chordata
Fig. 7.1 Phylogenetic relationships among deuterostomes inferred from recent molecular phy-
logeny and genomics (See text for details) (The hemichordate photo and cephalochordate
specimens are courtesy of Drs. Kuni Tagawa (Hiroshima University) and Takayuki Onai (RIKEN
CDB), respectively)

7
Identifying Vertebrate Brain Prototypes in Deuterostomes
155
Fig. 7.2 Schematic drawing of the nervous system of an enteropneust hemichordate, Balanoglos-
sus simodensis. (a) Schematic view of an adult acorn worm. Note the tripartite body structure of the
proboscis, collar, and trunk. Dorsal and ventral nerve cords as well as the prebranchial nerve ring
are shown in red. (b) Lateral view of a Metschnikoff-stage larva with fully grown ciliary bands.
Larval ciliary bands are shown in blue. af aboral ﬁeld, an anus, at apical tuft, c collar, cn collar
nerve cord, dn dorsal nerve cord, lg, longitudinal ciliary band, mo mouth, of oral ﬁeld, p proboscis,
pa perianal ciliary ring, pb prebranchial nerve ring, pc protocoel, t trunk, tt telotroch, vb ventral
ciliary band, vn ventral nerve cord (Reproduced with permission from Miyamoto et al. (2010). ©
2010 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.)
body of echinoderms is radially symmetrical and pentameric. One of their unique
features is a well-developed water circulatory system, which is connected to numer-
ous tube feet that project through the body wall. Another unique feature is an internal
calcium carbonate skeleton that protects the adult body. Adult hemichordates show
a tripartite organization with bilateral symmetry. The body of the enteropneust
hemichordates (acorn worms) is composed of an anterior proboscis, a middle collar
region, and a long posterior trunk (Fig. 7.2). Although the adult body plans are thus
distinct from each other, echinoderms and hemichordates have similar bilaterally
symmetrical pelagic (dipleurula-type) larvae (Figs. 7.2 and 7.3).
In addition to Chordata and Ambulacraria, the phylum Xenacoelomorpha has
recently been proposed to be a group of deuterostomes (Philippe et al. 2007, 2011).
More recently, however, Xenacoelomorpha was proposed to be the sister group to
Nephrozoa, namely, all remaining Bilateria (Cannon et al. 2016; Rouse et al. 2016).

156
T.G. Kusakabe
Fig. 7.3 Larval and adult nervous systems of sea urchins. Neural tissues are in red. (a) Larval
nervous system of an early pluteus. (b) Lateral view of an adult sea urchin. (See text for details.)
A anus, AO apical organ, CB ciliary band, LG lateral ganglia, M mouth, NR nerve ring, OG oral
ganglia, RN radial nerves (Reproduced with permission from Burke et al. (2006). © 2006 Elsevier
Inc. All rights reserved)
Thus, the position of the phylum Xenacoelomorpha has been controversial, and
therefore their nervous system is not discussed here.
7.2
Larval Nervous Systems of Ambulacrarians
The ambulacrarian dipleurula-type larvae have a bilaterally symmetrical nervous
system consisting of an apical organ and ciliary bands associated with neurons
and nerve tracts (Nieuwenhuys 2002; Burke et al. 2006; Nakano et al. 2009). In
both echinoderms and hemichordates, the nervous system of the pelagic larvae
degenerates and an adult nervous system is newly formed during metamorphosis
(Chia and Burke 1978; Lester 1988; Heinzeller and Welsch 2001; Nakano et al.
2006, 2009; Byrne et al. 2007; Hirokawa et al. 2008; Raff 2008; Nomaksteinsky
et al. 2009; Miyamoto et al. 2010). In the late nineteenth century, Garstang proposed
that the chordate CNS evolved by the dorsal fusion of ciliary band nerve tracts
of the dipleurula-type ancestral deuterostome larva, which was similar to the
auricularia larva of holothurians (Garstang 1894). This hypothesis, however, is not
in favor with the recent molecular developmental biology data, which rather support
another hypothesis, namely, that the hemichordate adult CNS is homologous to the
vertebrate CNS (Morgan 1894; Bateson 1886; Kappers 1929; Brown et al. 2008;

7
Identifying Vertebrate Brain Prototypes in Deuterostomes
157
Lowe 2008; Nomaksteinsky et al. 2009; Kaul and Stach 2010; Luttrell et al. 2012;
Pani et al. 2012; Miyamoto and Wada 2013; Holland 2015).
How the ambulacrarian larval nervous system functions has been deduced from
neuroanatomy and behavior (Nieuwenhuys 2002). The tornaria larva of acorn
worms has a well-developed apical organ, called the apical complex, situated at the
anterior pole. The apical complex contains a thickened epithelium with long cilia
and a ganglion that contains clusters of serotonergic neurons (Hay-Schmidt 2000).
The serotonergic axons extend from the ganglion cells into and along the ciliary
band throughout its length (Hay-Schmidt 2000). Some species have a pair of eyes at
the sides of the apical complex, consisting of cups of ectoderm cells surrounded by
pigment (Morgan 1891). Thus, the apical complex is thought to serve as a sensory
organ.
The tornaria larva has two ciliated band systems: a circumoral and circumanal
band system (Nieuwenhuys 2002) (Fig. 7.2). The circumoral band is composed of
uniciliated cells and has basal ciliary nerves. Nerve cells, provided with multiple
apical and basal processes, occur regularly along the band (Lacalli and West 1993).
The circumoral band system combines feeding and locomotor functions (Lacalli
and West 1993). The circumanal band consists of multiciliated cells and serves as a
principal locomotor organ (Lacalli and West 1993).
Similar to the hemichordate tornaria, the echinoderm bipinnaria (sea stars),
pluteus (sea urchins and brittle stars), and auricularia (sea cucumber) larvae have
a circumoral ciliary band, which is their principal feeding and locomotor organ,
but a circumanal band is lacking (Nieuwenhuys 2002). Their apical organ is less
complex than that of tornaria; there is no tuft of cilia nor eyes (Nieuwenhuys 2002).
The apical ganglion contains serotonergic cells, which send their axons into the
anterodorsal parts of the ciliary band (Burke et al. 1986; Hay-Schmidt 2000). The
ciliated cells of the ciliary band and musculature of the esophagus and mouth appear
to be the principal effectors (Strathmann 1975). It is assumed that coordinated
reversals of cilia, reversals of peristalsis in the esophagus, and contraction of the
muscles that open the mouth and ﬂex the arms are controlled by the nervous system
(Bisgrove and Burke 1986). The electrical activity from ciliary bands was shown to
be coincident with ciliary reversals (Mackie et al. 1969).
Three types of neurons, sensory, bipolar, and multipolar, are embedded in the
ciliary bands of echinoderm larvae (Lacalli et al. 1990; Lacalli and West 1993;
Nieuwenhuys 2002). The sensory and bipolar cells are uniciliated elements. The
multipolar cells are ﬂask shaped with a slender tapering process that extends to
the surface of the band. In addition to the serotonergic ﬁbers, the ciliary nerves
contain axons of catecholaminergic neurons, which are also localized along the
bands (Burke et al. 1986; Bisgrove and Burke 1987; Nakajima 1987). Another
neurotransmitter that seems to be used in the echinoderm larval nervous system
is ”-amino butyric acid (GABA). GABA induces the settlement of the sea urchin
Strongylocentrotus droebachiensis larvae (Pearce and Scheibling 1990). It has
been suggested that the swimming activity of sea urchin larvae is regulated by a
combination of serotonergic, dopaminergic, and GABAergic systems (Katow et al.
2007, 2010, 2013).

158
T.G. Kusakabe
7.3
Adult Nervous Systems of Echinoderms
Extant echinoderms are divided into two subphyla, the Eleutherozoa and the
Pelmatozoa. The Eleutherozoa include sea cucumbers, sea urchins, starﬁsh, and
brittle stars, and the extant Pelmatozoa are the crinoids, namely, feather stars and
sea lilies. The adults of both the Eleutherozoa and the Pelmatozoa have a pentaradial
nervous system containing a circumoral nerve ring and radial nerve cords (Hyman
1955; Smith 1965; Nieuwenhuys 2002; Burke et al. 2006; Nakano et al. 2009)
(Fig. 7.3). Studies on the expression of developmental patterning genes have failed
to ﬁnd evidence that the nerve ring or radial nerves are homologous to any part of the
brain or nerve cord in bilaterians (Sly et al. 2002; Nielsen 2006; Cisternas and Byrne
2009; Holland 2015). In addition to the nerve ring and the radial nerve cords, the
Pelmatozoa crinoids have an aboral nerve center, a ganglion situated at the aboral
region (Hyman 1955; Bohn and Heinzeller 1999; Nakano et al. 2009). Fossil records
suggest an aboral ganglion was the dominant nervous system in the ancestor of
echinoderms (Paul and Smith 1984). Therefore, the evolutionary relationship of the
crinoid aboral ganglion to the nervous system of other deuterostomes is of particular
interest, although no information is available regarding their homology at present.
Although many studies have been conducted on the morphological aspects of the
adult echinoderm nervous system, the functional and physiological aspects remain
poorly understood, except for the wealth of information on neurotransmitters. For
example, acetylcholine is the excitatory neurotransmitter mediating motor responses
in the echinoderms (Devlin 2001). Both GABA and acetylcholine have been shown
to cause contractions of the muscles of the isolated tube feet of sea urchins (Florey
et al. 1975) and starﬁsh (Protas and Muske 1980). GABA also shows an inhibitory
action on the longitudinal muscle of the body wall of sea cucumbers (Devlin 2001).
The neuropeptides known as SALMFamides have been identiﬁed and shown to act
as muscle relaxants in starﬁsh and sea cucumbers (Elphick et al. 1991; Elphick
and Melarange 2001). Recent studies using sea urchin genome information have
identiﬁed components for pathways of major neurotransmitters, such as serotonin
(5-hydroxytryptamine, or 5-HT), dopamine, acetylcholine, GABA, glutamate, and
glycine, suggesting that sea urchins use a broad range of neurotransmitters known
in vertebrates (Burke et al. 2006). Another interesting piece of information also
comes from the genome sequences. Orthologues of mammalian cannabinoid,
lysophospholipid, and melanocortin receptors are not present in the Drosophila,
Caenorhabditis elegans, and sea urchin genomes (Elphick and Egertova 2001, 2005;
Burke et al. 2006), whereas the Ciona genome contains an orthologueof mammalian
cannabinoid and lysophospholipid receptors (Elphick et al. 2003), suggesting that
this group of receptors is unique to chordates (Burke et al. 2006).

7
Identifying Vertebrate Brain Prototypes in Deuterostomes
159
7.4
Adult Nervous Systems of Hemichordates
There are two classes of hemichordates, the Enteropneusta (acorn worms) and
the Pterobranchia. Both enteropneusts and pterobranchs possess a similar tripartite
body organization but are characterized by distinct feeding mechanisms (Lowe
2008). The pterobranchs use a lophophore, a ciliated extension from the mesosome,
to ﬁlter feed (Halanych 1995), whereas enteropneusts use their highly muscular
and ciliated proboscis for particle ingestion and ﬁlter feeding (Cameron 2002).
Most of the data in hemichordate molecular developmental biology have been
obtained in enteropneust species. Enteropneust worms have nerve cords in the
dorsal midline and ventral midline (Fig. 7.2). The dorsal nerve cord is divided into
the proboscis stalk region, the collar cord, and the dorsal nerve cord in the trunk
region (Nomaksteinsky et al. 2009). The ventral nerve cord exists only in the trunk
region and is connected to the dorsal nerve cord via the prebranchial nerve ring.
Among them, only the collar cord has tubular organization and thus is proposed
to be a homologous organ to the neural tube (Bateson 1886; Morgan 1894; Brown
et al. 2008; Luttrell et al. 2012; Kaul and Stach 2010; Miyamoto and Wada 2013),
although this homology is still controversial (Nomaksteinsky et al. 2009; Kaul and
Stach 2010).
Lowe and colleagues examined the expression of orthologues of 22 transcription
factors that have conserved roles in the patterning of the brain and spinal cord
of vertebrates along the anteroposterior axis. Expression patterns of many of
these genes in the hemichordate juvenile ectoderm are similar to the patterns
found in the developing vertebrate CNS (Lowe et al. 2003). Furthermore, genetic
programs homologous to the three vertebrate signaling centers [the anterior neural
ridge (ANR), zona limitans intrathalamica (ZLI), and midbrain–hindbrain bound-
ary (MHB)/isthmic organizer (IsO)] that direct anteroposterior patterning in the
vertebrate anterior neural plate are shown to be present in hemichordates (Pani
et al. 2012). Thus, hemichordates and vertebrates share the genetic mechanisms
for anteroposterior patterning of the neuroectoderm. Recent histological and gene
expression analyses suggest that the hemichordate collar cord is subdivided into
dorsoventral domains (Miyamoto and Wada 2013). In vertebrate embryos, Hedge-
hog signaling from the notochord to the neural plate is essential for ﬂoor plate
induction and for patterning of the neural tube along the dorsoventral axis (Echelard
et al. 1993). Similarly to the dorsoventral patterning of the vertebrate neural tube,
the dorsoventral patterning of collar cord neurulation may be regulated by Hedgehog
signaling from the dorsal endoderm (Miyamoto and Wada 2013). Thus, molecular
mechanisms for both anteroposterior and dorsoventral patterning may be conserved
between vertebrates and hemichordates.
Neuronal types were examined in enteropneust worms. Numerous giant 5-
HT neurons, in the absence of 5-HT ﬁbers, were observed in the collar cord of
Glossobalanus berkeleyi (Brown et al. 2008), whereas the arrangement was the
opposite in Ptychodera ﬂava, whose collar cord was rich in 5-HT ﬁbers but devoid
of 5-HT cells (Nomaksteinsky et al. 2009). However, 5-HT cells were abundant

160
T.G. Kusakabe
in the epidermal peripheral nervous system (PNS) of P. ﬂava. The distributions of
GABAergic and cholinergic neurons were also examined in P. ﬂava (Nomaksteinsky
et al. 2009). The highest density of GABAergic neurons was found in the neural
plate at the base of the proboscis, but some were also detected in the ventral
and dorsal cords and in the PNS of the proboscis. A low density of cholinergic
neurons was observed in the nerve cords and a dense dorsal cluster was observed
in the anterior neural plate, at the level where it surrounds the proboscis stem.
Interestingly, no cholinergic cells were detected in the PNS (Nomaksteinsky et al.
2009).
Nomaksteinsky et al. (2009) also investigated neuronal types in P. ﬂava by
examining the expression of two neuron type-speciﬁc transcription factors, Drg11
and Hb9. In vertebrates, Drg11 is largely speciﬁc for somatic sensory neurons of
the CNS and PNS (Saito et al. 1995; Rebelo et al. 2007). Inside the vertebrate
nervous system, Hb9 is speciﬁc for somatic motor neurons (Tanabe et al. 1998)
and a subclass of interneurons (Wilson et al. 2005) in the spinal cord and hindbrain.
It is also expressed in somatic motor neurons in ascidians (Dufour et al. 2006) and
possibly cephalochordates (Ferrier et al. 2001), as well as in protostomes (Thor
and Thomas 2002; Denes et al. 2007). In P. ﬂava, Dgr11C neurons and Hb9C
neurons were found in the collar cord, proboscis stem, and ventral and dorsal
cords. An occasional Drg11C neuron but no Hb9C neurons were found in the PNS
of the proboscis or collar folds. Thus, Drg11C, Hb9C, and cholinergic neurons
are preferentially or exclusively located in the CNS, whereas 5-HT neurons are
restricted to the PNS. Based on these observations, Nomaksteinsky et al. (2009)
pointed out that the entire cord system or CNS of P. ﬂava would correspond to the
spinal and hindbrain levels of the vertebrate CNS, where Hb9C and Dgr11C cells
are conﬁned.
Homology of hemichordate nerve cords to the chordate spinal cord and hindbrain
has also been suggested by morphological studies. Giant neurons were found in
the collar cord of enteropneust worms of the family Ptychoderidae, especially
balanoglossids and glossobalanids (Brown et al. 2008) (Fig. 7.4). These unipolar
cells are probably serotonergic and send their axons across the midline and
posteriorly into the dorsal cord of the trunk (Bullock 1944; Brown et al. 2008).
Bullock (1944, 1965) has suggested that the giant neurons may be homologous
to Mauthner cells of the lamprey and Rhode cells of amphioxus (Brown et al.
2008; Holland et al. 2013). The giant neurons have been proposed to be involved
in hemichordate escape responses, the rapid contraction of the posterior segments
of the worm (Bullock 1944, 1965).
7.5
Nervous Systems of Cephalochordates
Cephalochordate amphioxus (also called lancelets) are morphologically homoge-
neous animals that are classiﬁed into only three genera: Branchiostoma, Epigo-
nichthys, and Asymmetron (Kon et al. 2007). Despite their striking morphological

7
Identifying Vertebrate Brain Prototypes in Deuterostomes
161
Fig. 7.4 Giant cells in the
collar nerve cord of a
balanoglossid enteropneust
worm, redrawn from Bullock
(1944). The giant neurons
(red) located in the collar
nerve cord send their axons
across the midline and
posteriorly into the dorsal
cord of the trunk (Reproduced
with permission from Brown
et al. (2008). Copyright ©
2008 Wiley-Liss, Inc.)
similarity, the divergence time of the last common ancestor of the three extant
genera is estimated to be 162 million years ago (Nohara et al. 2005). Furthermore,
extant cephalochordates exhibit body plans similar to early chordates, such as
Cathaymyrus (Shu et al. 1996) and Pikaia (Conway Morris 1982).
The body structure of both larval and adult amphioxus is vertebrate like, but
much simpler (Nieuwenhuys 2002; Bertrand and Escriva 2011). They have typical
chordate characters, such as a dorsal hollow neural tube and notochord, a ventral
gut and a pharynx with gill slits, segmented paraxial muscles, and the thyroid gland
homologue (endostyle). The free-living planktonic larvae show an asymmetrical
body plan: the mouth forms on the left side, the gill slits form on the right ventral
side, and the right series of somites form half a segment posterior to the left ones.
During metamorphosis, much of this asymmetry disappears, although the axial
muscles retain their asymmetry (Bertrand and Escriva 2011).

162
T.G. Kusakabe
The notochord extends from the anterior tip of the body to the end of the tail.
The CNS of the amphioxus consists of the tubular nerve cord, located immediately
dorsal to the notochord, and extends throughout almost the entire length of the body.
In contrast to the CNSs of the other groups of chordates (tunicates and vertebrates),
an anterior accumulation of the nervous tissue is not conspicuous in the nerve cord
of amphioxus, especially at the adult stage (Nieuwenhuys 2002; Wicht and Lacalli
2005); a transient anterior swelling (the cerebral vesicle) is recognizable only in
young larvae (Wicht and Lacalli 2005). The anteroposterior organization of the CNS
is not evident externally; however, regional differences along the anteroposterior
axis can be recognized by developmental gene expression (Castro et al. 2006; Irimia
et al. 2010; Holland et al. 2013) and cytoarchitectural differences in both adults and
larvae (Wicht and Lacalli 2005).
The expression patterns of developmental regulatory genes in the CNS show
conserved features between amphioxus and vertebrates (Holland 2009; Bertrand
and Escriva 2011; Holland et al. 2013). For example, the expression of Otx marks
the anterior part of the CNS, and posterior to the Otx-expressing domain Gbx is
expressed, suggesting the presence of a region homologous to the vertebrate MHB at
the boundary between the two expression domains (Castro et al. 2006; Holland et al.
2013). However, the genes that confer organizer properties on the vertebrate MHB,
namely, the Engrailed, Wnt1, Pax2/5/8, and FGF genes, are not expressed in this
region, suggesting that the amphioxus MHB lacks organizer ability (Holland 2009;
Holland et al. 2013). Thus, the organizer properties of this region may have evolved
later during the evolution of ancestral olfactores or early vertebrates. The presence
of ANR and ZLI, the signaling centers for anteroposterior brain organization, in
addition to MHB/IsO, has been controversial. Holland and colleagues argue that
amphioxus retain these signaling centers (Holland et al. 2013), whereas Pani and
colleagues claim that amphioxus and tunicates have lost all or part of these three
signaling centers during evolution (Pani et al. 2012).
Another example of anteroposterior conservation of gene expression is that
of Hox genes. The amphioxus genome contains a single archetypal Hox gene
cluster (Garcia-Fernandez and Holland 1994; Amemiya et al. 2008). The colinear
expression of Hox genes is also conserved in amphioxus (Wada et al. 1999). The
gene expression data collectively suggest that the anterior portion of the amphioxus
nerve cord is homologous to the vertebrate brain. Regional homologies within
the CNS have been proposed based on these gene expression data (Castro et al.
2006; Lacalli 2008; Holland et al. 2013). In addition to the conservation along the
anteroposterior axis, gene networks for the dorsoventral patterning also seem to be
conserved between vertebrates and amphioxus to a certain extent (Yu et al. 2007;
Holland 2009).
Neuroanatomical organization of the amphioxus nerve cord has been investigated
in detail in the young larvae (Wicht and Lacalli 2005; Lacalli 2008) (Fig. 7.5). The
anterior portion of the nerve cord shows distinct features compared to the typical
organization of the rest of the nerve cord. The anteriormost region is called the
cerebral vesicle (CV). Immediately caudal to the CV is the primary motor center

7
Identifying Vertebrate Brain Prototypes in Deuterostomes
163
Fig. 7.5 Organization of the anterior nerve cord in a 12-day amphioxus larva, lateral view, anterior
to the left. The central nervous system (CNS) region shown in this ﬁgure contains about 150
neurons at this stage. Inf (dark shading), infundibular cells. (See text for details.) (Reproduced
with permission from Lacalli (2008). © 2007 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.)
(PMC), which contains the anteriormost motor neurons and a set of interneurons
with caudal projections that are thought to be involved in locomotor control.
The CV can be further divided into the anterior and posterior portions, each
exhibiting a distinct organization (Wicht and Lacalli 2005; Lacalli 2008). The
anterior CV contains the frontal eye, which consists of pigment cells, putative
photoreceptor cells, and some neurons. The posterior CV contains a ventral neuropil
and the dorsal lamellar body, which is another putative photoreceptor organ. The
lamellar body has been implicated in circadian control (Wicht and Lacalli 2005).
There is no direct experimental evidence for such rhythms in either adults or larvae,
but the larvae have diurnal patterns of vertical migration in the plankton (Wickstead
and Bone 1959). A ventral cluster of secretory infundibular cells serves as a useful
landmark at the transition between the anterior and posterior CV. Sensory receptor
cells of the anterior CV and the infundibular region have neurites projecting to the
neuropil of the posterior CV, and neurites from the lamellar body and peripheral
sensory neurons also terminate at the post-infundibular neuropil. These sensory
terminals form varicosities but not synapses, suggesting that these anterior neurons
act largely through paracrine release of transmitters (presumably neuropeptides),
which further suggests that the post-infundibular neuropil is mainly a modulatory
center (Lacalli 2008).
In contrast to the paucity of synaptic connections in the post-infundibular
neuropil, conventional synaptic transmissions predominate in the PMC, suggesting
that the locomotor circuits depend on fast transmission with acetylcholine and
amino acid transmitters (Wicht and Lacalli 2005; Lacalli 2008). The PMC contains
three pairs of large paired interneurons (LPN1-3 s), which are innervated by various
sensory inputs (Fig. 7.6). The third pair of neurons, the LPN3s, are contralaterally
innervated by each other, implying that they are mutually inhibitory and could
serve as key components of a central pattern generator (Lacalli and Kelly 2003).
Dendrites of these neurons extend to the post-infundibular neuropil, where they
receive mechanosensory inputs via well-developed synapses (Lacalli 2008). The
nerve targets of LPN3s are ventral “fast” motor neurons via synapses and dorsal

164
T.G. Kusakabe
Fig. 7.6 Pacemaker circuits in young amphioxus larvae. (a) Schematic diagram shows the inferred
pattern of synaptic contacts between large paired neurons (LPN2s, LPN3s, and LPN4s) in the
anterior nerve cord of amphioxus larvae. For the output of LPN2, LPN3, and LPN4 to be in
phase, according to Lacalli (2003), synapse 1 must be excitatory and synapses 2 and 3 must
both be inhibitory (Reproduced with permission from Lacalli (2003). © 2003 Wiley-Liss, Inc.)
(b) Schematic diagram shows inputs to motor neurons in the anterior nerve cord of amphioxus
larvae. The third pair of large paired neurons (LPN3) are suggested to having a pacemaker
function. Junctions are either chemical synapses (with vesicles) or juxtareticular (JR) junctions
(parallel lines, no vesicles). DC dorsal compartment motor neurons, VC ventral compartment
motor neurons, IPN ipsilateral projection neurons, PPN2 type 2 preinfundibular projection neurons
(PPN2) (Reproduced with permission from Lacalli (2002). © 2002 Wiley-Liss, Inc.)
“slow” motor neurons via an unusual class of intercellular junctions (Fig. 7.6).
Young larvae respond very strongly to touch by initiating a fast escape response,
although they are also capable of more prolonged periods of slow swimming,
which probably drives the diurnal vertical migrations; the escape response may be
suppressed during slow migration. The structural features of PMC neuronal circuits
suggest that they act as a central pattern generator for swimming locomotion as well

7
Identifying Vertebrate Brain Prototypes in Deuterostomes
165
as a switch between fast and slow modes of swimming behavior (Wicht and Lacalli
2005; Lacalli 2008).
The Otx-expressing domain roughly corresponds to the CV and an anterior
portion of the PMC, suggesting that this region is homologous to the forebrain
and midbrain of vertebrates (Lacalli 2008). The boundary between the fore-
brain/midbrain and hindbrain counterparts is located somewhere between somites
1 and 2, although the exact position is uncertain. Correspondingly, the expression
patterns of Hox genes suggest that a portion of the nerve cord, beginning at
about the level of somite 3, is homologous to the vertebrate hindbrain (Wada
et al. 1999; Nieuwenhuys 2002). As to further regional homologies within the
forebrain/midbrain counterpart, it has been proposed that the frontal eye and the
lamellar body are homologous to the paired eyes and the pineal organ, respectively
(Nieuwenhuys 2002; Wicht and Lacalli 2005; Lacalli 2008; Vopalensky et al.
2012). In addition, the middle CV region immediately anterior to the cluster of
infundibular cells has been proposed to be homologous to the hypothalamus (Lacalli
and Kelly 2003). The PMC may be a rudimentary homologue of the ventral
part of the vertebrate midbrain because the anteriormost motor neurons and the
beginning of the reticulospinal system are located in these regions and also because
they are the posteriormost expression zone of Otx (Lacalli and Kelly 2003). The
homologies described here have been proposed based on similarities not only in
development and gene expression but also in neuroanatomical organization and
expected physiological functions (Nieuwenhuys 2002; Wicht and Lacalli 2005;
Lacalli 2008). For example, a variety of modulatory inputs, including signals from
sensory neurons located in the hypothalamus or its amphioxus equivalent, converge
on a ventral locomotor control center (the midbrain tegmentum and reticulospinal
system in vertebrates and the PMC in amphioxus), and this initiates a locomotor
response (Wicht and Lacalli 2005).
In conclusion, although the anterior nerve cord of amphioxus larvae is not
prominently enlarged as in the brains of vertebrates and tunicates, it seems to have
sophisticated neuronal circuits with overall similarities to those of the vertebrate
diencephalon-midbrain-hindbrain. Current understanding of the functional aspects,
however, is largely dependent on anatomical observations. In addition, the neurons
of amphioxus have been only partially identiﬁed. Therefore, neurophysiological
studies as well as precise identiﬁcation of neurons are needed to elucidate the precise
structure and function of the neuronal circuitry in amphioxus larvae.
7.6
Nervous Systems of Tunicates
Tunicates or urochordates comprise three classes: the Ascidiacea (ascidians), the
Appendicularia (larvaceans), and the Thaliacea (salps, pyrosomes, and doliolids).
The class Ascidiacea consists of two orders: the Enterogona (representative genera
include Ciona and Phallusia) and the Pleurogona (representative genera are Styela,
Botryllus, and Halocynthia). Recent molecular phylogeny suggests that thaliaceans

166
T.G. Kusakabe
are included in the Enterogona clade of ascidians (Swalla et al. 2000). The phy-
logenic position of larvaceans is still controversial; some authors place larvaceans
at a basal position among tunicates while others place them within the Pleurogona
clade of ascidians (Nishino and Satoh 2001; Stach et al. 2008; Satoh 2009). Among
tunicates, the development, organization, and function of the nervous system have
been most well studied in ascidians. Therefore, this section focuses mainly on the
nervous system of ascidians.
The life history of ascidians consists of distinct larval and adult stages. The
adult ascidians are sessile animals, bearing an extremely modiﬁed version of the
chordate body plan with a simple nervous system. In contrast, the body plan of
the free-swimming, tadpole-like larvae shares basic features with the body plan
of vertebrates, including a CNS derived from a dorsal neural tube (Nicol and
Meinertzhagen 1988). The CNS of the ascidian larva is, however, far simpler than
that of vertebrates; it consists of fewer than 200 neurons (Cole and Meinertzhagen
2004). The expression patterns of transcription factors that regulate the patterning
of the neural tube along the anterior–posterior axis are conserved between ascidians
and vertebrates, suggesting that the developmental mechanisms of the CNS are
conserved among chordates (Wada et al. 1998; Imai et al. 2002; Takahashi and
Holland 2004; Ikuta and Saiga 2007). The adult CNS, a simple cerebral ganglion
(Fig. 7.7), is formed from the larval CNS during metamorphosis (Dufour et al. 2006;
Horie et al. 2011); this provides a good contrast with the situation in ambulacrarians,
in which no direct link has been found between the larval and adult nervous systems
(Chia and Burke 1978; Lester 1988; Heinzeller and Welsch 2001; Nakano et al.
2006, 2009; Byrne et al. 2007; Hirokawa et al. 2008; Raff 2008; Nomaksteinsky
et al. 2009; Miyamoto et al. 2010). In this regard, the tadpole-like larva stage of
Fig. 7.7 Schematic illustration of the nervous systems of ascidians. (a) The central nervous system
of the larva. (b) The peripheral nervous system of the larva. (c) The simple nervous system of the
adult (See text for details)

7
Identifying Vertebrate Brain Prototypes in Deuterostomes
167
ascidians is not correspondent to the dipleurula-type larva stage of ambulacrarians,
further contradicting Garstang’s hypothesis (Garstang 1894).
The CNS of the ascidian larva is divided into three parts, a brain vesicle (also
called a sensory vesicle), a motor ganglion (also called a visceral ganglion or
trunk ganglion), and a caudal nerve cord, from anterior to posterior (Katz 1983;
Meinertzhagen and Okamura 2001; Meinertzhagen et al. 2004; Horie et al. 2009)
(Fig. 7.7). In addition to these three regions, a slender “neck” region containing six
cells has been morphologically recognized between the brain vesicle and the motor
ganglion in Ciona (Nicol and Meinertzhagen 1991), although it is not apparent in
Halocynthia. Recent studies on the structure and function of sensory organs and
neurons in the Ciona brain vesicle have suggested that the brain vesicle can be
functionally divided into an anterior region consisting of a ventricular cavity and
surrounding cells, including sensory organs, and a posterior region containing a
number of diverse interneurons, which presumably form neural circuits for sensory
information processing and motor regulation. Taking this difference into account,
Horie and colleagues proposed to further divide the brain vesicle into the anterior
“sensory vesicle” and the posterior brain (Horie et al. 2009).
The sensory vesicle contains two conspicuous pigmented sensory organs. The
pigmented sensory organ located anteriorly is an otolith, and used for the perception
of gravity, whereas the posterior one is an ocellus, used for light reception (Tsuda
et al. 2003b; Sakurai et al. 2004). Electron microscopic observation showed that
the otolith is a spherical mass of pigment granules connected to the midline of
the ﬂoor of the sensory vesicle by a narrow stalk (Dilly 1961, 1964; Eakin and
Kuda 1971; Ohtsuki 1990; Sakurai et al. 2004). The otolith-associated neurons
extend their axon to the posterior brain (Horie et al. 2008a). The Ciona ocellus
is composed of three lens cells, one pigment cup cell, and a group of photoreceptor
cells (Kusakabe and Tsuda 2007; Horie et al. 2008b). In addition to the pigmented
ocellus, which is located at the right side of the brain vesicle, the Ciona larva has
a nonpigmented ocellus at the ventromedial side of the brain vesicle (Horie et al.
2008b). The photoreceptor cells of the conventional pigmented ocellus are called the
group I and II photoreceptor cells, and the unique photoreceptor cells constituting
the nonpigmented ocellus are called the group III photoreceptor cells (Horie et al.
2008b).
Regional homology within the CNS between ascidians and vertebrates has been
discussed based on regulatory gene expression. The ascidian motor ganglion/nerve
cord, in which Hox genes are expressed, has been suggested to be homologous to
the vertebrate hindbrain/spinal cord (Wada et al. 1998; Imai et al. 2002; Takahashi
and Holland 2004; Ikuta and Saiga 2007). The neck region has been proposed to
be homologous to MHB/IsO because this region expresses Pax-2/5/8 (Wada et al.
1998; Imai et al. 2002). The existence of the region corresponding to MHB/IsO
in ascidians, however, has been controversial, because some of the key regulatory
genes are not expressed in the expected patterns or are missing in the genome
(Lacalli 2006; Pani et al. 2012). The Pax-2/5/8-expressing neck cells also express
a paired-like homeobox gene Phox2, which is a marker for cranial motor neurons
of the vertebrate hindbrain (Dufour et al. 2006). The neck cells expressing Phox2

168
T.G. Kusakabe
develop into branchial motor neurons in the adult CNS. Based on this observation,
Dufour and colleagues proposed that the neck is homologous to the hindbrain and
the motor ganglion is homologous to the spinal cord (Dufour et al. 2006). The
Ciona Otx gene is expressed in the CNS region anterior to the Pax-2/5/8-expressing
cells, suggesting that this most anterior region corresponds to the forebrain/midbrain
of vertebrates (Wada et al. 1998; Imai et al. 2002; Takahashi and Holland 2004).
However, there seems to be no midbrain counterpart in the ascidian CNS, because
the midbrain marker Dmbx is not expressed in the region anterior to the Pax-
2/5/8-expressing cells (Takahashi and Holland 2004). Within the Otx-expressing
“forebrain” region of Ciona, a region homologous to the hypothalamus and retina
has been suggested based on the commonality in both regulatory gene expression
and differentiated cell types (Horie et al. 2008b; Razy-krajka et al. 2012).
7.7
Neuronal Types in the Ascidian Larva
Recent studies have revealed neuronal types and networks in the CNS of the ascidian
larva (Takamura 1998; Yoshida et al. 2004; Imai and Meinertzhagen 2007; Horie
et al. 2008a, 2009, 2010, 2011; Nishino et al. 2010; Takamura et al. 2002, 2010;
Stolﬁand Levine 2011; Razy-Krajka et al. 2012; Kusakabe et al. 2012) (Fig. 7.8).
The functions of neuronal networks have been investigated by pharmacological
and genetic manipulations of the larval CNS (Inada et al. 2003; Brown et al.
2005; Nishino et al. 2010; Razy-Krajka et al. 2012). These studies have revealed
commonalities of neurotransmitters and neuronal cell types between tunicates and
vertebrates. In the following paragraphs, neuronal types known in the ascidian larva
are summarized with reference to their vertebrate counterparts.
Glutamatergic Neurons In the Ciona larva, glutamatergic neurons are present in
the CNS and PNS (Horie et al. 2008a). Most sensory neurons, including papillar
neurons, epidermal neurons, the otolith cell, and ocellus photoreceptor cells are
glutamatergic. Most of these glutamatergic axons terminate in the posterior brain.
In the posterior brain, a group of glutamatergic interneurons are present and send
their axons to the motor ganglion, suggesting that these neurons control the activity
of the motor system. Thus, glutamatergic neurotransmission probably has a major
role in sensory systems and in the integration of the sensory inputs of the ascidian
larva (Horie et al. 2008a).
Cholinergic Neurons Cholinergic neurons are present in the posterior brain, motor
ganglion, and nerve cord of the ascidian larva (Takamura et al. 2002, 2010;
Yoshida et al. 2004; Horie et al. 2010). A few cholinergic interneurons located
in the posterior brain extend their axons to the motor ganglion. As in vertebrates,
acetylcholine is the transmitter at the neuromuscular junction in the ascidian larva
(Whittaker 1973; Ohmori and Sasaki 1977). Cholinergic motor neurons are located
in the motor ganglion, and extend their axons posteriorly to form the nerve terminals
on the tail muscle (Horie et al. 2010).

7
Identifying Vertebrate Brain Prototypes in Deuterostomes
169
Fig. 7.8 Summary diagrams showing distribution patterns of neurotransmitter phenotypes of
neurons in the Ciona intestinalis larva. (a) Glutamatergic neurons (Horie et al. 2008a). (b)
GABAergic/glycinergic neurons (Yoshida et al. 2004; Horie et al. 2010; Nishino et al. 2010). (c)
Cholinergic neurons (Takamura et al. 2002, 2010; Yoshida et al. 2004; Horie et al. 2010). (d)
Dopaminergic neurons (Moret et al. 2005a; Razy-Krajka et al. 2012) (See text for details)
GABA/glycinergic Neurons GABA is a major inhibitory neurotransmitter in
the CNS of both vertebrates and invertebrates (Varju et al. 2001; Alford et al.
2003; Schuske et al. 2004), whereas glycine is a vertebrate-speciﬁc inhibitory
neurotransmitter (Legendre 2001). Vesicular GABA/glycine transporter (VGAT),
which uptakes both GABA and glycine into the synaptic vesicle, is used as a
GABA/glycinergic neuron marker in the Ciona larva (Yoshida et al. 2004; Horie
et al. 2010; Nishitsuji et al. 2012). GABA/glycinergic neurons are present in the
adhesive organ, sensory vesicle, posterior brain, motor ganglion, and dorsal regions
of the tail (Yoshida et al. 2004). Among these neurons, two pairs of neurons located
in the anterior nerve cord (anterior caudal inhibitory neurons; ACINs) are probably
glycinergic, because ACINs do not express glutamic acid decarboxylase (GAD), a
GABAergic neuron-speciﬁc marker, and are labeled by immunostaining using an
anti-glycine antibody (Nishino et al. 2010). Conversely, VGAT-positive neurons in
the brain vesicle and motor ganglion are probably GABAergic because they are

170
T.G. Kusakabe
GAD positive (Zega et al. 2008) and are also labeled by immunostaining using an
anti-GABA antibody (Brown et al. 2005). The inhibitory neurons in the posterior
brain and motor ganglion may be involved in sensory information processing or
motor activity control or both. In vertebrates, GABA is mainly used in the brain and
glycine is mainly used in the spinal cord and brainstem. It should be noted that the
situation is similar in ascidians: the brain uses GABA and the nerve cord contains
glycinergic ACINs.
Pharmacological and genetic manipulation of glycine receptors has revealed
that alternating swimming movements are controlled by glycinergic inhibitory
neurotransmission (Nishino et al. 2010). In addition, glycine receptors are present on
both cholinergic motor neurons in the motor ganglion and, unexpectedly, an anterior
set of tail muscle cells, suggesting that muscle contraction activity may be controlled
both directly and indirectly by ACINs. Thus, the glycinergic control system in the
ascidian larva exhibits both conserved and unique features when compared with
vertebrates (Nishino et al. 2010).
Serotoninergic Neurons Tryptophan hydroxylase (TPH) is a rate-limiting enzyme
in serotonin (5-HT) synthesis. In Ciona larvae, the TPH gene is expressed in the
motor ganglion and muscle cells (Pennati et al. 2007). In Phallusia mammillata,
5-HT was detected in the neurons located near the ocellus, in papilla, and in caudal
epidermal neurons (Pennati et al. 2001). In this species, 5-HT and dopamine have
been implicated in the onset of metamorphosis (Zega et al. 2005). In the Ciona larva,
however, the localization of 5-HT has not been clearly demonstrated (Stach 2005;
Pennati et al. 2007). Interestingly, a homologue of the 5-HT transporter (SERT)
is expressed in the TH-positive dopaminergic neurons in the brain vesicle of the
Ciona larva, and 5-HT uptake by these cells was observed when the larvae were
treated with exogenous 5-HT (Razy-Krajka et al. 2012).
Catecholaminergic Neurons Dopamine, noradrenaline, and adrenaline are called
catecholamines, and are synthesized from tyrosine by the catecholamine synthetic
pathway. TH is a rate-limiting enzyme in catecholamine synthesis and used as a
marker for catecholaminergic neurons. In the Ciona larva, the TH gene is expressed
in a small population of cells in the ventral region of the sensory vesicle (Moret
et al. 2005a). Immunoreactivity of dopamine was detected in the TH-positive
cells, but no staining was observed by immunostaining with an anti-noradrenaline
antibody (Moret et al. 2005a). Because Ciona lacks the machinery to synthesize
adrenaline, adrenergic neurons are probably absent in Ciona (Dehal et al. 2002).
Therefore, the TH-positive cells in the ascidian larva are thought to be dopaminergic
neurons. In vertebrates, dopaminergic neurons are involved in the regulation of
motor behavior. In Ciona, the growth of the axon of dopaminergic neurons occurs a
few hours after hatching. Moret et al. (2005a) speculated that dopaminergic neurons
could contribute to the age-dependent change in the swimming behavior of the
larva. Razy-Krajka and colleagues further examined the role of dopamine in the
swimming behavior of Ciona larvae (Razy-Krajka et al. 2012). The dopaminergic
cells are located in the vicinity of photoreceptor cells and correspond to the coronet
cells, which resemble the dopaminergic coronet cells of the saccus vasculosus of

7
Identifying Vertebrate Brain Prototypes in Deuterostomes
171
cartilaginous and teleost ﬁshes. Pharmacological and behavioral analyses suggest
that dopaminergic cells modulate the light-off-induced swimming behavior of
ascidian larvae by acting on alpha2-like receptors, supporting a role of dopamine
in the modulation of the photic response.
GnRH Neurons Gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) is a key neuropeptide
responsible for the control of reproductive function in vertebrates (Oka 1997). In
the C. intestinalis genome, two GnRH genes are present, each of which encodes
three GnRH peptides and four GnRH receptor (GnRHR) genes (Adams et al. 2003;
Kusakabe et al. 2003; Tello et al. 2005). In the adult ascidian, GnRH neurons
are distributed along the dorsal strand and cerebral ganglion (Powell et al. 1996;
Tsutsui et al. 1998; Ohkuma et al. 2000). Injection of GnRH into mature adults of
C. intestinalis was able to induce gamete release, suggesting that GnRH plays a role
in reproduction as in vertebrates (Terakado 2001).
The two GnRH genes are conspicuously expressed in the C. intestinalis larval
CNS through the entire anteroposterior body axis (Kusakabe et al. 2012). Corre-
spondingly, the GnRH receptor genes are speciﬁcally expressed in the phylotypic
axial structures along the CNS (Kusakabe et al. 2012). The larvae of C. intestinalis
occupy a nonreproductive dispersal stage; the gonad develops after metamorphosis
and reproduction occurs much later. Conspicuous expression of the genes for
GnRHs and GnRHRs in the nervous system and tail tissues in the larva strongly
suggests that GnRHs regulate biological processes that are not directly related to
reproduction. Interestingly, similar expression patterns of a GnRH gene have been
suggested in vertebrates (Kusakabe et al. 2012). Thus, a nonreproductive GnRH
system may be evolutionarily conserved between tunicates and vertebrates. One
possible nonreproductive role of Ciona GnRHs is the control of locomotion and
swimming behavior (Kusakabe et al. 2012). Another possible role of GnRH in the
ascidian larva may be the control of metamorphosis (Kusakabe et al. 2012; Kamiya
et al. 2014). The results of treatment of Ciona larvae with GnRHs suggested that
GnRHs are responsible for the control of two major metamorphic events, namely,
tail absorption and adult organ growth (Kamiya et al. 2014).
7.8
Behavior and Neuronal Function of Ascidian Larvae
Ciona larvae show different behavior patterns during larval life (Kajiwara and
Yoshida 1985; Svane and Young 1989; Nakagawa et al. 1999; Tsuda et al. 2003a;
Zega et al. 2006). In the early stage until 3 h after hatching, the larvae swim upwards
(ﬁrst-phase behavior). In the following stage, the larvae start swimming when light
intensity decreases and stop swimming when light intensity increases (second-phase
behavior) (Nakagawa et al. 1999; Tsuda et al. 2003a). Although the photoreceptor
cells have already differentiated, including expression and localization of the visual
pigment opsin (Kusakabe et al. 2001; Horie et al. 2008b), the photoresponse does
not emerge until 3 h after hatching (Nakagawa et al. 1999). Horie et al. (2005)

172
T.G. Kusakabe
demonstrated that the development of the nerve terminal of the photoreceptors
was correlated with the photoresponse. By 3 h after hatching, the nerve terminals
had expanded to a remarkable degree, concomitant with the emergence of a
photoresponse.
The ascidian larva swims by rhythmically oscillating its tail. This movement is
generated by alternate contraction and relaxation of the lateral muscles. This type
of stereotyped repetitive motion is produced by a central pattern generator (CPG) in
various animals (Wilson 1961; Satterlie 1985; Grillner et al. 1995; Roberts 2000). A
simple CPG is organized into a reciprocal inhibitory neural circuit. In the vertebrate
locomotor CPGs located in the spinal cord, commissural interneurons provide
reciprocal coordination between the left and right sides of the spinal cord (Soffe
et al. 1984; Dale 1985; Buchanan 1999; Quinlan and Kiehn 2007). A motor control
system similar to that of the vertebrate CPGs has been proposed in the swimming of
the tadpole larva of ascidians (Horie et al. 2009, 2010; Nishino et al. 2010). The CPG
of the ascidian larva has been proposed to contain two major components: several
bilateral pairs of cholinergic motor neurons in the motor ganglion and two bilateral
pairs of inhibitory interneurons in the anterior part of the tail nerve cord (Fig. 7.9).
The inhibitory neurons (ACINs) send axons to contralateral cholinergic neurons
(Horie et al. 2009, 2010; Nishino et al. 2010). The organization of the CPG in the
ascidian larva seems simpler but resembles that of the spinal CPGs for vertebrate
locomotion. Takamura and colleagues further proposed an extended version of the
neural circuit of the ascidian larva by incorporating other interneurons and sensory
Fig. 7.9 Schematic diagram shows a neuronal circuit for larval swimming locomotion of C.
intestinalis. The neural circuit comprises cholinergic motor neurons in the motor ganglion and
inhibitory interneurons, called ACINs, in the anterior nerve cord (See text for details)

7
Identifying Vertebrate Brain Prototypes in Deuterostomes
173
inputs from the brain sensory organs and peripheral sensory neurons (Takamura
et al. 2010).
7.9
Photoreceptors and Cerebrospinal Fluid
(CSF)-Contacting Neuron Homologues in Ascidians
The morphology and electrophysiological response of retinal photoreceptors differ
between vertebrates and invertebrates. Vertebrate retinal photoreceptors are ciliary
photoreceptors, and they hyperpolarize in response to light. On the other hand, most
photoreceptors of invertebrate eyes are rhabdomeric and depolarize in response to
light. There are a number of important differences in phototransduction between
ciliary photoreceptors and rhabdomeric photoreceptors (Tsuda 1987; Hardie and
Raghu 2001). Ciliary photoreceptors and rhabdomeric photoreceptors use different
types of opsins, which are clearly distinguished by their primary structures.
The photoreceptor cells of the ascidian larva show morphological and electro-
physiological properties that are similar to those of the visual cells of the vertebrate
retina (Kusakabe and Tsuda 2007). The photoreceptor cells of the pigmented ocellus
are ciliary and hyperpolarized photoreceptors (Eakin and Kuda 1971; Gorman et al.
1971). Ci-opsin1, the photopigment of ascidian ocelli, is a member of the vertebrate
ciliary opsin subfamily (Kusakabe et al. 2001). The Ci-opsin1-knockdown larvae
have lost the photic behavior, demonstrating that Ci-opsin1 is responsible for pho-
toreception in swimming behavior (Inada et al. 2003). Targeted knockdown of the
Ciona orthologue of rx, a homeobox gene that regulates photoreceptor development
in vertebrates, resulted in the loss of ocellus pigment and photoreceptor-speciﬁc
gene expression, suggesting that the developmental program is also similar between
vertebrate and ascidian photoreceptors (D’Aniello et al. 2006). The outer segments
of photoreceptor cells of Ciona larval ocelli are exposed to the lumen of the brain
vesicle, a space homologous to the vertebrate ventricular cavity (Horie et al. 2008b).
This positional arrangement of photoreceptors is common to the retinal, pineal, and
deep brain photoreceptors of vertebrates. These similarities between the ascidian
ocelli and vertebrate photoreceptors suggest their common ancestry.
The ocelli of the ascidian larva may have some sort of evolutionary link to
CSF-contacting neurons in vertebrates. CSF-contacting neurons are sensory neurons
located in the wall of the brain ventricle that send a ciliated process into the CSF
(Vigh et al. 2002). Various opsins and phototransduction cascade proteins have been
demonstrated in telencephalic and hypothalamic groups of CSF-contacting neurons.
These specialized neurons are called “deep brain photoreceptors” (Vigh et al. 2002).
The nonpigmented ocellus is located in the region that has been proposed to be
homologous to the vertebrate hypothalamus (Moret et al. 2005a, 2005b). Thus, the
photoreceptor cells of the nonpigmented ocellus might be counterparts of the deep
brain photoreceptors of vertebrates.

174
T.G. Kusakabe
Fig. 7.10 Schematic representation of the proposed evolutionary scenario for the emergence of the
retina and hypothalamus in craniates/vertebrates. The anterior neural tube of a chordate ancestor
contained periventricular photoreceptor cells intermingled with neuroendocrine cells synthesizing
dopamine and neuropeptides. These cells could also be connected to the CNS. These cell types line
the anterior neural ventricle and contact the cerebrospinal ﬂuid (CSF). A reminiscent but derived
situation is found in ascidians, where photoreceptor cells line the ventricle and are adjacent to the
dopaminergic cells of the sensory vesicle, which form coronets inside the ventricle. Dopaminergic
cells are able to modulate the motor response to light. In craniates/vertebrates, the optic vesicle
becomes separated from the anterior hypothalamus at the end of the neurulation process and bulged
out of the neural tube to reach the lateral neuroectodermal epithelium and the lens placode, leading
to new morphogenetic movements and to the inversion of the retina. The retina comprises several
cell types inherited from the protochordate ancestor, including photoreceptor cells, pigmented
epithelium, and dopaminergic amacrine cells (Reproduced from Razy-Krajka et al. (2012). ©
Razy-Krajka et al.; licensee BioMed Central, Ltd. 2012)
Other putative homologues of the CSF-contacting neurons are the dopaminergic
coronet cells of the ascidian larva, which share traits with the CSF-contacting
dopamine neurons of the vertebrate hypothalamus (Moret et al. 2005a; Razy-Krajka
et al. 2012) (Fig. 7.10). As a result of the ventral location of the dopaminergic
cells and their protrusions (coronets) in the lumen of the sensory vesicle, these cells
resemble the dopaminergic coronet cells of the saccus vasculosus of cartilaginous
and teleost ﬁshes, a paraventricular organ of the hypothalamus that is secondarily
lost in tetrapods, in addition to resembling the dopamine-synthesizing cells of

7
Identifying Vertebrate Brain Prototypes in Deuterostomes
175
the caudal hypothalamus in teleosts (Joly et al. 2007). On the other hand, the
dopaminergic coronet cells are located in the vicinity of photoreceptor cells and
share traits with dopaminergic amacrine cells of the vertebrate retina (Razy-
Krajka et al. 2012). Based on these observations, Razy-Krajka and colleagues
proposed that that the dopaminergic coronet cells of the ascidian larva were derived
from an ancestral multifunctional cell population located in the periventricular,
photoreceptive ﬁeld of the anterior neural tube of chordates, which also gave rise
to both the anterior hypothalamus and the retina in vertebrates (Fig. 7.10).
7.10
Rudimentary Neural Crest and Cranial Placodes
in Invertebrate Chordates
It has been proposed that the emergence of the vertebrate head during evolution
was accompanied by the acquisition of two types of embryonic ectodermal tissues,
the neural crest and the cranial placodes (Northcutt and Gans 1983; Northcutt
2005). The neural crest, which undergoes an epithelial–mesenchymal transition and
subsequent extensive migration, produces a diverse array of cell types, including
ectomesenchyme derivatives that elaborate the vertebrate head (Bronner and Le
Douarin 2012; Green et al. 2015). The cranial placodes give rise to the anterior pitu-
itary gland, sensory organs [nose, ear, eye (lens), and lateral line], neuroendocrine
cells in the brain, and sensory ganglia of the vertebrate head (Schlosser 2006; Begbie
2008; Schlosser 2010). Both the neural crest and cranial placodes originate in the
neural plate border region (Schlosser 2008).
Indisputable homologues of the neural crest and placodes are lacking in
amphioxus (Holland 2009), although they have populations of cells that have
been proposed to be homologues of the neural crest and cranial placodes (Holland
et al. 1996; Schlosser 2005; Kaltenbach et al. 2009; Ivashkin and Adameyko 2013).
In ascidians, neural crest-like cells of three distinct lineages have been reported
(Jeffery et al. 2004, 2008; Abitua et al. 2012; Stolﬁet al. 2015). One type of
the proposed homologues of the neural crest in ascidians are the migratory cells
that give rise to pigmented cells (Jeffery et al. 2004; Jeffery 2006). In Ciona
intestinalis, the neural crest-like cells of this type are shown to be the trunk lateral
cells, which are migratory mesenchymal cells of mesodermal lineage (Jeffery et al.
2008). The pigment cells of the brain sensory organs, the otolith and the ocellus,
are neural crest-like cells of another type reported in Ciona intestinalis (Abitua
et al. 2012). These pigment cells arise at the neural plate border and express
many neural crest-related genes. Moreover, their development is regulated by Wnt
signaling in the manner of the vertebrate neural crest. Interestingly, these cells can
be reprogrammed into migrating ectomesenchyme by the targeted misexpression
of Twist. Based on these results, it has been proposed that that the co-option
of mesenchyme determinants, such as Twist, into the neural plate ectoderm was
crucial to the emergence of the vertebrate head (Abitua et al. 2012).

176
T.G. Kusakabe
Cranial placode homologues have been proposed in ascidians (Wada et al. 1998;
Manni et al. 2004a, 2004b, 2005; Mazet and Shimeld 2005; Mazet et al. 2005;
Abitua et al. 2015). These putative placodal regions include cells giving rise to oral
and atrial siphon primordia, the neurohypophysial duct, the larval adhesive palps,
and preoral sensory neurons. Among these, the rostral palp-forming ectoderm has
been proposed to be an olfactory placode homologue (Mazet et al. 2005), but it
does not express Pitx, Six3/6, Six1/2, Six4/5, or Eya at the neural plate stage, and its
position relative to the oral opening is different from that of the vertebrate olfactory
placode. The oral siphon primordium and the neurohypophyseal duct derived from
the anterior neural plate have been proposed to be olfactory and adenohypophyseal
homologues (Manni et al. 2004a, 2005; Mazet and Shimeld 2005; Mazet et al.
2005) and express a set of key transcription factors for placode development. These
regions, however, have not been demonstrated to be “neurogenic,” which is an
important characteristic of the vertebrate olfactory placode. The bilaterally paired
atrial primordia also express a set of key placodal transcription factors and have been
proposed to be homologues of otic or lateral line placodes (Wada et al. 1998; Manni
et al. 2004b; Mazet and Shimeld 2005; Mazet et al. 2005). The atrial primordia,
however, do not develop from the anterior neural plate border, and they contribute
adult tissues associated with the anal opening. Thus, neither their embryonic origin
nor future position in the adult body correspond to the vertebrate counterparts
(Abitua et al. 2015).
Recently, the preoral ectoderm of C. intestinalis was proposed to be a proto-
neurogenic placode that is homologous to the vertebrate neurogenic placodes
(Abitua et al. 2015). This embryonic region was shown to give rise to dual-
functional neurons that harbor characteristics of both chemosensory and GnRH-
generating neurons, cell types developed from the olfactory placode of vertebrates
(Fig. 7.11). In addition, these cells express the key regulatory determinants of
cranial placodes, Six1/2 and Eya, and their development is regulated by bone
morphogenetic protein (BMP) signaling in a manner similar to the development
of cranial placodes of vertebrates. These observations provide evidence that the
putative sensory neurons arise from a placodal-like territory in a non-vertebrate.
In vertebrates, GnRH neuroblasts migrate along the axon tracts of chemosensory
neurons to a ﬁnal destination in the brain, such as the hypothalamus. Olfactory
and GnRH neurons form a coherent neuronal circuit, and pheromones detected by
chemosensory neurons cause a release of gonadotropins via hypothalamic GnRH
neurons, a function crucial to sexual reproduction. Thus, the intimate connection
between olfaction and reproductive control likely arose long ago. The proposed
chemosensory and neurosecretory functions of these neurons may have become
segregated into dedicated cell types that work together within a coherent circuit
during early vertebrate evolution. This type of cellular subfunctionalization might
be an important mechanism of neuronal circuit evolution in vertebrates (Abitua
et al. 2015). A similar subfunctionalization process has also been proposed for the
evolution of the proto-hypothalamo-retinalterritory of chordates (Razy-Krajka et al.
2012).

7
Identifying Vertebrate Brain Prototypes in Deuterostomes
177
Fig. 7.11 Putative sensory neurons arising from a placodal-like territory in a tunicate embryo
(Abitua et al. 2015). The ascidian larva (left) possesses a group of GnRH neurons, located behind
the oral opening, derived from the proto-placodal ectoderm. These neurons possess cilia that
have a 9 C 2 microtubule arrangement, a shared characteristic attributed to nonmotile cilia of
vertebrate olfactory neurons, and express a functional cyclic nucleotide-gated channel (CNGA),
which is also a characteristic of vertebrate olfactory neurons. In vertebrates (right), neurosecretory
and chemosensory cells both arise from the olfactory placode and are intimately linked. GnRH
neuroblasts use the axon tracts of chemosensory neurons to guide them to their ﬁnal destination in
the hypothalamus (Modiﬁed from Abitua et al. 2015)
7.11
Conclusions
Comparison of the nervous systems among the extant deuterostome taxa illustrates
both their remarkable diversity and shared basic plans of neural architecture. For
example, irrespective of whether they are homologous or analogous, a motor control
system containing a pair(s) of contralaterally inhibitory interneurons seems to
be common among hemichordates, cephalochordates, tunicates, and vertebrates.
Considering the highly conserved expression patterns of anteroposterior patterning
genes in the CNS between protostomes (arthropodsand annelids) and deuterostomes
(chordates) (Arendt et al. 2008; Holland et al. 2013), the simple organization of the
nervous system in some deuterostome taxa, such as hemichordates, echinoderms,
and tunicates, may be a feature evolved from an ancestor with a more complex
CNS. If so, the simple CNS in such taxa could serve as an excellent model system
for elucidating the basic mechanisms of the vertebrate CNS descended from the
common ancestor.
It seems highly plausible that the simple tunicate CNS was evolved from the more
complex CNS of a common ancestor of the Olfactores. Tunicates have photorecep-
tive and gonadotropin-releasing hormone systems, which are clearly homologous
to those of vertebrates, whereas equivalent systems seem to be absent or highly
diverged in cephalochordate amphioxus (Kusakabe et al. 2001, 2009, 2012; Tello
and Sherwood 2009; Roch et al. 2014). The putative homologues of neural crest and
neurogenic cranial placodes have been identiﬁed in ascidians (Abitua et al. 2012,
2015; Stolﬁet al. 2015). The less cephalized CNS of cephalochordates also has
neuronal circuits with similarities to those of the vertebrate diencephalon-midbrain-
hindbrain. With the shared characters among chordates, the CNS of invertebrate

178
T.G. Kusakabe
chordates should provide a unique platform for studying the developmental and
evolutionary bases underlying the emergence of the complex CNS of vertebrates.
References
Abitua PB, Wagner E, Navarrete IA, Levine M (2012) Identiﬁcation of a rudimentary neural crest
in a non-vertebrate chordate. Nature 492:104–107
Abitua PB, Gainous TB, Kaczmarczyk AN, Winchell CJ, Hudson C, Kamata K, Nakagawa M,
Tsuda M, Kusakabe TG, Levine M (2015) The pre-vertebrate origins of neurogenic placodes.
Nature 524:462–465
Adams BA, Tello JA, Erchegyi J, Warby C, Hong DJ et al (2003) Six novel gonadotropin-releasing
hormones are encoded as triplets on each of two genes in the protochordate, Ciona intestinalis.
Endocrinology 144:1907–1919
Alford S, Schwartz E, Viana di Prisco G (2003) The pharmacology of vertebrate spinal central
pattern generators. Neuroscientist 9:217–228
Amemiya CT, Prohaska SJ, Hill-Force A, Cook A, Wasserscheid J, Ferrier DE, Pascual-Anaya J,
Garcia-Fernandez J, Dewar K, Stadler PF (2008) The amphioxus Hox cluster: characterization,
comparative genomics, and evolution. J Exp Zool B Mol Dev Evol 310:465–477
Arendt D, Denes AS, Jékely G, Tessmar-Raible K (2008) The evolution of nervous system
centralization. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 363:1523–1528
Bateson W (1886) The ancestry of the chordata. Q J Microsc Sci 26:535–571
Begbie J (2008) Migration of neuroblasts from neurogenic placodes. Dev Neurosci 30:33–35
Bertrand S, Escriva H (2011) Evolutionary crossroads in developmental biology: amphioxus.
Development 138:4819–4830
Bisgrove BW, Burke RD (1986) Development of serotonergic neurons in embryos of the sea urchin
Strongylocentrotus purpuratus. Dev Growth Differ 28:569–574
Bisgrove BW, Burke RD (1987) Development of the nervous system of the pluteus larva of
Strongylocentrotus droebachiensis. Cell Tissue Res 248:335–343
Bohn JM, Heinzeller T (1999) Morphology of the bourgueticrinid and isocrinid aboral nervous
system and its possible phylogenetic implications (Echinodermata, Crinoidea). Acta Zool
80:241–249
Bourlat SJ, Juliusdottir T, Lowe CJ, Freeman R, Aronowicz J, Kirschner M, Lander ES,
Thorndyke M, Nakano H, Khon AB, Heyland A, Moroz LL, Copley RR, Telford MJ (2006)
Deuterostome phylogeny reveals monophyletic chordates and the new phylum Xenoturbellida.
Nature 444:85–88
Bronner ME, Le Douarin NM (2012) Evolution and development of the neural crest: an overview.
Dev Biol 366:2–9
Brown ER, Nishino A, Bone Q, Meinertzhagen IA, Okamura Y (2005) GABAergic synaptic
transmission modulates swimming in the ascidian larva. Eur J Neurosci 22:2541–2548
Brown FD, Prendergast A, Swalla BJ (2008) Man is but a worm: chordate origins. Genesis 46:605–
613
Buchanan JT (1999) Commissural interneurons in rhythm generation and intersegmental coupling
in the lamprey spinal cord. J Neurophysiol 81:2037–2045
Bullock TH (1944) The giant nerve ﬁber system in balanoglossids. J Comp Neurol 80:355–367
Bullock TH (1965) The nervous system of hemichordates. In: Bullock TH, Horridge GA
(eds) Structure and function in the nervous systems of invertebrates. Freeman, San Fran-
cisco/London, pp 1567–1577
Burke RD, Brand DG, Bisgrove BW (1986) Structure of the nervous system of the auricularia larva
of Parasticopus californicus. Biol Bull 170:450–460

7
Identifying Vertebrate Brain Prototypes in Deuterostomes
179
Burke RD, Angerer LM, Elphick MR, Humphrey GW, Yaguchi S, Kiyama T, Liang S, Mu X, Agca
C, Klein WH, Brandhorst BP, Rowe M, Wilson K, Churcher AM, Taylor JS, Chen N, Murray
G, Wang D, Mellott D, Olinski R, Hallböök F, Thorndyke MC (2006) A genomic view of the
sea urchin nervous system. Dev Biol 300:434–460
Byrne M, Nakajima Y, Chee FC, Burke RD (2007) Apical organs in echinoderm larvae: insights
into larval evolution in the Ambulacraria. Evol Dev 9:432–445
Cameron CB (2002) Particle retention and ﬂow in the pharynx of the enteropneust worm
Harrimania planktophilus: the ﬁlter-feeding pharynx may have evolved before the chordates.
Biol Bull 202:192–200
Cameron CB, Garey JR, Swalla BJ (2000) Evolution of the chordate body plan: new insights from
phylogenetic analyses of deuterostome phyla. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 97:4469–4474
Cannon JT, Vellutini BC, Smith J III, Ronquist F, Jondelius U, Hejnol A (2016) Xenacoelomorpha
is the sister group to Nephrozoa. Nature 530:89–93
Castro LFC, Rasmussen SLK, Holland PWH, Holland ND, Holland LZ (2006) A Gbx home-
obox gene in amphioxus: insights into ancestry of the ANTP class and evolution of the
midbrain/hindbrain boundary. Dev Biol 295:40–51
Chia FS, Burke RD (1978) Echinoderm metamorphosis: fate of larval structures. In: Chia FS, Rice
ME (eds) Settlement and metamorphosis of marine invertebrate larvae. Elsevier-North Holland,
New York, pp 219–234
Cisternas P, Byrne M (2009) Expression of Hox4 during development of the pentamerous juvenile
sea star, Parvulastra exigua. Dev Genes Evol 219:613–618
Cole AG, Meinertzhagen IA (2004) The central nervous system of the ascidian larva: mitotic
history of cells forming the neural tube in the late embryonic Ciona intestinalis. Dev Biol
271:239–262
Conway Morris S (1982) Atlas of the Burgess shale. Palaeontological Association, London
Dale N (1985) Reciprocal inhibitory interneurones in the Xenopus embryo spinal cord. J Physiol
363:61–70
D’Aniello S, D’Aniello E, Locascio A, Memoli A, Corrado M, Russo MT, Aniello F, Fucci L,
Brown ER, Branno M (2006) The ascidian homolog of the vertebrate homeobox gene Rx is
essential for ocellus development and function. Differentiation 74:222–234
Dehal P, Satou Y, Campbell RK, Chapman J, Degnan B et al (2002) The draft genome of Ciona
intestinalis: insights into chordate and vertebrate origins. Science 298:2157–2167
Delsuc F, Brinkmann H, Chourrout D, Philippe H (2006) Tunicates and not cephalochordates are
the closest living relative of vertebrates. Nature 439:965–968
Denes AS, Jekely G, Steinmetz PR, Raible F, Snyman H, Prud’-homme B, Ferrier DE, Balavoine
G, Arendt D (2007) Molecular architecture of annelid nerve cord supports common origin of
nervous system centralization in Bilateria. Cell 129:277–288
Devlin CL (2001) The pharmacology of ”-aminobutyric acid and acetylcholine receptors at the
echinoderm neuromuscular junction. J Exp Biol 204:887–896
Dilly N (1961) Electron microscope observations of the receptors in the sensory vesicle of the
ascidian tadpole. Nature 191:786–787
Dilly N (1964) Studies on the receptors in the cerebral vesicle of the ascidian tadpole. 2. The
ocellus. Q J Microsc Sci 105:13–20
Dufour HD, Chettouh Z, Deyts C, de Rosa R, Goridis C, Joly JS, Brunet JF (2006) Precraniate
origin of cranial motoneurons. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 103:8727–8732
Eakin RM, Kuda A (1971) Ultrastructure of sensory receptors in ascidian tadpoles. Z Zellforsch
112:287–312
Echelard Y, Epstein DJ, St.-Jacques B, Shen L, Mohler J, McMahon JA, McMahon AP (1993)
Sonic hedgehog, a member of a family of putative signaling molecules, is implicated in the
regulation of CNS polarity. Cell 75:1417–1430
Elphick MR, Egertova M (2001) The neurobiology and evolution of cannabinoid signalling. Philos
Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 356:381–408
Elphick MR, Egertova M (2005) The phylogenetic distribution and evolutionary origins of
endocannabinoid signalling. Handb Exp Pharmacol 168:283–297

180
T.G. Kusakabe
Elphick MR, Melarange R (2001) Neural control of muscle relaxation in echinoderms. J Exp Biol
204:875–885
Elphick MR, Price DA, Lee TD, Thorndyke MC (1991) The SALMFamides: a new family of
neuropeptides isolated from an echinoderm. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 243:121–127
Elphick MR, Satou Y, Satoh N (2003) The invertebrate ancestry of endocannabinoid signalling:
an orthologue of vertebrate cannabinoid receptors in the urochordate Ciona intestinalis. Gene
302:95–101
Ferrier DEK, Brooke NM, Panopoulou G, Holland PWH (2001) The Mnx homeobox gene class
deﬁned by HB9, MNR2 and amphioxus AmphiMnx. Dev Genes Evol 211:103–107
Florey E, Cahill MA, Rathmayer M (1975) Excitatory actions of GABA and of acetylcholine in
sea urchin tube feet. Comp Biochem Physiol 51C:5–12
Garcia-Fernandez J, Holland PWH (1994) Archetypal organization of the amphioxus Hox gene
cluster. Nature 370:563–566
Garstang W (1894) Preliminary note on a new theory of the ancestry of the Chordata. Zool Anz
17:122–125
Gorman AL, McReynolds JS, Barnes SN (1971) Photoreceptors in primitive chordates: ﬁne
structure, hyperpolarizing receptor potentials, and evolution. Science 172:1052–1054
Green SA, Simoes-Costa M, Bronner ME (2015) Evolution of vertebrates as viewed from the crest.
Nature 520:474–482
Grillner S, Deliagina T, Ekeberg O, El Manira A, Hill RH, Lansner A, Orlovsky GN, Wallen P
(1995) Neural networks that co-ordinate locomotion and body orientation in lamprey. Trends
Neurosci 18:270–279
Halanych KM (1995) The phylogenetic position of the pterobranch hemichordates based on 18S
rDNA sequence data. Mol Phylogenet Evol 4:72–76
Hardie RC, Raghu P (2001) Visual transduction in Drosophila. Nature 413:186–193
Hay-Schmidt A (2000) The evolution of the serotonergic nervous system. Proc R Soc Lond B
267:1071–1079
Heinzeller T, Welsch U (2001) The echinoderm nervous system and its phylogenetic interpretation.
In: Roth G, Wulliman WF (eds) Brain evolution and cognition. Wiley-Spektrum, New
York/Heidelberg, pp 41–75
Hirokawa T, Komatsu M, Nakajima Y (2008) Development of the nervous system in the brittle star
Amphipholis kochii. Dev Genes Evol 218:15–21
Holland LZ (2009) Chordate roots of the vertebrate nervous system: expanding the molecular
toolkit. Nat Rev Genet 10:736–746
Holland LZ (2015) Evolution of basal deuterostome nervous systems. J Exp Biol 218(pt 4):637–
645
Holland ND, Panganiban G, Henyey EL, Holland LZ (1996) Sequence and developmental
expression of AmphiDll, an amphioxus distal-less gene transcribed in the ectoderm, epidermis
and nervous system: insights into evolution of craniate forebrain and neural crest. Development
122:2911–2920
Holland LZ, Carvalho JE, Escriva H, Laudet V, Schubert M, Shimeld SM, Yu JK (2013) Evolution
of bilaterian central nervous systems: a single origin? Evodevo 4:27
Horie T, Orii H, Nakagawa M (2005) Structure of photoreceptors in the ascidian Ciona intestinalis
larva revealed by an anti-arrestin antibody. J Neurobiol 65:241–250
Horie T, Kusakabe T, Tsuda M (2008a) Glutamatergic networks in the Ciona intestinalis larva. J
Comp Neurol 508:249–263
Horie T, Sakurai D, Ohtsuki H, Terakita A, Shichida Y, Usukura J, Kusakabe T, Tsuda M (2008b)
Pigmented and nonpigmented ocelli in the brain vesicle of the ascidian larva. J Comp Neurol
509:88–102
Horie T, Nakagwa M, Sasakura Y, Kusakabe TG (2009) Cell type and function of neurons in the
ascidian nervous system. Dev Growth Differ 51:207–220
Horie T, Nakagawa M, Sasakura Y, Kusakabe TG, Tsuda M (2010) Simple motor system of
the ascidian larva: neuronal complex comprising putative cholinergic neurons and GABAer-
gic/glycinergic neurons. Zool Sci 27:181–190

7
Identifying Vertebrate Brain Prototypes in Deuterostomes
181
Horie T, Shinki R, Ogura Y, Kusakabe TG, Satoh N, Sasakura Y (2011) Ependymal cells of
chordate larvae are stem-like cells that form the adult nervous system. Nature 469:525–528
Hyman LH (1955) The invertebrates. Echinodermata: the coelomate Bilateria, vol 4. McGraw-Hill,
New York
Ikuta T, Saiga H (2007) Dynamic change in the expression of developmental genes in the ascidian
central nervous system: revisit to the tripartite model and the origin of the midbrain-hindbrain
boundary region. Dev Biol 312:631–643
Imai JH, Meinertzhagen IA (2007) Neurons of the ascidian larval nervous system in Ciona
intestinalis: I. Central nervous system. J Comp Neurol 501:316–334
Imai KS, Satoh N, Satou Y (2002) Region speciﬁc gene expressions in the central nervous system
of the ascidian embryo. Gene Expr Patterns 2:319–321
Inada K, Horie T, Kusakabe T, Tsuda M (2003) Targeted knockdown of an opsin gene inhibits the
swimming behaviour photoresponse of ascidian larvae. Neurosci Lett 347:167–170
Irimia M, Piñeiro C, Maeso I, Gómez-Skarmeta JL, Casares F, Garcia-Fernàndez J (2010)
Conserved developmental expression of fezf in chordates and Drosophila and the origin of
the zona limitans intrathalamica (ZLI) brain organizer. Evodevo 1:7
Ivashkin E, Adameyko I (2013) Progenitors of the protochordate ocellus as an evolutionary origin
of the neural crest. Evodevo 4:12
Jefferies RPS (1991) In: Bock GR, Marsh J (eds) Biological asymmetry and handedness. Wiley,
Chichester, pp 94–127
Jeffery WR (2006) Ascidian neural crest-like cells: phylogenetic distribution, relationship to larval
complexity, and pigment cell fate. J Exp Zool B Mol Dev Evol 306:470–480
Jeffery WR, Strickler AG, Yamamoto Y (2004) Migratory neural crest-like cells form body
pigmentation in a urochordate embryo. Nature 431:696–699
Jeffery WR, Chiba T, Razy-Krajka F, Deyts C, Satoh N, Joly JS (2008) Trunk lateral cells are
neural crest-like cells in the ascidian Ciona intestinalis: insights into the ancestry and evolution
of the neural crest. Dev Biol 324:152–160
Joly JS, Osorio J, Alunni A, Auger H, Kano S, Retaux S (2007) Windows of the brain: towards
a developmental biology of circumventricular and other neurohemal organs. Semin Cell Dev
Biol 18:512–524
Kajiwara S, Yoshida M (1985) Change in behavior and ocellar structure during the larval life of
solitary ascidians. Biol Bull 169:565–577
Kaltenbach SL, Yu JK, Holland ND (2009) The origin and migration of the earliest-developing
sensory neurons in the peripheral nervous system of amphioxus. Evol Dev 11:142–151
Kamiya C, Ohta N, Ogura Y, Yoshida K, Horie T, Kusakabe TG, Satake H, Sasakura Y
(2014) Nonreproductive role of gonadotropin-releasing hormone in the control of ascidian
metamorphosis. Dev Dyn 243:1524–1535
Kappers CUA (1929) The evolution of the nervous system in invertebrates, vertebrates and man.
Bohn, Haarlem
Katow H, Yaguchi S, Kyozuka K (2007) Serotonin stimulates [Ca2C]i elevation in ciliary
ectodermal cells of echinoplutei through a serotonin receptor cell network in the blastocoel.
J Exp Biol 210:403–412
Katow H, Suyemitsu T, Ooka S, Yaguchi J, Jin-Nai T, Kuwahara I, Katow T, Yaguchi S, Abe H
(2010) Development of a dopaminergic system in sea urchin embryos and larvae. J Exp Biol
213:2808–2819
Katow H, Abe K, Katow T, Zamani A, Abe H (2013) Development of the GABA-ergic signaling
system and its role in larval swimming in sea urchin. J Exp Biol 216:1704–1716
Katz MJ (1983) Comparative anatomy of the tunicate tadpole Ciona intestinalis. Biol Bull 164:1–
27
Kaul S, Stach T (2010) Ontogeny of the collar cord: neurulation in the hemichordate Saccoglossus
kowalevskii. J Morphol 271:1240–1259
Kon T, Nohara M, Yamanoue Y, Fujiwara Y, Nishida M, Nishikawa T (2007) Phylogenetic
position of a whale-fall lancelet (Cephalochordata) inferred from whole mitochondrial genome
sequences. BMC Evol Biol 7:127

182
T.G. Kusakabe
Kusakabe T, Tsuda M (2007) Photoreceptive systems in ascidians. Photochem Photobiol 83:248–
252
Kusakabe T, Kusakabe R, Kawakami I, Satou Y, Satoh N, Tsuda M (2001) Ci-opsin1, a vertebrate-
type opsin gene, expressed in the larval ocellus of the ascidian Ciona intestinalis. FEBS Lett
506:69–72
Kusakabe T, Mishima S, Shimada I, Kitajima Y, Tsuda M (2003) Structure, expression, and cluster
organization of genes encoding gonadotropin-releasing hormone receptors found in the neural
complex of the ascidian Ciona intestinalis. Gene 322:77–84
Kusakabe TG, Takimoto N, Jin M, Tsuda M (2009) Evolution and the origin of the visual retinoid
cycle in vertebrates. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 364:2897–2910
Kusakabe TG, Sakai T, Aoyama M, Kitajima Y, Miyamoto Y, Takigawa T, Daido Y, Fujiwara K,
Terashima Y, Sugiuchi Y, Matassi G, Yagisawa H, Park MK, Satake H, Tsuda M (2012) A
conserved non-reproductive GnRH system in chordates. PLoS One 7:e41955
Lacalli TC (2002) The dorsal compartment locomotory control system in amphioxus larvae. J
Morphol 252:227–237
Lacalli TC (2003) Ventral neurons in the anterior nerve cord of amphioxus larvae. II. Further data
on the pacemaker circuit. J Morphol 257:212–218
Lacalli TC (2006) Prospective protochordate homologs of vertebrate midbrain and MHB, with
some thoughts on MHB origins. Int J Biol Sci 2:104–109
Lacalli TC (2008) Basic features of the ancestral chordate brain: a protochordate perspective. Brain
Res Bull 75:319–323
Lacalli TC, Kelly SJ (2003) Ventral neurons in the anterior nerve cord of amphioxus larvae. I. An
inventory of cell types and synaptic patterns. J Morphol 257:190–211
Lacalli TC, West JE (1993) A distinctive nerve cell type common to diverse deuterostome larvae:
comparative data from echinoderms, hemichordates and amphioxus. Acta Zool 74:1–8
Lacalli TC, Gilmour THJ, West JE (1990) Ciliary band innervation in the bipinnaria larva of
Pisaster ochraceus. Philos Trans R Soc B Biol Sci 330:371–390
Legendre P (2001) The glycinergic inhibitory synapse. Cell Mol Life Sci 58:760–793
Lester S (1988) Settlement and metamorphosis of Rhabdopleura normani (Hemichordata: Ptero-
branchia). Acta Zool 69:111–120
Lowe CJ (2008) Molecular genetic insights into deuterostome evolution from the direct-developing
hemichordate Saccoglossus kowalevskii. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 363:1569–1578
Lowe CJ, Wu M, Salic A, Evans L, Lander E, Stange-Thomann N, Gruber CE, Gerhart J, Kirschner
M (2003) Anteroposterior patterning in hemichordates and the origins of the chordate nervous
system. Cell 113:853–865
Luttrell S, Konikoff C, Byrne A, Bengtsson B, Swalla BJ (2012) Ptychoderid hemichordate
neurulation without a notochord. Integr Comp Biol 52:829–834
Mackie GO, Spencer AN, Strathmann R (1969) Electrical activity associated with ciliary reversal
in an echinoderm larva. Nature 223:1384–1385
Manni L, Lane NJ, Gasparini F, Tiozzo S, Caicci F, Zaniolo G, Burighel P (2004a) Neurogenic and
nonneurogenic placodes in ascidians. J Exp Zool B Mol Dev Evol 302:483–504
Manni L, Caicci F, Gasparini F, Zaniolo G, Burighel P (2004b) Hair cells in ascidians and the
evolution of lateral line placodes. Evol Dev 6:379–381
Manni L, Agnoletto A, Zaniolo G, Burighel P (2005) Stomodeal and neurohypophysial placodes
in Ciona intestinalis: insights into the origin of the pituitary gland. J Exp Zool B Mol Dev Evol
304:324–339
Mazet F, Shimeld S (2005) Molecular evidence from ascidians for the evolutionary origin of
vertebrate cranial sensory placodes. J Exp Zool B Mol Dev Evol 304:340–346
Mazet F, Hutt JA, Milloz J, Millard J, Graham A, Shimeld SM (2005) Molecular evidence from
Ciona intestinalis for the evolutionary origin of vertebrate cranial placodes. Dev Biol 282:494–
508
Metchnikoff E (1881) Über die systematische Stellung von Balanoglossus. Zool Anz 4:153–157
Meinertzhagen IA, Okamura Y (2001) The larval ascidian nervous system: the chordate brain from
its small beginnings. Trends Neurosci 24:401–410

7
Identifying Vertebrate Brain Prototypes in Deuterostomes
183
Meinertzhagen IA, Lemaire P, Okamura Y (2004) The neurobiology of the ascidian tadpole larva:
recent developments in an ancient chordate. Annu Rev Neurosci 27:453–485
Moret F, Christiaen L, Deyts C, Blin M, Joly JS, Vernier P (2005a) The dopamine-synthesizing
cells in the swimming larva of the tunicate Ciona intestinalis are located only in the
hypothalamus-related domain of the sensory vesicle. Eur J Neurosci 21:3043–3055
Moret F, Christiaen L, Deyts C, Blin M, Vernier P, Joly JS (2005b) Regulatory gene expressions
in the ascidian ventral sensory vesicle: evolutionary relationships with the vertebrate hypotha-
lamus. Dev Biol 277:567–579
Morgan TH (1891) The growth and development of tornaria. J Morphol 5:407–458
Morgan TH (1894) Development of Balanoglossus. J Morphol 9:1–86
Miyamoto N, Wada H (2013) Hemichordate neurulation and the origin of the neural tube. Nat
Commun 4:2713
Miyamoto N, Nakajima Y, Wada H, Saito Y (2010) Development of the nervous system in the acorn
worm Balanoglossus simodensis: insights into nervous system evolution. Evol Dev 12:416–424
Nakagawa M, Miyamoto T, Ohkuma M, Tsuda M (1999) Action spectrum for the photophobic
response of Ciona intestinalis (Ascidiacea, Urochordata) larvae implicates retinal protein.
Photochem Photobiol 70:359–362
Nakajima Y (1987) Localization of catecholaminergic nerves in larval echinoderms. Zool Sci
4:293–299
Nakano H, Murabe N, Amemiya S, Nakajima Y (2006) Nervous system development of the sea
cucumber Stichopus japonicus. Dev Biol 292:205–212
Nakano H, Nakajima Y, Amemiya S (2009) Nervous system development of two crinoid species,
the sea lily Metacrinus rotundus and the feather star Oxycomanthus japonicus. Dev Genes Evol
219:565–576
Nicol D, Meinertzhagen IA (1988) Development of the central nervous system of the larva of
the ascidian, Ciona intestinalis L. II. Neural plate morphogenesis and cell lineages during
neurulation. Dev Biol 130:737–766
Nicol D, Meinertzhagen IA (1991) Cell counts and maps in the larval central nervous system of
the ascidian Ciona intestinalis (L.). J Comp Neurol 309:415–429
Nielsen C (2006) Homology of echinoderm radial nerve cords and the chordate neural tube? Evol
Dev 8:1–2
Nielsen C (2012) Animal evolution: interrelationships of the living phyla, 3rd edn. Oxford
University Press, New York
Nieuwenhuys R (2002) Deuterostome brains: synopsis and commentary. Brain Res Bull 57:257–
270
Nishino A, Satoh N (2001) The simple tail of chordates: phylogenetic signiﬁcance of appendicu-
larians. Genesis 29:36–45
Nishino A, Okamura Y, Piscopo S, Brown ER (2010) A glycine receptor is involved in the
organization of swimming movements in an invertebrate chordate. BMC Neurosci 11:6
Nishitsuji K, Horie T, Ichinose A, Sasakura Y, Yasuo H, Kusakabe TG (2012) Cell lineage and
cis-regulation for a unique GABAergic/glycinergic neuron type in the larval nerve cord of the
ascidian Ciona intestinalis. Dev Growth Differ 54:177–186
Nohara M, Nishida M, Miya M, Nishikawa T (2005) Evolution of the mitochondrial genome
in Cephalochordata as inferred from complete nucleotide sequences from two Epigonichthys
species. J Mol Evol 60:526–537
Nomaksteinsky M, Röttinger E, Dufour HD, Chettouh Z, Lowe CJ, Martindale MQ, Brunet
JF (2009) Centralization of the deuterostome nervous system predates chordates. Curr Biol
19:1264–1269
Northcutt RG (2005) The new head hypothesis revisited. J Exp Zool B Mol Dev Evol 304B:274–
297
Northcutt RG, Gans C (1983) The genesis of neural crest and epidermal placodes: a reinterpretation
of vertebrate origins. Q Rev Biol 58:1–28

184
T.G. Kusakabe
Ohkuma M, Katagiri Y, Nakagawa M, Tsuda M (2000) Possible involvement of light regulated
gonadotropin-releasing hormone neurons in biological clock for reproduction in the cerebral
ganglion of the ascidian, Halocynthia roretzi. Neurosci Lett 293:5–8
Ohmori H, Sasaki S (1977) Development of neuromuscular transmission in a larval tunicate. J
Physiol 269:221–254
Ohtsuki H (1990) Statocyte and ocellar pigment cell in embryos and larvae of the ascidian, Styela
plicata (Lesueur). Dev Growth Differ 32:85–90
Oka Y (1997) The gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) neuronal system of ﬁsh brain as a
model system for the study of peptidergic neuromodulation. In: Parhar IS, Sakuma Y (eds)
GnRH neurons: genes to behavior. Brain Shuppan, Tokyo, pp 245–276
Pani AM, Mullarkey EE, Aronowicz J, Assimacopoulos S, Grove EA, Lowe CJ (2012) Ancient
deuterostome origins of vertebrate brain signalling centres. Nature 483:289–294
Paul CRC, Smith AB (1984) The early radiation and phylogeny of echinoderms. Biol Rev 59:443–
481
Pearce CM, Scheibling RE (1990) Induction of metamorphosis of larvae of the green sea urchin,
Strongylocentrotus droebachiensis, by coralline red algae. Biol Bull 179:304–311
Pennati R, Groppelli S, Sotgia C, Candiani S, Pestarino M, De Bernardi F (2001) Serotonin
localization in Phallusia mammillata larvae and effects of 5-HT antagonists during larval
development. Dev Growth Differ 43:647–656
Pennati R, Candiani S, Biggiogero M, Zega G, Groppelli S, Oliveri D, Parodi M, De Bernardi
F, Pestarino M (2007) Developmental expression of tryptophan hydroxylase gene in Ciona
intestinalis. Dev Genes Evol 217:307–313
Perseke M, Golombek A, Schlegel M, Struck TH (2013) The impact of mitochondrial genome
analyses on the understanding of deuterostome phylogeny. Mol Phylogenet Evol 66:898–905
Philippe H, Brinkmann H, Martinez P, Riutort M, Baguñà J (2007) Acoel ﬂatworms are not
platyhelminthes: evidence from phylogenomics. PLoS ONE 2:e717
Philippe H, Brinkmann H, Copley RR, Moroz LL, Nakano H, Poustka AJ, Wallberg A, Peterson
KJ, Telford MJ (2011) Acoelomorph ﬂatworms are deuterostomes related to Xenoturbella.
Nature 470:255–258
Powell JFF, Reska-Skinner SM, Prakash MO, Fischer WH, Park M et al (1996) Two new forms
of gonadotropin-releasing hormone in a protochordate and the evolutionary implications. Proc
Natl Acad Sci USA 93:10461–10464
Protas LL, Muske GA (1980) The effects of some transmitter substances on the tube foot muscles
of the starﬁsh, Asterias amurensis (Lutken). Gen Pharmacol 11:113–118
Quinlan KA, Kiehn O (2007) Segmental, synaptic actions of commissural interneurons in the
mouse spinal cord. J Neurosci 27:6521–6530
Raff RA (2008) Origin of the other metazoan body plans: the evolution of larval forms. Philos
Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 363:1473–1479
Razy-Krajka F, Brown ER, Horie T, Callebert J, Sasakura Y, Joly J-S, Kusakabe TG, Vernier
P (2012) Monoaminergic modulation of photoreception in ascidian: evidence for a proto-
hypothalamo-retinal territory. BMC Biol 10:45
Rebelo S, Reguenga C, Osorio L, Pereira C, Lopes C, Lima D (2007) DRG11 immunohistochem-
ical expression during embryonic development in the mouse. Dev Dyn 236:2653–2660
Roberts A (2000) Early functional organization of spinal neurons in developing lower vertebrates.
Brain Res Bull 53:585–593
Roch GJ, Tello JA, Sherwood NM (2014) At the transition from invertebrates to vertebrates, a
novel GnRH-like peptide emerges in amphioxus. Mol Biol Evol 31:765–778
Rouse GW, Wilson NG, Carvajal JI, Vrijenhoek RC (2016) New deep-sea species of Xenoturbella
and the position of Xenacoelomorpha. Nature 530:94–97
Saito T, Greenwood A, Sun Q, Anderson DJ (1995) Identiﬁcation by differential RT-PCR of a
novel paired homeodomain protein speciﬁcally expressed in sensory neurons and a subset of
their CNS targets. Mol Cell Neurosci 6:280–292
Sakurai D, Goda M, Kohmura Y, Horie T, Iwamoto H, Ohtsuki H, Tsuda M (2004) The role of
pigment cells in the brain of ascidian larva. J Comp Neurol 475:70–82

7
Identifying Vertebrate Brain Prototypes in Deuterostomes
185
Satoh N (2009) An advanced ﬁlter-feeder hypothesis for urochordate evolution. Zool Sci 26:97–
111
Satoh N, Rokhsar D, Nishikawa T (2014) Chordate evolution and the three-phylum system. Proc
R Soc B 281:20141729
Satterlie RA (1985) Reciprocal inhibition and postinhibitory rebound produce reverberation in a
locomotor pattern generation. Science 229:402–404
Schlosser G (2005) Evolutionary origins of vertebrate placodes: insights from developmental
studies and from comparisons with other deuterostomes. J Exp Zool B Mol Dev Evol
304B:347–399
Schlosser G (2006) Induction and speciﬁcation of cranial placodes. Dev Biol 294(2):303–351
Schlosser G (2008) Do vertebrate neural crest and cranial placodes have a common evolutionary
origin? BioEssays 30:659–672
Schlosser G (2010) Making senses development of vertebrate cranial placodes. Int Rev Cell Mol
Biol 283:129–234
Schuske K, Beg AA, Jorgensen EM (2004) The GABA nervous system in C. elegans. Trends
Neurosci 27:407–414
Shu DG, Conway Morris S, Zhang XL (1996) A Pikaia-like chordate from the Lower Cambrian
of China. Nature 348:157–158
Sly BJ, Hazel JC, Popodi EM, Raff RA (2002) Patterns of gene expression in the developing adult
sea urchin central nervous system reveal multiple domains and deep-seated neural pentamery.
Evol Dev 4:189–204
Smith JE (1965) Echinodermata. In: Bullock TH, Horridge GA (eds) Structure and function in the
nervous systems of invertebrates. Freeman, London, pp 1519–1558
Soffe SR, Clarke JDW, Roberts A (1984) Activity of commissural interneurons in the spinal cord
of Xenopus embryos. J Neurophysiol 51:1257–1267
Stach T (2005) Comparison of the serotonergic nervous system among Tunicata: implications for
its evolution within Chordata. Org Divers Evol 5:15–24
Stach T, Winter J, Bouquet JM, Chourrout D, Schnabel R (2008) Embryology of a planktonic
tunicate reveals traces of sessility. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 105:7229–7234
StolﬁA, Levine M (2011) Neuronal subtype speciﬁcation in the spinal cord of a protovertebrate.
Development 138:995–1004
StolﬁA, Ryan K, Meinertzhagen IA, Christiaen L (2015) Migratory neuronal progenitors arise
from the neural plate borders in tunicates. Nature 527:371–374
Strathmann RR (1975) Larval feeding in echinoderms. Am Zool 15:717–730
Svane I, Young CM (1989) The ecology and behavior of ascidian larvae. Oceanogr Mar Biol Rev
27:45–90
Swalla BJ, Cameron CB, Corley LS, Garey JR (2000) Urochordates are monophyletic within the
deuterostomes. Syst Biol 49:122–134
Takahashi T, Holland PWH (2004) Amphioxus and ascidian Dmbx homeobox genes give clues to
the vertebrate origin of midbrain development. Development 131:3285–3294
Takamura K (1998) Nervous network in larvae of the ascidian Ciona intestinalis. Dev Genes Evol
208:1–8
Takamura K, Egawa T, Ohnishi S, Okada T, Fukuoka T (2002) Developmental expression
of ascidian neurotransmitter synthesis genes. I. Choline acetyltransferase and acetylcholine
transporter genes. Dev Genes Evol 212:50–53
Takamura K, Minamida N, Okabe S (2010) Neural map of the larval central nervous system in the
ascidian Ciona intestinalis. Zool Sci 27:191–203
Tanabe Y, William C, Jessell TM (1998) Speciﬁcation of motor neuron identity by the MNR2
homeodomain protein. Cell 95:67–80
Tello JA, Sherwood NM (2009) Amphioxus: beginning of vertebrate and end of invertebrate type
GnRH receptor lineage. Endocrinology 150:2847–2856
Tello JA, Rivier JE, Sherwood NM (2005) Tunicate gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH)
peptides selectively activate Ciona intestinalis GnRH receptors and the green monkey type
II GnRH receptor. Endocrinology 146:4061–4067

186
T.G. Kusakabe
Terakado K (2001) Induction of gamete release by gonadotropin-releasing hormone in a proto-
chordate, Ciona intestinalis. Gen Comp Endocrinol 124:277–284
Thor S, Thomas JB (2002) Motor neuron speciﬁcation in worms, ﬂies and mice: conserved and
‘lost’ mechanisms. Curr Opin Genet Dev 12:558–564
Tsuda M (1987) Photoreception and phototransduction in invertebrate photoreceptors. Photochem
Photobiol 45:915–931
Tsuda M, Kawakami I, Shiraishi S (2003a) Sensitization and habituation of the swimming behavior
in ascidian larvae to light. Zool Sci 20:13–22
Tsuda M, Sakurai D, Goda M (2003b) Direct evidence for the role of pigment cells in the brain of
ascidian larvae by laser ablation. J Exp Biol 206:1409–1417
Tsutsui H, Yamamoto N, Ito H, Oka Y (1998) GnRH-immunoreactive neuronal system in the
presumptive ancestral chordate, Ciona intestinalis (ascidian). Gen Comp Endocrinol 112:426–
432
Varju P, Katarova Z, Madarasz E, Szabo G (2001) GABA signaling during development: new data
and old questions. Cell Tissue Res 305:239–246
Vigh B, Manzano MJ, Zadori A, Frank CL, Lukats A, Rohlich P, Szel A, David C (2002) Non
visual photoreceptors of the deep brain, pineal organs and retina. Histol Histopathol 17:555–
590
Vopalensky P, Pergner J, Liegertova M, Benito-Gutierrez E, Arendt D, Kozmik Z (2012) Molecular
analysis of the amphioxus frontal eye unravels the evolutionary origin of the retina and pigment
cells of the vertebrate eye. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 109:15383–15388
Wada H, Satoh N (1994) Details of the evolutionary history from invertebrates to vertebrates, as
deduced from the sequences of 18S rDNA. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 91:1801–1804
Wada H, Saiga H, Satoh N, Holland PWH (1998) Tripartite organization of the ancestral chordate
brain and the antiquity of placodes: insights from ascidian Pax-2/5/8, Hox and Otx genes.
Development 125:1113–1122
Wada H, Garcia-Fernàndez J, Holland PWH (1999) Colinear and segmental expression of
amphioxus Hox genes. Dev Biol 213:131–141
Whittaker JR (1973) Segregation during ascidian embryogenesis of egg cytoplasmic information
for tissue-speciﬁc enzyme development. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 70:2096–2100
Wicht H, Lacalli TC (2005) The nervous system of amphioxus: structure, development, and
evolutionary signiﬁcance. Can J Zool 83:122–150
Wickstead JH, Bone Q (1959) Ecology of acraniate larvae. Nature 184:1849–1851
Wilson DM (1961) The central nervous control of ﬂight in a locust. J Exp Biol 38:471–479
Wilson JM, Hartley R, Maxwell DJ, Todd AJ, Lieberam I, Kaltschmidt JA, Yoshida Y, Jessell
TM, Brownstone RM (2005) Conditional rhythmicity of ventral spinal interneurons deﬁned by
expression of the Hb9 homeodomain protein. J Neurosci 25:5710–5719
Yoshida R, Sakurai D, Horie T, Kawakami I, Tsuda M, Kusakabe T (2004) Identiﬁcation of neuron-
speciﬁc promoters in Ciona intestinalis. Genesis 39:130–140
Yu JK, Satou Y, Holland ND, Shin-i T, Kohara Y, Satoh N, Bronner-Fraser M, Holland LZ (2007)
Axial patterning in cephalochordates and the evolution of the organizer. Nature 445:613–617
Zega G, Penatti R, Groppelli S, Sotgia C, De Bernardi F (2005) Dopamine and serotonin modulate
the onset of metamorphosis in the ascidian Phallusia mammillata. Dev Biol 282:246–256
Zega G, Thorndyke MC, Brown ER (2006) Development of swimming behavior in the larva of the
ascidian Ciona intestinalis. J Exp Biol 209:3405–3412
Zega G, Biggiogero M, Groppelli S, Candiani S, Oliveri D, Parodi M, Prestarino M, Bernardi
F, Pennati R (2008) Delopmental expression of glutamic acid decarboxylase and of ”-
aminnobutyric acid type B receptors in the ascidian Ciona intestinalis. J Comp Neurol
506:489–505

Chapter 8
Genome and Transcriptome-Wide Research
of Brain Evolution
Atsushi Ogura
Abstract Genomics and transcriptomics research of the brain, accelerated by the
development of sequencing technologies and genomic analysis methods, can reveal
the genetic mechanisms underlying brain function, evolution, and development
in various animals. This chapter ﬁrst introduces the background of the recent
technology of sequencing machines and analytical methods by bioinformatics,
which makes possible the large-scale study of brains, and then presents recent
results and achievements for brain function and evolution. Recent studies utilizing
these emerging technologies are also introduced to demonstrate the power of large-
scale analysis of genome and transcriptome for brain research. A perspective of
international research projects for brain function is also introduced in the last
section.
Keywords Genomics • Transcriptomics • Omics • Gene regulatory network •
Next-generation sequencing • Genetic variants • Brain function • Brain evolu-
tion • Brain diversiﬁcation
8.1
Introduction
8.1.1
Overview
Genomics is a research ﬁeld for understanding the genetic background underlying
species by analyzing the target species genome. Transcriptomics is a research
method to understand functional context underlying organisms, tissues, and cells.
Genomics can reveal the function and structure of genomes and genes. Genomic
information is usually static and considered to be identical to individual organisms,
although recent research has revealed that there are many epigenetic changes in
cells and tissues that often cause disorders. Transcriptomic information, on the
other hand, varies in tissues and conditions even though in the same individuals.
A. Ogura ()
Nagahama Institute of Bio-Science and Technology, Nagahama, Japan
e-mail: aogu@whelix.info
© Springer Japan KK 2017
S. Shigeno et al. (eds.), Brain Evolution by Design, Diversity and Commonality
in Animals, DOI 10.1007/978-4-431-56469-0_8
187

188
A. Ogura
A combination of genomics and transcriptomics is necessary to understand the
mechanism underlying functions in cells and organisms. The genomics approach
is ﬁrst applied to the historically important model organisms such as bacteria, yeast,
and humans, and to small-sized-genome model species such as the worm and ﬂy
(Blattner et al. 1997; Goffeau et al. 1997; International Human Genome Sequencing
Consortium 2001; The C. elegans Sequencing Consortium 1998; Adams et al.
2000). As the number of genome-sequenced species is few for conducting a
comparative analysis of brain evolution, it was difﬁcult to identify genetic changes
required for the development of the brain. However, modern technologies repre-
sented by next-generation sequencers changed the situation drastically (Schuster
2008). With these emerging technologies, we could obtain genomic information
required for tracing the evolutionary history of brain development easily. The
transcriptomics approach, on the other hand, is ﬁrst attempted by sequencing a small
portion of expressed genes and tags and calculating gene expression frequencies in
various samples (Adams et al. 1991). As this information depends on samples and
conditions, it is required to compare several samples with biological and technical
replicates to show statistically signiﬁcant differences. Spatiotemporal differences
in gene expression between regions and developmental processes is an essential
approach to understand how the brains of animals developed and evolved (Kang
et al. 2011). Transcriptome studies give us comprehensive data on the animal brain
transcriptome and insights into the basis of neurodevelopment.
Application of genomics and transcriptomics for brain function is usually carried
out by comparative analysis of genome data among individuals (Kang et al. 2011).
A fundamental role of this large-scale analysis in brain research is to extract genes
that are related to brain function. By comparing individuals with various phenotypes
related to brain functions, it is possible to locate genes corresponding to the
phenotype. This approach is also taken for deciphering genes that cause disorders in
the brain (Hang et al. 2014). The other approach to understanding brain function is
transcriptome analysis. One of the primary targets of transcriptome study for brain
function is to clarify the gene regulatory network that controls brain function (Carro
et al. 2010). The transcriptome reﬂects environmental changes so that it is possible
to relate genes and functions.
It is essential to compare genomes and transcriptomes of brains among species
for brain research (Cahoy et al. 2008). For instance, comparing human and
chimpanzee could reveal differences to form human brains from apes (Khaitovich
et al. 2005). Comparing remotely related but highly organized brain such as
primates and sea primates, cephalopods, could unveil the evolutionary mechanism
and diversiﬁcation of brains (Albertin et al. 2012). The advantages of these large-
scale genomic and transcriptomic studies of animal brains are that they can trace the
evolutionary process of not only the key regulatory genes but also genes related to
brain functions through the analyses of orthologous gene sets found in animals.

8
Genome and Transcriptome-Wide Research of Brain Evolution
189
A question arises how to utilize next-generation sequencers (NGS) for brain
research. NGS could characterize DNA and RNA sequence information deeply,
and comparing NGS data including genome and transcriptome of various brain
samples could reveal insight into brain function as noted. NGS also accelerated
analyses of genes and the gene regulatory networks in brains that explain the
evolution and diversiﬁcation of central nervous systems among animals. Advances
in library construction methods from a small amount of samples make it possible
to examine tissues and cells in the brain for clarifying cell–cell interactions. This
chapter introduces recent studies utilizing emerging novel technologies of NGS and
the novel targets of brain evolution and diversiﬁcation.
8.1.2
The Rise of Next-Generation Sequencers
Development of the next- or second-generation sequencers has been triggered by
a pyrosequencing method reported by 454 life sciences articles in 2005 (Margulies
et al. 2005). In comparison with the ﬁrst-generation sequencers (Sanger method), the
second-generation sequencers utilize slides or plates with millions of wells, in which
nucleotide incorporation occurs, and imaging is used to identify the nucleotide
sequence. As an important characteristic, NGS technology can produce shorter,
but various, sequences whereas the Sanger method can produce relatively longer
pieces. One of the latest sequencers, the Hiseq 2500 sequencer by Illumina, Inc.,
could generate more than 600 gigabases (Gb) per experiment that can cover a 200-
fold sequence of the human genome whereas the Sanger method sequencer could
generate fewer than 1 megabase (Mb) per experiment. The running costs of NGS
machines are becoming lower and lower, and a draft genome project of an animal
having 1-Gb-sized genome can be performed for a few hundred dollars (http://
www.genome.gov/sequencingcosts/). The cost of the human genome project was
hundreds of thousands of dollars, but with the latest techniques it might be reduced
to a $10 genome project shortly (Fig. 8.1; Table 8.1).
Lately, single-molecule real-time sequencers have been developed and released
by many companies (Levene 2003). DNA polymerase ﬁxed at the bottom of an
apparatus could start to replicate a sample DNA molecule as a template. One of
the preceding products is Pacbio RS2 (Paciﬁc Biosciences) makes it possible to
handle more than a 7-kb sequence for a read. This long sequence read could easily
overcome repetitive elements in the genome that often remain as gaps in the genome
assembly. In the case of the transcriptome, long sequence reads are also useful
as they can distinguish different splicing variants processed by alternative splicing
mechanisms directly (Chin et al. 2014).
Bioinformatics has advanced together with the development of NGS technolo-
gies. Assembling genome and transcriptome data is one of the most difﬁcult
problems in bioinformatics (Miller et al. 2010). Sequence reads consist of an enor-
mous number of short sequences with tiny errors, heterozygosity, single-nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs), and mutations that interfere with a concise genome and

190
A. Ogura
0
350
700
1050
1400
0
7500
15000
22500
30000
~1989 1991
1993
1995
1997
1999
2001
2003
2005
2007
2009
2011
2013
Genome or Genomics
Transcriptome or Transcriptomics
Fig. 8.1 Research activities show expansion of brain genomics and transcriptomics. The number
of publications regarding brain genomics is represented in a darker line with left axis, and the
number of publications regarding brain transcriptomics is represented in a lighter line with right
axis. Although the publications for brain transcriptomics are fewer in number, growth is rapid since
the mid-2000s
Table 8.1 Currently available next-generation sequencers for genomics and transcriptomics. Cost
does not include library preparation and varies depending on time and region
Products
Read length
Data
Technology
Cost/Gb
Illumina Hiseq
2  100–150 bp
60 Gbp/lane
Sequencing by
synthesis
$50
Illumina Miseq
2  150–300 bp
9 Gbp/lane
Sequencing by
synthesis
$150
Ion Proton
200 bp
8 Gbp
Ion semiconductor
sequencing
$1000
Ion PGM
200 bp
0.8 Gbp
Ion semiconductor
sequencing
$1000
Pacbio RSII
5,000–10,000 bp
0.5 Gbp
Single molecule
real-time sequencing
$1000
2  ***bp represents sequence reads produced from pair-end library that allows us to sequence
both ends of a fragment. Gb represents giga basepairs for sequence reads
gene assembly and produce chimeric products. Gene expression frequencies are
calculated as reads per kilobase per million reads (RPKM). In contrast to the
genome sequence assembly, transcriptome data include different types of transcripts
including transcripts with alternative splicing. Therefore, an assembly algorithm
designed for a transcriptome but not for a genome is required (Martin and Wang
2011). In comparative genome and transcriptome analyses, it is also important to
distinguish orthologues and paralogues (Koonin 2005). Homologous genes would
be orthologues if they were separated by a speciation event, whereas they are

8
Genome and Transcriptome-Wide Research of Brain Evolution
191
paralogues if a duplication event separated them. Orthologues are useful not only
for phylogenetic analysis but also for functional annotation because orthologous
genes tend to have the same function. On the other hand, paralogues tend to have
different functions as duplicated genes are often redundant in species, and neo-
functionalization or sub-functionalization occurs to gain novel or substitute existing
functions (Ohno 1970, Stoltzfus 1999). One of the main motivations of meta-
transcriptome studies is to clarify the dynamics of gene regulation and interaction,
and in this respect discrimination between orthologues and paralogues and brief
annotations of genes are essential.
These NGS technologies and bioinformatics shed light on brain research
(Fig. 8.2). Regarding the comprehensive scale analysis of gene expressions,
microarray technologies based on DNA–DNA hybridization on designated probes
have been utilized so far. However, they can detect only gene expression intensities
but cannot identify sequence directly. In contrast, NGS can determine the sequence
of samples that lead to further detailed analysis of alternative splicing, methylation,
RNA editing, and micro-exons that are known to be related to brain function.
Fig. 8.2 Various applications of next-generation sequencer (NGS) technology in brain research.
Whole-genome sequencing is useful for structural rearrangements of chromosomes and copy
number variations. As whole-genome sequencing is expensive, exome sequencing that could
sequence only exon regions is useful to detect point mutations. Together with the transcriptome,
we could clarify the gene regulatory system working in the brain, such as alternative splicing, gene
fusion, and RNA editing

192
A. Ogura
For instance, alternative splicing (AS) contributes to the functional diversity of
most genes in multicellular organisms by producing various proteins by generating
multiple transcript isoforms from the same gene. This AS has a signiﬁcant role
in the brain as AS regulates the development of the brain; more than 20,000 AS
forms are functionarily regulated in the brain (Yeo et al. 2004, Meshorer et al. 2005,
Goymer 2007). Sequence analysis of genomic DNA is widely used to identify
responsible genes and mutations for certain phenotypes, such as single-nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs). There are various applications for NGS. Exome sequencing
is a method to sequence only the exon region by capturing probes to exons so that
we can quickly access gene information (Sarah et al. 2009). Exome sequencing has
advantages regarding cost and coverage quality. Whole-genome resequencing can
clarify noncoding regions of genomes that are known to be important for regulation
of the gene expression network. Sequence analysis of transcripts is also accepted
to understand the dynamics of gene expression proﬁles in cells and tissues that are
essential to understanding the higher layers of the living system. Phenotypes often
directly link to gene expression proﬁles. Micro-RNA (miRNA) and lincRNA (long
internecine noncoding RNA) are also targeted for RNA-seq analysis (Kapranov
et al. 2007). Research for gene regulatory systems has also been analyzed via NGS
technologies. ChIP-Seq is a technique to combine chromatin immunoprecipitation
and NGS to clarify protein–DNA interaction such as the target region of particular
transcription factors in the genome. As data generated from NGS are extensive,
bioinformatics approaches by utilizing high-end servers are required to understand
the functionality of genes working in the brain. Understanding the gene regulatory
network and interactions are critical targets for genomics and transcriptomics
approaches. For examination of the functional representation of such networks, it is
required to identify neighborhoods of functionally related genes, well-represented
pathways that can be highlighted which are functional in the environment. Adopting
a network analysis could identify node genes are mediating essential roles within
the network. Network analysis of this type can be performed using tools and
algorithms designed for RNA-seq studies, such as Cytoscape (Shannon et al. 2003)
and Ingenuity Pathways Analysis (Ingenuity® Systems).
8.2
Genome- and Transcriptome-Wide Research
on the Brain
Recent studies have made signiﬁcant achievements in ﬁnding genes related to
functions of the human brain. However, it is still difﬁcult to understand the
genetic basis of brain evolution and brain diversiﬁcation. By utilizing comparative
genomics and transcriptomics, which involves comparisons of gene sequences and
their expressions across many species, we could trace the evolutionary history of
genetic changes among animals. To understand brain evolution, gene expression
comparisons and genome structural variations between species are also essential.

8
Genome and Transcriptome-Wide Research of Brain Evolution
193
These evolutionary studies have become possible not only because of the availability
of large amounts of sequence data but also by the development of modern methods
and computational tools.
Genomics studies for the brain have increased lately. As of 2014, more than
25,000 research articles related to brain genomics were identiﬁed using a PubMed
title/abstract search under the keywords “genome” and “brain,” but the real number
of studies related to the brain will be even higher. Most of these studies were
published within the past 10 years, indicating that this ﬁeld of research has grown
rapidly (Fig. 8.1). This rapid increase was prompted by recent advancements in
next-generation sequencing (NGS) technologies and high-throughput methods for
genomic analysis (Table 8.1). Genomics offers a valuable approach to study the
functional and genetic diversity of animal brains; however, this approach cannot
provide information on active functional genes and gene regulatory networks in the
living systems. In fact, a growth rate of transcriptomics studies for brain function is
higher than that of genomics research, even though the number itself is much lower,
which might reﬂect the difﬁculties in performing a transcriptomic study in the brain.
8.2.1
Genomics Approach
To understand the evolutionary process of the animal brain, it is essential to identify
the biological basis of the genomic differences among various animal brains that
would be responsible for brain size, brain organization, brain development, brain
function, and behavior. There are several way to estimate regulatory sequences
in the genome to trace the evolutionary processes of animal brains. One is to
utilize sequence conservation across animal genomes, which is important for
controlling one regulatory network and gene expressions. Another approach is to
perform experiments to seek for binding sites of certain transcription factors and
by comparing binding information and spatial and temporal regulation of the gene
expression that is inscribed in the genome and is predictive of regulatory function.
Application of genomics to brain research varies, such as genome-wide asso-
ciation study (GWAS) for quantitative trait loci (QTLs) and variant analysis for
indels, which are underlying a particular phenotype in brain functions. GWAS is a
method of mapping QTLs that can link phenotypes to genotypes, usually conducted
by microarray analysis. GWAS is a popular approach for brain research so far,
and more than ten publications are frequently cited (Table 8.2). According to the
GWAS catalog developed by the European Molecular Biology Laboratory (http://
www.ebi.ac.uk/gwas/) (Fig. 8.3), more than 2000 QTLs related to brain function
have been identiﬁed so far. For example, GWAS analysis for Alzheimer’s disease
was performed using quality-controlled genotype and scan data including more than
620 K SNPs and found several new QTLs related to the disease (Table 8.2, Shen
et al. 2010). In another case, six genes or chromosomal regions were identiﬁed
by GWAS analysis that relates to the pathways involved in neurodevelopment and
response to stress (Table 8.2, Potkin et al. 2009). Thus, a genome-wide whole-brain

194
A. Ogura
Table 8.2 Selected publications with high numbers of citations regarding genomics and transcriptomics for brain research
Title
Authors
Year
Journal
Citation
An anatomically comprehensive atlas of the adult human brain
transcriptome
Hawrylycz MJ, Lein ES,
Guillozet-Bongaarts AL et al.
2012
Nature
312
Spatiotemporal transcriptome of the human brain
Kang HJ, Kawasawa YI,
Cheng F et al.
2011
Nature
448
Whole-transcriptome sequencing reveals gene expression and splicing
differences in brain regions affected by Alzheimer’s disease
Twine NA, Janitz K, Wilkins
MR et al.
2011
PLOS ONE
121
Divergence of human and mouse brain transcriptome highlights
Alzheimer disease pathways
Miller JA, Horvath S,
Geschwind DH.
2010
PNAS
154
Whole-genome association study of brain-wide imaging phenotypes for
identifying quantitative trait loci in MCI and AD: A study of the ADNI
cohort
Shen L, Kim S, Risacher SL
et al.
2010
Neuroimage
160
Genome-wide analysis reveals mechanisms modulating autophagy in
normal brain aging and in Alzheimer’s disease
Lipinski MM, Zheng B, Lu T
et al.
2010
PNAS
157
Brain function in carriers of a genome-wide supported bipolar disorder
variant
Erk S, Meyer-Lindenberg A,
Schnell K et al.
2010
Arch Gen Psychiatry
122
Functional and evolutionary insights into human brain development
through global transcriptome analysis
Johnson MB, Kawasawa YI,
Mason CE et al.
2009
Neuron
286
A genome-wide association study of schizophrenia using brain
activation as a quantitative phenotype
Potkin SG, Turner JA,
Guffanti G et al.
2009
Schizophr Bulletin
123
Transgenerational epigenetic programming of the brain transcriptome
and anxiety behavior
Skinner MK, Anway MD,
Savenkova MI et al.
2008
PLOS ONE
158
Evolution of the aging brain transcriptome and synaptic regulation
Loerch PM, Lu T, Dakin KA
et al.
2008
PLOS ONE
140
A transcriptome database for astrocytes, neurons, and oligodendrocytes:
a new resource for understanding brain development and function
Cahoy JD, Emery B, Kaushal
A et al.
2008
The Journal of
Neuroscience
1161
(continued)

8
Genome and Transcriptome-Wide Research of Brain Evolution
195
Table 8.2 (continued)
Title
Authors
Year
Journal
Citation
Functional organization of the transcriptome in human brain
Oldham MC, Konopka G,
Iwamoto K et al.
2008
Nature Neuroscience
308
HITS-CLIP yields genome-wide insights into brain alternative RNA
processing
Licatalosi DD, Mele A, Fak
JJ et al.
2008
Nature
622
Transcriptome-wide identiﬁcation of novel imprinted genes in neonatal
mouse brain
Wang X, Sun Q, McGrath SD
et al.
2008
PLOS ONE
145
Genome-wide atlas of gene expression in the adult mouse brain
Lein ES, Hawrylycz MJ, Ao
N, Ayres M et al.
2007
Nature
1809
From the genome to the proteome: uncovering peptides in the Apis brain
Hummon AB, Richmond TA,
Verleyen P et al.
2006
Science
198
High-resolution genome-wide mapping of genetic alterations in human
glial brain tumors
Bredel M, Bredel C, Juric D
et al.
2005
Cancer Research
140
A genome-wide in situ hybridization map of RNA-binding proteins
reveals anatomically restricted expression in the developing mouse brain
McKee AE, Minet E, Stern C
et al.
2005
BMC Dev Biology
177
Mouse brain organization revealed through direct genome-scale tf
expression analysis
Gray PA, Fu H, Luo P et al.
2004
Science
325
Sister grouping of chimpanzees and humans as revealed by
genome-wide phylogenetic analysis of brain gene expression proﬁles
Uddin M, Wildman DE, Liu
G et al.
2004
PLOS ONE
207
Blood–brain barrier genomics
Li JY, Boado RJ, Pardridge
WM.
2001
J Cerebral Blood Flow &
Metabolism
119
Rapid accumulation of genome rearrangements in liver but not in brain
of old mice
Dollé ME, Giese H, Hopkins
CL et al.
1997
Nature Genetics
205
Genetic correlates of brain aging on MRI and cognitive test measures: a
genome-wide association and linkage analysis in the Framingham Study
Seshadri S, DeStefano AL,
Au R et al.
2007
BMC Medical Genetics
140
(continued)

196
A. Ogura
Table 8.2 (continued)
Title
Authors
Year
Journal
Citation
The mouse blood–brain barrier transcriptome: a new resource for
understanding the development and function of brain endothelial cells
Daneman R, Zhou L, Agalliu
D et al.
2010
PLOS ONE
128
Genome-wide analysis reveals differences in brain gene expression
patterns associated with caste and reproductive status in honey bees
(Apis mellifera)
Grozinger CM1, Fan Y,
Hoover SE, Winston ML.
2007
Wiley Online Library
108
3’tag digital gene expression proﬁling of human brain and universal
reference RNA using Illumina Genome Analyzer
Asmann YW, Klee EW,
Thompson EA et al.
2009
BMC Genetics
104
Transcriptome analysis of channel catﬁsh (Ictalurus punctatus): genes
and expression proﬁle from the brain
Ju Z, Karsi A, Kocabas A
et al.
2000
Gene
100

8
Genome and Transcriptome-Wide Research of Brain Evolution
197
A
B
C
D
Useful web resources regarding brain genomics and transcriptomics.
A. GWAS catalog (https://www.ebi.ac.uk/gwas/)
B. Allen Brain Atlas (http://www.brain-map.org)
C. The Brain Initiative (http://braininitiative.nih.gov)
D. Human Brain Project (https://www.humanbrainproject.eu)
Fig. 8.3 Useful web resources and projects for brain research: useful web resources regarding
brain genomics and transcriptomics. (a) GWAS catalog (https://www.ebi.ac.uk/gwas/). (b) Allen
Brain Atlas (http://www.brain-map.org). (c) The Brain Initiative (http://braininitiative.nih.gov). (d)
Human Brain Project (https://www.humanbrainproject.eu)
search strategy could reveal novel candidate genes and loci for a speciﬁc diseases or
functions (Table 8.2, Lipinski et al. 2010; Twine et al. 2011; Erk et al. 2010; Bredel
et al. 2005; Li et al. 2001).
The variant analysis is an approach to detect nucleotide variation in individuals
by whole-exome sequencing (Fig. 8.2; Table 8.2). Mutations in somatic cells that
are caused by radiation, chemicals, and infection by viruses often have an effect
on epigenetic changes in a genome and alter physiological characteristics in cells
and tissues. These changes are a leading cause of cancer, and sequencing of these
responsible genes and regions can be a primary strategy for cancer research. The
number of reports is not so large up to 2015 as this technology is new to brain
research, but it should be increased shortly.

198
A. Ogura
The genome of somatic cells has been often regarded as static and unchanged.
However, many epigenetic changes have been accumulated. These epigenetic
changes cause diversiﬁcation and differentiation of cells and tissues, and neu-
ral cells can acquire characteristics to form the neuron and brain. The pri-
mary molecular mechanism of such epigenetic changes is methylation and his-
tone modiﬁcation. It has long been possible to survey these changes across
genomes, but recent technologies of sequencing made it possible to analyze
methylations and histone modiﬁcations across the whole genome by bisulﬁte
sequencing, ChIP-seq. The International Human Epigenome Consortium (IHEC)
(http://ihec-epigenomes.org) is an international consortium for studying the methy-
lome, that stands for all methylation in the genome, for 1000 kinds of cells in
the human, and 18 samples from adult or fetal brain have been studied already.
There are only a few studies for large-scale epigenetic analysis across species
so that it is a bit difﬁcult to trace evolutionary changes in an epigenomic sys-
tem so far.
8.2.2
Transcriptomics Approach
Transcriptomic approaches to understanding brain function are also often conducted
by many researchers (Table 8.2). Application of transcriptomics to brain research
is intensively carried out in model organisms including the human. Researchers
at the Allen Institute for Brain Science have reported a comprehensive study of
gene expression in the brain tissues obtained by laser microdissection (Table 8.4,
Hawrylycz et al. 2012). Their results allow us to compare gene expression proﬁles
between humans and other animals, and to conduct neurogenetic studies of normal
and abnormal human brain function (http://www.brain-map.org) (Fig. 8.3). Several
groups performed a transcriptome study for multiple brain regions and neocortical
areas of developing and adult human brains and found that 70–90 % of genes were
differentially regulated across brain regions or time (Table 8.4, Johnson et al. 2009;
Kang et al. 2011).
In other animals, such as mice and primates, transcriptomic studies are also
conducted to elucidate the developmental process and functions in the brain
(Table 8.2, Lein et al. 2007; McKee et al. 2005; Gray et al. 2004; Uddin et al.
2004). These data are valuable as we could compare gene expression proﬁles of
animals to identify genes and interactions responsible for the higher class of brain
functions.
The same as the genomics approach, transcriptomics is also a powerful tool to
identify genes responsible for disorders. To understand how brain aging has evolved,
Loerch et al. compared age-related gene expression proﬁles in the cortex of humans,
rhesus macaques, and mice by utilizing a microarray, and found that repression
of gene expression in the neuron is a key to understanding the evolution of brain
aging in humans and rhesus macaques (Table 8.2, Loerch et al. 2008). There are
many projects for brain transcriptomes, and outcomes of more than 3000 projects

8
Genome and Transcriptome-Wide Research of Brain Evolution
199
Table 8.3 Brain transcriptome projects
Species
Experiments
Run
Total size (MB)
Mus musculus
4479
5258
3; 857; 483
Homo sapiens
3560
4409
10; 106; 284
Rattus norvegicus
2770
2805
640; 853
Platynereis dumerilii
213
285
65; 297
Drosophila melanogaster
95
103
253; 679
Cerapachys biroi
90
90
155; 063
Rabies virus
84
84
21; 299
Macaca mulatta
83
83
92; 492
Pan troglodytes
59
59
70; 081
West Nile virus
44
58
16; 432
Bos taurus
39
43
129; 242
Meleagris gallopavo
39
39
23; 800
Mus musculus musculus
37
37
73; 383
Aedes aegypti
32
32
224; 134
Ovis aries
32
40
57; 042
Nothobranchius furzeri
31
31
42; 684
Macaca fascicularis
30
30
96; 457
Danio rerio
28
30
46; 656
Oryctolagus cuniculus
27
29
45; 204
Apis mellifera
26
198
64; 895
All other taxa
757
980
1; 943; 559
The number of brain transcriptome projects is collected from Sequence Read Archives (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/sra) with the search keyword “brain” with RNA sources, as of April 2015.
The column “species” is shown as represented in the database, although there are strange rows such
as Mus musculus and Mus musculus musculus, and viruses that should be the pathogen to animals.
The column “Run” represents the number of sequencing samples. Total size represents the total
length of sequence reads
are already submitted to the Sequence Read Archives (SRA) that are maintained
by National Center for Biotechnology Information, National Library of Medicine
(Table 8.3). These transcriptomics approaches reveals many genes that involve in
various functions in the brain (Table 8.4). These genes listed in Table 8.4 were
found to be functional in the brain through large-scale transcriptomics studies.
Most of those genes seem to be conserved only in humans and mice but not in
other primitive animals such as the fruit ﬂy and worm, because these genes are
mainly studied in the mouse so that there are few genes only found in human.
Transcriptomics using human cell lines can tell us about human brain-speciﬁc genes
shortly.

200
A. Ogura
Table 8.4 The list of genes related to brain functions and their conservation among animals
Gene
Description
H. sapiens ID
M. musculus ID
D. melanogaster ID
C. elegans ID
A. mellifera ID
References
DRD1
Dopamine receptor D1
ENSG00000184845
ENSMUSG00000021478
Hawrylycz MJ et al
DRD2
Dopamine receptor D2
ENSG00000149295
ENSMUSG00000032259
CELE_T14E8.3
Hawrylycz MJ et al
DRD3
Dopamine receptor D3
ENSG00000151577
ENSMUSG00000022705
CELE_K09G1.4
Hawrylycz MJ et al
DRD4
Dopamine receptor D4
ENSG00000069696
ENSMUSG00000025496
Hawrylycz MJ et al
DRD5
Dopamine receptor D5
ENSG00000169676
ENSMUSG00000039358
Hawrylycz MJ et al
TH
Tyrosine hydroxylase
ENSG00000180176
ENSMUSG00000000214
FLYBASE:FBgn0005626
CELE_B0432.5
Hawrylycz MJ et al
DOC2A
Double C2-like domains,
alpha
ENSG00000149927
Hawrylycz MJ et al
SLC6A2
Solute carrier family 6
(neurotransmitter
transporter), member 2
ENSG00000103546
ENSMUSG00000055368
FLYBASE:FBgn0034136
CELE_T23G5.5
Hawrylycz MJ et al
SLC6A3
Solute carrier family 6
(neurotransmitter
transporter), member 3
ENSG00000142319
ENSMUSG00000021609
Hawrylycz MJ et al
SLC18A1
Solute carrier family 18
(vesicular monoamine
transporter), member 1
ENSG00000036565
ENSMUSG00000036330
Hawrylycz MJ et al
SLC18A2
Solute carrier family 18
(vesicular monoamine
transporter), member 2
ENSG00000165646
ENSMUSG00000025094
FLYBASE:FBgn0260964
CELE_W01C8.6
Hawrylycz MJ et al
MAOA
Monoamine oxidase A
ENSG00000189221
ENSMUSG00000025037
Hawrylycz MJ et al
MAOB
Monoamine oxidase B
ENSG00000069535
ENSMUSG00000040147
Hawrylycz MJ et al
COMT
Catechol-O-
methyltransferase
ENSG00000093010
ENSMUSG00000000326
Hawrylycz MJ et al
DLGAP2
Discs, large (Drosophila)
homolog-associated
protein 2
ENSG00000198010
ENSMUSG00000047495
Hawrylycz MJ et al

8
Genome and Transcriptome-Wide Research of Brain Evolution
201
DLGAP3
Discs, large (Drosophila)
homolog-associated
protein 3
ENSG00000116544
ENSMUSG00000042388
Hawrylycz MJ et al
PDE2A
Phosphodiesterase 2A,
cGMP-stimulated
ENSG00000186642
ENSMUSG00000030653
Hawrylycz MJ et al
SYT1
Synaptotagmin I
ENSG00000067715
ENSMUSG00000035864
FLYBASE:FBgn0004242
CELE_F31E8.2
Hawrylycz MJ et al;
Oldham MC et al
SNAP25
Synaptosomal-associated
protein, 25 kDa
ENSG00000132639
ENSMUSG00000027273
FLYBASE:FBgn0266720
CELE_Y22F5A.3
Hawrylycz MJ et al
STX1A
Syntaxin 1A (brain)
ENSG00000106089
ENSMUSG00000007207
FLYBASE:FBgn0013343
CELE_F56A8.7
Hawrylycz MJ et al
HOMER1
Homer homolog 1
(Drosophila)
HPRD:09211
Hawrylycz MJ et al
VSNL1
Visinin-like 1
ENSG00000163032
Hawrylycz MJ et al
AMPH
Amphiphysin
ENSG00000078053
ENSMUSG00000021314
CELE_F58G6.1
Hawrylycz MJ et al
GABBR2
”-Aminobutyric acid
(GABA) B receptor, 2
ENSG00000136928
Hawrylycz MJ et al
NEFL
Neuroﬁlament, light
polypeptide
ENSG00000277586
Hawrylycz MJ et al
NEFM
Neuroﬁlament, medium
polypeptide
ENSG00000104722
ENSMUSG00000022054
Hawrylycz MJ et al
NEFH
Neuroﬁlament, heavy
polypeptide
ENSG00000100285
ENSMUSG00000020396
Hawrylycz MJ et al
ANK1
Ankyrin 1, erythrocytic
ENSG00000029534
ENSMUSG00000031543
Hawrylycz MJ et al
PLP1
Proteolipid protein 1
ENSG00000123560
ENSMUSG00000031425
Hawrylycz MJ et al;
Oldham MC et al
MOG
Myelin oligodendrocyte
glycoprotein
ENSG00000204655
ENSMUSG00000076439
Hawrylycz MJ et al;
Oldham MC et al
MBP
Myelin basic protein
ENSG00000197971
ENSMUSG00000041607
Hawrylycz MJ et al
(continued)

202
A. Ogura
Table 8.4 (continued)
Gene
Description
H. sapiens ID
M. musculus ID
D. melanogaster ID
C. elegans ID
A. mellifera ID
References
SCN1A
Sodium channel,
voltage-gated, type I, alpha
subunit
ENSG00000144285
ENSMUSG00000064329
Hawrylycz MJ et al
SCN1B
Sodium channel,
voltage-gated, type I, beta
subunit
ENSG00000105711
ENSMUSG00000019194
Hawrylycz MJ et al
TTC18
(CFAP70)
Tetratricopeptide repeat
domain 18 (cilia and ﬂagella
associated protein 70)
ENSG00000156042
ENSMUSG00000039543
Hawrylycz MJ et al
DLEC1
Deleted in lung and
esophageal cancer 1
ENSG00000008226
ENSMUSG00000038060
Hawrylycz MJ et al
DNALI1
Dynein, axonemal, light
intermediate chain 1
ENSG00000163879
ENSMUSG00000042707
FLYBASE:FBgn0037962
Hawrylycz MJ et al
TYROBP
TYRO protein tyrosine
kinase binding protein
ENSG00000011600
ENSMUSG00000030579
Hawrylycz MJ et al
C1QA
complement component 1, q
subcomponent, A chain
ENSG00000173372
ENSMUSG00000036887
Hawrylycz MJ et al
C1QB
Complement component 1, q
subcomponent, B chain
ENSG00000173369
ENSMUSG00000036905
Hawrylycz MJ et al
AQP4
Aquaporin 4
ENSG00000171885
ENSMUSG00000024411
FLYBASE:FBgn0015872
Hawrylycz MJ et al;
Oldham MC et al
HEPH
Hephaestin
ENSG00000089472
ENSMUSG00000031209
Hawrylycz MJ et al
VDAC1
Voltage-dependent anion
channel 1
ENSG00000213585
ENSMUSG00000020402
Hawrylycz MJ et al
CLTC
Clathrin, heavy chain (Hc)
ENSG00000141367
ENSMUSG00000047126
FLYBASE:FBgn0000319
CELE_T20G5.1
Hawrylycz MJ et al
RGS9
Regulator of G-protein
signaling 9
ENSG00000108370
ENSMUSG00000020599
Hawrylycz MJ et al

8
Genome and Transcriptome-Wide Research of Brain Evolution
203
RPL19
Ribosomal protein L19
ENSG00000108298
ENSMUSG00000017404
FLYBASE:FBgn0002607
Hawrylycz MJ et al
RPS26
Ribosomal protein S26
ENSG00000197728
ENSMUSG00000025362
FLYBASE:FBgn0261597
CELE_F39B2.6
Hawrylycz MJ et al
EEF1B2
Eukaryotic translation
elongation factor 1 beta 2
ENSG00000114942
ENSMUSG00000025967
FLYBASE:FBgn0028737
CELE_F54H12.6
Hawrylycz MJ et al
ENPP2
ectonucleotide pyrophos-
phatase/phosphodiesterase
2
ENSG00000136960
ENSMUSG00000022425
Hawrylycz MJ et al;
Oldham MC et al
PCDH11Y
Protocadherin 11 Y-linked
ENSG00000099715
Kang HJ et al
RPS4Y1
Ribosomal protein S4,
Y-linked 1
ENSG00000279950
Kang HJ et al
USP9Y
Ubiquitin0speciﬁc peptidase
9, Y-linked
ENSG00000114374
ENSMUSG00000069044
Kang HJ et al
DDX3Y
DEAD (Asp-Glu-Ala-Asp)
box helicase 3, Y-linked
ENSG00000067048
ENSMUSG00000069045
CELE_Y54E10A.9
Kang HJ et al
NLGN4Y
Neuroligin 4, Y-linked
ENSG00000165246
FLYBASE:FBgn0031866
CELE_C40C9.5
Kang HJ et al
UTY
Ubiquitously transcribed
tetratricopeptide repeat
containing, Y-linked
ENSG00000183878
ENSMUSG00000068457
Kang HJ et al
EIF1AY
Eukaryotic translation
initiation factor 1A, Y-linked
ENSG00000198692
FLYBASE:FBgn0026250
CELE_H06H21.3
Kang HJ et al
ZFY
Zinc-ﬁnger protein, Y-linked
ENSG00000067646
Kang HJ et al
ZFX
Zinc-ﬁnger protein, X-linked
ENSG00000005889
ENSMUSG00000079509
Kang HJ et al
MAG
Myelin-associated
glycoprotein
ENSG00000105695
ENSMUSG00000036634
Oldham MC et al
OLIG2
Oligodendrocyte lineage
transcription factor 2
ENSG00000205927
ENSMUSG00000039830
Oldham MC et al
(continued)

204
A. Ogura
Table 8.4 (continued)
Gene
Description
H. sapiens ID
M. musculus ID
D. melanogaster ID
C. elegans ID
A. mellifera ID
References
MOBP
Myelin-associated
oligodendrocyte basic
protein
ENSG00000168314
ENSMUSG00000032517
Oldham MC et al
CNP
2’,3’-Cyclic nucleotide
30-phosphodiesterase
ENSG00000173786
ENSMUSG00000006782
Oldham MC et al
GFAP
Glial ﬁbrillary acidic protein
ENSG00000131095
ENSMUSG00000020932
Oldham MC et al
GJA1
Gap junction protein, alpha
1, 43 kDa
ENSG00000152661
ENSMUSG00000050953
Oldham MC et al
GLUL
Glutamate-ammonia ligase
ENSG00000135821
ENSMUSG00000026473
Oldham MC et al
GLUD1
Glutamate dehydrogenase 1
ENSG00000148672
ENSMUSG00000021794
FLYBASE:FBgn0001098
CELE_ZK829.4
Oldham MC et al
SLC1A2
Solute carrier family 1 (glial
high afﬁnity glutamate
transporter), member 2
ENSG00000110436
ENSMUSG00000005089
CELE_C12D12.2
Oldham MC et al
MAP2
Microtubule-associated
protein 2
ENSG00000078018
ENSMUSG00000015222
Oldham MC et al
MAP1B
Microtubule-associated
protein 1B
ENSG00000131711
ENSMUSG00000052727
Oldham MC et al
NRXN1
Neurexin 1
ENSG00000179915
ENSMUSG00000024109
CELE_C29A12.4
Oldham MC et al
SLC1A1
Solute carrier family 1
(neuronal/epithelial high
afﬁnity glutamate
transporter, system Xag),
member 1
ENSG00000106688
ENSMUSG00000024935
Oldham MC et al
NRCAM
Neuronal cell adhesion
molecule
ENSG00000091129
ENSMUSG00000020598
FLYBASE:FBgn0264975
CELE_Y54G2A.25
Oldham MC et al

8
Genome and Transcriptome-Wide Research of Brain Evolution
205
PLLP
Plasmolipin
ENSG00000102934
ENSMUSG00000031775
Oldham MC et al
MAL
Mal, T-cell differentiation
protein
ENSG00000172005
ENSMUSG00000027375
Oldham MC et al
HSPA2
Heat shock 70-kDa protein 2
ENSG00000126803
ENSMUSG00000059970
Oldham MC et al
TF
Transferrin
ENSG00000091513
ENSMUSG00000032554
Oldham MC et al
GPR37
G-protein-coupled receptor
37 (endothelin receptor type
B-like)
HPRD:03992
Oldham MC et al
ENPP2
Ectonucleotide pyrophos-
phatase/phosphodiesterase
2
ENSG00000136960
ENSMUSG00000022425
Oldham MC et al
FA2H
Fatty acid 2-hydroxylase
ENSG00000103089
ENSMUSG00000033579
FLYBASE:FBgn0050502
CELE_C25A1.5
Oldham MC et al
C11orf9
(MYRF)
Myelin regulatory facto
ENSG00000124920
ENSMUSG00000036098
Oldham MC et al
AHCYL1
Adenosyl
homocysteinase-like 1
ENSG00000168710
ENSMUSG00000027893
Oldham MC et al
NTRK2
Neurotrophic tyrosine
kinase, receptor, type 2
ENSG00000148053
ENSMUSG00000055254
Oldham MC et al
SOX9
SRY (sex-determining region
Y)-box 9
ENSG00000125398
ENSMUSG00000000567
Oldham MC et al
PDLIM5
PDZ and LIM domain 5
ENSG00000163110
ENSMUSG00000028273
Oldham MC et al
PPAP2B
Phosphatidic acid
phosphatase type 2B
ENSG00000162407
ENSMUSG00000028517
Oldham MC et al
PLSCR4
Phospholipid scramblase 4
ENSG00000114698
ENSMUSG00000032377
Oldham MC et al
TP53BP2
Tumor protein p53 binding
protein 2
ENSG00000143514
ENSMUSG00000026510
Oldham MC et al
METTL7A
Methyltransferase-like 7A
ENSG00000185432
ENSMUSG00000054619
Oldham MC et al
PREPL
Prolyl endopeptidase-like
ENSG00000138078
ENSMUSG00000024127
Oldham MC et al
(continued)

206
A. Ogura
Table 8.4 (continued)
Gene
Description
H. sapiens ID
M. musculus ID
D. melanogaster ID
C. elegans ID
A. mellifera ID
References
SYNJ1
Synaptojanin 1
ENSG00000159082
ENSMUSG00000022973
FLYBASE:FBgn0034691
CELE_JC8.10
Oldham MC et al
TPD52
Tumor protein D52
ENSG00000076554
ENSMUSG00000027506
Oldham MC et al
G3BP2
GTPase-activating protein
(SH3 domain) binding
protein 2
ENSG00000138757
ENSMUSG00000029405
Oldham MC et al
YWHAZ
Tyrosine 3-
monooxygenase/tryptophan
5-monooxygenase activation
protein, zeta
ENSG00000164924
ENSMUSG00000022285
FLYBASE:FBgn0004907
CELE_F52D10.3
Oldham MC et al
PAFAH1B1
Platelet-activating factor
acetylhydrolase 1b,
regulatory subunit 1
(45 kDa)
ENSG00000007168
ENSMUSG00000020745
CELE_T03F6.5
Oldham MC et al
GABRG2
”-Aminobutyric acid
(GABA) A receptor, gamma
2
ENSG00000113327
ENSMUSG00000020436
Oldham MC et al
SCAMP1
Secretory carrier membrane
protein 1
HPRD:06072
ENSMUSG00000021687
FLYBASE:FBgn0040285
CELE_M01D7.2
Oldham MC et al
ANK2
Ankyrin 2, neuronal
ENSG00000145362
Oldham MC et al
GLRB
Glycine receptor, beta
ENSG00000109738
ENSMUSG00000028020
FLYBASE:FBgn0003011
Oldham MC et al
CD24
CD24 molecule
ENSG00000272398
Oldham MC et al
DPYSL3
Dihydropyrimidinase-like 3
ENSG00000113657
ENSMUSG00000024501
Oldham MC et al
ASCL1
Achaete-scute family bHLH
transcription factor 1
ENSG00000139352
ENSMUSG00000020052
Oldham MC et al
IQCG
IQ motif containing G
ENSG00000114473
ENSMUSG00000035578
Oldham MC et al
STK38L
Serine/threonine kinase 38
like
ENSG00000211455
ENSMUSG00000001630
CELE_R11G1.4
Oldham MC et al
CETN2
Centrin, EF-hand protein, 2
HPRD:02051
ENSMUSG00000031347
FLYBASE:FBgn0040010
Oldham MC et al

8
Genome and Transcriptome-Wide Research of Brain Evolution
207
FLJ22167
(TMEM231)
Transmembrane protein 231
ENSG00000205084
ENSMUSG00000031951
Oldham MC et al
NEK1
NIMA-related kinase 1
ENSG00000137601
ENSMUSG00000031644
Oldham MC et al
NPC1
Niemann–Pick disease, type
C1
ENSG00000141458
ENSMUSG00000024413
FLYBASE:FBgn0024320
Oldham MC et al
PMP22
Peripheral myelin protein 22
ENSG00000109099
ENSMUSG00000018217
Oldham MC et al
CRYAB
Crystallin, alpha B
ENSG00000109846
ENSMUSG00000032060
Oldham MC et al
PRRG1
Proline-rich Gla
(G-carboxyglutamic acid) 1
ENSG00000130962
ENSMUSG00000047996
Oldham MC et al
TUBB2B
Tubulin, beta 2B class IIb
ENSG00000137285
ENSMUSG00000045136
FLYBASE:FBgn0003889
CELE_ZK154.3
Oldham MC et al
SLC1A3
Solute carrier family 1 (glial
high afﬁnity glutamate
transporter), member 3
ENSG00000079215
ENSMUSG00000005360
CELE_Y53C12A.2
Oldham MC et al
PON2
Paraoxonase 2
ENSG00000105854
Oldham MC et al
SDC4
Syndecan 4
ENSG00000124145
ENSMUSG00000017009
Oldham MC et al
EDG1
(S1PR1)
Sphingosine-1-phosphate
receptor 1
ENSG00000170989
ENSMUSG00000045092
Oldham MC et al
MAPK1
Mitogen-activated protein
kinase 1
ENSG00000100030
ENSMUSG00000063358
FLYBASE:FBgn0003256
CELE_F43C1.2
Oldham MC et al
FGF12
Fibroblast growth factor 12
ENSG00000114279
Oldham MC et al
NUDT21
Nudix (nucleoside
diphosphate linked moiety
X)-type motif 21
ENSG00000167005
FLYBASE:FBgn0035987
CELE_F43G9.5
Oldham MC et al
RAB5A
RAB5A, member RAS
oncogene family
ENSG00000144566
ENSMUSG00000017831
CELE_F26H9.6
Oldham MC et al
DNM1L
Dynamin 1-like
ENSG00000087470
ENSMUSG00000022789
FLYBASE:FBgn0026479
CELE_T12E12.4
Oldham MC et al
SYN2
Synapsin II
ENSG00000157152
ENSMUSG00000009394
Oldham MC et al
(continued)

208
A. Ogura
Table 8.4 (continued)
Gene
Description
H. sapiens ID
M. musculus ID
D. melanogaster ID
C. elegans ID
A. mellifera ID
References
PITPNA
Phosphatidylinositol
transfer protein, alpha
ENSG00000174238
ENSMUSG00000017781
Oldham MC et al
PLTP
Phospholipid transfer
protein
ENSG00000100979
ENSMUSG00000017754
Oldham MC et al
TuJ1
Not found
Oldham MC et al
ALDH1L1
Aldehyde dehydrogenase
1 family, member L1
ENSG00000144908
ENSMUSG00000030088
CELE_F36H1.6
Oldham MC et al
AKH
Adipokinetic hormone
FLYBASE:FBgn0004552
BEEBASE:GB53230
Hummon AB et al
AST
Allatostatin
FLYBASE:FBgn0015591
BEEBASE:GB47928
Hummon AB et al
Apid1
Apidaecin 1
BEEBASE:GB47546
Hummon AB et al
Burs
Bursicon
FLYBASE:FBgn0038901
BEEBASE:GB45446
Hummon AB et al
DH31
Diuretic hormone 31
FLYBASE:FBgn0032048
BEEBASE:GB47217
Hummon AB et al
CRZ
Corazonin
FLYBASE:FBgn0013767
BEEBASE:GB53951
Hummon AB et al
CCAP
Crustacean cardioactive
peptide
FLYBASE:FBgn0039007
BEEBASE:GB50604
Hummon AB et al
ITP
Ion-transport peptide
BEEBASE:GB47095
Hummon AB et al
ETH
Ecdysis-triggering
hormone
FLYBASE:FBgn0028738
EEBASE:GB40094
Hummon AB et al
EH
Eclosion hormone
FLYBASE:FBgn0000564
BEEBASE:GB49646
Hummon AB et al
FLRF
FLRFamide-like
FLYBASE:FBgn0000715
Hummon AB et al
LOC409241
IDLSRFYGHFNT-
containing neuropeptide
(prohormone-4)
BEEBASE:GB45263
Hummon AB et al

8
Genome and Transcriptome-Wide Research of Brain Evolution
209
INS
Insulin
ENSG00000254647
ENSMUSG00000000215
Hummon AB et al
LOC726472 ITGQGNRIF-containing
neuropeptide
(prohormone-3)
BEEBASE:GB50651
Hummon AB et al
LOC725616 LRNQLDIGDLQ-
containing neuropeptide
(prohormone-1)
BEEBASE:GB43201
Hummon AB et al
LOC409634 MVPVPVHHMADELL-
RNGPDTVI-containing
neuropeptide
BEEBASE:GB45265
Hummon AB et al
MS
Myosuppressin
FLYBASE:FBgn0011581
Hummon AB et al
NPF
Neuropeptide F
FLYBASE:FBgn0027109
BEEBASE:GB50693
Hummon AB et al
NPFF
Neuropeptide FF-amide
peptide precursor
ENSG00000139574
ENSMUSG00000023052
Hummon AB et al
Neuroparsin Not found
Hummon AB et al
NPLP-1
Neuropeptide-like
precursor 1
FLYBASE:FBgn0035092
Hummon AB et al
NPLP-2
Neuropeptide-like
precursor 2
FLYBASE:FBgn0040813
Hummon AB et al
NPLP-3
Neuropeptide-like
precursor 3
FLYBASE:FBgn0042201
Hummon AB et al
LOC409314 NVPIYQEPRF-
containing neuropeptide
(prohormone-2)
BEEBASE:GB44988
Hummon AB et al
Ork
Orcokinin
Not found
Hummon AB et al
(continued)

210
A. Ogura
Table 8.4 (continued)
Gene
Description
H. sapiens ID
M. musculus ID
D. melanogaster ID
C. elegans ID
A. mellifera ID
References
Capa
AFGLLTYPRIa-
containing
(Periviscerokinin)
FLYBASE:FBgn0039722
Hummon AB et al
PBAN
Pheromone
biosynthesis-activating
neuropeptide
BEEBASE:GB46057
Hummon AB et al
PDH
Pigment-dispersing
hormone
Not found
Hummon AB et al
RFamide-
like1
Not found
Not found
Hummon AB et al
RFamide-
like2
Not found
Not found
Hummon AB et al
sNPF
Short neuropeptide F
precursor
FLYBASE:FBgn0032840
Hummon AB et al
SIFa
SIFamide
FLYBASE:FBgn0053527
Hummon AB et al
SK
Sulfakinin
FLYBASE:FBgn0000500
Hummon AB et al
TK
Tachykinin
FLYBASE:FBgn0037976
BEEBASE:GB49248
Hummon AB et al
LOC724564
TWKSPDIVIRFa-
containing
neuropeptide
BEEBASE:GB41295
Hummon AB et al
FOXP2
Forkhead box P2
ENSG00000128573
ENSMUSG00000029563
Preuss TM

8
Genome and Transcriptome-Wide Research of Brain Evolution
211
8.3
Remarks
There are large projects for elucidating the brain and its function from various
angles including genomics and transcriptomics. One is the BRAIN Initiative (Brain
Research through Advancing Innovative Neurotechnologies) that was announced
on April 2, 2013, as a national project by the Obama administration, the White
House Ofﬁce of Science and Technology Policy (OSTP), as part of a broader White
House Neuroscience Initiative (http://braininitiative.nih.gov)(Fig. 8.3). This project
aims at the development of novel technologies for understanding brain function
and brain disorders such as Alzheimer’s and Parkinson’s disease. The other is the
Human Brain Project led by EU that aims to help researchers clarify brain functions
and disorders (https://www.humanbrainproject.eu) (Fig. 8.3). These projects pursue
a “functional connectome” comprising genomics as well as other experimental
approaches that would be developed in the progress of the projects. Japan and
China also focus on brain research as national projects in various research ﬁelds
such as medical science, neuroscience, computer science, and life sciences. With
these projects, a huge amount of data including genomics and transcriptomics will
be available, so that we could prepare a novel diagram to understand brain evolution
and diversiﬁcation.
References
Adams MD et al (1991) Complementary DNA sequencing: expressed sequence tags and human
genome project. Science 252(5013):1651–1656
Adams MD et al (2000) The genome sequence of Drosophila melanogaster. Science
287(5461):2185–2195
Albertin CB et al (2012) Cephalopod genomics: a plan of strategies and organization stand.
Genomic Sci 7:175–188
Blattner FR et al (1997) The complete genome sequence of Escherichia coli K-12. Science
277:1453–1462
Cahoy JD et al (2008) A transcriptome database for astrocytes, neurons, and oligodendrocytes: a
new resource for understanding brain development and function. J Neurosci 28(1):264–278
Carro MS et al (2010) The transcriptional network for mesenchymal transformation of brain
tumours. Nature 463:318–325
Chin J et al (2014) SMRT® sequencing solutions for large genomes and transcriptomes. J Biomol
Tech 25(suppl):S15
Goffeau A et al (1997) The yeast genome directory. Nature 387:5–105
Goymer P (2007) Alternative splicing switches on the brain. Nat Rev Genet 8:572
Hang G et al (2014) Genomics in neurological disorders. Genomics Proteomics Bioinformatics
12(4):156–163
International Human Genome Sequencing Consortium (2001) Initial sequencing and analysis of
the human genome. Nature 409(6822):860–921
Kang HJ et al (2011) Spatio-temporal transcriptome of the human brain. Nature 478:483–489
Kapranov P et al (2007) RNA maps reveal new RNA classes and a possible function for pervasive
transcription. Science 316(5830):1484–1488

212
A. Ogura
Khaitovich P et al (2005) Parallel patterns of evolution in the genomes and transcriptomes of
humans and chimpanzees. Science 309:1850
Koonin EV (2005) Orthologs, paralogs, and evolutionary genomics. Annu Rev Genet 39:309–338
Levene MJ (2003) Zero-mode waveguides for single-molecule analysis at high concentrations.
Science 299(5607):682–686
Margulies M et al (2005) Genome sequencing in microfabricated high-density picolitre reactors.
Nature 437:376–380
Martin JA, Wang Z (2011) Next-generation transcriptome assembly. Nat Rev Genet 12:671–682
Meshorer E et al (2005) Chronic cholinergic imbalances promote brain diffusion and transport
abnormalities. FASEB J 19:910–922
Miller JR et al (2010) Assembly algorithms for next-generation sequencing data. Genomics
95(6):315–327
Ohno S (1970) Evolution by gene duplication. Springer, Berlin/New York
Sarah BN et al (2009) Targeted capture and massively parallel sequencing of 12 human exomes.
Nature 461:272–276
Schuster SC (2008) Next-generation sequencing transforms today’s biology. Nat Methods 5(1):16–
18
Shannon P et al (2003) Cytoscape: a software environment for integrated models of biomolecular
interaction networks. Genome Res 13:2498–2504
Stoltzfus A (1999) On the possibility of constructive neutral evolution. J Mol Evol 49(2):169–181
The C. elegans Sequencing Consortium (1998) Genome sequence of the nematode C. elegans: a
platform for investigating biology. Science 282:2012–2018
Yeo G et al (2004) Variation in alternative splicing across human tissues. Genome Biol 5:R74

Part III
Cognitive Systems

Chapter 9
The Origin of Vertebrate Brain Centers
Yasunori Murakami
Abstract Vertebrate brains have diversiﬁed into a variety of forms, probably
because of lineage-speciﬁc modiﬁcations of the neural tube. By contrast, the
anteroposterior arrangement of brain compartments from the telencephalon to the
rhombencephalon is observed in all extant vertebrates, and the stereotyped frame-
work of longitudinal and commissural tracts are also conserved among vertebrates.
Thus, vertebrate brains are thought to have inherited their basic organization in
the course of evolution, although the size and functions of brain subregions may
have diverged in different vertebrate lineages. In this evolutionary process, spatially
and temporally regulated gene expression is thought to have a crucial role. Recent
evolutionary developmental biology (Evo-Devo) studies using bilateral animals
suggested that combinatory expression of regulatory genes which are involved in
the patterning of the neural tube may be inherited from an early stage of animal
evolution. By contrast, integrative centers including the cerebellum, mesencephalon,
and telencephalon are thought to have been established in vertebrates as an
evolutionary novelty.
Keywords Brain centers • Central nervous system • Cyclostomes • Develop-
ment • Gene expression • Lamprey • Vertebrates • Telencephalon
9.1
Introduction
Vertebrate brains have evolved a variety of forms in each group to adapt to many
environments. In particular, the relative size of integrative centers in the brain
appears to link to the physiology or body morphology of animals. For example,
sharks or rays, which are sensitive to chemicals dissolved in water, possess a well-
developed olfactory bulb to process olfactory information, and birds, which mainly
use visual cues in searching for prey, have a large orbit and well-organized optic
tectum in the midbrain, which have an important integrative role for the visual
Y. Murakami ()
Graduate School of Science and Engineering, Ehime University, 2-3 Bunkyo cho, Matsuyama,
Ehime 790-8577, Japan
e-mail: muakami.yasunori.mu@ehime-u.ac.jp
© Springer Japan KK 2017
S. Shigeno et al. (eds.), Brain Evolution by Design, Diversity and Commonality
in Animals, DOI 10.1007/978-4-431-56469-0_9
215

216
Y. Murakami
Fig. 9.1 Schematic drawings of vertebrate brains showing their diversiﬁed morphology. Brain
anatomy is based on Nieuwenhuys 1997 and Witmer et al. (2003)
system (Fig. 9.1). Thus, it is important to note that the morphology and function
of brain centers in vertebrates may have evolved symbiotically with other body
elements such as the skeletal, muscular, and vascular systems.
Conversely, vertebrate brains also represent a conserved organization among
groups. Namely, the anteroposterior arrangement of brain compartments includ-
ing the telencephalon, diencephalon, midbrain (mesencephalon), and hindbrain
(rhombencephalon) are conserved in all extant vertebrates (Fig. 9.2). In addition
to brain compartments, many longitudinal and commissural neuronal circuits
connecting brain regions in the central nervous system (CNS) are also highly
conserved in vertebrates. Thus, vertebrate brains are thought to have inherited their
basic organization during the course of evolution, whereas the size and functions of
brain subregions may have diverged in different lineages depending on the adaptive
radiation of vertebrates. Modiﬁcation of the brain could arise from small changes in
conserved developmental mechanisms during embryogenesis.
In this chapter, we search for the origin of the basic organization of the brain
regions and for the modiﬁcation process in the early stage of vertebrate evolution.
To reveal these evolutionary processes, we focused mainly on the cyclostomes (lam-
preys and hagﬁshes), which diversiﬁed from the jawed vertebrate (gnathostomes)
lineage in the early evolutionary period. By comparing the brains of cyclostomes
and gnathostomes, we hope we can identify which part of the brain is ancestral
(plesiomorphic) or derivative (apomorphic), and discuss possible evolutionary

9
The Origin of Vertebrate Brain Centers
217
Telencephalon
Diencephalon
Mesencephalon
Rhombencephalon
Olfactory 
epithelium
Olfactory 
epithelium
Xm
VIII
Dorsal root ganglia
Optic tectum
Tegmentum
,VWKPXV
Thalamus
Hypothalmus
Neural crest-derived 
sensory neurons
Placode-derived 
sensory neurons
Neural tube-derived 
motor neurons
Neural tube-derived 
sensory neurons
V
o
I
II
III
VII
VI
IX
X
(\H
29
Vomeronasal
epithelium
Vomeronasal
epithelium
9,,J
,;J
;J
Nasal placode
9J
Epibranchial placodes
Otic and lateral line placodes
'
$
0
3
Trigeminal 
placode
Profundal 
placode
D
S
Sn
Cerebellum
Epiphysis
vestibulo-cochlear and
lateral line ganglia
vestibulo-cochlear and
lateral line ganglia
Synpathetic chain
Pallium
Subpallium
Spinal cord
Spinal motor neuron
IXm
VI
VIIm
Vm
IV
III
Terminal
nerve
MeV
Naris
Teeth
Lingual organ
Notochord
Tectal cartilages
Gill pouches
Arcualia
Myosepta
Fin
Anterior olfactory lobe
Central optic lobe
Posterior otic lobe
Eyebar
Eye
Gut  and oesophagus
Morphology of Tullimonstrum
A
B
Fig. 9.2 (a) Basic organization of developing vertebrate brain. Subregions of the neural tube and
developmental origin of neurons. (b) Morphology of Tullimonstrum (After McCoy et al. 2016).
OV otic vesicle, a anterior lateral line nerve, A ganglion of the anterior lateral line nerve, D
dorsal ganglion of the anterior lateral line nerve, M ganglion of the middle lateral line nerve, MeV
mesencephalic trigeminal nucleus, p posterior lateral line nerve, P ganglion of the posterior lateral
line nerve, Sn spinal nerves, 0 terminal nerve, I olfactory nerve, II optic nerve, III oculomotor
nerve, IV trochlear nerve, V trigeminal nerve, VI abducens nerve, VII facial nerve, VIII cochlear
nerve, IX glossopharyngeal nerve, X vagus nerve
processes in the brain developmental programs that led to the diversiﬁcation of the
vertebrate brain.
9.2
Origin of Vertebrate-Speciﬁc Traits
The brains of protochordates (tunicates and amphioxus) and vertebrates share many
fundamental features (see Chap. 7). In addition to the neural tube, tissues giving rise
to the neural crest, the mid-hindbrain boundary (MHB, also known as the isthmic
organizer; Fig. 9.3), and neurogenic placodes have been identiﬁed in tunicates
(Mazet et al. 2005). Because chordates and vertebrates share several orthologous
genes specifying the vertebrate nervous system, new vertebrate-speciﬁc structures

218
Y. Murakami
Fig. 9.3 (a) Development of the neural tube. Dermal ectoderm differentiates into the neural plate
by the signal from the notochord. Then, neural plate invaginates to form the neural tube. The
lateral wall of the neural tube then enlarged and differentiates into brain vesicles and the internal
cavity, which subsequently will be ﬁlled with cerebrospinal ﬂuid and gives rise to ventricles. (b)
Basic organization of the developing CNS. Developing brain is subdivided into series of segmental
units called rhombomres (r1–r8) and prosomeres (p; see below). Mid-hindbrain boundary (MHB)
locates between mesencephalon and metencephalon (MHB is also known as the ithmic organizer).
Zona limitans intrathalamica (Zli) lies in the diencephalon primordium between prosomere2 (p2)
and p3. Anterior neural ridge (ANR) or commissural plate (CP) locates in a rostral end of the
telencephalon primordium. EP epiphysis, LGE lateral medial ganglionic eminence, MGE medial
ganglionic eminence, OT optic tectum, PE parietal eye, TS torus semicircularis, II optic nerve, Vn
trigeminal nerve root, VIIn facial nerve root
may have evolved through co-option of additional copies of genes into existing
gene networks (Ohno 1970; Holland 2013). In addition, whole-genome duplication
(WGD) events appear to have occurred several times in vertebrate evolution: the
common ancestor of vertebrates, cyclostomes, chondrosteans, and teleosts (Sidow
1996; Miyata and Suga 2001; Abi-Rached et al. 2002; McLysaght et al. 2002;
Meyer and Van de Peer 2005; Crow et al. 2012). These events may have provided
additional duplicated genes or enhancer elements for preexisting gene networks and
accelerated vertebrate diversiﬁcation.

9
The Origin of Vertebrate Brain Centers
219
9.3
Brains of Early Vertebrates
The vertebrate nervous system can be divided into the CNS and the peripheral
nervous system (PNS), with the CNS divided further into the brain and the spinal
cord (Fig. 9.2). A comparative approach using fossil records sometimes provides
important insights into brain evolution because well-preserved fossils indicate
signs of nervous system morphology. Recent studies identiﬁed the earliest verte-
brates, Myllokunmingia fengjiaoa, Haikouichthys ercaicunensis, and Metaspriggina
walcotti, from sediment of the Cambrian period (Shu et al. 2003; Butler and
Hodos 2005; Morris and Caron 2014). Thus, the origin of vertebrates may date
back 540 million years. Based on morphological characters such as paired eyes,
segmented myotomes, a series of pharyngeal arches, and undifferentiated jaws,
these animals are classiﬁed as agnathans (jawless animals). It is important to note
that signs of eyes or nasal pits imply the presence of neurogenic placodes, which
give rise to sensory cells, and the evidence of pharyngeal arches also indicates the
presence of neural crest cells, which produce mesenchymal and skeletal elements
in the craniofacial region. Some fossil osteostracans, which possess a skeletal head
shield, have preserved casts of many internal organs, including the brain. A fossil
specimen of Norselaspis, a kind of osteostracan that inhabited Earth during the
Devonian period, presents remarkable signs of both a CNS and a PNS (Janvier
2002). Furthermore, recent advanced techniques using synchrotron radiation X-ray
tomography or propagation phase-contrast synchrotron microtomography images
enable us to see the brain cavity in the skull without disturbing fossils, and we
can reconstruct the external morphology of the ancient brain (Witmer et al. 2003;
Witmer and Ridgely 2009; Rowe et al. 2011; Balanoff et al. 2013; Tanaka et al.
2013; Cong et al. 2014). Using this new technique, the brain morphology of Shuyu,
one of the earliest and most primitive galeaspid genera, has been reported (Gai et
al. 2011). The brain of Shuyu shows signs of cerebral hemispheres with olfactory
bulbs and the earliest evidence for a clear separation of the olfactory organs from
the hypophysial duct. Recently, Dupret and colleagues argued that the morphology
of brains appears to be changed in crown gnathostomes (Dupret et al. 2014), that
is, telencephalons extend anteriorly in these lineages (Fig. 9.4). This extension
may possibly result from a modiﬁcation of the developmental position of the nasal
and hypophysial placodes: a short telencephalon was associated with separate but
closely spaced nasal and hypophysial placodes, whereas a long telencephalon could
be supported and protected by a horizontal shelf that was created between the nasal
sacs and hypophysis.
Although endocast analysis provides valuable insights into the size and external
morphology of brains, as just noted, the brain cast sometimes can provide an
overestimate of the size of the brain because of the presence of space between
the brain and bone (and meninges) in the live condition. In addition, we cannot
identify the internal structures (cellular organization and neuronal connections) of
ancient brains. A possible approach is comparative analyses of extant animals.
If particular traits are shared by both groups, they may be inherited from a
common ancestor of the two groups of vertebrates and hence may be plesiomorphic

220
Y. Murakami
Cyclostomes
T
D
R
C
T
D
R
C
T
D
R
O
O
O
C
T
D
R
O
Lamprey
Hagﬁsh
Shark
Polypterus
T
D
R
O
T
D
R
O
T
D
R
O
Kujdanowiaspis
Shuyu
Osteostracans
Romundina
Establishment of jaws
Anterior expansion of the telencephalon
Placoderms
T：Telencephalon
D：Diencephalon
O：Optic tectum
C：Cerebellum
R：Rhombencephalon
Cyclostomes
Placoderms
Actinopterygians
Chondrichthyans
Exit of the vagus nerve
Exit of the optic nerve
Fig. 9.4 Brain of early vertebrates: schematic drawings of brains of agnathans (cyclostomes and
osteostracans) and gnathostomes (placoderms, actinopterygians, and chondrichthyans). Brains are
aligned based on the position of optic and vagus nerve exits. Telencephalons of gnathostomes
extend anteriorly before the diversiﬁcation between actinopterygians and chondrichthyans (After
Dupret et al. 2014)
characters. Using these morphological characters, we could reconstruct the ancient
brain architectures. In addition, recent studies have shown that various transcription
factors and morphogens are expressed in embryonic mouse brains in a region-
speciﬁc manner (Shimamura et al. 1995; Wilson and Rubenstein 2000; Mallamaci
and Stoykova 2006; Guillemot 2007; Pierani and Wassef 2009). Therefore, com-
parison of molecular cues underlying brain morphogenesis in various species may
provide insight into the origins and diversiﬁcation processes of vertebrate brains.
Because cyclostomes (lamprey and hagﬁsh), belonging to agnathans, bifurcated
from gnathostomes at an early evolutionary stage (Kuratani et al. 2002; Kuraku and
Kuratani 2006; Heimberg et al. 2010; Oisi et al. 2013), the brains of cyclostomes
will shed light on the origin of vertebrate brain centers.
9.4
Cyclostomes
Brain structures shared between cyclostomes and gnathostomes are expected to
provide important plesiomorphic signs about the brain elements. Extant cyclostomes
(lampreys and hagﬁshes) thus possibly inherit some important traits that are

9
The Origin of Vertebrate Brain Centers
221
characteristic not only in extinct agnathans but also in the common ancestor of
vertebrates. Generally, the brains of cyclostomes are relatively small, and plotting
brain weight against body size reveals a less-developed brain in cyclostomes than in
gnathostomes (Jerison 1985; Striedter 2005).
9.4.1
Lampreys
There are 38 species of lamprey, 29 of which inhabit freshwater (Nelson 2006).
The adult animal possesses a sucker-like oral funnel with rings of horny teeth, a
single nostril, a single pair of eyes, and seven pairs of gill openings. They have dual
semicircular canals in the vestibular organ, in contrast to gnathostomes, which have
three canals. Although lampreys lack a lateral horizontal canal, they appear to have
evolved in parallel an anatomically distinct horizontal duct system (Maklad et al.
2014). They lack paired appendages, although they possess unpaired dorsal and tail
ﬁns. The nervous system of the lamprey exhibits some cyclostome-speciﬁc features
as well; it lacks sympathetic chain ganglia and the nerve axons lack myelin sheaths.
Adult animals breed in shallow rivers, and their hatched larvae, which are called
ammocoetes, have eye spots embedded in their skin and an endostyle that is thought
to be homologous to the thyroid gland in other vertebrates. After metamorphosis,
some species remain in freshwater, whereas marine species move to a saltwater
environment. During spring and early summer, marine lampreys migrate to shallow
freshwater streams to breed. After spawning, they usually die.
The most ancient lamprey (Priscomyzon riniensis gen. et sp. nov.), which
possesses many of the key characteristics of modern forms, has been found in the
fossil record from the Devonian period (360 million years ago). Therefore, it is
evident that the lamprey lineage has a long evolutionary history (Gess et al. 2006).
A recent study showed that Tullimonstrum gregarium, known as the Tully
monster, possesses the buccal apparatus containing teeth, the paired eyes extending
laterally on a long rigid bar, the tri-lobed brain (the anterior olfactory lobe, the
central optic lobe, and the posterior otic lobe), and the segmented body with caudal
ﬁn. This combination of characters indicates Tullimonstrum as a vertebrate and
places it on the stem lineage to lampreys (Fig. 9.2; McCoy et al. 2016).
9.4.2
Hagﬁshes
Extant hagﬁshes live in a marine environment. They possess three pairs of short
tentacles around the mouth. They have from one to six pairs of pharyngeal openings
and a mucous gland on the body surface to prevent attacks by enemies. Their
semicircular canal appears to be single, but a recent morphological study suggests
that they originally had two canals similar to lampreys, after which one canal
degenerated (Jorqensen et al. 1998). In contrast to lampreys, all living hagﬁshes
lack larval stages in their life cycle (Jorqensen et al. 1997). Because they breed in the

222
Y. Murakami
deep sea, their developmental process was not observed for a long time. However,
recent studies have successfully obtained fertilized eggs and living embryos from
the Japanese hagﬁsh Eptatretus burgeri (Ota and Kuratani 2006; Ota et al. 2007)
and have revealed that they share a common body plan with lampreys (Ota et al.
2007, 2011; Oisi et al. 2013).
9.4.3
Cyclostome-Speciﬁc Characters
Cyclostomes may possibly have inherited plesiomorphic traits (e.g., a neural tube,
paired eyes, a nasal organ, inner ears, and a pineal organ), which are established in
the common ancestor of vertebrates. By contrast, they have their own morphological
characters such as the ﬁrst arch-derived oral apparatus and a distinct immune system
(Hirano et al. 2013). These cyclostome-speciﬁc traits may have been established
after the divergence between agnathans and gnathostomes by the modiﬁcation of
their developmental plan. Notably, recent studies revealed that lampreys possess
distinct Hox clusters (Mehta et al. 2013), suggesting that cyclostomes experienced
their own WGD. This genomic modiﬁcation may have contributed to the evolution
of cyclostome-speciﬁc traits.
9.5
Origin of the Vertebrate CNS
9.5.1
Neural Tube
The vertebrate brain is divided into several components including the telencephalon,
diencephalon, midbrain (mesencephalon), cerebellum, and hindbrain (rhomben-
cephalon). These regions originate from the neural tube, which is initially speciﬁed
from the dorsal ectoderm (Fig. 9.3). In the process of neural tube formation, some
signaling molecules, such as Hedgehog, are secreted from the notochord and later
in the ﬂoor plate, and induce ventral differentiation in the neural tube. Dorsalizing
factors, such as bone morphogenetic protein (BMPs) are expressed in the ectoderm
overlying the neural tube. The ventro-dorsal axis of the neural tube is determined by
antagonistic interaction between these two signals (Fig. 9.3) (Yamada et al. 1991;
Echelard et al. 1993; Echevarria et al. 2003; Sanes 2006; Suzuki et al. 2012). The
lateral wall of the neural tube then enlarges and differentiates into three brain vesi-
cles, known as the procecephalon, mesencephalon, and rhombencephalon (Fig. 9.3),
along the anteroposterior axis of the tube. It has been believed that the second brain
vesicle gives rise to the mesencephalon. However, a recent study suggests that the
second brain vesicle differentiates into the mesencephalon and a rostral region of
rhombencephalon, at least in some vertebrates (Ishikawa et al. 2012). The internal
cavity of the neural tube, which will be ﬁlled with cerebrospinal ﬂuid, gives rise to

9
The Origin of Vertebrate Brain Centers
223
the ventricles. The ventricles are initially surrounded by neuroepithelial cells that
produce neurons and are then replaced with ependymal cells (Jacobson 1991). The
neural tube could be divided into dorsal (alar) and ventral (basal) plates. Within
the brainstem (from the diencephalon to the hindbrain) and the spinal cord, sensory
centers tend to be dorsal, autonomic centers are lateral and intermediate, and motor
centers are ventral. This regionalization is patterned by signaling molecules such as
SHH secreted from the ﬂoor plate and BMP from the roof plate (Yamada et al. 1991;
Echelard et al. 1993; Roelink et al. 1995; Lee and Jessell 1999). This neural tube-
based patterning mechanism appears to serve as a basic plan for the vertebrate brain.
However, a tubular CNS is also found in chordates, including the cephalochordates
and urochordates. Comparative studies have shown that the expression patterns of
genes that specify the neural plate and its border in amphioxus and vertebrates
are highly conserved (Beccari et al. 2013; Holland 2013). Moreover, a number
of genes that pattern the region of the neural tube have been expressed similarly
between vertebrates and chordates, although some genes (e.g., Gbx) are absent in
the tunicate genome (Passamaneck and Di Gregorio 2005; Holland 2013). Thus, the
developmental mechanism underlying neural tube formation has been established,
at least in the common ancestor of chordates. Interestingly, a recent developmental
study showed that the collar cord of the hemichordate, in which a tubular nerve cord
could be observed, shared gene expression patterns common to that seen during
chordate neurulation. In addition, it receives a Hedgehog signal from the dorsal
endoderm of the buccal tube and the stomochord, which lie beneath the collar cord.
This ﬁnding suggests that the endoderm functions as an organizer to pattern the
overlying collar cord, similar to the relationship between the notochord and the
neural tube in chordates (Miyamoto and Wada 2013). Taken together, the origin
of the core genetic mechanisms underlying the development of the neural tube
date back to the last common ancestor of deuterostomes. Because this regulatory
gene expression has also been observed in insects (Lichtneckert and Reichert 2005),
the gene regulatory framework involved in brain formation may originate from the
urbilaterians, a presumptive ancestral form of bilaterians (De Robertis and Sasai
1996). However, despite the considerable similarities between the developmental
plans of chordates and vertebrates, the brain morphology of chordates shows
some remarkable differences from that of vertebrates. For example, the brains of
amphioxus and tunicates apparently lack brain regions such as the telencephalon
and cerebellum (Wicht and Lacalli 2005). Moreover, a recent study has shown that
the amphioxus neural tube appears to lack a mesencephalic region (Suzuki et al.
2015b). Therefore, some brain compartments observed in extant vertebrates may
possibly have been established after the split between chordates and vertebrates.
The vertebrate-speciﬁc modiﬁcation of the gene regulatory network involved in
brain morphogenesis may have caused the innovation in the vertebrate brain. In
vertebrates, despite the diversity of brain regions, the anteroposterior or dorsoventral
organization of the neural tube is quite similar throught different lineages: this
indicates that the developmental plan of the vertebrate CNS is highly conserved
for more than 500 million years under a constraint (evolutionary constraint).

224
Y. Murakami
9.5.2
Organizing Centers
In the development of the vertebrate brain, some speciﬁc regions act as important
signaling centers called organizers, one of which is the MHB that is located between
the mesencephalon and metencephalon (Fig. 9.3). The other organizer is a zona
limitans intrathalamica (Zli), which lies in the diencephalon primordium in which
the boundary between prosomere 2 (p2) (see following) and p3 is established.
Finally, the anterior neural ridge (ANR) or commissural plate (CP), located at the
rostral end of the telencephalon primordium, is crucial in the patterning of the
telencephalon.
These organizing centers are characterized by the combinatory expression of
transcription factors and signaling molecules. For example, the MHB is patterned
in the expression boundary between Otx2 and Gbx2, and FGF8 secreted in the
boundary increases the level of expression of Pax2/5/8, En1/2, and Wnt1 (Broccoli
et al. 1999; Millet et al. 1999; Katahira et al. 2000; Matsunaga et al. 2002). Zli
is marked by the expression of Shh, which differentiates alar plate regions of p2
and p3 into the thalamus and the prethalamus, respectively (Rubenstein et al. 1994;
Kobayashi et al. 2002; Echevarria et al. 2003). ANR/CP secretes FGF8 and regulates
the size of the telencephalon (Cecchi 2002; O’Leary and Sahara 2008; Medina and
Abellan 2009). Importantly, this gene expression has been partially identiﬁed in
the cephalochordates and urochordates (see Chap. 7). Surprisingly, gene expression
that characterizes these centers is also found in the ectoderm of hemichordates
(Pani et al. 2012). This ﬁnding suggests that the developmental basis that gives
rise to these centers might have emerged in an ancestor of hemichordates as an
ectodermal patterning mechanism. At that time, in chordates, these organizers might
have been diverted to a brain-patterning program. However, chordates lack some
of the brain regions that are observed in vertebrates. Thus, it is likely that many,
but not all, of the gene regulatory frameworks for constructing organizing centers
were already present in a common ancestor of chordates, although their neural tube
was only partially regionalized into brain vesicles that were comparable to those
of vertebrates. This issue may be explained by a fascinating concept called “deep
homology” (see following).
9.6
Origin of the Vertebrate PNS
9.6.1
Cranial Placodes and Neural Crests
The PNS essentially consists of cranial, spinal, sympathetic, and enteric nerves,
which include axons of sensory and motor neurons (Figs. 9.2 and 9.5). The
sensory peripheral nerves are induced during developmental periods by speciﬁc
cells such as sensory placodes (neurogenic placodes) or neural crests. Sensory
placodes are formed in speciﬁc parts of an epidermal thickening in the craniofacial

9
The Origin of Vertebrate Brain Centers
225
Fig. 9.5 Morphology of the peripheral nervous system (PNS) in shark (a) and lamprey (b). (c)
Coronal section of the lamprey hindbrain shows projection of the trigeminal and lateral line nerves.
Trigeminal nerve branches innervating the upper lip (green) and lower lip (red) are segregated and
enter a speciﬁc part of the hindbrain. (d) Early axonal scaffold of the embryo of red seabream
(Pagrus major). ac anterior commissure, ALLN anterior lateral line nerve, api apical nerve, bas
basilar nerve, Cb cerebellum, Di diencephalon, HB hindbrain, llf lateral longitudinal fascicle,
mand mandibular nerve, MB midbrain, mlf medial longitudinal fascicle, MoV motor nucleus of
the trigeminal nerve, oph ophthalmic ramus of the trigeminal nerve, pc posterior commissure,
PLLN posterior lateral line nerve, poc postoptic commissure, r. buc buccal ramus of the lateral line
nerve, r. op. sup superﬁcial ramus of the ophthalmic lateral line nerve, sot supraoptic tract, sub
suborbital nerve, Te telencephalon, tpoc tract of the postoptic commissure, tr. hyo. hyomandibular
nerve, V1 ophthalmic ramus of the trigeminal nerve, V2 maxillary ramus of the trigeminal nerve, V3
mandibular ramus of the trigeminal nerve, IV trochlear nerve, VII facial nerve, IX glossopharyngeal
nerve, X vagus nerve
region surrounding the brain (Schlosser 2006). These placodes differentiate into
sensory receptor cells, supporting cells, and sensory neurons. In vertebrates, nasal,
hypophysial, lens, profundal, trigeminal, otic, lateral line, and epibranchial placodes
can be observed (Fig. 9.2).
Neural crest cells develop in a boundary between the epidermis and the neural
plate and subsequently migrate to several parts of the body. The sympathetic and
enteric nervous systems are derived from these cells. Because neural crests generate
pigment cells and many parts of the head skeleton and pharyngeal arches (including
jaws), they have a key role, not only in the body’s morphogenesis, but also in the
morphological evolution of vertebrates.
Molecular mechanisms underlying the formation of sensory placodes and neural
crests have been extensively studied. The cranial placodes that are formed sur-
rounding the neural tube are known as the preplacodal region (PPR), in which
Six1, Six4, and Eya1 are expressed (Schlosser 2006; Streit 2007; McCabe and
Bronner-Fraser 2009). Later, other genes are additionally expressed in PPR to form

226
Y. Murakami
speciﬁc placodes. Alternatively, Sox9, Snail2, Foxd3, and other genes are important
in the differentiation of the neural crests (Betancur et al. 2010; Milet and Monsoro-
Burq 2012). Accordingly, complicated gene regulatory networks are involved in the
patterning of neural crests (Betancur et al. 2010; Theveneau and Mayor 2012). In the
later stages, axon guidance molecules including semaphorin and ephrin are involved
in the migration of these cells. Recent studies have revealed that interactions
between semaphorin3A and neuropilin1, a receptor for semaphorin ligands, are
involved in the formation of the sympathetic chain (Theveneau and Mayor 2012). In
an evolutionary aspect, many PNS components are present in the lamprey, although
a sympathetic chain cannot be observed in this animal. In the process of lamprey
development, placodes and neural crests, which are thought to be involved in the
differentiation of sensory ganglia, are identiﬁed (Langille and Hall 1988; McCauley
and Bronner-Fraser 2003; Modrell et al. 2014), and the general pathways of cranial
neural crest migration are conserved through the vertebrates, although a lamprey-
speciﬁc migratory route could be identiﬁed (McCauley and Bronner-Fraser 2003).
These lines of evidence suggest that the developmental mechanism underlying the
production of the PNS may have been established before the diversiﬁcation between
cyclostomes and extant gnathostomes occurred.
9.6.2
Origins of Placodes and Neural Crest Cells
Protochordates apparently lack convincing homologues of neurogenic (sensory)
placodes in vertebrates, except possibly for the olfactory epithelium in tunicates
(Bassham and Postlethwait 2005). However, amphioxus and tunicates have some
ectodermal sensory cells that are considered homologues of neurogenic placodes
in vertebrates. These cells express some genes such as Six and Eya, similar to
vertebrate neurogenic placodes (Bassham and Postlethwait 2005; Holland 2013).
Thus, the evolutionary origin of some neurogenic placodes may date back to the
ancestor of chordates. In the case of neural crests, homologues of genes specifying
the vertebrate neural crest are not expressed at the edges of the amphioxus neural
plate, although homologues of genes that specify the neural plate and its edges
are similarly expressed in amphioxus and vertebrates (Yu et al. 2002; Meulemans
and Bronner-Fraser 2004; Holland 2013, 2015). By contrast, tunicates appear to
have a homologous neural crest cell (Mazet et al. 2005; Abitua et al. 2012; Stolﬁ
et al. 2015). Therefore, the developmental plan for initializing neural crests may be
incorporated into the gene network after the split between cephalochordates and
other chordates. Consequently, the increased number or rearrangement of genes
by genome duplication in the vertebrate lineage may have a key function in the
establishment of multipotency of neural crest cells in vertebrates.
Some aquatic vertebrates such as ﬁshes and amphibians possess neural crest-
derived neurons called Rohon–Bared cells (RB cells) (Beard 1889; Bernhardt et al.
1990; Coghill 1914; Hughes 1957). These unique neurons have their cell body in
the spinal cord and extend their axons within or beyond the spinal cord (Bernhardt
et al. 1990; Hartenstein 1993). Generally, in the course of their development, RB

9
The Origin of Vertebrate Brain Centers
227
cells decrease their numbers by apoptosis and are replaced by dorsal root ganglia
(DRG), which are also derived from neural crests (Lamborghini 1987). Because RB
cell-like neurons are observed in amphioxus, they must have emerged in the early
stage of chordate evolution. In lampreys, both RB cells and extramedullary sensory
neurons (DRG homologues) are present, although their spinal roots are primitive
and asymmetrical (Fritzsch and Northcutt 1993). Thus, in the common ancestor of
chordates, sensory stimuli were presumably received by neurons whose cell bodies
are located in the spinal cord. Then, in the course of the evolution of vertebrates, this
type of cell was replaced by neurons whose cell body is located outside of the spinal
cord; that is, sensory stimuli are perceived by DRG neurons located outside the
spinal cord. This evolutionary switching of neurons is a characteristic event in the
evolution of the PNS. A recent study has shown that this developmental switching
from RB cells to DRG neurons is regulated by Six1 in Xenopus (Yajima et al. 2014).
9.7
Regionalization of the Vertebrate CNS
9.7.1
Brain Segmentation
In the course of brain development, the neural tube differentiates into a series
of vesicles representing unique morphology. Namely, the wall of the neural tube
shows segmental bulges, resembling a lepidopteran caterpillar. These structures
were initially identiﬁed by von Baer in the chick embryo (von Baer 1828). Since
then, segmental bulges have been identiﬁed in all vertebrate embryos studied so far.
Several studies have shown that these bulges contain speciﬁc neurons or nuclei, and
for that reason these segments were thought to provide morphological units that are
important in eliciting a speciﬁc function. Thus, Bergquist and Källén (1953) referred
to these segments as “Grundgebiete (basic domains).” These brain segments are now
called neuromeres (Rubenstein et al. 1998), and those in the procencephalon and
the hindbrain are named prosomeres and rhombomeres, respectively (Fig. 9.3). Pro-
someres have been observed in many gnathostomes, including teleosts (Wullimann
and Puelles 1999; Diaz-Regueira and Anadon 2000), chickens (Redies et al. 2000),
frogs (Javier-Milan and Puelles 2000), and mice (Puelles and Rubenstein 1993; Shi-
mamura et al. 1995; Puelles and Rubenstein 2003). Rhombomeres have attracted the
attention of developmental biologists because of their topographical relationships
with peripheral nerves and segmental boundary-related gene expression patterns
(Orr 1887; Vaage 1969; Lumsden and Keynes 1989; Clarke and Lumsden 1993;
Kuratani and Eichele 1993; Kontges and Lumsden 1996). It is also important to
note that rhombomeres represent an arrangement of serially homologous segments
that can give rise to a series of similar neuronal elements. For example, the motor
nuclei for the branchial neurons including trigeminal, facial, glossopharyngeal, and
vagal motor nuclei develop in corresponding rhombomere segments (Neal 1896;
Lumsden and Keynes 1989; Noden 1991; Gilland and Baker 1993). Furthermore, in
some vertebrates, rhombomeres generate similar repeated sets of neurons, namely,

228
Y. Murakami
“serial homologues” (Metcalfe et al. 1986; Mendelson 1986; Kimmel et al. 1988;
Hanneman et al. 1988; Lee et al. 1993; Clarke and Lumsden 1993), one of which
is an anteroposteriorly arranged set of reticulospinal neurons that forms part of the
pattern-generating circuits for a variety of behavioral patterns including swimming.
The Mauthner neuron, a type of reticulospinal neuron, is important for escape
behavior and appears in rhombomere 4 in many anamniotes including the lamprey,
and similar neurons are observed in rhombomere 5 as serial homologues in some
aquatic species (Mendelson 1986; Hanneman et al. 1988; Murakami et al. 2004).
9.7.2
Molecular Basis for Constructing Rhombomeres
Rhombomeres are characterized by the expression of some homeodomain-
containing transcription factors. In particular, rhombomere segments are identiﬁed
by the combinatory expression of Hox or Krox genes (Fig. 9.6) (Wilkinson et al.
1989; Schneider-Maunoury et al. 1997; Hunt et al. 1991; Krumlauf et al. 1993; Rijli
Hoxa2
Hoxb1
Hoxb3
Krox20
Hoxb4
Pax6, Atoh1, Ptf1a, Wnt1 (rhombic lip) 
Trigeminal nerve root
Otx2
Gbx2
Optic tectum
Rhombic lip
Boundary between
diencephalon and
mesencephalon
Pax6
p1
p1
Mesencephalon
Diencephalon
Facial nerve root
r1
r1
r2
r2
r3
r3
r4
r4
r5
r5
r6
r6
r7
r7
A
Hox2
Hox3
Krox20
Hox1
En, Pax2/5/8, Fgf8/17
Trigeminal nerve root
OtxA
GbxA
Optic tectum
Boundary between
diencephalon and
mesencephalon
Pax6
p1
p1
Mesencephalon
Diencephalon
Facial nerve root
r1
r1
r2
r2
r3
r3
r4
r4
r5
r5
r6
r6
r7
r7
Expression pattern of lamprey Pax6
Mesencephalon
Diencephalon
B
C
Kreisler
Hox4x
Cerebellum (undiﬀerentiated)
MHB
Kreisler
MHB
Cerebellum
Retina
Optic tectum
Nasal
Temporal
Rostral
Caudal
EphA3
ephrinA2/ephrinA5
Retina
Anterior
Posterior
EphC
Vm
Vm
Posterior commissure
Posterior commissure
Pax6B, Atoh1, Ptf1a-B, Wnt1 (rhombic lip)  
Rhombic lip
Pax7
Pax7
Fig. 9.6 Developmental plan of vertebrate mesencephalon and hindbrain. (a) Expression patterns
of regulatory genes in developing gnathostomes. Right drawing shows scheme of the retino-tectal
projection and expression domains of axon guidance molecules (EphA3 and ephrinsA5/epharinA2)
in the retina and the tectum. (b) Expression patterns of regulatory genes in the developing lamprey
(after Takio et al. 2007; Parker et al. 2014; Sugahara et al. 2016). Expression domain of lamprey
EphC (LjEphC) is indicated in the left. (c) Pax6 (LjPax6) in the lamprey embryo at stage 27. LjPax6
mRNA is expressed in speciﬁc parts of the CNS, whereas it is absent in the mesencephalon. Vm
motor nucleus of trigeminal nerve. See Fig. 9.3 for abbreviations

9
The Origin of Vertebrate Brain Centers
229
et al. 1998; Schilling and Knight 2001). Hox family genes are expressed colinearly
in the hindbrain primordium and are involved in the formation of rhombomere
compartments. The colinearity of Hox gene expression is found in the amphioxus
(Schubert et al. 2006), although this animal has no morphological bulges in its
neural tube. In cyclostomes, neuromeres similar to those of gnathostomes have
been identiﬁed in the lamprey (Pombal and Puelles 1999; Pombal et al. 2001, 2009;
Murakami et al. 2001, 2004; Osorio et al. 2005). In the hagﬁsh Eptatretus burgeri,
the embryonic hindbrain shows six rhombomeres (Oisi et al. 2013). Thus, the
molecular framework for generating neuromeres is thought to have been acquired
in a chordate-like ancestor. Then, morphological segments may be established in
the vertebrate lineage. This observation indicates the establishment of a molecular
mechanism that restricts cell proliferation or migration into speciﬁc compartments
(Cooke et al. 2001), and establishment of neuromeres as module elements may be a
key innovation of the vertebrate brain.
9.7.3
Early Neuronal Scaffolds
Some speciﬁc neuronal circuits are formed in the developmental period. These
early tracts, called “early axonal scaffolds,” act as a guidepost for later developing
axons and provide a template for the subsequent development of complex neural
circuitry (Fig. 9.5). Importantly, the framework of these tracts is highly conserved
in vertebrates (Anderson and Key 1999; Chitnis and Kuwada 1990; Doldan et al.
2000; Easter et al. 1993; Ishikawa et al. 2004; Ross et al. 1992; Barreiro-Iglesias et
al. 2008). Given that the basic axonal connection of adult animals is similar between
vertebrates, this conservation may be the result of stereotyped scaffolds that provide
basic frameworks for axons. These early tracts consist of longitudinal (extending
along the anteroposterior axis) and commissural (connecting the left and right side
of the brain) types. Longitudinal tracts include the lateral longitudinal fascicle, the
tract of the postoptic commissure, and the supraoptic tract, and the commissural
tracts include the anterior, habenular, and posterior commissures.
In the cyclostomes, although the basic framework of the axonal scaffold is similar
to those of gnathostomes (Barreiro-Iglesias et al. 2008), the anterior commissure
is poorly developed. Instead, they have a well-developed interbulbar commissure
(coib), which is thought to be homologous to the hippocampal commissure in
gnathostomes (Wicht and Northcutt 1992). In gnathostomes, axons of the olfactory
system enter the anterior commissure, but in cyclostomes, the olfactory ﬁbers enter
into the coib. This observation indicates that the axon guidance mechanism underly-
ing the olfactory tract might have been differentially modiﬁed between cyclostomes
and gnathostomes in relationship to the evolution of the anterior telencephalon.
Given that the morphology of the telencephalon changed dramatically in the early
stage of vertebrate evolution (Dupret et al. 2014), the gross modiﬁcation of the
olfactory tract might have occurred during the agnathan–gnathostome transition.

230
Y. Murakami
These early formed tracts provide a landmark, not only in the adult brain, but
also in the developing brain compartments. For example, the posterior commissure
deﬁnes the boundary between prosomere 1 (pretectum) and mesencephalon. These
highly conserved tracts imply a strict neurodevelopmental program that guides
extending axons to their correct targets. Some transcription factors and axon
guidance molecules such as the Slit2 ligand and Robo2 receptor are important in
the formation of networks in the early tracts (Plump et al. 2002; Shu and Richards
2001; Shu et al. 2003; Lopez-Bendito et al. 2007; Devine and Key 2008; Hocking
et al. 2010; Ricano-Cornejo et al. 2011, Tosa et al. 2015).
Interestingly, orthologues of these genes are involved in the formation of
commissures in the insect brain, which are seen to be “not homologous” in the
vertebrate brain (Rothberg et al. 1990). Why are orthologous genes involved in
the formation of nonhomologous brains? A concept raised in recent evolutionary
morphology called “deep homology” may be able to explain this incongruity.
9.8
Deep Homology
Classical morphology has established that body plans for vertebrates and insects
are quite different. For example, the insect brain originated from a placode-like
ectodermal enlargement, whereas the vertebrate brain is formed from a neural
tube. Insects have a compound eye that is different from the camera eyes in
vertebrates. However, recent studies have revealed that the genes involved in body
morphogenesis are sometimes quite similar in these animals (Fig. 9.7). For example,
Pax6 is involved in the morphogenesis of compound eyes in insects and camera
eyes in vertebrates. Interestingly, if vertebrate Pax6 is expressed ectopically in fruit
Fig. 9.7 (a) Expression patterns of regulatory genes in insect (Drosophila) and mammal (mouse)
brain primordia (after Lichtneckert and Reichert 2005). (b) Comparison of cross sections of
embryos in Platynereis (annnelids) and vertebrates. The mediolateral expression pattern is shown
for nk2.2/nkx2.1(red), pax6 (blue), and msx (black). VNC ventral nerve cord (After Denes et al.
2007)

9
The Origin of Vertebrate Brain Centers
231
ﬂies, they will still develop compound eyes instead of camera eyes (Gehring 1996).
This ﬁnding indicates that Pax6 has a key role in the formation of nonhomologous
optic organs among animals, suggesting that a fundamental molecular mechanism is
shared between vertebrates and insects, after which the downstream target genes for
Pax6 were modiﬁed in the course of evolution, causing different eye morphology.
Thus, even though there seems to be no morphological similarity, a common gene
regulatory network may be involved in the formation of apparently nonhomologous
structures. A fascinating concept that may be useful in addressing this issue is “deep
homology,” in which highly conserved genetic regulatory networks across phyla
might be derived from ancient regulatory systems established in a common ancestor
(Carroll 2008; Shubin et al. 1997). Because this is often identiﬁed in several areas of
brain formation, including in higher cognitive centers (Fig. 9.7) (Denes et al. 2007;
Strausfeld and Hirth 2013), it is a very important concept with which to explore
brain evolution at the level of gene regulation.
9.9
Evolution of the Vertebrate CNS
9.9.1
Hindbrain (Rhombencephalon)
The hindbrain is deﬁned as the region that is located posterior (caudal) to the
midbrain and rostral to the spinal cord. Although some researchers regard the
cerebellum as a part of the hindbrain, it presents as a distinct region in this issue
(see following). Although the vertebrate hindbrain shows diversiﬁed morphology
in some groups such as teleosts (Fig. 9.1), it also represents highly conserved
organization between vertebrates. Namely, the vertebrate hindbrain is characterized
by the series of segmental neurons such as branchial motor nuclei and reticulospinal
neurons (see brain segmentation). In addition to those neurons, nuclei of the general
or special somatic sensory system are also arranged anteroposteriorly corresponding
to rhombomeres in the vertebrate hindbrain (Marin and Puelles 1995; Gaufo et al.
2004; Oury et al. 2006). This highly conserved columnar organization in vertebrates
implies the presence of a strict developmental program that imposes selective
pressure or evolutionary constraint. A number of studies have revealed that the Hox
gene family displays nested, segmentally restricted expression patterns with sharp
anterior boundaries, and has a crucial role in the morphogenesis of the hindbrain
(Fig. 9.6) (Hunt et al. 1991; Krumlauf et al. 1993; Rijli et al. 1998; Schilling and
Knight 2001; Gaufo et al. 2004; Kiecker and Lumsden 2005; Geisen et al. 2008;
Erzurumlu et al. 2010).
The vertebrate hindbrain is also characterized by the number of nerve roots
through which cranial nerves connect to the CNS. Actually, these roots function
as an important window for “plug in” of sensory nerves and “output” of motor
nerves (Fig. 9.6). These cranial nerves have been identiﬁed in cyclostomes and
fossil agnathans in which the anteroposterior arrangements are similar to those of
gnathostomes (Janvier 2002; Gai et al. 2011; Dupret et al. 2014).

232
Y. Murakami
Among the cranial nerves, the development of the trigeminal nerve has been
extensively studied because it is one of the largest peripheral nerves and has
an important function in somatosensory perception in the craniofacial region
(Erzurumlu et al. 2010). In vertebrates, cells in the trigeminal ganglion generally
receive input through the peripheral processes innervating the skin or sensory organs
and send axons to the hindbrain through the trigeminal nerve root in rhombomere 2
(Figs. 9.3, 9.5, and 9.6); exceptionally, the trigeminal nerve root in the shark shifts
to r3 during its development (Kuratani and Horigome 2000). These afferents then
connect with the trigeminal sensory nuclei located in the anterior hindbrain.
Lamprey hindbrains display some speciﬁc features. For example, the trigeminal
motor nucleus is located at r2–r3 and the posterior limit expands to the middle part
of r4, differeing from gnathostomes, in which the nucleus is generally restricted
to r2 and r3 (Fig. 9.6) (Murakami et al. 2004). In the lamprey, a homologue
of the principal nucleus of the trigeminal nerve (PrV) has not been identiﬁed
(Koyama et al. 1987). In addition, the maxillary and mandibular branches of
the maxillomandibular nerve (mmV) are not comparable between lampreys and
gnathostomes, and spacial segregation of mmV neruron precursor territories may
represent lamprey-speciﬁc feature (Kuratani et al. 2004; Higashiyama and Kuratani
2014; Modrell et al. 2014). Despite these morphological differences, the expression
pattern of signaling molecules or transcription factors that is involved in the for-
mation of the hindbrain is quite similar between lampreys and other gnathostomes.
The regulatory elements that are involved in Hox gene expression are also similar
between lampreys and gnathostomes (Fig. 9.6) (Parker et al. 2014). Thus, the origin
of the gene regulatory network for hindbrain patterning may date back to a common
ancestor of vertebrates.
The trigeminal system in hagﬁshes has ﬁve sensory ganglia and nerves and
represents a unique feature because it is thought to facilitate the chemosensory and
cutaneous sensation (Braun 1998). Similar to lampreys, hagﬁshes appear to lack a
PrV, and their trigeminal afferents project to the hindbrain, where ﬁve columns of
ﬁbers surrounded by cell bodies can be observed (Nishizawa et al. 1988).
9.9.2
Cerebellum
In gnathostomes, the cerebellum is located between the isthmus in the midbrain
and the medulla oblongata (posterior part of the hindbrain) (Fig. 9.2). Generally,
the vertebrate cerebellum receives proprioceptive input from the spinal cord via a
spinocerebellar tract and vestibular input from the inner ear. However, in mammals,
the cerebellum receives input from a higher center, such as the neocortex, relayed
through pontine nuclei, and has an important role in cognitive function. In the
vertebrate lineage, the cerebellum seems to have evolved in relationshp to sensory
perception and motor regulation because some vertebrates that inhabit aquatic
or aierial environments have been found to have an enlarged cerebellum. In
particular, the cerebellum in some vertebrates, including chondrichthyans, avians,

9
The Origin of Vertebrate Brain Centers
233
and pterosaurs, is highly expanded and has elongated features (Fig. 9.1) (Voogd
and Glickstein 1998; Witmer et al. 2003). In those animals, the cerebellum
receives strong input from the vestibular and spinocerebellar tracts. Pterosaurs also
have a quite enlarged ﬂocculus, which might receive inputs from well-developed
semicircular canals (Witmer et al. 2003). Because of this specialized cerebellum,
pterosaurs with an extremely large body size may have been able to ﬂy. Interestingly,
mormyrids, which are a kind of actinopterygian, have a remarkably enlarged
cerebellar region (valvula cerebelli), which is thought to have evolved with their
electroreception (Nieuwenhuys 1967a; Voogd and Glickstein 1998). Mormyrids
also process signals from an electrosensory organ in the electrosensory lobe of
the medulla oblongata and in a region of the midbrain called the exterolateral
nucleus, where the timing of responses of knollenorgans, a kind of electroreceptors,
is compared to extract information about electric signals (Carlson et al. 2011). By
contrast, in agnathans, the cerebellum is less prominent (Fig. 9.6) (Nieuwenhuys
1967a), although fossil osteostraci Norselaspis or the galeaspid Shuyu have a bulge
on the dorsal metencephalon (Fig. 9.4) (Janvier 2002; Gai et al. 2011). Because
these animals appear to be more closely related to gnathostomes than to cyclostomes
(Fig. 9.4) (Davis et al. 2012; Oisi et al. 2013), a gnathostome-type cerebellum
might have evolved in early vertebrates after a split from the cyclostome lineage.
Extant lampreys possess a small bulge on the roof of the hindbrain called a corpus
cerebelli in which Purkinje-like cells can be observed. However, these cells are
intermingled with the granule-like cells and are not stained by antibodies to zebrin,
which recognize gnathostome Purkinje cells (Lannoo and Hawkes 1997). Moreover,
hagﬁshes have only the uncertain sign of a cerebellum in the hindbrain (Larsell
1947; Bone 1963; Nieuwenhuys 1967a; Kusunoki et al. 1982), and cyclostomes
lack some cerebellum-related nuclei, such as the red nucleus, that are identiﬁed in
gnathostomes (Butler and Hodos 2005). Because the red nucleus or precerebellar
nuclei have been identiﬁed in sharks (Pose-Mendez et al. 2014), organization of
a cerebellum that possesses molecular, Purkinje cell, and granular layers with a
precerebellar system may possibly have been established after a split between
cyclostomes and gnathostomes. The evolution of paired appendages, which enable
animals to move accurately in three-dimensional space, may have accelerated the
evolution of the cerebellum.
In developing gnathostomes, the cerebellum emerges from the dorsal side of
the hindbrain, which corresponds to the ﬁrst rhombomere segment (rhombomere
1; Figs. 9.3 and 9.6), and cells in the cerebellar primordium are marked by
some transcription factors (Butts et al. 2014). In mammals, Ptf1a-expressing
cells migrate dorsally and differentiate into Purkinje cells. Conversely, Atoh1-
positive cells migrate tangentially in the rhombic lip to form an external granular
layer. Subsequently, these cells expressing NeuroD migrate ventrally through the
Purkinje cell layer and form an internal granular layer. The cellular organization
and expression of Atoh1 orthologues in the cerebellar primordium have been
observed in many gnathostome species including amniotes, teleosts, and sharks
(Chaplin et al. 2010), suggesting that the developmental plan to produce a cerebellar
cytoarchitecture could date back at least to the common ancestor of gnathostomes.

234
Y. Murakami
However, presumptive cognates of Atoh1 and Ptf1a could be identiﬁed in the
lamprey, and their expression domains are located in the dorsal side of the hindbrain,
which corresponds to the rhombic lip (Fig. 9.6) (Sugahara et al. 2016). Thus, a
certain genetic background underlying the acquisition of the cerebellum might have
been already established in the latest common ancestor of vertebrates, although the
cerebellum proper is less prominent in extant cyclostomes.
9.9.3
Midbrain (Mesencephalon)
The midbrain is located anterior to the rhombencephalon and is composed mainly
of three parts: the isthmus, the optic tectum, and the tegmentum (Fig. 9.2) (Butler
and Hodos 2005). Among these regions, the optic tectum (a region homologous
to the mammalian superior colliculus) is characterized by a laminated structure in
which extensive retinal input enters the superﬁcial layers, whereas other sensory
inputs, such as the somatosensory system, terminate in the deep layers. The optic
tectum is highly developed in some vertebrate groups such as teleosts. In amniotes,
including birds and reptiles, it represents highly expanded and elongated features
(Figs. 9.1 and 9.6). Thus, the optic tectum in those animals must have evolved
to serve as a processing center for several sensory systems during the process of
adaptation to terrestrial environments. The torus semicircularis, which is located on
the ventral side of the optic tectum, is thought to be a homologue of the mammalian
inferior colliculus. In aquatic anamniotes, it receives input mainly from the lateral
line and auditory systems (in ﬁsh, it also receive inputs from somatosensory signals
coming from the spinal cord and the trigeminal system) (Yamamoto et al. 2010).
In some avian species, such as owls, the midbrain center of the auditory system
possesses an elegant system to identify the position of prey in a dark environment
(Konishi 2006). Tegmental regions contain some nuclei such as the red nucleus
and substantia nigra, both of which are important in motor coordination, and are
connected to the cerebellum and basal ganglia, respectively. In vertebrates studied
so far, the midbrain is induced by an FGF8 signal that is secreted from the anterior
part of the MHB, in which Otx2 is expressed (Fig. 9.6). In the early developmental
period, expression domains of Otx2 and Gbx2 overlap in the presumptive MHB.
Then, in the course of development, these two genes restrict their expression and
represent a clear expression boundary in MHB (Broccoli et al. 1999; Millet et al.
1999; Katahira et al. 2000; Matsunaga et al. 2002). Subsequently, the midbrain and
forebrain are induced in the Otx2 expression domain, whereas the hindbrain and
cerebellum are differentiated in the Gbx2 domain (Fig. 9.6). The midbrain is also
characterized by the presence of Pax7 and the absence of Pax6 transcripts (Ferran
et al. 2007). Thus, these Pax expressions represent an important landmark in the
vertebrate midbrain primordium (Fig. 9.6).
In the lamprey, the cognate of Fgf8/17 (LjFgf8/17) is restricted to the MHB, and
the orthologues of Otx2 (LjOtxA) and Gbx2 (LjGbxA) represent a clear expression
boundary in the isthmic region in tailbud-stage embryos (stages 26–27) (Fig. 9.6)

9
The Origin of Vertebrate Brain Centers
235
(Murakami et al. 2001; Takio et al. 2007). In addition, LjPax6 is absent but
LjPax3/7 is present in the LjOtxA expression domain. These observations strongly
indicate that the developing lamprey brain has a midbrain primordium similar
to those of other vertebrates (Fig. 9.6). Although the lamprey optic tectum has
less clear lamination in the ammocoete larva, the adult animal, which develops
camera eyes during metamorphosis, has an expanded optic tectum in which a
clearly laminated organization is visible, as in other vertebrates (Kennedy and
Rubinson 1977; Nieuwenhuys 1997). Moreover, in the hagﬁsh, three layers can
be observed in the optic tectum (Iwahori et al. 1996). Thus, a laminated optic
tectum is thought to have been established in the common ancestor of vertebrates.
The torus semicircularis is observed in the lamprey and receives input from the
acousticolateral line system, optic tectum, diencephalon, and reticular formation
(Gonzalez et al. 1999). Conversely, it is not observed in the hagﬁsh (Butler and
Hodos 2005). These observations indicate that it might have been established in the
common ancestor of vertebrates, and then secondarily degenerated in the hagﬁsh
lineage because of a regression of the lateral line system. In the tegmentum of
cyclostomes, the substantia nigra has been identiﬁed in the lamprey and is thought
to link to the telencephalon and be essential in motor coordination (Fig. 9.8)
(Stephenson-Jones et al. 2011).
The mesencephalic nucleus of the trigeminal nerve that regulates motoneurons
innervating jaw muscles has not been identiﬁed in either the lamprey or the
hagﬁsh (Nieuwenhuys 1997). Because this nucleus has been identiﬁed in many
gnathostomes, including chondrichthyes (Fig. 9.2) (Witkovsky and Roberts 1975;
MacDonnell 1980), it is considered to have evolved in accordance with the
establishment of jaws.
9.9.4
Retinotectal Projection
In the chick, retinal axons project topographically in the speciﬁc region of the
optic tectum. In this retinotectal projection process, repulsive interaction between
the Eph receptor and the ephrin ligand is crucial (Fig. 9.6). Speciﬁcally, EphAs
and ephrinAs are expressed in the retina and the optic tectum, respectively, with
anteroposterior gradients in each region. The formation of an ephrinA gradient in the
tectum is mediated by En1/2 expressed in the MHB (Logan et al. 1996; Shigetani
et al. 1997). In the developmental process, EphA3-expressing retinal axons are
repelled by ephrinA5-expressing tectal neurons and result in the topographic sorting
of retinal axons. A recent study of lampreys showed that orthologues of EphA
familiy (LjEphC and LjEphB) are expressed in the retina during metamorphosis,
simultaneously with the development of their camera eyes (Fig. 9.6; Suzuki et
al. 2015a). This ﬁnding indicates that the molecular mechanism underlying the
retinotectal projection may have been established in the common ancestor of
vertebrates. Interestingly, both the lateral eye in the larval lamprey (ammnocoete
larva) and the frontal eye in amphioxus project to the caudal prosencephalic region

236
Y. Murakami
Sp8/9A
DlxA
Isl1/2B
Fgf8/17
Sp8
Dlx2
Isl1
Fgf8
Nkx2.1
Shh
Migration of 
GABAergic 
interneurons
Pax6/GliA
Pax6/Gli3
Pallium
Subpallium
PSB
PSB
Subpallium
Lamprey
Mouse
Pallium
EmxA
Emx2
Rostral
Dorsal
A
B
Nkx2.1/2.4B
Lateral pallium (cortex)
Striatum
GPe
STN
Olfactory 
bulbs
SNc
SNr/GPi
Motor programs
Thalamus
Tectum
MLR
DLR
Reticulospinal
D1 direct D2 indirect
Hyperdirect
Re-entrant
Descending
Fig. 9.8 (a) Presumptive neuronal connections of the lamprey subpallium (After Stephenson-
Jones et al. 2011; Ocana et al. 2015). (b) Expression patterns of transcription factors and signaling
morphogens in the developing mouse and lamprey (After Murakami et al. 2001; Sugahara et al.
2013, 2016). DLR diencephalic locomotor region, GPe globus pallidus externa, GPi globus pallidus
interna, MLR mesencephalic locomotor region, SNr substantia nigra pars reticulata, SNc substantia
nigra pars compacta, STN subthalamic nucleus
marked by Pax6, indicating that a light-detecting visual center in the ancestral
vertebrates is not located in the optic tectum, where Pax6 expression is negative
(Suzuki et al. 2015b). Thus, the visual system of the larval lamprey provides an
important model to study the evolutionary transition of visual centers.
9.9.5
Diencephalon
In early embryogenesis, the vertebrate forebrain (the anterior end of the neural
tube) differentiates into a rostral telencephalon (including the pallium or cortex and
subpallium or basal ganglia) and a diencephalon. Thus, the diencephalon is located

9
The Origin of Vertebrate Brain Centers
237
posterior (caudal) to the telencephalon and rostral to the midbrain (Fig. 9.2). In
recent morphological and embryological points of view, the vertebrate diencephalon
has been subdivided into the pretectum, thalamus, prethalamus, and hypothalamus.
However, it is important to note that a recent prosomeric model proposed that
the hypothalamus belongs to the same prosomeres as hypothlamo-telencephalic
prosomeres (Puelles and Rubenstein 2003, 2015). To maintain continuity with the
terms in previous anatomical studies, this issue follow the traditional view, in which
the hypothalamus is included in the diencephalon.
The pretectum is closely associated with the visual system and is also marked by
the posterior commissure on the dorsal side (Figs. 9.5 and 9.6). The thalamus has an
epiphysis that is identiﬁed in fossil agnathans (Janvier 2002) and has a parapineal
organ or parietal eye in some lineages. The thalamus also represents important
relay nuclei, which connect nuclei of several sensory system to the telencephalon.
Thus, the vertebrate thalamus may have evolved to serve as a relay center for
several sensory modalities, although the olfactory sense reaches the telencephalon
directly without a relay through the thalamus. These diencephalic regions have
originated from prosomeres (p), in which P1, P2, and P3 give rise to the pretectum,
thalamus, and prethalamus, respectively (Fig. 9.3) (Puelles and Rubenstein 2003).
As noted earlier (see 5.2), the boundary between P2 and P3 corresponds to the Zli,
in which SHH is crucial in the patterning of P2 and P3 compartments (Fig. 9.3)
(Echevarria et al. 2003; Kiecker and Lumsden 2005). The hypothalamus regulates
hormone production and involuntary autonomic responses. The primordium of the
hypothalamus is deﬁned by the expression of Nkx2.1 (Kimura et al. 1996).
Prosomeric compartments have been identiﬁed in the adult lamprey by detailed
morphological observation (Pombal et al. 2009). Moreover, in the development
period, the lamprey has a posterior commissure on the posterior side of the
diencephalon and epiphysis and habenular commissure on the thalamus, as do the
gnathostomes (Barreiro-Iglesias et al. 2008). In addition to these morphological
traits, the expression pattern of regulatory genes specifying the diencephalon
primordium in vertebrates is similar in lampreys and gnathostomes. Speciﬁcally,
Pax6 is expressed on the dorsal side of the diencephalic primordium, overlapping
with Dlx in the anterodorsal part (Murakami et al. 2001). The prethalamic eminence,
a part of the presumptive P3, has been shown by the expression of Lhx1/5 transcripts
(Osorio et al. 2006). In particular, a lamprey cognate of Shh (LjHhA) is expressed
in the presumptive Zli, as occurs in gnathostomes (Fig. 9.3). In the hypothalamus,
a lamprey homologue of Nkx2.1 (LjNkx2.1) is expressed in the primordium of the
hypothalamic region in which LjHhA and LjNkx2.1 expression domains overlap, as
seen in the mouse and the zebraﬁsh (Rohr et al. 2001; Wullimann and Mueller 2004).
Moreover, molecular asymmetries between the left and right developing habenulae
were identiﬁed in catshark and lamprey (Lagadec et al. 2015). These observations
strongly suggest that the lamprey has a diencephalic compartment comparable
to those of gnathostomes, although the diencephalon proper is less prominent in
cyclostomes than in gnathostomes.

238
Y. Murakami
9.10
Telencephalon
9.10.1
Pallium and Subpallium
Evolution of the cognitive center is thought to be a crucial phase in the adaptive
radiation of animals. In vertebrates, the morphology of brains and neuron circuits
seems to have evolved in relationship to their sensory and behavioral diversiﬁcation.
In particular, the telencephalon, located at the most anterior part of the CNS,
was found to show remarkable morphological diversity among vertebrate groups
(Fig. 9.1). For example, the telencephalon in some vertebrates, including hag-
ﬁshes, chondrichthyes, and amniotes, has highly expanded and elongated features
(Nieuwenhuys 1997). Because the telencephalon of cyclostomes or chondrichthyes
has large olfactory bulbs with a number of olfactory ﬁbers, it may have evolved
to serve as a processing center for olfaction in the initial stage of vertebrate
evolution. By contrast, the highly expanded telencephalon in amniotes appears to
be correlated with their well-organized integrative and cognitive functions, which
lead to physiological and behavioral adaptations to the terrestrial environment.
In mammals and birds, the telencephalon (also called the cerebrum) is crucial in
memory, attention, sensory integration, and voluntary motor control (Medina and
Reiner 2000; Butler and Hodos 2005; Jarvis et al. 2005, 2013). During development,
the telencephalon of gnathostomes is subdivided into dorsal and ventral portions,
called the pallium and the subpallium, respectively (Figs. 9.2 and 9.8). In mammals,
the pallium generally gives rise to the hippocampus, neocortex, olfactory cortex, and
a part of the amygdala (cortical amygdala). Alternatively, the subpallium induces the
subpallial part of the amygdala, striatum, and pallidum (Puelles et al. 2000). Pallial
and subpallial components are marked by differential expression patterns of some
transcription factor-encoding genes. Among these, Pax6 and Dlx2 are expressed in
primordial pallium and subpallium, respectively (Puelles et al. 2000; Bishop et al.
2000, 2002).
9.10.2
Origin of the Telencephalon
Although a telencephalon is identiﬁed in all extant vertebrate species, its evolution-
ary origin remains unknown. Some researchers suggest that its origin dates back
to the common ancestor of deuterostomes and protostomes (Tomer et al. 2010)
because of the similarities in cellular composition and molecular architecture of
the pallium and mushroom body in annelids. These similarities may be explained
by the concept of deep homology (see earlier). In chordates, the amphioxus has
a tiny bulge called a cerebral vesicle, which is located in the most anterior part
of the neural tube (Lacalli et al. 1994). Based on the expression patterns of some
key marker genes, this bulge has been regarded as a homologue of the vertebrate
brain (Holland and Short 2008; Venkatesh et al. 1999; Irimia et al. 2010). As a

9
The Origin of Vertebrate Brain Centers
239
signature for the telencephalic primordium, the expression of FoxG1, a marker for
the vertebrate telencephalon, has been identiﬁed in the amphioxus cerebral vesicle.
However, its domain of expression is restricted to the surrounding of the frontal
eye, which does not appears to be homologous to the telencephalon (Toresson et
al. 1998). Moreover, the amphioxus cerebral vesicle seems to lack an olfactory
bulb, a characteristic feature of the vertebrate telencephalon. In addition, although
some orthologous genes encoding vertebrate olfactory receptor proteins are found
in the amphioxus, the olfactory epithelium that connects to the olfactory bulb in
vertebrates is less prominent in this animal (Lacalli 2004; Niimura 2009). Taken
together, the vertebrate telencephalon probably represents an evolutionary novelty
(or a synapomorphy) in the vertebrate lineage. Fossil records show that some fossil
vertebrates represent signatures of the telencephalon: the osteostracan Norselaspis
possesses an olfactory organ, as in lampreys (Janvier 2002), and the galeaspid
Shuyu apparently possesses a paired olfactory bulb (Gai et al. 2011). Moreover,
the earliest agnathan has nasal sacs between its eyes, implying the presence of an
olfactory epithelium (Shu et al. 2003; Morris and Caron 2014). Thus, the origin of
the telencephalon should date back to the last common ancestor of vertebrates.
9.10.3
Telencephalon of Cyclostomes
The telencephalons of lampreys and hagﬁshes are characterized by the huge olfac-
tory bulb that is connected to the olfactory epithelium. In the lamprey olfactory bulb,
glomeruli lie in a single layer, and mitral cell-like neurons are located in it, although
these neurons have a different morphology and position from those in gnathostomes.
In addition, granule cell-like neurons are also observed (Nieuwenhuys 1967b).
Thus, the lamprey may possess components of the main olfactory system, which
receives input from the olfactory epithelium and connects to the pallium, as found
in other vertebrates. By contrast, differing from many other vertebrates, including
tetrapods and lungﬁshes, the lamprey lacks an accessory olfactory (vomeronasal)
system in which neurons in the accessory olfactory bulb receive inputs from the
vomeronasal epithelium and connect to the hypothalamus (Gonzalez et al. 2010).
However, a recent study suggests that the lamprey olfactory bulb receives axons
originating from a speciﬁc part of the olfactory epithelium, which is thought to be
homologous to the vomeronasal epithelium in gnathostomes. Then, bulbar neurons
receiving projections from the presumed vomeronasal epitherium send ﬁbers to the
hypothalamus (Chang et al. 2013). This system is thought to be a precursor to
the vomeronasal system in gnathostomes. If so, the origin of both the main and
accessory olfactory systems may date back to the common ancestor of vertebrates.
The pallium of adult cyclostomes represents a unique morphology. The lamprey
medial pallium (primordium hippocampi, phip) displays an unevaginated shape,
although other pallial parts represent evagination as seen in many gnathostomes
(Nieuwenhuys 1997). In adult hagﬁshes, the cerebral hemisphere and olfactory bulb
are much larger than those of the lamprey. Characteristically, distinct lamination

240
Y. Murakami
was observed in the hagﬁsh pallium, in which ﬁve layers were identiﬁed (Nieuwen-
huys 1967b). However, identiﬁcation of the telencephalic subregions is extremely
difﬁcult because of a signiﬁcant reduction of the ventricular systems in addition to
the highly differentiated organization of the pallium (Conel 1929).
It has been assumed that the lamprey telencephalon mainly processes olfactory
information because it has an enlarged olfactory bulb (OB). In fact, many parts
of the lamprey pallium receive extensive connections from the OB. Recent studies
have shown that the lamprey pallium receives input not only from the OB, but also
from other regions of the brain, such as the thalamus (Northcutt and Wicht 1997).
In addition, Ocana and colleagues identiﬁed the lamprey pallial region where the
projection neurons send axons toward the subnuclei of the basal ganglia, midbrain,
and brainstem similar to that of mammalian motor cortex (Fig. 9.8) (Ocana et
al. 2015). These studies have suggested that the afferent and efferent neuronal
connections of the pallium that are a prerequisite for the subsequent construction of
a integrative center are likely to be present in the common ancestor of vertebrates.
9.10.4
Developmental Plan for the Pallium
Pax6 and Dlx2 homologues of the chondrichthyan shark (Scyliorhinus torazame)
and cyclostome lamprey (Lethenteron japonicum) are expressed exclusively along
the dorsoventral axis of the telencephalic primordium (Fig. 9.8) (Sugahara et al.
2013). Moreover, the expression domains of Emx cognates in those animals are
included in the Pax6 expression domain in the dorsal telencephalon, as found in
osteichthyans (Murakami et al. 2001; Derobert et al. 2002; Tank et al. 2009). This
similarity indicates that the pallio–subpallium boundary, and at least two distinct
pallial domains, were probably established in the most recent common ancestor of
vertebrates (Fig. 9.8).
9.10.5
Developmental Plan for the Subpallium
The vertebrate subpallium can be divided into two major subdivisions, the striatum
and pallidum, both of which represent a part of the basal ganglia and are crucial
in motor function in the adult brains of gnathostomes (Reiner 2007). During
embryogenesis, the striatum and pallidum arise from the lateral and medial gan-
glionic eminences (LGE and MGE), respectively (Puelles et al. 2000). The MGE
produces precursors of inhibitory interneurons that are marked by ”-aminobutyric
acid (GABA), and these GABA-positive cells migrate tangentially toward the dorsal
pallium during embryonic development (Fig. 9.8) (Marin and Rubenstein 2001).
Recent molecular analysis using rodents has shown that the LGE is marked by
the expression of Dlx, Gsh1/2, Sp8, and Isl1, whereas the MGE is characterized
by the expression of Dlx, Nkx2.1, Lhx6/7/8, and Shh, and comparative embryology

9
The Origin of Vertebrate Brain Centers
241
has indicated that the Dlx-, Gsh1/2-, and Sp8-expressing subpallium is commonly
observed in tetrapods, teleosts, and lampreys (Fig. 9.8) (Moreno et al. 2009;
Sugahara et al. 2011). These results suggest that the LGE might have been
present in an evolutionary ancestral (default) stage. A recent comparative study
has shown both Nkx2.1 and Shh expression in the ventral telencephalon in the
shark (Scyliorhinus canicula), which implies the presence of an MGE (presumptive
pallidum) (Quintana-Urzainqui et al. 2012). In addition to the gene expression,
GABA-positive cells are distributed not only in the subpallium but also in the pallial
area of the shark (Carrera et al. 2008). Therefore, the two subpallial domains are
likely to have been acquired by the most recent common ancestor of the extant
gnathostome lineages. However, the evolutionary origin of the MGE was uncertain
because neither Nkx2.1 nor Shh or Lhx6/7 cognates could be observed in the
lamprey subpallium (Fig. 9.7) (Murakami et al. 2001; Sugahara et al. 2011). This
absence may indicate that lampreys lack an equivalent region of gnathostome MGE
(Murakami et al. 2005). However, recent studies have identiﬁed the pallidum in the
lamprey subpallium and GABA-immunoreactive cells in the pallium in addition to
the subpallium (Stephenson-Jones et al. 2011; Pombal et al. 2011). These studies
indicate the presence of MGE derivatives in the lamprey, although the embryonic
origin of the pallidum-like region remains unclear. It is also important to clarify
whether the GABA-positive/Dlx-positive cells in the lamprey pallium represent
interneurons originating from the MGE.
Importantly, two extra lamprey Nkx2.1 orthologous genes (Nkx2.1/2.4B and
Nkx2.1/2.4C) were recently identiﬁed from the L. japonicum draft genome
sequence. Surprisingly, these genes were expressed in the lamprey subpallium,
strongly suggesting the presence of the MGE (Fig. 9.8) (Sugahara et al. 2016).
In addition, the hagﬁsh cognate of Nkx2.1 was also identiﬁed and its expression
domain was located in a rostral telencephalon, in which the gnathostome MGE
would be formed (Sugahara et al. 2016). Taken together, vertebrate telencephalon
genoarchitecture is dated back to the latest common ancestor of extant vertebrates
(Fig. 9.9).
9.10.6
FGF Signaling from the Anterior Telencephalon
As already mentioned (see 5.2), ﬁbroblast growth factors (FGFs) that are secreted
from the ANR, which subsequently develops into a CP, are crucial in the patterning
of the vertebrate telencephalon (Fig. 9.8). In lamprey embryogenesis, the lamprey
orthologue of Fgf8 (LjFgf8/17) is expressed in the anteroventral region of the
telencephalon, which may possibly correspond to the CP of mammals (Sugahara
et al. 2011). However, in contrast to gnathostomes, the expression domain is
restricted to the ventral side, suggesting that lamprey Fgf8/17 is expressed only
in the presumptive subpallium (Fig. 9.8). In addition, Sp8, a downstream target
gene in the gnathostome pallium, could not be observed in the lamprey pallium
(Fig. 9.8) (Sugahara et al. 2011). These results suggest that the FGF-mediated

242
Y. Murakami
Lamprey
Gnathostomes
In telencephalon:
Dorsal pallium
Ventral pallium
LGE, MGE
In diencephalon:
Diencephalic prosomeres 
(p1-3)
Zli
Hagfish
Morphologically distinct cerebellum
In rhombencephalon:
Rhombomeres
Rhombic lip 
Primordium of cerebellum
Nerve roots
In mesencephalon:
Optic tectum
MHB
p1
Pal
Epi
Hpt
p2
p3
Cyclostomes
U
MHB
S
+SW
S
S
FRLE
KF
SF
hc
LGE
MGE
Zli
ch
ch
Zli
U
SF
Pal
LGE?
MGE
27
27
MHB
p1
Hpt
p2
p3
KF
SF
ch
Zli
Pal
LGE MGE
27
U
Epi
Fig. 9.9 Evolutionary process of the vertebrate brain (After Sugahara et al. 2016). ch optic
chiasm, coib interbulbar commissure, hc habenular commissure. See Figs. 9.2, 9.3, 9.4, and 9.5
for abbreviations
pallium patterning mechanism might have been established in the gnathostome
lineage, although the lamprey subpallium was patterned by an FGF-based gene
network, as occurs in gnathostomes. Thus, to identify the origin of FGF signaling,
it is also important to study the development of the hagﬁsh brain.
9.11
Conclusions
The vertebrate brain has been established on a preexisting neuroectoderm as
a vertebrate-speciﬁc plan. Recent molecular approaches using cyclostomes have
demonstrated that the basic arrangement of the neural tube has been conserved
through vertebrate evolution under a strict developmental system, in which spatially
and temporally regulated gene expression has a crucial role. Some of the combina-
tory expression of regulatory genes may be inherited from an early stage of animal
evolution as a deep homology. By contrast, integrative centers, including the cere-
bellum, mesencephalon, and telencephalon, are thought to have been established
in vertebrates as an evolutionary novelty (Fig. 9.9). The ﬂexibility of the brain
developmental program may result in morphological and physiological diversity
and enable vertebrates to adapt to complex environments. However, knowledge
of the evolutionary process of their brain centers is still fragmentary, although

9
The Origin of Vertebrate Brain Centers
243
recent comparative approaches have demonstrated additional modiﬁcation of gene
regulatory networks. Further advances in evolutionary developmental biology will
provide insight into the origin and evolution of the vertebrate brain.
Acknowledgments We thank Dr. Fumiaki Sugahara, Moe Kawara and Saori Yamakami for
technical support and valuable discussions. We thank all past and present members of the YM
laboratory for support and constructive discussions. Work in YM’s laboratory was supported by
RIKEN, Kobe, Japan and the Japan Society for the Promotion of Science (JSPS; grant number
24650178 and 26430018).
References
Abi-Rached L, Gilles A, Shiina T, Pontarotti P, Inoko H (2002) Evidence of en bloc duplication in
vertebrate genomes. Nat Genet 31:100–105
Abitua PB, Wagner E, Navarrete IA, Levine M (2012) Identiﬁcation of a rudimentary neural crest
in a non-vertebrate chordate. Nature 492:104–107
Anderson RB, Key B (1999) Novel guidance cues during neuronal pathﬁnding in the early scaffold
of axon tracts in the rostral brain. Development 126:1859–1868
Balanoff AM, Bever GS, Rowe TB, Norell MA (2013) Evolutionary origins of the avian brain.
Nature 501:93–96
Barreiro-Iglesias A, Villar-Cheda B, Abalo XM, Anadon R, Rodicio MC (2008) The early scaffold
of axon tracts in the brain of a primitive vertebrate, the sea lamprey. Brain Res Bull 75:42–52
Bassham S, Postlethwait JH (2005) The evolutionary history of placodes: a molecular genetic
investigation of the larvacean urochordate Oikopleura dioica. Development 132:4259–4272
Beard J (1889) On the early development of Lepidosteus osseus: preliminary notice. Proc R Soc
Lond 46:108–118
Beccari L, Marco-Ferreres R, Bovolenta P (2013) The logic of gene regulatory networks in early
vertebrate forebrain patterning. Mech Dev 130:95–111
Bergquist H, Källén B (1953) On the development of neuromeres to migration areas in the
vertebrate cerebral tube. Act Anat 18:65–73
Bernhardt RR, Chitnis AB, Lindamer L, Kuwada JY (1990) Identiﬁcation of spinal neurons in the
embryonic and larval zebraﬁsh. J Comp Neurol 302:603–616
Betancur P, Bronner-Fraser M, Sauka-Spengler T (2010) Assembling neural crest regulatory
circuits into a gene regulatory network. Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol 26:581–603
Bishop KM, Goudreau G, O’Leary DD (2000) Regulation of area identity in the mammalian
neocortex by Emx2 and Pax6. Science 288:344–349
Bishop KM, Rubenstein JL, O’Leary DD (2002) Distinct actions of Emx1, Emx2, and Pax6 in
regulating the speciﬁcation of areas in the developing neocortex. J Neurosci 22:7627–7638
Bone Q (1963) The central nervous system. In: Bodal A, Hinge R (eds) The biology of myxine.
Universitetsforlaget, Oslo, pp 50–91
Braun CB (1998) Schreiner organs: a new craniate chemosensory modality in hagﬁshes. J Comp
Neurol 392:135–163
Broccoli V, Boncinelli E, Wurst W (1999) The caudal limit of Otx2 expression positions the isthmic
organizer. Nature 401:164–168
Butler AB, Hodos W (2005) Comparative vertebrate neuroanatomy: evolution and adaptation, 2nd
edn. Wiley, Hoboken
Butts T, Modrell MS, Baker CV, Wingate RJ (2014) The evolution of the vertebrate cerebellum:
absence of a proliferative external granule layer in a non-teleost ray-ﬁnned ﬁsh. Evol Dev
16:92–100

244
Y. Murakami
Carlson BA, Hasan SM, Hollmann M, Miller DB, Harmon LJ, Arnegard ME (2011) Brain
evolution triggers increased diversiﬁcation of electric ﬁshes. Science 332:583–586
Carrera I, Ferreiro-Galve S, Sueiro C, Anadón R, Rodríguez -Moldes I (2008) Tangentially
migrating GABAergic cells of subpallial origin invade massively the pallium in developing
sharks. Brain Res Bull 75:405–409
Carroll SB (2008) Evo-devo and an expanding evolutionary synthesis: a genetic theory of
morphological evolution. Cell 134:25–36
Cecchi C (2002) Emx2: a gene responsible for cortical development, regionalization and area
speciﬁcation. Gene 291:1–9
Chang S, Chung-Davidson YW, Libants SV, Nanlohy KG, Kiupel M, Brown CT, Li W (2013) The
sea lamprey has a primordial accessory olfactory system. BMC Evol Biol 13:172
Chaplin N, Tendeng C, Wingate RJ (2010) Absence of an external germinal layer in zebraﬁsh
and shark reveals a distinct, anamniote ground plan of cerebellum development. J Neurosci
30:3048–3057
Chitnis AB, Kuwada JY (1990) Axonogenesis in the brain of zebraﬁsh embryos. J Neurosci
10:1892–1905
Clarke JD, Lumsden A (1993) Segmental repetition of neuronal phenotype sets in the chick embryo
hindbrain. Development 118:151–162
Coghill GE (1914) Correlated anatomical and physiological studies on the growth of the nervous
system of Amphibia. 1. The afferent system of the trunk of Amblystoma. J Comp Neurol
24:161–233
Conel JL (1929) The development of the brain of Bdellostoma stouti. 1. External growth changes.
J Comp Neurol 47:343–403
Cong P, Ma X, Hou X, Edgecombe GD, Strausfeld NJ (2014) Brain structure resolves the
segmental afﬁnity of anomalocaridid appendages. Nature 513:538–542
Cooke J, Moens C, Roth L, Durbin L, Shiomi K, Brennan C, Kimmel C, Wilson S, Holder N (2001)
Eph signalling functions downstream of Val to regulate cell sorting and boundary formation in
the caudal hindbrain. Development 128:571–580
Crow KD, Smith CD, Cheng JF, Wagner GP, Amemiya CT (2012) An independent genome
duplication inferred from Hox paralogs in the American paddleﬁsh: a representative basal ray-
ﬁnned ﬁsh and important comparative reference. Genome Biol Evol 4:937–953
Davis SP, Finarelli JA, Coates MI (2012) Acanthodes and shark-like conditions in the last common
ancestor of modern gnathostomes. Nature 486:247–250
De Robertis EM, Sasai Y (1996) A common plan for dorsoventral patterning in Bilateria. Nature
380:37–40
Denes AS, Jékely G, Steinmetz PR, Raible F, Snyman H, Prud’homme B, Ferrier DE, Balavoine
G, Arendt D (2007) Molecular architecture of annelid nerve cord supports common origin of
nervous system centralization in Bilateria. Cell 129:277–288
Derobert Y, Plouhinec JL, Sauka-Spengler T, Le Mentec C, Baratte B, Jaillard D, Mazan S (2002)
Structure and expression of three Emx genes in the dogﬁsh Scyliorhinus canicula: functional
and evolutionary implications. Dev Biol 247:390–404
Devine CA, Key B (2008) Robo-Slit interactions regulate longitudinal axon pathﬁnding in the
embryonic vertebrate brain. Dev Biol 313:371–383
Diaz-Regueira S, Anadon R (2000) Calretinin expression in speciﬁc neuronal systems in the brain
of an advanced teleost, the grey mullet (Chelon labrosus). J Comp Neurol 426:81–105
Doldan MJ, Prego B, Holmqvist B, Helvik JV, de Miguel E (2000) Emergence of axonal tracts in
the developing brain of the turbot (Psetta maxima). Brain Behav Evol 56:300–309
Dupret V, Sanchez S, Goujet D, Tafforeau P, Ahlberg PE (2014) A primitive placoderm sheds light
on the origin of the jawed vertebrate face. Nature 507:500–503
Easter SS Jr, Ross LS, Frankfurter A (1993) Initial tract formation in the mouse brain. J Neurosci
13:285–299
Echelard Y, Epstein DJ, St.-Jacques B, Shen L, Mohler J, McMahon JA, McMahon AP (1993)
Sonic hedgehog, a member of a family of putative signaling molecules, is implicated in the
regulation of CNS polarity. Cell 75:1417–1430

9
The Origin of Vertebrate Brain Centers
245
Echevarria D, Vieira C, Gimeno L, Martinez S (2003) Neuroepithelial secondary organizers and
cell fate speciﬁcation in the developing brain. Brain Res Brain Res Rev 43:179–191
Erzurumlu RS, Murakami Y, Rijli FM (2010) Mapping the face in the somatosensory brainstem.
Nat Rev Neurosci 11:252–263
Ferran JL, Sanchez-Arrones L, Sandoval JE, Puelles L (2007) A model of early molecular
regionalization in the chicken embryonic pretectum. J Comp Neurol 505:379–403
Fritzsch B, Northcutt RG (1993) Cranial and spinal nerve organization in amphioxus and lampreys:
evidence for an ancestral craniate pattern. Acta Anat 148:96–109
Gai Z, Donoghue PC, Zhu M, Janvier P, Stampanoni M (2011) Fossil jawless ﬁsh from China
foreshadows early jawed vertebrate anatomy. Nature 476:324–327
Gaufo GO, Wu S, Capecchi MR (2004) Contribution of Hox genes to the diversity of the hindbrain
sensory system. Development 131:1259–1266
Gehring WJ (1996) The master control gene for morphogenesis and evolution of the eye. Genes
Cells 1:11–15
Geisen MJ, Di Meglio T, Pasqualetti M, Ducret S, Brunet JF, Chedotal A, Rijli FM (2008)
Hox paralog group 2 genes control the migration of mouse pontine neurons through slit-robo
signaling. PLoS Biol 6, e142
Gess RW, Coates MI, Rubidge BS (2006) A lamprey from the Devonian period of South Africa.
Nature 443:981–984
Gilland E, Baker R (1993) Conservation of neuroepithelial and mesodermal segments in the
embryonic vertebrate head. Acta Anat (Basel) 148:110–123
Gonzalez MJ, Yanez J, Anadon R (1999) Afferent and efferent connections of the torus semicircu-
laris in the sea lamprey: an experimental study. Brain Res 826:83–94
Gonzalez A, Morona R, Lopez JM, Moreno N, Northcutt RG (2010) Lungﬁshes, like tetrapods,
possess a vomeronasal system. Front Neuroanat 4
Guillemot F (2007) Spatial and temporal speciﬁcation of neural fates by transcription factor codes.
Development 134:3771–3780
Hanneman E, Trevarrow B, Metcalfe WK, Kimmel CB, Westerﬁeld M (1988) Segmental pattern of
development of the hindbrain and spinal cord of the zebraﬁsh embryo. Development 103:49–58
Hartenstein V (1993) Early pattern of neuronal differentiation in the Xenopus embryonic brainstem
and spinal cord. J Comp Neurol 328:213–231
Heimberg AM, Cowper-Sal-lari R, Semon M, Donoghue PC, Peterson KJ (2010) microRNAs
reveal the interrelationships of hagﬁsh, lampreys, and gnathostomes and the nature of the
ancestral vertebrate. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 107:19379–19383
Higashiyama H, Kuratani S (2014) On the maxillary nerve. J Morphol 275:17–38
Hirano M, Guo P, McCurley N, Schorpp M, Das S, Boehm T, Cooper MD (2013) Evolutionary
implications of a third lymphocyte lineage in lampreys. Nature 501:435–438
Hocking JC, Hehr CL, Bertolesi GE, Wu JY, McFarlane S (2010) Distinct roles for Robo2 in the
regulation of axon and dendrite growth by retinal ganglion cells. Mech Dev 127:36–48
Holland LZ (2013) Evolution of new characters after whole genome duplications: insights from
amphioxus. Semin Cell Dev Biol 24:101–109
Holland LZ (2015) The origin and evolution of chordate nervous systems. Philos Trans R Soc Lond
B Biol Sci 370(1684):20150048
Holland LZ, Short S (2008) Gene duplication, co-option and recruitment during the origin of the
vertebrate brain from the invertebrate chordate brain. Brain Behav Evol 72:91–105
Hughes A (1957) The development of the primary sensory system in Xenopus laevis (Daudin). J
Anat 91:323–338
Hunt P, Gulisano M, Cook M, Sham MH, Faiella A, Wilkinson D, Boncinelli E, Krumlauf R (1991)
A distinct Hox code for the branchial region of the vertebrate head. Nature 353:861–864
Irimia M, Pineiro C, Maeso I, Gomez-Skarmeta JL, Casares F, Garcia-Fernandez J (2010)
Conserved developmental expression of Fezf in chordates and Drosophila and the origin of
the Zona Limitans Intrathalamica (ZLI) brain organizer. EvoDevo 1:7
Ishikawa Y, Kage T, Yamamoto N, Yoshimoto M, Yasuda T, Matsumoto A, Maruyama K, Ito H
(2004) Axonogenesis in the medaka embryonic brain. J Comp Neurol 476:240–253

246
Y. Murakami
Ishikawa Y, Yamamoto N, Yoshimoto M, Ito H (2012) The primary brain vesicles revisited: are the
three primary vesicles (forebrain/midbrain/hindbrain) universal in vertebrates? Brain Behav
Evol 79:75–83
Iwahori N, Nakamura K, Tsuda A (1996) Neuronal organization of the optic tectum in the hagﬁsh,
Eptatretus burgeri: a Golgi study. Anat Embryol (Berl) 193:271–279
Jacobson M (1991) Developmental neurobiology. Plenum Press, New York
Janvier P (2002) Early vertebrates. Oxford University Press, Oxford
Jarvis ED, Gunturkun O, Bruce L, Csillag A, Karten H, Kuenzel W, Medina L, Paxinos G, Perkel
DJ, Shimizu T, Striedter G, Wild JM, Ball GF, Dugas-Ford J, Durand SE, Hough GE, Husband
S, Kubikova L, Lee DW, Mello CV, Powers A, Siang C, Smulders TV, Wada K, White SA,
Yamamoto K, Yu J, Reiner A, Butler AB (2005) Avian brains and a new understanding of
vertebrate brain evolution. Nat Rev Neurosci 6:151–159
Jarvis ED, Yu J, Rivas MV, Horita H, Feenders G, Whitney O et al (2013) Global view of
the functional molecular organization of the avian cerebrum: mirror images and functional
columns. J Comp Neurol 521:3614–3665
Jerison HJ (1985) Animal intelligence as encephalization. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci
308:21–35
Jorqensen JM, Lomholt JP, Weber RE, Malte H (eds) (1997) The biology of hagﬁshes. Chapman
& Hall, London/New York
Jorqensen JM, Shichiri M, Genese FA (1998) Morphology of the hagﬁsh inner ear. Acta Zool
79:251–256
Katahira T, Sato T, Sugiyama S, Okafuji T, Araki I, Funahashi J, Nakamura H (2000) Interaction
between Otx2 and Gbx2 deﬁnes the organizing center for the optic tectum. Mech Dev 91:43–52
Kennedy MC, Rubinson K (1977) Retinal projections in larval, transforming and adult sea lamprey,
Petromyzon marinus. J Comp Neurol 171:465–479
Kiecker C, Lumsden A (2005) Compartments and their boundaries in vertebrate brain develop-
ment. Nat Rev Neurosci 6:553–564
Kimmel CB, Sepich DS, Trevarrow B (1988) Development of segmentation in zebraﬁsh. Develop-
ment 104(suppl):197–207
Kimura S, Hara Y, Pineau T, Fernandez-Salguero P, Fox CH, Ward JM, Gonzalez FJ (1996) The
T/ebp null mouse: thyroid-speciﬁc enhancer-binding protein is essential for the organogenesis
of the thyroid, lung, ventral forebrain, and pituitary. Genes Dev 10:60–69
Kobayashi D, Kobayashi M, Matsumoto K, Ogura T, Nakafuku M, Shimamura K (2002) Early
subdivisions in the neural plate deﬁne distinct competence for inductive signals. Development
129:83–93
Konishi M (2006) Behavioral guides for sensory neurophysiology. J Comp Physiol A Neuroethol
Sens Neural Behav Physiol 192:671–676
Kontges G, Lumsden A (1996) Rhombencephalic neural crest segmentation is preserved through-
out craniofacial ontogeny. Development 122:3229–3242
Koyama H, Kishida R, Goris RC, Kusunoki T (1987) Organization of sensory and motor nuclei of
the trigeminal nerve in lampreys. J Comp Neurol 264:437–448
Krumlauf R, Hunt P, Sham MH, Whiting J, Nonchev S, Marshall H, Graham A, Papalopulu N,
Cook M, Boncinelli E, Wilkinson D (1993) Hox genes: a molecular code for patterning regional
diversity in the nervous system and branchial structures. Restor Neurol Neurosci 5:10–12
Kuraku S, Kuratani S (2006) Time scale for cyclostome evolution inferred with a phylogenetic
diagnosis of hagﬁsh and lamprey cDNA sequences. Zool Sci 23:1053–1064
Kuratani SC, Eichele G (1993) Rhombomere transplantation repatterns the segmental organization
of cranial nerves and reveals cell-autonomous expression of a homeodomain protein. Develop-
ment 117:105–117
Kuratani S, Horigome N (2000) Developmental morphology of branchiomeric nerves in a cat
shark, Scyliorhinus torazame, with special reference to rhombomeres, cephalic mesoderm, and
distribution patterns of cephalic crest cells. Zool Sci 17:893–909
Kuratani S, Kuraku S, Murakami Y (2002) Lamprey as an evo-devo model: lessons from
comparative embryology and molecular phylogenetics. Genesis 34:175–183

9
The Origin of Vertebrate Brain Centers
247
Kuratani S, Murakami Y, Nobusada Y, Kusakabe R, Hirano S (2004) Developmental fate of the
mandibular mesoderm in the lamprey, Lethenteron japonicum: comparative morphology and
development of the gnathostome jaw with special reference to the nature of the trabecula cranii.
J Exp Zool B Mol Dev Evol 302:458–468
Kusunoki T, Kadota T, Kishida R (1982) Chemoarchitectonics of the brain stem of the hagﬁsh,
Eptatretus burgeri, with special reference to the primordial cerebellum. J Hirnforsch 23:109–
119
Lacalli TC (2004) Sensory systems in amphioxus: a window on the ancestral chordate condition.
Brain Behav Evol 64:148–162
Lacalli TC, Holland ND, West JE (1994) Landmarks in the anterior central nervous system of
amphioxus larvae. Philos Trans R Soc Lond Ser B 344:165–185
Lagadec R, Laguerre L, Menuet A, Amara A, Rocancourt C, Pericard P, Godard BG, Rodicio MC,
Rodriguez-Moldes I, Mayeur H, Rougemont Q, Mazan S, Boutet A (2015) The ancestral role
of nodal signalling in breaking L/R symmetry in the vertebrate forebrain. Nat Commun 6:6686
Lamborghini JE (1987) Disappearance of Rohon-Beard neurons from the spinal cord of larval
Xenopus laevis. J Comp Neurol 264:47–55
Langille RM, Hall BK (1988) The organ culture and grafting of lamprey cartilage and teeth. In
Vitro Cell Dev Biol 24:1–8
Lannoo MJ, Hawkes R (1997) A search for primitive Purkinje cells: zebrin II expression in sea
lampreys (Petromyzon marinus). Neurosci Lett 237:53–55
Larsell O (1947) The development of the cerebellum in man in relation to its comparative anatomy.
J Comp Neurol 87:85–129
Lee KJ, Jessell TM (1999) The speciﬁcation of dorsal cell fates in the vertebrate central nervous
system. Annu Rev Neurosci 22:261–294
Lee RK, Eaton RC, Zottoli SJ (1993) Segmental arrangement of reticulospinal neurons in the
goldﬁsh hindbrain. J Comp Neurol 329:539–556
Lichtneckert R, Reichert H (2005) Insights into the urbilaterian brain: conserved genetic patterning
mechanisms in insect and vertebrate brain development. Heredity (Edinb) 94:465–477
Logan C, Wizenmann A, Drescher U, Monschau B, Bonhoeffer F, Lumsden A (1996) Rostral
optic tectum acquires caudal characteristics following ectopic engrailed expression. Curr Biol
6:1006–1014
Lopez-Bendito G, Flames N, Ma L, Fouquet C, Di Meglio T, Chedotal A, Tessier-Lavigne M,
Marin O (2007) Robo1 and Robo2 cooperate to control the guidance of major axonal tracts in
the mammalian forebrain. J Neurosci 27:3395–3407
Lumsden A, Keynes R (1989) Segmental patterns of neuronal development in the chick hindbrain.
Nature 337:424–428
MacDonnell MF (1980) Mesencephalic trigeminal nucleus in sharks. A light microscopic study.
Brain Behav Evol 17:152–163
Maklad A, Reed C, Johnson NS, Fritzsch B (2014) Anatomy of the lamprey ear: morphological
evidence for occurrence of horizontal semicircular ducts in the labyrinth of Petromyzon
marinus. J Anat 224:432–446
Mallamaci A, Stoykova A (2006) Gene networks controlling early cerebral cortex arealization. Eur
J Neurosci 23:847–856
Marin F, Puelles L (1995) Morphological fate of rhombomeres in quail/chick chimeras: a
segmental analysis of hindbrain nuclei. Eur J Neurosci 7:1714–1738
Marin O, Rubenstein JLK (2001) A long, remarkable journey: tangential migration in the
telencephalon. Nat Rev Neurosci 2:780–790
Matsunaga E, Katahira T, Nakamura H (2002) Role of Lmx1b and Wnt1 in mesencephalon and
metencephalon development. Development 129:5269–5277
Mazet F, Hutt JA, Milloz J, Millard J, Graham A, Shimeld SM (2005) Molecular evidence from
Ciona intestinalis for the evolutionary origin of vertebrate sensory placodes. Dev Biol 282:494–
508
McCabe KL, Bronner-Fraser M (2009) Molecular and tissue interactions governing induction of
cranial ectodermal placodes. Dev Biol 332:189–195

248
Y. Murakami
McCauley DW, Bronner-Fraser M (2003) Neural crest contributions to the lamprey head. Devel-
opment 130:2317–2327
McCoy VE, Saupe EE, Lamsdell JC, Tarhan LG, McMahon S, Lidgard S, Mayer P, Whalen CD,
Soriano C, Finney L, Vogt S, Clark EG, Anderson RP, Petermann H, Locatelli ER, Briggs DE
(2016) The ‘Tully monster’ is a vertebrate. Nature 552:496–499
McLysaght A, Hokamp K, Wolfe KH (2002) Extensive genomic duplication during early chordate
evolution. Nat Genet 31:200–204
Medina L, Abellan A (2009) Development and evolution of the pallium. Semin Cell Dev Biol
20:698–711
Medina L, Reiner A (2000) Do birds possess homologues of mammalian primary visual,
somatosensory and motor cortices? Trends Neurosci 23:1–12
Mehta TK, Ravi V, Yamasaki S, Lee AP, Lian MM, Tay BH, Tohari S, Yanai S, Tay A, Brenner S,
Venkatesh B (2013) Evidence for at least six Hox clusters in the Japanese lamprey (Lethenteron
japonicum). Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 110:16044–16049
Mendelson B (1986) Development of reticulospinal neurons of the zebraﬁsh II. Early axonal
outgrowth and cell body position. J Comp Neurol 251:172–184
Metcalfe WK, Mendelson B, Kimmel CB (1986) Segmental homologies among reticulospinal
neurons in the hindbrain of the zebraﬁsh larva. J Comp Neurol 251:147–159
Meulemans D, Bronner-Fraser M (2004) Gene-regulatory interactions in neural crest evolution and
development. Dev Cell 7:291–299
Meyer A, Van de Peer Y (2005) From 2R to 3R: evidence for a ﬁsh-speciﬁc genome duplication
(FSGD). Bioessays 27:937–945
Milan FJ, Puelles L (2000) Patterns of calretinin, calbindin, and tyrosine-hydroxylase expression
are consistent with the prosomeric map of the frog diencephalon. J Comp Neurol 419:96–121
Milet C, Monsoro-Burq AH (2012) Neural crest induction at the neural plate border in vertebrates.
Dev Biol 366:22–33
Millet S, Campbell K, Epstein DJ, Losos K, Harris E, Joyner AL (1999) A role for Gbx2 in
repression of Otx2 and positioning the mid/hindbrain organizer. Nature 401:161–164
Miyamoto N, Wada H (2013) Hemichordate neurulation and the origin of the neural tube. Nat
Commun 4:2713
Miyata T, Suga H (2001) Divergence pattern of animal gene families and relationship with the
Cambrian explosion. Bioessays 23:1018–1027
Modrell MS, Hockman D, Uy B, Buckley D, Sauka-Spengler T, Bronner ME, Baker CV (2014) A
fate-map for cranial sensory ganglia in the sea lamprey. Dev Biol 385:405–416
Moreno N, Gonzalez A, Retaux S (2009) Development and evolution of the subpallium. Semin
Cell Dev Biol 20:735–743
Morris SC, Caron JB (2014) A primitive ﬁsh from the Cambrian of North America. Nature
512(7515):419–422
Murakami Y, Ogasawara M, Sugahara F, Hirano S, Satoh N, Kuratani S (2001) Identiﬁcation and
expression of the lamprey Pax6 gene: evolutionary origin of the segmented brain of vertebrates.
Development 128:3521–3531
Murakami Y, Pasqualetti M, Takio Y, Hirano S, Rijli FM, Kuratani S (2004) Segmental develop-
ment of reticulospinal and branchiomotor neurons in lamprey: insights into the evolution of the
vertebrate hindbrain. Development 131:983–995
Murakami Y, Uchida K, Rijli FM, Kuratani S (2005) Evolution of the brain developmental plan:
insights from agnathans. Dev Biol 280:249–259
Neal HV (1896) A summary of studies on the segmentation of the nervous system in Squalus
acanthias. Anat Anz 12:377–391
Nelson JS (2006) Fishes of the world, fourth edition. Wiley, Hoboken
Nieuwenhuys R (1967a) Comparative anatomy of the cerebellum. Prog Brain Res 25:1–93
Nieuwenhuys R (1967b) Comparative anatomy of olfactory centres and tracts. Prog Brain Res
23:1–64
Nieuwenhuys R (1997) The central nervous system of vertebrates. Nieuwenhuys R, TenDonkelaar
HJ, Nicholson C, (eds) Springer, Berlin/Heidelberg

9
The Origin of Vertebrate Brain Centers
249
Niimura Y (2009) On the origin and evolution of vertebrate olfactory receptor genes: comparative
genome analysis among 23 chordate species. Genome Biol Evol 1:34–44
Nishizawa H, Kishida R, Kadota T, Goris RC (1988) Somatotopic organization of the primary
sensory trigeminal neurons in the hagﬁsh, Eptatretus burgeri. J Comp Neurol 267:281–295
Noden DM (1991) Vertebrate craniofacial development: the relation between ontogenetic process
and morphological outcome. Brain Behav Evol 38:190–225
Northcutt RG, Wicht H (1997) Afferent and efferent connections of the lateral and medial pallia of
the silver lamprey. Brain Behav Evol 49:1–19
O’Leary DD, Sahara S (2008) Genetic regulation of arealization of the neocortex. Curr Opin
Neurobiol 18:90–100
Ocana FM, Suryanarayana SM, Saitoh K, Kardamakis AA, Capantini L, Robertson B, Grillner S
(2015) The lamprey pallium provides a blueprint of the mammalian motor projections from
cortex. Curr Biol 25:413–423
Ohno S (1970) Evolution by gene duplication. Springer, Berlin/New York
Oisi Y, Ota KG, Kuraku S, Fujimoto S, Kuratani S (2013) Craniofacial development of hagﬁshes
and the evolution of vertebrates. Nature 493:175–180
Orr H (1887) Contribution to the embryology of the lizard. J Morphol 1:311–372
Osorio J, Mazan S, Retaux S (2005) Organisation of the lamprey (Lampetra ﬂuviatilis) embryonic
brain: insights from LIM-homeodomain, Pax and hedgehog genes. Dev Biol 288:100–112
Osorio J, Megias M, Pombal MA, Retaux S (2006) Dynamic expression of the LIM-homeodomain
gene Lhx15 through larval brain development of the sea lamprey (Petromyzon marinus). Gene
Expr Patterns 6:873–878
Ota KG, Kuratani S (2006) The history of scientiﬁc endeavors towards understanding hagﬁsh
embryology. Zool Sci 23:403–418
Ota KG, Kuraku S, Kuratani S (2007) Hagﬁsh embryology with reference to the evolution of the
neural crest. Nature 446:672–675
Ota KG, Fujimoto S, Oisi Y, Kuratani S (2011) Identiﬁcation of vertebra-like elements and their
possible differentiation from sclerotomes in the hagﬁsh. Nat Commun 2:373
Oury F, Murakami Y, Renaud JS, Pasqualetti M, Charnay P, Ren SY, Rijli FM (2006) Hoxa2-
and rhombomere-dependent development of the mouse facial somatosensory map. Science
313:1408–1413
Pani AM, Mullarkey EE, Aronowicz J, Assimacopoulos S, Grove EA, Lowe CJ (2012) Ancient
deuterostome origins of vertebrate brain signalling centres. Nature 483:289–294
Parker HJ, Bronner ME, Krumlauf R (2014) A Hox regulatory network of hindbrain segmentation
is conserved to the base of vertebrates. Nature 514(7523):490–493
Passamaneck YJ, Di Gregorio A (2005) Ciona intestinalis: chordate development made simple.
Dev Dyn 233:1–19
Pierani A, Wassef M (2009) Cerebral cortex development: from progenitors patterning to
neocortical size during evolution. Dev Growth Differ 51:325–342
Plump AS, Erskine L, Sabatier C, Brose K, Epstein CJ, Goodman CS, Mason CA, Tessier-Lavigne
M (2002) Slit1 and Slit2 cooperate to prevent premature midline crossing of retinal axons in
the mouse visual system. Neuron 33:219–232
Pombal MA, Puelles L (1999) Prosomeric map of the lamprey forebrain based on calretinin
immunocytochemistry, Nissl stain, and ancillary markers. J Comp Neurol 414:391–422
Pombal
MA, Marin
O, Gonzalez
A
(2001)
Distribution of
choline
acetyltransferase-
immunoreactive structures in the lamprey brain. J Comp Neurol 431:105–126
Pombal MA, Megias M, Bardet SM, Puelles L (2009) New and old thoughts on the segmental
organization of the forebrain in lampreys. Brain Behav Evol 74:7–19
Pombal MA, Alvarez-Otero R, Perez-Fernandez J, Solveira C, Megias M (2011) Development and
organization of the lamprey telencephalon with special reference to the GABAergic system.
Front Neuroanat 5:20
Pose-Mendez S, Candal E, Adrio F, Rodriguez-Moldes I (2014) Development of the cerebellar
afferent system in the shark Scyliorhinus canicula: insights into the basal organization of
precerebellar nuclei in gnathostomes. J Comp Neurol 522:131–168

250
Y. Murakami
Puelles L, Rubenstein JL (1993) Expression patterns of homeobox and other putative regulatory
genes in the embryonic mouse forebrain suggest a neuromeric organization. Trends Neurosci
16:472–479
Puelles L, Rubenstein JL (2003) Forebrain gene expression domains and the evolving prosomeric
model. Trends Neurosci 26:469–476
Puelles L, Rubenstein JL (2015) A new scenario of hypothalamic organization: rationale of new
hypotheses introduced in the updated prosomeric model. Front Neuroanat 9:27
Puelles L, Kuwana E, Puelles E, Bulfone A, Shimamura K, Keleher J, Smiga S, Rubenstein JL
(2000) Pallial and subpallial derivatives in the embryonic chick and mouse telencephalon,
traced by the expression of the genes Dlx-2, Emx-1, Nkx-2.1, Pax-6, and Tbr-1. J Comp Neurol
424:409–438
Quintana-Urzainqui I, Sueiro C, Carrera I, Ferreiro-Galve S, Santos-Duran G, Pose-Mendez S,
Mazan S, Candal E, Rodriguez-Moldes I (2012) Contributions of developmental studies in the
dogﬁsh Scyliorhinus canicula to the brain anatomy of elasmobranchs: insights on the basal
ganglia. Brain Behav Evol 80:127–141
Redies C, Ast M, Nakagawa S, Takeichi M, Martinez-de-la-Torre M, Puelles L (2000) Morpho-
logic fate of diencephalic prosomeres and their subdivisions revealed by mapping cadherin
expression. J Comp Neurol 421:481–514
Reiner A (2007) The evolution of the basal ganglia in mammals and other vertebrates. In: Kaas JH
(ed) Evolution of nervous systems, vol 3. Academic, Amsterdam/Boston, pp 397–411
Ricano-Cornejo I, Altick AL, Garcia-Pena CM, Nural HF, Echevarria D, Miquelajauregui A,
Mastick GS, Varela-Echavarria A (2011) Slit-Robo signals regulate pioneer axon pathﬁnding
of the tract of the postoptic commissure in the mammalian forebrain. J Neurosci Res 89:1531–
1541
Rijli FM, Gavalas A, Chambon P (1998) Segmentation and speciﬁcation in the branchial region of
the head: the role of the Hox selector genes. Int J Dev Biol 42:393–401
Roelink H, Porter JA, Chiang C, Tanabe Y, Chang DT, Beachy PA, Jessell TM (1995) Floor plate
and motor neuron induction by different concentrations of the amino-terminal cleavage product
of sonic hedgehog autoproteolysis. Cell 81:445–455
Rohr KB, Barth KA, Varga ZM, Wilson SW (2001) The nodal pathway acts upstream of hedgehog
signaling to specify ventral telencephalic identity. Neuron 29:341–351
Ross LS, Parrett T, Easter SS Jr (1992) Axonogenesis and morphogenesis in the embryonic
zebraﬁsh brain. J Neurosci 12:467–482
Rothberg JM, Jacobs JR, Goodman CS, Artavanis-Tsakonas S (1990) slit: an extracellular protein
necessary for development of midline glia and commissural axon pathways contains both EGF
and LRR domains. Genes Dev 4:2169–2187
Rowe TB, Macrini TE, Luo ZX (2011) Fossil evidence on origin of the mammalian brain. Science
332:955–957
Rubenstein JL, Martinez S, Shimamura K, Puelles L (1994) The embryonic vertebrate forebrain:
the prosomeric model. Science 266:578–580
Rubenstein JL, Shimamura K, Martinez S, Puelles L (1998) Regionalization of the prosencephalic
neural plate. Annu Rev Neurosci 21:445–477
Sanes DH (2006) Development of the nervous system. 2nd ed., Sanes DH, Reh TA, Harris W, (eds)
Academic Press, Oxford
Schilling TF, Knight RD (2001) Origins of anteroposterior patterning and Hox gene regulation
during chordate evolution. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 356:1599–1613
Schlosser G (2006) Induction and speciﬁcation of cranial placodes. Dev Biol 294:303–351
Schneider-Maunoury S, Seitanidou T, Charnay P, Lumsden A (1997) Segmental and neuronal
architecture of the hindbrain of Krox-20 mouse mutants. Development 124:1215–1226
Schubert M, Holland ND, Laudet V, Holland LZ (2006) A retinoic acid-Hox hierarchy controls
both anterior/posterior patterning and neuronal speciﬁcation in the developing central nervous
system of the cephalochordate amphioxus. Dev Biol 296:190–202
Shigetani Y, Funahashi JI, Nakamura H (1997) En-2 regulates the expression of the ligands for
Eph type tyrosine kinases in chick embryonic tectum. Neurosci Res 27:211–217

9
The Origin of Vertebrate Brain Centers
251
Shimamura K, Hartigan DJ, Martinez S, Puelles L, Rubenstein JL (1995) Longitudinal organiza-
tion of the anterior neural plate and neural tube. Development 121:3923–3933
Shu T, Richards LJ (2001) Cortical axon guidance by the glial wedge during the development of
the corpus callosum. J Neurosci 21:2749–2758
Shu T, Sundaresan V, McCarthy MM, Richards LJ (2003) Slit2 guides both precrossing and
postcrossing callosal axons at the midline in vivo. J Neurosci 23:8176–8184
Shubin N, Tabin C, Carroll S (1997) Fossils, genes and the evolution of animal limbs. Nature
388:639–648
Sidow A (1996) Gen(om)e duplications in the evolution of early vertebrates. Curr Opin Genet Dev
6:715–722
Stephenson-Jones M, Samuelsson E, Ericsson J, Robertson B, Grillner S (2011) Evolutionary
conservation of the basal ganglia as a common vertebrate mechanism for action selection. Curr
Biol 21:1081–1091
StolﬁA, Ryan K, Meinertzhagen IA, Christiaen L (2015) Migratory neuronal progenitors arise
from the neural plate borders in tunicates. Nature 527:371–374
Strausfeld NJ, Hirth F (2013) Deep homology of arthropod central complex and vertebrate basal
ganglia. Science 340:157–161
Streit A (2007) The preplacodal region: an ectodermal domain with multipotential progenitors that
contribute to sense organs and cranial sensory ganglia. Int J Dev Biol 51:447–461
Striedter GF (2005) Principles of brain evolution. Sinauer, Sunderland
Sugahara F, Aota S, Kuraku S, Murakami Y, Takio-Ogawa Y, Hirano S, Kuratani S (2011)
Involvement of Hedgehog and FGF signalling in the lamprey telencephalon: evolution of
regionalization and dorsoventral patterning of the vertebrate forebrain. Development 138:1217–
1226
Sugahara F, Murakami Y, Adachi N, Kuratani S (2013) Evolution of the regionalization and
patterning of the vertebrate telencephalon: what can we learn from cyclostomes? Curr Opin
Genet Dev 23:475–483
Sugahara F, Pascual-Anaya J, Oisi Y, Kuraku S, Aota S, Adachi N, Takagi W, Hirai T, Sato N,
Murakami Y, Kuratani S (2016) Evidence from cyclostomes for complex regionalization of the
ancestral vertebrate brain. Nature 531:97–100
Suzuki M, Morita H, Ueno N (2012) Molecular mechanisms of cell shape changes that contribute
to vertebrate neural tube closure. Dev Growth Differ 54:266–276
Suzuki DG, Murakami Y, Yamazaki Y, Wada H (2015a) Expression patterns of Eph genes in the
“dual visual development” of the lamprey and their signiﬁcance in the evolution of vision in
vertebrates. Evol Dev 17:139–147
Suzuki DG, Murakami Y, Escriva H, Wada H (2015b) A comparative examination of neural circuit
and brain patterning between the lamprey and amphioxus reveals the evolutionary origin of the
vertebrate visual center. J Comp Neurol 523:251–261
Takio Y, Kuraku S, Murakami Y, Pasqualetti M, Rijli FM, Narita Y, Kuratani S, Kusakabe R (2007)
Hox gene expression patterns in Lethenteron japonicum embryos: insights into the evolution of
the vertebrate Hox code. Dev Biol 308:606–620
Tanaka G, Hou X, Ma X, Edgecombe GD, Strausfeld NJ (2013) Chelicerate neural ground pattern
in a Cambrian great appendage arthropod. Nature 502:364–367
Tank EM, Dekker RG, Beauchamp K, Wilson KA, Boehmke AE, Langeland JA (2009) Patterns
and consequences of vertebrate Emx gene duplications. Evol Dev 11:343–353
Theveneau E, Mayor R (2012) Neural crest delamination and migration: from epithelium-to-
mesenchyme transition to collective cell migration. Dev Biol 366:34–54
Tomer R, Denes AS, Tessmar-Raible K, Arendt D (2010) Proﬁling by image registration reveals
common origin of annelid mushroom bodies and vertebrate pallium. Cell 142:800–809
Toresson H, Martinez-Barbera JP, Bardsley A, Caubit X, Krauss S (1998) Conservation of BF-1
expression in amphioxus and zebraﬁsh suggests evolutionary ancestry of anterior cell types that
contribute to the vertebrate telencephalon. Dev Genes Evol 208:431–439

252
Y. Murakami
Tosa Y, Tsukano K, Itoyama T, Fukagawa M, Nii Y, Ishikawa R, Suzuki KT, Fukui M, Kawaguchi
M, Murakami Y (2015) Involvement of Slit-Robo signaling in the development of the posterior
commissure and concomitant swimming behavior in Xenopus laevis. Zool Lett 1:28
Vaage S (1969) The segmentation of the primitive neural tube in chick embryos (Gallus
domesticus). Ergeb Anat Entw Gesch 4:1–88
Venkatesh TV, Holland ND, Holland LZ, Su MT, Bodmer R (1999) Sequence and developmental
expression of amphioxus AmphiNk2-1: insights into the evolutionary origin of the vertebrate
thyroid gland and forebrain. Dev Genes Evol 209:254–259
von Baer K (1828) Über die Entwickelungsgeschichte der Thiere. Königsberg
Voogd J, Glickstein M (1998) The anatomy of the cerebellum. Trends Neurosci 21:370–375
Wicht H, Lacalli TC (2005) The nervous system of amphioxus: structure, development, and
evolutionary signiﬁcance. Can J Zool 83:122–150
Wicht H, Northcutt RG (1992) The forebrain of the Paciﬁc hagﬁsh: a cladistic reconstruction of
the ancestral craniate forebrain. Brain Behav Evol 40:25–64
Wilkinson DG, Bhatt S, Chavrier P, Bravo R, Charnay P (1989) Segment-speciﬁc expression of a
zinc-ﬁnger gene in the developing nervous system of the mouse. Nature 337:461–464
Wilson SW, Rubenstein JL (2000) Induction and dorsoventral patterning of the telencephalon.
Neuron 28:641–651
Witkovsky P, Roberts BL (1975) The light microscopical structure of the mesencephalic nucleus
of the ﬁfth nerve in the selachian brain. Proc R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 190:457–471
Witmer LM, Ridgely RC (2009) New insights into the brain, braincase, and ear region of
tyrannosaurs (Dinosauria, Theropoda), with implications for sensory organization and behavior.
Anat Rec 292:1266–1296
Witmer LM, Chatterjee S, Franzosa J, Rowe T (2003) Neuroanatomy of ﬂying reptiles and
implications for ﬂight, posture and behaviour. Nature 425:950–953
Wullimann MF, Mueller T (2004) Teleostean and mammalian forebrains contrasted: evidence from
genes to behavior. J Comp Neurol 475:143–162
Wullimann MF, Puelles L (1999) Postembryonic neural proliferation in the zebraﬁsh forebrain and
its relationship to prosomeric domains. Anat Embryol 199:329–348
Yajima H, Suzuki M, Ochi H, Ikeda K, Sato S, Yamamura K, Ogino H, Ueno N, Kawakami K
(2014) Six1 is a key regulator of the developmental and evolutionary architecture of sensory
neurons in craniates. BMC Biol 12:40
Yamada T, Placzek M, Tanaka H, Dodd J, Jessell TM (1991) Control of cell pattern in the devel-
oping nervous system: polarizing activity of the ﬂoor plate and notochord. Cell 64:635–647
Yamamoto N, Kato T, Okada Y, Somiya H (2010) Somatosensory nucleus in the torus semicircu-
laris of cyprinid teleosts. J Comp Neurol 518:2475–2502
Yu JK, Holland ND, Holland LZ (2002) An amphioxus winged helix/forkhead gene, AmphiFoxD:
insights into vertebrate neural crest evolution. Dev Dyn 225:289–297

Chapter 10
Adaptive Radiation and Vertebrate Brain
Diversity: Cases of Teleosts
Naoyuki Yamamoto
Abstract There are numerous species of teleosts in the world. In their widespread
distribution in divergent environments, different teleost species have employed
variable strategies for survival. The diversity in niches and habits is reﬂected in
the morphology of teleost brains, although all the major brain parts are present that
are common to other vertebrates. Species differences are particularly remarkable
in the external morphology of sensory brain regions. Generally speaking, the brain
part bulges, which is involved in the processing of the most “important” sensory
modality for that species. Thus, one can imagine, to a certain extent, the lifestyle
of a teleost species, just by looking at its external brain morphology. However,
there are also cases of amazing diversity, the reasons for which remain unknown.
The diversity of teleost brain morphology is introduced in this chapter, presenting
selected cases among the virtually inﬁnite variety. In addition to the intra-teleostean
diversity just mentioned, there are features in brain organization that are speciﬁc
to teleosts (and related non-teleostean actinopterygians) but are lacking in other
vertebrates, which is also demonstrated in this chapter. Diversity can be also found
in such teleost-speciﬁc structures.
Keywords Teleosts • Brain • Morphology • External appearance • Diversity •
Niche • Evolution
Abbreviations
a
axon
alln
anterior lateral line nerve
ALMs major spinal accessory lobes
ALm
minor spinal accessory lobe
CC
cerebellar corpus (corpus cerebelli)
cf
climbing ﬁber
N. Yamamoto ()
Laboratory of Fish Biology, Graduate School of Bioagricultural Sciences, Nagoya University,
Furo-cho, Chikusa-ku, Nagoya 464-8601, Japan
e-mail: nyama@agr.nagoya-u.ac.jp
© Springer Japan KK 2017
S. Shigeno et al. (eds.), Brain Evolution by Design, Diversity and Commonality
in Animals, DOI 10.1007/978-4-431-56469-0_10
253

254
N. Yamamoto
CrC
cerebellar crest (crista cerebellaris)
d
dendrite
DI
diencephalon
EG
granular eminence (eminentia granualaris)
ELLL electrosensory lateral line lobe
Eur
eurydendroid cell
g
granule cell
GCL
granule cell layer
GL
glomerular layer
GrL
granular layer
L
lateral granular cell part of TL
l
lateral ﬁbrous part of TL
LI
inferior lobe (part of diencephalon)
LVII
facial lobe
LIX
glossopharyngeal lobe
LX
vagal lobe
M
medial granular cell part of TL
m
medial ﬁbrous part of TL
MCL
mitral cell layer
ME
mesencephalon
ML
molecular layer
MO
medulla oblongata
nI
olfactory nerve
nII
optic nerve
nIII
oculomotor nerve
nIV
trochlear nerve
nV
trigeminal nerve
nVII
facial nerve
nVIII octaval nerve
nIX
glossopharyngeal nerve
nX
vagal nerve
OB
olfactory bulb
OE
olfactory epithelium
ot
olfactory tract
OT
optic tectum (part of mesencephalon)
otr
optic tract
P
pons
pc
posterior commissure
PCL
Purkinje cell layer
pf
parallel ﬁber
Pit
pituitary
plln
posterior lateral line nerve
Pur
Purkinje cell
Pyr
pyramidal cell
SAC
stratum album centrale

10
Adaptive Radiation and Vertebrate Brain Diversity: Cases of Teleosts
255
SC
spinal cord
SFGS stratum ﬁbrosum et griseum superﬁciale
SGC
stratum griseum centrale
SM
stratum marginale
SO
stratum opticum
SPV
stratum periventriculare
TE
telencephalon
TL
torus longitudinalis
TS
torus semicircularis
VC
cerebellar valvula (valvula cerebelli)
VCl
lateral lobe of VC
VCm
medial lobe of VC
10.1
Diversity of Teleosts
More than 25,000 extant species constitute the teleosts, making this lineage the
largest among vertebrates. Their habitats range from the Equator to the polar
regions, from the deep sea and seashores to lakes and rivers. Some species even
dwell in the darkness of caves. Living in the same area, some species prefer rocky
bottoms, others live on sandy bottoms, and still others stay on seaweed beds. Also,
there are nocturnal as well as diurnal species. Feeding habits also differ: there are
carnivorous, herbivorous, and omnivorous species. Adapting to the environmental
features of their habitats with speciﬁc lifestyles, the external morphology of teleosts
show a fascinating variety (Nelson 2006). Interestingly, the diversity of niches and
habits is also reﬂected in the morphology of brains in teleosts, as exempliﬁed
by Kotrschal et al. (1998) regarding the external morphology. In this chapter, the
diversity of brains is described and discussed at the levels of external morphology
as well as histology (cytoarchitecture).
10.2
Teleost Brains Are Composed of Brain Parts Common
to Other Vertebrates
Before jumping into the jungle of diversity in teleost brain morphology, the
organization of the brains in teleosts is brieﬂy explained to facilitate a better
understanding of subsequent sections. The brains of teleosts are composed of the
telencephalon (cerebrum), diencephalon, mesencephalon (midbrain), pons (pontine
region), cerebellum, and medulla oblongata, the latter continuing to the spinal cord
(as shown in Fig. 10.1). Figure 10.1 also illustrates cranial nerves, for convenience
of subsequent sections, where different cranial nerves are mentioned to explain brain
centers. Although it is frequently supposed that the brains of teleosts lack the pons,

256
N. Yamamoto
Fig. 10.1 Dorsolateral view of the brain and spinal cord of the common carp Cyprinus carpio,
showing major parts of the brain and cranial nerves. The sixth cranial nerve or abducens nerve,
which emerges from the ventral aspect of the rhombencephalon, is not visible. Rostral is to the left.
See list for abbreviations (Modiﬁed from Yamamoto 2005)
this is not the case. This popular misconception stems from the fact that teleosts do
not possess clearly identiﬁable “pontine nuclei” (although a probable homologue
is present: Yang et al. 2004), well-known nuclei in the mammalian pons that relay
cortical inputs to the cerebellum. However, the brain region corresponding to the
pons of mammals is clearly present, that is, the rhombencephalic region ventral to
the cerebellum. Thus, all the brain parts present in other vertebrates can be found in
the brains of teleosts.
10.3
Diversity in the Teleost Brains
10.3.1
Optic Tectum
The optic tectum of teleosts is the largest visual center, receiving direct retinal inputs
via the optic nerve (or axons of retinal ganglion cells), and occupies the dorsal
part of the mesencephalon, usually along its entire rostrocaudal and mediolateral
extent. The thread-sail ﬁleﬁsh, Stephanolepis cirrhifer, is a diurnal species living
mainly in groups on sandy bottoms of shallow water. The ﬁsh feed on crustaceans,
polychaetes, jellyﬁsh, and bivalves. The ﬁsh blow away sand to ﬁnd polychaetes
and bivalves, most likely dependent on vision. This species also relies on vision for
communication. They change color patterns on the body as well as the position of
the ﬁrst, spiny dorsal ﬁn ray, according to the social relationship to other individuals
(dominant, surrender, frightened, and so on) (Ito et al. 2007). This communication
is clearly dependent on vision, because changes in color patterns and the position
of the ray cannot be detected by other sensory modalities. The ﬁleﬁsh is known
to anglers as a notorious stealer of bait. They stand in front of the bait to see it

10
Adaptive Radiation and Vertebrate Brain Diversity: Cases of Teleosts
257
Fig. 10.2 Dorsal views of the brains and spinal cords of the thread-sail ﬁleﬁsh Stephanolepis
cirrhifer (a), the kidako moray Gymnothorax kidako (b), and the silver croaker Pennahia argentata
(c). Hypertrophied parts of the brain are drawn in gray. Rostral is to the top. See list for
abbreviations (Modiﬁed from Ito et al. 2007)
binocularly and frequently eat it before the angler becomes aware of this humiliating
fact. Thus, the life of the thread-sail ﬁleﬁsh is heavily dependent on vision. The optic
tectum is huge in this species (Fig. 10.2a). In a nocturnal species, the kidako moray
Gymnothorax kidako that is referred to in more detail in the next section, the optic
tectum is quite small (Fig. 10.2b).
10.3.2
Olfactory Bulb
The olfactory bulb is the primary center for olfaction. It receives axons of olfactory
receptor neurons (or the olfactory nerve) and sends ﬁbers mainly to the telen-
cephalon through the olfactory tract (Fig. 10.1). It is present just caudal to the
olfactory epithelium in some species such as the common carp (Fig. 10.1) and
catﬁshes (short olfactory nerves and long olfactory tracts, called the “stalked”
olfactory bulb), although rostrally adjacent to the telencephalon and away from the
olfactory epithelium in other species such as the thread-sail ﬁleﬁsh (Fig. 10.2a: long
olfactory nerves and short olfactory tracts, called the “sessile” olfactory bulb). These
two types of conﬁguration, therefore, provide another case of diversity in teleost

258
N. Yamamoto
brain morphology. The stalked type appears sporadically in the phylogenetic tree:
Osteoglossiformes (that includes arowanas), Ostariophysi (that includes catﬁshes
and cyprinids), and Gadiformes (that includes cod). No clear relationship with
the lifestyle or niche is recognized so far as the author has explored, and no
further survey on the two morphological types of the bulb is made in this chapter.
Signiﬁcant species differences, however, are clearly recognized in the size of the
olfactory bulb. For example, the olfactory bulb of the thread-sail ﬁleﬁsh is quite
small (Fig. 10.2a), whereas the bulb of the kidako moray is extremely hypertrophied
and is larger than the optic tectum as observed dorsally (Fig. 10.2b). The kidako
moray lives in reefs, staying in rock caves in the daytime. In the nighttime they come
out from the caves to feed on cephalopods (in particular, octopus), crustaceans, and
ﬁsh. The smells of their prey should provide important cues for hunting them under
the darkness of the night, and the olfactory epithelium is very large, accompanying
many olfactory lamellae. Interestingly, the cytoarchitecture of the olfactory bulb of
the moray is bizarre. The olfactory bulb of most teleost species shows a concentric
laminar organization (Fig. 10.3a, goldﬁsh) with small granule cells in the center,
similar to other vertebrates. However, the olfactory bulb of the moray appears to be
composed of many subregions, and groups of granule cell aggregates are scattered
in the bulb (Fig. 10.3b). Also, glomeruli are diffusely distributed within the bulb
without forming a layer (Fig. 10.3b). This unusual cytoarchitecture of the bulb in
the kidako moray might be advantageous in analyzing a large amount of olfactory
information.
Fig. 10.3 Transverse sections showing the cytoarchitecture of the olfactory bulb of the goldﬁsh
Carassius auratus (a: Nissl staining) and the kidako moray Gymnothorax kidako (b: Nissl
staining). Note concentric laminar organization of the olfactory bulb of goldﬁsh, with the granule
cell layer in the center. In the moray, however, granule cells form smaller aggregates (arrowheads)
that are scattered in the bulb. Similarly, the glomeruli (asterisks) are scattered within the bulb
without forming a layer. Bars 100 m (a); 500 m (b)

10
Adaptive Radiation and Vertebrate Brain Diversity: Cases of Teleosts
259
10.3.3
Cerebellar Crest
The cerebellar crest (crista cerebellaris in Latin) is a superﬁcial ﬁbrous layer
associated with the octavolateral (auditory, vestibular, and lateral line) nuclei in
the rostral medulla oblongata. The crest is composed of ﬁbers that originate
from granule cells in the eminentia granularis, a component of the cerebellum
in teleosts (see 10.4.2). Ventrally adjacent to the crest, the primary lateral line
nucleus is present laterally, and the primary and secondary auditory nuclei are
present medially. The primary lateral line nucleus receives information about water
movement from the lateral line organs, and the primary auditory nucleus receives
ﬁbers that arise from otolith organs in the inner ear; teleosts can detect underwater
sounds with otolith organs, although they do not possess externally visible ear
auricles and middle ears. Some neurons in the primary lateral line and auditory
nuclei extend dendrites into the cerebellar crest to receive input from ﬁbers from
the eminentia granularis. The secondary auditory nucleus is situated rostral to the
primary nucleus and receives ﬁbers from the primary auditory nucleus. Deep to
the three nuclei just enumerated are primary centers receiving sense of balance
(vestibular sense) from semicircular canals and otolith organs (i.e., otolith organs
serve for both hearing and vestibular sense). The silver croaker Pennahia argentata
is a species with a nocturnal trend that prefers strong, turbid tidal currents. In the
nighttime they come close to shore to hunt for polychaetes and crustaceans. They
have to maintain their balance for hunting under turbulence in the water’s edge in
the dark. Lateral line information and vestibular inputs should be important under
such circumstances. It should be also noted that this species makes sounds, or is
a sonic ﬁsh. When we grasp the ﬁsh, they grunt by vibrating their swim bladder
with sonic motor muscles. They likely use the sounds for communication in their
ordinary life. Related to the presumed sound communication, one of the otoliths
of the croaker is extremely large, which may reﬂect the high sensitivity of this
species to sounds. As enumerated, octavolateral information is of great importance
for the silver croaker. Sensory nuclei responsible for the processing of octavolateral
information become well developed, and the cerebellar crest overlying the nuclei
becomes swollen (Fig. 10.2c).
10.3.4
Primary Gustatory Centers
Taste buds are present on the tongue, pharynx, and upper larynx in humans.
Therefore, we can taste only those items that are put into our mouth. However,
taste buds are also present on the face and body surface in some species of teleosts,
which means that those species can taste potential food before they eat it, a feature
advantageous for their life under water. Cranial nerves that carry gustatory (taste)
sense are the facial (VII), glossopharyngeal (IX), and vagal (X) nerves, as in
mammals where the three cranial nerves project to the rostral part of the nucleus

260
N. Yamamoto
of the solitary tract in the medulla oblongata. In teleosts the facial nerve conveys
gustatory information from the rostral oral cavity as well as the body surface when
extra-oropharyngeal taste buds are present. The glossopharyngeal nerve carries
gustatory information from the caudal oral cavity and rostralmost pharynx. The
vagal nerve carries gustatory inputs from the caudal pharynx. The three cranial
nerves terminate in the dorsal part of the caudal medulla oblongata, basically
according to the numerical order of the nerves from rostral to caudal. In some
species, such as the thread-sail ﬁleﬁsh and the rainbow trout Oncorhynchus mykiss,
the terminal zones of the three nerves cannot be distinguished as observed externally
(Figs. 10.2a and 10.4a) (Meek and Nieuwenhuys 1998) or by observations of
nonexperimentalbrain sections. In such a case the terminal zones of the three nerves,
which form together a rostrocaudally elongate primary gustatory column, may be
collectively called the nucleus of the solitary tract after the mammalian terminology
(Meek and Nieuwenhuys 1998). The rainbow trout ﬁnd their prey (smaller ﬁsh and
insects) mainly by relying on vision, and the contribution of the gustatory sense
does not appear quite signiﬁcant; this is evident considering that we can ﬁsh for
trout with lures that do not emit tasty substances. The morphology of the primary
gustatory centers in teleosts with well-developed taste sensory systems is quite
different from that of the rainbow trout and thread-sail ﬁleﬁsh. For example, the
caudalmost region of the primary gustatory zone forms a bilateral pair of huge
bulges in the goldﬁsh (Fig. 10.4b). The region receives vagally mediated taste
information and is hence called the vagal lobe. The goldﬁsh frequently suck the
bottom of the water body in search of food. Connected to this behavior, the goldﬁsh
Fig. 10.4 Dorsal views of the brains and spinal cords of the rainbow trout Oncorhynchus mykiss
(a), the goldﬁsh Carassius auratus (b), the common carp Cyprinus carpio (c), the zebraﬁsh Danio
rerio (d), and the Bensasi goatﬁsh Upeneus japonicus (e). Hypertrophied parts of the brain are
drawn in gray or shaded. Rostral is to the top. See list for abbreviations (b, c, e are modiﬁed from
Ito et al. 2007)

10
Adaptive Radiation and Vertebrate Brain Diversity: Cases of Teleosts
261
possess a specialized muscular organ in the roof of the pharynx, called the palatal
organ. There are many taste buds on the surface of the palatal organ and gill
rakers facing the organ. Edible particles, which are detected by the taste buds,
are sandwiched between the gill rakers and the palatal organ (the region of the
organ touching the edible particle protrudes) but sand or mud is not. The latter is
washed back out of the mouth, and the goldﬁsh then swallow the edible particles
that remain in the pharyngeal cavity (Finger 2008). Imagine that you put into your
mouth 50 plastic balls 1 mm in diameter together with 50 candies of 1-mm diameter
and then spit out the plastic balls, leaving the candies in your mouth. I do not
think you can anticipate a happy ending with a lot of tasty candies and without
any plastic balls in your mouth. The goldﬁsh can do such sorting. To determine
exact positions of edible particles and protrude tiny portions of the palatal organ
that are exactly facing the particles should require much information processing
and hence many neurons, leading to the hypertrophied “vagal lobe.” The goldﬁsh
also possess taste buds on the body surface, and hence a corresponding, relatively
large primary gustatory region is present that is called the facial lobe (Fig. 10.5a).
This bulge, however, is not easily visible externally because gigantic vagal lobes
cover it dorsally (Figs. 10.4b and 10.5a). The glossopharyngeal lobe is also present
in the goldﬁsh. The glossopharyngeal nerve innervates relatively small regions
of the pharyngeal wall and gill rakers, and thus is thin in comparison with the
facial or vagal nerves. Therefore, the glossopharyngeal lobe is much smaller than
the facial and vagal lobes and is not identiﬁable by external observations, hidden
between the facial and vagal lobes. It can be identiﬁed as observed with transverse
sections (Fig. 10.5a). The common carp Cyprinus carpio also possess large vagal
lobes, because this cyprinid species also uses the palatal organ for sorting food
from inedible items (Fig. 10.4c). Being different from the closely related goldﬁsh,
however, the common carp have a huge facial lobe (Fig. 10.4c), which is related
to the presence of barbels on the snout of the common carp, whereas the goldﬁsh
have no barbel. There are many taste buds on the surface of the barbels, leading to
an increased amount of information that has to be processed in the facial lobe of
the carp. The hypertrophied facial lobe is visible externally in the common carp, in
spite of the presence of large vagal lobes. Pseudogobio esocinus (Japanese common
name: kamatsuka) and Misgurunus anguillicaudatus (pond loach), two species of
cyprinids equipped with barbels around the mouth, also possess a huge facial lobe
(Tuge et al. 1968). The vagal lobe is also huge in these cyprinid species. Enlarged
vagal lobes as enumerated here are cases from cyprinids. Therefore, one might
suspect that this is a character common to all cyprinids (phylogenetically conserved
trait) rather than reﬂecting the niche and behavior of each species. This assumption
is not correct. The vagal lobe of the zebraﬁsh Danio rerio, another species of
cyprinids, is not as pronounced as those in the goldﬁsh or common carp and does
not bulge out (Fig. 10.4d). The zebraﬁsh feed mainly on planktonic items in the
water column (Spence et al. 2008), differing from those cyprinid species with the
huge vagal lobe enumerated here that prefer the bottom of the water and feed from
the substratum. A still different case of diversity in the primary taste centers can be
found in the Bensasi goatﬁsh Upeneus japonicus. The goatﬁsh possess a pair of long

262
N. Yamamoto
Fig. 10.5 Transverse sections through the primary gustatory centers of the goldﬁsh Carassius
auratus (a: Nissl staining), the torus longitudinalis (TL) of the goldﬁsh (b: Nissl staining), the TL
of the north Paciﬁc squirrelﬁsh Sargocentron spinosissimum (c–d: Bodian staining), the TL of the
Japanese riceﬁsh (medaka) Oryzias latipes (e: Bodian staining), and the TL of the yellowﬁn goby
Acanthogobius ﬂavimanus (f: Nissl staining). Note that the size and cytoarchitecture of the TL vary
substantially in different species of teleosts. See list for other abbreviations. Bars 500 m (a, b, c,
f); 100 m (d, e, inset of f); 50 m (inset of e)
barbels extending from the lower jaw. Being different from barbels in most other
ﬁshes, the barbels of the goatﬁsh are mobile. The ﬁsh swim close to the bottom
and vigorously move the barbels in different directions to touch the bottom. The
barbels are probes to search for shrimps and sand shrimps and thus are equipped
with numerous taste buds (Kiyohara et al. 2002). Gustatory information detected

10
Adaptive Radiation and Vertebrate Brain Diversity: Cases of Teleosts
263
by the barbels is mediated to the facial lobe, because the taste buds are present on
the external body surface. The facial lobe of the goatﬁsh is hence large. In the case
of the goatﬁsh, however, the facial lobe is not only large but also wrinkled as is
our cerebral cortex (Fig. 10.4e). The reason why the facial lobe is wrinkled remains
unclear but this phenotype may be related to the fact that the barbels of the goatﬁsh
are mobile, in contrast to those of other species, including the common carp. The
facial lobe of the goatﬁsh is composed of small and large neurons, and together
with ﬁbers these cell types form layers in the facial lobe (Ito and Yoshimoto 1991).
That is, the facial lobe of the goatﬁsh is a sheet-like structure whereas the facial
lobe in other teleosts such as the goldﬁsh is a mass of neurons (see Fig. 10.5a).
The goatﬁsh have to know the direction of the barbel when a shrimp touches it
to calculate the precise position of the shrimp that should be targeted as a prey.
This action would require computation and integration of sensory and motor-related
information, and the laminar organization of neurons may be necessary to perform
such a task. To increase the power of information processing, such a sheet-like
structure has to enlarge the area rather than the mass. To be housed in the cranial
cavity that should have some upper limit in volume, the surface of facial lobe in
the goatﬁsh has become wrinkled. The vagal lobe is also laminated in the goldﬁsh
(Fig. 10.5a) and common carp, probably because the lobe also processes sensory
as well as motor-related (control on the protrusion of palatal organ) information in
these species as well. The vagal lobes are not wrinkled in these cyprinids, however,
perhaps because the cranial cavity still has room to house the unfolded vagal lobes
of these species.
10.3.5
Spinal Cord
The spinal cord is not a part of the brain. However, spectacular cases of diversity,
which can be also found in this part of the central nervous system, are introduced in
this section. The northern sea robin Prionotus carolinus “walk” on sandy bottoms
using modiﬁed pectoral ﬁns as if they were limbs. There are three pairs of free
ﬁn rays lacking the membranous ﬁn between them, and they move independently
from each other and from the ordinary part of the pectoral ﬁn with membranes. The
three pairs of free pectoral ﬁn rays are used for locomotion, while the remaining,
ordinary portions of the pectoral ﬁns are used for swimming and threatening (by
expanding the ﬁn; it is colorful). Although “walking” on pectoral ﬁns is bizarre
enough for a ﬁsh, this is not the whole story. The free ﬁn rays are equipped with
specialized chemosensory cells called solitary chemosensory cells (Whitear 1971).
Solitary chemosensory cells are similar to single taste cells in taste buds. Multiple
taste cells are present in single taste buds. However, solitary chemosensory cells
are “solitary”; they do not form groups. In rodents, solitary chemosensory cells
can be found in the lumen of the digestive tract (Sbarbati and Osculati 2003) and
on the walls of the nasal cavity (in the respiratory epithelium, not in the olfactory
epithelium involved in olfaction) (Finger et al. 2003). However, they can be found

264
N. Yamamoto
also on the body surface in teleosts. While “walking,” the free spiny ﬁn rays are
used to detect prey (shrimps, crabs, and small ﬁsh); that is, the sea robin is not
walking just for fun but is utilizing this behavior in a serious search for prey. Three
conspicuous pairs of bulges, called major spinal accessory lobes, are found on the
dorsal aspect of the rostral spinal cord of the sea robin (Fig. 10.6a) (Finger 2000).
They correspond to the terminal zones of three spinal nerves innervating the three
free rays. Another pair of less pronounced bulges, called minor spinal accessory
lobes, is also found on the dorsal aspect of the rostral spinal cord; they receive
inputs from the ordinary part of the pectoral ﬁns. The spinal cords of teleosts are
usually very long, occupying much of the rostrocaudal extent of the vertebral canal.
However, the spinal cord of the long-spined porcupine ﬁsh Diodon holocanthus
is extremely short (Fig. 10.6b). Surprisingly, it is shorter than the brain. There
are a number of species in Tetraodontiformes (puffers and ﬁleﬁshes) with such
a short spinal cord (e.g., ocean sunﬁsh Mola mola). However, other species of
Tetraodontiformes (e.g., the thread-sail ﬁleﬁsh and blunthead puffer Sphoeroides
pachygaster) possess an ordinary, long spinal cord (Figs. 10.2a and 10.6c). The
reason why the spinal cord has to be (and can be) so short in some species of
Tetraodontiformes is not known.
Fig. 10.6 Dorsal views of the brains and spinal cords of the northern sea robin Prionotus carolinus
(a), the long-spined porcupine ﬁsh Diodon holocanthus (b), the blunthead puffer Sphoeroides
pachygaster (c), and the elephant-nose ﬁsh Gnathonemus petersii (d). The olfactory bulb (OB) is
not visible in the longspined porcupine ﬁsh (b) because it is hidden below the large telencephalon
(TE). The olfactory nerve (nI) can be seen. The OB of the elephant-nose ﬁsh is of stalked type (d);
this species belongs to Osteoglossiformes. It should be also noted that only the lateral margins of
the telencephalon (TE) and a posterior portion of the electrosensory lateral line lobe (ELLL) are
visible dorsally, while the rest of the brain is covered completely by the hypertrophied cerebellar
valvula (VC) in the elephantnose ﬁsh (d). Hypertrophied and underdeveloped parts of the brain or
spinal cord are drawn in gray. Rostral is to the top. See list for other abbreviations (a is modiﬁed
from Ito et al. 2007)

10
Adaptive Radiation and Vertebrate Brain Diversity: Cases of Teleosts
265
10.4
Brain Regions Speciﬁc to Teleosts and Their Diversity
As mentioned in Sect. 10.2, the brains of teleosts possess all the major parts common
to other vertebrates. However, there are a few brain regions that are not present in
other vertebrates. Such teleost-speciﬁc structures are be introduced in this section,
together with cases of diversity found in those structures.
10.4.1
Torus Longitudinalis
A pair of columnar structures runs longitudinally and ventrally adjacent to the
medial margin of the optic tectum (goldﬁsh: Fig. 10.5b), called the tori longitu-
dinales (sing. torus longitudinalis). The torus can be found in most actinopterygian
lineages: teleosts, the bowﬁn (Amia calva), Lepisosteiformes (gars), and Acipen-
siformes (sturgeons and paddleﬁshes). The torus longitudinalis, however, is not
present in Polypteryformes. [In this chapter Polypteryformes is regarded as an
actinopterygian lineage, although some researchers consider that Polypteryformes
is closely related to sarcopterygians (lungﬁshes and coelacanths) rather than
Actinopterygii.] The torus longitudinalis is composed of small cells similar to the
granule cells of the cerebellum. In fact, the torus is a component of a neural circuitry
that is similar to that seen in the cerebellum. In the cerebellum, axons of granule cells
run though the molecular layer parallel to each other and make synaptic contacts
with the spiny dendrites of Purkinje cells (Fig. 10.7). The axons of toral cells run
through the most superﬁcial layer of the optic tectum, the stratum marginale or
marginal layer (Fig. 10.5c), which is lacking in the optic tectum of vertebrates
without the torus longitudinalis. Similarly to cerebellar parallel ﬁbers, toral ﬁbers
run parallel to each other through the layer and are called parallel ﬁbers (or
marginal ﬁbers). The stratum marginale also contains dendrites that originate from
tectal neurons situated in a deeper layer (stratum ﬁbrosum et griseum superﬁciale:
superﬁcial layer of ﬁbers and gray matter). These tectal cells are called pyramidal
cells. Their superﬁcial dendrites are spiny and show a fan-shaped branching pattern
within the stratum marginale, similar to those of the Purkinje cells in the cerebellum.
These dendrites make synaptic contacts with toral ﬁbers, a conﬁguration reminiscent
of parallel ﬁber–Purkinje cell synapses in the cerebellum (Fig. 10.7). In contrast to
the Purkinje cells, however, pyramidal cells of teleosts also possess a basal dendrite
that extends into deeper tectal layers (Xue et al. 2003). The axon of pyramidal cells
forms terminals in a small dimension of a deep tectal layer. The target cell type
of pyramidal cell axons remains unclear. Gibbs and Northmore (1996) proposed
that the torus longitudinalis is involved in the processing of luminance information.
Details of the functions of the torus, however, await further study. The size of
the torus longitudialis varies substantially in different species. For example, the
torus of the north Paciﬁc squirrelﬁsh Sargocentron spinosissimum is amazingly
large (Fig. 10.5c), but the torus longitudinalis of the Japanese riceﬁsh (medaka)

266
N. Yamamoto
Fig. 10.7 Schematic illustrations showing neural circuits of the torus longitudinalis (TL)-optic
tectum (OT) (a) and the cerebellar corpus (CC) (b). (a) Granule cells (g) of the TL send axons
to the stratum marginale (SM) of the OT. These axons run parallel to each other and are called
parallel ﬁbers (pf) or marginal ﬁbers. Parallel ﬁbers make synaptic contacts with spiny superﬁcial
dendrites of pyramidal cells (Pyr). The target tectal cell type of pyramidal cells remains unknown.
(b) Axons of the granule cells of the cerebellum reach the molecular layer (ML), where they run
parallel to each other (hence called parallel ﬁbers) to make synaptic contacts with spiny dendrites
of Purkinje cells (Pur). Dendrites of Purkinje cells spread in the plane perpendicular to parallel
ﬁbers and thus two-dimensional spread of the dendrites cannot be appreciated in this illustration.
Purkinje cells receive another input from the inferior olive, which is carried by climbing ﬁbers (cf).
Climbing ﬁbers of teleosts form busy axon terminal arbors around the proximal dendrite (Xue et al.
2008), differing from those of mammals that “climb” superﬁcially along the Purkinje cell dendrite.
Purkinje cells send an axon to eurydendroid cells (Eur). Eurydendroid cells are output neurons of
the cerebellum in teleosts and hence correspond to neurons of cerebellar nuclei of mammals. For
other abbreviations, see the list
Oryzias latipes is quite small (Fig. 10.5e). The cytoarchitecture of the torus also
show species differences. In the north Paciﬁc squirrelﬁsh the torus can be subdivided
into medial and lateral parts, each of which is composed of a granular cell zone and
a ﬁbrous zone (Fig. 10.5d). Such subdivisions are not recognized in the goldﬁsh,
the Japanese riceﬁsh, or the yellowﬁn goby Acanthogobius ﬂavimanus (Fig. 10.5b,
e, f). In the yellowﬁn goby, a thick shell of small cells enclose the core with
scattered cells (Fig. 10.5f), a cytoarchitecture dissimilar to those in the north Paciﬁc
squirrelﬁsh, goldﬁsh, or Japanese riceﬁsh. Thus, the size and cytoarchitecture of the
torus longitudinalis show quite a bit of variation in teleosts. The reason for such
diversity, however, remains an open question.

10
Adaptive Radiation and Vertebrate Brain Diversity: Cases of Teleosts
267
10.4.2
Cerebellar Valvula
The cerebellum of mammals is composed of the hemisphere, vermis, and ﬂocculo-
nodular lobe (Steward 2000). The cerebellar hemisphere receives cortical inputs
relayed by the pontine nuclei. The vermis mainly receives ascending spinal inputs.
The ﬂocculo-nodular lobe is related to equilibrium and control of eye movement
and receives ﬁbers of the vestibular nerve. The cerebellum of teleosts is composed
of the cerebellar corpus, cerebellar valvula, granular eminence, and caudal lobe.
The cerebellar corpus receives inputs from the spinal cord (Finger 2000) and
telencephalic inputs relayed by the lateral valvular nucleus (Yang et al. 2004) and
hence appears to include components comparable to the hemisphere and vermis
of mammals. The granular eminence is a protrusion that is situated caudolaterally
adjacent to the corpus. It receives sense of balance through primary afferents of the
octaval nerve and lateral line inputs via the lateral line nerve (Yamamoto and Ito
2005; Noro et al. 2007) and projects to the molecular layer of caudal lobe (and also
to the cerebellar crest covering the primary lateral line nucleus, and the cerebellar
crest overlying primary and secondary auditory nuclei, as mentioned earlier). The
caudal lobe is the caudalmost region of the cerebellum, which is present caudally
adjacent to the cerebellar corpus. The granular eminence and caudal lobe receiving
ﬁbers from the eminence may be comparable, as a unit, to the ﬂocculo-nodular
lobe of mammals. Although correspondences of teleost cerebellar regions to mam-
malian cerebellar regions need to be veriﬁed by further studies, those teleost and
mammalian cerebellar regions just mentioned are common in that they are present
dorsal to the pons. The remaining cerebellar region in teleosts, or the cerebellar
valvula, is not situated dorsal to the pons. It protrudes rostrally, from the cerebellar
corpus into the mesencephalic ventricle. The cerebellar valvula is present in all
actinopterygians except Polypteryformes. It is not found in non-actinopterygian
vertebrates. The cerebellar valvula receives descending telencephalic inputs relayed
by the lateral valvular nucleus (Yang et al. 2004) but does not appear to receive
spinal inputs; a number of previous studies on spinal connections did not report such
a connection. The functional signiﬁcance of the valvula is not well known, although
a previous study reported that the common carp sank down onto the bottom after the
ablation of the valvula (Ito and Kishida 1978). The cerebellar valvula also shows
species differences. In the Japanese riceﬁsh the valvula is small without further
divisions (Fig. 10.8a). However, it is very large in the goldﬁsh and is composed
of medial and lateral lobes (Fig. 10.8b); the former continues caudally toward
the cerebellar corpus. We can see an incredible case of diversity in the cerebellar
valvula. The valvula of the elephant nose ﬁsh Gnathonemus petersii (Mormyridae)
reaches an enormous dimension to cover almost completely the other parts of the
brain (Fig. 10.6d). This is similar to the situation of us humans, where the cerebral
cortex covers the other parts of the brain almost entirely (except the cerebellum), as
seen in a dorsal view. The elephant nose ﬁsh is a so-called weakly electric ﬁsh that
emits weak electric currents to survey the environment and also to communicate
with other individuals. The ﬁsh also possess well-developed electrosensory lateral

268
N. Yamamoto
Fig. 10.8 Transverse sections showing the cerebellar valvula (VC) of the Japanese riceﬁsh Oryzias
latipes (a: Nissl staining) and the goldﬁsh Carassius auratus (b: Nissl staining). Note that the VC
of the goldﬁsh is very large and composed of the lateral (VCl) and medial (VCm) lobes, whereas
the VC of the riceﬁsh is quite small and not subdivided into lobes. See list for other abbreviations.
Bars 100 m (a); 500 m (b)
line systems (Fig. 10.6d): the primary sensory structure, the electrosensory lateral
line lobe, is huge but only a part of it is visible, hidden by the large cerebellar
valvula. This amazing hypertrophy may be related to electrosensory processing or
control of electric discharges. However, other weakly electric ﬁsh do not possess
such a large valvula [e.g., the banded knifeﬁsh Gymnotus carapo (Gymonotidae)] .
The actual cause for this fantastic case of diversity, therefore, remains to be studied
further.
10.5
Motor Zones
In general, the cerebellum of vertebrates is involved in motor control in that it
processes information that ultimately regulates proper activity patterns of motor
neurons. Cerebellar neurons, however, do not directly innervate the muscles or
motor neurons (Steward 2000; Meek and Nieuwenhuys 1998). Diversity can be
found in the size of cerebellum in teleosts (e.g., compare the northern sea robin
and long-spined porcupine ﬁsh: Fig. 10.6a, b). However, diversity is not evident
regarding the brain regions where motor neurons are present in teleosts. For
example, bulges are not seen along the ventral aspect of the spinal cord, where motor
neurons are embedded. Lethotremus awae (Japanese common name: dango-uo) is
a small lampﬁsh 3–4 cm in length. This species adheres to rocks or seaweeds with
a sucker or the modiﬁed ventral ﬁns. The author investigated the ventral aspect of
spinal cord of this species in search of a bulge associated with the motor control of
the sucker. Such an enlargement, however, was not found. The Japanese ﬂyingﬁsh
Cypselurus agoo possesses a pair of huge pectoral ﬁns that are used while gliding.
Similarly to the negative ﬁnding in Lethotremus awae, no bulges are appreciated on

10
Adaptive Radiation and Vertebrate Brain Diversity: Cases of Teleosts
269
the ventral aspect of the spinal cord in the ﬂyingﬁsh (Tuge et al. 1968). In short,
no distinct bulges or lobes such as those seen in the sensory regions as described
here are present on regions that contain motor neurons, so far as the author is
aware. In the spinal cord of mammals slightly thickened regions are recognized
at cervical and lumbar levels (cervical and lumbar enlargements) (Steward 2000).
These enlargements are thought to reﬂect the presence of more sensory and motor
neurons required for limbs in comparison with the trunk, where the skins are less
sensitive to mechanical stimuli and less elaborate muscular systems are present.
That is, the enlargements probably emerge from combinatorial effects of sensory
and motor requirements. Thus, motor zones per se do not form evident bulges,
although sensory zones sometimes result in drastic enlargements. The reason for
this difference between the sensory zones and motor zones is not really clear but
may be explained as follows. When numerous sensory cells are devoted for greater
precision and higher sensitivity of a sensory organ, many sensory neurons have
to work in the central nervous system. If sensory inputs from many receptor cells
converge on much fewer sensory neurons, this immediately results in a great loss in
resolution and/or sensitivity; expending many cells for the sensory organ becomes
in vain. In the case of motor neurons, they receive inputs from premotor neurons
that conﬁgure patterns of motor neuron ﬁring. That is, much of the computation
necessary for appropriate control of muscles has already been done before the input
reaches the motor neurons; motor neurons just perform the ﬁnal integration of
afferent inputs. Also, motor neurons innervate multiple muscle ﬁbers via axonal
branching. Thus, the performance of complex behavior may not require a large
number of motor neurons. Simulations with computer models may provide a more
quantitative ground for the intuitive speculations mentioned here.
10.6
Developmental Processes that Produce Bulges
and Environmental Effects on Brain Morphology
Little is known about the ontogenetic processes leading to the bulged brain
regions. Sensory systems are mainly considered herein, because extreme cases of
hypertrophy are found mostly in sensory regions. The situations may differ among
different sensory modalities. For example, in the case of olfaction, the receptor
cells themselves are neurons having an axon that reaches the primary center, or
the olfactory bulb. The cause for the enlarged olfactory bulb as seen in the kidako
moray may be the increased number of sensory cells; some changes in the gene
network regulating the number of olfactory receptor cells may cause the larger
size of the olfactory bulb that receives olfactory information. The olfactory bulb is
not present when the olfactory placode (anlage of the olfactory epithelium) forms.
The olfactory bulb differentiates subsequent to the arrival of the olfactory nerve
(fascicle of olfactory receptor axons) onto the developing telencephalon (Honkanen
and Ekström 1991). Thus, it is possible that more olfactory nerve axons induce a

270
N. Yamamoto
larger number of telencephalic cells that are recruited into the developing olfactory
bulb, although it may not be ruled out that the number of future bulbar neurons
is determined on the side of the brain. It is also possible that both factors are
involved. Similar arguments may also apply to other sensory modalities where
receptor cells are neurons (e.g., free nerve endings in the skin). The story may be
different regarding senses that are detected and sent to the central nervous system
by two cells. For example, in the case of taste, gustatory stimuli are detected by taste
cells in the taste buds. Ganglion cells of the facial, glossopharyngeal,or vagal nerves
(primary sensory neurons) receive taste information on the peripheral process and
send action potentials to primary centers (i.e., facial, glossopharyngeal, and vagal
lobes), through their centrally directed axons. In this case, the cause for enlarged
gustatory centers can lie in the sensory receptor cells, primary sensory neurons, or
the secondary sensory neurons in the brain. The increase in the number of receptor
cells may affect the number of primary afferents reaching the receptor organs,
and in turn an increased number of primary afferents results in the production
of more secondary sensory neurons in the brain. Flow of inﬂuence in the reverse
direction, perhaps via trophic factors, might be also present. It is also possible that
an increased number of primary sensory neurons results in larger gustatory centers.
The amazing diversity of teleost brains, as enumerated in this chapter, provides
model cases to study the mechanisms that lead to hypertrophied or poorly developed
sensory systems and associated brain regions. The key to solve the question is the
mechanism that governs the number of cell divisions made by stem cells during
early phases of ontogeny. Differences in the size of brain parts seen in different
medaka strains reared under the same conditions suggest that genetic differences
underlie this issue (Ishikawa et al. 1999). Also importantly, the body as well as
sensory and nervous systems of teleosts continues to grow in adulthood, and the
mechanism that determines the number of newly recruited neurons should also
have an important role in shaping the brain of teleosts. In fact, the size of brain
parts is under the inﬂuences of the environment (Eifert et al. 2015). Therefore, the
mechanism of the emergence of diversity in brain morphology in teleosts should be
considered from the aspects of both genetic and environmental factors.
Acknowledgments The author appreciates Prof. Masami Yoshimoto (University of Tokyo Health
Sciences) and Dr. Yuji Ishikawa (National Institute of Radiological Sciences) for a continuing
collaboration that forms the basis of the topics introduced in this chapter. The author expresses
particular thanks to Prof. Emeritus Hironobu Ito (Nippon Medical School) for guiding me to the
fascinating world of ﬁsh brain morphology and instructing me about the enormous diversity.
References
Eifert C, Farnworth M, Schultz-Mirbach T, Riesch R, Bierbach D, Klaus S, Wurster A, Tobler M,
Streit B, Indy JR, Arias-Rodriguez L, Plath M (2015) Brain size variation in extremophile ﬁsh:
local adaptation versus phenotypic plasticity. J Zool 295:143–153
Finger TE (2000) Ascending spinal systems in the ﬁsh Prionotus carolinus. J Comp Neurol
422:106–122

10
Adaptive Radiation and Vertebrate Brain Diversity: Cases of Teleosts
271
Finger TE (2008) Sorting food from stones: the vagal taste systems in goldﬁsh, Carassius auratus.
J Comp Physiol A 194:135–143
Finger TE, Böttger B, Hansen A, Anderson KT, Alimohammadi H, Silver W (2003) Solitary
chemosensory cells in the nasal cavity serve as sentinels of respiration. Proc Natl Acad Sci
USA 100:8981–8986
Gibbs MA, Northmore DPM (1996) The role of torus longitudinalis in equilibrium orientation
measured with the dorsal light reﬂex. Brain Behav Evol 48:115–120
Honkanen T, Ekström P (1991) An immunocytochemical study of the development of the olfactory
system in the three-spined stickleback (Gasterosteus aculeatus L., Teleostei). Anat Embryol
184:469–477
Ishikawa Y, Yoshimoto M, Yamamoto N, Ito H (1999) Different brain morphologies from different
genotypes in a single teleost species, the medaka (Oryzias latipes). Brain Behav Evol 53:2–9
Ito H, Kishida R (1978) Afferent and efferent ﬁber connections of the carp torus longitudinalis. J
Comp Neurol 181:465–476
Ito H, Yoshimoto M (1991) Nervous system. In: Itazawa Y, Hanyu I (eds) Fish physiology.
Koseisha-Koseikaku, Tokyo, pp 363–402 (in Japanese)
Ito H, Ishikawa Y, Yoshimoto M, Yamamoto N (2007) Diversity of brain morphology in teleosts:
brain and ecological niche. Brain Behav Evol 69:76–86
Kiyohara S, Sakata Y, Yoshitomi T, Tsukahara J (2002) The “goatee” of goatﬁsh: innervation of
taste buds in the barbels and their representation in the brain. Proc Biol Sci 269:1773–1780
Kotrschal K, van Staaden MJ, Huber R (1998) Fish brains: evolution and environmental relation-
ships. Rev Fish Biol Fish 8:373–408
Meek J, Nieuwenhuys R (1998) Holosteans and teleosts. In: Nieuwenhuys R, Ten Donkelaar HJ,
Nicholson C (eds) The central nervous system of vertebrates, vol 2. Springer, Berlin, pp 759–
937
Nelson JS (2006) Fishes of the world, 4th edn. Wiley, Hoboken
Noro S, Yamamoto N, Ishikawa Y, Ito H, Ijiri K (2007) Studies on the morphology of the inner
ear and semicircular canal end organ projections of ha, a medaka behavior mutant. Fish Biol J
Medaka 11:31–41
Sbarbati A, Osculati F (2003) Solitary chemosensory cells in mammals? Cells Tissues Organs
175:51–55
Spence R, Gerlach G, Lawrence C, Smith C (2008) The behaviour and ecology of the zebraﬁsh,
Danio rerio. Biol Rev 83:13–34
Steward O (2000) Functional neuroscience. Springer, New York
Tuge H, Uchihashi K, Shimamura H (1968) An atlas of the brains of ﬁshes of Japan. Tsukiji-
Shokan, Tokyo
Whitear M (1971) Cell specialization and sensory function in the ﬁsh epidermis. J Zool (Lond)
163:237–264
Xue H-G, Yamamoto N, Yang C-Y, Kerem G, Yoshimoto M, Imura K, Ito H (2003) Fiber
connections of the torus longitudinalis and optic tectum in holocentrid teleosts. J Comp Neurol
462:194–212
Xue H-G, Yang C-Y, Yamamoto N (2008) Afferent sources to the inferior olive and distribution of
the olivocerebellar climbing ﬁbers in cyprinids. J Comp Neurol 507:1409–1427
Yamamoto N (2005) Nervous system. In: Taniuchi T et al (eds) Encyclopedia of ﬁsh science.
Asakura Shoten, Tokyo, pp 132–147 (in Japanese)
Yamamoto N, Ito H (2005) Fiber connections of the central nucleus of semicircular torus in
cyprinids. J Comp Neurol 491:186–211
Yang C-Y, Yoshimoto M, Xue H-G, Yamamoto N, Imura K, Sawai N, Ishikawa Y, Ito H (2004)
Fiber connections of the lateral valvular nucleus in a percomorph teleost, tilapia (Oreochromis
niloticus). J Comp Neurol 474:209–226

Chapter 11
Molecular Proﬁling Reveals Insight into Avian
Brain Organization and Functional Columnar
Commonalities with Mammals
Kazuhiro Wada, Chun-Chun Chen, and Erich D. Jarvis
Abstract The avian cerebrum has pallial functions similar to those of the mam-
malian cortex. Although the avian pallium is organized as nuclear structures, and the
mammalian cortex as layers, the avian pallium supports cognitive abilities similar
to those of many mammals. We recently presented a global view of the pallial
organization of birds, based on quantitative analyses of constitutively expressed
or behaviorally regulated genes in different pallial cell populations (Jarvis et al.
J Comp Neurol 521:3614–3665, 2013; Chen et al. J Comp Neurol 521:3666–
3701, 2013). Here we present a shortened synopsis of these articles. The ﬁndings
of the constitutively expressed genes and known neural connectivity reveal four
major cell populations: (1) a primary sensory input population, (2) a secondary
intrapallial population, (3) a tertiary intrapallial population, and (4) a quaternary
output population. These populations have greater similarities to cell layers of the
mammalian cortex than to the amygdala. The patterns of behaviorally regulated
genes revealed functional columns of activation across boundaries of these cell
populations, reminiscent of columns through layers of the mammalian cortex. Each
neural cell population contributes portions to columns that control different sensory
or motor systems. These ﬁndings inﬂuence hypotheses on homologies of the avian
pallium with other vertebrates.
Keywords Forebrain • Neural activity • Motor behavior • Primary sensory •
Neurotransmitter receptors • Pallium • Cortex • Striatum • Pallidum • Basal
ganglia
K. Wada ()
Faculty of Science, Department of Biological Sciences, Hokkaido University, Sapporo, Hokkaido
060-0810, Japan
e-mail: wada@sci.hokudai.ac.jp
C.-C. Chen • E.D. Jarvis ()
Department of Neurobiology, Duke University Medical Center, Box 3209, Durham,
NC 27710, USA
Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Chevy Chase, MD 20815, USA
e-mail: jarvis@neuro.duke.edu
© Springer Japan KK 2017
S. Shigeno et al. (eds.), Brain Evolution by Design, Diversity and Commonality
in Animals, DOI 10.1007/978-4-431-56469-0_11
273

274
K. Wada et al.
11.1
Introduction
In English, the term “birdbrain” is sometimes used to mean “stupid,” which is
untrue in the ﬁeld of animal behavior and neuroscience. Many birds have cognitive
proﬁciencies that are quite sophisticated. For example, as reviewed by Jarvis et al.
(2005), scrub jays (Aphelocoma coerulescens) show episodic memory, the ability
to recall autobiographical events that happened at a speciﬁc time or place (Clayton
and Dickinson 1998). New Caledonian crows (Corvus moneduloides) make tools
and use them to retrieve food, and are thought to pass this knowledge on to other
crows through social learning (Weir et al. 2002; Hunt and Gray 2003). Pigeons
(Columba livia) can memorize up to 725 different visual patterns (Vonfersen and
Delius 1989), learn to categorize objects as ‘human-made’ versus ‘natural’ (Lubow
1974), and discriminate cubistic and impressionistic styles of painting (Watanabe
et al. 1995). Parrots, hummingbirds, and oscine songbirds possess the rare trait of
vocal learning that is a prerequisite in humans for spoken language (Jarvis 2004).
These cognitive abilities are mainly controlled by the telencephalons. The
avian telencephalon organization was recently reclassiﬁed into two major regions
that contain at least seven major subdivisions: pallium (containing hyperpallium,
mesopallium, nidopallium, arcopallium, and hippocampus) and subpallium (con-
taining striatum and pallidum) (Reiner et al. 2004b; Jarvis et al. 2005) (Fig. 11.1).
In neuroanatomy, the pallium is the cortical region of the telencephalon and the
subpallium is equivalent to the basal ganglia. Although the avian pallium supports
cognitive abilities similar to those of many mammals, their pallial organization
is different. The mammalian pallium, that is, the cortex, is laminar whereas the
avian pallium structure is nuclear. In contrast, the avian subpallial subdivisions,
striatum and pallidum, are more conserved with their mammalian counterparts
in developmental origin, connectivity, cell types, and cell organization (Medina
and Abellan 2009; Butler et al. 2011). Because of the less conserved pallium
organization, our understanding of the organization of the avian pallium and its
cellular homologies with mammals has still been controversial (Jarvis et al. 2005).
To address this issue, we recently performed a quantitative analyses of telen-
cephalic expression proﬁles of constitutive and activity-responsive genes (52 total)
in the adult and a subset of these in the embryonic avian brain to decipher the
molecular and functional relationships between different avian telencephalic cell
populations (Chen et al. 2013; Jarvis et al. 2013). The 52 genes were selected on
the basis of their speciﬁc expression patterns in particular sectors of the telen-
cephalon, their relationships with mammalian brain structures, or their functions.
Our assumption was that similar brain areas should express similar gene sets to
achieve similar functions. Therefore, we chose genes with a wide range of functions
and cellular locations, from inside the nucleus to the extracellular space, including
neurotransmitter/neuromodulator receptors, protein ligands, transcription factors,
enzymes, and a diverse set of membrane and cytoplasmic genes. Among these,

11
Molecular Proﬁling Reveals Insight into Avian Brain Organization...
275
Fig. 11.1 Modern view of avian cerebral organization. Modern (2004–2005) consensus view of
avian brain relationships according to the conclusions of the Avian Brain Nomenclature Forum
(Reiner et al. 2004a; Jarvis et al. 2005) (Figure panels from Jarvis et al. (2013) used with
permission)
we included six genes (BDNF, EGR1, C-FOS, C-JUN, DUSP1, and ARC) that are
activity regulated in the brain by sensory and motor behaviors (Wada et al. 2006;
Jarvis et al. 2013).
Based on the totality of the ﬁndings, we proposed a new view of avian pallium
organization as four major cell populations, instead of seven, that wrap above and
below the lateral ventricle instead of being different populations below and above.
Some of these cell populations have similarities with molecular proﬁles similar
to the different layers of mammalian cortex, as was recently further supported
with high-throughput gene expression proﬁling between avian and primate brains
(Pfenning et al. 2014). Furthermore, the patterns of behaviorally regulated genes
revealed functional columns of activation across the boundaries of these cell
populations, reminiscent of columns through layers of the mammalian cortex. Here
we present a synopsis of those ﬁndings, including a shortened and updated text of the
study. For additional information on the evolving views of avian brain organization,
see (Montiel and Molnar 2013).

276
K. Wada et al.
11.2
Six Major Cerebral Expression Domains
The basal expression levels of 50 genes were quantiﬁed in 20 telencephalic regions
and 3 cerebellum layers as outgroup regions in the zebra ﬁnch (Jarvis et al.
2013), which is a songbird species widely used in neuroscience. The speciﬁc
genes were chosen based on their distinct expression patterns in the telencephalon,
their diverse molecular functions (e.g., glutamate receptors, FOXP2) (Haesler et al.
2004; Wada et al. 2004), and their use to distinguish cell types in the mammalian
brain (e.g., “dopamine receptors” in striatal neurons, “ROR-b” in layer IV cortex
neurons, “ER81” in layer V cortex and amygdala neurons, and “LHX9” in amygdala
neurons) (Molnar and Cheung 2006; Watakabe et al. 2007; Garcia-Lopez et al.
2008; Kubikova et al. 2010). The speciﬁc brain regions were chosen to test the
relationships proposed in the 2004–2005 brain nomenclature (Riener et al. 2004a, b;
Jarvis et al. 2005) and to resolve alternative views on which brain regions constitute
the newly deﬁned hyperpallium, mesopallium, and arcopallium (Puelles et al. 2000;
Yamamoto et al. 2005; Feenders et al. 2008). We developed cluster dendrogram
analyses called “brain phylo-gene expression trees” to quantitatively infer unbiased
relationships between cell populations (Jarvis et al. 2013). In brief, ﬁrst, mRNA
signals detected by in situ hybridization were digitized for each brain region of
interest. Following this, the values of signal intensity were normalized to a scalar
range from 0 to1 to reduce experimental artifacts and adjust discretization (this
normalized value is shown as a heatmap in Fig. 11.2). The expression values for each
brain region were converted into a vector “xi” and similarity scores between all pairs
of vectors were calculated using either Distance–Correlation or Euclidian–Distance.
The Distance–Correlation or Euclidean–Distance similarity values between all pairs
of brain regions were used to generate a hierarchical cluster tree. For this expression
analysis, all genes used have the same impact on clustering of the phylo-gene
expression tree. Phylo-gene expression tree analyses grouped the 20 telencephalic
regions into at least six major expression clusters at high similarity (left color-coded
in Fig. 11.2). These six expression clusters were as follows.:
1. 10-pallium: The primary sensory input ﬁelds L2, entopallium (E), and basoros-
tralis (B) and hyperpallium intercalatum (IH) at 0.8 correlation, which together
we refer to as primary pallium [Figs. 11.2 (orange), 11.3a].
2. 20-pallium: The nidopallium (N) and hyperpallium (H; apicale part) minus
primary sensory input ﬁelds (L2, E, B, and IH) at 0.86–0.99 correlation, which
together we refer to as secondary pallium [Figs. 11.2 (green), 11.3b].
3. 30-pallium: The dorsal mesopallium (MD; hyperpallium densocellulare in the
2004–2005 view) and ventral mesopallium (MV; mesopallium in the 2004–2005
view) with near identity at 0.99, which together we refer to as tertiary pallium
[Figs. 11.2 (red), 11.3c].
4. 40-pallium: The arcopallium (A) regions, at 0.75, which together we refer to as
quaternary pallium [Figs. 11.2 (yellow), 11.3d].

11
Molecular Proﬁling Reveals Insight into Avian Brain Organization...
277
Fig. 11.2 Brain phylo-gene expression tree. Tree (left) and gene expression heatmap (right) show
molecular relationships of 23 brain regions of the zebra ﬁnch based on 50 genes. High similarity
is considered at 0.7–0.99 correlation coefﬁcient (red values inside nodes), 70–100 % bootstrap
probability (number above branches), and 93–100 approximate unbiased probability supports
(number below branches). The six major telencephalic subdivisions revealed by the tree are color-
coded (names of brain regions). The tree was generated with Distance-Correlation on normalized
gene expression data, followed by Biedl’s ordering of leaves according to similarity of gene
expression vectors. Far right is the global numbered pallial and subpallial terminologies based
on this tree and known connectivity. The gene expression heatmap shows relative expression levels
for each gene scaled between 0 and 1 (red, higher than the average for that region relative to other
regions; blue, lower than the average). Above the heatmap is the tree relationship of the genes
based on brain expression (Figure reproduced from Jarvis et al. (2013) with permission)
5. The lateral and medial striatum plus the intermediate striatum (intrapeduncular
nucleus in the classical view) at 0.9 [Figs. 11.2 (purple), 11.3e].
6. The dorsal and ventral pallidum at 0.97 [Figs. 11.2 (turquoise), 11.3f].
The higher correlation value (at 0.9) among the subpallial regions (i.e., striatum
and pallium) indicates consistent results of distinct expression compared with those
among the pallial regions, as described in previous studies (Reiner et al. 2004a;
Jarvis et al. 2005).

278
K. Wada et al.
Fig. 11.3 Examples of six major cerebral expressions. (a) Examples of intercalated pallium
(10-pallium)-enriched genes, S100 calcium-binding protein, and dual speciﬁcity phosphatase 1
(DUSP1). (b) Examples of hyperpallium or nidopallium (20-pallium)-enriched genes, phosphatidic
acid phosphatase 2 domain containing 1A (PPAPDC1A), and chicken ovalbumin upstream
promoter transcription factor 2 (COUP-TF2) (c) Examples of mesopallium (30-pallium)-enriched
genes, activity-regulated cytoskeleton-associated gene (ARC), and calcium-dependent secretion
activator 2 (CADPS2). (d) Examples of arcopallium (40-pallium)-enriched genes, Ets-related 81
(ER81) transcription factor, and LIM home domain 9 (LHX9). (e) Examples of striatum-enriched
genes, dopamine 1B (D1B) receptor, and dopamine 2 (D2) receptor. (f) Examples of pallidum-
enriched genes, glutamate receptor ionotropic NMDA subunit 2C (GRIN2C), and LIM homeobox
8 (LHX8) transcription factor.Images are in situ hybridizations with cDNAs of the associated genes
in zebra ﬁnch brain tissue. Gene expression mRNA signal is white silver grains; general cellular
stain is cresyl violet (red) (Figure reconstructed from panels in Jarvis et al. (2013), used with
permission.) Bar 1 mm

11
Molecular Proﬁling Reveals Insight into Avian Brain Organization...
279
11.3
Functional Columns of Brain Activation in the Avian
Brain
The basal expression patterns of the genes studied were conﬁned to lamina-deﬁned
subdivision boundaries. However, the induced expression patterns of the activity-
dependent genes (EGR1, C-FOS, C-JUN, ARC, BDNF, and DUSP1) were not
conﬁned to the lamina-deﬁned boundaries (Mello et al. 1992; Jarvis and Nottebohm
1997; Wada et al. 2006; Feenders et al. 2008; Horita et al. 2010, 2012; Jarvis et
al. 2013). These genes were upregulated in subsets of cell types in different brain
regions when the animals processed speciﬁc sensory stimuli or performed repeated
motor behaviors. Thus, the genes were used to map physiological activation of
different cell types within functionally connected neural systems (Feenders et al.
2008; Horita et al. 2010, 2012). EGR1, C-FOS, C-JUN, and ARC are all inducible
in pallial and striatal cells except the primary sensory neurons (particularly for
EGR1; Mello and Clayton 1995; Wada et al. 2006; Feenders et al. 2008). DUSP1
is mainly inducible in primary sensory neurons of the telencephalon and thalamus
(Horita et al. 2010). BDNF is mainly inducible in pallial cells (Wada et al. 2006). By
examination of the proﬁles of these genes from prior studies with our modiﬁed view
of avian brain organization,it was found that the avian brain shows semi-“columnar”
patterns of activation across speciﬁc combinations of brain subdivisions. Four such
columns are as follows.
11.3.1
Auditory Column
When songbirds hear playbacks of song, while sitting in the dark in sound isolation
chambers, and do not vocalize in response, a column of adjacent brain regions show
early growth response (EGR)1 and dual-speciﬁcity phosphatase (DUSP)1 activation
with boundaries that transverse brain subdivisions (Fig. 11.4a, b, vs. c, d) (Mello
et al. 1992; Velho et al. 2005; Feenders et al. 2008; Horita et al. 2010). The EGR1-
activated portion of the column consisted of a caudal part of the ventral mesopallium
(often called the caudal mesopallium, CM), the subadjacent caudal nidopallium
(comprising what has been called L1, L3, and NCM), and a subadjacent part of
caudal striatum (called CSt). The DUSP1-activated portion was the primary sensory
L2 cells of nidopallium intercalatum (IN; combined population of L2, E, and B)
(Fig. 11.4d). The only major auditory-activated telencephalic region separate from
this column was the RA (robust arcopallium) cup in the arcopallium, adjacent to the
RA song nucleus (Mello and Clayton 1994; Feenders et al. 2008).

280
K. Wada et al.
Fig. 11.4 Functional columns revealed by activity-dependent gene expression in the songbird
brain. (a, b) Example of basal expression in an awake zebra ﬁnch, sitting still in the dark. (c,
d) Example of hearing-induced gene expression in a zebra ﬁnch that heard playbacks of three
different conspeciﬁc songs for 30 min. (e, f) Example of light-induced gene expression in the
visual pathway of the ventral pallium from a zebra ﬁnch sitting still and stimulated with daylight
for 1 h after an overnight period of darkness. (g, h) Example of induced gene expression in three
columns: the visual pathway of the dorsal pallium, the adjacent anterior somatosensory pathway
of the dorsal pallium, and a motor-activated region of the ventral pallium surrounding the song
nuclei in a zebra ﬁnch male that hopped around a cylindrical cage for 30 min with lights on.
(i, j) Example of hopping-induced gene expression in the dorsal pallium somatosensory pathway
and the ventral pallium motor regions surrounding the song nuclei in a deaf male zebra ﬁnch
that hopped in a rotating wheel with lights off. (k, l) Example of dim-light, magnetic vision-
induced gene expression in a light-dependent magnetic compass sensing column (Cluster N) of
the dorsal pallium found in night-migrating garden warblers. (m, n) Example of hopping-induced
gene expression in a similarly treated animal, but in a more medial part of the dorsal pallial
somatosensory pathway. (o, p) Example of singing-induced gene expression in song nuclei of a
male zebra ﬁnch that sang for 30 min and made some hopping movements between singing bouts.
Bar 1 mm (Figure reproduced from Jarvis et al. (2013) with permission)

11
Molecular Proﬁling Reveals Insight into Avian Brain Organization...
281
11.3.2
Visual Columns
When birds are stimulated with light after an overnight period of darkness, two
clusters of activation are seen in known visual pathways (Feenders et al. 2008;
Hara et al. 2009; Horita et al. 2010). The ﬁrst cluster consists of a patchy column
that includes EGR1 activation in a portion of MV near the E, the subadjacent N
near E, the subadjacent striatum ventral to E, and DUSP1 activation in E of the IN
(Fig. 11.4e, f). The second and larger column is in the Wulst and consists of EGR1
activation in the central part of MD, in the overlying central part of the H, and
DUSP1 in the central part of IH (Fig. 11.4g, h); the anterior end of this column is
not visual, but includes somatosensory parts of H, IH, and MD, activated during
movement (Fig. 11.4i, j) (Feenders et al. 2008). The caudal end of this cluster
in migratory songbirds has a dim-light magnetic sensing-activated column called
cluster N, also consisting of portions of H, IH, and MD involved in processing light-
dependent magnetic compass information (Fig. 11.4k, l) (Mouritsen et al. 2005;
Liedvogel et al. 2007; Zapka et al. 2009; Zapka et al. 2010). A difference from the
ventral pallial visual columns is that with the dorsal columns we could not ﬁnd not
striatal regions of activation associated with them.
11.3.3
Somatosensory and Motor Columns
When birds hop, walk, or ﬂy (particularly while deaf and in the dark to eliminate
auditory and visual activation), activated columns of brain regions are found in the
two known somatosensory pathways and an apparent motor pathway (Feenders et
al. 2008; Horita et al. 2010). The somatosensory pathway columns include (1) the
MV and N adjacent to B (in anterior IN), B itself (for DUSP1), and the adjacent
striatum; and (2) the anterior MD and H adjacent to anterior IH, and anterior IH itself
(for DUSP1; Fig. 11.4m, n). The motor-activated column includes a proportion of
the anterior MV, the subadjacent anterior N, and the subadjacent anterior striatum,
all surrounding anterior song nuclei (MO, MAN, and Area X, respectively) in song
learning species (Fig. 11.4g, i). Another movement-activated column includes the
posterior-lateral MV, the adjacent N, and interestingly a part of L2 of the IN located
within the auditory column; that is, these parts of MV, N, and L2 have both motor
and auditory activation (Feenders et al. 2008). Similar to the auditory pathway,
there was a movement-activated region in the arcopallium, the lateral intermediate
arcopallium, that was not part of a column (Feenders et al. 2008).

282
K. Wada et al.
11.3.4
Song Nuclei
When song-learning birds sing, singing-driven gene expression occurs in seven
analogous song nuclei. These song nuclei include the mesopallium oval nucleus
(MO) that according to our modiﬁed view is located in MV, the underlying
lateral magnocellular nucleus nucleus (LMAN) in the anterior nidopallium, and
the underlying area X in the anterior striatum, forming a column within a column
(Fig. 11.5a, b). The four posterior song nuclei in songbirds do not show a columnar
organization, although we note that the interfacial nucleus (NIf) in the nidopallium
meets up with avalanche (Av) in MV at the lamina border (best seen with C-
FOS; Fig. 11.5b). In contrast, in hummingbirds and parrots the HVC-like and
RA-like song nuclei are adjacent to each other in a semi-columnar organization
Fig. 11.5 Singing-driven neural activity-dependent gene expression. (a) EGR1. (b) C-Fos. (c)
ARC. (d) DUSP1. Left images in each panel: Medial and lateral sections from a quiet control,
sitting still animal, showing basal neural activity-dependent gene expression. Right images in each
panel: Medial and lateral sections from a singing animal (for 30 min), perched, without much
hopping, showing the highest levels of singing-driven increased gene expression in song nuclei
(lines), and hearing-driven increased expression in the auditory pathway (NCM, L1, L3, CM, CSt)
from hearing itself sing. (a–c) Images from X-ray ﬁlm exposure. (d) Images from emulsion-dipped
slides (Figure panels reproduced from Jarvis et al. (2013) with permission)

11
Molecular Proﬁling Reveals Insight into Avian Brain Organization...
283
at the arcopallium lamina border (Jarvis and Mello 2000; Jarvis et al. 2000). The
activated patterns conform to the differential expression differences already present
at baseline. For example, EGR1 and C-FOS are induced in all nonprimary sensory
pallial regions, and they are induced in all song nuclei in the corresponding brain
subdivisions (Fig. 11.5a, b). C-JUN is low in the mesopallial regions at baseline,
and it is not induced in the mesopallial song nuclei (Av and MO) by singing (Wada
et al. 2006). ARC is high in the mesopallium at baseline, and it is induced in the
mesopallial song nuclei by singing (Fig. 11.5c). BDNF is not expressed in the
striatum at baseline, and it is not induced in area X by singing (Wada et al. 2006).
The only exception is DUSP1, which is not induced in higher order (nonprimary)
connected neurons in the forebrain except in song nuclei by singing (Fig. 11.5d)
(Horita et al. 2012).
11.4
Conclusions
The Jarvis et al. (2013) study contains the highest number of genes and the most
quantitative for comparative in situ expression proﬁling of avian brain subdivisions
to date. Along with the companion study by Chen et al. (2013) on the developmental
proﬁles of some of these genes, the key new elucidated points are (1) the expression
patterns of most genes in the avian telencephalon can be grouped into one of six
expression populations, four pallial and two subpallial; (2) the pallial populations
form a partial mirror image proﬁle of each other above and below the ventricle and
the associated lamina through the mesopallium; (3) these populations form ﬁrst as
layers of cells in the dorsal or ventral pallium that later during development wrap
around the ventricle space and mesopallium to form the mirror image proﬁles;
and (4) three of the pallial populations (INC IH; nidopalliumC hyperpallium;
mesopallium) function in a columnar-like organization for speciﬁc sensory or motor
systems (Fig. 11.6a).
11.4.1
Functional Column Organization of the Avian
Cerebrum
The activity-dependent gene expression results suggest that the avian pallium also
has a functional columnar organization akin to the mammalian pallium. The ﬁnding
by Jarvis et al. (2013) is accordance with those of previous studies (Karten 1997;
Medina and Reiner 2000; Wang et al. 2010). However, we emphasized this concept
of “functional column” on the ﬁnding of a semi-mirror pallial organization. In
mammals, the columns span the six cortical layers or pallial amygdala regions
for particular sensory or motor systems, with topographic projections from the
columnar layer 5 cells to the striatum (Swanson 2000). In the avian brain, the func-
tional adjacent columns wrap from ventral pallial (auditory, visual, somatic motor,

284
K. Wada et al.
Fig. 11.6 General model of avian brain organization proposed by Jarvis et al. 2013. (a) Drawing
in sagittal view with subdivision shapes based on songbirds. (b) Same drawing as in (a) with
outlines of different brain systems that show columnar activation of immediate early genes (IEGs).
Arrows show known connectivity. (c) Color-coded scheme of rodent brains according to the ﬁeld
hypothesis of homology with the avian brain proposed in our study (Jarvis et al. 2013). For all
images, solid white lines are lamina (relatively cell-sparse zones) that separate subdivisions; dashed
lines divide regions within a subdivision, whether or not a lamina is present
somatosensory) to dorsal pallial (somatosensory, visual) regions, each containing a
primary (IN or IH), secondary (N or H), and tertiary (MV or MD) pallial population
(Fig. 11.6b); when seen in this view the two avian somatosensory pathways are
near each other in the anterior forebrain. The avian ventral pallial columns also
include topographically positioned striatal-activated regions. We do not yet have
an immediate early gene (IEG) that is activated in pallidal cells to determine if it
too forms topographically organized columns with the striatum and pallium. The
pallidal cells intermingled in the anterior striatum of birds (Kuenzel et al. 2011)
presumably make up the pallidal component of the somatic motor and vocal motor
columns. We do not know if there are striatal, pallidal, and arcopallial components to
the dorsal pallial columns, although this is likely, because the hyperpallium, similar
to the nidopallium, sends robust projections to the striatum (Veenman et al. 1995).
Based on these ﬁndings, Jarvis et al. (2013) suggested that a minimal column system
to process sensory information in the avian telencephalon is to incorporate adjacent
sectors of 10-pallium (IN or IH), 20-pallium (N or H), and 30-pallium (MV or
MD), and the striatum, with feedback to the brainstem primarily via the 40-pallium
(arcopallium). A minimal system to produce behavior is to incorporate adjacent

11
Molecular Proﬁling Reveals Insight into Avian Brain Organization...
285
sectors of the 20-pallium, 30-pallium, striatum, and projections to brainstem/spinal
cord motor nuclei via 40-pallium.
11.4.2
Brain Homologies Between Birds and Mammals
There are still two major controversial hypotheses on speciﬁc homologies of
different cell populations between the avian and mammalian pallium. (1) The
nuclear-to-layer hypothesis posits that the different nuclear subdivisions of the
avian telencephalon below the lateral ventricle, called the dorsal ridge (DVR),
contain cell types that are homologous to layers I–IV of the mammalian cortex. (2)
The nuclear-to-claustrum/amygdala hypothesis posits that the DVR subdivisions
are, in contrast, homologous to the mammalian amygdala and claustrum. Although
we believe that the reviewed ﬁndings impact the two competing hypotheses on
avian and mammalian pallial homologies, we caution against using the reviewed
ﬁndings alone to equate the “homology” of the avian columns with the mammalian
six-layered cortex columns because it is also possible that each vertebrate group
develops a similar functional organization by different mechanisms. The mam-
malian cortical columns extend across layers of cells that predominantly arrive
in their locations by radial migration from the same sector of the ventricle zone
during development, whereas the avian pallial columns extend across larger clusters
of cells that may predominantly arrive in their location by tangential migration
from different sectors of the ventricle zone (Medina and Abellan 2009). The
pallial portions of the mammalian amygdala and claustrum develop by diverse
mechanisms, including both local radial and long-distance tangential migration of
cells from the dorsal pallium, the thalamus, and preoptic area (Carney et al. 2006;
Hirata et al. 2009; Soma et al. 2009; Garcia-Moreno et al. 2010; Bupesh et al.
2011). Recent studies of columnar circuit formation in mammals have revealed
that the columnar neural connection across layers within the mammalian cortex is
accomplished by preferential synaptic connections among clonally related neurons,
which are originally generated by a single neural progenitor (Yu et al. 2009;
Ohtsuki et al. 2012; Gao et al. 2013). In contrast, the developmental mechanism of
avian columnar circuit formation is still almost unidentiﬁed. At least, avian species
possess a genetically controlled developmental program for the chronological
generation of the layer-speciﬁc neural subtypes (Suzuki et al. 2012).
Nevertheless, regardless of how the pallial and subpallial cells arrive to their
ﬁnal destinations and how the layer-speciﬁc subtype neurons connect with other
cell populations to develop functionally specialized columnar circuits in mammals
and birds, the ﬁnal outcome is similar: columns across different cell populations
organized as layers (cortex in mammals) or thick nuclear slabs (pallium in birds and
claustrum/amygdala in mammals) (Fig. 11.6c). In a previous study performed by
our group, we analyzed expression proﬁles of more than 7000 homologous genes
between avian and primate genomes of the avian and primate brains, respectively,

286
K. Wada et al.
using oligo-microarrays by focusing on vocal learning-related regions (Pfenning
et al. 2014). In that study, we found that the molecular proﬁle of RA, a song
nucleus located in the arcopallium, was more similar to that of layer 5 cells of
the primate primary motor cortex than to that of any other brain region; HVC, a
nidopallium song nucleus, was more similar to layers 2 and 3 of the cortex; and basal
ganglia Area X was most similar to parts of the anterior putamen/caudate. There
was a negative correlation between RA and the amygdala and claustrum. These
ﬁndings support the cortex-layered hypothesis of avian and mammalian homologies;
thus, the model is proposed in Fig. 11.6a, b. However, we emphasize that our
hypotheses need to be further tested with additional comparative high-throughput
gene expression proﬁles between mammals, birds, and non-avian reptiles as well as
comparative analyses at other biological levels. Although further molecular proﬁling
investigations should be performed to better resolve forebrain homologies (Belgard
et al. 2013; Zhang et al. 2014), we believe that two criteria must be met. (1)
One needs to know the global expression proﬁle within each species, including
cortical, amygdala, and claustrum patterns, in mammals and the major subdivisions
described here for birds. (2) One needs to compare multiple genes across species
to guard against making broad conclusions on the basis of one or a few genes that
could show variations within a brain subdivision.
References
Belgard TG, Montiel JF, Wang WZ, Garcia-Moreno F, Margulies EH, Ponting CP, Molnar Z
(2013) Adult pallium transcriptomes surprise in not reﬂecting predicted homologies across
diverse chicken and mouse pallial sectors. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 110:13150–13155.
doi:10.1073/pnas.1307444110
Bupesh M, Legaz I, Abellan A, Medina L (2011) Multiple telencephalic and extratelencephalic
embryonic domains contribute neurons to the medial extended amygdala. J Comp Neurol
519:1505–1525. doi:10.1002/cne.22581
Butler AB, Reiner A, Karten HJ (2011) Evolution of the amniote pallium and the origins of
mammalian neocortex. Ann N Y Acad Sci 1225:14–27. doi:10.1111/j.1749-6632.2011.06006.x
Carney RS, Alfonso TB, Cohen D et al (2006) Cell migration along the lateral cortical stream to the
developing basal telencephalic limbic system. J Neurosci 26:11562–11574. doi:10.1523/JNEU-
ROSCI.3092-06.2006
Chen CC, Winkler CM, Pfenning AR, Jarvis ED (2013) Molecular proﬁling of the developing
avian telencephalon: regional timing and brain subdivision continuities. J Comp Neurol.
doi:10.1002/cne.23406
Clayton NS, Dickinson A (1998) Episodic-like memory during cache recovery by scrub jays.
Nature (Lond) 395:272–274. doi:10.1038/26216
Feenders G, Liedvogel M, Rivas M et al (2008) Molecular mapping of movement-associated
areas in the avian brain: a motor theory for vocal learning origin. PLoS One 3, e1768.
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0001768
Gao P, Sultan KT, Zhang XJ, Shi SH (2013) Lineage-dependent circuit assembly in the neocortex.
Development (Camb) 140:2645–2655. doi:10.1242/dev.087668
Garcia-Lopez M, Abellan A, Legaz I, Rubenstein JL, Puelles L, Medina L (2008) Histogenetic
compartments of the mouse centromedial and extended amygdala based on gene expression
patterns during development. J Comp Neurol 506:46–74. doi:10.1002/cne.21524

11
Molecular Proﬁling Reveals Insight into Avian Brain Organization...
287
Garcia-Moreno F, Pedraza M, Di Giovannantonio LG, Di Salvio M, Lopez-Mascaraque L,
Simeone A, De Carlos JA (2010) A neuronal migratory pathway crossing from diencephalon
to telencephalon populates amygdala nuclei. Nat Neurosci 13:680–689. doi:10.1038/nn.2556
Haesler S, Wada K, Nshdejan A, Morrisey EE, Lints T, Jarvis ED, Scharff C (2004) FoxP2 expres-
sion in avian vocal learners and non-learners. J Neurosci 24:3164–3175. doi:10.1523/JNEU-
ROSCI.4369-03.2004
Hara E, Kubikova L, Hessler NA, Jarvis ED (2009) Assessing visual requirements for social
context-dependent activation of the songbird song system. Proc Biol Sci 276:279–289.
doi:10.1098/rspb.2008.1138
Hirata T, Li P, Lanuza GM, Cocas LA, Huntsman MM, Corbin JG (2009) Identiﬁcation of distinct
telencephalic progenitor pools for neuronal diversity in the amygdala. Nat Neurosci 12:141–
149. doi:10.1038/nn.2241
Horita H, Wada K, Rivas MV, Hara E, Jarvis ED (2010) The dusp1 immediate early gene is
regulated by natural stimuli predominantly in sensory input neurons. J Comp Neurol 518:2873–
2901. doi:10.1002/cne.22370
Horita H, Kobayashi M, Liu WC, Oka K, Jarvis ED, Wada K (2012) Specialized motor-driven
dusp1 expression in the song systems of multiple lineages of vocal learning birds. PLoS One 7,
e42173. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0042173
Hunt GR, Gray RD (2003) Diversiﬁcation and cumulative evolution in New Caledonian crow tool
manufacture. Proc Biol Sci 270:867–874. doi:10.1098/rspb.2002.2302
Jarvis ED (2004) Learned birdsong and the neurobiology of human language. Ann N Y Acad Sci
1016:749–777. doi:10.1196/annals.1298.038
Jarvis ED, Mello CV (2000) Molecular mapping of brain areas involved in parrot vocal communi-
cation. J Comp Neurol 419:1–31
Jarvis ED, Nottebohm F (1997) Motor-driven gene expression. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 94:4097–
4102
Jarvis ED, Ribeiro S, da Silva ML, Ventura D, Vielliard J, Mello CV (2000) Behaviourally
driven gene expression reveals song nuclei in hummingbird brain. Nature (Lond) 406:628–632.
doi:10.1038/35020570
Jarvis ED, Gunturkun O, Bruce L et al (2005) Avian brains and a new understanding of vertebrate
brain evolution. Nat Rev Neurosci 6:151–159. doi:10.1038/nrn1606
Jarvis ED, Yu J, Rivas MV et al (2013) A global view of the functional molecular orga-
nization of the avian cerebrum: mirror images and functional columns. J Comp Neurol.
doi:10.1002/cne.23404
Karten HJ (1997) Evolutionary developmental biology meets the brain: the origins of mammalian
cortex. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 94:2800–2804
Kubikova L, Wada K, Jarvis ED (2010) Dopamine receptors in a songbird brain. J Comp Neurol
518:741–769. doi:10.1002/cne.22255
Kuenzel WJ, Medina L, Csillag A, Perkel DJ, Reiner A (2011) The avian subpallium: new
insights into structural and functional subdivisions occupying the lateral subpallial wall and
their embryological origins. Brain Res 1424:67–101. doi:10.1016/j.brainres.2011.09.037
Liedvogel M, Feenders G, Wada K, Troje NF, Jarvis ED, Mouritsen H (2007) Lateralized
activation of Cluster N in the brains of migratory songbirds. Eur J Neurosci 25:1166–1173.
doi:10.1111/j.1460-9568.2007.05350.x
Lubow RE (1974) High-order concept formation in the pigeon. J Exp Anal Behav 21:475–483
Medina L, Abellan A (2009) Development and evolution of the pallium. Semin Cell Dev Biol
20:698–711. doi:10.1016/j.semcdb.2009.04.008
Medina L, Reiner A (2000) Do birds possess homologues of mammalian primary visual,
somatosensory and motor cortices? Trends Neurosci 23:1–12
Mello CV, Clayton DF (1994) Song-induced ZENK gene expression in auditory pathways of
songbird brain and its relation to the song control system. J Neurosci 14:6652–6666
Mello CV, Clayton DF (1995) Differential induction of the ZENK gene in the avian forebrain
and song control circuit after metrazole-induced depolarization. J Neurobiol 26:145–161.
doi:10.1002/neu.480260112

288
K. Wada et al.
Mello CV, Vicario DS, Clayton DF (1992) Song presentation induces gene expression in the
songbird forebrain. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 89:6818–6822
Molnar Z, Cheung AF (2006) Towards the classiﬁcation of subpopulations of layer V pyramidal
projection neurons. Neurosci Res 55:105–115. doi:10.1016/j.neures.2006.02.008
Montiel JF, Molnar Z (2013) The impact of gene expression analysis on evolving views of avian
brain organization. J Comp Neurol 521:3604–3613. doi:10.1002/cne.23403
Mouritsen H, Feenders G, Liedvogel M, Wada K, Jarvis ED (2005) Night-vision brain area in
migratory songbirds. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 102:8339–8344. doi:10.1073/pnas.0409575102
Ohtsuki G, Nishiyama M, Yoshida T, Murakami T, Histed M, Lois C, Ohki K (2012) Similarity
of visual selectivity among clonally related neurons in visual cortex. Neuron 75:65–72.
doi:10.1016/j.neuron.2012.05.023
Pfenning AR, Hara E, Whitney O et al (2014) Convergent transcriptional specializations in the
brains of humans and song-learning birds. Science 346:1256846. doi:10.1126/science.1256846
Puelles L, Kuwana E, Puelles E et al (2000) Pallial and subpallial derivatives in the embryonic
chick and mouse telencephalon, traced by the expression of the genes Dlx-2, Emx-1, Nkx-2.1,
Pax-6, and Tbr-1. J Comp Neurol 424:409–438
Reiner A, Perkel DJ, Bruce LL et al (2004a) Revised nomenclature for avian telencephalon and
some related brainstem nuclei. J Comp Neurol 473:377–414. doi:10.1002/cne.20118
Reiner A, Perkel DJ, Bruce LL et al (2004b) The avian brain nomenclature forum: ter-
minology for a new century in comparative neuroanatomy. J Comp Neurol 473:E1–E6.
doi:10.1002/cne.20119
Soma M, Aizawa H, Ito Y et al (2009) Development of the mouse amygdala as revealed by
enhanced green ﬂuorescent protein gene transfer by means of in utero electroporation. J Comp
Neurol 513:113–128. doi:10.1002/cne.21945
Suzuki IK, Kawasaki T, Gojobori T, Hirata T (2012) The temporal sequence of the mammalian
neocortical neurogenetic program drives mediolateral pattern in the chick pallium. Dev Cell
22:863–870. doi:10.1016/j.devcel.2012.01.004
Swanson LW (2000) Cerebral hemisphere regulation of motivated behavior. Brain Res 886:113–
164
Veenman CL, Wild JM, Reiner A (1995) Organization of the avian “corticostriatal” projection
system: a retrograde and anterograde pathway tracing study in pigeons. J Comp Neurol 354:87–
126. doi:10.1002/cne.903540108
Velho TA, Pinaud R, Rodrigues PV, Mello CV (2005) Co-induction of activity-dependent genes in
songbirds. Eur J Neurosci 22:1667–1678. doi:10.1111/j.1460-9568.2005.04369.x
Vonfersen L, Delius JD (1989) Long-term retention of many visual-patterns by pigeons. Ethology
82:141–155
Wada K, Sakaguchi H, Jarvis ED, Hagiwara M (2004) Differential expression of glutamate
receptors in avian neural pathways for learned vocalization. J Comp Neurol 476:44–64.
doi:10.1002/cne.20201
Wada K, Howard JT, McConnell P et al (2006) A molecular neuroethological approach for
identifying and characterizing a cascade of behaviorally regulated genes. Proc Natl Acad Sci
USA 103:15212–15217. doi:10.1073/pnas.0607098103
Wang Y, Brzozowska-Prechtl A, Karten HJ (2010) Laminar and columnar auditory cortex in avian
brain. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 107:12676–12681. doi:10.1073/pnas.1006645107
Watakabe A, Ichinohe N, Ohsawa S, Hashikawa T, Komatsu Y, Rockland KS, Yamamori T (2007)
Comparative analysis of layer-speciﬁc genes in mammalian neocortex. Cereb Cortex 17:1918–
1933. doi:10.1093/cercor/bhl102
Watanabe S, Sakamoto J, Wakita M (1995) Pigeons’ discrimination of paintings by Monet and
Picasso. J Exp Anal Behav 63:165–174
Weir AA, Chappell J, Kacelnik A (2002) Shaping of hooks in New Caledonian crows. Science
297:981. doi:10.1126/science.1073433
Yamamoto K, Sun Z, Wang HB, Reiner A (2005) Subpallial amygdala and nucleus taeniae in birds
resemble extended amygdala and medial amygdala in mammals in their expression of markers
of regional identity. Brain Res Bull 66:341–347. doi:10.1016/j.brainresbull.2005.02.016

11
Molecular Proﬁling Reveals Insight into Avian Brain Organization...
289
Yu YC, Bultje RS, Wang X, Shi SH (2009) Speciﬁc synapses develop preferentially among sister
excitatory neurons in the neocortex. Nature (Lond) 458:501–504. doi:10.1038/nature07722
Zapka M, Heyers D, Hein CM et al (2009) Visual but not trigeminal mediation of magnetic com-
pass information in a migratory bird. Nature (Lond) 461:1274–1277. doi:10.1038/nature08528
Zapka M, Heyers D, Liedvogel M, Jarvis ED, Mouritsen H (2010) Night-time neuronal acti-
vation of Cluster N in a day- and night-migrating songbird. Eur J Neurosci 32:619–624.
doi:10.1111/j.1460-9568.2010.07311.x
Zhang G, Li C, Li Q et al (2014) Comparative genomics reveals insights into avian genome
evolution and adaptation. Science 346:1311–1320. doi:10.1126/science.1251385

Chapter 12
The Neocortex and Dorsal Ventricular Ridge:
Functional Convergence and Underlying
Developmental Mechanisms
Wataru Yamashita and Tadashi Nomura
Abstract Extensive radiation of extant amniotes could have been achieved by the
innovation of several unique characteristics in the body plans of their ancestors.
In particular, distinct brain regions were enlarged independently to acquire similar
functional properties in different amniote lineages. The neocortex and dorsal
ventricular ridge (DVR) are a typical case of such parallel brain evolution in
mammalian and reptilian lineages. Although these structures have distinct devel-
opmental origins, striking functional similarities in the neocortex and DVR have led
to long-lasting arguments regarding their evolutionary development from ancestral
amniotes. Here, we introduce morphological, neuroanatomical, and developmental
aspects of the convergent and divergent features of the neocortex and DVR in
amniotes. Furthermore, we discuss possible genetic changes that provided these
remarkable brain structures, with special interest in the role of the Pax6 gene, an
essential regulator of neural stem/progenitor cell dynamics. Comparative functional
analyses of the regulatory genes required for pallial development will provide
signiﬁcant insights into the evolutionary origin of the hallmarks of mammalian and
reptilian brains.
Keywords Neocortex • DVR • Sensory inputs • Neural stem/progenitor cells •
Pax6
W. Yamashita
Developmental Neurobiology, Kyoto Prefectural University of Medicine, INAMORI Memorial
Building, 1-5 Shimogamo-hangi cho, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto, 606-8023 Japan
T. Nomura ()
Developmental Neurobiology, Kyoto Prefectural University of Medicine, INAMORI Memorial
Building, 1-5 Shimogamo-hangi cho, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto, 606-8023 Japan
Japan Science and Technology Agency (JST), PRESTO, 4-1-8 Honcho, Kawaguchi, Saitama,
332-0012 Japan
e-mail: tadnom@koto.kpu-m.ac.jp
© Springer Japan KK 2017
S. Shigeno et al. (eds.), Brain Evolution by Design, Diversity and Commonality
in Animals, DOI 10.1007/978-4-431-56469-0_12
291

292
W. Yamashita and T. Nomura
12.1
Introduction
Accumulating paleontological evidence has suggested that the ﬁrst appearance of
tetrapods on land occurred during the Permian period, which was approximately
300 million years ago (MYA) (Carroll 1988; Modesto et al. 2015; Benton et al.
1988). In addition to the radiation of ancestral amphibians, primitive amniotes
that adapted to a terrestrial lifestyle could have evolved during the late Permian
(Romer 1957). The early stages of amniotes are sometimes called “reptiliomorpha”
and include a large number of ancestral tetrapods with unique characteristics,
although their phylogenetic positions remain under debate (Laurin 2004). By
contrast, fossil evidence and molecular phylogenetics have suggested that ancestral
amniotes rapidly radiated and diverged into distinct lineages, which are classiﬁed
by anatomical differences such as the number of openings in the lateral side of the
skull (Carroll 1988). These lineages include synapsid and diapsid, which were the
ancestry of extant mammals and reptiles, respectively (Ruta et al. 2003; Sanchez-
Villagra 2010; Kemp 2007).
Recent X-ray tomographic analyses of fossil endocasts have provided a fascinat-
ing scenario of the brain evolution in which the volume of the forebrain was rapidly
increased in mammalian lineages (Rowe et al. 2011). Brains might have become
larger as the result of an increased dependency on speciﬁc sensory modalities, such
as olfactory, somatosensory, and auditory information (Rowe 1996; Rowe et al.
2011). In extant mammals, multiple types of sensory information are integrated into
the dorsal part of the telencephalon, which is called the neocortex. Indeed, one of
the distinguishing characteristics of the mammalian brain is the enlarged neocortex
with tangential expansion of its surface area and a six-layered laminar structure
composed of multiple neuronal subtypes (Nieuwenhuys 1994).
By contrast, diapsid lineages established distinct styles of forebrains. In extant
reptiles, multiple sensory modalities are uniﬁed and processed in the dorsal
ventricular ridge (DVR), which is a large, bulge-like structure that protrudes in
the lateral side of the ventricular zone (Ulinski 1983; Bulter and Hodos 2005;
Nieuwenhuys et al. 1998). Thus, the mammalian neocortex and reptilian DVR are
comparable brain regions regarding functional commonalities. However, how these
unique structures evolved in parallel in distantly related amniote lineages and what
types of genetic modiﬁcations contributed to the creation of such different forebrain
designs remain unknown. In this chapter, we introduce the mammalian neocortex
and reptilian DVR as a typical example of the convergent evolution of amniote brain
architectures. First, we provide evidence regarding the neuroanatomical similarities
of the neocortex and DVR with respect to sensory inputs. Later in the chapter,
possible molecular mechanisms that provided parallel evolution of the neocortex
and DVR are discussed, focusing on the role of Pax6 as a master regulatory gene of
brain development in vertebrates.

12
The Neocortex and Dorsal Ventricular Ridge: Functional Convergence...
293
12.2
Morphological Diversity of the Amniote Telencephalon
The dorsal part of the vertebrate telencephalon, designated the pallium, is rec-
ognized in all vertebrate telencephali (Bulter and Hodos 2005; Holmgren 1922,
1925). The pallium is classiﬁed into four subdivisions, including the medial,
dorsal, lateral, and ventral pallium, based on their anatomical positions and tran-
scription factor expression patterns (Puelles et al. 2000). These pallial subdi-
visions are evolutionarily conserved in all vertebrates, whereas mature deriva-
tives of each pallial region show considerable morphological diversity among
phyla and species (Puelles and Medina 2002). In mammals, the dorsal pallium
gives rise to the neocortex, which is characterized by tangential expansion of
six-layered laminar sheets (Fig. 12.1a, c). This neocortical landmark is com-
monly equipped in all extant mammalian species, including eutheria, marsupials,
and monotremes, suggesting that the neocortical structure could have already
evolved in common ancestor(s) of modern mammalian lineages (Molnár et al.
2006).
Mammal
Reptile
DVR
MC
DC
LC
DVR
STR
Amg
NCx
DC
B
C
D
Th
MC
LC
Hpc
Th
Gecko 
Dorsal pallium-derived regions
Ventral pallium-derived regions
NCx
Pir
A
Amg
Hpc
Th
Mouse 
200 µm
l
ll/lll
IV
V
Vl
Fig. 12.1 Comparison of mammalian and reptilian telencephali. Coronal sections of neonatal
mouse (a) and gecko (b) telencephali with Nissl staining. Note the enlarged neocortex (NCx)
and dorsal ventricular ridge (DVR) in the mouse and gecko pallia, respectively. The mammalian
neocortex is consists of a six-layered neuronal structure. (c, d) Schematic illustration of mouse
(c) and gecko (d) telencephalic structures. Hpc hippocampus, Amg amygdala, Th thalamus, MC
medial cortex, DC dorsal cortex, LC lateral cortex, Pir piriform cortex

294
W. Yamashita and T. Nomura
Extant nonmammalian amniotes consist of two phylogenetic groups, lepi-
dosaurs and archosaurs (Pyron et al. 2013; Sterling 2011). The former group
includes snakes, lizards, and related species, and the latter includes crocodiles
and birds. Species of Sphenodon (tuatara), which are considered to retain the
ancient characteristics of amniotes, are also classiﬁed in the lepidosaurs (Jones
and Cree 2012). Recent molecular phylogenetic analyses have demonstrated that
turtles should be classiﬁed in the out group of archosaurs, although their external
morphology and skeletons could have been extremely modiﬁed (Wang et al.
2013; Nagashima et al. 2013; Field et al. 2014). In this chapter, we use the
term “reptiles” to refer to amniote groups that include lepidosaurs and archosaurs
but that exclude modern birds, which might be acceptable for general read-
ers.
Modern reptiles and birds have unique telencephalon architectures, some of
which are not fully comparable to the mammalian counterparts. The reptilian
cortex, which is thought to be a homologous region of the mammalian
neocortex, exhibits a three-layered laminar organization (Ulinski 1990; Nomura
et al. 2013b). Although cortical cellular arrangements show subtle variations
among reptilian species, the middle layer (layer II), in which neuronal
cell bodies are densely accumulated between the upper (layer I) and lower
layer (layer III), is discernible in the dorsal pallium of all reptiles. In
addition to the cortex, the DVR is a remarkable structure in the reptilian
telencephalon, which is derived from the embryonic ventral pallium, and
is characterized as “the stippled mass that extends from the ventrolateral
wall of the cerebral hemisphere into the lateral ventricle” (Ulinski 1983)
(Fig. 12.1b, d). The reptilian DVR is subdivided into the anterior and posterior
compartments (ADVR and PDVR), which are distinguished by anatomical
structures and by sensory projection patterns. Generally, the ADVR receives
visual, auditory and somatosensory information and the PDVR receives olfactory
information (Ulinski 1983; Bulter and Hodos 2005).
The avian telencephalon demonstrates extensively speciﬁed morphology.
The dorsal part of the telencephalon gives rise to a tissue slab, called the
hyperpallium or Wulst, which is composed of nuclear organizations rather
than horizontally oriented laminar structures (Jarvis et al. 2005; Medina and
Reiner 2000). However, a large stratiﬁed Wulst, which could be a derived
architecture as a result of evolutionary adaptation, has been described in some
avian species, such as parrots and owls (Striedter 2005). Similar to reptiles, the
most obvious region in the avian telencephalon is also the DVR, which consists
of several neuronal compartments, such as the mesopallium and nidopallium.
As indicated by their names, all these compartments are derived from the
embryonic pallium, although their precise origins remain under debate (Medina
et al. 2013).

12
The Neocortex and Dorsal Ventricular Ridge: Functional Convergence...
295
12.3
Functional Similarities of the Neocortex and DVR
Remarkable similarities regarding neuronal circuits can be found among the
mammalian neocortex, reptilian/avian cortex/Wulst, and DVR. The mammalian
neocortex receives several types of sensory information, such as somatosensory,
visual, and auditory inputs through speciﬁc thalamic nuclei (Nieuwenhuys 1994;
Nieuwenhuys et al. 1998). These sensory pathways maintain their topographic order
within the forebrain, and project to the speciﬁc area of the neocortex, namely, the
primary somatosensory, visual, and auditory cortex. Similarly, the reptilian cortex
and DVR (ADVR) also receive multiple ascending sensory inputs from the thalamus
(Ulinski 1983). Each sensory afferent terminates in distinct regions of the reptilian
dorsal cortex and DVR, as in the mammalian neocortex. Notably, topographic
arrangement of somatosensory, motor and visual areas in the dorsal pallium is highly
conserved among amniotes, suggesting that common developmental mechanisms
control the sensory projection pattern in the dorsal pallium (Medina and Reiner
2000). However, molecular mechanisms underlying the establishment of the sensory
areas in the developing reptilian and avian DVR remain elusive. A recent study
revealed that the expression of EphA4 and Slit2 in the developing turtle thalamus
was similar to those in the mouse. Thus, basic molecular mechanisms that control
thalamic axon guidance are shared in mammals and reptilian/avian lineages (Tosa
et al. 2015).
Based on the similarities in sensory connection patterns, Karten claimed that
the nuclear-speciﬁc neurons in the reptilian/avian pallia correspond to the layer-
speciﬁc neurons in the mammalian neocortex (Karten 1969). This “equivalent cell
hypothesis” proposes that homologues of the mammalian neocortical neurons are
widely distributed in the reptilian/avian pallia, including the dorsal cortex and
DVR. Concomitantly, recent studies have revealed that gene expression patterns
associated with neuronal connections are highly conserved among mammalian and
nonmammalian pallia. For example, layer IV neurons in the mammalian neocortex
receive thalamic inputs, and these neurons are characterized by the expression of
Rorß and Eag2 (Dugas-Ford et al. 2012; Hevner et al. 2003). Similar to mammals,
orthologous genes of Rorß and Eag2 are expressed in thalamo-recipient neurons in
the dorsal cortex and DVR in turtles (Dugas-Ford et al. 2012). However, subsequent
comprehensive transcriptome analyses have demonstrated that gene expression
patterns in the adult mouse neocortex are not comparable to the gene expression
patterns of the adult chicken pallium (Belgard et al. 2013; Jarvis et al. 2013). Thus,
a certain degree of similarity in gene expression patterns between distantly related
species (e.g., mouse and chick) could be the results of functional convergence.
Indeed, reptilian DVR and avian mesopallium/nidopallium are derived from the
ventral pallium, which shares a developmental origin with the amygdala, claustrum,
and endopiriform complex, not the neocortex, in the developing mammalian pallium
(Puelles et al. 2000; Puelles and Medina 2002; Fernandez et al. 1998) (Fig. 12.1d).

296
W. Yamashita and T. Nomura
12.4
Developmental Mechanisms Caused the Convergent
Evolution of the Neocortex and DVR
One fundamental question is how the neocortex and DVR have acquired similar
functions, although these structures have distinct developmental origins. Of note,
signiﬁcant similarities in neuronal connections, particularly regarding the sensory
inputs from the dorsal thalamus, have been observed between the mammalian
neocortex and reptilian/avian DVR.
The thalamic afferent pathway includes the collothalamic and lemnothalamic
pathways: the former is relayed through the midbrain, although the latter is
not mediated by the midbrain. These two pathways are well conserved among
vertebrates, although each neural pathway projects to distinct pallial targets. For
example, in mammals, the collothalamic visual pathway is relayed through several
thalamic nuclei including posterior nuclear groups, which target the visual cortex
and lateral nucleus of the amygdala (Bulter and Hodos 2005) (Fig. 12.2a). A
similar pathway exists in nonmammalian amniotes, such as turtles and birds
(Fig. 12.2b). In these animals, collothalamic visual pathways are mediated by the
optic tectum and thalamic nuclei, which project to the visual region of the ADVR in
reptiles and to the ectopallium in birds (Ulinski 1983). In contrast, lemnothalamic
visual pathways are relayed through the dorsal geniculate nucleus in all amniotes,
which target the visual cortex in mammals, dorsal cortex in reptiles, and visual
Wulst in birds (Nieuwenhuys et al. 1998; Bulter and Hodos 2005; Ulinski 1990)
(Fig. 12.2a, b).
Extensive similarities in the patterns of sensory inputs in distinct amniote
lineages suggest that these characteristics are derived from common ancestor(s). If
DVR
(visual region)
NCx (visual area)
DC
MC
Visual pathway
(lemnothalamic)
Visual pathway
(collothalamic)
lateral nucleus of
amygdala
Visual pathway
(lemnothalamic)
Visual pathway
(collothalamic)
Mammal
Reptile
A
B
Fig. 12.2 Illustration of common sensory pathways in mammals and reptiles. Target regions of
lemnothalamic and collothalamic visual pathways in the pallium are well conserved in amniotes.
The regions with the same colors are thought to be homologous (This illustration was based on
Bulter and Hodos (2005) with slight modiﬁcations)

12
The Neocortex and Dorsal Ventricular Ridge: Functional Convergence...
297
this is the case, how did the striking architectural differences of pallial subdomains
evolve during amniote evolution? Expansion and/or protrusion of the dorsal and
ventral pallia give rise to the neocortex and DVR, as a result of differences in the
patterns of neural stem cell proliferation, differentiation, and migration. Recent
studies have clariﬁed that morphological diversities are provided by small but
signiﬁcant modiﬁcations in genetic programs, such as changes in the spatiotemporal
patterns of core-regulatory gene networks during embryogenesis (Galant and
Carroll 2002; Ronshaugen et al. 2002; Chan et al. 2010; Guerreiro et al. 2013).
Accumulating evidence has indicated that neurogenesis regulation has a key role
in the disproportional expansion of the human neocortex (Borrell and Calegari
2014; Charvet et al. 2011). In the next sections, we discuss a possible molecular
mechanism that generated the enlarged neocortex and DVR by focusing on the role
of the transcription factor, Pax6.
12.5
Phenocopies of the Reptilian Cortex and DVR in Pax6
Mutant Mouse Brains
Pax6 is a member of the Pax family of transcription factors. The structure of
the Pax6 gene is highly conserved among a wide variety of organisms including
invertebrates and vertebrates (Quiring et al. 1994; Wang et al. 2010). Pax family
genes are characterized by the presence of two unique DNA-binding domains called
paired domains (PDs) and homeodomains (HDs), and each domain can recognize
speciﬁc DNA sequences in either a cooperative or independent manner (Jun and
Desplan 1996; Lang et al. 2007). The Pax gene was identiﬁed as being responsible
for mouse and human eye development (Hill et al. 1991; Quiring et al. 1994; Halder
et al. 1995). In the central nervous systems of vertebrates, Pax6 is expressed in the
forebrain, hindbrain, and spinal cord in a speciﬁc spatiotemporal manner (Simpson
and Price 2002). The role of Pax6 in cortical development has been studied in mouse
embryos (Georgala et al. 2011).
Several lines of evidence have suggested that alterations in Pax6-dependent
genetic programs underlie the diversiﬁcation of pallial morphology during amniote
evolution (Molnár and Butler 2002; Aboitiz and Zamorano 2013). In the Pax6
mutant mouse, the size and thickness of the neocortex is severely reduced (Quinn
et al. 2007) whereas the ventrolateral portion of the pallium is abnormally enlarged
(Jones et al. 2002). Therefore, the cytoarchitecture of the Pax6 mutant mouse
pallium is reminiscent of the reptilian and avian pallia: a small and thin dorsal
cortex and a DVR-like protrusion at the lateroventral region (Molnár and Butler
2002). Because the expression of Pax6 is highly conserved in all amniote pallia

298
W. Yamashita and T. Nomura
Reptile
Bird
Mammal
A
B
C
APs/RGCs
Pax6
neurons
Tbr2
BPs/IMPs
- Maintain APs
- Suppress subpallial fates
- Promote BPs production
- Establish/maintain BP
- Navigate thalamo-cortical
  axons
D
STR
VP
DP
LP
MP
STR
STR
VP
VP
LP
LP
DP
DP
MP
MP
Fig. 12.3 The expression pattern of Pax6 among amniotes. Coronal sections of the telencephali of
mouse (E13.5, a), Madagascar ground gecko (19 d.p.o., b) and chick (HH stage27, c). Sections are
immunostained with anti-Pax6 antibody (green) and anti-Tbr1 antibody (red). Pax6 is strongly
expressed in the pallial neural stem/progenitor cells, which produce Tbr1-positive excitatory
neurons. (d) Schematic illustration of how Pax6 functions in neurogenesis. MP medial pallium,
DP dorsal pallium, LP lateral pallium, VP ventral pallium, STR striatum. Bars 100 m
(Fig. 12.3a–c), the phenotype of the Pax6 mutant mouse is not attributed to the
same genetic programs as those of reptilian/avian brains. However, altered cellular
dynamics in the Pax6 mutant mouse brain may resemble those in reptilian/avian
brains, although this hypothesis has not been argued in detail.
12.6
Phenotypic Similarities Between the Pax6 Mutant
Mouse Neocortex and Reptilian/Avian Dorsal Pallia
Among the many regulatory functions in cortical development, Pax6 promotes the
expression of many transcription factors and cell-cycle genes to modulate the self-
renewal and neuronal differentiation of the neural stem cells (NSCs) (Fig. 12.3d).

12
The Neocortex and Dorsal Ventricular Ridge: Functional Convergence...
299
A signiﬁcant reduction in the volume of the Pax6 mutant mouse cortex is caused
by impairments in NSC maintenance and in neural differentiation. The developing
mammalian neocortex contains several types of neural stem/progenitor cells with
distinct morphologicaland molecular features (Stancik et al. 2010; Fietz and Huttner
2011). In the pallia of all amniotes, Pax6 is expressed in the apical progenitor cells
(or radial glial cells) that are localized in the pallial ventricular zone. During early
stages of cortical development, apical progenitors undergo symmetrical division to
increase the progenitor pool. As corticogenesis proceeds, apical progenitors produce
postmitotic neurons or basal progenitors by asymmetrical division (Tabata and
Nakajima 2003; Noctor et al. 2004; Haubensak et al. 2004; Miyata et al. 2004;
Hevner et al. 2006). In the Pax6 mutant mouse neocortex, apical progenitors are
not adequately maintained (Estivill-Torrus et al. 2002; Quinn et al. 2007; Asami
et al. 2011; Tuoc et al. 2009), resulting in the precocious depletion of neural
stem/progenitor cells. In addition, radial ﬁbers of apical progenitors in the Pax6
mutant mouse pallium do not extend in a straight manner, probably because of the
alteration of basal lamina components (Caric et al. 1997; Gotz et al. 1998).
Recent studies have shown the unique characteristics of apical progenitors in
reptilian and avian dorsal pallia (Nomura et al. 2013a, 2014; Suzuki et al. 2012;
Charvet 2010). In the developing gecko pallium, the rates of proliferation and
differentiation of apical progenitors are signiﬁcantly lower than are those in the
mammalian neocortex. These characteristics of apical progenitors in the gecko are
the result of prolonged cell-cycle lengths and lower frequencies of asymmetrical
division, resulting in a lower production of cortical neurons during a limited
neurogenic period (Nomura et al. 2013a). Apical progenitors in the avian dorsal
pallium also exhibit a restricted mitotic potential (Suzuki et al. 2012; Charvet
2010). Furthermore, a wavy extension of radial ﬁbers was evident in the developing
reptilian and avian dorsal pallia, as in the case of the Pax6 mutant mouse neocortex.
In the developing mammalian neocortex, proliferating basal progenitors
are abundant in
the
subventricular zone, and
these
progenitors undergo
symmetrical neuron production divisions and contribute to the expansion of
cortical neuronal numbers (Sessa et al. 2008; Martinez-Cerdeno et al. 2006;
Nonaka-Kinoshita et al. 2013). By contrast, a few subventricular mitoses have
been reported in the reptilian and avian dorsal pallia (Cheung et al. 2007; Suzuki
et al. 2012). Tbr2, a T-box transcription factor, is responsible for the generation
and maintenance of basal progenitors (Sessa et al. 2008). Although Tbr2-positive
cells are present in the basal side of the ventricular zone in reptiles, these cells
do not exhibit proliferative activity (Nomura et al. 2013a). Of note, the number
of Tbr2-positive basal progenitors is severely reduced in the Pax6 mutant mouse
neocortex (Quinn et al. 2007), suggesting that Pax6 promotes the transition from
apical progenitors to basal progenitors.

300
W. Yamashita and T. Nomura
12.7
The Role of Pax6 in the Development of the Ventral
Pallium
In mammals, the ventral pallium develops as a source of unique neuronal subpopu-
lations. At early stages of mouse cortical development, a subtype of Cajal–Retzius
(CR) cells is generated from the progenitors in the ventral pallium, along with
the cortical hem and the septum, and these CR cells migrate to the surface of
the neocortex (Bielle et al. 2005; Takiguchi-Hayashi et al. 2004; Yoshida et al.
2006). CR cells are essential in the inside-out pattern of corticogenesis via the
secreted molecule Reelin (Kirischuk et al. 2014; Sekine et al. 2014; Frotscher 1998).
Recent studies have demonstrated that CR cells regulate rostral-caudal patterning
of the neocortex (Griveau et al. 2010). Subsequent to CR cells, a subpopulation
of excitatory glutamatergic neurons differentiates from the ventral pallium and
migrates tangentially to the developing neocortex (Teissier et al. 2010). Although
the majority of these neurons undergo apoptosis during corticogenesis, this transient
neuronal population enhances the production of the later-born cortical neurons
(Teissier et al. 2012). Another neuronal population derived from the ventral pallium
migrates toward the ventrolateral part of the telencephalon and gives rise to the
amygdala, claustrum, and endopiriform nucleus (Hicks and D’Amato 1968). This
migratory route is called the lateral cortical stream (Carney et al. 2006). In mice,
most of these neuronal populations are derived from Dbx1-positive progenitors
in the ventral pallium (Bielle et al. 2005; Teissier et al. 2010; Hirata et al.
2009). The loss of Pax6 gene functions disrupts the dorsoventral patterning of the
telencephalon, and ventral pallial markers including Dbx1 are not expressed in the
Pax6 mutant mice (Assimacopoulos et al. 2003; Hirata et al. 2002). Furthermore,
the majority of neurons derived from the ventral pallium accumulate at the junction
between the cortex and striatum (Jones et al. 2002). Consequently, a portion of
amygdala and associated nuclear structures are not developed at the lateroventral
portion of the Pax6 mutant telencephalon (Tole et al. 2005).
Migration patterns of ventral pallium-derived neurons in reptiles and birds
largely differ from those in mammals. In reptiles and birds, the majority of neurons
that differentiate at the ventral pallium migrate toward the pial surface in an outside-
in manner: early-born neurons position at the surface area whereas later-born
neurons occupy the deep area (Tsai et al. 1981; Gofﬁnet et al. 1986). In the reptilian
DVR, an obvious laminar structure is not evident, but neuronal clusters are present
(Ulinski 1983). As discussed in the previous section, thalamic projection contributes
to an increase in the volume of the DVR. Notably, the thalamocortical projection
in the Pax6 mouse mutant stalls at the border between the cortex and striatum
and intermingles with abnormally accumulated neurons at the lateroventral portion
of the telencephalon (Jones et al. 2002). Compared to mammals, the numbers of
Reelin-positive CR cells in the reptilian and avian pallia are much fewer (Nomura
et al. 2008; Cabrera-Socorro et al. 2007; Tissir et al. 2003; Bernier et al. 2000),
possibly because of differences in the potential of Reelin expression or in the
generation of CR cells among amniotes. Indeed, Dbx1 expression at the ventral

12
The Neocortex and Dorsal Ventricular Ridge: Functional Convergence...
301
pallium is speciﬁcally absent in the developing chick telencephalon, and Dbx1
overexpression induces ectopic Reelin-positive cells in chick embryos (Bielle et al.
2005; Nomura et al. 2008). These data suggest that Pax6-dependent regulation
of Dbx1 expression had been acquired in mammalian lineages, resulting in the
ampliﬁcation of CR cells and in the establishment of a unique migratory stream of
neurons to form the amygdaloid complex. The expression of Dbx1 in the developing
reptilian pallium remains to be elucidated.
12.8
A Possible Scenario Regarding Changes in Pax6
Functions and the Emergence of the Neocortex
and DVR
Evolutionary developmental biologists have hypothesized that a few but signif-
icant changes in core-regulatory factors of developmental processes resulted in
considerable anatomical differences (King and Wilson 1975; Rakic 1995; Jacob
1977). In this context, subtle alterations in the gene regulatory networks under the
control of the Pax6 gene may have provided species-speciﬁc progenitor dynamics in
the developing amniote pallium. Consistent with this possibility, a previous report
clariﬁed the differential regulation of pluripotent and neural genes by Pax6 between
mouse and human (Zhang et al. 2010). This differential regulation might be caused
by heterotopic or heterochronic changes in the expression patterns of Pax6 or related
genes or to alterations in the cis-regulatory elements of downstream genes (Molnár
and Butler 2002; Aboitiz and Zamorano 2013). In the developing mouse neocortex,
the expression level of Pax6 shows a rostrolateral-high and caudomedial-low
gradient. In contrast, the gradient in the expression of Pax6 is not obviously detected
in the reptilian/avian pallium (Fig. 12.3a–c). A previous study indicated that neural
progenitors in the Pax6-low regions (include the medial and dorsal pallium) have
higher proliferative capacity than those in the Pax6-high regions (lateral and ventral
pallum) because of the dose-dependent negative regulation of Pax6 in cell-cycle
progression (Mi et al. 2013; Sansom et al. 2009). Thus, it is possible that the small
volume of the dorsal pallium in reptiles/birds might be the result of the relatively
higher expression level of Pax6 in the dorsal pallium compared to mammals. In
contrast, Aboitiz (Aboitiz and Zamorano 2013) hypothesized upregulation of Pax6
in the ventral pallium of reptiles/birds might contribute to the expansion of the
DVR, which could be attributed to positive regulation of Pax6 in cell proliferation.
Indeed, Pax6 not only suppress the expression of Cdk6 (Mi et al. 2013) but also
positively regulates other cell-cycle regulators such as cyclin D2 (Sansom et al.
2009). A possible scenario that integrates these controversial theories is that the role
of Pax6 is context dependent, and the heterometric changes of Pax6 contributed to
the increase/decrease of different pallial regions, although we need to have more
experimental data about the dose-dependent function of Pax6 in different amniote
species.

302
W. Yamashita and T. Nomura
We summarized putative changes in Pax6-dependent regulation that are relevant
to the creation of the neocortex and DVR (Table 12.1). Notably, the tangential
expansion and six-layered laminar structure of the mammalian neocortex could
have evolved by a massive increase in apical progenitor mitosis, together with the
ampliﬁcation of basal progenitors: these developmental events are tightly controlled
by Pax6-dependent genetic networks in mammals. By contrast, the emergence of
DVR structures in reptilian lineages might be caused by other changes in Pax6-
dependent regulation of neural stem/progenitor cells, resulting in the expansion
of apical progenitors and in the massive production of excitatory neurons in the
reptilian ventral pallium. In addition to the control of progenitor proliferation,
species-speciﬁc patterns of cell migration in the dorsal and ventral pallium might
also be accomplished by changes in Pax6 functions during evolution. Along with the
inside-out patterns of excitatory neuron migration in the dorsal pallium, the emer-
gence of the lateral cortical stream is a critical step for making mammalian-speciﬁc
telencephalic structures. Recent studies have reported differential expression of
guidance molecules for axon elongation and neuronal migration in developing
mammalian and nonmammalian telencephali (Bielle et al. 2011; Tosa et al. 2015).
Thus, changes in the expression patterns, levels and/or timing of these molecules
might have contributed to the establishment of novel migratory patterns of dorsal
and ventral pallium in mammalian and nonmammalian lineages.
12.9
Conclusion and Perspective
In addition to anatomical, physiological, and behavioral differences, the neocortex
and DVR have remarkable characteristics to classify amniotes into two major
groups that descended from ancestral synapsids and diapsids. Although these brain
architectures might have developed independently in ancient amniote lineages,
genetic and environmental constraints have provided amazing functional simi-
larities. Comparative neuroanatomical studies have identiﬁed that some of these
commonalities are based on the conserved neural circuits, which possibly derived
from common ancestral characteristics. Elaboration of the neocortex and DVR as
a higher cognitive center might have resulted in successful adaptive radiation of
mammals and reptiles.
Currently, much evidence has been accumulating regarding the developmental
regulation of the mammalian neocortex and underlying molecular mechanisms.
However, we do not have sufﬁcient information regarding the lineage- and species-
speciﬁc functions of regulatory genes such as Pax6 in different contexts of brain
development. Although most genes and their expression patterns during embryo-
genesis are highly conserved among amniotes, no evidence has indicated that
orthologous genes have identical functions among amniote lineages because unique
brain designs must underlie species-speciﬁc developmental constraints. Thus, we

12
The Neocortex and Dorsal Ventricular Ridge: Functional Convergence...
303
Table 12.1 Possible changes in Pax6-dependent cortical developmental programs in mammals and reptiles
Mammals
Reptiles
Putative downstream genesa
Dorsal pallium
Tangential expansion of the surface area
Lesser expansion of the surface area
Neurogenin 2
Enhanced proliferation of apical progenitors
Slower proliferation of the apical progenitors
Tbr2
Ampliﬁcation of basal progenitors
No or minimum ampliﬁcation of basal progenitors
Cdk6
Ampliﬁcation of outer radial glial cellsb
Dmrta1
Navigation of thalamic axons
Hes family genes
Establishment of internal capsule
Wnt family genes
Eph/ephrins
Slit/Robo family genes
Ventral pallium
Generation of Dbx1-positive cell populations
Formation of the DVR
Dbx1
Production of Cajal–Retzius cells
Enhanced proliferation of apical progenitors
Neurogenin 2
Production of transient excitatory neurons
Ampliﬁcation of basal progenitorsc
Tbr2
Production of amygdala neurons
Establishment of nuclear structures
Cdk6
Establishment of the lateral cortical stream
Outside-in patterns of cortico/palliogenesis
Dmrta1
Establishment of claustrum/amygdala complex
Navigation of thalamic axons
Hes
Wnt
Reelin/Dab1
Eph/ephrins
Slit/Robo family genes
aReferences are cited in the text
bMassively ampliﬁed in gyrencephalic mammals
cMassively ampliﬁed in avian lineages

304
W. Yamashita and T. Nomura
could not simply extrapolate the molecular logic of the mammalian neocortex
to understand nonmammalian brain development. Manipulations of orthologous
gene functions in various animals are powerful approaches to unveil the genetic
mechanisms of the evolution of brain diversity. Recent advancements in molecular
genetics such as RNA interference, genome editing, and comprehensive RNA
sequencing technologies will provide new insights into comparative analyses of
orthologous gene functions. Identifying regulatory systems that constitute species-
speciﬁc developmental constraints is essential to understanding the origin and
evolution of the neocortex and DVR as landmarks of amniotes.
Acknowledgments We thank Drs. Katsuhiko Ono and Hitoshi Gotoh for providing critical
comments and suggestions for the research and Ms. Misato Kawami and Mr. Kazuhiro Arimura for
technical support. This work was supported by Grant-in-Aid for Challenging Exploratory Research
(#24657158), Scientiﬁc Research on Innovative Areas (The Empathetic Systems, #26118510) and
PRESTO, JST.
References
Aboitiz F, Zamorano F (2013) Neural progenitors, patterning and ecology in neocortical origins.
Front Neuroanat 7:38. doi:10.3389/fnana.2013.00038
Asami M, Pilz GA, Ninkovic J, Godinho L, Schroeder T, Huttner WB, Gotz M (2011) The role
of Pax6 in regulating the orientation and mode of cell division of progenitors in the mouse
cerebral cortex. Development 138(23):5067–5078. doi:10.1242/dev.074591
Assimacopoulos S, Grove EA, Ragsdale CW (2003) Identiﬁcation of a Pax6-dependent epidermal
growth factor family signaling source at the lateral edge of the embryonic cerebral cortex. J
Neurosci 23(16):6399–6403
Belgard TG, Montiel JF, Wang WZ, Garcia-Moreno F, Margulies EH, Ponting CP, Molnár Z
(2013) Adult pallium transcriptomes surprise in not reﬂecting predicted homologies across
diverse chicken and mouse pallial sectors. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 110(32):13150–13155.
doi:10.1073/pnas.1307444110
Benton M, Gauthier J, Kluge A, Rowe TB (1988) The early evolution of the Amniota. In: Benton
MJ (ed) The phylogeny and classiﬁcation of the tetrapods. Clarendon, Oxford, pp 103–155
Bernier B, Bar I, D’Arcangelo G, Curran T, Gofﬁnet AM (2000) Reelin mRNA expression during
embryonic brain development in the chick. J Comp Neurol 422(3):448–463
Bielle F, Griveau A, Narboux-Neme N, Vigneau S, Sigrist M, Arber S, Wassef M, Pierani A (2005)
Multiple origins of Cajal–Retzius cells at the borders of the developing pallium. Nat Neurosci
8(8):1002–1012. doi:10.1038/nn1511
Bielle F, Marcos-Mondejar P, Keita M, Mailhes C, Verney C, Nguyen Ba-Charvet K, Tessier-
Lavigne M, Lopez-Bendito G, Garel S (2011) Slit2 activity in the migration of guidepost
neurons shapes thalamic projections during development and evolution. Neuron 69(6):1085–
1098. doi:10.1016/j.neuron.2011.02.026
Borrell V, Calegari F (2014) Mechanisms of brain evolution: regulation of neural progenitor cell
diversity and cell cycle length. Neurosci Res 86:14–24. doi:10.1016/j.neures.2014.04.004
Bulter A, Hodos W (2005) Comparative vertebrate neuroanatomy: evolution and adaptation. Wiley,
Hoboken
Cabrera-Socorro A, Hernandez-Acosta NC, Gonzalez-Gomez M, Meyer G (2007) Comparative
aspects of p73 and Reelin expression in Cajal-Retzius cells and the cortical hem in lizard,
mouse and human. Brain Res 1132(1):59–70. doi:10.1016/j.brainres.2006.11.015

12
The Neocortex and Dorsal Ventricular Ridge: Functional Convergence...
305
Caric D, Gooday D, Hill RE, McConnell SK, Price DJ (1997) Determination of the migratory
capacity of embryonic cortical cells lacking the transcription factor Pax-6. Development
124(24):5087–5096
Carney RS, Alfonso TB, Cohen D, Dai H, Nery S, Stoica B, Slotkin J, Bregman BS, Fishell
G, Corbin JG (2006) Cell migration along the lateral cortical stream to the developing
basal telencephalic limbic system. J Neurosci 26(45):11562–11574. doi:10.1523/JNEU-
ROSCI.3092-06.2006
Carroll RL (1988) Vertebrate paleontology and evolution. Freeman, New York
Chan YF, Marks ME, Jones FC, Villarreal G Jr, Shapiro MD, Brady SD, Southwick AM, Absher
DM, Grimwood J, Schmutz J, Myers RM, Petrov D, Jonsson B, Schluter D, Bell MA, Kingsley
DM (2010) Adaptive evolution of pelvic reduction in sticklebacks by recurrent deletion of a
Pitx1 enhancer. Science 327(5963):302–305. doi:10.1126/science.1182213
Charvet CJ (2010) A reduced progenitor pool population accounts for the rudimentary appearance
of the septum, medial pallium and dorsal pallium in birds. Brain Behav Evol 76(3-4):289–300.
doi:10.1159/000322102
Charvet CJ, Striedter GF, Finlay BL (2011) Evo-devo and brain scaling: candidate developmental
mechanisms for variation and constancy in vertebrate brain evolution. Brain Behav Evol
78(3):248–257. doi:10.1159/000329851
Cheung AF, Pollen AA, Tavare A, DeProto J, Molnár Z (2007) Comparative aspects of cortical
neurogenesis in vertebrates. J Anat 211(2):164–176. doi:10.1111/j.1469-7580.2007.00769.x
Dugas-Ford J, Rowell JJ, Ragsdale CW (2012) Cell-type homologies and the origins of the
neocortex. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 109(42):16974–16979. doi:10.1073/pnas.1204773109
Estivill-Torrus G, Pearson H, van Heyningen V, Price DJ, Rashbass P (2002) Pax6 is required to
regulate the cell cycle and the rate of progression from symmetrical to asymmetrical division
in mammalian cortical progenitors. Development 129(2):455–466
Fernandez AS, Pieau C, Reperant J, Boncinelli E, Wassef M (1998) Expression of the Emx-1
and Dlx-1 homeobox genes deﬁne three molecularly distinct domains in the telencephalon
of mouse, chick, turtle and frog embryos: implications for the evolution of telencephalic
subdivisions in amniotes. Development 125(11):2099–2111
Field DJ, Gauthier JA, King BL, Pisani D, Lyson TR, Peterson KJ (2014) Toward consilience in
reptile phylogeny: miRNAs support an archosaur, not lepidosaur, afﬁnity for turtles. Evol Dev
16(4):189–196. doi:10.1111/ede.12081
Fietz SA, Huttner WB (2011) Cortical progenitor expansion, self-renewal and neurogenesis-a
polarized perspective. Curr Opin Neurobiol 21(1):23–35. doi:10.1016/j.conb.2010.10.002
Frotscher M (1998) Cajal–Retzius cells, Reelin, and the formation of layers. Curr Opin Neurobiol
8(5):570–575
Galant R, Carroll SB (2002) Evolution of a transcriptional repression domain in an insect Hox
protein. Nature 415(6874):910–913. doi:10.1038/nature717
Georgala PA, Carr CB, Price DJ (2011) The role of Pax6 in forebrain development. Dev Neurobiol
71(8):690–709. doi:10.1002/dneu.20895
Gofﬁnet AM, Daumerie C, Langerwerf B, Pieau C (1986) Neurogenesis in reptilian corti-
cal structures:
3H-thymidine autoradiographic analysis. J Comp Neurol 243(1):106–116.
doi:10.1002/cne.902430109
Gotz M, Stoykova A, Gruss P (1998) Pax6 controls radial glia differentiation in the cerebral cortex.
Neuron 21(5):1031–1044
Griveau A, Borello U, Causeret F, Tissir F, Boggetto N, Karaz S, Pierani A (2010) A novel
role for Dbx1-derived Cajal–Retzius cells in early regionalization of the cerebral cortical
neuroepithelium. PLoS Biol 8(7), e1000440. doi:10.1371/journal.pbio.1000440
Guerreiro I, Nunes A, Woltering JM, Casaca A, Novoa A, Vinagre T, Hunter ME, Duboule
D, Mallo M (2013) Role of a polymorphism in a Hox/Pax-responsive enhancer in
the evolution of the vertebrate spine. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 110(26):10682–10686.
doi:10.1073/pnas.1300592110
Halder G, Callaerts P, Gehring WJ (1995) Induction of ectopic eyes by targeted expression of the
eyeless gene in Drosophila. Science 267(5205):1788–1792

306
W. Yamashita and T. Nomura
Haubensak W, Attardo A, Denk W, Huttner WB (2004) Neurons arise in the basal neuroepithelium
of the early mammalian telencephalon: a major site of neurogenesis. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
101(9):3196–3201. doi:10.1073/pnas.0308600100
Hevner RF, Daza RA, Rubenstein JL, Stunnenberg H, Olavarria JF, Englund C (2003) Beyond
laminar fate: toward a molecular classiﬁcation of cortical projection/pyramidal neurons. Dev
Neurosci 25(24):139–151. doi:72263
Hevner RF, Hodge RD, Daza RA, Englund C (2006) Transcription factors in glutamatergic
neurogenesis: conserved programs in neocortex, cerebellum, and adult hippocampus. Neurosci
Res 55(3):223–233. doi:10.1016/j.neures.2006.03.004
Hicks SP, D’Amato CJ (1968) Cell migrations to the isocortex in the rat. Anat Rec 160(3):619–634.
doi:10.1002/ar.1091600311
Hill RE, Favor J, Hogan BL, Ton CC, Saunders GF, Hanson IM, Prosser J, Jordan T, Hastie ND,
van Heyningen V (1991) Mouse small eye results from mutations in a paired-like homeobox-
containing gene. Nature 354(6354):522–525. doi:10.1038/354522a0
Hirata T, Nomura T, Takagi Y, Sato Y, Tomioka N, Fujisawa H, Osumi N (2002) Mosaic
development of the olfactory cortex with Pax6-dependent and -independent components. Brain
Res Dev Brain Res 136(1):17–26
Hirata T, Li P, Lanuza GM, Cocas LA, Huntsman MM, Corbin JG (2009) Identiﬁcation of distinct
telencephalic progenitor pools for neuronal diversity in the amygdala. Nat Neurosci 12(2):141–
149. doi:10.1038/nn.2241
Holmgren N (1922) Points of view concerning forebrain morphology in lower vertebrates. J Comp
Neurol 34:391–459
Holmgren N (1925) Points of view concerning forebrain morphology in higher vertebrates. Acta
Zool (Stockh) 6:413–477
Jacob F (1977) Evolution and tinkering. Science 196(4295):1161–1166
Jarvis ED, Gunturkun O, Bruce L, Csillag A, Karten H, Kuenzel W, Medina L, Paxinos G, Perkel
DJ, Shimizu T, Striedter G, Wild JM, Ball GF, Dugas-Ford J, Durand SE, Hough GE, Husband
S, Kubikova L, Lee DW, Mello CV, Powers A, Siang C, Smulders TV, Wada K, White SA,
Yamamoto K, Yu J, Reiner A, Butler AB (2005) Avian brains and a new understanding of
vertebrate brain evolution. Nat Rev Neurosci 6(2):151–159. doi:10.1038/nrn1606
Jarvis ED, Yu J, Rivas MV, Horita H, Feenders G, Whitney O, Jarvis SC, Jarvis ER, Kubikova L,
Puck AE, Siang-Bakshi C, Martin S, McElroy M, Hara E, Howard J, Pfenning A, Mouritsen
H, Chen CC, Wada K (2013) Global view of the functional molecular organization of the
avian cerebrum: mirror images and functional columns. J Comp Neurol 521(16):3614–3665.
doi:10.1002/cne.23404
Jones ME, Cree A (2012) Tuatara. Curr Biol 22(23):R986–R987. doi:10.1016/j.cub.2012.10.049
Jones L, Lopez-Bendito G, Gruss P, Stoykova A, Molnár Z (2002) Pax6 is required for the normal
development of the forebrain axonal connections. Development 129(21):5041–5052
Jun S, Desplan C (1996) Cooperative interactions between paired domain and homeodomain.
Development 122:2639–2650
Karten H (1969) The organization of the avian telencephalon and some speculations on the
phylogeny of the amniote telencephalon. Ann NY Acad Sci 167:164–179
Kemp TS (2007) The origin of higher taxa: macroevolutionary processes, and the case of the
mammals. Acta Zool (Stockh) 88:3–22
King MC, Wilson AC (1975) Evolution at two levels in humans and chimpanzees. Science
188(4184):107–116
Kirischuk S, Luhmann HJ, Kilb W (2014) Cajal-Retzius cells: update on structural and functional
properties of these mystic neurons that bridged the 20th century. Neuroscience 275:33–46.
doi:10.1016/j.neuroscience.2014.06.009
Lang D, Powell SK, Plummer RS, Young KP, Ruggeri BA (2007) PAX genes: roles in development,
pathophysiology, and cancer. Biochem Pharmacol 73(1):1–14. doi:10.1016/j.bcp.2006.06.024
Laurin M (2004) The evolution of body size, Cope’s rule and the origin of amniotes. Syst Biol
53(4):594–622. doi:10.1080/10635150490445706

12
The Neocortex and Dorsal Ventricular Ridge: Functional Convergence...
307
Martinez-Cerdeno V, Noctor SC, Kriegstein AR (2006) The role of intermediate progenitor cells
in the evolutionary expansion of the cerebral cortex. Cereb Cortex 16((suppl 1)):i152–i161.
doi:10.1093/cercor/bhk017
Medina L, Reiner A (2000) Do birds possess homologues of mammalian primary visual,
somatosensory and motor cortices? Trends Neurosci 23(1):1–12
Medina L, Abellan A, Desﬁlis E (2013) A never-ending search for the evolutionary origin
of the neocortex: rethinking the homology concept. Brain Behav Evol 81(3):150–153.
doi:10.1159/000348282
Mi D, Carr CB, Georgala PA, Huang YT, Manuel MN, Jeanes E, Niisato E, Sansom SN,
Livesey FJ, Theil T, Hasenpusch-Theil K, Simpson TI, Mason JO, Price DJ (2013) Pax6
exerts regional control of cortical progenitor proliferation via direct repression of Cdk6 and
hypophosphorylation of pRb. Neuron 78(2):269–284. doi:10.1016/j.neuron.2013.02.012
Miyata T, Kawaguchi A, Saito K, Kawano M, Muto T, Ogawa M (2004) Asymmetric pro-
duction of surface-dividing and non-surface-dividing cortical progenitor cells. Development
131(13):3133–3145. doi:10.1242/dev.01173
Modesto SP, Scott DM, MacDougall MJ, Sues HD, Evans DC, Reisz RR (2015) The oldest
parareptile and the early diversiﬁcation of reptiles. Proc R Soc B Biol Sci 282(1801):1–9.
doi:10.1098/rspb.2014.1912
Molnár Z, Butler AB (2002) The corticostriatal junction: a crucial region for forebrain development
and evolution. BioEssays 24(6):530–541. doi:10.1002/bies.10100
Molnár Z, Metin C, Stoykova A, Tarabykin V, Price DJ, Francis F, Meyer G, Dehay C, Kennedy H
(2006) Comparative aspects of cerebral cortical development. Eur J Neurosci 23(4):921–934.
doi:10.1111/j.1460-9568.2006.04611.x
Nagashima H, Hirasawa T, Sugahara F, Takechi M, Usuda R, Sato N, Kuratani S (2013)
Origin of the unique morphology of the shoulder girdle in turtles. J Anat 223(6):547–556.
doi:10.1111/joa.12116
Nieuwenhuys R (1994) The neocortex. An overview of its evolutionary development, structural
organization and synaptology. Anat Embryol 190(4):307–337
Nieuwenhuys R, Ten Donkelaar HJ, Nicholson C (1998) The central nervous system of vertebrates.
Springer, Berlin
Noctor SC, Martinez-Cerdeno V, Ivic L, Kriegstein AR (2004) Cortical neurons arise in symmetric
and asymmetric division zones and migrate through speciﬁc phases. Nat Neurosci 7(2):136–
144. doi:10.1038/nn1172
Nomura T, Takahashi M, Hara Y, Osumi N (2008) Patterns of neurogenesis and amplitude of
Reelin expression are essential for making a mammalian-type cortex. PLoS One 3(1), e1454.
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0001454
Nomura T, Gotoh H, Ono K (2013a) Changes in the regulation of cortical neurogene-
sis contribute to encephalization during amniote brain evolution. Nat Commun 4:2206.
doi:10.1038/ncomms3206
Nomura T, Kawaguchi M, Ono K, Murakami Y (2013b) Reptiles: a new model for brain evo-devo
research. J Exp Zool B Mol Dev Evol 320(2):57–73. doi:10.1002/jez.b.22484
Nomura T, Murakami Y, Gotoh H, Ono K (2014) Reconstruction of ancestral brains: explor-
ing the evolutionary process of encephalization in amniotes. Neurosci Res 86:25–36.
doi:10.1016/j.neures.2014.03.004
Nonaka-Kinoshita M, Reillo I, Artegiani B, Martinez-Martinez MA, Nelson M, Borrell V, Calegari
F (2013) Regulation of cerebral cortex size and folding by expansion of basal progenitors.
EMBO J 32(13):1817–1828. doi:10.1038/emboj.2013.96
Puelles L, Medina L (2002) Field homology as a way to reconcile genetic and developmental
variability with adult homology. Brain Res Bull 57(3-4):243–255
Puelles L, Kuwana E, Puelles E, Bulfone A, Shimamura K, Keleher J, Smiga S, Rubenstein JL
(2000) Pallial and subpallial derivatives in the embryonic chick and mouse telencephalon,
traced by the expression of the genes Dlx-2, Emx-1, Nkx-2.1, Pax-6, and Tbr-1. J Comp Neurol
424(3):409–438

308
W. Yamashita and T. Nomura
Pyron RA, Burbrink FT, Wiens JJ (2013) A phylogeny and revised classiﬁcation of
Squamata,
including
4161
species
of
lizards
and
snakes.
BMC Evol Biol 13:93.
doi:10.1186/1471-2148-13-93
Quinn JC, Molinek M, Martynoga BS, Zaki PA, Faedo A, Bulfone A, Hevner RF, West JD, Price
DJ (2007) Pax6 controls cerebral cortical cell number by regulating exit from the cell cycle
and speciﬁes cortical cell identity by a cell autonomous mechanism. Dev Biol 302(1):50–65.
doi:10.1016/j.ydbio.2006.08.035
Quiring R, Walldorf U, Kloter U, Gehring WJ (1994) Homology of the eyeless gene of Drosophila
to the Small eye gene in mice and Aniridia in humans. Science 265(5173):785–789
Rakic P (1995) A small step for the cell, a giant leap for mankind: a hypothesis of neocortical
expansion during evolution. Trends Neurosci 18(9):383–388
Romer AS (1957) Origin of the amniote egg. Sci Mon 85(57-63)
Ronshaugen M, McGinnis N, McGinnis W (2002) Hox protein mutation and macroevolution of
the insect body plan. Nature 415(6874):914–917. doi:10.1038/nature716
Rowe T (1996) Coevolution of the mammalian middle ear and neocortex. Science 273(5275):651–
654
Rowe TB, Macrini TE, Luo ZX (2011) Fossil evidence on origin of the mammalian brain. Science
332(6032):955–957. doi:10.1126/science.1203117
Ruta M, Coates MI, Quicke DL (2003) Early tetrapod relationships revisited. Biol Rev Camb
Philos Soc 78(2):251–345
Sanchez-Villagra MR (2010) Developmental palaeontology in synapsids: the fossil record of
ontogeny in mammals and their closest relatives. Proc R Soc B Biol Sci 277(1685):1139–1147.
doi:10.1098/rspb.2009.2005
Sansom SN, Grifﬁths DS, Faedo A, Kleinjan DJ, Ruan Y, Smith J, van Heyningen V, Rubenstein
JL, Livesey FJ (2009) The level of the transcription factor Pax6 is essential for controlling the
balance between neural stem cell self-renewal and neurogenesis. PLoS Genet 5(6), e1000511.
doi:10.1371/journal.pgen.1000511
Sekine K, Kubo K, Nakajima K (2014) How does Reelin control neuronal migration
and layer formation in the developing mammalian neocortex? Neurosci Res 86:50–58.
doi:10.1016/j.neures.2014.06.004
Sessa A, Mao CA, Hadjantonakis AK, Klein WH, Broccoli V (2008) Tbr2 directs conversion of
radial glia into basal precursors and guides neuronal ampliﬁcation by indirect neurogenesis in
the developing neocortex. Neuron 60(1):56–69. doi:10.1016/j.neuron.2008.09.028
Simpson TI, Price DJ (2002) Pax6: a pleiotropic player in development. BioEssays 24(11):1041–
1051. doi:10.1002/bies.10174
Stancik EK, Navarro-Quiroga I, Sellke R, Haydar TF (2010) Heterogeneity in ventricular zone
neural precursors contributes to neuronal fate diversity in the postnatal neocortex. J Neurosci
30(20):7028–7036. doi:10.1523/JNEUROSCI.6131-09.2010
Sterling JN (2011) The early evolution of archosaurs: relationships and the origin of major clades.
Bull Am Mus Nat Hist 352:1–292
Striedter GF (2005) Principle of brain evolution. Sinauer, Sunderland
Suzuki IK, Kawasaki T, Gojobori T, Hirata T (2012) The temporal sequence of the mammalian
neocortical neurogenetic program drives mediolateral pattern in the chick pallium. Dev Cell
22(4):863–870. doi:10.1016/j.devcel.2012.01.004
Tabata H, Nakajima K (2003) Multipolar migration: the third mode of radial neuronal migration in
the developing cerebral cortex. J Neurosci 23(31):9996–10001
Takiguchi-Hayashi K, Sekiguchi M, Ashigaki S, Takamatsu M, Hasegawa H, Suzuki-Migishima
R, Yokoyama M, Nakanishi S, Tanabe Y (2004) Generation of reelin-positive marginal zone
cells from the caudomedial wall of telencephalic vesicles. J Neurosci 24(9):2286–2295.
doi:10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4671-03.2004
Teissier A, Griveau A, Vigier L, Piolot T, Borello U, Pierani A (2010) A novel transient gluta-
matergic population migrating from the pallial-subpallial boundary contributes to neocortical
development. J Neurosci 30(31):10563–10574. doi:10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0776-10.2010

12
The Neocortex and Dorsal Ventricular Ridge: Functional Convergence...
309
Teissier A, Waclaw RR, Griveau A, Campbell K, Pierani A (2012) Tangentially migrating transient
glutamatergic neurons control neurogenesis and maintenance of cerebral cortical progenitor
pools. Cereb Cortex 22(2):403–416. doi:10.1093/cercor/bhr122
Tissir F, Lambert De Rouvroit C, Sire JY, Meyer G, Gofﬁnet AM (2003) Reelin expression
during embryonic brain development in Crocodylus niloticus. J Comp Neurol 457(3):250–262.
doi:10.1002/cne.10573
Tole S, Remedios R, Saha B, Stoykova A (2005) Selective requirement of Pax6, but not Emx2,
in the speciﬁcation and development of several nuclei of the amygdaloid complex. J Neurosci
25(10):2753–2760. doi:10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3014-04.2005
Tosa Y, Hirao A, Matsubara I, Kawaguchi M, Fukui M, Kuratani S, Murakami Y (2015)
Development of the thalamo-dorsal ventricular ridge tract in the Chinese soft-shelled turtle,
Pelodiscus sinensis. Dev Growth Differ 57(1):40–57. doi:10.1111/dgd.12186
Tsai HM, Garber BB, Larramendi LM (1981)
3H-Thymidine autoradiographic analysis of
telencephalic histogenesis in the chick embryo: I. Neuronal birthdates of telencephalic com-
partments in situ. J Comp Neurol 198(2):275–292. doi:10.1002/cne.901980207
Tuoc TC, Radyushkin K, Tonchev AB, Pinon MC, Ashery-Padan R, Molnár Z, Davidoff
MS, Stoykova A (2009) Selective cortical layering abnormalities and behavioral deﬁcits
in cortex-speciﬁc Pax6 knock-out mice. J Neurosci 29(26):8335–8349. doi:10.1523/JNEU-
ROSCI.5669-08.2009
Ulinski PS (1983) Dorsal ventricular ridge: a treatise on forebrain organization in reptiles and
birds. Wiley, New York
Ulinski PS (1990) The cerebral cortex of reptiles. In: Cerebral cortex, vol 8A. Plenum Press,
New York, pp 139–215
Wang W, Zhong J, Wang YQ (2010) Comparative genomic analysis reveals the evolutionary
conservation of Pax gene family. Genes Genet Syst 85(3):193–206
Wang Z, Pascual-Anaya J, Zadissa A, Li W, Niimura Y, Huang Z, Li C, White S, Xiong Z, Fang D,
Wang B, Ming Y, Chen Y, Zheng Y, Kuraku S, Pignatelli M, Herrero J, Beal K, Nozawa M, Li
Q, Wang J, Zhang H, Yu L, Shigenobu S, Wang J, Liu J, Flicek P, Searle S, Wang J, Kuratani
S, Yin Y, Aken B, Zhang G, Irie N (2013) The draft genomes of soft-shell turtle and green sea
turtle yield insights into the development and evolution of the turtle-speciﬁc body plan. Nat
Genet 45(6):701–706. doi:10.1038/ng.2615
Yoshida M, Assimacopoulos S, Jones KR, Grove EA (2006) Massive loss of Cajal–Retzius cells
does not disrupt neocortical layer order. Development 133(3):537–545. doi:10.1242/dev.02209
Zhang X, Huang CT, Chen J, Pankratz MT, Xi J, Li J, Yang Y, Lavaute TM, Li XJ, Ayala M,
Bondarenko GI, Du ZW, Jin Y, Golos TG, Zhang SC (2010) Pax6 is a human neuroectoderm
cell fate determinant. Cell Stem Cell 7(1):90–100. doi:10.1016/j.stem.2010.04.017

Chapter 13
Molecular Investigations of the Structure
and Development of the Brain of Carnivores
Yohei Shinmyo, Tomohisa Toda, Kosuke Masuda, Yoshio Hoshiba,
Haruka Ebisu, Naoyuki Matsumoto, and Hiroshi Kawasaki
Abstract The brains of higher mammals such as carnivores and primates contain
developed structures that are not found in the brains of mice. Revealing the physio-
logical importance, developmental mechanisms, and evolution of these structures
using carnivores and primates would greatly contribute to our understanding of
the human brain and its diseases. Although the anatomical and physiological
characteristics of the brains of carnivores and primates have been intensively
investigated, molecular investigations are still limited. Recently, genetic techniques
that can be applied to carnivores and primates have been explored, and molecules
whose expression patterns were related to their developed brain structures were
reported. To investigate the functional importance of these molecules, rapid and
efﬁcient genetic manipulation methods were established. Here we review recent
advances in molecular investigations of the development and evolution of the brains
of higher mammals, mainly focusing on the ferret (Mustela putorius furo).
Keywords Marmoset • Ferret • Cerebral cortex • Gyrus • Outer subventricular
zone • Outer radial glia • In utero electroporation
13.1
Introduction
Genetically modiﬁed mice have been widely used for investigating the molecular
mechanisms underlying the function and development of the brain and the patho-
physiology of brain diseases. Recently, higher mammals such as carnivores and
primates have attracted more attention from researchers in neuroscience because
Y. Shinmyo • T. Toda • K. Masuda • Y. Hoshiba • H. Ebisu • N. Matsumoto
Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Kanazawa University, Takara-machi 13-1, Kanazawa,
Ishikawa 920-8640, Japan
H. Kawasaki, M.D., Ph.D. ()
Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Kanazawa University, Takara-machi 13-1, Kanazawa,
Ishikawa 920-8640, Japan
Brain/Liver Interface Medicine Research Center, Kanazawa University, Ishikawa 920-8640, Japan
e-mail: hiroshi-kawasaki@umin.ac.jp
© Springer Japan KK 2017
S. Shigeno et al. (eds.), Brain Evolution by Design, Diversity and Commonality
in Animals, DOI 10.1007/978-4-431-56469-0_13
311

312
Y. Shinmyo et al.
the brains of carnivores and primates contain developed brain structures that mice do
not seem to have. These brain structures include ocular dominance columns (ODCs)
in the visual cortex, the magnocellular (M) and parvocellular (P) pathways in the
visual system, and the gyri and the outer subventricular zone (OSVZ) of the cerebral
cortex. Because these structures have been proposed to be important for higher brain
functions, determining the physiological importance, developmental mechanisms,
and evolution of these structures using carnivores and primates would lead to
our understanding of the human brain and its diseases, which are often difﬁcult
to investigate using mice. Although the anatomical and physiological properties
have been intensively investigated, the molecular mechanisms of the formation,
function, pathophysiology, and evolution of these structures are still unclear, not
only because these structures are only poorly developed in mice, but also because
genetic manipulation techniques that can be used for carnivores and primates were
not readily available until recently.
To overcome these limitations, genetic manipulation techniques that can be
applied to carnivores and primates have been explored. Pioneering studies have
reported successful application of virus vectors to make transgenic primates such as
monkeys and marmosets (Chan et al. 2001; Lois et al. 2002; Sasaki et al. 2009). The
injection of a lentiviral vector into marmoset eggs led to transgenic marmosets that
expressed transgenes in several organs (Sasaki et al. 2009). Importantly, germline
transmission of the transgene was demonstrated, and transgenic offspring developed
normally (Sasaki et al. 2009). Although the creation of transgenic marmosets would
provide novel animal models for various kinds of human diseases (Okano et al.
2012), developing new transgenic animals takes time and effort and requires special
animal facilities. Therefore, it was desirable to establish a rapid and simple genetic
manipulation technique for carnivores and primates. To achieve the expression
of transgenes in the cerebral cortex of higher mammals, we applied in utero
electroporation to ferrets (Mustela putorius furo) (Fig. 13.1) and succeeded in
expressing GFP in the cerebral cortex, as described next (Kawasaki et al. 2012,
2013). The ferret, similar to the weasel, badger, and skunk, belongs to Mustelidae,
Fig. 13.1 An adult ferret (Mustela putorius furo). The ferret has an average length of about 50 cm
and weighs about 1–2 kg

13
Molecular Investigations of the Structure and Development of the Brain...
313
Fig. 13.2 Dorsal view of the ferret brain. Cortical gyri and sulci are clearly visible. Bar 1 cm
(Adapted from Kawasaki et al. 2012)
which is a family of carnivorous mammals. They have an average length of
about 50 cm and weight of about 1–2 kg. Ferrets have a long history as animal
model subjects because they have developed brain structures that mice do not
have (Fig. 13.2). Combining transgenic marmosets and electroporated ferrets would
greatly facilitate our understanding of the development and evolution of the brain of
higher mammals. In this chapter, we summarize recent advances in the molecular
understanding of the brains of higher mammals, especially focusing on ferrets.
13.2
The Ferret as a Model Animal for Investigating
the Cerebral Cortex
One of the most prominent features of the brains of higher mammals is the
formation of folds in the cerebral cortex (i.e., cortical gyrus) (Fig. 13.2). Humans,
monkeys, and ferrets have gyrencephalic brains (i.e., brains with cortical folds),
whereas the brains of rodents are often lissencephalic (i.e., lacking cortical folds).
It has been proposed that the increased number of cortical neurons resulted in
expansion and folding of the cerebral cortex during evolution. It is therefore
important to investigate the mechanisms regulating the proliferation, migration, and
differentiation of neural progenitors in the cerebral cortex during development in
higher mammals (Borrell and Reillo 2012; Dehay and Kennedy 2007; Rakic 2009;

314
Y. Shinmyo et al.
Fietz and Huttner 2011; Lui et al. 2011; Hevner and Haydar 2012; Molnar and
Clowry 2012).
During development, cortical neurons are produced from radial glial cells (RG
cells, also known as apical progenitors/apical RG cells/ventricular RG cells). RG
cells are epithelial stem cells in the ventricular zone (VZ) that are located along
the cerebral ventricles and have apical ﬁbers and basal ﬁbers (Malatesta et al.
2000; Miyata et al. 2001; Noctor et al. 2001). RG cells undergo multiple rounds of
asymmetrical cell divisions and produce intermediate progenitor cells (IP cells/basal
progenitors). IP cells migrate into the subventricular zone (SVZ) and further
proliferate to increase neuronal number (Haubensak et al. 2004; Noctor et al. 2004).
One of the important features of the developing cerebral cortex of carnivores and
primates is the appearance of the large SVZ, which has an inner region (ISVZ)
and an outer region (OSVZ), often divided by a thin layer of ﬁbers called the inner
ﬁber layer (IFL) (Smart et al. 2002; Zecevic et al. 2005). Recent pioneering studies
uncovered a novel class of progenitor cells in the OSVZ, OSVZ radial glial cells
(oRG cells/outer RG cells/basal RG cells/intermediate RG cells/translocating RG
cells) (Fietz et al. 2010; Hansen et al. 2010; Reillo et al. 2011). In contrast to RG
cells in the VZ, oRG cells in the OSVZ are unipolar and have a basal ﬁber that
ascends toward the pia without an apical ﬁber descending to the ventricle. Because
a major underlying cause of the expansion and gyriﬁcation of the cerebral cortex
during evolution seems to be the increase in population size of neural progenitors in
the OSVZ, which is a specialized germinal zone characteristic of higher mammals,
it would be intriguing to investigate the mechanisms underlying the proliferation,
migration, and differentiation of neural progenitors in the OSVZ.
Ferrets seem to be a good option for investigating such mechanisms, given that
genetic manipulation using ferrets has become feasible (Borrell 2010; Kawasaki
et al. 2012, 2013; Reillo et al. 2011; Nonaka-Kinoshita et al. 2013; Pilz et al.
2013). Recently, lists of genes expressed in the VZ and SVZ of mice and in various
regions of the cerebral cortex in monkeys were reported (Ayoub et al. 2011; Bernard
et al. 2012). Manipulating these genes in ferrets should lead to identifying the
mechanisms underlying the formation and evolution of the gyrus and the OSVZ
in the cerebral cortex. Recent studies also identiﬁed oRG-like progenitors in mice
and marmosets. These animals also appear useful for examining the developmental
mechanisms of oRG cells (Garcia-Moreno et al. 2012; Wang et al. 2011; Shitamukai
et al. 2011; Kelava et al. 2011). Discovering molecules whose expression patterns
correspond to brain structures unique to carnivores and primates will facilitate our
understanding of the development, function, pathophysiology, and evolution of the
brain. Because a recent report identiﬁed four distinct morphologies of oRG cells
in macaques (Betizeau et al. 2013), it is intriguing to examine the morphological
diversity of oRG cells in ferrets.
Neuronal migration has also been examined using the ferret cerebral cortex
(Anderson et al. 2002; O’Rourke et al. 1992, 1995, 1997; Borrell et al. 2006). Time-
lapse confocal microscopic analyses using cultured cortical slices demonstrated
that most cells migrated along radial ﬁbers, whereas a subset of cells migrated
orthogonal to radial ﬁbers (O’Rourke et al. 1992). In vivo DiI focal injection showed

13
Molecular Investigations of the Structure and Development of the Brain...
315
that labeled cells migrated in all directions and over long distances (O’Rourke et al.
1997). These results suggest that cortical cells migrate not only radially but also
non-radially during development, which may lead to tangential dispersion.
13.3
The Ferret as a Model Animal for Investigating
the Visual Cortex
Using the developed visual system in carnivores and primates, important concepts
about the intrinsic and extrinsic regulatory factors responsible for brain development
have been intensively investigated (Chalupa and Werner 2003). Anatomical proper-
ties of ocular dominance columns (ODCs) in the visual cortex and retinogeniculate
projections in the lateral geniculate nucleus (LGN), physiological descriptions of
cortical responses, and the dendritic morphology of neurons in the visual cortex
have been investigated (Callaway and Katz 1993; Usrey et al. 2003; Yu et al. 2005;
Crowley and Katz 1999, 2000; Kawasaki et al. 2004; Huberman et al. 2005; Iwai
et al. 2013; Matsui et al. 2013; Horch and Katz 2002). A pioneering study by Hubel
and Wiesel initially demonstrated ODCs in the primary visual cortex (V1) of cats
in the early 1960s (Fig. 13.3) (Hubel and Wiesel 1962). Cortical neurons in V1
respond differentially to one of the two eyes, and those neurons with similar eye
preference are segregated into cortical columns in V1. These columns contain LGN
axons derived from right and left eye-speciﬁc layers of the LGN, and LGN axons
segregate to form alternating stripes in cortical layer 4 of V1 (Fig. 13.3). ODCs
can be revealed with electrophysiological techniques and transneuronal tracers such
as tritiated amino acids. Although it has been proposed that ODCs are involved in
binocular vision, it is still unclear whether ODCs are functionally important or are
LGN
Eyes
ODCs in V1
Fig. 13.3 Schematic representation of ocular dominance columns (ODCs) in the primary visual
cortex (V1). Note that cortical neurons in one ODC are activated preferentially by one of the two
eyes. Green and red in the lateral geniculate nucleus (LGN) and V1 represent the areas that are
preferentially activated by visual inputs to the green eye and the red eye, respectively

316
Y. Shinmyo et al.
just a by-product.Notably, ODCs in V1 are observed in both primates and carnivores
including ferrets, but not in mice.
ODCs in V1 of primates and carnivores have been widely used for investigating
the mechanisms of developmental plasticity. Monocular eyelid closure during the
ﬁrst few months of life (i.e., the critical period) reduced the number of neurons
activated by the closed eye and increased the number of neurons activated by the
intact open eye (Wiesel and Hubel 1963, 1965a, b). The investigations of the effects
of monocular deprivation demonstrated that preexisting neuronal connections are
substantially modiﬁed by an activity-dependent competitive process mediated by
the NMDA receptor. Interestingly, visualization of geniculocortical axons by direct
tracer injections into an eye-speciﬁc layer of the LGN in early postnatal ferrets
revealed segregated ODCs before the critical period (Crowley and Katz 2000).
These ﬁndings distinguished between the innate mechanisms that determine the
initial formation of cortical columnar architecture and the experience-dependent,
competition-based reﬁnement responsible for their later modiﬁcation during the
critical period in V1.
13.4
The Ferret as a Model Animal for Investigating
Projection Patterns of Retinal Axons
The visual information detected by the retina is transferred to the LGN via
the retinogeniculate axons of retinal ganglion cells (RGCs). These retinogenic-
ulate axons contain several distinct information properties including eye speci-
ﬁcity, ON/OFF responses, and magnocellular/parvocellular/koniocellular (M/P/K)
responses.
Using eye-speciﬁc projections, the mechanisms underlying the activity-
dependent reﬁnement of connections have been investigated. In adult mammals,
RGC axons from the two eyes are segregated into eye-speciﬁc regions in the LGN
(Fig. 13.4). Early in development, however, when retinogeniculate projections
are initially formed, RGC axons from the two eyes are intermingled and are not
LGN
LGN
Immature
Mature
segregation
Eyes
Eyes
Fig. 13.4 A schematic representation of eye-speciﬁc segregation of retinogeniculate axons in
the LGN. Retinal ganglion cell (RGC) axons from the two eyes are initially intermingled in the
LGN (left, yellow) and then are segregated into eye-speciﬁc regions (right, green and red) during
development

13
Molecular Investigations of the Structure and Development of the Brain...
317
segregated in the LGN (Fig. 13.4). After this initial formation, the reﬁnement
of retinogeniculate projections proceeds to make distinct eye-speciﬁc regions
during development (eye-speciﬁc segregation). The mechanisms of eye-speciﬁc
segregation have been examined, and eye-speciﬁc segregation was found to
require spontaneous retinal activity called retinal waves. Monocular blockade
of retinal waves prevented normal eye-speciﬁc segregation in the LGN (Penn
et al. 1998). Retinogeniculate projections from the intact retina were greatly
expanded in the LGN, whereas those from the inhibited retina were substantially
decreased. These ﬁndings indicate that spontaneous neuronal activity leads to
highly stereotyped patterns of projections preceding visual experience (Penn et
al. 1998; Huberman et al. 2003). It has been proposed that the ﬁring patterns of
retinal waves provide the appropriate spatial and temporal information to guide the
reﬁnement of retinogeniculate projections (Meister et al. 1991). Retinal waves are
observed during the same period in which eye-speciﬁc segregation proceeds in the
LGN and subside gradually as retinogeniculate projections stabilize (Wong et al.
1993). Although ferrets have been widely used for investigating these mechanisms,
mice are becoming another choice for examining the mechanisms of eye-speciﬁc
segregation during development (Chen and Regehr 2000; Demas et al. 2006; Upton
et al. 1999; Hayakawa and Kawasaki 2010; Iwai and Kawasaki 2009).
In contrast to eye-speciﬁc projections, the ON/OFF pathways and the M/P/K
pathways are more developed in the visual system in ferrets than in mice. For
example, ON cells and OFF cells, which receive inputs from ON-center RGCs
and OFF-center RGCs, are spatially mixed in the mouse LGN, whereas they are
distributed in distinct ON and OFF sublaminae in the ferret LGN (Stryker and Zahs
1983). Using ON and OFF sublaminae in the ferret LGN, the mechanisms underly-
ing the formation of ON and OFF sublaminae have been examined. Pharmacological
experiments demonstrated that the NMDA receptor was required for the formation
of ON and OFF sublaminae (Hahm et al. 1991). Because the formation of ON and
OFF sublaminae was disrupted by the nitric oxide (NO) synthase inhibitor L-NoArg
and the soluble guanylyl cyclase (sGC) inhibitor ODQ, NO and sGC seemed to be
downstream mediators of the NMDA receptor (Cramer et al. 1996; Leamey et al.
2001). It seemed likely that calcium inﬂux through the NMDA receptor activates NO
synthase, and activation of sGC leads to the formation of ON and OFF sublaminae
in the LGN during development. It remains unclear whether NO and sGC work
presynaptically or postsynaptically. It should be noted that the NMDA receptor is
crucial for the ON/OFF segregation of retinogeniculate axons in the ferret LGN,
although they are dispensable for eye-speciﬁc segregation of retinogeniculate axons
(Smetters et al. 1994). It seems likely that distinct mechanisms underlie different
types of segregation of retinogeniculate axons in the ferret LGN.

318
Y. Shinmyo et al.
13.5
The Ferret as a Model Animal for Investigating
the Parallel Visual Pathways
The magnocellular/parvocellular/koniocellular parallel visual pathways are also
more prominent in the visual system of higher mammals than in that of mice. Visual
information detected by the retina is conveyed to the LGN and then to V1 along the
parallel visual pathways. The parallel visual pathways are composed of three path-
ways with distinct anatomical and physiological properties. These three pathways
are known as the X, Y, and W pathways in carnivores and as the parvocellular (P),
magnocellular (M), and koniocellular (K) pathways in primates (DeYoe and Van
Essen 1988; Sherman and Spear 1982; Livingstone and Hubel 1987; Felleman and
Van Essen 1991; Maunsell 1992; Hendry and Reid 2000; Sherman and Guillery
2004; Jones 2007; Nassi and Callaway 2009; Wassle 2004). It is believed that
these parallel visual pathways contribute to visual perception differently. The visual
ability of monkeys was investigated after selectively damaging either the M or P
layers of the LGN by injecting pharmacological reagents. Selective damage to the
M layers had little effect on visual acuity or color vision, but strongly reduced the
ability to recognize moving stimuli. In contrast, damage to the P layers did not
show obvious effects on motion perception but markedly impaired visual acuity and
color perception. These results suggest that the visual information conveyed by the
P pathway is related to the detailed analysis of the shape, size, and color of objects,
whereas the M pathway is mainly concerned with information about the movement
of objects.
To elucidate the molecular mechanisms underlying the formation of the devel-
oped brain structures unique to higher mammals, it is important to identify
molecules whose expression patterns correspond to these structures. Several lab-
oratories have identiﬁed such molecules using carnivores and primates (Bernard
et al. 2012; Kawasaki et al. 2004; Iwai et al. 2013; Yamamori 2011; Johnson et al.
2009; Murray et al. 2008; Mashiko et al. 2012). For example, we recently found
that the Forkhead transcription factor FoxP2 was selectively expressed in X cells
of the adult ferret dLGN and in the P layers of the adult monkey LGN (Iwai et al.
2013). One of the long-standing questions about the evolution of the visual system
is the relationship between M and P cells in primates and Y and X cells in carnivores
(Fig. 13.5). It has been suggested that X and Y cells in carnivores are comparable to
Carnivores
Hypothesis 1
Hypothesis 2
Primates
Y cells
X cells
M cells
P cells
Carnivores
Primates
Y cells
X cells
non-linear M cells
linear M cells
P cells
Fig. 13.5 Two hypotheses about the relationship between M and P cells in primates and Y and X
cells in carnivores. The expression pattern of FoxP2 suggests that hypothesis 1 is correct

13
Molecular Investigations of the Structure and Development of the Brain...
319
P and M cells in primates, respectively. An alternative view was that X and Y cells
are homologous to linear and nonlinear M cells, respectively, and that P cells are
unique to primates (Kaplan 2004). Because our ﬁndings demonstrated that FoxP2
was selectively expressed in X cells in the ferret LGN and also in the P layers in
the monkey LGN, these ﬁndings provide new evidence for a homology between
X cells of ferrets and P cells of monkeys (Iwai et al. 2013) (Fig. 13.5). Because
FoxP2 is the ﬁrst transcription factor found to be selectively expressed in one of the
three pathways, further investigations of FoxP2 would be important for detailing the
mechanisms underlying the development and evolution of the M/P/K parallel visual
pathways. It would be important to investigate the roles of FoxP2 in the development
of X cells of the LGN in carnivores and the P layers of the LGN in primates because
the molecular mechanisms underlying the formation of the parallel visual pathways
during development are still unknown. Detailed analyses of the visual functions of
the KE family, whose members have a mutated FOXP2 gene and developmental
speech-language abnormalities (Lai et al. 2001), could also aid in uncovering the
roles of FoxP2 in the development of visual system. Another application of FoxP2
would be the characterization of the FoxP2 promoter, which should be useful for
selectively expressing genes of interest such as GFP, Kir2.1, and NaChBac in the P
pathway of the LGN. Expressing such genes would uncover the precise neuronal
circuits and functional roles of the P pathway. A deeper understanding of the
parallel visual pathways in higher mammals will not only provide information about
visual recognition in humans but will also contribute to our understanding of the
development and evolution of the visual system and the general mechanisms by
which the brain integrates sensory information derived from the external world.
13.6
Other Studies Using the Ferret as a Model Animal
Remodeling of axonal projection patterns has also been examined using the visual
system of ferrets (Sur et al. 1988; Roe et al. 1992, 1993; Angelucci et al.
1997). Using neonatal surgical manipulations, RGC axons, which usually innervate
the LGN, can be induced to innervate the auditory thalamus (Sur et al. 1988).
Importantly, neuronal activity in response to visual stimuli can be recorded in the
primary auditory cortex (Sur et al. 1988). Similar to neurons in the normal primary
visual cortex, those in the primary auditory cortex of manipulated animals show
orientation and direction selectivity and have simple and complex receptive ﬁelds
(Roe et al. 1992). Among the X, Y, and W types of retinal ganglion cells of the
ferret retina, W cells are mainly responsible for this remodeling (Roe et al. 1993).
Interestingly, eye-speciﬁc projection patterns found in the LGN of the visual system
are recapitulated in the auditory thalamus of manipulated ferrets (Angelucci et al.
1997). These ﬁndings indicate that functional neuronal circuits are reconstituted in
the auditory thalamus of manipulated ferrets.

320
Y. Shinmyo et al.
13.7
Genetic Manipulation of Ferrets Using In Utero
Electroporation
Although transgenic marmosets provided a new avenue to examine the pathophys-
iological mechanisms of human diseases (Okano et al. 2012), it was also desirable
to establish rapid and simple genetic manipulation methods for carnivores and
primates. In utero electroporation is well known to be useful for expressing genes
of interest in the living rodent brain (Ako et al. 2011; Saito and Nakatsuji 2001;
Tabata and Nakajima 2001; Fukuchi-Shimogori and Grove 2001; Sehara et al.
2010). Because successful application of in utero electroporation in carnivores and
primates had not been achieved, we developed a rapid and efﬁcient procedure of in
utero electroporation for the ferret brain (Fig. 13.6) (Kawasaki et al. 2012, 2013).
Using our procedure, electroporated ferret babies can be obtained within a couple of
days after in utero electroporation is performed. Expression of transgenes becomes
detectable in the embryo and is observed at least 2 months after birth. Transgenes
can be expressed in both superﬁcial and deep neurons in the cerebral cortex,
depending on when in utero electroporation is performed. In utero electroporation
performed at E31 and E37 results in transgene expression in superﬁcial and
deep cortical neurons, respectively. Our electroporation procedure is useful for
transfecting not only postmitotic neurons but also neural progenitors, which include
radial glial cells (RG cells) in the ventricular zone (VZ), outer radial glial cells (oRG
cells) in the outer subventricular zone (OSVZ), and intermediate progenitor cells
(IP cells) (Kawasaki et al. 2012, 2013). Because the OSVZ of the cerebral cortex is
especially prominent in gyrencephalic mammals during development, it would be
Dorsal View
GFP
Lateral View
Fig. 13.6 Green ﬂuorescent protein (GFP) in the ferret brain introduced by using in utero
electroporation. Bars 1 cm (Adapted from Kawasaki et al. 2012)

13
Molecular Investigations of the Structure and Development of the Brain...
321
exciting to examine the mechanisms of the formation of the OSVZ and the roles of
the OSVZ in the formation of the gyrencephalic cortex. These experiments may lead
to our understanding of the mechanisms of the formation of gyri during evolution.
In utero electroporation is useful not only for investigating molecular mecha-
nisms but also for identifying novel neuronal circuitry (Sehara et al. 2010, 2012).
Development of the cerebral cortex in higher mammals such as monkeys and
humans is characterized by the appearance of the inner ﬁber layer (IFL), a ﬁber layer
located between the ISVZ and the OSVZ (Smart et al. 2002; Zecevic et al. 2005).
However, a previous study using ferrets failed to identify an obvious ﬁber layer
corresponding to the IFL of the primate cerebral cortex (Martinez-Cerdeno et al.
2012). In addition, it was unclear from which neurons the IFL is derived (Molnar
and Clowry 2012). Interestingly, when we expressed GFP in layer 2/3 neurons of the
ferret cerebral cortex using in utero electroporation, we found GFP-positive ﬁbers
located in the inner OSVZ (Fig. 13.7). This ﬁnding suggests that ferrets do also
have a ﬁber layer corresponding to the IFL in the primate cerebral cortex (Kawasaki
et al. 2013). This ﬁnding also suggests that layer 2/3 neurons in the cerebral cortex
are responsible for the IFL, at least partially, in ferrets (Fig. 13.7) (Kawasaki et al.
2013). One attractive hypothesis would be that an increase in the number of layer
2/3 neurons during evolution led to the formation of the thick bundle comprising the
IFL in the cerebral cortex of higher mammals.
GFP
Hoechst
Merge
VZ
ISVZ
OSVZ
CP
ISVZ
OSVZ
VZ
Fig. 13.7 Inner ﬁber layer (IFL)-like ﬁbers in the developing ferret cerebral cortex. When GFP
was expressed in layer 2/3 neurons using in utero electroporation, GFP-positive ﬁbers were found
in the inner region of the outer subventricular zone (OSVZ) (arrows). Upper panels are low-
magniﬁcation images; lower panels are high-magniﬁcation images. CP cortical plate. Bars 500 m
(upper); 200 m (lower) (Adapted from Kawasaki et al. 2013)

322
Y. Shinmyo et al.
In utero electroporation has several important characteristics. First, it is easy
to perform co-transfection, and as a result, multiple genes can be expressed
simultaneously. When in utero electroporation is performed using a mixture of GFP
and mCherry expression plasmids, most GFP-positive neurons are also mCherry
positive in the ferret cerebral cortex, suggesting that co-transfection efﬁciencies
are reasonably high. Second, the location of the transfected area can be modiﬁed
by adjusting the direction of the electrodes and by changing the age at which in
utero electroporation is performed. Based on the results obtained using rodents
(Borrell et al. 2005; Kataoka and Shimogori 2008; Soma et al. 2009; Nakahira and
Yuasa 2005; Hatanaka et al. 2004; Garcia-Frigola et al. 2007), it seems plausible
that genetic manipulation using in utero electroporation is applicable to other brain
regions such as the hippocampus, the thalamus, the retina, and the amygdala in
ferrets. Third, because larger plasmids can be used for in utero electroporation, cell
type-speciﬁc promoters would be valuable for regulating the distribution patterns of
transgenes in the electroporated ferret brain. For example, we recently combined in
utero electroporation and the Thy1S promoter for labeling neurons sparsely in mice
(Ako et al. 2011). Finally, it does not take much time and effort to express genes
of interest using in utero electroporation. It takes only a couple of days to make
transfected ferrets. Because in utero electroporation is useful not only for rodents
but also for carnivores, it seems possible that it would also be useful for other higher
mammals such as primates.
Besides in utero electroporation, postnatal electroporation was reported to be
a feasible method for expressing genes into the cerebral cortex of ferrets (Borrell
2010). When postnatal electroporation was used, transfected neurons were mostly
distributed in superﬁcial layer 2/3 in the ferret cerebral cortex. This distribution
seems to occur because most cortical neurons had already moved into the cortical
plate from the ventricular zone when postnatal electroporation was performed.
Combining postnatal and in utero electroporation, excitatory neurons in most of
the cerebral cortex of ferrets can be manipulated.
Although both species are candidates for research into the brains of higher
mammals, ferrets and marmosets differ in a number of important ways. Ferrets
and marmosets become sexually mature at about 8 months old and 14 months old,
respectively, and average lifespans are 5–10 years in ferrets and 10–15 years in
marmosets. The gestation period of ferrets is shorter than that of marmosets (ferrets,
42 days; marmosets, 150 days). About eight babies are often born from one pregnant
ferret mother, while one or two are born from a pregnant marmoset. This larger
number of babies per pregnant mother is helpful for obtaining a sufﬁcient number
of experimental samples. Therefore, the ferret should be an interesting option for
exploring developed brain structures in higher mammals.

13
Molecular Investigations of the Structure and Development of the Brain...
323
13.8
Conclusions
Here we have summarized recent advances in the molecular understanding of the
development and evolution of the brain of higher mammals, mainly focusing on
ferrets. Given that one of the ultimate goals of neuroscience research is to understand
the human brain, molecular investigations of the brain of carnivores and primates
are of great importance. Because a rapid and simple genetic manipulation is now
feasible using ferrets, the ferret should be an important option for neuroscience
researchers.
Acknowledgments We apologize to the numerous authors whose valuable papers we were
not able to cite because of limitations. We thank the Kawasaki Laboratory members for their
contributions.
References
Ako R, Wakimoto M, Ebisu H, Tanno K, Hira R, Kasai H, Matsuzaki M, Kawasaki H (2011)
Simultaneous visualization of multiple neuronal properties with single-cell resolution in the
living rodent brain. Mol Cell Neurosci 48(3):246–257
Anderson SA, Kaznowski CE, Horn C, Rubenstein JL, McConnell SK (2002) Distinct origins of
neocortical projection neurons and interneurons in vivo. Cereb Cortex 12(7):702–709
Angelucci A, Clasca F, Bricolo E, Cramer KS, Sur M (1997) Experimentally induced retinal
projections to the ferret auditory thalamus: development of clustered eye-speciﬁc patterns in
a novel target. J Neurosci 17(6):2040–2055
Ayoub AE, Oh S, Xie Y, Leng J, Cotney J, Dominguez MH, Noonan JP, Rakic P (2011)
Transcriptional programs in transient embryonic zones of the cerebral cortex deﬁned by high-
resolution mRNA sequencing. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 108(36):14950–14955
Bernard A, Lubbers LS, Tanis KQ, Luo R, Podtelezhnikov AA, Finney EM, McWhorter MME,
Serikawa K, Lemon T, Morgan R, Copeland C, Smith K, Cullen V, Davis-Turak J, Lee C-
K, Sunkin SM, Loboda AP, Levine DM, Stone DJ, Hawrylycz MJ, Roberts CJ, Jones AR,
Geschwind DH, Lein ES (2012) Transcriptional architecture of the primate neocortex. Neuron
73:1083–1099
Betizeau M, Cortay V, Patti D, Pﬁster S, Gautier E, Bellemin-Menard A, Afanassieff M, Huissoud
C, Douglas RJ, Kennedy H, Dehay C (2013) Precursor diversity and complexity of lineage
relationships in the outer subventricular zone of the primate. Neuron 80(2):442–457
Borrell V (2010) In vivo gene delivery to the postnatal ferret cerebral cortex by DNA electropora-
tion. J Neurosci Methods 186(2):186–195
Borrell V, Reillo I (2012) Emerging roles of neural stem cells in cerebral cortex development and
evolution. Dev Neurobiol 72(7):955–971
Borrell V, Yoshimura Y, Callaway EM (2005) Targeted gene delivery to telencephalic inhibitory
neurons by directional in utero electroporation. J Neurosci Methods 143(2):151–158
Borrell V, Kaspar BK, Gage FH, Callaway EM (2006) In vivo evidence for radial migration of
neurons by long-distance somal translocation in the developing ferret visual cortex. Cereb
Cortex 16(11):1571–1583
Callaway EM, Katz LC (1993) Photostimulation using caged glutamate reveals functional circuitry
in living brain slices. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 90(16):7661–7665
Chalupa LM, Werner JS (2003) The visual neuroscience. MIT Press, Cambridge

324
Y. Shinmyo et al.
Chan AW, Chong KY, Martinovich C, Simerly C, Schatten G (2001) Transgenic monkeys produced
by retroviral gene transfer into mature oocytes. Science 291(5502):309–312
Chen C, Regehr WG (2000) Developmental remodeling of the retinogeniculate synapse. Neuron
28(3):955–966
Cramer KS, Angelucci A, Hahm JO, Bogdanov MB, Sur M (1996) A role for nitric oxide in the
development of the ferret retinogeniculate projection. J Neurosci 16(24):7995–8004
Crowley JC, Katz LC (1999) Development of ocular dominance columns in the absence of retinal
input. Nat Neurosci 2(12):1125–1130
Crowley JC, Katz LC (2000) Early development of ocular dominance columns. Science
290(5495):1321–1324
Dehay C, Kennedy H (2007) Cell-cycle control and cortical development. Nat Rev Neurosci
8(6):438–450
Demas J, Sagdullaev BT, Green E, Jaubert-Miazza L, McCall MA, Gregg RG, Wong RO, Guido W
(2006) Failure to maintain eye-speciﬁc segregation in nob, a mutant with abnormally patterned
retinal activity. Neuron 50(2):247–259
DeYoe EA, Van Essen DC (1988) Concurrent processing streams in monkey visual cortex. Trends
Neurosci 11(5):219–226
Felleman DJ, Van Essen DC (1991) Distributed hierarchical processing in the primate cerebral
cortex. Cereb Cortex 1(1):1–47
Fietz SA, Huttner WB (2011) Cortical progenitor expansion, self-renewal and neurogenesis: a
polarized perspective. Curr Opin Neurobiol 21(1):23–35
Fietz SA, Kelava I, Vogt J, Wilsch-Brauninger M, Stenzel D, Fish JL, Corbeil D, Riehn A,
Distler W, Nitsch R, Huttner WB (2010) OSVZ progenitors of human and ferret neocortex
are epithelial-like and expand by integrin signaling. Nat Neurosci 13(6):690–699
Fukuchi-Shimogori T, Grove EA (2001) Neocortex patterning by the secreted signaling molecule
FGF8. Science 294(5544):1071–1074
Garcia-Frigola C, Carreres MI, Vegar C, Herrera E (2007) Gene delivery into mouse retinal
ganglion cells by in utero electroporation. BMC Dev Biol 7:103
Garcia-Moreno F, Vasistha NA, Trevia N, Bourne JA, Molnar Z (2012) Compartmentalization of
cerebral cortical germinal zones in a lissencephalic primate and gyrencephalic rodent. Cereb
Cortex 22(2):482–492
Hahm JO, Langdon RB, Sur M (1991) Disruption of retinogeniculate afferent segregation by
antagonists to NMDA receptors. Nature 351(6327):568–570
Hansen DV, Lui JH, Parker PR, Kriegstein AR (2010) Neurogenic radial glia in the outer
subventricular zone of human neocortex. Nature 464(7288):554–561
Hatanaka Y, Hisanaga S, Heizmann CW, Murakami F (2004) Distinct migratory behavior of early-
and late-born neurons derived from the cortical ventricular zone. J Comp Neurol 479(1):1–14
Haubensak W, Attardo A, Denk W, Huttner WB (2004) Neurons arise in the basal neuroepithelium
of the early mammalian telencephalon: a major site of neurogenesis. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
101(9):3196–3201
Hayakawa I, Kawasaki H (2010) Rearrangement of retinogeniculate projection patterns after eye-
speciﬁc segregation in mice. PLoS One 5(6), e11001
Hendry SH, Reid RC (2000) The koniocellular pathway in primate vision. Annu Rev Neurosci
23:127–153
Hevner RF, Haydar TF (2012) The (not necessarily) convoluted role of basal radial glia in cortical
neurogenesis. Cereb Cortex 22(2):465–468
Horch HW, Katz LC (2002) BDNF release from single cells elicits local dendritic growth in nearby
neurons. Nat Neurosci 5(11):1177–1184
Hubel DH, Wiesel TN (1962) Receptive ﬁelds, binocular interaction and functional architecture in
the cat’s visual cortex. J Physiol 160:106–154
Huberman AD, Wang GY, Liets LC, Collins OA, Chapman B, Chalupa LM (2003) Eye-speciﬁc
retinogeniculate segregation independent of normal neuronal activity. Science 300(5621):994–
998

13
Molecular Investigations of the Structure and Development of the Brain...
325
Huberman AD, Murray KD, Warland DK, Feldheim DA, Chapman B (2005) Ephrin-As mediate
targeting of eye-speciﬁc projections to the lateral geniculate nucleus. Nat Neurosci 8(8):1013–
1021
Iwai L, Kawasaki H (2009) Molecular development of the lateral geniculate nucleus in the
absence of retinal waves during the time of retinal axon eye-speciﬁc segregation. Neuroscience
159(4):1326–1337
Iwai L, Ohashi Y, van der List D, Usrey WM, Miyashita Y, Kawasaki H (2013) FoxP2 is a
parvocellular-speciﬁc transcription factor in the visual thalamus of monkeys and ferrets. Cereb
Cortex 23:2204–2212
Johnson MB, Kawasawa YI, Mason CE, Krsnik Z, Coppola G, Bogdanovic D, Geschwind DH,
Mane SM, State MW, Sestan N (2009) Functional and evolutionary insights into human brain
development through global transcriptome analysis. Neuron 62(4):494–509
Jones EG (2007) The thalamus, 2nd edn. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge
Kaplan E (2004) The M, P, and K pathways of the primate visual system. In: Chalupa LM, Werner
JS (eds) The visual neurosciences, vol 1. MIT Press, Cambridge, pp 481–493
Kataoka A, Shimogori T (2008) Fgf8 controls regional identity in the developing thalamus.
Development 135(17):2873–2881
Kawasaki H, Crowley JC, Livesey FJ, Katz LC (2004) Molecular organization of the ferret visual
thalamus. J Neurosci 24(44):9962–9970
Kawasaki H, Iwai L, Tanno K (2012) Rapid and efﬁcient genetic manipulation of gyrencephalic
carnivores using in utero electroporation. Mol Brain 5:24
Kawasaki H, Toda T, Tanno K (2013) In vivo genetic manipulation of cortical progenitors in
gyrencephalic carnivores using in utero electroporation. Biol Open 2(1):95–100
Kelava I, Reillo I, Murayama AY, Kalinka AT, Stenzel D, Tomancak P, Matsuzaki F, Lebrand C,
Sasaki E, Schwamborn JC, Okano H, Huttner WB, Borrell V (2011) Abundant occurrence of
basal radial glia in the subventricular zone of embryonic neocortex of a lissencephalic primate,
the common marmoset Callithrix jacchus. Cereb Cortex 22(2):469–481
Lai CS, Fisher SE, Hurst JA, Vargha-Khadem F, Monaco AP (2001) A forkhead-domain gene is
mutated in a severe speech and language disorder. Nature 413(6855):519–523
Leamey CA, Ho-Pao CL, Sur M (2001) Disruption of retinogeniculate pattern formation by
inhibition of soluble guanylyl cyclase. J Neurosci 21(11):3871–3880
Livingstone MS, Hubel DH (1987) Psychophysical evidence for separate channels for the
perception of form, color, movement, and depth. J Neurosci 7(11):3416–3468
Lois C, Hong EJ, Pease S, Brown EJ, Baltimore D (2002) Germline transmission and tissue-
speciﬁc expression of transgenes delivered by lentiviral vectors. Science 295(5556):868–872
Lui JH, Hansen DV, Kriegstein AR (2011) Development and evolution of the human neocortex.
Cell 146(1):18–36
Malatesta P, Hartfuss E, Gotz M (2000) Isolation of radial glial cells by ﬂuorescent-activated cell
sorting reveals a neuronal lineage. Development 127(24):5253–5263
Martinez-Cerdeno V, Cunningham CL, Camacho J, Antczak JL, Prakash AN, Cziep ME, Walker
AI, Noctor SC (2012) Comparative analysis of the subventricular zone in rat, ferret and
macaque: evidence for an outer subventricular zone in rodents. PLoS One 7(1), e30178
Mashiko H, Yoshida AC, Kikuchi SS, Niimi K, Takahashi E, Aruga J, Okano H, Shimogori
T (2012) Comparative anatomy of marmoset and mouse cortex from genomic expression. J
Neurosci 32(15):5039–5053
Matsui A, Tran M, Yoshida AC, Kikuchi SS, Mami U, Ogawa M, Shimogori T (2013)
BTBD3 controls dendrite orientation toward active axons in mammalian neocortex. Science
342(6162):1114–1118
Maunsell JH (1992) Functional visual streams. Curr Opin Neurobiol 2(4):506–510
Meister M, Wong RO, Baylor DA, Shatz CJ (1991) Synchronous bursts of action potentials in
ganglion cells of the developing mammalian retina. Science 252(5008):939–943
Miyata T, Kawaguchi A, Okano H, Ogawa M (2001) Asymmetric inheritance of radial glial ﬁbers
by cortical neurons. Neuron 31(5):727–741

326
Y. Shinmyo et al.
Molnar Z, Clowry G (2012) Cerebral cortical development in rodents and primates. Prog Brain
Res 195:45–70
Murray KD, Rubin CM, Jones EG, Chalupa LM (2008) Molecular correlates of laminar differences
in the macaque dorsal lateral geniculate nucleus. J Neurosci 28(46):12010–12022
Nakahira E, Yuasa S (2005) Neuronal generation, migration, and differentiation in the mouse
hippocampal primoridium as revealed by enhanced green ﬂuorescent protein gene transfer by
means of in utero electroporation. J Comp Neurol 483(3):329–340
Nassi JJ, Callaway EM (2009) Parallel processing strategies of the primate visual system. Nat Rev
Neurosci 10(5):360–372
Noctor SC, Flint AC, Weissman TA, Dammerman RS, Kriegstein AR (2001) Neurons derived from
radial glial cells establish radial units in neocortex. Nature 409(6821):714–720
Noctor SC, Martinez-Cerdeno V, Ivic L, Kriegstein AR (2004) Cortical neurons arise in symmetric
and asymmetric division zones and migrate through speciﬁc phases. Nat Neurosci 7(2):136–
144
Nonaka-Kinoshita M, Reillo I, Artegiani B, Martinez-Martinez MA, Nelson M, Borrell V, Calegari
F (2013) Regulation of cerebral cortex size and folding by expansion of basal progenitors.
EMBO J 32(13):1817–1828
O’Rourke NA, Dailey ME, Smith SJ, McConnell SK (1992) Diverse migratory pathways in the
developing cerebral cortex. Science 258(5080):299–302
O’Rourke NA, Sullivan DP, Kaznowski CE, Jacobs AA, McConnell SK (1995) Tangential
migration of neurons in the developing cerebral cortex. Development 121(7):2165–2176
O’Rourke NA, Chenn A, McConnell SK (1997) Postmitotic neurons migrate tangentially in the
cortical ventricular zone. Development 124(5):997–1005
Okano H, Hikishima K, Iriki A, Sasaki E (2012) The common marmoset as a novel animal model
system for biomedical and neuroscience research applications. Semin Fetal Neonatal Med
17(6):336–340
Penn AA, Riquelme PA, Feller MB, Shatz CJ (1998) Competition in retinogeniculate patterning
driven by spontaneous activity. Science 279(5359):2108–2112
Pilz GA, Shitamukai A, Reillo I, Pacary E, Schwausch J, Stahl R, Ninkovic J, Snippert HJ,
Clevers H, Godinho L, Guillemot F, Borrell V, Matsuzaki F, Gotz M (2013) Ampliﬁcation of
progenitors in the mammalian telencephalon includes a new radial glial cell type. Nat Commun
4:2125
Rakic P (2009) Evolution of the neocortex: a perspective from developmental biology. Nat Rev
Neurosci 10(10):724–735
Reillo I, de Juan Romero C, Garcia-Cabezas MA, Borrell V (2011) A role for intermediate radial
glia in the tangential expansion of the mammalian cerebral cortex. Cereb Cortex 21(7):1674–
1694
Roe AW, Pallas SL, Kwon YH, Sur M (1992) Visual projections routed to the auditory pathway in
ferrets: receptive ﬁelds of visual neurons in primary auditory cortex. J Neurosci 12(9):3651–
3664
Roe AW, Garraghty PE, Esguerra M, Sur M (1993) Experimentally induced visual projections to
the auditory thalamus in ferrets: evidence for a W cell pathway. J Comp Neurol 334(2):263–280
Saito T, Nakatsuji N (2001) Efﬁcient gene transfer into the embryonic mouse brain using in vivo
electroporation. Dev Biol 240(1):237–246
Sasaki E, Suemizu H, Shimada A, Hanazawa K, Oiwa R, Kamioka M, Tomioka I, Sotomaru Y,
Hirakawa R, Eto T, Shiozawa S, Maeda T, Ito M, Ito R, Kito C, Yagihashi C, Kawai K, Miyoshi
H, Tanioka Y, Tamaoki N, Habu S, Okano H, Nomura T (2009) Generation of transgenic non-
human primates with germline transmission. Nature 459(7246):523–527
Sehara K, Toda T, Iwai L, Wakimoto M, Tanno K, Matsubayashi Y, Kawasaki H (2010) Whisker-
related axonal patterns and plasticity of layer 2/3 neurons in the mouse barrel cortex. J Neurosci
30(8):3082–3092
Sehara K, Wakimoto M, Ako R, Kawasaki H (2012) Distinct developmental principles underlie the
formation of ipsilateral and contralateral whisker-related axonal patterns of layer 2/3 neurons
in the barrel cortex. Neuroscience 226:289–304

13
Molecular Investigations of the Structure and Development of the Brain...
327
Sherman SM, Guillery RW (2004) Thalamus. In: Shepherd GM (ed) The synaptic organization of
the brain, 5th edn. Oxford University Press, New York, pp 311–359
Sherman SM, Spear PD (1982) Organization of visual pathways in normal and visually deprived
cats. Physiol Rev 62(2):738–855
Shitamukai A, Konno D, Matsuzaki F (2011) Oblique radial glial divisions in the developing mouse
neocortex induce self-renewing progenitors outside the germinal zone that resemble primate
outer subventricular zone progenitors. J Neurosci 31(10):3683–3695
Smart IH, Dehay C, Giroud P, Berland M, Kennedy H (2002) Unique morphological features of
the proliferative zones and postmitotic compartments of the neural epithelium giving rise to
striate and extrastriate cortex in the monkey. Cereb Cortex 12(1):37–53
Smetters DK, Hahm J, Sur M (1994) An N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor antagonist does not prevent
eye-speciﬁc segregation in the ferret retinogeniculate pathway. Brain Res 658(1–2):168–178
Soma M, Aizawa H, Ito Y, Maekawa M, Osumi N, Nakahira E, Okamoto H, Tanaka K, Yuasa S
(2009) Development of the mouse amygdala as revealed by enhanced green ﬂuorescent protein
gene transfer by means of in utero electroporation. J Comp Neurol 513(1):113–128
Stryker MP, Zahs KR (1983) On and off sublaminae in the lateral geniculate nucleus of the ferret.
J Neurosci 3(10):1943–1951
Sur M, Garraghty PE, Roe AW (1988) Experimentally induced visual projections into auditory
thalamus and cortex. Science 242(4884):1437–1441
Tabata H, Nakajima K (2001) Efﬁcient in utero gene transfer system to the developing mouse
brain using electroporation: visualization of neuronal migration in the developing cortex.
Neuroscience 103(4):865–872
Upton AL, Salichon N, Lebrand C, Ravary A, Blakely R, Seif I, Gaspar P (1999) Excess of
serotonin (5-HT) alters the segregation of ispilateral and contralateral retinal projections in
monoamine oxidase A knock-out mice: possible role of 5-HT uptake in retinal ganglion cells
during development. J Neurosci 19(16):7007–7024
Usrey WM, Sceniak MP, Chapman B (2003) Receptive ﬁelds and response properties of neurons
in layer 4 of ferret visual cortex. J Neurophysiol 89(2):1003–1015
Wang X, Tsai JW, LaMonica B, Kriegstein AR (2011) A new subtype of progenitor cell in the
mouse embryonic neocortex. Nat Neurosci 14(5):555–561
Wassle H (2004) Parallel processing in the mammalian retina. Nat Rev Neurosci 5(10):747–757
Wiesel TN, Hubel DH (1963) Single-cell responses in striate cortex of kittens deprived of vision
in one eye. J Neurophysiol 26:1003–1017
Wiesel TN, Hubel DH (1965a) Comparison of the effects of unilateral and bilateral eye closure on
cortical unit responses in kittens. J Neurophysiol 28(6):1029–1040
Wiesel TN, Hubel DH (1965b) Extent of recovery from the effects of visual deprivation in kittens.
J Neurophysiol 28(6):1060–1072
Wong RO, Meister M, Shatz CJ (1993) Transient period of correlated bursting activity during
development of the mammalian retina. Neuron 11(5):923–938
Yamamori T (2011) Selective gene expression in regions of primate neocortex: implications for
cortical specialization. Prog Neurobiol 94(3):201–222
Yu H, Farley BJ, Jin DZ, Sur M (2005) The coordinated mapping of visual space and response
features in visual cortex. Neuron 47(2):267–280
Zecevic N, Chen Y, Filipovic R (2005) Contributions of cortical subventricular zone to the
development of the human cerebral cortex. J Comp Neurol 491(2):109–122

Chapter 14
Evolution of the Mammalian Brain with a Focus
on the Whale Olfactory Bulb
Takushi Kishida
Abstract Mammals possess relatively larger brains compared to body size, and
there are many studies focusing on the evolutionary changes of the relative brain size
in mammals. A recent study showed that increased resolution in olfaction drove the
enlargement of mammalian brains. However, the olfactory bulbs are degenerated
among highly encephalized mammals, primates and whales. Several species of
whales possess functional olfactory bulbs, but their olfactory bulbs lack a speciﬁc
area known to induce innate avoidance behavior against odors of predators and
spoiled foods. In this chapter, evolutionary changes of the encephalization quotient
among mammals and the degeneration processes of olfactory bulbs among whales
are discussed from paleontological, anatomical, and genomic points of view.
Keywords Cetacea • Encephalization quotient • Glomeruli • Mysticeti • Olfac-
tion • Primates
14.1
Origin of the Mammalian Brain and the Evolutionary
Changes of the Olfactory Receptor Genes in Basal
Mammals
14.1.1
Increased Resolution in Olfaction Drove
the Enlargement of Mammalian Brains
Mammals are a class of vertebrates that originated in or before the Early Jurassic and
were derived from extinct Cynodontia (Rowe et al. 2008, 2011; Luo 2007; O’Leary
et al. 2013; Rowe 1988; Rowe and Gauthier 1992). Mammals possess larger brains
relative to body size, mainly because of the enlarged neocortex (isocortex), which is
unique to mammalian brains. Especially in humans, 90 % of the cerebral cortex
is neocortex (Noback et al. 2005). As a matter of course, many studies on the
evolution of mammalian brains have been focused on the origin of the neocortex
T. Kishida ()
Wildlife Research Center, Kyoto University, Tanaka Sekiden-cho, Sakyo, Kyoto 606-8203, Japan
e-mail: taku.kishida@gmail.com
© Springer Japan KK 2017
S. Shigeno et al. (eds.), Brain Evolution by Design, Diversity and Commonality
in Animals, DOI 10.1007/978-4-431-56469-0_14
329

330
T. Kishida
and the increases in brain size (Jerison 1973, 1988; Rowe et al. 2011; Montiel et
al. 2011, 2013; Aboitiz 2011; Aboitiz and Zamorano 2013; Aboitiz and Montiel
2007). Encephalization quotient (EQ) is often used to compare the relative brain
size to body size across different groups at many taxonomic levels. EQ value is
generally calculated as follows: EQ D (brain weight)/0.12 (body weight)2/3 (Jerison
1973)
Fossils are the keys to understanding the evolutionary changes of relative brain
size. Figure 14.1 shows how EQ values have increased from basal cynodonts
to modern mammals. The EQs are 0.16–0.23 in cynodonts, but increase with
the emergence of Mammaliaformes, a clade including modern mammals and
their closest extinct relatives (Rowe 1988). The EQ of Morganucodon, a basal
mammaliaform, is 0.32, nearly 50 % larger than in basal cynodonts (Fig. 14.1).
Although no clear evidences of the possession of a neocortex has been found in
a Morganucodon endocranial cast, a skeleton of its close relative Castorocauda
preserves the oldest evidence of the differentiation of the neocortex (Ji et al.
2006; Rowe et al. 2011), suggesting that the mammalian neocortex originated
at this point in evolution (Fig. 14.1). However, the larger EQ in Morganucodon
is seen mainly because of its enlarged olfactory bulbs (OBs) rather than the
acquisition of a neocortex (Rowe et al. 2011). Rowe et al. (2011) pointed that
relative brain size expanded to mammalian levels in two evolutionary pulses,
and that the initial pulse was the enlargement of OBs in basal mammaliaforms,
probably driven by increased resolution in olfaction. The second pulse was shown
in Hadrocodium, a mammaliaform closely related to modern mammals. The EQ
Thrinaxodon
Diademodon
Massetognathus
Probelesodon
Probainognathus
Exaeretodon
Therioherpeton
Morganucodon
Hadrocodium
Zaglossus
Ornithorhynchus
Vombatus
Dasyurus
Monodelphis
Didelphis
Dasypus
Procavia
Trichechus
Manis
Fellis
Canis
Encephalization Quotient (EQ)
0
0.6
0.8
1.0
0.4
0.2
1.2
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
Prototheria
Metatheria
Eutheria
OB enlargement
NC differentiation
Cynodontia
Mammaliaformes
Mammalia
brain enlargement
ethmoid ossification
152
492
781
No. of OR genes
OR gene expansion
Cynodontia
Mammaliaformes
Fig. 14.1 A schematic phylogenetic relationships of basal cynodonts, mammaliaformes, and three
major groups of modern mammals (Estimated encephalization quotients (EQ) of each species were
taken from Rowe et al. 2011. Asterisks indicate extinct species. The estimated numbers of ancestral
olfactory receptor (OR) genes are shown under the phylogenetic tree from Niimura and Nei 2007
and Niimura et al. 2014. OB olfactory bulb, NC neocortex)

14
Evolution of the Mammalian Brain with a Focus on the Whale Olfactory Bulb
331
of Hadrocodium is measured as 0.49 (Fig. 14.1). At this point, EQ reached the
mammalian levels.
14.1.2
The Mammalian Olfactory System: From Receptors
to Glomeruli
Mammals detect environmental volatile odorants using repertoires of olfactory
receptors (ORs), which are encoded by intronless OR genes that constitute one of
the largest multigene families (Nei et al. 2008). All mammalian OR genes can be
classiﬁed into two monophyletic subfamilies, class I and class II, based on sequence
similarities (Niimura and Nei 2006). The numbers of OR genes vary greatly among
mammals, from approximately 2000 in African elephants (Niimura et al. 2014) to
only 12 in bottlenose dolphins (Kishida et al. 2015) (Fig. 14.2). These ORs detect
0
500
1000
1500
2000
Human Homo sapiens
Chimpanzee Pan troglodytes
Orangutan Pongo abelii
Macaque Macaca mulatta
Marmoset Callithrix jacchus
Lemur Microcebus murinus
Bush baby Otolemur gamettii
Tree threw Tupaia nelanger
Mouse Mus musculus
Rat Rattus norvegicus
Guinea pig Cavia porcellus
Rabbit Oryctolagus cuniculus
Dog Canis familiaris
Hourse Equus caballus
Cow Bos taurus
Bowhead whale Balaena mysticetus
Minke whale Balaenoptera bonaerensis
Dolphin Tursiops truncatus
Elephant Loxodonta africana
Opossum Monodelphis domestica
Platypus Ornithorhynchus anatinum
class I
class II
Primates
Scandentia
Rodentia
Lagomorpha
Carnivora
Perissodactyla
Artiodactyla
Cetacea
Proboscidea
Marsupialia
Monotremata
1
1
1
1
1
1
2
3
3
3
3
3
4
4
4
4
4
4
5
6
6
No. of intact OR genes
Fig. 14.2 Numbers of intact OR genes in various mammalian species. Blue bars numbers of class
I OR genes; red bars numbers of class II OR genes (From Matsui et al. 2010 (1), Go and Niimura
2008(2), Niimura and Nei 2007 (3), Niimura et al. 2014 (4), Kishida et al., 2015b (5), Kishida et al.
2015 (6))

332
T. Kishida
odorants in a combinatorial manner: a single OR may detect multiple odorants and
a single odorant may be detected by multiple ORs (Malnic et al. 1999).
The mammalian olfactory system has long been studied using mice and rats as
model organisms. Olfactory sensory neurons (OSNs) are located in the olfactory
epithelium of the nasal cavity, and each OSN expresses only one OR gene (one
neuron–one receptor rule) (Serizawa et al. 2003, 2004). The OSNs project to the
glomeruli, which are located near the surface of the OB (Fig. 14.3), and each
glomerulus is projected by ONSs that express the same OR (one glomerulus–one
receptor rule) (Mombaerts et al. 1996). It is reported that any one OR is typically
represented by two glomeruli (Ressler et al. 1994; Vassar et al. 1994; Mombaerts et
al. 1996), which indicates that the number of glomeruli in an OB is approximately
twice that of the number of OR genes in its genome.
glomeruli
external plexiform layer
mitral cell layer
olfactory nerve layer
internal plexiform layer
granule cell layer
dorsal
ventral
medial
lateral
Fig. 14.3 Coronal section of an OB of Macaca mulatta, stained with anti-OMP (olfactory marker
protein) antibody (Santa Cruz Biotechnology, cat sc-2023) and counterstained with thionin,
showing layers

14
Evolution of the Mammalian Brain with a Focus on the Whale Olfactory Bulb
333
14.1.3
Inconsistency Between the Enlargement of Olfactory
Bulbs and the Increase of Olfactory Receptor Genes
As shown, olfactory signals are initially produced by ORs, and the number of
glomeruli in an OB is highly related to the number of OR genes. Therefore, from
the evolutionary context, it is expected that the size of OBs and the number of
ORs should be increased coordinately. Rowe et al. (2011) showed that the OBs of
mammaliaforms were as large as that of modern mammals. Certainly, it is indicated
that large-scale duplications of OR genes had been occurred in the mammalian
lineage before the Prototheria–Eutheria split (Kishida 2008). However, the number
of OR genes possessed by the last common ancestor (LCA) of all modern mammals,
estimated by the reconciled tree method (Goodman et al. 1979; Page and Charleston
1997) in which the topology of a gene tree is reconciled with that of a species tree, is
152 (Fig. 14.1), much less than that of modern terrestrial mammals (Fig. 14.2). The
number of OR genes had increased gradually in the eutherian lineage, and that of the
LCA of all modern eutherians reached the modern eutherian level (Fig. 14.1). These
ﬁndings suggest that the initial pulse of the brain enlargement, the enlargement of
OBs, did not correlate to the enlargement of OR gene repertoires. Thus, the initial
odor signals had not been increased when the basal mammaliaforms emerged. It is
thus a mystery why the OBs had been enlarged at that point in evolution.
14.2
The Largest Brain: Evolution of the Primate
and Cetacean Brains
Among modern mammals, it is widely known that primates (humans, apes, mon-
keys, prosimians) and cetaceans (whales, dolphins, porpoises) have larger brains
compared to body mass. Especially, the EQ of our own species is highest among
all mammals (Fig. 14.1; Table 14.1). However, the second highest EQ is not found
in primates, but in cetaceans (Table 14.1) (Marino 1998), and it has been debated
why several species of cetaceans have such larger brains (Marino 2007; Marino et
al. 2008; Manger 2006).
From the evolutionary aspect, primates show a strong trend for directional
increase in relative brain size (Montgomery et al. 2010). Increases in brain size
are almost ubiquitous across the primate phylogenetic tree in a background of
body mass evolution that shows no signiﬁcant trend to increase through time
(Montgomery et al. 2010). However, the evolutionary pattern in cetaceans contrasts
with that in primates. Cetaceans is an order of mammals that originated in the
early Eocene and which was derived from Artiodactyls (Thewissen et al. 2009).
All living cetaceans are classiﬁed into two suborders, Mysticeti (baleen whales)
and Odontoceti (toothed whales), and both of these are fully aquatic (Fig. 14.4).
As shown in Fig. 14.4, both body mass and brain mass had increased during
the basal cetacean evolution before the basilosaurids–modern cetaceans split, and

334
T. Kishida
Table 14.1 Encephalization quotients (EQs) and body weights of primates and cetaceans
Species
EQ
Body weight (g)
Primates
Callithrix jacchus
1.66
233
Callithrix geoffroyi
1.89
793
Cebuella pygmaea
1.42
120
Cebus capucinus
2.63
71
Saimiri oerstedii
2.38
753
Macaca mulatta
2.15
6;652
Papio anubis
1.76
30;000
Cercopithecus aethiops
2.04
4;324
Colobus badius
1.72
7;000
Hylobates lar
2.54
5;664
Pongo pygmaeus
1.77
63;730
Gorilla gorilla
1.63
114;654
Pan troglodytes
2.34
48;893
Homo sapiens
7.06
57;333
Cetartiodactyla
Odontoceti
Physeter macrocephalus
0.58
35;833;330
Kogia breviceps
1.78
305;000
Kogia sima
1.63
168;500
Mesoplodon mirus
1.97
929;500
Mesoplodon europaeus
2.11
732;500
Mesoplodon densirostris
1.39
767;000
Ziphius cavirostris
0.92
2;273;000
Delphinapterus leucas
2.24
636;000
Monodon monoceros
1.76
1;578;330
Lipotes vexillifer
2.17
82;000
Inia geoffrensis
2.51
90;830
Platanista gangetica
1.55
59;630
Pontoporia blainvillei
1.67
34;890
Phocoena phocoena
2.59
61;100
Phocoenoides dalli
3.54
86;830
Tursiops truncatus
4.14
209;530
Sotalia ﬂuviatilis
4.56
42;240
Lagenorhynchus obliquidens
4.55
91;050
Delphinus delphis
4.26
60;170
Grampus griseus
4.01
328;000
Globicephala melaena
2.39
943;200
Orcinus orca
2.57
1;955;450
Mysticeti
Balaenoptera physalus
0.49
38;421;500
Balaenoptera musculus
0.21
50;904;000
Megaptera novaeangliae
0.44
39;295;000
(continued)

14
Evolution of the Mammalian Brain with a Focus on the Whale Olfactory Bulb
335
Table 14.1 (continued)
Species
EQ
Body weight (g)
Artiodactyla
Sus scrofa
0.58
124;640
Giraffa camelopardalis
1.20
318;850
Cervus elaphus
0.92
141;890
Tragulus javanicus
0.12
32;370
Hyemoschus aquaticus
0.14
56;230
Source: Hof et al. (2005) and Marino (1998)
extant artiodactyls
mysticetes
odontocetes
65
45
25
55
35
15
5
(million years ago)
Paleocene
Eocene
Oligocene
Miocene
Pliocene
Pleistocene
(terrestrial)
Artiodactyla
raoellids
pakicetids
(amphibious)
(amphibious)
†
†
remingtonocetids
basilosaurids
†
†
(amphibious)
(fully aquatic)
(fully aquatic)
(fully aquatic)
Cetacea
body 43.5kg
EQ 0.47
body 1,275.1kg
EQ 0.46
body 166.6kg
EQ 1.38
body 2,800.9kg
EQ 0.70
body 130.5kg
EQ 1.68
body mass and brain mass increase
body mass 
decrease
body mass 
decrease
body mass increase
Fig. 14.4 Modiﬁed phylogenetic tree of cetaceans inferred from Thewissen et al. and Uhen
(Thewissen et al. 2007, 2009; Uhen 2007). Extinct groups indicated by daggers. Purple branches
amphibious lifestyle, blue branches fully aquatic. Estimated body weights and EQ values in several
ancestral nodes were taken from Montgomery et al. (2013)
the EQ of the LCA of basilosaurids and modern cetaceans is estimated to have
been 0.46. Body mass had decreased profoundly in the modern cetacean lineage
between the basilosaurids–modern cetaceans split and the mysticetes–odontocetes
split, resulting in the increase of the EQ value. In the cetacean lineages, evolutionary
changes of body mass have had more important roles for the changes of EQ values
compared to that of brain mass (Fig. 14.4) (Montgomery et al. 2013). Actually,
EQs of bigger whales (sperm whales, Physeter macrocephalus, and mysticetes) are
relatively small, and especially, the biggest blue whales (Balaenoptera musculus)
show the smallest EQ (0.21) among all cetaceans (Table 14.1).
Interestingly, both primates and cetaceans have reduced or lost the sense of
smell and OBs (Table 14.2) (Stephan et al. 1981; Ridgway 1988; Dehnhardt 2002;
Pihlström 2008), and both these orders possess smaller numbers of OR genes
(Fig. 14.2). There is a traditional view that olfaction is a ‘primitive’ sense, although

336
T. Kishida
Table 14.2 Relative size of olfactory bulb (OB) to the whole brain
Species
Relative OB size
References
Primates
Homo sapiens
0:01 %
Stephan et al. (1981)
Pan troglodytes
0:06 %
Stephan et al. (1981)
Colobus badius
0:07 %
Stephan et al. (1981)
Papio anubis
0:14 %
Stephan et al. (1981)
Macaca mulatta
0:09 %
Stephan et al. (1981)
Callithrix jacchus
0:30 %
Stephan et al. (1981)
Saguinus oedipus
0:19 %
Stephan et al. (1981)
Galago demidovii
2:46 %
Stephan et al. (1981)
Indri indri
0:44 %
Stephan et al. (1981)
Lemur fulvus
0:89 %
Stephan et al. (1981)
Cetacea
Balaena mysticetus
0:13 %
Thewissen et al. (2011)
Modern odontocetes
0:00 %
Afrosoricida
Tenrec ecaudatus
12:22 %
Stephan et al. (1981)
Oryzorictes talpoides
8:09 %
Stephan et al. (1981)
Soricomorpha
Solenodon paradoxus
9:96 %
Stephan et al. (1981)
Sorex araneus
7:85 %
Stephan et al. (1981)
Erinaceomorpha
Erinaceus europaeus
9:91 %
Stephan et al. (1981)
Scandentia
Tupaia glis
4:11 %
Stephan et al. (1981)
this is not true because OR genes are found only in the chordate species, suggesting
that the OR genes appeared relatively recently (Niimura 2009). In my opinion, it
is partly because the sense of smell has been reduced in these highly encephalized
mammals.
14.3
Evolution of the Degeneration of Olfactory Bulbs
in Cetaceans
In this section, recent studies of the evolution and function of cetacean OBs are
discussed. Until recently, it had been widely been considered that cetaceans either
have a minimal sense of smell or lack it altogether (Dehnhardt 2002; Pihlström
2008). Indeed, all living odontocetes have no nervous system structures that mediate
olfaction, such as OBs, olfactory tract, and cranial nerve I (Oelschläger 2008).
However, highly degenerated but fully equipped olfactory system and OBs are
found in at least some species of mysticetes (Fig. 14.5) (Thewissen et al. 2011).
The numbers of OR genes are higher in mysticetes than in odontocetes (Fig. 14.2).
The evolutionary changes of the synonymous and nonsynonymous change ratios
of an olfactory-involved gene [olfactory marker protein (OMP) gene] suggest that
mysticetes use olfaction in foraging (Kishida and Thewissen 2012).

14
Evolution of the Mammalian Brain with a Focus on the Whale Olfactory Bulb
337
Fig. 14.5 Bowhead whale (Balaena mysticetus, Mysticeti) olfactory bulbs (Modiﬁed after
Thewissen et al. (2011) and Kishida et al., submitted). (a) Diagram of location of olfactory bulb in
the bowhead whale skull. (b) Dorsal view of left and right olfactory bulbs of a bowhead whale. Bar
10 mm. (c) Coronal section of right olfactory bulb of a bowhead whale. Glomeruli were stained
with DAB using anti-OMP antibody; the whole tissue was counterstained with thionin. Bar 1 mm
Generally, glomeruli are distributed in both dorsal and ventral sides of OBs
among mammals (e.g., Fig. 14.3). However, it was found that dorsal glomeruli
are absent or nearly absent in the bowhead whale OB (Fig. 14.5). The glomerular

338
T. Kishida
layer of the OB can be divided into two nonoverlapping areas, a dorsal domain
(D domain) and a ventral domain (V domain), based on the expression patterns of
domain-speciﬁc marker genes; the D domain is deﬁned by the expression of the
OMACS gene and the V domain is deﬁned by the expression of the OCAM gene
(Kobayakawa et al. 2007; Imai and Sakano 2007; Oka et al. 2003; Yoshihara et al.
1997). It was reported that although the OCAM gene is highly conserved widely
among cetacean species, the OMACS gene have become functionless pseudogenes
in a mysticete, the Antarctic minke whale (Balaena bonaerensis) (Kishida et al.
2015). Comparative genomics revealed that the mysticete OMACS gene turned into
a pseudogene before the Odontoceti–Mysticeti split (Kishida et al. 2015). Regarding
OR–glomeruli projection, most OSNs expressing class I ORs project speciﬁcally
to the D domain (Tsuboi et al. 2006), whereas OSNs expressing class II ORs
project to both D and V domains (Miyamichi et al. 2005). As shown in Fig. 14.2,
cetaceans possess very small numbers of class I ORs compared to their class II
ORs. These ﬁndings strongly suggest that the D domain had been lost from the
mysticete OBs. The OB communicates with the nasal cavity via the clibriform
plate (Fig. 14.5a), which fossilizes. Fossils of basal amphibious cetacean pakicetids
(Fig. 14.4) show that a part of their cribriform plate faces dorsally, but this could
not be found in the fossils of remingtonocetids (Fig. 14.4) (Kishida et al. 2015).
This observation suggests that the D domain was lost during the course of Eocene
between the pakicetids–modern cetaceans split and the remingtonocetids–modern
cetaceans split. The relative size of OBs is also reduced in Primates (Table 14.2),
but glomeruli are present in both dorsal and ventral sides of their OB (Fig. 14.3).
D domain-ablated mutant mice (D mice) were generated by Kobayakawa et
al. (2007), who reported that the D mice fail to show innate avoidance behavior
against predator odors and spoiled smells, and that the D domain is sufﬁcient for
such avoidance behavior. It is not obvious that this study using mice can be directly
extended to other mammals, but Kishida et al. (2015) discussed that it is reasonable
to assume that the olfactory capability of myeticetes resembles that of D mice,
that is, that mysticetes lack innate avoidance behavior against odors of predators
and spoiled foods. Terrestrial animals cannot prey on fully aquatic whales, and the
predators of whales, such as sharks and killer whales, cannot be detected by smelling
in air. In addition, differing from the nares of other mammals, the nares of whales
are not located at the tip of their snout (Fig. 14.5a), and the nasal passage of whales
is not connected directly to their oral cavity, indicating that it is difﬁcult for whales
to rely on olfaction to judge whether something they are about to swallow is edible.
Further studies will test this assumption.
The number of glomeruli in a bowhead whale OB is estimated to be more
than 4000, whereas bowhead whales have only 80 OR genes (Kishida et al.,
submitted), but this is inconsistent with the widely assumed theory that the ratio
of OR to glomeruli is approximately 1:2 (see Sect. 14.1). The same tendency was
also reported in humans. Humans have much larger numbers of glomeruli in their
OB (5600 on average) compared to the number of their ORs (396; Fig. 14.2)
(Maresh et al. 2008). These ﬁndings show the conceptual limits of using rodents
as model organisms for understanding the initial coding of odor information among
mammals.

14
Evolution of the Mammalian Brain with a Focus on the Whale Olfactory Bulb
339
14.4
Conclusions
In this chapter, I showed the evolution of mammal brains mainly based on
quantitative analyses. As shown in Sect. 14.1, encephalization of the mammalian
brain was led by the encephalization of OBs. However, interestingly, the OBs
are profoundly degenerated or lost in two highly encephalized mammalian orders,
the primates and cetaceans. Details of the degenerated OBs possessed by living
mysticetes are shown in Sect. 14.3. The mysticete OB has changed drastically not
only its relative size but also in its shape and function, indicating that brains may
easily be changed, not only quantitatively but qualitatively. Qualitative analyses of
the mammalian brains including fossil specimens are required to understand the
origin and evolution of brains among the mammals.
Acknowledgments I thank the editors, especially Yasunori Murakami, for inviting me to con-
tribute to this volume. This work was ﬁnancially supported in part by MEXT KAKENHI (grant
no. 24770075).
References
Aboitiz
F
(2011)
Genetic
and
developmental
homology
in
amniote
brains.
Toward
conciliating
radical
views
of
brain
evolution.
Brain
Res
Bull
84(2):125–136.
doi:10.1016/j.brainresbull.2010.12.003
Aboitiz F, Montiel JF (2007) Origin and evolution of the vertebrate telencephalon, with special
reference to the mammalian neocortex. Springer, Berlin/New York
Aboitiz F, Zamorano F (2013) Neural progenitors, patterning and ecology in neocortical origins.
Front Neuroanat 7:38. doi:10.3389/fnana.2013.00038
Dehnhardt G (2002) Sensory systems. In: Hoelzel R (ed) Marine mammal biology. Blackwell,
Oxford, pp 116–141
Go Y, Niimura Y (2008) Similar numbers but different repertoires of olfactory receptor genes in
humans and chimpanzees. Mol Biol Evol 25(9):1897–1907. doi:10.1093/molbev/msn135
Goodman M, Czelusniak J, Moore GW, Romero-Herrera AE, Matsuda G (1979) Fitting the gene
lineage into its species lineage, a parsimony strategy illustrated by cladograms constructed from
globin sequences. Syst Biol 28(2):132–163. doi:10.1093/sysbio/28.2.132
Hof PR, Chanis R, Marino L (2005) Cortical complexity in cetacean brains. Anat Rec A Discov
Mol Cell Evol Biol 287A(1):1142–1152. doi:10.1002/ar.a.20258
Imai T, Sakano H (2007) Roles of odorant receptors in projecting axons in the mouse olfactory
system. Curr Opin Neurobiol 17(5):507–515. doi:10.1016/j.conb.2007.08.002
Jerison HJ (1973) Evolution of the brain and intelligence. Academic, New York
Jerison
H
(1988)
Brain
size.
In:
Comparative
neuroscience
and
neurobiology.
Readings
from
the
encyclopedia
of
neuroscience.
Birkhäuser,
Boston,
pp
15–17.
doi:10.1007/978-1-4899-6776-3_7
Ji Q, Luo Z-X, Yuan C-X, Tabrum AR (2006) A swimming mammaliaform from the Middle
Jurassic and ecomorphological diversiﬁcation of early mammals. Science 311(5764):1123–
1127. doi:10.1126/science.1123026
Kishida T (2008) Pattern of the divergence of olfactory receptor genes during tetrapod evolution.
PLoS One 3(6), e2385. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0002385

340
T. Kishida
Kishida T, Thewissen JGM (2012) Evolutionary changes of the importance of olfac-
tion in cetaceans based on the olfactory marker protein gene. Gene 492(2):349–353.
doi:10.1016/j.gene.2011.11.013
Kishida T, Thewissen JGM, Hayakawa T, Imai H, Agata K (2015) Aquatic adaptation and the
evolution of smell and taste in whales. Zool Lett 1:9. doi: 10.1186/s40851-014-0002-z
Kishida T, Thewissen JGM, Usip S, Suydam RS, George JC (2015b) Organization and distribution
of glomeruli in the bowhead whale olfactory bulb. PeerJ 3:e897. doi:10.7717/peerj.897
Kobayakawa K, Kobayakawa R, Matsumoto H, Oka Y, Imai T, Ikawa M, Okabe M, Ikeda T, Itohara
S, Kikusui T, Mori K, Sakano H (2007) Innate versus learned odour processing in the mouse
olfactory bulb. Nature 450(7169):503–508. doi:10.1038/nature06281
Luo Z-X (2007) Transformation and diversiﬁcation in early mammal evolution. Nature
450(7172):1011–1019
Malnic B, Hirono J, Sato T, Buck LB (1999) Combinatorial receptor codes for odors. Cell
96(5):713–723. doi:10.1016/S0092-8674(00)80581-4
Manger PR (2006) An examination of cetacean brain structure with a novel hypothe-
sis correlating thermogenesis to the evolution of a big brain. Biol Rev 81(2):293–338.
doi:10.1017/S1464793106007019
Maresh A, Rodriguez Gil D, Whitman MC, Greer CA (2008) Principles of glomerular organization
in the human olfactory bulb: implications for odor processing. PLoS One 3(7), e2640.
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0002640
Marino L (1998) A comparison of encephalization between odontocete cetaceans and anthropoid
primates. Brain Behav Evol 51(4):230–238
Marino L (2007) Cetacean brains: how aquatic are they? Anat Rec 290(6):694–700.
doi:10.1002/ar.20530
Marino L, Butti C, Connor RC, Fordyce RE, Herman LM, Hof PR, Lefebvre L, Lusseau
D, McCowan B, Nimchinsky EA, Pack AA, Reidenberg JS, Reiss D, Rendell L, Uhen
MD, Van der Gucht E, Whitehead H (2008) A claim in search of evidence: reply to
Manger’s thermogenesis hypothesis of cetacean brain structure. Biol Rev 83(4):417–440.
doi:10.1111/j.1469-185X.2008.00049.x
Matsui A, Go Y, Niimura Y (2010) Degeneration of olfactory receptor gene repertories in primates:
no direct link to full trichromatic vision. Mol Biol Evol 27(5):1192–1200. doi:10.1093/mol-
bev/msq003
Miyamichi K, Serizawa S, Kimura HM, Sakano H (2005) Continuous and overlapping expression
domains of odorant receptor genes in the olfactory epithelium determine the dorsal/ventral
positioning of glomeruli in the olfactory bulb. J Neurosci 25(14):3586–3592. doi:10.1523/jneu-
rosci.0324-05.2005
Mombaerts P, Wang F, Dulac C, Chao SK, Nemes A, Mendelsohn M, Edmondson J, Axel R (1996)
Visualizing an olfactory sensory map. Cell 87(4):675–686
Montgomery SH, Capellini I, Barton RA, Mundy NI (2010) Reconstructing the ups and downs
of primate brain evolution: implications for adaptive hypotheses and Homo ﬂoresiensis. BMC
Biol 8:9. doi:10.1186/1741-7007-8-9
Montgomery SH, Geisler JH, McGowen MR, Fox C, Marino L, Gatesy J (2013) The evolutionary
history of cetacean brain and body size. Evolution 67(11):3339–3353. doi:10.1111/evo.12197
Montiel JF, Wang WZ, Oeschger FM, Hoerder-Suabedissen A, Tung WL, García-Moreno F, Holm
IE, Villalón A, Molnár Z (2011) Hypothesis on the dual origin of the mammalian subplate.
Front Neuroanat 5:25. doi:10.3389/fnana.2011.00025
Montiel JF, Kaune H, Maliqueo M (2013) Maternal-fetal unit interactions and eutherian neocortical
development and evolution. Front Neuroanat 7:22. doi:10.3389/fnana.2013.00022
Nei M, Niimura Y, Nozawa M (2008) The evolution of animal chemosensory receptor gene
repertoires: roles of chance and necessity. Nat Rev Genet 9(12):951–963. doi:10.1038/nrg2480
Niimura Y (2009) Evolutionary dynamics of olfactory receptor genes in chordates: inter-
action
between
environments
and genomic
contents. Hum
Genomics
4(2):107–118.
doi:U3T40206KH4144N5 [pii]

14
Evolution of the Mammalian Brain with a Focus on the Whale Olfactory Bulb
341
Niimura Y, Nei M (2006) Evolutionary dynamics of olfactory and other chemosensory receptor
genes in vertebrates. J Hum Genet 51(6):505–517. doi:10.1007/s10038-006-0391-8
Niimura Y, Nei M (2007) Extensive gains and losses of olfactory receptor genes in mammalian
evolution. PLoS One 2(1), e708. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0000708
Niimura Y, Matsui A, Touhara K (2014) Extreme expansion of the olfactory receptor gene
repertoire in African elephants and evolutionary dynamics of orthologous gene groups in 13
placental mammals. Genome Res 24:1485–1496. doi:10.1101/gr.169532.113
Noback CR, Strominger NL, Demarest RJ, Ruggiero DA (2005) The human nervous system:
structure and function, 6th edn. Humana Press, Totowa
O’Leary MA, Bloch JI, Flynn JJ, Gaudin TJ, Giallombardo A, Giannini NP, Goldberg SL, Kraatz
BP, Luo ZX, Meng J, Ni X, Novacek MJ, Perini FA, Randall ZS, Rougier GW, Sargis EJ, Silcox
MT, Simmons NB, Spaulding M, Velazco PM, Weksler M, Wible JR, Cirranello AL (2013) The
placental mammal ancestor and the post–K-Pg radiation of placentals. Science 339(6120):662–
667. doi:10.1126/science.1229237
Oelschläger HHA (2008) The dolphin brain—a challenge for synthetic neurobiology. Brain Res
Bull 75(2-4):450–459. doi:10.1016/j.brainresbull.2007.10.051
Oka Y, Kobayakawa K, Nishizumi H, Miyamichi K, Hirose S, Tsuboi A, Sakano H (2003)
O-MACS, a novel member of the medium-chain acyl-CoA synthetase family, speciﬁcally
expressed in the olfactory epithelium in a zone-speciﬁc manner. Eur J Biochem 270(9):1995–
2004. doi:10.1046/j.1432-1033.2003.03571.x
Page
RDM,
Charleston
MA
(1997)
From
gene
to
organismal
phylogeny:
reconciled
trees
and the gene tree/species
tree problem. Mol Phylogenet
Evol 7(2):231–240.
doi:10.1006/mpev.1996.0390
Pihlström H (2008) Comparative anatomy and physiology of chemical senses in aquatic mammals.
In: Thewissen JGM, Nummela S (eds) Sensory evolution on the threshold: adaptations in
secondarily aquatic vertebrates. University of California Press, Berkeley, pp 95–109
Ressler KJ, Sullivan SL, Buck LB (1994) Information coding in the olfactory system: evidence for
a stereotyped and highly organized epitope map in the olfactory bulb. Cell 79(7):1245–1255.
doi:10.1016/0092-8674(94)90015-9
Ridgway S (1988) The cetacean central nervous system. In: Comparative neuroscience and
neurobiology. Readings from the encyclopedia of neuroscience. Birkhäuser, Boston, pp 20–
25. doi:10.1007/978-1-4899-6776-3_9
Rowe T (1988) Deﬁnition, diagnosis, and origin of Mammalia. J Vertebr Paleontol 8(3):241–264.
doi:10.1080/02724634.1988.10011708
Rowe T, Gauthier J (1992) Ancestry, paleontology, and deﬁnition of the name Mammalia. Syst
Biol 41(3):372–378
Rowe T, Rich TH, Vickers-Rich P, Springer M, Woodburne MO (2008) The oldest platypus and
its bearing on divergence timing of the platypus and echidna clades. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
105(4):1238–1242. doi:10.1073/pnas.0706385105
Rowe TB, Macrini TE, Luo ZX (2011) Fossil evidence on origin of the mammalian brain. Science
332(6032):955–957. doi:10.1126/science.1203117
Serizawa S, Miyamichi K, Nakatani H, Suzuki M, Saito M, Yoshihara Y, Sakano H (2003) Negative
feedback regulation ensures the one receptor–one olfactory neuron rule in mouse. Science
302(5653):2088–2094. doi:10.1126/science.1089122
Serizawa S, Miyamichi K, Sakano H (2004) One neuron–one receptor rule in the mouse olfactory
system. Trends Genet 20(12):648–653. doi:10.1016/j.tig.2004.09.006
Stephan H, Frahm H, Baron G (1981) New and revised data on volumes of brain structures in
insectivores and primates. Folia Primatol 35(1):1–29
Thewissen JGM, Cooper LN, Clementz MT, Bajpai S, Tiwari BN (2007) Whales originated
from aquatic artiodactyls in the Eocene epoch of India. Nature 450(7173):1190–1194.
doi:10.1038/nature06343
Thewissen JGM, Cooper LN, George JC, Bajpai S (2009) From land to water: the origin of whales,
dolphins, and porpoises. Evol Educ Outreach 2(2):272–288. doi:10.1007/s12052-009-0135-2

342
T. Kishida
Thewissen
JGM,
George
J,
Rosa
C,
Kishida
T
(2011)
Olfaction
and
brain
size
in
the
bowhead
whale
(Balaena
mysticetus).
Mar
Mamm
Sci
27(2):282–294.
doi:10.1111/j.1748-7692.2010.00406.x
Tsuboi A, Miyazaki T, Imai T, Sakano H (2006) Olfactory sensory neurons expressing class I
odorant receptors converge their axons on an antero-dorsal domain of the olfactory bulb in the
mouse. Eur J Neurosci 23(6):1436–1444. doi:10.1111/j.1460-9568.2006.04675.x
Uhen MD (2007) Evolution of marine mammals: back to the sea after 300 million years. Anat Rec
290(6):514–522. doi:10.1002/ar.20545
Vassar
R,
Chao
SK,
Sitcheran
R,
Nuñez
JM,
Vosshall
LB,
Axel
R
(1994)
Topo-
graphic organization of sensory projections to the olfactory bulb. Cell 79(6):981–991.
doi:10.1016/0092-8674(94)90029-9
Yoshihara Y, Kawasaki M, Tamada A, Fujita H, Hayashi H, Kagamiyama H, Mori K (1997)
OCAM: a new member of the neural cell adhesion molecule family related to zone-to-zone
projection of olfactory and vomeronasal axons. J Neurosci 17(15):5830–5842

Chapter 15
The Evolution and Function of Sleep
Yu Hayashi and Chih-Yao Liu
Abstract Sleep is a common physiological state appearing in the everyday life of
humans and other animals. In humans, sleep occupies approximately one third of our
whole lifetime. People have thus kept asking the question of why we sleep. Sleep
deprivation in rats results in lethality, indicating its essential roles (Rechtschaffen A,
Bergmann BM, Sleep 25:18–24, 2002; Rechtschaffen A, Bergmann BM, Everson
CA, Kushida CA, Gilliland MA, Sleep 12:68–87, 1989). From the aspect of evolu-
tion, sleep or sleep-like states are conserved across diverse animal species, implying
an existent function for fulﬁlling a common purpose that may beneﬁt the survival of
animals. Up to now, however, the function and mechanism of sleep are still largely
unknown. Recently, simple genetic animal models including fruit ﬂies (Drosophila
melanogaster), roundworms (Caenorhabditis elegans), and zebraﬁsh (Danio rerio)
have been actively studied to reveal the evolutionarily conserved components of
sleep, which may lead to solving the fundamental question about the evolutionary
origin of sleep (Hendricks JC, Finn SM, Panckeri KA, Chavkin J, Williams JA,
Sehgal A, Pack AI, Neuron 25:129–138, 2000; Raizen DM, Zimmerman JE,
Maycock MH, Ta UD, You YJ, Sundaram MV, Pack AI, Nature 451:569–572,2008;
Shaw PJ, Cirelli C, Greenspan RJ, Tononi G, Science 287:1834–1837, 2000; Singh
K, Ju JY, Walsh MB, DiIorio MA, Hart AC, Sleep 37:1439–1451, 2014; Zhdanova
IV, Wang SY, Leclair OU, Danilova NP, Brain Res 903:263–268, 2001). In
addition, with the development of new techniques such as two-photon microscopy,
optogenetics, and pharmacogenetics, researchers have obtained more ability to
observe and manipulate neurons or their activity. Partly owing to the breakthroughof
such new tools, researchers have found some evidence suggesting that sleep serves
several functions including memory consolidation, clearance of brain metabolites,
Y. Hayashi ()
International Institute for Integrative Sleep Medicine (WPI-IIIS), University of Tsukuba,
1-1-1 Tennodai, Tsukuba, Ibaraki, 305-8575 Japan
Japan Science and Technology Agency (JST), PRESTO, 4-1-8 Honcho, Kawaguchi, Saitama,
332-0012 Japan
e-mail: hayashi.yu.fp@u.tsukuba.ac.jp
C.-Y. Liu
International Institute for Integrative Sleep Medicine (WPI-IIIS), University of Tsukuba,
1-1-1 Tennodai, Tsukuba, Ibaraki, 305-8575 Japan
© Springer Japan KK 2017
S. Shigeno et al. (eds.), Brain Evolution by Design, Diversity and Commonality
in Animals, DOI 10.1007/978-4-431-56469-0_15
343

344
Y. Hayashi and C. Liu
spine remodeling, and brain development (Bushey D, Tononi G, Cirelli C, Science
332:1576–1581, 2011; Donlea JM, Thimgan MS, Suzuki Y, Gottschalk L, Shaw PJ,
Science 332:1571–1576, 2011; Kayser MS, Yue Z, Sehgal A, Science 344:269–
274, 2014; Rasch B, Buchel C, Gais S, Born J, Science 315:1426–1429, 2007;
Rechtschaffen A, Bergmann BM, Everson CA, Kushida CA, Gilliland MA, Sleep
12:68–87, 1989; Xie L, Kang H, Xu Q, Chen MJ, Liao Y, Thiyagarajan M,
O’Donnell J, Christensen DJ, Nicholson C, Iliff JJ, et al. Science 342:373–377,
2013; Yang G, Lai CS, Cichon J, Ma L, Li W, Gan WB, Science 344:1173–1178,
2014). These studies have shown the relationship between sleep and other biological
processes in different animals, and it further brings us to the question of whether the
function of sleep is only for one purpose or is for multiple purposes. Up to now, our
knowledge about sleep seems to be merely the tip of the iceberg. Further research is
needed to understand the general function of sleep across species.
Here, we ﬁrst introduce general criteria for sleep, which allows its deﬁnition
in animals other than mammals (Sect. 15.1). Then we introduce REM sleep and
non-REM sleep, which are the two major sleep stages of mammalian and avian
sleep (Sect. 15.2), and introduce studies and hypotheses related to how they evolved
(Sect. 15.3). Next, we brieﬂy introduce sleep in aquatic mammals, which have
made a unique change from their ancestral mammals to adapt to their lifestyle
(Sect. 15.4). Then we introduce the current progress in studies using simple genetic
animal models, namely, zebraﬁsh, fruit ﬂies, and roundworms (Sect. 15.5 and
Sect. 15.6). Finally, we compare the suggested functions of sleep between mammals
and invertebrate animals (Sect. 15.7).
Keywords Sleep • Evolution • REM sleep • Slow wave • Mammal • Reptile •
Dolphin • Unihemispheric sleep • Zebraﬁsh (Danio rerio) • Roundworm
(Caenorhabditis elegans) • Fruit ﬂy (Drosophila melanogaster)
15.1
Deﬁnition of Sleep
Sleep in mammals and birds is a relatively evident state. In these animals,
electroencephalograms (EEG) and electromyograms (EMG) can be used to easily
distinguish sleep and wakefulness. However, criteria based on EEG and EMG are
often difﬁcult to apply to other animals. Therefore, researchers have proposed
several features of sleep to deﬁne it in species across the animal kingdom. These
features include loss of locomotion, distinct postures, enhanced arousal thresholds
to environmental signals, rapid reversibility, preference for speciﬁc environmental
spots, and homeostatic rebound to sleep deprivation (Campbell and Tobler 1984;
Rial et al. 2010). Based on these deﬁnitions, sleep has been characterized in fruit
ﬂies (Drosophila melanogaster), roundworms (Caenorhabditis elegans), zebraﬁsh
(Danio rerio), and various other animal species (Hendricks et al. 2000; Raizen et al.
2008; Shaw et al. 2000; Singh et al. 2014; Zhdanova et al. 2001) (Fig. 15.3). These
criteria also differentiate sleep from other quiescent states within mammals. For
example, hibernation in some mammals is distinct from sleep in that reversibility

15
The Evolution and Function of Sleep
345
to the active state is not rapid. Furthermore, the studies applying these deﬁnitions
to simple animal models led to ﬁndings that several genetic components related to
sleep are conserved across different species, including the epidermal growth factor
(EGF) signaling pathway (Foltenyi et al. 2007; Kramer et al. 2001; Kushikata et al.
1998; Van Buskirk and Sternberg 2007), protein kinase G (PKG) (Langmesser et al.
2009; Raizen et al. 2008), the cyclic adenosine monophosphate signaling pathway
(Graves et al. 2003; Hendricks et al. 2001; Raizen et al. 2008), the dopaminergic
pathway (Kume et al. 2005; Singh et al. 2014; Wisor et al. 2001), the histaminergic
pathway (Haas et al. 2008; Monnier et al. 1967; Nicholson et al. 1985; Oh et al.
2013; Renier et al. 2007; Sundvik et al. 2011), etc. (summarized in Table 15.1).
However, cautious interpretation is necessary, as these genes or neurotransmitters
are involved in a diverse array of cellular events, rather than involved speciﬁcally
in sleep. Genes involved in circadian rhythm can also have roles independent of
circadian rhythm in the regulation of sleep (Franken et al. 2007; Monsalve et
al. 2011; Naylor et al. 2000; Shaw et al. 2002; Viola et al. 2007; Wisor et al.
2002). These ﬁndings suggest that using the foregoing features to dissect sleep in
nonmammalian species is feasible.
15.2
REM Sleep and Non-REM Sleep
Human sleep can be roughly divided into two main stages, rapid eye movement
sleep (REM sleep) and non-REM sleep (NREM sleep). NREM sleep is further
subdivided into multiple stages. During a night’s sleep, a normal person cycles
between these stages (Figs. 15.1 and 15.2). Each sleep stage can be distinguished
by means of electroencephalography(EEG), recording the electrical activity derived
from the brain surface (Fig. 15.1) and electromyography (EMG), recording the
electrical activity of skeletal muscle. Each stage has its distinct pattern of EEG
and EMG as well as other features. The EEG of a wakeful person mostly shows
alpha and beta activity (neural oscillations in the frequency range of 7.5–12.5 Hz
and 12.5–30 Hz, respectively) (Fig. 15.1). Beta activity appears when the person
is conducting a behavior that requires attention. By contrast, alpha activity appears
when the person is in a relaxed and quiet state. After the onset of sleep, a person
ﬁrst enters NREM sleep, which can be further differentiated into three stages
N1–N3 (classically four stages). In stage N1, alpha activity gradually decreases
and theta activity (4–8 Hz) appears (Figs. 15.1 and 15.2). During stage N2, EEG
is characterized by the appearance of sleep spindles [e.g., brief bursts of high-
frequency (7–14 Hz) activity) and K-complexes (e.g., one cycle of slow oscillation)
(Figs. 15.1 and 15.2). When the person enters stage N3, delta activity (1–4 Hz)
or so-called slow wave activity (SWA) starts to dominate the EEG (Figs. 15.1 and
15.2). Classically, stage N3 was further divided into two stages based on the amount
of slow waves (Fig. 15.1). Stage N3 is typically called slow wave sleep (SWS),
and during this stage, the person is situated in the deepest sleep and is hardest to
be wakened (Fig. 15.1). These series of NREM sleep are usually followed by REM

346
Y. Hayashi and C. Liu
Table 15.1 Neurotransmitters or signaling pathways involved in sleep/wake regulation across animal species
Fruit ﬂy (Drosophila
melanogaster)
Roundworm (Caenorhabditis
elegans)
Zebraﬁsh (Danio rerio)
Mammals
Dopamine
Wakefulness "
Wakefulness "
–
Wakefulness "
Amphetamine feeding causes
higher activity. Genetic loss of
dopamine transporter reduces
sleep (Andretic et al. 2005;
Kume et al. 2005)
Genetic loss of dopamine
transporter reduces lethargus and
loss of dopamine receptor
increases quiescence (Singh et al.
2014)
Genetic loss of dopamine transporter
in mice causes less NREM sleep and
more awake time. (Lu et al. 2006a;
Wisor et al. 2001)
Noradrenaline
–
–
–
Wakefulness"
Optogenetic activation of locus
coeruleus neurons induces wake
(Carter et al. 2010)
Histamine
Wakefulness "
–
Wakefulness "
Wakefulness "
Genetic loss of histidine
decarboxylase increases sleep
(Oh et al. 2013)
Genetic knockdown of histidine
decarboxylase causes less locomotor
activity in the light phase (Sundvik
et al. 2011)
Histamine causes increased
wakefulness through the activation
of H1 receptor (Haas et al. 2008)
Serotonin
Sleep "
Wakefulness "
–
Mixed results
Genetic loss of serotonin
receptor 1A has reduces sleep
(Yuan et al. 2006)
Genetic loss of serotonin
receptor reduces quiescence
(Singh et al. 2014)
Serotonin receptor 1A knockout
mice show increased REM sleep
(Boutrel et al. 2002). The serotonin
precursor 5-HTP administration to
mice at light onset increases
wakefulness, whereas administration
at dark onset increases NREM sleep
(Morrow et al. 2008).

15
The Evolution and Function of Sleep
347
Orexin/hypocretin
–
–
Mixed results
Wakefulness " (or perhaps
stabilization of each state)
Orexin/hypocretin overexpression
increases locomotor activity (Prober
et al. 2006), whereas genetic loss of
orexin/hypocretin receptor reduces
sleep and injection of
orexin/hypocretin reduces
locomotor activity (Yokogawa et al.
2007).
Orexin/hypocretin knockout mice
show fragmented sleep and a
mutation of orexin/hypocretin
receptor in dog causes narcolepsy
(Chemelli et al. 1999; Lin et al.
1999b)
GABA
Sleep "
Sleep "
–
NREM sleep "
Genetic inhibition of GABA
release causes less sleep
(Agosto et al. 2008)
Genetic loss of glutamic acid
decarboxylase or GABAA
receptor reduces quiescence
(Singh et al. 2014)
Benzodiazepines produce hypnotic
effects mainly through GABAA
receptor (Harrison 2007)
cAMP signaling
Wakefulness "
Wakefulness "
–
Wakefulness "
Higher levels of cAMP
reduce sleep, whereas lower
levels of cAMP increase
sleep (Hendricks et al. 2001)
Higher level of cAMP reduces
arousal threshold (Raizen et al.
2008)
Mice with CREB mutation have less
NREM sleep (Graves et al. 2003)
EGF signaling
Sleep "
Sleep "
–
NREM sleep "
Activation of EGFR
increases sleep (Foltenyi et
al. 2007)
Overexpression of EGF-like
ligand increases quiescence (Van
Buskirk and Sternberg 2007)
Administration of EGF increases
NREM sleep in rats and rabbits,
whereas mice with an EGFR
mutation have reduced sleep
(Kushikata et al. 1998; Obal et al.
1988) (Kramer et al. 2001)
(continued)

348
Y. Hayashi and C. Liu
Table. 15.1 (continued)
Fruit ﬂy (Drosophila
melanogaster)
Roundworm
(Caenorhabditis elegans)
Zebraﬁsh (Danio rerio)
Mammals
PKG signaling
–
Sleep "
–
Sleep "
Gain-of-function mutation of
cGMP-dependent kinase
increases quiescence, whereas
loss-of-function mutation
reduces quiescence (Raizen et al.
2008)
Mice with mutation of
cGMP-dependent kinase type 1 have
less REM sleep, low-quality NREM
sleep, and disrupted sleep/wake
cycle (Langmesser et al. 2009)
Voltage-gated
potassium
channel
Sleep "
Sleep "
–
NREM sleep "
Mutant of Shaker potassium
channel has less sleep (Cirelli et
al. 2005)
Genetic loss of Shaker
potassium channel reduces
quiescence (Singh et al. 2014)
Kcna2 knockout mice have reduced
NREM sleep (Douglas et al. 2007)

15
The Evolution and Function of Sleep
349
Fig. 15.1 Typical electroencephalogram (EEG) patterns of wakefulness and sleep in a normal
human adult. Non-rapid eye movement (NREM) sleep was classiﬁed according to the current (N1–
N3) and classical (1–4) classiﬁcation. EEG data were kindly provided by Dr. Makoto Satoh and Ms.
Kumiko Shimoyama (International Institute for Integrative Sleep Medicine (WPI-IIIS), University
of Tsukuba, Japan)
Fig. 15.2 Typical hypnogram of a normal human adult. NREM sleep was classiﬁed according to
the classical (1–4) classiﬁcation. Hypnogram data were kindly provided by Dr. Takashi Kanbayashi
(Akita University)
sleep, in which beta activity comes up again, along with theta activity (Figs. 15.1 and
15.2). More distinctively, the person during REM sleep shows rapid eye movement,
muscular atonia, and loss of homeothermy. Therefore, REM sleep can be easily
distinguished from wakefulness by the low signal on EMG, although the EEG
patterns look similar. At the end of REM sleep is the timing when the person can be
wakened easiest with small disturbance. Afterward, the person goes into stage N1 of
NREM sleep again (Fig. 15.2). The total time from the onset of NREM sleep to the

350
Y. Hayashi and C. Liu
end of REM sleep is on average around one and a half hours. A normal person takes
about 8 h of sleep a day, which alternates between REM sleep and NREM sleep by
4–5 times.
REM sleep was the latest sleep stage to be discovered, ﬁrst reported in 1953
by Kleitman and Aserinsky (Aserinsky and Kleitman 1953). Several years later,
Kleitman and Dement further demonstrated that REM sleep is closely associated
with dreaming (Dement and Kleitman 1957). Soon after, Dement, and subsequently
Jouvet’s group, discovered a similar state in cats (Dement 1958; Jouvet et al. 1959).
REM sleep is also termed paradoxical sleep, as the EEG patterns are similar to
wakefulness although the muscle tone is lost. Ever since the discovery of REM
sleep in cats, intense pharmacological, physiological, and genetic studies have been
carried out by Jouvet’s group as well as other groups to elucidate the neural substrate
of REM and NREM sleep. These studies led to discoveries that the brainstem
pontine tegmental area and adjacent mesencephalic and medullary regions contain
neurons that have key roles in generating REM and NREM sleep (Boissard et al.
2002; Crochet et al. 2006; Lu et al. 2006b; Sakai et al. 2001; Saper et al. 2010;
Vanni-Mercier et al. 1989).
15.3
Evolution of REM and NREM Sleep
NREM and REM sleep are two distinct sleep states observed in various mammalian
and avian species but not in other vertebrates, which has motivated researchers to
investigate what evolutionary events occurred during the transitions from ancestral
vertebrates to mammals and birds (Fig. 15.3). The key to answering this question
could be located in reptiles, which are likely closest to the ancestors of mammals
and birds. More precisely, according to phylogenetic analysis, the primitive form
of reptiles, cotylosaurs, is regarded as the common ancestor of reptiles, mammals,
and birds (Young 1981). Although the sleep/wake patterns of cotylosaurs cannot be
assessed, current reptiles may still retain some features inherited from its ancestor.
Compared with mammals and birds, current reptiles seem to share more features
with cotylosaurs in metabolism and brain architecture, including poikilothermy
and simple telencephalic structures. By contrast, mammals and birds are both
homeotherms and have advanced telencephalic structures such as the neocortex
in mammals and the neostriate in birds. Given that the reptilian EEG is highly
dependent on body temperature and information processing are largely different
between reptiles and mammals/birds because of the distinct brain architecture, some
researchers hypothesize that the transitions in sleep from the ancestral style to
mammalian or avian styles may be related to the evolution of homeothermy and
telencephalic structures (Nicolau et al. 2000).
Nonetheless, although a host of studies seeking the origin of NREM and REM
sleep have been carried out, solid and consistent conclusions cannot be drawn
among researchers. Given that, up to now, obvious signs of NREM and REM
sleep could only be detected in mammals and birds, there is a possibility that

15
The Evolution and Function of Sleep
351
Fig. 15.3 Sleep or sleep-like states are observed across the animal kingdom
these sleep states emerged independently in the respective evolutionary route of
mammals and birds. In further addressing this issue, the monotremes, which are
egg-laying mammals, have received much attention. The extant monotremes are
the echidna and the platypus. During the evolution of mammals, the divergence
of the monotreme lineage from other mammalian lineages (the marsupial lineage
and the placental lineage) happened prior to the divergence between marsupials and
placental mammals. Monotremes are thought to most closely resemble ancestral
primitive mammals. Early studies that carefully recorded various measures of
sleep/wake in the echidna (Tachyglossus aculeatus) suggested that this animal
undergoes NREM sleep with slow waves but shows no sign of REM sleep (Allison
et al. 1972). This could be interpreted that REM sleep emerged in mammals after the
divergence of the monotremes from other mammals, and that NREM sleep closely
resembles primitive sleep. When another group simultaneously recorded brainstem
neural activity, however, they observed a REM sleep-like pattern, although the EEG
detected slow wave activity (Siegel et al. 1996). Thus this putatively primitive
form of sleep contains features of both REM and NREM sleep. In contrast to
these studies, other researchers reported that sleep in echidna could be clearly
differentiated to REM sleep and NREM sleep by cortical EEG, but that REM sleep
could only be detected at an appropriate temperature (Nicol et al. 2000). This report
is, however, challenged by a view that quiet wakefulness and REM sleep were
not sufﬁciently differentiated. Overall, whether REM sleep and NREM sleep were
present in the common ancestors of mammals and bird remains to be solved.
There are also opinions that REM sleep, rather than NREM sleep, closely
resembles a state in ancestral animals. During REM sleep, the regulation of
body temperature in mammals and birds is reduced, namely, a partial loss of

352
Y. Hayashi and C. Liu
homeothermy. Furthermore, REM sleep is generated in the brainstem, which is
highly conserved among vertebrates. In fetuses and infants of certain mammals,
REM sleep is the major state of sleep, perhaps because rhombencephalon (hind-
brain) matures in an earlier developmental stage, compared to other parts of the
brain (Finlay et al. 1998). Taken together, REM sleep could be an ancient form of
sleep, which appeared in a common ancestor or evolved respectively in mammals
and birds. However, such hypotheses require careful interpretation. Recent studies
clearly show that the brainstem has crucial roles not only in generating REM sleep
but also non-REM sleep (Anaclet et al. 2014). There are also opinions that sleep
in neonates is qualitatively different from that in mature individuals, and that their
sleep should be classiﬁed as active sleep and quiet sleep, instead of REM sleep and
NREM sleep.
Although REM sleep and NREM sleep have not been detected in reptiles,
researchers have pointed out that some characteristics of reptilian EEG patterns are
reminiscent of that of NREM sleep or REM sleep. While the sleep-like state in
reptiles is not accompanied by increased slow wave activity, Rattenborg proposed
that the high-voltage spikes observed in reptilian sleep could be a counterpart of
hippocampal activity in the mammalian hippocampus during NREM sleep (Hartse
1994; Rattenborg 2006). Rattenborg further discussed that SWA was not detectable
in reptiles because of the lack of corticocortical connections in reptilian cortex. This
“interconnectivity” hypothesis also explained the avian NREM sleep similarly in
term of the extensive interconnectivity in the avian pallium. Rial and colleagues,
on the other hand, emphasized the increase of a slow wave-like EEG during
wakefulness in reptiles, and proposed that mammalian NREM sleep evolved from
reptilian wakefulness. They further proposed that mammalian wakefulness is a novel
state that emerged as a result of the development of the cortex (Rial et al. 2007,
2008; Rial et al. 2010). Future studies addressing the effects of neurotransmitters
and neuromodulators such as noradrenaline (norepinephrine), histamine, dopamine,
and orexin (hypocretin), which are important in the control of the wake–sleep
cycle in mammals, in reptiles might be meaningful. As described below, at least
histamine and dopamine seem to have a deeply conserved role in promoting
wakefulness across the animal kingdom, but the role of orexin (hypocretin) seems
more complicated. Another effective approach would be to clarify the molecular
identity of various neurons in the brainstem that regulate REM/NREM sleep. As the
anatomical features of the brainstem are highly conserved, such studies will allow
detailed comparison of sleep-regulating cells among various vertebrate species.
15.4
Sleep in Aquatic Mammals
One might imagine that whales and dolphins, which spend their whole life in water,
need somehow to adopt a special form of sleep, or otherwise they will drown or
be under a high threat of being attacked by predators while sleeping. Intriguingly,
dolphins circumvent such risks by sleeping one hemisphere of the brain at a

15
The Evolution and Function of Sleep
353
Fig. 15.4 Schematic of EEG
patterns during wake and
unihemispheric sleep in a
dolphin. UHS unihemispheric
sleep, L left cerebral
hemisphere, R right cerebral
hemisphere
time, which is termed unihemispheric sleep. EEG recording from dolphins clearly
demonstrated that slow waves were generated in a single hemisphere (Mukhametov
et al. 1977) (Fig. 15.4). During unihemispheric sleep, one half of the brain retains
a low level of alertness so that dolphins can keep swimming. Another interesting
aspect of sleep in dolphins is that REM sleep amount is very low, if any. A general
feature of REM sleep in mammals is the loss of muscle tone, which could be
dangerous for aquatic mammals. Thus dolphins might have evolved to minimize
or even abandon REM sleep.
Unihemispheric sleep is also observed in other marine mammals, such as the
fur seal (Mukhametov et al. 1985). In contrast to dolphins, fur seals live both on
land and in water. Interestingly, while sleeping on land, fur seals predominantly
display bilateral sleep, whereas when sleeping in water, they primarily display
unihemispheric sleep. How the brain switches between these two modes of sleep
remains to be revealed.
In addition, various bird species also show unihemispheric sleep (reviewed
in Rattenborg et al. 2000), which might be beneﬁcial in reducing the risk of
predation. Indeed, mallard ducks exhibited increased unihemispheric sleep under
higher predation risk, which allowed rapid response to visual stimuli (Rattenborg et
al. 1999). It may also aid birds, especially migratory birds, to retain consciousness
during a long period of ﬂight, although direct evidence of unihemispheric sleep
during ﬂight is lacking (Rattenborg and Martinez-Gonzalez 2014).
These studies in aquatic mammals and birds strongly suggest that, during evolu-
tion, vertebrates have created unihemispheric sleep multiple times, independently
(convergent evolution). This result might imply the innate nature of vertebrate
sleep to be locally regulated. Indeed, in rats, prolonged wakefulness leads to local
emergence of slow waves even though, as a whole, the individual appears to be
awake (Vyazovskiy et al. 2011). Unihemispheric sleep might be an extreme form of
such local sleep.
15.5
Sleep in the Zebraﬁsh (Danio rerio)
Along with fruit ﬂies (Drosophila melanogaster) and roundworms (Caenorhabditis
elegans), the zebraﬁsh (Danio rerio) is one of the most efﬁcient animal models for
genetic analyses. The zebraﬁsh is a teleost ﬁsh, which is much closely related to
mammals than invertebrate animal models. For example, the design of the brain
roughly resembles those of mammals, especially in the brainstem, a key structure

354
Y. Hayashi and C. Liu
regulating sleep/wake. Moreover, many genes, including genes for neuropeptides
and their receptors, are conserved. Thus, to address the evolutionary origin of
wakefulness and REM/NREM sleep, the roles of zebraﬁsh brain regions, genes, or
neuromodulators homologous to those involved in mammalian sleep are of interest.
Zebraﬁsh displays circadian quiescence that basically follows the criteria for
sleep described in Sect. 15.1 (Yokogawa et al. 2007; Zhdanova et al. 2001). One
notable thing about zebraﬁsh sleep is that it is under the strong inﬂuence of light.
There are reports that, under constant light conditions for as long as 3 days, sleep
was completely suppressed (Yokogawa et al. 2007). This ﬁnding suggests that
light has stronger effects than circadian inﬂuences. Moreover, surprisingly, sleep
deprivation by light exposure is not accompanied by a sleep rebound (Yokogawa
et al. 2007), which suggests that light inﬂuences can even overcome homeostatic
responses. It is not clear how this sensitivity to light is adaptive. Perhaps, for
zebraﬁsh, falling asleep in a bright place is of extreme danger, compromising them
to attacks by predators.
Hints on whether sleep/wake states are conserved across vertebrates might be
discussed from the apparently conserved roles of histamine. In mammals, histamine
is a well-addressed wake-inducing molecule. Similarly, histamine seems to promote
wake in zebraﬁsh. Mutants of the histidine decarboxylase (hdc), a gene required
for histamine synthesis, have increased sleep (Sundvik et al. 2011). In addition, H1
histaminergic antagonists increase the amount of sleep (Renier et al. 2007).
Although the conserved roles of histamine support the conservation between
mammalian sleep and zebraﬁsh sleep, the case is not so simple for orexin (hypocre-
tin), a neuropeptide important for maintaining mammalian wake (de Lecea et al.
1998; Sakurai et al. 1998). In humans, loss of neurons producing orexin (hypocretin)
leads to narcolepsy, a sleep disorder characterized by excessive daytime sleepiness,
cataplexy (sudden brief episodes of muscle paralysis that are typically triggered by
strong positive emotions), and dream-like hallucinations at sleep onset likely caused
by direct transition from wake to REM sleep (Peyron et al. 2000; Thannickal et
al. 2000). Similar phenotypes are observed in mice or dogs lacking either orexin
(hypocretin), their receptors, or the neurons synthesizing orexin (Chemelli et al.
1999; Hara et al. 2001; Lin et al. 1999a; Willie et al. 2003). On the other hand, rats
and mice receiving orexin (hypocretin) administration show increased wakefulness
(Hagan et al. 1999; Mieda et al. 2011; Piper et al. 2000). Orexinergic neurons ﬁre
most during wakefulness, and become silent upon entering sleep (Lee et al. 2005;
Mileykovskiy et al. 2005; Takahashi et al. 2008). Optogenetic activation of these
neurons is sufﬁcient to induce wakefulness (Adamantidis et al. 2007). The orexin
(hypocretin) receptors are expressed in monoaminergic and cholinergic systems that
promote wakefulness. Thus, in mammals, orexin (hypocretin) seems to have a role
to maintain wakefulness and suppress REM sleep.
By contrast, zebraﬁsh mutants lacking the orexin (hypocretin) receptor display
no obvious phenotypes during the daytime, and increased wakefulness and frag-
mented sleep during the nighttime (Yokogawa et al. 2007). Even more surprisingly,
administration of orexin (hypocretin) induces sleep in a receptor-dependent manner
(Yokogawa et al. 2007). Moreover, in contrast to mammals, the receptor expression

15
The Evolution and Function of Sleep
355
does not match with the monoaminergic and cholinergic arousal system, although
there seem to be some inconsistencies among studies (Mieda et al. 2011; Prober et
al. 2006; Yokogawa et al. 2007). All these results suggest a somewhat differential
role for orexin (hypocretin) in mammalian and teleost ﬁsh wakefulness. However,
cautious interpretation is required, as the function of orexin (hypocretin) in mam-
mals is itself complicated. Mice deﬁcient in orexin (hypocretin) signaling, similar
to the zebraﬁsh mutants, also display fragmented sleep, and the total sleep amount
actually seems unaffected (Mochizuki et al. 2004). Future studies to assess the ﬁring
patterns of orexinergic neurons in zebraﬁsh might be meaningful.
In mammals, the catecholamines dopamine and noradrenaline (norepinephrine)
also comprise a major component of the arousal circuit. As described next,
catecholamines also promote wakefulness in invertebrates. Their roles in zebraﬁsh
sleep, however, have not been well studied yet.
15.6
Sleep in Invertebrate Animals
15.6.1
General Introduction
Humans have had tight relationships with silkworms ever since the history of silk
culture started in China in the very old days. Thus, the life cycle of this insect is
very well characterized. The silkworm larvae undergo four molts before forming
a cocoon. Before each molt, they stop feeding and become immobile. In Japan,
this behavior was termed “min,” which means “sleep”. As in this example, people
have felt certain commonness between our sleep and particular quiescence states in
invertebrate animals. Currently, we do not know very well whether our sleep and
the invertebrate sleep-like states are derived from a common evolutionary origin
and share similar mechanisms. If they did, it will have at least two important
meanings. The ﬁrst is that sleep would be of an extremely ancient origin, perhaps
extending back to ancestral animals with a primitive nervous system. The second
is that we can utilize the fruit ﬂy (Drosophila melanogaster) and the roundworm
(Caenorhabditis elegans), two of the most efﬁcient genetic animal models, to
understand the molecular bases underlying human sleep. Many researchers have
already started to intensively study the molecular mechanisms and functions of sleep
in these two animal species, and thus it is expected that we will know in the near
future to what extent sleep is conserved across the animal kingdom.
15.6.2
Sleep in the Fruit Fly (Drosophila melanogaster)
Adult fruit ﬂies display a circadian rhythm of locomotor activity, with periods of
rest at night. This has been a model extensively studied by circadian biologists, and

356
Y. Hayashi and C. Liu
such studies have had major contributions to elucidating the molecular entity of
our circadian clock. Now researchers have gone further into the investigation of the
periods of rest displayed at night, to see whether it satisﬁes the basic criteria for
sleep. Rest in fruit ﬂies not only receives circadian inﬂuences, but also homeostatic
regulation, as demonstrated by a rebound after deprivation by mechanical stimula-
tion or social interaction (Hendricks et al. 2000; Shaw et al. 2000). Arousal threshold
was also increased. Thus, this behavior follows the basic criteria for sleep described
in Sect. 15.1, and cannot be explained simply as a rest period regulated by the
circadian clock. Moreover, similar to human sleep, the rest period was decreased in
old ﬂies compared to young ﬂies, and caffeine, which promotes wake in mammals,
also efﬁciently promoted arousal in fruit ﬂies (Hendricks et al. 2000; Wu et al. 2009).
In mammals, caffeine acts by antagonizing the receptor for adenosine, which is
one of the few known endogenous sleep-inducing substances in mammals. In mice
lacking the A2A adenosine receptor, caffeine does not increase wakefulness (Huang
et al. 2005). Although the apparently conserved effect of caffeine seems intriguing,
arousal effect on fruit ﬂies, however, was independent of the putative adenosine
receptor homologue, raising the possibility that the underlying mechanism might be
largely different between mammals and fruit ﬂies (Wu et al. 2009).
Catecholamine neurotransmitters, namely dopamine and noradrenaline (nore-
pinephrine) in the vertebrate central nervous system, have important roles in
mammalian sleep/wake regulation. Dopamine promotes wake in mammals. Mice
lacking the dopamine transporter (DAT) gene, in which extracellular dopamine
is increased, exhibit increased wake and reduced NREM sleep (Wisor et al.
2001). Similarly, in fruit ﬂies, a mutation in the DAT gene results in increased
activity and reduced rest (Kume et al. 2005). Noradrenaline also enhances wake in
mammals. Optogenetic activation of mouse noradrenaline-releasing neurons in the
brainstem locus coeruleus promoted sleep-to-wake transitions, whereas optogenetic
inhibition reduced wakefulness (Carter et al. 2010). Although invertebrates do not
possess noradrenaline, the catecholamine octopamine is generally regarded as the
invertebrate counterpart to noradrenaline, both involved in conserved behaviors such
as the ﬁght-or-ﬂight response (Haller et al. 1998; Libersat and Pﬂueger 2004).
Similar to the case of mouse noradrenaline, genetic excitation or silencing of
octopamine-releasing neurons in fruit ﬂies increased or decreased wakefulness,
respectively (Crocker and Sehgal 2008).
The roles of histamine in promoting wakefulness also seem conserved. As with
zebraﬁsh (Danio rerio), mutants of hdc display increased sleep (Oh et al. 2013). As
in caffeine, however, the downstream pathway might be different. In mammals, the
H1 receptor, which is a G-protein-coupled receptor, conveys the wake-promoting
effect of histamine. On the other hand, in fruit ﬂies, a histamine-gated chloride
channel seems crucial (Oh et al. 2013).
In mammals, the inhibitory neurotransmitter GABA is involved in promoting
sleep. GABAergic neurons in the preoptic hypothalamic area or the brainstem
medulla promote NREM sleep (Anaclet et al. 2014; Zhang et al. 2015). In addition,
the GABAA receptor is a major target for treating insomnia in humans, although
the responsible brain areas remain to be clariﬁed (Equihua et al. 2013). GABA and

15
The Evolution and Function of Sleep
357
the GABAA receptor are also important for promoting sleep in fruit ﬂies. Genetic
hyperpolarization of GABAergic neurons reduced sleep, and a mutation in the
GABAA receptor gene that results in increased channel current led to increased sleep
(Agosto et al. 2008).
A disadvantage in using fruit ﬂies (or roundworms) as a model for sleep might
be the low conservation of neuropeptides. Although orexin (hypocretin) has a
crucial role in maintaining wake in mammals, invertebrates lack an obvious orexin
(hypocretin) homologue. Instead, in fruit ﬂies, the neuropeptide pigment dispersing
factor (PDF), which is not present in vertebrates, is critical in regulating circadian
rhythms and maintaining wakefulness (Parisky et al. 2008).
15.6.3
Sleep in the Roundworm (Caenorhabditis elegans)
Roundworms take less than a week to mature, and no obvious circadian behavior
has been reported. However, recently, this small animal has received much attention
as a model for studying sleep. Roundworms enter a quiescent state under certain
conditions. The most intensely studied is a state termed lethargus, which is actually
similar to the silkworm “min” state. Similar to silkworm larvae, roundworm larvae
undergo four molts before becoming adults. And as with the silkworm larvae, before
each molt, the larvae become quiescent, and this state is termed lethargus in the
case of roundworms (Fig. 15.5). Although lethargus is not a daily event but rather
occurs in intervals of 7–12 h, this state satisﬁes various criteria of sleep, including
the display of a homeostatic rebound following “sleep deprivation” by mechanical
stimulation and increased arousal threshold (Raizen et al. 2008). The robustness of
Fig. 15.5 Schematic of the periodic emergence of lethargus during the development of a round-
worm (Caenorhabditis elegans) larva. L1–L4 indicate each larval stage. Each lethargus is followed
by molting and transition to the next developmental stage

358
Y. Hayashi and C. Liu
this quiescent state compared to other quiescent states in roundworms is another
advantage as a sleep model.
For roundworm lethargus, the lack of a 24-h cycle and its restriction to a
particular immature stage largely separates it from sleep in other animal models.
However, several studies support that roundworm lethargus and fruit ﬂy sleep are
conserved at the molecular level. For example, the roundworm homologue of PDF,
PDF-1, negatively regulates lethargus (Choi et al. 2013). In another study, a wide
survey was conducted to examine to what extent roundworm lethargus and fruit ﬂy
sleep are conserved (Singh et al. 2014). Of 26 genes known to be required for fruit
ﬂy sleep, 20 orthologous roundworm genes were examined for their involvement
in lethargus. Surprisingly, all 20 genes affected lethargus quantity and arousal
thresholds. Moreover, for 18 genes including the DAT and GABAA receptor genes,
the direction of the effect matched the fruit ﬂy genes. These studies highlight the
deep conservation between fruit ﬂy sleep and roundworm lethargus. In the future, a
major question will be, of course, whether there is also a deep conservation between
these animals’ sleep and mammalian sleep.
15.7
Is Sleep Function Conserved Across the Animal
Kingdom?
The function of sleep is even less understood than its regulatory mechanisms.
Sleep deprivation leads to death in rats, fruit ﬂies (Drosophila melanogaster),
and roundworms (Caenorhabditis elegans) (Driver et al. 2013; Rechtschaffen and
Bergmann 2002; Shaw et al. 2002). In all cases, the exact cause of the lethality
remains obscure. In mammals, sleep is roughly classiﬁed to REM and NREM sleep.
Although the function of REM sleep is almost a complete mystery, NREM sleep has
been reported to be involved in the secretion of growth hormone, synaptic plasticity,
memory consolidation, and clearance of brain metabolites (Chauvette et al. 2012;
Marshall et al. 2006; Rasch et al. 2007; Takahashi et al. 1968; Xie et al. 2013; Yang
et al. 2014). Despite the fact that slow waves occurring during NREM sleep are
a unique feature of mammals and birds, as discussed next, there seem to be some
conservation between the roles of our sleep and sleep in invertebrates.
Novel imaging techniques using two photon microscopes have allowed in vivo
observation of the mouse brain at the synaptic level: this led to ﬁndings that, during
mammalian sleep, dendritic spines, which are postsynaptic structures, undergo
active remodeling (Maret et al. 2011; Yang and Gan 2012; Yang et al. 2014).
Similarly, in fruit ﬂies, sleep was associated with structural changes in multiple brain
areas including the mushroom body, which is important for learning and memory
(Bushey et al. 2011).
At the behavioral level, NREM sleep is related to memory consolidation. In
humans, reactivation of a speciﬁc memory by means of odor cues during NREM
sleep, but not during wake or REM sleep, improved memory consolidation (Rasch et
al. 2007). Enhancing slow wave activity during NREM sleep also improved memory

15
The Evolution and Function of Sleep
359
consolidation (Marshall et al. 2006). Sleep also seems to be related to learning and
memory in fruit ﬂies. In fruit ﬂies, artiﬁcial induction of sleep by stimulating sleep-
regulating neurons promoted formation of long-term memories, and this effect was
canceled by sleep deprivation (Donlea et al. 2011).
Chronic sleep deprivation in rats results in the disability to regulate the body
temperature, skin lesions, high metabolic rate, and weight loss in spite of increased
food intake. Within 2–3 weeks, the sleep-deprived rats died (Rechtschaffen and
Bergmann 2002; Rechtschaffen et al. 1989). Although this ﬁnding indicates the
necessity of sleep, the direct cause of lethality remains elusive. A study addressed
this issue using fruit ﬂies (Shaw et al. 2002), identifying two strains that are
extremely sensitive to sleep deprivation. These strains, carrying a mutation in either
the circadian clock gene cycle, or the heat shock-induced gene hsp83, showed an
exaggerated sleep rebound after 3 h of sleep deprivation. Moreover, individuals
of these strains started dying after just 10 h of sleep deprivation. These ﬁndings
might provide hints to the fundamental function of sleep at the molecular level.
The hsp83 gene encodes a chaperone protein, and thus sleep might be required for
quality management of certain proteins.
In roundworms, continuous disturbance of lethargus by mechanical stimulation
results in lethality (Driver et al. 2013), just as in rats. This ﬁnding supports that there
is an active role for lethargus. In addition to preparation for molting, in the nervous
system, synaptic remodeling and pruning events coincide with the lethargus timing
(Hallam and Jin 1998; Hayashi et al. 2009; White et al. 1978), raising the possibility
that, as with mammalian NREM sleep and fruit ﬂy sleep, lethargus is a state where
neural circuit remodeling is enhanced.
The foregoing sleep deprivation study in rats also suggests that metabolism is
tightly connected with sleep, as sleep deprivation caused a higher metabolic rate
and enhanced appetite (Rechtschaffen et al. 1989). Indeed, hypothalamic neurons
such as the orexinergic neurons and the melatonin-concentrating hormone (MCH)-
releasing neurons have dual roles in the regulation of sleep and feeding, supporting
their coordinated regulation (Chemelli et al. 1999; Hassani et al. 2009; Jego et al.
2013; Konadhode et al. 2013; Modirrousta et al. 2005; Qu et al. 1996; Sakurai
et al. 1998; Szentirmai and Krueger 2006; Tsunematsu et al. 2014; Verret et al.
2003). Starvation suppresses sleep in fruit ﬂies, suggesting that feeding and sleep
interact in invertebrates, too (Keene et al. 2010). In humans, the amount of sleep is
associated with the regulation of metabolic hormones, body mass index, and obesity
(Baumgartner et al. 1993; Taheri et al. 2004; Van Cauter and Knutson 2008). In
addition, in humans, sleep deprivation also affected the release of sex hormones
including luteinizing hormone (LH), estradiol, and follicle-stimulating hormone
(FSH) (Baumgartner et al. 1993). Taken together, these observations suggest that
sleep might be an important strategy used to regulate the energy distribution and
conservation through the adjustment of metabolism and feeding or reproductive
behavior, although more detailed examinations and accurate interpretations are
needed (Rechtschaffen et al. 1989).

360
Y. Hayashi and C. Liu
15.8
Concluding Remarks and Future Prospects
In this review, we featured studies using various vertebrate or invertebrate animal
species to clarify the mysteries of the evolution and function of sleep. Recent studies
using novel genetic tools or simple animal models have offered substantial advan-
tages in identifying neural circuits or genes that are engaged in sleep regulation.
There are, however, fundamental questions yet to be solved. Finally, we propose
such important issues together with the future directions for addressing these issues.
Is there a universal molecular pathway that encodes “sleepiness”? Although
various neurotransmitters and some signaling molecules have been identiﬁed, our
understanding of the molecular basis of sleep is still weak compared to, for example,
the circadian clock. In the future, intense high-throughput genetic and molecular
approaches might lead to the elucidation of the overall picture of the core sleep-
regulatory pathway.
Why is sleep essential? Whether there is a general purpose for sleep across
animal species still remains unsolved. The discovery of unihemispheric sleep in
aquatic mammals and birds and local sleep in rodents may imply that at least some
aspects of sleep functions can be fulﬁlled without the change in state of the whole
individual. Recent advances in genetic tools for precise manipulation of neuronal
activity, such as optogenetics and pharmacogenetics, have led to the identiﬁcation
of neural circuits critical for sleep. In the future, these tools are also expected
to be effective for manipulating sleep/wake states and subsequent analyses of the
phenotypic outcome of sleep induction or inhibition.
How did REM and NREM sleep evolve, and how were they beneﬁcial? The
individual roles of each sleep state are even less well understood. In the future,
the precise identiﬁcation of neural circuits that play central roles in generating these
sleep states will offer substantial advantages. Inhibition or induction of REM sleep
by manipulation of such circuits may provide clues to the function of REM sleep.
In addition, identiﬁcation and analyses of homologous neural circuits in animals
lacking REM/NREM sleep may provide clues to the evolutionary origin of these
sleep states. These approaches will require the integration of multiple approaches,
including genetics, physiology, comparative neurology, behavioral studies, and
developmental studies in various animal species.
References
Adamantidis AR, Zhang F, Aravanis AM, Deisseroth K, de Lecea L (2007) Neural substrates of
awakening probed with optogenetic control of hypocretin neurons. Nature 450:420–424
Agosto J, Choi JC, Parisky KM, Stilwell G, Rosbash M, Grifﬁth LC (2008) Modulation of GABAA
receptor desensitization uncouples sleep onset and maintenance in Drosophila. Nat Neurosci
11:354–359
Allison T, Van Twyver H, Goff WR (1972) Electrophysiological studies of the echidna, Tachyglos-
sus aculeatus. I. Waking and sleep. Arch Ital Biol 110:145–184

15
The Evolution and Function of Sleep
361
Anaclet C, Ferrari L, Arrigoni E, Bass CE, Saper CB, Lu J, Fuller PM (2014) The GABAergic
parafacial zone is a medullary slow wave sleep-promoting center. Nat Neurosci 17:1217–1224
Andretic R, van Swinderen B, Greenspan RJ (2005) Dopaminergic modulation of arousal in
Drosophila. Curr Biol 15:1165–1175
Aserinsky E, Kleitman N (1953) Regularly occurring periods of eye motility, and concomitant
phenomena, during sleep. Science 118:273–274
Baumgartner A, Dietzel M, Saletu B, Wolf R, Campos-Barros A, Graf KJ, Kurten I, Mannsmann U
(1993) Inﬂuence of partial sleep deprivation on the secretion of thyrotropin, thyroid hormones,
growth hormone, prolactin, luteinizing hormone, follicle stimulating hormone, and estradiol in
healthy young women. Psychiatry Res 48:153–178
Boissard R, Gervasoni D, Schmidt MH, Barbagli B, Fort P, Luppi PH (2002) The rat ponto-
medullary network responsible for paradoxical sleep onset and maintenance: a combined
microinjection and functional neuroanatomical study. Eur J Neurosci 16:1959–1973
Boutrel B, Monaca C, Hen R, Hamon M, Adrien J (2002) Involvement of 5-HT1A receptors in
homeostatic and stress-induced adaptive regulations of paradoxical sleep: studies in 5-HT1A
knock-out mice. J Neurosci 22:4686–4692
Bushey D, Tononi G, Cirelli C (2011) Sleep and synaptic homeostasis: structural evidence in
Drosophila. Science 332:1576–1581
Campbell SS, Tobler I (1984) Animal sleep: a review of sleep duration across phylogeny. Neurosci
Biobehav Rev 8:269–300
Carter ME, Yizhar O, Chikahisa S, Nguyen H, Adamantidis A, Nishino S, Deisseroth K, de Lecea
L (2010) Tuning arousal with optogenetic modulation of locus coeruleus neurons. Nat Neurosci
13:1526–1533
Chauvette S, Seigneur J, Timofeev I (2012) Sleep oscillations in the thalamocortical system induce
long-term neuronal plasticity. Neuron 75:1105–1113
Chemelli RM, Willie JT, Sinton CM, Elmquist JK, Scammell T, Lee C, Richardson JA, Williams
SC, Xiong Y, Kisanuki Y et al (1999) Narcolepsy in orexin knockout mice: molecular genetics
of sleep regulation. Cell 98:437–451
Choi S, Chatzigeorgiou M, Taylor KP, Schafer WR, Kaplan JM (2013) Analysis of NPR-1 reveals
a circuit mechanism for behavioral quiescence in C. elegans. Neuron 78:869–880
Cirelli C, Bushey D, Hill S, Huber R, Kreber R, Ganetzky B, Tononi G (2005) Reduced sleep in
Drosophila Shaker mutants. Nature 434:1087–1092
Crochet S, Onoe H, Sakai K (2006) A potent non-monoaminergic paradoxical sleep inhibitory
system: a reverse microdialysis and single-unit recording study. Eur J Neurosci 24:1404–1412
Crocker A, Sehgal A (2008) Octopamine regulates sleep in Drosophila through protein kinase
A-dependent mechanisms. J Neurosci 28:9377–9385
de Lecea L, Kilduff TS, Peyron C, Gao X, Foye PE, Danielson PE, Fukuhara C, Battenberg EL,
Gautvik VT, Bartlett FS 2nd et al (1998) The hypocretins: hypothalamus-speciﬁc peptides with
neuroexcitatory activity. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 95:322–327
Dement W (1958) The occurrence of low voltage, fast, electroencephalogram patterns during
behavioral sleep in the cat. Electroencephalogr Clin Neurophysiol 10:291–296
Dement W, Kleitman N (1957) Cyclic variations in EEG during sleep and their relation to eye
movements, body motility, and dreaming. Electroencephalogr Clin Neurophysiol 9:673–690
Donlea JM, Thimgan MS, Suzuki Y, Gottschalk L, Shaw PJ (2011) Inducing sleep by remote
control facilitates memory consolidation in Drosophila. Science 332:1571–1576
Douglas CL, Vyazovskiy V, Southard T, Chiu SY, Messing A, Tononi G, Cirelli C (2007) Sleep in
Kcna2 knockout mice. BMC Biol 5:42
Driver RJ, Lamb AL, Wyner AJ, Raizen DM (2013) DAF-16/FOXO regulates homeostasis of
essential sleep-like behavior during larval transitions in C. elegans. Curr Biol 23:501–506
Equihua AC, De La Herran-Arita AK, Drucker-Colin R (2013) Orexin receptor antagonists as
therapeutic agents for insomnia. Front Pharmacol 4:163
Finlay BL, Hersman MN, Darlington RB (1998) Patterns of vertebrate neurogenesis and the paths
of vertebrate evolution. Brain Behav Evol 52:232–242

362
Y. Hayashi and C. Liu
Foltenyi K, Greenspan RJ, Newport JW (2007) Activation of EGFR and ERK by rhomboid
signaling regulates the consolidation and maintenance of sleep in Drosophila. Nat Neurosci
10:1160–1167
Franken P, Thomason R, Heller HC, O’Hara BF (2007) A non-circadian role for clock-genes in
sleep homeostasis: a strain comparison. BMC Neurosci 8:87
Graves LA, Hellman K, Veasey S, Blendy JA, Pack AI, Abel T (2003) Genetic evidence for a role
of CREB in sustained cortical arousal. J Neurophysiol 90:1152–1159
Haas HL, Sergeeva OA, Selbach O (2008) Histamine in the nervous system. Physiol Rev 88:1183–
1241
Hagan JJ, Leslie RA, Patel S, Evans ML, Wattam TA, Holmes S, Benham CD, Taylor SG,
Routledge C, Hemmati P et al (1999) Orexin A activates locus coeruleus cell ﬁring and
increases arousal in the rat. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 96:10911–10916
Hallam SJ, Jin Y (1998) lin-14 regulates the timing of synaptic remodelling in Caenorhabditis
elegans. Nature 395:78–82
Haller J, Makara GB, Kruk MR (1998) Catecholaminergic involvement in the control of
aggression: hormones, the peripheral sympathetic, and central noradrenergic systems. Neurosci
Biobehav Rev 22:85–97
Hara J, Beuckmann CT, Nambu T, Willie JT, Chemelli RM, Sinton CM, Sugiyama F, Yagami
K, Goto K, Yanagisawa M et al (2001) Genetic ablation of orexin neurons in mice results in
narcolepsy, hypophagia, and obesity. Neuron 30:345–354
Harrison NL (2007) Mechanisms of sleep induction by GABA(A) receptor agonists. J Clin
Psychiatry 68(suppl 5):6–12
Hartse K (1994) Sleep in insects and nonmammalian vertebrates. Principles and practice of sleep
medicine, 2nd edn. Saunders, Philadelphia, pp 95–104
Hassani OK, Lee MG, Jones BE (2009) Melanin-concentrating hormone neurons discharge in a
reciprocal manner to orexin neurons across the sleep–wake cycle. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
106:2418–2422
Hayashi Y, Hirotsu T, Iwata R, Kage-Nakadai E, Kunitomo H, Ishihara T, Iino Y, Kubo T (2009)
A trophic role for Wnt-Ror kinase signaling during developmental pruning in Caenorhabditis
elegans. Nat Neurosci 12:981–987
Hendricks JC, Finn SM, Panckeri KA, Chavkin J, Williams JA, Sehgal A, Pack AI (2000) Rest in
Drosophila is a sleep-like state. Neuron 25:129–138
Hendricks JC, Williams JA, Panckeri K, Kirk D, Tello M, Yin JC, Sehgal A (2001) A non-circadian
role for cAMP signaling and CREB activity in Drosophila rest homeostasis. Nat Neurosci
4:1108–1115
Huang ZL, Qu WM, Eguchi N, Chen JF, Schwarzschild MA, Fredholm BB, Urade Y, Hayaishi
O (2005) Adenosine A2A, but not A1, receptors mediate the arousal effect of caffeine. Nat
Neurosci 8:858–859
Jego S, Glasgow SD, Herrera CG, Ekstrand M, Reed SJ, Boyce R, Friedman J, Burdakov D,
Adamantidis AR (2013) Optogenetic identiﬁcation of a rapid eye movement sleep modulatory
circuit in the hypothalamus. Nat Neurosci 16:1637–1643
Jouvet M, Michel F, Courjon J (1959) On a stage of rapid cerebral electrical activity in the course
of physiological sleep. CR Seances Soc Biol Fil 153:1024–1028
Kayser MS, Yue Z, Sehgal A (2014) A critical period of sleep for development of courtship
circuitry and behavior in Drosophila. Science 344:269–274
Keene AC, Duboue ER, McDonald DM, Dus M, Suh GS, Waddell S, Blau J (2010) Clock and
cycle limit starvation-induced sleep loss in Drosophila. Curr Biol 20:1209–1215
Konadhode RR, Pelluru D, Blanco-Centurion C, Zayachkivsky A, Liu M, Uhde T, Glen WB Jr,
van den Pol AN, Mulholland PJ, Shiromani PJ (2013) Optogenetic stimulation of MCH neurons
increases sleep. J Neurosci 33:10257–10263
Kramer A, Yang FC, Snodgrass P, Li X, Scammell TE, Davis FC, Weitz CJ (2001) Regulation of
daily locomotor activity and sleep by hypothalamic EGF receptor signaling. Science 294:2511–
2515

15
The Evolution and Function of Sleep
363
Kume K, Kume S, Park SK, Hirsh J, Jackson FR (2005) Dopamine is a regulator of arousal in the
fruit ﬂy. J Neurosci 25:7377–7384
Kushikata T, Fang J, Chen Z, Wang Y, Krueger JM (1998) Epidermal growth factor enhances
spontaneous sleep in rabbits. Am J Physiol 275:R509–R514
Langmesser S, Franken P, Feil S, Emmenegger Y, Albrecht U, Feil R (2009) cGMP-dependent
protein kinase type I is implicated in the regulation of the timing and quality of sleep and
wakefulness. PLoS One 4, e4238
Lee MG, Hassani OK, Jones BE (2005) Discharge of identiﬁed orexin/hypocretin neurons across
the sleep-waking cycle. J Neurosci 25:6716–6720
Libersat F, Pﬂueger HJ (2004) Monoamines and the orchestration of behavior. Bioscience 54:17–
25
Lin L, Faraco J, Li R, Kadotani H, Rogers W, Lin X, Qiu X, de Jong PJ, Nishino S, Mignot E
(1999a) The sleep disorder canine narcolepsy is caused by a mutation in the hypocretin (orexin)
receptor 2 gene. Cell 98:365–376
Lin L, Faraco J, Li R, Kadotani H, Rogers W, Lin XY, Qiu XH, de Jong PJ, Nishino S, Mignot E
(1999b) The sleep disorder canine narcolepsy is caused by a mutation in the hypocretin (orexin)
receptor 2 gene. Cell 98:365–376
Lu J, Jhou TC, Saper CB (2006a) Identiﬁcation of wake-active dopaminergic neurons in the ventral
periaqueductal gray matter. J Neurosci 26:193–202
Lu J, Sherman D, Devor M, Saper CB (2006b) A putative ﬂip-ﬂop switch for control of REM
sleep. Nature 441:589–594
Maret S, Faraguna U, Nelson AB, Cirelli C, Tononi G (2011) Sleep and waking modulate spine
turnover in the adolescent mouse cortex. Nat Neurosci 14:1418–1420
Marshall L, Helgadottir H, Molle M, Born J (2006) Boosting slow oscillations during sleep
potentiates memory. Nature 444:610–613
Mieda M, Hasegawa E, Kisanuki YY, Sinton CM, Yanagisawa M, Sakurai T (2011) Differential
roles of orexin receptor-1 and 2 in the regulation of non-REM and REM sleep. J Neurosci
31:6518–6526
Mileykovskiy BY, Kiyashchenko LI, Siegel JM (2005) Behavioral correlates of activity in
identiﬁed hypocretin/orexin neurons. Neuron 46:787–798
Mochizuki T, Crocker A, McCormack S, Yanagisawa M, Sakurai T, Scammell TE (2004)
Behavioral state instability in orexin knock-out mice. J Neurosci 24:6291–6300
Modirrousta M, Mainville L, Jones BE (2005) Orexin and MCH neurons express c-Fos differently
after sleep deprivation vs. recovery and bear different adrenergic receptors. Eur J Neurosci
21:2807–2816
Monnier M, Fallert M, Battacharya IC (1967) The waking action of histamine. Experientia 23:21–
22
Monsalve GC, Van Buskirk C, Frand AR (2011) LIN-42/PERIOD controls cyclical and develop-
mental progression of C. elegans molts. Curr Biol 21:2033–2045
Morrow JD, Vikraman S, Imeri L, Opp MR (2008) Effects of serotonergic activation by 5-
hydroxytryptophan on sleep and body temperature of C57BL/6J and interleukin-6-deﬁcient
mice are dose and time related. Sleep 31:21–33
Mukhametov LM, Supin AY, Polyakova IG (1977) Interhemispheric asymmetry of the electroen-
cephalographic sleep patterns in dolphins. Brain Res 134:581–584
Mukhametov LM, Lyamin OI, Polyakova IG (1985) Interhemispheric asynchrony of the sleep EEG
in northern fur seals. Experientia 41:1034–1035
Naylor E, Bergmann BM, Krauski K, Zee PC, Takahashi JS, Vitaterna MH, Turek FW (2000) The
circadian clock mutation alters sleep homeostasis in the mouse. J Neurosci 20:8138–8143
Nicholson AN, Pascoe PA, Stone BM (1985) Histaminergic systems and sleep. Studies in man
with H1 and H2 antagonists. Neuropharmacology 24:245–250
Nicol SC, Andersen NA, Phillips NH, Berger RJ (2000) The echidna manifests typical character-
istics of rapid eye movement sleep. Neurosci Lett 283:49–52
Nicolau MC, Akaarir M, Gamundi A, Gonzalez J, Rial RV (2000) Why we sleep: the evolutionary
pathway to the mammalian sleep. Prog Neurobiol 62:379–406

364
Y. Hayashi and C. Liu
Obal F Jr, Alfoldi P, Cady AB, Johannsen L, Sary G, Krueger JM (1988) Growth hormone-
releasing factor enhances sleep in rats and rabbits. Am J Physiol 255:R310–R316
Oh Y, Jang D, Sonn JY, Choe J (2013) Histamine-HisCl1 receptor axis regulates wake-promoting
signals in Drosophila melanogaster. PLoS One 8, e68269
Parisky KM, Agosto J, Pulver SR, Shang Y, Kuklin E, Hodge JJ, Kang K, Liu X, Garrity PA,
Rosbash M et al (2008) PDF cells are a GABA-responsive wake-promoting component of the
Drosophila sleep circuit. Neuron 60:672–682
Peyron C, Faraco J, Rogers W, Ripley B, Overeem S, Charnay Y, Nevsimalova S, Aldrich M,
Reynolds D, Albin R et al (2000) A mutation in a case of early onset narcolepsy and a
generalized absence of hypocretin peptides in human narcoleptic brains. Nat Med 6:991–997
Piper DC, Upton N, Smith MI, Hunter AJ (2000) The novel brain neuropeptide, orexin-A,
modulates the sleep–wake cycle of rats. Eur J Neurosci 12:726–730
Prober DA, Rihel J, Onah AA, Sung RJ, Schier AF (2006) Hypocretin/orexin overexpression
induces an insomnia-like phenotype in zebraﬁsh. J Neurosci 26:13400–13410
Qu DQ, Ludwig DS, Gammeltoft S, Piper M, Pelleymounter MA, Cullen MJ, Mathes WF, Przypek
J, Kanarek R, Maratos-Flier E (1996) A role for melanin-concentrating hormone in the central
regulation of feeding behaviour. Nature 380:243–247
Raizen DM, Zimmerman JE, Maycock MH, Ta UD, You YJ, Sundaram MV, Pack AI (2008)
Lethargus is a Caenorhabditis elegans sleep-like state. Nature 451:569–572
Rasch B, Buchel C, Gais S, Born J (2007) Odor cues during slow-wave sleep prompt declarative
memory consolidation. Science 315:1426–1429
Rattenborg NC (2006) Evolution of slow-wave sleep and palliopallial connectivity in mammals
and birds: a hypothesis. Brain Res Bull 69:20–29
Rattenborg NC, Martinez-Gonzalez D (2014) Avian versus mammalian sleep: the fruits of
comparing apples and oranges. Curr Sleep Med Rep 1:55–63
Rattenborg NC, Lima SL, Amlaner CJ (1999) Facultative control of avian unihemispheric sleep
under the risk of predation. Behav Brain Res 105:163–172
Rattenborg NC, Amlaner CJ, Lima SL (2000) Behavioral, neurophysiological and evolutionary
perspectives on unihemispheric sleep. Neurosci Biobehav Rev 24:817–842
Rechtschaffen A, Bergmann BM (2002) Sleep deprivation in the rat: an update of the 1989 paper.
Sleep 25:18–24
Rechtschaffen A, Bergmann BM, Everson CA, Kushida CA, Gilliland MA (1989) Sleep depriva-
tion in the rat: X. Integration and discussion of the ﬁndings. Sleep 12:68–87
Renier C, Faraco JH, Bourgin P, Motley T, Bonaventure P, Rosa F, Mignot E (2007) Genomic and
functional conservation of sedative-hypnotic targets in the zebraﬁsh. Pharmacogenet Genomics
17:237–253
Rial RV, Nicolau MC, Gamundi A, Akaarir M, Garau C, Aparicio S, Tejada S, Moranta D, Gene
L, Esteban S (2007) Comments on evolution of sleep and the palliopallial connectivity in
mammals and birds. Brain Res Bull 72:183–186
Rial RV, Akaarir M, Gamundi A, Garau C, Aparicio S, Tejada S, Gene L, Nicolau MC, Esteban S
(2008) Wake and sleep hypothalamic regulation in diurnal and nocturnal chronotypes. J Pineal
Res 45:225–226
Rial RV, Akaarir M, Gamundi A, Nicolau C, Garau C, Aparicio S, Tejada S, Gene L, Gonzalez
J, De Vera LM et al (2010) Evolution of wakefulness, sleep and hibernation: from reptiles to
mammals. Neurosci Biobehav Rev 34:1144–1160
Sakai K, Crochet S, Onoe H (2001) Pontine structures and mechanisms involved in the generation
of paradoxical (REM) sleep. Arch Ital Biol 139:93–107
Sakurai T, Amemiya A, Ishii M, Matsuzaki I, Chemelli RM, Tanaka H, Williams SC, Richardson
JA, Kozlowski GP, Wilson S et al (1998) Orexins and orexin receptors: a family of hypothalamic
neuropeptides and G protein-coupled receptors that regulate feeding behavior. Cell 92:573–585
Saper CB, Fuller PM, Pedersen NP, Lu J, Scammell TE (2010) Sleep state switching. Neuron
68:1023–1042
Shaw PJ, Cirelli C, Greenspan RJ, Tononi G (2000) Correlates of sleep and waking in Drosophila
melanogaster. Science 287:1834–1837

15
The Evolution and Function of Sleep
365
Shaw PJ, Tononi G, Greenspan RJ, Robinson DF (2002) Stress response genes protect against
lethal effects of sleep deprivation in Drosophila. Nature 417:287–291
Siegel JM, Manger PR, Nienhuis R, Fahringer HM, Pettigrew JD (1996) The echidna Tachyglossus
aculeatus combines REM and non-REM aspects in a single sleep state: implications for the
evolution of sleep. J Neurosci 16:3500–3506
Singh K, Ju JY, Walsh MB, DiIorio MA, Hart AC (2014) Deep conservation of genes required
for both Drosophila melanogaster and Caenorhabditis elegans sleep includes a role for
dopaminergic signaling. Sleep 37:1439–1451
Sundvik M, Kudo H, Toivonen P, Rozov S, Chen YC, Panula P (2011) The histaminergic system
regulates wakefulness and orexin/hypocretin neuron development via histamine receptor H1 in
zebraﬁsh. FASEB J 25:4338–4347
Szentirmai E, Krueger JM (2006) Central administration of neuropeptide Y induces wakefulness
in rats. Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol 291:R473–R480
Taheri S, Lin L, Austin D, Young T, Mignot E (2004) Short sleep duration is associated with
reduced leptin, elevated ghrelin, and increased body mass index. PLoS Med 1, e62
Takahashi Y, Kipnis DM, Daughaday WH (1968) Growth hormone secretion during sleep. J Clin
Invest 47:2079–2090
Takahashi K, Lin JS, Sakai K (2008) Neuronal activity of orexin and non-orexin waking-active
neurons during wake-sleep states in the mouse. Neuroscience 153:860–870
Thannickal TC, Moore RY, Nienhuis R, Ramanathan L, Gulyani S, Aldrich M, Cornford M, Siegel
JM (2000) Reduced number of hypocretin neurons in human narcolepsy. Neuron 27:469–474
Tsunematsu T, Ueno T, Tabuchi S, Inutsuka A, Tanaka KF, Hasuwa H, Kilduff TS, Terao
A, Yamanaka A (2014) Optogenetic manipulation of activity and temporally controlled
cell-speciﬁc ablation reveal a role for MCH neurons in sleep/wake regulation. J Neurosci
34:6896–6909
Van Buskirk C, Sternberg PW (2007) Epidermal growth factor signaling induces behavioral
quiescence in Caenorhabditis elegans. Nat Neurosci 10:1300–1307
Van Cauter E, Knutson KL (2008) Sleep and the epidemic of obesity in children and adults. Eur J
Endocrinol Eur Fed Endocrine Soc 159(suppl 1):S59–S66
Vanni-Mercier G, Sakai K, Lin JS, Jouvet M (1989) Mapping of cholinoceptive brainstem
structures responsible for the generation of paradoxical sleep in the cat. Arch Ital Biol 127:133–
164
Verret L, Goutagny R, Fort P, Cagnon L, Salvert D, Leger L, Boissard R, Salin P, Peyron C,
Luppi PH (2003) A role of melanin-concentrating hormone producing neurons in the central
regulation of paradoxical sleep. BMC Neurosci 4:19
Viola AU, Archer SN, James LM, Groeger JA, Lo JC, Skene DJ, von Schantz M, Dijk DJ (2007)
PER3 polymorphism predicts sleep structure and waking performance. Curr Biol 17:613–618
Vyazovskiy VV, Olcese U, Hanlon EC, Nir Y, Cirelli C, Tononi G (2011) Local sleep in awake
rats. Nature 472:443–447
White JG, Albertson DG, Anness MA (1978) Connectivity changes in a class of motoneurone
during the development of a nematode. Nature 271:764–766
Willie JT, Chemelli RM, Sinton CM, Tokita S, Williams SC, Kisanuki YY, Marcus JN, Lee C,
Elmquist JK, Kohlmeier KA et al (2003) Distinct narcolepsy syndromes in Orexin receptor-2
and Orexin null mice: molecular genetic dissection of non-REM and REM sleep regulatory
processes. Neuron 38:715–730
Wisor JP, Nishino S, Sora I, Uhl GH, Mignot E, Edgar DM (2001) Dopaminergic role in stimulant-
induced wakefulness. J Neurosci 21:1787–1794
Wisor JP, O’Hara BF, Terao A, Selby CP, Kilduff TS, Sancar A, Edgar DM, Franken P (2002) A
role for cryptochromes in sleep regulation. BMC Neurosci 3:20
Wu MN, Ho K, Crocker A, Yue Z, Koh K, Sehgal A (2009) The effects of caffeine on sleep in
Drosophila require PKA activity, but not the adenosine receptor. J Neurosci 29:11029–11037
Xie L, Kang H, Xu Q, Chen MJ, Liao Y, Thiyagarajan M, O’Donnell J, Christensen DJ, Nicholson
C, Iliff JJ et al (2013) Sleep drives metabolite clearance from the adult brain. Science 342:373–
377

366
Y. Hayashi and C. Liu
Yang G, Gan WB (2012) Sleep contributes to dendritic spine formation and elimination in the
developing mouse somatosensory cortex. Dev Neurobiol 72:1391–1398
Yang G, Lai CS, Cichon J, Ma L, Li W, Gan WB (2014) Sleep promotes branch-speciﬁc formation
of dendritic spines after learning. Science 344:1173–1178
Yokogawa T, Marin W, Faraco J, Pezeron G, Appelbaum L, Zhang J, Rosa F, Mourrain P, Mignot
E (2007) Characterization of sleep in zebraﬁsh and insomnia in hypocretin receptor mutants.
PLoS Biol 5, e277
Young JZ (1981) The life of vertebrates, 3rd edn. Clarendon, Oxford
Yuan Q, Joiner WJ, Sehgal A (2006) A sleep-promoting role for the Drosophila serotonin receptor
1A. Curr Biol 16:1051–1062
Zhang Z, Ferretti V, Guntan I, Moro A, Steinberg EA, Ye Z, Zecharia AY, Yu X, Vyssotski AL,
Brickley SG et al (2015) Neuronal ensembles sufﬁcient for recovery sleep and the sedative
actions of alpha2 adrenergic agonists. Nat Neurosci 18:553–561
Zhdanova IV, Wang SY, Leclair OU, Danilova NP (2001) Melatonin promotes sleep-like state in
zebraﬁsh. Brain Res 903:263–268

Chapter 16
Prefrontal Anatomical Architecture
and Top-Down Behavioral Control in Human
and Nonhuman Primates
Yosuke Morishima
Abstract Primates, including humans, have great cognitive capability, can adapt to
their environments, and have a brain is characterized by a large volume of prefrontal
cortex. In this chapter, I provide an overview on how the primate prefrontal
cortex differs from that of other species, and I discuss the structural similarities
and differences of the prefrontal cortex among primate species. In particular, I
discuss how the human prefrontal cortex has unique characteristics among primate
species. I also provide an overview of the neural mechanisms of top-down control
of visual attention and discuss how cognitive research in human and non-human
primates is integrated to understand brain mechanisms. In summary, I will argue
that comparative and integrative approaches aid the understanding of the biological
basis of human cognition.
Keywords Attention • Comparative anatomy • Executive function • Human
brain • Nonhuman primate • Prefrontal cortex • Top-down control
16.1
Introduction
Adaptive behavior requires ﬂexible processing of external information for behav-
ioral guidance according to the demands of environments (Miller and Cohen 2001;
Real 1991). Organisms receive external information through sensory organs, but not
all information received can be actively processed at the same time. For example,
we cannot report two consecutively presented visual stimuli, called a phenomenon
of attentional blink (Marois and Ivanoff 2005). The capacity of working memory is
limited to ﬁve to seven items (Baddeley et al. 1974; Kane and Engle 2002). There-
fore, the ﬁrst step in achieving adaptive behavior is to select relevant information and
ignore irrelevant information pertaining to the demand at hand. In the next step, the
Y. Morishima ()
Division of Systems Neuroscience of Psychopathology, Translational Research Center, University
Hospital of Psychiatry, University of Bern, Bolligenstrasse 111, 3000 Bern, Switzerland
e-mail: yosuke.morishima@puk.unibe.ch
© Springer Japan KK 2017
S. Shigeno et al. (eds.), Brain Evolution by Design, Diversity and Commonality
in Animals, DOI 10.1007/978-4-431-56469-0_16
367

368
Y. Morishima
processed information is utilized and evaluated according to the current demand. In
the last step, a relevant action is selected and executed. Higher cognitive functions,
such as attention, working memory, planning, decision making, memory retrieval,
motivated behavior, and social cognition, can be fractionated into these steps that
are served by the prefrontal cortex (PFC) (Desimone and Duncan 1995; Fujii et al.
2009; Fuster 1988; Goldman-Rakic 1996; Grabenhorst and Rolls 2011; Iacoboni et
al. 2004; Karaﬁn et al. 2004; Miller and Cohen 2001; Passingham 2008; Passingham
and Wise 2012; Rudebeck et al. 2006; Rushworth et al. 2007a, b; Sakai 2008; Sallet
et al. 2011; Squire et al. 2013; Tsujimoto et al. 2011).
The PFC is a part of the cerebral cortex that is observed only in mammals.
Amphibians and lower organisms do not have a PFC (Butler and Hodos 2005;
Wilczynski 2009). Birds have a brain area analogous to the mammalian PFC, but
the area does not have the columnar structure of the cerebral cortex that is found
in mammals (Fuster 1988; Wilczynski 2009). Among mammalian species, primates
have a considerably larger PFC compared to other species (Roth and Dicke 2005).
Although the function of the PFC has been studied extensively in humans and
nonhuman primates, rodents have recently been used to study PFC functions as
well.
The goal of this chapter is to discuss human cognition by taking a comparative
approach of brain architecture. To this end, in the ﬁrst part of this chapter, I
provide an overview of the anatomical architecture of the PFC in human and
nonhuman primates and illustrate the differences from other nonprimate species.
Then, I discuss the structural commonality and differences of the PFC among
primate species. In the second part of this chapter, I review recent research on
visual attention. I chose visual attention in this chapter, because researchers have
investigated the neural mechanism of the top-down control of visual attention with
human and nonhuman primates, and studies with different species have been nicely
integrated to understand human cognition.
16.2
Anatomical Architecture of the PFC in Humans
and Nonhuman Primates
16.2.1
The Deﬁnition of the PFC
First, I clarify the deﬁnition of the PFC. In this chapter, I deﬁne the PFC as a part
of the cerebral cortex that covers cortical areas in the frontal lobe, except for motor
areas, such as the primary motor area, premotor, and supplementary motor area.
Therefore, the PFC is different from the frontal lobe; the frontal lobe is separated
from the parietal lobe by the central sulcus and separated from the temporal lobe
by the lateral sulcus (in humans, the Sylvian ﬁssure). Within the primate PFC,
distinct types of cytoarchitecture have been observed: granular, dysgranular, and
agranular parts of the PFC (Fuster 1988; Passingham and Wise 2012). These three

16
Prefrontal Anatomical Architecture and Top-Down Behavioral Control...
369
cytoarchitecture types are differentiated by the cell density of the internal granular
layer; that is, layer IV. The granular PFC has an evident layer IV, whereas few
neuronal cell bodies are observed in the agranular PFC. The dysgranular PFC shows
an immature layer IV (Öngür and Price 2000; Petrides and Pandya 1999, 2007).
Because of the subtle differences, the dysgranular PFC was included in Brodmann’s
classical deﬁnition of the PFC (Brodmann 1909). Rodents are recognized to have
a PFC, but no evidence has been shown for the existence of the granular PFC in
rodents (Öngür and Price 2000; Preuss 1995; Uylings et al. 1990). Brodmann thus
did not acknowledge the existence of the PFC in rodents, although the presence of a
PFC in rodents is currently being considered (Preuss 1995; Uylings et al. 1990,
2003). Although the granular PFC is observed in a limited number of species,
the agranular PFC is observed in lower mammals, such as rodents. Hence, the
agranular PFC is considered to be an evolutionarily older PFC and the granular
PFC is considered to contribute to the complex cognitive processes of primates.
16.2.2
Subdivision of the PFC in Humans, Macaques,
and Marmosets
The PFC is not a homogeneous structure. Hence, the PFC is subdivided into
subregions based on macroscopic and microscopic criteria. The cerebral cortex of
mammals comprises six laminated layers based on distinct neuronal cell density
layers. The patterns of cell densities in the six layers are not uniform across the
entire cerebral cortex but are considerably different among different brain areas.
Therefore, the cerebral cortex has been parcellated into subregions based on distinct
patterns of cytoarchitecture. Brodmann’s initial parcellation of human brain areas is
still of value (Brodmann 1909), and a similar naming rule has been adopted to label
the brain areas of other primate species (Walker 1940). Figure 16.1 illustrates the
parcellated brain areas of the PFC in humans, macaque monkeys, and marmoset
monkeys (Burman et al. 2006; Burman and Rosa 2009; Öngür and Price 2000;
Petrides and Pandya 1999, 2007). As shown in Fig. 16.1, the agranular PFC is
observed in the more caudal part of the lateral and medial PFC, whereas the
granular PFC is observed in the more rostral part of the lateral and medial PFC.
The dysgranular PFC is located in between the two. In addition, the more rostral
part of the orbital PFC has a thicker layer IV along with the anterior posterior line
(Mackey and Petrides 2010). This rule is uniformly applied to humans, macaque
monkeys, and marmoset monkeys. Although such comprehensive cytoarchitecture
information is not available for other primate species, this rule could be applied
to other primate species. The commonality in the naming rules among species
helps to easily relate knowledge obtained from one species to another, in particular
between humans and macaque monkeys, as both species have been extensively used
to study the neural basis of cognition. The functional similarity of a particular area
between human and nonhuman primates is ubiquitously reported. In addition, more

370
Y. Morishima
10
14r
14c
13a
13l
13m
13b
11m
11l
12m
12r
12l
12o
12/45
10
9
8B
8Ad
6dr
8Av
46
46
46
10
10
47/12
45A
47/12
8B
8B
9
9
9/46d
9/46d
9/46v
9/46v
44
8Ad
8Ad
8Av
8Av
45A45B
45B
9
8B
10
32
24
25
14r
14c
9
8B
10
32
24
25
14r
14c
10
32
9
8
24a
24b
25
14r
14c
10
10
11m
11l
12r
12l
12m
13l
13m
14r
14c
13A
13b
11m
11l
12l
12o
13l
13m
13b 13a
14r
14c
12m
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
I
Fig. 16.1 Cytoarchitectural subdivision of the prefrontal cortex (PFC): the subdivisions of the
PFC in humans (a, d, g), macaque monkeys (b, e, h), and marmoset monkeys (c, f, i). Each
lateral (a–c), medial (d–f), and orbital (g–i) surface is described. Subdivision of the surface of
human prefrontal cortex is shown. Colors indicate the existence of granular layer IV. The granular,
dysgranular, and agranular PFC areas are depicted by blue, purple, and yellow, respectively. As is
the convention, the rostral ventral prefrontal area is described as area 47/12 or 45/12 in the lateral
surface, whereas the area is labeled as area 12 in the orbital surface (Petrides and Pandya 2002)
(Figures are adapted and modiﬁed from Petrides and Pandya (1999) (a, b, d, e), Öngür and Price
(2000) (g, h), Burman et al. (2006) (c), and Burman and Rosa (2009) (f, i))
recent studies have examined the pattern of anatomical and functional connectivity
among brain areas and found certain similarities between human and primate brains
(De Schotten et al. 2012; Margulies et al. 2009; Neubert et al. 2014, 2015; Ramnani
et al. 2006; Rilling et al. 2008).
The second labeling rule of the PFC that is widely used is based on gross
anatomical features, and the PFC is subdivided into ﬁve areas: the dorsolateral pre-
frontal cortex (DLPFC), ventrolateral prefrontal cortex (VLPFC), medial prefrontal
cortex (MFPC), orbitofrontal cortex (OFC), and frontopolar cortex (otherwise called
the anterior PFC or polar PFC). These deﬁnitions are convenient to roughly note

16
Prefrontal Anatomical Architecture and Top-Down Behavioral Control...
371
the locus of activation, recording, or lesion. However, the nomenclature causes
misunderstanding because each subregion covers broad cortical areas. For example,
the DLPFC sometimes refers to the core area of executive control function, and
BA 9 and BA 46 are involved in the process, but at the same time, the DLPFC
in this deﬁnition includes BA 8, BA 9, BA 10, and BA 46 (Cieslik et al. 2012).
Because of the confusion of the terminology, in particular in human neuroimaging
studies, the foci of activation should be carefully conﬁrmed to interpret the results.
We sometimes encounter a study that refers to DLPFC activation as the control
mechanism, but the activation was observed in the posterior extreme of area 6,
which is less likely to be involved in executive control. Hence, the precise deﬁnition
of brain areas is prerequisite for the interpretation of functional associations.
16.2.3
Evolutionarily Relevant Neural Index for Intelligence
What feature of the brain accounts for our intelligence? In this section, I overview
potential neural indices that may account for the interspecies variation of intelli-
gence: Total brain volume, total brain volume scaled by body size, PFC volume
scaled by total cortex, and granular PFC size scaled by total cortex (Table 16.1).
The brain volume of primates is generally larger than that of most other mammalian
species (Roth and Dicke 2005). However, there are many species whose brain is
larger than that of humans, such as elephants and whales. Hence, the total brain
volume does not represent the uniqueness of primate intelligence, and another
measure is needed to relate the structural variation among species with intelligence.
If we scale total brain volume by body size, it may potentially account for the
difference in intelligence across mammalian species (Fig. 16.2a) (Van Dongen
1998), but that is not yet an ideal measure to account for the association between
brain structure and intelligence. In fact, the scaled total brain volume of humans
Table 16.1 Possible evolutionarily relevant neural indices for intelligence
Index
Relevance
Reason
References
Total brain volume
No
Elephants and whales
have larger brain than
primates
Roth and Dicke (2005)
Brain volume scaled by
body size
No
Mice have larger
relative brain size than
most primates
Van Dongen (1998)
PFC volume scaled by
total cerebral cortex
No
Rats have larger
relative brain size than
primates, including
humans
Uylings et al. (1990)
Granular PFC volume
scaled by frontal lobe
size
Yes
Consistent with
interspecies variation
of intelligence
Elston (2003, 2006)

372
Y. Morishima
man
cat
chimpanzee
dusky dolphin
african elephant
sperm whale
blue 
whale
hippopotamus
horse
pig
dog
rhesus monkey
hedgehog
marmoset
mouse
shrew
bat
rat
Body weight (kg)
Brain weight (g)
1
100
10,000
1,000,000
0.01
10
100
1000
10000
1
0.1
0.0001
1
2
3
45
6
7
8
9
10
11
70
50
40
2
4
6
8
10
12
Granular PFC/frontal lobe (%)
Total cortical surface area (10  mm  )
2
4
Human
Chimpanzee
Gibbon
Mandril
Baboon
Macaque
Vervet
Capuchin
Marmoset
Black Lemur
Dwarf Lemur
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
14
0
80
60
A
B
Fig. 16.2 Relative brain and prefrontal size. (a) Relationship between the body weight and brain
weight in mammalian species. The oblique line is drawn through the relative brain size equal to
humans. The relative brain weight of marmoset monkeys is equal to humans, and the relative brain
weight of the shrew is larger than for humans (Figure adapted and modiﬁed from Van Dongen
1998). (b) The relationship between the total cortical surface and fraction of the granular PFC
in primates. In the human brain, the granular PFC occupies 80 % of the volume of the frontal
lobe, whereas the granular PFC occupies between 40 and 60 % of the frontal lobe in other species.
Among nonhuman primates, apes have a larger relative granular PFC area compared with other
nonhuman primates (Figure adapted and modiﬁed from Elston et al. 2006)
is lower than that of mice and is comparable to that of marmosets (Fig. 16.2a).
As we are discussing the PFC in this chapter, we consider the size of the PFC
across species. If we look at the PFC volume scaled by total cerebral cortex,
among primate species, humans have the highest relative PFC size, followed by
apes, macaque monkeys, and marmosets (Semendeferi et al. 2002; Uylings et al.
1990). However, the relative PFC size of rats is considerably larger than that of
humans (Uylings et al. 1990). Thus, PFC volume scaled by total cerebral cortex
is not an appropriate measure to account for the association of brain size measures
with primate intelligence. However, the relatively large PFC size in rats may account
for the fact that rats have been widely used to study cognition.
Because the existence of granular cell layer IV in the primate PFC is a unique
characteristic of the primate PFC, we can look at the size of the granular area of the
PFC. The granular PFC is observed mostly in primates and among primate species,
and the human granular PFC is extraordinarily large relative to the frontal lobe
size (Elston et al. 2006) (Fig. 16.2b). Thus, granular PFC volume scaled by frontal
lobe size is a promising neural index for the interspecies variation of intelligence in
mammals. The granular part of the PFC is considered to characterize the uniqueness
of the primate PFC. In primates, the granular PFC occupies a considerable part of
the total cortex (from 8 % in marmosets to 29 % in humans), whereas in Pteropus
(a bat) and Leporidae (rabbits), the granular area makes up approximately 2 % of
the total cortex (Elston 2003). These results suggest that the larger granular PFC
reﬂects the high intelligence of human and nonhuman primates but also results raises

16
Prefrontal Anatomical Architecture and Top-Down Behavioral Control...
373
a new question: what is the function of the granular layer IV? From the microscopic
perspective, neurons in layer IV consist of glutamatergic stellate neurons and
GABAergic interneurons (de Almeida and Mengod 2008), which send excitatory
and inhibitory inputs to layers II, III, and V. As layer IV receives input from the
thalamus (Sherman 2007), layer IV in the granular PFC may integrate information
from subcortical structures, local cortical inputs, and cortical inputs from other brain
areas mediated via the thalamus. In sum, the existence and size of the granular
PFC support the large capacity for processing information and may reﬂect the high
intelligence of humans and nonhuman primates. Studying prefrontal functions of
primates is thus important for the understanding not only of human intelligence but
also of the biological origins of intelligence.
16.2.4
What Is Special About the Human Brain?
In this section, we consider the unique characteristics of the human PFC compared
to that of other primate species. As already discussed, the human PFC has a
considerably larger granular PFC (80 %) compared to that of other primates (40–
55 %) (Elston et al. 2006). Other than the relative granular PFC size, the white matter
volume is disproportionally larger in the human PFC than in that of other primates
(Schoenemann et al. 2005). One point of caution when interpreting this study is that
it adopted an uncommon deﬁnition of the PFC. Because it is hard to examine the
cytoarchitecture of the cerebral cortex with MRI, the study speciﬁed the PFC as
“all portions of the frontal cortex anterior to the genu of the corpus callosum, in a
plane perpendicular to the line connecting the anterior and posterior commissures”
(Schoenemann et al. 2005). The uncommon deﬁnition may create bias to estimate
the PFC size across species. In addition to the size of the granular PFC area, the
human PFC has area 44. Although area 44 is categorized as the dysgranular PFC,
area 44 is observed in neither macaque monkeys nor marmoset monkeys and it is
a part of Broca’s area, which is crucial for the production and comprehension of
language. In humans, the volume of the left areas 44 and 45 is larger than that of
right areas 44 and 45 (Amunts et al. 1999), which apparently reﬂects the dominance
of language processing in the left side of the brain. Surprisingly, this asymmetry of
the posterior part of the inferior frontal gyrus is observed not only in humans but also
in great ape species (Cantalupo and Hopkins 2001), suggesting that the ape’s brain
emerged with the anatomical capacity to process complex language systems. Other
studies of the size of area 10 in humans and apes included that of Semendeferi et
al. (2001), which found that the volume of area 10 relative to the total brain volume
in humans is double that in other apes. Area 10 is located in the most rostral part of
the PFC and is situated at the top of the prefrontal hierarchy (Badre and D’Esposito
2007; Botvinick 2008; Koechlin and Summerﬁeld 2007). In fact, area 10 is involved
in more complex processes of executive function, such as complex planning and
decision making, metacognition, and lie telling (Burgess et al. 2007; Fleming et al.
2010; Karim et al. 2010; Passingham and Wise 2012; Ramnani and Owen 2004;

374
Y. Morishima
Stuss and Knight 2013; Tsujimoto et al. 2011), and, in particular, the larger gray
matter volume in area 10 is associated with better metacognitive ability (Fleming
et al. 2010). Therefore, a large area 10 in the human PFC may reﬂect the capacity
of human intelligence.
At a microscopic level, several unique characteristics of the human PFC have
been reported. First, Elston and colleagues studied the number of dendritic spines
in seven primate species including humans (Elston et al. 2006). They showed that
the number of spines is signiﬁcantly larger in the human granular PFC than that in
the granular PFC of other primates, although this difference was not observed in
visual areas V1 and V2. Because spines are the locus for the reception of neural
inputs to pyramidal neurons, these results suggested that human prefrontal neurons
integrate more complex information. Second, a study by Sherwood and colleagues
compared the density of glial cells relative to neurons in subregions of the PFC
across 18 primate species including humans, gorillas, and chimpanzees (Sherwood
et al. 2006). They showed that glial cell density relative to neuron density in the
human PFC is considerably higher than in other primates. However, in that study,
they did not examine glial cell densities other than in the PFC. Therefore, it was not
clear whether the increased density of glial cells is speciﬁc to prefrontal areas. The
third unique characteristic observed in the human PFC is a large number of bipolar
spindle-shaped neurons, called von Economo neurons (VENs). We discuss VENs in
the next section.
16.2.5
Von Economo Neurons
The seminal work by von Economo and Koskinas described large bipolar neurons
in layer V of the anterior cingulate cortex (von Economo and Koskinas 1925). In
humans, VENs are located in the anterior part of the insular cortex, the anterior
cingulate cortex, and the rostral part of the middle cingulate cortex (Allman et al.
2010). VENs are mostly observed in anthropoids, such as humans, chimpanzees,
gorillas, and bonobos, and, more recently, the existence of VENs was also reported
in the anterior insular cortex of macaque monkeys (Evrard et al. 2012). Although the
neurons were also reported as large spindle-shape neurons in other reports, including
those of Betz and Cajal (Betz 1881; Cajal 1904), von Economo comprehensively
described the morphology and location of these neurons, and these neurons are apt
to be called VENs. The morphological characteristics of VENs are unique. VENs
are projection neurons characterized as being elongated, gradually tapering, with
large-sized somas, and are considerably larger than neighboring pyramidal neurons
(Nimchinsky et al. 1995, 1999). The functional role of VENs is still elusive. It
has been speculated that VENs might be involved in the processing of emotionally
and socially salient information relevant to human awareness (Allman et al. 2010)
because VENs are observed only in anthropoids and macaque monkeys and are
located in the rostral part of the ACC and insula, areas highly associated with
social cognition (Frith and Frith 2012). Although most of these speculations are

16
Prefrontal Anatomical Architecture and Top-Down Behavioral Control...
375
not supported by experimental evidence, Santos and colleagues have reported the
atypical characteristics of VENs in autistic children, suggesting the association
of VENs with the theory of mind (Santos et al. 2011). The study investigated
the number of VENs in the frontoinsular cortex of healthy and autistic children.
Autistic spectrum disorder is a developmental psychiatric disorder characterized
by difﬁculty in social interactions and atypical processing (mostly hypersensitive)
of sensory information (American Psychiatric Association 2013; Frith 1991). That
study showed that children with autism had a higher ratio of VENs to pyramidal
neurons in the frontoinsular cortex than in healthy children, but the density of
VENs was comparable between the two groups, indicating that the numbers of both
VENs and other neurons were increased. In addition, the study reported that some
VENs of autistic children had atypically swollen somata. The results suggested
the association of VENs with autism, but it is still elusive how VENs contribute
to social interactions, which are impaired in autism. One possible consideration
that may be derived from comparative approaches is behavioral differences among
species with VENs can be associated with differences in distributions of VENs
among those species. In summary, we overviewed the unique characteristics of
the human PFC; that is, larger granular PFC and area 10, and higher amounts of
white matter volume, spines, and VENs. All those characteristics are quantitatively
different from other primate species but not qualitatively different. Human cognition
can be partly understood by interpolation from other species, but the complexity of
brain networks may add new cognitive processes that can be studied only in humans.
16.3
Executive Function in Human and Nonhuman Primates
16.3.1
Top-Down Attentional Control Mechanism
In the second half of this chapter, we discuss the common neural mechanism of
executive function in human and nonhuman primates. To discuss how studies of
human and nonhuman primates are integrated to understand executive function, we
consider neural mechanisms of attention in humans and macaque monkeys because
attention has been extensively studied in both species. Attention refers to a cognitive
process to enhance and suppress the processing of external information (Corbetta
and Shulman 2002; Desimone and Duncan 1995; Kastner and Ungerleider 2000;
Reynolds and Chelazzi 2004). Selective processing is important from an evolu-
tionary perspective. First, living organisms need to process information relevant to
survival according to environmental demands. Second, the processing of irrelevant
information is not efﬁcient from the perspective of energy consumption. Therefore,
the prioritization of information processing is important for ﬁtness in different
environments. In addition, information relevant to a behavioral goal depends on the
environmental demands at hand, and the brain therefore needs to ﬂexibly control
the focus of attention in favor of the processing of currently relevant information.

376
Y. Morishima
In the following sections, I overview the neural mechanisms of top-down control
of attention in humans and nonhuman primates and discuss the uniﬁed neural
mechanisms of attentional systems.
16.3.2
Existence of Top-Down Signals
Seminal work by Moran and Desimone has demonstrated that attention to a visual
stimulus enhances the selectivity of neuronal response to the stimulus when dis-
tracting visual stimuli are simultaneously presented (Moran and Desimone 1985).
This study suggested that attention creates control signals that enhance the selective
processing of sensory information. However, it was not clear how the control signals
that enhance the selective processing of visual stimuli are generated. One possibility
is that these control signals are driven by the external sensory stimulus itself
(bottom-up driven account). Another explanation is that the control signals were
generated in the brain according to the demands of the environment without actual
sensory input (top-down account). To distinguish between top-down and bottom-up
processing, researchers examined the modulation of brain activity in sensory areas
without any sensory stimuli. Kastner and colleagues have shown activation in the
extrastriate cortex in the absence of visual stimuli when human subjects covertly
directed attention to a peripheral location where visual stimuli were expected to
be presented (Kastner et al. 1999) (Fig. 16.3a). In addition, they also observed
Time (sec)
0
40
80
120
0
2
Signal change (%)
80
0
250
500
750
FEF microstimulation
Visual stimulus
Spike rate (s  )
-1
Time (sec)
A
B
UA
UA
A
A
E
E
No microstimulation
Microstimulation
Fig. 16.3 Top-down signals during visual attention in humans and macaque monkeys. (a) Brain
activity is measured by functional magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) in the human visual cortex.
In one condition (EA), subjects were told to attend the forthcoming visual stimulus (E period, gray)
and then an actual visual stimulus was presented (A period, yellow). In the other condition, the
visual stimulus is presented, but subjects were not told to attend to the visual stimulus (UA period,
blue). Note that the visual cortex was activated by the instruction to attend to the display without
any visual stimulus (Figure is adapted and modiﬁed from Kastner et al. 1999). (b) Concurrent
recording of visual neurons in area V4 and microstimulation of FEF. Neuronal ﬁring of V4 neurons
is recorded while presenting the visual stimulus to the receptive ﬁeld of the V4 neurons. In the
middle of the presentation of visual stimuli, microstimulation is brieﬂy applied to FEF (red). The
FEF microstimulation increased the ﬁring rate of the V4 neurons after offset of microstimulation
(Figure adapted from Moore and Armstrong 2003)

16
Prefrontal Anatomical Architecture and Top-Down Behavioral Control...
377
activation in the PFC during orienting attention without a visual stimulus. Tomita
and colleagues also demonstrated that neurons in the inferior temporal (IT) cortex,
which selectively respond to a speciﬁc visual stimulus, increase the ﬁring rate when
monkeys retrieve a visual item during a paired-association memory retrieval task
(Tomita et al. 1999). In that task, monkeys were ﬁrst trained to learn the association
of two visual items, and then they were presented with one of the visual items (stim
1) and were instructed to retrieve the other visual item (stim 2). The ﬁring rate of
IT neurons selectively responding to stim2 was increased after the presentation of
the ﬁrst visual item but before the presentation of the paired item, indicating an
increase in the ﬁring rate of the neurons without a visual stimulus. In addition, they
also slit the posterior half of the corpus callosum and again presented the ﬁrst visual
stimulus in the single visual hemiﬁeld. Then, they showed that the ﬁring rate of
the ipsilateral IT neurons were increased during retrieval. Because a visual stimulus
presented in one visual hemiﬁeld is processed in the contralateral side of the visual
cortex, no bottom-up visual information will be transmitted to the ipsilateral side of
the visual cortex. Therefore, the neuronal ﬁring in the ipsilateral side is supposed
to be driven by signals via the PFC. Those results clearly showed the existence of
top-down control signals originating from the PFC.
The studies left an open question of whether top-down signals originating from
the PFC causally inﬂuence activity in the visual areas. Moore and colleagues
addressed that question (Moore and Armstrong 2003) in a study in which they
recorded neuronal activity from the V4 visual area while electronically stimulating
the frontal eye ﬁeld (FEF). The FEF is a subdivision of the PFC and is directly
connected with V4 (Stanton et al. 1995). The FEF is also shown to have involvement
in top-down attentional processes (Corbetta and Shulman 2002; Maunsell and Treue
2006). Electronic stimulation of the FEF increased the neuronal response of V4
neurons to visual stimuli (Fig. 16.3b), whereas the enhancement was not observed in
the absence of visual stimulation. Another study by Ekstorm and colleagues reported
that the electronic stimulation of the FEF increased the activation in visual areas
only in the presence of visual stimuli (Ekstrom et al. 2008). The results suggested
that the FEF causally enhances the activity of visual areas in the presence of visual
stimuli. The results may sound contradictory to the initial report by Kaster et al.,
wherein there was activation in the extrastriate cortex in the absence of visual
stimuli (Kastner et al. 1999). These results may be explained by the differences
in underlying mechanisms between artiﬁcial electronic stimulation and endogenous
top-down control. The other possible explanation is that both studies with monkeys
did not instruct them to orient attention to a speciﬁc location during electronic
stimulation in the absence of visual stimuli.
16.3.3
Flexible Control of Top-Down Signals
Studies with macaque monkeys have clearly shown that the top-down signals
originating from the PFC can causally enhance the activity of visual areas in

378
Y. Morishima
the presence of visual stimuli. However, to achieve adaptive behavior, the biased
processing of sensory information needs to be ﬂexibly controlled according to
environmental demands at hand. This concept gives an assumption that top-
down signals are ﬂexibly controlled in favor of processing information relevant to
behavioral goals. To address this question, our previous study measured neuronal
signal transmission from the PFC to visual areas by concurrently using transcranical
magnetic stimulation (TMS) and electroencephalography (EEG) (Morishima et al.
2009). The rationale of the TMS-EEG method is the following. A weak single-pulse
TMS excites neurons in the stimulated area, and the impulse of stimulated neurons
spreads along the anatomical connections. The spread of TMS-evoked potentials
depends on the excitability of neuronal populations at the time of stimulation.
In fact, other studies have shown that sleep state-dependent changes in neural
transmission occur in cortical networks; neuronal signal transmission is broken
down during the slow wave (deep stage) sleep (Massimini et al. 2005). We invented
an experimental paradigm to study the ﬂexible nature of top-down control signals
during visual attention. Subjects were presented with visual stimuli comprising
a face image and a moving stripe (Fig. 16.4a). The subjects were required to
discriminate either the gender of the face image or the direction of the moving
stripe according to a task instruction cue, which was presented at the beginning
of each trial. Because the visual stimuli always comprised a face and moving
stripe, the bottom-up information was equivalent in both tasks. In addition, we
manipulated the level of preparation by changing the time interval between the
task instruction cue and the target visual stimuli. Thus, the subject could fully
prepare for the forthcoming target visual stimuli in long preparation trials, but
they could not prepare in the short cue–target interval trials. We then applied TMS
on the FEF (frontal eye ﬁeld), shown as a source of top-down signals in primate
studies (Ekstrom et al. 2008; Moore and Armstrong 2003) and examined TMS-
evoked potentials in visual areas. We showed that TMS-evoked EEG potentials
in the occipital area and neural transmission from the FEF to the visual cortex
were changed depending on the task engaged, and the change was observed only
when the subject had a long preparation time (long preparation trials) (Fig. 16.4b).
We have also shown that TMS-evoked potentials spread to the middle temporal
(MT) area, which is specialized to process visual motion, when performing a
motion discrimination task, whereas TMS-evoked potentials spread to the fusiform
face area, which is specialized to process face information, when performing the
face discrimination task (Fig. 16.4c). In sum, the results suggested that the signal
transmission from the FEF to visual areas is ﬂexibly controlled according to the
task demands at hand.
16.3.4
Prefrontal-Visual Interactions Through Neural
Oscillations
In the previous two sections, I overviewed the causal evidence that top-down control
signals originating from the PFC modulate selective processing in visual areas

16
Prefrontal Anatomical Architecture and Top-Down Behavioral Control...
379
Fig. 16.4 Flexible prefrontal
transmission to visual areas.
(a) Tasks used in
experiments. Subjects were
asked to indicate either the
direction of the grating
motion or the gender of a face
image according to a task
cue. Between the task cue and
target stimulus, there were
two types of preparation, long
and short. This allows for the
manipulation of the level of
preparation for the target
stimulus. After 134 ms of
target onset, a TMS pulse was
delivered to the FEF. (b)
TMS-evoked EEG potentials
from the visual cortex. A
TMS was delivered to the
FEF (orange dot in the head
map), and its response was
recorded at occipital area P8
(red dot in the head map).
TMS-evoked potentials are
different between the face
(thick blue line) and motion
(thick red line) conditions in
the long preparation trials,
whereas the difference
disappeared in the short
preparation trials (thin lines).
(c) TMS-evoked source brain
activity was estimated in the
motion processing MT area
and face processing FFA area.
TMS-evoked source activity
in the MT area was enhanced
in the motion task, whereas
activity in the FFA was
enhanced in the face task
(Figures adapted and
modiﬁed from Morishima
et al. 2009)
B
100
200
(ms)
-2
2
4
6(µV)
P8
0
6.8
1
3.4
Motion
Face
T
M
A
F
F
R
(x10    )
-3
Motion, Long prep
Motion, Short prep
Face, Long prep
Face, Short prep
C
A
Target
750 ms
TMS
134
ms
Task cue
117 ms
or
Preparation time
150 or 1500 ms

380
Y. Morishima
during visual attention. The studies with macaque monkeys have shown that the
FEF causally inﬂuences the activity of visual areas in the presence of visual stimuli.
The studies with human subjects have shown that the FEF can ﬂexibly control
the prefrontal inﬂuence over visual areas according to task demands. The next
question arising from these studies is how top-down signals are triggered and how
interactions between the FEF and visual areas are established.
A study by Gregoriou and colleagues addressed this question (Gregoriou et al.
2009). They simultaneously recorded from the FEF and V4 visual area of macaque
monkeys while the monkeys were performing a visual attention task. Then, they
identiﬁed the receptive ﬁeld of each recording site. When the receptive ﬁelds of
both FEF and V4 recording sites were overlapped, neuronal coherence at the gamma
frequency band (40–60 Hz) between the FEF and V4 was signiﬁcantly increased.
By contrast, the coherence was not modulated when the two receptive ﬁelds were
not overlapped. The results are in fact consistent with the human EEG study
that demonstrated occipital-frontal gamma-band coherence (Doesburg et al. 2008).
Gregoriou and colleagues also examined the direction of inﬂuence between the FEF
and V4 as a function of time by using Granger causality analysis. Granger causality
analysis calculates time-lagged correlations, and it therefore provides the direction
of inﬂuence from one time series to another. They found that the Granger causality
from the FEF to V4 was signiﬁcantly modulated by visual attention at 110 ms after
the onset of the visual stimulus, whereas Granger causality from V4 to the FEF was
modulated at 160 ms after the onset of the visual stimulus. The results suggest that
attentional effects on top-down inﬂuence precede bottom-up inﬂuence. In summary,
the PFC, in particular the FEF, is a major source of top-down signals that enhance
the processing of relevant information at hand. Prefrontal inﬂuence followed by
bottom-up inﬂuence at a gamma band frequency establishes the prefrontal-visual
interactions.
16.4
Conclusion
In this chapter, I ﬁrst showed that the primate brain is characterized by a consider-
ably large volume of the PFC and overviewed the commonality and difference of
prefrontal anatomical architecture among human and nonhuman primates. Those
studies indicate that the human PFC is not qualitatively different but rather is
quantitatively different from that of other primate species, which suggests that
the human PFC would have the capacity to address more complex information
compared to other primates, and the study of other primate species will contribute
to the understanding of human cognition. In fact, as I discussed in the second part,
human and primate experiments are successfully integrated to understand the neural
mechanisms of visual attention. However, to understand cognitive processes unique
to humans, we need to study the cognitive processes that involve the brain areas
unique to humans, such as area 10 and area 44.

16
Prefrontal Anatomical Architecture and Top-Down Behavioral Control...
381
References
Allman JM, Tetreault NA, Hakeem AY, Manaye KF, Semendeferi K, Erwin JM, Park S, Goubert
V, Hof PR (2010) The von Economo neurons in frontoinsular and anterior cingulate cortex in
great apes and humans. Brain Struct Funct 214:495–517
Amunts K, Schleicher A, Bürgel U, Mohlberg H, Uylings HB, Zilles K (1999) Broca’s region
revisited: cytoarchitecture and intersubject variability. J Comp Neurol 412:319–341
American Psychiatric Association (2013) Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders
(DSM-5
®). American Psychiatric Association, Washington, DC
Baddeley AD, Hitch GJ, et al (1974) Working memory. Psychol Learn Motiv 8:47–89
Badre D, D’Esposito M (2007) Functional magnetic resonance imaging evidence for a hierarchical
organization of the prefrontal cortex. J Cogn Neurosci 19:2082–2099
Betz W (1881) Ueber die feinere Structur der Gehirnrinde des Menschen. Zentralbl Med Wiss
19:193–195
Botvinick MM (2008) Hierarchical models of behavior and prefrontal function. Trends Cogn Sci
12:201–208
Brodmann K (1909) Vergleichende Lokalisationslehre der Groshirnrinde. Barth, Leipzig
Burgess PW, Gilbert SJ, Dumontheil I (2007) Function and localization within rostral prefrontal
cortex (area 10). Philos Trans R Soc B Biol Sci 362:887–899
Burman KJ, Rosa MG (2009) Architectural subdivisions of medial and orbital frontal cortices in
the marmoset monkey (Callithrix jacchus). J Comp Neurol 514:11–29
Burman KJ, Palmer SM, Gamberini M, Rosa MG (2006) Cytoarchitectonic subdivisions of the
dorsolateral frontal cortex of the marmoset monkey (Callithrix jacchus), and their projections
to dorsal visual areas. J Comp Neurol 495:149–172
Butler AB, Hodos W (2005) Comparative vertebrate neuroanatomy: evolution and adaptation.
Wiley, New York
Cajal R (1904) Textura del sistema nervioso del hombre y de los vertebrados. Alicante Instituto de
Neurociencias, Madrid
Cantalupo C, Hopkins WD (2001) Asymmetric Broca’s area in great apes. Nature 414:505–505.
doi:10.1038/35107134
Cieslik EC, Zilles K, Caspers S, Roski C, Kellermann TS, Jakobs O, Langner R, Laird AR,
Fox PT, Eickhoff SB (2012) Is there “one” DLPFC in cognitive action control? Evidence for
heterogeneity from co-activation-based parcellation. Cereb Cortex 23(11):2677–2689
Corbetta M, Shulman GL (2002) Control of goal-directed and stimulus-driven attention in the
brain. Nat Rev Neurosci 3:201–215
de Almeida J, Mengod G (2008) Serotonin 1A receptors in human and monkey prefrontal cortex
are mainly expressed in pyramidal neurons and in a GABAergic interneuron subpopulation:
implications for schizophrenia and its treatment. J Neurochem 107:488–496
De Schotten MT, Dell’Acqua F, Valabregue R, Catani M (2012) Monkey to human comparative
anatomy of the frontal lobe association tracts. Cortex 48:82–96
Desimone R, Duncan J (1995) Neural mechanisms of selective visual attention. Annu Rev Neurosci
18:193–222
Doesburg SM, Roggeveen AB, Kitajo K, Ward LM (2008) Large-scale gamma-band phase
synchronization and selective attention. Cereb Cortex 1991(18):386–396
Ekstrom LB, Roelfsema PR, Arsenault JT, Bonmassar G, Vanduffel W (2008) Bottom-up
dependent gating of frontal signals in early visual cortex. Science 321:414–417
Elston GN (2003) Cortex, cognition and the cell: new insights into the pyramidal neuron and
prefrontal function. Cereb Cortex 13:1124–1138
Elston GN, Benavides-Piccione R, Elston A, Zietsch B, Defelipe J, Manger P, Casagrande V,
Kaas JH (2006) Specializations of the granular prefrontal cortex of primates: implications for
cognitive processing. Anat Rec A Discov Mol Cell Evol Biol 288:26–35
Evrard HC, Forro T, Logothetis NK (2012) Von Economo neurons in the anterior insula of the
macaque monkey. Neuron 74:482–489

382
Y. Morishima
Fleming SM, Weil RS, Nagy Z, Dolan RJ, Rees G (2010) Relating introspective accuracy to
individual differences in brain structure. Science 329:1541–1543
Frith U (1991) Autism and asperger syndrome. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge/New York
Frith CD, Frith U (2012) Mechanisms of social cognition. Annu Rev Psychol 63:287–313
Fujii N, Hihara S, Nagasaka Y, Iriki A (2009) Social state representation in prefrontal cortex. Soc
Neurosci 4:73–84
Fuster JM (1988) Prefrontal cortex. Springer, Berlin
Goldman-Rakic PS (1996) The prefrontal landscape: implications of functional architecture for
understanding human mentation and the central executive. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci
351:1445–1453
Grabenhorst F, Rolls ET (2011) Value, pleasure and choice in the ventral prefrontal cortex. Trends
Cogn Sci 15:56–67
Gregoriou GG, Gotts SJ, Zhou H, Desimone R (2009) High-frequency, long-range coupling
between prefrontal and visual cortex during attention. Science 324:1207–1210
Iacoboni M, Lieberman MD, Knowlton BJ, Molnar-Szakacs I, Moritz M, Throop CJ, Fiske
AP (2004) Watching social interactions produces dorsomedial prefrontal and medial parietal
BOLD fMRI signal increases compared to a resting baseline. Neuroimage 21:1167–1173
Kane MJ, Engle RW (2002) The role of prefrontal cortex in working-memory capacity, executive
attention, and general ﬂuid intelligence: an individual-differences perspective. Psychon Bull
Rev 9:637–671
Karaﬁn MS, Tranel D, Adolphs R (2004) Dominance attributions following damage to the
ventromedial prefrontal cortex. J Cogn Neurosci 16:1796–1804
Karim AA, Schneider M, Lotze M, Veit R, Sauseng P, Braun C, Birbaumer N (2010) The truth
about lying: inhibition of the anterior prefrontal cortex improves deceptive behavior. Cereb
Cortex 1991(20):205–213
Kastner S, Ungerleider LG (2000) Mechanisms of visual attention in the human cortex. Annu Rev
Neurosci 23:315–341
Kastner S, Pinsk MA, De Weerd P, Desimone R, Ungerleider LG (1999) Increased activity in
human visual cortex during directed attention in the absence of visual stimulation. Neuron
22:751–761
Koechlin E, Summerﬁeld C (2007) An information theoretical approach to prefrontal executive
function. Trends Cogn Sci 11:229–235
Mackey S, Petrides M (2010) Quantitative demonstration of comparable architectonic areas within
the ventromedial and lateral orbital frontal cortex in the human and the macaque monkey brains.
Eur J Neurosci 32:1940–1950
Margulies DS, Vincent JL, Kelly C, Lohmann G, Uddin LQ, Biswal BB, Villringer A, Castellanos
FX, Milham MP, Petrides M (2009) Precuneus shares intrinsic functional architecture in
humans and monkeys. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 106:20069–20074
Marois R, Ivanoff J (2005) Capacity limits of information processing in the brain. Trends Cogn Sci
9:296–305
Massimini M, Ferrarelli F, Huber R, Esser SK, Singh H, Tononi G (2005) Breakdown of cortical
effective connectivity during sleep. Science 309:2228–2232
Maunsell JH, Treue S (2006) Feature-based attention in visual cortex. Trends Neurosci 29:317–322
Miller EK, Cohen JD (2001) An integrative theory of prefrontal cortex function. Annu Rev
Neurosci 24:167–202
Moore T, Armstrong KM (2003) Selective gating of visual signals by microstimulation of frontal
cortex. Nature 421:370–373
Moran J, Desimone R (1985) Selective attention gates visual processing in the extrastriate cortex.
Science 229:782–784
Morishima Y, Akaishi R, Yamada Y, Okuda J, Toma K, Sakai K (2009) Task-speciﬁc signal
transmission from prefrontal cortex in visual selective attention. Nat Neurosci 12:85–91
Neubert F-X, Mars RB, Thomas AG, Sallet J, Rushworth MF (2014) Comparison of human ventral
frontal cortex areas for cognitive control and language with areas in monkey frontal cortex.
Neuron 81:700–713

16
Prefrontal Anatomical Architecture and Top-Down Behavioral Control...
383
Neubert F-X, Mars RB, Sallet J, Rushworth MFS (2015) Connectivity reveals relationship of brain
areas for reward-guided learning and decision making in human and monkey frontal cortex.
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 112(20):E2695–E2704
Nimchinsky EA, Vogt BA, Morrison JH, Hof PR (1995) Spindle neurons of the human anterior
cingulate cortex. J Comp Neurol 355:27–37
Nimchinsky EA, Gilissen E, Allman JM, Perl DP, Erwin JM, Hof PR (1999) A neuronal
morphologic type unique to humans and great apes. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 96:5268–5273
Öngür D, Price JL (2000) The organization of networks within the orbital and medial prefrontal
cortex of rats, monkeys and humans. Cereb Cortex 10:206–219
Passingham R (2008) What is special about the human brain? Oxford University Press,
Oxford/New York
Passingham RE, Wise SP (2012) The neurobiology of the prefrontal cortex: anatomy, evolution,
and the origin of insight. Oxford University Press, Oxford
Petrides M, Pandya DN (1999) Dorsolateral prefrontal cortex: comparative cytoarchitectonic
analysis in the human and the macaque brain and corticocortical connection patterns. Eur J
Neurosci 11:1011–1036
Petrides M, Pandya DN (2002) Comparative cytoarchitectonic analysis of the human and the
macaque ventrolateral prefrontal cortex and corticocortical connection patterns in the monkey.
Eur J Neurosci 16:291–310
Petrides M, Pandya DN (2007) Efferent association pathways from the rostral prefrontal cortex in
the macaque monkey. J Neurosci 27:11573–11586
Preuss T (1995) Do rats have prefrontal cortex? The Rose-Woolsey-Akert program reconsidered. J
Cogn Neurosci 7:1–24
Ramnani N, Owen AM (2004) Anterior prefrontal cortex: insights into function from anatomy and
neuroimaging. Nat Rev Neurosci 5:184–194
Ramnani N, Behrens TE, Johansen-Berg H, Richter MC, Pinsk MA, Andersson JL, Rudebeck
P, Ciccarelli O, Richter W, Thompson AJ, et al (2006) The evolution of prefrontal inputs to
the cortico-pontine system: diffusion imaging evidence from macaque monkeys and humans.
Cereb Cortex 16:811–818
Real LA (1991) Animal choice behavior and the evolution of cognitive architecture. Science
253:980–986
Reynolds JH, Chelazzi L (2004) Attentional modulation of visual processing. Annu Rev Neurosci
27:611–647
Rilling JK, Glasser MF, Preuss TM, Ma X, Zhao T, Hu X, Behrens TEJ (2008) The evolution of
the arcuate fasciculus revealed with comparative DTI. Nat Neurosci 11:426–428
Roth G, Dicke U (2005) Evolution of the brain and intelligence. Trends Cogn Sci 9:250–257
Rudebeck PH, Buckley MJ, Walton ME, Rushworth MF (2006) A role for the macaque anterior
cingulate gyrus in social valuation. Science 313:1310–1312
Rushworth MF, Behrens TE, Rudebeck PH, Walton ME (2007a) Contrasting roles for cingulate
and orbitofrontal cortex in decisions and social behaviour. Trends Cogn Sci 11:168–176
Rushworth MF, Buckley MJ, Behrens TE, Walton ME, Bannerman DM (2007b) Functional
organization of the medial frontal cortex. Curr Opin Neurobiol 17:220–227
Sakai K (2008) Task set and prefrontal cortex. Annu Rev Neurosci 31:219–245
Sallet J, Mars RB, Noonan MP, Andersson JL, O’Reilly JX, Jbabdi S, Croxson PL, Jenkinson M,
Miller KL, Rushworth MFS (2011) Social network size affects neural circuits in macaques.
Science 334:697–700
Santos M, Uppal N, Butti C, Wicinski B, Schmeidler J, Giannakopoulos P, Heinsen H, Schmitz C,
Hof PR (2011) von Economo neurons in autism: a stereologic study of the frontoinsular cortex
in children. Brain Res 1380:206–217
Schoenemann PT, Sheehan MJ, Glotzer LD (2005) Prefrontal white matter volume is dispropor-
tionately larger in humans than in other primates. Nat Neurosci 8:242–252. doi:10.1038/nn1394
Semendeferi K, Armstrong E, Schleicher A, Zilles K, Van Hoesen GW (2001) Prefrontal cortex in
humans and apes: a comparative study of area 10. Am J Phys Anthropol 114:224–241

384
Y. Morishima
Semendeferi K, Lu A, Schenker N, Damasio H (2002) Humans and great apes share a large frontal
cortex. Nat Neurosci 5:272–276. doi:10.1038/nn814
Sherman SM (2007) The thalamus is more than just a relay. Curr Opin Neurobiol 17:417–422
Sherwood CC, Stimpson CD, Raghanti MA, Wildman DE, Uddin M, Grossman LI, Goodman M,
Redmond JC, Bonar CJ, Erwin JM, et al (2006) Evolution of increased glia–neuron ratios in
the human frontal cortex. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 103:13606–13611
Squire RF, Noudoost B, Schafer RJ, Moore T (2013) Prefrontal contributions to visual selective
attention. Annu Rev Neurosci 36:451–466
Stanton GB, Bruce CJ, Goldberg ME (1995) Topography of projections to posterior cortical areas
from the macaque frontal eye ﬁelds. J Comp Neurol 353:291–305
Stuss DT, Knight RT (2013) Principles of frontal lobe function. Oxford University Press,
Oxford/New York
Tomita H, Ohbayashi M, Nakahara K, Hasegawa I, Miyashita Y (1999) Top-down signal from
prefrontal cortex in executive control of memory retrieval. Nature 401:699–703
Tsujimoto S, Genovesio A, Wise SP (2011) Frontal pole cortex: encoding ends at the end of the
endbrain. Trends Cogn Sci 15:169–176
Uylings HB, van Eden CG, et al (1990) Qualitative and quantitative comparison of the prefrontal
cortex in rat and in primates, including humans. Prog Brain Res 85:31–62
Uylings HB, Groenewegen HJ, Kolb B (2003) Do rats have a prefrontal cortex? Behav Brain Res
146:3–17
Van Dongen PAM (1998) Brain size in vertebrates. In: The central nervous system of vertebrates.
Springer, Berlin, pp 2099–2134
von Economo CF, Koskinas GR (1925) Die Cytoarchitektonik der Hirnrinde der erwachsenen
Menschen. Springer, Berlin
Walker AE (1940) A cytoarchitectural study of the prefrontal area of the macaque monkey. J Comp
Neurol 73:59–86
Wilczynski W (2009) Evolution of the brain in amphibians. In: Encyclopedia of neuroscience.
Springer, Berlin, pp 1301–1305

Part IV
Models and Designs

Chapter 17
Organisational Principles of Connectomes:
Changes During Evolution and Development
Roman Bauer and Marcus Kaiser
Abstract The set of neural connections in an organism is now called the con-
nectome. Using recent noninvasive techniques such as diffusion tensor imaging
and traditional invasive techniques for tract tracing has uncovered a wide range
of connectomes from Caenorhabditis elegans and Drosophila melanogaster to
cat, mouse, rat, macaque, and human. We can therefore start to look at organi-
sational changes during evolution. At the same time cell lineage information and
measurements at different time steps allow us to observe network changes during
individual, ontogenetic development. We ﬁnd that the structure of a network is
closely linked to its function, with distinct functional components ﬁrst leading
to network modules and, after the rise of further specialisation, to a hierarchical
architecture with modules at different levels of network organisation. We ﬁrst
describe concepts that are used to characterize complex networks, then move on
to brieﬂy discuss computational models for development and evolution, before
showing how network features change during the evolution and development of
brain networks. We conclude with future challenges in the ﬁeld of connectome
development and evolution.
Keywords Complex networks • Connectome • Neuronal network • Network
structure • Topology • Modelling • Development • Evolution
R. Bauer • M. Kaiser
Interdisciplinary Computing and Complex BioSystems (ICOS) research group, School of
Computing Science, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne NE1 7RU, UK
Institute of Neuroscience, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne NE1 7RU, UK
e-mail: marcus.kaiser@ncl.ac.uk
© Springer Japan KK 2017
S. Shigeno et al. (eds.), Brain Evolution by Design, Diversity and Commonality
in Animals, DOI 10.1007/978-4-431-56469-0_17
387

388
R. Bauer and M. Kaiser
17.1
Representing Brain Connectivity as a Network
The nodes of a neural network can be neurons, populations of neurons, or brain
regions, depending on the scale under examination. Synaptic connections between
such nodes can be of chemical or electrical nature. Neuronal activity is transmitted
in only one direction by chemical synapses (A–>B), whereas electrical synapses
allow for bidirectional communication (A<–>B). These networks or graphs can be
represented in an adjacency matrix (Fig. 17.1), based on which various measures
can be computed. Also, the network structure can be in weighted or binarized form,
depending on the knowledge of connection strength (e.g., the number of chemical
synapses between two neurons).
The synaptic connectivity reﬂects the structure of the neural network and
shapes its function. Also this functional aspect can be captured using the network
formalism, by establishing links between nodes that show similar activity patterns.
Such similarity could, for example, be measured in the correlation of the activity
patterns between two brain regions or two neurons. Again, the link could be a
continuous value of correlation strength, or could be binarized in that connection
weights are set to one if the corresponding correlation is above a certain threshold
and zero otherwise. Importantly, a functional connection might indicate that two
nodes are structurally connected, but it might also arise if both nodes are driven by
common input. In this chapter, we focus on the structural connectivity, that is, the
‘connectome’ (Sporns 2013).
17.2
Properties of Complex Networks
Before we describe the organisation of biological neural networks, we ﬁrst need to
describe some concepts that are used to study complex networks. We only give a
brief overview; a more complete list of network measures can be found in (Costa
et al. 2007; Rubinov and Sporns 2010; Kaiser 2011).
Fig. 17.1 Network representations of neural networks. (a) Network with four nodes and
feedforward paths (A–>C, A–>B–>C) and feedback (A–>C–>D–>A) loops. (b) Representation
in an adjacency matrix where ‘1’ represents an existing connection and ‘0’ stands for a connection
that either has not been discovered yet or which is known to be absent. (c) For visualization,
such binary matrices can be represented with black squares for existing and white squares for
nonexisting connections

17
Organisational Principles of Connectomes: Changes During Evolution...
389
17.2.1
Modularity
Networks often show topological modules, also called clusters or communities.
There is a relatively higher density of connections within modules than between
modules. This difference allows rapid ﬂow and integration of information within
densely connected modules whereas information ﬂow between modules can only
use fewer links that form a potential bottleneck for passing information.
The measure of modularity Q is a reﬂection of the segregation within a network
(Newman 2006), and serves as a tool in identifying the structural modules within.
It quantiﬁes how well a parcellation into nonoverlapping modules or communities
represents the architecture of a network. Given two parcellations into distinct
modules for the same network, the parcellation with the higher value of Q would
be preferred.
From a biological aspect, modularity is an evolutionary beneﬁcial network
property because it allows for robustness and evolvability (Hintze and Adami 2008).
Nonmodular network topologies entail strong interdependence among individual
sub-networks, and so local changes can have detrimental effects on a more global
level. It is therefore not surprising that modularity is a common feature of biological
networks.
17.2.2
Hierarchy
A pervasive property of most complex networks is a hierarchical structure among
nodes and/or modules. Usually, hierarchical networks are also modular, and the hier-
archical composition can involve different functional levels or temporal orders. For
example, a network might consist of several modules, where each module consists
of several sub-modules, which again consist of several sub-sub-modules, and so on.
A hierarchical structure has been shown to be a fundamental characteristic of many
complex systems (Ravasz and Barabási 2003).
17.2.3
Small World (SW) Property
The small world phenomenon (Milgram 1967) refers to the property that two nodes
in complex networks often are separated by much fewer edges than what one would
expect. Small-world networks can be assessed using two network features (Watts
and Strogatz 1998). First, the clustering coefﬁcient describes how well neighbours
of a node are connected where neighbours are all nodes that are directly connected
to a node. For small-world networks, this proportion of links between neighbours is
much higher than for randomly connected networks. Another more recent measure
for this local connectivity is local efﬁciency (Latora and Marchiori 2001). Second,

390
R. Bauer and M. Kaiser
the characteristic path length describes the average number of connections one has
to cross to go from one node to another node following the shortest possible path (the
one with the lowest number of connections). This measure is only slightly higher
than for a randomly organised network. Another more recent measure for this global
feature is global efﬁciency (Latora and Marchiori 2001). For a small-world network,
the clustering coefﬁcient is thus much higher while the characteristic path length is
comparable to that of a randomly connected network.
To ensure a comparable characteristic path length, small-world networks contain
‘short-cuts’ that directly link different parts of the network. Using these long-
range connections, one can quickly reach different parts of the network over few
intermediate links.
Most complex networks are also small-world networks. One main advantage of
small-world networks is that they incorporate fast communication within functional
modules (i.e., high clustering coefﬁcient), and still allow for reliable and efﬁcient
signal propagation to nodes in different modules (i.e. short minimal path length).
They also enable easier synchronisation of network activity (Masuda and Aihara
2004).
17.2.4
Scale-Freeness
Many complex networks have been shown to be scale-free or scale-invariant, a
property of how the values for the number of connections of a node, its degree, are
distributed. For randomly connected networks, the degree of a node will be close
to the average degree of all nodes in the network, which means that the degree will
be on the same characteristic scale: if the average degree is 10, all network degrees
may be in the range of 0–99. On the other hand, scale-free networks do not show a
characteristic scale: even if the average degree is 10, some nodes may have a degree
of 100, 1000, or higher, thus reaching different orders of magnitude. For scale-free
networks, the degree distribution follows the form P.k/  k, where P.k/ denotes
the probability that a node is linked to k other nodes, and  is the exponent of this
power law. The seminal work of Barabási and Albert (Barabási and Albert 1999) has
proposed an abstract model for the growth of such scale-free networks. Since then,
many artiﬁcial networks and some biological ones have been demonstrated to be
scale-free (Jeong et al. 2000). However, for structural neural networks usually only
aggregate networks with connections between brain regions rather than between
individual neurons have been reconstructed. The only organism for which the
complete neuronal network structure is known is the roundworm Caenorhabditis
elegans (White et al. 1986; Achacoso and Yamamoto 1992). However, a scale-free
distribution is not supported in this case (Amaral et al. 2000). It therefore remains
to be clariﬁed whether whole-brain structural connectomes are scale-free or not.

17
Organisational Principles of Connectomes: Changes During Evolution...
391
17.2.5
Hubs
Scale-free and also other complex networks can have ‘hubs,’ nodes that participate
in many more connections than one would expect. Because of their structural
signiﬁcance, hubs are usually also interesting from a functional point of view (Jeong
et al. 2001; Goymer 2008). Studies show that such networks are very robust against
random lesions, while being vulnerable towards removal or knockout of hubs
(Newman 2003; Warren et al. 2014). This resilience is believed to be advantageous
from an evolutionary point of view, which is in accordance with the ﬁnding that
hubs have been observed in most biological networks.
17.2.6
Rich-Club Organization
Networks with hubs often incorporate rich-club organization, a bias for hubs to
connect with one another, rather than with other nodes. It has been suggested that
evolution favours both (hubs and rich-club organization) properties because they
increase the robustness of networks to random breakdowns (McAuley et al. 2007).
Along these lines, rich-club organization supports versatile information processing,
allows for the dynamic resource allocation in a context-dependent manner and the
collaborative integration of multisensory information (Zamora-Lopez et al. 2010;
Collin et al. 2013; Senden et al. 2014).
17.3
Developmental and Evolutionary Patterns
As for other aspects of biology, it is useful to look at connectomes in terms
of their evolutionary origins and developmental trajectories. Indeed, evolutionary
mechanisms have been linked to topological network properties (Ebbesson 1980,
1984), and a number of complex network growth models have been proposed
(Barabási and Albert 1999; Ravasz and Barabási 2003; Louf et al. 2013). Such
models are usually framed on a rather abstract level, and it is ongoing work to
elucidate how certain complex network properties arise using growth mechanisms
based on local information exchange only (Sporns et al. 2004). Along these
lines, Kaiser and Hilgetag (2004a, b) and Nisbach and Kaiser (2007) propose
a local, spatial growth rule for the self-organization of network topologies with
similar clustering coefﬁcients and characteristic path lengths as for structural brain
connectivity.
Advances in computing performance have led to the generation of novel research
tools (Stanley and Miikkulainen 2002; Torben-Nielsen and De Schutter 2014;
Zubler and Douglas 2009; Koene et al. 2009), paving the way for detailed
computational models of neural network evolution (Verbancsics and Stanley 2011;

392
R. Bauer and M. Kaiser
Fig. 17.2 Neuronal network morphology after simulated development (Bauer et al. 2014). The
network is composed of differentiated neurons (grey). For better visualization, examples of neurons
are coloured in red. Synapses (black rectangles) form at appositions between axons and dendrites
Gauci and Stanley 2010) and development (Bauer et al. 2012, 2014) (Fig. 17.2).
In the future, such models will likely allow for a more extensive comparison to
biological data across different spatial scales and developmental stages.
In the following, we give a short review of connectome patterns observed across
different species and developmental stages.
One of the simplest species possessing a neural network is Cnidaria. These
animals show a diffuse two-dimensional nerve net for the polyp stage, which, in
terms of network science, is called a regular or lattice network (Fig. 17.3a). In such
networks, neighbours are well connected (high clustering coefﬁcient) but there are
no long-distance connections. We therefore do not have a small-world network yet.
Such lattice networks are an important part of neural systems such as the retina, as
well as some cortical and subcortical layered structures.
For functionally specialized circuits, however, a regular organization is unsuit-
able. The connectomes of evolutionary higher progressed species therefore have
modular topology (Kaiser 2015). Starting with the formation of sensory organs and
motor units, neurons aggregate in ganglia. Such ganglia are often not only spatially
clustered but also are modular in terms of connectivity (Fig. 17.3b). In this way,
ganglia can process one modality without interference from neurons processing
different kinds of information. A well-studied example of a modular network is the
neuronal network of C. elegans (White et al. 1986; Achacoso and Yamamoto 1992),
the ﬁrst organism in which the complete set of neural connections or ‘connectome’

17
Organisational Principles of Connectomes: Changes During Evolution...
393
Fig. 17.3 Examples of different types of neural networks (From Kaiser and Varier 2011). (a)
Regular or lattice network. (b) Modular network with two modules. (c) Hierarchical network with
two modules consisting of two sub-modules each. (d–f) Matrices represent the circular network
topologies. (g–i) Species possessing the afore detailed network architectures. (g) Polyp stage of
Hydra (phylum Cnidaria) shows a nerve net. (h) Nematode C. elegans shows a modular network.
(i) Global human neural network traced by diffusion tensor imaging
(Sporns et al. 2005) is known. In addition, the connectome of the fruit ﬂy Drosophila
melanogaster has been investigated in this respect (Cardona et al. 2010; Ito et al.
2013). Indeed, a high modularity in terms of both spatial proximity as well as
topology are observed. However, with increasing complexity of neural processing,
a single module for one modality or function is not sufﬁcient; an example is the
visual system in the rhesus monkey (macaque) where the visual module consists
of two network components: the dorsal pathway for processing object movement
and the ventral pathway for processing object features such as colour and form
(Young 1992). These networks are hierarchical, because smaller sub-modules are
nested within modules (Fig. 17.3c). A hierarchical structure has been observed

394
R. Bauer and M. Kaiser
in most modular brain connectomes (Chatterjee and Sinha 2008; Bassett et al.
2008; Felleman and van Essen 1991; Hilgetag et al. 2000). It has been argued that
hierarchical topology embeds a rich dynamic and functional repertoire based on an
economical wiring diagram (Meunier et al. 2010; Kaiser et al. 2010; Hilgetag and
Hutt 2014).
From a developmental perspective, it is notable that certain poly-sensory and
high-order association areas of cortex, which are the most complex areas in terms of
their laminar architecture, also exhibit the most complex developmental trajectories
(Shaw et al. 2008). Hence, structural and functional hierarchy is reﬂected also
developmentally during brain ontogenesis.
Although there is a trend for spatial neighbours to be in the same module, it is not
necessarily always true (da Fontoura et al. 2007). For the visual cortex in primates,
for example, the frontal eye ﬁeld is most closely linked to the topological module
related to vision while being in the frontal lobe it is spatially distant from the other
visual regions that are part of the occipital lobe.
On a smaller scale, a connectivity pattern composed of modules is the superﬁcial
patch system or daisy architecture, a patchy motive of clustered axonal projections
in the superﬁcial layers of cortex (Rockland and Lund 1983, 1982; Gilbert and
Wiesel 1983). Interestingly, this connectivity pattern has been observed in mam-
malian species except rodents (Van Hooser et al. 2006). Different hypotheses exist
for how it arises during development (Mitchison and Crick 1982; Buzas et al. 2006;
Bauer et al. 2012). On the macroscale, modularity has been shown to develop early
on during human development (van den Heuvel et al. 2014).
Modular systems (Fig. 17.4) usually have, in addition to the strong intramodular
connectivity, sparse links between modules. These intermodular connections can
Fig. 17.4 Modules. (a) Schematic hierarchical modular network with modules at two levels,
cortical regions (large circles) including columns (smaller circles) that include individual neurons.
For modules, there are more connections within the same module than to other modules. (b)
Modular organization of human corticocortical connectivity (Hagmann et al. 2008). Cortical areas
were arranged around a circle by evolutionary optimization so that highly interlinked areas were
placed close to each other. Note that nodes in the same cluster, having a high structural similarity,
also have a similar function. (c) Dendrogram of the same network using hierarchical clustering.
A dendrogram running from the root to the leaves (here, from left to right) consists of branches
connecting objects in the tree. The distance of the branching point on the x-axis is the rescaled
distance when clusters are combined

17
Organisational Principles of Connectomes: Changes During Evolution...
395
serve as shortcuts, hence rendering the average path length between any two to
be short. A short path length supports global brain functions, as the distributed
entities can efﬁciently be integrated (Sporns and Zwi 2004). Commonly, it has
been shown that many neural networks possess a small-world organization, as, for
example, C. elegans (Watts and Strogatz 1998), Drosophila (Ito et al. 2013), the
ﬁbre tract networks between brain regions in the cat (Scannell et al. 1995), the
macaque (Hilgetag and Kaiser 2004; Sporns and Zwi 2004), and human brain (He
et al. 2007; Hagmann et al. 2008). Recent work using injections of an anterograde
tracer yielded the mouse connectome at the mesoscale resolution (between single-
neuron and whole-brain imaging resolution) (Oh et al. 2014). Also in this case, a
high clustering coefﬁcient and the presence of hubs indicate small-world topology
(Sporns and Bullmore 2014). The incorporation of the small-world property across
many different species underlines its signiﬁcance in promoting efﬁcient and fast
communication between any two nodes, while keeping the total wiring length
comparably small (Karbowski 2001). However, these shortcuts come at rather high
metabolic costs, as they require the development of (spatial) long-rangeconnections.
Interestingly, (Varier and Kaiser 2011) found that in C. elegans the majority of nodes
connected via long-range connections are born around the same time. This ﬁnding
suggests that developmental trajectories could allow for the efﬁcient establishment
of neuronal connections, by forming these long-range projections early during
development, without the need for energetically expensive guidance cues. Related
to this, a recent study on the C. elegans and human connectome found that the
characteristic path length is longer than what one would expect based on the
modularity alone (Kim and Kaiser 2014). Entropy-based considerations indicate that
this discrepancy originates from evolutionary pressure towards efﬁcient encoding of
developmental processes.
Overall, in modular networks there is a multidimensional trade-off between
saving axons, communication costs, and genetic efﬁcacy. As for modularity, small-
world organization has been shown to arise early during human brain development
(van den Heuvel et al. 2014), and remain stable during brain maturation (Lim et al.
2013).
A further common hallmark of brain networks is the presence of hubs. For
mammals such as macaques, subcortical regions such as the hippocampus and
amygdala are the most highly connected nodes (Kaiser et al. 2007). The structural
centrality of these nodes goes usually hand in hand with functional signiﬁcance.
Additionally, computational studies demonstrate that networks with hubs are more
resilient towards random node removal or knockout (Kaiser et al. 2007; Newman
2003; Warren et al. 2014). It is therefore not surprising that many brain diseases
usually involve malfunction of hub brain regions (Crossley et al. 2014). Interest-
ingly, hubs are usually in the centre of the brain, forming early during development
(Hwang et al. 2012; Varier and Kaiser 2011), and presumably originating earlier
during evolution. It has been suggested that the time that is available for connection
establishment, from node formation to brain maturation, has a crucial role in the
developmentally efﬁcient establishment of hubs in vertebrates as well as in C.
elegans (Varier and Kaiser 2011).

396
R. Bauer and M. Kaiser
Interestingly, most brain networks with hubs have been shown to exhibit a rich-
club connectivity, for example, in the C. elegans (Towlson et al. 2013), cat (de
Reus and van den Heuvel 2013), macaque (Harriger et al. 2012), and human brain
(van den Heuvel and Sporns 2011). As for hubs, rich-club organization has been
shown to arise early during development (Ball et al. 2014; van den Heuvel et al.
2014). Such a developmental priority points towards this connectivity pattern to
serve as a developmental scaffold, and to confer several advantages to the network
as a whole (Collin et al. 2013; van den Heuvel et al. 2012). This central role in
the network is in accordance with pathological rich-club organization observed in
neurodevelopmental and other brain diseases (Grayson et al. 2014; Ray et al. 2014;
Daianu et al. 2013).
17.4
Conclusion
In summary, complex neural networks become less homogeneous during evolution
in line with their increasingly varied functional tasks. Neural systems in species
above a certain evolutionary stage show a modular, hierarchical and typically small-
world topology with rich-club organization. This shift in structural complexity goes
hand in hand with the (functional) specialization of the tasks that the organism
performs. This relationship between structure and function is reﬂected in evolution
(Sherwood et al. 2008; Semendeferi et al. 2011), as well as development (Hill et al.
2010). In addition to this functional perspective, certain network features emerged as
a consequence of the network topology itself: as brain networks evolved to become
more complex, there was the inherent pressure for greater resilience in the face of
injury. For example, although hubs and rich-club organization entail the formation
of additional axons, they are evolutionarily beneﬁcial as they support such improved
resilience towards lesions. Simpler, regular networks seen in primitive life forms
have a higher degree of redundancy and are therefore less sensitive (Kaiser and
Varier 2011).
Multiple studies have shown that the topology of biological neural networks
satisﬁes a nontrivial ‘ﬁtness function,’ that is, a combination of multiple natural
requirements. Aspects such as wiring economy, fast information ﬂow, richness of
dynamics, functional specialization, integrative communication, robustness, and
developmental efﬁciency (Bullmore and Sporns 2012; Kim and Kaiser 2014)
inﬂuence connectome topologies. Hence, network science serves as a way of
understanding the structure and function of neural networks in light of evolutionary
pressure. Knowledge of how such multidimensional trade-offs can be satisﬁed will
also likely help in the improved design and planning of many artiﬁcial networks.
The early (temporal) formation of many complex network properties underlines
their signiﬁcance and points to a genetically encoded blueprint. Possibly, these
initial properties support the reliable unfolding of the developmental process.
Interestingly, such characteristic network features are often disrupted in neurodevel-
opmental and neurodegenerative brain diseases, suggesting a better understanding

17
Organisational Principles of Connectomes: Changes During Evolution...
397
of the connectome to be valuable from a clinical perspective (Stam 2014; Collin and
van den Heuvel 2013). State-of-the-art computational models have been proposed
to account for many real-world network characteristics (Barabási and Albert 1999;
Ravasz and Barabási 2003). However, these models are usually phrased on a
rather abstract level, and not directly relatable to biological mechanisms. The
detailed modelling of connectome development will have a major part in the better
understanding of the connectomes themselves.
Finally, elucidating the link between topological characteristics and functional
processing (e.g., does consciousness structurally correlate with the top level of
a hierarchical neural network and where is this ‘top’ level?) remains one of the
main challenges of the ﬁeld. Because the structure and function of neural networks
are mutually inﬂuencing each other, insights into their dynamic interaction will
constitute a crucial part of this endeavour.
Acknowledgments This work was supported by the Engineering and Physical Sciences Research
Council of the United Kingdom (EP/K026992/1) as part of the Human Brain Development Project
(http://www.greenbrainproject.org). R.B. was also supported by the Medical Research Council of
the United Kingdom (MR/N015037/1).
References
Achacoso TB, Yamamoto WS (1992) AY’s neuroanatomy of C. elegans for computation. CRC
Press, Boca Raton
Amaral LAN, Scala A, Barthélémy M, Stanley HE (2000) Classes of small-world networks. Proc
Natl Acad Sci USA 97(21):11149–11152
Ball G, Aljabar P, Zebari S, Tusor N, Arichi T, Merchant N, Robinson EC, Ogundipe E, Rueckert
D, Edwards AD, Counsell SJ (2014) Rich-club organization of the newborn human brain. Proc
Natl Acad Sci USA 111(20):7456–7461. doi:10.1073/pnas.1324118111
Barabási A-L, Albert R (1999) Emergence of scaling in random networks. Science 286:509–512
Bassett DS, Bullmore E, Verchinski BA, Mattay VS, Weinberger DR, Meyer-Lindenberg A (2008)
Hierarchical organization of human cortical networks in health and schizophrenia. J Neurosci
28(37):9239–9248
Bauer R, Zubler F, Hauri A, Muir DR, Douglas RJ (2012) Developmental origin of patchy
axonal connectivity in the neocortex: a computational model. Cereb Cortex. doi:10.1093/cer-
cor/bhs327
Bauer R, Zubler F, Pﬁster S, Hauri A, Pfeiffer M, Muir DR, Douglas RJ (2014) Developmental
self-construction and -conﬁguration of functional neocortical neuronal networks. PLoS Comput
Biol 10(12):e1003994. doi:10.1371/journal.pcbi.1003994
Bullmore E, Sporns O (2012) The economy of brain network organization. Nat Rev Neurosci
13(5):336–349
Buzas P, Kovacs K, Ferecsko AS, Budd JM, Eysel UT, Kisvarday ZF (2006) Model-based
analysis of excitatory lateral connections in the visual cortex. J Comp Neurol 499(6):861–881.
doi:10.1002/cne.21134
Cardona A, Saalfeld S, Preibisch S, Schmid B, Cheng A, Pulokas J, Tomancak P, Hartenstein
V (2010) An integrated micro- and macroarchitectural analysis of the Drosophila brain by
computer-assisted serial section electron microscopy. PLoS Biol 8(10):e1000502

398
R. Bauer and M. Kaiser
Chatterjee N, Sinha S (2008) Understanding the mind of a worm: hierarchical network struc-
ture underlying nervous system function in C. elegans. Prog Brain Res 168:145–153.
doi:10.1016/S0079-6123(07)68012-1
Collin G, van den Heuvel MP (2013) The ontogeny of the human connectome: develop-
ment and dynamic changes of brain connectivity across the life span. Neuroscientist.
doi:10.1177/1073858413503712
Collin G, Sporns O, Mandl RC, van den Heuvel MP (2013) Structural and functional aspects
relating to cost and beneﬁt of rich club organization in the human cerebral cortex. Cereb Cortex.
doi:10.1093/cercor/bht064
Costa LF, Rodrigues FA, Travieso G, Villas Boas PR (2007) Characterization of complex networks:
a survey of measurements. Adv Phys 56(1):167–242
Crossley NA, Mechelli A, Scott J, Carletti F, Fox PT, McGuire P, Bullmore ET (2014) The hubs
of the human connectome are generally implicated in the anatomy of brain disorders. Brain
Journal Neurol 137(8):2382–2395. doi:10.1093/brain/awu132
da Costa Fontoura L, Kaiser M, Hilgetag CC (2007) Predicting the connectivity of primate cortical
networks from topological and spatial node properties. BMC Syst Biol 1:16
Daianu M, Dennis EL, Jahanshad N, Nir TM, Toga AW, Jack CR, Weiner MW, Thompson PM,
Initia ADN (2013) Alzheimer’s disease disrupts rich club organization in brain connectivity
networks. I S Biomed Imaging 2013:266–269
de Reus MA, van den Heuvel MP (2013) Rich club organization and intermodule com-
munication in the cat connectome. J Neurosci 33(32):12929–12939. doi:10.1523/JNEU-
ROSCI.1448-13.2013
Ebbesson SOE (1980) The parcellation theory and its relation to interspeciﬁc variability in brain
organization, evolutionary and ontogenetic development, and neuronal plasticity. Cell Tissue
Res 213:179–212
Ebbesson SOE (1984) Evolution and ontogeny of neural circuits. Behav Brain Sci 7(3):321–331
Felleman DJ, van Essen DC (1991) Distributed hierarchical processing in the primate cerebral
cortex. Cereb Cortex 1:1–47
Gauci J, Stanley KO (2010) Autonomous evolution of topographic regularities in artiﬁcial neural
networks. Neural Comput 22(7):1860–1898. doi:10.1162/neco.2010.06-09-1042
Gilbert CD, Wiesel TN (1983) Clustered intrinsic connections in cat visual cortex. J Neurosci
3(5):1116–1133
Goymer P (2008) Network biology: why do we need hubs? Nat Rev Genet 9(9):650
Grayson DS, Ray S, Carpenter S, Iyer S, Dias TG, Stevens C, Nigg JT, Fair DA (2014) Structural
and functional rich club organization of the brain in children and adults. PLoS One 9(2):e88297.
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0088297
Hagmann P, Cammoun L, Gigandet X, Meuli R, Honey CJ, Wedeen VJ, Sporns O (2008)
Mapping the structural core of human cerebral cortex. PLoS Biol 6(7):e159. doi:10.1371/jour-
nal.pbio.0060159
Harriger L, van den Heuvel MP, Sporns O (2012) Rich club organization of macaque cerebral
cortex and its role in network communication. PLoS One 7(9):e46497. doi:10.1371/jour-
nal.pone.0046497
He Y, Chen ZJ, Evans AC (2007) Small-world anatomical networks in the human brain revealed
by cortical thickness from MRI. Cereb Cortex 17(10):2407–2419. doi:10.1093/cercor/bhl149
Hilgetag CC, Hutt MT (2014) Hierarchical modular brain connectivity is a stretch for criticality.
Trends Cogn Sci 18(3):114–115. doi:10.1016/j.tics.2013.10.016
Hilgetag CC, Kaiser M (2004) Clustered organization of cortical connectivity. Neuroinformatics
2(3):353–360
Hilgetag CC, O’Neill MA, Young MP (2000) Hierarchical organization of macaque and cat cortical
sensory systems explored with a novel network processor. Philos Trans R Soc Lond Ser B
355:71–89
Hill J, Inder T, Neil J, Dierker D, Harwell J, Van Essen D (2010) Similar patterns of cortical
expansion during human development and evolution. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 107(29):13135–
13140. doi:10.1073/pnas.1001229107

17
Organisational Principles of Connectomes: Changes During Evolution...
399
Hintze A, Adami C (2008) Evolution of complex modular biological networks. PLoS Comput Biol
4(2):e23. doi:10.1371/journal.pcbi.0040023
Hwang K, Hallquist MN, Luna B (2012) The development of hub architecture in the human
functional brain network. Cereb Cortex. doi:10.1093/cercor/bhs227
Ito M, Masuda N, Shinomiya K, Endo K, Ito K (2013) Systematic analysis of neural pro-
jections reveals clonal composition of the Drosophila brain. Curr Biol 23(8):644–655.
doi:10.1016/j.cub.2013.03.015
Jeong H, Tombor B, Albert R, Oltwal ZN, Barabási A-L (2000) The large-scale organization of
metabolic networks. Nature 407:651–654
Jeong H, Mason SP, Barabási A-L, Oltvai ZN (2001) Lethality and centrality in protein networks.
Nature 411:41–42
Kaiser M (2011) A tutorial in connectome analysis: topological and spatial features of brain
networks. Neuroimage 57(3):892–907
Kaiser M (2015) Neuroanatomy: connectome connects ﬂy and Mammalian brain networks. Curr
Biol 25(10):R416–R418
Kaiser M, Hilgetag CC (2004a) Modelling the development of cortical networks. Neurocomputing
58–60:297–302
Kaiser M, Hilgetag CC (2004b) Spatial growth of real-world networks. Phys Rev E Stat Nonlinear
Soft Matter Phys 69(3):036103
Kaiser M, Varier S (2011) Evolution and development of brain networks: from Caenorhabditis
elegans to Homo sapiens. Netw Comput Neural Syst 22:143–147
Kaiser M, Martin R, Andras P, Young MP (2007) Simulation of robustness against lesions of
cortical networks. Eur J Neurosci 25(10):3185–3192. doi:10.1111/j.1460-9568.2007.05574.x
Kaiser M, Hilgetag CC, Kötter R (2010) Hierarchy and dynamics of neural networks. Front
Neuroinform 4:112. doi:10.3389/fninf.2010.00112
Karbowski J (2001) Optimal wiring principle and plateaus in the degree of separation for cortical
neurons. Phys Rev Lett 86(16):3674–3677. doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.86.3674
Kim JS, Kaiser M (2014) From Caenorhabditis elegans to the human connectome: a speciﬁc
modular organization increases metabolic, functional and developmental efﬁciency. Philos
Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 369:1653. doi:10.1098/rstb.2013.0529
Koene RA, Tijms B, van Hees P, Postma F, de Ridder A, Ramakers GJ, van Pelt J, van
Ooyen A (2009) NETMORPH: a framework for the stochastic generation of large scale
neuronal networks with realistic neuron morphologies. Neuroinformatics 7(3):195–210.
doi:10.1007/s12021-009-9052-3
Latora V, Marchiori M (2001) Efﬁcient behavior of small-world networks. Phys Rev Lett
87:198701
Lim S, Han CE, Uhlhaas PJ, Kaiser M (2013) Preferential detachment during human brain
development: age- and sex-speciﬁc structural connectivity in diffusion tensor imaging (DTI).
Cereb Cortex Adv Online. doi:10.1093/cercor/bht333
Louf R, Jensen P, Barthelemy M (2013) Emergence of hierarchy in cost-driven growth of spatial
networks. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. doi:10.1073/pnas.1222441110
Masuda N, Aihara K (2004) Global and local synchrony of coupled neurons in small-world
networks. Biol Cybern 90(4):302–309. doi:10.1007/s00422-004-0471-9
McAuley JJ, Costa LDF, Caetano TS (2007) Rich-club phenomenon across complex network
hierarchies. Appl Phys Lett 91(8). doi:10.1063/1.27723951
Meunier D, Lambiotte R, Bullmore ET (2010) Modular and hierarchically modular organization
of brain networks. Front Neurosci 4:200. doi:10.3389/fnins.2010.00200
Milgram S (1967) The small-world problem. Psychol Today 1:60–67
Mitchison G, Crick F (1982) Long axons within the striate cortex: their distribution, orientation,
and patterns of connection. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 79(11):3661–3665
Newman MEJ (2003) The structure and function of complex networks. SIAM Rev 45(2):167–256
Newman ME (2006) Modularity and community structure in networks. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
103(23):8577–8582. doi:10.1073/pnas.0601602103

400
R. Bauer and M. Kaiser
Nisbach F, Kaiser M (2007) Developmental time windows for spatial growth generate multiple-
cluster small-world networks. Eur Phys J B 58(2):185–191
Oh SW, Harris JA, Ng L, Winslow B, Cain N, Mihalas S, Wang Q, Lau C, Kuan L, Henry
AM, Mortrud MT, Ouellette B, Nguyen TN, Sorensen SA, Slaughterbeck CR, Wakeman W,
Li Y, Feng D, Ho A, Nicholas E, Hirokawa KE, Bohn P, Joines KM, Peng H, Hawrylycz MJ,
Phillips JW, Hohmann JG, Wohnoutka P, Gerfen CR, Koch C, Bernard A, Dang C, Jones AR,
Zeng H (2014) A mesoscale connectome of the mouse brain. Nature 508(7495):207–214.
doi:10.1038/nature13186
Ravasz E, Barabási A-L (2003) Hierarchical organization in complex networks. Phys Rev E
67:026112
Ray S, Miller M, Karalunas S, Robertson C, Grayson DS, Cary RP, Hawkey E, Painter JG, Kriz D,
Fombonne E, Nigg JT, Fair DA (2014) Structural and functional connectivity of the human
brain in autism spectrum disorders and attention-deﬁcit/hyperactivity disorder: a rich club-
organization study. Hum Brain Mapp 35(12):6032–6048. doi:10.1002/hbm.22603
Rockland KS, Lund JS (1982) Widespread periodic intrinsic connections in the tree shrew visual
cortex. Science 215(4539):1532–1534
Rockland KS, Lund JS (1983) Intrinsic laminar lattice connections in primate visual cortex. J
Comp Neurol 216(3):303–318. doi:10.1002/cne.902160307
Rubinov M, Sporns O (2010) Complex network measures of brain connectivity: uses
and
interpretations.
Neuroimage
52(3):1059–1069.
doi:S1053-8119(09)01074-X
[pii]
10.1016/j.neuroimage.2009.10.003
Scannell JW, Blakemore C, Young MP (1995) Analysis of connectivity in the cat cerebral cortex.
J Neurosci 15(2):1463–1483
Semendeferi K, Teffer K, Buxhoeveden DP, Park MS, Bludau S, Amunts K, Travis K, Buckwalter
J (2011) Spatial organization of neurons in the frontal pole sets humans apart from great apes.
Cereb Cortex 21(7):1485–1497. doi:10.1093/cercor/bhq191
Senden M, Deco G, de Reus MA, Goebel R, van den Heuvel MP (2014) Rich club organiza-
tion supports a diverse set of functional network conﬁgurations. NeuroImage 96:174–182.
doi:10.1016/j.neuroimage.2014.03.066
Shaw P, Kabani NJ, Lerch JP, Eckstrand K, Lenroot R, Gogtay N, Greenstein D, Clasen L, Evans A,
Rapoport JL (2008) Neurodevelopmental trajectories of the human cerebral cortex. J Neurosci
28(14):3586–3594
Sherwood
CC,
Subiaul
F,
Zawidzki
TW
(2008)
A
natural
history
of
the
human
mind: tracing evolutionary changes in brain and cognition. J Anat 212(4):426–454.
doi:10.1111/j.1469-7580.2008.00868.x
Sporns
O
(2013)
The
human
connectome:
origins
and
challenges.
Neuroimage.
doi:10.1016/j.neuroimage.2013.03.023
Sporns O, Bullmore ET (2014) From connections to function: the mouse brain connectome atlas.
Cell 157(4):773–775. doi:10.1016/j.cell.2014.04.023
Sporns O, Zwi JD (2004) The small world of the cerebral cortex. Neuroinformatics 2(2):145–162.
doi:10.1385/NI:2:2:145
Sporns O, Chialvo DR, Kaiser M, Hilgetag CC (2004) Organization, development and function of
complex brain networks. Trends Cogn Sci 8(9):418–425
Sporns O, Tononi G, Kötter R (2005) The human connectome: a structural description of the human
brain. PLoS Comput Biol 1(4):e42. doi:10.1371/journal.pcbi.0010042
Stam CJ (2014) Modern network science of neurological disorders. Nat Rev Neurosci 15(10):683–
695. doi:10.1038/nrn3801
Stanley KO, Miikkulainen R (2002) Evolving neural networks through augmenting topologies.
Evol Comput 10(2):99–127. doi:10.1162/106365602320169811
Torben-Nielsen B, De Schutter E (2014) Context-aware modeling of neuronal morphologies. Front
Neuroanat 8:92. doi:10.3389/fnana.2014.00092
Towlson EK, Vertes PE, Ahnert SE, Schafer WR, Bullmore ET (2013) The rich club of
the C. elegans neuronal connectome. J Neurosci 33(15):6380–6387. doi:10.1523/JNEU-
ROSCI.3784-12.2013

17
Organisational Principles of Connectomes: Changes During Evolution...
401
van den Heuvel MP, Sporns O (2011) Rich-club organization of the human connectome. J Neurosci
31(44):15775–15786. doi:10.1523/jneurosci.3539-11.2011
van den Heuvel MP, Kahn RS, Goni J, Sporns O (2012) High-cost, high-capacity back-
bone for global brain communication. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 109(28):11372–11377.
doi:10.1073/pnas.1203593109
van den Heuvel MP, Kersbergen KJ, de Reus MA, Keunen K, Kahn RS, Groenendaal F, de Vries
LS, Benders MJ (2014) The neonatal connectome during preterm brain development. Cereb
Cortex. doi:10.1093/cercor/bhu095
Van Hooser SD, Heimel JA, Chung S, Nelson SB (2006) Lack of patchy horizontal connectivity
in primary visual cortex of a mammal without orientation maps. J Neurosci 26(29):7680–7692.
doi:10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0108-06.2006
Varier S, Kaiser M (2011) Neural development features: spatio-temporal development of the
Caenorhabditis elegans neuronal network. PLoS Comput Biol 7:e1001044. doi:10.1371/jour-
nal.pcbi.1001044
Verbancsics P, Stanley KO (2011) Constraining connectivity to encourage modularity in hyper-
NEAT. Gecco-2011: proceedings of the 13th annual genetic and evolutionary computation
conference, pp 1483–1490
Warren DE, Power JD, Bruss J, Denburg NL, Waldron EJ, Sun H, Petersen SE, Tranel D (2014)
Network measures predict neuropsychological outcome after brain injury. Proc Natl Acad Sci
USA 111(39):14247–14252. doi:10.1073/pnas.1322173111
Watts DJ, Strogatz SH (1998) Collective dynamics of ‘small-world’ networks. Nature 393:440–442
White JG, Southgate E, Thomson JN, Brenner S (1986) The structure of the nervous system of the
nematode Caenorhabditis elegans. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 314(1165):1–340
Young MP (1992) Objective analysis of the topological organization of the primate cortical visual
system. Nature 358(6382):152–155
Zamora-Lopez G, Zhou C, Kurths J (2010) Cortical hubs form a module for multisen-
sory integration on top of the hierarchy of cortical networks. Front Neuroinform 4:1.
doi:10.3389/neuro.11.001.2010
Zubler F, Douglas R (2009) A framework for modeling the growth and development of neurons
and networks. Front Comput Neurosci 3:25. doi:10.3389/neuro.10.025.2009

Chapter 18
Muscular-Hydrostat Computers: Physical
Reservoir Computing for Octopus-Inspired Soft
Robots
Kohei Nakajima
Abstract The octopus has been one of the major sources of inspiration for
roboticists for many years. It can harness its complex body dynamics in a highly
sophisticated manner despite the fact that its body does not contain any rigid
components through the interaction between the characteristic organization of its
nervous system and its speciﬁc body morphology and muscle characteristics, called
muscular-hydrostats. Inspired by these biological ﬁndings, we investigated the
potential information processing capacity of its soft body dynamics with the help
of a machine learning approach called reservoir computing. We review a series of
concepts and platforms, called muscular-hydrostat computers throughout our study
and suggest that the diverse body dynamics of soft materials can be exploited as a
computational resource. This approach could enable some controls to be embedded
into the robot body.
Keywords Reservoir computing • Natural computing • Soft robotics • Bio-
inspired robotics • Octopus • Soft materials • Embodiment
18.1
Introduction and Outlooks
Inspired by the soft material ubiquitous in all living creature’s body structures, a new
family of robots has been constructed with the aim of incorporating ﬂexible body
elements. The resulting machines, called soft robots (Trivedi et al. 2008; Kim et al.
2013), have signiﬁcant advantages over traditionally articulated robots in terms of
morphological deformability and interactional safety. These robots are able to adapt
their morphology to unstructured environments and can manipulate fragile objects
without damaging them, making them especially attractive for interactions with
humans. Speciﬁc possibilities include care for the elderly, prosthetics, and wearable
K. Nakajima
The Hakubi Center for Advanced Research & Graduate School of Informatics, Kyoto University,
Yoshida Honmachi, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto, 606-8501, Japan
JST PRESTO, 4-1-8 Honcho, Kawaguchi, Saitama, 332-0012, Japan
e-mail: k_nakajima@acs.i.kyoto-u.ac.jp
© Springer Japan KK 2017
S. Shigeno et al. (eds.), Brain Evolution by Design, Diversity and Commonality
in Animals, DOI 10.1007/978-4-431-56469-0_18
403

404
K. Nakajima
technology (Pfeifer et al. 2012). Soft robots can generate diverse behaviours with
simple types of actuation by partially outsourcing control to the morphological
and material properties of their soft bodies (Shepherd et al. 2011), which is made
possible by the tight coupling between control, body, and the environment (Pfeifer
et al. 2007; Pfeifer and Bongard 2006; Nakajima et al. 2012a). Furthermore,
production costs for these types of robots are relatively low. Thus, they can be easily
incorporated into a wide range of machines and technology with various purposes
(Morin et al. 2012).
Concomitant with these beneﬁts is a great challenge in controlling their body
dynamics. In general, soft body dynamics exhibit multifold properties, such as high
dimensionality, nonlinearity, and a certain amount of “sluggishness” as a result of
their elastic nature (Nakajima et al. 2015a, 2012b, 2011). In addition, they have
higher levels of freedom of movement than traditional robots, often with greater
degrees of freedom than the number of actuators (i.e., under-actuated systems),
making them notoriously difﬁcult to control.
Here, we aim to reverse this scenario and view it in a positive light. We claim that
it is these same nonlinear and elastic body dynamics that make soft robots feasible
and simple to control. In nature, some animals have soft bodies and control them in a
sophisticated manner by capitalizing on their body dynamics. The octopus serves as
a prime example (Hochner 2012). It does not have any rigid components in its body,
which can move with virtually inﬁnite degrees of freedom. One of the characteristic
structures observed in the octopus arm is the muscular-hydrostat (Smith and Kier
1989; Kier and Smith 1985; Taylor and Kier 2003; Feinstein et al. 2011; Li et al.
2012a). In such structures, the volume of the organ remains constant during all
movements, enabling the muscles themselves to perform all of the functions usually
performed by the skeleton. By developing a series of platforms called muscular-
hydrostat computers, inspired by the octopus, we have demonstrated that these body
dynamics can be positively exploited as a computational resource. For example, we
have shown that their muscular organization provides sufﬁcient nonlinearity and
elasticity that it can be used to embed multiple control programs. In this paper, we
aim to review bio-inspirations and our series of proposed platforms. We begin by
discussing the inspiration stemming from octopus movement and then introduce the
physical reservoir computing approach.
18.2
Octopus Inspirations: Embodiment,
Muscular-Hydrostats, and Embedded Motor Programs
Biological systems have certain morphologies and material characteristics that
improve their adaptivity and increase their probability of survival. In nature, these
body structures and organizations evolve based on the animal’s ecological niche,
suggesting that the mechanism controlling animal behaviour is not only located in its
brain, but that there is a tight coupling between the brain, body, and its environment,
an idea that is usually termed embodiment (Pfeifer et al. 2007; Pfeifer and Bongard

18
Muscular-Hydrostat Computers
405
2006). An octopus has hyper-redundant limbs with a virtually unlimited number
of degrees of freedom; its movements are known to be highly sophisticated. Its
speciﬁc body structure is specialized to permit survival in a complicated underwater
environment (Hochner 2012). From a conventional control perspective, the octopus’
method of controlling its movement and harnessing its nonlinear body dynamics is
outstanding and instructive. In this context, the octopus has been a good source of
inspiration for designing a control strategy for soft robots (Trivedi et al. 2008; Kim
et al. 2013).
One of the most characteristic body structures observed in the octopus is its
muscular organization, called muscular-hydrostats (Smith and Kier 1989; Kier and
Smith 1985; Taylor and Kier 2003; Feinstein et al. 2011; Li et al. 2012a). It acts to
keep the volume of the organ constant during all movements, so that if the diameter
of the muscular-hydrostats decreases, then its length increases, and vice versa. For
example, in the octopus arm, muscles are organized into transverse, longitudinal,
and obliquely oriented groups, which form the muscular-hydrostatic structure. Such
ﬂexible structures show major advantages over articulated arms that have a rigid
skeleton and joints. Accordingly, in robotics, there have been several attempts to
characterize the role of the muscular-hydrostat system in terms of its anatomical
structure and morphology.
The nervous system of the octopus is characteristically highly distributed
throughout the entire body. It has a relatively small central nervous system (CNS),
which controls the large peripheral nervous system (PNS) of the arms. The CNS
integrates information from the visual system, and then issues commands to the
lower motor centres that control the elaborate neuromuscular system of the arms. A
typical example showing the effectiveness of this nervous system distribution is the
animal’s reaching behaviour. Reaching behaviour consists of a bend propagation
along the arm toward the tip in a highly stereotypical and invariant way. Sumbre
et al. showed that the arm extensions can be evoked in arms whose connection with
the brain has been severed (Sumbre et al. 2001). Because the evoked motions in
denervated octopus arms were qualitatively and kinematically identical to natural
bend propagations, an underlying motor program appears to be embedded in the
neuromuscularsystem of the arm, which does not require continuous central control.
Based on these biological ﬁndings, we have been exploring a novel view of the
property of the muscular-hydrostat system combined with the PNS in terms of its
functionality. In this chapter, we introduce a series of platforms based on a machine
learning technique called reservoir computing.
18.3
Physical Reservoir Computing
Reservoir computing has been proposed as a framework to train recurrent neural
networks (Jaeger and Haas 2004; Maass et al. 2002; Verstraeten et al. 2007). In this
framework, low-dimensional inputs are mapped to a high-dimensional nonlinear
dynamical system, typically referred to as a reservoir, and the corresponding outputs

406
K. Nakajima
reservoir
input
output
Adjusting the readout weights
Fig. 18.1 Information processing in the reservoir computing scheme. Low-dimensional inputs
are injected to a high-dimensional dynamic system called a reservoir. Outputs are calculated as
a weighted sum of the states of the reservoir nodes. Network training only requires the adjustment
of the linear readout weights
are expressed as weighted sums of the reservoir states (Fig. 18.1). To possess a
computational capability, a reservoir should have both input separability and fading
memory. Input separability is usually achieved through a mapping of the low-
dimensional input to a high-dimensional state space. Fading memory is a property
of a system that retains the inﬂuence of a recent input sequence within the system
and permits the integration of stimulus information over time, enabling reproducible
computation for which the recent history of the signal is signiﬁcant. A remarkable
property of the approach is that if the reservoir involves enough nonlinearity and
memory, it can be shown that it is sufﬁcient to add a simple linear and static
readout from the high-dimensional state space to emulate nonlinear and complex
computations (Fig. 18.1). The approach is extensively studied in neuroscience
(Sussillo and Abbott 2009), and many applications can be found in the latest robotic
applications (Li et al. 2013a, 2012b,c, 2013b; Kuwabara et al. 2012).
Because of its generic nature, reservoir computing is not limited to digital
simulations of neural networks. Any high-dimensional dynamic system can serve
as a reservoir if it has the appropriate properties. More speciﬁcally, if the reservoir
consists of a physical system, we term the approach physical reservoir computing
(e.g., see summary on robotics-related implementations in Hauser et al. 2014). A
number of physical implementations for reservoirs have been proposed, such as the
surface of water (Fernando and Sojakka 2003), and nonlinear mass spring systems
(Hauser et al. 2011). More recently, electronic and optical implementations have
also been reported (Appeltant et al. 2011; Woods and Naughton 2012).
In this chapter, we introduce a series of platforms that exploit the dynamics
of soft structures as a reservoir. The ﬁrst platform is a dynamic model of a
muscular-hydrostat system that is inspired by the muscle organization of the octopus
(Nakajima et al. 2013a). The second is a dynamic model of an entire octopus arm
equipped with a muscular-hydrostat system (Nakajima et al. 2013b). It has been
shown that this model can also be used as a model for certain soft robotic arms

18
Muscular-Hydrostat Computers
407
by tuning its mechanical parameters (Zheng et al. 2012). The ﬁnal platform is a soft
robotic arm made of silicone (Nakajima et al. 2014, 2015b, 2013c). In each platform,
we demonstrate that the body dynamics of the system can be used as a successful
reservoir; this means that, by simply attaching a static linear readout from the high-
dimensional nonlinear dynamics, one can emulate complex nonlinear computations
without altering the physical system itself. That is, we employ the physical body as
part of a computational device. We call this series of platforms muscular-hydrostat
computers (Nakajima et al. 2013d), and introduce them in the next section.
18.4
Muscular-Hydrostat Computers
In this section, we brieﬂy introduce our physical reservoir computing platforms,
called muscular-hydrostat computers. Note that the term “muscular-hydrostat” is
not used in a strict sense, because the soft silicone arm that we introduce later does
not have any muscular-hydrostat properties. However, we use this term because our
arm shares the same operational characteristics as the octopus’ arm.
18.4.1
Muscular-Hydrostat System
Several models emulating the muscular-hydrostat system of the octopus have been
proposed (e.g., see Yekutieli et al. 2005a,b; Kang et al. 2012). The model used in
this study is originally proposed in Kang et al. (2012). The overall structure of our
muscular-hydrostat system is shown in Fig. 18.2a. We use a mass-spring-damper
system in the shape of a truncated cone, consisting of a base plane, a ceiling plane
composed of four transverse springs, a central strut, and four longitudinal springs,
which emulate the anatomical structure of the muscle alignment in an actual octopus
arm. The longitudinal springs control the position and orientation of the ceiling
plane, while the transverse springs control the radius of the ceiling plane. The system
has an isovolumetric structure, which provides forces constantly striving to maintain
the arm volume, a property of the muscular-hydrostats. Thus, all the springs are
assumed to be implicitly or explicitly coupled with each other. The values for all
model parameters (e.g., spring coefﬁcients, damping) are either inspired by the
octopus or directly drawn from biological data. Because of these parameters, the
overall model dynamics are highly nonlinear, even though the springs used in the
model are linear.
By providing inputs as forces on the springs and adjusting the linear readout
weights using the spring length dynamics as reservoir states, we demonstrate that
the system can be directly used to accomplish complex nonlinear computations
(Nakajima et al. 2013a). Together with the physical reservoir computing approach,
the core concept of our technique was the introduction of different time scales
between I/O signals and the system movement. In real-world applications, the

408
K. Nakajima
T
L
L: longitudinal muscle
T: transverse muscle
transverse 
spring
Input 
Output 
longitudinal 
springs
Win
Wout
Board 
Bend 
sensor
Platform 
Silicone-based 
soft robotic arm 
C
longitudinal
spring
compartment
arm base
arm tip
transverse
spring
y
z
x
Octopus arm model
B
A
Fig. 18.2 A series of physical reservoir computing platforms called muscular-hydrostat comput-
ers. (a) Exploiting the muscular-hydrostat system as a computational resource, the mass-spring
damper system emulates the muscle conﬁguration of the octopus arm and the property of muscular-
hydrostats, which maintain a constant system volume. Forces are provided as inputs to the springs
and the corresponding dynamics of the transverse and longitudinal springs serve as a reservoir.
By introducing a different time scale between I/O relations and the muscular-hydrostat system, we
demonstrate that the system has sufﬁcient computational capacity to emulate nonlinear dynamical
systems. (b) A dynamic model of the octopus arm. The arm consists of 20 compartments, which
are equipped with muscular-hydrostat systems (Fig. 18.2a). The mechanical parameters of the
system are drawn from bio-inspirations. By controlling the base rotation of the model as inputs,
the resulting passive dynamics of the springs are exploited as a reservoir. This system can be used
to emulate nonlinear dynamical systems and embed robust closed-loop control. (c) The silicone-
based soft robotic arm. The arm encloses 10 bend sensors, which monitor local bends during each
time step. It is actuated at the base point and is able to rotate. It has been shown that the body
dynamics (sensory time series) can be used as a successful reservoir. The behaviour of the arm
successfully emulates functions that require memory and embeds a robust closed-loop control
assumption of this time scale difference is rather natural, usually caused by the
sampling rate of the hardware device compared to the continuous physical dynamics
of the robots. We have shown that this system can emulate desired nonlinear
dynamical systems and reported that the system demonstrates a characteristic short-
term memory proﬁle. One possible application of this technique would be to embed

18
Muscular-Hydrostat Computers
409
a local control and outsource the computational load to the body part in order to
make an external controller more efﬁcient.
18.4.2
Dynamic Model of the Octopus Arm
The next platform we create is a 3D dynamic model inspired by the octopus arm.
The overall structure of the entire arm is shown in Fig. 18.2b (Kang et al. 2012).
The arm consists of 20 compartments; each compartment implements the same
muscular-hydrostats construction explained in the previous section. It is assumed
that the arm is to be immersed in an underwater environment in which water friction
constants are approximated by computational ﬂuid dynamics simulations (Kang
et al. 2011; Kazakidi et al. 2012). As a result, the arm has highly nonlinear body
dynamics when actuated.
By using this platform, we demonstrate that the body dynamics of the arm
can be exploited as a computational resource: ﬁrst, to emulate complex nonlinear
dynamical systems; and second, to implement closed-loop control (Nakajima et al.
2013b). Usually, closed-loop control in robots is realized through a sensory-motor
loop, where controllers take sensory values and calculate the corresponding motor
commands. In our experimental setting, an external controller is absent, and the
body dynamics themselves are exploited to control the next motion, meaning that
the controller and the body part it is controlling are the same. We used several
nonlinear limit cycles to see how they can be embedded directly into the soft robotic
arm without any support for nonlinearity and memory from an external controller.
For roboticists, our method will offer one way to quantitatively characterize which
controls are efﬁcient for a variety of body designs. In addition, it will also help
outsourcing the control load to the body parts. In addition, through the emulation
of nonlinear dynamical systems, we showed that each body part has a speciﬁc role
according to its task type. These obvious and speciﬁc coherencies suggest that these
properties originate from the intrinsic body structure.
18.4.3
Soft Robotic Arm Made of Silicone Materials
It is important to demonstrate whether the techniques illustrated in these models can
actually work in a real physical platform. We have developed a simple but powerful
physical platform implemented with silicone material (Fig. 18.2c) (Nakajima et al.
2014, 2015b, 2013c). The platform consists of a soft silicone arm, its sensing and
actuation systems, data processing via a PC, and a water tank containing fresh water
as an underwater environment. Note that in a precise sense, the silicone arm does not
emulate the simulated octopus arm, which was introduced in the previous section.
However, they share a similar operational property in terms of morphology and
density. The arm has 10 embedded bend sensors within the silicone material. The

410
K. Nakajima
base of the arm can rotate left and right through the actuation of a servo motor.
Our system has one active degree of freedom, but there is a much higher number
of passive degrees of freedom in the silicone arm. By rotating the base of the arm
and generating body dynamics induced by the interaction between the underwater
environment and the soft silicone material, we showed that the sensory time series
reﬂecting body dynamics can be exploited as a part of a computational device. It
could be used to emulate nonlinear dynamic systems and functions that require
memory by embedding robust closed-loop control into the arm. The soft silicone
arm presented here only partially mimics the properties, such as morphology, and
the material of a real octopus arm. We expect that the real octopus arm has a greater
computational capacity than the one we present here because of its diverse and
dynamic nature.
18.5
Discussion and Future Directions
Many biological systems have soft bodies, which are able to adapt and behave
effectively in their given ecological niche. The framework presented in this study
may also shed light on the role of the body in biological systems. In this context,
it would be interesting to investigate whether the soft arm could be used to
embed more biologically plausible behaviours in future work. For example, as
we mentioned earlier, it is well known that the octopus adopts a speciﬁc strategy
for reaching, called bend propagation (Fig. 18.3a). In this speciﬁc motion, it is
suggested that the CNS only initiates the motion and the muscle activations
themselves are handled at the PNS level (Li et al. 2012a). Several researchers have
investigated this behaviour by directly extracting the muscle contraction patterns
from the real octopus and externally applying these patterns to the octopus arm
models. The technique presented here may yield further insights into the overall
scheme by including the role of the arm’s body dynamics. Because the PNS does
not have plasticity, it would be worth investigating how the arm’s body dynamics,
together with the PNS, modelled as a linear and static feedback loop in the arm,
embeds the motor patterns of bend propagation according to the initiation command
sent by the CNS (Fig. 18.3b, c). This line of experimentation can be investigated in
future work.
In this study, we have introduced a series of platforms that exploit body dynamics
as a computational resource. The technique can be potentially applied to a wide
class of soft robots because the main component required is the soft body itself,
which is already present in the soft robotic platform. For example, the model can be
used to produce nonlinear limit cycles, which enable locomotion in robots. These
systems can be embedded into the body in a closed-loop manner without additional
nonlinearity and memory support from an external controller. Recently, this line of
study has been initiated with the use of physical platforms (e.g., Caluwaerts et al.
2014; Zhao et al. 2013). Consequently, different types of robot morphology, which
increases the computational capacity of the body, should be explored in the future.

18
Muscular-Hydrostat Computers
411
fixed base
Input
compartment 1
spring1
spring2
spring3
spring4
transverse spring
bend 
propagation
Embedding motor program
Bend propagation
CNS
PNS
A
2
1
3
4
Input 
20
…
…
compartment 
output1
output2
output3
output20
…
readout
C
B
Fig. 18.3 Illustration of the scheme used to embed a motor program for the bend propagation
using a physical reservoir computing approach. (a) Reaching behaviour of the octopus is based on
stereotypical motion called bend propagation. The CNS only initiates the behaviour and does not
handle the sequence of muscle controls, while the octopus arm together with the PNS controls the
movement. (b) Schematics illustrating how to embed the bend propagation into the modelled arm.
Bend propagation is achieved by contracting the springs of the compartments in a speciﬁc order
from the base to the tip. (c) Information processing scheme used to embed the bend propagation
using a physical reservoir computing approach. By exploiting the body dynamics of the modelled
arm as a reservoir, it regulates the timing and strength of the local muscle contractions. The speed
and degree of the bend propagation can be controlled by the initiation signal sent from the CNS as
an input
In particular, recent advancements in biomaterial science suggest that numerous
functionalities can be outsourced to the body materials. The way in which different
types of materials regulate the computational capacity, from a reservoir computing
point of view, is worth exploring. In addition, developments in new types of sensors,
which can effectively monitor body dynamics, would make our technique applicable
to further applications. Furthermore, with a novel technique that could be used to
implement linear readouts as a device, it would be possible to control spatially
distant points of the body through the use of body dynamics actuated on more
local body parts. This approach would be especially useful when the actuation
points are limited by the platform’s physical constraints. To conclude, we believe
that our approach will contribute to the use of soft materials in various engineering
applications in multiple ﬁelds.

412
K. Nakajima
Acknowledgements The author expresses his gratitude towards all members of the ailab for the
CSC discussions throughout his time in Zurich, Dr. Tao Li for engineering support during the
OCTOPUS project, Dr. Helmut Hauser for his helpful suggestions, and Prof. Rolf Pfeifer for all
the opportunities and valuable experiences. This work was supported by the European Commission
in the ICT-FET OCTOPUS Integrating Project (EU project FP7-231608), the JSPS Postdoctoral
Fellowships for Research Abroad, and the JST PRESTO program, KAKENHI No. 15K16076 and
No. 26880010.
References
Appeltant L, Soriano MC, der Sande GV, Danckaert J, Massar S, Dambre J, Schrauwen B, Mirasso
CR, Fischer I (2011) Information processing using a single dynamical node as complex system.
Nat Commun 2:468
Caluwaerts K, Despraz J, Iscen A, Sabelhaus AP, Bruce J, Schrauwen B, SanSpiral V (2014)
Design and control of compliant tensegrity robots through simulations and hardware validation.
J R Soc Interface 11:20140520
Feinstein N, Nesher N, Hochner B (2011) Functional morphology of the neuromuscular system of
the Octopus vulgaris arm. Vie Milieu 61(4):219–229
Fernando C, Sojakka S (2003) Pattern recognition in a bucket. Lecture notes in computer science,
vol 2801. Springer, Berlin/New York, pp 588–597
Jaeger H, Haas H (2004) Harnessing nonlinearity: predicting chaotic systems and saving energy in
wireless communication. Science 304:78–80
Hauser H, Ijspeert AJ, Fuchslin RM, Pfeifer R, Maass W (2011) Towards a theoretical foundation
for morphological computation with compliant bodies. Biol Cybern 105:355–370
Hauser H, Fuchslin RM, Nakajima K (2014) Morphological computation – the body as a
computational resource. In: Helmut H, Fuchslin RM, Pfeifer R (eds) E-book on opinions and
outlooks on morphological computation, chapter 20, pp 226–244. ISBN:978-3033045156
Hochner B (2012) An embodied view of octopus neurobiology. Curr Biol 22:R887–R892
Kang R, Kazakidi A, Guglielmino E, Branson DT, Tsakiris DP, Ekaterinaris JA et al (2011)
Dynamic model of a hyper-redundant octopus-like manipulator for underwater applications.
In: Proceedings of 2011 IEEE/RSJ international conference on intelligent robots and systems
(IROS), San Francisco, pp 4054–4059
Kang R, Branson DT, Guglielmino E, Caldwell DG (2012) Dynamic modeling and control of an
octopus inspired multiple continuum arm robot. Comput Math Appl 64:1004–1016
Kier WM, Smith KK (1985) Tongues, tentacles and trunks: the biomechanics of movement in
muscular-hydrostats. Zool J Linn Soc 83:307–324
Kim S, Laschi C, Trimmer B (2013) Soft robotics: a new perspective in robot evolution. Trends
Biotechnol 31:287–294
Kazakidi A, Vavourakis V, Pateromichelakis N, Ekaterinaris JA, Tsakiris DP (2012) Hydrodynamic
analysis of octopus-like robotic arms. In: Proceedings of 2012 IEEE international conference
on robotics and automation (ICRA), St. Paul, pp 5295–5300
Kuwabara J, Nakajima K, Kang R, Branson DT, Guglielmino E, Caldwell DG, Pfeifer R (2012)
Timing-based control via echo state network for soft robotic arm. In: Proceedings of the 2012
international joint conference on neural networks (IJCNN), Brisbane, pp 1–8
Li T, Nakajima K, Kuba MJ, Gutnick T, Hochner B, Pfeifer R (2012a) From the octopus to soft
robots control: an octopus inspired behavior control architecture for soft robots. Vie Milieu
61:211–217
Li T, Nakajima K, Calisti M, Laschi C, Pfeifer R (2012b) Octopus-inspired sensorimotor control
of a multi-arm soft robot. In: Proceedings of 2012 international conference on mechatronics
and automation (ICMA), Chengdu, pp 948–955

18
Muscular-Hydrostat Computers
413
Li T, Nakajima K, Cianchetti M, Laschi C, Pfeifer R (2012c) Behavior switching by using reservoir
computing for a soft robotic arm. In: Proceedings of 2012 IEEE international conference on
robotics and automation (ICRA), St. Paul, pp 4918–4924
Li T, Nakajima K, Pfeifer R (2013a) Online learning technique for behavior switching in a soft
robotic arm. In: Proceedings of 2013 IEEE international conference on robotics and automation
(ICRA), Karlsruhe, pp 1288–1294
Li T, Nakajima K, Pfeifer R (2013b) Learning from the octopus: sensorimotor control of octopus-
inspired soft robots. In: Proceedings of 2013 international workshop on soft robotics and
morphological computation (SoftRobot2013), Monte Verità, P-34
Maass W, Natschlager T, Markram H (2002) Real-time computing without stable states: a new
framework for neural computation based on perturbations. Neural Comput 14:2531–2560
Morin SA, Shepherd RF, Kwok SW, Stokes AA, Nemiroski A, Whitesides GM (2012) Camouﬂage
and display for soft machines. Science 337:828–832
Nakajima K, Li T, Sumioka H, Cianchetti M, Pfeifer R (2011) Information theoretic analysis on a
soft robotic arm inspired by the octopus. In: Proceedings of 2011 IEEE international conference
on robotics and biomimetics (ROBIO), Phucket, pp 110–117
Nakajima K, Ngouabeu AMT, Miyashita S, Goldi M, Fuchslin RM, Pfeifer R (2012a) Morphology-
induced collective behaviors: dynamic pattern formation in water-ﬂoating elements. PLoS ONE
7(6):e37805
Nakajima K, Li T, Kang R, Guglielmino E, Caldwell DG, Pfeifer R (2012b) Local information
transfer in soft robotic arm. In: Proceedings of 2012 IEEE international conference on robotics
and biomimetics (ROBIO), Guangzhou, pp 1273–1280
Nakajima K, Hauser H, Kang R, Guglielmino E, Caldwell DG, Pfeifer R (2013a) Computing with a
muscular-hydrostat system. In: Proceedings of 2013 IEEE international conference on robotics
and automation (ICRA), Karlsruhe, pp 1496–1503
Nakajima K, Hauser H, Kang R, Guglielmino E, Caldwell DG, Pfeifer R (2013b) A soft body as a
reservoir: case studies in a dynamic model of octopus-inspired soft robotic arm. Front Comput
Neurosci 7:91
Nakajima K, Li T, Hauser H, Pfeifer R (2013c) Morphological computation in a silicone-based soft
robotic arm. In: Proceedings of 2013 international workshop on soft robotics and morphological
computation (SoftRobot2013), Monte Verità, P-49
Nakajima K, Li T, Hauser H, Pfeifer R (2013d) Muscular-hydrostat computers: toward a novel
control scheme for soft robots. In: Proceedings of 2013 international workshop on soft robotics
and morphological computation (SoftRobot2013), Monte Verità, O-29
Nakajima K, Li T, Hauser H, Pfeifer R (2014) Exploiting short-term memory in soft body dynamics
as a computational resource. J R Soc Interface 11(100):20140437
Nakajima K, Schmidt N, Pfeifer R (2015a) Measuring information transfer in a soft robotic arm.
Bioinspir Biomim 10(3):035007
Nakajima K, Hauser H, Li T, Pfeifer R (2015b) Information processing via physical soft body. Sci
Rep 5:10487
Pfeifer R, Bongard J (2006) How the body shapes the way we think: a new view of intelligence.
MIT Press, Cambridge
Pfeifer R, Lungarella M, Iida F (2007) Self-organization, embodiment, and biologically inspired
robotics. Science 318:1088–1093
Pfeifer R, Lungarella M, Iida F (2012) The challenges ahead for bio-inspired ‘soft’ robotics.
Commun ACM 55:76–87
Shepherd RF, Ilievski F, Choi W, Morin SA, Stokes AA, Mazzeo AD, Chen X, Wang M,
Whitesides GM (2011) Multi-gait soft robot. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 108:20400–20403
Smith KK, Kier WM (1989) Trunks, tongues, and tentacles: moving with skeletons of muscle. Am
Sci 77:28–35
Sumbre G, Gutfreund Y, Fiorito G, Flash T, Hochner B (2001) Control of octopus arm extension
by a peripheral motor program. Science 293:1845–1848
Sussillo D, Abbott LF (2009) Generating coherent patterns of activity from chaotic neural
networks. Neuron 63:544–557

414
K. Nakajima
Taylor J, Kier W (2003) Switching skeletons: hydrostatic support in molting crabs. Science
301:209–210
Trivedi D, Rahn CD, Kier WM, Walker ID (2008) Soft robotics: biological inspiration, state of the
art, and future research. Appl Bionics Biomech 5:99–117
Verstraeten D, Schrauwen B, D’Haene M, Stroobandt D (2007) An experimental uniﬁcation of
reservoir computing methods. Neural Netw 20:391–403
Woods D, Naughton TJ (2012) Photonic neural networks. Nat Phys 8:257
Yekutieli Y, Sagiv-Zohar R, Aharonov R, Engel Y, Hochner B, Flash T (2005a) Dynamic model of
the octopus arm. I. Biomechanics of the octopus reaching movement. J Neurophys 94:1443–
1458
Yekutieli Y, Sagiv-Zohar R, Hochner B, Flash T (2005b) Dynamic model of the octopus arm. II.
Control of reaching movements. J Neurophys 94:1459–1468
Zhao Q, Nakajima K, Sumioka H, Hauser H, Pfeifer R (2013) Spine dynamics as a computational
resource in spine-driven quadruped locomotion. In: Proceedings of 2013 IEEE/RSJ interna-
tional conference on intelligent robots and systems (IROS), Tokyo, pp 1445–1451
Zheng T, Branson DT, Kang R, Cianchetti M, Guglielmino E, Follador M et al (2012) Dynamic
continuum arm model for use with underwater robotic manipulators inspired by octopus
vulgaris. In: Proceedings of 2012 IEEE international conference on robotics and automation
(ICRA), St. Paul, pp 5289–5294

Chapter 19
Brain Evolution as an Information Flow
Designer: The Ground Architecture
for Biological and Artiﬁcial General Intelligence
Shuichi Shigeno
Abstract For centuries, neuroscientists have identiﬁed a number of neural sys-
tems involved in sensory, motor, state control, and cognitive functions. Modern
comparative studies have proposed their diversity, origins, and basic functionality
across animal phyla. Despite a number of attempts, however, a common functional
plan of the complex brain remains controversial. For example, there is currently no
prominent theory of how neural networks are structurally comparable between phy-
logenetically distant animals such as vertebrates, octopuses, worms, and insects, in
which there are distinguishably different brain architectures. This chapter attempts
to identify the types of information ﬂow patterns that were specialized during
brain evolution, when these patterns appeared as a prototype, and how the ﬂow
systems have been shaped based on the common morphological architecture. In a
notable case, a number of sensory associative centers show comparable patterns
in mammalian, insect, and octopus brains, representing a common input and output
ﬂow of information. One can speculate that a common underlying structure is shared
between various animals because of common functionalities that produce highly
effective learning, memory, and autonomous cognitive tasks. Such an underlying
structure could help establish a large-scale framework for comparison between
phylogenetically distant animal brains and perhaps even form the groundwork for
artiﬁcial general intelligence.
Keywords Brain • Neuronal network • Brain diversity • Evolution
S. Shigeno ()
Department of Marine Biodiversity Research, Japan Agency for Marine-Earth Science
and Technology, 2-15 Natsushima, Yokosuka 237-0061, Japan
Department of Biology and Evolution of Marine Organism, Stazione Zoologica Anton Dohrn,
80121 Naples, Italy
e-mail: sushigeno@gmail.com
© Springer Japan KK 2017
S. Shigeno et al. (eds.), Brain Evolution by Design, Diversity and Commonality
in Animals, DOI 10.1007/978-4-431-56469-0_19
415

416
S. Shigeno
19.1
Introduction
A number of neuroanatomical studies have elucidated a variety of brain structures
(Cajal 1917; Hanström 1928; Bullock and Horridge 1965; Nieuwenhuys et al. 1998;
Roth and Wullimann 2001; Butler and Hodos 2005; Striedter 2005; Kaas 2006,
Strausfeld 2012; Schneider 2014; Schmidt-Rhaesa et al. 2016; Borden et al. 2016).
These structures are complex, but they are often classiﬁed by common functional
systems: sensory detection, motor generation, behavioral states, including reward
and sleep, and cognitive systems (Swanson 2003, 2007). The origin of such neural
systems can be traced back to ancestral forms in sponges, sea anemones, comb
jellies, ﬂatworms, nematodes, polychaetes, and other invertebrates (Roth 2013;
Arendt et al. 2015; Holland 2016; Schmidt-Rhaesa et al. 2016; Wolff and Strausfeld
2016). Despite a well-established basic structure underlying small elementary
nervous systems, there is no consensus about a basic underlying structure or
unifying model in more complicated brains (Bullock 1993, 2002; Roth 2013). In
fact, some invertebrates such as cephalopods and arthropods display a higher level
psychological repertoire, with components such as cognition, emotion, planning,
sleep, and consciousness, but a common neural basis between vertebrates remains in
dispute (Hochner et al. 2006; Moroz 2009; Krubitzer 2009). A contemporary view
posits that higher ordered brain centers, such as the cerebral cortex of mammals
and the mushroom bodies of insects, share comparable organization, developmental
control genes, neurotransmitter action, long-term memory consolidation, and in
part, features of neuropsychiatric or behavioral disorders (Tomer et al. 2010;
Strausfeld and Hirth 2013; Wolff and Strausfeld 2016).
For this reason, I was motivated to ask what basic architecture forms the
dominant multisensory integration regions or binding sites, such as the cerebral
cortex and the mushroom bodies, in neural evolution, when it appeared as a
prototype in early animals, and how common neural systems have been shared
among many phyla. The complex brains in vertebrates and cephalopods (octopuses
and squids) that evolved independently are of particular interest. These two types
of complex brains evolved independently from a common ancestor that may have
had diffused neural nets or simple neural cords, yet the octopus or squid brains have
similar sizes, functional regionalized units, and many similar neuronal and glial cell
types in the sensory, motor, and cognitive systems (Nixon and Young 2003; Hochner
et al. 2006; Darmaillacq et al. 2014; Shigeno et al. 2015).
19.2
The Classic and Modern Ladder-Like Models
How can we distinguish a common structure for the diverse neural centers spanning
from invertebrates to advanced species such as mammals? The brains of phyloge-
netically distant animals often exhibit similarities despite anatomical differences,
possibly the result of physiological and functional constraints (Farris 2008). Occur-
rence of the sensory, motor, and higher centers is summarized with the phyletic

19
Brain Evolution as an Information Flow Designer: The Ground...
417
Fig. 19.1 Independent specialization of the higher brain centers. The common origins and
homological relationships of higher brain centers are still in debate. The red rectangles indicate
animals with a laminar or layer-like structure of the higher sensory processing centers, such as the
cerebral cortex, the mushroom body, and the frontal-vertical lobe system found in cephalopods.
The green circles indicate the presence of interneuron clusters in the anterior nervous system. The
blue rectangles represent highly specialized motor centers (see Table X.1) (This phylogram was
adapted from Hejnol et al. (2009; see also Philippe et al. 2009; Laumer et al. 2015) and the data
were selected from Bullock and Horridge (1965) and Strausfeld (2012))
relationships of other phyla (Fig. 19.1). Such centers composed of a functional
unit of neurons in early development can be arranged along the body axis that
is usually deﬁned with phylogenetically shared cell types, expression domains of
the neurotransmitter, and developmental control genes (see Arendt 2008, 2015)
(Fig. 19.2). The higher centers or associative centers for cognition are often deﬁned
by higher order and small intrinsic interneurons that usually appear at the anterior
regions of the nervous systems (see Farris 2008) (Fig. 19.2; Table 19.1). The higher
centers often form laminar patterns, although they exhibit a species-speciﬁc manner
(Bullock and Horridge 1965; Butler and Hodos 2005; Strausfeld 2012). These
centers are generally found in derived species, but not in basal lineages, suggesting
that higher centers evolve independently (Hejnol and Martindale 2008; Farris 2008;
Moroz 2009; for common origins and controversies, see Arendt and Nübler-Jung
1996; Reichert and Simeone 2001; Arendt 2008; Tomer et al. 2010).
If higher centers evolved independently, what structural and functional frame-
work supports the commonality between higher order centers in different animals?
In this section, the classic and modern models of brain structure are the focus

418
S. Shigeno
Table 19.1 The higher sensory, motor, and neurosecretory centers in the cerebral parts of selected animals
Lophotrochozoa
Ecdysozoa
Deuterostomea
Platyhelminthes
Molluscs
Annelids
Arthropods
Chordates
Triclad
Gastropod
Cephalopod
Polychaete
Insect
Vertebrate
The cerebral cluster
Cerebral ganglia
Cerebral ganglia
Supraesophageal
mass
Cerebral ganglia
Proto- and
deutocerebrum
Fore- and
midbrain
1. Interneuron-rich
higher center
Globuli cell
cluster
Procerebrum
Frontal-vertical
lobe system
Mushroom body
Mushroom body
Cerebral cortex,
Pallium
Speciﬁc cell types
Globuli cells
Procerebral
interneurons
Amacrine cells
Globuli cells
Kenyon cells
Granule cells
2. Higher
sensory-motor centers
(basal area)
Spongy region?
Commissural
area?
Basal lobes
Central body
Central complex
Basal ganglia
3. Cerebral
neurosecretory center
n/a
Dorsal body
Subpedunculate
lobe, buccal lobe
Neurosecretory
center
PI
Hypothalamus
Analogical or homological relationships in some centers are still controversial. Some outgroups are included for comparison (data assembled from Bullock and
Horridge 1965; Wells 1978; Butler and Hodos 2005; Hartenstein 2006; Strausfeld and Hirth 2013; and see text for more references). PI pars intercerebralis

19
Brain Evolution as an Information Flow Designer: The Ground...
419
Fig. 19.2 Sketches of a shared plan of the central nervous systems in diverse animals. The
ﬁgures indicate that two distinct evolutionary pathways can be identiﬁed across animal phyla:
ﬁrst, the discrete ganglion-type in snails and arthropods, and second, the centralized neural cords
in cephalopods and vertebrates, both of which stem from the primitive plan found in species such
as cnidarians. The discrete cords or ganglia are shown from a dorsal view. The bilaterian plan
was adapted from Hejnol and Martindale (2008) (Data for the schematic are from Bullock and
Horridge (1965), Rubenstein et al. (1998), Shigeno et al. (2010), Puelles and Rubenstein (2015)
(see also Wollesen et al. (2015), Sugahara et al. (2016); Watanabe (Chap. 3, in this book) for
more details). The expression patterns of some developmental regulatory genes are shared in many
animals (Denes et al. 2007; Tessmar-Raible et al. 2007; Tomer et al. 2010))
(Fig. 19.3a, b). All neural systems have sensory, motor, and associative or cognitive
subsystems, which has already been suggested by Cajal (1917) and a modern model
by Swanson (2003, 2007). In Fig. 19.3a, b, we present a “ladder-like” network
composed of two simple ﬂows of information for sensory inputs (S) and motor
outputs (M). We see the sensory, association areas, and motor areas, or the “S-A-M”
axis, as the core structure. In the case of humans, the cerebral cortex can be seen as a
large associative network capable of detailed cognitive processing. The state control
networks support the sensory and motor pathways. Each pathway has feedback.
Notably, the S-A-M axis is an important basic architecture for the design of
artiﬁcial intelligence in insect-like, worm-like, dog-like (Pfeifer et al. 2007; Pfeifer
and Gomez 2009), and humanoid robots (Goerick 2009). For example, in the
humanoid robot, Honda ASIMO, the central control system, ALIS (Autonomous
Learning and Interacting System), has a ladder-like ﬂow of sensory and motor
information (Fig. 19.3c). ALIS is composed of a hierarchical control architecture
called SYSTEMATICA, which represents a sensory system; the associative internal
dynamics are organized in parallel for each sensory modality with interactions
between top-down processing and long-term memory, which converge into motor
commands for conﬂict resolution (Fig. 19.3c) (Goerick 2009). The similarity
between biological and artiﬁcial systems is not surprising because artiﬁcial products
were inspired by animal brain structures.

420
S. Shigeno
Fig. 19.3 Diagrams of the human brain and control architecture in a humanoid robot, Honda
ASIMO, showing the common ladder-like information ﬂow design. (a) In the classics, Cajal (1890)
published the histological diagram based on the neuron doctrine to show how sensory information
from the skin passes to the cerebral cortex and ends in motor output signals to the muscles. (b)
The modern Swanson model shows the basic plan of the brain (Modiﬁed from Swanson 2003).
The ladder-like model is composed of four systems: sensory, cognitive, state, and motor systems
with reciprocal feedback. (c) Artiﬁcial autonomous learning and control architecture called ALIS
in the humanoid robot Honda ASIMO (Simpliﬁed from Goerick 2009). D dynamics, T top-down
information, R representations

19
Brain Evolution as an Information Flow Designer: The Ground...
421
19.3
The Cerebral Cortex Equivalents
Further evidence for the ladder-like S-A-M axis in different animal brains is the
anatomically differentiable centers between the layered structure of the mammalian
cerebral cortex and the nucleic nature of the pallium in birds. Karten (1997)
originally emphasized the importance of both the developmental origins and the
common plans of neural circuit connectivity. First, there is evidence that the cerebral
cortex and pallium are both derived from the neurogenic region of the dorsal
or rostral forebrain. Furthermore, in comparable regions, a conserved connective
structure, the sensory input-interneuron-motor output axis, or S-A-M axis, is found
(Karten 1997; see also Jarvis et al. 2005; Karten 2013; Puelles and Rubenstein;
2015). The S-A-M axis is often difﬁcult to identify because of the many feedback
loops, but it can be identiﬁed by its bundled, dominant ﬁbers, which are often treated
as “driver pathways” (Sherman and Guillery 1998, 2006). Based on the S-A-M
structural framework, Dugas-Ford et al. (2012; see also Karten 2013) performed
comprehensive molecular expression analyses for differentially organized nuclei in
birds, cortical areas in reptiles, and six layered neocortical layers in mammals.
Roth also tried to identify a hierarchy of processing areas and the S-A-M axis
in birds, octopuses, and honeybees (Roth 2013; see also Hochner 2010; Shomrat
et al. 2011; Grasso 2014) (Fig. 19.4a, b). This comparative approach can be applied
across phyla, including ﬂatworms, ragworms, and cephalopods. In the schematic
ﬁgure (Fig. 19.4b), local and feedback pathways are largely omitted for simplicity,
and it is not obvious what function is being mapped for most of the pathways.
This scheme, however, is important to help ﬁnd comparable cell types and possible
functional synaptic equivalents in complex centers derived from similar feed-
forward information processing with cell types and layers. For instance, granule
cells in the mammalian cerebral cortex, amacrine cells in octopus brains, and the
Kenyon cells of insect mushroom bodies become the primary targets for comparison
because of the small size and numerous numbers of interneuron types for infor-
mation ﬁne-tuning or memory pooling (Fig. 19.4a). Many levels of representation
including primary and secondary, associative unimodal and multimodal, and global
representations of one’s physical body, the environment, and self-awareness may
appear along such feed-forward information streams. Thus, the proposal of Roth
(2013) and the theories of Cajal (1917) and Swanson (2007) are based on a “ladder-
like” composition to represent the S-A-M axis as a whole.

422
S. Shigeno
Fig. 19.4 Models for the learning systems and possible cerebral cortical equivalents. (a) The
comparable models for learning systems in the frontal-vertical (FV) lobe system of Octopus (Wells
1978), the mushroom body (MB), and Kenyon cells in the honeybee brain (Heisenberg 2003). (b)
A common connectivity structure, based on Karten’s hypothesis (Karten 1997, 2013), between
several species (see Roth 2013). The similar information ﬂow composed of driver pathways
represented by the input-interneuron-output networks (arrows) with some nested looping pathways
(dotted arrows). The small interneurons are bipolar in vertebrates or monopolar in the octopus
(The schematic was adapted from Karten (1997), Young (1971), and Strausfeld (2012)). MNP
mesonidopallium

19
Brain Evolution as an Information Flow Designer: The Ground...
423
19.4
The Evolution of Information Flow Patterns
The ladder-like S-A-M axis, as just summarized, has traditionally been thought of as
one of the most known structures for basic brain function. The structure consists of
state controllers, such as the endocrine system, emotion for reward or reinforcement,
and many reciprocal feedback loops. Here, a revised view is proposed. The brain
is more than just a ladder and an input–output processing agent. This proposal
extends the conventional view that information processing is based on a ladder-
like organization. The approach proposed here was inﬂuenced by Adrian Bejan’s
design theory (Bejan and Lorente 2008, 2010), which explains and predicts the
most efﬁcient design for ﬂow dynamics. In his theory, the pattern of convergence
(many-to-one: signals tend to ﬂow from area to point) or divergence (one-to-many:
signals tend to ﬂow from point to area) (Fig. 19.5a) of ﬂow dynamics determines the
distinct functional design and features in both animate and inanimate systems. Based
on his theory, the networks of primitive and advanced brains can be classiﬁed into
four representative types to establish the information ﬂow conﬁguration in evolution
(Fig. 19.5a):
1. The diffused type: this is the typical type of nervous system in many sea
anemones, comb jellies, and jellyﬁshes (Fig. 19.5a). Information processing
occurs in simple elements called nodes, which are comparable, in part, with
the single-layer perceptron (Rosenblatt 1962), parallel distributed processing
(Rumelhart et al. 1986a, b), and the self-organizing map found in artiﬁcial
networks (Kohonen 1995).
2. The “many-to-one” type: this is a typical central nervous system in primitive
brains. The signals from sensory receptors of several body areas are localized
to “one” point, for example, at the anterior of the body as a brain, but they still
display a kind of diffuse arrangement. We see this type of network in the neural
ring of cnidarians, the primitive brain of acoelomorphs, and primitive forms of
the protostome and deuterostome brains (see Watanabe’s chapter in this book).
3. The “one-to-many” type: this is deﬁned by the appearance of higher order
intrinsic neuronal clusters (Fig. 19.5a, b). Connectivity is organized in “one”
centrally located brain, and then processed in “many” small, higher order
interneurons, generally called a globuli cell cluster in protostome animals. The
numerous small intrinsic neurons with short neuronal processes and synapses are
organized in the cortex. The most frequently analyzed cases are the Kenyon or
globuli cells and the mushroom bodies in insects and annelid brains. The signals
from sensory receptors merge into one brain, and then these signals are processed
at many synaptic sites in intrinsic neurons in cortically arealized domains.
This type of organization is also seen in some protostomes, such as polyclad
ﬂatworms and land snails. Some species possess only a pair of small globuli
cell clusters for chemical sensing, which usually lacks feedback loops between
primary and higher order centers. Addition of such higher order association or
internal representation units between the sensory and motor network axis in
higher order animals is similar to a learning technique called “teacher node” or

424
S. Shigeno
Fig. 19.5 Evolutionary transition of information ﬂow design. (a) The four types of information
ﬂow design in brain evolution. (b) Transitions of major input–output pathways with small
interneuron clusters from the brain of polyclad ﬂatworm, ﬂy, and octopus. (c) A model of human
brains to propose comparable patterns. Many mammalian brains also have the identical systems.
The left diagram shows simple input–output information ﬂow, whereas a complex thalamocortical
system is shown on the right. HO higher order (Modiﬁed from Bullock and Horridge (1965), Young
(1971), Sherman and Guillery (2006), Strausfeld (2012))
back-propagation,which is used for training the multilayer perceptron in artiﬁcial
networks (Rumelhart et al. 1986b).
4. The “many-to-one, one-to-many” type: this type is deﬁned by the appearance
of interactive association centers for cognitive function. The cortical centers are

19
Brain Evolution as an Information Flow Designer: The Ground...
425
composed of many small intrinsic neurons that send information to a relatively
simple, or “one,” subcortical center, and form the multisensory integration
between hierarchically organized motor centers to perform simple behavioral
tasks, such as attack or retreat. The subcortical centers project to multiple cortical
centers to form reciprocal corticosubcortical loops or relay loops. Such patterns
are commonly found in the octopus and vertebrate brains. The most developed
loop is the thalamocortical relay loop found in mammals (Sherman and Guillery
2002, 2013; Sherman 2007; Fig. 19.5c).
In the traditional approach, sensory information, such as vision, enters the
cortex via the thalamic pathway and is processed within the cortex. However,
a recent model suggests that corticocortical information transfer is relayed via
newly developed higher order thalamic nuclei, which form the characteristically
ordered ﬁrst-, second-, and higher order thalamocortical relay loops (Sherman and
Guillery 2013; Fig. 19.5c). The functional signiﬁcance is not known in detail,
but such differentiable relay loops regulate brain functions, such as attention, by
synchronizing sensory responses through burst or tonic modes of thalamic responses
(Sherman and Guillery 2006). Models of artiﬁcial networks are discussed later, but
many attempts have constructed internal representation using integration modules
(Mareschal and Shultz 1996).
19.5
Diffused to Compact Form: Identifying a Transitory
Pattern
The structure of information ﬂow is important and is useful to provide models
based on biophysical theories and to identify the best optimized structure, when
we consider information ﬂow along the neural tracts in function and evolution. It
is obvious that the neural networks of animals initially have a diffuse structure
rather than a ladder-like structure. There are many theories to explain the elaboration
process of brain centers and circuitry in vertebrates and arthropods (as summarized
in Butler and Hodos 2005; Strausfeld 2012). One of them, the parcellation theory
by Ebbesson (1980), may provide a guideline for how the brain evolves. The theory
suggests that the brain becomes more complex, not only by one system adding to
another, but by a diffused “parcellation” process that involves the selective loss of
diffused connections and aggregation of preexisting subsystems (Ebbesson 1980).
This theory is based on the ﬁndings that (1) a diffuse, undifferentiated system
appears ﬁrst and (2) a range of segregated or “compact” patterns evolves from the
diffused type. This process is also typical in early brain development, wherein the
brain initially displays the diffused pattern and the segregated pattern emerges later.
One principle underlying early growth, differentiation, and multiplication of circuits
appears to be the process of parcellation (Ebbesson 1980).
Brain evolution in cephalopods may serve as a model organism. In cephalopods,
more extensive subsystems have appeared in a primitive, diffused form. The cerebral
cord of a polyplacophoran (e.g., the chiton) has nine transversely distinct zones with

426
S. Shigeno
Fig. 19.6 Shift from the primitive diffused centers to the derived compact lobes in the cephalopod
higher brain centers: the interlacing system of the nautilus higher centers. (a, d) The subfrontal lobe
in the ﬁnned octopus (red color), Stauroteuthis syrtensis (b, e), and the subfrontal lobe (red color)
or the vertical lobe of Octopus vulgaris (c, f), in which the small amacrine cells and neuropil layer
are distinct. Many interweaving axonal bundles are still seen in the octopus. The subfrontal lobe is
composed of numerous small interneurons with short axons. All photographs are negative images
of Cajal staining from the Smithsonian JZ Young collection (kind courtesy of Dr. M. Vecchione,
Smithsonian Institute; photographs by the author). The picture of the ﬁnned octopus, Stauroteuthis
syrtensis, is modiﬁed from Roper and Sweeney (1984)
diffused neural tracts (Faller et al. 2012). Similarly, the origin of the cephalopod
brain can be examined in the primitive nautiloid brain, where higher centers have
numerous distributed cell bodies and intersected axonal ﬁbers (Fig. 19.6a) (see also
Young 1965). The brain of the deep-sea ﬁnned octopus, Stauroteuthis syrtensis, has
an intermediate state between a distributed and centralized structure (Fig. 19.6b),
but the most highly compact and centralized neuropils are in the derived coleoid

19
Brain Evolution as an Information Flow Designer: The Ground...
427
cephalopods, such as the brain of Octopus vulgaris (Fig. 19.6c) (Young 1977; Nixon
and Young 2003).
Interestingly, such “diffused to compact” systems have also been seen in the
evolution of cognitive centers in arthropods. Although a trend may be difﬁcult
to identify because of the great diversity and parallelism, arthropod mushroom
bodies display elaboration, acquisition, reduction, or loss of small intrinsic globuli
cells, and neuropil compartments with variation in behavioral ecology (Bullock
and Horridge 1965; Farris and Strausfeld 2001). One potential mechanism of brain
evolution is that the precursors of globuli interneurons are initially distributed in
the cerebral cord, resembling a band, with several olfactory inputs from receptors
(Strausfeld 2012). In the next step of elaboration, the cell bodies and neuropils are
clustered and the major bundled tracts are assembled. Some new functional modular
tracts also appeared, but the basic plan has already established a complicated
state in the basal lineages of arthropods such as Chelicerata and Crustacea, with
consideration to Panarthtropoda, including Onycophora such as velvet worms
(Strausfeld 2012).
19.6
Implications for Artiﬁcial Neural Networks
It is widely accepted that nervous systems function by physiological electronic
signals activated via cellular networks. It is also known that many artiﬁcial neural
networks are deﬁned by electronically processed information ﬂow, and their algo-
rithms are often deﬁned by sensor, motor, state control (reward and reinforcement),
and an aspect detector, or planning system, similar to that seen in the brain
(Braitenberg 1984; Sendhoff et al. 2009; Mnih et al. 2015). Even in the simplest
cases, such as Von Neumann architecture, Turing machines, and neural Turing
machines, artiﬁcial agents share a fundamental mechanism for information sorting,
attentional processing, logical ﬂow, associative recall, and working memory (Graves
et al. 2014). Despite these similarities, the structure of the brain and artiﬁcial
systems has been debated. Here, I use a comparative approach to describe novel
artiﬁcial neural networks and identify a common basic organization. First, artiﬁcial
neural networks have been historically created using a computational model inspired
by biological perception and neural networks (Eames et al. 1990). Hebbian learning
networks, where synaptic efﬁcacy arises by repeated and persistent stimulation, is
one example, but we focus on speciﬁc connectivity organization here.
The “perceptron” or a computational model of the “perceptron convergence
procedure” was ﬁrst invented by Rosenblatt (1957, 1962) as a linear classiﬁer or
pattern learning machine with simple feed-forward networks (Fig. 19.7a). Mapping
sets of input data onto a set of appropriate output, an improved “multilayer
perceptron” was constructed with three or more input layers of nodes and a feedback
system, each of which in one layer connects to a certain information weight to
every node in the next layer (see Minsky and Papert 1988; Rumelhart et al. 1986a).
Effective learning occurs in the model by changing connective weights after each

428
S. Shigeno
Fig. 19.7 A comparative model of the multilayer perceptron, convolution network (Deep-Q-
network), and octopus brain. (a–c) Each network shows highly intersected and distributed
pathways with hierarchically ordered nodes or centers along the input–output axis. Each network
performs learning, recognition, and problem-solving tasks (The multilayer perceptron, convolution
network, and octopus brain diagrams are modiﬁed from Minsky and Papert (1988), Mnih et al.
(2015), and Young (1971, 1995), respectively). (d) A more detailed scheme of the octopus
brain shows more locally distributed, but globally segregated sensory pathways, as in Fig. 19.6c
(Modiﬁed from Young 1971)
datum is processed, based on the amount of error in the output compared to
the expected output estimated by “teacher node” (Fig. 19.7a). Moreover, a large
number of models have been created for a vast array of functions that represent
multilevel, nonlinear, and parallel distributed processing (Rumelhart et al. 1986a).
More recently, many improved neural networks have been created (Fukushima
1980; Kohonen 1995; Bengio 2009; LeCun et al. 2015), and notably, the brain-
inspired agent called “Deep Q-Network” (DQN) has become skilled enough to beat
a professional human player in various classic arcade games (Fig. 19.7b) (Mnih et al.
2015). The DQN can learn concepts and object categories directly via a sequence of

19
Brain Evolution as an Information Flow Designer: The Ground...
429
observations, actions, and rewards. The architecture of the DQN has several layers
of nodes that use progressively more abstract representation. Additionally, it has a
deep convolutional network that is composed of three hierarchical tiled convolution
ﬁlters that provide better image recognition using overwrapped visual ﬁelds. The
basic idea of this design was inspired by the mammalian cerebral cortex to mimic
the receptive ﬁelds of the visual cortex (Hubel and Wiesel 1963).
When we compare biological neural systems to the multilayer perceptron or deep
neural networks, the similarity is obvious in the case of the octopus brain (Fig. 19.7c,
d). Both biological and artiﬁcial systems are constructed by intersecting pathways
and multiple layers, representing mainly feed-forward and parallel distributed
networks. Differing from the perceptron or DQN, the octopus system has more
nested pathways and a loop-like circuitry, which shape the lower and higher order
hierarchy (e.g., lower order: from the sensory input to subvertical pathway; higher
order: the input via the vertical lobe pathway) (Fig. 19.7d). Some octopus cell
layers correspond to the perceptron or DQN layers. Amacrine cells are like teacher
cells or small-scaled convolution processes. Again, recall that the perceptron and
many other artiﬁcial networks were designed using the mammalian cerebral cortex
and cerebellum as a template (Block 1962; Poon and Shah 1998; Voicu 2008)
to create diverse applications such as speech, image recognition, and problem-
solving abilities to obtain suitable solutions for extremely complex problems. For
this reason, the identiﬁed similarities and basic organization between the biological
and artiﬁcial systems might not to be surprising.
19.7
Cognitive Design from Classic to Modern Psychology
Even if the artiﬁcial neural networks display intelligence, such products cannot
have animal-like cognitive states, such as emotion and consciousness. Creation of
the DQN was inspired by the cerebral cortex, particularly the visual processing
system, but its design did not draw from regions such as the thalamus, basal ganglia,
hippocampus, amygdaloid complex, midbrain, or spinal cord. Complicated psy-
chological phenomena have appeared in animal evolution, which modern artiﬁcial
intelligence fails to mimic. In fact, the coordinated actions of the sensory, motor,
and emotional systems with primary consciousness in vertebrates and cephalopods
(Edelman et al. 2005; Edelman and Seth 2009; Mather 2008; Feinberg and Mallatt
2013) are never performed artiﬁcially. It is hard to mimic many neuropsychological
functions produced by an entire system, including learning, sensation, working
memory, sleeping, emotion, attention, spatial navigation, allocentric and egocentric
awareness, and social interaction.
Modern neuroscientists have identiﬁed the major neuronal components of the
S-A-M axis as a basic structure that is shared between phylogenetically distant
animals (Fig. 19.3b) (Swanson 2007). This basic design was proposed by ancient
Greek philosophers. Despite any empirical evidence, Plato proposed a preliminary
concept that the major functions in humans are based on common sensory, motor,

430
S. Shigeno
and cognitive cues, or a “sensory-cognitive-motor axis” (Plato, around 380 BCE).
A more precise theory is attributed to Aristotle’s comparative behavioral studies
in which he described the functional subdivisions of the “mind” or “intellect”
(Aristotle, around 350 BCE). These theories were largely speculative, but were
inﬂuential until roughly the late seventeenth century, when French philosopher René
Descartes formulated his theory of mind–brain dualism and the geometric rules of
sensory integration (Descartes 1644).
More precise models of sensory perception and knowledge were proposed
by Benedict de Spinoza (1677), John Locke (1690), David Hume (1748), and
Immanuel Kant (1781). The most prominent studies were published by Kant
(1781, 1788), who posed questions about the most basic and “pure” architecture
of the complicated mental functions in the human. He theorized that mental
functions are composed of a few major components such as concepts of creation
and consciousness. The strategy of Kant in his Critique of Pure Reason was to
propose the basic architecture for human minds, particularly sensory perception or
aesthetic represented in space and time, categorical representation as analogies of
experiences, cognition, judgment, and a rule for self-perception or consciousness.
Although he never provided the neuroanatomical terms, he explained his theory as
if an architect or comparative anatomist. For example, “Human reason is by nature
architectonic, i.e., it considers all cognitions as belonging to a possible system : : : ”
(Kant 1781; p. 502, L23). “Systems seem, like certain worms, to be formed : : : ” (p.
692, L33). In his Critique, the S-A-M axis is represented as the sensory (aesthetic),
cognition (logic, reason, judgment), and motor (behavior, action) axis. “All our
cognition starts from the senses, goes from there to the understanding, and ends
with reason, beyond which there is nothing higher to be found in us : : : ” (p. 387,
L9).
One of the most important achievements of Kant was the identiﬁcation of the
“many-to-one, one-to-many” architecture as a crucial ﬂow design for psychological
processes (Fig. 19.8a). Many sensory faculties or centers for conceptual representa-
tion are integrated as “many-to-one.” The concepts interact as “one-to-many.” Kant
found that the interaction between convergentand divergent information ﬂow design
is central to human mental processing. Such interactions are examples of “dialectic
conﬂict” or “antinomy.” This conﬂict is a compulsory trade-off: the centers for
sensory representation tend to divide into “many” areal spaces whereas the many
spaces tends to unite into “one.” Many different types of sensory information have to
be integrated to produce a simple “one” action. In Kant’s Critique of Pure Reason,
dialectic conﬂicts occupy about 220 of 700 pages to explain the mental functions
of knowing, understanding, concepts, logic, decision making, illusion, estimation,
and self-consciousness. Further theoretical debates have built upon Kant’s theories,
including those from the post-Kantian German idealism philosophers, such as Georg
Hegel (1977), the phenomenologists, such as Edmund Husserl (1913), and the
modern logicians, such as Bertrand Russell (1921).

19
Brain Evolution as an Information Flow Designer: The Ground...
431
Fig. 19.8 Cognitive architectures. (a) A simpliﬁed interpretation for cognitive architecture in
Kant’s Critiques of Pure Reason (1781). There are two distinct faculties for cognition. First,
the faculty of receptivity in which the sensory representations are cognized locally as concepts,
sensory binding, or [elemental logic] (Kant 1781). Second, a unity of conceptions is demonstrated
at the highest faculty for reason (Kant 1781), where the many categorized representations tend
to be reduced to the smallest possible number by a total synthetic integration center. The
functional differences of analytical (divisible) and synthetic (uniﬁed) functions give rise to a self-
contradictory conﬂict (Kant 1781). The photograph from Public Domain. (b) A simpliﬁed diagram
for the global workspace model for human consciousness by Baars (1988) and Baars et al. (2013)
(Modiﬁed from Shanahan 2006). The many distinct and distributed contexts or information units
bind to one massive center, and then the inﬂuenced contexts again change to distinct contexts along
the linear timeline. (c) A network model and diagram simpliﬁed from Dehaene et al. (1998). The
peripheral distinct processors connect to the central global workspace for long range and distributed
activity
19.8
Current Frontiers on the Designs
The ideas of Kant have been incorporated into modern theories; for example, the
concept-knowledge design theory (C-K theory) (Hatchuel and Weil 2009). This
theory explains the logic that organizes the generation of unknown objects during
problem solving. In the C-K theory, there are two distinct spaces: concept space and
knowledge space. Concepts that depart from existing knowledge can be partitioned

432
S. Shigeno
into “many” mutually interacting subconcepts in the concept space, and then derived
concepts return to the simple “one” knowledge space for synthesis into a new single
concept. This theory is based on a “many-to-one, one-to-many” information ﬂow
design, similar to those proposed by Kant (1781).
Interestingly, current neuropsychologists and computational neuroscientists have
reached similar solutions. Even though their models are very different, they were
placed on the strong inﬂuence (Baars 1988, 2002; Baars et al. 2013; Crick and
Koch 1990; Damasio 2000; Edelman and Tononi 2000; Tononi 2004, 2008; Merker
2007; see Mudrik et al. 2014 for references). For example, Baars theorized about
the simplest and the most complex computational designs in the brain. He focused
on the parallel, sequential, and limited operations that occur in conscious and
unconscious states in the corticothalamic pathways. Information from multiple
sensory modalities is integrated into a space called “the global workspace,” which
forms and keeps a stream of rich experiences that happen one after another to form
a conscious state. The content of a winning neuronal populations are broadcast to
all other populations, forming a spatially integrated and continuous conscious state
(Fig. 19.8b) (Shanahan 2006). Inspired by the Baars global workspace (GW) theory,
several computational models and autonomous agents have been created in which
the “sensory-GW-motor” or “S-GW-M” axis is the core design for information
ﬂow (Fig. 19.8c) (Dehaene et al. 1998; Shanahan 2006; Franklin 2003; Franklin
et al. 2012). In these artiﬁcial models and in human GW theory, the “many-to-one,
one-to-many” structure is the core morphological and functional structure in brain
evolution.
One compelling interpretation of our perspective that the basic structure under-
lying the evolution of the brain is a whole interactive system represented by the
“many-to-one, one-to-many” organization suggested by Kant, Hatchuel, and Baars
(Fig. 19.7a, b), rather than the ladder-like axis that has been used for animals (Cajal
1917; Swanson 2007) and robots (Pfeifer et al. 2007; Goerick 2009). During animal
brain evolution, this basic architecture may have evolved independently because of
a stable framework that includes a dynamic trade-off of analytical (high resolution,
but slow processing speed) and synthetic (low resolution, but fast processing speed)
functions. Creating detailed spatial maps is essential to navigate one’s environment
to increase ﬁtness, but information must be transported efﬁciently to enable effective
behavior. The organization of the whole brain may provide a reasonable solution for
such combinatorial optimization adaptive problems. The models described in the
present paper are probably too global, large scale, and hard to study in neuroscience,
and we do not yet have the methodology to gain access into the subjective realm in
animal brains, except for recent advances in whole-brain activity imaging in vivo,
such as in the zebraﬁsh brain (Ahrens et al. 2012) and nematode nervous system
(Nguyen et al. 2015), or fruit ﬂy brains (Honegger et al. 2011).

19
Brain Evolution as an Information Flow Designer: The Ground...
433
19.9
Conclusion
Our current understanding of the evolution of the brain is too preliminary to
permit us to propose a common functional layout in any simple way, despite many
attempts in classic theories (Cajal 1917; Hanström 1928; Bullock and Horridge
1965; Reisinger 1972; Arendt and Nübler-Jung 1996) and in recent advanced
studies and perspectives (Holland 2003; Arendt 2008; Hejnol and Martindale 2008;
Moroz 2009; Pani et al. 2012; Northcutt 2012; Schmidt-Rhaesa et al. 2016; Borden
et al. 2016). With such a long historical background, one may ask how a global
information ﬂow design has been shaped in brain evolution. I proposed a large-
scale framework by which one can address questions about the functionality and
performance shared between the brains of phylogenetically distant animals and even
in artiﬁcial intelligence. A theory of information ﬂow design is notably reminiscent
to the theories proposed by the classic Greek philosophers Plato and Aristotle,
which were further enhanced and structured by Immanuel Kant. Recently, theories
have been proposed by Adrean Bejan (Bejan and Lorente 2010), who formed a
concept-knowledgedesign theory (Hatchuel and Weil 2009), a global working space
model for human consciousness was put forward by Baar (1988, 2002), and an
information integration theory was presented by Tononi (2004, 2008). All these
theories discussed information-processing patterns: the divergent “one-to-many,”
convergent “many-to-one,” and their structure as a global underlying structure for
the evolution of the brain. Despite its importance, such global patterns are not
effectively adopted into recent evolutionary studies or the research for creating
artiﬁcial intelligence. This proposal is based on a global connectivity design,
but is neither a model nor a theory. It is a large-scale framework by which we
can address questions about the structure and function shared between the brains
of phylogenetically distant animals and even in the design of artiﬁcial general
intelligence.
References
Ahrens M, Li MJ, Orger MB, Robson DN, Schier AF, Engert F, Portugues R (2012) Brain-wide
neuronal dynamics during motor adaptation in zebraﬁsh. Nature (Lond) 485:471–479
Arendt D (2008) The evolution of cell types in animals: emerging principles from molecular
studies. Nat Rev Genet 9:868–882
Arendt D, Nübler-Jung K (1996) Common ground plans in early development in mice and ﬂies.
Bioessays 18:255–258
Arendt D, Tosches MA, Marlow H (2015) From nerve net to nerve ring, nerve cord and brain:
evolution of the nervous system. Nat Rev Neurosci 17:61–72
Aristotle, De Anima [On the Soul] (350BCE) Delphi complete works of Aristotle, illustrated,
Delphi ancient classics book 11, English edn. (2013) Amazon Ser Int, Inc
Baars BJ (1988) A cognitive theory of consciousness. Cambridge University Press, New York
Baars BJ (2002) The conscious access hypothesis: origins and recent evidence. Trends Cogn Sci
6:47–52

434
S. Shigeno
Baars BJ, Franklin S, Ramsoy TZ (2013) Global workspace dynamics: cortical “binding and
propagation” enables conscious contents. Front Psychol 4:200
Bejan A, Lorente S (2008) Design with constructal theory. Wiley, Hoboken
Bejan A, Lorente S (2010) The constructal law of design and evolution in nature. Philos Trans R
Soc Lond B 365:1335–1347
Bengio Y (2009) Learning deep architectures for AI. Found Trend Mach Learn 2:1–127
Block HD (1962) The perceptron: a model for brain functioning. Rev Mod Phys 34:123–135
Borden NM, Forseen SE, Cristian S (2016) Imaging anatomy of the human brain. A comprehensive
atlas including adjacent structure. Demos Medical, New York
Braitenberg V (1984) Vehicles: experiments in synthetic psychology. Bradford/MIT Press,
Cambridge
Bullock TH (1993) How are more complex brains different. Brain Behav Evol 41:88–96
Bullock TH (2002) Grades in neural complexity: how large is the span? Integr Comp Biol 42:757–
761
Bullock TH, Horridge GA (1965) Structure and function in the nervous systems of invertebrates,
vol I, II. Freeman, London
Butler AB, Hodos W (2005) Comparative vertebrate neuroanatomy: evolution and adaptation, 2nd
edn. Wiley-Liss, New York
Cajal SR (1890) New ideas on the structure of the nervous system in man and vertebrates. English
translation, Swanson N, Swanson LW (1990) MIT Press, Cambridge
Cajal SR (1917) Histologie du système nerveux de l’homme et des vertèbrès, 2 vols. Translated by
Azoulay L, Maloine A, Paris. English translation, Swanson N, Swanson LW (1995) Histology
of the nervous system of man and vertebrates, 2 vols. Oxford University Press, New York
Crick F, Koch C (1990) Towards a neurobiological theory of consciousness. Semin Neurosci
2:273–304
Damasio AR (2000) The feeling of what happens: body and emotion in the making of conscious-
ness. Vintage Books, London
Darmaillacq AS, Dickel L, Mather J (2014) Cephalopod cognition. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge
Dehaene S, Kerszberg M, Changeux JP (1998) A neuronal model of a global workspace in effortful
cognitive tasks. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 95:14529–14534
Denes AS, Jekely G, Steinmetz PR, Raible F, Snyman H, Prud’homme B, Ferrier DE, Balavoine
G, Arendt D (2007) Molecular architecture of annelid nerve cord supports common origin of
nervous system centralization in Bilateria. Cell 129:277–288
Descartes R (1644) The principles of philosophy. Translation with explanatory notes. Rodger V,
Miller RP, Reprint edition (1983). Reidel, Dordrecht
Dugas-Ford J, Rowell JJ, Ragsdale CW (2012) Cell-type homologies and the origins of the
neocortex. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 109:16974–16979
Eames C, Eames R, Fleck G, Cohen IB, Staples R (1990) A computer perspective: background to
the computer age. Revised subject edition. Harvard University Press, Harvard
Ebbesson SOE (1980) The parcellation theory and its relation to interspeciﬁc variability in brain
organization, evolutionary and ontogenetic development, and neuronal plasticity. Cell Tissue
Res 213:179–212
Edelman DB, Seth AK (2009) Animal consciousness: a synthetic approach. Trends Neurosci
32:476–484
Edelman GM, Tononi G (2000) A universe of consciousness: how matter becomes imagination.
Basic Books, New York
Edelman DB, Baars BJ, Seth AK (2005) Identifying hallmarks of consciousness in non-
mammalian species. Conscious Cogn 14:169–187
Faller S, Rothe BH, Todt C, Schmidt-Rhaesa A, Loesel R (2012) Comparative neuroanatomy of
Caudofoveata, Solenogastres, Polyplacophora, and Scaphopoda (Mollusca) and its phyloge-
netic implications. Zoomorphology 131:149–170
Farris SM (2008) Evolutionary convergence of higher brain centers spanning the protostome-
deuterostome boundary. Brain Behav Evol 72:106–122

19
Brain Evolution as an Information Flow Designer: The Ground...
435
Farris SM, Strausfeld NJ (2001) Development of laminar organization in the mushroom bodies of
the cockroach: Kenyon cell proliferation, outgrowth, and maturation. J Comp Neurol 439:331–
351
Feinberg TE, Mallatt J (2013) The evolutionary and genetic origins of consciousness in the
Cambrian period over 500 million years ago. Front Psychol 4:667
Franklin S (2003) IDA: a conscious artifact? In: Holland O (ed) Machine consciousness. Imprint
Academic, Exeter
Franklin S, Strain S, Snaider J, McCall R, Faghihi U (2012) Global workspace theory, its LIDA
model and the underlying neuroscience. Biol Insp Cogn Arch 1:32–43
Fukushima K (1980) Neocognitron: a self-organizing neural network model for a mechanism of
pattern recognition unaffected by shift in position. Biol Cybern 36:193–202
Goerick C (2009) Towards cognitive robotics. In: Sendhoff B, Koerner E, Sporns O, Ritter H, Doya
K (eds) Creating brain-like intelligence. From basic principles to complex intelligent systems.
Springer, Heidelberg, pp 192–214
Grasso FW (2014) The octopus with two brains: how are distributed and central representations
integrated in the octopus central nervous system? In: Darmaillacq A-S, Dickel L, Mather J (eds)
Cephalopod cognition. Cambridge University, Cambridge, pp 94–122
Graves A, Wayne G, Danihelka I (2014) Neural turing machines. arXiv preprint arXiv:1410.5401
Hanström B (1928) Vergleichende Anatomie des Nervensystems der Wirbellosen Tiere unter
Beruecksichtigung Seiner Funktion. Julius Springer, New York
Hartenstein V (2006) The neuroendocrine system of invertebrates: a developmental and evolution-
ary perspective. J Endocrinol 190:555–570
Hatchuel A, Weil B (2009) C-K design theory: an advanced formulation. Res Eng Des 19:181–192
Hegel GWF (1977) Phenomenology of spirit. Translation by Miller AV, Findlay JN. Clarendon
Press, Oxford
Heisenberg M (2003) Mushroom body memoir: from maps to models. Nat Rev Neurosci 4:266–
275
Hejnol A, Martindale MQ (2008) Acoel development supports a simple planula-like urbilaterian.
Philos Trans R Soc Lond B 363:1493–1501
Hejnol A, Obst M, Stamatakis A, Ott M, Rouse GW, Edgecombe GD, Martinez P, Baguñà J, Bailly
X, Jondelius U, Wiens M, Müller WG, Seaver E, Wheeler WC, Martindale MQ, Giribet G,
Dunn CW (2009) Assessing the root of bilaterian animals with scalable phylogenomic methods.
Proc R Soc Lond B 276:4261–4270
Hochner B (2010) Functional and comparative assessments of the octopus learning and memory
system. Front Biosci 2:764–771
Hochner B, Shomrat T, Fiorito G (2006) The octopus: a model for a comparative analysis of the
evolution of learning and memory mechanisms. Biol Bull 210:308–317
Holland ND (2003) Early central nervous system evolution: an era of skin brains? Nat Rev
Neurosci 4:617–627
Holland ND (2016) Nervous systems and scenarios for the invertebrate-to-vertebrate transition.
Philos Trans R Soc B 371:0. doi:10.1098/rstb.2015.0047
Honegger KS, Campbell RA, Turner GC (2011) Cellular-resolution population imaging reveals
robust sparse coding in the Drosophila mushroom body. J Neurosci 31:11772–11785
Hubel DH, Wiesel TN (1963) Shape and arrangement of columns in cat’s striate cortex. J Physiol
165:559–568
Hume D (1748) An enquiry concerning human understanding: a critical edition. The Clarendon
edition of the works of David Hume (2006), Beauchamp TL, ed. Oxford University Press,
Oxford
Husserl E (1913) Ideas pertaining to a pure phenomenology and to a phenomenological philoso-
phy – ﬁrst book: general introduction to a pure phenomenology, 1982. Kersten F, trans. Nijhoff
Publisher, Hague
Jarvis ED, Güntürkün O, Bruce L, Csillag A, Karten H, Kuenzel W, Medina L, Paxinos G,
Perkel DJ, Shimizu T, Avian Brain Nomenclature Consortium (2005) Avian brains and a new
understanding of vertebrate brain evolution. Nat Rev Neurosci 6:151–159

436
S. Shigeno
Kaas JH (ed) (2006) Evolution of nervous systems. Vol. 1. Theories, development, invertebrates.
Elsevier Academic Press, Oxford
Kant I (1781) Critique of pure reason. In: Complete works of Immanuel Kant. Translated into
English by Meiklejohn JMD (1998). Cambridge University Press, Cambridge
Kant I (1788) Critique of practical reason. In: Complete works of Immanuel Kant. Translated into
English by Meiklejohn JMD (1998). Cambridge University Press, Cambridge
Karten HJ (1997) Evolutionary developmental biology meets the brain: the origins of mammalian
cortex. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 94:2800–2804
Karten HJ (2013) Neocortical evolution: neuronal circuits arise independently of lamination. Curr
Biol 7:12–15
Kohonen T (1995) Self-organizing maps. Springer, Heidelberg
Krubitzer L (2009) In search of a unifying theory of complex brain evolution. Ann NY Acad Sci
1156:44–67
Laumer CE, Bekkouche N, Kerbl A, Goetz F, Neves RC, Sørensen MV, Kristensen RM, Hejnol
A, Dunn CW, Giribet G, Worsaae K (2015) Spiralian phylogeny informs the evolution of
microscopic lineages. Curr Biol 25:2000–2006
LeCun Y, Bengio Y, Hinton G (2015) Deep learning. Nature (Lond) 521:436–444
Locke J (1690) An essay concerning human understanding. Penguin Classics, new edition (2008).
Oxford University Press, Oxford
Mareschal D, Shultz TR (1996) Generative connectionist networks and constructivist cognitive
development. Cogn Dev 11:571–603
Mather JA (2008) Cephalopod consciousness: behavioural evidence. Conscious Cogn 17:37–48
Merker B (2007) Consciousness without a cerebral cortex: a challenge for neuroscience and
medicine. Behav Brain Sci 30:63–81, with discussion part pp 81–134
Minsky ML, Papert SA (1988) Perceptrons: an introduction to computational geometry, expanded
edition. MIT Press, Cambridge
Mnih V, Kavukcuoglu K, Silver D, Rusu AA, Veness J, Bellemare MG, Graves A, Riedmiller M,
Fidjeland AK, Ostrovski G, Petersen S, Beattie C, Sadik A, Antonoglou I, King H, Kumaran
D, Wierstra D, Legg S, Hassabis D (2015) Human-level control through deep reinforcement
learning. Nature (Lond) 518:529–533
Moroz LL (2009) On the independent origins of complex brains and neurons. Brain Behav Evol
74:177–190
Mudrik L, Faivre N, Koch C (2014) Information integration without awareness. Trends Cogn Sci
18:488–496
Nguyen JP, Frederick B, Shipleya FB, Linderc AN, Plummer GS, Liu M, Setru SU, Shaevit JW,
Leifer AM (2015) Whole-brain calcium imaging with cellular resolution in freely behaving
Caenorhabditis elegans. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 113(8):E1074–E1081
Nieuwenhuys R, Ten Donkelaar HJ, Nicholson C (1998) The central nervous system of vertebrates,
3rd edn. Springer, Heidelberg
Nixon M, Young JZ (2003) The brains and lives of cephalopods. University Press, Oxford
Northcutt RG (2012) Evolution of centralized nervous systems: two schools of evolutionary
thought. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 109:10626–10633
Pani AM, Mullarkey EE, Aronowicz J, Assimacopoulos S, Grove EA, Lowe CJ (2012) Ancient
deuterostome origins of vertebrate brain signaling centres. Nature (Lond) 483:289–294
Pfeifer R, Gomez G (2009) Morphological computation: connecting brain, body, and environment.
In: Sendhoff B et al (eds) Creating brain-like intelligence. Springer, Berlin, pp 66–83
Pfeifer R, Lungarella M, Iida F (2007) Self-organization, embodiment, and biological inspired
robotics. Science 318:1088–1093
Philippe H, Derelle R, Lopez P, Pick K, Borchiellini C, Boury-Esnault N, Vacelet J, Renard E,
Houliston E, Queinnec E, Silva CD, Wincker P, Guyader HL, Leys S, Jackson DJ, Schreiber
F, Erpenbeck D, Morgenstern B, Worheide G, Manuel M (2009) Phylogenomics revives
traditional views on deep animal relationships. Curr Biol 19:706–712
Plato (380BCE) Republic, Delphi complete works of Plato, illustrated, Delphi ancient classics
book 5, English edition (2012) Amazon Serv Int, Inc

19
Brain Evolution as an Information Flow Designer: The Ground...
437
Poon CS, Shah JV (1998) Hebbian learning in parallel and modular memories. Biol Cybern 78:79–
86
Puelles L, Rubenstein JL (2015) A new scenario of hypothalamic organization: rationale of new
hypotheses introduced in the updated prosomeric model. Front Neuroanat 9:27
Reichert H, Simeone A (2001) Developmental genetic evidence for a monophyletic origin of the
bilaterian brain. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B 356:1533–1544
Reisinger E (1972) Die Evolution des Orthogons der Spiralier und das Archicoelomatenproblem.
Zeitsch Zool System Evol 10:1–43
Roper CFE, Sweeney MJ (1984) FAO species catalogue. Vol 3. Cephalopods of the world. An
annotated and illustrated catalogue of species of interest to ﬁsheries. FAO, Roma
Rosenblatt F (1957) The perceptron – a perceiving and recognizing automaton. Report 85-460-1,
Cornell Aeronautical Lab, New York
Rosenblatt F (1962) Principles of neurodynamics. Spartan, New York
Roth G (2013) The long evolution of brains and minds. Springer, Heidelberg
Roth G, Wullimann MF (2001) Brain evolution and cognition. Wiley-Liss, Berlin
Rubenstein JL, Shimamura K, Martinez S, Puelles L (1998) Regionalization of the prosencephalic
neural plate. Annu Rev Neurosci 21:445–478
Rumelhart DE, Hinton GE, Williams RJ (1986a) Learning internal representations by error
propagation. In: Rumelhart DE, McClelland JL, PDP research group (eds) Parallel distributed
processing: explorations in the microstructure of cognition. Volume 1: Foundations. MIT Press,
Cambridge, pp 318–362
Rumelhart DE, McClelland JL, The PDP research group (eds) (1986b) Parallel distributed
processing: explorations in the microstructure of cognition. Volume 1: Foundations. MIT Press,
Cambridge
Russell B (1921) The analysis of mind. George Allen & Unwin, London
Schmidt-Rhaesa A, Harzsch S, Purschke G (2016) Structure and evolution of invertebrate nervous
systems. Oxford University Press, Oxford
Schneider GE (2014) Brain structure and its origins: in development and in evolution of behavior
and the mind. MIT Press, Cambridge
Sendhoff B, Koerner E, Sporns O, Ritter H, Doya K (eds) (2009) Creating brain-like intelligence.
From basic principles to complex intelligent systems. Springer, Heidelberg
Shanahan M (2006) A cognitive architecture that combines internal simulation with a global
workspace. Conscious Cogn 15:433–449
Sherman SM (2007) The thalamus is more than just a relay. Curr Opin Neurobiol 17:417–422
Sherman SM, Guillery RW (1998) On the actions that one nerve cell can have on another:
distinguishing ‘drivers’ from ‘modulators’. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 95:7121–7126
Sherman SM, Guillery RW (2002) The role of the thalamus in the ﬂow of information to the cortex.
Philos Trans R Soc Lond B 357:1695–1708
Sherman SM, Guillery RW (2006) Exploring the thalamus, 2nd edn. Academic, San Diego
Sherman SM, Guillery RW (2013) Functional connections of cortical areas. A new view from the
thalamus. MIT Press, Cambridge
Shigeno S, Sasaki T, Boletzky SV (2010) The origins of cephalopod body plans: a geometrical and
developmental basis for the evolution of vertebrate-like organ systems. In: Tanabe K, Shigeta
Y, Sasaki T, Hirano H (eds) Cephalopods—present and past. Tokai University Press, Tokyo, pp
23–34
Shigeno S, Parnaik R, Albertin C, Ragsdale C (2015) Evidence for a cordal, not ganglionic, pattern
of cephalopod brain neurogenesis. Zool Lett 1:26
Shomrat T, Graindorge N, Bellanger C, Fiorito G, Loewenstein Y, Hochner B (2011) Alternative
sites of synaptic plasticity in two homologous “fan-out fan-in” learning and memory networks.
Curr Biol 21:1773–1782
Spinoza B de (1677). The ethics. Translated by GHR Parkinson. English new edition (1993). Tuttle
Publishing, North Clarendon
Strausfeld NJ (2012) Arthropod brains: evolution, functional elegance and historical signiﬁcance.
Belknap Press of Harvard University Press, Cambridge

438
S. Shigeno
Strausfeld NJ, Hirth F (2013) Deep homology of arthropod central complex and vertebrate basal
ganglia. Science 340:157–161
Striedter GF (2005) Principles of brain evolution. Sinauer Associates, Sunderland
Sugahara F, Pascual-Anaya J, Oisi Y, Kuraku S, Aota S, Adachi N, Takagi W, Sato N, Murakami
Y, Kuratani S (2016) Evidence from cyclostomes for complex regionalization of the ancestral
vertebrate brain. Nature (Lond) 10:1038
Swanson LW (2003). Brain architecture: understanding the basic plan. 1st Edition. New York:
Oxford University Press, Japanese translation 2010
Swanson LW (2007) Quest for the basic plan of nervous system circuitry. Brain Res Rev 55:356–
372
Tessmar-Raible K, Raible F, Christodoulou F, Guy K, Rembold M, Hausen H, Arendt D (2007)
Conserved sensory-neurosecretory cell types in annelid and ﬁsh forebrain: insights into
hypothalamus evolution. Cell 129:1389–1400
Tomer AS, Denes K, Tessmar-Raible K, Arendt D (2010) Proﬁling by image registration reveals
common origin of annelid mushroom bodies and vertebrate pallium. Cell 142:800–809
Tononi G (2004) An information integration theory of consciousness. BMC Neurosci 5:42
Tononi G (2008) Consciousness as integrated information: a provisional manifesto. Biol Bull
215:216–242
Voicu H (2008) The cerebellum: an incomplete multilayer perceptron? Neurocomputing 72:592–
599
Wells MJ (1978) Octopus: physiology and behaviour of an advanced invertebrate. Chapman &
Hall, London
Wolff GH, Strausfeld NJ (2016) Genealogical correspondence of a forebrain centre implies an
executive brain in the protostome–deuterostome bilaterian ancestor. Philos Trans R Soc B
371:20150055
Wollesen T, Rodríguez Monje SV, Todt C, Degnan BM, Wanninger A (2015) Ancestral role of
Pax2/5/8 in molluscan brain and multimodal sensory system development. BMC Evol Biol
15:231
Young JZ (1965) The central nervous system of Nautilus. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B 249:1–25
Young JZ (1971) The anatomy of the nervous system of Octopus vulgaris. Oxford University Press,
Oxford
Young JZ (1977) Brain, behaviour and evolution of cephalopods. Symp Zool Soc Lond 38:377–434
Young JZ (1995) Multiple matrices in the memory system of Octopus. In: Abbott JN, Williamson
R, Maddock L (eds) Cephalopod neurobiology. Oxford University Press, Oxford, pp 431–443

