See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/357222095
Brain.centric part one
Book · December 2021
CITATIONS
0
READS
314
1 author:
Ronald Cicurel
École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne
12 PUBLICATIONS   28 CITATIONS   
SEE PROFILE
All content following this page was uploaded by Ronald Cicurel on 21 December 2021.
The user has requested enhancement of the downloaded file.

BRAIN-CENTRIC
1

BRAIN-CENTRIC
 
2

BRAIN-CENTRIC
BRAIN-CENTRIC
How the mental space builds realities
Part one: THE MENTAL SPACE
3

BRAIN-CENTRIC
4

BRAIN-CENTRIC
BRAIN-CENTRIC
How the mental space builds realities
Part one: THE MENTAL SPACE
RONALD CICUREL
5

BRAIN-CENTRIC
By the same author
Spyridon’s Quest, 2001. Editions Sarina 
L'ordinateur ne digérera pas le cerveau, science et cerveaux artificiels, 
essai sur la nature du Réel 2013, Editions Sarina 
The Relativistic Brain: How it Works and why it Cannot be Simulated 
by a Turing Machine
in collaboration with Miguel Nicolelis (English and Portuguese versions) 2015 Kios 
Publishing
Nausées, danses avec l’irréel, 
(French) 2016, Editions Sarina
 
Mémoires du Caire: Souvenirs d'enfance d'un grand-père juif d'Egypte 
(French Edition), 2018, Editions Sarina
La réalité est une création humaine. 
Reality is a human construct. 
(French and English versions) 2021 Editions Sarina
Que devient la vérité si tout se passe dans notre cerveau, De l'analogue au 
digital. (French) Editions Sarina 2021
°°°°°°°
°°°°°°°
Brain-centric, How the Mental Space Builds Realities. 
Part one: The Mental Space. With 39 drawings.
© 2020 Ronald Cicurel, éditions Sarina.
editions-sarina.ch
1st Edition, May 2021
ISBN: 9781082275562 
6

BRAIN-CENTRIC
Part one: THE MENTAL SPACE
7

BRAIN-CENTRIC
Thank you
To my children Valerie, Samuel, and Sarina and my grandson Ben, 
that made me a proud father and grandfather. With all my love, 
respect, and esteem for my so devoted companion, Liliane. My 
profound gratitude for supporting and encouraging me through good 
and bad weather.
With all my gratitude to my friend Professor Miguel Nicolelis for the 
years-long passionate discussions, days, and nights in Lausanne, 
Montreux, Natal, Sao Paulo, and other places on this planet. Thank 
you with all my heart, Miguel, for sharing your ideas and inspiring 
mine.
And to my friends and colleagues for sharing with me and letting me 
burrow and adopt their ideas. Admiring other humans is a privilege. A 
special thank you to Lecia Caris that I respect for the logic and 
creativity of her writing. She motivated me and helped me with her 
remarks complete the redaction of this book. I am also grateful to 
Hélène Potier for her comments and proofreading.
I am grateful to all the brilliant thinkers and scientists that allow us to 
make some sense of our human existence and set an example. It cited 
most of them in the text.
I feel much closer to scientists up to the 1960s. Is it because of my 
age or some other mental biases? But I feel these people were thinkers 
or researchers more than scientists. Most were not part of any 
organized system and free to go in the direction they had chosen. 
They were not running as much as now after celebrity, publications, 
hype, and honors. Their passion was the quest for truth, and they did 
not hesitate to take risks and step out of their primary competences. 
Heroes are not the people who have the power; heroes are the people 
who contest power. Heroes are not professionals, they are rather 
passionate amateurs.
8

CONTENTS
Preface	
13
......................................................................
History, why this book	
15
.............................................
Notes to the reader	
18
...................................................
I: PERCEPTION
1.1 Survival	
21
..............................................................
1.2 Perception	
23
..........................................................
1.3 Expectations	
31
.......................................................
1.4 Filling in	
34
.............................................................
1.5 Individuation	
37
......................................................
1.6 Fragmentation	
40
....................................................
1.7 Mental worlds	
42
....................................................
1.8 Two information sources	
47
....................................
1.9 Are expectations universal?	
49
...............................
II: THE FABRIC OF THE MENTAL SPACE
2.1 Memory	
53
..............................................................
2.2 Brains and mental spaces	
58
...................................
2.3 Computer’s mental space	
61
...................................
2.4 Mental Patterns	
64
..................................................
2.5 Mental abstractions	
68
............................................
2.6 Orders and invisible worlds	
72
...............................
2.7 Cave painting	
74
.....................................................
2.8 Cybernetics, adaptation	
78
......................................
2.9 Adaptation, Complexity and Russian dolls	
85
........
2.10 Extraterrestrial intelligence	
90
..............................
2.11 Life and Survival are part of Intelligence	
95
........
2.12 Curiosity and Learning	
98
....................................
9

CONTENTS
III: THE VERBAL WORLD
3.1 Languages and mental spaces	
103
..........................
3.2 Maps and territories	
115
.........................................
3.3 Information	
119
.......................................................
3.4 Shannon information in the mental space	
125
........
3.5 Information in the mental space	
128
.......................
3.6 Learning	
132
...........................................................
3.7 Reduction and Inclusion	
137
..................................
3.8 Complex adaptive systems	
143
...............................
3.9 Causality	
148
..........................................................
3.10 The mind and body problem	
151
..........................
3.11 Mental causation	
157
............................................
3.12 Cartesian dualism and fragmentation	
160
.............
3.13 Libet’s experiment	
162
.........................................
3.14 Why the mental space	
165
....................................
IV: KNOWLEDGES, BRAINS AND COMPUTERS
4.1 Studying with Pythagoras	
173
................................
4.2 Knowing and Being	
176
.........................................
4.3 Knowledge and the quest for truth	
181
...................
4.4 Leibniz dream	
185
..................................................
4.5 A deep mathematical crisis	
191
...............................
4.6 Gödel and Hilbert	
193
.............................................
4.7 Algorithms and thinking	
198
..................................
4.8 The decision problem	
201
.......................................
4.9 Undecidable problems are everywhere	
205
............
4.10 Oracle Machine and natural worlds	
209
...............
4.11 About computer simulations	
211
..........................
4.12 Extending the explanatory landscape	
213
.............
10

CONTENTS
V: FROM INVISIBLE WORLD TO SCIENTIFIC 
PARADIGMS
5.1 Mental spaces and invisible worlds	
219
.................
5.2 The language of Gods	
222
......................................
5.3 Physical laws	
227
....................................................
5.4 Subjective choices in the scientific method	
234
.....
5.5 Sciences and mathematics	
239
................................
5.6 The Circle of Vienna	
245
........................................
5.7 Paradigm shifts	
251
.................................................
5.8 The Laplace deterministic Universe	
256
................
5.9 Physicalism	
259
......................................................
5.10 Computationalism is a bad brain model	
263
.........
5.11 Why is computationalism wrong?	
267
..................
VI: UNKNOWABLES
6.1 Undefinable words, antinomy	
271
..........................
6.2 Truth and belief	
276
................................................
6.3 Existence in physics	
283
.........................................
6.4 Causality and special relativity	
286
........................
6.5 Understanding understanding	
290
..........................
6.6 Intuition	
294
............................................................
6.7 Free will	
303
...........................................................
6.8 Time	
305
.................................................................
6.9 Limits to scientific knowledge	
309
.........................
6.10 Self-reference and blind spots	
311
........................
6.11 Intelligence, Artificial Intelligence	
318
................
VII: WE HUMANS
7.1 The imitation fallacy	
323
........................................
11

CONTENTS
7.2 Fighting emptiness by learning	
329
........................
7.3 Conclusions	
334
......................................................
12

PREFACE
Preface
“Science is done by humans. This obvious fact is easily 
forgotten; it is perhaps useful to remind it.” Werner Heisenberg
This essay is about how we produce “realities.” Scientists think 
of the world under the “External Reality Paradigm or Postulate” 
(ERP), whose familiar name is “realism.” ERP asserts that our 
mental representations reflect what “is” out there. One can 
correct eventual “reading mistakes” by empirical techniques.
Brain-centrism, on the contrary, asserts that our mental 
representations are not what “is” out there; we perceive our 
reaction to the external world. We can correct reading errors, but 
cannot change the structure of the mental space that identifies 
and understands. One cannot “correct” the fact that we all are 
human observers. No one has seen the universe neither through 
non-human eyes, or with a non-human brain.
Recent progress in cognitive neuroscience has forced us to 
question ERP and distinguish “what is out there” from how our 
mental space illustrates it.
Brain-centrism argues that our so-called objective “third-party” 
statements are “first-party” human stories structured according 
to precise rules. These rules, known as the scientific method, 
should make sure that knowledge got by respecting them is the 
best one can expect.
ERP proposes an improbable situation: an isomorphism between 
“out there” and our representations of “out there.” We shall 
explain all along with this book why this extreme case is so 
unlikely. 
In this first volume, we shall examine the “mental space,” an 
abstract entity generated by the brain’s activity. The mental 
space is the place where we live, feel, believe, desire, fear, and 
think. Its components are mental representations. We shall 
examine its relationship with the brain, and its connections with 
13

PREFACE
“out there.” We shall discuss how language developed and 
modeled our realities.
Many properties attributed to the universe are, in the brain-
centric approach, properties of the mental space. They derive 
from the brain’s physiology. Causes, that ERP refers to as 
belonging to the universe, are sometimes brain productions. 
Only a non-human entity could confront us with a different view 
of “out there.” A view not “readjusted” by our mental space. We 
shall examine what attributes an extraterrestrial mental space 
could have. We shall also examine the computer’s mental space.
Special and General Relativity, diverging with Newton’s 
approach, has brought in some physical characteristics of the 
observer, his speed and acceleration. Brain-centrism goes one 
step further, recognizing some aspects of the mental space in our 
explanatory landscape.
The controversy between ERP and variations of brain-centrism 
has been ongoing. Different human cultures, including the 
Chinese and the ancient Greeks, have considered forms of brain-
centrism.
Important figures such as Leibniz, Kant, Schopenhauer, and 
Einstein, Bohr, Schrödinger, to name a few, could be precursors. 
Brain-centrism is significant in science, but it also opens new 
avenues in social sciences, the economy, and most human 
endeavors. 
Brain-centric will comprise two parts. I entitled this first part, 
“The Mental Space.” The title of the second part will be 
“Science and Knowledge viewed from the Mental Space 
perspective.” 
The first three chapters examine the functioning of the mental 
space. Chapter 4 is dedicated to knowledge and the quest for 
truth. Chapter 5 analyzes how and why the mental space 
generated invisible worlds, mathematics, and science. Chapter 
six concerns the limits of the mental space and primitive 
14

PREFACE
undefinable words. Chapter 7 is a conclusion. A few paragraphs 
may be harder to read, please just skip them. The book depicts 
the concept of brain-centrism under various angles, chooses the 
ones who are the most interesting for you.
*
History, why this book
The quest for a consistent and comprehensive global worldview 
has occupied most of my thinking life. Was it an obsession, was 
it my way to rebel against an established order, or against the 
prevailing thinking paradigms? I cannot know. I realize I always 
preferred non-conventional thinking and alternative approaches 
to connect the dots. All our dots regroup in the human brain. 
One may study a remote galaxy, celebrate an anniversary, play 
tennis, or struggle to solve a complex mathematical question; all 
take place in our brain. The brain is the focus of the mystery. 
And the mystery is the source of any quest.
Let me explain how I came to the brain-centric perspective. The 
first significant step was when I studied Kurt Gödel a few years 
after my Ph.D. Logic was not my specialty. However, the 
incompleteness theorems resonated for me far beyond their 
mathematical horizon. It was as if I knew, since very young, that 
our explanations of reality did not present us with what was 
going on out there. I had read Plato, but with Gödel, we have a 
mathematical theorem, not a simple allegory. The weirdness of 
quantum physics and its total dependence on mathematics had 
increased my suspicions. Could He have conceived something 
so bizarre? The equations work fine, but there must be another 
way to interpret them! Is there a “superior” necessity for things 
to be like that?
The next big step, reinforcing my doubts, was reading, some 
forty years ago, the work of Alfred Korzybski, proclaiming that 
“the map is not the territory.” I took time to digest it. I was not 
sure if Korzybski’s idea was evidence or a revolutionary vision. 
15

PREFACE
I tried relating incompleteness, Korzybski, and quantum 
measurement. That is when the writing of this book started.
Twenty years later, after many reading books and having 
innumerable discussions, I was still trying to imagine a more 
satisfactory view. At the Swiss polytechnic in Lausanne, where I 
was teaching, I met Professor Henry Markram, a distinguished 
neuroscientist who had just arrived from Israel. He wanted to set 
up a crazy project. He planned to simulate the brain on a digital 
computer. And he convinced me it was possible in the next ten 
years. I became associated with the project with some other 
friends and professors from EPFL. 
The Blue Brain Project allowed me to confront my views on 
reality with dozens of scientists worldwide. With one exception, 
none of the thinkers I met gave me the impression that their 
ideas would help me in my quest to connect the dots. They were 
specialists; I was lucky enough to be an amateur. The “one” 
exception was a Brazilian neuroscientist, a professor at Duke 
University, whose openness, humanistic perspective, and 
extensive culture impressed me further and further at every 
encounter. Although Miguel Nicolelis is a renowned 
neuroscientist, his interests went well beyond his academic 
specialty. My ideas resonated with his, and we became very 
close friends, discussing for years our favorite subjects on a 
quasi-daily basis. He taught me most of what I have learned 
about the brain.
I abandoned Platonism, and neuroscience convinced me that 
perception could not tell us all about the fabric of “out there.” 
However, I could not surmount the key issue of anyone that was 
educated in ERP: 
What I see “is” out there, I can touch it, smell it, kick it. From 
what I see and think, I can build instruments, and these 
instruments work as I had proposed.
The relation between my representations and out there seemed 
to be direct and truthful: I see what “is” there. We all see the 
“same thing,” we can study and describe it to one another.
16

PREFACE
We can predict the movement of the planets and verify our 
predictions. We can even collide particles and expect the result.
Realism, physicalism, materialism, and even computationalism 
must be true! But then consciousness and free will must be some 
illusion. 
Gödel helped me again. The high-power digital computer that 
IBM had provided to Blue Brain was using a language like any 
digital computer. Step-by-step instructions. Gödel’s 
incompleteness suggested to me this system would never 
simulate the human mental space. Computers cannot understand. 
Computationalism must be a false hypothesis. 
In 2011 (having left the Blue Brain Project), I wrote the first 
essay on the topic, asserting that a mechanism was something 
different from an organism. We build mechanisms, organisms 
evolve. I explained in this book that a simulation of the brain on 
a digital computer had a minimal meaning and would teach us 
very little. I argued the brain must have an analog component 
interacting with its digital neuronal network.
Miguel Nicolelis, although he is the founder of BMI, brain-
machine interface, had the same opinion and the same ideas. He 
thought computationalism was a false assumption for very 
different reasons connected to how populations of neurons 
handle sensory information. We associated our efforts to publish 
in 2015 a monograph: “The Relativistic brain, how it works, and 
why it cannot be simulated by a Turing machine.”
In this monograph, we extended the idea of information by 
considering the information that was non-reachable by a formal 
system, as Gödel had described. We called that information 
Gödelian information. Contrary to Shannon’s information, 
Gödelian information is not symbolic and digital. It is rather 
physical, analog, and integrated. Shannon information cannot be 
causal effective because it is “subtract independent,” Gödelian 
information is because it is physical and subtract dependent.
17

PREFACE
These last 15 years, most discussions I had about reality have 
taken place with Miguel Nicolelis, who became over time more 
than a friend, a soul partner, or an intellectual brother. 
Confronting our two views, the one of a distinguished Brazilian 
pioneering neuroscientist and the one of a mathematician 
engaged in foundational questions, has been the most fertile 
adventure of my whole intellectual life. I wish it could continue 
until my last minute.
What convinced me that brain-centrism was the most 
compelling perspective was an amazing personal experience I 
went through in December 2015. After serious heart surgery, 
they held me in an artificial coma for ten days. For ten days, I 
lived in another world made of “narcotic dreams” just as 
convincing as what we call reality. The experience was so 
fascinating that, for years, I could not figure out what was real in 
these dreams and what was pure brain inventions. I wrote a book 
in 2016 to narrate these amazing narcotic memories.
Brain-centric is thus the result of a lifetime of questioning to 
understand the nature of human reality.
Miguel has published a book (2020) entitled “The True Creator 
of everything: How the Human Brain Shaped the Universe as 
We Know It”. The theme is similar to “Brain-centric” but The 
True Creator is enriched by Miguel’s vast culture in 
neuroscience and human history. I can only recommend reading 
it; I had the honor of reviewing the preprints, and it is 
breathtaking.
*
Notes to the reader
I shall often use the word “out there” instead of “reality” or 
“universe.” “Out there” bears fewer inferences and ERP 
references. 
I used “mental space” and not psyche or mind, which bears their 
references. Studying the mental space differs from psychology. 
18

PREFACE
The individuations we will use, such as the natural world, and 
the verbal world have no correspondence in the psychological 
language. The goal of psychology is healing diseases. It is far 
from the purpose of brain-centrism.
I did my best for the book to present a linear development, 
where I define a concept before I use it. I failed miserably. I use 
many ideas and only develop them later. Skip any paragraph of 
lesser interest for you. However, I added a reference to the 
paragraph where I expose the concept. I also exposed many 
ideas several times at different angles according to the context, 
hoping to make things clearer.
In many aspects, this is not a science, semantics, or a philosophy 
book. Many of the exposed approaches are not consensually 
accepted science, which is ERP-based. I hope to start 
discussions and contradictions.
I have included several historical narratives in this book, hoping 
to make clearer the long cultural route towards brain-centrism.
For my readers who want to have a faster overview of brain-
centric, I marked with a star some key paragraphs.
Finally, one can object I have written this book before all the 
ideas are sufficiently mature. I know my only excuse is age… 
19

PERCEPTION
20

PERCEPTION
I: PERCEPTION
“The laws of physics are believed to be at least approximately 
true, although they are not logically necessary; the evidence 
for them is empirical. All empirical evidence consists, in the 
last analysis, of perceptions; thus the world of physics must be, 
in some sense, continuous with the world of our perceptions, 
since it is the latter which supplies the evidence for the laws of 
physics.” Bertrand Russell, 1927.
1.1 Survival
The human brain has not developed through millions of years to 
maximize our intellectual reasoning skills or to perform 
mathematics. That was not the main orientation of evolution.
The central nervous system (CNS) formed to regulate and 
facilitate our movements, to extend our survival skills. 
Controlling the inner motor system was the function of primitive 
mammals and human CNS.
It was not decisive to bring about a perfect representation of the 
“external reality.” Realism was not the name of the game. Much 
more critical was to generate representations that gave the best 
chances of survival. Even if, from a third-party perspective, the 
picture presented was statistically wrong. 
*
Let us place ourselves about 50,000 years ago.
Imagine that beautiful sunny evening in the African savanna. A 
man has removed from his group, intrigued by an unusual odor. 
The senses of this primitive Homo sapiens are as always on 
alert. His eyes scrutinize the landscape, and his ears interpret 
every sound. His sensitivity to a range of smells also contributes 
to his global awareness. His well-developed primate brain is 
21

PERCEPTION
anticipating what could happen and seeks sensory evidence of 
his expectations. Most of this activity is analog and instinctive; 
consciousness would slow the process. Memorized visual, 
olfactive, haptic, and auditory maps, at various resolution levels, 
meet with sensory signals, adjust, confirm, and readjust, 
generating a high level of brain activity. 
Our man is experienced. He knows how to account for a vast 
number of signals including the wind direction, the humidity, 
and the temperature, although he has no names for them. He can 
also feel and know where his fellows Homo sapiens are. His 
“amygdala” assesses the environment for danger, ready to 
conjure the fear he might need to respond to any threat. His state 
of alertness is maximal, controlled by his reticular activating 
system (RAS) and his neurohormones. Any activity in the 
sensory pathways leading to his cortex will activate the RAS, 
which will facilitate the cortex, which allows the processing of 
the combined sensory input. 
A sudden gust of wind blowing on the high grasses produces a 
slight, unusual vibration. This vibration triggers an electrical 
signal. It starts in the ear, which confirms the details of a 
representation proposed by the memory’s anticipatory system.
This analog match, regarding a minor detail, triggers a feedback 
loop between the RAS and the cortex. Neurotransmitters get 
liberated and activate higher levels of alertness and 
synchronization. 
The anticipatory representation proposes as an “interpretation” 
of the gust of wind: a lion crouching in the grass.
Natural selection has taught him not to hesitate and to accept 
this map as “real” and rush away in the direction opposite the 
signal.
Believing a grass tremor is the sign of a lion is effective for 
survival, although it is often false. 
No similar abusive interpretation applies to his internal body 
sensors. The information pathways are different, and the 
coordination of his muscles is perfect. Like most mammals, he 
22

PERCEPTION
will not choose a straight line for his escape; it is much too 
predictable to be safe.
Nature has invented the fastest way to generate safe (although 
wrong) representations of external reality. This quickest way is 
by generating expectations. To analyze, compare, measure, using 
various thinking procedures would slow a decision. On top of 
the shortlist of expectations, his mental space selected the ones 
that signal danger. 
The brain has evolved to maximize survival, and not for truth or 
“realism.”
* *
1.2 Perception
Brains rely on anticipation and prediction mechanisms to align 
our perceptions with our expectations. This involves two 
separate groups of neurons. One population of neurons encodes 
the sensory data coming in from “out there,” and another group 
represents the memorized expectations.
Each confrontation of the encoded sensory data with pre-
existing representations contributes to refine our expectation list 
and its memorization. Through these continuous interactions, the 
brain builds new neuronal networks. From them emerges our 
multidimensional inner “reality.” All our sensory perceptions 
and their associated feelings combine at various resolution levels 
to improve these constructs. These multidimensional 
representations, and their interactions, constitute the “mental 
space,” as opposed to the underlying brain who would be the 
“physical space.”
Large-scale connectivity between brain regions makes it 
possible to privilege some expectations according to the context 
and personal history. The brain is continuously refining, 
combining, and adapting its expectations. The more often we 
activate a connection, the more it builds up, and more we will 
use it. Prior knowledge can, therefore, reinforce expected signals 
23

PERCEPTION
and reduce the influence of less-awaited signs. Perception is thus 
a selective process, started in the brain, where incoming 
messages by confirming an expectation allow it to gain a higher 
priority. Anticipation is a mechanism used by all our senses and 
our feelings, who represent our physical emotions. 
If sensory information contradicts your expectations, you feel 
surprised and alerted. Your brain releases adrenaline, and for 
some milliseconds seems to stop working, as if paralyzed. It is 
trying to integrate, as fast as possible, the latter information 
incoming from the senses, adapt or call up a better matching 
prior knowledge to determine what to do. We know this 
behavior as “episodic simulation.” Expectations are at work in 
every facet of our life, and we cannot avoid thinking about every 
future situation. That is what our mental space does in the 
background all the time.
Expecting is one of the unstoppable mental mechanisms. 
Anticipation selects what information our senses will prioritize 
in their probing. The selection process allows us, for instance, to 
single out and follow a conversation in a noisy party gathering, 
or to spot out the spider that you fear on the wall. The permanent 
confrontation between our inner models and our sensory 
information determines our views about the external world. It 
develops the individual we are and the reality we live in; it 
shapes our mental space.
We expect somatosensory stimuli, such as heat, cold, touch, and 
pain, before being confirmed.
When you put a step forward, you “expect” the ground to be 
robust under your foot. Have you tried climbing a non-
functioning escalator? At the moment you step off your brain 
behaves as if the escalator was working, and you risk losing 
your balance. Speaking to someone, you expect him to listen and 
react. When you receive the meal you ordered, you expect its 
smell and its taste. 
24

PERCEPTION
We handle perception differently if it is conscious or 
unconscious. Unconscious perceptions involve representations 
that analyze colors, sounds, shapes, faces. The same object 
shown consciously involves a much larger variety of 
representations, activating regions beyond the sensory cortex 
and recruiting a more significant neuronal synchronization basis.
A study was published in 2017 by the neuroscientist Peter Kok, 
Pim Mostert, and Floris de Lange. These scientists show that, 
when we expect an event to occur, one can detect activity in 
visual cortex well before the event out there happens. This 
activity provides a considerable speed advantage, allowing us to 
adapt our behaviors. When the expectation which occurred 
before the fact is wrong, the goalkeeper hurls himself in the 
opposite direction! 
As feelings such as fear, pleasure, or desire preceded the 
development of other representations, we associate them with 
most expectations. Their frequent and ancient usage raises them 
high on the list of what the brain expects. It takes hard personal 
work to control them.
Because of its strong emotional roots, we consider music must 
have been an extremely ancient mental activity.
We love themes where we can expect the succession of notes. 
When the sequence is too simple, too expectable, the music feels 
dull. Successful music pieces subtly combine satisfied 
expectations and moments of surprise. We would feel a total 
surprise as a “random succession” of notes and not consider it as 
music but as noise. It’s impossible to expect! Noise is not 
singable nor learnable. To memorize we need order! (2.6) Music 
must follow some expectable patterns for our brain to recognize 
it, to remember it, and ultimately to “enjoy it.” 
A proper balance between routines and innovation is a condition 
for enjoying any activity. We feel repetitive tasks as boring. A 
rapid succession of unforeseen events can destabilize us. It 
undermines any of our predictions.
25

PERCEPTION
Expectations and representations are not physical, although our 
physical brain activity generates them. They are mental/
informational experienced events. They belong to the mental 
space, and no third-party viewer can observe them. The best 
third party could do is measure the underlying neuronal activity. 
The mental space shapes what we experience. We can 
voluntarily associate, combine, adapt experiences to our needs, 
memorize them and generate new imaginary ones. However, 
most of the time, our expectations remain unconscious.
Because expectations are mental, they give our perceptual 
systems incredible flexibility and the capability to spot out 
similarities and create new representations.
Without the “motor” of analogies, no thinking, creating or 
imagining would be possible. Analogies build links between 
representations. They build and organize the mental space in a 
dynamic and continuous process. New connections develop and 
older ones disappear in the underlying physical space.
For instance, by looking at the clouds, one can see a face or a 
dog that someone else would not notice. By staring at the stars, 
we can draw familiar objects, the constellations, if we are told 
what we should see. Manipulating representations allows us to 
“imagine” and develop new ones extending far beyond what we 
perceive. By doing so, we generate new mental states. Artists are 
used to this extraordinary inflation of their mental space. 
Applied scientists and judges, on the contrary, learn to avoid any 
mental extension during their professional life. We train them to 
be “realist,” and stick to “facts.” This ambivalence is because 
the mental space has two facets. (1.7)
Mastering what we expect is mastering our perceptions. We can 
act on expectations, changing their priority and organization. We 
first need to become conscious of what we are expecting. 
Humans are perhaps the only animals who can reorganize their 
expectations according to conscious wills. This capacity to 
interfere with spontaneous reactions explains the immense 
diversity of knowledge and worldview. Even more than 
26

PERCEPTION
biological diversity, mental diversity is responsible for the 
incredible and unlikely success of our species.
The mental space can thus act on itself. It can represent itself as 
one of its components. This group of representations is our self-
image or self-schema. It is central to any representation network 
and interferes with any perception or thinking process. Because 
of self-image, the mental space has its point of view, like an 
origin in a reference frame. A positive self-image is vital 
because every perception reinforces it. From the outside, third 
parties perceive it as our personality.
No finite narrative can encapsulate the mental space. There will 
be a part of it who escapes any theory or description.
The mental space can observe itself from the outside of any 
description, and change thus falsifying it. We are here pointing 
at the very source of free will, and the reason no precise 
scientific theory of the mental space can describe it.
Representations and expectations are building blocks of our 
multidimensional hyper-connected mental space. Expectations 
are a driving force behind its activity. In this space, we 
experience all we can know about our lives and our universe. 
One considers that the brain gives us access, or generates our 
mental space. This is because the mental space vanishes when 
the brain dies, at least from a third-party perspective. If we can 
observe and measure the physical space, we only know the 
mental space from the inside as first-party knowledge. If the 
physical spaces of various individuals look very similar, their 
mental spaces can be unimaginably diverse.
Brain-centrism considers that all our knowledge is about our 
representations. These cannot reflect the nature of what is out 
there. ERP is the assumption that we perceive what is “out 
there.” Perception is a direct isomorphic image. ERP has 
27

PERCEPTION
developed in connection with vision because of its 
predominance over all other senses . 
1
If one considers taste or smell, for instance, ERP appears much 
less consistent.
We cannot find sweetness in the sugar by analyzing atoms or 
molecules, it needs a mental space to taste it.
We consider odors as a minor factor, but they are critical for us. 
Losing smell, called anosmia, disrupts virtually every facet of 
our lives and transforms our inner reality. These disruptions can 
concern:
our hygiene, a loss of sexual intimacy, a loss of appetite and 
weight, a loss of memory, modifications to our emotional 
balance, depression, anxiety, and the breakdown of personal 
relationships.
How did science come to adopt perception by expectation?
Hermann Weyl (1885–1955) was one of the greatest 
mathematicians and physicists of the last century. Here is how 
he described the unexplainable mysteries that raise a direct 
perception process.
“The processes on the retina produce excitations, which are 
conducted to the brain in the optic nerves, as electric currents. 
Even here, we are still in the real sphere. But between the 
physical processes which are released in the terminal organ of 
the nervous conductors in the central brain and the image which 
thereupon appears to the perceiving subject, there gapes a 
hiatus, an abyss which no realistic conception of the world can 
span. It is the transition from the world of being, to the world of 
appearing image or of consciousness.”
The so-called Binding Problem shows up in the computational 
model of the brain. Different sensory information reports an 
 the processing of visual information seems to dominate the processing of 
1
information from other senses in humans. Other animals gain most of their 
information through their sense of smell.
28

PERCEPTION
event using distinct brain circuits to encode that information. 
However, the brain generates a coherent, precise perception out 
of these non-synchronized data. We accurately perceive the 
consolidation of different sensory messages, although these 
signals reach the brain unsynchronized. The speed of the signal 
along the distinct pathways is different. In the computational 
model of the brain, this synchronization of the various auditory, 
visual, and haptic stimuli is unexplainable. 
The binding problem appears because we consider we have 
created the representation “a posteriori” (or after the stimulus). 
In the anticipatory mechanism, the brain generates its 
expectations of what is being seen as “a priori.” Incoming 
signals interfere with the “a priori” expectations until a resulting 
ultimate image emerges. In this model, there is no “Binding 
Problem.” Everything is “pre-bound” by the expectation and 
confirmed by the various incoming signals.
In the 19th century, Hermann von Helmholtz (1821–1894), 
known for his theory of vision, proposed the idea of 
“unconscious inferences.” For him, the observer uses 
unconsciously tacit previous knowledge, which, combined with 
the sensory input, provides an “accurate” representation. He was 
one of the first modern scientists to express doubts about ERP.
The philosopher John Friedrich Herbart (1776–1841) that 
inspired Bernhard Riemann is a forerunner of brain-centrism. As 
a successor of Immanuel Kant, he was a pioneer in the study of 
perception and learning. His great concern was the relation 
between mental representations and sensations. For Herbart, 
vision and touch developed by combining the “production of 
space” in our minds. He describes visual images as mental 
hypotheses, adapting to the sensory inputs. By considering space 
as a mind production, his ideas inspired Riemann’s discovery of 
non-Euclidian geometries. Riemann’s discovery is the symbol of 
the inspiration brain-centrism could generate by overcoming the 
rigidity of the ERP dictate. 
29

PERCEPTION
Alfred North Whitehead (1861–1947) was an important 
mathematician and philosopher. He co-authored with Bertrand 
Russell of the three volumes of the “Principia Mathematica.” 
The prevailing perception theory embarrassed Whitehead. In his 
book, “The Concept of Nature,” he writes:
“What we see depends on light entering the eye. Furthermore, 
we do not even perceive what enters the eye. The things 
transmitted are waves or—as Newton thought—minute particles, 
and the things seen are colors. … There is now reigning in 
philosophy and in science an apathetic acquiescence in the 
conclusion that no coherent account can be given of nature as it 
is disclosed to us in sense-awareness, without dragging in its 
relation to mind.”
In the 1970s, the British psychologist Richard Gregory (1923–
2010), founder of the Department of Machine Intelligence and 
Perception at Edinburg University, suggested, “perception as a 
hypothesis.” He compares human perception to the way the 
scientific method works, conjecturing followed by verifying. 
Stephen Hawking and Leonard Mlodinow introduced in their 
book “The Grand Design” (2010), the “model-dependent 
realism.” Our brains interpret (using memorized expectations) 
the input from our sensory organs and make a model of the 
outside world. We then organize these models in mental 
concepts that become the only “reality” we can know.
In his book “Beyond Boundaries” (2011), my very dear friend 
and brother Miguel Nicolelis assert:
“Most information about the world and our body comes to the 
brain because of exploratory actions initiated by the brain itself. 
Perception is an active process that starts inside our head…”
He was the first to speak about the brain’s own point of view, 
expressing doubts on ERP. Miguel confirms these doubts in his 
recent book: “The True Creator of Everything” (2020). Miguel 
has established the expectation mechanism as the dominant 
position.
30

PERCEPTION
Scientists who initially proposed an “expectation mechanism” 
could not realize how deep and far-reaching this proposal would 
end up being. They could not have imagined the fantastic 
consequences that it would have for our understanding of reality. 
The expectation mechanism will play a central role in the brain-
centric idea, we consider it as the neuroscience equivalent to the 
Copernicus Heliocentrism. 
Non-observable components make a large part of our reality; 
therefore, expectations will play a critical role in our worldview. 
* *
1.3 Expectations
When you meet a stranger for the first time, you are cautious 
because you do not know what might happen. He registers in a 
category of your mental space as “stranger,” and strangers are 
unknown and may be dangerous. You might feel cautious and try 
to find out details that support this impression.
If a friend has introduced you, it makes things more comfortable 
because you know a bit more about what you can expect. Over 
time, you get to learn about him in many situations. As you 
update your expectations, you become less defensive. The 
stranger is the same person, but your representation has 
developed.
In our social relations, in business, in negotiations, and in 
friendship, we need to show predictable behaviors to make our 
partners feel comfortable. That is how we build a reputation. 
People know what to expect from us (or our brand).
Reading this text, you only read the first letters of each word or 
even of each sentence. Your brain’s expectations build the rest of 
the word or the sentence.
When you hear or read a sentence, understanding it results from 
associating/connecting it to a multitude of prior representations. 
This prior knowledge includes multiple dimensions: the social 
31

PERCEPTION
context, feelings, memorized narratives, intentions, relationship 
with the speaker, etc. A large part of your emotional, physical, 
and cognitive history takes part in your understanding.
When a child learns how to read, the process is slow and 
painful; it requires the continuous intervention of consciousness. 
The child has to read every letter to build up an expectation 
catalog. Adults already have patterns for most words and 
sentences; therefore, a simple hint is sufficient for their brain to 
decide what comes next.
When listening to another person, we put ourselves in his 
situation. This involves simulating his state of mind and trying 
to make sense of it. This amazing capacity of the mental space, 
named empathy, involves imitation and analogy. It implicates 
specialized groups of neurons, called mirror neurons, distributed 
in various brain regions. Mirror neurons can synchronize with 
other mental spaces. They are not only helpful to understand 
others, they also enrich the states of our mental space and its 
expectations through learning. Speaking with an old-time friend, 
you can guess his words, a feeling that will enhance your 
receptivity inhabits you. The expectation mechanism plays its 
role in empathy. When we perceive a facial expression, for 
instance, it triggers expectations about his feelings and his 
mental state.
Expectations are sometimes misleading. One can spot many 
pictures on the internet, created to be interpreted in various 
manners, depending on what the viewer expects. You can either 
see an older woman or a young one, either a rabbit or a bowl of 
vegetables. It depends on your expectations. These pictures also 
show us how complex it is to change one’s expectations. Once 
you identify the old lady, it is rather difficult to switch and see 
the young one. We recognize what we expect to see and have 
difficulties seeing what we do not expect.
I suggest you examine the picture (Figure 1.3.1) before you turn 
the book upside down.
32

PERCEPTION
Once you activated an expectation, it behaves like a habit; it 
pops up in every similar situation, and it is challenging to 
change.
Our brain seeks confirmations; it does not seek falsifications. We 
call this process confirmation bias; it plays a significant role in 
stabilizing our worldview.
Belief echoes are also common perception and memory biases. 
They happen when you have listened to a narrative and 
determined it is incorrect. Later, if you hear it again, you might 
give it some credibility; you have remembered knowing the 
story but have forgotten your initial judgment. That is often a 
strategy used in politics to create rumors. “Tell your negative 
story, even if people doubt it, something will remain.”
We feel other people’s feelings and wishes and react when they 
are expecting something from us. Children should learn young 
how to say no and not respond to all expectations. We do not 
limit empathy to our species; our sensitivity extends to other 
mammals’ feelings and moods.
The focusing effect is another common bias linked to the 
expectation mechanism. It occurs when someone places too 
much emphasis on a picked detail rather than considering the 
“larger picture.” Because of the emotional importance it has for 
him, he sees this detail as essential, whereas for other people it 
would not be relevant. The excessive focusing effect is due to 
how feelings relate to expectations.
Focusing effects also produces selective perception. The first 
time you get a dog, you notice many people are dog owners. The 
first time you buy a red car, you will cross a lot of red cars. By 
imagining our future, we use the focusing effect to help us reach 
our goals, putting the expectation mechanism at our service. 
Through this effect, fears, desires, and values govern our lives 
without us even noticing it.
We estimate that 80% of plane crashes are because of pilots’ 
errors. The error stems from physiological and psychological 
33

PERCEPTION
human limitations. Most pilot errors are because of a wrong 
interpretation, of an alarm signal, of the scenery, of an 
instruction from the tower… Expectations of the pilot play an 
important role in generating these errors. 
Brain-centrism asserts that we have no access to “true reality,” 
we cannot even know if such a “thing” exists or what “existing” 
could mean for such an entity. What our mental space presents 
us is the only reality. Our fate is thus to build the best possible 
mental models. Determining what we should mean by best 
possible is the crucial question. For our savanna man, the “best 
model” relates to survival, but since that time, the environment 
in which we must survive has changed.
We can detect and correct perception biases, like in the examples 
we analyzed in this paragraph, by comparing with third parties. 
But biases that would result from the structure of the human 
mental space are undetectable and unavoidable. Only a non-
human could act as a third party. 
* *
1.4 Filling in
“Filling in” is the second crucial mental space unconscious 
mechanism we shall consider. It is also a non-stoppable driving 
motor of the mental space activity. While building mental 
representations, some sensory data will be missing. The brain 
“fills in” the missing elements by interpolation. It “guesses” 
what should be there according to the situation, its history, and 
its expectations. Filling-in is a perceptual phenomenon. The 
brain adds information in the perceptual field, although no signal 
has reached it.
Our human eye has a physiological blind spot. This is where the 
visual field that has no light-detecting photoreceptor cells. At 
this place, the optic nerve passes through the optic disc. No 
vision is possible there. No photons arrive in that region, 
however there is no “hole” in our visual field. The brain has 
filled in.  
34

PERCEPTION
The transmission speed of 
the nerve fibers is about 
one meter per second. 
When you blink, you 
b l a c k o u t s o m e 8 0 
milliseconds which your 
brain fills in, stitching the 
gap, without you even 
noticing. Enjoying a movie 
or watching television 
involves filling in.
The same thing happens 
when you listen to an 
indistinct conversation. A 
prestigious bottle creates an expectation on the taste of the wine, 
one often fills in with the expected taste.
Filling in happens at all levels in the brain—when we have 
missing data, the brain builds the data, invents them by using 
analogy, expectations or interpolations.
The reverse process, sometimes called dropping out, can also 
happen. When something is not expected to be there, we 
sometimes do not see it! In a famous experiment the spectators 
are presented a clip of a ballroom with people dancing. They are 
then asked if they noticed something unusual. Most people 
notice nothing, although there is a man disguised as a gorilla 
who crosses the scene. The mental space wipes him out because 
he does not fit in.
The brain initiates perception by probing expectations. It then 
confronts them with multiple sensory input data. It organizes 
these data, synchronizing and combining them in a coherent 
picture by filling in the missing parts and dropping out the 
incompatible parts. This happened, for instance, when observing 
the image of the young lady above.
The fill-in mechanism is a cause of false and catastrophic 
representations. We attribute car and even plane crashes to fill-
35

PERCEPTION
ins, called human errors. Training can teach us to avoid many of 
these human errors. Over-training can also favor their 
production. Having exercised so many cases, our mental space 
might find a case close enough to fit the incoming data, but 
wrong.
Fill-in has critical survival advantages: it is fast, it allows the 
brain not to get stuck by a missing piece of data to decide. An 
ill-advised choice is preferable to no decision at all, filling-in 
developed as perceptual guessing, educated by trial and error. 
Often errors could be fatal. Once language appeared, the 
functions of filling-in increased, generating a vast variety of 
creative narratives modeling our inner worldview.
Filling-in is so tied up in the way our mental space gains 
knowledge that one cannot dismiss it. Human civilizations have 
been using fill-ins without noticing mistakes for centuries. 
Filling-in is part of how our brain and its mental space work.
Most of the time, shaped by millennia of natural selection, our 
expectations “fit” well enough with what is “out there.” They 
allow us to “navigate” the world. However, occasionally they do 
not! With some understanding of how expectations work, one 
can create pictures, movies, or virtual realities that “cheat” our 
interpretations and generate “illusions.” 
A typical example is a TV set. What you see if you’re in front of 
the screen is a James Bond film. A technician “knows” that the 
electronics switches on and off in a precise order, a series of 
pixels. 
Describing the scene, you and the technician would deliver two 
distinct languages. You would speak about James Bond diving 
from a helicopter (the first-person perspective); the technician 
would explain how the intensity of 5 million LEDs varied over 
the last minute. (Third-person perspective.) You are describing 
what you perceive and feel; he is saying what he has learned 
about how to produce TV images. 
36

PERCEPTION
It makes no sense to suggest that one description is more “real” 
than the other. The third party description is more appropriate to 
repair a TV set. The first person one, to have an entertaining 
moment. You and the technician are not “using” the same mental 
information sources. Both are useful and both appear in mental 
spaces.
* *
1.5 Individuation
Detecting movement has been one of the most critical functions 
of the visual system. Any movement detected out there could 
mean danger or food and relates to survival. We infer motion 
perception from the changing pattern of light in the retinal 
image. One detects differences in size, texture, contrast, and 
other characteristics. The Middle Temporal (MT) area of the 
primate visual cortex receives and processes the visual signal. 
When we detect unexpected changes, the MT triggers the RAS 
and facilitates the cortex and immediate awareness. Movie 
producers know how to control our attention through movement, 
sound, and image. Preys have learned to immobilize when they 
perceive danger. Predators could notice a movement of escape.
Luminance, contrast, change, and other factors allow the mental 
space to differentiate one object from its environment and other 
objects. Touch, vision, and sometimes audition collaborate to 
confirm the boundaries given to an object in a process called 
“individuation.” We can test and sense differences because we 
can compare sensory inputs. It allows us to consider that 
something differs from its surrounding environment and forms 
an object, a unity per se. We can then identify this something, 
view it as isolated, generate representations, name it. This is a 
mental process, it is not something that happens out there. 
The representation is independent of the object’s movements or 
background changes. It’s a network of individuated properties of 
the entity, including its subparts and all its attributes. Perceiving 
one of these properties will trigger an expectation of the other 
properties. That is why we imagine the lion only seeing 
37

PERCEPTION
something like his tail. An odorous molecule is a sufficient 
attribute for the expectation mechanisms to propose a complete 
lion. Perception, according to psychologist Kurt Lewin, has 
three components, but we not only perceive an object and the 
environment, we also perceive the complex relations between 
the object and the environment. We integrate this third 
component into our representations and expectations, facilitating 
individuation when the object moves or changes. 
The individuation process fragments our perception of “out 
there” into separated parts, building this complex 
multidimensional network of connected representations we 
called the mental space. Many interconnected representations 
thus represent the identity of an individuated entity. Once this 
identity stabilizes, the entity “exists” in our mental space. We are 
still far from understanding how this complex process works. 
You notice a person advancing in your direction. Expectations 
you form concern a large variety of aspects that your brain has 
learned to predict. His physical look: “is it a man or a woman,” 
the path he is following: “How far from me is he, how fast is he 
walking.” But also his intentions “what is he holding in his 
hand, why does he seem agitated, what does he want from me?” 
According to the context, your “state of mind” will activate one 
set of expectations or another, then confirmed or denied by new 
sensory information flowing in.
Face recognition individuation and memorization are of the 
utmost importance for mammals. Looking at faces activates the 
fusiform gyrus, a region of the temporal lobe specialized in their 
identification. By stimulating the fusiform gyrus, scientists can 
alter your identification of a face. The patient will recognize 
someone else!
Learning a language will impose on the child the individuations 
and the relations built in the categories, the words, and the 
grammar of his language. Through the names given by the 
language, he will fragment, separate, individuate and reunite 
objects. The language will build a universe based on symbols he 
38

PERCEPTION
shares with other individuals of his group. It doesn’t mean he 
shares the same feelings associated with the words.
Our mental space individuates not only external objects; it also 
needs to fragment physical emotions into different feelings and 
be able to associate them with names.
Although we experience feelings as “existing things,” their 
individuation is not clear. Feelings don’t have the precise and 
stable contours of external entities. They overlap, change, 
intensify, or vanish out of our lives. They are different for each 
of us. How to individuate and define things like intelligence, 
love, consciousness, friendship, honor, pain, infatuation, 
courage, respect, trust, shame, resentment, admiration, 
gratitude? Feelings lack the “objectivity” required for third-party 
individuation. 
Human languages mirror this difficulty by allowing flexibility, 
metaphors, analogies, evocations, and poetry. Computer 
languages and mathematical definitions, on the contrary, must be 
rigorous to serve their purpose.
Society needs precise criteria and definitions, even for feelings. 
Defining a feeling with words can create difficult situations for 
children who are learning the definition and comparing it to 
what they feel.
If by reversing the definition procedure, instead of fitting the 
definition to the feeling, we impose that the feeling fits the 
definition, we might sacrifice some crucial aspects. This 
reversing is the source of what we call mechanization. We then 
constrain our mental space to behave according to a verbal 
definition, limiting it to exhibit what the rigorous definition 
allows. 
Most children becoming teenagers confront this duality, a 
distance between what they feel and what “they should feel.” 
Many have difficulties overcoming this discrepancy that can 
make them feel different or not adapted. It can take time for 
them to understand that the richness of our inner world is 
39

PERCEPTION
difficult to communicate in the apparent rigor of third-party 
perspectives. 
Measurable individuations about human qualities can only 
concern behaviors, they never illustrate the richness of feelings.
Language is an incredibly powerful tool. However, to express its 
full power to describe our mental space, it cannot be rigorous, it 
must allow flexibility in the individuation of mental states; it 
must often be metaphorical. Music and poetry are more adapted 
to communicate feelings.
* *
1.6 Fragmentation
The great American theoretical physicist David Bohm (1917–
1992), contributed in his original way to quantum physics. He 
expressed grave doubts about our methods of individuation of 
physical objects. He believed that our individuations and our 
fragmentation of “reality” required us to paint an inaccurate 
picture of what is there. His many conversations with the Indian 
philosopher Jiddu Krishnamurti from 1965 to the 1980s are 
remaining testaments of his thinking and the genuine passion of 
Bohm to meet truth. Some recordings of these discussions are 
available on the internet. When I was 20, I had the privilege to 
meet them in Gstaad, where Krishnamurti gave a summer 
seminar each year. 
Bohm opposes “fragmentation” to “wholeness” and considers 
that our method of individuation relates to the limitations of our 
perception. Somehow we miss the point of understanding the 
universe:
“Things appear fragmented because we are looking too low; we 
fail to raise our sights to the level at which the fragmentation is 
only a part of a greater whole. As a result, we mistakenly see 
things as separate, as fragmented.”
40

PERCEPTION
He also says in his book: “The Implicate Order: a New 
Approach to the Nature of Reality”:
“Man sees and experience himself and his world as made up of 
components. Being guided by this view, man then acts in such a 
way as to try to break himself and the world up, so that all seems 
to correspond to his way of thinking. He thus obtains an 
apparent proof of the correctness of his fragmentary self-
worldview, not noticing that it is he himself, acting according to 
his mode of thought, who has brought about the fragmentation 
that now seems to have an autonomous existence, independent of 
his will and of his desire.”
Albert Einstein, who admired David Bohm, also expressed 
doubts about our fragmentation of reality. He wrote in a letter to 
his fellow physicist Robert Thornton in 1944:
“I fully agree with you about the significance and educational 
value of methodology, as well as history and philosophy of 
science. So many people today—and even professional scientists
—seem to me like someone who has seen thousands of trees but 
has never seen a forest. A knowledge of the historical and 
philosophical background gives that independence from 
prejudices of his generation from which most scientists are 
suffering. This independence created by philosophical insight is 
the mark of distinction between a mere artisan or specialist and 
a real seeker after truth.”
What worried Bohm is that fragmentations divide and separate 
things into concepts and words. “Out there,” there is no such 
separation, but a “wholeness.” The mental space generates 
fragmentation then uses it to discover fragmentation “out there” 
in a self-referral confirmation bias.
We then sometimes stumble into difficulties our fragmentation 
has generated, building a world of problems that have no 
existence “out there.” We use the same approach to solve these 
problems, and we engage in unending self-referral loops. ERP 
presents individuations as “external” realities, being external 
they seem unchangeable, and we consider them as “facts.” For 
41

PERCEPTION
brain-centrism, they are mental constructs, convenient for 
certain explanations, but in no way absolute.
Fragmentation establishes limits and frontiers create divisions 
that aren’t in what we are trying to model. For instance, we 
separate between bodies and forces; we individuate a body like a 
planet and a force like gravity producing its movement. We have 
separated hardware from software. We separate mental and 
physical. Our material productions must carry this separation 
because the mental space produces them. An enormous 
difference separates an organism that developed as a whole, 
from a mechanism that was built as the sum of parts. Nature 
does not produce mechanisms, only humans do. (2.8)
ERP has many other complications: beyond fragmentation, we 
will examine them in this book. These difficulties make our 
models different from what they represent.
Brain-centrism argues that individuation and fragmentation are 
essential functions of the mental space’s arsenal to gain 
knowledge. We cannot dismiss or correct them, as we can do it 
with optical illusions. Our individuations and fragmentation are 
part of the way we represent out there, they are surely not part of 
“out there” itself.
* *
1.7 Mental worlds
The prodigious complexity of the human mental space, the 
interdependence of its components, the subtlety and diversity of 
its activities will not fit in any summarized verbal description. 
We are describing one of the most elaborated complex adaptive 
systems in the universe. To understand it, our only possibility is 
to propose some simplified metaphor. The first simplification I 
suggest is to divide the mental space into two mental sectors: the 
natural world and the verbal world. This is the most central 
metaphor we will use to describe the mental space. The activity 
of these two worlds is very different. What we are and our 
reality will result from their unending interactions. (Figure 1.7.1.)
42

PERCEPTION
Two primary sources of information feed the mental space: the 
“internal” bodily information and the “external” sensory 
information. Both sources feed the natural world, the verbal 
world has no external connection. The first source is information 
associated with feelings from our physical emotions. The second 
is information triggered from “out there” by the first internal 
source through our senses. These two types of information 
combine and correlate to complete our natural world 
representations. (Figure 1.7.2.) 
This is how the expectation mechanism materially works in the 
brain. We associate a representation with a feeling. The feeling 
“calls” the sensory representation and gives it its color: This 
association will be critical to understanding most of our high-
level mental and brain functions including our sense of 
“meaning.” (6.5)
The expectation mechanism always starts as a feeling that calls 
for, and associates with, a natural world representation. When 
43

PERCEPTION
we detect an anticipatory electrical signal in the neuronal system 
(3.12), the feeling has triggered it in the associated 
representation; it has called for. 
Expectations are thus always “colored” by our emotional state. 
This emotional state that the mental space lives through analog 
feelings will determine what sensory representation we call for 
and how we “interpret” it. It is thus responsible for filling in and 
dropping out.
Internal analog information has thus a critical role in our natural 
world.
Our verbal world is “about” the natural world, the structures and 
categories of language mainly control its representations.
The verbal world contains our verbal representations, words, and 
narratives who are “about” natural world representations. 
The mental activity of our savanna man, who did not use 
structured symbolic language, was centered in the natural world. 
Analogy organizes information and “thinking” in this world. It’s 
a world of feelings, pictures, sounds, and smells. These associate 
by calling each other through analogies. The natural world is the 
44

PERCEPTION
oldest mental world, the one in which our ancestors have spent 
their lives since our origins. It is also the world in which our 
children live until language becomes prevalent. This world of 
analogies, of sensations, of feelings, of imagination and of 
creativity will, however, remain crucial for us throughout our 
entire life.
Any representation immediately calls other representations they 
connect to. It will thus form a large network representations 
associated with the initiating feeling to form the sensory 
perception. For any representation (R), our mental space will 
call up a network Net(R) of representations we call “the logical 
context representation network.” The tail of the lion suffices to 
evoke the whole animal. Every element of Net(R) will have its 
feelings associated.  At the level of the brain neuron ensembles 
2
and synchronization of neuronal activity will build Net(R). 
Every time it is activated Net (R) will vary because the state of 
the brain and the sensory inputs will never be the same. We will 
often speak about a mental representation and rather mean 
Net(R) than (R).
Emotions do not use a representation system. They are physical. 
They were here millions of years before any symbolic 
representations and languages. We resent this world as truthful 
and natural. Here, things don’t need to have a name to exist. 
Thinking in the natural world is a succession of images, smells, 
desires, impressions, and sensations organized by cascades of 
analogies. It’s more like daydreaming or meditating. Spontaneity 
and creativity are in command. Time has nothing to do with 
clocks. Most representations of the natural world remain latent 
but active. They will influence our decisions and behaviors, our 
tastes, and expectations. They will determine our beliefs. 
Because they are unconscious, they are difficult to change, and 
words only are not sufficient. Through these basic emotional 
anchors, we give meaning to events and concepts. Without them 
things would remain mechanical, understanding itself would not 
 The “material” brain version of what we described is the subject of our theory 
2
(with Miguel Nicolelis) of the brain exposed in our book The Relativistic 
Brain.
45

PERCEPTION
exist. In the natural world, there is no symbolic coding and no 
abstractions, there is no truth or untruth, things simply “are.” 
The verbal world is “about” the natural world (Figure 1.7.3). It 
does not deal with “things” but with “meta-things,” with things 
about the things. It is a level of abstraction higher, it’s a meta-
world. In the verbal world, thinking is telling stories. We already 
did that before the structured languages, but now language has 
changed the way we do it and we organize it. Causality has 
replaced analogy as an organizing force to relate events and 
concepts. Because we are dealing with symbols, we have the 
freedom to manipulate them as we wish. They can or not 
represent our natural world’s feelings and representations. The 
major asset of the verbal world is that it allows easier and more 
precise communication between humans. They have now a 
common word to designate a subject even when it is not there or 
not material. Naming becomes a powerful tool to “give 
existence” to things. The categories and the structure of the 
46

PERCEPTION
language reinforce the individuation and fragmentation 
capacities of the verbal world.
This move from analog-to-digital represents the initial step of 
the digital revolution. For the first time on our planet, and 
perhaps in the universe, digitalization appeared in a brain. It was 
getting ready to change the planet, and perhaps a larger part of 
the universe. However, we should not forget who we are 
biological organisms, with a consciousness that strives to 
understand the universe and itself. A consciousness that forgets 
that the fundamental things happen behind its back at levels we 
cannot understand. Our brief history makes us short-sighted. Our 
first-person perspective puts us at the center of things. But it 
might well turn out our digital experience is only an ephemeral 
event, lasting a few thousand years. On this insignificant planet 
something went wrong but nature quickly repaired it. We are not 
the player we are minor pieces on the chessboard.
* *
1.8 Two information sources 
The feeling-dominated natural world is the oldest part of the 
mental space. Mammals millions of years before we discovered 
symbolic languages, already associated feelings expressing 
physical emotions to mental representations. The limbic brain, 
the structures that control emotions, motivation, and memories, 
is far older than the neocortex. Feelings, prolonging ancestral 
emotions, interfere with every aspect of our mental and social 
activities. They shape our representations, trigger our 
expectations, guide our thoughts and our intuitions, confirm our 
understanding, and determine our tastes and beliefs. Every 
mental representation, however abstract it is, connects to 
feelings with bidirectional information. Human thinking, 
however abstract it is, will always be attached to feelings. 
Feelings drive the activity of the brain. That is why, as a child 
(and even later), it is so critical to learning how to balance 
emotions and thoughts. Associating positive feelings to our 
representations will determine our attitude when confronting any 
47

PERCEPTION
circumstance. The richness and variety of feelings will allow us 
to color our interpretations in a rainbow of amazing and creative 
tints or reduce them to limit categories, dominated by fear or 
greed. 
Emotions are “physical,” only their verbal representations are 
symbolic; that means their “information content” is integrated, 
“non-detachable” information. One cannot “detach” the 
information from the emotion itself. The emotion is the event, it 
is not “about” the event. Feeling something is living it, not 
commenting on it. We can say something that we don’t think, we 
cannot feel something we do not feel. With my friend Miguel 
Nicolelis, we have called the non-symbolic, physical, analog 
information “lived” through emotions and feelings “Gödelian 
information,” to distinguish it from the classical, 
detachable Shannon information. (3.4) One can say things 
“about” Gödelian information as we say something “about” this 
tree out there. But one cannot say Gödelian information, like one 
cannot say the tree itself. Gödelian information and trees are not 
words, they are not detachable from their physical expression, 
they don’t belong to the verbal world. One says that Gödelian 
information is subtract-dependent.
This reminds us that the verbal world is not the totality, it is 
merely a superposed symbolic layer about the natural world. The 
information of this symbolic layer is subtract-independent 
Shannon information. The information of the natural world, be it 
regarding our body or any entity out there is unspeakable 
Gödelian information.  
Another important difference between analog, physical Gödelian 
information and symbolic detachable Shannon information is 
that Shannon information does nothing. One says that it is not 
causal effective, it is only a succession of symbols that one 
could write as a series of zeros and ones. Such symbols can lie 
in a book: they are not active by themselves and mean nothing, 
as long as a mental space does not interpret them. Gödelian 
information is causal effective, it acts on the physical because it 
48

PERCEPTION
is itself physical. We can express this with a metaphor by saying 
that.
Planets do not know Newton’s law. However, they orbit the sun. 
Out there any information is analog, physical, and embedded, it 
is not detachable. To detach it, a mental space fragments, and 
separates information from matter or movement. That 
fragmentation only occurs mentally. It needs a brain. Having 
generated such a brain must have been a revolution for the 
universe. It took him thirteen billion years to get there (in our 
fragmented vision). 
* *
1.9 Are expectations universal?
Do mosquitoes or extraterrestrials also use expectation and fill-
in mechanisms to represent, “out there”? Do they individuate 
and fragment as we do? Can we expect extraterrestrial beings, if 
they exist, to see the world?
The search and the perhaps discovery of extraterrestrial 
intelligent beings are the most intriguing and revealing quest 
humans can pursue. Finding intelligent extraterrestrial life would 
confront us to a real “third party” vision of “out there.” It would 
allow us an understanding of ourselves and the universe that 
alone we could never gain. Discussing extraterrestrial intelligent 
life is part of the Brain-centric program to make us as conscious 
as possible about our limitations and eventual possibilities to 
overcome them. It also helps us understand our place in the 
universe and thus gives a deeper meaning to our existence. 
What we know about mental spaces already allows us to say 
quite a lot of things about these beings in case they exist.
But let’s start with what has occupied us in this chapter: 
perception. Could any developed (intelligent) entities have 
“come up with” an alternative to getting knowledge about what 
is out there that is not using expectation mechanisms?
49

PERCEPTION
This question is crucial. Our senses work through expectations, 
what they render to our brain cannot be isomorphic to what is 
out there. But would isomorphism be possible for other 
developed species using different strategies than the ones that 
have developed on earth?
An “isomorphic” system would sense and picture information 
received from “out there.” It would store these pictures in a 
database of analog pictures. If a picture is missing, no adaptation 
is then possible. The animal would not present sufficient 
complexity and adaptability for individual intelligence to 
develop.
We know that on earth mammals all use an anticipation 
perception system, allowing them to adapt and learn by trial and 
error. If they use an anticipatory system, they must have a 
natural world and thus feel.
Insects seem to use a direct representation system. With such a 
system, changing perceptual representation is difficult. An 
individual can get stuck in a “behavioral loop” and repeat the 
behavioral pattern. He can end up dying because of a minor 
change in his environment for which he has no corresponding 
existing pattern. Experiments with the Sphex wasp, for instance, 
illustrate these behavioral loops, as a representation does not 
adapt, the insect continues having the same deceitful behavior.
If insects survive, it is because they have another adaptation 
process that does not require learning. It is the Darwinian natural 
selection. At the species level adaptation derives from 
reproduction and natural selection.
Advanced animals adapt by natural selection at the species level 
and by learning at the individual level. This second level is 
because of the expectation mechanism changing the 
representations of their natural world.
Behavioral loops are not to be confused with compulsion loops, 
which concern advanced mental spaces. Compulsion loops are 
patterns, habitual chains of activities that repeat and provide a 
50

PERCEPTION
neurochemical reward such as dopamine release. The result, for 
instance, from practicing video games or using websites 
designed to gain customer loyalty through addiction.
Expectations and fill-ins exist in every advanced living species. 
It implies that these species have emotions and feelings and a 
natural world. No species could develop “individual 
intelligence” by only using direct isomorphism. Direct 
isomorphism has to be analog. 
Humans, because of symbolic language, have developed a third 
level of adaptation by which we transform the environment to 
suit our needs. This third level happens only because we have 
sufficient complexity to digitalize and materialize our ideas.
Because of the universality of expectations, we can cheat a dog 
who could start running in the wrong direction when one 
simulates throwing the ball.
Let’s consider a simple remark that highlights the difficulties 
humans have regularly come across in their quest for truth:
Only an external third-party observer can compare the 
representations of two individuals, but that third party cannot 
have direct access to A and B’s experience and representation 
system.
Let us say A wants to compare himself to B. He will analyze B 
through the filter of A’s representations. Same thing: if B is in 
charge of the comparison, he will analyze A through B’s 
representation system. One will then get two results.
An external observer C having access to A and B’s inner 
representations does not exist. Only A has access to A’s 
representations, and only B has access to B’s representations. So 
A, and B, cannot know how good their models are. Neither A 
nor B can be “correct.” Humans have resorted to truth imposed 
by an authority or truth got through discussions and consensual 
agreement.
51

PERCEPTION
Since the 18th-century enlightenment, science has established a 
“third-party” description method of “reality” through narrative 
accepted and verified by experimentation. This third-party 
perspective is what we have called ERP.
Brain-centrism asserts that ERP cannot eliminate the 
intervention from the observer’s perspective. We cannot create 
an external third-party C out of A or B by setting up rules. One 
can’t eliminate the specificities of the brain’s physiology that 
would allow us to build ERP isomorphic knowledge.
* *
Summary of chapter 1:
- Survival has been the key driver of our brain development
- The brain uses anticipatory systems specifically for perception
- Perception is subject to biases. Only personal biases can be corrected.
- When information is missing, the brain fill-ins
- Expectations and fill-ins are two driving motors of the mental space
- The mental space works by fragmenting reality and individuating objects 
out there. Language extends and reinforces fragmentation and 
individuation.
- We can divide the human mental space into two worlds: the original 
analog natural world and the more recent digital verbal world. We live in 
both.
- The mental space has two sources of information. The physical integrated 
analog Gödelian information from our body, the symbolic digital Shannon 
information from our sensory system.
- We associate every representation with feelings
- Representations form networks who are themselves representations 
associated with feelings
- The expectation mechanism is universal for intelligent species. Feelings 
and emotions are essential for intelligence.
- Mathematical objects are their verbal definition.
-
* * *
52

THE FABRIC OF THE MENTAL SPACE
II: THE FABRIC OF THE MENTAL SPACE
The mental space is the inner place where we experience our 
lives, take our decisions, and build our tools to act on “out 
there.” Two sources of information are available for the mental 
space to build representations.
We have distinguished two worlds in the mental space 
according to what source of information is dominant. This 
chapter will further discuss the “building blocks” and the 
functioning of the mental space.
2.1 Memory
The famous author Philip K. Dick is one of my favorite science 
fiction writers. He published in 1966 a short novel entitled: “We 
Can Remember It for You Wholesale” in which the hero 
becomes a client of Rekal Inc. He buys from Rekal Inc. 
beautiful vacations on the planet Mars. Not physical vacations, 
but “memory implants.” Rekal Inc. guarantees that their memory 
implants are indistinguishable from life experience,  but at a 
3
much lower price.
Dick’s idea has the merit to pose the question of “what is our 
identity,” if not our memories. It also raises other questions: 
What is the nature of the past? What is a “true reality”? If one 
cannot distinguish our “real” memories from implanted 
memories, what is reality? 
The sense of “being me,” the feeling of continuity and 
permanence, merely manifests because of memory. We can feel 
and observe the “same body” and the “same feelings” today as 
last week, only because we can remember. If someone can 
implant or erase our memories, then who are we?
For now, Dick’s idea is still science fiction, but will it remain 
so? For many neuroscientists, the answer is no; they are working 
 Two films both named Total Recall have been inspired by Dick’s short story.
3
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Total_Recall_(1990_film)
53

THE FABRIC OF THE MENTAL SPACE
on ways to “read” the brain, and to implement or to erase 
memories.
Our memories define how we perceive ourselves and who we 
are. Based on them, we have built our “self-image,” and our 
identity. Losing our remembrances, like with Alzheimer’s 
condition, is losing ourselves; you feel yourself go. Later, the 
feeling itself goes. You are there, but gone! One can lose 
memories after a traumatic accident, a stroke, or an epileptic 
crisis. There are many types of losses. It shows we should 
distinguish various memories. 
Memory losses are always scary. When you don’t recognize 
anybody, you don’t know whom to trust, you cannot even trust 
yourself. It is also traumatic for your close ones. Sometimes one 
can recognize a distant colleague, but not recognize one’s wife 
or children. 
Language remains memorized in most memory losses, alike 
when understanding of the words disappears. We remember 
music, words, and smells through different channels. Music, like 
language, is very enduring. Some Alzheimer’s cases that have 
lost their souvenirs can still play piano or sing a melody. We 
remember smells when we come across them, but because they 
are not visual, we may have trouble recalling them. A general 
rule is that we remember details associated with powerful 
emotions.
When meeting a very different person, I often wonder what it 
would feel like living in his body with his mental space, his 
history, and experiences. I know how it feels to be me; (although 
I am surprised), what does it feel like to be him? Because of 
perception by expectation, two mental spaces that have observed 
the “same” scene have had unique experiences and will recall 
something different. The sense of self, the very core of all our 
knowledge, is something we can only know from the inside. We 
can only infer others have it, and we can only guess what it feels 
like to be someone else.
54

THE FABRIC OF THE MENTAL SPACE
Other people’s stories feed human memory today. Controlling 
the narratives has always been a major concern of people in 
power. Through narratives, one controls memories, expectations, 
and mental spaces. 
As George Orwell put it, controlling the past is controlling the 
future. 
The only way today to implement a narrative in a mental space 
is through language, communication, education and learning. 
Many  people estimate that the capacity of transmission is 
4
overly narrow. They wish to find some direct way to access our 
memory. Something like plugging a USB key into a computer. If 
such an invention becomes possible one day, we would, 
however, still not be at the level proposed by Rekal Inc. Such an 
implemented knowledge would only concern the verbal world, 
not the natural world governed by Gödelian information. We 
would know that this learning is not “real,” it is not something 
we have lived! To involve the natural world in such a narrative 
would, however, perhaps be workable by adopting repetition and 
belief echo.
The metaphor “building blocks” we used to qualify as memories 
find its limits. Memories don’t look at all like blocks. They look 
more like liquids that can divide into fresh streams or regroup in 
powerful rivers or hide in deep caves or even evaporate. What 
we have individuated as memory does not have precise contours.
One distinguishes two categories of long-term 
memories: explicit memory and implicit memory. 
Explicit memory requires to be recalled consciously. We 
associate them with a time and a place; they belong to the verbal 
world. 
Implicit memory is not about precise facts but is more of a semi-
conscious, emotional recollection, it’s a memory of the natural 
world. 
 Elon Musk has also expressed this opinion
4
55

THE FABRIC OF THE MENTAL SPACE
Children form explicit memories only when they reach the age 
of two, but most of their memories remain implicit until about 
seven years old. They can remember things before the age of 
three when they are small, but by the time they get older, they 
lose those early autobiographical memories. Sigmund Freud has 
called this phenomenon childhood amnesia.
One considers implicit memories as the pillars founding our 
mental space. They take part in the brain’s formation already a 
few months after conception. Implicit memories are physical 
and analog and possess a large emotional content. We attach 
them to most of our representations and they allow us to remind 
ourselves. Because of their emotional origin, they can act on the 
body.
When we recall memories, the present state of the mental space 
influences the way we perceive them. Feelings, at that moment, 
do not always prioritize the same components of the memory. 
They put certain elements forward, neglect others, according to 
the general state of the mental space at the moment of the recall. 
The process is like what happens in perception.
For instance, at someone’s funeral, one does not recall the same 
aspects of the buried person we would have remembered one 
year before.
Natural selection did not bother to create precise and stable 
memories. Most of our souvenirs are implicit, analog, and 
imprecise. Nature privileges speed and adaptability. We always 
associate feelings with representations to memorize them. When 
you pull your hand away from a hot cooking plate, it can happen 
instantly because of the analog memorized expectation. 
Sometimes the cooking plate is not even warm, but it triggers 
the reaction before you get to know it.
When we remember an ancient event, probably we remember a 
more recent recall of this event, colored by what these recalled 
have added or omitted. Over time, what remains of the event 
disappears. It is a bit like when you have played often an old 
56

THE FABRIC OF THE MENTAL SPACE
vinyl recording; you hear more noise than music. It happens to 
any analog system.
Our brain also uses digital short-term memory. Let us say you 
have to remember a phone number. Without repeating it many 
times, humans can remember five to nine digits. For that, we 
resort to auditive memory. We use a different circuitry for visual 
short-term memory, which is even smaller. 
For instance, when we read, we are shuffling things in and out of 
this digital memory. We build words not to exceed a certain 
length to facilitate their apprehension. The same thing when we 
listen to somebody speak. The limited sizes of short-term 
memory have enormous consequences not only on our 
communication bandwidth and capacities but also on our global 
understanding and our worldview. 
We have difficulties processing an intricate calculation for which 
we have to memorize many intermediary results without a pen 
and paper. Not for a computer with plenty of RAM. When short-
term memory becomes a longer-term memory, we associate it 
with an analog feeling.
Scientific American reports on the life of the savant Kim Peek, 
who is capable of unimaginable long-term memory capacities. 
“His repertoire included the Bible, the complete works of 
Shakespeare, US area codes and zip codes, and 12,000 other 
books.” He remembered every word of all these books.
In another article, Scientific American Mind discusses with 
Daniel Tammet. He is the author of two books, “Born on a Blue 
Day” and “Embracing the Wide Sky.” He holds the European 
record for reciting the first 22,514 decimals of the mathematical 
constant π (PI) in front of a jury and television cameras for five 
continuous hours, with no mistake.
These incredible performances of savants often come at a cost to 
them. However, they show we are still far from understanding 
how memory works and its capacities.
* *
57

THE FABRIC OF THE MENTAL SPACE
2.2 Brains and mental spaces
Three hundred thousand years ago, the brain size in early Homo 
sapiens was already within the range of present-day humans. 
Studies show; however, the brain shape continued to evolve. It 
reached present-day shape between 100,000 and 35,000 years 
ago. We can surely consider that the brain of our savanna hunter 
was very similar to ours.
The relation between the brain and the mental space is a 
complicated problem. Some see the future in accessing the 
mental space by manipulating some brain hardware or wetware. 
As per 2021 we don’t know, for instance, how the brain stores 
memories . Certain neuroscientists dream about discovering a 
5
“brain code” that would allow a direct correlation between 
physical brain activity and mental space representations. By 
probing this activity and translating it through the brain code, 
one could then know what the individual is feeling, thinking, or 
dreaming. If such decoding of brain signals is possible for the 
motor cortex, as Miguel Nicolelis’s BMI  shows, it is 
6
controversial for the so-called higher brain functions. A brain 
activity or neural patterns do not correspond to mental space 
activity. 
Brain-centric considers that such a code cannot exist . Feelings 
7
are central to any representation and are integral to any thought. 
According to brain-centrism, we express feelings in unreadable 
Gödelian information. Measuring brain activity is only about the 
 The most widely held view is that memories are stored by enhancing synaptic 
5
connections between neurons. Recent experiments have suggested that 
memories may be stored within the nucleus of neurons, where RNA is 
synthesized.
 BMI stands for Brain Machine Interface. Is a technology to read and decode 
6
brain’s electrical activity, with implanted electrodes or with a helmet, in order 
for a computer to execute the brain’s instructions. Miguel Nicolelis has 
developed many application of the technology, for instance to help with spinal 
cord injury.
 Every few years, though, one can read in the news that a group of 
7
neuroscientists has read thoughts or dreams. To my knowledge, it is 
journalistic hype, or, in the best case, they are reading “silently spoken” words, 
the signals they consider result from the motor cortex activity.
58

THE FABRIC OF THE MENTAL SPACE
digital Shannon information in the brain. That is the case for 
BMI’s motor functions. 
Brain-centrism refutes the possibility of a universal brain code. 
Such a code would imply an isomorphic correspondence 
between the brain’s electrical signals and our experienced 
feelings, but also between brains and computers. The computer 
could read the brain signals, decode them, and print out your 
thoughts and feelings. 
One could then describe the universe, including all mental 
activity, in the language of matter. Scientists that hope to 
discover such a code have adopted the “computationalism” 
paradigm. The brain would then be a mechanism, rather than an 
organism striving to remain far from thermodynamic 
equilibrium. (2.9) This paradigm is, according to the theoretical 
physicist Lee Smolin, responsible for us losing at least ten years 
in brain research. (5.13 and 5.14). 
However, the brain engenders mental space. Our mental space 
must undergo the constraints enforced by the brains’ physiology 
and structure. The environment has regulated the evolution of 
the brain’s primordial parts associated with motor activity. More 
recent regions, such as parts of the frontal neocortex, have 
developed to serve the needs of the mental space. Once the 
verbal world became predominant, our brains adapted.
Among all advanced animals’ brains, the human brain at birth is 
by far the smallest compared to its final size (less than 50%). We 
thus create considerable new brain matter, a phenomenon 
called neurogenesis. We correlate the brain’s neurogenesis with 
mental space learning and memorizing. This underscores how 
crucial education will be for every life. Memory in the mental 
space thus corresponds to increased physical connectivity and 
neurogenesis processes in the brain.
The sequence of a child’s brain’s expansion is from the back to 
the front. The last region to mature is the prefrontal cortex that 
reaches complete expansion at 25. Before that, feelings and the 
59

THE FABRIC OF THE MENTAL SPACE
natural world dominate the mental space, rational thinking is the 
last to develop.
Brains grow at the cell level by a choreographed process of cell 
proliferation, migration, and differentiation; but it also develops 
at the connectivity level with axonal growth, dendritic 
connectivity, and general refinement of the neural connections. 
For humans, this growth is a regulated, dynamic process that 
continues well into adolescence. For the mental space, it 
corresponds to the fastest growing and structuring phase.
The brain, and the mental space, are complex adaptive systems. 
Everything inside the brain is shifting, developing, retracting, 
adapting at every level from the molecules, to the cells, and 
entire brain regions. Actions and retroactions multiply between 
brain regions and between levels. This happens through 
electromagnetic, chemical, and physical forces. It provides the 
brain its marvelous adaptation capacity, named brain plasticity, 
and is critical to learning and adaptation. Plasticity is ongoing 
throughout the lifetime and so should learning and memorizing.
The connectivity of the cortex corresponds to patterns of neural 
activity. We create these patterns through novel representations 
of the surroundings. The brain’s growth and adaptation correlate 
to the quantity and the diversity of new representations 
generated in the mental space.
Scientists have shown that physical exercise helps neurogenesis 
and plasticity in the hippocampal  region. Sleep plays an 
8
important role in dendritic growth. It reinforces connections and 
favors long-term memory. Many studies show we can improve 
long-term memory of adults by training. 
9
 Hippocampus is a brain structure embedded deep into temporal lobe. It has a 
8
major role in learning and memory.
 The method of loci is a common technique used by memory sports 
9
competitors. It refers to the memory enhancement strategy of associating the 
items to be memorized with specific physical locations and retrieving the items 
by mentally “walking” through the imagined place. It is an old technic, its 
origins are traceable to ancient Greece and Rome
60

THE FABRIC OF THE MENTAL SPACE
However, certain areas of the brain are not as plastic. Even 
regions that play critical roles in factors such as movement, 
language, or speech. Damage to those areas can cause 
permanent handicaps, as other areas cannot take over.
* *
2.3 Computer’s mental space
Even if some parallels exist between the computer’s memory 
and the brain’s memory, they function differently.
We did not design computer digital memory for the same usage 
as human analog memory. We require it to be accurate and to 
repeat the result each time we need it. Computers would be 
useless if their memory were like ours.
It is confusing that computer scientists have the habit of 
employing names attributed to brain functions. They describe 
computer attributes which “seem” like brain functions but are de 
facto different. It is the case with memory, but also intelligence, 
decision, and many other words.
A digital computer has a mental space when we switch it on. At 
the difference with an organism, one can switch it off, cut the 
energy source and when we switch it back on, continue working 
as before. If an organism is “switched off” it dies and the 
process is irreversible. Time reversibility is a critical difference 
between a mechanism and an organism.
Laws of physics are (locally) time-symmetric; one can change 
the time variable t into -t in the equations and nothing special 
happens. Because the effects of mechanical and electromagnetic 
phenomena, as described by the equations, are time-reversible, 
one can “wind back the clock” and restart any experiment. 
Without this local reversibility , the universe would not be 
10
understandable and we would not exist.
 Time reversibility is a mental abstraction. Laws of physics consider isolated 
10
objects that allow this reversibility. They don’t apply to organisms who are 
dissipative entities. (2.9)
61

THE FABRIC OF THE MENTAL SPACE
We cannot consider a computer as a third party as we would 
consider an intelligent extraterrestrial. This is because it did not 
evolve, we built it as a (very limited) projection of our mental 
space. We projected on him our individuations, our 
fragmentations, our mathematics, and a large part of our verbal 
world. However, as our natural world works with integrated, 
subtract dependent Gödelian information, we could not project 
it. He is a “one world” mental space lacking the complexities of 
the two worlds in which we struggle. It then means that he lacks 
intelligence and does not understand. When computer scientists 
use the same word for computer and human attributes, they 
“neglect” the natural world representations and feelings attached 
to it. Those attachments give life, meaning, and purpose to 
human words. By attributing these words to computers, they 
strip them of their essential substance .
11
Examining some differences between his memory and ours will 
give us a glimpse into the computer’s limited mental space.
1- The brain’s memory is contextual; how and what we recall 
depends on the present state of the brain. The current status 
gives its “color” to what we remember. It uses a fill-in process, 
adapting the memory to the present situation. Computer memory 
is a precise digital copy, independent of any context.
2- Brains’ memory does not have an “address.” It instead works 
by associations and analogy; it is implicit. When one tries to 
remember something, one evokes the history or the context in 
which it happened. Many routes, many associations allow us to 
recall a name or an event. We do not search in our memory as 
we explore in a directory by knowing the address.
3- The brain’s memory is not precise; it is not dealing with 
numbers or data, but with associated feelings and impressions. 
We remember what we have experienced rather than measures 
and data. We remember something like “She was a pretty big 
 This sneaky mechanization is the main subject of my book L’ordinateur ne 
11
digèrera pas le cerveau, 2013 Editions Sarina.
62

THE FABRIC OF THE MENTAL SPACE
and imposing woman,” rather than “She measured 1,925 me and 
weighed 124.56 kg.”
4- When we recall a memory, we color it with the present 
context as per point 1-, when we memorize it again, the recent 
recall alters the memory. We recall having remembered. 
Memories of old events can this way get very distorted by 
successive recalls and fill-ins. Computer memory is an exact 
digital copy.
5- Brains forget. One can erase computer memory; they don’t 
forget. Brains “believe” something happened; they can think, 
although they are not sure. Computers have something in 
memory or do not have it. They cannot believe or doubt. They 
have no underlying feeling.
6- Brains can have false recollections, illusions, a computer 
cannot. Computers’ “false memories” are correct when 
compared to the input. If its memory contradicts with facts, the 
input already contradicted those facts. 
7- Human memories influence perceptions by the expectation 
process. The computer’s memory content does not affect the 
inputs.
8- Not only we remember sensory data or verbal information; 
we remember in priority smells, feelings, imagined stories, 
dreams, fears, beliefs, trust. We memorize implicitly and 
explicitly. Computers do not have feelings, they do not trust or 
“believe.”
9- Memories change the “hardware” of our brain. Plasticity and 
neurogenesis create new molecules, synapses, and pathways. 
The volume of the hypothalamus, or the white matter, can vary. 
If we stop using a pathway, the memory vanishes. It is not the 
case for computers. 
10- Two human witnesses will never describe the same event in 
the same way. They have not perceived it the same way; they did 
not have the same expectations while observing. The state of 
their brains was different. Two computers with the same inputs 
63

THE FABRIC OF THE MENTAL SPACE
will produce the same output. If they do not, it means that we 
have programmed them not to do so.
11- We can encode a computer’s digital memory on different IT 
devices; it is not the case for human memories. We already 
noticed that our analog memory is physical and causal; we 
cannot detach, and is not directly communicable. We sometimes 
“know,” but we cannot explain it with words, the translation into 
digital communicable form is difficult. We often need an analog 
picture or a drawing to communicate. Human language is 
imprecise to describe our feelings, for instance. What we 
memorize by “doing” cannot fit into words. One cannot explain 
a color or a taste to someone who has not experienced it.
12- Remembering a piece of music can make you cry. 
Remembering a situation can make you shiver. This is because 
memory information is analog and integrated. Computers do not 
tremble when we load a file. The mental space of a computer has 
no natural world. It has no imagination, no understanding, no 
creativity, no identity.
The precision and rigidity of the digital computer, the 
reversibility of its operations, make it useful. It does not make it 
intelligent.
* *
2.4 Mental Patterns
The brain is not only constantly expecting; it is also constantly 
building or adjusting models. Model building and adjusting are 
like a motor permanently switched on, we can hardly stop it 
running and producing combinations, plans, micro-realities. Our 
models are combinations or successions of mental 
representations. It is like a game that never stops, we cannot put 
it at rest. The mental space produces models not only because 
they are useful to solve a problem, but for no reason, only to 
play. Models use whatever representations are at their disposal at 
that moment, colors, shapes, equations, musical notes, sounds, 
smells, concepts, any building material will be fine as long as 
64

THE FABRIC OF THE MENTAL SPACE
the game goes on. Often we call thinking this act of model 
building. Because of this we build stories, we imagine situations, 
we prepare for the future. Even when no sensory input feeds 
new representations, the mental space will continue this vital 
activity. During dreams, deprived of any censorship and sensory 
inputs, these constructions go on. During the dream period, the 
neural activity in the primary sensory areas of the neocortex 
produces the impression of sensory perception. 
The capacity to coordinate this choreography and make it 
purposeful is critical, at least at certain moments. With a 
controlled choreography, a natural game of our mental space can 
become some useful creation, some answer to real questions, or 
some plan for the future. If the motor seems to be always on and 
the vehicle always running, most of the time it’s going nowhere 
by lack of guidance.
Many of these building patterns end up being repetitive. Either 
we build the same thing or we use the same pattern with other 
Lego pieces to build something else with the same model, in an 
unconscious and perpetual mental ballet.
Mental models will also induce behaviors. The mental activity is 
similar for these behavioral models, they repeat during our entire 
life, and often without us consciously noticing it. Certain 
thinking processes, certain feelings are like routes that one 
repetitively follows, like unchangeable habits. 
When these models are so deeply rooted in implicit memories 
and expectations; they serve as a “mental background” ready at 
any moment to take control of our mental state in response to 
external circumstances. 
These mental background patterns avoid the difficulty of 
thinking, they are ready to use on the shelf. However, they 
influence expectations and determine the way we 
“automatically” perceive a situation and respond to it.
For instance, one will not think, react, or behave the same way 
at the office, at a wedding party, or on the beach. Each situation 
65

THE FABRIC OF THE MENTAL SPACE
has its unconscious and usual behavioral patterns. Even some 
minute events can unconsciously trigger patterns: a facial 
expression, a smell, or some analogy with past circumstances 
can have us recall old and forgotten emotional attitudes. 
Behavioral patterns triggered by external circumstances often 
drive behaviors like being shy, not knowing what to say, being 
uselessly aggressive, for instance. 
Stereotypes are typical thinking patterns; they are ready made, 
ready-to-use thoughts or reactions, avoiding the thinking effort. 
They have the advantage of making the person more predictable. 
For instance, with a stranger, we start by carefully speak about 
uncontroversial common ground: the weather or the beauty of 
the landscape.
By “feeling” what pattern has adopted our interlocutor, we 
adjust our expectations accordingly and expect his answers. 
Social and work conventions establish communication patterns 
and codes that rule professional relationships. Our behavior feels 
then like pre-programmed. Everybody knows what to expect.
Many patterns are conscious. In a classroom, at the border, at a 
concert, at the restaurant, we adopt conventional stereotyped 
behaviors; they facilitate social relations. Everyone “plays” his 
reassuring conventional role, the same way children play being a 
doctor, or a police officer, or a superhero.
We learn and memorized deep patterns through explicit and 
implicit memorization during childhood. Although very 
influential, they are difficult to change because they mostly 
remain unconscious. We may unconsciously repeat these types 
of patterns, even if they are harmful to us or others. For instance, 
the reaction of blaming others for what happens to us is frequent 
in childhood, but we should not let it turn into a repeated pattern. 
We also build other deep patterns upon ancestral fears. Racism 
falls in this category. 
Repetitive behavioral loops happen when the individual has no 
way to observe, interpret or understand the result of an action. If 
this process produces any reward, he will go on repeating it 
66

THE FABRIC OF THE MENTAL SPACE
frequently with tragic effects. We have investigated behavioral 
loops in insects such as the Sphex wasp, whose perception 
involves no expectation mechanism. No adaptation can “correct” 
or interrupt the loop that continues to repeat like a bugged 
program.
Patterns are specific to each mental space and its history, and 
they interfere in every aspect of our life. Each of us, for 
instance, makes his resolve to questions like.
When is something too risky? How much can I disturb someone 
else? What does it mean to be cautious? When do I feel 
ashamed? How much should I fight back? When do I decide that 
this be too much for me? How do I show I have reached some 
limit? What is unbearable? How much am I expecting from 
myself? How much do I blame others? When should I feel a 
situation is unfair? When can I say I have understood? How can 
I pretend to be what I am not? How much can I cheat, lie, or 
betray? When can I feel, it’s none of my business? What makes 
me feel responsible? Do I have duties towards society? Do I feel 
I have a guardian angel? Do I over-trust my feelings? What is 
my interest? 
The diversity of our answers is a richness for human society, 
something that seems impossible for one of us will be an 
attainable goal for another.
Some of us end up behaving in such rigid conformity with social 
patterns they forget what it means to react spontaneously. They 
have buried any natural reactions that their natural world would 
suggest. These behaviors end up being very damaging for the 
mental space and social interactions. One is at risk of losing the 
sense of purpose by not allowing oneself to think and feel, to 
develop one’s own opinions and beliefs, and express them.
Behaving, as an adult, does not mean we have to forget how to 
be spontaneous and creative as a child.
* *
67

THE FABRIC OF THE MENTAL SPACE
2.5 Mental abstractions
We shall pursue now our exploration of components and 
functions of the mental space with one of its most important 
capacities.
The term “mental abstraction” is tautological. Abstractions are 
mental! Nothing is abstract “out there,” abstracting is an activity 
of a mental space seeking to organize itself. Abstracting 
corresponds to structures of the neocortex .
12
 The following sentences are obvious, however, we may have some 
12
difficulties fully understanding them as we are so deeply engaged in the ERP 
paradigme.
68

THE FABRIC OF THE MENTAL SPACE
Abstracting creates a new representation, a new concept, new 
individuation “about” a group of representations by adopting 
“analogy.” The analogy can involve a subpart or a shared 
property of all the representations of the group. 
“Vertebrates” individuates a subgroup of animals who have an 
“analog” spinal cord. “Vertebrates” is a mental abstraction that 
merely happens in the mental space, not out there.
“Family” individuates a subgroup of humans who have a close 
genetic relation (the analogy). “Family” is a mental abstraction 
that only happens in the mental space, not out there.
“Face” is an abstraction derived from similarities between some 
parts of Paul, Mary, a lion, and a dog, a painting… We have 
individuated something analogous and abstracted it with a new 
representation that we then called a face. A face is something 
“about” Paul, Mary, a lion, a dog, a painting… A face cannot be 
something out there. Abstractions are always mental.
The new abstracted representation will thus be at a “higher level 
of abstraction,” “about” what it abstracts and is therefore 
sometimes called a meta-representation. Abstraction thus creates 
hierarchies of levels, where each level is about the underlying 
one. The critical word here is “about.” Being “about,” means it 
does not belong to the same category of representations. Gravity 
is about massive objects; it is not itself a massive object. A 
crowd is about people but is not a person. The set of all sets is 
about sets, it is not itself a set. The hate of hate is about hate is 
not “hate.” A forest is about trees, it is not a tree. The verbal 
world is about the natural world, it is not the natural world. A 
physical law is about what we describe, it is not what it 
describes.
“Out there,” the “natural world” and the “verbal world” 
represent therefore three abstraction levels, each being about the 
one underneath. (Figure 2.5.1.) “Out there” is the ground level, it is 
69

THE FABRIC OF THE MENTAL SPACE
not mental . Our physical emotions also represent a ground 
13
level. 
The ground level is not “about” anything else, it is itself. We 
can’t know much about its nature, we can only know how we 
represent it in the natural and in the verbal worlds. Kant calls it 
the “noumena.” Einstein and Hawking called it the “mind of 
God.”
The natural world is about these ground levels. It collects 
information through perception to build its analog representation 
network. We described how these perceptions use an expectation 
mechanism. The organizing principle of this world is the 
analogy.
The verbal world collects information from the natural world 
and conveys it through digitalized symbolic language. It cannot 
be “identical” or isomorphic to the natural world about which it 
is. The structure of language allows us to continue building 
abstraction layers within the verbal world. A word can be about 
a word and a sentence can be about a sentence. The verbal world 
can therefore build abstraction towers. Each level is about the 
level underneath and cannot belong to the same category as it. 
The organizing principle is causality.
Most of the time, we are not conscious that we are abstracting; 
we are so used to live in our abstractions that we forget these 
operations are taking place in our verbal world. This powerful 
property of the mental space allows us to create unlimited 
hierarchies of abstraction, boosting the complexity of the mental 
space.
But abstraction has another important characteristic: when we 
have selected the similar part in the representations we abstract, 
we have also neglected all the parts that are not similar. Out 
there, such fragmentation in parts cannot exist as we examined 
in the first chapter. 
 Rather, it’s the mental representation of “something” we believe not to be 
13
mental.
70

THE FABRIC OF THE MENTAL SPACE
This mental operation of ignoring difference to create higher-
level representations turned out to be critical to building our 
realities. It granted us to apply thinking processes to large 
categories of represented objects. It allowed us a shallow 
understanding of large categories. Without neglecting some 
characteristics, an object would not even be identical to itself 
because of the internal ballet of its molecules. We would have an 
incredible number of individuated categories to which no 
general rule would apply.
For instance, one can assert that “dogs are friendly animals.” We 
don’t have to go animal per animal or dog by dog to assert their 
friendliness. By neglecting differences, we lack precision but 
gain understanding at the cost of finding some exceptions. 
Savants who individuate and memorize every detail improve 
difficulties in abstracting and painting a larger picture. 
Money is an abstraction that covers many “things.” One 
associates a dollar value to nearly everything. However, it says 
very little about the objects from which it is abstracted. As we 
express it with a number, it has a lot of weight in the mental 
realities. A balance sheet gives a picture of a company at a 
moment, but it’s like a picture taken with a monochrome 
camera. It neglects a large and important part of the information 
that could change our appreciation. 
Representations in the natural world are first-person 
perspectives, we cannot measure them from the outside and 
remain personal knowledge. Representations in the verbal world 
use a common language and favor exchanges between 
individuals that know the language. However, only the words 
and what they represent will be common, not the feelings 
associated with the words. Different people will then have 
different interpretations.
* *
71

THE FABRIC OF THE MENTAL SPACE
2.6 Orders and invisible worlds
All effort to bring order in disorder is disorder.
David Bohm
Abstracting never stops. As expecting and filling in our mental 
space cannot avoid it, we also consider abstracting as a driving 
motor of the mental space. One of the key abstractions is 
generating models or “orders.”
We enter an office and we can instantly feel how the owner has 
established it. When we observe a person carrying out a task, we 
can figure out how well this individual organizes himself. The 
organization of a city, an office, a person, a succession of 
movements is a concept we abstract from the relative position of 
components of the scene. The organization is a synonym for the 
optimization of certain values. We organize to save time, to 
remember, or to save space or energy. Any organization follows 
logic, a system, an algorithm. It can be a natural logic that 
everyone understands, like arranging books by authors and 
authors by alphabetic order. It may be another logic that the 
owner assumes.
Our mental space abstracts all the time. Higher-level 
abstractions become part of what we expect to see. Over time, 
we memorize many models of organizations. Each appears as a 
higher-level representation we call an “order.” Orders are not 
only abstractions of the verbal world, but we associate them 
with feelings in the natural world. Discovering an order, where 
before we saw nothing, is for most people a satisfaction. 
Discovering an order brings us some clarity and understanding. 
Certain orders are obvious like axial symmetries or by size 
classification. Others require much more study.
Science aims to discover orders. A scientific law can exist only 
where we perceive a sufficient regularity, that means an order. 
The law itself describes how this regularity works. Science does 
not apply in regions with any regularities.
72

THE FABRIC OF THE MENTAL SPACE
Many mammals can memorize orders, they seem to understand 
an event follows another and can abstract an order. Such a 
succession of events becomes a model that we will use as an 
expectation.
Not every one of us individuates the same orders. What appears 
as an order for someone will go unnoticed for someone else. A 
good automobile or plane pilot expects noises from his machine. 
He has trained to become sensitive and correlate multiple events 
and knows what sound a correlation should produce. A novice 
passenger would notice nothing. 
Orders can become expectations, they are part of the perception 
mechanism. Richer, the library of orders an individual has made 
up, larger will be his explanatory reservoir. 
Our search for orders is thus a search for understanding. It fills 
up our need to find simple rules explaining complex natural 
phenomena. This simple rule is often very hard to find. Orders 
are not immediately visible. But these invisible orders are the 
only way for us to understand the visible. 
Discovering orders was traditionally the entrance door to a 
secret, invisible world. 
In chapter 1, we have described the two sources that feed the 
mental space with information. The body and its emotions and 
the sensory information from out there. Many humans feel that a 
third source also feeds them. This third source would provide us 
with intuition, guidance, deep convictions, and meaning. The 
information would also be Gödelian. Once translated into the 
verbal world, people call it God or religiosity, Nature, or the 
Universe. We can only know this Gödelian information from the 
inside. Any third-party description or explanation in the verbal 
world will not be faithful. Brain-centrism accepts the idea of this 
third source. However, we cannot distinguish it, as a third party, 
from the emotional source, as both are Gödelian.
* *
73

THE FABRIC OF THE MENTAL SPACE
2.7 Cave painting
Let’s imagine we are now in the upper Paleolithic era, some 
25,000 years ago somewhere in Europe. Homo sapiens has 
remained as the sole human species alive on the planet after the 
last Neanderthals had disappeared 10,000 years before. A man 
from a nearby hunter-gatherer tribe, a gifted Shaman who has 
learned how to master different states of consciousness, is 
wandering in front of a large hole in the rocky mountain. He has 
taught himself how to master his emotions and develop empathy 
to understand the feelings of his fellow humans without letting 
their emotions invade him. Those skills have earned him the 
position of Shaman. 
The night before, he had a series of dreams; he has meditated 
and felt that these dreams were essential messages. Dreams have 
enormous importance for him; without a structured symbolic 
language, he only has his emotions to interpret them and limited 
ways to communicate them to his fellow humans. Cave painting 
was his way to express these visions to every member of his 
tribe.
The mastery of his fears and his desires, he has developed, freed 
up mental energy, allowing him to dedicate forces to higher 
mental activities. He learned how to control his expectations and 
his moods. The wisdom he gained gave him many social 
responsibilities in his tribe. His knowledge of plants has put him 
in charge of the health and the souls of his community. He is 
free from the obligation to go hunting, and his tribe values his 
capacities they take care of his basic needs. What he is about to 
do today is part of his social duty. The shaman is the only one in 
his group who has time to “think” and to meditate. After 
analyzing his dreams, he attributes them to an external force, a 
divine entity expecting something from him. (The third source 
of information.)
He has studied for years the invisible world where knowledge 
hides. Initially, the old shaman guided and instructed him. He 
knows the divine creatures who populate that world, and the 
74

THE FABRIC OF THE MENTAL SPACE
way they send messages he can interpret. He knows the healing 
power of the plants he collects for his sick fellows, and how to 
use them by respecting the hidden forces.
Figure 2.7.1: Reproduction of Pictures From the Lascaux Cave, by Maila 
Rinaldi
For him, the invisible world has become more important than 
the visible one. He believes his intimate relationship with the 
gods gives him his powers. He can master and interpret their 
symbols better than anybody else in his tribe. That is why he is 
also in charge of the burials when someone in his group dies.
He is now ready to translate his dreams into an artwork he is 
about to paint. He has found an obscure, hidden, and buried 
place, a rocky cave where he will work.
All over the world, wherever Homo sapiens lived, some 35,000 
years ago, one can observe an explosion of cave paintings. From 
Australia to Asia and from the Americas to Europe, in a short 
period, humans started painting deep caves. It is impossible to 
say what made them undertake these dark and dangerous 
journeys. What thoughts and beliefs motivated them to place 
their images in the innermost, darkest recesses of the caves, only 
illuminated by the flickering light of an uncertain fire. However, 
this period, about 35,000 years ago, is like when the size and the 
75

THE FABRIC OF THE MENTAL SPACE
shape of Homo sapiens’ brain reached the ones of present-day 
humans. (2.2.)
It is not astonishing, considering what we know on an analogy, 
that the subjects of these cave paintings are always animals 
typical of the region, and more rarely, humans or vegetation. 
Religious motivations behind the cave’s artworks were first 
suggested in the 1970s. The hypothesis was very controversial. 
It has now become widely accepted. For the first time, in the 
upper Paleolithic age, “analog material projections,” of the 
human mental space, were taking place on the rocks of deep 
caves. The mental space has reached a sufficiently developed 
stage to project itself outwards in artistic works.
These caves illustrate the ancestral origins of human 
questioning. The same questioning is still ongoing today. 
Questioning is always about the unknown, the hidden world, the 
unreachable, things that our senses do not immediately 
communicate to us. The mystery is the root of questioning. As 
mysteries are invisible, we represented them with visible 
symbols. Little has changed. Science today still needs the 
invisible to understand the visible.
Other human species such as Homo erectus, Homo 
neanderthalensis, or Homo habilis, did not paint. Why did art 
expression suddenly start nearly simultaneously all over the 
planet?
“The remarkable thing is not that the shamans of the Paleolithic 
had the visions they did but that they accepted them as divinely 
or externally inspired, and that accepting them they translated 
them into mortal form, the art of their rock paintings.” Says 
Dr. Ilse Vickers, who has for many years, pursued a professional 
career with the European Commission and with University 
College in London. She continues by writing:
“When we try and dissect the Paleolithic cave paintings and 
state that they either mean this or that, we have unraveled the 
precious and complicated weave of strands, and their true 
76

THE FABRIC OF THE MENTAL SPACE
meaning is lost: their treasure lies in their totality.  The 
14
symbolic language of the unconscious is at the same time a most 
primitive language, arising from the remote, bestial instinctive 
spheres of our being, and it is also the language which gives 
man insights of the highest order, far beyond what our rational 
mind could produce by itself.”
The mystery is the source of arts. Attempting to make the 
invisible visible to everyone is what artists do, allowing us to 
connect and inspire meaning. 
Carl Gustav Jung, the famous Swiss psychologist, writes:
“Such being the case, we should not be in the least surprised if 
the empirical manifestations of unconscious contents bear all 
the marks of something illimitable, something not determined by 
space and time, in short, something that has the quality of the 
numinous or divine.”
The common brain physiology induces archetypical similarities 
in our mental spaces. That could explain why we find similar 
mythological motifs and symbols in religions of all ages and at 
places far apart.
In the eyes of modern science, certain beliefs can sound 
nonsensical. However, they have their role in other significant 
aspects of our mental space. 
Shamans inspired respect because they opened doors to the 
invisible and answered open questions. 
Studying humans’ mental space will imply understanding how 
its most primordial projections led to its highest functions. It is 
not surprising that art and religion are so related; they both refer 
to the mysteries of hidden but deeply experienced worlds. They 
refer to those regions of the mental space fed only by inner 
Gödelian information.
 We expressed this idea by the difficulty to translate Gödelian felt 
14
information into Shannon syntactic information.
77

THE FABRIC OF THE MENTAL SPACE
For our shaman and many of his followers in human history, 
orders were an entry door into the hidden world of the gods, a 
world that explained why the visible behaves as it does. By 
asking questions about the visible world, anyone could feel the 
invisible world: Who created what we see? Why is it raining? 
Who made the world so beautiful? Why is it so unfair? 
With mathematical objects, numbers, and geometry with their 
infinite variety of orders, mathematics became a mother tongue, 
the language of the gods. A necessary entry door to the invisible 
kingdom.
How could anyone doubt that behind the visible, there is the 
invisible? When seeing the sunrise every morning, by observing 
the cycles of birth and death, no doubt could remain; a hidden 
world had to exist. When discovering that they are only five 
regular polyhedra, or that the length of the hypotenuse of a strait 
triangle is irrational and non-countable, could one doubt 
mathematics was part of the mystery? Could one question these 
rules were the hidden manifestations of the gods? Our highest 
mission was then to try to “read their minds” and accomplish 
their will.
Cave paintings were just the first steps. A succession of 
incredible monuments has followed. Cave paintings, pyramids, 
temples, cathedrals, moon rockets have all the same origin in our 
mental space; they all materialize our quest for the unknown. 
They express our mental orders, our hopes, fears, and beliefs, 
projecting aspects of the mental space into the matter. Not all 
materializations follow the same pathway from an idea to its 
encoding into matter. Arts follow an analog path, technological 
objects follow rather a digital path. The frontier is sometimes, 
however, not as clear as I expressed it.
* *
2.8 Cybernetics, adaptation
For hundreds of thousands of years, our organism has adapted to 
changing surroundings. Environments have molded us through 
78

THE FABRIC OF THE MENTAL SPACE
heat and cold, through abundance and scarcity. We have 
survived, although we have gone through rough periods. The 
Toba catastrophe has reduced the total human population to 
some 10,000–20,000 individuals. That was 75,000 years ago. 
Brains who developed to coordinate and regulate movement 
have played a decisive role in our constant evolution through 
natural selection. Natural selection needs a “selection pressure.” 
Currently, this pressure does barely come from an independent 
nature. It also develops from our constructions. We are closing a 
risky loop. We are adapting to our creations.
In the last 15,000 years, the adaptation process has reversed. 
Instead of only adapting to the environment, we started using 
our brain to transform it to fit our needs. We have developed 
technologies and cultures which shape the world to reduce 
natural selective pressure. We are the only animal that has 
transformed the environment on such a large scale. Our new 
environment has become closer to a projected image of our 
digital mental constructions. 
A regulation requires two independent parties, one regulates the 
other adapts. What happens when the regulator becomes a 
creation of the party who adapts?
There is a difference between an analog (natural, biological) 
adaptation process and a digital one that requires a mental space.
The mathematician Norbert Wiener (1894–1964) presented in 
1948 a powerful concept that he called cybernetics. He 
described it as “the scientific study of control and 
communication in the animal and the machine.” Wiener coined 
the term based on the Greek “kubernētēs.” He was not only a 
mathematician but also a philosopher whose book: “The Human 
Use of Human Beings. Cybernetics and the society” influenced 
generations of readers.
Cybernetics formalizes the notion of “feedback” as the 
mechanism of regulation and adaptation of a system. The first 
theorem of Wiener’s book is a very general assertion of Ross 
Ashby and Roger Conant. It states:
79

THE FABRIC OF THE MENTAL SPACE
“Every good regulator of a system must be a model of that 
system.” 
The tempo mat of your car is a regulator. It controls the speed by 
measuring it and acting on the gas pedal to adapt it to the desired 
value. The hypothalamus regulates our body temperature.
The theorem asserts that any maximally successful regulator 
must be isomorphic with the system it regulates. One also calls it 
“the internal model principle” or “the good regulator (model) 
theorem.” One can picture it with the following expression:
“Every good key must be a model of the lock it opens.” 
The Ashby-Conant theorem explains why a brain develops a 
mental space to operate. To regulate the body and adapt to the 
environment, it needs to build models or representations. It also 
asserts that a computer has a mental space.
The second theorem, known as Ashby’s law, is so fundamental 
that it’s also called “the first principle of cybernetics,” it states 
that
“the degree of control of a system is proportional to the 
available information.”
The more one knows about a system, the better one can manage 
it. The more an entity collects information from its environment, 
the more it can control it or react to it. The first principle of 
cybernetics explains that a species that wants to maximize its 
survival should gather as much as possible knowledge about its 
environment. It supports the concepts of research and education.
Let us now examine the difference between an analog and a 
digital regulator. The good model theorem is about the 
“collaboration” of two entities: a regulator R and an object O.
With a digital regulator like a tempo mat, R collects digital 
information on the state of O, processes it, and exercises a 
physical action on O to guide O towards the desired state. This 
involves a reader, a processor, and a writer. The processor must 
know (or decide) what should be the optimal state of O he wants 
80

THE FABRIC OF THE MENTAL SPACE
to reach so he can steer O in the correct direction: the goal G. A 
digital regulator thus needs a mental space, the regulation is then 
a process in which information and energy navigate in a 
feedback loop between physical and mental. It is a 
programmable device, one can change the value to be stabilized.
An analog regulator does not need a mental space and has no 
goal G. It uses the physical forces. The James Watt regulator 
(figure 2.8.1) is a classical example of an analog speed regulator 
that was used on steam engines. A planet orbiting the sun self 
regulates, no information to collect, no prefixed angular 
momentum, nothing to compute. Only Gödelian information 
manifests. Planets do not know Newton’s laws. However, they 
orbit the sun.
Analog regulators appear everywhere in nature, in physical and 
biological systems. We refer to these regulation processes in 
physics with the idea of “conservation laws,” such as 
conservation of energy or electric charge. In biology, we refer to 
them as homeostasis principles. Nature “out there” does not 
produce digital regulators, only mental spaces do, it has no pre-
defined goals.
81

THE FABRIC OF THE MENTAL SPACE
To our best knowledge today, we are the only entity in nature 
capable of producing digital regulators. How is it we can 
produce arrangements of atoms, objects that would not have 
evolved by themselves under the forces of nature?
Figure (2.8.2) represents the abstraction and the materialization 
process with two arrows in the opposite direction. For the 
materialization arrow, things start in the natural world with 
abstract imagination and creative images. Once these ideas have 
matured, they get digitalized, decomposed in parts, put into 
mathematical formulas and data. We are now in the verbal 
world, and we can run simulations. Once satisfied, we produce a 
blueprint that is a model of the ultimate object according to 
Ashby’s theorem. What started as an abstract natural world 
creation finds itself encoded in the blueprint. From there we can 
transfer it, encode it, or print it into the matter because 
Shannon’s information is independent of the subtract. 
82

THE FABRIC OF THE MENTAL SPACE
Figure 2.8.3: Natural and Human Productions
Technology would not be possible without this digitalization 
process. It is what we do when we build a car, a computer chip, 
or a building. We start by preparing a thorough digital 
representation of our mental abstraction, a series of instructions 
describing step-by-step how to manipulate, transform, and 
assemble various pieces of the matter: a “blueprint.” This 
blueprint serves as the printing program to build our object by 
“encoding” the information into the matter.
We can distinguish a natural object from human production 
because our productions go through a digitalization phase and 
natural objects don’t. We fragment and decompose in 
independent pieces that we then assemble. That’s why one can 
“reverse engineer them.” We cannot reverse engineer biological 
entities, they have never been engineered. They have not been 
built by an external third party, they have evolved from within. 
Natural
Human
Existing matter
Existing matter
No conscious representation
Conscious problem
Analog regulators
Analog or Digital
No model
Analog and digital model
No blueprint
Analog-digital blueprint
No Goal G
Goal G
Combined action of physical forces, 
evolution
Encoding into matter following the 
blueprint
Recombined atoms
Functional product
No reverse engineering
Reverse engineering
Analog causal effective information
Digital, non-causal effective 
information
83

THE FABRIC OF THE MENTAL SPACE
Nature does not build mechanisms . Mechanisms and 
15
organisms are thus very different entities.
What we built results from our fragmented and decomposed 
thinking process. The verbal world cannot think otherwise, it has 
to use Shannon information. Out there is not fragmented, 
fragmentation is only the way our mental space works.
With technologies and digitalization taking over, we are 
transforming our environment. We are “materializing” our 
visions. Rearranging the atoms around us as a projection of our 
verbal mental world. Many of us only see, hear, smell, touch 
human productions all day long. At each step we are silencing 
our “natural world ” and forgetting that our vital sources are in 
16
there. It is different to do something because we have to follow a 
procedure or because we want to. 
Confronted to new technologies, our older answers to 
ontological questions become irrelevant. We will have to rethink 
them. Technology itself won’t solve our problems. Our human 
solutions are in the natural world, not in the verbal world that 
generated the confusion. 
Our natural world is suffering. By adapting to our digital 
products, we are at risk of losing focus on what makes us human 
and engaging in a funnel leading to mechanization. We are 
losing our inner guidance. We behave as if the perfect human 
should be a robot.
The race to rationalization and productivity is enslaving us more 
than it is liberating us. Our evaluation instruments omit or 
cannot measure what is important, because it is not Shannon 
informational. The deeper questions are not technological, but 
about applications of technology. We should stop asking, what 
 We sometimes call mechanism a production of nature, but in fact it has not 
15
been built as a mechanism it has evolved.
 In my book L’ordinateur ne digerera pas le cerveau, I warn against this 
16
growing mechanization of humans and the society.
84

THE FABRIC OF THE MENTAL SPACE
can we produce, how fast can I produce? And quest for what is 
desirable to produce? 
Knowledge and wisdom must return at the steering wheel, and 
technology must remain a tool, amazing, but a tool.
Digital regulators have given us the fantastic power to control 
limited aspects of nature. We regulate immediate and local 
aspects to discover later we’re disturbing other, more important, 
equilibria. We navigate, guided by the smell of things that we 
created as tools but are becoming our masters.
* *
2.9 Adaptation, Complexity and Russian dolls
Let’s imagine a series of Russian dolls. The dolls represent 
complex structures of increasing sizes. From molecules to 
animals, the planet, the solar system, the galaxy. The complete 
universe is always the last doll of any Russian chain. The 
85

THE FABRIC OF THE MENTAL SPACE
smallest dolls are, according to 2021 physics, electrons and 
quarks.
This metaphor is a typical mental fragmentation. “Out there,” 
does not separate the dolls.
The Universe is expanding, the structures inside it must adapt. 
Multiple waves of energies flow down and back up the Russian 
doll’s chains, transforming the aspect and the structure of each 
doll. The Universe’s expansion reflects on the galaxies, who, in 
their turn, affect the solar systems, who influence the planets. 
Actions and adaptations happen down and back up the chain at 
every stage, using any of the recognized physical forces and at 
specific time scales. A continuous feed-forward and feedback of 
activity spread through the full system. 
Our Russian doll is a metaphor for the abstract concept of 
Complex Adaptive System . That is a system with many levels 
17
of independent agents acting on one another. It could be a 
galaxy, a brain, the economy, the markets, … The mental space 
abstracts such structures to organize and make sense of its 
fragmented representation procedure.
When we individuate a doll at whatever level, we separate it 
from the entire chain. We can therefore not get a full 
understanding of its dynamic because of Ashby’s theorem. 
Unexpected events will happen that originated outside the 
perimeter of individuation, in the dolls above or beneath. Lack 
of information explains the events that we call random like 
coincidences. Such randomness can only exist in the mental 
space, not “out there” where nothing happens.
As humans, our size puts us in the middle of the series. This is a 
fascinating place to be. Had we been bigger or smaller, our 
average complexity would have been lower  (Figure 2.9.1.). We 
18
 We will further develop this concept in (3.8).
17
 We are comparing here a subsystem to its external environment (excluding 
18
the subsystem itself) like in unpacked Russian dolls (Figure 2.9.1.) If we do 
not exclude the subsystem, the complexity in the chain would be stable or 
increases from the smallest entity to the biggest.
86

THE FABRIC OF THE MENTAL SPACE
are at the privileged place where complexity is sufficient for 
mental spaces to develop and invent structured symbolic 
languages. We will call it the intelligence plateau. (Figure 2.9.2.) 
From that privileged place, we have developed our third-party 
visions and communication. We have built digital regulators that 
otherwise would have never existed and materialized ideas into 
structures that the universe does not produce directly himself.
We can control the dolls above and below because of our digital 
mental capacities. We can change the natural adaptation/energy 
flow. By adopting the mechanism detailed in the preceding 
paragraph (Figure 2.8.2) we act as digital regulators, materialize 
our ideas, and fix levels of energy flow. Humans can strive to 
reach goals.
Dolls who are far from the intelligence plateau (Figure 2.9.1) do 
not strive for goals, this behavior requires digital modeling 
capacities. Because we have these aptitudes, we can escape the 
natural analog adaptation system of the Russian doll chain. We 
create, we materialize new combinations of atoms. These 
arrangements would not have appeared in the normal evolution 
of the chain. Our mental space generates extreme ingenuity, 
87

THE FABRIC OF THE MENTAL SPACE
persistence, and resilience to materialize abstract ideas. We 
change our environment and organize it according to a mental 
plan.
Brain-centrism considers that the intelligence plateau is part of 
the life plateau. (Figure 
2.9.3.) This is because 
intelligence requires 
striving for survival, thus 
curiosity. Without a 
n a t u r a l 
w o r l d , 
intelligence would not 
appear. That also means 
that for brain-centrism 
t h e r e c a n n o t b e 
intelligence without 
evolution. Artificial or 
mechanical intelligence 
would be better named advanced automation.
*
Survival of living systems on earth is only possible because of 
the continuous energy flow from the sun that allows a 
differentiated inner state. 
The second law of thermodynamics tells us that everything in the 
universe tends towards disorder. We can experience daily this 
tendency at work. Organized systems end up disorganizing and 
our hot cup of coffee slowly regains the room temperature. This 
tendency towards thermodynamic equilibrium is a measurable 
characteristic of a system’s representation called entropy.
An entity can maintain its high level of organization distant from 
equilibrium, only with a sufficient inflowing stream of energy. 
Ilya Prigogine (1917–2003) named such entities open 
“dissipative” systems because they dissipate the incoming 
energy. They will use this energy to resist drifting towards 
equilibrium by reorganizing themselves and maintain or increase 
their complexity.
88

THE FABRIC OF THE MENTAL SPACE
With a sufficient temperature gradient, dissipative systems self-
organize. The simplest example of a physical dissipative system 
that self-organizes would be a pan of water on a fire. The fire 
maintains a continuous temperature difference between the top 
and the bottom of the pan. If the temperature gradient is 
sufficient, one would see cyclic convection currents  appear. 
19
The system is self-organizing. The system stabilizes far from 
equilibrium, as long as the energy flow continues. 
Typical examples are hurricanes, living organisms, societies, 
brains, and perhaps even the observable universe. These systems 
self-organize to maximize the flow of energy. In a living system, 
this energy will support life and generate additional internal 
information.
Dissipative and self-organizing systems are the first step; 
however, we have not found a complete mechanism explaining 
how the first living cell is generated. 
Life appears to be an improbable event. (Figure 2.9.3.) For 
instance, a protein is made from a ribbon of amino acids. 30020 
possibilities exist to assemble 20 out of 300 amino acids in the 
right order to make a human protein of medium size. This huge 
number makes it unlikely for evolution to stumble onto the 
correct combination. 
Intelligent life in our sense is even much less probable. Maybe, 
because of our individuations, are we missing important 
information that would change this probability?
The initial conditions of the Universe seem to be set up for life 
to appear. We know this problem as the “fine-tuning problem.” 
If certain universal constants had been different, according to 
our models, the chain of Russian dolls would not have 
developed the same way, and we would not be there to notice it. 
The anthropic principle states that “scientific observation of the 
universe would not even be possible if the laws of the universe 
had been incompatible with the development of sentient life.”
 Convection is the transfer of heat due to the bulk movement of molecules 
19
within fluids.
89

THE FABRIC OF THE MENTAL SPACE
In our daily life, we often forget the immensity of where we 
stand. We also forget that we are in a unique position on the 
intelligence plateau of complexity.
According to brain-centrism, our stand as part of the chain 
prevents us to have a complete third-party understanding. We 
cannot in the verbal world understand the entire chain and its 
origins because the mental space is here describing itself. This 
limitation is a fundamental characteristic of the mental space 
that we call a blind spot. We will examine it in (6.10).
Orders only have a mental existence. They are, as we described 
earlier, a function of the mental space trying to organize itself. 
Out there is no order. Orders require mental spaces to 
individuate them. Entropy, as a function describing order, is thus 
also a construction of the verbal world. Entropy is useful for the 
mental world to explain certain perceptions. Out there is no 
entropy. We are in the middle of the Russian doll chain that our 
mental space has created. Where else could we center this 
chain? We are on the intelligence plateau that we have 
imagined. Out there is no intelligence plateau.
* *
2.10 Extraterrestrial intelligence
Most of us feel the profound impact it would have on us 
discovering extraterrestrial life. But the impact that would have 
an extraterrestrial life form would change humanity. Nothing 
more could teach us about ourselves than such an encounter.
All our knowledge up to now has come from a unique source, 
the human mental space. Meeting an intelligent alien would 
show us another mental space at work. Such an encounter, 
especially if our extraterrestrial is different, would inspire new 
concepts on “out there” that we cannot develop on our own.
Such an encounter would be as interesting for them as it is for 
us. I hope that by the time we develop technology for interstellar 
travel, we will have mastered our fears of Savanna inhabitants!
90

THE FABRIC OF THE MENTAL SPACE
Most science fiction narratives involve extraterrestrial beings. 
They describe what they look like, how they perceive reality, 
how they think, their ambitions, their technologies. However, it’s 
the human mental space that produces science fiction narratives. 
If we get to meet aliens, they might not compare to any of our 
expectations. We cannot escape being anthropocentric.
Trying to communicate with an intelligent alien might be a very 
enriching but challenging task. It will require a complete 
decentralization of our perspectives. For the first time, we could 
have a third-person perspective on our mental space.
Would we be able to recognize intelligence in aliens? Do we 
recognize it in other species on earth? A more practical approach 
would be to evaluate aliens’ productions. If they visit our planet, 
they can travel in space. If they have come with a spaceship , 
20
they must have discovered digitalization, language, and master 
technologies. They are on the intelligence plateau. 
There are other types of intelligences, like swarm intelligence or 
plant intelligence ? Could one speak about a swarm’s mental 
21
space or a plant’s mental space? None of this intelligence on our 
planet has reached a digital level and the intelligence plateau.
We wish to meet an intelligence like ours so we can recognize 
each other and communicate. We expect they would be for us a 
true third party.
Would they be organisms or mechanical entities? We would 
expect them to be organisms. Nature does not produce 
intelligent mechanisms without transiting through brains. (2.8) 
Cybernetics tells us they must have a brain and a mental space. 
If they are organic, they have developed following Darwin’s 
principles. However, their adaptations have been fitting their 
environment. Humans are “good models” for planet earth; they 
 Certain bacteria can support space conditions.
20
 Monica Gaeliano, an Italian behavioral ecologist wrote: “Plant cognition is 
21
a new and exciting field of research directed at experimentally testing the 
cognitive abilities of plants, including perception, learning processes, memory 
and consciousness… “
91

THE FABRIC OF THE MENTAL SPACE
would be “good models” for Planet X. If they are mechanical, 
we would ask what organism has conceived them. Mechanisms 
need a creator. We suppose organisms don’t need one and have 
developed according to the laws of physics, although we don’t 
know specifically how. (2.11)
Will they come from a planet? Their natural environment must 
be a planet to produce enough diversity and abundance. A star or 
outer space would not allow it according to our physics. They 
would be the leading species on Planet X, but they could not be 
the unique species. They demand a complete Russian Doll chain, 
with sufficient complexity on both sides of the chain and quite a 
long history to have given them the time to reach an intelligent 
plateau. Their life duration will be long enough for them to have 
time to learn, but not too long to maintain a renewal cycle. 
Would they have a mental space? As we know, they will have an 
“expectation” system. (1.9) Their mental space will therefore 
have many similarities with ours. For instance, they would have 
developed at least one central brain and a variety of external and 
internal sensors. They would have discovered symbolic 
languages and mastered digital regulators. Like us, they would 
navigate between two mental worlds, a natural world, and a 
verbal world. They would have at least two information sources, 
and their brain would handle analog and digital information. 
They would be able of first-person and third-person perspectives 
and have difficulties translating their Gödelian information into 
their language. Their individuation categories might differ from 
ours. This is the case for various human populations on our 
planet. Richard Nisbett, in his book: “The geography of 
thought,” shows that Western and Eastern populations have 
different perspectives. Westerner concentrates more on details, 
and easterners more on a global vision.
What would be their size? A complex doll in our Russian chain 
(2.9) can only flourish in a complex environment, according to 
Ashby’s law. If their intelligence is like ours, concentrated in 
individual brains, their size is an intermediary size comparable 
to ours. 
92

THE FABRIC OF THE MENTAL SPACE
Would they be able to abstract? They would, without 
abstracting, it would not be possible to conceive laws describing 
the regularities out there. And without laws of physics, they 
could have no advanced technologies. However, their 
fragmentations of reality “out there” might be different if their 
sensory systems lead them to different individuations. The way 
they combine abstraction and generalization might lead them to 
different visions than ours.
Would they use analogy and causality? We should suppose so, as 
they would have a mental space with two worlds. One could 
imagine that their analogies can diverge from ours if their 
individuations are distinct. Among humans, analogies are very 
different. What they would call causality may also differ from 
us. Their logical system may well be non-Aristotelian. It could 
be, for instance, based on probabilities.
Would they have a motion of space and time? Organisms must 
be able to observe movement, to survive (1.1). Spotting out 
movement shows a sense of order and time. Their space will 
vary from ours, perhaps zoomable like a computer picture. 
Professor Edward Hubbard explores questions at the junction of 
education and neuroscience at the University of Wisconsin. He 
asserts that mathematical concepts such as Cartesian coordinates 
or the complex plane, although they appear by cultural 
invention, were selected as useful mental tools because they fit 
well in the pre-existing architecture of our primate cerebral 
representations.
Would they die? I guess they would as dying individuals is the 
greatest way for a species to adapt, to survive, and to develop. 
Their lifespan may nevertheless differ from ours. But it could 
not be too short because of the limited speed of light. In an 
overly short lifespan (milliseconds), they could not achieve 
maturity and accomplish tasks to be transmitted to the next 
generation. But it could be long according to our criteria. On 
earth, experts agree a Bristlecone pine tree (Pinus longaeva) in 
93

THE FABRIC OF THE MENTAL SPACE
California’s White Mountain range nicknamed Methuselah is 
over 4,700 years old.
Would they have religions? As they are organic and have 
generated sufficient complexity to be on the intelligence plateau, 
they would be sensitive to the mystery and the unknown. They 
would have developed invisible worlds and fill-in narratives to 
overcome the limits of the knowable. They would have then a 
sense of religiosity.
Would they have mathematics? Once gained a structured 
symbolic language, they would have created mathematics. Their 
mathematics would have some similarities with ours, but they 
could have developed different fields of mathematics 
corresponding to their intuitions and their physiology.
Astronomers and exobiologists have reflected on the minimal 
conditions required on Planet X for life to develop. They have 
also examined the probability of intelligent life to appear. In 
2019, the Geneva astrophysicist Michel Mayor received the 
Nobel prize, along with Didier Queloz, for discovering the first 
exoplanet in 1995. Since then we have found thousands of 
planets within a radius of 100 light-years. One hundred light 
years is an enormous distance, but not when compared to the 
150,000 light years’ diameter of our galaxy alone. 
The Kepler satellite monitors 150,000 stars like our sun. Slight 
periodic dips in starlight are the sign that a planet is obstructing 
the star’s light. Many of the exoplanets orbiting their star at 
around 150 million kilometers (the distance earth-sun) could 
have liquid water and could be suitable candidates for harvesting 
life.
 The SETI Institute, founded in 1984, under the initiative of Carl 
Sagan, is listening to detect any signal that could show 
intelligence. However, up to now, they have found no sign of 
intelligent life. As the physicist, Enrico Fermi put it: where are 
they?
94

THE FABRIC OF THE MENTAL SPACE
The good model theorem and the Russian Doll metaphor assure 
us we relate the complexity of an organism to the complexity of 
its environment. Stephen Gould had already observed that it 
requires a minimum threshold of complexity in the environment 
for life even to exist. In his book published in 2015 Pathways 
Towards Habitable Planets, Sebastian Wolf declares:
“ … the property of living systems to possess a high degree of 
complexity in structure and its response to the environment are 
discussed since it can be used for remote sensing of 
extraterrestrial life.”
Researchers have defined a “habitable zone” based on the 
distance between the planet and its star. The habitable zone is 
the one in which liquid water can exist on the planetary surface. 
We have reduced this Goldilocks zone to consider the 
atmospheric gazes that could support life. What we would 
consider “habitable” for single-celled microbes wouldn’t work 
for complex creatures. 
Discovering an intelligent signal would be a cosmic event; it 
could change our deepest thoughts and dreams.
No other discovery, no other encounter could teach us more 
about ourselves than non-ourselves, extraterrestrial intelligence.
* *
2.11 Life and Survival are part of Intelligence
The ultimate source of life and intelligence is the expansion of 
the Universe. The universe is the upper limit of every Russian 
doll’s chain. Therefore, its expansion trickles down and affects 
all the substructures. We know dissipative systems convert 
inflowing energy into internal order to maintain it far from 
equilibrium. (2.9) Order means information. By producing inner 
order, any complex dissipative system generates additional 
internal Gödelian information.
95

THE FABRIC OF THE MENTAL SPACE
In 1922 Alfred Lotka (1880–1949), an American mathematician 
proposed to interpret natural selection as a fight among 
organisms for energy. Lotka’s principle states that: 
Organisms that survive and prosper are those that capture and 
use energy more than their competitors, biological systems 
compete for usable power. 
This principle would apply between species or even within a 
species.
We can extend Lotka’s principle to thermodynamics of open 
systems far from equilibrium: 
Dissipative systems increase stored energy/information to 
maximize energy flow. 
Self-organization  is the mechanism by which we store energy/
22
information. This maximizes the future energy flow potential of 
the system. Biological systems, dissipate inflowing energy in 
self-organizing in a way that maximizes future evolutionary 
potential. Survival and adaptation are the consequences of 
Lotka’s principle. Adapting is a way for the system to maximize 
future evolutionary and survival potential.
This also applies to the brain who uses the metabolism to 
maintain its internal organization and generate additional 
Gödelian information by creating new connections and 
neurogenesis.
Translated at the level of the mental space, it means the brain’s 
metabolism dissipates into Gödelian information that can favor 
future energy flow by learning and understanding. These 
characteristics are very close to what we feel like intelligence.
Lotka’s principle could justify why the behavior of dissipative 
systems is unpredictable. If the system had been predictable, no 
 Self-organization is a physical process that happens in all dissipative 
22
systems. Phase transitions are the physical processes of transition between the 
basic states of matter: solid, liquid, and gas.
96

THE FABRIC OF THE MENTAL SPACE
additional information would exist.  It also narrows the gap 
23
between non-life and life.
In his book: “The 
True Creator of 
Everything,” (2020) 
Miguel Nicolelis 
explains how, in the 
summer of 2015, we 
were walking on the 
M o n t r e u x L a k e 
Shore. We were 
o n c e 
m o r e 
d i s c u s s i n g t h e 
origins of life and 
t h e n a t u r e o f 
intelligence when 
w e s t o p p e d t o 
admire the intricate structure of a tree. Our observation led us to 
express what we called the third principle of thermodynamics. 
Those shapes were not random; they were historical traces 
produces by energy dissipation. We ignored Lotka’s principle 
from 1922. However, our third principle added an essential twist 
to Lotka. Beyond explaining survival, it also allowed us to 
describe in physical terms the tendency towards “intelligence.” 
The open question was: how does energy dissipate into the 
various hierarchical levels in the brain? Spontaneous 
fluctuations are neuronal activities in the brain that one cannot 
correlate with sensory stimulus or conscious activity. They make 
up most of what’s happening but cannot know why. Most 
neuroscientists call it noise. We interpreted this noise as the trace 
on the neural network of energy distribution in the brain’s 
hierarchical levels and established a correspondence between 
neural network activity, oscillation, and the energy flow.
 Data is informative if it is not previously known
23
97

THE FABRIC OF THE MENTAL SPACE
Energy dissipates through the brain’s hierarchical levels to 
ensure a maximal future energy flow. 
Learning, organizing our thoughts through analogy and 
causality, understanding, helps the brain remain far from 
equilibrium by minimizing its entropy and preparing it for 
potential future learning. It amazes me to notice that survival 
closely relates to learning for thermodynamical reasons. 
Survival, who has been in chapter one, our fundamental 
assumption, would then have a thermodynamical origin. If one 
considers entropy as an increase of “entanglements,” survival 
would then have a quantum physical origin .
24
However, survival not only concerns the individual, it mainly 
concerns the species. An aging population without limitations on 
natality would imply an increase in the population. Our planet 
has limited resources, we estimate it can support 11 billion 
humans. Whatever this figure is, the day will come where 
resources will start missing. Nature would then have to arbitrate 
between two possibilities. Either reduce the average age or 
reduce natality. Adaptation at the species level and our third law 
would favor newcomers and reduce aging.
* *
2.12 Curiosity and Learning
Each of our 75 trillion cells has a limited lifespan: colon cells 
die after three days, skin cells after three weeks, red blood ones 
after four months, and brain cells can last for a lifetime. Until 
recently, one believed they could not renew. Joseph Altman 
(1925–2016) has proven this former dogma wrong in the 1960s. 
He discovered adult brains could replace damaged neurons. 
Neuroscience did not recognize Altman’s work until the 1990s 
as it contradicted the prevailing paradigm.
 Part 2 will cover entanglement and quantum physical interpretation
24
98

THE FABRIC OF THE MENTAL SPACE
The theory of learning, which up to then, had embraced the 
limited view that only synaptic modifications could explain 
learning, had to be revised. Learning involves deep physical 
modifications at various levels of the brain, including 
neurogenesis, new neuronal connections, and synaptic 
reinforcement. Learning is how the brain renews and reorganizes 
itself at various adaptation levels. (2.11) We regroup these 
modifications under the name of “brain plasticity.” At rest, for 
an adult human, we estimate that the brain uses 20% of the 
body’s metabolism. A quarter of which is used to maintain the 
neurons, the networks, and glial cells, we use the rest for 
generating Gödelian information by creating representations and 
memories. 
The mental space does not directly perceive this huge brain 
activity involving over 80 billion neurons, although this work 
generates it, and keeps it alive and active. Learning and 
memorizing is instead what we perceive.  
Not adapting his representations would mean for the primitive 
man a rapid death sentence. His strive to survive sharpened his 
awareness, making him conscious of any unexpected sight, 
sound, or smell. But it also favored his curiosity and his learning 
appetite. 
Curiosity would come for him at an expensive price. He had to 
learn the proper balance between the risk of approaching, and 
the reward of discovering. This problematic situation favored 
mental space development. A situation where he had to master 
the fear of risk, imagine all future possibilities, evaluate and 
study probabilities, invent a variety of escape possibilities, and 
approach techniques, special movements, and escape routes. 
Curiosity favored developing both the mental space and the 
brain in reciprocal interactions. 
With language, curiosity, learning, and risk evaluation extended 
far beyond their basic survival roots.
We ignore how much we have inherited and how much our 
ancestors had to go through for us to become the humans we are 
99

THE FABRIC OF THE MENTAL SPACE
today. We also neglect how powerful is the survival need, and 
how rich its consequences are for our daily life. 
I believe the major reason we prefer a human plane pilot rather 
than a computer one is that we are sure that he, like us, wants to 
survive. We can be told that a computer is as performing as a 
human pilot; the computer still misses the survival component.
Expanding our time horizon has extended adaptation beyond 
short-term needs, we strive to adapt to future conditions. We not 
only solve problems to adapt now. We ask questions; we 
imagine futures, we wish, we hope, we experiment. We want to 
survive in the future, whatever this future will be. 
This is a gigantic step, extending our adaptation levels not only 
to what we observe but also to what we imagine. We are the only 
species capable of having visions and dreams about our future. 
We then plan, agree, and cooperate with others to make things 
happen beyond the simple necessity of immediate survival. 
Should we consider then this imagination capacity also as 
belonging to intelligence?
With language and the verbal world, most human activities 
migrated from the immediate needs proposed by the natural 
world to expected future needs. Learning from simple imitation 
extended to learning narratives. We could know things we had 
never experienced. 
Agriculture which started some seven to ten thousand years ago, 
for instance, needed a common language to be implemented. It 
started in the so-called Fertile Crescent, an area between the 
Syrian Desert to the south and the Anatolian Plateau to the north, 
where we invented the first written language and the wheel. We 
know the area as the cradle of civilization. 
Agriculture needed knowledge that one cannot learn by 
experience in a short period. From that moment on, humanity 
has been striving for purposes well beyond immediate survival. 
From adapting ourselves to what nature offered, we started with 
100

THE FABRIC OF THE MENTAL SPACE
agriculture to adapt nature to our needs by using materialization 
(Figure 2.8.2).
Since then we have been harnessing the energy and using it not 
only to survive but also to ensure that we had better survival 
possibilities in the future. What happened 10,000 years ago in 
the Fertile Crescent was the first manifestation of a tendency 
that has brought us to the civilization as we know it today. A 
migration from analog-to-digital. We recreated our “Reality” 
with the tools of the verbal mental world.
To end this chapter, and these first remarks on the brain-centric 
perspective, I want to cite Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz:
“Although the whole of this life was said to be nothing but a 
dream, and the visible world nothing but a phantasm, I should 
call this dream or phantasm real enough, if, using reason well, 
we were never deceived by it.”
Although brain-centrism asserts that our knowledge is mental 
and our conceptions are not “isomorphic” to out there, it also 
claims, as does Leibniz, that it can be “real enough” to call it 
Reality.
* * 
101

THE FABRIC OF THE MENTAL SPACE
Key ideas of chapter 2:
- Human memory is mainly analog and very different from computer 
memory.
- There are no general neural codes
- The computer’s mental space is limited to the verbal world, it has no 
Gödelian information
- Like expectations and fill-ins, abstraction and order are a mental “motor” 
we cannot stop them.
- The mental space generates invisible worlds to explain the visible one
- Organisms are complex adaptive systems, they adapt to inside and outside
- Survival is part of intelligence
- Learning is fundamental for neurogenesis and brain connectivity.
-
* * *
102

THE VERBAL WORLD
III: THE VERBAL WORLD
We have described two worlds in the human mental space and 
the two types of information. Since language, we have evolved 
from a reality centered in the natural world to one with all the 
complexities of continuous interactions between both worlds. 
The concept of information is central to study the mental space. 
Information can have several facets. We already shortly 
described Shannon’s digital information and Gödelian analog 
integrated information. We will examine here limitations of the 
verbal world implied by structured languages.
“The ability to perceive or think differently is more 
important than the knowledge gained.” — David Bohm
3.1 Languages and mental spaces
We have distinguished two worlds in the mental space: the 
ancient natural world and the verbal world. The first is using 
integrated Gödelian analog information, the second, whose 
representations are words and narratives, is using digital 
information. Gödelian information is subtract-dependent, 
making it difficult to communicate. However, any representation 
of the verbal world is connected to the feelings and emotions of 
the natural world.
I can’t imagine human reality before language. One can try 
thinking without words or communicating without a structured 
language. When we have to do it, we rely on gestures, like 
pointing to objects or exaggerating facial expressions. If we 
have to communicate an abstract concept, the exercise becomes 
somewhat complicated. How can one think of Newton’s laws 
with no language to think with? What remains of our knowledge 
if we lose the symbols to express it? 
The first sentence of the opening chapter of the Gospel of John 
in the New Testament is:
103

THE VERBAL WORLD
In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and 
the Word was God.
The word would precede everything. Its power makes it divine.
In his book of 1871, The Descent of Man, and Selection in 
Relation to Sex, Charles Darwin (1809–1882) was one of the 
first thinkers to claim that language was a human invention. 
According to the book of Genesis, God gave Adam authority to 
name every being in the Garden of Eden. This would remain the 
most common belief up to the 18th century’s enlightenment and 
is still very common in the western world. 
The development of languages, according to Darwin, happened 
in parallel to the biological evolution of the body, the CNS, and 
the brain. It started from animal-like vocalization whose 
complexity increased. However, being a mental activity, 
language could evolve much faster than biological adaptations. 
Naming natural objects has structured the mental space’s 
individuation capacity. It took thousands of years for human 
groups to agree on how to name what, then how to combine 
sounds into words; and how to structure words into sentences. 
These structural combinations had to integrate the beliefs and 
the cultural rituals of the population, their behaviors, their social 
hierarchies, and their interactions. It had to mirror their relation 
to the invisible worlds, as well as their apprehension of natural 
living and non-living entities. Various types of words and their 
specific arrangements had to reflect not only cultural aspects but 
also properties of the mental space.
This evolution proceeded over hundreds of thousands of years.
Although language formed over very long periods, we will 
simplify by regarding it as an invention that took place 15 to 
29 thousand years ago.
Aristoteles considered language so significant that he defines 
humans as: “creatures who use language.” René Descartes 
(1596–1650), the French mathematician and philosopher, 
reinforced this interpretation, remarking that we should 
104

THE VERBAL WORLD
distinguish human words from animal sounds: “Humans can 
think without speaking, but can’t speak without thinking.” For 
Claude Levi-Strauss, language is the basis of culture as: “We 
don’t inherit it, we have to learn it.”
Let’s review how structured languages have remodeled our 
brain, our mental space, our perceptions, our realities, and 
human society.
Language and brain structures. 
Babies learn languages and after only 2–3 years, they can 
express what they want. We believe existing genetic conditions 
support this capability. Babies can hear already three months 
before birth while still in their mother’s womb. They then learn 
the sound and melody of their mother tongue while the brain 
develops. Although many brain regions are involved in language 
processing, neurolinguistic distinguish two major regions. The 
Broca’s area in the left frontal lobe, and the Wernicke’s area in 
the left temporal lobe. The Broca area controls tongue 
movements and the facial muscles necessary to produce speech. 
If it gets damaged, the patient can still read and understand 
spoken language but cannot speak or write. Wernicke’s area 
handles interpretation and meaning. When it is damaged, the 
person may speak, but his sentences are meaningless. Since the 
1990s, modern technology like magnetic resonance imaging 
(MRI) has produced an enormous shift in neurolinguistics. It 
now allows us to track the brain activity that is going on while 
people are reading, listening, and speaking instead of 
concentrating on aphasia patients. 
When we created spoken words, they had to respect our auditory 
frequency characteristics. Sentences had to account for the 
capacity of our short-term memory to store and assimilate 
information. The fovea played a role in writing and the additive 
structure of the grammar. Individuation influenced our 
descriptions as sums of separated entities in a sentence. 
The brain can learn and generate new representations and new 
pathways. This has allowed languages to speak about 
105

THE VERBAL WORLD
themselves. For instance, the sentence: this sentence is much too 
short, is recursive. It has also allowed the possibility to create 
new concepts as abstractions of existing ones. The brain can 
create new networks by combining or including elements with 
existing neuronal ensemble . 
25
Language can thus also build nested expressions such as the 
table that is in the room at the end of the corridor at the second 
floor of the house.
CNS and brain characteristics thus modeled the structure of our 
languages.
Grammar and syntax. 
Syntax is the set of principles by which units of symbolic 
language (words) are assembled to form more complex 
expressions (sentences). The possibilities provided by syntax 
combining concepts into meaningful sentences were so 
impressive that the usage of symbolic language imposed itself. It 
offered the opportunity of breaking down complex thoughts in 
smaller steps and to establish new concepts by gathering 
 The distributed principle, which states that behaviors depend on the 
25
coordinated work of populations of neurons distributed across multiple brain 
structures, describes this brain capacity. In July 2009 Miguel Nicolelis and 
Mikhail Lebedev a paper in Nature Reviews entitled Principles of neural 
ensemble physiology underlying the operation of brain-machine interfaces.
106

THE VERBAL WORLD
existing ones. It made understanding clearer. Syntax allowed us 
to represent any situation. With an appropriate sequence of 
words, and following the rules of grammar, one could describe 
events, objects, or feelings visible, never seen, or invented. 
Syntax was our initial step towards materialization. (Figure 2.8.2.)
We still debate the question of the origin of grammar. Noam 
Chomsky argued that grammar is innate and universal. Other 
linguists, such as Daniel Everett, oppose Chomsky’s claims that 
grammar was invented as a tool to solve social communication 
problems.
Language gained its life through its freedom of combining 
concepts, creating extra words, and grammatical categories. In 
return, these new grammatical categories started imposing 
themselves on our perceptions and our feelings. We started 
seeing and feeling according to the language’s categories. 
(Column II in figure 3.1.1.) The architecture of the language reshaped 
our worldviews, our representations, and feelings while 
expressing them. The additive structure of the language 
determined the way we would analyze situations by 
decomposing them. Descriptive narratives modeled our 
expectations. We started perceiving and feeling more and more 
under descriptive narrative and less conforming to our natural 
representations of “out there.” 
Narratives and fill-ins. 
Narratives penetrated cultures. Certain stories explained how to 
live a human life, how to raise children, how to bury the dead, or 
how to organize societies… Other narratives answered 
existential questions on the origins of the world, on death, and 
the afterlife. Stories served as fill-ins to understand unexplained 
things. Most of these fill-in descriptions used beings of the 
“invisible world” to explain events in the visible one.
Narratives also separated one human group from another one 
that had chosen other tales as their beliefs. Before language, men 
could fight for sex or food, they now could start wars for 
imagined stories. Words became compelling. Their credibility 
107

THE VERBAL WORLD
outstripped the one of the sensory system. They produce or 
mobilize powerful emotions and can galvanize entire 
populations. Certain individuals became experts in exploiting 
the power of language.
Language and cognition. 
A long-debated question has been: is it possible to think without 
language? Does language precede cognition or the contrary?
Descartes had explained: Speech is the sign of thought because 
to speak is to aim for meaning through signs, and only thought 
can operate the relationship by which a sign refers to meaning.
Language and cognition are two functions of the mental space. 
According to brain-centrism, a thinking process starts in the 
natural world and thus precedes language that belongs to the 
verbal world. But things are a bit more complicated.
Ferdinand de Saussure (1857–1913), the father of contemporary 
linguistics, claimed in his “Cours de linguistique 
générale“ published posthumously in 1916: “Philosophers and 
linguists have always agreed to recognize that without the help 
of signs we would be incapable of distinguishing two ideas in 
one way. Clear and constant. Taken by itself, thought is like a 
nebula where nothing is necessarily delimited.” 
For brain-centrism de Saussure is correct, an idea generated in 
the natural world manifests as analog Gödelian information and 
is difficult to express before “translating” it in digital form. 
However, as verbal concepts are high-level abstractions, they 
never reflect their analog representations source. The verbal 
abstraction may sometimes trigger, in the verbal world by 
association, ideas that were not intended. The continuous 
collaboration of both worlds using different information systems 
interacting by feed-forward and feedback is a resonance 
chamber for cognition, who will amplify and multiply thoughts 
started in the analog world. (Figure 3.1.1.)
108

THE VERBAL WORLD
The two interacting worlds can belong to two different brains. 
This is the case when two individuals collaborate in research. 
One amplifies ideas emitted by the other.
In The Relativistic Brain, Miguel Nicolelis and I described the 
brain activity corresponding to this interaction between two 
mental space worlds. According to the relativistic brain theory, 
complex central nervous systems like ours generate, process, 
and store information through the recursive interaction of a 
hybrid digital-analog computation engine. The digital 
component of this engine is defined by the spikes produced by 
neural networks distributed all over the brain, whereas the 
analog component is represented by the superimposition of time-
varying, neuronal electromagnetic fields (NEMFs), generated by 
the flow of neuronal electrical signals through the multitude of 
local and distributed loops of white matter that exist in the 
mammalian brain. 
The relativistic brain theory proposes that the interaction of 
time-varying neuronal NEMFs provides the “physiological glue” 
creating the neuronal space-time continuum in higher mammals. 
(Figure 3.1.2.)
109

THE VERBAL WORLD
Reverting to the mental space description, the hybrid 
computation engine corresponds to the interaction of the natural 
and verbal worlds. NEMFs would represent the materialization 
of the higher brain functions manifested in the natural world, 
including things like our ability to experience pain sensations, 
our sense of self, and even our consciousness.
We also attributed the hyper-computation capacities of the brain 
to the hybrid analog-digital computation engine.
In the 1970s, cognitive linguists maintained a position opposite 
to de Saussure. They claimed that the building blocks of 
language—grammar and lexicon—depend on pre-existing 
mental schemas. For them, language does not structure thought; 
thought shapes language. We now know that both positions 
combine, natural and verbal world interact.
With language, third-party descriptions transcended our feelings 
to generate descriptions common to everyone. Individuations 
stopped being personal choices to become standardized by the 
lexicon. 
Language gave not only shared names to designate objects and 
events, but it also gave a common way of relating objects to 
each other and understanding events. 
In the natural world, the analogy was the way representations 
related. An analogy is “personal,” each of us makes his ones. 
The verbal causal relations are shareable and language suggests 
and pre-embeds them.
Lying and cheating. 
For brain-centrism, the most decisive aspect of language is truth. 
Language gives us the power to manipulate its words. It allows 
us to build any narrative, with no concern for its truth value. One 
could lie, express a feeling that is not sensed, or describe a 
situation that never happened. “Out there” or our natural world 
cannot lie. Lying is an attribute of the verbal world. It happens 
because it’s a world of symbols. There are no symbols “out 
there,” or in the analog natural world.
110

THE VERBAL WORLD
Humans understood the advantages of a lie. No experimental 
verification exists when a narrative concerns non-visible objects 
or events like feelings, past or distant events, or future ones. 
Lying is natural for children experimenting with the language it 
can become disastrous when they turn into adults. A lie needs 
other lies to cover it up, and the narratives funnel towards 
complicated contradictions using much of the brain’s energy. 
Many, in human history, have used a speech to build up power 
or gain trust by making promises and false claims. When 
nothing distinguishes a true narrative from a fake one, additional 
problems occupy daily human life. Lies are cancer for societies. 
In a later chapter, we will consider the imitation fallacy. 
Imitating, pretending to be what we are not, can also reveal is a 
dangerous game.
For brain-centrism, there can be no absolute truth as it is the 
same mental space that asserts the narrative and its truth value. 
The only replacement we have imagined for “absolute truth” is 
thus “conventional truth,” the agreement between several mental 
spaces that consider a narrative to be true. (5.3) The scientific 
method demands, however, that narratives make a falsifiable 
prediction to be accepted as scientific. It does not mean that the 
narrative is true, it only means that we have not yet found it 
false.
Language and Third Party Perspective 
Before language, each person was strictly the center of his 
universe. Everything was “observed” and “thought of” based on 
a first-party perspective. In the natural world, a third-party 
perspective is difficult to imagine. This world, dominated by 
feelings, leaves no space for logical analysis.
One of the most important consequences of language and the 
verbal world is that it allowed humans to build a “common” 
verbal picture. In this world, one could describe “reality out 
there” as independent of any observer, from a “third-person” 
perspective. 
111

THE VERBAL WORLD
For observable objects, one could be sure that a word referred to 
the same designated “thing” “out there” for any observer. (Figure 
3.1.1.) For entities that one cannot show, a common verbal 
definition specifying the object through other known words 
replaces the physical designation. But even if two individual 
uses the same word, we cannot be sure that they “feel” the same 
thing. The verbal representation can be similar, but not 
necessarily the representation and the feelings in the natural 
world.
Language expressed for the first time a third-party perspective, 
in which we are not in the center of the picture. The world is 
“externalized.” It exists independently of any observer. Because 
it is a “shared” symbolic system, language gives an independent 
“reality” to the event it describes. As everyone speaks about the 
same “thing,” this thing must “exist” per se. The world existed 
out of us. We perceived it as “being there” even if we were not 
present, it started having its own “permanence.” Over time, this 
outer existence has become “the reality.” Memory evolved, and 
the explicit component took a growing place. ERP became the 
predominant worldview.
In third-party descriptions, we attribute qualities to the objects 
and not to the observer. Let’s consider the three sentences:
1.- This red rose is beautiful. 
2.- I find the red of this rose beautiful
3.- I find this red color that I attribute to the “thing” we call a 
rose, beautiful
One and two are first-person perspectives. The first detaches 
completely “reality” from any observer. The second makes us 
believe that red is a property of the rose. The third is more 
correct but heavy to express. 
In all three cases, one has individuated and named the rose as 
separated from the rosier and the rest of the ecosystem. (Figure 
3.1.3.)
112

THE VERBAL WORLD
For brain-centrism, any description must come from a mental 
space. What we usually call a third-party description is our best 
effort to be “objective,” to discard any elements in the 
description that do not come from the object we are describing. 
For brain-centrism, this is not possible.
Written Language 
We invented written language much later, first as analog 
pictograms, then as symbols: abstractions, representing 
something other than themselves. Cuneiform, the ancient 
Sumerian script, emerged 5000 years ago in Mesopotamia, in the 
Fertile Crescent. It is the first known symbolic system of written 
communication. Sumerians came up with an amazing and 
revolutionary idea: instead of representing the visual perception 
with a pictogram, they started representing the spoken sounds 
with symbols: the letters. This allowed them to combine sound 
letters into words, then sentences, just like music. One cannot do 
113

THE VERBAL WORLD
that with pictograms. They multiplied this way the full power of 
syntax and the capacity to write any word that can be 
pronounced without having to learn new symbols.
Five thousand years ago, humans started writing a new page of 
their history named digitalization. Digitalization, as we know it 
today, came over the millennia. It allowed a “third level of 
adaptation” where it’s the environment that is changed to better 
suit our needs.
Language and interpretation. 
Human language is context-driven, not univocal, and not 
precise. Noam Chomsky declared that its power was in its 
imprecision. A word can have many meanings, and a sentence is 
always interpreted. One can use metaphors, irony, humor, hints, 
or poetry. A sentence can suggest the opposite of what its words 
are expressing. The imprecision of language allows depiction of 
the transience of our feelings. Writers and poets can convey 
subtle emotions and delicate situations by controlling the 
ambiguities of expressions and sentences. The same word, with 
a distinctive timbre or a different facial expression, will convey 
a different message. The language permits humor, the finest 
expression of human wisdom because it permits lying. Human 
language is a living system. Anyone can invent a word, and the 
context may provide understanding. Dialects and jargon can 
reveal variations or depict meaningful analogies for who can 
interpret them.
Computer languages. 
Computer languages, contrary to human ones, have to be 
univocal and precise because computers do not interpret. They 
are not aware of the context and do not use empathy to adapt the 
meaning of a sentence. As mental space, they only have a verbal 
world. If computers were subject to interpretation, they would 
be useless tools, as they would not always give the same result 
for the same input. The mechanical “reversibility” of computers 
and their language is their strength and their weakness. The 
difficulty of computer translation illustrates the confrontation 
114

THE VERBAL WORLD
between the two worlds of necessary precision and creative 
imprecision.
Undefinable Concepts 
Some concepts are primitive. Our natural world “knows” them 
because we experience them. (6.1). However, they are 
undefinable by description without entering circularities. Among 
the most fundamental ones, we can name.
Time, space, intelligence, and existence.
Before language, our natural world was already familiar with 
these notions who are undefinable in the verbal world. After 
inventing language, human societies needed, however, 
definitions. We accepted self-referential definitions like time is 
what a clock measures. We build an instrument to measure time 
and define time by what the instrument measures. 
Circular definitions may be useful in physics, but they can also 
become confusing and dangerous.
* *
3.2 Maps and territories
In 1974, I came upon an impressive book by Alfred Korzybski, 
entitled “Science and Sanity: An Introduction to Non-
Aristotelian Systems and General Semantics” printed in 1933. 
This title intrigued me and I went through its 600 pages several 
times. I could not figure out if Korzybski was describing 
tautological evidence or if he had spotted out a flaw in our 
knowledge so severe I could not see it. None of my usual 
discussion partners had heard of him. But 45 years later, I 
recognize that the significance of Korzybski’s work has had an 
unbroken influence on my thoughts and contributed to my 
understanding of brain-centrism.
In his book, Korzybski called “maps” approximately what we 
have named “mental representations.” A map is a model of a 
territory. His major claim is that “the map is not the territory.” 
115

THE VERBAL WORLD
That conclusion is not surprising. We know that abstraction is 
different “in nature” from what it is about. But Korzybski’s 
slogan reminds us vividly how misleading it is to confuse a 
“representation” with “what it represents.”
Identifying the map with the territory is yet pretty frequent in 
daily life, but also science. It regularly leads to a logical mistake.
A menu is not a meal. The word “dog” does not bark. The word 
water is not liquid.
 The verbal world is not the natural world, it’s about it. The true 
anchor of our life in the natural world.
You perhaps know the famous painting of Magritte: This is not a 
pipe! (Figure 3.2.1.) 
I still remember the first question that came to my mind:
—If it is not a pipe, then what is it?
We are so immersed in the ERP worldview that makes it difficult 
not to identify map and territory.
The difficulty that Korzybski noticed in most Indo-European 
languages is the usage of the verb “to be” in the sense of 
116
Figure 3.2.1: Magritte, “This is not a pipe”, illustrates that a 
map is not the territory

THE VERBAL WORLD
identity. One can say: “This is a book.” We identify the object 
you are holding in your hands to the word book. “Is” represents 
here an identity. Korzybski attributes the origin of this 
misleading construction to Aristotle and his first principle of 
logic. We need something either to be or not to be. If it is not X, 
it must be something else.
Our habit of identifying maps and territories shows the tight grip 
ERP has on our thinking process. In chapter one, we have 
considered perception and noticed that this identification could 
not be the case. The structure of the language favors this 
identification. As we use language for any description, it takes a 
little effort to realize this identification as an abuse. 
This confusion can become very problematic in science when 
the territory is “defined” by the map itself, with no observation, 
as we will analyze in the next chapters.
The distinction between map and territory supports the idea that 
our knowledge, our mental models of “out there” differ from out 
there itself. It alludes to a problem on which René Descartes had 
stumbled in the first part of the 17th century. How can mental 
act on physical, if they are not of the same nature?
If one draws a static map of a forest with exquisite precision, it 
will not show the leaves falling in autumn. We can build a 
simulation, a “dynamic model.” We add the “falling” of the 
leaves at time t. But “out there” the falling is not “added” it is 
integral to the system. We have fragmented and by adding the 
fall we are trying to “stick back together. But whatever the stick-
backs we make, we cannot build the map the way “out there” 
works. “Out there” is not fragmented. Sticking back produces 
mechanical objects, a tree is an organism. Scientific models 
represent how an individuated object changes with time. They 
use mathematical differential equations to describe the changes. 
The models are not “out there.” The Newtonian laws of motion, 
for instance, represent motion “out there,” but they are not “out 
there.”
117

THE VERBAL WORLD
A computer simulation represents what it simulates; it is not 
what it simulates. If you combine in a simulation representation 
of atoms of oxygen and hydrogen, it will not produce water and 
energy but only representations of these elements.
Confusing maps and territory can be very misleading. When one 
uses mathematical models of “out there,” one should remain 
conscious that we are using abstractions. We are navigating in 
the mental domain, not in the physical one. Basic concepts that 
we use daily in physics, such as a point, a line, a circle, a 
function, equality, continuity, computability, infinity, probability, 
randomness, force, field have no independent existence in the 
physical world.
Even within mathematics, the confusion between an object and 
its representations can lead to misinterpretations. The very 
appreciated and talented Russian/American mathematician, 
humanist, and author Edward Frenkel  gives an example. 
26
Edward underlines, on Numberphiles , the confusion between a 
27
mathematical object and its representation with numbers. He 
considers vectors on a plane with an origin point. He then 
chooses a coordinate system and represents each vector with the 
two coordinates numbers of its endpoint in this system. The two 
numbers he explains are not the vector; they represent the 
vector. The vector precedes the numbers; it existed before 
anybody described it with numbers. It would still exist if one 
changed the coordinates system and represent it with two other 
numbers; its nature is not numbers.
When some thinkers declare the universe is mathematical, we 
should consider it as a metaphor. Mathematics is a human 
language used to represent, “out there.” Some physicists claim 
the universe is a giant quantum computer and that physics could 
reduce to quantum information theory. But classical physics, and 
quantum information theory, are mental representations, they are 
not what is “out there.”
 Author of Love and Maths, The Heart of Hidden Reality, Basic Books
26
 Numberphiles is an extraordinary youtube channel on mathematics
27
118

THE VERBAL WORLD
Modern physics has added to the confusion between map and 
territory. It defines “existence” differently than our 
commonsense notion of existence. It claims that something 
exists if it is useful to explain an observation. (6.3)
Mental abstractions of the verbal world such as rules, or laws of 
physics, have no causal efficiency; they are made of symbols 
and do not, themselves, “generate” anything in the physical 
world. Laws of physics describe regularities we have noticed in 
our representations of nature out there. Maps are essential to 
gain understanding, but the causal agencies must be separately 
specified. Newton’s laws of movement move nothing.
“The planets don’t know Newton’s law, but they still orbit the 
sun.”
Verbal mental abstractions and their combinations remain 
mental, and not physical. 
* *
3.3 Information
The word information covers so many subjects that it is hard to 
say what is not information. In every object or event, we 
individuate “out there” our mental space can “detect” 
information. 
We only started using the word information in the enlightenment 
age. It carried the idea that the world “out there” is informing us 
through our sensory system. Experimentation was the act of 
collecting “information.” Matter “out there” would have a 
“form” to which we are receptive. Information was thus the 
mental ability to collect “forms.” For the empiricists, giving 
form meant attributing a unit, like a meter or a kilo, qualifying 
the measurement. (The idea of forms was from Plato.)
Philosophers, like David Hume, did not agree. He believed that 
our sensory experiences are much too imprecise to make up a 
sure link between us and “out there.” The question of how the 
119

THE VERBAL WORLD
mental space gathers information about the world remained an 
open question until the discovery of the expectation mechanism. 
The word information is self-referral, it can apply to itself as in 
the sentence: are you informed about the latest information? 
Because information is self-referral, it can produce paradoxes 
like: Having no information is having some information. In this 
sentence, the second usage of the word information is about the 
first usage. The absurdity results from having the same word 
representing two different abstraction levels. (Figure 2.4.1.) The 
second information is “meta-information” and we should not 
confuse it with “information.”
Understanding, intelligence, knowledge, language, secrecy, 
learning and teaching, are all mental attributes using 
information. As with any mental abstraction, we cannot see it or 
touch it. We can give information without losing it, and we can 
memorize it, forget it, or write it. Information can save our lives; 
or trigger our curiosity; it can be as helpful as it can be 
misleading. It can trigger beliefs and destroy empires. It can 
reassemble people as it can start wars. It can boost the stock 
market or crash the economy. Information is at the very core of 
science and measurement, but likewise of communication, 
justice, and democracy. Producing and sharing it is of major 
importance at all levels in human societies. 
Defining information to cover all its usages and correspond with 
our internal feeling is elusive. Too many significations of this 
single word are possible to make it useful as a scientific concept. 
The word information can apply to anything, anything can be 
informative.
One can distinguish the capacity of “something” to 
communicate information from the capacity of mental space to 
individuate information. Brain-centrism will concentrate on the 
second approach. ERP focuses on “out there,” it will adopt the 
first. For physicists and computer scientists, information is an 
intrinsic quality of an object “out there” that we can calculate. 
ERP will therefore avoid any “mental” interpretation.
120

THE VERBAL WORLD
The concept originated as a feeling belonging to the natural 
world, much before the first languages. Later we individuated it 
and named it. Naming a feeling always implies a problem, only 
a descriptive definition is possible and it will never reflect all 
aspects of the feeling.
Science needed a usable definition of information, a definition 
that would “make objective” the concept, although it is not a 
measurable property of matter like mass or electrical potential. 
Aristotle, Leibniz, Boole, and many others had previously 
opened the road. One had, however, to wait for the 
groundbreaking work of Claude Shannon (1916–2001) in 1948 
to clear it up. Shannon’s information theory does not concern the 
mental space interpretation aspect of information. Any role of 
the mental space is discarded. 
The word “Burro” means butter in Italian and donkey in 
Spanish. The “objective” part is the five-letter b u r r o, written 
in this order, with no allusion to meaning. Meaning depends on 
the language the receiver uses. It does not concern Shannon’s 
information. Remember our James Bond example, burro, viewed 
as a suite of five letters with no meaning, would be the 
technician’s perspective. He describes switching LEDs. The 
Italian and the Spanish would adopt a spectator’s viewpoint, 
who enjoys the film; because their mental space made sense of 
these LED switching.
When Claude Shannon published 1948, his groundbreaking 
paper, he was working as an engineer at Bell Labs; he entitled it:
121

THE VERBAL WORLD
A mathematical theory of communication
Shannon proposed his theory in the perspective of studying the 
maximal information that could transit a communication 
channel. His information is discreet and digital, the minimum 
unit is the bit, it corresponds to a yes or no option. 
Shannon described his approach to Information as “restricted” to 
a specific context: sending a message between a transmitter and 
receiver over a (potentially noisy) channel. The maximum 
success of this transmission is that the message received is 
identical to the message sent, with no loss or gain during the 
transmission. The system is thus reversible, information can be 
returned to the sender with no loss. It means that the word b u r r 
o is the same on both sides of the channel, the letters being in 
the same order.
Shannon’s information is thus purely about the syntax. The bits 
have no intrinsic “meaning.” Shannon’s concept of information 
puts aside semantics and interpretation, as it is only concerned 
by what happens in the transmission channel and not in the 
mental spaces of the sender or the receiver. Shannon information 
is digital, subtract-independent, and becomes a measurable 
quantity.
Shannon’s information was what ERP science needed. It is 
subtract-independent and thus communicable. It perfectly fits 
the recently developed electronic digital computers. The success 
was such that it imposed itself as “the” notion of information. In 
physics, the maximal information “contained” in an “object” 
was now a measurable quantity. One just had to evaluate the 
number of physical states this object could take. 
Here is how Shannon comments about his theory of information 
regarding semantic issues:
“Frequently the messages have meaning; that is they refer to or 
are correlated according to some system with certain physical or 
conceptual entities. These semantic aspects of communication 
are irrelevant to the engineering problem. The significant aspect 
122

THE VERBAL WORLD
is that the actual message is one selected from a set of possible 
messages.” 
Shannon’s information and the languages coded in bits avoid 
interpretation problems. The receiver has, however, to know 
how the message was encoded into bits if he wants to 
understand it. Reading the message does not need a code, but 
understanding it does.
Here is how the famous Argentinian mathematician Gregory 
Chaitin (1947-) describes the “cost” of introducing Shannon’s 
Information in “formal systems”:
“Formal languages avoid the paradoxes by removing the 
ambiguities of natural languages. The paradoxes are eliminated, 
but there is a price. Paradoxical natural languages are evolving 
open systems. Artificial languages are static closed systems 
subject to imitative meta-theorems. You avoid the paradoxes, but 
you are left with a corpse!” 
Humans overcome the “paradoxes” of natural language by 
understanding the context and the mental space of the emitter. 
They refer to their natural world. For them, meaning is crucial, 
but they find it through the second information source (Figure 
1.6.2), it does not transit through Shannon’s information. If we 
want to account for the role of perception, we will need a 
broader notion of information. We will then have to accept 
introducing Chaitin’s ambiguities, communication difficulties, 
and irreversibility. As Chomsky observed, “meaning” emerges in 
the natural world from analog ambiguities. Defining a word by 
description does not assure us that all humans will give the same 
meaning to this succession of alphabetic symbols. The feelings 
that each of us will relate to this word will differ from one 
person to the other, making ambiguity unavoidable. 
Figure (3.3.1) illustrates the communication between Bob and 
Alice. Shannon’s information concerns what happens in the 
communication channel, but discards what happens in the two 
mental spaces.
123

THE VERBAL WORLD
Robots using formal systems and Shannon digital information 
do not have these problems. They don’t have a natural world. If 
they did, they would be useless to us. That makes 
communication with robots somehow difficult. It obliges us to 
adapt to them, as they cannot adapt to us.
After the 1948 paper, ERP scientists started forgetting about the 
broader meanings of “information.” The quantifiable Shannon 
information was the information that fit the ERP physicalism 
paradigm and the only information usable in science. As a result, 
they excluded considering the mental space. For many scientists 
and philosophers, mental functions had to be “illusions,” 
because theories do not accommodate their existence. 
Shannon had “objectified” the word information by giving it a 
third-party definition that made a physical sense. Although the 
information collected is not a property of an object, one can 
calculate the maximal number of bits of a system by counting all 
its states.
The language of scientific knowledge, like the popular general 
language, refers increasingly to numbers. We measure 
everything to build better models. Numbers and data feed our 
computers, they are the language computers “speak,” but not the 
language of our mental space, and not the one of our natural 
world. This drift towards digitalization respects Asby’s law, but 
it mechanizes us.
Shannon’s information has invaded our lives and now dominates 
our relations, our activities, and our worldviews. Personal 
impressions, feelings, and other “subjective” judgments are 
discarded for the profit of more reliable, measurable, or 
countable data. For instance, we now base many tests and exams 
on multiple-choice answers, which are easier to correct with 
computers. Algorithmic procedures examine us in the 
background. Health organizations, insurances, banks, tax offices, 
are deciding on our behalf. We estimate automatized decisions 
based on numbers more reliable and cost-effective than personal 
interviews. The digital age has opened up the doors to a 
124

THE VERBAL WORLD
surveillance society. By adapting to the language of computers 
for the sake of efficiency, we neglect our natural world.
However, discovery in science, creation in arts, novel solutions 
to human and social problems, all make usage of intuition, 
feelings, creativity, and imagination. These are attributes of the 
natural world. They imply the ambiguities of analogy. 
Discovering something is not an algorithmic activity.
The ERP language and methods used to study “out there” do not 
adapt to study our mental space. A third-party digital view will 
“miss” something essential when considering only the brain and 
not the mental space. 
* *
3.4 Shannon information in the mental space
For a mental space to derive meaning out of Shannon’s 
information, it needs to have some previous knowledge. Out of a 
sequence of bits, one can, “a priori,” not know if one should call 
it noise  or valuable information. If we know the series contains 
28
relevant information, we still need a “code” to understand it. For 
instance, if you have a book written in an unknown language, 
you can, a priori, suppose that the book contains valuable 
information, but you cannot understand it. You need to know the 
language or at least have a “Rosetta stone.”
Jorge Luis Borges (1899–1986) in his novel, “The Library of 
Babel” illustrates these prior requirements to find useful 
information. He imagines a huge, but finite library containing all 
books made of any combination of one million characters. In 
this library you can find, for instance, all the science books that 
will exist in one thousand years and all the lottery winning 
numbers during these years. The library comprises invaluable 
information. Most books contain unreadable garbage. If one 
could know what book to read, we would see the future. The 
library would be a time machine, allowing us to access the 
 Noise is a random series of bit.
28
125

THE VERBAL WORLD
future now. There is no way to select the correct book. Even if 
somebody pretended to have picked the right book, he might 
have to wait one thousand years to prove it.
We can instruct any computer to print out the library. The library 
is therefore very compressible, as a small program can generate 
it. A program that selects the “correct” books and eliminates the 
garbage is missing. That is also the problem of the internet 
today. 
The mere existence of such a “Borges selection” program would 
mean that our universe is deterministic: the future would be pre-
written. It would also mean that one can solve the “truth 
problem” (4.4): is there a way within the verbal world to 
determine for every narrative if it is true or false.
The famous twentieth-century French mathematician Armand 
Borel (1923–2003) has noticed that the number π contains in its 
decimal development all possible information. We could add an 
infinite number of Babel’s libraries! In Carl Sagan’s science 
fiction novel “Cosmos,” extraterrestrial suggests that important 
information on the creation of the universe lies hidden some 
place in the decimals of π.
Information is everywhere, the problem is not information, it’s 
selection. Selecting is a mental operation. In 2020 we call it the 
fake news problem. We realize that our society relies on truth. 
As most of the information we digest comes from other humans, 
our entire society depends on trust. 
Data is never enough. One needs understanding. One can have a 
vast collection of data, however, lacking understanding, one 
cannot sort between garbage and valid information. In (4.8), we 
will assert that computers will not solve the problem because 
they have no natural world.
Shannon’s information is a mathematical theory belonging to the 
verbal world. It needs a mental space to individuate it and to 
extract information from a series of bits. Shannon’s information 
126

THE VERBAL WORLD
has to be encoded in the matter, with no reading code, matter 
possesses only “potential Shannon information.” 
Let’s consider that the gravitational pull between a planet and 
the sun is an exchange of information, one body influencing the 
other. It cannot be Shannon’s information. Shannon’s 
information would require mental spaces at both ends to encode 
it and decode it. Yet, there are no digital regulators developed by 
nature. Shannon’s information is an abstraction of the mental 
space. It is about mental representations of “out there,” not “out 
there” itself. At the “ground level” there is no Shannon 
information. It cannot be an intrinsic physical property of an 
object. An object “is” itself it is not “about itself.” A symbol is 
not what it represents. Only a mental space can generate 
Shannon information about some ground-level event.
This is contrary to ERP and the paradigm most scientists use 
daily and will attract me quite some criticism.
For instance, it’s an abuse in the language to say that DNA 
contains digital information. This digital information only 
happens in our mental representations of some physical events. 
DNA molecules are integrated and causal effective Gödelian 
information. Nobody “out there” has established a code, only 
mental spaces do that.
Criticisms are now extending to microbiologists.
The transfer of information through perception, and emotions, is 
physical, it does not use the Shannon digital coded route. Once a 
physical event has triggered a representation in the natural 
world, then the mental space can generate further mental 
abstractions in the verbal world and use Shannon’s information. 
Shannon’s information can be “detached” from a subtract where 
a mental space has encoded it. It can be re-encoded in other 
physical subtracts. The recipient can decode it. A computer can 
manipulate it, and it will allow reversible computation. 
127

THE VERBAL WORLD
However, this digitalized information is not causal efficient by 
itself .
29
* *
3.5 Information in the mental space
We have asserted that information that builds our mental 
representations comes from two sources. (Figure 1.7.2.) The first 
source is our emotions. This is Gödelian information, and 
emotions appear as feelings in the mental space. Gödelian 
information is integrated, not symbolic. When you feel pain, it’s 
not “about” pain, it’s pain itself. If you feel love, it’s not about 
love, and when you fear, it’s not about fear. We do not translate 
emotions into symbols in the natural world. They are physical. 
They existed millions of years before any symbolic 
representation.
We feel pleasure or dislike directly; we need no word for us to 
know about them. It’s “direct knowledge” that we only gain 
through a first-person perspective. This direct knowledge has 
developed to make the brain aware of inner events. We 
experience it, we feel it. At a later stage, we can then describe 
this analog information with words.
Discussing with Miguel in 2014, we agreed that this “direct 
knowledge” is also information physically active in the brain. 
We should not neglect it when studying the mental space. We 
were observing at that moment a tree trunk on the Geneva Lake 
Shore, and we could gather a quantity of information stored 
physically in its matter. The convolutions, the shapes, are 
significant traces.
A first-party feeling is not “independent” from its subtract, it is 
its subtract. That is why when we translate a feeling into words, 
we cannot be precise. Natural language gives us the possibility 
to use words poetically, to help up overcome this difficulty.
 This lack of causal efficiency of Shannon’s information was the basis of 
29
Descartes mind and body problem. How can the mind act on the body? (3.10)
128

THE VERBAL WORLD
One can conjecture that the physical, integrated Gödelian 
information is present everywhere out there. We can see it at 
work in all the physical forces. When a stone is falling, for 
instance, it exchanges Gödelian information with the planet. We 
expressed that by a metaphor: 
Planets orbit the sun without knowing Newton’s laws.  
Because the brain is on the “complexity plateau” (Figure 2.8.2) it 
has feelings and can express the first-person viewpoint in a 
communicable way. We thus have access to Gödelian 
information by feeling. Entities of lesser complexity do not. 
A third-party perspective, expressed in the verbal world through 
Shannon’s information, does not account for the enormous 
amount of Gödelian information in the natural world. It is a 
fragmented abstraction.
Therefore, to describe the mental space, Shannon’s information 
will not be sufficient. We cannot appreciate certain major 
aspects of the mental space’s activity through a “third-party” 
perspective. The internal first-person perspective, modulated by 
physical Gödelian information, paints a different and much 
richer reality. In most of its aspects, it is not interpretable 
through the concepts, individuations, and languages used in a 
third-party perspective. 
For planets and objects with low internal complexity, it suffices 
to describe them in the fragmented ERP way object under the 
influence of external forces. Third-party descriptions like 
Newton’s laws are then adequate to predict. When we study an 
organism, a mechanical description will fail. The additive 
structure of language does not qualify for systems that have 
developed and increased complexity.
Paul Davies gives a striking example. If you throw a dead bird 
you can predict its trajectory, but if you through a living bird you 
cannot.
For organisms on the complexity plateau, with multiple levels of 
adaptations and feedback like the human brain, third-party 
129

THE VERBAL WORLD
models cannot carry out predictions. Lotka’s principle explains 
this lack of predictability. (2.11) 
When you evoke a souvenir, you experience sensations, smells, 
tastes, pictures you don’t experience data. The events that make 
your life don’t come to you through measurable properties. They 
have no weight, no size, no electrical charge. Your struggles, 
your memories, your beliefs, your understanding, your feelings, 
your fears, the deepest part of what you are, express themselves 
in Gödelian information. The words you write, all you assert in 
Shannon information, constitute only a thin add-on layer and 
hardly reflect the multidimensionality of your inner life. 
We live our life in Gödelian information, but we communicate 
about it in Shannon’s information. Understanding means 
associating verbal representations with feelings and images in 
Gödelian information. The natural world gives meaning to the 
verbal one.
There is a vast difference between experiencing a Beethoven 
sonata played on the piano (the analog version) and the same 
sonata encoded with musical notes on partition paper (digital 
version). Both versions contain identical Shannon information, 
but the second provides us with a richer experience.
We mentioned in a footnote that many of us believe we have 
access to the third source of information. One could call it a 
spiritual source. From our shaman to Descartes and Russell or 
Einstein, many thinkers have expressed this idea that they 
considered as a direct relation with God or with the Universe. 
This third information source would also use Gödelian 
information and is difficult to translate into words. This third 
source also generates feelings, sometimes called revelation or 
inspiration. Srinivasa Ramanujan (1887–1920), one of the most 
astonishing mathematical geniuses of all times, claimed that he 
received in the visions of his dreams of entire rolls of complex 
mathematical formulas given to him by the Goddess 
Mahalakshmi.
130

THE VERBAL WORLD
Figure 3.5.1 Gödelian and Shannon Information
Panpsychism is the view that the “mind” is a fundamental 
feature of “out there” which permeates the universe. Thales, 
Plato, Spinoza, Leibniz, William James, Alfred North 
Whitehead, all had a similar view. The mind would then come to 
us through this third channel. Bertrand Russell’s Panpsychism, 
called neutral monism, is the belief that “all causal properties are 
extrinsic manifestations of identical intrinsic properties.” This 
belief is thus compatible with the universal Gödelian 
information hypothesis. Russell further believed the “conscious 
mind” resulted from such a physical structure.
Brain-centrism can accept the idea of a third information source, 
but as it is also Gödelian, one can only distinguish it from 
emotions from the first-person perspective.
Gödelian information Shannon information
physical, analog, integrated
symbolic, digital, “about”
shaped by natural selection
shaped by grammar logic
limited communication
mainly by empathy
symbolic language
social communication
analog
digital
feelings
words
inprecise
precise
ancestral
recent
understanding, belief, pleasure, 
fear, hunger, intuition, creativity, 
fast, artistic expression
reasoning, cheating, lying, making 
hypothesis and plans, predicting, 
calculating, solving, 
materializations
enactive and iconic knowledge
symbolic knowledge
physical fill in
verbal fill in
little abstraction capacity
unlimited abstraction capacity
learning by acquaintance
learning by description
causal effective
non causal effective
dominating in the natural world
dominating in the verbal world
131

THE VERBAL WORLD
Computers only use Shannon information, they can imitate 
feelings or understanding, but they don’t live them. You can 
program a computer to “imitate” crying when he listens to 
Mozart, and he would do it very well. You can also switch the 
program so that he laughs by listening to the same music. 
Imitation of feelings is not feelings. (7.1)
* *
3.6 Learning
We divided humans’ mental space into two zones, the natural 
world and the verbal world. Learning means building mental 
models and logical context representation networks, 
Net(R)’s. However, these models are different in each world. 
Learning in the verbal world is a digital activity. We learn 
symbols for things and connect these symbols by causality to 
build narratives. Net(R)’s that our mental space structures 
extend to both worlds. The new narratives should be compatible 
with the ones we have learned as Net(R)’s include rudimentary 
logical principles. 
Learning in the natural world is an analog association process. 
We experience or feel “things” (not symbols). We memorize 
pictures, sounds, smells, … These images call one another by 
analogy. Causality and logic are not involved. The process is 
physical, we learn by doing. 
We can learn about the Gizeh Pyramids by reading a book, or we 
can visit them. The feeling and the knowledge are different. 
Bertrand Russell distinguishes two methods to gain knowledge: 
knowledge by description and knowledge by acquaintance.
We learn by description by listening or reading a verbal 
description. This symbolic knowledge belongs to the verbal 
world. That is the way we learn history, mathematics, … it’s the 
way schools do their teaching for most subjects. 
132

THE VERBAL WORLD
We get knowledge by acquaintance, by direct experience, by 
interacting with the subject we are trying to know. We can learn 
by acquaintance matters who are not accessible by description, 
such as playing ping pong, playing golf, riding a bike, dating a 
partner, appreciating music, how to walk, what the red color is, 
the smells of a rose, what it is like to like or dislike, the taste of 
an orange, truth, fairness, dignity, kindness… When we learn by 
an acquaintance, we are forming integrated Gödelian 
information, with no intermediary symbols.
The pathways for description and acquisition are different, 
although both use brain plasticity and neurogenesis.
A baby can only get his original knowledge by acquaintance. 
Our ancestors, before language, could likewise only learn by an 
acquaintance.
We forget most of what we get by description, five years later 
less than one percent will remain. But what we get by an 
acquaintance, we will never forget. 
Imitation is an acquaintance. We are not solitary creatures, 
disconnected from one another. Learning about oneself is 
workable because we engage with others.
We base any knowledge on a description of previous detached 
knowledge by acquaintance. This is how my friend the 
philosopher Craig Weinberg puts it:
“We cannot describe numbers, or gravity, or matter to a 
creature that does not experience them either… Things which 
are presumed to exist independently of subjectivity, such as 
matter, energy, time, space, and information are themselves 
concepts derived from intersubjective consensus.”
Bill Gates wrote in 1993, after visiting central Africa with 
Melinda.
While I was aware of the vast inequalities in the world, I had 
never come face to face with people living on the bottom rungs 
of the income ladder—people so poor they didn’t have shoes. Of 
133

THE VERBAL WORLD
course, they lacked much more than that: healthcare, education, 
better seeds and tools to grow more food, and, above all, 
opportunity. Seeing this with our eyes was life changing.
Experiencing offers something specific that description cannot 
propose. We connected experiencing to emotions as we express 
it in Gödelian information. It makes it more convincing and 
easier to memorize.
Alfred Korzybski, we already cited, had observed in 1930 that 
there are two types of definition we can give to a word:
An Intensional definition is defining a word by associating it or 
equating it to other words, like does a dictionary. Korzybski’s 
favorite example is Plato’s definition of a man. Although it may 
be correct, it says nothing about the man himself: “A man is a 
featherless biped.”
An intensional definition creates associations between words, 
connections of mental representations in the verbal world. It 
presupposes you know all the words used in the descriptive 
narrative. This may lead to circularities, like in any dictionary.
Extensional definition. This is how you would teach the word 
“man” extensionally: 
While you point your hand at a series of men, one after the 
other, you pronounce each time the word “man.” You rely on the 
brain of the student to associate what he sees, pointed by your 
finger, to what he hears. Here, the association is between 
representations of different worlds: in the natural world, the 
visual one you pointed at, in the verbal world, the word you 
pronounced. The idea of repeating the gesture and designate 
different men allows the abstraction to cover many types of men 
and learns to neglect the unimportant differences in the 
abstracting process.
We cannot show mental objects like the Big Bang. We have no 
other solution than to describe them intensionally. To simplify 
the definition, we often associate a metaphor or find an 
evocative name for the “non-observable” object. The name or 
134

THE VERBAL WORLD
the metaphor then guides the feeling one associates with the 
concept. A terrible choice can be very misleading and drive us to 
a false understanding and critical decisions. In the Big Bang, for 
instance, nothing banged, and it was all but big! Naming 
something can be a disaster for generations, said the French 
philosopher Albert Camus.
A careful reader will find dubious names in most branches of 
human activity. 
A computer only “learns ” by description as its program is 
30
based on symbolic digital language, and his memory is digital. 
Recently, deep learning system is frequently cited. The program 
“learns” to relate a word with many unique pictures showing 
similar objects in various positions, colors, backgrounds, at 
different levels. The computer makes up a multilevel database of 
pictures associated with this word, allowing him to recognize it. 
That is not the way the human brain recognizes situations, 
patterns, and objects.
The power of a digital language is precisely that it is symbolic; 
one can learn the symbol without knowing the meaning. 
Symbolic language is “detachable” information that one can 
transfer from its original subtract into a new device.
In the last 15,000 years, we have shifted our knowledge from 
acquaintance to description. Emotions, that our mental space 
previously only associated with perceptions, we now also 
associate them with words. We can be afraid of the word lion 
and not only by the perception of a lion. Language has made it 
possible for us to hide behind words. We can appear to be, even 
if we are not. (7.1)
We now base some of our new emotional landscapes, hopes, 
perspectives, and fears only on narratives, for which we have no 
direct knowledge. We trust.
 In fact he never learns in the human sense as learning implies attaching an 
30
emotion.
135

THE VERBAL WORLD
This behavior has changed not only the mental space but also 
the physiology of the human brain. It is now “adapting” to 
technology, it has itself created as its new environment. This is 
changing our habits, our behaviors, our feelings, and developing 
our beliefs.
Institutionalized religions had imposed authoritative knowledge. 
The enlightenment had put reason and empiricism at the steering 
wheel for truth. But authoritative knowledge is making a great 
comeback with broken democracies, dictators, and sadly often 
with organized “science” itself. 
Solutions we choose to adopt in personal and social life adapt to 
the knowledge we have, as do the dreams we dream, and the 
future for which we strive. By considering that the only “real” 
knowledge is the one that comes from digital descriptions, we 
possibly forget some aspects that have contributed to our 
survival up to now.
Mental abstractions and digital language have opened up another 
drive for evolution.
We imagine a desirable future and try to materialize it, instead of 
allowing for random mutations to determine our future.
Natural selection has allowed certain species to survive for 
hundreds of million years because selection and adaptation 
mediated the random push to the environment. It has proven to 
be a useful guide for survival. Will, our mental adaptation to 
“materialized mental abstractions” reach the same performance? 
We used to adapt to an environment that developed 
independently.
Today we adapt to an environment that we create ourselves. We 
have put ourselves under control of our economy, presupposing 
that some “invisible” hand knows where we have to go!
* *
136

THE VERBAL WORLD
3.7 Reduction and Inclusion
A deck of cards is an abstract entity of similar components, the 
cards. The abstract concept deck focuses on the analogies 
between the cards. It neglects their differences, such as their 
color and their denomination. It also discards meta-information 
on the cards such as their order. Our mental space permits this 
abstraction by individuating a virtual object, the deck. When you 
consider a fork, you individuate an abstract entity made of 
similar metal molecules in a specific order, the form of the fork, 
and you neglect differences such as the position and the 
momentum of each molecule. (Figure 3.7.1 first column) 
Reciprocally, instead of abstracting the deck from the cards, one 
can decompose the deck into parts, its cards. The figure 
represents abstracting and decomposing by arrows in the 
opposite direction (Figure 3.7.1).
We decompose when we ask: what is this object is “made of”? 
This question is the method we use when we inquire, we collect 
information, by fragmenting and individuating parts. We then 
“re-glue” the parts together by making a sentence. Knowing, in 
the verbal world, requires decomposing an entity into smaller 
parts. We then consider that our object is a “sum” of these 
137

THE VERBAL WORLD
i n d i v i d u a t e d p a r t s . We c a l l t h i s k n o w l e d g e 
strategy reductionism. It is the only strategy used by the verbal 
world. However, it is not the only one in our mental space.
Often, reductionism suffices to answer our questions; in other 
cases, it is not. Let’s say you decide to sort your deck of cards by 
color. At the abstract level of the deck, nothing changes, it 
remains the same deck, but in a different order.
Abstracting builds a higher-level verbal representation by 
focusing on similarity and neglecting differences at lower levels. 
A reduction is the reversed operation, it decomposes an object 
into its parts. (Figure 3.7.1.)
Our mental space can only individuate an object because this 
object has a boundary. There is “something” larger outside in 
which contains it. We cannot even conceive something that is 
not a part of something else. We sometimes call this basic 
ancestral character of our mental space the inclusion principle. It 
states that any mental representation “S” in the brain is part of a 
larger representation. Our mental space always considers there is 
a larger representation containing “S.” The inclusion principle is 
the opposite of reduction. Inclusion and reduction are the two 
directions in our Russian doll metaphor. The limits are always 
problematic if one considers that our abstract representation 
corresponds to something “out there.”
The fovea that we met in (3.1) is a bit in the retina’s macula 
(about 1% or the entire surface) that provides the clearest vision 
of all. It handles the sharp central vision that is necessary for 
primates to make a detailed observation. The fovea mobilizes 
over 50% of the visual cortex. It developed with perception and 
brain mapping systems. As a theater projector, the fovea lets us 
follow the exciting part of an event by sweeping through it.
The eye fovea guides the brain’s awareness when doing a 
detailed observation of an object. We consider one region of the 
object after the other, following the sweeping movement of the 
fovea over the object to discover its details. This visual 
characteristic has led us to fragmentation and reductionism, 
138

THE VERBAL WORLD
which we now consider so “natural” and logical. It finds its 
origin in the physiology of our brain rather than in nature “out 
there.” Reductionism thus analyses and describes a phenomenon 
in terms of the individuated constituents. We can decompose 
these parts into subparts. This way we can build mental layers of 
description at increasing resolution levels.
 This process is recursive and has “in principle” no end for the 
mental space who can imagine zooming in. For physics, that 
describes observable entities, the recursive process needs to 
stop. Physicists stop this recursivity when the next level of sub-
elements can have no more measurable influence on the object 
they are describing. 
Recursiveness is an important property of the verbal world 
caused by individuation, fragmentation, and reductionism. The 
choice of physicists to stop it is legitimate. The discovery by 
Max Planck (1858–1947) and Albert Einstein (1879–1955), 
beginning of the last century, that electromagnetic interactions 
only appear in discrete quantity comforts this choice. (5.12) 
Reductionism produces convincing descriptive models when the 
object studied shows negligible internal and external 
interactions. We then considered the object as “isolated” from its 
inner parts and the environment, justifying its individuation. 
Isolation is an approximation, out there, no object is isolated. 
But even for isolated objects, reductionism will not always give 
a proper picture of the whole, as in the following example (Figure 
3.7.2).
Consider the two-dimensional surface that mathematicians call 
the Moebius strip.
Its main observable characteristic is that it only has one side. 
One can draw a continuous closed line on the strip that will 
mark both sides of the paper with which we made the Moebius. 
If we now divide the strip into small regions like on the figure 
and study these regions one by one, none of them has the 
characteristic of being one-sided. The reductionist analysis, 
region per region, will miss the key feature of the Moebius strip, 
139

THE VERBAL WORLD
which is a property of the whole not reflected in the parts. (See 
also 3.8.)
Often, some physical characteristics only appear when one 
considers a holistic view, as in our example. This is true for 
complex interactive systems, like organisms. Up and down the 
ladder of resolution levels, specific properties appear or 
disappear. “Out there” cannot be the cause. “Out there” nothing 
changes when we change our observation resolution. Changes 
resulting from the mental space’s functioning, its abstractions, 
its individuation, and its fragmentations. 
However, our human verbal world cannot apprehend “out there” 
differently. Reductionism, like individuation, does not bias such 
as we described in (1.3). No “corrective” methods exist. The 
“understanding” that results from reductionism is proper to our 
mental space, it is our mental construction and cannot give us a 
faithful picture of what is out there.
In our reductionist descriptions, physical systems are reducible 
to particles. Any phenomena should then be understandable by 
analyzing subatomic particles. It is not the case. We need other 
140

THE VERBAL WORLD
description languages when navigating up and down the 
resolution ladder. Every level has its language and brings its 
specificities: chemistry, biology, psychology, sociology. In our 
deck of cards example, after reordering the cards, it is always 
the same deck, but when one looks closer, something has 
changed. By looking at one card at a time, we cannot understand 
the arrangement order.
Lee Smolin (1955-), one of the brightest living theoretical 
physicists, proposes an interesting rewriting of physics:
“Rather than describing an isolated system in terms of things 
that are measured from the outside, we’re taking the universe as 
comprised relations among events. The idea is to try to 
reformulate physics in terms of these views from the inside, what 
it looks like from inside the universe.”
To account for interactions between parts, or between an object 
and its surroundings, physics considers another mental 
abstraction: the physical laws. Our new maps, when 
complemented with these laws, describe the time evolution of a 
system that we call models. 
On the map, we have fragmented “object” and “interactions.” 
On the territory, the interactions are not “added,” they are in-
dissociable from the things themselves and their environment; 
they are integrated. We cannot observe “interactions”; we only 
can perceive what they do. When we measure the intensity of an 
electrical current, we measure what this non-observable current 
does to our instrument. When you measure your weight, you 
only read what the weight of your body does to a scale. On the 
map, we have two separate “things”; the objects and the 
interactions. On the territory out there “things,” are in-
dissociable.
“Out there” physical actions do not use computation, or a 
representation system to move, there are no fragmented 
individuations. This is the idea we have summarized by saying 
that:
141

THE VERBAL WORLD
Planets orbit the sun but ignore Newton’s laws
One could say the same thing for all physical actions:
The needle of a compass will move according to a magnetic field 
without calculating Maxwell’s equations.
Movements on the territory are not “computed,” no Shannon’s 
information can be involved in the process “out there.” It only 
gets involved when our mental space models it with fragmented 
representations. Our models are sometimes “good” enough, but 
they can never be isomorphic. No computer simulation can 
model a natural phenomenon.
Henri Poincaré (1854–1912), to account for internal interactions 
in our models, has added higher derivative terms to the 
descriptive differential equations. These higher derivative terms 
can make the equations non-integrable.
Organisms, living systems, are in perpetual exchange with their 
environment and adapt by changing themselves at various 
levels, from the molecules to the whole organism. (2.9) There is 
no way to consider them as isolated systems and adapt 
reductionist methods. A brain is all but an isolated system. We 
saw in (2.8) that it belongs to the complexity plateau. These 
characteristics make it impossible to model it. A global theory of 
the brain will thus not be mathematical, neither will it emerge 
from a reductionist approach.
If one considers just one level, the proteins, we estimate that at 
least 16,000 different ones populate the brain. They formed 
these proteins as sequences of amino acids threaded like pearls 
on a necklace. The DNA gives the instructions to position the 
amino acids. Once the pearls are in the correct sequence, the 
protein folds up in a precise three-dimensional structure that 
determines its role in the organism. The folded protein shape 
represents the lowest free-energy state. This ribbon folds itself 
up in very complex ways. The geometry of the folding 
determines what the protein will do. Folding takes less than a 
second, even if the protein contains several thousand amino 
142

THE VERBAL WORLD
acids. A computer simulation, even on the fastest 
supercomputers, could take 10127 years to determine the folded 
form even for a small protein of 100 amino acids. Recently 
(2021) new algorithms seem to have significantly reduced the 
calculated folding time to a few days. 
However “out there” is not doing the same kind of algorithmic 
computation to perform its folding! (2.8)
Even if maps and territory arrive at the same result, they are not 
taking the same route and not using the same tools to reach this 
result! Identifying any model to what it models makes little 
sense, identifying map and territory, as ERP suggests, can lead 
to terrible confusions. It’s true as the system gets more complex 
with more levels of adaptation to consider.
Digital computing has trained us to think in terms of 
“detachable” Shannon information: hardware and software. “Out 
there,” this distinction does not exist. Falling apples don’t follow 
any software; they don’t need a language; proteins fold using no 
software to do so, a hurricane does not follow software to take 
their shape. Only our mathematical verbal world representations 
of these events require this separation.
* *
3.8 Complex adaptive systems
We have already described why the verbal world has to consider 
the abstract concept of complex adaptive systems (CAS). (2.9) 
These constructions of the verbal world are necessary to 
describe certain systems out there. Because we understand a 
system by answering the question: what is it made of, we 
decompose it in part by reduction. (3.7) If these parts are 
themselves active agents, re-gluing them to get the complete 
system is complicated because the parts are not isolated systems. 
Imagine a jigsaw puzzle made of pieces, but instead of having a 
fixed shape, the pieces change because they interact. Re-gluing 
by adding the pieces will be complicated. In our Russian doll 
143

THE VERBAL WORLD
example (2.9), information flows up and down the system. The 
complexity grows when we approach the intelligence plateau 
because the subsystems handle information differently. (2.11) 
They use this energy flow to reorganize themselves. This 
reorganization generates additional information, like our jigsaw 
puzzle pieces that would change their shape.
Out there systems are integrated they are not fragmented, our 
mental space fragments them to understand them. Out there, 
there are no complex adaptive systems. CAS are on the map, not 
on the territory as ERP considers. 
The mental space that generates complex adaptive systems must 
consider itself as a system. So is the underlying brain. CAS’s are 
powerful mental tools, authorizing us to examine characteristics 
of our verbal world and organize the data our instruments 
collect. It’s an abuse of language to speak about a complex 
adaptive system. We should rather than say the complex 
adaptive mental representation of a system.
For ERP, complex adaptive systems model open “physical” 
systems. The components of these systems interact, they adapt to 
each other and change the entire system. We cannot describe 
them as the aggregation of static components. The continuous 
multilevel adaptations imply they change in time. A stream of 
inflowing energy keeps them far from equilibrium and feeds the 
changes from one level to the next. Feed forward and feedback 
combine at every level.
Here are some examples. Living organisms, crowds, flocks of 
birds, traffic jams, the economy, the weather, the market, 
companies, human society, the solar system, galaxies. Most of 
the systems we live with are complex adaptive with multiple 
layers of adaptation. That makes our simple school mathematics 
inapplicable in most ordinary situations.
144

THE VERBAL WORLD
Complex adaptive 
s y s t e m s e x h i b i t 
properties we cannot 
observe/deduce by 
a n a l y z i n g 
t h e 
components, we call 
t h e m “ e m e r g e n t 
properties. ” 
31
Is the “one-sided” 
p r o p e r t y o f o u r 
Moebius strip an 
emergent property if 
we consider it built out 
of the small rectangles 
as in (Figure 3.7.2)? The 
strip is not a complex system, and the property of being “one-
sided” is not emergent. The rectangles are not open active 
agents, there is no energy flow. Looking closer, our rectangles 
are not rectangles, they are distorted.
Let’s take a simple system with two levels, S would be the entire 
system, the higher level, and c1…. cn its components, the lower 
level. S and c’s are open entities. (Figure 3.8.1.)
Let’s say the observer is describing c’s. Energy is flowing 
through S, who transforms part of this energy into order or 
additional information, as we have seen in (2.9). It does that by 
organizing its components, the c’s. In return, c’s also interact 
absorbing order from S and thus changing S. Nothing in the 
language and the concepts describing individual c’s will allow to 
expect what happens with S. From the c’s point of view, a 
change of S’s behavior is an emerging property.  
For instance, we cannot deduce the activity of a formicary by 
observing a single ant. It’s an emergent property. The market 
cannot be estimated by observing only one stock.
 It is also abusive to say emergent property, it leaves the impression that the 
31
emergence comes from the system when in fact it comes from the 
representation in mental space.
145

THE VERBAL WORLD
One cannot describe emergent properties with the language, and 
the individuations used for its subcomponents. They are not at 
the same level in the abstraction tower. Analyzing a molecule of 
water will not tell us if the water is liquid, solid, or gas. Liquid 
solid or gas is another mental individuation that does not belong 
to the language we use for a single molecule.
The philosopher David Chalmers (1966 -) distinguishes weak 
and strong emergences. He defines weak emergence in ERP 
terms:
“We can say that a high-level phenomenon is weakly emergent 
with respect to a low-level domain when the high-level 
phenomenon arises from the low-level domain, but truths 
concerning that phenomenon are unexpected given the 
principles governing the low-level domain.”
One can notice that Chalmers’ definition relies on what the 
mental space expects should happen. Without a mental space 
that expects something to happen or not, there is no emergence. 
With weak emergence, we cannot have access to the information 
that would let us calculate the emergence.
Some usual examples of weak emergence could be
When unexpected complex patterns form in the cellular 
automaton, like in Conway’s Game of Life . In traffic jams. In 
32
the behavior of a school of fishes. In solar systems or galaxies. 
The emergence of phase changes. 
Understanding these emergences requires further levels of 
explanations. Our initial individuations of the system and its 
parameters omit some information that becomes important after 
some time.
Often the omitted parameters were impossible to measure, like, 
in traffic jams, the reaction moment of each driver. Other times, 
the omitted parameters will interfere only at a moment, like in 
phase changes that happen at a temperature.
 https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Conway%27s_Game_of_Life
32
146

THE VERBAL WORLD
Chalmers defines strong emergence in ERP terms by:
“We can say that a high-level phenomenon is strongly emergent 
with respect to a low-level domain when the high-level 
phenomenon arises from the low-level domain, but truths 
concerning that phenomenon are not deducible even in principle 
from truths in the low-level domain.”
In ERP, the structure of the universe should cause this “non-
deductibility.” By having in principle no cause, the emerging 
phenomenon appears then like a miracle. As Einstein had 
claimed, we must be able to understand the universe. Everything 
happens because of a cause, even if at the moment we don’t 
know it.
Can we observe “out there” examples of strong emergence? 
Such an observation would be the appearance of “something” 
with no cause. This something would not only be unexplained, 
but we could prove it unexplainable. This would contradict 
physics and its conservation laws.
Most neuroscientists consider consciousness and our mental 
space as “emerging” from the activity of the brain. ERP would 
require this emergence to be weak. That is why, for them, there 
must be a “brain code.” This brain code would be a way to 
explain the content of what we experience (the emergence) 
based on the brain’s electrochemical activity. Experience and 
consciousness would then only be a “weak emergence,” and our 
incapacity to expect the emergence would no more be “in 
principle.”
For ERP physicists, it should be possible to explain 
consciousness and the mental space with new principles, but 
within the framework of physics. The mathematician and Nobel 
prize in physics Roger Penrose (1931 -), for instance, believes 
that “new physics” is necessary to understand the emergence of 
consciousness. He developed a theory with the American 
anesthesiologist and professor at the University of Arizona 
Stuart Hameroff, in which the brain uses quantum phenomena in 
the cell’s microtubules for its functioning. However, new 
147

THE VERBAL WORLD
physics must “fit in” the third-party language of physics. That 
condemns it as an explanatory system for consciousness and the 
content of the mental space.
In the verbal world, proposals can “emerge” (be formulated), the 
truth of which we cannot, even in principle, deduces from truths 
of elements within the system. The truth of these proposals is 
undetermined, they have no causes .
33
For brain-centrism, mathematical indeterminacy proves that 
strong emergence exists in the mental space. We encounter 
indeterminacy when the mental space examines itself in a self-
referral process. (6.10) Consciousness can feel itself in the 
natural world. When it wants to explain itself through a third-
party perspective in the verbal world, it encounters a blind spot. 
(2.11) 
* *
3.9 Causality
Emergent properties are surprising because they seem to escape 
causal explanations. Brain-centrism considers causality as a 
function of the verbal world. Its function is to organize, connect 
concepts, and facilitate memorization. The underlying brain 
generates it in its effort to minimize energy expenditure, reduce 
entropy, and increase connectivity.
ERP, on the contrary, would consider that the universe is causal. 
Scientists keep scrutinizing it to find causes explaining the 
phenomenon they observe. Physicalism explains the physical 
nature of causality by energy exchange between two events.
Many philosophers and scientists have rejected the idea of 
“physical” causality, considering that causation was only a 
mental operation. For instance,
 Kurt Gödel proved (4.6) that this can happen for any consistent 
33
mathematical formal system. In (6.10) we will analyze why this happens in the 
mental space.
148

THE VERBAL WORLD
David Hume (1711–1776) the great Scottish Enlightenment 
philosopher, argued that there was no causality in nature, 
although he recognized causality was useful in everyday life. 
“Causal necessity has neither an empirical nor a logical 
foundation.”
Bertrand Russell concluded that, since cause and effect play no 
fundamental role in physics, “causality” should be removed 
from the philosophical vocabulary altogether. “The law of 
causality, like much that passes muster among philosophers, is a 
relic of a bygone age, surviving, like the monarchy, only because 
it is erroneously supposed not to do harm.”
Carlo Rovelli (1956-), a famous Italian physicist, and author 
writes: “If I observe the microscopic state of things, then the 
difference between past and future vanishes … in the elementary 
grammar of things, there is no distinction between cause and 
effect.”
Most commonly for physicists, causality formalizes the 
statement that information propagates from present to future. 
However, Einstein’s Special Relativity has, in 1905, questioned 
this classical perception of causality and simultaneity. (6.4)
Brain-centrism asserts that there is no way to measure causality 
“out there,” causality is an abstract concept describing an 
operation of the verbal mental space. Because we represent, 
fragment, and abstract, we have separated an “action” from the 
body it is acting on. Just as we separate hardware and software. 
Causality is the mental operation by which the mental space “re-
glues” timely what we have separated. It allows the verbal world 
to produce a coherent and communicable whole.
This “causal” organization of the verbal world favors memory 
retrieval. We associate memories with timestamps and organize 
them “coherently,” like a puzzle. This facilitates understanding 
and explanation. We form causal chains by connecting past 
events to present situations. For any representation (R), Net (R) 
149

THE VERBAL WORLD
will include causal chains we have memorized . These 
34
constructions will also rely on expectations, and fill-in to select 
the most appropriate causes. Therefore, different people will 
come up with different causal explanations for the same event.
We will also abstract the structure of a causal chain as an order 
or a pattern. It will allow us to use a similar procedure for 
different circumstances, like an algorithm. 
Proper usage of causality does not seem to be imprinted in the 
brain’s circuitry and we will need to be trained during childhood 
to logical thinking.
Building a convincing causal explanation is easier “a posteriori” 
after the event. Causal chains are not the proper tool to predict 
because of the variety of causes that one can select. However, by 
carefully learning patterns, we gain experience that can be useful 
for prediction.
Democritus (460—c. 370 BC) already understood that causal 
chains can be problematic. They are infinite and recursive. He 
was the first to stop the recursivity of the chain “what is it made 
of” with his idea of atoms. We remember Socrates for his 
doubting. What can we know? On what foundations rests human 
knowledge if answers are part of infinite causal chains. 
Ultimately, if knowledge implies knowing the causes, we end up 
knowing nothing. 
The “origin problem” that appears with all causal chains remains 
today as it was in ancient Greece.
By considering causality as an operator of the verbal world, 
brain-centrism put forward limitations of any formal system, 
allowing self-referrals. (6.10)
Brain-centrism bases knowledge on the natural world. (4.2)
* *
 Net(R) is the logical context representation network.(1.7)
34
150

THE VERBAL WORLD
3.10 The mind and body problem
René Descartes’s landmark book, Discourse on the Method of 
Rightly Conducting One’s Reason and of Seeking Truth in the 
Sciences, published in 1637 includes his famous quotation, I 
think therefore I am. It is one of the most influential philosophy 
books of all time. In the Discourse, Descartes, 2000 years after 
Socrates, starts by doubting everything. He notices that the only 
thing he could not doubt is that he is thinking. Thinking is 
primordial to any knowledge, a perfectly brain-centric idea.
After having individuated two types of “substances” mind and 
matter, Descartes raised an important question: how could these 
two substances interact. He could not answer, but we consider 
him the founder of modern dualism. Descartes’s question had 
ancient sources. We can trace dualism to the Greek philosophers, 
especially Plato and Aristoteles. It is the belief that we must 
separate the world into two types of realities, material and 
immaterial or spiritual.
Aristotle, in his book “De Anima,” was one of the early thinkers 
asking how to relate mind and body. How to establish a 
connection between “immaterial” thoughts and matter? 
In his Sixth Meditation, first published in 1641, René Descartes 
expresses the central problem posed by confronting mind and 
body.
“How can things so utterly different in nature as a thinking 
being and corporeal being, each acting and acted upon in 
incommensurate ways (thought vs. motion), enter so intimate 
union—a union that includes causal interaction between them? 
How can anything that acts only by thinking exert effects on 
something that can be acted upon only by being moved? And 
how can anything that acts only by moving exert effects on 
something that can be acted upon only through feelings 
(sensations, passions)?” 
“I was not able to give any explanation of all this, except that 
nature taught me so. For there is absolutely no connection (at 
151

THE VERBAL WORLD
least that I can understand) between the tugging sensation and 
the decision to take food, or between the sensation of something 
causing pain and the mental apprehension of distress that arises 
from that sensation.” 
Descartes believed it would never be possible to solve this 
problem for science:
“In any chain of physical causes, one can only find one particle 
or set of particles communicating their motion to another 
particle or set of particles: so that even if the chain were to 
proceed to infinity, we would never reach anything but still other 
motions of particles, i.e., we would never reach desires and 
aversions, distress and delights, etc.” 
In 1640, the Princess Elisabeth of Bohemia, the daughter of 
King Frederic of Bohemia, had asked Descartes for advice in the 
awkward moments she was going through. She was living in 
exile since the 30-year war. She maintained a correspondence 
with Descartes until he died in 1650. The princess, in these 
epistolary exchanges, insisted that Descartes should offer her an 
answer to the mind-body problem. She could not accept the idea 
of two different kinds of natural entities without a clear 
explanation of how they could interact. 
In her letter, dated from La Hague May 16, 1643, she says:
“ … begging you to tell me how the human soul can determine 
the body to achieve voluntary actions. Because it seems that any 
movement is made by the pulsing of the thing moved, in the way 
it is pushed by the thing moving it… That is why I am asking you 
for a precise definition of the soul…”
Descartes answered on the 21st of May. He explains how objects 
are attracted to the center of the earth with no contact being 
visible between the planet and the drawn objects. He then argues 
that this analogy explains how mind and body could interact. 
The princess answers on the 20th of June in a long and detailed 
letter that she does not understand Descartes’s analogy, and 
requires more explanations.
152

THE VERBAL WORLD
For many thinkers, Descartes’s problem remains open today. 
Many scientists are materialists during work hours and become 
dualists after. Brain-centric answer on the mental causation 
problem is in (3.11).
Phenomenology is the study of conscious phenomena, mainly 
from the first-person perspective. It developed with Kant and 
Schopenhauer and was given its independent status as a branch 
of philosophy in Europe during the 20th century under the 
impulse of Husserl, Heidegger, Sartre, Merleau-Ponty, Jacques 
Derrida, and many others. 
Arthur Schopenhauer was a great admirer of Immanuel Kant. 
Relatively unknown during his lifetime, he did not give value to 
social encounters and was as many brillant thinkers, a solitary 
man. He wrote:
“A man can be himself only so long as he is alone; and if he 
does not love solitude, he will not love freedom; for it is only 
when he is alone that he is really free.”
At the beginning of the 20th century, his work gained an 
enormous influence among scientists, philosophers, and artists. 
He was the first major Western philosopher to take eastern 
philosophy seriously. Nietzsche praised him for “his honesty, his 
cheerfulness, and his steadfastness.” Karl Popper (1902–1994) 
the great philosopher of sciences considered him to be: “a man 
of supreme integrity who cherished truth beyond anything else.”
In his major book “The World as Will and Representation,” 
Schopenhauer recognizes Kant’s distinction between the world 
as it is and the world as we see it.
“Kant’s greatest merit is the distinction of the phenomenon from 
the thing-in-itself, based on the proof that between things and us 
there always stands the intellect, and that on this account they 
cannot be known according to what they may be in themselves.” 
153

THE VERBAL WORLD
For Schopenhauer, our cognitive apparatus, our brain, the very 
element that allows us to know, forbids our full comprehension 
of the objects it describes.
In April 1837, the Royal Norwegian Society of Sciences offered 
a prize for the best essay on the following topic: Can the 
freedom of the will be proven from self-consciousness? Arthur 
Schopenhauer won the prize. The problem he attacked in his 
essay was precisely Descartes’s question: the problem of mental 
causation. (3.11) How can one reduce the mental to the physical? 
Schopenhauer believed that the deepest explanation is not a 
physicalist’s explanation, but a mental one.
For Schopenhauer, the “nave” realism at the basis of the post-
enlightenment sciences was a “childish mistake.” He agrees that 
“matter precedes mind,” but he also argues that in some sense 
“mind precedes matter.” He calls this “an antinomy in our 
faculty of knowledge.” His solution is to follow Kant’s 
distinction:
“Time, space, and causality are forms of appearance; they 
belong only to phenomena, not to things-in-themselves.”
Schopenhauer has this way delegitimized Descartes’s problem. 
The price for this was high, he had to abandon ERP and 
materialism. He paved the way for brain-centrism.
With the development of ERP neuroscience, Descartes’s 
problem took a very concrete aspect: How does the brain 
activity generate experience? What, in the brain, produces 
consciousness, and wherein the brain does lie? (3.11)
David Chalmers in 1995 has famously called this same mind-
body problem the “Hard Problem” of neuroscience. He was 
trying to reconcile a physical phenomenon, such as brain 
processes and experience, phenomenal qualities or qualia 
generated by the mental space.
As did Descartes, Chalmers is seeking a description of a first-
party inner perspective within a third party ERP framework, 
individuation’s concepts, and language. As Descartes had 
154

THE VERBAL WORLD
already noticed, a true explanatory connection is impossible, as 
we have shown, even if she can observe some correlation for 
motor activity. The hard problem disappears if one abandons 
ERP who requires us to reconcile a first party and a third party 
perspective.
For brain-centrism,
On one side, there are the representations of the natural world 
described under a first-party inner perspective that we call “what 
we experience.” They mostly operate in Gödelian information. 
From this perspective, we are blind to our brain activity and 
perfectly see what we experience.
On the other side, there are the representations of the verbal 
world described under a semi-third-party perspective that we 
call scientific observations. They operate with Shannon’s 
information. From this perspective, we are blind to what the 
patient experiences, but can imprecisely measure some of his 
brain activity.
We should notice that these two sets of representations are 
obtained differently. They don’t even represent the same 
territory. Internal Gödelian information feeds the first set of 
representations (1), by sensory perception, memory associations, 
individuations, and entailments dictated by the language; it 
highly depends on the state of the mental space. Limited 
Shannon information, collected through measuring instruments, 
feeds the second set of representations (2). It concerns other 
individuations consensually approved and following the 
scientific language and methods. 
The tentative reconciliation is not between the tangible and the 
non-tangible; it is about two sets of representations that ERP 
wrongly hypothesizes as being two aspects of the same unique 
thing. For brain-centrism, we base these two sets of 
representations on different individuations and they result from 
different perception mechanisms. One cannot be explained in the 
language of the other. We already know that the complexity of 
155

THE VERBAL WORLD
the mental space (1) is infinitely higher than the complexity of 
the scientific explanatory system (2).
I would like to mention the famous American philosopher and a 
critique of physicalism, Thomas Nagel who argues that some 
phenomena are not to be grasped from an objective perspective.
“We are wrong to take modern science to be the only paradigm 
of objectivity. The kind of understanding that science represents 
does not transfer to everything that people would like to 
understand.” 
Nagel is an advocate of the idea that consciousness and 
subjective experience cannot, at least with the contemporary 
understanding of physicalism, be satisfactorily explained using 
the current concepts of physics. In 1974 he presented an article 
detailing this position entitled: “What is it Like to Be a Bat?”
When a musician composes a masterpiece, a mathematician 
solves a problem that has been open for 200 years, a man 
overcomes a serious debilitating handicap by the strength of his 
will, when we travel to the moon or a child suddenly shows by 
156

THE VERBAL WORLD
his smile that he understands and loves, we must be more than a 
bag of molecules. 
The very tools of digitalization, symbolic representations and 
experimentations that have allowed us to acquire so much 
mechanical knowledge also limits our investigation capacities 
when we try to apply them to study first party experiences for 
which their individuations and methods do not apply.
* *
3.11 Mental causation
Causal efficiency is a concept referring to the ability of 
“something,” physical or mental, to act on another mental or 
physical entity. How can information in a mental space be causal 
efficient?
In ERP science, “acting on” implies an exchange of energy 
between the two parties. Something physical can act on some 
other physical thing, like two billiard balls colliding or an 
electric current flowing through a copper wire. They exchanged 
energy. (Figure 3.11.1) (1).
A mental representation can act on other mental representations. 
This is the learning process we can all experiment with. This 
happens in the mental space by analogy or causality as we 
described. (3). At the brain level, this corresponds to reinforcing 
connections, creating new connections, and neurogenesis.
How does a physical entity act on a mental representation and a 
mental concept act on a physical body (2) and (4)?
Weak emergence explains (2) how the physical acts or generates 
the mental, although it does not explain the content of the mental 
picture. We have discussed weak emergence in (3.8).
The process describing (4) mental causation is straightforward. 
However, two things make it complicated. The first is the 
language that does not distinguish levels of abstraction and thus 
157

THE VERBAL WORLD
confuses maps and territories. The second is that description 
happens at both the level of the brain and the mental space. 
Let’s take it in a step-by-step description of (4), mental 
causation.
1.- A feeling (F) will initiate a representation (R) in the natural 
world
2.- A narrative will translate and abstract (R) in a verbal world 
representation N(R)
The feeling (F) is Gödelian information initiator of (R). The 
narrative N(R) is Shannon’s information in the verbal world, 
symbolizing (R).
3.- The narrative N(R) is causally related to other memorized 
narratives in the verbal world. R is related by analogy to other 
natural world representations. This generates a network of 
called-up representations in both worlds that we will call Net(R), 
the “logical context representation network.” 
158

THE VERBAL WORLD
4.- Net(R) is associated with a series of feelings in the natural 
world whose Gödelian information will combine with F in a new 
feeling Net(F).
The Relativistic brain theory explains how this combination 
happens as analog field computing. (3.1) The system is a CAS 
continuous interactions occur between the analog and the digital 
computing systems.
5.- Net(R) is Godelian causal effective physical information 
related to our physical bodily emotions that act on our body. The 
body can then act on “out there.” We interpret this whole 
mechanism as mental causation (4). (R) acts on “out there.”  
Figure (3.11.2) illustrates the mechanism we just described.
For ERP physicalism Gödelian information being integrated and 
thus not measurable, it is denied. ERP then asserts that mental 
causation is impossible and is an illusion. Therefore, most 
scientists are “materialists.” For them, only one kind of 
substance can exist: matter, and one kind of information: 
Shannon digital symbolic information.
The procedure we described respects the laws of physics and 
conservation of energy. However, it extends the notion of 
information beyond symbolic information to integrated 
information. The fact that the procedure is initiated physically in 
feelings could be interpreted in favor of physicalism. However, 
conscious thinking interferes through the associations in the 
verbal world that make up Net(R), the logical context 
representation network.
We can thus train thinking at the level of these associations and 
at their meta levels. We don’t need to learn every procedure, we 
can meta learn how to build procedures.
Intuition is illustrated by the natural world part of Net(R) that 
will generate analog associations. (6.6) In (3.13) we examine how 
Libet’s experiment supports this description.
159

THE VERBAL WORLD
This mental construction seems to be much more coherent than 
denying altogether the existence of consciousness or of a mental 
space that we can all resent in a first-person perspective. 
Denying it because of the limitations of the symbolic 
representation seems absurd. All the more when we know the 
verbal system itself that has blind spots causes these limitations. 
(6.9) and (6.10).
Abstract thoughts or narratives cannot be causal effective 
according to energy conservation laws. A thought or a narrative 
has no energy, it is not a physical object. A story itself cannot be 
causal. One can write it on paper, as it is “detachable” Shannon 
information, but it will “do” nothing. It is only when a story is 
read and has triggered an emotion that it “means” something for 
someone. It’s not the words of the poem or the notes of the 
music that make us feel happy or sad. The emotions to which we 
mentally connect them handle our bodily reactions.
* *
3.12 Cartesian dualism and fragmentation
Descartes’s division of the world into two types of entities is a 
verbal world fragmentation named dualism. Both physical and 
spiritual substances are mental representations. The mental 
representations of these two types of substances can interfere as 
they are mental. Descartes’s problem with dualism was related 
to ERP. For ERP this mental interference corresponds to an 
interference “out there.” However “out there” mental and 
material is not fragmented. The separation only happens in the 
verbal world.
Once fragmented, we have difficulties reuniting them in a 
common understanding.
If fragmentation has little consequences when describing non-
organic isolated systems, it fails in describing mental operations, 
because we are fragmenting the tool that is fragmenting. (6.9) and 
(6.10) 
160

THE VERBAL WORLD
Not that easy to understand and admit that this fragmentation/
separation results from our mental space operations. There can 
be no “natural fragmentation out there.” We fragment to 
represent, and we represent to understand. Fragmentation is a 
characteristic of the map and not of the territory. The difficulty 
arises because, to analyze and understand the nature and origin 
of fragmentation, we use the same tool that had caused the 
fragmentation: our structured language.
Simplified individuations induce the mind and body, 
“separation.” When we describe any object separating it from 
the forces that act on it, we fragment. We have expressed that by 
the sentence: 
Planets orbit the sun without knowing Newton’s laws.
Let take our protein folding example (3.7).
We have individuated the protein as the “matter” that makes the 
protein its amino acids. The matter is the specific individuating 
quality. The folding, the action, has not got the quality of being 
material, it is individuated, like software separated from its 
161

THE VERBAL WORLD
material hardware. It is “created” by the mental space because 
out there “action” is not detachable. We then try to figure out a 
rule (the folding) that would take the protein (the matter) from 
its initial state to its ultimate state. Out there the physically 
integrated proteins information reaches it result in seconds. This 
is the essence of the concept of Gödelian integrated information.
Our fragmented individuation results from how we produce the 
mental map; it is not on the territory. On the map, narratives 
about physical and mental events use entirely different 
languages for which we have created mental concepts with no 
existence out there. On one side, you have reductionism, 
particles, mass, dimensions, chemistry; on the other, you have 
abstraction, thoughts, time, feelings, algorithms. With so 
dissimilar individuations, it is impossible to reconcile these 
narratives, although on the “out there,” they are not separated. 
This impossibility is at the heart of Descartes’s problem, 
Chalmer’s Hard problem, or the brain code problem.
* *
3.13 Libet’s experiment
The famous experiment conducted by the neurologist Benjamin 
Libet in the 1980s has often been used to support physicalism 
and the idea that consciousness is an illusion. Brain-centrism 
considers a key to understanding thinking and the mental space.
Libet shows that the neurological sign of a decision can be 
“read” in the person’s brain activity some 300 milliseconds 
before he even becomes conscious he was deciding. The volition 
process thus started unconsciously. (Figure 3.13.1.) 
Let’s see how this supports and justifies the idea of an 
expectation mechanism. At the moment of the conscious 
perception, and before the motor act corresponding to a visible 
decision, one can notice a delay of 100 ms. During this Gap of 
100 ms, consciousness has the possibility to interfere and change 
the unconscious impulse associated with the expectation. That 
precious 100 ms allows consciousness to delay and change the 
162

THE VERBAL WORLD
reaction proposed by our expectation mechanism. They have 
allowed human civilization to develop. Libet experiment thus 
supports our description of mental causation (3.11).
During this 100 ms, consciousness can act to accept the 
unconscious anticipation and the preset behavioral expectation 
patterns or to refute it, allowing then other anticipation to 
manifest and a thinking process to start. If consciousness does 
not take advantage of this 100 ms, the “automatic” pre-learned 
expectations and behaviors will be in control. It happens, in all 
our “automatic” behaviors, like for instance, when we drive a 
car or when we autocomplete a word after just reading the first 
letters.
Nature has left this opening to start a thinking process without 
imposing it. It would have been too slow to guarantee our 
survival. Without this 100 ms, we could never have been able of 
third-party perspectives.
Our shamans 30,000 years ago took advantage of this 100 ms to 
delay his spontaneous reactions, allowing him to explore 
163

THE VERBAL WORLD
different mental pathways through conscious thinking. This 
opened up for him the creation of invisible worlds. 
Most learning and materialization processes involve delaying 
our reactions and start thinking. But for humans, delaying our 
reactions is only a possibility, it is not mandatory. We are not 
obliged to think; we have 100 ms to choose to do it; otherwise, 
usual patterns take full control of our reactions. (Figure 3.13.2.)
Many human activities are better accomplished after a learning 
process that has automatized our reactions to speed them up. 
Like playing tennis, driving a car, or piloting a plane, doing 
repetitive work. In these activities, we have to learn an algorithm 
that will drive preset learned patterns and allow immediate 
reactions. In all life-saving situations, thinking is too slow, as for 
our primitive man in the savanna. 
The final 50 ms shown in the picture (3.13.1) is the time needed 
to activate the muscles. During this interval, no more possibility 
exists for the spontaneous act to be stopped, it will go to 
completion.
Libet himself asserts:
The finding that the volitional process is initiated unconsciously 
leads to the question: Is there then any role for conscious will in 
the performance of a voluntary act. 
The conscious will decide to allow the volitional process to go to 
completion, resulting in the motor act itself. Or the conscious 
will block or “veto” the process, so that no motor act occurs.
For brain centrism, Libet’s experiment confirms that the 
expectation mechanism is at work throughout the mental space. 
Consciousness can decide because of this 100 ms delay that 
allowed thinking, developing third-party perspectives, and 
human civilizations. Educating our mental spaces to make usage 
of this 100 ms is critical. Even if, for economic reasons, it can 
sometimes seem to be a waste of time. We should let machines 
do algorithmic repetitive tasks, they have no way to stop their 
algorithmic procedures and start thinking.
164

THE VERBAL WORLD
* *
3.14 Why the mental space
We have examined part of the huge abstract territory that makes 
up our mental space. With some of its natural and pre-existing 
lands, some of its older and more recent human structures, its 
two information sources and information systems, and some of 
its forces. We have emphases on the perception mechanisms that 
relate the mental space with the external world and allow it to 
update and adapt. The complexity of the mental space is such 
that it escapes any verbal description. A verbal description 
would be part of the verbal world, which itself is only a recent 
part of the total space. Only metaphors can give us a feel and 
help the mental space visualize itself.
From the outside, what we can “discover” is the brain, the 
physical space. A third party cannot “recognize” the mental 
space we experience from the inside. This is per se remarkable 
and has played a critical role in the way human societies have 
formed. That our internal world is our secret has conditioned the 
way we structure our society and represent our ultimate personal 
freedom. Amazingly, nature has developed this internal feeling 
of freedom by building an impenetrable wall around aspects of 
our mental space. Organized groups, societies, powerful men, 
militaries have always attacked this freedom that they consider 
as a potential disorganization source or a threat to their power. 
The neural code tentative is just but the latest assaults on our 
freedom wall. Previous attacks used much slower and less 
efficient methods, such as manipulating emotions and narratives 
to condition beliefs.
To describe the mental space, we could have used the language 
of psychology. But that language has developed as a third-party 
description. Psychologists dealing with suffering patients have 
built these individuations and concepts. Here we have other 
goals, we are trying to understand our reality and how the 
mental space generates it. 
165

THE VERBAL WORLD
In our James Bond example (1.4), the two perspectives (the 
spectator and the technician) don’t experience the same thing, 
although they are looking at the same “object.” If we adopt a 
third-person ERP perspective to describe the mental space, the 
picture would be the one of a technician. It would not allow 
distinguishing some elements important for brain-centrism. 
Brain-centrism wants not only to know how the mental space 
“functions.” It wants to understand why it creates mathematics, 
why it loves music, why a painter is ready to put his life at risk 
to finish his painting, why we build temples and start wars. It 
wants to understand why humans create civilizations and why 
they have built this reality rather than another one. Would 
another one be possible? What are the limits? Are there any 
limits? For brain-centrism, a “physical theory of everything” 
cannot be a theory of everything, as it would be included in the 
verbal world.
We thus need to include in our study the full richness of the first-
person perspective, and confront it with our creation of “semi-
objective,” semi third party visions. We should not close our 
eyes to the fact that the world we live in is not an “objective” 
third-party world. It’s the world our mental spaces build. By 
neglecting this, we take the risk of building an external world to 
which we cannot adapt. Nobody reasonable would build a 
building without knowing who will live in it. But we also 
confront the huge difficulty of reconciling two very different 
perspectives, the inner first-party view and the outer semi third 
party one. The human mental space is the only place in the 
universe of which we can know this double inside and semi 
outside view. 
A photo camera is never in the pictures it takes.
The fundamental difficulty is that we need the mental space to 
visualize itself. When we focus on certain regions, we create 
recursive loops. These recursive loops generate blind spots that 
limit our understanding and obscure our vision. The “natural 
brain’s reaction” when we come to such blind spots is that the 
brain proposes fill-ins. Observing a system from the inside 
166

THE VERBAL WORLD
creates limitations. ERP neglects these limitations when it 
adopts an outside third-party approach. ERP has to attribute 
these limitations to “out there,” when brain centrism sees them 
in the structure of the mental space.
For instance, brain-centrism relates certain intrinsic limits of 
formal systems to blind spots of the verbal world. These limits 
can produce emerging properties or “indeterminacies.” ERP, 
sometimes like in quantum physics, considers these 
indeterminacies as properties of nature out there, while brain-
centrism will attribute them to mental space blind spots. 
Self-referral, at the source of blind spots, makes it impossible to 
define primitive words by description. For example, we cannot 
define consciousness, existence, time, or space. To understand 
these words, we need the natural world and thus the first-person 
viewpoint that science excludes. 
Many difficulties inherent to the mental space are because of 
self-referral or indeterminacy, here are some of these problems:
Limitations to scientific knowledge, including the measurement 
problem, limits to empiricism.
Reductionism and individuation.
The “origins” problem. How do things start?
The inevitability of moral and ethical questions.
Confirmation biases.
For brain-centrism, perceptions are central to how the mental 
space builds realities. The word perception here would include 
both sources of information. This remark gives a critical role to 
the mental mechanisms that assemble and reorganize pieces of 
information to build realities. Most remarkable is the role of the 
expectation mechanism at work at all levels between 
representations. Expectations are the sources of self-referral 
biases, they guarantee tour quest for the truth will remain 
endless. 
167

THE VERBAL WORLD
Fill-ins then play a central role by filling the gaps in our first- 
and third-party knowledge. In the past fill-ins have determined 
the destiny of civilization, they have provided answers to blind 
spots which have oriented our hopes and our beliefs. 
Expectations have cut short the idea of absolute knowledge and 
absolute truth. But they have allowed learning at a level no other 
species have reached once combined with structured languages. 
They have also allowed incredible abuses by allowing beliefs to 
prevail on observations, and discourses to prevail on precise 
information.
The expectation mechanism has another important consequence. 
When no sensory input is available to change or support our 
expectations, these prevail and we treat them as perceptions.
It is the case when we close our eyes let our minds wander. This 
specificity has consequences on how our mental space treats 
non-observable objects. For instance, elementary particles such 
as electrons, photons, or quarks are non-observable. They are 
equivalent to their formal definition. Mathematical expectations 
apply then with no direct possibility for us to adapt any 
individuation. This has consequences for our interpretation of 
quantum phenomena.
Mental blind spots, because of expectations, are of critical 
importance in our quest for truth. It is the case when associated 
with fill-ins and bias confirmations. In chapter 6, we will give a 
closer look at them. However, we can already realize that their 
consequences are more important to humanity than the regions 
of the mental landscape more susceptible to an “isomorphic” 
description on which ERP concentrates.
Brain-centrism claims that studying the intrinsic limits of the 
mental space and its consequences should become a central 
research and educational task. The famous Socratic “Know 
thyself” touches the core of blind spots. It justifies our 
description of two lines of development for humans. One should 
know not only the object but also the characteristics and 
limitations of the “knower.”  
168

THE VERBAL WORLD
Nature and evolution have provided our mental space with 
adaptation and learning mechanisms, allowing us to overcome 
or circumvent certain blind spots. We can also attribute many 
mental states to ourselves and others. We can “guess” the 
intentions, hopes, expectations, desires, happiness, and beliefs of 
other humans and certain animals. Psychologists use the term 
“theory of mind” to denote this amazing ability.
Among these abilities, the most powerful one is imagination—
the capacity to conceive and explore alternative realities.
As Descartes observed, we know we are conscious because we 
observe and know we observe. Consciousness is self-referral. 
We know consciousness because of what it does, not because of 
what causes it. This internal projector lights up the parts of the 
scene, but we cannot aim it at itself. 
From an inner perspective, because the scene lightens up, we 
know there must be a projector. In the same way, we conclude 
by seeing photography that there must have been a camera, even 
if we never see it. That is how Descartes reaches the primordial 
conclusion: “I think; thus, I am.” 
A third party has no way to know the scene and deduce that the 
projector is there and working. 
Consciousness is primitive; in the mental space, it can have no 
causes that explain it. Causality stops when confronting blind 
spots, just as it stops in the Newtonian system for space and time 
that must be pre-given primitives.
By a third-party analysis of the physical space, one can find 
correlations with the mental space. But we see no way to explain 
our inner experiences with electrochemical events in the brain. 
The language of science and its individuations and its integrated 
ERP perspective prevents us from complete access to the mental 
experience by using this form of Shannon world explanations. 
                                                                                                        
                                                                                                        
                                      
169

THE VERBAL WORLD
Representations of external objects or events are far less subject 
to distortions than feelings because we confront them with 
outward-oriented sensory inputs. However, they are subject to 
various constraints related to brain physiology, language, 
emotions, and pre-existing expectations. 
The shape of the water is often the shape of the bottle.
Immanuel Kant (1724–1804) already explained that what 
perception tells us about the world is how it presents itself to us, 
not what it is “In itself.” By combining information sources, the 
mental space continuously changes its own “state.” The intensity 
of our active emotions and the prevalent feelings at that moment 
change. So do our expectations and our dominant thoughts; it 
changes the active mental patterns; it changes memories and the 
complete reactions of the rest of our body. A third-party 
perspective, when analyzing the brain or a stone, only feeds at 
sensory information.
There is an uncountable number of possible mental states, and 
we create new ones through brain plasticity and adaptations at 
every level. A mental space cannot be twice in the same state 
during one’s lifetime. We cannot individuate a mental space 
independently of the environment, be it physical or social. 
Miguel Nicolelis has studied in his lab what he calls brainnets. 
These synchronizations between primates’ brains occur through 
speaking or through listening or observing a common scene. He 
showed that one can establish a brainnet by sharing brain signals 
from “brain to brain.”
At church, in the laboratory or a court of justice, at a ball, on the 
beach, or at a football match, each situation triggers the opening 
of a pattern. We do not use the same concepts and do not 
develop the same feelings in every life situation. The language is 
different, and, most of all, the balance of the various information 
sources is different. 
How does the mental space solve all the problems we encounter, 
from playing chess, crossing a busy road, preparing our food, 
170

THE VERBAL WORLD
speaking, writing, building a spacecraft, greeting a friend, 
choosing how to answer a question? 
Jerry Alan Fodor (1935–2017) was an influential American 
cognitive scientist and philosopher. For him, “modules” 
structure the mind. Each has a specific function and a 
geographical location in the brain. Every module has specialized 
problem-solving skills, a module for language, another one for 
perception, another one to control our emotions, a module to 
recognize faces. A central processing part takes care of the 
relations between the various contents.
The most compelling evidence for the modularity approach 
comes from studies of patients with damaged brains. Damage 
often impairs some cognitive capacities, but not others. A patient 
can, for instance, lose the capacity to understand speech but still 
be able to speak or lose long-term memory without the short-
term memory being affected.
But the mental space also has general-purpose problem-solving 
capacities. Its incredible plasticity allows the “take over” of 
damaged regions by other parts of the brain. Recent research, for 
instance, has shown that one can develop a visual image through 
touch and kinesthetic movement, called haptic feedback; we are 
all familiar with inserting a key in a lock in the dark by touch 
and pressure feedback sensations.
To finish this overview, I would like to remind us how complex 
the mental space is. Its complexity is infinitely higher than the 
complexity of certain of its subsystems, like language or 
theoretical physics. We will obtain simple proof of this assertion 
by noticing that the complexity of mathematics is infinitely 
higher than the complexity of any language, formal ones, and 
natural ones. This assertion justifies our metaphorical 
descriptions. It is then not astonishing that the underlying brain 
does not fit into traditional physical descriptions. 
* *
171

THE VERBAL WORLD
Properties, functions, and components of the mental space 
reviewed.
- Perception, Representations, feelings, expectations, representation networks,
- Anticipation or expectation mechanism, fill-in mechanism, Initiation of 
expectation
- Fragmentation, Individuation, Identification, association
- Adaptation, Analogy, Causality, Order, Curiosity
- Russian dolls, adaptation levels, complexity, complex adaptive systems
- Abstraction, abstraction levels, about function, mental abstractions
- Memory, short-term memory, mental patterns 
- Learning, imitation, neurogenesis
- Feelings as representations of Emotions
- Two information sources, analog and digital
- Survival, primitive emotions, and feelings
- Symbolic structured languages
- Inclusion principle
- Irreversibility
- Shannon information, digital and analog combination. Gödelian information.
- Reductionism, holism, decomposition, fragmentation, wholeness
- Emergence
- Self-reference, recursively, recursive loops, blind spots
* * * 
172

THE VERBAL WORLD
IV: KNOWLEDGES, BRAINS AND 
COMPUTERS
Knowledge makes up the substance of the mental space. In this 
chapter, we will review how knowledge is gained. We will 
distinguish two types of knowledge corresponding to the two 
worlds we have described.
The verbal world alone cannot find out the truth of a narrative. 
We call this fundamental question, “The Truth Problem.” We 
will describe the ancestral philosophical struggle to solve the 
truth problem. This millenary story is critical to understanding 
reality.
4.1 Studying with Pythagoras
It was not so easy to enter the school of Pythagoras settled in 
Croton, in southern Italy, about 525 BC. An applicant would be 
refused and put under observation. That observation period 
would last several years. If they admitted him, it was for a five-
year vow during which they would teach him music, geometry, 
and magical incantations. Pythagoras emphasized moderation, 
piety, respect for elders, and of the state. He advocated a 
monogamous family structure and preached an austere lifestyle. 
Pythagoras believed in social justice; justice had for him its 
origin in geometry. He also believed in the reincarnation of the 
soul and the afterlife. Humans could reach reincarnation through 
their conduct during their life on earth. Their soul was then 
admitted to another world. Aristotle explains that Pythagoras, on 
the tracks of his teacher Anaximander, could calculate the size of 
all the known planets and that, for him, all the planets were 
spheres orbiting the sun. 
The observation period, preceding the admission, allowed the 
school to detect the sincerity and the deeper motivations of the 
future student. No admission exams were required, and they 
delivered no diplomas. Most of what the student would learn, he 
would learn it by an acquaintance, and not by verbal discourses.
173

THE VERBAL WORLD
Pythagorean ideas would exercise a marked influence on Plato 
and Aristotle and through them, on all Western philosophies. His 
school had become famous for some of its basic ideas, including 
The nature of reality: Reality is, at its deepest level, 
mathematical. Music and astronomy are examples of how 
numbers underlie everything in our world. Numbers were more 
than quantities; they had more profound importance as guides to 
the harmony of the soul.
How to make one’s mind clear: they considered philosophy a 
guide to spiritual purification. Without a purified mind, we lose 
track of our internal guidance. This purification needs to be 
learned; it comes by itself. Meditation did the learning; the 
student had to discover by himself before any theoretical 
discussion was possible.
The human soul can unite with the divine: The human soul can 
reach unity with what transcends us, but it does not come 
automatically. Purification is the way to rise to this union. 
Uniting with the divine means a deep personal global 
understanding, leading to personal peace and wisdom in 
interpreting nature and society. It was the ultimate goal of the 
human mind. It was considered that, without this union, any 
understanding would be limited; any conclusion could further 
down the road lead to disasters. Narratives were not the method 
to discover the divine, it only “appeared” after sufficient guided 
meditation on symbols. The divine unified all knowledge and 
defragmented the student’s personality. 
The study of spiritual symbols: Students would learn the 
symbolic nature and meditate on the beauty of numbers and 
relations such as the golden section and the harmony of the 
spheres. Although the matter had technical roots, this study was 
contemplative. Each symbol, each number, could help develop 
an aspect of the soul.
The school promised nothing; it gave no diplomas or 
certificates; it did not teach how to “make money” or become 
famous. It did not consider the purpose of knowledge as related 
174

THE VERBAL WORLD
to power or social status. It warned on the fact that power or the 
quest for honor would corrupt accurate knowledge. The 
philosophical program of the school aimed at liberating from the 
animal’s passions and identifying our divine part. 
However, the central thesis of Pythagoras of Samos was that the 
number is the principle and the origin of everything. 
Reality is much too complex to be expressed by one unique 
principle, Pythagoras separated reality in two opposed 
principles: the finite and the infinite. Numbers are the key to 
understand how these two principles interplay and combine to 
generate reality. The odd numbers represented the infinite 
principle and even the finite. Equilibrium resulted from the 
proper balance between these two principles; without this 
equilibrium, there was no hope to concentrate on purifying the 
mind and the soul.
Interesting is that for Pythagoras, numbers represented not only 
quantities, each had a symbolic meaning and a moral 
signification. It had to be discovered. By contemplating 
numbers, their combinations with their symbolic meanings, the 
student would go through his purification process. 
By referring to numbers from two perspectives, the school of 
Pythagoras elevated its students for them to find internal 
guidance; by associating practical techniques with spiritual 
meditation. By taking the time to reach a deeper understanding 
of the “hidden orders,” were among Pythagoras methods to 
emphasize equilibrium between inner and outer sources of 
information to purify the minds. To understand the first-party 
perspective, one had first to develop the third party perspective.
What we consider today the legacy of Pythagoras; his theorem 
on the right triangles was for him a minor technical aspect. At 
his times, his most celebrated idea was the discovery of the 
divine that unified the personality by equilibrating inner and 
outer knowledge.
175

THE VERBAL WORLD
Pythagoras teaching and methods might seem strange to us 
today. They reflect a culture and values that have largely 
disappeared. What we have kept from his teaching fit in our 
present culture.
* *
4.2 Knowing and Being
Education is not the learning of facts, but the training of 
the mind to think… Albert Einstein
So many things have changed in our societies since Pythagoras 
times. It can be because of environmental changes, like 
earthquakes, volcano eruptions, falling meteorites, biological 
mutations. Many are because of deliberate human judgments, 
like wars, alliances, regulations. Others are because of 
possibilities opened up by technological innovations, like 
motors, telescopes, airplanes, electricity. However, many 
evolutions are caused by emerging properties of these first three 
causes. In these cases, nobody or no group has decided anything, 
no invention is the source, and nobody could have predicted the 
changes. Cultural changes belong to this last category. 
Explaining how societies evolve is delicate. Certain ideas can be 
successful, although they are harmful to survival. It seems like 
Darwin’s mechanism does not account for emerging properties.
It might now seem ridiculous to meditate on numbers; we prefer 
studying how to use them. Materialism and “efficiency” have 
won a firm grip on the mental spaces. We are not living in a 
mystical era. We focus on the practical and technological side. It 
is much more efficient for engineers who have to build 
something. Nobody would have the patience to wait years to be 
admitted to the school of Pythagoras.
We have given a foremost priority to the measurable; power is 
now the major reason we want to gain knowledge. We teach our 
students how to perform what society will demand from them. 
176

THE VERBAL WORLD
Knowledge has become “how to do,” rather than “how to be.” 
“How to execute,” rather than “how to question.”
What made us take this direction, is it a determined direction 
that any civilization would take, the brains have reached the 
intelligence plateau? Is it a necessity imposed by Darwinian 
Competition?
Western education systems favor descriptive  knowledge 
35
methods. The knowledge that description does not cover has to 
be gained as an inner first-person perspective. This knowledge 
concerns our natural world. Feeding the verbal world with 
information does not help. Let us cite, for instance, the 
knowledge one gets by practicing meditation or yoga, the 
knowledge taught by Pythagoras, where his students gained 
wisdom by meditating on numbers. But also the evaluation of 
moral and ethical issues, the fairness issues, truth and trust 
issues… Knowledge like those developed by our shaman painter 
who had learned how to master his fears and balance his 
emotions. The knowledge one may gain by spending a night 
outside looking at the stars. Knowledge like the one’s 
interactions with an animal can give us, or like spending time in 
a different human culture. Knowledge gained by discovering 
alone proofs of mathematical theorems. Knowledge of our 
limits. Knowledge on meaning, on feelings, on love.
The enlightenment in the western world has brought forward the 
preeminence of reason and indirectly an ERP worldview. This 
has resulted in the science and technological revolutions that we 
have known. In Asia, Zen has focused more on the development 
of perception. This has resulted in higher degrees of inner 
knowledge or understanding that we could call “wisdom.” 
We collect “out there” 20 to 30 musical notes, our mental space, 
our natural world, then generate the whole opera. Our life is the 
opera, but we could not live it without the notes. It does not 
learn the notes; we have to study how, with those notes, we can 
generate the most delightful opera to live in. 
 See (3.6) for learning by description or by acquaintance
35
177

THE VERBAL WORLD
Collecting other notes or having a different mental space 
organization would generate another opera in which to live. 
Between two humans, the operas differ. It differs even more 
between us and another animal or an extraterrestrial. However, 
between humans, we can agree on the notes; repeated 
experimentations can define and gauge them. But they do not 
assure fulfilled and balanced lives. Considering that our reality 
is only the notes are not sufficient. If we could only learn notes, 
only data, no meat around the bones, no meaning even for the 
bones, we would be computers.
Informational data are like pebbles falling. Only studying the 
pebbles is not sufficient, because falling on various surfaces will 
produce different reactions. The ripples landing pebble produce 
will not be the same on every kind of surface. The ripples are 
not the stone. Mental spaces produce an immense variety of 
ripples.
Their teaching is easier to organize, it allows to control and 
measure the results, and doesn’t need to be adapted to each 
student. One can teach facts and avoid teaching how to 
understand these facts. It allows the teacher to concentrate on a 
third-person perspective.
George Ivanovich Gurdjieff (1877–1949) was a Russian mystic 
and philosopher, a strange personality indeed. His teaching was 
about “awakening our consciousness and unifying the 
personality”; teaching by some aspects resembling the one of 
Pythagoras. It took its roots in various oriental traditions that 
Gurdjieff adapted to the western world. He grouped the teaching 
of human development into two learning categories: “Being” on 
one side and “Knowing” on the other. Being centers on “inner 
information,” feelings, and acquaintance, it’s learning for the 
natural world. Knowing centers on descriptive knowledge, it’s 
learning for the verbal world. Only a proper balance of these two 
aspects of learning can lead to a proper balance of the 
personality and liberate our higher mental potential. (Figure 4.3.1.)
178

THE VERBAL WORLD
Higher are your responsibilities, more powerful is your voice, 
and more this balance becomes important for you and your 
environment.
According to Gurdjieff, one can learn how to “be more” as well 
as how to “know more.” Both lines should grow in parallel. 
Knowing more means accumulating factual or technical 
information. Gurdjieff claimed we could also act on our 
unconscious patterns, and we have to do so. If emotions are 
difficult to change consciously, we can change the feelings that 
represent them. 
Both development lines have to grow in parallel to gain, “actual 
knowledge.” (Figure 4.2.1.)
Accumulating “knowing” without having developed “being” 
creates a personal imbalance. One could lose the sense of 
purpose or run after unworthy goals. Here, one is acting 
hypnotized, in a robotic way. “Being” without the “knowing,” 
leads to inefficiency and incapacity to act on the world. It 
generates a lot of frustration.
179

THE VERBAL WORLD
The knowing is always a third-person perspective verbal world 
knowledge. The being is a first-person perspective, natural 
world knowledge. 
The natural world expresses mastery of one’s fears and negative 
feelings, our self-image, the sense of integrity, dignity, of truth, 
our various human values, our mental attitudes on the “being” 
line, using Gödelian information. 
We left the family alone in charge of developing the “being” of 
our children. Very knowledgeable people can have very little 
wisdom. Their knowledge and diplomas put them at the summit 
of social hierarchies, where their lack of being qualities can 
cause significant damage to society.
Cultures differ one from the other only on the being line. The 
knowing one ends up being similar everywhere.
Gurdjieff insisted we are at a point where humans need guidance 
to develop the “being,” just as they need guidance in the 
development of the “knowing.” The challenge of humans and 
humanity is not 
only to master 
nature “out there,” 
but also to master 
themselves “in 
there.” Because 
what happens in 
there determines 
the interpretation 
and the usage of 
what happens out 
there.
I n a s o c i e t y 
dominated by descriptive knowledge by description, knowing 
develops at the expense of being. The social price to pay for this 
imbalance starts with stress, lack of a sense of purpose, 
destruction of human values, mechanization of humans, lack of 
social fairness, social unrest, violence, lack of appreciation of 
180

THE VERBAL WORLD
our position in nature, mixed-up priorities and generalized 
health problems. If we already see these consequences 
generalize today, we are just the beginning of a catastrophic 
scenario. We are running the productivity loop, squeezing to 
increase productivity everywhere, with little respect for human 
nature. 
Without the guidance of wisdom, the power of technology 
centralizes information. It destroys diversity who is a critical 
survival asset. We are running an insane race. Wealth 
concentrates in a few hands. Technology and wealth take their 
decisions for their reasons.
We can see this happening under our eyes now.
If an oracle or an extraterrestrial answered any question, we 
might have, that would in fine not be so helpful. An answer is 
only on the knowing line. We need in parallel to discover and 
understand the being one. Brain-centrism asserts that only our 
answers matter because we live in our universe, what we need is 
understanding. Only by understanding (a being asset) can we 
progress and ask further questions?
Changing the world is about changing the map, not the territory. 
We have put on the map artificial paradises, strange and 
destructive attractors. Changing the map will take care of us 
because that is where we live! 
* *
4.3 Knowledge and the quest for truth
These last 15,000 years, the main vector of information that had 
been sensory perceptions, has become the language. Information 
we are receiving and memorizing now is verbal and is feeding 
the knowing line. However, most of it gets forgotten. 
Decay theory explains retrieval failure. Our memories fade 
because we have not assessed them for some time. We forget 
56% of information within an hour, 66% after a day, and 75% 
181

THE VERBAL WORLD
after six days. We know we reinforce a brain connection by 
using it, and that we create a memory trace every time we 
memorize additional information. Savants prove that the brain’s 
capacity for memorizing is huge. Therefore, if we forget, there 
must be an evolutionary advantage. Psychologists believe the 
brain prunes memories that become unused, a process that is 
known as active forgetting. An old unused memory would 
“leave its place” to new information.
What remains after some time are feelings and impressions from 
the natural world that we have attached to the verbal input.
Pythagoras wanted to make sure that his students were 
motivated, he did not want them to register for the wrong 
reasons. He understood he should not limit the mental space to 
the verbal world. The purpose of Pythagoras’s meditation was to 
prepare the mental space to reorganize itself in order to register 
new concepts and sensory 
data. 
Meditation allowed his 
students to discover 
themselves the deep 
significance their mental 
space could attach to any 
verbal information. 
Pythagoras understood 
one knows what one has 
created. Learning is 
creating (from the first 
party perspective). 
Mental space’s own 
creations remain for ever, 
memorized descriptions 
vanish, leaving only a 
vague impression.
Learning should thus involve the natural world. Remember the 
figure (2.5.1) describing the abstraction process. In descriptive 
182

THE VERBAL WORLD
learning, we associate directly the sensory verbal input to an 
abstract concept. To be merged, this representation in the verbal 
world must find deeper roots. It does that by a sort of inverted 
procedure. The verbal representation triggers “creative” activity 
in the natural world illustrated with the descending arrow on the 
figure (4.3.1). We form new representation networks, including 
feelings.
Language favored third-party views, even if the individual 
perception is different, the words and the narratives can be 
common. Therefore, teaching now concentrates on verbal world 
knowledge and the “being” line is left for each of us to handle.
When humans could share narratives, cultures and civilizations 
developed. “Reality” checks, for truth, or survival could not 
apply to many of the founding myths. Because the narrated 
events were in the past or a remote location, no confrontation 
with “out there” could happen. Narratives were transmitted and 
“believed” with no implications.
Many of these stories helped fill in knowledge gaps and create a 
common social agreement. Natural selection could not directly 
operate on these “gap-filling” beliefs; their truth or falseness did 
not make any immediate selective differences. If a tribe believed 
that the sun was orbiting the earth or the contrary, changed 
nothing to day-to-day life. Natural selection would not favor or 
condemn a population because it believed in twelve gods instead 
of only the ten true ones. Natural selection was not, at least in 
the short term, capable to act on mental abstractions.
The eternal struggle for dominance and power learned how to 
use language for its purpose. Rivalries among groups 
concentrated on rivalries on narratives. The winner of the fight 
would impose what narrative to believe! And the master of 
beliefs would gain dominance and power.
The “truth question” remained opened: Is there a way in the 
verbal world to determine the truth of a proposal.
183

THE VERBAL WORLD
An astonishing characteristic of the mental space that Aristotles 
would later formalize as the “excluded middle principle,” played 
its role in selecting beliefs. We don’t accept something to be 
there, and to not be there at the same time; our mental space 
does not handle contradiction, we feel uncomfortable with it. If 
two close enough representations contradict, we choose one and 
erase the representation that fits the less in our global 
perspective.
Reacting to contradiction has developed because of learning. 
Expectations have to learn from incoming data to adapt to the 
environment. Without the excluded middle observation and 
experimentation would be useless. When languages appeared, 
this same model of adaptation to new incoming information 
applied to narratives. By learning, the excluded middle has 
integrated the way our mental space builds our logical context 
representation network, Net(R).
Aristotle, in his “Organon,” was the first to propose “rules of 
formal logic,” (6.2) acting as guiding “orders,” to screen and 
evaluate a narrative for consistency of its contents. Aristotle was 
trying to criticize the reasoning and the rhetoric of the sophists. 
These knew how to exploit language and words to entertain or 
persuade an audience. They understood how to develop beliefs 
by appealing to the public’s emotions and desires. They could 
handle promises, predictions, secret fears, and knew how to 
appear as saviors. Sophists with their narratives and public 
speeches were putting in peril the Athenian democracy with 
their lies. Their rhetoric was unconstrained by any commitment 
to facts or truth, its purpose was to convince by entertaining and 
manipulating emotions. 
Rhetoric allowed to gain political power and economic wealth, 
independent of the truth of the narrative. Teachers of rhetoric 
focused on controlling the audience’s emotions rather than 
resorting to their logical thinking. Pericles was elected. He knew 
how to manipulate fear and comfort with his speeches. By 
exploiting language, Pericles became a despot and ended up 
destroying the first-ever democracy. Misleading speeches and 
184

THE VERBAL WORLD
manipulation left Athens a legacy of instability, bloodshed, and 
genocidal warfare. 
36
Aristotle’s dream was to establish rules that would guarantee the 
proper functioning of reason. In the third part of the Organon, 
Aristotles develop the art of demonstration, based on syllogism 
that he opposes induction . The primary purpose of his “logic” 
37
was to avoid the contradictions created by manipulating 
narratives, to “clean up” human knowledge, and fight the 
sophists! 
The quest for truth had started much before Aristotle, but he was 
perhaps the first human to formalize it in the language’s 
structure. He realized that if a sword can kill a human body, an 
untruth could end up destroying civilizations.
Language and the marvelous development of the verbal world 
showed up with a bomb in his suitcases. A bomb that Aristoteles 
had hoped to defuse from inside the verbal world. But although 
he put quite some order, he failed. He could not answer the truth 
question,
In a little essay introducing brain-centrism, we developed the 
question: What happens with truth if everything happens in the 
mental space .
38
* *
4.4 Leibniz dream
Big and profound questions keep haunting us through millennia. 
They build through space and time a network of related mental 
spaces, dedicating their lives to solve them. A thinker dies, but 
his problems survive for another thinker to pick up, centuries 
 Unfortunately Pericles was not the last democratically elected Governor who 
36
used the sophists teaching!
 induction, is the mental process that moves from particulars to their 
37
generalizations. It is the basis of knowledge. It implies primitive 
indemonstrable proposals.
 Que devient la vérité si tout se passe dans le cerveau, 2021 Editions Sarina
38
185

THE VERBAL WORLD
later, under different latitudes and with different perspectives. 
The “truth question” that structured language brought in its 
baggage is the most crucial one. What is truth? Is there a way in 
the verbal world to determine the truth of a proposal? How can 
we make sure that a narrative is true? Answers to any other 
question all depend on the truth question. 
The question of the truth of narratives must be as old as 
language itself. But we will fix its origin with Aristotle and his 
fight with the Sophists about 2500 years ago. The rules of logic 
he established gave him the reputation of being the greatest 
logician of all times. 
Our story here will be about structuring the language to convey 
truth: answering the truth question within the verbal world. We 
will start with Aristotles and will end with Kurt Gödel, the 
second-biggest logician of all times. The dream to master the 
truth of narratives through structural rules went through multiple 
different routes all around the globe, and was picked up by many 
brilliant minds. All, like Aristotle, were revolted minds who 
rejected the devastating damages lies are causing, generation 
after generation. 
Truth, we know, does not come naturally to the human mind. We 
have to invent methods to compensate for our perception 
weaknesses. What can we rely on if our mental space, with its 
expectations and biases, is the ultimate judge of what is true? 
Are we prisoners of ever-ending loops of unjustified beliefs, 
where we see what we want to see? 
Gottfried William Leibniz (1646–1716), though he had found a 
method to guarantee the truth of a narrative and solve the truth 
problem. Leibniz is best known today for his differential and 
integral calculus, which he invented in parallel, but 
independently from Newton. The variety of his contributions in 
philosophy, mathematics, linguistics, epistemology, mechanics is 
unique. Leibniz should be considered as the father of so many 
lines of thought and could be qualified as a founder of brain-
centrism:
186

THE VERBAL WORLD
“Moreover, matter and motion are not substances or things as 
much as they are the phenomena of the perceiver, the reality of 
which depends on the harmony of the perceiver.”
Two thousand years after Aristotle, Leibniz had picked up the 
same dream. It obsessed him during his entire life. He wanted to 
find a linguistic system that would ensure the infallibility of 
reasoning, making the correct use of language a guide to truth. 
In his “De Arte combinatoria” in 1666, an extended version of 
his doctoral thesis, he explains his dream. The “Characteristica 
universalis” would be a formal language integrated within the 
framework of a universal logical “calculation” that he named 
“calculus ratiocinator.” Computation capacity is then integrated 
into the background of language, it would then be possible to 
calculate truth.
The 17th century in Europe was a period of widespread conflict 
and instability. Some historians have called it the “general 
crisis.” Events such as the English Civil War, the Fronde in 
France, the Thirty Years’ War in the Holy Roman Empire, and 
revolts against the Spanish Crown in Portugal, Naples, and 
Catalonia were manifestations of this crisis. In that context, 
Leibniz imagined that a language generating truth by calculation 
could erase misunderstandings and avoid the wars and conflicts 
that plagued humanity.
Leibniz realized very young he had an enormous advantage 
compared to Aristotle. In 1140 Robert of Chester, a Spanish 
mathematician, had translated to Latin a book of Al-Khwarizmi, 
written in 830: “Liber algebrae et almucabala.” Bagdad and the 
Arabs enjoyed the most advanced and flourishing culture on the 
planet. If the Romans had adopted the Greek Gods, the Arabs 
had taken over most of the ancient Greek knowledge in 
mathematics and made significant developments themselves.
The translation introduced Algebra to Spain and Europe for the 
first time. Al-Khwarizmi’s book became over the centuries the 
standard mathematical text for Algebra at European universities. 
Algebra, along with the Arabic numerals, laid the foundations 
187

THE VERBAL WORLD
for Europe’s Renaissance and the Scientific Revolution to come 
through Copernicus, Galileo and Newton.
Leibniz realized that algebra and geometry could give him a 
precise idea of what was for him a model of correct reasoning. 
Mathematics after all didn’t have a truth problem. The same way 
Greeks had formalized Geometry, and Arabs had structured 
algebra, Leibniz wanted to structure language for any narrative 
to become provable with a calculation. He had to find a manner 
to formulate language in such a way that he could prove a 
sentence true with a calculation. And algebra was a perfect 
model for how he should proceed. Language had to be 
mathematized.
Here is how he did it. He first noticed that he could build 
categories for concepts, which could then organize these 
categories to form propositions. Once he had applied this to 
build propositions, he should then categorize them to form 
truths. Leibniz believed that by using this mathematized 
language, he could transform an argumentation into an 
equivalent to the “proof of a theorem.” With misunderstandings 
or conflicts, one could then sit down and calculate. The language 
would become an “Ariadne’s thread” of thoughts that one only 
needs to follow, step-by-step, to be guided towards correct 
reasoning.
If this dream seems crazy to you, it is because it’s crazy. 
Humans can dream “a priori” unrealistic dreams, that is how we 
advance. Human heroes are not those who solve a problem; they 
are rather those who refuse a situation. 
Leibniz’s dream hides in our quest for guidance towards 
“accurate knowledge.” But it also hides the hypothesis of the 
existence of “objective” truths out there, truths that a system of 
rules like the ones of algebra could establish.
To realize his dream, Leibniz pursued two considerable projects. 
Both projects have repercussions up nowadays.
188

THE VERBAL WORLD
The first project was to build a new language in which any 
ambiguity would be impossible. This is how Leibniz did it: In 
this language, every sign corresponds to an idea, a bit like in 
Chinese. Simple concepts would have a role similar to prime 
numbers in arithmetic, their combination would then allow 
access to more profound ideas. To construct this language, 
Leibniz invented the binary digits 0 and 1’s as elementary 
components. This idea set the stage for what would become 300 
years later, Shannon’s information theory. He showed how, by 
using such a constructed language, everything could be 
expressed using his basic binary digits. In the 1670s, Leibniz 
was already laying the seeds of our computer languages.
His second project leads him still a step closer to his goal: 
thinking by calculating. For that, Leibniz had invented in 1672 
an amazing digital calculating machine: The Step Reckoner. He 
built two prototypes; one still survives and is deposited in the 
National Library of Lower Saxony in Germany.
He remained convinced until his death that a symbolic scripture 
and proper calculation rules inspired by algebra would lead to a 
world of peace, where nobody could propagate thinking 
mistakes. 
Leibniz’s dream of peace never came true, he did not solve the 
truth problem. However, he inspired many followers, such as the 
mathematician George Boole (1815–1864). Boole is best known 
for this book: “The Laws of Thought,” published in 1854. 
Another follower was Charles Babbage (1791–1871), the 
mathematician who originated the concept of a digital 
programmable computer with his programmer Ada Lovelace. 
Babbage built, in 1822, the first digital computer, a mechanical 
device that he named the difference engine. A programmable 
mechanical digital computer: the Analytical engine then 
followed. Ada Lovelace became the first-ever programmer. (We 
named the Ada programming language in her honor.)
Dreams are so important and characteristic of a human’s mental 
space. Because we can imagine even absurd things, it gives us 
189

THE VERBAL WORLD
the energy to advance, to adjust our thinking, and, perhaps over 
generations, discover something different from what had been 
the initial dream.  
Dreams happen because we can close our eyes and let our 
mental space build on our expectations with no censorship of 
sensory inputs. We can be voluntarily irrational, we can become 
creators within our mental space. Geniuses unconsciously feel 
that beyond the absurdity of their dream, there is something that 
needs to hatch. A belief pushes them, not rational thinking. 
By planning too precisely what you want to discover, you end up 
doing “more of the same thing,” you discover nothing. The 
rational always start in the irrational. Creativity starts in the 
natural world. Imposing rationality at the beginning of a creative 
process leads nowhere. A deduction is always a loss of 
information.
Nature has provided us with a hybrid digital-analog brain and a 
mental space with two worlds to escape the rigid prison of 
rationality. Creation starts with the irrational feeling that some 
situation is unacceptable or revolting. It starts with analogies in 
our natural world. New knowledge is not a matter of rational 
thinking; it is rather a matter of not accepting.
Questions, hopes, and dreams are more important than answers 
because they keep us going; they keep us creative and alive. We 
need good questions; we need to find correct formulations, to 
ask. Good questions result from broader overviews, from larger 
individuations, from unexpected analogies, from unplanned 
events. They don’t all originate through increased fragmentation 
and specialization or rational deduction. Today they trained us 
for answers more than for questions. Answers are only a pretext 
to find the next good questions!
From Leibniz to Gödel, Hilbert, Turing, and Von Neumann, it 
took another 300 years for us to mature Leibniz’s ideas and to 
answer the truth problem. This led us to the digital computer as a 
side product.
190

THE VERBAL WORLD
4.5 A deep mathematical crisis
In the legacy of what Aristotle and Leibniz had originated, a 
deep crisis appeared nearly 300 years later. The notion of 
mathematical truth was the foundational inspiration of the 
structure Leibniz wanted to introduce in language. But this 
structural rigor, who was meant to avoid any contradiction, and 
to give truth objectivity, started showing puzzling signs of 
weakness at the very roots of mathematics. Here is what 
happened: 
Gottlob Frege (1848–1925), a very famous German 
mathematician professor at Jena University, known as the father 
of analytic philosophy was finishing the second volume of his 
monumental work, entitled: “The Foundations of Arithmetic.” 
Frege was basing his construction of Arithmetics on a logic 
extending the one of Aristotle’s, and inspired by Leibniz’s dream 
concerning provability of human knowledge. His book was 
weeks from going to press when Frege received a letter on June 
16, 1902, from a young Englishman named Bertrand Russell. 
Russell pointed out a paradox in Frege’s construction layered 
out in volume one. Russell showed that the axioms Frege was 
using to formalize his logic were inconsistent, an absolute 
catastrophe for any mathematical construction. It is the 
equivalent of an apple falling upwards for Newton’s laws of 
gravity, even worse. Frege replied on the 22nd of June, 
recognizing that Russell’s remarks were “a catastrophe.” He 
added at the last minute the following appendix to his second 
volume:
Hardly anything more unwelcome can befall a scientific writer 
than that one of the foundations of his edifice be shaken after the 
work is finished. This is the position into which I was put by a 
letter from Mr. Bertrand Russell as the printing of this volume 
was nearing completion.
 Russell’s letter was the first warning shot announcing the deep 
crisis that was about to shake the mathematical world for the 
191

THE VERBAL WORLD
next 30 years. Mathematics is based on consistency, and it 
cannot tolerate contradictions. One contradiction somewhere 
and the whole castle crumbles. And Russell had just spotted one 
at the very roots of mathematics: arithmetic.
Here is the paradox as Russell formulated it:
Let R be the set of all sets that are not members of themselves. If 
R is not a member of itself, then its definition dictates that it 
must contain itself, and if it contains itself, then it contradicts its 
own definition as the set of all sets that are not members of 
themselves.
We consider R in this sentence both as a set and as a member of 
the set. This construction is one root that builds the paradox. The 
same symbol, R, designates two abstraction levels, that are then 
mixed up confusing map and territory. 
The Greeks well knew this type of paradox, the model being the 
ancient Cretan paradox posed by Epimenides:
This statement is untrue becomes paradoxical when you apply 
the statement to itself. You then create a situation where the 
192

THE VERBAL WORLD
sentence is a statement and the object of the statement and you 
mix up two abstraction levels. This identification of map and 
territory creates a blind spot. 
Another expression of this mental construct is the famous liar’s 
paradox
The liar declares: I am a liar. If he is a liar then his declaration 
“I am a liar” is false and he tells the truth. But if he tells the 
truth, that means that he is a liar.
Paradoxes contradict Aristoteles’ excluded middle principle. 
They are “unacceptable” for the verbal world. When a proposal 
is a paradox, it can be true, and non-true at the same time. We 
cannot answer the truth question for them. In mathematics, 
paradoxes are an absolute catastrophe compromising the 
complete structure.
* *
4.6 Gödel and Hilbert
At the beginning of the 20th century, to circumvent the crises 
Russell had triggered, David Hilbert (1862–1943), one of the 
greatest mathematicians of all times, proposed to ground all 
theories to a finite, complete set of axioms, and provide proofs 
of the consistency of that these axioms. 
Any proposal written in a formal system and respecting the rules 
would then be true within that formal system. That was 
Leibniz’s idea, but restricted to mathematics.
To implement his ideas, Hilbert proposed a vast program of 
formalization of all mathematics. It comprised rewriting all 
mathematics in a formal language to be sure to avoid any 
shortcuts because of interpretation.
The famous Bourbaki books that many students have worked on, 
was an indirect consequence of Hilbert’s program. The program 
was well underway when something as surprising as Russell’s 
letter to Frege happened to the great Hilbert.
193

THE VERBAL WORLD
In 1930, a young Austrian mathematician, Kurt Gödel, would 
prove two results that nobody had expected, and that made 
Hilbert’s program impossible. Specifically, the second theorem.
The crisis started by Russell had shaken the mathematical world, 
and for 30 years, the best minds had been at work to build a 
solution to rescue mathematics from inconsistencies. Russell and 
Whitehead had produced the “Principia Mathematica,” a three-
volume work on the foundations of mathematics, and showed 
that the set of all sets could itself not be a set. Hilbert had 
involved hundreds of mathematicians in his vast formalization 
program. Kurt Gödel, working on his own in Vienna, had put an 
end to it by proving his two incompleteness theorems. We can 
express them in the following way: 
1. For any consistent formal system F in which we can carry out 
a certain amount of elementary arithmetic, is incomplete. That 
means that in F there are statements, which can neither be 
proven nor disproven in F.
2. For any consistent formal system F in which we can carry out 
a certain amount of elementary arithmetic, we cannot prove the 
consistency of F in F itself.
Hilbert was so shocked that he seemed never to have accepted 
Gödel’s proofs. He never wrote about Gödel, never met him, 
never spoke about him. 
This is what the philosopher Wilfried Sieg wrote about Hilbert’s 
reaction:
In fact, there are no communications between Hilbert and Gödel 
and they never met. Perhaps the second incompleteness theorem 
on the unprovability of consistency of a system took Hilbert by 
surprise. We don’t know exactly what he made of it, but we can 
appreciate that it might have been disturbing, for he had 
invested many thought and emotion in his finitary consistency 
program which became problematic as a result.
Hilbert was convinced that we could solve every mathematical 
problem. He had once more declared this belief at the opening of 
194

THE VERBAL WORLD
the Society of German Scientists and Physicists who held a 
meeting in Konigsberg, in September 1930:
“For the mathematician there is no Ignorabimus, and, in my 
opinion, not at all for natural science either… The true reason 
[no one] has succeeded in finding an unsolvable problem is, in 
my opinion, that there is no unsolvable problem. In contrast to 
the foolish Ignorabimus, our credo avers: We must know, we 
shall know.”
Hilbert made this declaration the day before Gödel announced, 
at a different meeting in another part of the same town, the first 
incompleteness result. The audience was not shaken. However, 
that was not true for every participant in the room. Another 
genius was there, who saw the consequences of Gödel’s work. In 
the audience was a certain John von Neumann.
Gödel had to flee Austria when the Nazis came to power. A Nazi 
student murdered Moritz Schlick, the chairperson of the Circle 
of Vienna. Gödel, who was a member of this prestigious Circle, 
left the country. He found a job and a refuge in Princeton’s 
Institute for Advanced Studies (IAS) and became the best friend 
of Albert Einstein. 
To prove his theorems Gödel builds, for any complete formal 
system F, a statement G(F) called the Gödel sentence of F. G(F) 
is designed, as was Russell’s paradox, to be self-referral. G(F) is 
the statement: “This statement is unprovable.” 
Gödel reasons by the absurd and supposes that the formal 
system F is complete. His idea is to attach to each statement of F 
a number, called the Gödel number. This allows him to translate 
any property of a statement of F, such as its truth or falsehood, 
into a property of the associated Gödel numbers. Properties of 
the statements can, therefore, be discovered by examining the 
arithmetical properties of the related numbers. Gödel builds 
these numbers for the self-referential statement G(F). He then 
applies a technique called diagonalization that Georg Cantor had 
developed to build a new statement. This new statement is that is 
195

THE VERBAL WORLD
neither provable nor disprovable in F, so the initial hypothesis is 
wrong and F cannot be complete.  
For any formal system F, there is an infinity of unprovable 
proposals. We can take such a proposal as new axioms in a new 
extended formal system, as it is not contradictory with F. 
However, that extended system will also be incomplete and 
contain its unprovable statements. 
A most famous example of an unprovable question had driven 
Georg Cantor to depression. Nobody before Gödel suspected 
unprovability. The continuum hypothesis that had haunted 
Cantor until his death was about the sizes of infinities. Is there 
an infinity between the infinity of Natural numbers and one of 
Real numbers? The question was finally proven undecidable. 
This happened in two steps, the first by Gödel himself, the 
second by Paul Cohen (1934–2007) in 1963. Cantor believed 
that there was no intermediary infinity, but never proved it. The 
continuum hypothesis had become the first problem on the list 
of important mathematical questions that Hilbert presented at the 
International Mathematical Congress in 1900. 
Undecidable problems require a choice from the mathematician. 
Should he add the undecidable as a new axiom or not? A 
decision that the formal system cannot take itself. This 
introduces a further “subjective” aspect in mathematics. The 
mental space of the mathematician must decide according to his 
choice, with no rational reason. Both directions are possible, 
increasing the complexity of mathematics as a whole. It is also 
informs us on the mental space, its activity and complexity go 
beyond the limits of any formal system. So does the complexity 
of the universe containing mental spaces. 
39
Gödel’s first theorem has separated the notion of truth in 
mathematics from the concept of provability. Gödel has shown 
that truth is not formalizable: Formal systems can express true 
proposals that cannot be proven true within the system. 
 Contrary to (2.9) we consider here the Russian dolls with their inclusions.
39
196

THE VERBAL WORLD
For if G(F) were provable, then it would be true so that it would 
be unprovable in F. So it cannot be provable in F. But if G(F) is 
unprovable in F, then it is true. G(F) must be true and 
unprovable-in-the-system.
Gödel’s incompleteness theorem has another fundamental 
consequence. Mathematical theories are of finite complexity, as 
we can generate them out of a finite number of axioms. But 
mathematics themselves are of infinite complexity. The 
mathematical landscape is infinitely bigger than ERP’s 
physicalist reality. 
The basic idea of Aristotle and Leibniz was dead, and it died 
where Leibniz wanted to anchor his idea of a truth-guiding 
language: mathematics. Even there, in this limited portion of the 
verbal world, all statements within a formal system cannot be 
proven true!
Not only our mathematical models of “out there” cannot be 
isomorphic to what they represent, but they might be subject to 
“internal” problems of indeterminacy if we are not very careful. 
John von Neumann (1903–1957), the Hungarian mathematical 
genius, was a former student of Hilbert. He had assisted at the 
first public presentation of Gödel’s first theorem and had 
understood its profound implications. Shortly after the 
conference where Gödel had presented his first theorem, he 
wrote to him, telling him he had deduced the second theorem, 
which was not presented at the conference or published yet. 
Both men would later meet at IAS in Princeton, where Von 
Neumann would design the computer architecture that we still 
use today. He even convinced IAS to build one of the very first 
electronic digital computers on the campus. He understood the 
capacities and the limitation of the specific formal systems that 
we call computer languages.
Gödel showed Leibniz’s dream impossible, but that same dream 
would give birth to the digital computer. And the same dream 
would hint at why the human mental space could go beyond a 
digital computer.
197

THE VERBAL WORLD
Gödel undermined the idea of the provability of mathematical 
proposals in a formal system. Truth and provability became two 
different concepts. In the brain-centric perspective, blind spots 
are limits to scientific knowledge that appear because of the 
structure of the mental space itself. Surely not because of the 
fabric of “out there.”
* *
4.7 Algorithms and thinking
We can express some mathematical formulations as algorithms: 
step-by-step instructions decomposing the solving method into 
already known procedures. In this series of simple instructions, 
the algorithm allows us to solve “mechanically” the problem. 
We then say that we obtain algorithmically the solution. For 
instance, when we multiply two numbers, we apply a procedure 
that is a simple algorithm. An algorithm is a “method” a “how-
to” procedure, detailed enough for each step to be “common 
basic knowledge.” 
An algorithm avoids us having to think each time about the 
meaning of what we are doing. Our mental space works 
algorithmically when it does not need to think, but only to apply 
a learned procedure. Algorithmic functioning is just one method 
used by the mental space. It involves only a few of the mental 
space capacities; it does not require, for instance, creativity, 
imagination, understanding or any of the attributes generated by 
Gödelian information in the natural world.
Solving a problem by decomposing in small steps has some 
similarities with reductionism. We ask about an object “what is 
it made of” and decompose it into the most elementary parts. An 
algorithm does the same but instead of decomposing an object, it 
decomposes a procedure or a proof.  
Because of Gödel’s work (and Turing in-computability that we 
will examine in the next paragraph), we cannot translate most 
198

THE VERBAL WORLD
mathematical functions into algorithms. There is no systematic 
procedure to solve them. This includes problems like finding an 
algorithm that would solve the truth problem. Such an algorithm 
would have allowed Leibniz’s dream to succeed! We also know 
that some properties global properties of a system cannot be 
reached by reductionism. This analogy between reductionism 
and algorithms is not fortuitous. Reductionism, like algorithms, 
presupposes fragmentation, in “parts” or in “steps.” Both these 
methods limit the knowledge that the mental space can gain by 
using them, but both are because of the verbal world and its 
digital approach. They do not affect the natural world.
Many non-algorithmic problems involve showing that a property 
is valid for an infinite set of cases, an algorithm that would 
examine one case after the other could then never be able to 
examine all the cases. It can also happen that certain steps of a 
solution are non-algorithmic and need a non-mechanical 
decision to be taken. External non-mechanical intervention is 
then necessary. This external intervention is the role of the 
natural world.
We don’t even know most times if an algorithm can exist. We 
know several digital computer algorithms that can factor any 
number in a product of primes. However, computing time grows 
exponentially with the size of the number. We do not know if a 
fast algorithm  can exist. Our security systems (banking, credit 
40
cards, internet) assume that such a fast algorithm does not exist.  
Peter Shor’s algorithm is such a fast factorization algorithm. It 
works on quantum computers with enough Qbits. When we will 
have powerful enough quantum computers, it will oblige us to 
review our security systems.
Most of our daily activities comprise following a procedure. 
Those procedures avoid us having to think; we follow them step-
by-step like does a computer. That is how most of us take a bath, 
cook a meal, do our job, and respect our daily schedule. Small 
 Whose computing time would grow polynomially with the size of the 
40
number.
199

THE VERBAL WORLD
steps, one after the other, no thinking needed. An algorithm does 
not take advantage of the 100 ms nature has given us to interfere 
and take a conscious decision. (3.12). 
Thinking becomes necessary for non-algorithmic problems 
when algorithms stop working. As long as we follow our 
expectations, and react according to our basic patterns, we have 
not involved the higher functions of our mental space.
Recent amazing successes of artificial intelligence show that the 
algorithmic domain is much larger than what we had imagined 
some years ago. By increasing the computing power, more 
complex algorithms can be used, that are not used by limited 
memory capacities of the brain. A new battle has started. Who 
will dominate knowledge, algorithms, or mental spaces? 
Computers can collect and store large amounts of data. The 
mental space, who developed out of the natural world, lags far 
behind their capacity to find correlations in gigantic databases. 
However, computers don’t have a complete mental space, that 
would include a natural world.
In day-to-day life, we encounter many “non-mathemizable” 
questions, and we usually solve them by making choices. For 
instance, “Should I spend my holidays in the mountains or at the 
beach? Should I read Shakespeare or go to the cinema? Should I 
marry Rosemary or Nathalie?” A computer would have no basis 
to take such a decision for us. Our natural world must decide. 
The corresponding problems in mathematics, non-algorithmic 
problems, are non-computable functions. We cannot decompose 
them in elementary steps to be treated one after the other. That 
situation often happens because a past step depends on a future 
step. Steps cannot be determined in a successive series, an 
appreciation can only come from a global overview. 
Decomposing in steps creates auto-referral loops in which 
computation gets stuck.
When that happens, if we only were to follow algorithms, they 
would leave us in the desert; from that point on, there are no 
200

THE VERBAL WORLD
more roads to follow, one needs to think. Intuition, creativity, 
understanding, and various feelings play their role.
Intuition and analogy can also solve some problems that can also 
be solved algorithmically with sufficient computing power, such 
as playing chess or go. Other common problems for scientists, 
like solving certain differential equations, are not algorithmic 
and need the creativity and intuition of the mathematician.
Finding an algorithmic solution to a problem may itself not be 
an algorithmic operation. This is most often the case and ensures 
computers will not replace mathematicians. We can verify a 
posteriori algorithmically a solution found by intuition. This 
happens when a mathematician proves a deep conjecture, he 
then formalizes his proof, and in theory, we can verify it 
algorithmically. 
Once the thinking is done and once our way in the desert is 
found, it is sometimes possible to build an alternative route for 
others to follow. They do not have to redo the thinking. No 
algorithm allowed the invention of the plane, but we do not need 
to reinvent it each time we travel.
Algorithms do not “create” anything; they are only procedures; 
they cannot put out more “information” than what we have put 
into them. Algorithms have no imagination of their own. But 
creating them can sometimes require imagination, creativity, and 
hard work. Digital computers, and quantum computers, use 
algorithms. 
* *
4.8 The decision problem
In 1928, two years before Gödel’s proof, Hilbert had proposed 
another conjecture critical to building his formalization program. 
He named that conjecture the “Entscheidungsproblem,” (the 
decision problem in German). It is more commonly known in 
the English-speaking world as the “halting problem.” The 
halting problem raises the following question:
201

THE VERBAL WORLD
Can one find an algorithm that, when applied to any proposal of 
a formal system, would output a yes or a no answer according to 
whether the proposal is true or false?
The sentence asks if one could algorithmically decide if a 
mathematical proposal was true or false. Can an algorithm 
replace mathematicians? The question is a straight descendant of 
Leibniz’s dream. Hilbert’s decision problem is the mathematical 
version of our “truth problem.” We can also formulate it by 
asking: 
Can we mechanize proof? Can we build a machine (or an 
algorithm) that would tell us for any proposal if it is true or 
false? Like a machine detects “fake money” or like a “lie 
detector.”
Before Gödel’s theorems, we believed the question equivalent 
to: 
Can we mechanize truth? It was the problem that Leibniz 
wanted to solve, and Gödel answered: no, we cannot.
Remained the question of mechanization of proof.
The definitive answer to the halting problem came eight years 
after Hilbert raised it in 1936. Simultaneously, but 
independently, Alonzo Church (1903–1995) in the US and Alan 
Turing (1912–1954) in the UK proved it was impossible. We 
cannot build such an algorithm.
Using a more familiar computer terminology, one can express 
Hilbert’s halting problem this way:
Can one find a program that when applied to any program P as 
input would tell us if P, running on a computer, would halt after 
a finite time and give us a solution, or if P would continue to run 
indefinitely?
This formulation justifies the English name, “Halting problem.”
202

THE VERBAL WORLD
To prove that we could not build such an algorithm, Alan Turing, 
in his legendary 1936 paper, formalized precisely what we mean 
by an algorithm.
For that, he imagined a machine, now named a Turing Machine, 
who would, step-by-step, read and write on the squares of an 
infinite paper tape as instructed by an algorithm. (Figure 4.8.1.) 
We can imagine a Turing machine as someone who is following 
a set of rules; he can read and write on an unlimited roll of paper 
divided into squares. Every square can have only one symbol at 
a time. He can read only one symbol at a time and, depending on 
that symbol and his current “state of mind,” he will write 
another symbol, change his “state of mind” and move to the left 
or right. 
We can write such an instruction: (1, A, R,0, B). 
It would mean: If the square that is being read contains 1, and 
the head is in state A, move one square to the Right and print 0 
on this new square, then change the state of the head to B.
A finite set of such instructions thus defines every Turing 
machine: The Turing machine program. A Turing machine is 
what we call a “model of computation.” It’s a formal 
mathematical structure that defines what we mean by a 
“computation.” 
Turing’s machine was an abstract mathematical construct. His 
ideas soon found implementations as physical devices in the 
hands of Konrad Zuse (1910–1995), and, shortly after, in those 
of John Von Neumann.  
The physical implementation of the Turing machine shows that 
some questions about physical systems have uncomputable 
answers. As “out there,” nothing can be uncomputable; this 
further confirms that our representations cannot be isomorphic 
to what they represent out there. The possibility to build a digital 
computer puts some doubts about ERP.
203

THE VERBAL WORLD
Turing’s proof that the halting problem is not algorithmically 
realizable also uses a self-referral construction, this is how it 
goes: 
Let’s suppose “ad absurdum” that an algorithm exists that takes 
as input the description P of a Turing machine and some input x. 
Let’s call this algorithm A. By definition; A does not halt if the P 
halts when it is fed with x and halts if the P runs forever. 
Because A is an algorithm, there must be a Turing machine A’ 
that formalizes it. One can then use A’ as the description P to 
feed A, which means to feed the algorithm A with its 
description P=A’. Because of the way we have defined it, this 
machine does not halt if it halts, which is an obvious 
contradiction. Therefore, A cannot exist. 
One cannot find an algorithm able to decide if a Turing machine 
will halt or run forever. Notice that this proof again uses self-
reference, and again the result generates an unknowable blind 
spot. A deterministic machine with finite memory will either halt 
or repeat a previous state.
Just as Gödel had associated a number to any proposal, the 
genius of Turing was to associate a machine with an algorithm. 
They both build a bridge across two mental categories, create 
this way a self-reference, and arrive at an absurd conclusion. 
They can then conclude their impossibility.
The Turing machine is not the only model of computation; one 
now classifies these models of computation in three categories: 
the sequential models such as the Turing machine, the functional 
model, and the concurrent model. These models differ in the set 
of operations that are allowed. Different models may give 
different answers to what is and what is not computable given a 
set of rules. Computability is thus not an absolute notion; it 
depends on what model of computation one uses. 
An uncomputable function for a Turing machine may become 
computable for another model of computation. 
204

THE VERBAL WORLD
Remember that non-computability concerns mathematical 
functions, which means mental abstractions. It cannot concern 
out there, out there does not compute. Pretending that a physical 
phenomenon is non-computable is an abuse of language that 
mixes map and territory. Identifying what is out there with the 
mathematical representation can be problematic and misleading.
* *
4.9 Undecidable problems are everywhere
The Halting problem happens because we restrict ourselves to 
the “mechanizable” functions of the mental spaces, the verbal 
worlds. The halting problem is not about out there, nor is it 
about the natural world. Again, it is important not to confuse 
map and territory. Turing’s answer clarifies that creativity, 
imagination, and understanding cannot be mechanized. These 
attributes require something else, other procedures are at work. 
As we will see in the next paragraph on Oracle machines, Turing 
himself was aware of the necessity of this “something else.” 
Thus, novelty is never algorithmic; it cannot be programmed. 
However, one can search algorithmically for correlations that 
would be hard to find using the limited capacity of the brain . 
41
Roger Penrose (1931-), the great Oxford mathematician, Nobel 
prize 2020, and author put the Halting problem this way that 
excludes the possibility of solving our truth problem even in 
mathematics:
The perception of mathematical truth cannot be reduced to a set 
of mechanical rules.
I find the phrasing of this formulation that Penrose used in his 
conferences, particularly interesting. Truth is perceived, it is not 
absolute and not deduced. It is thus not “out there” nor in the 
 This statement is still controversial with computer scientists. We argue here 
41
that the invention is not in the instrument but in the human brain. The 
microscope doesn’t discover a new bacteria, the telescope doesn’t discover a 
new planet, the algorithm doesn’t discover a new correlation, The brain does it 
using these instruments.
205

THE VERBAL WORLD
verbal world. Only the natural world perceives, and it must be 
beyond mechanical rules. 
What has been the reaction of the mathematical and physical 
communities after Gödel’s incompleteness, followed by Turing’s 
non-computability? Initially, the reaction seemed to be: 
“business as usual.” A firm belief prevailed that mathematics 
and science could carry on much as before without bumping into 
exotic non-computable objects. Few noticed what the physical 
implementation of an algorithm could mean for the ERP 
approach. 
Turing had shown that one can encode in physical objects not 
only data like in materialization (2.8) but also procedures like 
algorithms. On one hand, this allowed the digital computer, on 
the other it questioned ERP.
Incompleteness and non-computability have since shown up 
everywhere, in mathematics and even in physical applications. 
From being the exception, they are becoming the rule. 
Some examples:
Hilbert submitted his 10th problem at the International 
Mathematical Congress in 1900; it concerned Diophantine 
equations. Those are polynomial equations with integer 
coefficients and a finite number of unknowns. Hilbert was 
asking if one could find a general algorithm that, given any 
diophantine equation, would tell us if it had a solution in integer 
values. The conclusive answer came from the Russian 
mathematician Yuri Matiyasevich (1947 -) in 1970, it was again 
negative.
In 1972, the same Yuri Matiyasevich proved simple questions a 
school student might even ask could lead directly to a rich 
diversity of uncomputable sets.
Marian Pour-El (1928–2009) and Ian Richards exhibited a 
differential equation with computable boundary conditions 
leading to uncomputable solutions. For certain computable 
206

THE VERBAL WORLD
initial conditions, determining the behavior of the wave equation 
is an undecidable problem.
Freeman Dyson (1923–2020) used uncomputability to argue for 
the evolutionary superiority of analog-to-digital forms of life.
Gödel and Cohen proved the undecidability of the continuum 
hypothesis.
Celso José da Costa (1949 -) and Francisco Doria (1945 -) 
explicated in 1991 examples of incompleteness and non-
computability in Hamiltonian mechanics and dynamical systems 
theory.
In December 2009 the journal Nature published an article  in 
42
the news section entitled: “Paradox at the heart of mathematics 
makes physics problems unanswerable”; with the subtitle: 
“Gödel’s incompleteness theorems are connected to unsolvable 
calculations in quantum physics.” 
A long paper by Toby Cubitt, a quantum-information theorist at 
University College London, and his team made the news by 
asserting that one can reduce the problem of deciding whether a 
material is gapped or gapless to the Halting problem. The 
spectral gap is an important property of matter describing the 
gaps between the lowest energy levels of its electrons. 
The reduction of the Gap problem to the Halting problem is such 
that the material will be gapped if your Turing machine halts or 
gapless if it runs forever. The result came as a surprise for ERP 
physicists. It is not surprising in the brain-centric context. For 
brain-centrism, the Gap problem is further evidence of the limits 
of our representation system; it says nothing about “out there” 
where there is no Halting problem.
Limits because of the mathematical structure of an otherwise 
well-tested model of the atomic structure of matter are limits to 
our third-party knowledge capacity. 
 https://www.nature.com/news/paradox-at-the-heart-of-mathematics-makes-
42
physics-problem-unanswerable-1.18983
207

THE VERBAL WORLD
The list could continue. Uncomputable sets and functions are no 
more at the periphery of mathematics, they are central 
mathematical questions and have made their way into 
mathematical descriptions of physical phenomena. In their book, 
Gödel’s Way, Gregory Chaitin, Jose da Costa, and Francisco 
Doria show that there are more uncomputable functions than 
Real numbers.
What are the consequences for physics? As no halting problem 
and no indeterminacy can exist out of the mental space, this 
questions ERP. It also questions the universality of the 
algorithmic nature of our models. It opens the possibility for 
some mathematical representation of “out there” events to be 
undecidable. 
As the physicist Seth Lloyd (1960 -) puts it in the abstract of his 
2013 article Uncomputability and physical law :
43
“If a physical system is capable of universal computation, then 
its energy gap can’t be computed. At an even more fundamental 
level, the most concise, applicable formulation of the underlying 
laws of physics is uncomputable. That is, physicists are in the 
same boat as mathematicians: many quantities of interest can be 
computed, but not all.”
“For example, even though the most concise formulation of the 
underlying laws of physics is uncomputable, short and elegant 
formulations of physical laws certainly exist. Not knowing in 
advance whether or not the quantity that one is trying to 
compute is uncomputable reflects the shared experience of all 
scientists: one never knows when the path of one’s research will 
become impossible. The underlying uncomputability of physical 
law simply adds zest and danger to an already exciting quest.”
Seth does not speak about the fundamental question that 
occupies us here. Is the ERP hypothesis still valid?
* *
 https://arxiv.org/abs/1312.4456
43
208

THE VERBAL WORLD
4.10 Oracle Machine and natural worlds
Alan Turing spent the years 1936 to 1938 at Princeton writing 
his Ph.D. thesis on ordinal logics under the supervision of 
Alonzo Church. 
He had shown, in 1936, that Turing machines could not solve 
Hilbert’s halting problem.
His 1939 paper describes what he called an Oracle machine. It 
was a Turing machine with an added “oracle” that could be 
accessed during the computation. The Oracle is an “external 
advisor” that would be consulted and activated at given steps in 
the calculation. That would happen when a question could not be 
solved algorithmically by the Turing Machine. He showed 
Oracle Machines would have capacities exceeding those of a 
Turing machine. He went on:
“We shall not go any further into the nature of this Oracle, apart 
from saying that it cannot be a machine.”
Turing never came back to his Oracle machine after his 1939 
paper. For a few years, the war would mobilize all his efforts, 
with the tremendous success he got in decoding the German 
Enigma machine.
Many authors, following the route Turing opened with his 
Oracle machine, have been concerned by the idea of the non-
algorithmic base of the human mind. Among them Roger 
Penrose and Freeman Dyson.
The brilliant Italian physicist Paola Zizzi wrote in the abstract of 
her article The non-algorithmic side of the mind :
44
The existence of a non-algorithmic side of the mind, conjectured 
by Penrose based on Gödel’s first incompleteness theorem, is 
investigated here in terms of a quantum metalanguage.
 The non algorithmic side of the mind. https://arxiv.org/pdf/1205.1820.pdf
44
209

THE VERBAL WORLD
We suggest that, besides human ordinary thought, which can be 
formalized in a computable, logical language, there is another 
important kind of human thought, which is Turing-non-
computable. This is metatought, the process of thinking about 
ordinary thought. Metathought can be formalized as a 
metalanguage, which speaks about and controls the logical 
language of ordinary thought.
“Hyper-computing” is the field of research aiming to conceive 
and to build computers strictly more powerful than Turing 
machines. By more powerful, we mean here able to solve 
problems similar to the Halting problem.
The most common opinion today is that hyper-computation 
cannot be physically implemented; this because of the 
“physical” version of the Church-Turing hypothesis. (5.14). 
However, the field of hypercomputing remains active on the 
theoretical side. 
In their book, Gödel’s Way, Exploits into an undecidable 
world , Gregory Chaitin, Newton da Costa, and Francisco 
45
Antonio Doria assert that hyper computing is just a matter of 
technology.
In my 2013 book, I postulated that the brain had to have along 
with a digital part, an analog computing component. I attributed 
this analog component to field computing by internal 
electromagnetic waves.
Miguel Nicolelis and I refined and developed this idea, showing 
how both computing systems complemented a hybrid analog-
digital system. The idea is similar to the Turing Oracle machine 
in which an analog Oracle would continuously interact with the 
Turing machine part. In our 2015 book “The Relativistic Brain” 
we claim that the continuous interactions of the digital and the 
analog computation in the brain could effectively generate 
hyper-computation. We considered that the very existence of 
 CRC Press 2012, The Netherlands
45
210

THE VERBAL WORLD
brains falsifies the Church-Turing physical hypothesis (5.11) and 
thus hypercomputation is physically possible.
We have proposed in this book to divide the mental space into 
two “worlds.” The verbal world using languages and Shannon 
digital information and the natural world using analog Godelian 
information. The brain-centric description of the mental space is 
a consequence and supports our Relativistic brain theory.
In an article from B. Jack Copeland and Oron Shagrir from and 
entitled Turing versus Gödel on Computability and the Mind, the 
authors compare Turing and Gödel’s position on the question: is 
the human mind a machine? They state in the conclusion of this 
very interesting article:
 In fact, Turing agreed with Gödel that the mind is more 
powerful than any given Turing machine. Unlike Gödel, 
however, Turing did not think that the mind is something 
different from machinery.
* *
4.11 About computer simulations
Computer simulations are contributing fantastically to research 
in multiple fields, including medicine, drug research, 
meteorology, cosmology to name a few. We have noted how 
often, because we heavily rely on verbal descriptions, we 
confuse map and territory. Unfortunately, his also happens with 
“computer simulations.” In this paragraph, we would like to 
underline that computer simulations don’t simulate what is 
happening “out there.” They rather simulate our mental space 
interpretations of “out there.”
Shannon’s information in our approach is a mental creation. It 
can be encoded on various subtracts but is not causal effective 
(3.3). To “make it effective,” to do something with it one needs 
another mental space. 
211

THE VERBAL WORLD
A simulation will use the algorithms and the data we feed the 
computer with. These are human mental space abstractions that 
we encode in the machine. It will respect the way our mental 
space has been individuated and fragmented to generate its 
simulation. 
Let’s imagine we are simulating the time evolution of an object. 
The first step will require measuring the characteristics of this 
object. The mental space interferes here because his selections, 
individuations, and fragmentations of “out there” are the ones 
that will be used. 
Experimenting and measuring always involve a mental space to 
collect the data. Even where everything is done automatically 
with instruments. A mental space had to conceive the 
instruments and individuate what and how to measure. When a 
mental space is involved, the expectation mechanism, 
individuation, and fragmentation will intervene. 
The next step is to select proper mathematical functions that will 
describe the “forces” acting on the object. That again is the 
perspective of a human mental space that separates forces from 
objects. One has then to transform the mathematics into an 
algorithm and encode them in the computer’s memory. 
A computer simulation of an object “out there” looks like a 
simulation of our mental representation of this object. The 
computers’ mental space looks like our verbal world and is fed 
by our interpretations and approaches. 
The “bridge” between a computer simulation and the 
phenomenon “out there” inevitably passes through our human 
mental space and is dressed up with its characteristics. It cannot 
be considered as a third party for us. It can only act as a tool for 
our mental space.
* *
212

THE VERBAL WORLD
4.12 Extending the explanatory landscape
Newton’s approach considered time and space as absolute and 
pre-given. The scene on which event could happen. The 
observer was not on the scene, in theory, he could even not exist, 
it would change nothing to the description.
In special and general relativity, the speed and acceleration of 
the observer play a role. But not his mental characteristics. 
Einstein, in his discussions with the Indian poet, philosopher, 
and Nobel prize Rabindranath Tagore agrees ERP is a deliberate 
choice. It is a “religion” that allows him to do his work without 
having to bother about the mental space. I reproduce an excerpt 
in (5.4).
Brain-centrism also suggests taking into consideration aspects of 
the mental space. Sometimes one could explain observations or 
measurements by neurophysiological or mental space causes, 
such as expectations.
ERP science limits its search for causes to phenomena “out 
there.” Extending the explanatory landscape to include causes in 
the mental space could help remove certain paradoxes and 
reorient research directions.
The suggestion becomes pertinent when the phenomena we 
study are themselves mental creations with no direct observable 
existence. Particle physics, aspects of cosmology, consciousness 
studies, the economy, education, and social sciences fall into this 
category.
This proposal is consistent with the idea that the “reality” we 
live in is mental. The brain and the mental space generate some 
of its aspects. We traditionally distinguish between hard and soft 
sciences. The latter includes psychological aspects that hard 
sciences will ignore.
The divergence is, however, getting blurry between observable 
physical bodies and objects dependent on a mental creation. For 
many phenomena it is not clear how much information is 
213

THE VERBAL WORLD
specific to the phenomenon, and how much the mental space 
originates.
In science, measurement is critical to validate a theory. It is the 
only bridge between “out there” and the mental space.
Let’s examine the various stages we go through in a 
measurement experiment. 
The first steps are mental. (Figure 4.12.1.) We imagine what has to 
be measured; we conceive and plan our experiment, its setup, 
and the instruments we will use. This “blueprint” is then 
materialized and encoded in a set-up “out there.” After running 
the experiment, we perceive and read what the instruments have 
measured.
214

THE VERBAL WORLD
We can then compare with what the initial theory had predicted. 
The first and the last phases are mental. 1 and 2 in the picture 
represent the bridges between “out there” and the mental space 
where perception and materialization take place.
ERP considers only the right part of the figure (4.12.1) as an 
explanatory landscape. Brain-centrism suggests extending this 
landscape to some elements of the left part of the figure (4.12.1).
The theory that has started the experiment dictates the set-up and 
will create mental expectations. Often the results and their 
interpretation may confirm the theory’s predictions. One should 
make sure this is not happening for reasons related to the mental 
space. Like a placebo effect or self-fulfilling prophecies. The 
expectation mechanisms, cultural censorship, or other mental 
effects could, for instance, introduce self-regulation and 
adaptation in the first and last steps of the process.
A typical example is a study of “consciousness.” ERP requires 
explanations of the phenomenon to be found “out there.”
According to panpsychism, for instance, consciousness pervades 
the universe and is a fundamental feature of it. Panpsychism 
would require new physics. According to Roger Penrose and 
Stuart Hameroff, we generate consciousness in cellular 
microtubules through quantum phenomena. They suggest we 
need new physics. Other thinkers believe that as we lack proper 
physical explanations, one should deny the existence of 
consciousness and consider it as an “illusion.”
Brain-centrism would extend its explanatory landscape to 
phenomena of the mental space. Because we base the “natural 
world” on Gödelian information, it cannot fit in the framework 
of the “verbal world.” Just like any other feeling. From a third-
party perspective, we can only know it approximately. Our best 
knowledge of consciousness is first-party natural world 
knowledge. Thus there cannot be a “complete theory of 
consciousness.” Even if the underlying brain “mechanism” finds 
a material explanation, it will say nothing about the feeling we 
215

THE VERBAL WORLD
experience. One should add that consciousness is a self-referral 
mental blind spot. (The camera is not on the photo.)
The initial theory (Figure 4.12.1) individuates and defines the 
characteristics to measure according to a fragmentation.
If this initial theory is an ERP theory, it will expect the answer 
originating, “out there.” Brain-centrism suggests extending this 
expectation landscape.
For instance, medical experimentation knows the placebo effect 
when testing drug efficiency. It produces the required result for 
reasons not related to the drug itself, but because of mental 
space characteristics. 
ERP’s limited individuations have driven us to abusive 
approaches like Skinner’s behaviorism. By focusing on 
“objectively measurable” criteria like behaviors, we are 
discounting important mental differences such as intentions. 
With modern new technologies, limited “objectively 
measurable” individuations  are leading us to further 
46
destructive absurdities. The domains we cited above are full of 
“objectively measurable” definitions concerning non-measurable 
mental feelings. These definitions are distorting our perception 
by focusing on the descriptive definition and neglecting the 
richness of the feeling. Brain-centrism would suggest revising 
the usage of defining indexes such as the GDP, Homo 
Economicus, IQ, … 
The danger of “objectively measurable” criteria is well known in 
brain-centrism. We are confusing map and territory. We should 
remember that even when we have a common word, we don’t 
see the same thing. Each of us experiences it differently. In the 
vast majority of cases, it has minimal importance. Sometimes, 
however, it’s critical, we must consider the internal reality and 
not limit ourselves to the defined by description words. For 
instance, the judiciary tries to understand the motives and the 
 These individuations are made so that the corresponding definition can be 
46
programmed on a computer, but distort the mental brain reality.
216

THE VERBAL WORLD
intentions of a criminal. The behavior alone doesn’t assert a 
complete understanding.
During the first quarter of the 20th century, scientists discovered 
that at the microscale, when the reduction process reaches tiny 
scales and entities, measurements become impossible. In 
quantum experiments, one must account for some characteristics 
of the observer himself. For instance, his choice of measuring 
instrumentation. If he chooses a telescope or an interferometer, 
the results will be different. This observation will produce 
strange ERP interpretations of the quantum phenomena. It’s the 
case for experiments such as Thomas Young’s double-slit or 
Wheeler’s delayed-choice experiment or Eugene Wigner’s friend 
paradox. To explain these experimentations, physicists are led to 
develop unverifiable theories such as parallel universes.
* *
Summary of the concepts introduced in chapter 4:
• The verbal world is subject to self-referral paradoxes and blindspots
• These self-referral loops induce indeterminate proposals and uncomputable 
function
• “Out there” and the natural world do not suffer from indeterminacy or 
uncomputability
• Indeterminacy and uncomputability limit the capacity of the verbal world 
and digital computers, as not every proposal is algorithmic
• The truth problem has no solution within the verbal world, truth is a feeling 
of the natural world
• The brain is a hybrid computer, according to the Relativistic Brain Theory
• Computer simulations are verbal world simulations
• The mental space can affect measurement.
* * *
217

THE VERBAL WORLD
218

FROM INVISIBLE WORLD TO SCIENTIFIC PARADIGMS
V: FROM INVISIBLE WORLD TO 
SCIENTIFIC PARADIGMS
Every epoch has its dominant background of ideas, beliefs, 
feelings, and knowledge. Like an invisible grid or a living 
collective mind, these basic ideas diffuse and shape mental 
spaces. Beliefs in invisible worlds seem to accompany all 
evolutions. Even the latest paradigms haven’t eliminated them. 
We will inquire to understand how and why mental spaces 
generate invisible worlds and how and why they generate 
physical laws. We will examine the main paradigms that 
govern our thinking and the problems they cause. The two deep 
problems we have analyzed Descartes’s dualism and Leibniz’s 
dream are the background source of all these dominant beliefs 
and paradigms. Mathematics, which started in the invisible 
world, has played a unique role in the human mental space.
“Every kind of science, if it has only reached a certain degree 
of maturity, automatically becomes a part of mathematics.” 
David Hilbert,
5.1 Mental spaces and invisible worlds
Why is it that mental spaces need to create invisible worlds, like 
did our shaman? Why is it that this has happened in all known 
human civilizations ? These worlds have taken on different 
47
appearances and names. But humans, over the millennia, always 
needed to believe that beyond the visible there is some invisible. 
And that to understand the visible one must access the invisible. 
Rituals, prayers, or meditation but also arts, music, and love are 
the bridges we built to contact the invisible.
How is it that our mental space (and our natural world) needs 
some hidden reality and populates it with actors, stories, and 
myths to make sense of what is visible? How is it that religiosity 
 One should ask if mammals also create invisible worlds? It is well 
47
documented that elephants have mourning and funeral rituals.
219

FROM INVISIBLE WORLD TO SCIENTIFIC PARADIGMS
appears in the human mental space? Is dualism “a la Descartes” 
unavoidable? (See 4.12.)
Some humans would evoke the third information channel we 
have already mentioned in (3.5) to justify this belief. This third 
channel would put us in contact with invisible worlds and justify 
religiosity. The information from this third channel must be 
Gödelian and undetectable by third-party observations. Humans 
will need to interpret it in digital form to communicate it. The 
interpretation will generate the actors and the stories inspired by 
the culture of the epoch. That every tribe has different gods does 
not invalidate the existence of this third channel.
Once an organism moves, it has to develop sensors and a 
nervous system to coordinate its movements. In its evolutionary 
development, the brain will discover representations and 
expectations. It will become curious and evolve to a point where 
it needs to connect its representation and form a global 
worldview.
However, because of mental representations and causality, any 
worldview will always be incomplete. Explanations will be 
missing. There’ll always be explanatory gaps. The most frequent 
questions are: Who created all this and why? Why do certain 
things happen and other things don’t? 
Science can answer parts of these questions. But because of its 
verbal, digital nature, a large part falls out of its possibilities 
(4.6). We can only describe a few steps backward in the causal 
chains. 
Explanations respond to emotional needs, such as fears and 
curiosity. Survival is their ultimate source. They must generate 
understanding and fit in the global worldview to play their fill-in 
role. They should also contribute to the quality of predictions.
Language gave invisible worlds a powerful feeling of reality. It 
allowed them to develop and diversify, and their stories started 
spreading through generations. These narratives became the 
220

FROM INVISIBLE WORLD TO SCIENTIFIC PARADIGMS
founding myths of civilizations as they answered in-temporal 
questions and gave meaning to otherwise unexplainable facts.
To describe his vision of “accurate knowledge,” Plato presented 
his famous “cave allegory” in his monumental work “The 
Republic,” in 375 BC.
Plato considers people who have lived all their lives chained to 
the wall of a cave. In front of them, the only visible thing is a 
blank wall. On the wall, shadows are projected coming from 
“entities.” Plato imagines that fire behind the people creates the 
projection of the shadows. He examines what can be the 
“reality” of those prisoners who have only seen shadows. He 
explains a philosopher is a prisoner who has gotten rid of his 
chains and has discovered that the shadows on the wall are not 
reality, but only projections. 
For Plato, one cannot know “reality” until one has broken his 
chains. The “true reality” is in a world of pure ideas. (An 
invisible world.) Plato is considered the founder of idealism, one 
of the most influential ideas of all time.
Invisible worlds are “about” the visible world they explain. They 
belong to a “platonic realm.” They explain what we perceive 
from a higher but invisible perspective. They are one step higher 
in the abstraction ladder.
Invisible worlds were initially populated with fill-in forces like 
gods, spirits, monsters, angels, titans, and many mythical 
creatures whose wishes and behaviors explained what we 
observe. Their third-party anthropomorphic descriptions gave 
these creatures a “real” and sometimes human appearance. 
Although their powers largely exceeded those of humans.
Since the first known civilization, death was considered at the 
very heart of humans’ weakness and one of the biggest 
mysteries. It has been the subject of the most powerful fill-in 
myths and motivators of humans’ activities. Everybody dies, the 
creatures of the invisible world are immortal.
221

FROM INVISIBLE WORLD TO SCIENTIFIC PARADIGMS
The Platonic reality is much more important than the visible 
reality because it creates and explains the visible one. Plato 
called the visible reality an illusion, the invisible reality became 
for him the only “existing” one. His approach fits perfectly with 
the expectation mechanism. We expect before we perceive. 
However, it is problematic. There is nothing to perceive, no 
feedback comes from “out there” to correct and adapt the 
“invisible” reality. 
Over 2000 years later, Descartes tried to bridge visible and 
invisible realities. (3.10). Today, some neuroscientists are still 
trying to discover a “brain code”; to bridge the visible brain to 
the invisible mental space.
Materialism has tried to negate the Platonic realm which is 
impossible. Any materialist explanation will always be 
incomplete because it does not explain itself. The very existence 
of a materialistic explanation implies the existence of a Platonic 
realm in which the mental explanation exists. (5.12)
Invisible worlds appear in the mental space as the combined 
result of abstraction, causality, and curiosity. The mental space 
often uses visible entities to symbolize or personify the players of 
these invisible worlds. Any mental space that has developed both 
the natural and the verbal world will generate invisible worlds. 
One can thus predict that any intelligent extraterrestrial 
civilization will have developed them. As their source is 
Gödelian, every culture will translate them in different myths. 
Reasoning and the verbal world are not a substitute for invisible 
worlds. This is because once we can abstract, any explanation 
needs a meta-explanation. The reason is then trapped in an 
infinite regress causal chain and cannot explain the origins. 
Invisible worlds don’t have the same logical constraints.
* *
5.2 The language of Gods
Once we discovered mathematics, they found their natural place 
in the invisible worlds. Mathematics is mental, abstract, and can 
222

FROM INVISIBLE WORLD TO SCIENTIFIC PARADIGMS
explain many phenomena. Mathematics was since the beginning 
considered as the language of the gods. Religiosity, 
mathematics, and philosophy have thus a common origin as 
forces that populate and animate invisible worlds.
Mathematics soon occupied an important role in the invisible 
worlds. One could find numbers everywhere and manipulate 
them to get corresponding results in the material world. Long 
before Plato, many humans believed that what we were seeing 
was only an artifact, the true fabric of reality was hidden, and 
mathematics a way to access this realm.
When I was a child, in Cairo, I saw from my window in the 
distance the Gizeh Pyramids. I remember questioning, asking 
why. Why this gigantic, unimaginable effort to build these 
incredible monuments. How did these people find the energy, 
convince thousands, commit so many resources to these 
constructions? Today I have an answer. Humans do things only 
because they believed in invisible worlds. These worlds give 
meaning that matter alone does not give. Meaning is the food of 
our natural world, it’s worth any effort.
Ancient Egyptians believed that to get the attention of the gods; 
one had to respect specific mathematical rules, inspired by 
astronomical observations. Observing and measuring the Great 
Bear and Orion with an instrument called a “merkhet,” 
astronomer priests determined the proportions of every 
important building with astonishing accuracy. These monuments 
were not made of matter, but combined matter and meaning in 
their mental space. What made the Egyptian civilization so 
remarkable was not the “matter” part, but the “meaning” part. 
The buildings are just the materialization of the meanings in 
their natural world, a sort of printout explaining their feelings 
and their beliefs and their invisible worlds. Just as our buildings 
also express what is happening in our mental space.
According to certain Egyptologists, the Gizeh plateau, on which 
rest the three massive pyramids and the Sphinx, is a mirror 
reflection of the Duat. The Duat was where the gods lived. Like 
223

FROM INVISIBLE WORLD TO SCIENTIFIC PARADIGMS
the mount, Olympus was the place where the Greek Gods 
stayed. But the Egyptian mythology was far more subtle. The 
Duat, the kingdom of Osiris, is where Orion and Sirius rise just 
ahead of the sun at dawn on the summer solstice. 
Their world was a connected whole, including life and death. 
Their “meanings” were profound and universal. Gods, 
astronomy, and mathematics were integrated into the world of 
matter. This weaker fragmentation gave a deeper substance to 
their lives that we cannot imagine today. 
Thoth, the god of wisdom, was also the inventor of writing and 
the hieroglyphs. He wrote the “Book of the Dead.” He was also 
the protector of writers, mathematicians, scribes, teachers, and 
whoever was handling knowledge and was one of the most 
important gods.
Egyptians already used the 365-day calendar. They determined 
the dates of religious festivals by watching the stars and 
observing conjunctions. Three thousand years BC Egyptians 
started using a base-ten numbering system. 1900 years BC, they 
also mastered fractions. Stale bread gave them antibiotics. They 
manipulated big numbers, in hieroglyphs, a frog represented the 
number 100,000. A god with his hands raised in a sign of 
adoration represented a million.
They associated numbers with mystical and divine meanings, as 
we saw, two thousand years later, in the school of Pythagoras.  
Greeks started separating mathematics from the rest of the 
invisible world. The mathematical Platonic realm was populated 
with numbers and geometrical objects and had its own rules. 
However, mathematics has somehow maintained its attribute of 
“language of the gods.”
The idea of “demonstrable truth” characterized Greek 
mathematics. Influenced by Thales, Diophantus, Euclide, 
Pythagoras, Demosthenes, and so many others, Greek 
mathematics was a specialty on its own, although it remained a 
part of philosophy.
224

FROM INVISIBLE WORLD TO SCIENTIFIC PARADIGMS
Pythagoras asserted that “all is number,” and later Aristotles 
paraphrased him by saying: “The principles of mathematics are 
the principles of all things.” When one entered Plato’s academy, 
one could read: Do not enter if you are not a geometer.
Greeks had placed mathematics at the core of the hidden reality. 
Plato based his description of the Universe on the existence of 
only five convex regular polyhedra. Geometrical magnitudes, 
such as the diagonal of a square that one cannot express with 
rational numbers, was a sign that mathematics was a bridge to 
transcendence. The Babylonians had already approximated some 
irrational numbers such as the square root of 2. But Greek 
mathematicians proved these approximations can never be exact. 
The invisible worlds were hiding in squares and circles under 
their eyes, and mathematics was the bridge to access them.
The rupture of mathematics from philosophy became even 
subtler in Bagdad around the year 1000, discovering algebra and 
algorithmic solutions. They established formulas to calculate 
solutions for problems solved today by using linear and 
quadratic equations. Algebra extended arithmetic by allowing us 
to replace numbers with letters that could take any numerical 
value, forcing abstraction one level higher.
In Europe, 600 years later, the enlightenment put “reason” as the 
central tool to gain knowledge. It produced a further partition of 
mathematics from philosophy and mysticism. Galileo Galilei 
(1564–1642), the Italian astronomer and main initiator of the 
scientific revolution, wrote: “The book of nature is written in the 
language of mathematics.” With thinkers like Baruch Spinoza 
and Denis Diderot, the enlightenment extended to the 
organization of society and the nature of what it means to be 
human.
In many regards, separating mathematics from other lines of 
thought remained “theoretical.” The incentives to study pure 
mathematics, for instance, still find sources outside practical 
usages, and these motivations often originate with mystical 
thinking.
225

FROM INVISIBLE WORLD TO SCIENTIFIC PARADIGMS
In the mental space of mathematicians, the unknown and the 
mysterious remain an active motivation. Most are Platonists, and 
many contemporary mathematicians or theoretical physicists 
have expressed the idea that their research was an adventure to 
try to “Understand the mind of God.” This was, for instance, a 
favorite expression of both Einstein and Hawking. The Mind of 
God has even become a book under the signature of the 
Physicist Paul Davies with the subtitle: The Scientific Basis for a 
Rational World. 
Richard Feynman expressed the same idea by saying that 
calculus is “the language God talks.” Francis S. Collins is an 
American physician geneticist, one leader of the Human 
Genome Project. He wrote The Language of God, where he 
explains that science supports theism.
Leibniz had claimed that God in his universality had knowledge 
of all conceivable worlds, i.e., worlds who are non-
contradictory. But in his wisdom had made real only the best 
possible world, the one with an optimum balance between good 
and evil. Voltaire wrote the essential little novel Candide to 
mock Leibniz, “best of all possible worlds.”
Steven Weinberg, the famous Nobel laureate from the University 
of Texas, described himself as “pretty Platonist.” He thinks the 
laws of nature are as real as “the rocks in the field.” The laws 
seem to persist. Weinberg wrote: “whatever the circumstance of 
how I look at them, and they are things about which it is 
possible to be wrong, as when I stub my toe on a rock I had not 
noticed.”
Mathematicians have excellent reasons to feel that their 
discipline has something eternal and divine. Once a 
mathematical proposal is proven true, it is true forever, leaving 
the feeling that it had always existed, and that we only discover 
it, like new territory, rather than invent it as new technology. We 
perhaps invent proofs, but the theorem itself has always been 
there, eternal. The “eternity” of mathematical truths, the rigor, 
and the credibility that they bring to all sciences, give them a 
226

FROM INVISIBLE WORLD TO SCIENTIFIC PARADIGMS
divine origin. How do we discover them, why are certain simple 
conjectures so hard to prove and remain unsolved for hundreds 
of years, are further questions that give mathematics mystery 
and divinity.
Einstein famously said: “The most incomprehensible thing about 
the universe is that it is comprehensible.” For brain-centrism, 
our mental space has built our theories in a comprehensible way. 
Non-comprehensible theories never see light and are never 
considered. We have built our theories using the tools we 
understand, and that fit the constraints of our mental space.
In his recent book, Infinite Powers: How Calculus Reveals the 
Secrets of the Universe, Steven Strogatz explains, for instance, 
that “calculus is as much about mysteries as it is about method.”
The focus in this paragraph is that from the shamans up to now 
we need the invisible world to make sense, to understand, and to 
act on the visible one. We have always been Platonists. That is 
inevitable since we have a representation system, whose 
productions are not part of the “visible” world. The relation 
between these two worlds, Descartes’s problem, remains open in 
an ERP perspective. Brain-centrism asserts that both worlds are 
mental. The progressive fragmentation of our reality these last 
15,000 years have had consequences on our mental space. The 
natural world and the verbal world are not as integrated as they 
were. We lose the sense of the global, the unity, and of meaning.
* *
5.3 Physical laws
Henri Poincaré remarked that we could establish physical laws 
because “the Universe” was sufficiently homogeneous and 
regular. Without these regularities, we would have been 
restricted to a database of case-by-case descriptions.
However, regularities are orders and depend on mental 
individuations. (2.6) What appears as unusual or irregular at a 
time scale, such as the fall of a big meteorite, will appear as a 
227

FROM INVISIBLE WORLD TO SCIENTIFIC PARADIGMS
regularity at a larger one. That would mean that our laws of 
physics reflect characteristics of the human mental space, not 
only of the universe. Extraterrestrials with a different mental 
space might discover regularities that escape to our eyes.
Galileo, Kepler, and Newton have taught us how to translate 
regularities into predictive physical laws by describing 
mathematically the regularities. They have taught us how to use 
our abstraction capacities to express what is regular. 
For a physical law to make a prediction we need to have 
measured initial conditions. The law is only about how the 
system will evolve from that point on. The law itself cannot say 
anything about the initial conditions. They have to be measured.
In his book: “The Character of Physical Law,” published in 
1965, Richard Feynman explains what he means by physical 
laws: 
The rhythm and pattern of phenomena of nature which is not 
apparent to the eye, but only to the eye of analysis. 
Feynman stresses in his words Poincaré’s regularities, who are 
not immediately apparent. They become apparent only with an 
intervention of mental space tools like mathematics, the eyes of 
analysis.
But Feynman’s main point is we do not deduce scientific laws 
from fundamental theories, we reach them through layers of 
simplifying assumptions and approximations. 
The German philosopher Rudolf Carnap  shared this opinion. 
48
He wrote in 1966:
Physics originally began as descriptive macro-physic narratives, 
containing an enormous number of empirical laws with no 
apparent connections. In the beginning of a science, scientists 
may be very proud to have discovered hundreds of laws. But, as 
 We will meet again Carnap in (5.6) as an inspirer of the Vienna Circle.
48
228

FROM INVISIBLE WORLD TO SCIENTIFIC PARADIGMS
the laws proliferate, they become unhappy with this state of 
affairs; they begin to search for underlying unifying principles.
Our scientific perception of the universe will depend on the laws 
of physics and on the mathematics that underlies them. As they 
are third-party views, physical already accounted for any 
changes that can happen in the universe. The laws themselves do 
not change; they are valid all over the universe and from the 
beginning to the end. As third-party perspectives, they live 
outside the universe itself; they transcend it. For ERP, they must 
belong to the associated Platonic realm.
In 1902 Poincaré wrote a small and fantastic book entitled 
“Science and Hypothesis.” In his book, he first examines how 
mathematics and science develop. He then asserts we reach most 
scientific conclusions as a conventional consensus among 
scientists. Mainstream scientific knowledge is the result of 
convenient conventions among peers.
Poincaré showed prior hypothesis is at the base of all human 
knowledge. Knowledge is not “absolute”; it relies on unproven 
or unverifiable assumptions. At various epochs and in diverse 
contexts, those assumptions are different.
Conventionalism is the claim that adopted frameworks 
determine the physical meaning of measurements. Truth is not 
absolute, it will depend on two factors: measuring data and 
interpreting these data with conventionally accepted narratives. 
Poincaré’s conventionalism opposes head-on ERP. How could 
our theory be isomorphic to “out there” if they change and “out 
there” does not? 
The “focusing principle” would rescue ERP. It is the idea that 
scientific laws are approximations. These approximations are 
getting better at each new generation of laws. Theories are 
focusing through their evolution on what is out there.
However, for conventionalism, as for brain-centrism, physical 
laws cannot be “absolute” or God-given entities. They don’t 
come from a Platonic realm, mental spaces produce them. 
229

FROM INVISIBLE WORLD TO SCIENTIFIC PARADIGMS
Because we never observed them fail in the past, these “verbal 
world” proposals are crowned “physical laws.” 
Thomas Popper was one of the two most influential 
philosophers of science in the 20th century. He rejected the 
inductivist view for empirical falsification. He contributed to 
clarify the scientific method born during the enlightenments. 
According to Popper, we can never prove a scientific theory 
correct, but we can falsify it. Experiments can contradict a 
theory’s prediction.
Empiricism requires from any narrative certain conditions for it 
to become a scientific theory. 
—It should be logical and coherent with measurements and 
already accepted theories.
—It should make at least one prediction that an experiment 
could falsify.
—Observations or experimentations should be repeatable and 
validate this prediction.
Under these conditions, a scientific theory is never “absolutely 
true,” it is waiting for a falsification.
Experimentation and measurement are thus the cornerstone of 
science. Shannon’s capacity theorem limits the digital 
information flow in measurements (3.3), and our models cannot 
be isomorphic to “out there” (1.7). Scientific theories represent 
our “best-effort” knowledge at a given moment. 
If the theory fulfills the first two conditions, and the third is on 
hold, one can speak of a scientific hypothesis. If only the first 
condition is met, the theory is not scientific.
In case an experiment falsifies the prediction, the narrative is no 
more science, and we have to fix it or replace it. We express 
most often scientific theories in mathematical terms, allowing 
predictions to be calculated. However, it is not necessarily the 
case, Darwin had no mathematics in his descriptions.
230

FROM INVISIBLE WORLD TO SCIENTIFIC PARADIGMS
However, Karl Popper’s “ideal” view is getting harder to follow 
today. This is because empirical experimentation is getting more 
now that we have emptied the lower branches from their fruits. 
Often, direct observations have become impossible for various 
reasons.
The conceptual background of theories often relies on non-
observable entities that have only a “mathematical existence.” 
(5.3.1) Quantum physics confronts us with situations where the 
simple fact of gathering information destroys the fundamental 
properties of the inspected entities. Particle physics requires 
higher and higher energies to dig into the substance of “out 
there.” Studying living organisms, such as the living brain, 
forbids us to collect certain information in keeping the organism 
alive. Studying the origin of the universe confronts us with 
physical and intellectual limits. 
Figure (5.3.1) represents the steps from measurements of 
physical data (A) to choice of the mathematics (1), followed by 
the mathematical transformation (2), the physical interpretation 
231

FROM INVISIBLE WORLD TO SCIENTIFIC PARADIGMS
of the results (3), and the falsification or corroboration of the 
results .
49
At all four levels, the mental space made choices. For instance, 
it eliminated some mathematical results as non-physical (3), or it 
applied one mathematical approach rather than another (1).
In a famous lecture in 1964 at Cornell University, Richard 
Feynman invited the audience to imagine two objects 
gravitationally attracted to each other. He then asked the 
audience how to predict their movements and proposed three 
approaches. Each approach invokes a different belief about the 
world. The first approach used Newton’s law of gravity, 
according to which the bodies exert a pull on each other. The 
second imagined a gravitational field extending through space, 
which the objects distort. The third applied the principle of least 
action. It holds that each object moves, following the path that 
takes the least energy in the least time. All three approaches 
produce the same correct prediction. They are three equally 
useful descriptions of how gravity works. 
The same empirical results can have multiple interpretations. 
How to choose?
“One of the amazing characteristics of nature is this variety of 
interpretations schemes,” Feynman concluded. 
Is that a characteristic of nature? Doesn’t it mean that we don’t 
know what is going on out there? Isn’t it rather a characteristic 
of our mental space who can produce a variety of interpretations 
of the data he has collected?
Leibniz, 300 years before, had made an observation similar to 
Feynman. He had remarked that through a finite number of 
points, one could trace an infinite number of continuous curves. 
In his mind, the points represent our measurements, and the 
continuous lines are our interpretations or our theories. The 
theory we choose will determine our worldview. Because of it, 
we will build pyramids, rockets, or … (5.3.2)
 Further explanations on figure (5.3.1) in paragraph 5.5.
49
232

FROM INVISIBLE WORLD TO SCIENTIFIC PARADIGMS
When in 1632 Galileo wrote the Dialogue Concerning the Two 
Chief World Systems, he was in fact discussing two Feynman 
interpretation schemes or two Leibniz curves.
When Einstein proposed General Relativity, he was presenting a 
new Leibniz curve. By observing and measuring, Eddington 
confirmed that Einstein’s interpretation was closer to the points 
than Newton’s. The focusing principle is respected.
The focusing principle works for the mathematical predictions 
of our theories, they are getting more accurate at every 
generation. We are getting closer to the points and passing 
through points that had not been measured before.
It surely does not apply to the interpretations of the theories, the 
narratives describing “reality” are different. Just as different as 
the two narratives that Galileo had discussed 300 years before. 
At each generation, we are accepting opposed models of the 
fabric of reality, based on different individuated concepts, each 
with its mathematics, and its language. Each generation brings 
its perspectives and its future possibilities and limitations, and 
each its mysterious unknowns, its hypothesis, and its fill-ins.
ERP will focus our attention on measurable mathematical 
results. Brain-centrism will welcome these advances, but will 
also care about the interpretations. Because the interpretations 
will model our worldview, not the data. (5.3.2) Interpretations 
will act on our collective mental space, guide and hopes, and our 
perspectives. They will decide what we should do tomorrow, 
what we should build, and where humanity is going to put its 
efforts. Measurements are only part of the complete picture, we 
need to go beyond ERP.
By extending the explanatory landscape to the mental space, 
brain-centrism strives for a more integrated scientific approach, 
closer to the full spectrum of our mental capacities and 
limitations.
* *
233

FROM INVISIBLE WORLD TO SCIENTIFIC PARADIGMS
5.4 Subjective choices in the scientific method
In certain cases, empiricism will not help us choose between two 
theories. For instance, if all measurements would give the same 
result for both narratives like in Feynman example of 1964. (5.3) 
Or, if the data that could show a difference, is not accessible or 
not individuated. In particle physics, it could be because the 
energy required to get these data is too high. In “in vivo” 
neuroscience, it could be because getting it would imply 
destroying what we want to measure. Sometimes, because of 
entropy, the required information has spread out and become 
inaccessible.
What can then arbitrate? Let’s suppose both theories are 
compatible with our prior knowledge. Then the only answer we 
can have is conventionalism.
We can always agree on measured data, how scientists choose 
and agree on interpretations of these data. How to choose the 
best curve of the figure (5.3.2)?
The mental space has to choose: What theory, what 
interpretation of the data to adopt? How to decide if two theories 
make the same predictions? And if two theories make different 
predictions, both validated? What if a theory makes multiple 
predictions and only some of them are falsifiable? How to react 
if an interpretation supposes that non-observable entities exist? 
(Arrow 3 in figure 5.3.1.) We are entering the era of post-empirical 
science. As we will see in this chapter, post-empirical science 
introduces mental aspects in traditional objectivity.
Discussing the many-world interpretation of quantum 
mechanics, Jim Baggott, an experienced British popular-science 
author, in a recent article in Aeon (2019) says:
“These theories are attractive to some few theoretical physicists 
and philosophers, but there is absolutely no empirical evidence 
for them. And, as it seems we can’t experience these other 
universes, there will never be any evidence for them.”
234

FROM INVISIBLE WORLD TO SCIENTIFIC PARADIGMS
An extended definition of existence would allow physicists to 
consider that the multiple universes “exist,” because they are 
useful to explain observed phenomena. However, other 
interpretations of the measurements or the mathematics (5.5.1) 
can also claim existence for the same reason. How to choose? 
Must we choose? Any choice will only rely on the mental space.
Paul Dirac in 1928 remarked the role of the mental space 
characteristics in the choice of a theory.
“It is not always so that theories which are equivalent are 
equally good, because one of them may be more suitable than 
the other for future developments.”
Brain-centrism supports this observation that extends the causal 
landscape. A theory that allows future developments or has 
beneficial effects on the mental space is to be preferred. 
Scientists use non-empirical, subjective “rules” to select one 
interpretation over another, or, in certain cases, one theory over 
another. (Arrow 1 in 5.3.1)
These “guides” are playing a crucial role in the post empiricism 
era. For the public, this is rather confusing. Too often the 
newspaper titles expose an interpretation as scientific and 
“absolute.” These presentations erode the credibility of science 
at a time this credibility is essential. For many of us, certain 
claims are very like pre-enlightenment authoritarian truths. It is 
a risk that brain-centrism, when superficially understood, could 
stress. Being a mental creation does not reduce science to a 
simple opinion. It is our best possible knowledge, our most 
precious asset, and we should care for it and the credibility of 
science. Nothing should restrain scientists from speculating and 
hypothesizing, but we should not present speculations as 
science.
Let’s review some guides that physicists used to make their 
choices.
In the Middle Ages, William of Occam, a Franciscan friar, 
pointed out that scientific theories ought to strive for parsimony. 
235

FROM INVISIBLE WORLD TO SCIENTIFIC PARADIGMS
Theories should avoid introducing unnecessary new hypotheses 
and assumptions. They should, as far as possible, rely on 
existing individuated entities and accepted theories. We call this 
principle “Occam’s razor,” it’s an epistemological criterion, it 
has now become standard in science. 
Leibniz has observed in his discourses that God has created the 
most condensed possible laws that would give the most diverse 
results. Gregory Chaitin remarks Leibniz had already expressed 
in his words, the idea of the shortest possible computer program 
that would generate the richest output . We call a law that 
50
would generate the entire universe a theory of everything.
Another popular, but controversial, guide is the “beauty of the 
theory.” Beauty would be an indicator that the theory is true. 
The idea of relating beauty to truth is old. Truth and beauty have 
a common source that appears in Greek and Roman philosophy, 
and in most religions. Beauty is “divine,” mathematics is the 
language of the divine.
At a conference, a lady asked Bertrand Russell: Why is it I find 
nature beautiful? Russell replied with a Darwinian touch: 
Madam, you’d better. The story does not say if the lady 
understood Russell’s answer .
51
For Paul Dirac and Richard Feynman, beauty and simplicity are 
guides towards truth. Physics, according to them, should prefer 
theories that are beautiful and simple. Simplicity here is an 
aesthetical benchmark, not to be confused with Occam’s razor. 
Einstein himself considered that “beauty of the equations” as a 
criterion, although, as we see in his dialogue with Tagore (7.5), 
he accepts the subjectivity of beauty, but not of truth. He did not 
take simplicity as a guideline. (He’d better!)
 Chaitin along with Kolmogorof and Solomonoff is the founder of the 
50
Algorithmic information theory, who study the relationship between 
computation and information of computably generated objects. Finding the 
shorts possible program is in general impossible because of Gödel/Turing.
 Finding Nature beautiful is positive for survival.
51
236

FROM INVISIBLE WORLD TO SCIENTIFIC PARADIGMS
Naturalness is another modern criterion of truth that has become 
a force among physicists and philosophers. A theory is “natural” 
if its underlying parameters have a similar size. Naturalness 
refers to the “vague idea” that a model of physics should work 
without requiring some ad hoc “fine-tuning” of its parameters.
Leonard Susskind is a professor of theoretical physics at 
Stanford University and author of popular books. He is one 
founder of string theory and of the holographic principle. 
Susskind rejects the idea that beauty, simplicity, or symmetry 
can qualify the fabric of reality. He claims that conceptions of 
elegance are shortcuts created by our pattern-seeking brains that 
rarely hold up to scientific scrutiny.
Physicists have often introduced “principles” to dismiss “non-
physical” results that their mathematical models would produce. 
(Arrow 3, figure 5.5.1.) 
For instance.
The “chronology protection conjecture” proposed by Stephen 
Hawking which postulates that the laws of physics are such as to 
prevent time travel on all but microscopic scales. 
237

FROM INVISIBLE WORLD TO SCIENTIFIC PARADIGMS
Roger Penrose introduced the “cosmic censorship hypothesis.” 
These principles eliminate certain mathematical “solutions” that 
appear on the map but that physicists “judge” not to exist out 
there.
In the last decades, a technique named “bootstrapping” implies a 
coherence in the laws of Nature. It assumes that the laws dictate 
one another through their mutual mathematical consistency. ERP 
physicists claim that the mathematical consistency of physical 
laws teaches us a lot on nature. Brain-centrism considers that 
this consistency teaches us about the mental space that has 
produced the laws. 
For instance: Steven Weinberg (1933-) who won the Nobel prize 
in physics in 1971, had shown in 1964, that the “existence” of 
spin-2 particles  named bosons leads inevitably to general 
52
relativity. This remarkable result implies general relativity 
through a novel approach using only “mathematical 
consistency.”
Bootstrapping is not without reminding Leibniz’s concept of 
space and time. Leibniz opposed Newton’s idea of absolute 
space and time. He considered that space and time are not so 
much a stage on which bodies evolve, but a consistency relation, 
orders outlined by the mental space:
“As for my own opinion, I have said more than once, that I hold 
space to be something merely relative, as time is, that I hold it to 
be an order of coexistence, as time is an order of successions.”
In 2015, I took part at a conference in Edinburgh entitled Beauty 
in science organized by the late and regretted Fields medalist, 
Sir Michael Atiyah. Roger Penrose connected the beauty of 
Escher painting with the beauty of the underlying mathematics. 
Robert Attenborough showed us how puffer fishes had a sense 
of beauty. Many of the attending scientists were convinced that 
Beauty was a powerful guide to truth. As they also supported 
 https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Spin_(physics)#Fermions_and_bosons
52
238

FROM INVISIBLE WORLD TO SCIENTIFIC PARADIGMS
ERP and physicalism, many tried to “objectify” beauty to avoid 
a contradiction in their beliefs.
Brain-centrism observes that beauty is a powerful stimulating 
factor for the mental space. When associated with sensory 
representations, it generates curiosity and desire. Finding a 
theory beautiful, we will work on it harder. If other people find it 
beautiful, it will attract them. So if beauty does not say much 
about the truth of a theory, it has another role to play, as Dirac 
had observed. Beauty as a guide makes sense for mathematics. 
They don’t require any external validation. It is perhaps the very 
core of mathematics. Sensing beauty, a mental space will choose 
to develop an aspect of the mathematical landscape rather than 
another one.
The very gifted physicist and fantastic blogger, my Facebook 
friend Sabine Hossenfelder (1976-) believes that beauty is a 
deceptive guide for science. She gives excellent arguments in 
her successful recent book (2018): “Lost in Math: How Beauty 
Leads Physics Astray.” She points out how mathematics has 
derived physicists to study theories who have no chance to make 
any experimental prediction, because of the beauty of the maths.
After reading her book, I remarked that most of the people 
attending the conference in Edinburgh were mathematicians. 
Beauty definitively guides pure maths.
* *
5.5 Sciences and mathematics
One can consider that science uses two chief guides in its search 
for truth: experimentation and mathematics. A and B represent 
them in the figure (5.3.1). Mathematics is an internal operation of 
the verbal world and experimentation is the bridge between the 
mental space and “out there.”
In ERP, mathematics does not belong to the physical space, but 
to the associated Platonic realm (5.1). In the brain-centric 
perspective it’s a mental space creation and belongs to the verbal 
239

FROM INVISIBLE WORLD TO SCIENTIFIC PARADIGMS
world (5.1.1). Mathematics can thus only assure that mental 
manipulations are legitimate and coherent. (Arrow 2 in 5.3.1) They 
won’t say anything about “out there” itself, nor if the 
mathematical tools that are used are appropriated and 
“correspond” to some physical operation “out there.” (Arrow 1 in 
5.3.1.)
However, mathematics is much more than a language. They 
have an internal structural coherence, a logic and a manner of 
reasoning, a way of organizing thoughts, that can guide us 
through successive steps. For instance, many theorems relate 
different mathematical fields, allowing us to use different 
representations for the same underlying object. Bridges between 
unrelated mathematical domains permit the transfer of 
underlying organization from one field to the other. By using a 
mathematical representation, the scientist disposes of all the 
tools mathematicians have prepared. This is the process 
illustrated by arrow 2 in the figure (5.3.1).
Newton had developed new mathematical methods to express 
laws of movement. Einstein found Riemann Geometry and 
tensor calculus off the shelf and could use these mathematical 
concepts and processes to establish general relativity. Murray 
Gell-Man found Cartan’s classification of Lie groups ready for 
him to pick up the group su(3).
Mathematicians do not give meaning to the variables or the 
unknown. They pursue the most general case.
With arrow number 3, physicists will interpret the mathematical 
results to get a physical law. To do that, they try to make sure 
that the mathematics makes “physical sense” by screening the 
results with the guides we have described here above. (5.6). They 
plug-in units and, by doing that, they re-associates a physical 
“meaning” to the variables.
For physicists, mathematical symbols are idealizations. For 
instance, the most used mathematical concept is perhaps 
equality =. who is a high-level abstraction. To find things equal, 
one has to abandon a lot of differences. Mathematical equality 
240

FROM INVISIBLE WORLD TO SCIENTIFIC PARADIGMS
has no “existence” in the physical world. Two physical events 
“out there” cannot possibly be equal. When we use equality, we 
refer to these abstractions of the physical phenomena (2.5), not to 
the phenomena itself.
Many authors have recently questioned the legitimacy of using 
Real numbers in physics. This includes Gregory Chaitin in his 
article “How Real Are Real Numbers? (2012), and more recently 
Nicolas Gisin , the famous Swiss quantum physicist. In the 
53
abstract of a recent paper (2018)  Gisin writes:
54
“It is usual to identify initial conditions of classical dynamical 
systems with mathematical real numbers. However, most real 
numbers contain an infinite amount of information. I argue that 
a finite volume of space can’t contain more than a finite amount 
of information, hence that the mathematical real numbers are 
not physically relevant.”
In another paper published in January 2020, in the journal 
Nature, and entitled Mathematical Languages Shape Our 
Understanding in Physics , Nicolas Gisin worries about the 
55
usage of Platonist mathematics in Physics.
As we underlined in (5.1), for our mental space to understand the 
universe, it has to use mental objects that, in the ERP 
perspective, cannot exist such as infinity, continuous functions, 
derivatives, and integrals, Lie groups, algebra, …
Physicists use mathematics differently than pure 
mathematicians. They give meanings to symbols and interpret 
the results of calculations through these meanings. Loading 
meaning into symbols leads to differences in how physicists and 
mathematicians interpret equations. Physicists can, for instance, 
eliminate certain solutions because of the guides we have 
 https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nicolas_Gisin
53
https://arxiv.org/abs/1803.06824
54
 https://www.nature.com/articles/s41567-019-0748-5
55
241

FROM INVISIBLE WORLD TO SCIENTIFIC PARADIGMS
mentioned and, for instance, declare certain solutions, “non 
physical.” 
In his book published in 2014, Our Mathematical Universe: My 
Quest for the Ultimate Nature of Reality, the MIT physicist Max 
Tegmark claims that what we name matter, atoms, molecules, 
stars are all “baggage.” He considers “reality” as limited to the 
mathematical apparatus used to describe the behavior of matter. 
Reality for Tegmark is a “set of abstract entities with relations 
between them.” That would be an idealistic position, in which 
the Platonic associated realm would be the unique reality. He 
speculates that mathematics does not describe the universe, it is 
the universe. For him, the Platonic world of mathematics 
contains the visible world. This extreme Platonism reminds the 
Greek principle of sufficient reason as adapted by Leibniz. The 
claim the universe is mathematical is an ERP assertion. For 
ERP, the mathematical equations are what the universe “is.” For 
brain-centrism, the universe is not mathematical, our models 
are. And our model cannot be isomorphic to what is out there.
242

FROM INVISIBLE WORLD TO SCIENTIFIC PARADIGMS
Physical laws, although they can make verifiable predictions, are 
not isomorphic to what happens out there. 
Empirical verification controls that the values predicted by the 
mathematical law when initial values are introduced, 
corresponds to final measured values (figure 5.5.1.). 
The mental route (B) differs from the route “out there” (A). (B) 
is a mental manipulation of data got by discrete measurements. 
It has required fragmentations, individuations and expectations. 
(A) does not happen the same way. There is no fragmentation, 
no data, no measurement. Planets don’t know Newton’s laws. 
Identifying them is confusing map and territory. Getting the 
correct result for a transformation doesn’t mean we understand 
how this result is produced. For our planet, it is surely not gotten 
by applying laws. A third-party description cannot be 
isomorphic to what it describes. (1.8) and (2.5).
For ERP, (A) is isomorphic to (B). 
Physicists, like Nicolas Gisin, worry: we identify initial 
conditions of classical dynamical systems with mathematical 
real numbers.
Measurements can only produce discrete data. The mathematical 
manipulations use continuous methods and Real numbers that 
one can never measure out there. An entity out there can only 
“contain” finite Shannon information. (3.3). Sometimes, the 
mathematical model uses complex numbers that have no 
“reality” out there. In other cases particles move backwards in 
time, an event that has never been observed.
Conventionalism is harder to accept with mathematics. How can 
the Pythagoras theorem on square triangles result from a 
conventional agreement? How could it possibly depend on us 
humans?
Most pure mathematicians are “Platonists,” they tend to believe 
that mathematics has an independent “existence” in an “ideal” 
realm. (5.1). The work of the mathematician is to explore this 
realm and to discover its components.
243

FROM INVISIBLE WORLD TO SCIENTIFIC PARADIGMS
Mathematical objects are defined by description. The 
“existence” of a mathematical object is equivalent to its 
definition. The definition is not the mental representation of a 
mathematical object, it’s the object itself. The definition must 
not contradict the axioms chosen for that mathematical theory. 
For a mathematical object, the map is the territory. Nothing has 
to be measured out there, and no interpretation is necessary. 
Existence for a mathematical object does not depend on any 
other source of information, be it sensory or of emotional origin. 
If one accepts that the definition is non-contradictory, one 
accepts that the object exists. 
However, in their work, mathematicians do attach images and 
feelings to mathematical objects to trigger their intuition and 
their imagination. As Kuhn explained, it is only in the context of 
justification, when their work is communicated, that any 
reference other than formal must be abandoned. The 
mathematical notion of existence put it aside of science.
As we examined in (5.1), either as ERP would suggest one 
considers mathematics belongs to a Platonic realm. Brain-
centrism asserts, it belongs to the verbal world.
Gödel’s indeterminacy theorems show that, within a formal 
system, one cannot prove its coherence and that formal systems 
are incomplete (4.5). The mathematical landscape, including all 
choices of axioms, is of infinite complexity. Mathematicians 
conventionally chose what territories of this landscape are 
interesting to explore. They chose in relation to already known 
mathematics, but also to humans’ intuition. Some territories are 
too far for our intuition to make valuable advances. They 
consider interesting the parts of the landscape where they can 
make discoveries. (6.9).
We formalize proofs of theorems for publication and 
conventional acceptance. Some mathematical proofs take years 
to get accepted; because of how complex they are and how 
much time to go through the proof.
Conventionalism thus also applies to mathematics.
244

FROM INVISIBLE WORLD TO SCIENTIFIC PARADIGMS
An interesting observation, partially due to Newton da Costa and 
Francisco Doria, could make clear how intuition interferes and 
why aliens could have different mathematics.
The Jordan Curve theorem says that a simple plane closed curve, 
such as a circle, with no self-intersection divides the plane into 
two disconnected regions. The set of points inside the circle and 
the points outside the circle. This seems intuitively obvious to 
our mental space. Rigorous mathematical proof is astonishingly 
complicated. Some extraterrestrials with a different mental space 
might not find the Jordan Curve theorem obvious. They may not 
have the same geometrical intuition as we do because of their 
different brain physiology. However, we both will agree on 
formal proof. This is the power of mathematics, once the terms 
defined and the axioms agreed upon, one can communicate, they 
are no more matters of opinion or interpretation.
Terrestrial mathematicians have probably concentrated on the 
mathematics for which humans have good intuitions, rather than 
regions of the unlimited mathematical landscape where our 
brains leave us with no exciting visions.
The structure of our mental space does not leave us any choice. 
We have to collect and analyze data through our sensory system. 
We have to interpret these data to build mental models and 
interpretations. As Dirac observed, these interpretations will 
condition future developments. Because of the difference in 
nature of (A) and (B) our models give sometimes unacceptable 
results. Physicists need guiding principles such as those we 
described in here above to filter and select the results that make 
physical sense.
* *
5.6 The Circle of Vienna
Years after Poincaré had studied and proposed conventionalism, 
after Frege’s, Russell’s and Hilbert’s tentative and Gödel’s and 
Turing’s results, the dream of “absolute” truth that Aristoteles 
245

FROM INVISIBLE WORLD TO SCIENTIFIC PARADIGMS
and Leibniz had been pursuing, was still not dead. It might never 
die.
Over the centuries, two 
entities have been 
dancing together. The 
dance is the search of 
truth; the music is 
obsessive and beautiful. 
The two dancers have, 
however, a different idea 
of what their dance is 
looking for. They realize 
they can both take 
advantage of the other’s 
movements. The first dancer seeks truth by dancing rigor, 
formalism, logic, and mathematics. His movements are digital, 
they come from the verbal world. His partner, the second dancer, 
knows truth cannot be hidden there and searches for it through 
the harmony of a global analog dreams in the natural world. The 
first dancer can show his immense accomplishments, he has to 
his credit knowledge and technology. The second dancer 
believes that these accomplishments only happened because of 
her. She senses he has produced those things not because of his 
movements, but because she inspires him. If she were to follow 
him, both would get lost. The dance would stop. He is looking 
into more and more details, hoping to find the secret hidden 
deep into matter, and by creating useful applications, she is 
searching the mind of God. Descartes vainly tried to marry them. 
Materialism pretends he is dancing alone. 
We humans with our hybrid digital analog brain, with our double 
mental space, we humans are dancing our lives.
Thomas Kuhn (1922–1986) was, with Karl Popper, one of the 
two most significant philosophers of science of the last century. 
Kuhn is known for having introduced the notion of “paradigm” 
and paradigm shift. He exposed his ideas, in 1963, in his very 
controversial book: “The Structure of Scientific Revolutions.” 
246

FROM INVISIBLE WORLD TO SCIENTIFIC PARADIGMS
The Guardian newspaper rated it among the 100 most influential 
books of the 20th century. However, when it was first published, 
it raised a lot of criticism. 
To understand why it raised so much criticism, it is necessary to 
situate the philosophical context in which Kuhn’s ideas 
developed. Astonishingly, this context is related to our central 
thesis: how the mental space produces our realities.  
Among the many scientists that fled Europe to avoid the Nazis, a 
large group of them came from Austria. In the 1920s and ’30s, 
the “Circle of Vienna” was one of the intellectual world centers. 
The German physicist and philosopher Moritz Schlick (1882–
1936) had started the circle in 1923. It lasted until Schlick’s 
death in 1936, when a Nazi student assassinated him at the 
entrance steps of Vienna’s university. 
Vienna had become, at the beginning of last century, home to 
many great thinkers among which, notably, Ludwig Boltzmann, 
Paul Ehrenfest, Wolfgang Pauli, Ernst Mach, Otto Neurath, 
Herbert Feigl; but also Sigmund Freud, Leon Tolstoi, Leon 
Trotsky, Joseph Stalin.
The Circle of Vienna was initially named the “Ernst Mach 
society,” to honor the giant Austrian physicist who left his name 
to the speed of sound, and was an inspirer of the young Albert 
Einstein. 
Ludwig Wittgenstein’s Tractatus logico-philosophicus (1921) 
was the first “Bible” of the Circle, although Wittgenstein himself 
never took part in any of the meetings. 
After publishing his book, Wittgenstein was convinced he had 
solved all problems of philosophy. These problems he believed 
arose from a misunderstanding of the logic of our language. The 
Tractatus asserted that in order to determine the truth of a 
narrative, one has to compare it with “reality.” That comparison 
was the work of natural sciences: “The totality of true 
propositions is the total natural science.” 
247

FROM INVISIBLE WORLD TO SCIENTIFIC PARADIGMS
So after the publication of the Tractatus, Wittgenstein abandoned 
philosophy and became a schoolteacher in his hometown of 
Vienna. But in 1929, he changed his mind; he returned to 
Cambridge, where he had studied with Bertrand Russell, to meet 
Frank Ramsey (1903–1930). The young Ramsey had visited 
twice with Wittgenstein in Vienna and had persuaded him there 
was a flaw in the Tractatus. Ramsey claimed substantially that 
logical relations are not entities of the world “out there,” but 
connections between mental narratives. 
The underlying philosophy of the Circle was called “logical 
positivism.” Rationalism and empiricism inspired it. For logical 
positivism, information derives from sensory experience, and 
mathematics is the exclusive form of all certain knowledge. 
Logical positivism was an ERP approach, and if initially Moritz 
Schlick was open to Kant’s ideas on phenomenology, he then 
changed his position. The book published in 1928 by Rudolf 
Carnap entitled: “The logical structure of the world,” was 
probably at the source of Schlick’s change. 
Carnap, that we have already met in (5.2), was a German-
speaking philosopher, who became a leading and very influential 
member of the Circle. He is still today considered as one of the 
major philosophers of the last century. Carnap, together with 
Wittgenstein, recognizes that many philosophical problems are 
simply the result of the misuse of language. Some of these 
problems simply disappear when one acknowledges they 
concern choices between different linguistic frameworks. 
Following the traces of Aristotles and Leibniz, Carnap considers 
that the logical analysis of language is the key instrument in 
resolving philosophical problems. 
The Circle made some references to the work of Henri Poincaré, 
Gottlieb Frege, Bertrand Russell, and Karl Popper. It sowed a 
foremost consideration for natural science, mathematics, and 
logic. Empiricism and “objectivity” were not subject to 
discussion. The Circle was pluralistic and committed to the 
ideals of the Enlightenment. Under the influence of Wittgenstein 
and even more Carnap, the movement wanted to prevent 
248

FROM INVISIBLE WORLD TO SCIENTIFIC PARADIGMS
confusion due to language and denounced illogical and 
unverifiable claims, in the tradition of Aristotle, Leibniz and 
Hilbert. (5.4).
Niels Bohr, Albert Einstein, and Oskar Morgenstern are believed 
to have occasionally taken part in some of the Circle’s 
encounters. Kurt Gödel, who then lived in Vienna as a Ph.D. 
student, became a junior member of the circle.
The meetings were held at the University of Vienna or at Cafe 
Central, one of the famous Viennese coffee shops. The key 
participants could have a seat around the central table and be 
allowed to speak one after the other. Gödel, who was a junior 
member, could only sit on the chairs arranged along the walls 
and could only silently listen. The movement also had a branch 
in Berlin where certain meetings were organized. Doing the 
’30s, the Circle had gained an international reputation among the 
world’s intellectual elite.
Logical positivism distinguishes, in a Cartesian way, between 
two kinds of “objects”: the “observable” ones, like “this chair,” 
and the theoretical ones like “this electron.” Contrary to 
Descartes’s vision, and because logical positivism was an ERP 
perspective, both types of objects have a physical existence. 
The tentative of the Circle was to relate theoretical objects to 
observable ones using logical considerations. Logic would then 
be the bridge between theory and direct observation in the spirit 
of Leibniz mathematical structuring of language. Like 
Descartes’s, this tentative ultimately failed at explaining how 
theory can relate to observation. In this “Observable versus 
Theoretical” divide, a logical bridge would have its two ends on 
the same side, in the verbal world, which is astonishing for a 
bridge! Logic can only relate a representation to another 
representation, both ends of any logical or mathematical bridge 
belong to the mental space’s verbal world. Nothing except 
observation or measurement can connect it to “out there.”
Isn’t it a curious irony that it was a member of the logical 
positivist Vienna Circle, Kurt Gödel, who showed that logical 
249

FROM INVISIBLE WORLD TO SCIENTIFIC PARADIGMS
systems containing arithmetic could not prove their consistency 
and thus could not lead us to the truth? And even more 
interesting, two deep questions, both initiated 2500 years before 
by Aristotles, after following different routes, would finally meet 
up in Vienna. (4.5 and 4.9) .
56
When Kuhn’s book was published, logical positivism had 
expanded worldwide, and become one of the main philosophical 
positions among scientists. The idea Gödel had developed in the 
1930s had in fact left a very little impact outside a few 
specialized mathematicians and logicians. Logical positivism 
had continued to spread worldwide after the war, and the 
scientific-philosophical background was “a priori” not so 
appropriate to welcome Kuhn’s ideas.
This is because Kuhn explains one has to distinguish two 
different contexts. The context in which we make a discovery, 
from the context in which the discovery is justified and 
communicated. For him, discovering and communicating are 
two aspects of the scientific work. In our term here, discovering 
is a natural world analog activity that has the be translated to the 
verbal world and structured to be communicated.
The context of discovery, that logical positivism “de facto” 
rejected, is non-algorithmic, it involves intuition and creativity, 
it is often motivated by the feeling one rejects something 
commonly accepted. The context of justification and 
communication is algorithmic, rigorous, formalized and logic. 
Natural world versus verbal world. Logical positivists were only 
open to consider the context of justification. For them, rational 
arguments and logic must understand the scientific enterprise. 
Kuhn gave its importance to the context of discovery and the 
“irrational” (non-algorithmic) aspects of thinking. He situated it 
at the heart of science, in the discovery phase. He got vividly 
criticized by the scientific establishment.
 Even more astonishing is that the divide between theoretical and observable 
56
objects remaining opened, it was artificially solved by introducing an extended 
definition of existence, that introduced mental operations in ERP objectivity 
without saying it!
250

FROM INVISIBLE WORLD TO SCIENTIFIC PARADIGMS
The brain-centrist description of our mental space supports 
Kuhn’s asymmetry between discovery and justification. It 
recognizes the central role played by emotions in our 
interpretations, our creativity, and our intuition. It asserts that 
logic and rationality were developed in a later phase and that 
algorithmic functioning hardly contributes to imagination. We 
handle the discovery phase in a first-person perspective, as all 
natural world activity. In the scientific process, third party, 
rational and communicable narratives only appear later, in the 
context of justification. The only possible “bridge” between 
theoretical and observable objects is experimentation. For brain-
centrism, experimentation is only made possible because the 
mind can act on the body through emotions and expectations, as 
described in (3.11). Brain-centrism also insists on the importance 
of individuation, expectation and interpretation in the 
fragmentation, the selection, the filtering and interpreting the 
measured data.  
This is clear in mathematics, discovering and presenting are 
different activities.
* *
5.7 Paradigm shifts
The most important idea detailed in Kuhn’s book is the concept 
of “paradigm shift.” It details how science advances, alternating 
phrases of profound novelties and phases of digging up the 
details. Both phases are necessary, like both our dancers lead the 
way.
A scientific paradigm, as a high-level mental abstraction, can 
only be “vaguely” defined intensionally. However, Kuhn 
described two components:
 1- A set of fundamental theoretical hypotheses accepted at that 
time.
2- A set of typical scientific problems that are solved with these 
theoretical assumptions.
251

FROM INVISIBLE WORLD TO SCIENTIFIC PARADIGMS
A paradigm is not a scientific theory, it concerns the scientific 
environment and its procedures; it is rather an agreement a la 
Poincaré between powerful scientists on how future researchers 
in the field should proceed, which problems are “interesting” to 
tackle, what are the methods to solve these problems, what the 
solutions should look like. Such presuppositions are meta-
scientific, they are not science.
A paradigm is like a scientific program, a guide to what, when, 
and how things should be done and presented to be good 
science. This set of shared assumptions, beliefs, and values 
imposes itself on the scientific community. For scientists, it 
defines “normal” science at a period. Under the reign of a 
paradigm, conjectures or theories that do not fit in the limits the 
paradigm has fixed are discarded. Their authors have to abandon 
or are rejected. A paradigm facilitates science communication, 
scientific education programs, and above all financing of 
research programs. Under the umbrella of a paradigm, “truth” 
can be presented as more “objective,” research directions are 
clear and one can just sit down and do the work of discovering. 
What logical positivists disliked the most in Kuhn’s approach to 
scientific knowledge is that it affirms that science rests on 
unproven assumptions and beliefs. Absolute rigor, absolute truth, 
absolute objectivity, no intervention of subjective choices, was 
considered the very heart of sciences. In the ERP “zeitgeist” of 
1963, rigor, precision, and denial of any trace of subjectivity 
seemed essential. Science had gained an aura of credibility that 
distinguishes it from any other type of narrative, because of this 
objective rigor and precision. That was a character that the 
scientific community was not ready to see discarded. 
Although Kuhn’s ideas became mainstream, science is still 
today confronted with the dilemma. Rigor and truth give science 
its aura, its acceptance in the public, and its financial resources. 
However, it is based on assumptions and intuitions. Fundamental 
science is like creativity, it cannot be pre-planned. So the dance 
continues.
252

FROM INVISIBLE WORLD TO SCIENTIFIC PARADIGMS
Kuhn’s ideas on scientific truth appear as a natural extension of 
Poincaré’s conventionalism, expressed already 60 years before. 
(5.7).
For Kuhn, “normal” science is the type of science done under 
the reign of a paradigm. This is what he says about normal 
science in his book: Normal science does not aim at novelties of 
facts or theory, and when it is successful, it finds none.
- Wandering in the labs of a university or a technology company, 
one can see thousands of talented researchers. Young Ph.D.’s 
full of hope, high levels, very busy technicians, and confident 
professors, all are doing normal science. Many of them are not 
conscious they are living under the reign of a paradigm. Many 
of them are convinced that what they are doing, is the way 
science must be done. They feel they are working to build our 
future. We organize the entire system for them to believe in the 
importance of what they are doing and to keep them dependent 
on the paradigm. The organization runs through the internal 
hierarchy, the publication system, the financing system, 
authority, diplomas.
- From time to time you meet a denier, a woman, or a man who 
has put a foot outside of the paradigm, a dreamer seeking the 
mind of God; the system will squash him. From time to time, 
one of them escapes and will make history. I just reviewed the 
scientists cited in this book. With no exception they were all 
deniers, none had been doing normal science.
- Deniers are excluded because elements of the paradigm itself 
are non negotiable. According to Kuhn, a period of normal 
science can last until too many anomalies of the paradigm have 
accumulated. Too many facts derived either from the theory or 
from measurements do not fit within the limits of the ruling 
paradigm. In the beginning, there are not enough anomalies, 
and we simply ignore the isolated ones that appear. We must 
save the paradigm as long as possible. For instance,
- Aristotelian physics dictated the Earth was at the center of the 
universe. It failed to explain the retrograde motion of the 
253

FROM INVISIBLE WORLD TO SCIENTIFIC PARADIGMS
planets. Claudius Ptolemy saved this paradigm when too many 
questions became burning. If the planets are revolving around 
the Earth, then why do they sometimes pause and reverse 
direction? Ptolemy modeled this anomaly using epicycles, as 
he described in his Almagest. This “patch” to Aristotle’s work 
lasted another 1500 years. Until the invention of the telescope, 
Copernicus, Galileo, and the enlightenment.
- Under Newton’s paradigm, one supposed that “ether” filled the 
entire universe and made up a stationary frame of reference. 
Ether had to be impermeable to electromagnetic waves but 
completely permeable to matter. That strange or paradoxical 
property was “ignored” until Einstein removed the idea of 
either altogether and changed our narrative on gravity. 
- Einstein added a “cosmological constant” to his General 
Relativity equations to maintain the Universe’s size invariable. 
He later called this addition his biggest mistake. 
- Today in quantum electrodynamics (QED) the vacuum energy 
is estimated at 10113 joules per cubic meter. Using the upper 
limit of the cosmological constant, the vacuum energy of free 
space has been estimated to be 10-9 joules per cubic meter. 
This huge discrepancy is known as the cosmological constant 
problem. The problem remains as weirdness physicists have to 
live with; it might require a paradigm shift. 
- Lord Kelvin, in 1884, first suggested the existence of “dark 
matter” to explain why galaxies rotation did not follow 
Newton’s laws. It is accounting for approximately 85% of the 
total matter in the universe if our laws are correct. In 1906, 
Henri Poincaré in “The Milky Way and Theory of Gases” used 
the expression “dark matter” in discussing Kelvin’s work. In 
1980, a paper by Vera Rubin and Kent Ford showed most 
galaxies must contain about six times as much dark than 
visible mass, according to our theories or gravity. Scientists 
widely recognized the need for dark matter as a major 
unsolved problem in astronomy. They developed several 
254

FROM INVISIBLE WORLD TO SCIENTIFIC PARADIGMS
hypotheses to explain dark matter and dark energy and rescue 
our theories. 
- The dominating model of the brain is still today based on 
computationalism. (5.12). This model of normal neuroscience is 
the paradigm that will allow scientists access to publication 
and financing. Each region has a function; eventually, each 
neuron has a function! Miguel has shown that this reductionist 
paradigm does not hold, and the brain being a complex system 
one must also consider it as a “continuity,” as a whole to 
understand it.
- A famous debate opposed Einstein and Walther Ritz about the 
right way to understand classical electrodynamics. As two 
electrons have both negative charges, they will repel one 
another. The question was: does an electron feel the effect of 
his electromagnetic field? Is there a self-referral effect, as we 
have observed in various examples? Both answers, yes and no, 
lead to problems where infinity shows up, or energy loss 
becomes unexplainable. Feynman, who was Wheeler’s 
assistant, proposed, as had done Ritz, to eliminate the idea of a 
wave. In the Wheeler-Feynman theory, particles respond to 
both the past and the future behavior of one another. But the 
problem has up to now no consensual ERP solution. That is not 
astonishing. The brain-centric proposes to extend the 
explanatory landscape (4.12). Mental spaces are the ones who 
generate self-referral problems, not “out there.” (4.12.1). 
According to Kuhn, when the anomalies with a paradigm exceed 
a certain threshold, everything stops. The confidence in the 
paradigm breaks down, and we stop producing normal science.
A scientific revolution period can then start. It will last until we 
build enough confidence in a new paradigm. And a new cycle 
can start based on the new consensual agreement that becomes 
the new main scientific paradigm.
The accepted paradigm explains the previous anomalies. It 
requires some reorganization of the field. We have to examine 
how the systems fit together under the new perspective.
255

FROM INVISIBLE WORLD TO SCIENTIFIC PARADIGMS
Sometimes the reorganization extends beyond strict science and 
will bring modifications to the dominant worldview, as has been 
the case during the enlightenment.
* *
5.8 The Laplace deterministic Universe
Although the concepts of determinism, predictability, and 
reversibility are closely related, they are different. Determinism 
is a third-party proposal about a system, thus an ERP property of 
the system independent from any observer. Predictability refers 
to the capacity of an observer to model the future evolution of a 
system. Reversibility qualifies the independence of a mental 
model regarding the time parameter. By abuse of language, 
reversibility is used by ERP to qualify the system itself. Here, 
one has to suppose it is an isolated system. 
ERP and brain-centrism have different views and attach different 
meanings to these three words.
The Greek philosopher Leucippus (5th century BC) was the 
teacher of Democritus. They have together developed the theory 
of philosophical atomism. 
Leucippus is known for having stated a dogma that remains 
familiar today under the name of the “principle of sufficient 
reason.”
“Nothing occurs randomly, but everything occurs for a reason 
and by necessity.”
The picture proposed by Leucippus is that of a world of causal 
entailments, understandable by the human brain. The past events 
determine the future events. Randomness, things that happen 
with no cause, is excluded. However, Aristotle, in his Physics 
and Metaphysics, contradicts Leucippus’s dogma. He accepts 
that there are “accidents” caused by “chance.” Chance becomes 
itself a cause, an uncaused or self-caused cause like randomness.
256

FROM INVISIBLE WORLD TO SCIENTIFIC PARADIGMS
Must of us remain today convinced that everything happens for 
a reason, that any event has a cause. Our mental space needs to 
find reasons to make sense of its representations. For brain-
centrism, this need developed because of the mental space’s 
internal organization necessities. Remember that causality is the 
brain function allowing energy-saving reorganization. (3.9). 
Learning and understanding happen by generating and changing 
causal chains of representations and feelings to form meaningful 
networks. Any event must fit in such a network, even if one has 
to employ an ad hoc fill-in.
Leibniz nearly 2,000 years after Leucippus, would develop 
similar ideas:
“Everything proceeds mathematically … if someone could have 
a sufficient insight into the inner parts of things, and in addition 
had remembrance and intelligence enough to consider all the 
circumstances and take them into account, he would be a 
prophet and see the future in the present as in a mirror.”
But the champion of a fully deterministic universe is the French 
polymath Pierre Simon de Laplace (1749–1827).
Laplace worked in engineering, mathematics, statistics, physics, 
and astronomy. He was one of the first scientists to postulate the 
existence of black holes. Someone had told Napoleon that 
Laplace’s book, “The System of the World,” contained no 
mention of the name of God. When both men met, Napoleon 
questioned:
“M. Laplace, they tell me you have written these large volumes 
on the system of the universe, and have never even mentioned its 
Creator.” 
The story says that Laplace answered bluntly:
“I did not need that hypothesis.”
The “Laplacian universe” has remained the symbol of a 
deterministic universe. Once the initial conditions are 
257

FROM INVISIBLE WORLD TO SCIENTIFIC PARADIGMS
established, no room is left for randomness or God’s, or anybody 
else’s intervention in the succession of events. 
In 1814 Laplace presented “Laplace’s Demon.” If the demon 
knows the position and the momentum of every atom in the 
universe, he can calculate these values for any moment in the 
past and the future. The universe is not only deterministic, it is 
also fully predictable. However, the demon has to know its state 
at some moment.  
In his book dated 1814, “A Philosophical Essay on 
Probabilities.” Laplace, extending explains:
“We may regard the present state of the universe as the effect of 
its past and the cause of its future. An intellect which at a certain 
moment would know all forces that set nature in motion, and all 
positions of all items of which nature is composed, if this 
intellect were also vast enough to submit these data to analysis, 
it would embrace, in a single formula, the movements of the 
greatest bodies of the universe and those of the tiniest atom; for 
such an intellect nothing would be uncertain and the future just 
like the past would be present before its eyes.” 
Laplace claimed he did not need the god hypothesis, that the 
entire universe could be self-explained.
Paul Davies remarked that Laplace’s demon would have a hard 
job in measuring his initial conditions and that quantum 
mechanics did not yet exist:
If the demon overlooked the gravitational force of a single 
electron at the edge of the observable universe, then his 
prediction for the motion of a given molecule of air in your 
living room would be rendered completely uncertain after only 
12 intermolecular collisions. This arresting example reveals how 
exquisitely sensitive to error predicting the future can be… The 
real absurdity in Laplace’s statement is its implicit reliance on 
physical Platonism extrapolated to a staggering degree…
A certain number of physicists, including David Deutsch, have 
rescued Laplace’s Demon from quantum indeterminacy and true 
258

FROM INVISIBLE WORLD TO SCIENTIFIC PARADIGMS
randomness by adopting the “Many-world interpretation ” of 
57
quantum mechanics.
The Laplacian universe would now be a Laplacian Multiverse. 
Laplace Demon, and the many-world hypotheses, assume ERP 
that brain-centrism denies. The demon himself would live in the 
associated Platonic realm and would have to store his data there. 
* *
5.9 Physicalism
Max Planck, at the beginning of the last century, was trying to 
clarify the role and methods of physics and of science. He was 
aware of the distortions that could bring human perception. His 
idea, in the line of Aristoteles and Leibniz, was to make science 
as indisputable as mathematics, he declared:
“The role of physics and science, generally, is to obtain a 
complete separation between reality and individuality of the 
brain. It is thus the role of physics to build a world stranger to 
consciousness, where consciousness has no role to play.”
Lord Kelvin expressed the same idea in 1883:
“ … when you can measure what you are speaking about, and 
express it in numbers, you know something about it; but when 
you cannot measure it, when you cannot express it in numbers, 
your knowledge is of a meager and unsatisfactory kind; it may 
be the beginning of knowledge, but you have scarcely in your 
thoughts advanced to the stage of science, whatever the matter 
may be.”
This struggle for “objectivity” that most scientists since Galileo 
and Newton have adopted paves our road from an analog world 
 The many world interpretation holds that there are many worlds which exist 
57
in parallel at the same space and time as our own. The existence of the other 
worlds makes it possible to remove randomness and action at a distance from 
quantum theory and thus from all physics.
259

FROM INVISIBLE WORLD TO SCIENTIFIC PARADIGMS
to digital one, but it eliminates from science investigations an 
important part of what makes up our human lives.
A few years later, Erwin Schrödinger would write:
“The material world has only been constructed at the price of 
taking the self, that is, mind, out of it, removing it; the mind is 
not part of it…”
By removing the mental space from the science narratives, 
physicalism generates third-party perspectives that concentrate 
on matter.
Craig Weinberg writes:
Materialism ultimately predicts that consciousness is impossible, 
which is why we are left with materially impossible terms like 
illusion and information to plug the gigantic hole it creates.
This third-party view is, however, also a mental space 
production with constraints aimed at eliminating biases. We call 
it a semi-third party view. It considers mental properties as 
“illusions,” artifacts of neural activity. This is an oxymoron, the 
illusory artifact is claiming that he is an illusory artifact, just as 
in the liar’s paradox. (4.5)
Physicalism is a one substance view of reality. It’s the thesis that 
everything is physical. It is opposed to dualism a two-substance 
view as Descartes had proposed. (3.10) Physicalists don’t deny 
that the universe may contain items that don’t appear to be 
physical, they consider such items are physical or supervene on 
the physical. For our usage, physicalism will stand for 
materialism.
Physicalism is today the mainstream paradigm in science.
What does it entail to adopt physicalism?
- Physicalism is an ontological monism and thus an ERP 
paradigm, which means it considers we perceive what is out 
there. It does not distinguish between map and territory. It 
doesn’t explain the binding problem. (1.3)
260

FROM INVISIBLE WORLD TO SCIENTIFIC PARADIGMS
- Physicalism must consider that its laws, who are valid for the 
entire universe, are not part of that universe to avoid an infinite 
regress. They must belong to an associated Platonic realm 
whose description is not part of physics. (5.1).
- Physicalism entails the mind and body problem. It has to 
consider our feelings, our inner life, and consciousness as 
illusions. 
- Physicalism must limit its explanatory landscape to out there. 
Causes must belong on the right part of the figure (4.12.1). 
Causality itself is physical, and physicists explain it by energy 
exchanges. However, energy uses causality to be explained. 
- Physicalism obliges scientists who adopt it to introduce and 
justify concepts like time, entropy, order, information, or 
randomness as properties of “out there.” It also obliges them to 
extend the concept of existence.
- Physicalism must explain limitations to measurements, and 
knowledge by properties of “out there.” It cannot consider 
certain limitations as properties of the mental space. (4.12)
- Physicalism denies the mental space and only considers the 
underlying brain and its activity. As it is not measurable, it 
denies Gödelian information. The only type of information is 
Shannon information that becomes a physical property “out 
there.”
- Physicalism treats consciousness as an illusional passive 
spectator, registering an action and believing it has generated 
it. It does not explain the content of conscious thoughts or why 
experience accompanies these physical processes. The nature 
of such an “illusion” is not explainable in physical terms. 
Illusion is relative to something that we do not consider an 
illusion. No “physical illusions” can exist out there at the 
ground level. One has to presume some base-level mental 
perspective to begin with. An illusion needs a non-physical-
mental space to “exist.”
261

FROM INVISIBLE WORLD TO SCIENTIFIC PARADIGMS
Physicalism is thus a paradigm whose consequences in 
interpreting reality differ from brain-centrism.
For instance, under physicalism: 
- One could pursue research on “brain uploading” as all 
information is Shannon subtract independent.
- Computationalism could seem plausible. We will see in the 
next two paragraphs that even under physicalism 
computationalism is dubious.
- General Artificial Intelligence could be a plausible research 
aim.
- A general brain code allowing mind direct reading would also 
be plausible.
- Quantum physics will assert that true randomness exists out 
there.
In his book Something Deeply Hidden, Sean Carroll, a famous 
physicist from Caltech, declares:
“As far as we currently know, quantum mechanics isn’t just an 
approximation to the truth; it is the truth.” 
Carroll thus identifies maps and territories. One can understand 
his position if one remembers a particle is equivalent to its 
Shannon information content. Just as a mathematical object “is” 
its definition, a particle has no “observable existence.” Quantum 
mechanics is then “reality” rather than “about reality.” But it is 
purely mental reality.
Objects and behaviors defined or predicted by mathematics 
create mental expectations. As they are not observable, these 
expectations have no way to be updated by sensory inputs. This 
is the reason Carroll says quantum physics is true and not an 
approximation of truth, in the same way as mathematical 
proposals are true. However, his remark is confusing. What is 
true in quantum physics is the mathematics, not our description 
of “out there.”
262

FROM INVISIBLE WORLD TO SCIENTIFIC PARADIGMS
To explain itself, matter needs non-matter. Descartes frontier 
between body and mind can only exist if it does not exist. 
Materialism and idealism cannot explain themselves without 
involving each other.
*
The most famous argument against physicalism is Frank 
Jackson’s (1986) The knowledge argument. 
Mary is a brilliant neuroscientist who has learned all the known 
physics about color and vision. She has read all the books and 
studied all the classes, but Mary is color blind. The argument 
then goes that by some surgical intervention, Mary gets cured, 
opens her eyes, and sees the blue sky. She learns something new 
to her: what it is like to see blue! She has an unfamiliar 
experience that she could not have learned before by description. 
This phenomenal experience is blueness! The argument is that 
something is missing in the physicalist description of the world. 
Physicalists argue Mary has only learned a new behavior, which 
is: how to react to color knowledge by acquaintance, but no new 
knowledge about the color itself.
The brain-centric view explains that her representation of color 
blue got updated by sensory information from her eyes that was 
not there before. Her physical description of blue as an 
electromagnetic wave of 480 nm has not changed, but she has 
discovered a new feeling and related it to the physical 
description. Physicalists do not estimate that Mary has learned 
anything. As they consider, feelings are illusionary emerging 
properties. For brain-centrism, she learned nothing learnable by 
description but learned a lot by acquaintance. 
* *
5.10 Computationalism is a bad brain model
Neuroscience is unfortunately plagued by a false paradigm that 
has been driving research these last 30 years.
263

FROM INVISIBLE WORLD TO SCIENTIFIC PARADIGMS
The Atlantic published in July 2019 an article entitled: “The 
Human Brain Project  hasn’t lived up to its promise. Ten years 
58
ago, a neuroscientist said that within a decade he could simulate 
a human brain. Spoiler: It didn’t happen.” These are the first 
lines of the article: 
On July 22, 2009, the neuroscientist Henry Markram walked 
onstage at the TED Global Conference in Oxford, England, and 
told the audience that he was going to simulate the human brain, 
in all its staggering complexity, in a computer. His goals were 
lofty: “It’s perhaps to understand perception, to understand 
reality, and perhaps even to understand physical reality.” His 
timeline was ambitious: “We can do it within 10 years, and if we 
do succeed, we will send to TED, in 10 years, a hologram to talk 
to you.”
There are many reasons Markram claim could never happen, 
most of these reasons are detailed in our book with Miguel 
Nicolelis: The Relativistic Brain, how it works and why it cannot 
be simulated in a Turing Machine. (2015). For our purpose here, 
I would like to concentrate on two arguments, who are hidden 
presuppositions made by Markram and his followers. These 
arguments went unnoticed by the funders and deciders who 
supported the project. They are crucial for brain-centrism.
The first is an ERP assumption. By copying or simulating all 
observable components of an entity, we get a similar entity. As 
ERP neglect non-measurable characteristics, it will handle an 
organism as it handles a mechanism. The basic method used by 
experiments similar to the human brain project is to “reverse 
engineer the brain” as we do it for machines. One simulates the 
components in the computer and animates them with equations 
approximately modeling their behaviors. This idea voluntarily 
ignores the fundamental differences between an organism and a 
mechanism. An organism cannot be reversed engineered. It has 
never been engineered in the first place. It has evolved. It also 
ignores that the reductionist method does not apply to complex 
 https://www.humanbrainproject.eu/en/brain-simulation/
58
264

FROM INVISIBLE WORLD TO SCIENTIFIC PARADIGMS
adaptive systems as we saw in (3.8). And finally, it ignores the 
main characteristic of a brain: to be alive.
The second assumption is “computationalism.” 
Computationalism is a pure ERP vision. It considers that the 
fragmentation our mental space operates to gain knowledge is 
effective “out there,” that planet’s orbit because they follow 
Newton’s laws.
The computationalism hypothesis asserts that our brain “is” or 
can be modeled by a digital computer. 
There are some ways that the computer-brain metaphor makes 
sense. We can interpret the firing of a neuron as a digital signal. 
Measuring this information can be interpreted as digitally coded 
information. 
In The Relativistic Brain, we reminded the principles governing 
the behavior of neuronal ensembles.  These confirmed 
59
principles should have by themselves long ago raised serious 
doubts on the validity of the computationalism metaphor.
The distributed principle asserts that all behaviors generated by 
complex animal brains like ours depend on the coordinated work 
of populations of neurons, distributed across multiple brains 
structures. The multitasking principle shows that the electrical 
activity generated by individual neurons can contribute to 
multiple neural ensembles simultaneously. The neural 
degeneracy principle posits that a distinct combination of 
neurons can produce a given behavioral outcome, at distinct 
moments in time. Multiple neural ensembles can yield the same 
behavioral outcome at different moments in time. In fact, some 
evidence suggests that the same combination of neurons is never 
repeated to produce the same movement. 
These principles are the basis of neuroplasticity, a ground-level 
adaptation that computers cannot achieve.
 These principle put forward by Miguel Nicolelis and his team have been 
59
confirmed by decades of neuroscience experimentation. A complete description 
of these principles can be found in Miguel Nicolelis’ book: Beyond Boundaries 
(2010:)
265

FROM INVISIBLE WORLD TO SCIENTIFIC PARADIGMS
Computationalism has, however, been the dominant view in 
neuroscience these last 30 years. As a paradigm that fits 
perfectly with ERP and physicalism, it has given birth to large 
research programs with considerable funding, including the 
Human brain project cited here above. Many other programs to 
simulate the brain on a computer are ongoing, searches for 
neural codes, brain emulations, brain reading, brain uploading, 
artificial general intelligence, intelligent robots, and lie 
detectors. Computationalism has also been the basic assumption 
in many science fiction novels, films, and futuristic predictions. 
It has conditioned the dreams on several generations, although it 
is a false assumption.
A well-known article on transhumanism  one can read:
60
“Mind-uploading thus aims to free us from any material 
substrate, be it organic or non-organic.” Preliminary research 
on mind uploading, also known as whole brain emulation, is 
well on its way. Academic publications, like the “International 
Journal of Machine Consciousness” devout entire issues to the 
topic.
Entrepreneurs like Elon Musk, companies like Google, many 
neuroscientists, philosophers like Nick Bostrom support 
transhumanism. Governments all over the planet have joined in 
the race to simulate or emulate the human brain on a digital 
computer, based on the false computational paradigm.
How could this false hypothesis attract so much public attention, 
and why have companies and governments invested billions in 
related research programs?
The eminent physicist Lee Smolin had declared: 
Neuroscience is a fabulous area to work in, ripe for great 
discoveries. … But that is a field which is as bedeviled by 
outdated metaphysical baggage as physics is. Specifically, the 
antiquated idea that any physical system that responds to and 
 Antonina Kulchitskaya in her article entitled: Mind-Uploading: The Hard 
60
Problem of Transhumanism
266

FROM INVISIBLE WORLD TO SCIENTIFIC PARADIGMS
processes information is isomorphic to a digital programmable 
computer is holding back progress.
Stanislas Dehaene (1965-) a famous French neuroscientist and 
author considers computationalism model of intelligence wrong. 
He asserts that unlike computers, “neurons not only tolerate 
noise but even amplify it to help generate novel solutions to 
complex problems.”
Historically, the idea of imitating our body is deeply grounded in 
our psychology, imitation is the basis of learning. Think of 
ancient statues, dolls, fairies, demons, ventriloquists exhibiting 
their puppets and other mental or material objects we produce 
imitating humans. (See also 7.1)
Legends or mechanical marvels, human history all over the 
world describes moving and speaking imitations of humans. 
Something deeply buried in our mental space pushes us to 
“imitate” ourselves, using the technologies of the moment. 
Psychologists would perhaps say that it is a way to know 
ourselves or to believe we are as powerful creators as gods. 
When digital computers were discovered, they immediately 
raised the question of imitating our intelligence. 
* *
5.11 Why is computationalism wrong?
The conceptual origin of computationalism is in the so-called 
Church-Turing thesis. The Church-Turing Thesis (CTT) asserts 
that any function that is “effectively computable” is computable 
by a Turing machine. CTT is a hypothesis about computable 
functions (4.7). It states that a function on the natural numbers is 
computable by a human being following an algorithm, ignoring 
resource limitations, if and only if it is computable by a Turing 
machine. A Turing machine can do what a human does when he 
is following step-by-step an algorithm. 
Before this precise definition of computable function, 
mathematicians often used the informal term “effectively 
267

FROM INVISIBLE WORLD TO SCIENTIFIC PARADIGMS
calculable” to describe functions that are computable by paper-
and-pencil methods. In (4.8), we saw that a brain does not find its 
solutions algorithmically and can, for instance, solve 
uncomputable problems, for which algorithms cannot exist. 
Turing himself exhibited uncomputable problems like the 
halting problem (4.7).
An un-careful interpretation of the CTT has led to the extended 
idea to CTTP that asserts that whatever happens in nature could 
be simulated by a Turing Machine, including whatever happens 
in the brain. CTTP is the designation for the Physical Church-
Turing hypothesis. CTTP is not what the original Church-Turing 
hypothesis claims! CTT is a thesis about mathematical mental 
maps, not about natural territories (3.2). It makes no sense to 
speak of the computability of a natural phenomenon unless one 
confuses map and territory. It can only make sense of discussing 
the computability of our mathematical representations. Nature 
does not compute, planets do know Newton’s laws. 
Computability is about arrow 2 in the figure (5.5.1), not about 
“out there.” Computationalism is a mistake related to the 
confusion ERP makes between maps and territory. This 
confusion favored CTTP, a physical hypothesis extending the 
mathematical CTT hypothesis. CTTP asserts no physical process 
exists a Turing Machine can not simulate. The same way as 
many believed that no object heavier than the air could fly. 
(Although birds are heavier than air.)
Let’s cite the philosopher and computability expert Jack 
Copeland :
61
“An error, which, unfortunately, is common in modern writing 
on computability and the brain, is to hold that Turing’s results 
somehow entail that the brain, and indeed any biological or 
physical system whatever, can be simulated by a Turing 
machine. The Church-Turing thesis does not entail that the brain 
(or the mind, or consciousness) can be modeled by a Turing 
machine program, not even in conjunction with the belief that 
 https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jack_Copeland
61
268

FROM INVISIBLE WORLD TO SCIENTIFIC PARADIGMS
the brain (or mind, etc.) is scientifically explicable, or exhibits a 
systematic pattern of responses to the environment.”
The major consequence of the CTTP hypothesis is that there can 
be no computation method that can go beyond the universal 
Turing Machine. And thus that the brain must be a computer.
A Turing machine can only have a verbal world using Shannon’s 
information. Physicalism would not recognize the role of the 
natural world in our thinking processes. This denial leads 
physicalists to computationalism. All along with this book, we 
have stressed the critical functions of the natural world in 
cognitive processes.
In his article: On the Church-Turing Thesis, Germano 
D’Abramo analyzes the limits of the Church-Turing thesis.
The Church-Turing Thesis (CTT) is a crucial assumption for the 
proper setting and for the proper understanding of many 
fundamental unsolvability results in mathematics and logic. 
Outside mathematics CTT, in his physical/strong form (CTTP) 
has paramount implications in computability theory but also in 
the foundation of physics and knowability, in simulability of 
physical processes and existence of physical processes not 
simulable by Turing Machines.
In his paper, he gives an example of a procedure satisfying 
Church Turing asymptotically but that cannot be implemented 
on a Turing machine.
The great Argentinian mathematician Gregory Chaitin in his 
book Gödel’s Way (with the Brazilian physicists Da Costa and 
Doria), denies that Church Turing should be extended and that it 
is only technical questions that are stopping us from building 
hyper computers.
This is what Kurt Gödel had to say in the ’60s about the 
philosophical implications of his theorems on the brain:
Nothing has recently changed in my results or their 
philosophical consequences but certain misconceptions have 
269

FROM INVISIBLE WORLD TO SCIENTIFIC PARADIGMS
been put aside. My theorems only show that the mechanization 
of mathematics, i.e., the elimination of the spirit of the entities is 
impossible if one wishes to have a satisfying system and 
foundations for mathematics. I have not shown that there are 
mathematical questions who are undecidable for the human 
mind, but only that there can be no machine (or blind formal 
system) that can decide all the questions of number theory… 
Letter to Leon Rappaport dated August 2, 1962.
Quantum computers cannot solve the computability problem and 
save computationalism. The brain is no more a quantum 
computer than it is a classic digital one.
We can simulate any quantum system with a classical system, 
but with an exponential slowdown. But everything computable 
via a quantum system is computable via a classical system, just 
not necessarily as fast.
Just as digital computers, quantum computers cannot simulate 
the brain.
* * *
270

UNKNOWABLES
VI: UNKNOWABLES
Science establishes constraints on what is possible or not “out 
there,” which limits are because of “out there,” and which 
ones are due to the structure of our mental space itself? We will 
question here what is the nature of the limits to scientific 
knowledge? We will also ask ourselves how the mental space 
can sometimes overcome these limits by using non-algorithmic 
capacities such as intuition or creativity. Self-references and 
blind spots scatter various regions of the mental space and are 
responsible for many of our knowledge gaps.
6.1 Undefinable words, antinomy
The most fundamental and exciting words are undefinable by 
description. They are subjects of discussion for philosophers and 
poets, but also scientists and computer wizards! Words like 
space, time, love, gravity, intelligence, trust, …
Some words are undefinable because they refer to the mental 
natural world’s activity. We can only learn them by an 
acquaintance, the information that specifies them is Gödelian 
analog and subtract dependent. An abstraction into Shannon 
subtracts independent digital information will always be 
fragmental and incomplete.
Translating a feeling into a narrative moves us to another world. 
From the first person, we step into the cold and anonymous 
world of the third person description. The new world is 
governed by other rules, where causality replaces analogy. 
Instead of feeling, we now count and measure. A globally 
colored impression gets dissected and its pieces are arranged in 
prefabricated boxes. Now everything must have a cause and be 
arranged according to logical imposed rules. We are now 
counting the notes instead of enjoying the music. 
An abstract word will slice our dearest feelings and threw away 
the pieces that don’t fit in standard boxes. Once language got 
hold of them, we will hardly recognize them. These undefinable 
271

UNKNOWABLES
words express feelings like hate, shame, love, desire, proudness, 
integrity… Or they sensations like disgust, warmth, joy, pain, 
tenderness…
Other words are undefinable by description because they are 
“primitive.” They enter any narrative that would define them, 
creating a self-referral loop. These are words like space, time, 
thinking, understanding, or consciousness.
Some words are antinomies, we have attached to them a feeling 
that does not correspond to their descriptive definition. 
Antinomy arises when a word refers both to a feeling and to a 
concept defined by description. Our mental space has then 
difficulties matching both first- and third-party perspectives. 
This difficulty is not astonishing as one is “about” the other, the 
same word belongs to two abstraction levels. At each level, it 
means something else.
The words of a scientific language are third-party perspectives. 
They need to be precise and univocal. We can only define them 
by description. Because the verbal world is subject to 
indeterminacy and undecidability and the universe is not (4.6, 
4.8), science has limited description capacities. The scientific 
description tool is corrupt, and science makes sure not to 
consider the source of the corruption: the mental space. It 
pretends to avoid it by using a semi-third party language.
Words in the ordinary language come associated with other 
significant symbols that can change the meaning the listener will 
give them. They come with a context, a tone of voice, a rhythm, 
and the body language that will color them. Understanding 
ordinary language happens because the words we hear evoke a 
network of feelings and associated concepts that we named 
Net(R) . (1.7) The word itself includes no meaning. The 
62
meaning is attributed by the listener. It will depend on how the 
listener develops Net(R). Empathy contributes to understanding. 
We feel what the other experiences because we have a similar 
natural world. 
 The logical context representation network
62
272

UNKNOWABLES
We do not require exact descriptive definitions to speak the 
ordinary language. Being too formal might destroy the sincerity 
and spontaneity of the communication by introducing other 
elements in Net(R). 
The imprecision of ordinary language is the key to the richness 
and subtlety of human communication. What our verbal world 
calls imprecision, our mental space interprets as a second layer 
of information that extends the range of Net(R) in the natural 
world.
We can say things in a large variety of different ways. One can 
use a metaphor, allusions, irony, humor, special environments, 
formal settings, specialized languages… Speech is just an 
ingredient of the communication between humans. With a 
similar culture and background knowledge, we will need fewer 
words to communicate.
The individuation generated by our experienced reality, the one 
of our natural world, doesn’t correspond with the individuations 
proposed by the language. The way we attach feelings and 
analog images to a word will vary from one individual to the 
other. We all have our own “interpretations.” Natural 
representations don’t superpose with the descriptive definitions 
we learn later. A first-party and third-party cannot match. They 
never match when we speak about feelings.
We cannot show abstract concepts and feelings, one has to 
define them intensionally as a third party. This verbal 
“objectivization” suggests that these abstract concepts or 
feelings exist “out there.” Because everybody uses them, it 
contributes to the ERP belief that these conceptual objects exist 
as properties of nature. The verbal definition of feelings imposes 
itself on the mental space. The “objective definition” contradicts 
the first-person information that our natural world feels. 
This contradiction creates antinomy. An internal conflict 
develops between a descriptive definition and what is felt. This 
can be very upsetting for young adults. They do not understand 
the struggle between the natural and the verbal. Many conclude 
273

UNKNOWABLES
that they are not “normal,” because they do not experience what 
the verbal definition wants to impose, something must be wrong 
with them. 
If a person completely adapts to the verbal definitions, she gets 
mechanized. Verbal definitions of feelings are useful for robots 
who mimic humans, not for us that experience humanity. There 
is an enormous difference between being and imitating that we 
call the imitation fallacy. (7.1)
Time and space are examples of words that generate antinomy. 
Their meaning develops in the natural world by acquaintance at 
an early stage in life. Later we learn the descriptive definition 
but continue experiencing them as natural feelings. For instance, 
we don’t perceive time like what our clock is saying. Our feeling 
is contextual, not the watch.
Immanuel Kant employed the word antinomy in his “Critique of 
pure reason” (1781). Antinomic proposals for him are 
contradictions that result from our attempts to conceive the 
nature of transcendent reality. He explains antinomies relate to 
four situations:—Space, time and the universe—the whole as the 
sum of its parts, free will and causality, the necessity of a god.
Kant resolved antinomies by distinguishing two categories 
“phenomena” (third-person perspectives, as we called them) and 
“noumena” (first-person perspectives). He insisted we can never 
know the noumena of things from a third person’s perspective. 
Brain-centrism confirms Kant’s view.
Digital computers use a formal and univocal language. They 
don’t have a natural world and ancestral feelings to rely on and 
thus ignore antinomy. For computers to be useful tools, we need 
them to be reversible and thus avoid any ambiguity. Computer 
scientists use words describing human attributes to qualify the 
computer’s functions. Like intelligence, memory, understanding, 
creativity, learning, deciding. These words mean something else 
for the mental space. (2.1) That can sometimes be very confusing. 
Humans relate words to a network of feelings that we called 
274

UNKNOWABLES
Net(R) that will generate meaning. Computers have no natural 
world, they don’t have meaning or understanding. 
When a computer scientist says that a computer “understands,” 
we unwillingly assimilate this to human understanding. And 
activate an entire network of connected representations and 
feelings in our mental space. A network that belongs to the word 
understanding in the human sense, but does not apply to the 
computer’s “understanding.” This network will generate a wrong 
image of what the computer is doing! Because of these wrong 
images, we end up believing that computers can be, for instance, 
intelligent even more intelligent than humans. 
One can say computers have a better memory than humans. 
However, we are comparing two non-comparable things. A 
computer cannot memorize like human does, and humans don’t 
use digital addresses to retrieve their memories. 
The sentence computers have better memory than humans is 
only true if we use the computer definition of memory.
A lady at a conference given by Jurgen Schmidhuber (1963-), 
one of the leading tenants of artificial intelligence, asked if 
computers could have feelings. She wanted to know how the 
machine could feel “desire,” for instance. Schmidhuber 
answered, straight forward:
“It’s very simple; you give me your definition of desire, I will 
program it into the computer. I can program any feeling that you 
can define for me!”
Schmidhuber is correct by saying that if you can define 
something by description, you can also program it. You can 
program a robot to have the behavior you have described, and it 
will appear to be in love. Each time you launch the program, a 
typical imitation fallacy starts (7.1). The source of the fallacy is 
the belief that a descriptive definition carries meaning. The 
definition will trigger a behavior of the computer, it cannot 
trigger any feeling or meaning.
275

UNKNOWABLES
Computationalism would imply that everything in the universe 
is univocally definable by description (5.10). Computationalism 
has the same flaws as behaviorism.
Brain-centrism asserts that Schmidhuber’s individuation of a 
feeling is wrong. It claims that any comparison of two events 
cannot be limited to the visible behaviors, but should include the 
whole procedure that generates the behavior. 
I am always surprised when a machine expresses words that 
show an underlying feeling. When you reach Geneva airport by 
train, some recording machine says: “Welcome to Geneva 
airport.” The machine uses the same words as humans do, but 
these words are empty, no feeling, and no personal intention, no 
person is behind. No person, no meaning!
Some want us to believe that we can replace humans with 
imitated humans; others realize certain words cannot be defined 
by description. One has to learn them by experiencing them as 
humans do.
* *
6.2 Truth and belief
Aristoteles had proposed his three laws of logic: 
1. Identity: Whatever is, is 2. The law of contradiction, an 
assertion cannot be both true and false, and 3. The excluded 
middle principle we examined in (4.3). 
These laws express the fundamental characteristics of reasoning. 
The excluded middle holds that any assertion about an existent 
object or event must be true or false; no middle ground exists for 
truth. The laws of logic did not, for Aristoteles, derive from 
anything deeper and applied to every existent “thing” in the 
universe. The aim of logic for Aristoteles and the peripatetic, his 
followers, was the elaboration of a system that “allows humans 
to investigate, classify, and evaluate suitable forms of 
reasoning.” 
276

UNKNOWABLES
For ERP, logic must then be out of the universe and belong to a 
Platonic realm.
I remember long discussions we had among high school students 
on the origin of logic. Where did it come from, how does it 
apply to anything in the universe? It seemed miraculous, 
something happening in our head that applies everywhere. How 
did the universe learn logic? Was logic a “God-given” compass 
for us to understand in the universe and find “truth”?
Brain-centrism describes logic as a set of “orders” about mental 
representations. (2.6) Logical rules should govern our verbal 
representations and their relationships for our brain to become a 
good regulator. (2.8) 
So how can it be that logic is universal wherever we observe, 
“out there”? How is it that the universe “is logic,” if logic is a 
mental space attribute?
Animals were learning logical behaviors by trial and error, well 
before Aristoteles abstracted them as logical principles. We 
developed and adapted to the surrounding universe by learning. 
Logical principles are the very first regularity evolved animals 
learned by acquisition to survive. Over billions of years, survival 
has pushed organisms to adapt. Our brain developed, modeled 
by these necessities, dictated by the universe that it had to learn. 
The learning was Gödelian and manifested by physical 
transformations. “Out there” one can find no Shannon 
information or digital regulators; things are not symbols, they 
are.
We learned analogy and causality from the universe. Although 
they don’t exist out there. What “exists out there” is a succession 
of situations out of which we abstracted analogy and later 
causality. That is how our brain formed networks of connected 
representation that we called Net(R) in (3.11). These networks 
reflect our elementary logical principle.
277

UNKNOWABLES
Logic is a mental space attribute, if the universe applies it, it’s 
because we learned it from him. More precisely: it’s what we 
abstracted from what we learned from him.
No mysterious god-given compass is guiding us to some 
“absolute truth.”
But now it becomes far more interesting: Aristotelian logic does 
not always work.
Until the beginning of the last century, this “god-given” compass 
pointing to truth, seemed to apply everywhere. As often with 
knowledge, the universe showed us a problem.
Here it was the observed spectrum of black-body  radiation did 
63
not match with the theory at higher frequencies. The problem is 
the ultraviolet catastrophe. One could have called it the Logic 
catastrophe. And as always, this problem has led us to fantastic 
new discoveries, quantum physics.
Max Planck proposed a law by which radiation could only 
change its energy in a minimal increment. This minimal 
increment was proportional to the frequency of the 
electromagnetic wave associated with the radiation. That law 
would solve the black body radiation problem.
We know 1905 was the annus mirabilis for Albert Einstein. The 
first of the four revolutionary papers he published that year was 
about the photoelectric effect. In that paper, he proposed that 
light be emitted, propagated, and absorbed in energy quanta, 
and photons are the carriers of electromagnetic radiation. 
Contrary to Plank’s wave approach to radiation, Einstein 
proposed a particle approach.
For Einstein, energy is emitted through minimal packs, quanta, 
and not continuously in waves. Planck, Einstein, de Broglie, 
Bohr, Heisenberg, Schrödinger and many others led physics to 
accept the wave-particle duality. In quantum mechanics, one can 
 A black body is an object that absorbs all the radiation incident upon it
63
278

UNKNOWABLES
describe every particle or quantum entity either as a particle or 
as a wave. 
This contradicts Aristoteles’ three laws of logic.
The wave-particle duality became the first of a long list of 
“strange” quantum properties. Although quantum mechanics is 
the most well-tested theory in physics and its applications are 
uncountable, its meaning or interpretation is still not clear. 
Physicists have proposed many interpretations. Each 
interpretation describes a different universe. No experiment will 
tell us which one to choose. No experiment will answer the 
question, “what is reality?”
In quantum mechanics, because of the wave-particle duality, one 
cannot state any absolute mathematical facts about quantum 
entities. All facts about measurable properties are stochastic. 
This contradicts ERP knowledge and, of course, the three 
Aristoteles laws of logic. 
If our primitive brains learned logical principles from the 
environment, we had never directly confronted quantum 
mechanical phenomena. They only happen at a micro-scale. 
Quantum properties seem therefore strange and their 
interpretation does not fit in the worldviews our mental space 
has built up to now.
However, quantum properties, if they contradict the classical 
ERP views, fit with brain-centrism, which proposes much 
simpler interpretations of quantum weirdness. 
64
We have got an answer to our truth question, the verbal world 
cannot insure its coherence. We cannot find an algorithm that 
will tell us if a proposal is true or false. The verbal world can 
therefore not totally and isomorphically describe out there. ERP 
is a false assumption. Physicists, sticking with ERP, are trapped 
in a contradiction that they try to solve by attributing properties 
to the universe.
 See part 2 of Brain-centric.
64
279

UNKNOWABLES
The role of science is to isolate belief from knowledge. Isolate 
and be conscious of our assumptions and premises. Brain-
centrism is a tentative in this direction.
*
As we can never prove things true, we rely on beliefs. In 
science, Poincaré’s conventionalism replaces absolute truth with 
a common belief of experts that is temporarily adopted as a 
paradigm. (5.7)
In mathematics, absolute truth can exist because the objects 
belong to the verbal world. They never refer to feelings or to 
“out there.” A theorem will remain true, whatever mental space 
considers it if it can adopt the language, the premises, and the 
conventions.
In everyday life, beliefs model our thoughts. Beliefs, and not the 
truth, guide humans to think what they think and do what they 
do. Even if we “a posteriori” justify our behaviors with logical 
arguments. This remark is an illustration of our human 
condition. We have no possible guidance in our verbal world. 
And we have lost the primitive guidance that offered our natural 
world.
If we refuse to navigate from one belief to another in political, 
social unrest, and smoking unfairness, what should we do? 
Aristoteles, Descartes, Leibniz, and so many others tried to solve 
the problem. They did not manage to, but they made it clearer at 
every step: this major human problem compromises our long-
term survival. 
Why then is “truth” so important? An answer lies in Ashby’s 
good model theorem (1.7). A model of “out there” not 
sufficiently isomorphic would inevitably lead us to disappear. 
The entire perspective of science is to establish good models.
With today’s knowledge, it is crucial to understand how beliefs 
form in our mental spaces. Why we cannot avoid them, and how 
the verbal world can manipulate them.
280

UNKNOWABLES
Beliefs are verbal world expressions closely and strongly related 
to feeling. They most often concern non-visible events: future or 
past events, invisible world, … Often their verbal expression 
doesn’t appear as a direct expression of the feeling. For instance, 
one could believe in the existence of flying saucers and it would 
be based on a deep desire to discover something new. 
Psychology has been closely studying how certain beliefs are 
associated with primal emotions.
One distinguishes levels of beliefs. The higher the level of belief 
for a narrative, the higher the confidence in its truth. This idea 
has allowed statisticians to apply the Bayes theorem to express 
the degree of belief in probabilistic terms . They then study 
65
how this probability would evolve when additional information 
is released. The network of parameters supporting a belief is 
called a Bayesian network. 
A belief can grow to the point of denying the information of 
one’s sensory system (1.4) when it is supported by a group. That 
often happens in religious fanatic movements. The belief takes 
over any thinking capacity. The entire world is perceived 
through the eyes and interpretations of this belief.
Narratives are false if, when characterizing a subject, they 
express something in disharmony with data collected on the 
territory. The territory can be this case be an event “out there” or 
inner emotions. Most of our knowledge comes through 
narratives other people have produced. It is thus important to 
trust them and to understand their belief system.
Science has here a critical role as our ultimate certitude. We 
must all be sure that science and research are doing their best 
effort to search for truth. Undermining the social trust in science 
by false claims or bad journalism is a social catastrophe.
Lying, spreading false information to others, compromises their 
evaluations and survival capacities. Lies have killed more 
people than all other diseases together.
 Bayesian statistical methods use Bayes' theorem to compute and update 
65
probabilities after obtaining new data
281

UNKNOWABLES
To express truth is a decision everyone must take personally. It 
requires some personal work. Finding our inner balance is 
difficult but crucial, as declared Albert Einstein:
As for the search for truth, I know from my own painful 
searching, with its many blind alleys, how hard it is to take a 
reliable step, be it ever so small, towards the understanding of 
what is truly important.
 George Orwell would add concerning human societies:
“The further a society drifts from the truth, the more it will hate 
those that speak it.”
The most common model of distributed truth in history has been 
“authoritarian truth.” That a truth imposed on human societies 
by religious or political authorities. We enforced authoritarian 
truth for millennia, leaving people with no other choice than to 
believe narratives imposed by authorities.
Often authoritarian narratives manipulate fears and desires to 
coerce, “Beliefs.” Social conformity pressure would further 
strengthen them. Exclusion or even execution was the fate 
reserved for the deniers.
Authorities created various narratives, references, and words, 
such as “sacred,” or “blasphemy.” They claimed tablets or books 
to be God’s words. They instituted inquisitions and severe 
punishments for non-believers. Very serious questions, such as 
the creation of the universe, or the nature of human beings, have 
been overused. 
Kings realized that authoritarian truth was a precious tool to 
control the loyalty of their people and keep them working. 
Authoritarian societies restrained imagination, doubts, and 
creativity. Societies couldn’t make any progress. The belief was 
much more powerful than observation and occupied the mental 
spaces.
However, to be efficient, the supreme authorities, dictating the 
authoritarian truth, had always to belong to the invisible world. 
282

UNKNOWABLES
In that way, nobody could question them. Pharaohs were living 
gods, we crowned most kings with God’s blessings. 
Most narratives used fears such as eternal life in hell or having 
one’s body eaten by monsters or any other punishment that 
would happen after death, after leaving the visible world. 
The goal of authoritarian truth was to control people’s thinking. 
In many authoritarian cultures, rational thinking itself became 
the criminal, books were burned and declared useless.
We hardly realize today how profound have been the changes 
that occurred during the enlightenment age in the 17th and 18th 
centuries.
By imposing reason and experimentation instead of authority 
and belief, enlightenment opened our minds to a world of hope, 
dignity, research, and discovery.
It allowed us to use the full potentialities of our mental space, 
rid of ancestral fears. But the authoritarian temptation, that 
allows powerful people to reign, is still ready to recover its 
prerogatives. Today it uses a combination of old techniques and 
new technologies.
* *
6.3 Existence in physics
In physics during the last 100 years, the notion of “existence” 
has been under high pressure to develop. After the 
enlightenment, experimentation was critical. “Existence” 
became roughly synonymous with “being observable.” 
The wave theory of light outs a limit to optical observation when 
the sizes of the object observed decrease. Optical microscopy 
cannot distinguish objects separated by less than about half the 
wavelength of the light used to enlighten them. We often refer to 
this limit as the diffraction barrier. The maximum resolution in 
visible light corresponds to distances of around 200 nm. The 
smaller the entity, the smaller the wavelength of the photons has 
283

UNKNOWABLES
to be. The photon’s energy is inversely proportional to its 
wavelength, which means one needs higher and higher energies 
to probe the smallest scales. 
We had already abandoned the idea of direct observation in 
many sciences studying the past, for instance. For the very 
small, a physicist would adopt the same idea. If an object is not 
observable, let’s observe the traces he has left. 
An object would then exist under the condition that his existence 
explains the traces.
Physicists would agree that if one can observe the consequences 
of the “traces” of a mathematically predicted entity, this entity 
also exists “out there.” (3.2). 
A physical entity is then said to exist if it is useful to explain an 
observation. This type of existence is a combination of 
mathematics and physical observation. It introduces some blur 
in Descartes’s clear separation between mental and physical. It is 
a step in direction of brain-centrism as it recognizes the 
necessity of brain activity to individuate existence. 
This definition not only applies at the quantum level for smaller 
entities. Cosmology uses it to determine past events such as the 
Big Bang or inflation. 
All the recent discoveries in particle physics exist according to 
this extended definition. A coherent mathematical theory 
predicted in 1964 the existence of a massive scalar boson with 
zero spin, no electric charge, and no color charge. In 2012 at 
CERN near Geneva, a particle with the expected properties was 
discovered. Two experiments the ATLAS and CMS experiments 
at the Large Hadron Collider (LHC) indirectly confirmed the 
Higgs boson. The properties of the discovered particle matched 
the expected properties of the Higgs boson. In 2013, Peter Higgs 
and François Englert, were awarded the Nobel Prize in Physics 
for their theoretical predictions.
Dark energy “exists” because we can observe an accelerated 
expansion of the universe that the unobservable dark matter 
284

UNKNOWABLES
would produce. Dark matter “exists” because it can explain the 
geometrical configuration of galaxies and preserve our theory of 
gravity. So dark energy and dark matter “exist,” not because of 
an observation, but because they can explain an observation 
(2020).
 
In 1933, Swiss astronomer Fritz Zwicky, while observing the 
motion of galaxies in the Coma Cluster, began wondering what 
kept them together. There wasn’t enough mass to keep the 
galaxies from flying apart. Zwicky proposed that some kind of 
dark matter provided cohesion. But since he had no evidence, 
his theory was quickly dismissed.
Then, in 1968, the American astronomer Vera Rubin made a 
similar discovery. She was studying the Andromeda Galaxy at 
Kitt Peak Observatory in the mountains of southern Arizona 
when she came across something that puzzled her. Rubin was 
examining Andromeda’s rotation curve or the speed at which the 
stars around the center rotate, and realized that the stars on the 
outer edges moved at the same rate as those at the interior, 
violating Newton’s laws of motion. This meant there was more 
matter in the galaxy than was detectable.
A young and brilliant professor of theoretical physics, Claudia 
de Rham, born in Lausanne, has, for instance, constructed a non-
linear theory of massive graviton that could describe the 
accelerated expansion of the universe as a gravitational effect. 
This theory would eliminate the need for dark energy. If an 
experiment can, one day, decide which theory makes the best 
prediction, an existent object could suddenly become non-
existent.
For a non-physicist, this extended definition can confuse 
because it relies on previous theories to assert the existence of 
objects, “out there.” What if our mathematical models change? 
Are we not creating a risk of self-referral where things exist 
because our theories predict they exist? (6.10).
285

UNKNOWABLES
The objective existence of elements in the universe would 
depend on our capacity to use those unobserved entities to 
justify observed events. It is a curious mix-up of map and 
territory. 
Brain-centrism supports extended existence. It asserts that any 
narrative is about our representations and it should make us very 
careful with non-observable objects. This is true for objects that 
are equivalent to their verbal definition as quantum objects. 
Their definition or the mathematics that predict their behavior 
acts as expectations for our mental space. No sensory 
information will contradict those expectations, as the object is 
not visible or measurable. We then take the risk in ERP to 
attribute to the universe a property that belongs to our brain. 
(4.12)
* *
6.4 Causality and special relativity
In Special Relativity (SR), the passage of time depends on the 
speed of the observer. Closer he gets to the speed of light, slower 
will be his watch when viewed by an external observer. The 
286

UNKNOWABLES
Langevin paradox illustrates this effect. A man taking a one-year 
trip into space with his fast spaceship will notice, when he 
comes back one year later, that all humans on earth have aged 50 
years.
But Special Relativity, although it neglected gravitational effects 
by hypothesizing non-accelerating frameworks, already caused 
deep changes in our understanding of reality. 
Notions like time and space changed radically and became 
relative, we excluded ether. The “simultaneity” of two events 
became a notion dependent on the respective speed of the 
observers. The notion of physical causality had to be revised.
To every event A at time t, one can associate a cone with its 
summit on this event (6.4.1). Suppose B is an element at time t’ in 
this cone. A photon coming from B could influence A. Indeed, it 
would have had the time to travel from B to A. Any element 
outside the light cone could have no influence on A. Causes for 
A are thus all in the light cone having A as the summit. Same-
wise, A can only influence the events in the future part of the 
cone. The light cone represents observable events. The region 
out of the light cone contains non-observable but hypothetical 
events, useful to explain observable events. It might well be that 
C is in the light cone of B, for instance. 
For instance, the reason physicists distinguish “the universe” 
from the “observable universe,” the part of the universe that is 
inside our light cone. 
In (3.9), we have shown that causality is a metal space function; 
we will further confirm it.
In SR an event X can happen before an event Y for observer A 
and after Y for an observer, B. This “reversed order” in their 
perspective depends on their respective speeds.
Here, for A, X could cause Y, while for B, Y could cause X.
287

UNKNOWABLES
But SR is a third-party ERP perspective of an observer C. For C 
causality (where the cause precedes the effect), disappears. So 
does simultaneity. 
However, for A and B, in their first-party perspective, causality 
remains always respected whatever their speed.
An observer by himself will never experiment with time 
distortion, he will never see his watch running slower or faster. 
To notice that their watches don’t show at the same time, A and 
B will have to communicate. 
SR is a model build from the perspective of a third-party C. This 
third party can never exist at the moment of the observation. 
What makes SR difficult to understand is that we describe in C’s 
third-party perspective, and at the same time we want to 
understand it from the first party perspective of one observer. 
A and B cannot agree on the time separation between two 
events, neither can they agree on the distance separating two 
objects. This shows that time and space are not “usual” 
measurable physical entities. In a third-person perspective, they 
must be a function of the observer’s speed, as the equations of 
SR describe them.
However, in the first-person perspective, time and space do not 
depend on speed. The difficulty appears when two observers 
communicate. When A and B communicate, they need a 
common model that makes sense of both A and B’s 
observations. That is the genius intuition of Albert Einstein’s 
construction. Einstein builds a relative time and space, never 
directly observable, but useful to explain what A and B observe 
when they compare their watches. We end up having two times 
and two spaces. The first party ones, who are measured during 
the observation, and the third party ones, whose “existence” 
relies on the extended definition of existence. (6.3)  
In the Langevin paradox, both the traveler and the earth 
residents have seen the time pass by normally, nothing changes 
for them. When they meet, they notice the traveler did not age as 
288

UNKNOWABLES
much as the residents. His watch shows that one year has passed 
by and the resident’s watches show that 50 years have passed by. 
All was normal for each of them until they meet. The surprise 
when they meet happens because they are convinced that there is 
an absolute time equal for everybody. What makes it paradoxical 
is that they now realize that this absolute time cannot be the one 
they have experienced!
The discovery of the constancy of the speed of light and 
Einstein’s special relativity has had a tremendous impact. It 
obliged us to change our worldview on fundamental conceptual 
pillars such as causality, space, time, and the relation between 
matter and energy. “Out there” did not change. What changed 
because of this additional information is our knowledge of “out 
there.” The discovery of some information inaccessible in our 
day-to-day life obliged us to interpret common things 
differently.
We never observe the past, “out there.” Nor can we observe the 
future. We only observe, “nows.” Observing is always a first-
person activity of the natural world. (Figure 5.3.2) 
When you observe a distant galaxy, what you see is happening 
now. A third-party perspective (a verbal world perspective) 
could infer that, as the light took a billion years to reach us, what 
you observe now happened there a billion years ago. However, 
that is a mental inference, not an observation. The first and third 
parties claim different things. The first-party is directly 
experiencing a “now” observation. The third party is inferring 
from a verbal world theory when (in our time) was encoded by 
the information that this light carries. 
What we observe now is always happening now (the territory). 
Theories may infer from this observation something about the 
past (a map). It is a simple abuse of language to say we are 
observing the past when we are inferring it theoretically. 
Any knowledge by acquaintance happens here and now. On the 
contrary, knowledge by description can be about the past or the 
future and anywhere, even outside of the universe. Past and 
289

UNKNOWABLES
future cannot be part of first-party experiences. They are only 
third-party conclusions useful to explain observations.
We have become so used to our “verbal world,” we confuse it 
with “out there.” For some of us, it has become difficult to see 
the difference between a mental inference and an observation. 
This confusion is very common even among scientists. They 
trust their science so much that, for them, it is “out there.” 
ERP sounds so logical along as we don’t realize that we are 
confusing map and territory. We treat theoretical inferences as if 
they were observations. 
To avoid confusion, it is useful to train our “consciousness of 
abstracting.” This must be a “being line” training by meditation 
or acquisition. Descriptions will not help.
Let’s consider again the figure (4.12.1) ERP explanatory 
landscape is between arrow 1 and arrow 2 on the right side. 
Brain-centrism suggests extending it to the left side of the 
picture. Limitations to knowledge car happen by characteristics 
on both sides. For instance, mental blind spots (on the left side) 
will have to be explained by ERP by an event “out there” on the 
right side. ERP might attribute to the universe characteristics of 
the observer.  
The brain-centric view makes clear the difference between first-
party and third-party views. It also clarifies causality as a 
property of the verbal world rather than out there. 
* *
6.5 Understanding understanding
In a famous citation, Einstein declares: 
Any fool can know. The point is to understand. 
If one can test knowledge, testing understanding is much more 
complicated. Understanding is a feeling. We can get it from the 
first person’s perspective, but it’s difficult to measure as a third 
290

UNKNOWABLES
person. Like any feeling, it can take different forms and is not 
definable by description. It can refer to a narrative, but also a 
range of non-verbal sensory signals or feelings perceived by the 
mental space. It’s self-referral, one understands,§ one 
understands.
By reading a book a second time after a few years, one realizes 
that the first time one had not understood it the same way. 
John Kunios is a professor at Drexel University, he declared in 
an article in Aeon:
“The fact that evolution has linked the generation of new ideas 
and perspectives to the human brain’s reward system may 
explain the proliferation of creativity and the advancement of 
science and culture.”
He could have added that understanding is also rewarded by the 
brain. Probably because it’s a survival asset. In the verbal world, 
we increase our understanding by building causal chains and 
relating the subject to known facts. In the natural world, the 
feeling of understanding comes through analogies, often visual. 
Understanding plays the role of a fill-in reducing brain entropy 
and our increasing our prediction capacity. Explanations or 
analogies can trigger understanding but are not the 
understanding itself.
Understanding is not algorithmic, there is no “how to.” Having 
been in teaching, “how do we understand?” has remained an 
important question for me, like for all teachers. We have ways to 
facilitate the understanding by examples and images of the 
subject, but not of the understanding itself. Because itself as an 
“objective” third-party entity does not exist.
I remember Roger Penrose at a conference in Zürich; he was 
explaining to an audience of unconvinced computer scientists 
that understanding was non-computable. He was correct, and his 
demonstration was clear: understanding is not algorithmic. ERP 
physicalists in the audience refuted Penrose’s argumentation, 
based on Gödel’s incompleteness. Computer scientists are so 
291

UNKNOWABLES
used to define feelings with descriptions. They seem to have lost 
the basic understanding of a feeling. That is terrifying when you 
imagine how much the algorithms these people produce now 
control our lives, just as terrifying for me as I imagine the 
inquisition was in the Middle Ages for a non-believer.
One cannot know if someone else has understood or how he has 
understood; we have to ask him. Like in an audition test, the 
doctor asks you to raise your hand when you hear the sound. He 
has no way to measure our experience by himself. A person can 
evaluate his understanding from a first-party perspective. From 
the outside, it is not measurable. 
In the natural world, a series of connections to more in-depth 
Gödelian information represents understanding. The feeling 
appears when one relates an unknown event/representation to a 
previously understood phenomenon. Understanding unites, 
consolidates, and lightens up our mental space, preparing it for 
new questioning. Understanding triggers a feeling of conviction 
and knowledge. 
Any intensional definition of understanding would not only be a 
terrible simplification but would also create antinomy because of 
the recursiveness of the word. 
So why are super smart computer scientists, like Schmidhuber, 
claiming that they can program feelings? They add critical 
words if the feeling is properly defined. That is the danger (5.14) 
of the “imitation fallacy,” replacing a feeling with a brief series 
of words, then pretending that this series of words represent the 
feeling. 
Convinced computer scientists have another way to put it. They 
declare, show me something a brain can do and a computer 
cannot. They express that way their faith in ERP. What “exists” 
is what we can show. But remember what we said in (2.8) on 
materialization. Whatever we build has to go through 
digitalization and a blueprint process in the verbal world, before 
we encode it into the matter. Whatever visible object or event we 
produce “out there,” a computer can also do. But it cannot 
292

UNKNOWABLES
develop emotions and or feelings, love his children, understand, 
or prove mathematical conjectures, or play with infinity, etc. But 
we cannot show all these “things,” although they are the most 
important things in humans’ lives. They belong to the natural 
world, and computers don’t have it.
Many scientists have made a habit of building up thought 
experiments by imagining a situation and trying to figure out its 
consequences. Einstein explained that at 15, he imagined 
himself sitting on a ray of light chasing another beam of light 
and wondered what he would see. Some thought experiments 
have later found a realizable version. The method is fruitful and 
very illustrative of how imagination can trigger understanding. 
Sometimes the precise point we do not understand is unclear. If 
we can imagine a thought experiment, it may underline what 
piece is missing or what unconscious hypothesis we have made 
that should not be there. That is why often scientists love good 
science fiction. By accepting some dose of fiction, it can 
examine how science works in that situation. Sit on a light ray to 
realize that light cannot stop.
That justifies Einstein’s observation we stated to start this 
paragraph. Knowing and understanding are, in consequence, 
different things. In classrooms, students can know (repeat) even 
when they have not understood. We will then not anchor this 
knowledge with feelings; although they can repeat it, it will 
disappear. Analogies, pictures, examples, experiencing are 
useful tools for the teacher to trigger understanding. Verbal 
explanations are not sufficient, especially for younger children, 
acquisition is critical.
Create by oneself an explanation is the best way to generate 
understanding. Explaining to others and confronting and 
convincing them is the best possible way to deepen our 
understanding.
A good teacher would take advantage of the excitement and 
satisfaction generated by creative activities, he would use the 
Socratic method and ask a question and let the mental spaces of 
293

UNKNOWABLES
his students enjoy searching, creating, and finding. A good 
Sherlock Holmes detective or a scientist would need more than 
an initial analogy. He wants the piece of the puzzle to fit; 
however, you turn the game and from whatever angle you look 
at it.
* *
6.6 Intuition
We know our mental space feeds at two sources of information. 
(3.5) Even with no sensory input, it continues to build 
representations based on memorized information and emotions. 
That is how imagination works. Since Kuhn and the end of 
logical positivism, we now accepted that creativity and intuition 
have their role in producing science. 
Rules and methods do not exist for every situation. 
Uncomputability (4.8) shows that even in mathematics, situations 
exist where no laws are possible (4.7). No logical reasoning can 
then suggest a solution, and we must rely on our moral sense, on 
our “intuition,” or “good sense” to decide. The verbal world is 
confronted with a blind spot. (6.10) The mental space must rely 
on the natural world. (4.2) 
For every representation (R), our mental space builds up a 
logical context representation network, Net(R) associated with 
(R). (1.7) We know that Net(R) extends to both the verbal and the 
natural world. We also know that Net(R) depends on the context 
and the general mental state. That explains why an intuition or a 
creative idea will turn up at a precise moment. 
What we call higher brain functions such as creativity and 
intuition to appear because Net(R) associates to (R) a network 
that had previously not been formed or associated. This happens 
at a precise moment when the mental state and its environment 
present a suitable “alignment.” Brain regions will synchronize 
that are not usually working together.
294

UNKNOWABLES
Net(R) can be imagined as a “search engine.” However, its 
search is not based on researching an existing database for 
words or concepts. Net(R) will build analog and causal 
associations, recursively guided by the general state of the 
mental space and the sensory inputs. It can thus search for 
unknown things. Things that do not pre-exist in a database. 
Net(R), as we often noted, covers both worlds. However, 
intuitive and creative ideas appear through analog associations 
of the natural world. Like with Kuhn’s context of discovery. 
Net(R) is a non-reversible procedure. It is impossible to 
reproduce the state of the mental space and its environment that 
triggered the intuition. This irreversibility assures that the 
procedure is non-mechanical and uncomputable. No 
materialized machine can produce it, including computers. (2.8)
The brain is a dissipative system, it uses incoming energy to 
self-organize, create new connections, and lower its entropy. 
Part of the inflowing energy is converted through self-
organization into Gödelian information. (2.11) This novel 
information is physical and materialized in the brain by the 
connections producing the Net(R)’s. Our “non-reversibility” is 
what ensures our creativity and our intuition.
But it also ensures that no reversible machine could simulate the 
brain. Irreversible machines would be useless. 
Verifying proof can be done algorithmically step-by-step. But 
the proof was not conceived that way. It was dreamed, it came as 
a long succession of “revelations,” of sudden inner convictions, 
of visions, of “Eurekas.” The creative process was mainly 
emotional, visual, tactile, and Gödelian, it needed Net(R) to 
plunge into the natural world.
Brain-centrism suggests that education and research should 
consider this asymmetry and could largely profit from 
neuroscience’s findings on how the brain builds Net(R)s.  
Srinivasa Ramanujan, one of the most astonishing mathematical 
geniuses of all times, claimed that he had received in his dreams 
295

UNKNOWABLES
a vision of entire rolls of complex mathematical formulas given 
to him by the Goddess Mahalakshmi. This “explanation” of the 
source of his immense talent was the third source we have 
evoked. 
Often intuitions are so surprising for the discoverer himself, he 
cannot believe that his brain did it. Intuitions are by definition 
not algorithmic, like gods they put us in touch with something 
that belonged to an invisible world. 
Henri Poincaré had already similar ideas at the end of the 19th 
century, although not much yet was known about the brain and 
the mental space:
“ … for that they needed a guide. This guide is, first, analogy. 
For example, one of the methods of demonstration dear to 
analysts is that founded on the employment of dominant 
functions. We know it has already served to solve a multitude of 
problems; in what consists then the role of the inventor who 
wishes to apply it to a new problem? Initially he must recognize 
the analogy of this question with those which have already been 
solved by this method; then he must perceive in what way this 
new question differs from the others, and thence deduce the 
modifications necessary to apply to the method.
But how does one perceive these analogies and these 
differences? In the example just cited they are almost always 
evident, but I could have found other where they would have 
been much more deeply hidden; often an uncommon penetration 
is necessary for their discovery. The analysts, not to let these 
hidden analogies escape them, that is, to be inventors, must, 
without the aid of the senses and imagination, have a direct 
sense of what constitutes the unity of a piece of reasoning, of 
what makes, so to speak, its soul and inmost life.”
Poincaré explains the role of analogy and how a mental 
preparation at the verbal level can favor the construction of 
useful Net(R) able to perceive differences. 
296

UNKNOWABLES
But Poincaré also says: “[one must] have a direct sense of what 
constitutes the unity of a piece of reasoning.” That shows that 
analogies in play in intuition cover multiple dimensions. The 
similarity can, for instance, concern the content, the structure, 
the environment, the procedures, the notations, or even some 
emotional reaction when facing the question. That explains the 
importance of the state of mind and the context. If a simple 
detail can trigger the analogy, the experience will allow us to 
spot it out, give it value and attention and extend it to new 
regions of the mental landscape. A proper internal state of the 
mental space is critical to trigger its tendency to draw analogies. 
We must feel free from heavy and rigorous rules, like when a 
child is ready to play or ready to make jokes. Reaching this kind 
of state needs us not to be under any kind of pressure. Often 
education for practical and economic reasons concentrates only 
on “How to…” There is no how-to for creativity and intuition.
“A direct sense of what constitutes the unity” refers to Gödelian 
information, Poincaré uses “direct” and “sense” in place of 
“symbolic” and “knowledge.” Intuition is not about reasoning, 
but about triggering direct sense, making improbable 
connections between unconnected things, seeing unity between 
things seen as different, synchronizing to create unity.
If intuition or moral sense can often lead to understanding, it can 
also sometimes be misleading. This happens because it is using 
brain patterns and representations inappropriate to the situation 
under examination. It’s because of some lack of knowledge of 
the subject. The representations used by intuition are sometimes 
outdated or miss some critical information. That explains why, 
to get our brain to produce valid intuition, one needs a lot of 
preparation and extensive studies. How else could we know 
what makes up the “unity of a piece of reasoning”?
Most of the technologies we use today would appear impossible 
because contrary to the intuitions of humans, only a couple of 
dozen years ago. Most of the present scientific thinking has now 
diverged from ancestral intuitions. Without a deep-rooted culture 
297

UNKNOWABLES
in a specific subject and its environment, most (but not all) of 
our intuitions will be useless.
Poincaré suggests the following mathematical example:
“We know there exist continuous functions lacking derivatives. 
Nothing is more shocking to intuition than this proposition 
which is imposed upon us by logic. Our fathers would not have 
failed to say: ‘It is evident that every continuous function has a 
derivative, since every curve has a tangent.’
How can intuition deceive us on this point? It is because when 
we seek to imagine a curve, we cannot represent it to ourselves 
without width; just so, when we represent to ourselves a straight 
line, we see it under as a rectilinear band of a certain breadth. 
We well know these lines have no width; we try to imagine them 
narrower and narrower and thus to approach the limit; so we do 
in a certain measure, but we shall never attain this limit. And 
then it is clear we can always picture these two narrow bands, 
one straight, one curved, in a position such that they encroach 
slightly one upon the other without crossing. We shall thus be 
led unless warned by a rigorous analysis, to conclude that a 
curve always has a tangent.”
In mathematics, we define objects intensionally. (6.5) To 
understand the specified object, one needs to attach an analog 
representation, often a visual representation and feelings. 
Sensory perception alone does not guide us for abstract non-
physical objects. Proper analog representations will generate 
pertinent intuitions; improper ones will produce misleading 
intuitions.
One can have developed proper representations that give us a 
good understanding of hydrodynamics. Then try to apply them 
to electromagnetism, where they will provide us with a limited 
understanding and wrong intuitions. 
Poincaré continues:
“Pure analysis puts at our disposal a multitude of procedures 
whose infallibility it guaranteed; it opens to us a thousand 
298

UNKNOWABLES
different ways on which we can embark in all confidence; we are 
assured of meeting there no obstacles; but of all these ways, 
which will lead us most promptly to our goal? Who shall tell us 
which to choose? We need a faculty which makes us see the end 
from afar, and intuition is this faculty.”
This is a compelling remark. Even if a problem accepts an 
algorithmic solution, if a “step-by-step method” exists, intuition 
is, however, necessary to spot out in advance what method will 
lead us to the result. A mathematical proof can always be 
verified algorithmically. Because of the Halting problem, we 
cannot find it algorithmically. Explaining the past is easy, 
predicting the future is more complicated.
Intuition is a central capacity of the mental space that a digital 
computer cannot have, lacking a natural world.
Intuition, when viewed from a third-party perspective, seems to 
be an unjustified “guess.” Evolution has given us the capacity 
not to get stuck by equivalents of the Halting problem in the 
verbal world. The brain escapes the blind spots of the verbal 
world by referring to the natural world. The natural world works 
then as a Turing Oracle. 
This Oracle makes a guess or rather generates an intuition 
suggesting a way to go when nothing algorithmic can guide our 
steps.
This approach makes sense in the brain-centric perspective. 
However, we must learn how to use this hybrid analog-digital 
oracle. For it to be interesting, a solution must be compatible 
with the complete structure; it can otherwise be misleading. That 
is why valid intuitions only manifest only one has accumulated 
sufficient knowledge. Studies show that we rarely resort to 
rational thinking in day-to-day life. Most decisions are dictated 
by patterns, like stereotypes, or are based on feelings or 
intuitions.
Turing himself has insisted that “intuition” is present in every 
part of a mathematician’s thinking. For instance, when a 
299

UNKNOWABLES
mathematical proof is formalized, intuition has an explicit role 
in the choice of successive steps. However, Turing did not say 
what the brain was doing in a moment of such “intuition.” In his 
1939 paper, he distinguishes “ingenuity” from “intuition.” 
Ingenuity is what a clever Turing machine can have. Intuition, 
he says, is “something else”:
“Mathematical reasoning may be regarded … as the exercise of 
a combination of … intuition and ingenuity… In pre-Gödel 
times, it was thought by some that all the intuitive judgments of 
mathematics could be replaced by a finite number of … rules. 
The necessity for intuition would then be entirely eliminated. In 
our discussions, however, we have gone to the opposite extreme 
and eliminated not intuition but ingenuity, and this in spite of the 
fact that our aim has been in much the same direction.”
In 1939, Ludwig Wittgenstein conducted, at Cambridge, a set of 
lectures on the foundations of mathematics. Alan Turing took 
part in some of these lectures. The discussions between 
Wittgenstein and Turing have fortunately been recorded. They 
center on the notions of discovery and invention in mathematics. 
Turing still seems sometimes to believe that discovery is 
algorithmic. Wittgenstein insists that even if “a posteriori” 
mathematical operations can be presented algorithmically, “a 
priori” needs non-algorithmic creativity.
Albert Einstein is known for having declared that intuition is the 
highest level of intelligence. The precise quote goes much 
deeper and is a profound critic of our society:
“The intuitive mind is a sacred gift and the rational mind is a 
faithful servant. We have created a society that honors the 
servant and has forgotten the gift.” 
Einstein says that, when confronted with a problem he could not 
solve, he had developed the habit of taking a nap. Sometimes he 
would then wake up with a solution. 
Bernhard Riemann’s work was literally based on intuition. He 
had developed this type of reasoning during his discussions with 
300

UNKNOWABLES
Dirichlet. The substance of his ideas was not hidden in lengthy 
computations and his writing fell below the rigor usually 
required from mathematicians. Moritz Stern (1807–1894), a 
student of Gauss in Göttingen, was perhaps the first to realize 
that Riemann was a genius. He later described the young 
Riemann by saying that he:
“... Already sang like a canary.”
Srinivasa Ramanujan, as we know, was a profound Hinduism 
believer. He famously declared:
“A mathematical equation makes no sense for me unless it 
represents a thought of God.” 
Ramanujan did not take much care to prove his results (more 
than 3600 theorems and complex formulas), he knew they were 
correct. It took some 60 years after his death, at the age of 32, to 
finish proving formally all his proposals.
August Kekulé discovered the ring structure of the benzene 
molecule. He attributes his discovery to a dream he had in which 
a snake was eating its tail. When he woke up, he realized that the 
dream was indicating the circular shape of the benzene 
molecule.
An article that appeared in Quanta magazine describes how the 
field medal mathematician Terence Tao got an idea to (partially) 
solve the “3x+1” conjecture that is known as the simplest 
unsolved problem in mathematics. The conjecture posed in the 
1930s and also known as Collatz conjecture is so simple that 
anyone can try and prove it. It states:
Start by choosing any positive integer. If it’s odd, multiply it by 
3 and add 1. If it’s even, divide it by 2. Starting with the number 
obtained repeat the procedure. The conjecture asserts that you 
will eventually reach number one. Tao, using his trained and 
informed intuition, saw an analogy between this conjecture and 
methods to solve partial differential equations. That leads him to 
his partial solution.
301

UNKNOWABLES
Henri Poincaré explains that after a long period of hard and 
fruitless effort to solve a problem, he took a break. As he was 
stepping on a bus, he made one of his most important 
discoveries. The solution came to him out of nowhere. Poincaré 
describes how this solution appeared, along with the feeling of 
certainty that it was the correct approach!
On another occasion he explains:
“For 15 days, I strove to prove that there could not be any 
[mathematical] functions like those I have since called Fuchsian 
functions. I was then very ignorant; every day I seated myself at 
my work table, stayed an hour or two, tried a great number of 
combinations and reached no results. One evening, contrary to 
my custom, I drank black coffee and could not sleep. Ideas rose 
in crowds; I felt them collide until pairs interlocked, so to speak, 
making a stable combination. By the next morning…”
Paulo Coelho, the famous Brazilian author, describes in his book 
“Maktub” how Roger Penrose had one of his brightest intuitions. 
He was walking and discussing with friends. The conversation 
stopped while they were crossing a busy road:
“I remember, declared Penrose, that while crossing, a fantastic 
idea came to my mind. But arriving on the other side, the 
discussion continued and I lost the idea a just had some seconds 
before.”
At the end of the afternoon Penrose was feeling a bit 
euphorically, without understanding why:
“I had the sensation that something important had been revealed 
to me.” He reviewed every minute of what had happened that 
day. And when he remembered crossing that road, the idea came 
back to his memory and he wrote it down. It was a revolutionary 
idea on black holes.
Let us cite the Field medalist Mathematician René Thom:
Whatever is rigorous is meaningless.
* *
302

UNKNOWABLES
6.7 Free will
“It is a psychological fact that we believe we have the ability to 
control and modify our actions by the exercise of ‘will,’ and in 
practical life all sane men will assume they have this ability,” 
declared Sir John Eccles (1903–1997). John Eccles was a very 
famous Nobel prize winner, Australian neurophysiologist and 
philosopher.
“Freewill,” represents a feeling and a belief. We know feelings 
are not definable by description. As a feeling and is generated in 
Gödelian information in the natural world. It is not observable. 
However, we consider it the basis for all our freedoms. 
Depriving someone of liberty is the most obvious punishment. 
We consider freedom as one of their most valuable attributes. 
The ideas of choice and responsibility are the roots of our 
economic and legal systems. We base democracy on the capacity 
of making a choice.
Freewill was at the core of Descartes’s mind and body problem 
and the major subject of Schopenhauer’s preoccupations. It 
requires the capacity of mental causation. In (3.11), we described 
how thoughts and feelings can act on the body and thus on “out 
there.”
Most humans feel the free will experience as “true,” and build 
their lives on that belief. They feel they can choose and decide. 
They recognize they have to use the laws of physics and cannot 
go against them. But for them, the constraints imposed by these 
laws give them space to move within a framework.
However, this is not what many physicists believe.
The ERP perspective estimates that a Laplacian determinism 
(5.11) cascades down the causation chains. The conservation laws 
leave no place for effects with no causes. Everything we decide 
and do must have a cause. ERP rejects mental causation (see 
figure (3.11.1)) the cause must be a material cause. ERP would 
then look inside the brain and search for the previous step of the 
causal chain that led to the decision.
303

UNKNOWABLES
ERP materialists will consider that free will, like consciousness, 
is an artifact, an illusion associated with neural activity. They 
explain we experience this illusion because of the restricted 
perspective of first-party view and oppose to it the lack of 
measurability of this feeling. 
The famous philosopher Daniel Dennett (1942-) is a 
compatibilist, he believes, as did Henri Poincaré that free will 
and determinism are not incompatible, as he explains in his 
book, “Brainstorms.” 
Many thinkers have tried to reconcile the feeling and the third-
party antinomic definition of free will by referring to quantum 
indeterminacy, hoping to find there a Gap to give a place to free 
will. Quantum indeterminacy is itself a mental abstraction of the 
verbal world.
For most of us, that one cannot choose between tea or coffee 
because we live in a deterministic world seems ridiculous and 
illustrates the antinomy between a feeling and a third-party ERP 
description.
The Geneva quantum physicist Nicolas Gisin, who has 
experimentally confirmed Bell’s inequality, declared:
“I know that I enjoy free will much more than I know anything 
about physics. Hence, physics will never be able to convince me 
that free will is an illusion. Quite the contrary, any physical 
hypothesis incompatible with free will is falsified by the most 
profound experience I have about free will.”
Belief in the Laplacian universe will never change our reaction 
when facing a lion. Laws are perhaps deterministic, but we still 
cannot predict what will happen. So the future in the verbal 
world of Laplace is perhaps determined. However, for our first-
party view, better trust what millions of years of evolution have 
taught us: escape.
* *
304

UNKNOWABLES
6.8 Time
Most animals immediately react to movements and changes in 
their environment. Our Savanna human was permanently on 
alert, tracking with all his senses for any changes that could 
mean danger. (1.1). Nature has captured the importance of 
movement detection by dividing the retinal ganglion cells into 
two general categories: some cells with higher bandwidth are 
specialized in detecting movement.
Expecting changes, memorizing and continuously updating our 
representations, have translated over the millennia into a feeling. 
Memory separated past from future, body constraints, circadian 
rhythms, and repetitive natural events, modulated this feeling 
who became best described by the words “time flow.” Our 
explicit memory allows us to remember contextual information 
and associate internal sensations with external events. The quasi-
permanent activation of the time flow feeling reinforced its 
connections to most representations. Memories organizing 
themselves according to time flow decreased the brain’s entropy, 
transforming it into a fantastic survival tool. This timely 
organization, by improving the quality of our expectations, has 
been critical to our adaptation capacity and had shaped our 
general worldview. Most evolved mammals have developed 
time flow organization capacities, although certain aspects can 
differ greatlyt from one species to another. This very much 
depends on how the memory works. Mammals mainly use 
implicit memory (2.1) and learn only by imitation and 
acquaintance. They remember things by associating smells, 
sounds, and activities with specific representations.
After an extensive study in the Serengeti Park, Fritz Walter, who 
was studying how gazelles estimated the security flight distance, 
wrote:
The flight distance varies with the different predators according 
to their danger for gazelles. Experiments showed that adult 
males in herds (bachelors) have a lesser flight distance than 
305

UNKNOWABLES
females in herds, … Thus age, sex, and social status are all 
significant factors influencing flight distance. 
Mammals have learned long ago how to estimate speed. But 
interestingly, most mammals have not fragmented their reality in 
the same distinct conceptual categories as we humans have. 
Flight distance for a gazelle will depend on its escape speed or 
the predator speed, but it will also relate to the social status or 
the age of the animal, and the wind direction, or the nature of the 
ground.
Imagining the mental space of our Savanna man is difficult. 
Similar individuations did not fragment his “reality” as ours. His 
vision was much more holistic. Symbolic language reinforced 
explicit memory and the fragmentation of our worldview. 
Abstract concepts, including time, became entities for their own 
sake, separated from movement. 
The abstract concept of time, although it remains related to the 
feeling of time flow of the natural world has now its verbal 
world existence. Isolating time, as if it was “objective” and 
seeable, did not eliminate our ancestral feeling of time flow. 
We progressively learned to live with the antinomy of two times: 
our ancestral feeling of time flow and common consensual 
verbal world abstraction of time, the time of the clocks. Time 
would become the first feeling we have materialized with 
“clocks,” to then impose ourselves to structure our lives 
according to this materialization.
How did we measure a non-seeable abstract entity? We never 
measure it. We compare various low-level representations, such 
as unique positions of the sun in the sky or of rotating needles. 
We associate these ordered representations with other events and 
use these representations as a reference base. “The sun is getting 
lower on the horizon, winter is coming.” Through these 
associations, we materialize time flow, we have projected what 
is a feeling onto visible events. 
306

UNKNOWABLES
We find the earliest sundials known date some 1500 BC in 
ancient Egyptian and Babylonian astronomy. Mechanical clocks 
only appeared three thousand years later in the Middle Ages. 
The crucial aspect is the fact that we have associated a number 
with what was a feeling. We have transformed time into a 
common digital currency ruling our societies. 
As feelings cannot be intensional defined, science (and society) 
adopted this number as a definition. However, it does not 
capture what we feel as time flow, creating an antinomy.
What we experience is not always what the clock says! As for 
mammal’s flight distance, our feeling of time flow is also related 
to a variety of internal mental events: are we enjoying the 
moment, are we expecting something?
We are now embedded in this “objective” digitalized time that 
we are convinced it is a “natural” attribute of “out there,” 
although nobody has observed it, as it is a mental construct. Our 
ancestors before language lived the “now,” as the famous 
philosopher and author Alan Watts (1915–1973) wrote:
“We are living in a culture entirely hypnotized by the illusion of 
time, in which the so-called present moment is felt as nothing 
but an infinitesimal hairline between a causative past and an 
absorbingly important future. We have no present.”
*
ERP considers time as an “existing” physical entity. As we 
cannot observe it, this “existence” can only be of the extended 
type and must belong to the Platonic realm associated with 
physicalism. (5.1.)
Einstein defines a time in Special Relativity as what clocks 
measure, to have a usable, numerical ERP definition. However, 
this definition is circular, as any definition of primitive concepts. 
Time is defined with clocks and clocks are themselves defined 
as instruments built to measure time. 
307

UNKNOWABLES
But this circularity should not astonish us. Physicists need 
digital units, and the definition of these units is always circular, 
as it needs to connect a mental concept with some observable 
event “out there.” In 1799, the meter was defined in terms of a 
prototype meter bar deposited in Paris. It is now defined as the 
length of the path traveled by light in a vacuum in 
1/299,792,458 of a second which is also a circular definition. 
The circularity of these definitions only expresses the 
impossibility to bridge what is mental with what is out there 
without a measurement. Measurement is the only connection 
between map and territory. 
Other ERP physicists have different views on time. The British 
physicist and author Julian Barbour (1937-) described his view 
of time in a 1999 famous book: The end of time. He suggests 
that there be no time “out there.” His thinking is in the Machian 
tradition; Ernest Mach rejected the existence of entities that are 
not directly observable as being “non-physical.” However, 
Barbour’s position remains very controversial. Sean Carroll in 
his book The Reality of Time, in 2015, says: I think that these 
folks are working hard to tackle a problem that has already been 
solved. 
Leibniz had an original idea of space and time. He rejected the 
Newtonian “stage” on which everything happens. He would not 
have agreed with Einstein’s “what clocks measure,” nor with 
Carroll’s. His idea much better captures our feeling of time flow 
and fits with brain-centrism. 
He writes in his third paper:
As for my own opinion, I have said more than once, that I hold 
space to be something merely relative, as time is, that I hold it to 
be an order of coexistence, as time is an order of successions.
* *
308

UNKNOWABLES
6.9 Limits to scientific knowledge
What are the limits to what we can know? Sir Martin Rees, the 
British Royal Astronomer, famously declared:
“There is no reason to believe that our brains are matched to 
understanding every level of reality.” 
Science has made remarkable progress, and we seem to close 
certain knowledge gaps. However, we should remember that 
every answer makes us aware of many additional questions. We 
know much more than we knew 500 years ago, but we have 
more open questions we could not even plan. Knowledge is not 
like a book with a beginning and an end. For each page you 
read, a hundred new pages add up.
Brain-centrism and ERP may have different explanations for the 
origins of our limits to scientific knowledge.
One could distinguish four types of limits to scientific 
knowledge.
1- Limits because of the scientific method itself.
2- Limits because of entropy and lack of access to information.
3- Limits because of the fabric of reality out there.
4- Limits because of the structure of our mental space.
1- Limits because of the scientific method. Science does not 
cover all possible knowledge. It is seeking regularities to extract 
predictive laws. Its domain is the limited zone of predictable 
events. Un-measurable events are not part of scientific 
knowledge. That excludes de facto experienced events. ERP 
science that only considers measurable causes will not embrace 
the source of its existence. Brain-centrism considers this first 
type of limitation as to the requirements we have chosen for 
some knowledge to qualify as scientific. These requirements 
have changed in the past and will continue to change. If science 
ignores an event, it does not mean it has no existence.
309

UNKNOWABLES
2- Limits because of entropy and lack of access to information. 
For various reasons, we cannot collect information. For instance, 
because of the dispersion of information through entropy and 
entanglements, or because of Shannon’s noisy channel 
limitations (3.4), or because of the difficulty to access 
information without altering the event, we are observing. 
We rely on instruments to increase our capacity to access 
information. However, in physics, deeper, we want to dig into 
the structure of matter, higher are the energies involved. The 
total CERN energy consumption is 1.3 TWh per year, the one of 
the LHC is equivalent to 600 GWh per year. Geneva canton uses 
about 3 TWh per year, with 500 thousand inhabitants. In 
neuroscience, new scanning instruments have allowed a better 
evaluation of what is happening inside the living brain; their 
resolution remains still very weak. The typical fMRI spatial 
resolution is pixels of 3 mm to 4 mm. One cubic millimeter of 
the cerebral cortex contains roughly 50,000 neurons, each of 
which establishes approximately 6,000 synapses with 
neighboring cells. We are very far from being able to observe in 
real-time what happens in a single brain cell! Furthermore, the 
temporal resolution is terrible.
A critical point in the measurement/experimentation process is 
that the same party, the mental space, is individuating the 
elements, conceiving the experiment and the set-up, doing the 
measurement, and analyzing the results. No true third party is 
there to evaluate the operation. As David Bohm had remarked, 
the risks of confirmation biases and self-referrals are high.
The scientific method requires the experiments to be repeated by 
distinct groups to eliminate biases. Thousands of physicists sign 
large experiments requiring huge instruments, like CERN’s 
Large Hadron’s Collider. How can the traditional peer review 
process then function and what distinct group will effectively 
reproduce the experiment?
3- Limits because of the fabric of reality out there. In ERP these 
limits appear for several reasons. Because of the limited speed 
310

UNKNOWABLES
of light, the notion of simultaneity can disappear. Because 
entropy or entanglement increases like under our first point, it is 
impossible to collect all the information on a physical object. 
Heisenberg’s uncertainty expressed most of the limitations in 
this category. It concerns the quantum level. In the same 
category are Bohr’s complementarity principle and the no-go 
theorems such as Bell’s theorem that we will examine in part 
two of Brain-centric. These limitations are not because of the 
structure of reality out there, but of the mental space itself 
because of its blindspots. (6.10)
4- Limits because of the structure of our mental space. ERP does 
not formally recognize such limitations as they limit the 
investigations to the right side of the figure (4.12.1). For brain-
centrism most limits involve mental operations such as 
individuations, expectations, first-party view, fragmentations, 
abstractions, language, blindspots, …
The study of these brain-related limitations will become critical 
for future knowledge.
* *
6.10 Self-reference and blind spots
Self-reference is, as its name shows, a property that only mental 
verbal abstractions can have. “Out there,” there is no self-
reference because “things” don’t “refer to” other things. Only 
representations “refer to.” Some self-references apply to an 
entity without referring themselves to this entity such as in the 
proposition: all matter is made of atoms, it applies to this book 
without explicitly referring to it. We will say that these 
propositions self-apply.  
The Greeks already knew that self-reference is a linguistic 
phenomenon that causes paradoxes. Epimenides’s liar paradox: 
all Cretans are liars; its formulation by Eubulides : a liar 
66
claiming that he is lying; the Socratic paradox: Socrates knows 
 https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Eubulides
66
311

UNKNOWABLES
he knows; are variations of similar self-referential expressions. 
Russell’s paradox, the one he expressed in his letter to Frege (4.5) 
uses a self-apply paradox. Gödel based the original proof of his 
first incompleteness theorem on the self-apply sentence: This 
sentence is not provable. (4.5).
Ancient Greek Skeptics like Xenophanes and Democritus had 
raised the infinite regress problem. They explained that to know 
something (A), it is not enough to believe (A), one must have a 
good reason (B(A)). The good reason must be something else 
than (A), it is “about” (A). But to know (B(A)), one must have a 
good reason (C (B(A))), different from (B(A))., etc. The skeptics 
argued that no belief is known unless an infinitely long chain of 
other beliefs supports it. They claimed it is not humanly 
possible. Therefore, we know nothing! 
The infinite regress of causes uses self-reference or self-apply. It 
is not generated merely by the assumption that every event must 
have a prior cause, but by the assumption that every event must 
have a distinct prior cause. Remember that causality is a mental 
operation that allows the mental space to organize itself (3.9) and 
that infinite regress is because of our capacity of abstracting 
indefinitely.
In (3.7), we observed that reduction and inclusion lead to 
problematic infinite regresses. ERP has to block regresses 
somewhere as it considers them referring to “out there.” 
Democritus blocked infinite regress of the self-apply sentence, 
what is it made of, by considering atoms. Plato did it with his 
platonic elements and the standard model with quarks and 
electrons. A regress is blocked by asserting that there is at least 
one occurrence for which the property of having a distinct prior 
origin or cause is not self-applicable. The blocking element is 
then “made from nothing” but itself.
We can observe that a blocking element cannot refer to 
something directly observable. If it were observable, one could 
continue asking “what is it made of” and pursue the regression a 
step further. The origin of such chains is thus always a mental 
312

UNKNOWABLES
entity that refers to a non-observable entity “out there” that has 
no cause. It is not the mental space that causes the blocking 
element, but ERP constraints that require every step of the 
abstraction chain to represent something, “out there.” 
The universe is an example of a blocking element for the self 
apply sentence, what is it included in. We already know how 
paradoxical this concept of “the whole” can be. The universe is 
non-observable, as it has no “outside” to observe it from. Don’t 
forget we are in the verbal world where descriptions are 
expressed in a third-party perspective. However, the limited 
speed of light and Einstein’s light cones (6.4) have allowed us to 
define the “observable universe” that is a blocking limit. The 
observable universe is thus a non-observable mental 
abstraction .
67
The self-apply sentence, who made it, assumes that things are 
always made or created. ERP requires a blocking concept for 
this sentence. Our mental space has generated the fill-in concept 
of gods. Gods must thus either not have been made and be 
eternal, or have made themselves . 
68
Physicists like Lawrence Krauss, who declares himself an 
atheist, wrote in 2012 a book entitled A Universe From Nothing. 
He shows how a universe can emerge out of “nothing.” For 
physicists “nothingness” is the lowest-energy state of empty 
space or the ground state of the universe. This is an ERP third-
party observation, where the observer is out of the universe full 
of nothing. 
Descartes’ I think therefore I am seemed to him, and to most of 
us the very source of the undoubtedly. He based his discourse on 
this simple observation. However, this sentence is a self apply 
 The word observable is used here with two different meanings. In the 
67
“observable universe” it’s an observation from the inside. In “non-observable” 
it’s a third party observation from the outside. 
 Remember we are speaking here of the limits of knowledge in the verbal 
68
world under ERP. Many people have become atheist without noticing that the 
thinking that was leading them to this conclusion was governed by the ERP 
paradigme.
313

UNKNOWABLES
sentence, he can only think because he is. The “being” precedes 
the “thinking.” That creates a self-reference loop. Certainty is a 
natural world feel, it cannot come from a third-party self-referral 
observation. Thinking is because of being who is because of 
thinking…
These examples show how the verbal space can, by limiting 
itself to third-party descriptions, produce logical but strange or 
misleading conclusions. Brain-centrism uses the extended 
explanatory landscape (4.12). It explains by using a mental 
space characteristic that these conclusions have nothing to do 
with the universe “out there.” They are blindspots of our verbal 
world. Let’s take one step after the other.
Self-reference and infinite regress are two faces of the same 
coin. To produce an infinite regress, it is necessary and sufficient 
to stipulate that the regressive function, when applied to an 
element in the series, adds a new distinct object to it. If the new 
object is not distinct, we have a self-referral loop.
Many self-reference sentences are innocuous; however, essential 
other ones need a blocking element to make them acceptable 
under ERP. These blocking features are unexplainable within the 
system describing the other elements of the series. That is 
because their nature differs from the other elements of the 
recursive series: they have no cause to be found in the same 
system. ERP has to change its description of reality out there to 
account for these unexplainable blocking elements. It does that 
by introducing new fill-in concepts referring to non-observable 
entities. We have seen a few examples like eternal gods, atoms, 
nothingness, or universes. Another important example of a 
blocking element is the notion of “pure randomness” that plays 
such a fundamental role in quantum physics . Remember how 
69
 Bell’s theorem in quantum physics imply that the probabilities that arise in 
69
the descriptions. cannot be due to our ignorance of pre-existing local variables. 
They constitute our best possible knowledge of quantum phenomenon. 
However Bell’s theorem can be interpreted as the non-computability of the 
functions describing transformations of the phase space of the quantum 
system. That implies that quantum randomness in the mental space is 
equivalent to Gödel’s indeterminacy, and true randomness is another mental 
space blind spot. It says nothing about “out there.”
314

UNKNOWABLES
Einstein opposed his whole life the idea of using probabilities in 
physical descriptions. Randomness is a lack of order (2.6) and 
orders need mental space to exist. There can be no randomness 
out there, Einstein’s deep intuition was correct. 
In the mental space, any causal series of descriptive 
representations is ultimately based on an unjustified bedrock of 
descriptive foundations. In mathematics, for instance, one has to 
choose axioms. These axioms are chosen based on the 
mathematician’s intuitions and experience. However, intuition 
and experience do not belong to the verbal world, so in the 
verbal world, they are unjustified.
An infinite number of proposals are undecidable, because of 
Gödel’s indeterminacy. For the mental space, this lack of 
justified foundations is not problematic, because any 
understanding is ultimately anchored on acquaintance 
knowledge and physical emotions, that means in the natural 
world. Gödelian information thus precedes any descriptive 
knowledge (3.5). This allows the mental space to make choices 
for no reason related to the system. In the mental space, having 
no cause within the explanatory system is a common thing. Most 
usually choices are based on emotions, feelings, and beliefs not 
directly related to the system that has brought up the choice. But 
for ERP physicalism, who limits itself to descriptive knowledge, 
this is problematic.
ERP physics only considers external causes as explanations (the 
right side of the figure (4.12.1)). It must assume that the blocking 
elements are at the physical level “out there.” It has, for 
instance, to accept that there are events with no causes, pure 
random events in the universe. Brain-centrism extends the 
explanatory landscape to the mental space. Randomness can 
only be a mental abstraction, a fill-in of the verbal world. In the 
second volume of this book, we will examine the consequences 
of this remark for the interpretations of quantum physics.
We must now make an important distinction among two types of 
“self-referring” propositions:
315

UNKNOWABLES
Let consider the proposition: I am a sentence that includes fewer 
than 11 words. Once we count the words in that proposition, it 
will convince us of its validity. The truth of such sentences can 
be verified algorithmically. Though the proposition may look 
self-referral, it is not. The sentence does not speak about itself, 
but about the text that composes it, it says something about its 
syntax. The truth value of this proposition could change based 
on the manner or the language in which we phrase it. The 
sentence: I think that I am a proposition that includes fewer than 
eleven words, has the same meaning but has a unique truth-
value and is incorrect. 
One must distinguish a sentence from the text that composes the 
sentence as being on two different abstraction levels. The 
sentence’s syntax does not contain its truth value. This sounds 
very like what we have observed with reduction in (3.7) and has 
the same origin in the mental space.
In contrast, a sentence such as I am an unprovable proposition 
that Gödel used in his proof (4.5), is self-referral, since it refers to 
its semantics. The truth value of such propositions will not 
change if one changes the phrasing or the language in which we 
write them. An extensional property of a sentence is a property 
that does not refer to the syntax or the structure of the 
proposition. The truth value of a proposition and its provability 
are extensional properties. Propositions that address their own 
truth value or provability are therefore to be considered self-
referential. By referring to its semantics, such sentences drive 
the reader out of the syntactic system. The root of undecidability 
and uncomputability in formal systems lies in this idea.
The human mental space can make the difference between these 
two types of self-referral propositions. That difference would not 
appear in a third-party purely syntactic system. Both are abstract 
sentences, but the first is an abstraction about a lower level and 
its truth value is computable, on the contrary, the second is an 
abstraction about itself, and its truth value is not algorithmically 
deductible from the sentence, or is undetermined. 
316

UNKNOWABLES
What allows the mental space to differentiate the two sentences 
is our sensitivity to extensional properties like understanding 
and feelings. This sensitivity is because of our natural world. 
The computationalism paradigm (5.13) that would consider 
feelings and understanding as algorithmic would not allow this 
distinction.
As we already know, we cannot find truth values in syntax, 
Leibniz’s dream failed.
ERP by only considering Shannon’s information will miss the 
reference to feelings and emotions as an initial primitive cause, 
and will not describe human behavior.
When a third-party description comes to an effectively self-
referral description, we can find no algorithmic answer to the 
extensional properties of the sentence. Brain-centrism calls this 
situation a blind spot. 
It is the case when one limits the explanatory landscape to “out 
there” (the right side of (4.12.1)). One gives up the possibility of 
using mental space properties or mechanisms to explain 
observations. One has to imagine explanations as properties of 
“out there.”
Primitive concepts are necessarily self-referral and thus 
undefinable intensionally. The verbal representations of such 
concepts will allow building effective self-referral sentences, 
such as I am a liar, whose truth value will be undecidable and 
create mental blind spots. 
This mental phenomenon explains many limits to scientific 
knowledge and mathematics. Gödel’s incompleteness and 
Turing’s uncomputability are blind spots. We know mental 
spaces escape blind spots because we do not constrain them to 
remain within a formal system or within the verbal world. They 
can take a decision triggered by the natural world. A decision 
will allow stopping the self-referential nature of a regress by 
introducing an additional element. 
317

UNKNOWABLES
At the underlying level of the physical space, the hybrid nature 
of the brain information system that Miguel and I have described 
in the Relativistic Brain theory represents this mental capacity. 
Turing had already figured out this mechanism in his paper of 
1939 by describing the Oracle machine. (4.10)
“Out there,” there are no self-referral propositions, no infinite 
regress, and no blind spots. Asserting that they happen because 
of the “nature” of “out there” cannot be satisfactory. Nature is 
not blind; our representations are.
We base our ancestral individuations of natural entities on 
information collected through our sensory system. But at the 
quantum level, where only the extended definition of existence 
can be used, our individuations are mathematical.  
* *
6.11 Intelligence, Artificial Intelligence
The word intelligence is a high-level abstract concept only 
definable intensionally. It describes a feeling of the natural 
world. We know that reason and logic are not the sources of 
intelligence, they are rather one of its products. (4.6 to 4.10.) 
Originally, intelligence is a feeling we have about someone else. 
The feeling we can rely on his judgment or his understanding. 
Or even perhaps in his fairness or his creativity. The feeling of 
intelligence developed when human societies organized. Just 
like the idea of time, we did not separate the idea of intelligence 
from many other mental characteristics. When we gave a name 
to intelligence, we “objectified” it and wanted to measure it. As 
always, the danger is that we call intelligence what we are 
measuring and create an antinomy with the “feeling of 
intelligence.” Intelligence is an umbrella term that covers a 
variety of mental abilities. These abilities are all interconnected, 
interacting, recombining in different proportions for each of us, 
in a manner that varies with the mental state and the 
environment. One can recognize various fragmented aspects 
such as survival, understanding, feeling of time, memory, 
318

UNKNOWABLES
creativity, intuition, feelings, mental patterns, imagination, 
problem-solving, mental attitudes, survival capacities. Although 
we decompose our feeling of intelligence, we know that these 
aspects, and many others, cannot be separated one from another. 
Fragmenting and isolating some aspects without the others can 
lead to confusion and mistakes.
Without survival, for instance, most aspects of intelligence 
disappear. If aging and death aren’t to be expected, the very 
meaning of most aspects would be different. Without the feeling 
of time, our entire approach to solving problems would be 
different. 
By giving a name to this complex and variable combination of 
feelings, capacities, characteristics, and tendencies of the mental 
space, we individuate “something,” treating it like “objective” 
reality. We also neglect aspects that may be sometimes critical.
This description of intelligence involving many Gödelian 
information aspects excludes the possibility for intelligence to 
be algorithmic and makes the term Artificial Intelligence, AI, 
sound strange. How could “something” woven in the fabric of 
our organic brain be reproduced artificially? How could pure 
syntax generate it?
John McCarthy invented the term Artificial Intelligence, then a 
young Assistant Professor of Mathematics, to promote his 
summer workshop in 1956 at Dartmouth College in Hanover, 
New Hampshire. A few years before McCarthy had published 
with Claude Shannon a book entitled “Automata Studies,” who 
had little impact. The genius of McCarthy was to understand the 
importance of a new name; Automata studies would become 
Artificial intelligence for the occasion. This was a great 
“marketing idea” and we now considered the Dartmouth 
workshop as the launchpad of Artificial Intelligence.
Huge personalities such as John McCarthy, Marvin Minsky, 
Julian Bigelow, John Nash, Nathaniel Rochester, Ray 
Solomonoff, and Claude Shannon were among the promoters 
and participants at the 1956 Dartmouth workshop. All these 
319

UNKNOWABLES
scientists became famous and recognized leaders in AI research 
for decades. 
Over 13,000 experts took part at the world’s leading academic 
AI conference in 2019 NeurIPS in Vancouver. Blaise Aguera y 
Arcas an authority in computer vision declared:
“Deep learning has rapidly knocked down some long-standing 
challenges in AI, but it doesn’t immediately seem well suited to 
many that remain… The models that we have learned how to 
train are about passing a test or winning a game with a score, 
[but] so many things that intelligence does, aren’t covered by 
that rubric at all.” 
At that same conference Yoshua Bengio, that is credited to be a 
founder of deep learning said:
“We have machines that learn in a very narrow way. They need 
much more data to learn a task than human examples of 
intelligence, and they still make stupid mistakes.”
Today’s methods combine both connectionism and symbolic 
approach. They try to mimic more closely the processes of the 
human brain that apply both ways and other alternatives.
Melany Mitchell, professor of computer science and author of 
“Complexity, a guided tour,” says:
“During the first several decades of AI research, many scientists 
believed they would be able to manually program computers 
with this model-based knowledge of the world, and the programs 
would be able to use logic to understand the situations they 
encountered, make plans, and deduce the likely future. However, 
this knowledge engineering project was doomed. Our mental 
models are too vast, too filled with unconscious knowledge, and 
too enormously interconnected to be captured manually and 
with rigid logic. So-called knowledge-based approaches to AI 
turned out to be brittle—unable to cope outside narrow domains
—and were largely abandoned.”
320

UNKNOWABLES
We have overcome many of the nursing problems, and our 
technologies are here to stay. Computer scientists also have 
access to much more powerful machines, allowing deeper 
algorithms to run. We discover that more tasks than we believed 
can be mechanized, and AI applications are growing in 
unsuspected fields.   
But although the advances in AI have been gigantic, we should 
not forget that it has little to do with human intelligence. It 
remains an automation tool, branded “intelligence” for 
marketing reasons. Now many researchers are putting a lot of 
effort into imitating human intelligence, branded AGI Artificial 
General Intelligence. 
This is what the physicist Sabine Hossenfelder says on her blog:
Physicists avoid the term “Artificial Intelligence” not only 
because it reeks of hype, but because the analogy to natural 
intelligence is superficial at best, misleading at worst. True, the 
current models are loosely based on the human brain’s 
architecture. … The current algorithms heavily rely on humans 
to provide suitable input data. They do not formulate own goals. 
They do not propose models. They are, as far as physicists are 
concerned, but elaborate ways of fitting and extrapolating data. 
Using the same name, intelligence, for human activity and a 
computer makes limited sense and can be very confusing and 
antinomic. By individuating “intelligence” in a limited manner, 
and neglecting many fundamental characteristics of humans, 
brain-centrism considers that ERP is embarking us in a 
dangerous direction. The danger comes from the “imitation 
fallacy” we described in (5.14). The mental space can confuse 
original and imitation and establish the imitation as the new 
norm, destroying profound and essential human characteristics. 
* * *
321

WE HUMANS
322

WE HUMANS
VII: WE HUMANS
Because the stage of our reality is the mental space, separating 
science and humanism is a lure, just as isolating knowing from 
being. All aspects of inner and outer knowledge contribute to 
who we are and how we will develop. Just as true morality 
comprises being moral and not only knowing about 
righteousness, true generosity comprises being generous, and 
genuine kindness comprises being kind, not of cultivating these 
qualities, hoping to gain something. The imitation fallacy with 
the use of technology is taking incredible proportions, it has 
destroyed credibility for marketing and show off. Greed has 
been institutionalized. A new enlightenment age is necessary if 
we want to survive.
7.1 The imitation fallacy
Alan Turing had proposed in his 1950 paper, “Computing 
Machinery and Intelligence” a game that he named the imitation 
game. In this game, a human evaluator would judge the capacity 
of a computer to imitate humans. Two parties hold conversations 
in natural language, a human and a correspondent. That 
correspondent could be a machine, designed to generate human-
like responses. The human evaluator has to guess if he is 
speaking with a machine or another human. This game was re-
baptized Turing test and serves as a benchmark for artificial 
intelligence. If the evaluator cannot reliably tell the machine 
from the human, the machine is said to have passed the test. 
Turing had previously expressed the idea that the intelligence of 
a machine was limited. It could imitate what a human does when 
he is calculating. That means when he is applying an algorithm. 
(4.7). In his 1950 paper he argues against all objections to the 
proposition that “machines can think.” This paper would have an 
amazing influence although Turing did not explicitly state that 
his game could be used as a measure of intelligence.
323

WE HUMANS
John McCarthy introduced the term Artificial Intelligence to 
promote his summer workshop in 1956 at Dartmouth College. 
(6.11) It is an unfortunate designation, as intelligence is not 
definable by description (6.10), and it does not apply to a 
machine. 
Today computers play chess with better results than humans; 
however, computers don’t play the game the same way humans 
do. They use different routes to achieve their result. (5.8.1) If one 
individuates the game of chess as the rules of chess, then 
humans and computers play the same game. However, if one 
individuates the game of chess as the mental activity associated 
with the rules, then they play different games. ERP, however, 
will not recognize the individuation of the game extending to the 
mental spaces of the players. In certain cases, as we will see 
below, extended individuation may be crucial.
An imitation can only be identical to the original it imitates if 
one chose a restricted individuation. 
ERP by considering that causes 
can only belong out there, on the 
right side of the figure (4.12.1) will 
neglect causes that manifest in the 
mental space. In our chess 
example, ERP would concentrate 
only on the “objective” rules of 
chess. (7.1.1) Brain-centrism 
considers that the game has been 
designed by humans and for 
humans, it consists not only in the 
algorithmic rules but also include the whole process humans use 
to play it, starting in the mental space, on the left on the figure 
(4.12.1). The entire thinking process is then part of the game, not 
only the result. The pleasure in playing chess is in the thinking 
process, not in the rules.
This is the case for many human activities, the path to get there 
is more important than the arrival line. Nobody wants to speed a 
324

WE HUMANS
piano concerto or enjoying an excellent wine, or a dance with 
your partner, just to “get it done” as fast as possible. 
We have designed those activities for humans; we enjoy the 
complete process. When feelings are involved, the goal of an 
activity is not to finish it as fast as possible. “Objective 
measuring” makes little sense. The ERP materialist vision 
focuses on what is measurable, however, the important things in 
our lives mental. Most are Gödelian and thus not measurable.
We cannot submit composing, painting, thinking, understanding, 
playing, and any activity requiring creativity to the constraints 
required by economic productivity. Only algorithmic activities 
can be rationalized and subject to mass production.
By remaining in the digital world, one cannot distinguish an 
original from a copy. It is only possible in an analog world 
where individuation extends beyond what can be measured. 
(4.12) In a digital world were one abstracts only Shannon 
information any copy is an original. The Shannon information of 
two objects can be equivalent but for our human mental space 
trigger very different Net(R)’s and thus different feelings and 
reactions.
Christies sold a copy of the first edition of Isaac Newton’s 
Principia dated 1687 for $1.5m. It contains the same Shannon 
information as the free ebook you can get online. To understand 
the difference, one has to consider the left side of the figure 
(4.12.1). By considering only the Shannon information content of 
the book, the measurable part, we can see no difference between 
an original edition and a copy-paste one. 
Let’s imagine a perfect imitation of a Van Gogh painting, 
indistinguishable from the original using the most sophisticated 
instruments. Every measurable criterion would tell us it is a 
Van Gogh painting. However, we have again restricted our 
individuation to what is measurable. You may be amazed by the 
imitation, but knowing it’s not Van Gogh who painted it, you 
would not pay the same price. For us humans, the important part 
lies in the natural world. And this part is not computable.
325

WE HUMANS
An imitation, even perfect is something different than the 
ground-level original. It’s about the original. We may not have 
the information, believe it’s original, and treat it as such. We are 
then at risk of one day waking up to the truth. 
This is the essence of what we call the “Imitation fallacy.” The 
imitation fallacy restricts the individuation of a phenomenon in 
such a way that one confuses an original with an imitation. 
ERP can cause imitation fallacies because it restricts its 
explanatory landscape to the right side of the figure (4.12.1). 
Brain-centrism proposes, when necessary, to extend the 
individuation range and avoid confusing simulated maps with 
the original territory.
“People can believe in the multiverse all they want—but it’s not 
science.” Says Sabine Hossenfelder, physicist at the Frankfurt 
Institute for advanced studies and renowned blogger and author. 
She adds:
“Theoretical physicists used to explain what was observed. Now 
they try to explain why they can’t explain what was not 
observed. And they’re not even good at that.”
Here is a reader’s comment I found recently on a physics 
website, that illustrates how physics is at risk of deriving from 
science to belief:
The last pronouncement, about visual evidence of the black hole 
phenomenon, occurred on Wednesday. A black hole is now a 
scientific truth because of three main reasons: One, people with 
great authority, who have monopoly over a narrow field of study, 
have said so after an arcane process that is widely believed to be 
very rigorous; two, other people like them have endorsed it; 
three, most people in the world, including scientists in other 
fields, do not have enough information to challenge the 
assertion. Also, the journalists, who usually seed doubt in the 
minds even in areas like genetics and climate do not challenge 
scientists on theoretical physics.
326

WE HUMANS
Erwin Schrödinger, who was a very independent personality, 
wrote very critically about what he called “the Barbarian 
scientist”:
“He reaches the point where he proclaims it a virtue not to take 
any notice of all that remains outside the narrow domain he 
himself cultivates, and denounces as dilettantism the curiosity 
that aims at the synthesis of all knowledge.”
The intrinsic value of science is trust. The public must trust what 
scientists are presenting as our best effort to approach truth. 
Imitating a friendship behavior, even perfectly, does not mean I 
am your friend. Imitating love is not love. Imitating sincerity is 
not sincerity. Imitating a feeling cannot be that feeling, because 
it implies an intention that feelings cannot have. Imitation 
fallacy can dissimulate everywhere. People use it to “make-
believe” and find some advantage in presenting themselves as 
they are not.
The judiciary systems recognize that not only the “objective” 
facts are crucial but also the intentions of the indicted person. 
Justice recognizes that our intentions and the state of our mental 
space are also important. One cannot neglect what happened 
mentally to evaluate a situation where humans are involved. 
Neglecting it is suppressing what makes us human, it is 
mechanizing.
For brain-centrism, they are no situation not involving humans. 
ERP creates this illusion because it uses third-party descriptions, 
brain-centrism considers that any description is a human 
description. 
Why is the bust of Nefertiti, coasted 1312 BC and exposed in 
Berlin, different for a perfect imitation of it? Because our mental 
space is involved, not only the physical matter of the statue. We 
attach to the “original” a history and complex feelings relating 
us to our past. An imitation can be perfect. It does not generate 
quite the same mental attachments. Millions, since its discovery 
in 1912 have traveled to visit the original Nefertiti. No one 
travels to visit a copy, regardless of its perfection. Our human 
327

WE HUMANS
life happens in our mental space, and the characteristics of this 
space dictate our decisions and actions.
We admire the sincerity of younger children, their nativity and 
lack of intentions, of hidden agendas, or calculated reactions. 
They act with no imitation fallacy. The “mental route” leading to 
a behavior is important because it says a lot about the feelings, 
the intentions, the purpose, the history, and the feelings behind 
an action. 
To survive we have learned how to calculate, hide and be, 
“clever.” We are trained to use our verbal world and to hide our 
natural one. Imitation has conquered the world and occupied the 
mental spaces. We spend more time pretending or “imitating” 
who we are not than time discovering who we are. We know that 
so well that we have learned “not to trust” to protect ourselves. 
The social and economic cost is enormous. 
Hidden agendas, vested interests, and corruption are results of 
the imitation fallacy conjugated with an economy that rewards 
the result and neglects the route used to get it.
For many practical purposes, imitations are necessary and 
convenient. Imitations become fallacies when they are presented 
as equivalent to originals, or when one hides that something is a 
copy.
The ERP limited individuations have driven us to dangerous 
visions like behaviorism that focuses on “objectively” 
observable behaviors discounting mental intentions. With new 
technologies, limited individuations could lead us to further 
destructive absurdities. The very idea of human-level Artificial 
General Intelligence (AGI) is an imitation fallacy. Because it 
pretends not only to imitate the verbal world but also the natural 
world and its Gödelian feelings.  
Many thinkers and entrepreneurs have reported that AGI can be 
dangerous. They are correct but often present the wrong reasons. 
AGI is a theoretical vision, impossible to realize on digital 
machines. The danger is that they might present one day to us 
328

WE HUMANS
something as an AGI. It will only be some stupid sophisticated 
imitation machine, based on narrow individuation of human 
intelligence and feelings. We will be instructed to believe it as 
hyper-intelligent, although it has no human emotions. We will 
forget it is a tool, a machine, its narratives might fool us. We will 
do our best to adapt to them. Our dogs, whose representations 
are based more on smell and much less on narratives, will not.
During the last 20 years, they have educated us to deal with 
machines. We have learned to overcome our frustration when 
confronted with their stupidity. We spend hours trying to get an 
answer that a human could give us immediately. They instructed 
us to call that progress. The public is doing now for free what 
the companies were doing before. They have mechanized us to 
save money, and we have accepted. With AGI, progress will 
speed up.
* *
7.2 Fighting emptiness by learning
Mammals can get bored, especially in captivity, when their 
environment does not show sufficient complexity to keep their 
mental space stimulated. In the wild, it does not happen. It never 
happened to our savanna man. But it happens to us and our 
children today. Boredom can develop when we overcome a 
threshold of security, and no new challenge keeps us busy. It is 
an unpleasant feeling, showing that our mental space, driven by 
curiosity, is hungry for new challenges and new stimulations. 
With no natural stimulations, it will concentrate on artificial 
entertainment.
Dr. Sandi Mann, a psychology lecturer at the University of 
Central Lancashire, explains:
“The more entertained we are, the more entertainment we need 
to feel satisfied. The more we fill our world with fast-moving, 
high-intensity, ever-changing stimulation, the more we get used 
to that and the less tolerant we become of lower levels.”
329

WE HUMANS
The Danish philosopher Søren Kierkegaard (1813–1855) 
described boredom as a feeling of emptiness. It is not, according 
to him, the absence of stimulation that triggers boredom, but an 
absence of meaning. 
People get bored, not only because of lack of stimulation but 
also because their mental space does not find a deeper meaning 
to what they experience. Boredom would be a feeling inviting us 
to reorganize our mental space to make sense of the world we 
are experiencing, or change our environment. We need 
stimulations, but we also need to gain meaning through what 
stimulates us. We need to generate new Gödelian information. 
Entertainment can overcome boredom, but it would not solve the 
problem. It would only increase our future need for more 
entertainment. Only a change in our attitude towards the world 
and our self-image could protect us from boredom. Switching on 
the TV or a video game is so much easier than questioning 
ourselves and broadening our individuations. Never getting 
bored is thus a matter of education on the “being line.” 
The way certain humans consider their life does not give them a 
second to feel bored. 
“There are only two ways to live your life. One is as though 
nothing is a miracle. The other is as though everything is a 
miracle.” Albert Einstein.
Do we see ourselves as nothing or as miracles? The progressive 
shift towards third-party perspectives, the immensity of the 
universe, the growing mechanization of our human society, and 
its apparent absurdity, leave us wondering where we stand. The 
world could discourage us when we open our eyes. Discovering 
who we are is no more sufficient, we must make choices and 
decide who we want to be. We must decide what will be our 
most important dreams and strive for them. Conforming and 
adapting is not sufficient. We may feel so weak and 
insignificant, that such decisions may be the most crucial but 
fundamental factor determining our personal and collective 
future. 
330

WE HUMANS
This future starts during the 100 milliseconds we dispose to 
interfere and change our immediate usual response and start 
thinking. (3.12). Thinking is the only guide we have to confront 
the complexities we are facing, and nature has only given us a 
brief time to start the process. One hundred milliseconds, often 
blurred by a permanent flow of distracting events designed to 
capture our attention. Choices and opportunities come to our 
minds when we think. They don’t come as ready-made thoughts, 
but as developing feelings that confront us with situations and 
people who can share these feelings. When we open up our 
mental space, decisions come, and “out there” also opens up.
Today, they embarked us in a generalized, all-encompassing 
model of lingering stimulations and rewards that, although they 
are entertaining, erode our thinking opportunities and limit our 
attention span. The average western citizen receives more 
information in a week than he would have received in a lifetime 
a few hundred years ago. That leaves him powerless to absorb, 
digest, and decide. It is then easier for him to remain a spectator. 
This attitude favors the undoubting narcissistic individuals in 
search of power.
Salespeople, politicians, advertisers, people with vested 
interests, who tell us what to think about, how to think about it, 
and want us to follow their suggestions rather than develop our 
thoughts invade us. Since young, they train us to conform and to 
follow. 
The continuous flow of information concerning subjects we 
cannot control is a prison and has a terrible effect on our stress 
levels. It conditions us to believe that there is no other solution 
to live our lives than to follow and conform. Brain-centrism 
teaches us we have control over our thought, we can at every 
moment choose to give up this control to others or not to do so. 
There are aspects of our lives where we feel we can act, and 
those are the aspects we should concentrate on. Giving too much 
attention to the flow of information, we cannot act on, will only 
bring stress and make us feel useless.  
331

WE HUMANS
Like the Sophists 25 centuries ago, some people and 
organizations today have understood how our mental space 
works. They use this knowledge to become our exclusive 
thinking guides, and invade our mental space, appealing to its 
weaknesses, rather than its strengths. We have built a society 
that uses the information to teach us how not to think, how not 
to realize who we are or where we are.
For brain-centrism, some distance from this continuous flow is 
necessary from time to time to realize what we can do if we 
catch these 100 ms. It is not so easy for many of us to find time 
and establish this distance. Our mental patterns will force us 
back to our usual behaviors. But only thinking by ourselves, 
imagining, creating our beliefs can allow us to find meaning and 
decide who we want to become. No ERP third-party perspective 
can reveal what we can only ourselves discover. Our truth is not 
in the verbal world, it’s in our natural one.
* * 
332

WE HUMANS
 
333

WE HUMANS
7.3 Conclusions
In a time of increasing 
darkness, we must respond 
increasing the light. 
Kabbalah
Over the years, many brilliant thinkers have become my heroes. 
For some of them, they even became my friends. When I felt 
lonely, I could come back to them, and they would teach me 
something. Amazing things that nourished my soul, stimulated 
my imagination and made me feel proud to belong to the human 
species. A pride one does not grasp in day-to-day life. Gödel, 
Poincaré, Russell, Aristotle, Democritus, Mach, Leibniz, are 
heroes on top of my list. But these last ten years Albert Einstein 
made it to the very top, even before our common friend Kurt 
Gödel.  
I am certain I don’t understand all his thinking. Reading his 
articles and his books, imagining his conversations with Tagore, 
with Niels Bohr, and with Kurt Gödel, I could appreciate how he 
matured as a man and as a scientist. I could feel his doubts and 
his persistence in pursuing an idea. I could appreciate his sense 
of vanity and his humor when he joked, declaring he had 
become a relic deposited in a museum. This guy was my 
absolute best friend. I would have loved discussing brain-
centrism with him.
Here is another citation that shows the deep humanity that 
connects him, millennia apart to our cave painter Shaman:
“To sense that behind anything that can be experienced there is 
a something that our mind cannot grasp and whose beauty and 
sublimity reach us only indirectly and as a feeble reflection, this 
is religiousness. In this sense I am religious.”
Einstein was a subtle philosopher. He chose realism as one study 
German instead of French. ERP was his dogma. Within the 
framework of the ERP dogma, he could bring his contributions. 
334

WE HUMANS
He knew well that this was a choice, only a working hypothesis 
to develop his theories without having to care what was 
happening in the mind of an observer.
In July 1930, in Berlin, Einstein met several times with the 
Indian poet and philosopher, the Nobel prize Rabindranath 
Tagore.
This is an excerpt of the first encounter between two men of 
different cultures and backgrounds: 
Einstein: I cannot prove scientifically that Truth must be 
conceived as a Truth that is valid independent of humanity; I 
believe it firmly. I believe, for instance, that the Pythagorean 
theorem in geometry states something that is approximately true, 
independent of the existence of man.
The usage of “approximately true” shows that Einstein is 
speaking as an ERP physicist. But the referral to a mathematical 
truth indicates he is also Platonist, a necessity we mentioned 
earlier for any materialist. The discussion continued:
Tagore: Yes, one eternal entity. We have to realize it through our 
emotions and activities. We realized the Supreme Man who has 
no individual limitations through our limitations. Science is 
concerned with that which is not confined to individuals; it is the 
impersonal human world of Truths. Religion realizes these 
Truths and links them up with our deeper needs; our individual 
consciousness of Truth gains universal significance. Religion 
applies values to truth, and we know this truth as well through 
our own harmony with it.
Tagore introduces the idea of realizing the truth through our 
human limitations. He distinguishes impersonal human truth 
studied by science from our consciousness of truth. In both 
cases, humans are at the center.
Einstein: Truth, then, or Beauty is not independent of Man?
Tagore: No.
335

WE HUMANS
Einstein: If there were no human beings anymore, the Apollo of 
Belvedere would no longer be beautiful.
Tagore: No.
Einstein: I agree with regard to this conception of Beauty, but 
not with regard to Truth.
Tagore: Why not? Truth is realized through man.
Einstein: I cannot prove that my conception is right, but that is 
my religion.
People often asked Einstein: “how do we know that objects in 
our models correspond to real things in the actual world?” He 
used to say with a big smile that there are questions that we 
cannot answer.
Esther Salaman was a Russian Jewish physicist, she was a 
student of Einstein in Berlin and became his friend. She wrote 
her final memoir on Albert Einstein. During a walk together in 
1925, Einstein declared:
“I want to know how God created this world. I’m not interested 
in this or that phenomenon, in the spectrum of this or that 
element. I want to know His thoughts; the rest is just details.” 
This was his deep idea, the one that would occupy him until he 
died in 1955: The Theory of Everything, the ultimate 
“unification,” the ultimate abstraction. 
His thoughts, as he expressed them to Esther, clarify that his 
mind went far beyond ERP. He deep hoped to penetrate the 
Platonic realm that accompanies physicalism. When asked about 
his religious beliefs, he came up with different answers: 
agnostic, pantheistic, religious non-believer. But he often 
specified that he did not believe in a God who interferes in 
human affairs. His convictions were closer to those of Baruch 
Spinoza: “a god who reveals himself in the harmony of nature.”
At the IAS in Princeton, he used to walk back home with his 
friend Kurt Gödel. One could often see these two very different 
336

WE HUMANS
men wander a few steps and stop to discuss or think. In his latter 
days, Einstein declared that he came to the institute to have the 
privilege “to be able to walk home with Gödel.”
Gödel was a convinced Christian and believed in a personal god, 
that interfered in human affairs. In his book “Tomorrow’s God: 
The Hebrew Lord in an Age of Science,” Robert N. Goldman 
narrates a discussion he had with Gödel after Einstein’s death in 
1955. In that discussion, Gödel confirmed Einstein believed that 
science could never explain consciousness:
“The methods of science lead away from the life world. Einstein 
believed that space and time are human constructs, but reality 
was something deeper.”
I have been very fortunate to have these scientific friends. I 
recognize now how “religiously” grateful I feel to have the 
chance and the curiosity to study their legacy. How privileged I 
am to be sensitive to their sincerity and the unlimited devotion 
they had to their work. I admire their successes. But I also feel 
for their failures, their doubts, their revolt, and their persistence. 
Getting older, I suppose we all feel growing disgust for power 
plays, imitations, arrogance, vested interests, and marketing 
strategies. My heroes were sincere; they were not playing 
around to market their personalities. They were hopeful because 
they recognized the fragility of our human condition, their fight 
came from recognizing our weakness. From their fight emanates 
the very fabric of what keeps us alive: hope. 
Some of their ideas are like pieces of art; we can start by loving 
them for the inspiring music they play in our hearts, and the 
order they put in our brain. But, one day, we realize that these 
pieces of art were not always there. A human being created 
them, a person just like us, who doubted, just like us, and 
transformed his doubts into scientific ideas just as monumental 
as the great Gizeh Pyramids. Be it pyramids or ideas, they 
connect us to humans that lived, strived, hoped, loved, and 
dreamed things so important for them they would never stop. 
Only these connections through the centuries can keep us alive 
337

WE HUMANS
by broadening our foundations. Looking backward, one can see 
the fulfillment, not the struggles and the pains. Those things 
evaporate, hope remains.
How many billion people have lived on earth for only a few 
dreamers to paint an immortal symphony? How many billion 
stars in the universe were necessary for intelligent life to 
emerge?
When you look at a painting, let’s say a Picasso, you can only 
appreciate it, it can only fill your soul if you are ready to receive 
it if you have the culture. That is because you represent this 
painting in association with memories and emotions, what we 
called Gödelian-information. What you will feel at that moment 
is yours, it’s in your brain. But it connects you to other humans 
who can experience similar music. This connection is not about 
explaining something, it’s deeper and only reserved for humans.
You can try to put words on it and explain the painting, but your 
explanations will only be a bad linear projection. You experience 
a multidimensional space; it possesses multiple attributes 
simultaneously, evokes important feelings and memories. All in 
an in-dissociable bundle, in unity, that you lose when you use a 
linear language. Explain a Mozart symphony, all you get is 
words, the soul got lost.
But the one who expressed it the best is Picasso himself. He 
took part at an exhibition of his paintings in Cannes in the 
1960s, and a journalist asked him:
Mr. Picasso, can you explain to me what this painting means?
Picasso stayed silent for a long moment, contemplating his 
abstract painting, like dreaming, then he replied:
Sir, if I could explain it, I would not have painted it.
Essential words are the ones we cannot define. Essential events 
cannot be programmed. What matters the most gets diluted 
when it is expected. Profound discoveries are never part of a 
research program. 
338

WE HUMANS
Genuine hope does not come from promises, we do not find it 
through greed, nor reasoning. The profound nature of things will 
always escape the verbal world, but seeking it makes us human. 
The most challenging mathematical questions are the unsolved 
ones. Most remarkable encounters happen by chance. The most 
frightening sheet of paper is the empty one, but once we 
overcome fear, it can become our best confidant.
We are at our best as human beings when we can act and feel 
spontaneous when we are not following rules that pre-program 
us.
We should not surrender to fear; our mental space can try to 
fight it. We should not always go for the safest solution; we 
should continue exploring and not swallow predigested 
explanations.
What a tremendous difference if you do something because you 
want to do it and if you do it because you are obliged. We 
humans can do things because we want to, for no other reason. 
They, robots, follow their programming.
By trying to identify us with computers, and treating us as if we 
were machines, I am afraid that our society is killing the best 
part of what we are: Independent but social individuals, each 
with their unique personality, able of imagination, of creation, 
able to show a huge empathy for our brother humans, able of 
hope, marvel, and dreams.
We should not let ourselves be managed like machines. We 
humans understand, they don’t. We need to understand to 
survive. We need to allow our primitive sources of emotions to 
continue thriving. To be alive in our minds and regulate our 
thoughts. We are not digital machines.
As we discuss many times in this book, we have reached a 
crossroads, a bifurcation point where new paradigms may 
emerge. A new image of our planet, of humankind, of our 
position in the universe, is now ready to grow.
339

WE HUMANS
The problems that we have created will not be solved by 
accelerating the same old methods. We are reaching the end of a 
Kuhn “normal” phase, in scientific research, in technology, but 
also healthcare, and sociology. But perhaps above all, we will 
have to imagine the values that can guide us towards a new 
enlightenment era.
Copernicus put the Sun at the center of the planetary system, 
asserting that there is no privileged place to observe the 
universe. This was a lesson of humility. Now brain-centrism puts 
us back in the center of the universe generated by our mental 
space but loses the universe out there. This should provide even 
more humility.
Our history of intervening in complex systems is not glorious. 
Humans are all too willing to interfere with orders that we 
barely understand. We want to improve them, but according to 
our standards. When we embark on such projects, our intentions 
might be good, but the effects can still be terrible down the road. 
We sometimes proceed with a worrying arrogance.
Human history looks like a long succession of disasters, one 
after the other, wars, plagues, ideologies, slavery, violence. 
When you sum all this up, we have, in a few thousand years, 
made incredible progress. A few hundred years ago, most of 
humanity lived in slavery, 1% possessed 99% of all the 
richnesses, they reserved higher education to an elite, and 
authoritarian systems dominated the planet.
From the brain-centric perspective, ERP is an illusion, a “make-
believe” so powerful that it is quasi-unescapable once installed 
in a mental space. Illusions have populated the mental space 
with a world of “material objects” that have no “material 
existence.” Man-made obstacles that have become “realities.” 
Objects that one cannot even see, or touch, or smell, but that 
dictate our behaviors. The belief in illusory objects is so strong 
that the infected mental spaces can destroy themselves and 
others for the sake of these illusions. Because of self-
reinforcement and self-confirmation, because of the very nature 
340

WE HUMANS
of the mental space, these materialized illusions appear as low-
level abstractions while they only are materializations. 
Economy, religions, social constructs, ideologies, but also 
science are full of these illusory and destructive objects. 
By not distinguishing low-level representations from higher-
level materialized abstractions, we have built a reality that puts 
us at risk of self-destruction. We individuate mental entities that 
have no existence out there as existent and give them the power 
to rule our lives, but also sometimes to destroy them.
Therefore, brain-centrism asserts that we need a new 
enlightenment age, that would more deeply review our thinking 
processes. The 18th-century enlightenment made a big step by 
giving priority to reason and experimentation and recognizing 
that humans must be central to any societal organization. We 
now need a further step that would recognize the illusory nature 
of ERP in science, in the economy, and the organization of 
human societies. It does not claim human rights as ERP facts; 
the new enlightenment should dig deeper into the characteristics 
of the human mental space and its unlimited varieties. It should 
recognize who and where we are, we humans.
Rousseau believed that the human soul was good and Voltaire 
that it was bad. I trust we have the choice at every second. Those 
100 milliseconds given to us to interfere and change any 
immediate mechanical reaction, Libet’s 100 milliseconds, is the 
place where our freedom hides. Our opening to the world of 
thinking and discovering. That is the point where everything can 
change. Nature has given us the opening but also the tool, our 
mental space, the true creator of our universe.
* * *
341

WE HUMANS
342
View publication stats

