Scientists Are Not Deﬁcient in Mental Imagery: Galton Revised
William F. Brewer
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
Marlene Schommer-Aikins
Wichita State University
In 1880, Galton carried out an investigation of imagery in a sample of distinguished
men and a sample of nonscientists (adolescent male students). He concluded that
scientists were either totally lacking in visual imagery or had “feeble” powers of mental
imagery. This ﬁnding has been widely accepted in the secondary literature in psychol-
ogy. A replication of Galton’s study with modern scientists and modern university
undergraduates found no scientists totally lacking in visual imagery and very few with
feeble visual imagery. Examination of Galton’s published data shows that his own
published data do not support his claims about deﬁcient visual imagery in scientists.
The modern data for scientists and nonscientists and the 1880 data for scientists and
nonscientists are in agreement in showing that all groups report substantial imagery on
recollective memory tasks such as Galton’s breakfast questionnaire. We conclude that
Galton’s conclusions were an example of theory-laden interpretation of data based on
the initial responses from several very salient scientists who reported little or no visual
imagery on Galton’s imagery questionnaire.
Keywords: Galton, mental imagery, psychology of science, scientists, visual imagery
Francis Galton was a major intellectual ﬁgure
in Victorian England (Brookes, 2004; Bulmer,
2003; Forrest, 1974; Gillham, 2001). He made
innovative contributions to many ﬁelds: geogra-
phy (explored southwestern Africa), biology (laws
of inheritance), forensics (ﬁngerprinting), meteo-
rology (high pressure systems and weather maps),
genetics (twin studies and pedigree analysis), in-
dividual differences (measures of ability and the
bell curve), general psychology (word associa-
tions and questionnaires), statistics (correlations
and regression), and cognitive psychology (imag-
ery). This article focuses on his contributions in
the area of visual imagery.
Galton’s Investigation of Visual Imagery
With the Breakfast Questionnaire
Galton (1880, 1883) carried out an extremely
innovative study of visual imagery. He had a
wide range of participants ﬁll out a question-
naire that asked them to recall some speciﬁc
scene such as the appearance of their breakfast
table from their morning’s breakfast. He then
evaluated the protocols in terms of the vividness
of the reported imagery and carried out a num-
ber of analyses based on his ranking of the
reports in terms of the vividness of the reported
imagery. This study was quite original in a
variety of different ways. It was one of the very
ﬁrst investigations of individual differences for
a psychological process, and it represents one of
Galton’s ﬁrst attempts to use ranking proce-
dures to efﬁciently describe an underlying set of
data. Brewer (1986, p. 36) has argued that this
investigation can be seen as a study of recollec-
tive memory, and thus it is one of the ﬁrst
empirical studies of human memory.
Galton was interested in how various groups
differed in their responses to psychological
tasks. One group that clearly fascinated him was
scientists (Galton, 1874). In describing his work
on mental imagery, Galton (1880, 1883) made
some very strong claims about imagery in sci-
entists. He stated that he ﬁrst carried out a pilot
study with his “friends in the scientiﬁc world”
(Galton, 1880, p. 302), and he reported that
to my astonishment, I found that the great majority of
the men of science to whom I ﬁrst applied, protested
William F. Brewer, Department of Psychology, Univer-
sity of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign; Marlene Schommer-
Aikins, Department of Counseling, Educational & School
Psychology, Wichita State University.
We thank Ellen Brewer, Don Dulany, Kay Bock, and
Greg Feist for comments on a draft of this article.
Correspondence concerning this article should be ad-
dressed to William F. Brewer, Department of Psychology,
University of Illinois, 603 East Daniel Street, Champaign,
IL 61820. E-mail: wbrewer@uiuc.edu
Review of General Psychology
Copyright 2006 by the American Psychological Association
2006, Vol. 10, No. 2, 130–146
1089-2680/06/$12.00
DOI: 10.1037/1089-2680.10.2.130
130

that mental imagery was unknown to them. . . .They
had no more notion of its true nature than a color-blind
man who has not discerned his defect has of the nature
of color. (p. 302)
Yet, he stated that when he used his ques-
tionnaire on persons from the “general society,”
they reported strong visual imagery. He con-
cluded that “scientiﬁc men as a class have fee-
ble powers of visual representation. There is no
doubt whatever on the latter point, however it
may be accounted for” (Galton, 1880, p. 304).
Clearly, Galton felt his data on this topic were
strong and that he had made an important non-
obvious discovery.
The Acceptance of Galton’s Claims in the
Psychological Literature
Galton’s claims that scientists have either no
mental imagery or that they have feeble mental
imagery have become ﬁrmly established in the
psychology literature (see Table 1). Galton’s
conclusions have been accepted by many of the
major ﬁgures in psychology over the past cen-
tury: William James (1890), E. B. Titchener
(1918), R. S. Woodworth (1938), Charles Os-
good (1953), George Miller (1962), Allan
Paivio (1971), and Stephen Kosslyn (1980).
Galton’s conclusions appear in the major hand-
books of the past century (James, 1890; Os-
good, 1953; Woodworth, 1938; Woodworth &
Schlosberg, 1954). They appear in textbooks of
cognitive psychology (Kosslyn, 1980; Paivio,
1971; Vinacke, 1952); in books on individual
differences (Gardner, 1983); and in the three
most recent biographies of Galton (Brookes,
2004; Bulmer, 2003; Gillham, 2001). The
claims are accepted by almost all modern his-
tories of psychology that discuss Galton’s work
on imagery (Fancher, 1996; Forrest, 1995;
Goodwin, 1999; Hergenhahn, 2005; Hothersall,
1984; Schultz & Schultz, 2004). From psychol-
ogy, the information has spread into other ﬁelds.
Galton’s conclusions appear in books in the area
of history (Libby, 1917); in the work of indi-
vidual philosophers such as Bertrand Russell
(1919),
and
in
textbooks
of
philosophy
(O’Connor & Carr, 1982). Thus, a reader of the
secondary literature would reasonably conclude
that scientists are either lacking in visual imag-
ery or are quite deﬁcient in mental imagery.
However, it seems to us that there are two other
literatures that raise concerns about this wide-
spread agreement about Galton’s conclusions.
Recollective Memory
In a 1986 chapter on autobiographical mem-
ory, Brewer argued (p. 36) that, even though
Galton’s breakfast questionnaire has tradition-
ally been considered to be a special technique
used to study mental imagery, it was better
thought of as a technique to study recollective
memory that happens to be experienced with
strong visual imagery. In a later chapter on
recollective memory, Brewer (1996, p. 60) de-
ﬁned recollective memory as “memory for a
speciﬁc episode from an individual’s past. It
typically appears to be a ‘reliving’ of the indi-
vidual’s phenomenal experience during that
earlier moment. . . .The information in this form
of memory is expressed as a mental image.”
Clearly, attempting to recall one’s breakfast ta-
ble for a particular day is an example of recall-
ing a speciﬁc episode from one’s past and thus
seems
a
classic
example
of
recollective
memory.
The reason this reinterpretation of Galton’s
task raised a red ﬂag for us was evidence that
showed that when undergraduates carried out a
recollective memory task they reported imagery
in essentially every case (Brewer & Pani, 1996).
It is, of course, possible that undergraduates
show essentially 100% imagery on this task,
whereas scientists show little or no imagery, but
it seemed unlikely to us. If this were true, it
would be one of the most striking cases of
differences between scientists and nonscientists
ever found, and it would be occurring on a
cognitive task (recollective memory) that does
not seem to be directly related to carrying out
many forms of scientiﬁc work.
Self-Reports of Imagery in Scientists
There is a second literature on imagery in
scientists that is quite in opposition to Galton’s
conclusions. A number of writers (e.g., Fergu-
son, 1977; A. I. Miller, 1984; Shepard, 1978;
Tweney, Doherty, & Mynatt, 1981) have argued
that mental imagery has played a important role
in the thinking of many great scientists. These
claims are not based on systematic empirical
studies. Instead, the major part of this literature
consists of the self-reports of major ﬁgures in
131
SPECIAL ISSUE: IMAGERY IN SCIENTISTS

Table 1
Citations From the Large Secondary Literature That Accepts Galton’s Conclusions That Scientists Are
Deﬁcient in Visual Imagery
Source
Quote
Romanes (1883, p. 97)
“It is remarkable that men of science, and of hard thinking generally, are for the most
part totally deﬁcient in [mental imagery].”a
James (1890; Vol. 2, p. 53)
James quotes Galton’s conclusion that “mental imagery was unknown to them
[scientists]” and places it in italics for emphasis.
Libby (1917, p. 262)
“Galton. . .stated
that
scientiﬁc
men,
as
a
class,
have
feeble
powers
of
visual
representation.”
Titchener (1918, p. 393)
Titchener quotes Galton: “Scientiﬁc men, as a class, have feeble powers of visual
representation.”
Russell (1919, p. 11)
“I see no reason whatever to reject the conclusion originally suggested by Galton’s
investigations, namely, that the habit of abstract pursuits makes learned men much
inferior to the average in the power of visualizing.”
Pillsbury (1921, p. 164)
“Galton found that English men of science had very little deﬁnite imagery.”
Pearson (1924; Vol. II,
p. 237)
“Scientiﬁc men as a class have feeble powers of visual representation.”
Woodworth (1938, p. 39)
“From his ﬁrst subjects, scholars and scientiﬁc men, he obtained answers which surprised
and somewhat disconcerted him, for many of them reported an absence of images, and
were inclined to regard the ‘mind’s eye’ as a pure invention of the poets.”
Vinacke (1952, p. 50)
“Scientiﬁc men, particularly, appeared to have poor and feeble imagery.”
Osgood (1953, p. 641)
“Galton. . .was astonished to discover that many scientists seemed to have no visual
imagery at all.”
Woodworth & Schlosberg
(1954, p. 721)
“Scholars and scientists were often devoid of such images.”
Burt (1962, p. 19)
“He notes with astonishment how completely devoid of visual imagery many highly
educated persons prove to be, particularly scientists.”
Miller (1962, p. 138)
“He was astonished to learn that most of them had no clear imagery, and considered it
fanciful when others spoke as if they did.”
Paivio (1971, p. 478)
“He was astonished to ﬁnd that many individuals reported little or no use of visual
imagery. This was especially true of scientists.”
Kosslyn (1980, p. 399)
“The nonimagers tended to be successful scholars and scientists.”
O’Connor & Carr (1982,
p. 128)
“Galton was surprised to ﬁnd that many educated people, particularly among the men of
science with whom he started his inquiries, claimed to have no experience of mental
imagery.”
Gardner (1983, p. 187)
“In his pioneering investigation of the imagery faculty, Francis Galton found that, when
asked to recall the scene of that morning’s breakfast, scientists typically reported little
or no visual imagery.”
Hothersall (1984, p. 238)
“Most people were able to recall clear and distinct mental images but to Galton’s
astonishment he found that the great majority of scientists and mathematicians were
unable to do so.”
Forrest (1995, p. 16)
“His statistical treatment of the results was not very enlightening, although he did seem
to be justiﬁed in concluding that his group of scientiﬁc respondents were weak in
imagery.”
Fancher (1996, p. 242)
“He found wide individual differences, with some subjects literally ‘seeing’ their images
with almost the same distinctness as a real scene, while others (especially scientists,
philosophers, and those accustomed to dealing with abstraction) reported only
‘thoughts.’”
Goodwin (1999, p. 143)
“One outcome that surprised him was the apparent lack of imagery ability in the
scientists he surveyed.”
Gillham (2001, p. 222)
“Initially, however, the scientists, thought Galton had gone bonkers when he questioned
them about mental imagery. ‘To my astonishment,’ the great majority ‘protested that
mental imagery was unknown to them.’”
Goodson (2003, p. 5)
“To his astonishment, he found that the eminent scientists he questioned maintained that
they were almost entirely devoid of mental images.”
Bulmer (2003, p. 32)
“Many others, in particular the great majority of scientists, were almost completely
defective in the faculty, and often doubted its existence.”
Brookes (2004, p. 215)
“With few exceptions, his men of science were almost blind to the images of the mind.
For some the concept was so alien that they even doubted the sincerity of Galton’s
questionnaire.”
132
BREWER AND SCHOMMER-AIKINS

the history of science describing the role of
imagery in their thinking. Although data of this
type are not conclusive, the reports are wide-
spread and consistent enough that they serve as
a second major difﬁculty in accepting Galton’s
conclusions at face value.
For example, in the late 1800s and early
1900s, British physics focused on the develop-
ment of mechanical model-based theories that
made strong demands on visual imagery. J. J.
Thomson (1930, pp. 15–16) described this ap-
proach as one where “an attempt is made to
form an idea of something concrete, a model,
for example, which will supply us with a mental
picture of what may be taking place in the
physical phenomena under consideration.” In
attempting to describe what led to the enormous
success of Ernest Rutherford and Niels Bohr,
the physicist Mark Oliphant observed that “each
was able to make vivid visual models of his
thought, models which helped the experimenter
greatly” (Oliphant, 1985, p. 70). Even after the
theories in physics were no longer based on
mechanical models, many physicists continued
to describe the strong role of imagery in their
work. Probably the most famous of all of these
autobiographical accounts is the one provided
by Albert Einstein. In response to questions
about the role of mental imagery in his thinking,
Einstein stated,
The words or the language, as they are written or
spoken, do not seem to play any role in my mechanism
of thought. The psychical entities which seem to serve
as elements in thought are certain signs and more or
less clear images which can be “voluntarily” repro-
duced and combined. (Hadamard, 1945, p. 142)
In describing how he solved certain problems
in physics, Richard Feynman stated, “Visualiza-
tion in some form or other is a vital part of my
thinking. . . .It was always with visualization.
There was a lot of visualization and a lot of
analysis” (Schweber, 1986, p. 504). These im-
age reports are not restricted to physicists. In his
account of the discovery of DNA, James
Watson wrote that “for over two hours I happily
lay awake with pairs of adenine residues whirl-
ing in front of my closed eyes” (Watson, 1968,
p. 188). Like the Galton literature, this literature
on the use of imagery by scientists is widely
known and widely cited. However, few scholars
have reviewed both literatures (cf. Table 6 for
papers that do), and thus the fundamental incon-
sistency between these two traditions has rarely
been pointed out. Given these two potential
problems with Galton’s conclusion that scien-
tists have feeble powers of mental imagery, we
decided to replicate Galton’s study with sam-
ples of modern scientists and undergraduates in
an attempt to resolve the inconsistencies.
Experiment 1
Method
Materials.
We developed a questionnaire that
used Galton’s (1880) exact instructions and con-
tained two of the questions exactly as he asked them
(even though we realized our modern participants
might be somewhat amused by the idea that we
thought mustard and parsley would be a likely part of
a breakfast menu!) The instructions stated,
Before addressing yourself to any of the Questions [at
the bottom of this page], think of some deﬁnite ob-
ject—suppose it is your breakfast-table as you sat
down to it this morning—and consider carefully the
picture that rises before your mind’s eye.” (Galton,
1880, p. 301)
Table 1
(continued)
Source
Quote
Pylyshyn (2004, p. 582)
“He was surprised to ﬁnd that many people disavowed having any visual imagery and
that scientists generally played down the role of imagery in their thinking.”
Schultz & Schultz (2004,
p. 161)
“To Galton’s amazement, his ﬁrst group of subjects, scientiﬁc acquaintances, reported no
clear images at all. Some were not even sure what Galton was talking about,”
Hergenhahn (2005, p. 280)
“Galton was amazed to ﬁnd that many of his scientist friends had virtually no ability to
form images.”
Note.
The authors have identiﬁed more than 20 additional references that accept Galton’s conclusion. These have been
omitted in the interest of saving space.
a Romanes was one of Galton’s respondents and was ranked by Galton as third from the bottom of his sample in terms of
image vividness.
133
SPECIAL ISSUE: IMAGERY IN SCIENTISTS

The two questions (Galton, 1880, p. 302) were:
1. Illumination–Is the image dim or fairly clear? Is its
brightness comparable to that of the actual scene?
2. Coloring–Are the colors of the china, of the toast,
bread crust, mustard, meat, parsley, or whatever may
have been on the table, quite distinct and natural?”
[The data from this scale were very similar to those
from the Illumination scale and so are not presented
here to conserve space.]
Participants.
There were two groups of partici-
pants—scientists and college undergraduates. The
scientists were from the University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign. The questionnaire and a cover
letter were mailed to 72 male full professors from the
Departments of Physics and Chemistry at the Uni-
versity of Illinois. The sample was restricted to men
to be comparable to Galton’s all-male sample. In
Galton’s sample of 100 distinguished men, it is dif-
ﬁcult to determine who should be classiﬁed as a
scientist (Burbridge, 1994). By restricting our sample
to full professors of chemistry and physics at a major
research university, we thought there would be no
ambiguity in classifying these respondents as scien-
tists. We received 35 usable replies. The nonscien-
tists were 70 male undergraduates from the Univer-
sity of Illinois who carried out the experiment as part
of a course requirement. We restricted our sample to
males to make our group of nonscientists comparable
to Galton’s nonscientist sample of male adolescent
schoolboys.
Results
Scoring image vividness.
Each response to
the illumination question was scored on a 1–5
scale by two raters. The scale was an elabora-
tion of a scale developed by Armstrong (1894).
On this scale, 1  Image comparable to or
more vivid than perception, 2  Image some-
what less clear and/or bright than perception,
3  Image considerably less clear and/or bright
than perception, 4  Image very weak, and 5 
No image. The detailed scoring criteria are
given in the Appendix. Scoring showed strong
reliability. For the 105 responses (35 scientists
and 70 undergraduates), there were two cases of
disagreement. The disagreements were resolved
by discussion so that each participant received a
single unique score on visual image vividness
for the illumination question.
Visual image vividness data.
Table 2 gives
the percentages of scientists and undergraduates
in each vividness category for the illumination
question. It is not completely clear how to trans-
late Galton’s verbal statement of his conclu-
sions into quantitative terms, but if “mental
imagery was unknown to [scientists],” then we
would expect all or most of the scientists to fall
in Category 5. The data for scientists in Table 2
show that there were no scientists who reported
a total absence of imagery (Image Vividness
Category 5). If “scientiﬁc men as a class have
feeble powers of visual representation,” we
would expect almost all of the scientists to fall
into the bottom two vividness categories, yet
only 6% of the scientists showed very weak
imagery (Image Vividness Category 4), and
none reported a total lack of visual images (Im-
age Vividness Category 5). The Interocular
Trauma Test (Edwards, Lindman, & Savage,
1963, p. 217) shows that the data for scientists
do not support Galton’s conclusions.
A second way to explore Galton’s claims is to
compare the data from the scientists with those
from the undergraduates. This is a much weaker
test of Galton’s claims, because in addition to
the scientist–nonscientist dimension, the two
samples differ along a number of other poten-
tially important dimensions such as age and
education. Examination of Table 2 shows that
there was a small tendency for the scientists to
show less vivid imagery than the undergradu-
ates, 2(3, N  105)  7.49, p  .06. However,
note that this comparison is not really a fair test
of Galton’s very strong conclusions. It does not
seem to us that showing a small difference in
the frequency distribution between a group of
Table 2
Percentages of Modern American Scientists and
Modern American Undergraduates in Each of Five
Visual Imagery Vividness Categories Based on
Responses From Galton’s Breakfast Questionnaire
Vividness
category
% participants in each visual
imagery vividness category
Scientists
(N  35)
Undergraduates
(N  70)
1
54
57
2
23
36
3
17
7
4
6
0
5
0
0
Note.
1  Image comparable to or more vivid than per-
ception; 2  Image somewhat less clear and/or bright than
perception; 3  Image considerably less clear and/or
bright than perception; 4  Image very weak; and 5  No
image. See the Appendix for additional information on
scoring the vividness categories.
134
BREWER AND SCHOMMER-AIKINS

scientists
and
(undergraduate)
nonscientists
would reasonably correspond to the strong lan-
guage Galton used.
Discussion
The data from the present study indicate that
94% of modern scientists showed from moder-
ate to high mental imagery on Galton’s break-
fast questionnaire. They did, however, show
slightly less vivid imagery than a group of uni-
versity undergraduates. These data are consis-
tent with the data showing that most undergrad-
uates showed imagery during recollective mem-
ory tasks (Brewer & Pani, 1996) and are also
consistent with the literature showing that many
famous scientists have reported the occurrence
of strong imagery during scientiﬁc thinking
(Ferguson, 1977; A. I. Miller, 1984; Shepard,
1978; Tweney et al., 1981). On the other hand,
these results are certainly not consistent with
Galton’s conclusions that scientists show either
no imagery or feeble imagery as presented in his
1880 paper and his 1883 book. The inconsis-
tency between our modern data and the conclu-
sions Galton drew from his study suggested a
careful examination of the data that Galton used
to support his conclusions.
Experiment 2 (Galton, 1880)
Pilot Study
From Galton’s reports of his studies of visual
imagery (1880, 1883), it appears that he ﬁrst
carried out an informal study of the visual im-
agery of some of his “friends in the scientiﬁc
world” (1880, p. 302). He chose to start with
scientists because he thought they, as scientists,
would provide more accurate accounts than
other groups of participants. It appears that it is
the results from this group that led him to state,
To my astonishment, I found that the great majority of
the men of science to whom I ﬁrst applied, protested
that mental imagery was unknown to them. . . .They
had no more notion of its true nature than a color-blind
man who has not discerned his defect has of the nature
of color. (Galton, 1880, p. 302)
Method
Participants.
Galton then carried out a more sys-
tematic study. He sent his breakfast questionnaire to
an (unknown) number of individuals and obtained a
sample of
100 adult men, of whom 19 are Fellows of the Royal
Society, mostly of very high repute, and at least twice,
and I think I may say three times, as many more are
persons of distinction in various kinds of intellectual
work. (Galton, 1880, p. 304)
It is quite likely that the initial sample of Gal-
ton’s “friends in the scientiﬁc world” are in-
cluded among the sample of 100 distinguished
men. Thus, the data from the sample of distin-
guished men are not independent from the (un-
known number of) scientists who “protested
that mental imagery was unknown to them” (p.
302). Galton also obtained data from the stu-
dents at Charterhouse, an English public school
(a private school in American usage). He re-
ceived a total of 172 usable questionnaires from
Charterhouse. He broke the data into two sub-
samples: the Charterhouse A data were from the
four higher grades and the Charterhouse B data
were from the ﬁve lower grades.
Results and Discussion
Distinguished men.
Galton ranked the sam-
ple of 100 men in terms of their overall reported
imagery, and for the illumination question he
presented the responses of the top 12, the mid-
dle 9, and the bottom 12 individuals of his total
sample. In addition, in another place he pro-
vided the data for individuals at selected points
throughout his distribution (highest person, 94th
percentile [“ﬁrst suboctile”], 88th percentile
[“ﬁrst octile”], 75th percentile [“ﬁrst quartile”],
50th percentile [“middlemost”], 25th percentile
[“last quartile”], 12th percentile [“last octile”],
6th percentile [“last suboctile”], and lowest per-
son). These data are presented in Table 3. (Note
that Table 3 also contains equivalent data from
Galton’s young adolescents and from the two
modern samples. These other sets of data are
discussed later in this article.) Galton reported
his data this way because he argued that it
allowed the reader to reconstruct the results of
the total sample, and he is correct. In fact, for
the purposes of this article, it is quite helpful
that standard statistical procedures had not been
invented as that allowed us to make direct com-
parisons with his published data. Typical mod-
ern reports of results are so abstracted from the
underlying data that if they had been available
135
SPECIAL ISSUE: IMAGERY IN SCIENTISTS

Table 3
Visual Image Vividness Protocols at Selected Percentiles for Galton’s 100 Distinguished Men, Modern
American Scientists, Galton’s Young Adolescents, and Modern American Undergraduates
Sample
Visual image vividness protocol
94th percentile (ﬁrst suboctile)
Galton’s distinguished men
“The image once seen is perfectly clear and bright.”
Modern American
scientists
“Very clear. Very bright. Background are piles of books, notes, magazine and computer
output, none of which are (or were) very bright compared with the breakfast.”
Galton’s young adolescents
“It is very clear and is as bright as it actually was. Everything occurs most distinctly.”
Modern American
undergraduates
“The image is fairly clear. The surrounding is brighter than it usually really is.”
88th percentile (ﬁrst octile)
Galton’s distinguished men
“I can see my breakfast table or any equally familiar thing with my mind’s eye quite as
well in all particulars as I can do if the reality is before me.”
Modern American
scientists
“Clear and bright—quite comparable to those characteristics of the actual scene.”
Galton’s young adolescents
“To me the picture seems quite clear and the brightness equal to the real scene.”
Modern American
undergraduates
“Image is fairly clear. It seems brighter than it actually was.”
75th percentile (ﬁrst quartile)
Galton’s distinguished men
“Fairly clear; illumination of actual scene is fairly represented. Well deﬁned.”
Modern American
scientists
“Clear—Normal brightness.”
Galton’s young adolescents
“The image is fairly clear, but its brightness is dimmer than the actual.”
Modern American
undergraduates
“Yes, clear and bright.”
50th percentile (middlemost)
Galton’s distinguished men
“Fairly clear. Brightness probably at least from one-half to two-thirds of the original.”
Modern American
scientists
“Clear, but not as bright as the actual scene.”
Galton’s young adolescents
“The image is fairly clear, but its brightness is not comparable to that of the actual
scene.”
Modern American
undergraduates
“The image is fairly clear, and the brightness is comparable to the actual scene.”
25th percentile (last quartile)
Galton’s distinguished men
“Dim, certainly not comparable to the actual scene.”
Modern American
scientists
“Fairly clear, but dimmer and smaller than reality.”
Galton’s young adolescents
“The image is fairly clear.”
Modern American
undergraduates
“Fairly clear; no.”
10th percentile (last octile—should have been 12th percentile)
Galton’s distinguished men
“Dim and not comparable in brightness to the real scene. Badly deﬁned with blotches
of light; very incomplete; very little of one object is seen at one time.”
Modern American
scientists
“Dimmer.”
Galton’s young adolescents
“I can call up to my mind the picture of the breakfast table in every detail, but seem to
see everything through a darkened pane of glass.”
Modern American
undergraduates
“Dim.”
6th percentile (last suboctile)
Galton’s distinguished men
“I am very rarely able to recall any object whatever with any sort of distinctness. Very
occasionally an object or image will recall itself, but even then it is more like a
generalized image than an individual one. I seem to be almost destitute of visualising
as under control.” (Response of Rev. David W. Simon—a theologian, not a scientist
as one would expect given Galton’s conclusions.)
136
BREWER AND SCHOMMER-AIKINS

to Galton we would not be able to make the
comparisons that are needed.
Distinguished men.
Now, what can we
learn from the data Galton has given us? From
the published reports, we do not know how
many of the 100 men in his sample were scien-
tists. However, he does tell us that 19 were
Fellows of the Royal Society, and it would seem
reasonable to infer that his sample also included
some unknown number of scientists who were
not Fellows of the Royal Society. So from his
published data, we can make a rough guess that
perhaps 30 to 40 members of his sample were
scientists of one type or another. Burbridge’s
(1994) analysis of Galton’s unpublished records
shows that this estimate is roughly correct. Ex-
amination of the data in Table 3 for Galton’s
distinguished men allows us to see if the reports
of the distinguished men correspond to Galton’s
characterization of them. The data in this table
and additional data given in Galton (1880) show
that no more than the bottom seven reports
could be considered to have no imagery. The
response of the 8th individual from the bottom
(Galton, 1880, p. 306) was “dim, imperfect”
(Category 4 on our Image Vividness Scale).
Thus, Galton’s own presentation of his data
from the 100 men shows that we can exclude
the widely cited conclusion that “mental imag-
ery was unknown to them” (Galton, 1880, p.
302).
Evaluation of Galton’s claim that “scientiﬁc
men as a class have feeble powers of visual
representation” is a little more difﬁcult. How-
ever, it would seem to us that this verbal state-
ment of the ﬁndings would mean that the data
from the sample of scientists (perhaps 30 or 40
out of the total sample) would lead to a very
large number of responses in the lower half of
the distribution with imagery described as “very
dim” or “almost no visual image.” Instead, the
individual at the 50th percentile reports his im-
age to be “fairly clear. Brightness probably at
least from one-half to two-thirds of the origi-
nal.” The individual at the 25th percentile re-
ports that his visual image is “dim, certainly not
comparable to the actual scene.” It is not clear
to us that even the individual at the 10th per-
centile would properly be described as having
“feeble” visual imagery. That individual stated
that his visual image was “dim and not compa-
rable in brightness to the real scene.” Therefore,
we conclude that Galton’s published data are
simply not consistent with his published claim
that “scientiﬁc men as a class have feeble pow-
ers of visual representation.”
Young adolescents.
Galton also ranked the
responses from the Charterhouse samples and
presented their responses at the same selected
points from the distribution that were described
above for the 100 distinguished men. The data
for Galton’s young adolescents are also given in
Table 3.
One of the innovations in Galton’s 1880 pa-
per is his method of “intercomparison.” Galton
points out that if one has two samples and can
rank each sample along the same dimension,
then one can compare individuals at equivalent
ranks and see if the two distributions differ. We
like Galton’s method of intercomparison and
propose to use it to study his data on visual
imagery.
We think the examination of the protocols of
the sample of distinguished men has demon-
strated that Galton’s claims about visual imag-
ery in scientists are not consistent with his own
Table 3
(continued)
Sample
Visual image vividness protocol
6th percentile (last suboctile) (continued)
Modern American
scientists
“Dim. It seems that I am simply reconstructing the table by remembering the meal.
No.” (Note that on his response for the colouring question, this participant wrote
“The image of the cereal box is clear.”)
Galton’s young adolescents
“The image is dim, dark, and smaller than the actual scene.”
Modern American
undergraduates
“Dim.”
Note.
The samples labeled Galton’s young adolescents are from the group he refers to as Charterhouse Boys A. In
presenting his data for the last octile of the distinguished men, Galton made a small error and used the protocol from the
10th percentile of his distribution. To make the comparisons in this table as close as possible, we have also displayed our
protocols from the 10th percentile.
137
SPECIAL ISSUE: IMAGERY IN SCIENTISTS

data. However, his Charterhouse sample allows
us to compare the sample of distinguished men
with this nonscientist adolescent sample. As we
noted earlier, this can only be an approximate
test as in addition to the scientist–nonscientist
dimension the two samples also differ along
other potentially important dimensions such as
age and education. If the sample of 100 distin-
guished men contained roughly 30–40 scien-
tists with little or no visual imagery, then a
comparison of the data from the total sample of
100 distinguished men with the nonscientist
sample (Charterhouse A students) should show
a very disproportionate number of individuals
with low imagery in the bottom of the distribu-
tion of the sample of distinguished men. Thus,
in comparing the protocols from the two sam-
ples at equivalent ranks, one would predict that,
starting somewhere in the lower half of the
distribution, the protocols of the sample of dis-
tinguished men would contain responses such
as “very dim,” “almost no visual image,” or “no
power of visualizing,” while at the equivalent
ranks, the sample of nonscientist young adoles-
cents would contain responses such as “fairly
clear” or “clear, but not as bright as the actual
scene.”
The relevant data are displayed in Table 3.
The protocol of the individual from the distin-
guished men at the 50th percentile reports that
his visual imagery is “fairly clear. Brightness
probably at least from one-half to two-thirds of
the original.” The protocol from the young ad-
olescent at the 50th percentile reports, “The
image is fairly clear, but its brightness is not
comparable to that of the actual scene.” The
protocol from the sample of distinguished men
at the 25th percentile describes his image as
“dim, certainly not comparable to the actual
scene.” The protocol from Galton’s young ad-
olescent sample at the equivalent rank reports,
“The image is fairly clear.” The individual from
the 10th percentile of the distinguished sample
states that their image is “dim and not compa-
rable in brightness to the real scene.” The indi-
vidual from the adolescent sample at the 10th
percentile reports, “I can call up to my mind the
picture of the breakfast table in every detail, but
seem to see everything through a darkened pane
of glass.”
We think that these comparisons may show a
slight tendency for stronger visual imagery in
Galton’s nonscientist sample. However, we do
not think the differences are large enough to be
consistent with the hypothesis that there is a
large subsample of individuals with little or no
visual imagery within the larger sample of dis-
tinguished men. Thus, it seems to us that the
intercomparison shows that the data from the
distinguished men and the young adolescent
nonscientists are inconsistent with the hypothe-
sis that “scientiﬁc men as a class have feeble
powers of visual representation” (Galton, 1880,
p. 304).
At this point, the reader may be thinking that
perhaps we have been biased in our interpreta-
tion of Galton’s data. However, we do not think
so, as Galton agrees with us! After Galton pre-
sented his data for the 100 distinguished men
and for the Charterhouse students, he stated
“that the A and B boys are alike in mental
imagery, and that the adult males are not very
dissimilar to them” (the adult males in this case
are, in fact, the sample of 100 distinguished
men; Galton, 1880, p. 312). Thus, we conclude
that Galton’s published data have never sup-
ported the extremely strong claims he made and
that this fact has always been available for very
careful readers of Galton’s (1880) paper.
Comparison of Galton’s Data With the
Modern Data
In this section, we use Galton’s method of
intercomparison to compare the data from Gal-
ton’s sample of distinguished men, the modern
sample of scientists, Galton’s sample of young
adolescent males (the Charterhouse A sample),
and the modern sample of male undergraduates.
To make the comparison, two raters ranked
the responses on the illumination question for
the sample of modern scientists and for the
undergraduate sample. The rankings showed
strong reliability. The Spearman rank correla-
tion coefﬁcient between the two raters for the
scientist sample was .88; for the undergraduate
sample, it was .83. The mean of the two inde-
pendent rankings was used to produce an over-
all ranking of the two samples. Then for each
sample the responses that corresponded to Gal-
ton’s ﬁrst suboctile, ﬁrst octile, ﬁrst quartile,
middlemost, last quartile, last octile, and last
suboctile were selected for comparison with
Galton’s samples.
138
BREWER AND SCHOMMER-AIKINS

Intercomparison Data
The data are presented in Table 3. The major
conclusion from an overall examination of the
intercomparison data is the remarkable consis-
tency in the vividness of visual imagery on the
breakfast questionnaire across time, across
countries, across ages, across levels of educa-
tion, and across scientists and nonscientists.
The data from the modern scientists is quite
comparable to that of Galton’s sample of dis-
tinguished men. The individual from Galton’s
sample who was at the 50th percentile described
the image as “fairly clear. Brightness probably
at least from one-half to two-thirds of the orig-
inal.” The modern scientist at the equivalent
point in the distribution reported that the image
was “clear, but not as bright as the actual
scene.” The individual from Galton’s sample of
distinguished men at the 25th percentile re-
ported that the image was “dim, certainly not
comparable to the actual scene.” The individual
at the equivalent rank in the modern sample of
scientists reported that the image was “fairly
clear, but dimmer and smaller than reality.”
Clearly, the image reports in the middle of
the distributions are very comparable. The re-
sponses at equivalent points on the distribution
are almost paraphrases. At the tail of the distri-
bution on the side of low imagery, there appears
to be a slightly larger number of nonimagers in
Galton’s sample of distinguished men. Note that
in Galton’s pilot study, he was surprised to ﬁnd
some (number unknown) individuals who re-
ported little or no visual imagery and that those
individuals were probably in the larger sample
of distinguished men. However, as noted ear-
lier, neither the distribution of responses for
modern scientists nor for Galton’s distinguished
men are consistent with his strong claims.
Examination of the data from Galton’s young
adolescents and the data from the modern un-
dergraduates suggests that the modern under-
graduates reported slightly more vivid images at
the high end of the distribution. For example,
the individual in Galton’s sample of young ad-
olescents at the 75th percentile reported that
“the image is fairly clear, but its brightness is
dimmer than the actual,” whereas the equivalent
individual from the modern undergraduate sam-
ple reported that the image was “clear and
bright.”
Classiﬁcation Data
Table 4 presents the same data from all four
groups in a more abstracted and quantitative
fashion. Two raters categorized each response
to the illumination question for Galton’s sam-
ples (100 distinguished men and Charterhouse
A students) and for the modern samples (scien-
tists and undergraduates) at each selected rank
on the 1–5 vividness scale. Table 4 shows the
mean (across the two raters) vividness scores
for each individual response for each of the four
samples at selected points along the imagery
Table 4
Mean Rated Vividness of Individual Visual Image Protocols From Galton’s Breakfast Questionnaire at
Selected Percentiles for Modern American Scientists, Galton’s 100 Distinguished Men, Modern American
Undergraduates, and Galton’s Young Adolescents
Ranking by vividness
of imagery
Vividness of mental imagery ratings
Modern scientists
(N  35)
Galton’s 100
distinguished
(N  100)
Modern
undergraduates
(N  70)
Galton’s young
adolescents
(N not given)
94th percentile (ﬁrst suboctile)
1
1
1
1
88th percentile (ﬁrst octile)
1
1
1
1
75th percentile (ﬁrst quartile)
1
1
1
2
50th percentile (middlemost)
2
2
1
2
25th percentile (last quartile)
2
2.5
2
2
10th percentile (last octile)
2
3
2
2.5
6th percentile (last suboctile)
3
4
3
3
Note. 1  Image comparable to or more vivid than perception; 2  Image somewhat less clear and/or bright than
perception; 3  Image considerably less clear and/or bright than perception; 4  Image very weak; 5  No image. The
rating is the mean of the ratings assigned by the two independent raters.
139
SPECIAL ISSUE: IMAGERY IN SCIENTISTS

distribution. These more quantitative data lead
to the same conclusion as the qualitative data
presented in Table 3. The four samples are very
similar in imagery on the breakfast question-
naire task, with a tendency for there to be some-
what lower imagery at the bottom of the distri-
bution for Galton’s 100 distinguished men and
somewhat higher imagery for the two samples
of younger individuals. Given the overall agree-
ment across the data that scientists do not show
dramatically different degrees of imagery from
nonscientists, we are now faced with the prob-
lem of explaining how Galton reached his
conclusions.
Galton’s Unpublished Data
Burbridge (1994) has examined Galton’s raw
data, which is preserved in the Manuscripts
Room of the Library of University College,
London. He also carried out the heroic task of
attempting to identify the names of Galton’s
100 distinguished men. One might think this
would allow us to ﬁnd out what the responses
were for the scientists in Galton’s sample. Un-
fortunately, Burbridge was not able to ﬁnd a list
of those Galton thought were scientists or a tally
sheet showing the responses on the imagery
questionnaire for scientists versus nonscientists.
Burbridge made some assumptions about whom
Galton might have considered to be scientists
and drew the circumspect conclusion that “from
Galton’s published account no one would be
likely to suppose that his scientiﬁc cases were
so widely spread across the spectrum” (p. 459).
Another aspect of Galton’s data that was not
visible in the published studies was the fact that
Galton had data from one of the most outstand-
ing scientists of all time—his half-cousin,
Charles Darwin. Table 5 gives Darwin’s re-
sponses to Galton’s breakfast questionnaire.
The data show clearly that the most outstanding
scientist in Galton’s sample was not lacking in
visual imagery.
General Discussion
Accounting for Galton’s Claims
It seems unlikely to us that Galton was being
deliberately misleading in his published studies.
If so, why would he provide the data in his 1880
article that would allow the reader to see that his
claims were not justiﬁed by the data? It seems to
us that the most likely explanation for Galton’s
behavior is that this was a classic example of
theory-ladenness in science. There is strong ev-
idence that the prior beliefs (theories) of scien-
tists can have an impact on their perception,
attention, interpretation, memory, and commu-
nication of their work (Brewer & Lambert,
2001; Brewer & Loschky, 2005; Kuhn, 1962;
Hanson, 1958; Popper, 1962).
At the time Galton was writing, many authors
believed that there was a hierarchy of intellec-
tual abilities. Abstract thought was considered
to be superior to concrete imagistic thought. As
applied to the then commonly assumed racial–
biological hierarchy, White males would be
more likely to use abstract thought and women,
Table 5
Galton’s Breakfast Questionnaire With Charles Darwin’s Responses, November 14, 1879
Galton’s question
Darwin’s response
“Before addressing yourself to any of the Questions on the opposite page, think of some deﬁnite object—suppose it is
your breakfast-table as you sat down to it this morning—and consider carefully the picture that rises before your
mind’s eye.”
1. “Illumination—Is the image dim or fairly clear? Is its
brightness comparable to that of the actual scene?”
“Moderate, but my solitary breakfast was early and
morning dark.”
2. “Deﬁnition—Are all the objects pretty well deﬁned at the
same time, or is the place of sharpest deﬁnition at any
one moment more contracted than it is in a real scene?”
“Some objects quite deﬁned, a slice of cold beef,
some grapes and a pear, the state of my plate
when I had ﬁnished and a few other objects are
as distinct as if I had photos before me.”
3. “Colouring—Are the colours of the china, of the toast,
breadcrust, mustard, meat, parsley, or whatever may have
been on the table, quite distinct and natural?”
“The objects above-named perfectly coloured.”
Note.
Darwin’s responses are taken from Pearson (1924).
140
BREWER AND SCHOMMER-AIKINS

children, and “inferior” races would be more
likely to use imagistic thought. In the present
case, scientists would presumably be at the top
of the pyramid and be most likely to engage in
abstract thought and least likely to use concrete
images. Although this sounds consistent with
other views Galton held, there simply is no
textual evidence to support the hypothesis that
Galton applied these ideas of a hierarchy of
ability to his scientist data. In fact, in attempting
to account for the lack of imagery in scientists
Galton did not use a nativist account, but gave
an explanation in terms of expertise. He stated
that
an over-readiness to perceive clear mental pictures is
antagonistic to the acquirement of habits of highly
generalized and abstract thought, and that if the faculty
of producing them was ever possessed by men who
think hard, it is very apt to be lost by disuse. (Galton,
1880, p. 304)
There is a second argument against the view
that Galton’s interpretation of his data was in-
ﬂuenced by his prior beliefs in the hierarchy of
abilities. When Galton carried out his initial
informal study and discovered that some of his
scientist friends claimed they had no mental
images, he stated that he was astonished. If he
already believed that scientists would have little
or no mental imagery, why would he have been
astonished by his ﬁndings? Thus, we do not
think Galton’s interpretation of his data was
biased by a prior belief in the hierarchy of
intellectual abilities.
We think that the best explanation of Gal-
ton’s behavior is that in his initial informal
study he happened to apply his questions to
several scientists who reported having little or
no imagery. Two likely candidates are the as-
tronomer John Herschel and the biologist
George Romanes. Both were outstanding scien-
tists whom Galton knew, and both reported very
little imagery on their breakfast questionnaires
(Burbridge, 1994). We hypothesize that his ini-
tial informants made a very strong impression
on his thinking and that this caused the top-
down interpretation of his data. In particular, he
did not let the more complete data from the
larger sample of 100 men change his initial
view. Brewer and Lambert (2001) argued that if
bottom-up evidence is strong enough, it will
frequently override top-down beliefs. In the
present case, bottom-up evidence would involve
identifying the scientists in Galton’s sample of
100 men and comparing their image reports to
those of the nonscientists. Burbridge (1994) was
not able to ﬁnd evidence that Galton made this
explicit comparison, and we suspect that he
never did it. If we are right, then there is a great
irony here. Galton was known for quantifying
everything from the physical beauty of women
to the efﬁcacy of prayer. Yet in this case it
appears that he relied on his nonquantitative
belief and did not produce the actuarial data (cf.
Faust, 1984; Meehl, 1954) he needed to over-
come his initial bias. Thus, Galton’s strong
claims that scientists show little or no visual
imagery seem to have been based on a few
highly salient individuals, and Galton let this
initial ﬁnding override the data in his larger
sample of 100 distinguished men.
Problems With Secondary Sources
In our examination of the large secondary
literature discussing Galton’s research on imag-
ery in scientists, we found a small number of
sources that suggested that there might be some
problem with Galton’s conclusion that scientists
are deﬁcient in visual imagery. The relevant
quotations are given in Table 6. It should be
noted that two of the authors appearing in Ta-
ble 6 also appear in Table 1, where in different
publications they appear to have accepted Gal-
ton’s conclusions. There may be some interest-
ing stories behind these dual appearances.
Conﬂicting evidence.
Three of these papers
(Johnson-Laird, 1998; Park & Kosslyn, 1990;
Posner, 1973) have pointed out the conﬂict be-
tween Galton’s conclusions and the literature
showing that many famous scientists have pro-
vided self-reports that show high levels of vi-
sual imagery (e.g., Ferguson, 1977; A. I. Miller,
1984; Shepard, 1978; Tweney et al., 1981).
McKellar (1972) and Kosslyn (1983) suggested
that there are other data that conﬂict with Gal-
ton’s conclusions.
Only Kosslyn (1983) and Park and Kosslyn
(1990) attempted to provide an explanation for
the conﬂicting data. Kosslyn (1983) suggested
that the occurrence of imagery in scientists may
have changed over time or that how they chose
to report their imagery may have changed over
time. Park and Kosslyn (1990) suggested that
the differences might be due to nonrandom sam-
pling on Galton’s part.
Note that our more radical hypothesis—that
141
SPECIAL ISSUE: IMAGERY IN SCIENTISTS

Galton’s data never supported his strong con-
clusions—means that we need not postulate any
additional factors to account for the discrepancy
as, for us, there is no discrepancy. All the evi-
dence–Galton’s 1880 data, the self-reports of
scientists, and our modern replication of Gal-
ton—lead to the same conclusion: Scientists are
not deﬁcient in visual imagery.
Evidence for conclusions.
It seems to us
that the major failure in the large secondary
literature is that the authors did not ask the
question “Where are the data that back up Gal-
ton’s extremely strong conclusions?” To us,
Galton’s claims seem to be a good case for the
rule of thumb that extraordinary claims require
extraordinary evidence.
Only three of the secondary sources (Forrest,
1974; R. I. Watson, 1979; R. I. Watson &
Evans, 1991) hint that Galton’s data might not
support his claims (see Table 6). R. I. Watson
(1979) and R. I. Watson and Evans (1991) sug-
gested that there might be differences between
Galton’s pilot study and his full study. Forrest
(1974) is the only secondary source we have
found that notes that Galton stated that his data
on imagery from the two groups of adolescent
boys (Charterhouse A and B) were “not very
dissimilar” to the data from the adult males.
Table 6
Citations Suggesting That the Author Is Aware That There May Be a Problem With Galton’s Conclusions
That Scientists Are Deﬁcient in Visual Imagery
Source
Quotation
McKellar (1972, p. 37)
“In Galton’s data we encounter his scientists, many of whom protested that mental imagery
was unknown to them. . . . Numerous investigators since Galton have had far more
difﬁculty in ﬁnding nonimagers than imagers.”
Posner (1973, p. 154)
“Some authors have proposed that visual imagery is an important, if not necessary,
condition for creativity in science (Walker, 1965), while others have found that scientists
tend to be unusually deﬁcient in the vividness of their imagery (Galton, 1907).”
Forrest (1974, p. 150)
Gives the quote “that scientiﬁc men as a class have feeble powers of visual representation”
and states that it was one of Galton’s notable results. However he is the only secondary
source to note that Galton’s “two schoolboy groups are almost identical and very similar
to the adults” without pointing out that the adult sample was the sample of 100
distinguished men and thus included the scientists who are suppose to have feeble
powers of visual representation.
Watson (1979, p. 172)
“That many scientists seemed to be very deﬁcient in visual imagery especially intrigued
him. . .. After collecting a larger, more representative sample in later years, it became
evident that this lack of imagery was not true for all scientists, and also that individuals
of the general populace lacked imagery.”
Kosslyn (1983, p. 195)
“Galton found that only about twelve percent of those he tested reported not being able to
form mental images in response to the questions. The nonimagers, interesting enough,
tended to be lawyers and professional men of various sorts.”
“A study published in 1965 gave the results of a pool of members of Mensa, a society
composed of people whose scores on IQ tests are unusually high. The results were in
sharp contrast to Sir Francis Galton’s: Fully ninety-seven percent of these people
reported experiencing vivid imagery. . .. What happened? Either people have changed in
the interim or what they tend to say has changed.”
Park & Kosslyn (1990,
pp. 186–187)
“Galton concluded that intellectual men do not use visual imagery because it is
antagonistic to abstract thinking.” Park & Kosslyn report preliminary data showing that
there is a very low correlation between IQ and imagery and conclude that “Galton’s
result could reﬂect small sample size or nonrandom sampling. . .. Self-reports of great
scientists also dampen the generality of Galton’s claims.”
R. I. Watson & Evans
(1991, p. 324)
“To Galton’s astonishment, many men of science whom he had ﬁrst questioned about
mental images protested they did not know what he was talking about. . .. With more
returns available, although similar differences persisted, he found numerous exceptions.
Some scientists did have vivid imagery; some persons in the general population lacked
imagery.”
Johnson-Laird (1998,
p. 443)
Galton’s study “revealed—somewhat to Galton’s consternation—that many of [the sample
of distinguished men] claimed to think without using images. Yet most scientists who
have written on their own thought processes have emphasized the role of imagery.”
Note.
See Burbridge (1994) for a detailed account of some aspects of Galton’s data.
142
BREWER AND SCHOMMER-AIKINS

Unfortunately, neither Forrest nor Galton go on
to point out that the “adult males” are the sam-
ple of distinguished men (which includes
30–40 scientists), and neither go on to draw the
conclusion that this result is inconsistent with
the claim that scientists lack or are very deﬁ-
cient in visual imagery.
It seems likely that most of the secondary
sources obtained their accounts from Galton’s
1883 book Inquiries Into Human Faculty and
Its Development and not from Galton’s earlier
1880 paper in Mind. In the 1883 book, Galton
gave the data on imagery for the sample of 100
distinguished men for selected portions of the
distribution (cf. Table 3 in this article). We have
argued that these data alone allow one to reject
Galton’s strong conclusions. Thus, Galton’s
book contains evidence that should have led the
authors of the secondary sources to reevaluate
Galton’s claims.
However, Galton did make it harder for
someone who only read the 1883 book (and not
the 1880 article) to see the problem. Galton did
not present the data on imagery for the adoles-
cent males (Charterhouse samples) in the book,
so it was not possible for the reader to notice
how similar the data were for the distinguished
men and the adolescent males. In addition, the
book does not contain the crucial sentence in
which Galton notes how similar the sample of
distinguished men was to the sample of male
adolescents. Thus, researchers who read only
Galton’s 1883 book had less evidence that
pointed to the inconsistency between Galton’s
data and his strong claims. In general, exami-
nation of the secondary literature suggests that
once a claim such as Galton’s becomes common
knowledge, it is very hard to remove it (thus
suggesting that this article will have a hard time
making headway against the “common knowl-
edge” displayed in Table 1).
Conclusions
It now appears that Galton’s strong claims
were incorrect. It is not the case that most
scientists show little or no mental imagery. Gal-
ton’s own data and our more recent data dem-
onstrate that scientists show strong visual imag-
ery in recollective memory tasks, just as non-
scientist undergraduates do. The data do suggest
there may be some small differences in vivid-
ness of visual imagery between scientists and
undergraduates.
However,
these
differences
could easily be due to age differences (Galton,
1879, p. 432, suggested that there may be a
decline in imagery with age) or to differences in
style of reporting internal mental states. It
seems to us that future work on these issues
should not focus on imagery in recollective
memory tasks such as the breakfast question-
naire. It is not obvious that this type of memory
plays a special role in the work of scientists.
However, we think that there might be interest-
ing differences on various types of spatial rea-
soning tasks between scientists and nonscien-
tists, and more particularly among different
types of scientists (e.g., crystallographers vs.
physiologists).
We also think this analysis of the reasons for
the discrepancies between Galton’s claims and
his data provides interesting insights into the
power of top-down factors in the work of sci-
entists. We entertained the hypothesis that the
discrepancy was due to deep-seated beliefs
about a hierarchy of intellectual abilities. How-
ever, we discarded that hypothesis as Galton
gave a non-nativist account of his ﬁndings and
was surprised by his initial ﬁnding that a few
scientists reported that they had little or no
mental imagery.
We conclude that Galton’s top-down inter-
pretation of his ﬁndings was not driven by deep-
seated theoretical beliefs but merely by the oc-
currence of a few unusual individuals in his
pilot sample. If our interpretation is correct, it
certainly highlights the powerful role of even
relatively routine top-down beliefs in the way
that scientists carry out their work (cf. Brewer
& Lambert, 2001).
References
Armstrong, A. C., Jr. (1894). The imagery of Amer-
ican students. Psychological Review, 1, 496–505.
Brewer, W. F. (1986). What is autobiographical
memory? In D. C. Rubin (Ed.), Autobiographical
memory (pp. 25–49). Cambridge, England: Cam-
bridge University Press.
Brewer, W. F. (1996). What is recollective memory?
In D. C. Rubin (Ed.), Remembering our past:
Studies in autobiographical memory (pp. 19–66).
Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
Brewer, W. F., & Lambert, B. L. (2001). The theory-
ladenness of observation and the theory-ladenness
of the rest of the scientiﬁc process. Philosophy of
Science, 68, S176–S186.
143
SPECIAL ISSUE: IMAGERY IN SCIENTISTS

Brewer, W. F., & Loschky, L. (2005). Top-down and
bottom-up inﬂuences on observation: Evidence
from cognitive psychology and the history of sci-
ence. In A. Raftopoulos (Ed.), Cognitive penetra-
bility of perception: Attention, action, strategies,
and bottom-up constraints (pp. 31–47). Haup-
pauge, NY: Nova Science.
Brewer, W. F., & Pani, J. R. (1996). Reports of
mental imagery in retrieval from long-term mem-
ory. Consciousness and Cognition, 5, 265–287.
Brookes, M. (2004). Extreme measures: The dark
visions and bright ideas of Francis Galton. New
York: Bloomsbury.
Bulmer, M. (2003). Francis Galton: Pioneer of he-
redity and biometry. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins
University Press.
Burbridge, D. (1994). Galton’s 100: An exploration
of Francis Galton’s imagery studies. British Jour-
nal for the History of Science, 27, 443–463.
Burt, C. (1962). Francis Galton and his contributions
to psychology. British Journal of Statistical Psy-
chology, 15, 1–49.
Edwards, W., Lindman, H., & Savage, L. J. (1963).
Bayesian statistical inference for psychological re-
search. Psychological Review, 70, 193–242.
Fancher, R. E. (1996). Pioneers of psychology (3rd
ed.). New York: Norton.
Faust, D. (1984). The limits of scientiﬁc reasoning.
Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
Ferguson, E. S. (1977, August 26). The mind’s eye:
Nonverbal thought in technology. Science, 197,
827–836.
Forrest, D. W. (1974). Francis Galton: The life and
work of a Victorian genius. New York: Taplinger.
Forrest, D. W. (1995). Francis Galton (1822–1911).
In R. Fuller (Ed.), Seven pioneers of psychology
(pp. 1–19). London: Routledge.
Galton, F. (1874). English men of science: Their
nature and nurture. London: Macmillan.
Galton, F. (1879). Psychometric facts. Nineteenth
Century, 5(25), 425–433.
Galton, F. (1880). Statistics of mental imagery.
Mind, 5, 301–318.
Galton, F. (1883). Inquiries into human faculty and
its development. London: Macmillan.
Gardner, H. (1983). Frames of mind: The theory of
multiple intelligences. New York: Basic Books.
Gillham, N. W. (2001). A life of Sir Francis Galton:
From African exploration to the birth of eugenics.
New York: Oxford University Press.
Goodson, F. E. (2003). The evolution and function of
cognition. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Goodwin, C. J. (1999). A history of modern psychol-
ogy. New York: Wiley.
Hadamard, J. (1945). An essay on the psychology of
invention in the mathematical ﬁeld. Princeton, NJ:
Princeton University Press.
Hanson, N. R. (1958). Patterns of discovery. Cam-
bridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
Hergenhahn, B. R. (2005). An introduction to the
history of psychology (5th ed.). Belmont, CA:
Thomson Wadsworth.
Hothersall, D. (1984). History of psychology. Phila-
delphia: Temple University Press.
James, W. (1890). The principles of psychology (2
vols.). New York: Henry Holt.
Johnson-Laird, P. N. (1998). Imagery, visualization,
and thinking. In J. Hochberg (Ed.), Perception and
cognition at century’s end (pp. 441–467). San
Diego, CA: Academic Press.
Kosslyn, S. M. (1980). Image and mind. Cambridge,
MA: Harvard University Press.
Kosslyn, S. M. (1983). Ghosts in the mind’s ma-
chine: Creating and using images in the brain.
New York: Norton.
Kuhn, T. S. (1962). The structure of scientiﬁc revo-
lutions. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Libby, W. (1917). An introduction to the history of
science. Boston: Houghton Mifﬂin.
McKellar, P. (1972). Imagery from the standpoint of
introspection. In P. W. Sheehan (Ed.), The function
and nature of imagery (pp. 35–61). New York:
Academic Press.
Meehl, P. E. (1954). Clinical versus statistical pre-
diction. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota
Press.
Miller, A. I. (1984). Imagery in scientiﬁc thought:
Creating
20th-century
physics.
Boston:
Birkha¨user.
Miller, G. A. (1962). Psychology: The science of
mental life. New York: Harper & Row.
O’Connor, D. J., & Carr, B. (1982). Introduction to
the theory of knowledge. Minneapolis: University
of Minnesota Press.
Oliphant, M. (1985). Bohr and Rutherford. In A. P.
French & P. J. Kennedy (Eds.), Niels Bohr: A
centenary volume (pp. 68–70). Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press.
Osgood, C. E. (1953). Method and theory in experi-
mental psychology. New York: Oxford University
Press.
Paivio, A. (1971). Imagery and verbal processes.
New York: Holt, Rinehart & Winston.
Park, S., & Kosslyn, S. M. (1990). Imagination. In
M. G. Johnson & T. B. Henley (Eds.), Reﬂections
on The principles of psychology: William James
after a century (pp. 183–196). Hillsdale, NJ:
Erlbaum.
Pearson, K. (1924). The life, letters and labours of
Francis Galton: Vol. 2. Researches of middle life.
Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
Pillsbury, W. B. (1921). The essentials of psychol-
ogy. New York: Macmillan.
Popper, K. R. (1962). Conjectures and refutations.
New York: Basic Books.
144
BREWER AND SCHOMMER-AIKINS

Posner, M. I. (1973). Cognition: An introduction.
Glenview, IL: Scott Foresman.
Pylyshyn, Z. (2004). Mental imagery. In R. L. Greg-
ory (Ed.), The Oxford companion to the mind (2nd
ed., pp. 582–585). Oxford, England: Oxford Uni-
versity Press.
Romanes, G. J. (1883). [Review of the book Human
faculty and its development]. Nature, 28, 97–98.
Russell, B. (1919). On propositions: What they are
and how they mean. Aristotelian Society: Supple-
mentary Volume II, 1–43.
Schultz, D. P., & Schultz, S. E. (2004). A history of
modern
psychology
(8th
ed.).
Belmont,
CA:
Thomson Wadsworth.
Schweber, S. S. (1986). Feynman and the visualiza-
tion of space-time processes. Reviews of Modern
Physics, 58, 449–508.
Shepard, R. N. (1978). Externalization of mental
images and the act of creation. In B. S. Randhawa
& W. E. Coffman (Eds.), Visual learning, thinking,
and communication (pp. 133–189). New York:
Academic Press.
Thomson, J. J. (1930). Tendencies of recent investi-
gations in the ﬁeld of physics. London: British
Broadcasting Corporation.
Titchener, E. B. (1918). Experimental psychology: A
manual of laboratory practice: Vol. I. Qualitative
experiments: Part II. Instructor’s manual. New
York: Macmillan.
Tweney, R. D., Doherty, M. E., & Mynatt, C. R.
(Eds.). (1981). On scientiﬁc thinking. New York:
Columbia University Press.
Vinacke, W. E. (1952). The psychology of thinking.
New York: McGraw-Hill.
Watson, J. D. (1968). The double helix. New York:
Atheneum.
Watson, R. I. (1979). Basic writings in the history of
psychology. New York: Oxford University Press.
Watson, R. I., & Evans, R. B. (1991). The great
psychologists (5th ed.). New York: HarperCollins.
Woodworth, R. S. (1938). Experimental psychology.
New York: Henry Holt.
Woodworth, R. S., & Schlosberg, H. (1954). Exper-
imental psychology (Rev. ed.). New York: Henry
Holt.
145
SPECIAL ISSUE: IMAGERY IN SCIENTISTS

Appendix
Scoring Criteria Used to Classify the Vividness of Visual Imagery for Data From the Galton
Breakfast Questionnaire
1. Image Comparable to or More Vivid Than
Perception
[Response should state that the imagery is compa-
rable to or more vivid than actual perception.]
[Image brighter and/or clearer than perception—
score as 1]
“clear image, brighter than the actual scene”; “as
bright, if not brighter than the actual scene”; “it is
probably more bright than the actual scene”; “fairly
clear” and “yes, maybe brighter.”
[Image comparable to perception]
“as bright as if it were sitting right in front of me;”
“brightness is the same as that of the actual scene”; “as
bright and clear as if I was there”; “very clear and
bright”; “yes, clear and bright”; “fairly clear, I can see
exactly the table setting”; “fairly clear, comparable to
actual scene”; “fairly clear” and “yes”; “yes.”
2. Image Somewhat Less Clear and/or Bright Than
Perception
[a. Response that indicates a mild reduction in
clearness and/or brightness.
b. Use of an adjective that reduces the strength of
the word “dim.”]
“brightness is slightly less”; “fairly clear, not as
bright”; “image is clear, but not as clear as if I was
actually there”; “fairly clear. . .darker in my mind than
it was this morning”; “slightly dim”; “a little dim”;
“relatively dim”; “dimmer”; “sort of dim”; “fairly
dim”; “dim but distinct”; “objects are clear but bright-
ness is low”; “fairly clear” and “no.”
3. Image Considerably Less Clear and/or Bright
Than Perception
[A relatively unmodiﬁed use of the word “dim.”]
“dim” and “no”; “dim”; “rather dim and hazy.”
4. Image Very Weak
[a. Response reports very weak image, but some
image present
b. Use of an adjective that intensiﬁes the word
“dim.”]
“very dim”; “almost no visual image”; “no” [in re-
sponse to “Is the image dim or fairly clear?”]
5. No Image
[No clear cases in our sample, but Galton’s data
provides the examples below.]
“no power of visualizing”; “my powers are zero.”
Note. These criteria are an elaboration of those
developed by Armstrong (1894). The responses used
to illustrate the categories were taken from pilot data.
Received January 30, 2006
Accepted February 8, 2006 
146
BREWER AND SCHOMMER-AIKINS

