Book Reviews 
William Glasser has aged well. He has worked hard at developing a 
simple but exacting approach for fighting coercive relationships and creating 
more joyful and successful educational systems. If simplicity involves 
removing the urmecessary so the necessary may speak, his two new books 
necessarily speak to our educational hearts, heads, and hands. It is necessary 
that we take them to heart of our educational concerns. 
References 
Glasser, W. (1981). Stations o/the mind: New directions/or reality therapy. 
New York: Harper & Row. 
Powers, W. (1973). Behavior: The control a/perception. Chicago: Aldine. 
The Disciplined Mind. 
Howard Gardner. New York, NY: Simon and Schuster Inc., 1999. 
Reviewed by Ted McKeigan, Graduate Student, Brock University. 
What is true, beautiful, and good? Using the theory of evolution, the musical 
genius of Mozart, and the horrors of the Holocaust, Howard Gardner, in The 
Disciplined Mind successfully assists students' and teachers' cultural 
understanding of their educational process as it relates to truth, beauty, and 
goodness. He does this by emphasizing that we should teach less but in more 
depth. By probing important issues in depth, we will be teaching much more. 
In pursuit of truth, Gardner links Darwin's development of systematic 
classification of living organisms to the understanding of topics that effect 
human beings today. In doing so, he manages to fmd common ground between 
the scientific and religious communities, despite the controversies surrounding 
the theory of evolution. He uses the power of music to depict the human 
condition in Mozart's work, "The Marriage of Figaro," in search of beauty as it 
appears in music and human relations. And, in pursuit of the good (and the 
ugly), Gardner uses the Holocaust and the atrocities associated with it, as a way 
to understand, not only the Holocaust, but also the human motivation behind 
such a horrific and elaborate endeavour. 
Gardner walks a fine line between the age old rivals of traditional 
education and progressive education. He lauds John Dewey and his 
progressive stance toward a humanistic, cormected educational curriculum, 
while, at the same time, supports the notion of national standards and a national 
curriculum - with limits! He does reject the preoccupation with standardized 
tests and feels that in the wrong hands, the results could be used to foster non-
75 

Book Reviews 
educational objectives. Gardner does, however, feel there is a vital need for 
accountability for the institutions that are publicly funded and that educational 
language should be easily understood by parents and students, alike. 
Gardner embodies the best of both approaches in his description of the 
disciplines. He acknowledges the need for a multi-disciplinary approach to 
education, especially in the early years, until an " intellectual core" is 
established. Gardner questions, however, the value of studying certain 
disciplines in order to achieve a specific end. He states, "Rather the rationale 
and the reward for studying the disciplines should be enhanced access to, and 
stronger purchase on, the major questions of human life" (p. 218). Curriculum 
should not confine one's experience, it should expand it. Once again, Gardner 
walks the line between tradition and progressive education, by approving of 
disciplinary studies but supporting the "progressives" by encouraging 
interdisciplinary work that would enrich "answers to essential questions." 
Ultimately, Gardner wishes to convey the value of gaining a deep 
understanding and connection to the issues of being human. Such a stance 
creates tension with the business driven, educational reformers of Ontario, as 
the probing human element of education seems to be legislated away. All the 
emphasis is being placed on money and profits, as well as teacher proof 
curriculum. 
Gardner would like to create a public that can think scientifically about 
new discoveries; think historically about society and politics; and identify what 
is moral and beautiful in their daily lives. He suggests six pathways through 
which to do this. These pathways are: the canon pathway, outlining historical 
and artistic values; the multicultural pathway, examining ethnic and racial 
culture; the progressive pathway, outlining democratic values; the 
technological pathway, defining the attainment of a competitive edge; the 
socially responsible pathway, looking at human development; and the 
understanding pathway, referring to continuous questioning and learning. By 
following any of these pathways, Gardner feels that people could make 
informed personal choices about what is true, beautiful, and good. Such a 
vision, would, in Gardner's opinion, better enable our society to take advantage 
of the opportunities presented in life, enriching both the present and our future. 
This type of education for understanding offered by Gardner would be 
useful to educators who are in teaching for the long run. The multitude of 
approaches to education are brought together and synthesized into a workable, 
creative plan. From a teacher's point of view, there is much guidance for 
extending perspective and influence. Teachers are encouraged to challenge 
their students and explore beyond the curriculum in search of truth, beauty, and 
goodness. Gardner states that, " Learning need not occur only within the four 
walls of the classroom. Parents, school board members, and key citizens of the 
76 

Book Reviews 
community are all factors in the equation that yields a curriculum" (p.136). 
This message is also directed to the reformers who would have all "learning" 
confined to a standardized curriculum that would stifle enrichment and 
experience. 
Gardner encourages teachers to empower students by giving them a 
voice in their educational experience. At the same time, he charges students 
with the task of taking responsibility for their education, using all the 
opportunities that teclmology has to offer. Teachers, students, and 
administrators should be " part and parcel of the envisioning and planning 
process" (p. 229), which is another distinct message to reformers that learning 
is better accomplished when all involved parties are connected to curriculum, 
rather than having a forced curriculum written by "experts" at a distance. 
Despite the inevitable changes that will occur in our notions of what is 
true, good, and beautiful, The Disciplined Mind provides teachers and students 
with the tools to grasp the opportunities for deeper understanding and identify 
the visions that will enhance our education now and in a more desirable future. 
Gardner once again has invited educators to focus their efforts and extend their 
reach. 
The COlIStruction o/the Self: A Developmental Perspective. 
Susan Harter. New York, NY: Guilford Press, 1999. 
Reviewed by Sandra Leanne Bosacki, Brock University. 
Within the fields of educational and developmental psychology, interest has 
grown concerning the question of how cognitive and socioemotional processes 
work together to construct pathways for the self. In particular, researchers and 
educators have become increasingly interested in the role that the school plays 
in children's self-development. According to Jerome Bruner, "the single most 
universal thing about human experience is the phenomenon of the 'Self" (1996, 
p. 35) and advocates that education is crucial to its formation. However, 
despite the strong theoretical claims linking a child's sense of self to school 
experience, there has been a lack of systematic research on the self within the 
school context. 
Developmental psychologist Susan Harter in her recent book entitled, 
The Construction of the Self: A Developmental Perspective, has addressed such 
a topic. Harter lends her expertise in the field of self-development and gender 
by examining the development of the structure and content of self-
representations from the preschool years through late adolescence. Harter 
provides a comprehensive analysis of the cognitive and social processes 
77 

