Bubbles, Panics and Crashes: An Introduction 
to Alternative Theories of Economic Crisis 
 
Dr. Sakir Devrim Yilmaz 
 
Economics 
University of Manchester 
 
 
Lecture 2 
Major Technological Bubbles & Credit Crunch 
1 

Major Technology Bubbles & Easy Liquidity 
Bubbles (Perez 2009) 
 
• Perez argues that major technology bubbles are -in 
nature and economic consequences- different from 
excess liquidity bubbles and the following Minsky 
moments 
 
• A major technology bubble occurs through a long 
period of time as a new technology that 
revolutionizes the production process develops 
• This 
happens 
through 
continuous 
market 
experimentation 
• The 
new 
technology 
creates 
immense 
opportunities for profits 
  


• Every new technology takes a long gestation 
period to be successfully installed first and 
then deployed. During this time, the full 
potential of the new technology is realised as it 
gets adopted by all the sectors in the economy. 
 
• The installation period is turbulent and creates 
a bubble. When the bubble bursts, a new 
framework is constituted through regulation of 
finance, and the technology deploys its full 
potential during the second phase. 
 

• The nature of the technology is independent from 
the evolution of the change that follows the birth 
of the technology 
• Technological development occurs as revolutions  
rather than smooth harmonious change due to the 
human resistance to change and institutional 
inertia. Violent competition between new and 
traditional industries forces the change during the 
installation period, as increased profits draw more 
and more companies into the adoption of the new 
technology. 
• This 
is 
Schumpeter’s 
creative 
destruction 
argument for capitalism. 

• During this phase, innovation in the financial 
sector follows the innovation in the real sector, 
as the finance industry quickly adopts the new 
technology. 
• Therefore, it quickly invents in order to attract 
more capital and transfer the available funds to 
the newly emerging industries 
• In the early stages of the development of a new 
technology, excessive faith in the benefits 
creates an irrational exuberance, which is 
justified by soaring stock prices (and therefore 
capital gains) 



• Two defining characteristics of an MTB : 
Concentration 
in 
new 
technologies 
(infrastructure)  and decoupling from the real 
economy 
• While decoupling is common in all bubbles, the 
new technology aspect is peculiar to MTBs. 
• Perez uses Price/Earnings ratios as an 
indicator of decoupling from the real economy. 
• Irrationally high P/E ratios are observed in 
MTBs, which signal that investors either expect 
very high future earnings or further increases 
in stock prices to incur capital gains 


• This is because it is not profits or dividends 
that determine the flow of investment during 
an MTB. Rather, it is capital gains through 
asset inflation. 
• Therefore, there is a massive increase in the 
demand for liquid assets (such as stocks) as 
the velocity of money and volume of trading 
increases 
• When the development of a new technology 
increases 
productivity 
and 
profits, 
the 
financial sectors begins channelling funds to 
the new industries rather than traditional 
clients. 


• The bubble associated with this channelling of 
funds leads to an artificial financial success in 
the early period (as stocks rise) and results in 
over-investment in the new infrastructure. 
• However, at some point, the MTB bursts, 
leading to a bust. By then, though, the economy 
is 
totally 
modernized 
and 
the 
new 
infrastructure has been in place. On the other 
hand, keep in mind that financialization of the 
economy has also taken place during this 
period with quick gains through speculation 
becoming widespread during the bubble  

• The success and duration of the deployment 
period that will follow depends on the ability of 
the state to restrain the financial sector (or the 
casino it has turned into) through regulation, so 
that investment decisions are taken with 
respect to real economy constraints. 
• Therefore, there is a fundamental difference 
between MTBs and ELBs. MTBs are driven by 
opportunity pull  as the thrill of the new 
technology draws the money into the casino 
while ELBs are driven by easy credit push as the 
abundance of cheap credit funnels the funds 
into the casino. 

• This can be clearly seen in the last two bubbles, 
the MTB of the 1990s and the ELB of the first 
decade of the century. 
• The interest rates were very high during the 
MTB, while they were at historical lows during 
the ELB. 
• The ELB of the first decade of the century was 
an amplification of the forces that resulted in 
the decoupling of finance from the real 
economy during the 1990s. Combined with the 
historically low interest rates, the magnitude of 
the bubble was intensified even more. 
 


Bubbles, Panics and Crashes: An Introduction 
to Alternative Theories of Economic Crisis 
 
Dr. Sakir Devrim Yilmaz 
 
Economics 
University of Manchester 
 
 
Lecture 4 
Credit Crunch 
1 

Credit Crunch 
• Accumulation of reserves in response to the 
1997 Asian crisis in order to defend 
domestic currencies. 
 
• Very stable macroeconomic conditions, 
steady economic growth, low inflation and 
low interest rates. (See Mizen 2008 for 
detailed analysis) 
 

• Historically low spreads between safe and risky 
assets, unusually low volatility, very high leverage 
 
• The bursting of the dot.com bubble at the end of the 
1990s caused the central banks to reduce interest 
rates in order to mitigate the affects of the coming 
recession. (to suppress the possible deflationary 
pressures) 
 
• Expansionary monetary policy accommodated the low 
interest rates as the money supply in industrial 
countries increased dramatically.  
 
 



 
• The Great Moderation in the U.S (Bernanke 2005)- 
The Great Stability in the U.K 
 
• Inflation kept at very low levels and in line with the 
target rates, as well as very low output volatility. (In 
general, this is not the case, as keeping inflation under 
control comes along with large fluctuations in output 
in general) 
 
• The well-known Phillips curve relationship between 
inflation-employment seemed to have disappeared. 
 
 

Money supply growth rates (Goodhart 2008) 

• ‘Greenspan put’: No downward risk in financial 
markets, leading to excessive risk-taking (see 
Heinemann 2008 for how current structure of 
financial system necessarily implies this) 
 
• There was widespread belief that the FED 
would not allow the markets to fall below 
certain thresholds and take immediate action 
by reducing interest rates and pumping up of 
liquidity. 
 
• The result was a clear underpricing of risk in 
financial markets. 
 

 
• “(D)evelopment of financial products, such as 
asset-backed 
securities, 
collateral 
loan 
obligations, and credit default swaps, that 
facilitate the dispersion of risk… These 
increasingly complex financial instruments 
have contributed to the development of a far 
more flexible, efficient, and hence resilient 
financial system than the one that existed just a 
quarter-century ago.“ (Greenspan, 2005) 

• “there is little systematic evidence to support 
widely cited claims that financial globalization 
by itself leads to deeper and more costly 
crises.” (IMF 2006, Financial Stability Report) 
 
• As a result of these conditions, it was argued 
that the economy is now much less vulnerable 
to shocks. (‘No return to boom and bust’ in 
Gordon Brown’s words) 
 
 
 

• Significant fall in personal saving rates and 
increase in Debt/Income ratios in the developed 
world. 
• Very low interest rates fuelled the demand for 
housing and consumer goods due to cheap credit, 
leading to sustained increase in house prices. 
(particularly in U.S, U.K and Southern Europe) 
• Median house prices in U.S for example increased 
by 40% between 2000 and 2006. 
• A significant increase in the ratio of total financial 
assets/GDP in U.S and Europe, indicating greater 
total 
indebtedness 
of 
the 
private 
sector, 
particularly households. 



• Increased surpluses from China, Japan, Germany and 
oil-exporting countries as the counterpart to deficits 
in U.S, U.K and Southern Europe. (The Savings Glut as 
it is called in the mainstream literature) 
 
• As mentioned  before, part of this was due to hedging 
against domestic currency devaluation after the bitter 
experience of the Asian Crisis. 
 
• However, competitive exchange rate policy to enhance 
exports also played a major role. 
 
• Of particular importance is the relation between 
China and U.S (and partly Europe) 
 

• The pegging of Yuan to the U.S $ and Chinese 
monetary policy implied a circular relationship 
between China and U.S 
• Increased consumption of U.S consumers 
based on cheap credit. (monetary expansion in 
U.S) 
• Massive U.S imports from China leading to 
excessive supply of U.S $ in China (as well as 
destroying domestic industry in U.S, as well as 
Europe, though to a lesser extent) 
• Pegging of Yuan requires the CB of China to 
drain this excess supply of $ to prevent the 
appreciation of the Yuan 

• These U.S $ invested back in U.S government 
bonds and Treasury bills 
 
• As of 2006, out of the $ 5 trillion U.S debt, 44% 
was held by foreigners, with Japan being the 
largest holder followed by China. 
 
• In April 2010, China exceeded Japan and became 
the largest holder. (In November 2010, FED 
outpaced China and now is the official largest 
holder of U.S debt) 
 
• Therefore, the entire discussion of revaluation of 
Yuan. 

Individual Savings Rates out of Disposable Income in 
Developed Countries (Goodhart 2008) 



• Massive increase in capital flows to developing countries, 
some as foreign direct investment but a large portion as 
speculative financial capital, as stock markets all over the 
world soared, and national currencies of developing countries 
experienced large appreciation episodes.  
 
• Very high rates of growth in developing economies between 
2001-2007 particularly, as well as the developed world. Low 
volatility of output growth 
 
• However, this came at the expense of large current account 
deficits on a continuous basis in U.S ,U.K and Spain in Euro-
zone. 
 
• These deficits were matched by massive current account 
surpluses in export economies such as China, Japan, Germany 
and oil-exporting countries. (Remember the Yuan-devaluation 
debate going on for years) 

• Massive currents account deficits in U.S and U.K funded by massive 
surpluses in export economies. (China, Japan, India and oil-
exporters..) 
  

Boratav (2009) has the cumulative numbers for oil exporting 
countries 
Current Account Balance 
2002 
2003 
2004 
2005 
2006 
2007 
China 
 2.4 
2.8 
3.6 
7.2 
9.5 
11.0 
Japan 
 2.9 
3.2 
3.7 
3.6 
3.9 
3.8 
UK 
-1.7 
-1.6 
-2.1 
-2.6 
-3.3 
-2.7 
U.S 
-4.3 
-4.7 
-5.3 
-5.9 
-6.0 
-5.2 
France 
 1.4 
0.8 
0.6 
-0.6 
-0.8 
-1.0 
Germany 
 2.0 
1.9 
4.7 
5.1 
6.1 
7.5 
Spain 
-3.3 
-3.5 
-5.3 
-7.4 
-8.9 
-10.1 

Boratav (2009) and IMF WEO Database 

• Reinhart and Rogoff (2008) show that 
historically, periods of greater capital mobility 
are followed by banking crisis. 
• Although they do not provide a reason for this 
phenomenon, the crises are in general 
triggered by sudden stops – reversals of capital 
flows. 
• One other observation by Reinhart and Rogoff 
is that emerging market borrowing tends to be 
pro-cyclical and dependent on commodity 
prices. 
• Spikes in commodity prices are followed by 
waves of sovereign defaults. 
 



• Most of the success in macroeconomic environment 
was attributed to  
 
 Better monetary policy that managed to reduce the swings 
in the business cycle 
Globalization of the world economy in general and finance 
in particular 
Improvements in information technology enabling better 
communication and risk assessment 
Securitization that enables to spread the risk 
Derivatives that enabled hedging against risk 
 

Securitization: The Beginning of the End? 
• Securitization is the process of pooling together future cash 
flows (such as loan payments) and transferring them to 
another entity which sells these future cash flows to investors 
and pays them as these flows are realized.  
 
• Was forbidden the U.S until 1980.  (Glass-Steagall Act) Banks 
were allowed to engage in some securitization in 1980,  in 
1999, the restriction was removed and originators of loans 
were allowed to sell the loans to issuers for securitization. 
(See Davidson 2008) 
 
• The full process (Fabozzi et al (2007) has a good example, 
Ashcraft et al (2008) has a very detailed explanation of the 
whole process) 
 

 
• The process starts with the borrower or most of the times 
through a mortgage broker, who gets paid for every mortgage 
arranged. 
 
• The originator, (a bank or mortgage firm) lends the initial 
amount to the borrower. 
• The pool of loans is then sold to an issuer (arranger). This 
might be at par value or higher than the initial principle, as the 
issuer expects to collect the interest payments on the loans. 
The originator already collects fees from the borrower for the 
contract.  
 
• The issuer scrutinises the originator company, and then sets up 
a special-purpose vehicle (SPV) that legally purchases the 
loans. This SPV is a bankruptcy-remote trust, meaning that it is 
unaffected by the bankruptcy of the originator, or the arranger. 
However, it is still vulnerable to losses on the loans. 

•  For the purchase of loans, the issuer uses internal funds where 
available. In some cases, the issuers have to borrow the funds 
from a warehouse lender, using the loans as collateral. In this 
case, the warehouse lender may require the issuer to use some 
internal funds, meaning a ‘haircut’ to the collateral.  
• The issuer pools the loans, and creates different tranches of 
securitized assets. (Mortgage-backed security) These in 
general involve three different classes: Senior, Mezzanine and 
Junior. Senior classes are protected by Mezzanine and Junior 
classes, as these bear the first losses if the loans default. For 
this reason, Junior class (toxic waste) offers the highest return 
and is the riskiest, while the senior class offers the lowest 
return and is the safest (AAA-rated securities). 
• As a rule of thumb, securitization issues backed by mortgages 
are called MBS, and securitization issues backed by debt 
obligations are called CDO. Securitization issues backed by 
consumer-backed products — car loans, consumer loans and 
credit cards, among others — are called ABS 
 

 
 

• Sometimes (not always) the issuers are asked to hold all or 
some of the junior tranche securities.  
 
• The quality of the securities are rated by Credit Rating 
Agencies (S&P, Moody’s) according to the loans in the 
tranches. The senior tranches receive AAA rating while junior 
tranches are not rated.  
 
• The credit rating agencies receive regular payments from 
issuers for this service. The ratings help the investors to 
choose between various asset-based securities.  
• This is the ‘originate and distribute’ model, as the risk is ‘in 
theory’ entirely removed from the banks’ balance sheets. 
 
• Credit Default Swaps (CDS): Another ingenious invention of the 
last decade. 
• A CDS is an arrangement where the buyer makes periodic 
payments to the seller and receives a payoff in return, if the 
underlying debt instrument (loan, bond, MBS) defaults. 
 


 
• At first glance, a CDS looks like insurance on debt. However, 
there are major differences between a CDS and an insurance 
contract. 
 
      The seller of a CDS does not have to be a regulated entity. 
      The buyer of the CDS does not have to hold the underlying security or 
any other  form of credit exposure. In other words, everybody can buy a 
CDS on any security or debt-related instrument. (on anybody’s debt in 
plain English). 
      The seller of the CDS does not have any capital adequacy or reserve 
requirements.  (Blind selling of CDS not backed up by any capital) 
      In U.S, the CDSs were subject to mark-to market accounting (just like 
MBS, or generally CDOs). Or in other words,  the institutions holding these 
assets on their balance sheets would use market prices for these contracts 
as the underlying value. (Mark-to-market has been suspended in U.S and 
U.K and the applied in Europe with Basel II since 2007 . Now, mark-to 
model or mark-to-myth) 

• Investors in securities engaged in extensive CDS purchasing. In 
this way, the default risk was removed(!), and the investors had 
little incentive to monitor or scrutinize the underlying loans in 
the securities.  
• Very-short maturities of securities: The average maturity of 
asset-backed commercial paper was around 90 days. Reduces 
incentives for investors. 
 
• In most cases, banks were either holders of securities by 
another issuer on their own mortgage loans, or were directly 
engaging in securitizing through special investment vehicles 
(SIV). Banks therefore bought CDS on this debt as well. This 
increased incentives for predatory lending. 
 
• Total notional amount of CDS (on all debts) was between 45- 
62trillion $ as of 2007 (larger than world GDP).  
 

Yield differentials (premium) with 10yr U.S Treasury 
bond (Goodhart 2008) 


Securitization: A Simple Example 
Borrower 
                                ↓(predatory lending) 
Originator: Bank 
                                                        ↓(information advantage problem) 
Issuer (Special Purpose Vehicle) 
↙                ↑                 ↘ 
                         Warehouse Lender    ↑                Investors 
                                                      ↑              ↗ (conflict of interest) 
                         Credit Rating Agency (paid by issuers) 
Servicer 

• All through the process, there are several incentive 
problems. (Detailed analysis in Ashcraft et al 2008) 
 
• PROBLEMS 
• 1-  Mortgagor – Originator 
• The most important problem is predatory lending: As 
the banks almost completely remove the risk from 
their balance sheets, there is incentive for making 
low-quality loans. This is documented in several 
empirical studies (Del’ariccia et al 2007, Keys et al 
2008). 
Further, 
sub-prime 
borrowers 
do 
not 
understand the risks associated with the loans – Not 
financially sophisticated enough. 
 

• 2 – Originator – Arranger 
• Once again, there’s the problem of predatory 
lending and borrowing. The arranger needs to 
conduct due-diligence and the originator has 
information advantage over the arranger. This 
creates 
incentives 
for 
collaborative 
fraud 
(mortgagor and originator), if proper due-
diligence is not carried out.   
• 3-Arranger – Third Parties 
• The arranger has information advantage over all 
other third parties concerned (CRAs, asset 
managers and warehouse lender) This creates the 
typical lemons problem. The warehouse lender 
may ask the arranger to fund part of the securities. 
 

• 4- Servicer – Mortgagor 
• Unobserved costly effort on the mortgagors 
side, which affects value of the collateral (e.g 
servicing the house, and paying property taxes) 
• 5- Asset Manager – Investor 
• Principal – Agent problem: Most investors 
invest in accordance with recommendations of 
asset managers. When asset managers do not 
conduct appropriate due-diligence on the 
issuer, the issuer has little incentive to conduct 
due-diligence on the originator or borrowers. 
In theory, this problem should be mitigated by 
the credit rating agencies. 
 

• 6 – Investor – Credit Rating Agencies 
• Credit Rating agencies are paid by issuers 
(Ironically!). They are paid higher fees to assess 
structured products. Creates a massive conflict 
of interest and may lead to over-pricing of 
securities.  
•  Investors lack the ability to evaluate the 
models of Credit Rating Agencies 
• All the problems (except 4) have significantly 
contributed to the sub-prime crisis. 
 
 

• Fabozzi and Kothari (2007) argue securitization  
 
Reduces funding costs through SIV’s (as these are 
bankruptcy-remote entities), therefore cheaper 
than issuing corporate bonds 
Diversifies funding channels (bonds & securities) 
Reduces interest rate and credit risk 
Reduces on-balance sheet leverage 
Provides maturity intermediation, diversification 
and information processing regarding the loans 
converts otherwise illiquid assets such as 
mortgage loans into liquid securities, and 
therefore   
 

• Further technical problems with securitization 
(see Coval et al 2009) 
The overlap of geographical locations increases 
the probability of higher than expected default 
correlations 
The probability of default has been higher than 
estimated due to declining credit quality of 
sub-prime borrowers 
The existence of CDO-squared (and cubed) 
increases the errors in determining probablity 
of default 
 

Classification of Mortgage Loans 
 
• Prime Loans: High quality borrowers. The guidelines 
are set by Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac. The 
originators can sell the mortgages to GSEs. (See Mizen 
2008) 
 
• Jumbo Loans: Exceed the limits set by Fannie Mae and 
Freddie Mac (around $800.000) but the loan cannot 
exceed 125% of average county house value. 
 
• Alt-A Loans: Do not conform to Fannie Mae and 
Freddie Mac definitions - has higher loan /income 
ratio, default probability than Jumbo and Prime Loans 

• The 2001 ‘Interagency Expanded Guidance for Subprime 
Lending Programs’ outlines the definition of a sub-prime 
borrower. (See Ashcraft et al 2008) 
Bankruptcy in the last 5 years 
Very high probability of defalut 
Debt-Income Ratio of 50% , limited ability to cover living expenses 
after debt-service 
• Sub-Prime Loans: Sometimes referred as NINJA(No 
Income No Job or Asset) loans. No upfront payment is 
provided by the borrower (The loan covers the full 
amount of the property) 
• Sub-prime borrowers pay 2-3% premium 
compared to jumbo loans 
• They are ineligible for securitization by GSEs, so 
were securitized by private Wall Street Banks 


 
• Further, a very large proportion of sub-prime loans 
consisted of hybrid loans defined as ARM, Option 
ARM etc.. 
 
• These loans had teaser (or no) interest rates at the 
initial stages but after some time (depending on the 
type of the loan) the payments increased dramatically. 
 
• They also depended on the ongoing interest rate in 
the Interbank market (LIBOR), making payments 
further vulnerable to fluctuations in the economy and 
central bank policy. 
 




 
•
Total sub-prime mortgages reached 25% of all mortgages issued by 
2007. Many sub-prime mortgage-backed bonds were further re-
securitized to create CDO-squared! (See Coval et al (2009) for 
detailed analysis) 
•
Most borrowers have experienced an improvement in their equity 
position due to increases in house prices. (outstanding mortgage 
obligations less than the value of the property)  Using this positive 
equity as collateral, mortgagors engaged in either re-financing their 
mortgages or borrowing personal loans, which were subsequently 
securitized themselves. 
 
•
This creates a vicious cycle that feeds itself. The securitized sub-
prime mortgages reached incredible levels in 2007. As a result of all, 
the sub-prime market was like a bombshell waiting to explode.  
 
•
Remember that many countries outside U.S had similar experiences 
due to excessively cheap credit. (U.K, Baltic countries, Spain..) 
 

Volume of Credit Instruments Wray (2008) 

Securities issued as % GDP (Landi et al 
2008) 


• Further risks associated with securitization 
(see Landi et al 2008) 
• A very important development is the ability of 
the financial agents to bypass regulatory capital 
requirements 
• This is achieved through off-balance-sheet 
vehicles, CDS covering and monoline insurers. 
• Results in a systematic risk. 
• Financial deepening has encouraged greater 
indebtedness of private sector 
• Secondary securities markets (where securities 
are traded over the counter) creates a 
perception of higher liquidity.  
 

• The problem of monoline insurers (AMBAC, 
MBIA) 
• Monoline insurers insure municipal bonds (which 
are/were considered safe so they have AAA 
rating) 
• Due to this perceived low-risk, they have 
excessively 
high 
leverage 
(150/1) 
Since 
monoliners have triple-A rating themselves, they 
don’t have to post collateral. 
• As of 2008, monoliners had insured around  $2.5 
trillion worth of asset backed bonds and CDOs. 
• Downgrading of monoliners leads to lower ratings 
for municipal bonds and can increase funding 
costs 
 


• Financial 
institutions 
could 
acquire 
and 
dispose of these securities, and therefore 
manage their liquidity needs. 
• On the other hand, financial deepening in the 
U.S was through the growth of non-bank 
financial institutions (investment banks, hedge 
funds, SIVs) 
• The share of total financial assets of non-bank 
institutions display a large increase. 
• This was accompanied with a large increase in 
the leverage of these institutions. 
 

• Leverage: Total Assets / Equity 
• Consider a household first 
• Suppose the household has a mortgage worth 
$90, the value of the house is $100 and the 
household has an equity (net worth) of $10 
•  Then the leverage of this household would be 
100/10 = 10. The balance sheet would look 
like 
 
 
ASSETS 
LIABILITIES 
MORTGAGE $90 
HOUSE   $100 
EQUITY  $10  

• If we assume that the total market value of debt 
remains the same when there are small 
fluctuations in the value of the asset, then 
leverage would be 
• L = A / (A – 90) 
• Therefore, leverage and total assets are 
inversely related. In other words, if the value of 
the house goes up, equity (net worth) increases 
and leverage falls. 
• This can be observed in the historical aggregate 
household data as well (showing passive 
behaviour to asset-price increases) 


• How about the post-2000 period? What would 
you expect about the leverage of households? 
•  On the other hand, the historical data on 
commercial banks does not display the same 
characteristics 
• The commercial banks seem to target a fixed 
leverage ratio, active management of leverage. 
• The more striking observation is the positive 
relation between leverage and asset prices for 
security brokers and dealers (which include 
major Wall Street investment banks) 
• Pro-cyclical leverage 




• Let’s see what happens when a financial 
intermediary targets a certain value for leverage 
 
 
 
• The initial leverage is 100/10 = 10. Assume the price 
of debt is constant for little changes in asset prices, 
and assume price of securities increases by $1 to 
$101 
 
ASSETS 
LIABILITIES 
SECURITIES   $100 
EQUITY   $10 
DEBT       $90 
ASSETS 
LIABILITIES 
SECURITIES   $101 
EQUITY   $11 
DEBT       $90 

• Leverage now falls to 101/11 = 9.18. If the 
intermediary wants to keep the leverage at the 
initial value of 10, then Assets/Liabilities = 10 
must hold. 
• (101+ D)/11 = 10 must hold, which gives D = 9 
• Therefore, the intermediary takes an additional 
$9 of debt to purchase securities. The final 
balance sheet looks like 
 
ASSETS 
LIABILITIES 
SECURITIES   $110 
EQUITY   $11 
DEBT       $99 

• The mechanism works exactly the same in the 
opposite way. Suppose the price of securities fall 
such that value of total securities fall to 109. 
Now, the balance sheet looks like 
 
 
 
• The leverage is too high now: 109/10 = 10.9. In 
order to keep the leverage at the same level, the 
firm sells securities worth $9 and pays back its 
debt. The final balance sheet is: 
ASSETS 
LIABILITIES 
SECURITIES   $109 
EQUITY   $10 
DEBT       $99 

 
 
 
• The magnitude of the reactions to price changes is 
amplified when leverage is pro-cyclical. When the price 
of the securities increase, the firm purchases even more 
securities with debt than constant leverage. 
• Therefore, if higher demand for the securities puts 
upward pressure on the price, then stronger balance 
sheet (as implied by lower leverage) increases the 
demand for the securities, which puts further upward 
pressure on the price... 
• This creates a vicious cycle in a boom, which is reversed 
in a downturn. 
 
ASSETS 
LIABILITIES 
SECURITIES   $100 
EQUITY   $10 
DEBT       $90 



Securities issued as % GDP (Landi et al 
2008) 

• In the Euro area, banks became more active in the 
securities markets from 1999 to 2007. However, in 
the U.S, non-bank intermediaries involvement in 
the securitization process was much more 
significant. (from 71% to 105% from 1999 to 
2007) 
• A much closer relationship between traditional 
banks and non-bank intermediaries such as 
pension funds, investment banks, hedge funds in 
terms of balance sheet elements, business models 
and exposure to market, credit and liquidity risk. 
• This creates homogeneity of financial portfolios 
and 
potential 
for 
strong 
contagion 
affects 
(deterioration in the balance sheet of one entity 
directly affecting others) and systemic risk. 

• This was further accompanied by a decline in the 
relative weight of deposits in banks, which are the 
most stable and credible sources of credit and 
liquidity. (Note the huge difference between U.S 
and the Eurozone) 
• As a result of all these, the originate and distribute 
model led to the standardization of balance sheets 
without 
adequate 
liquidity 
guarantees 
in 
secondary markets, thus creating a high systemic 
risk. 
• In other words, the design of the system implicitly 
required that the central banks will provide the 
necessary liquidity in case of a downturn.   



• When sub-prime loans (as well others) began to 
default at high rates in 2007, the investors 
withdrew from the securities markets, leading to 
increases in the spreads in secondary markets and 
massive fall in the prices of securities. 
• Coupled with fire sales due to shortages of 
liquidity, the SIV’s were unable to refinance the 
loans through the issuance of new bonds and 
securities. 
• The central banks had to step forward to provide 
the liquidity needed for the functioning of the 
system. (Liquidity crisis). The large fall in the 
prices of financial instruments (due to massive 
de-leveraging) also created a solvency crisis for 
large financial institutions, as liabilities well 
exceeded their assets.  
 

• Distorted Incentives of banksters and bonus schemes 
in financial institutions. (See Hoffmann (2008) for a 
very good discussion on this) 
 
• Hoffman (2008) shows that as long as the 
banker/trader’s discount rate for future income is 
below a certain threshold, he/she will choose to 
gamble for short-run profits. 
 
• Further, the competitive pressures in the market will 
force the trader to gamble even if his/her discount 
rate is high. (the probability of losing his/her job will 
increase the minimum discount rate necessary for 
gambling) 

• Some numbers: 
• On average, an employee in an investment bank 
earns 
$8367 
per 
week 
($435k 
annual) 
compared to  817$ per week ($40k annual) in 
private sector (Johnston 2007) 
• The top 25 hedge fund managers earned an 
average income of $570 million in 2006, with 
the income of top 3 over $1billion 
• Total earnings of 25 top hedge fund managers 
amount to $14 billion, and ranks 94th in World 
GDP statistics.  
 

• Due to the global nature of financial markets, 
very high returns of ABS, and the possibility of 
CDS covering, securities ended up in the 
balance sheets of many financial institutions 
over the world. 
 
• So the default risk of the borrower is actually 
replaced with the insolvency risk of the CDS 
seller (Remember AIG) 
 
• The systemic risk was globalized, as financial 
markets became more and more linked. 

Major UK banks’ and LCFIs’ outstanding exposures to selected 
structured credit markets and leveraged loans(a) 
Sources:  Bank of England, published accounts and Bank calculations. 
 
(a)  Exposures at end-2007, except for the US securities houses, US commercial banks and  
Credit Suisse, which are recorded at end-2008 Q1.  Not all firms disclosed exposures to all categories. 
(b)  Mortgage-backed securities and asset-backed securities.  Principally includes US prime and Alt-A residential mortgage-backed securities. 
(c)  Commercial mortgage-backed securities. 

Credit Crunch: Quelle Surprise? 
• ‘That which can be securitized will be securitized’ 
                                                             —Hyman P.Minsky (1987) 
 
• A good summary of key events:  
 
• Brunnermeier(2009), Hoffman (2008), a whole index of 
events regarding Northern Rock and others until end 2008 in 
Hall (2009). 
 
• The interest rates in U.S start to rise from the very low levels 
in 2005, leading to a decline in housing demand and prices. 
 
• As early as end of 2006, the increase in house prices almost 
come to an end, signalling first signs of distress 

The logbook of events (Hall 2009, summarised for key 
points) 
August 2007 
The European Central Bank injects €94.8 billion into the money markets, in a 
'front-loading' operation, to shore up confidence in the financial system. 49 
banks availed themselves of the funding. 
US Fed announces a new emergency credit facility providing term loans for 
up to 30 days. Citigroup, JP Morgan Chase, Bank of America and Wachovia 
each borrow $500 million, funds which will be passed on to clients, in a 
largely symbolic gesture as each claims to have ample liquidity and access to 
funds elsewhere in the system on better terms. 
September 2007 
US Fed cuts the Federal funds rate by 50 basis points, to 4.75 per cent, as well 
as the discount rate by 50 basis points. Moves designed to 'help forestall 
some of the adverse effects on the broader economy that might otherwise 
arise from the disruptions in financial markets'. 
Following assurances from the FSA that the bank is solvent, Bank of England 
provides emergency funding to Northern Rock, the UK's fifth largest 
mortgage lender and eighth largest bank. It also announces that, contrary to its 
stated position of 12.9.07, it will now, after all, lend to banks for periods of up to three 
months against a wider range of collateral, including mortgages. 
 
October 2007 
US Fed cuts the Federal funds rate by 25 basis points to 4.5 per cent. 
November 2007 
ECB announces it will inject an unspecified amount of extra liquidity into the 
money market next week and will continue to do so at least until the end of 
2007 in order to deal with "re-emerging tensions". 
December 2007 
US President unveils a voluntary plan to freeze interest rates on some subprime 
loans for up to five years to limit foreclosures (some 300,000 
borrowers are expected to benefit). 
US Fed cuts the Federal Funds rate by 25 basis points to 4.25 per cent and 
also the discount rate by 25 basis points to 4.75 per cent. 
ECB pumps a record €348.6 billion of two-week money into the markets. 
Some 390 Eurozone banks request funds, which are provided at 4.21 per cent. 

January 2008 
The monoline, Ambac, suffers a ratings downgrade, triggering downgrades 
for the bonds it guarantees, thereby threatening huge losses for the companies 
holding the bonds. The downgrading follows the downgrading of the smaller 
monoline, ACA Financial Guaranty, in December 2007. 
US Fed cuts the Federal funds rate by an unprecedented 75 basis points to 3.5 
per cent at an unscheduled meeting in a bid to ward off recession in the US. 
Ambac Financial, the World's second largest bond insurer, reports a $3.26 
billion loss after writing down the value of its guarantees on sub-prime 
mortgage-related bonds by $5.21 billion. 
US Fed announces a further 50 basis points cut in the Federal funds rate, 
taking it to 3 per cent, in a further attempt to ward off recession in the US. 
The discount rate is also cut by 50 basis points. 
February 2008 
AIG, the US insurance company, raises its estimate of 2007 losses incurred on 
insuring mortgage-related instruments (e.g. CDOs) from $1 billion to $5 billion. 
 
US President enacts a $170 billion fiscal stimulus package in an attempt to 
reinvigorate the US economy. 
 
U.K government nationalises Northern Rock 
 
March 2008 
A second round of co-ordinated central bank intervention is announced. US 
Fed is to lend, via an auction, primary bond dealers up to $200 billion in 
Treasury securities for a month at a time in exchange for triple-A rated 
mortgage-backed securities as collateral. The Fed, the ECB and the Swiss 
National Bank (SNB) also announced an increase in the size of currency 
swaps (extended until September 2008) put in place in December 2007 by 50 
per cent. 
US Fed provides $30 billion of emergency liquidity support, in the form of 
collateralised discount window lending, via JP Morgan Chase, to Bear 
Stearns, the fifth largest investment bank in the US. This is the first time cash 
has been disbursed to a US financial institution other than a regulated 
commercial bank since the 1930s, and reflected the Fed's concerns with the 
systemic risks associated with allowing the bank to fail given its 
interconnectedness with the wider US financial system via its operations in 
mortgage-backed securities and the credit default swaps and other derivatives 
markets, and its role as prime broker to hedge funds. 
US Fed cuts the Federal funds rate by a further 75 basis points, to 2.25 per 
cent, as well as the discount rate (by 75 basis points, taking it to 2.5 per cent). 

The US Office of Federal Housing Enterprise Oversight announces a 
reduction in surplus regulatory capital requirements (from 30 per cent to 20) 
for the government-chartered mortgage providers Fannie Mae and Freddie 
Mac to allow them to pump up to $200 billion of additional liquidity into the 
beleaguered US mortgage market. 
In a further bid to support the US housing market, the US Government, 
through the Federal Housing Finance Board, gives the Federal Home Loan 
Banks permission to increase (by over $100 billion) for two years their 
purchases of mortgage-backed securities guaranteed by Fannie Mae and 
Freddie Mac, the Government-chartered mortgage financiers. 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York activates its 'Term Securities Lending 
Facility' (TSLF) auctioning $75 billion of US Treasury securities in exchange 
for other securities held by primary dealers. The loan lasts for 28 days. 
April 2008 
UBS announces a further $19 billion of sub-prime-related writedowns amid 
plans to park troubled sub-prime mortgage assets in a separate subsidiary. 
Citigroup announces a first quarter loss of $5.1 billion caused, in part, by 
nearly $16 billion of writedowns, including $6 billion on sub-prime 
mortgages, $3.1 billion on leveraged loans, $1.5 billion on exposure to 
monoline bond insurers and $1.5 billion on auction rate securities. 
US Fed cuts the Federal funds rate by 25 basis points to 2 per cent, taking the 
cumulative cut since mid-September 2007 to 325 basis points. 
Bank of England reveals a new Special Liquidity Scheme under which it will 
swap Treasury bills for securities backed by mortgages made before 
1 January 2008 or credit card debts for a period of up to 364 days 
May 2008 
Lehman Brothers, the US investment bank, announces a second-quarter loss 
of $2.8 billion, largely due to losses on fixed income business. Plans to raise 
$6 billion through common and preferred stock issues were also announced 
simultaneously. 
According to the Nationwide's house price index, UK house prices suffered 
their biggest annual fall in May 2008, of 4.4 per cent, since December 1992, 
when the market was last in a downturn 
June 2008 
According to Standard & Poor's Case-Shiller Index, house prices in large US 
cities declined by a record 15.3 per cent in April 2008 
July 2008 
The ECB raises its policy rate by 25 basis points to 4.25 per cent in the face 

of eurozone inflation of over 4 per cent, more than double its target of 2 per cent. 
 
IndyMac Bancorp, a large Californian-based US regional bank, collapses and 
is subjected to a 'bridge bank' scheme by the FDIC. With assets of around 
$32 billion, this represents the US's second-biggest bank failure. 
Merrill Lynch announces sales of $30 billion of CDOs for $6.7 billion, 
raising just 22 cents on the dollar, intensifying pressure on other banks to 
make further writedowns on mortgage-related securities. 
US Fed announces that it will offer three-month (84-day) cash loans (under 
its TAF) to banks and create a new $50 billion options auction facility giving 
bidders the right to swap illiquid securities for Treasuries over periods of 
likely funding stress (e.g. year-end). Investment banks and other primary 
dealers will also be given extended access to emergency cash and loans of 
Treasury securities until 30 January 2009. 
August 2008 
Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac post total losses of $3 billion in the second quarter 
FDIC reveals that its 'problem list' of banks grew from 90 institutions at the 
end of March 2008 to 117 by the end of June, the highest figure since 2003. 
Meanwhile, the agency's insurance fund fell to 1.01 per cent of insured 
deposits, the lowest level since the 1990s and below the target level of 1.25 
per cent. 
FSA figures reveal that repossessions of UK houses have risen by more than 
40 per cent – from 6,471 to 9,152 – during the first quarter of 2008 compared 
with the same period one year earlier 
September 2008 
ECB announces that, from 1 February 2009, it will change its procedures to 
reduce the abuse of its special liquidity operations. Accordingly, haircuts 
applied to ABS used as collateral will be increased; and some bonds not 
backed by mortgages or other loans denominated in euros will be excluded. 
US Government takes control of the troubled GSEs Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac 
and pledges to inject up to $100 billion in each of them if necessary to prevent their 
failure. It will also buy and hold mortgage bonds issued by the two entities and 
extend an unlimited liquidity facility to them until end-2009. The decision to formally 
assume control was taken in order to bolster the US housing market – the two 
bodies combined 
own or guarantee more than $5 trillion of mortgage-backed securities – and 
prevent turmoil in the US and global financial markets 
Lehman Brothers announces a third-quarter loss of $3.9 billion after making 
credit-related writedowns of $7.8 billion. Only 5 days later, Lehman Brothers, the 
fourth-largest investment bank in the US, files for bankruptcy 

In the wake of the turmoil, the Fed dramatically eased the terms on which it 
lends to investment banks. Under the primary dealer credit facility it will now 
accept equities and sub-investment grade debt as eligible collateral; whilst, 
under its Treasury securities lending facility – now expanded to $200 billion 
– it will now accept all investment-grade debt against loans of government 
bonds. In addition, it supplied an extra $70 billion of overnight liquidity into 
the money markets to try to keep the effective Federal funds rate close to the 
policy rate of 2 per cent. 
The rating agencies Standard & Poor's and Moody's both downgrade 
Washington Mutual bank to junk status, raising fears that this bank would 
become the next US bank to fail. 
Reluctantly, and following a failed attempt to find a private sector solution, 
the US Fed extends an $85 billion, two-year bridging loan to the insurance 
giant AIG to fend off imminent bankruptcy. In exchange for the loan, the US 
Government takes an 80 per cent equity interest in the firm. Existing 
management are to be replaced; and the loan is made at a punitive rate of 
interest of LIBOR plus 8.5 per cent. 
Shares in the two remaining US investment banks, Morgan Stanley and 
Goldman Sachs, crash – by 37 per cent and 23 per cent respectively 
Figures released by the US Fed reveal a $61 billion decline in outstanding 
volume in the US commercial paper market following a $52.1 billion decline 
the week earlier, making it increasingly difficult for corporates to raise 
working capital. The fall in market liquidity reflects the dramatic withdrawal 
of funds from the market by money market funds as the latter flee to safer 
investments (i.e. government securities). 
Washington Mutual collapses to become the biggest bank failure in US 
history and the fourteenth casualty of the credit crunch this year. JP Morgan 
swoops to acquire the bank's assets and branches for $1.9 billion, in the 
process becoming the largest US bank. 
Following the House of Representatives' rejection of the US Government's 
$700 billion bailout plan ('TARP'),* US markets go into freefall, with the 
Dow Jones falling by just under 780 points on the day. 
On the same day that the US Government's bail-out plan was voted down, 
another major (the sixth largest) US bank – Wachovia – had to be rescued in 
a government-brokered takeover by Citigroup. 
UK Government's nationalisation of Bradford and Bingley, the 
Icelandic Government were forced to take control of Glitnir, the country's 
third largest bank, to prevent a systemic crisis (€600 million of equity had to 
be injected into the bank by the Government, which assumed a 75 per cent 
stake). The German Government, too, were in bailout mode, joining together 
with the banks to provide a €85 billion liquidity lifeline to Hypo Bank Estate, 
one of the country's biggest lenders in the commercial property market and to 
local authorities. The Governments of Belgium, Holland and Luxembourg 

also joined forces to inject €11.2 billion into Fortis's national banking 
subsidiaries to help shore up confidence in the banking and insurance group. 
U.K Prime Minister unveils a £1.6 billion package of measures to support the UK 
housing market. The package embraces a one-year increase in the zero-rate 
stamp duty threshold from £125,000 to £175,000, measures designed to help 
first-time buyers get on to the housing ladder 
FSA places a temporary ban (until 18 January 2009) on the short-selling of 
financial stocks to support financial markets. This follows its earlier ban on 
the short-selling of the stock during the period of firms' rights issues 
UK Government announces the nationalisation of Bradford and Bingley 
following the FSA's decision 
October 2008 
US Senate passes the revised (it now includes a $150 billion range of tax 
breaks for firms and individuals as well as a temporary increase in the level 
of FDIC-insured deposits from $100,000 per person per institution to 
$250,000) 'TARP' bill and it now passes back to the House of 
Representatives for reconsideration. Its potential cost now exceeds $850 
billion. 
In the wake of the continuing uncertainty over the fate of Hypo Real Estate, 
the German Government announced that it would offer a 100 per cent 
guarantee to all private bank depositors, following the lead taken by Ireland 
and Greece. 
Iceland, Portugal, Denmark and Sweden all extended the size of their explicit 
guarantees for depositors. 
 
The Fed announces that, for the first time in its history, it will purchase 
commercial paper from US corporations directly. 
 
FDIC announces that it is to double deposit insurance contributions to cover 
further expected losses arising from future bank failures of about $40 billion. 
$45 billion of losses had already been racked up by the end of the second 
quarter 2008. 
 
In a co-ordinated action by central banks around the world (including the 
Bank of England, the Peoples Bank of China, the ECB, the SNB and 
Sweden's Riksbank), the US Fed cuts its policy rate by 50 basis points to 1.5 
per cent, the ECB's policy rate falling to 3.75 per cent. 
 
ECB switches to offering banks unlimited euro-denominated liquidity at 
fixed interest rates and emergency lending at a lower penalty rate. Collateral 
requirements are also to be relaxed, contrary to earlier announcements. 
 
The US Fed announces that it is making unlimited amounts of dollar funds 
available to be distributed by the ECB, the SNB and the Bank of England. 

 
Following the lead taken by European governments, the US Government 
announces that $250 billion of the previously-agreed $700 billion bailout 
funds will now be used to recapitalise US banks. Half ($125 billion) is to be 
injected into just nine banks: Bank of America (including Merrill Lynch, 
which it is acquiring), JP Morgan Chase, Citigroup and Wells Fargo will each 
receive $25 billion; Goldman Sachs and Morgan Stanley will each receive 
$10 billion each; and the Bank of New York Mellon and State Street will 
receive $2 billion and $3 billion respectively. In return, the US Government 
will take non-voting preference shares paying 5 per cent annual interest, 
rising to 9 per cent after five years, as well as warrants for common stock 
equal to 15 per cent of its preference share investment until 2018. Unlike the 
UK, recipient banks will be able to carry on paying dividends but cannot 
increase them (nor buy back shares) without the permission of the Treasury. 
 
ECB confirms that it is to relax collateral requirements, other than for ABS, 
by reducing the acceptable ratings threshold from "A-" to "BBB-". Eurozone 
assets denominated in dollars, pounds and yen will now also be accepted as 
collateral alongside euro-denominated assets; and dollar liquidity will also be 
provided in exchange for euros, under swap arrangements which will not 
require banks to put up collateral. 
 
EU regulators agree to relax accounting rules relating to the "fair" valuation 
of bank assets. EU banks now have the discretion to "reclassify" certain 
financial instruments and shift them from their trading books, 
 
US Fed agrees to finance up to $540 billion of purchases of short-term debt 
(e.g. CDs, bank notes and commercial paper of up to three months maturity) 
from money market mutual funds, to help them finance redemptions and 
continue their normal investment patterns. 
 
US Fed reduces the federal funds rate by 50 basis points to 1 per cent; the 
lowest level since June 2004, 
 
November 2008 
 
ECB cuts its policy rate by 50 basis points to 3.25 per cent. 
 
US Government announces a new $150 billion bailout of AIG after the 
insurer posts a third-quarter loss of $24.5 billion. This follows the $85 billion 
loan provided earlier to the firm to prevent its collapse. 
 
US Government announces a bailout of Citigroup, the ultimate "too-big-toofail" 
bank with assets in excess of $2 trillion and operations in over 100 
countries. Under the deal, the US Treasury will inject another $20 billion 
under TARP ($25 billion had already been injected) via purchases of 
preference shares paying an annual return of 8 per cent. The US Government 
is also capping Citigroup's losses on $306 billion of potentially toxic assets, 
by shouldering 90 per cent of the residual pre-tax losses once the bank has 
taken the first $29 billion hit (the Treasury will absorb the first $5 billion of 

losses, the FDIC the next $10 billion, with the Federal Reserve standing by to 
provide a loan covering the remaining $227 billion of losses) 
US Fed pledges up to $800 billion to help homebuyers, small businesses and 
students facing difficulty in raising credit at reasonable rates. Under one 
scheme, it will buy up to $100 billion of debt from Fannie Mae, Freddie Mac 
and Federal Home Loan Banks, starting next week, with a further $500 
billion to be used to buy mortgage-backed securities from these GSEs before 
the end of the year. Separately, a $200 billion lending facility – the "term 
asset-backed securities loan facility", or TALF – for holders of asset-backed 
securities supported by car, credit cards, student loans or business loans is to 
be launched to encourage lending at lower rates. 
The Monetary Policy Committee of the Bank of England slashes 
its policy rate by 150 basis points, from 4.5 per cent to 3 per cent, the lowest 
rate seen for 54 years. 
December 2008 
ECB cuts its main policy rate by 75 basis points – its largest reduction ever – 
to 2.5 per cent in the face of evidence of a further weakening in the real 
economy in euroland. 
US Fed cuts its policy rate to between zero and 0.25 per cent, a record low, in 
order to guard against deflation – prices fell by 1.7 per cent in November – 
and limit the severity of the downturn. 
Bank of Japan cuts its policy rate from 0.3 per cent to 0.1 per cent whilst 
announcing that it would buy commercial paper directly from issuers and 
increase its outright purchases of Japanese government bonds to ¥1,400 
billion a month from ¥1,200 billion a month. 
U.K Government announces a £1 billion scheme to underwrite deferred mortgage 
interest payments for up to two years. Under the scheme, those with 
mortgages of up to £400,000 and with less than £16,000 savings would enjoy 
deferred mortgage payments if their mortgage payments were not covered 
through the benefits system following a "sudden and temporary loss of 
income". 
January 2009 
Figures reveal that more than one million jobs were lost in the US in 
December 2008 for the second successive month taking the unemployment 
rate to 7.2 per cent, its highest level in 16 years 
ECB cuts its policy rate by 50 basis points to reach a record low of 2 per cent 
in the face of a deepening recession in the euro area. 
S&P downgrades Portugal and Spain government bonds 
Latest GDP figures reveal that the US economy contracted by 3.8 per cent at 
an annualised rate in the final quarter of 2008, the worst performance since 1987. 



Mayer et al (2009) 


Tatom (2009) 

Brunnermeier (2008) 


` 



Iceland: The First Country to Fail 
• Explicit Inflation targeting in practice 
• Very high interest rates, triggering incentives for 
carry trade (from 5.3 % in 2003 to 15.25% in 2007) 
• Oversized banking sector (around 10 times 
Iceland’s GDP) 
• Bank assets and liabilities denominated in FX with 
a maturity mismatch (no lender of last resort 
unless CB has FX reserves or swap lines) 
• Increase in the interest rates cannot stop the asset 
price boom and expansion of credit 
• Currency appreciation 

• Very high trade & current account deficits 
• High inflation – high interest rates – restart the 
cycle 
• Typical sudden stop experience 
• Stop in capital flows – Currency Depreciation – 
Increase in the value of credit liabilities for the 
household – Increasing defaults – Banking Crisis 
• The CB tries to defend the currency but cannot 
due to lack of FX reserves 
• Due to oversized banking sector, the government 
is not able to provide guarantees. 
• GDP falls 30% in Euro terms in 2009 

The problem of Icesave 
• Offered high-interest savings accounts in U.K and 
Netherlands with local branches (Landsbanki) 
• Regulated and insured in Iceland 
• The bank went into administration in Iceland due 
to massive losses 
• The deposits of U.K and Dutch investors are only 
fractionally covered by the deposit insurance 
fund in Iceland. (Some City Councils in U.K had 
invested in Landsbanki) 
• U.K  froze accounts of all Icelandic banks and 
placed Iceland on the list of terrorist countries 

• The cost of foreign deposits in Landsbanki only to 
the Icelandic government is around 150% of GDP.  
• The referendum about whether to pay back this 
amount or not was refused with 93% in March 
2010. 
 
• One important observation in the case of Iceland 
is the ineffectiveness of monetary policy to 
prevent the boom 
• Major reason: Carry trade opportunities and lack 
of regulatory supervision 
 

• The unexpected response of interest rates to CB 
policy can be observed in the U.S as well, 
particularly during 2004 and 2005. 
• Although the federal funds rate was going up, 
mortgage rates fell and housing boom speeded 
up at this period 
• On the other hand, exactly the opposite can be 
seen after 2007, as mortgage rates climbed up as 
the federal funds rate fell 
• The pass-through effect of CB interest rates have 
weakened, reducing (if not completely abolishing 
in some cases) the effectiveness of monetary 
policy 


• A further problem of dollar appreciation appeared 
through the initial phases of the crisis. 
• From 2004 to 2007, the dollar either did not move or 
depreciated despite the increases in the federal 
funds rate.  
• On the other hand, although the FED reduced the 
interest rates at record speed (and faster than all 
other Central Banks) after 2007, the dollar 
appreciated against most currencies. (Apart from 
Japanese Yen). 
• Nominal Exchange rate behaves in exactly the 
opposite way : The power of carry trade. Very high 
demand for Japanese Yen and U.S Dollar as the carry 
trade reverses. 

EUR-USD 

GBP-USD 

USD-JPY 

