Current Biology
Magazine
Current Biology 29, R913–R917, October 7, 2019 © 2019 Elsevier Ltd. R913
Evolution of thought 
and emotion
György Buzsáki
The Deep History of Ourselves: The 
Four-Billion-Year Story of How We Got 
Conscious Brains
Joseph LeDoux
(Viking, New York, NY; 2019)
ISBN: 978-0-735-22383-7
What started as a self-scrutinizing 
exercise turned into an extraordinary 
volume on a journey in search of the 
origin of survival mechanisms and 
consciousness. Joseph LeDoux — 
the undisputed guru of emotions 
and the Henry and Lucy Moses 
Professor of Science at New York 
University — declares in The Deep 
History of Ourselves that the notion of 
an ‘amygdala fear center’ that became 
not only a scientiﬁ c doctrine but 
also a cultural meme is dead wrong. 
Since his writings contributed to this 
mischaracterization, LeDoux feels 
that he has some explaining to do. 
He does this in the form of beautifully 
composed prose of 400 pages. 
Without hesitation, he tells the reader 
up front that, in order to accomplish 
his goals, a “radical approach is 
needed”. This is done in the form 
of two interconnected journeys, 
the ﬁ rst of which is the evolution of 
survival circuits: “there is indeed good 
evidence that the same brain systems 
control survival behaviors in humans 
and other mammals”. However, 
these are not the systems that are 
responsible for the conscious feelings 
that we experience when we engage 
in such behaviors and, therefore, he 
postulates the need of another system 
that is uniquely human. To contrast 
these two lines of ideas, the author 
reaches back through four billion 
years of natural history. The elaborate 
discussion on our long past is done 
not for the sake of cataloguing facts 
but to seek answers to a complex 
problem: the origin of our phenomenal 
or access consciousness. In the 
process, two new LeDouxs unfold: 
LeDoux the evolutionary biologist, 
evo–devo guy and a consciousness 
expert.
To understand the brain, ﬁ rst one 
needs to know about the body it 
controls. And bodies are complex 
too, even if they started out simple. 
Living things must borrow energy 
from the physical world to survive and 
prosper. This fundamental survival 
strategy began way before cells with 
organelles and protective boundaries 
developed, initially using the simplest 
forms of chemotaxis and tropism 
before adopting more elaborate 
approach–avoidance strategies. 
LeDoux — the naturalist — shows 
impressive expertise in the 
development of everything that 
matters to life. We learn how bacteria 
adapted to changing temperature 
and oxygen levels by acquiring 
“internal molecular representations 
of environmental conditions”. He 
teaches us that memory is already 
present in unicellular protists — no 
need for a complicated brain — in the 
service of maintaining energy supplies, 
balancing ﬂ uids and osmolarity, 
and defending against harm. These 
are the deep roots of the “survival 
states”. He delves into the debate 
about the priority of DNA versus RNA, 
explains how compartmentalization of 
complex molecules eventually gave 
rise to subcellular units, and guides 
us through the emergence of archaea, 
bacteria, the merging of existing life 
forms, and the advantages of sexual 
multiplication. I particularly enjoyed 
the discussion on the continuity of the 
general Bauplan (body plan) that sets 
the architectural features common to 
many members of the same phylum, 
and along the way I learned to respect 
simple organisms even more than 
before. LeDoux is a patient and skillful 
teacher who is well familiar with the 
reader’s attention span and the need 
to pause for thought, contemplate, 
and get ready for the next chunk of 
novel information. Chapters consisting 
of typically two to four pages and 
half a page of blank paper are good 
reminders to take a deep breath and 
internalize the presented material. His 
story is greatly enhanced by uniform 
illustrations from the same artist, an 
effective aid to ease the reading.
By the end of the ﬁ rst part, the 
author had convinced me that “a key 
part of our story is […] how nervous 
systems came to be”. Yet, as I had just 
been educated about evolution by my 
recent readings of David Quammen’s 
Tangled Tree and David Reich’s Who 
We Are and How We Got Here, I kept 
wondering how much I would have 
missed if I had skipped the ﬁ rst half of 
the book. Once we get to the second 
part, things accelerate at a rapid pace 
from neurons to the brain and then 
on to discussions of deliberation, 
memory, language, consciousness, 
and emotion. It is here where the 
author explains his new model about 
the distinctness of survival circuits 
and brain circuits that support 
conscious thoughts and feelings. 
This distinction is of paramount 
importance for LeDoux because 
“in animals, all we can measure 
are the behavioral consequences”. 
Shivering we can see, but feeling 
cold is another matter. Research 
on survival circuits alone — for 
example, describing the physiological 
features of the amygdala or prefrontal 
cortex of animals in response to a 
threat, or even interfering with such 
behaviors — is not going to lead us 
to treatment of anxiety and PTSD. 
“This effort has been so unsuccessful 
at ﬁ nding new medications that some 
major pharmaceutical companies are 
ceasing to search for new treatments”. 
Different circuits are needed for 
inducing feelings, which he equates 
with the “cognitive interpretation of 
the situation”. For LeDoux, the survival 
circuits inﬂ uence but do not deﬁ ne 
Book review

Current Biology
Magazine
R914 Current Biology 29, R913–R917, October 7, 2019
the content of emotional experience: 
“the idea of unconscious emotion is 
an oxymoron: if you don’t feel it, it’s 
not a feeling, not an emotion”. Thus, 
the Freudian idea of subconscious 
emotions — allegedly supported 
by subcortical mechanisms — has 
no merit. Instead, circuits and 
mechanisms of consciousness 
need ﬁ rst to be developed. LeDoux 
distinguishes between lower-level 
‘noetic’ consciousness (nous = 
mind) and higher-level autonoetic 
(i.e., self-centered or phenomenal) 
consciousness, and the latter is a 
prerequisite for feelings: “for me, 
human emotions are autonoetic 
conscious experiences”. Emotions are 
thus the highest quality evolutionary 
product that has come after cognition 
in the outward growth of the tree of 
life. In his program, he goes so far 
as to offer anatomical substrates for 
these distinctions: the amygdala is part 
of the survival circuit but has nothing 
to do with fear, which is a feeling. 
The medial prefrontal, orbitofrontal, 
anterior cingulate cortex and insula 
are needed for noetic conscious 
cognition. In contrast, autonoetic 
consciousness and emotions require 
structures of the lateral prefrontal 
cortex and frontal pole that are 
uniquely human. The book’s most 
important take-home message is this: 
“the human brain is the only physical 
system that unequivocally possesses 
consciousness”. “No self, no emotion”.
As is the case with all great books, 
I expect LeDoux’s new manifesto will 
stir up a productive debate. Let me 
start it. The book beautifully illustrates 
the continuity rule of the Bauplan: 
evolution of everything. Therefore, it 
comes as a deus ex machina when he 
makes an exception and proposes a 
jump: the “evolution of a new cognitive 
capacity” that is solely human. He 
defends the exception by suggesting 
that “we haven’t, like most organisms, 
simply evolved by adapting our 
Bauplan to the world as it changes; 
we have used our cognitive abilities to 
change the world”. Where does this 
statement leave the umwelt concept 
of Jacob von Uexküll? Simple animals 
build homes, dams, and traps, and in 
the process they change their world. 
Humans are not special in such skills. 
Instead, I prefer the view that tiny 
cognition allows for tiny emotion and 
this loop gets more complex during 
evolution. After all, while the frontal 
pole and lateral prefrontal cortex 
might be most elaborate in humans, 
all mammals share their evolutionary 
Bauplan and the same kind of neurons. 
It is hard to accept that the sole job of 
these regions is to support autonoetic 
consciousness and emotions. Rather 
than discrete ‘kinds’ (subconscious, 
noetic, and autonoetic) being served 
by different substrates, perhaps the 
same circuits with different levels 
of complexity support ever more 
elaborate functions. An example is 
the relationship between navigation 
in the real world and its internalized 
version, mental travel (memory and 
imagination) — different names but 
involving the same structures and 
neuronal algorithms. To confront 
these views, we need to examine the 
physiological mechanisms of brain 
circuits, the discussion of which is 
conspicuously missing from the book. 
Linking psychological concepts to 
brain anatomy alone rarely provides a 
convincing case.
What I missed most from The Deep 
History of Ourselves is a discussion 
on the cultural evolution of the ideas. 
What is the relationship between 
self and experience and among 
psyche, anima, soul, and mind whose 
meanings have changed dramatically 
over the past 2,000 years and vary 
across different cultures. Aristotle’s 
psyche (distinguishing living from non-
living) is different from the Christian 
soul, which in turn differs from the 
post-Christian mind. For the ancient 
Greeks, even a ﬂ ower had a psyche 
or consciousness, but its meaning 
was different from what we interpret 
it as today. Similarly, emotion and 
motivation underwent multiple reforms 
over the centuries. For the Greeks, 
passions were tied to the body, the 
scholastic doctrine brought them 
closer to the soul, while Descartes 
separated them from rational thought. 
These early views were updated 
again in the Newtonian mechanics-
centered framework, which claimed 
that everything must be pushed (or in 
the case of living things stimulated) 
to become active, and this notion 
explained why positive and negative 
passions move the body in opposite 
directions. The new term ‘emotion’ 
(from the Latin move-re: displace) 
replaced older words. LeDoux poses 
the question of whether emotions 
are movers and he rejects it: “I think 
there’s a different explanation”. A 
rodent jumps off the hot plate not 
because of the pain it feels. Pain 
as a feeling is in a different basket, 
governed by autonoetic conscious 
circuits. Should we assume that 
there is a universal emotion that is 
recognized as the same entity in 
different cultures or is it a historical 
formation? Going beyond the dominant 
Western framework, our notions of 
perceiving, feeling, thinking, deciding, 
and acting have a single phrase in 
Buddhist philosophy described by 
the Sanskrit word ‘cit’ or ‘budh’. Are 
emotion and feeling (and the German 
gefühl) replaceable synonyms? 
‘Autonoetic’ is a quite recent term, a 
product of Western thinking. The word 
‘self’ was synonymous with ‘sinner’ 
and ‘Anti-God’ a few centuries ago 
(think of selﬁ sh).
Did psychology become a captive 
of the vocabulary it inherited? Should 
we pretend that, by today, we have 
cleaned up and objectiﬁ ed these 
terms and, therefore, we are ready to 
launch a program to understand how 
they arise from the brain? Isn’t there a 
certain arrogance in regarding human-
constructed concepts as natural kinds 
and giving the task of ﬁ guring out their 
mechanisms to neuroscience? This 
outside-in framework assumes that 
such historically inherited concepts 
and terms exist independently of the 
science whose objects they are. Some 
of us believe that this cannot be right 
(Buzsaki: The Brain from Inside Out).
I am sure that other readers will 
praise aspects of The Deep History of 
Ourselves that I have missed and may 
pose different objections. There are 
many ways to carve nature at its joints. 
I believe that LeDoux’s motivation 
to write his masterpiece was exactly 
this: to ignite discussion on the most 
complex topic we humans face. Who 
are we, why do we feel distinct from 
others, and what is our role in this 
endless universe? He has done his 
part with admirable scholarship, now it 
is our turn to show our cards.
NYU Neuroscience Institute, New York 
University, Langone Medical Center, 35 East 
30th Street, New York, NY 10016, USA. 
E-mail: gyorgy.buzsaki@nyumc.org 

