Are women adult human females?
Alex Byrne1
Published online: 6 January 2020
 Springer Nature B.V. 2020
Abstract Are women (simply) adult human females? Dictionaries suggest that they
are. However, philosophers who have explicitly considered the question invariably
answer no. This paper argues that they are wrong. The orthodox view is that the
category woman is a social category, like the categories widow and police ofﬁcer,
although exactly what this social category consists in is a matter of considerable
disagreement. In any event, orthodoxy has it that woman is deﬁnitely not a bio-
logical category, like the categories amphibian or adult human female. In the ﬁrst
part, a number of arguments are given for the view that women are adult human
females; the second part turns to rebutting the main objections. Finally, a couple of
morals are brieﬂy noted, one for activist sloganeering, and one for ameliorative
projects that seek to change the meaning of ‘woman’.
Keywords Sex  Gender  Transgender  Intersex  Conceptual engineering
1 Introduction
Are women (simply) adult human females? It might surprise the woman on the
Clapham Omnibus to learn that philosophers almost always answer no. This paper
argues that they are wrong.
The orthodox view among philosophers who have considered the matter is that
the category woman is a social category, like the categories wife, ﬁreﬁghter, and
& Alex Byrne
abyrne@mit.edu
1
Department of Linguistics and Philosophy, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 77
Massachusetts Avenue, 32-D808, Cambridge, MA 02139-4307, USA
123
Philos Stud (2020) 177:3783–3803
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11098-019-01408-8

shoplifter.1 It is not a biological category, like the categories vertebrate, mammal, or
adult human female.2 (Similar remarks go for man, girl, and boy; following the
literature the focus will be on woman.) This (alleged) distinction between adult
human female and woman is sometimes said to be the distinction between ‘‘sex’’ and
‘‘gender’’:
Speakers ordinarily seem to think that ‘gender’ and ‘sex’ are coextensive:
women and men are human females and males, respectively, and the former is
just the politically correct way to talk about the latter. Feminists typically
disagree and many have historically endorsed a sex/gender distinction. Its
standard formulation holds that ‘sex’ denotes human females and males, and
depends on biological features (chromosomes, sex organs, hormones, other
physical features). Then again, ‘gender’ denotes women and men and depends
on social factors (social roles, positions, behavior, self-ascription). (Mikkola
2016: 23, ﬁrst emphasis added)
Section 2 makes the positive case that women are adult human females; after that,
the ﬁnal section tries to defuse objections. But ﬁrst, some preliminaries.
The thesis to be defended is this:
AHF
S is a woman iff S is an adult human female
This biconditional should be understood as implicitly necessitated, with ‘S’ bound
by a universal quantiﬁer within the scope of the necessity operator. AHF is a purely
modal thesis: it is not a claim of grounding, real deﬁnition, a prioricity, or
synonymy. (Since the relevant objections all target AHF, further levels of subtlety
are not needed.)3
AHF is, of course, not about the words used to express it, in particular the
English word ‘woman’ (cf. Williamson 2007: chs. 1, 2).4 More importantly, AHF
bears at best a distant relation to people’s conception of women—roughly, people’s
beliefs about what women are—their ‘‘folk theory’’ of women, so to speak. It is a
familiar point from Kripke and Putnam that conceptions can be radically mistaken.
AHF itself is a case in point. Since some people’s conceptions of women include
AHF, while others’ conceptions are inconsistent with it, some people’s conceptions
of women will be in error no matter what.5
1 Categories are interchangeable with properties: S is a woman iff S has the property being a woman iff S
is a member of the category woman.
2 In Haslanger’s terminology, wife, ﬁreﬁghter, and so on, are ‘‘constitutively socially constructed’’
categories (Haslanger 2012: 87). For the purposes of this paper we can adopt one of Haslanger’s accounts
of constitutive social construction: a category F is socially constructed (i.e. is a social category) iff ‘‘in
order for X to be F, X must exist within a social matrix that constitutes F’s’’ (131; cf. 87). Biological
categories are categories proprietary to biology. These explanations are imprecise, but that will not matter
here. It will do no harm to individuate categories modally: necessarily equivalent categories are identical.
3 Given AHF, those with a taste for hyperintensional metaphysics will want to investigate whether it can
be strengthened to give a real deﬁnition of woman (see, e.g., Rosen 2015; Passinsky 2019).
4 For a defense of a view that would count certain disputes about AHF as ‘‘merely verbal’’, see Chalmers
2011.
5 Cf. Haslanger 2012: 14.
3784
A. Byrne
123

Related to this point, the evidence relevant to assessing AHF should not be
sought in the ‘‘ordinary use’’ of ‘woman’ and the like: a mistaken conception (for
instance) can lead people to systematically misapply words. Having said that, there
is nothing wrong with appealing to linguistic evidence that clearly bears on the
meaning (or intension) of ‘woman’, since that has immediate implications for AHF
via disquotational principles. (No doubt there is some connection between ordinary
use and meaning, but it is highly indirect and not well understood.) A simpler sort of
evidence comprises facts about where the women are in various actual and
counterfactual situations. (An analogous sort of evidence about who knows what is
precisely what Gettier appealed to in refuting the justiﬁed true belief analysis of
knowledge (JTB).) In what follows, appeal will be made to evidence of both sorts.
Naturally such appeals can be disputed. People vary in their abilities to correctly
identify members of categories, or to correctly apply words. Woman and ‘woman’
are no exceptions—indeed, this is amply illustrated by the discussion below. It can
be tempting to respond to such disagreement by losing one’s nerve and retreating to
the claim that one’s evidence really consists in neutrally characterized facts about
speakers’ use of words, or (perhaps worse) facts about ‘‘intuitions’’—evidence that
one’s opponents are less likely to challenge. That temptation should be resisted.6
Pointless charges of ‘‘begging the question’’ may be anticipated; this paper does not
attempt the futile task of convincing everyone.
Given that true and interesting equivalencies in the style of AHF and JTB are
notoriously hard to ﬁnd, one should be wary of claiming that AHF is more than a
very good approximation. More carefully put, this thesis of this paper is that woman
is a biological (and not social) category, and that AHF is close enough.7 But for
simplicity we can defend it outright.
1.1 Amelioration
One last preliminary before getting to the case for AHF. In an inﬂuential paper
Haslanger introduced the idea of:
…an analytical approach to the question, ‘‘What is gender?’’ [including
‘‘What is a woman?’’]… On this approach the task is not to explicate our
ordinary concepts; nor is it to investigate the kind that we may or may not be
tracking with our everyday conceptual apparatus; instead we begin by
considering more fully the pragmatics of our talk employing the terms in
question. What is the point of having these concepts? What cognitive or
practical task do they (or should they) enable us to accomplish? (Haslanger
2000: 33)
6 See, in particular, Williamson 2007: ch. 7.
7 Some argue that categories like female are social categories (see, e.g., Kessler and McKenna 1978;
Butler 1990: ch. 1; Hood-Williams 1996; A´ sta 2018: ch. 4). This position is assumed false here (for an
examination of some arguments see Byrne 2018), but there is no obvious reason why its proponents could
not meet the thesis of this paper half-way. As will become clear later, if female is a social category then
AHF is easier to defend.
Are women adult human females?
3785
123

In Haslanger’s later terminology (which has become standard) this is an
ameliorative approach to the question What is a woman? (Haslanger 2012:
367–368). On an ameliorative approach, the question is interpreted as something
like What should ‘woman’ mean? In the 2000 paper, Haslanger famously proposed
to appropriate the ‘‘everyday terminology’’ of ‘woman’ and to deﬁne it roughly to
mean: a person ‘‘subordinated in a society due to their perceived or imagined female
reproductive capacities’’ (2012: 8). She suggested (rather tentatively) that this
‘‘terminological shift’’, if implemented in certain circumscribed communicative
contexts, might ‘‘serve…the goal of understanding…sexual oppression, and of
achieving sexual…equality’’ (2000: 47). Because this is a revisionary proposal,
there is no conﬂict with AHF (supplemented with the disquotational principle that
‘woman’ applies to S iff S is a woman). But since ameliorative projects are
especially salient in the present context (see, e.g., Jenkins 2016), it deserves
emphasis that they are not the chief concern of this paper.8 That said, some
observations relevant to such projects will be made at the very end.
2 The case for AHF
Once more, here is the thesis to be defended:
AHF
S is a woman iff S is an adult human female
And here are six considerations in favor of it.
2.1 AHF reproduces the dictionary deﬁnition of ‘woman’
Granted that the dictionary deﬁnition gives the meaning of ‘woman’, the intension
of ‘woman’ at a world w is the set of adult human females in w, and AHF follows
immediately. This may be the most popular argument for AHF on Twitter, but it
seems quite weak. First, dictionaries rarely supply exact synonyms; second, they
also function as encyclopedias, giving useful contingent information about the
extension of a term. In nineteenth century dictionaries one can ﬁnd the following
entry for ‘soldier’: a man engaged in military service. Surely the dictionary
compilers were aware that women soldiers have made many appearances
throughout history! But given that military service was then an entirely male
occupation, the ‘‘deﬁnition’’ is not so misleading. (A reader might guess that there
could be women soldiers ‘‘in principle’’.)
So perhaps the dictionary ‘‘deﬁnition’’ of ‘woman’ merely reﬂects the fact that
almost any woman is an adult human female, and vice versa. Even if contingent,
that is a useful fact to know. (For similar reasons, opponents of same-sex marriage
who tried to argue that it was an oxymoron by appealing to dictionaries were on a
hiding to nothing.)
8 Haslanger subsequently suggested that her ‘‘ameliorative’’ proposals instead exposed existing meanings
(2012: 12–16); on this descriptive understanding of Haslanger’s project AHF is directly engaged. For
discussion see Saul 2006, Cappelen 2018: 78–81, and Bogardus 2019.
3786
A. Byrne
123

Still, the dictionary entry strongly suggests that ‘woman’ does not pick out a
social category. Sumo wrestlers have a quite distinctive physique—they are, let us
say, extreme endomorphs. Suppose that, as it happens, all and only Sumo wrestlers
are extreme endomorphs. Despite the fact that ‘Sumo wrestler’ and ‘extreme
endomorph’ are coextensive, it would be extraordinarily misleading to deﬁne the
former by means of the latter, suggesting that Sumo wrestlers do not thereby enjoy
any kind of social status, and that becoming a Sumo wrestler simply involves body
modiﬁcation. If ‘woman’ picks out a social category, then the lexicographers have
made a blunder of a similar magnitude. A defender of the view that woman is a
social category needs to explain how the lexicographers could have erred so badly,
but this issue is never even raised.
On closer examination, appealing to dictionaries is not so bad after all. They are
hard to reconcile with the idea that woman is a social category. A natural alternative
is that the category is biological, and the dictionary entry ‘adult human female’ is at
least a promising suggestion.
2.2 One would expect English to have a word that picks out the category
adult human female, and ‘woman’ is the only candidate
Anyone in the business of hunting or farming needs to take a keen interest in the
difference between male and female animals, and it is not surprising that long lists
of gendered animal words are found in numerous languages. For instance, in
English there are many (mostly monolexemic, often ambiguous) expressions for
adult females belonging to non-human kinds: ‘doe’, ‘sow’, ‘hen’, ‘goose’, ‘mare’,
‘peahen’, ‘queen’, and so on. Given the utility of a similar word in the human case,
it would be astounding if English made an exception here. Moreover, since the best
candidates in other languages for such a word are translations of ‘woman’, if
English makes an exception then near-enough all other languages do too.9
The semantics of words like ‘doe’ are not remotely controversial—they are
standardly taken to pick out biological categories like adult female deer. It is no
coincidence that Williamson (2007: chs. 3, 4), seeking a paradigm case of an
‘‘analytic’’ truth, chose ‘Vixens are female foxes’.
Of the six considerations, this is perhaps the most compelling. Someone who
wants to deny AHF needs to explain why this pattern of gendered animal words
leaves us out. Could the explanation be that when it comes to classifying their allies
and rivals, as opposed to animals that are tasty or dangerous, ordinary people are
interested in socially signiﬁcant categories, not biological ones? That line of thought
confuses a social category with a socially signiﬁcant one: we are interested in
socially signiﬁcant categories, but a category can be both socially signiﬁcant and
biological. Female and male are clear examples. Peacocks have an important role in
Hindu mythology—the social/religious signiﬁcance of the category peacock is not a
good reason for denying that it is biological.
9 ‘Woman’ is likely one of the very few lexical universals (Goddard 2001: 12–13).
Are women adult human females?
3787
123

2.3 AHF explains how we sometimes know that an individual is a woman,
despite knowing nothing else relevant about her other than the fact
that she is an adult human female
Mitochondrial Eve lived more than 100,000 years ago, in Africa. She is the most
recent common matrilineal ancestor of all humans alive today. We know nothing
about her life or opinions, except that she is human and had children. Nonetheless,
as the New York Times (correctly) puts it, she is ‘‘a woman from whom all living
humans inherited their mitochondrial DNA’’ (Yin 2016).10 Genetics and develop-
mental biology tell us that Mitochondrial Eve is an adult human female, but how do
we know she is a woman?
First, note that if AHF is true, then—like its counterparts for other animals—it is
not hard to discover. Many ordinary people have some kind of tacit knowledge of it,
as exhibited by their willingness to assent to counterfactuals like ‘If a woman had
won the US 1960 presidential election, she would have been the ﬁrst female
president’. Given this, the simplest explanation appeals to the (known) right-to-left
direction of AHF: we know that Mitochondrial Eve is a woman by deduction. A
similar explanation is available for our knowledge that ‘‘Y-chromosomal Adam’’
(the most recent common patrilineal ancestor of all human males alive today) is not
a woman, appealing to the left-to-right direction of AHF.
2.4 AHF stands or falls with the analogous thesis for girls, which can be
supported independently
Beauvoir’s ‘One is not born, but rather becomes, a woman’ (Beauvoir 1989: 267)
has that ‘No man is an island’ quality: evidently the platitudes that these sentences
express are not the intended messages. Beauvoir was not reminding her readers of
the trivial truth that one is born a girl, and later becomes, a woman.11 The categories
girl and woman are surely very similar: in particular, the former is social iff the
latter is, and former is biological iff the latter is. AHF, then, is more-or-less exactly
as plausible as:
JHF
S is a girl iff S is a juvenile human female
When a human female is born, it is almost invariably known that the baby is female,
by inspection. It is also almost invariably known by inspection that the baby is a
girl—no speculations about the baby’s society, upbringing or psychology are
10 A similar example (‘‘This is the DNA of a woman’’) is in Saul 2012: 200. However, Saul denies AHF.
See Sect. 3.3 below.
11 See McGrath 2019: 116. In the later translation of The Second Sex the indeﬁnite article is omitted: ‘‘One is
not born, but rather becomes, woman’’ (Beauvoir 2011: 283). The iconic sentence is often supposed to express
theinsightthatwomanisasocialcategory(e.g.Butler1986).ThisisnottheplaceforBeauvoirexegesis,butitis
worth noting that in the introduction she contrasts a paradigmatic social category (proletarian) with the
categorywoman: ‘‘But proletarians havenot alwaysexisted, whereasthere havealways been women. They are
women in virtue of their anatomy and physiology.’’ (Beauvoir 1989: xxiv, emphasis added); the later
translationismoreliteralbut preservesthe basic point(Beauvoir2011: 8).Andina 1976interviewshe said: ‘‘A
positive deﬁnition of ‘‘woman’’? Woman is a human being with a certain physiology…’’ (Brison 2003: 192).
3788
A. Byrne
123

needed. (Indeed, knowing that the baby will die from an infection in a month is no
obstacle to knowing that she is a girl.) Why do these pieces of knowledge always go
together? The simplest explanation appeals to JHF. Since girl and (juvenile human)
female are modally equivalent, any reliable indication that a human baby is female
is also a reliable indication that the baby is a girl, and vice versa.
2.5 AHF predicts the correct verdict in cases of gender role reversal
Imagine a possible world w in which the people who are in fact dentists and the
people who are in fact plumbers have exchanged occupational roles. In w, the actual
dentists ﬁx leaky pipes and install toilets, while the actual plumbers whiten teeth and
attach braces and crowns. This is not a world in which dentists are disguised as
plumbers, and vice versa. Rather, w is a world in which the actual dentists are
plumbers. What about a possible world in which the kind of people who are in fact
women and the kind of people who are in fact men have exchanged gender roles?
In 2010 the French director Ele´onore Pourriat made a short ﬁlm, Majorite´
Opprime´e (Oppressed Majority), in which the males push children in strollers and
are sexually harassed and assaulted by the females, who jog brazenly through the
streets shirtless. Evidently the point was not that males would have been women if
society had been completely different. As the New York Times (correctly) puts it,
‘‘the parent doing the chores is a man, and all the gender roles are reversed, creating
a world in which men confront what it would be like to face the daily indignities,
compromises and risks that women often face’’ (Rubin 2014, emphasis added). This
is exactly as predicted by AHF: in the ﬁctional world of the ﬁlm, the occupants of
the female gender roles are adult human males.
One more example: in 2003 the writer Norah Vincent resolved to try living as a
man; she wrote a book—Self-Made Man—about her experiences. This was not, she
emphasizes, a trial run for transitioning from female to male, but an undercover
investigation into the secret lives of men (Vincent 2006: 15–17). Vincent’s alter ego
Ned joined an all-male bowling team, went to a strip club, and did other manly
things. As the subtitle of the reprint edition—One Woman’s Year Disguised as a
Man—implies, Vincent did not become a man. As it happens, she made some
serious attempts to transform her body by weightlifting and eating lots of protein,
but even if her preparations had included testosterone supplements, she would have
remained a woman. Imagine that, due to misreading Judith Butler, Vincent became
convinced (and perhaps alarmed) for a few months during her ﬁeldwork that her
performance as a man made her one. If that had happened, she would have been
wrong. Again, all this is exactly as predicted by AHF.
2.6 AHF is supported by the fact that ‘woman’ and ‘female’ are often
appropriately used as stylistic variants of each other, even
in hyperintensional contexts
Granted AHF, there is not much difference between wanting to meet the woman of
one’s dreams and wanting to meet the (adult human) female of one’s dreams: they
Are women adult human females?
3789
123

are both fulﬁlled in the same circumstances. Conversely, if AHF is false, one desire
could be fulﬁlled without the other.
For an example of particular relevance to present topics, recall AHF’s
counterpart for girls:
JHF
S is a girl iff S is a juvenile human female
As noted, an argument for JHF is also an argument for AHF. Consider these
autobiographical remarks from the writer and activist Julia Serano’s Whipping Girl:
a transsexual woman on sexism and the scapegoating of femininity:
…saying that I ‘‘wished’’ or ‘‘wanted’’ to be a girl erases how much being
female made sense to me…I had dreams about being or becoming a girl well
before I experienced any conscious desire to be female… (Serano 2007:
80–81)
Serano moves indifferently between wanting (as a juvenile human) to be a girl and
wanting to be female as if these amount to the same thing. If JHF is wrong—or,
more carefully, if JHF is anything but a very good approximation—Serano
expressed her childhood desires in a confused way. She did not.
The foregoing makes a strong cumulative case, and AHF is of considerably greater
initial appeal than the JTB analysis of knowledge. Before turning to objections, one
more consideration is worth mentioning. Decades of attempts to analyze knowledge
in the wake of JTB’s failure have led, not to despair about whether anyone knows
anything, but to an invigorated program of epistemology—Knowledge First!—that
takes knowledge as basic and unanalyzed (Carter et al. 2017). Strikingly, ‘Women
First!’ was not the reaction to the apparent discovery that AHF was false, and that
woman deﬁes analysis. As Saul explains, ‘‘[t]his led to a kind of crisis in feminist
theorizing’’ (2012: 197)—the feminism-imploding possibility that there are no women
was taken very seriously (see, e.g., Alcoff 2006: ch. 5). Now, if AHF is true, then (as
we saw) it is sometimes part of the explanation of how we know that an individual is,
or isn’t, a woman. (If AHF is false, of course it plays no such role.) For instance, AHF
provides a decisive reason for thinking that Norah Vincent’s heroic attempt to live as a
man had no effect at all on her status as a woman (see Sect. 2.5). Accordingly, if
someone becomes convinced that AHF is false, his knowledge that Vincent is a woman
may vanish, with his prior conviction that Vincent is a woman being replaced by
uncertainty. That may well produce a more general feeling of vertigo. If Vincent might
not be a woman, why am I so sure Simone de Beauvoir is one? The discombobulating
thought that women are cultural ﬁctions like witches and mermaids is not far behind. If
AHF is true, the otherwise puzzling ‘‘crisis in feminist theorizing’’ starts to make sense.
AHF is in better starting shape than JTB ever was. Given that AHF enjoys almost
zero defenders,12 the arguments against it are presumably conclusive. What are they?
12 Stone (2007: 141) comes close, writing that ‘‘in everyday language ‘woman’ often just means ‘female
human being’’’, but then immediately qualiﬁes this by arguing that ‘‘the word ‘woman’ is ambiguous
between sex and gender’’. By standard tests, there is no relevant ambiguity in ‘woman’, and in any case
there are theoretical reasons for suspicion. Lexical ambiguity is rife arguably because it leads to efﬁcient
3790
A. Byrne
123

3 Arguments against AHF
The appeal of AHF has not been completely overlooked. Stoljar was one of the ﬁrst
to explicitly note it:
There is only one plausible biological type that is a candidate for the species of
woman: the type ‘‘female human being’’. (Stoljar 1995: 267)
(Stoljar, like a number of other philosophers, omits ‘adult’, which we can presume
to be implicit.13)
Bettcher agrees:
On the face of it, the deﬁnition ‘‘female, adult, human being’’ really does seem
right. Indeed, it seems as perfect a deﬁnition as one might have ever wanted.
(Bettcher 2009: 105)
What is surprising is that this point is frequently missed. Bach, for instance, puts a
representative ‘‘biological essentialist’’ account as follows:
XX
An individual Q belongs to the kind woman if and only if Q possesses XX
chromosomes and female reproductive organs. (Bach 2012: 233; label added,
explanatory gloss omitted)
This, Bach says, belongs to a justiﬁably ‘‘maligned tradition of philosophical and
scientiﬁc theorizing’’ (2012: 233). He does not provide an example of anyone who
has endorsed XX. This kind of claim, he reports, ‘‘is most commonly attacked on the
grounds that it is empirically false and that it explains the social status of women as
inevitable, necessary, and therefore justiﬁed’’ (233–4). One might well be mystiﬁed
about how such an explanation is supposed to go, but Bach is certainly correct that
XX is false.14 His own historical theory of the category woman would have been
better motivated if AHF’s defects had also been exposed, but he does not mention it.
Footnote 12 continued
communication when the context can easily disambiguate (Piantadosi et al. 2012); but the suggested
ambiguity in ‘woman’ would presumably lead to misunderstanding.
Saul (2012: 196–197) does not explicitly mention AHF, but reports that she used to be sympathetic to
the view that ‘woman’ ‘‘picks out those who have certain biological traits’’, before changing her mind.
See also Bogardus 2019: 1–2, 16.
13 Stoljar is clearly not using ‘woman’ in some technical sense, hence the need for the qualiﬁcation.
Haslanger, on the other hand, stipulates that ‘woman’ (in her usage) applies to girls (Haslanger 2012: 40;
see also Haslanger 2017: 165).
14 Since there is no restriction to humans XX counts a female hippopotamus as a woman; there is also no
mention of developmental stage. These omissions are no accident, because Bach says that the properties
mentioned on the right hand side are supposed to ‘‘supervene on…Q’s occurrent physiology’’, i.e. be
‘‘intrinsic’’ (2012: 233). And even waiving these issues XX fails to give a necessary condition for many
reasons (e.g. some women with Turner syndrome have only one X chromosome, women with triple X
syndrome have three, and women can lack ‘‘female reproductive organs’’ due to birth defects or surgery).
Are women adult human females?
3791
123

Let us start with Bettcher’s argument against AHF, followed by two others which
have a more central place in the literature. There are a few more, but they are
relatively unimportant and can be relegated to a footnote.15
3.1 Swapped gender roles
If AHF is true, then women might not have occupied the gender roles they in fact
occupy. According to Bettcher, this is doubtful:
We can imagine a world where the cultural roles normally assigned on the
basis of sex are inverted: females dress ‘like men’, males dress ‘like women’;
stereotypical traits and behaviors are assigned to each group. Here, it isn’t
clear how to apply the terms ‘man’ and ‘woman’. Does physical sex or cultural
role determine category membership? If this is a hard case (I believe it is),
then cultural roles (and related practices and conceptions) must somehow be
connected to the semantic content of gender terms like ‘woman’. (Bettcher
2009: 103–104)
Pace Bettcher, this is not a hard case at all. We have already examined these sorts of
scenarios in the previous section (Sect. 2.5) and, far from disconﬁrming AHF, they
nicely conﬁrm it.16
15 Bettcher gives two more objections to AHF. First: ‘‘One problem for a deﬁnitional account of ‘woman’
is that the term ‘sex’ [more exactly, ‘female’] does not itself seem very easy to deﬁne’’ (2009: 103; cf.
Saul 2012: 198). It is hard to see how this is a problem at all, since in general one can deﬁne a word W1
using an undeﬁned word W2; naturally a regress looms if W2 also has to be deﬁned. Second: ‘‘consider
adjectives such as ‘womanly’, ‘manly’, ‘girly’, and the like. It seems as if they have cultural traits packed
right into their meaning’’ (Bettcher 2009: 104). That is, ‘womanly’ does not mean: like a (stereo)typical
woman; it rather means: has cultural traits X, Y,…, where X, Y,… are cultural traits actually distinctive
of women. So, Bettcher thinks, ‘Ditch digging is womanly’ is necessarily false. Whether Bettcher is right
about ‘womanly’ is debatable, but what is quite unclear is how this is supposed to ‘‘suggest that there is
something wrong’’ (104) with AHF. For another argument that also appeals to ‘womanly’, see Spelman
1988: 14.
16 Cultures with a ‘‘third gender’’ (e.g. the berdaches in many native North American tribes) might be
thought to provide a similar (and perhaps more effective) argument against AHF. Plausibly, third genders
(also sometimes called ‘third sexes’) are cultural expressions of male homosexuality or androphilia
(Vasey and VanderLaan 2014; see also Hames et al. 2017). (The phenomenon is mostly but not entirely
male.) Adult male members of these third genders do not socially identify as men; can we go further and
say that they are not men? In his seminal study of the Zuni berdaches in New Mexico, the activist and
author Will Roscoe writes that ‘‘[t]he answer to the question ‘Was We’wha [a berdache] a man or a
woman?’ is ‘Neither’’’ (Roscoe 1991: 145, but cf. 147). And if adult male berdaches are not men, then
men are not simply adult human males, and (by parity) women are not simply adult human females.
Obviously this is an immense topic, but here are three brief observations intended to dampen any
enthusiasm for this objection. First, Roscoe recounts a story in which a Zuni elder is asked where a
deceased member of the ‘‘third gender’’ will be buried: ‘‘On the south side, the men’s side, of course…Is
this not a man?’ the Zuni replied with a smile’’ (1991: 126). Second, literal translations of berdache names
do not inspire conﬁdence: admittedly they include ‘man transformed into a woman’ and ‘man-woman’,
but also ‘acts like a woman’, ‘woman pretenders’, and ‘unmanly man’ (Roscoe 1998: 213–220). Finally,
in an Australian television documentary about the fa’afaﬁne, the Samoan third gender, one fa’afaﬁne
remarks: ‘‘We know that we’re boys at the end of the day’’ (SBS 2013).
3792
A. Byrne
123

3.2 Intersex individuals
Stoljar writes:
Consider…cases of sexually indeterminate people, such as those described by
Anne Fausto-Sterling [1993]…Their existence…undermine[s] the claim that
‘woman’ refers to all and only female human beings (and correspondingly that
‘man’ refers to all and only male human beings). (Stoljar 1995: 273)17
‘Sexually indeterminate’ has a natural epistemic reading—something like ‘not
known to be either male or female’—which Stoljar evidently does not intend. On
the epistemic reading, Stoljar’s argument in this passage would be tantamount to
‘Some women are not known to be female, therefore some women are not female’,
which is plainly invalid. Rather, a ‘‘sexually indeterminate’’ individual in the
relevant sense is someone who is, simply, neither female nor male. Are there any
such individuals? Fausto-Sterling, in the article cited, does not argue for this claim:
she seems to think that merely describing some so-called ‘‘intersex’’ conditions is
sufﬁcient evidence, although this is hardly straightforward.
As a concession to Stoljar, we can avoid entering the empirical weeds and
examine an ideal hypothetical case. Consider, then, the ﬁctional condition Complete
Asexual Syndrome (CAS), which occurs in 1 in 100,000 live births. CAS individuals
are born without sex chromosomes; in a CAS fetus, the primordial gonads which
typically differentiate at around 7 weeks into ovaries or testes instead dissolve.
Nonetheless, at birth CAS individuals appear as normal females and have female-
typical play-styles and interests in infancy. Despite lacking ovaries and a uterus,
around puberty they develop breasts and undergo regular episodes of bleeding that
are easy to mistake for menstrual cycles. All this means that CAS usually goes
undetected. Even when a CAS individual seeks medical help for fertility issues,
CAS is unlikely to be diagnosed.
CAS individuals behave and look just like (human) females. But behaving and
looking like a female is not sufﬁcient for being one. By any reasonable standard,
CAS individuals are not female. If adult CAS individuals are women, then we have
a counterexample to the left-to-right direction of AHF: being female is not
necessary for being a woman.
Are CAS individuals women? Naturally they are, and should be, treated as
women in all but certain infrequent medical situations. In particular, they should be
called ‘women’. But there is a difference between being an F and being (rightly)
treated as an F. (Here we are presupposing a clear understanding of ‘treating
someone as an F’.18) Some children should be treated as adults. Conversely, some
adults should be treated as children. Usually, being an F is neither necessary nor
17 This argument can also be found in Oakley 1972: 115. It cannot be said that philosophers have reacted
uniformly to these sorts of cases (in medical terminology, ‘‘disorders of sex development’’): cf. Manne
2018: 26–27.
18 In the cultural anthropologist Gayle Rubin’s ‘‘androgynous and genderless (though not sexless)
society, in which one’s sexual anatomy is irrelevant to who one is’’ (Rubin 1975: 61), there is no such
thing as ‘‘treating someone as a woman’’.
Are women adult human females?
3793
123

sufﬁcient for being (rightly) treated as one. Even if CAS individuals are not women,
only an obtuse moralistic pedant would deny them entry to a space marked ‘Woman
Only’; the same kind of inﬂexible literal-mindedness would prevent groundskeepers
from mowing a patch of turf with a ‘Keep Off the Grass’ sign. Spaces marked
‘Females Only’ illustrate the same point. CAS individuals are not female, but
everyone agrees that any rights and privileges afforded to females should apply to
them too. Any inclination to say that CAS individuals are women might be largely
driven by failing to make the distinction between being (rightly) treated as a woman
and actually being one.
If CAS individuals are neither women nor female, why is it more tempting to say
that they are women than to say that they are female? A plausible explanation is that
the prototype of woman is more heavily weighted to social characteristics and
external phenotype than the prototype of (human) female, which is more heavily
weighted to reproductive organs. One can see a similar effect—to continue the
ﬁction—using CAS in peafowl. CAS peafowl are neither male nor female, but
appear as peacocks, complete with resplendent tails. It is tempting to say that CAS
peafowl are peacocks, thus refuting the claim that peacocks are simply (adult) male
peafowl. But that may be too hasty: we have a well-documented tendency to give
too much weight to stereotypical or representative features, and CAS peafowl are
very similar to the stereotypical peacock.19
Even the best possible ﬁctional example of an individual with ‘‘indeterminate
sex’’ is not especially convincing, then. But we can go further. Suppose that CAS
individuals are women. Why? One possibility is that their biological condition is
sufﬁcient for being a woman. One might support this by considering cases of a
socially isolated CAS individual, raised by wolves on a desert island. If that
individual is a woman, then that is surely because her biological condition is
sufﬁcient. But then we have moved no distance at all from the idea that woman is a
biological category—it is merely a somewhat more complicated biological category
than adult human female. Speciﬁcally: someone is a woman iff she is either an adult
human female or an adult human with CAS, or perhaps something a little fancier.
And as far as this paper goes, that revision of AHF will do.
However, there is another possibility to consider. Perhaps CAS individuals are
women because they function socially as women and/or have an external womanly
phenotype. But notice that individuals who are neither male nor female can only
provide counterexamples against the left-to-right direction of AHF, and its
counterpart for men:
AHM
S is a man iff S is an adult human male.
The idea that being an adult human female/male is sufﬁcient for being a woman/man
is left untouched. Consider, then, trans women (male-to-female, or MtF, transsex-
uals).20 With the highly plausible assumption—accepted by Stoljar: see following
19 See Kahneman 2012: chs. 14, 15.
20 Standardly characterized as natal males who have a history of gender dysphoria (signiﬁcant distress or
unhappiness with one’s sex), which has led them to ‘‘transition’’ and live more-or-less full-time as
women.
3794
A. Byrne
123

section—that these individuals are male, we get the result that (some) trans women
are both women and men.21 They are women because of their social role and/or
external phenotype; they are men because they are male. However, the view that
trans women are both women and men is—to judge by its extreme unpopularity—
the worst of both worlds.
Summing up, Stoljar’s ‘‘intersex’’ argument fails comprehensively. If this is the
only objection, then AHF, or a minor variant thereof, is all but irresistible. More
generally, given the right-to-left direction of AHF, there is a strong case for the
converse direction, and so for AHF itself.
What opponents of AHF need, then, is an argument that dismantles the right-to-
left direction; that is, an argument that being an adult human female is not sufﬁcient
for being a woman. Assume, reasonably enough, that individuals who are
counterexamples to the right-to-left direction are men. If there are (or could be)
adult human females who are men, then being an adult human male is not necessary
for being a man, and so the left-to-right direction of AHM fails. Similarly, if the
right-to-left direction of AHM fails, so does the left-to-right direction of AHF. Since
AHF and AHM stand or fall together, we should expect that the sought-after
objection to AHF will dismantle both directions.
3.3 Transsexual individuals
Stoljar has a ﬁnal argument that promises to do just that:
Transsexuals keep the same chromosomes, yet change genders. These
examples show at least that there is more to the concept ‘woman’ than
having an XX chromosome and related sex characteristics. At most, they show
that female sex is not necessary for being a woman and hence cannot be a
candidate for the universal ‘woman’. (Stoljar 1995: 274)22
Trans women, according to Stoljar, are not female, but they are women. They are
thus a counterexample to the left-to-right direction of AHF. Stoljar rests content
with the conclusion that ‘‘being a female human is not necessary to being a woman’’
(1995: 274), but if she’s right about this, a similar counterexample shows that the
right-to-left direction is also false. Just as trans women are women (and, moreover,
are not also men), trans men (FtM transsexuals) are men and not women. Assuming
(as Stoljar in effect does) that trans men are of the ‘‘female sex’’, being an adult
human female is not sufﬁcient for being a woman. Transsexuality is thus potentially
more devastating to AHF than Gettier’s counterexamples were to JTB, which only
21 Some animals change sex (for a review, see Vega-Frutis et al. 2014); mammals do not. Current
surgical techniques and hormone treatments do not come close to reproducing the process of sex change
as it occurs in the wild.
22 ‘‘These examples’’ include the ‘‘sexually indeterminate people’’ just discussed, and also (improbably)
‘‘male transvestites’’ (Stoljar 1995: 273–274). It should be noted that Stoljar at one point puts her
conclusion somewhat cautiously: ‘‘the examples suggest that being a female human is not necessary to
being a woman’’ (274). The same argument, minus the crucial last sentence of the quotation, is in Kessler
and McKenna 1978: 1–2.
Are women adult human females?
3795
123

targeted the purported sufﬁcient conditions. As desired, this example threatens to
destroy AHF completely.
Stoljar’s argument is echoed by Saul. She ﬁrst makes the (plausible) claim that
‘‘some [trans women] are bound to be excluded from any biologically based
category’’, and then says:
I think TW is true:
TW
Trans women are women, even if they have not had ‘reassignment’
surgery or hormonal treatments. (Saul 2012: 200; thesis label changed)
She draws the conclusion that woman is not a ‘‘biologically based category’’; if that
is right, then AHF is false.23
TW is a generic, like ‘Women give birth’, and so there is semantic room for
exceptions. However, it is clear that the intended interpretation allows for no
exceptions, so it should be read as a universal generalization. Endorsement of TW has
recently become quite popular among philosophers. Jenkins, for instance, writes:
The proposition that trans gender identities are entirely valid—that trans
women are women and trans men are men—is a foundational premise of my
argument, which I will not discuss further. (Jenkins 2016: 396),24,25
23 Saul formulates and sympathetically discusses a context-dependent proposal for the semantics of
‘woman’ (for more sympathy see Barnes 2019: 16–17):
‘S is a woman’ is true in a context C iff S is human and relevantly similar (according to the
standards at work in C) to most of those possessing all of the biological markers of female sex.
(Saul 2012: 201; endnotes omitted, some typography changed)
The idea is that in ‘‘a context in which our concern is with how people self-identify’’ (201), self-
identiﬁcation becomes the relevant respect of similarity. Since most females self-identify as women, in
such a context ‘Charla [a trans woman] is a woman’ will be true, because Charla is similar to most
females in the relevant respect: she, like most females, identiﬁes as a woman. (Whether this secures the
truth of ‘Trans women are women’ is another matter.) Saul raises a number of objections, including
‘‘complications about how to understand ‘self-identiﬁcation’’’; she concludes that the proposal ‘‘is far
from perfect or complete’’ (206).
Matters are worse. First, consider ‘girl’, which presumably should receive a similar treatment. (Saul’s
proposal as written fails to take account of developmental stage, and ‘adult’ should qualify ‘human’ on
the right-hand side.) A parallel account of ‘girl’ would mean that in ‘‘a context in which our concern is
with how people self-identify’’, ‘girl’ applies to Jazz, a natal male child with gender dysphoria who
identiﬁes as a girl—the desired result. But now suppose that Jazz has a 1-year old sister, Jane. It seems
that ‘Jazz and Jane are both girls’ will be false, uttered in the same context, because—whatever ‘‘self-
identiﬁcation’’ comes to—Jane is too young to self-identify as anything.
Second, and more troublingly, the word ‘woman’ is used in specifying the contextually salient respect
in which Carla is similar to most (adult) females: Carla identiﬁes as a woman. The proposal is therefore
circular (a vice, since it is supposed to specify the meaning of ‘woman’). Moreover, since ‘woman’ is
context-dependent, ‘identiﬁes as a woman’ is also context-dependent, and the proposal cannot explain
how it should be interpreted.
24 More examples (some perhaps with minor qualiﬁcations): McKitrick 2015: 2576, Barnes 2016: 90,
Manne 2018: 14, Mikkola 2017: 177, and Tuvel 2018: 81–82.
25 The quotation is difﬁcult to reconcile with Jenkins’ stated project of supplying an ‘‘ameliora-
tive…deﬁnition of woman…[that] respect[s] the gender identiﬁcations of all trans people’’ in the
Haslangerian sense (Jenkins 2016: 396; see Sect. 1.1 above). The word ‘woman’ in the quotation in the
text plainly has its ordinary sense and so is unameliorated. (Indeed, the quotation occurs long before
3796
A. Byrne
123

Like Jenkins, Stoljar and Saul treat TW as an unargued premise.26 There is nothing
in general wrong with that, of course. Arguments have to start somewhere, and the
case for AHF in the previous section made copious appeal to unargued premises.
However, taking TW as an unargued premise is methodologically quite ill-advised.
First, TW is controversial, to say the least. Treating it as an axiom is unlikely to
be dialectically effective, even if one’s audience is presumed to be a small group of
specialists in feminist philosophy. Many notable feminist philosophers and theorists
have either explicitly rejected TW or else endorsed views that evidently conﬂict
with it. An example of the former: ‘‘The transsexual may look like a woman but can
never feel like or be a woman’’ (Grosz 1994: 207); an example of the latter: ‘‘part of
what it means to be a woman or a man is to be recognized to have a certain kind of
body that is linked to certain biological processes like reproduction’’ (Witt 2011: 35;
see also 40–1).27 More examples are easy to ﬁnd.28 Bettcher’s own position on TW
is also nuanced.29
Footnote 25 continued
Jenkins has explained her ameliorative proposal for redeﬁning ‘woman’.) Jenkins is therefore saying that
(in the ordinary sense of ‘woman’) trans women are women and so their identities are ‘‘entirely valid’’.
And the ordinary sense is the relevant one. For instance, the distinguished economist Deirdre McClos-
key—who transitioned from the (slightly less distinguished economist) Donald at age 53—writes in her
memoir Crossing, ‘‘Am I a woman? Yes.’’ (McCloskey 1999: 176). This quotation is in standard English,
not philosophical argot, and so any ameliorated sense is irrelevant to whether McCloskey is correct.
26 Caveat: given her ‘‘cluster’’ analysis of ‘woman’, Stoljar might not endorse TW interpreted
unrestrictedly (1995: 284–285).
27 Witt’s account illustrates how the view that woman is a social category (albeit one with a biological
component) and that AHF is false, may be combined with the denial of TW. Her account has some
dubious consequences. For instance, a Brave New World scenario in which human reproduction is
ofﬂoaded to hatcheries is one in which there are no women (Witt 2011: 39); she thus disagrees with
Aldous Huxley. For the same reason, Witt’s account conﬂicts with the radical feminist Shulamith
Firestone’s own description of her ‘‘cybernetic communist’’ utopia (Firestone 1970: 221–224).
28 The most infamous in feminist writings is Janice Raymond’s The Transsexual Empire (Raymond
1994; original publication in 1979). Some others are Oakley 1972: 122; Daly 1978: 68; Gatens 1983:
153–4; Paglia 1992: 5; Hale 1996: 115; Greer 2000: 70–80; Bach 2012: 269; Jeffreys 2014. Haslanger
(during her descriptive period—see fn. 8) can also be included. (A few of the preceding allow that some
trans women are women; that milquetoast position is understandably not very popular, however.) Some
theorists, while not rejecting TW (even implicitly), do not ﬂatly afﬁrm it either (cf. the quotation from
Chappell, above). For instance: ‘‘The question ‘are MTF transsexuals women?’ is not well-formed in the
absence of a ﬁxed set of criteria of womanhood to which we can appeal’’ (Heyes 2000: 93). See also
Scheman 1993: 191 (cf. Scheman 1999: 69–70, 86); Moi 2001: 37, fn. 50, 78, 88–99 (arguably belonging
on the ﬁrst list); and A´ sta 2018: 90.
29 Bettcher claims that both ‘trans woman’ and ‘woman’ have non-standard meanings in some idiolects.
‘Trans woman’, she says, is often ‘‘understood to mean ‘a man who lives as a woman’’’, but ‘‘in trans
subcultures it simply does not mean that’’ (Bettcher 2013: 235). If that is right then TW, on its ordinary
interpretation, amounts to ‘All men who live as women are women’; assuming that there are such men
and that they are not also women, TW turns out false. This is not an appealing view of the meaning of
‘trans woman’. First, a man might live as a woman as a journalistic experiment, as Vincent lived as a man
(see Sect. 2.5 above); he would not thereby be a trans woman. Second, new words are often introduced by
pointing to paradigm cases of application and non-application, with some additional explanatory
verbiage, in the hope that the listener will catch on (as we’ll see, Bettcher herself appeals to this model).
No explicit deﬁnition is given or needed. ‘Trans woman’ ﬁts this nicely (see fn. 20, where the paradigms
are too obvious to mention) and nothing in the introduction of the phrase forces it to have the meaning of
Are women adult human females?
3797
123

Second, and more importantly, there is a danger that one’s ‘‘intuitive’’ assessment
of TW will be clouded by non-epistemic factors. Depending on who one’s friends
are, denying (or afﬁrming) TW can bring heavy social penalties. Cliche´d insults
await the wrongthinkers: deny TW and you’re a bigoted transphobe; assert it and
you’re a deluded member of the transcult. By the same token, the rightthinkers have
their virtue and in-group credentials reinforced. Accordingly, an assessment of TW
should be as indirect and oblique as possible. Ideally, its truth or falsity should be
derived from premises whose acceptance is uncontaminated by any desire for social
approval. No doubt that ideal cannot be reached completely, but the arguments of
the previous section go some distance.
As noted, the proponents of TW (and, for that matter, many of its opponents) do
not supply any argument. A reasonable conjecture is that the insistence on TW by
trans women themselves has had some inﬂuence. And isn’t that evidence for TW?
After all, when someone declares ‘I am an F’ that is often a strong indication that
she is an F. In the present case, however, this is unpersuasive for a perfectly general
reason: if someone is personally heavily invested in the truth of p, it is prudent to
treat her claim that p is true with some initial caution.
And in any case—this can hardly come as a surprise—trans women themselves
are not of one mind on TW. To take some random examples:
I certainly wouldn’t be happy with the idea of being a man, and I don’t
consider myself a man, but I’m not going to try and convince anyone that I’m
really a woman…I like the idea of accepting the identity of a transsexual,
rather than having to be ‘man’ or ‘woman’. (County 1996: 139)
Footnote 29 continued
‘man who lives as a woman’. (The remainder of this note assumes that this neutral account of the meaning
of ‘trans woman’ is correct.)
Turning now to ‘woman’, and following Bettcher’s notation, the standard (or ‘‘dominant’’) meaning of
‘woman’ is woman-D. According to Bettcher, some trans women are not women-D—further, she
suggests, some trans women are men-D. Thus TW, interpreted in the standard way, is false. However,
‘woman’ supposedly has another (‘‘resistant’’) meaning, woman-R, found in the idiolects of (some) ‘‘trans
subcultures’’ (244), and all trans women are women-R. (See also Dembroff Forthcoming.)
Where does this leave AHF? As we have seen (Sect. 3.1), Bettcher thinks it is false, but the ambiguity
view alone does not show that. If AHF has two interpretations—corresponding to the dominant and
resistant meanings of ‘woman’—the one clearly in play in the relevant literature is the ﬁrst. There is no
reason to think this interpretation falsiﬁes AHF—quite the contrary (cf. 236).
Moreover, Bettcher’s account of the alleged resistant disambiguation has difﬁculties of its own. In a
number of places she describes it as a more inclusive understanding of ‘woman’: its extension is
‘‘broadened’’ (240), corresponding to ‘‘an expanded category of womanhood’’ (246). If that is right, then
S is a woman-R iff S is either a woman-D or a trans woman. But then, assuming a similar resistant
interpretation of ‘man’, and that (some) trans woman are men-D, in the trans subculture idiolect ‘(Some)
trans women are men’ will be true, which is clearly not what was intended. Bettcher also has a quite
different idea, that the resistant interpretation of ‘woman’ is introduced by using trans women as
paradigm cases (241): she is a woman (pointing to a trans woman); he (pointing to a stereotypical man-D)
is not. The problem here is that it is unclear why ‘woman’ (in the resistant interpretation) doesn’t simply
mean trans woman, or at any rate fails to apply to many women-D, which again is not what Bettcher
intends. Finally, as she notes, ‘female’ and ‘male’ are capable of resistant interpretation too (214): if AHF
is true on a thoroughgoing dominant interpretation, it is likely also true on a thoroughgoing resistant one.
3798
A. Byrne
123

…but the darker, more difﬁcult fact that many trans women wish they were
women, period. This is most emphatically not something trans women are
supposed to want. The grammar of contemporary trans activism does not
brook the subjunctive. (Chu 2018; cf. Prosser 1998: 32–33.)
I know that I am not biologically female…To say that trans women are the
same as women…requires denial of some rather huge concrete truths. (Hayton
2018)
Are trans women women or aren’t they? Here too the urge to over-simplify
gets us into trouble. We imagine we have to line up in two discrete sides,
behind an unqualiﬁed Yes and an unqualiﬁed No. I don’t think that’s right at
all. Here as in so many other places, the right answer is more like ‘‘In some
ways yes, in other ways no’’. (Chappell 2019)
The prevalence of these views is a matter for speculation, but one can safely say that
trans women’s opinions run the gamut. Some think they are women, some think
they are men, some think they are neither, and some think the question of whether
they are women has no simple answer.30
If the main reason for TW is the testimony of trans women themselves, then this
is decidedly unimpressive. But as an attempt to refute AHF, it’s even worse. TW
alone does not entail that AHF is false. Another premise is needed, and it is clearly
intended to be:
NF
Trans women are not female.
(Like TW, this should be interpreted as a universal generalization. A weaker
premise would do, namely that some trans women are not female; but there is little
suggestion that Stoljar and Saul would only endorse the weaker premise.)
NF is no doubt true. However, the problem is that a non-negligible number of
trans women assert that they are female, thus denying NF. (Given AHF, this is only
to be expected.) For instance, a recent online article by a prominent trans woman
and activist is titled: ‘Medical professionals increasingly agree: Trans women are
female, trans men are male’ (Jones 2017).31 To argue against AHF from TW and
NF, while using the testimony of trans women to support the ﬁrst premise,
30 For a century-old example (this time of a trans man claiming to be a woman), see Hirschfeld 1991:
95–102; on varieties of identities among trans men, see Hale 2009: 46.
Which opinion on TW holds the majority appears to be a highly contingent matter—anecdotally, TW
has gained support over the last decade or so. There is a near-by possible world in which trans women
merely claim that they have—in a phrase from Lawrence 2013: 89—‘‘earn[ed] the right’’ to call
themselves ‘women’, not that they literally are women. (And there need be no shame in that: being an
honorary F is sometimes more of an achievement than being an F.) It seems unlikely that the philosophers
in that world would be so keen on TW, which suggests that its actual philosophical proponents are
responding to the way the zeitgeist happens to be blowing, rather than to the essence of womanhood.
31 Here it is important to distinguish the belief that one is female and the belief that one is anatomically
female (has a vagina, uterus, etc.). If one is in fact an ordinary anatomic male, having the second belief
would probably be delusional. But having the ﬁrst belief might well be understandable and even to some
extent defensible: what being female consists in is unobvious.
Are women adult human females?
3799
123

conveniently ignores the fact that one could also use their testimony to undermine
the second.
Perhaps surprisingly, there is a practical corollary to these abstract metaphysical
considerations concerning AHF. Granted that TW is false, propagating it might be
justiﬁed on the grounds that its ultimate acceptance will bring beneﬁts—rather like
exaggerating the dangers of climate change in order to get people to take it
seriously. Prejudice and discrimination against trans women will be lessened, one
might think, once it is widely believed that they are women.
The problem with this is not that many people are convinced that TW is false—
which they are. Rather, it is that they know that TW is false. If all women are adult
human females, this is hardly an arcane truth that members of the Inner Party can
keep hidden from the proles, and the falsity of TW is only a short step away. And, as
Williamson (2000: chs. 2, 3)—not to mention Plato—has pointed out, knowledge,
once attained, tends to stick around. Relatedly, people are less susceptible to
propaganda than is commonly feared (Mercier 2017). Repeatedly intoning TW is
likely to backﬁre, inducing a feeling of being snowed. An eminently desirable and
feasible goal is for trans women (and men) to be accepted by society and live in
peace and dignity. Ironically, evangelists for TW may be making this harder to
achieve.
Finally, let us brieﬂy return to the ameliorative project (see Sect. 1.1 above) of
formulating a revised ‘‘category of women’’ which includes ‘‘everyone who needs to
be included for the purposes of feminism’’ (Jenkins 2016: 421), and which feminist
theorists ‘‘should aim to get people to use’’ (395), speciﬁcally by encouraging a
suitable shift in the meaning of ‘woman’.
For the sake of the argument, grant Jenkins’ claim that trans women need to be
included (and that trans men need to be excluded) (421). The hope is not just that
the meaning of ‘woman’ can be semantically adjusted, but that no synonym of
‘woman’ with its earlier meaning will emerge to enjoy widespread use, else the
problem of ‘‘exclusion and marginalization’’ (395) would remain.32
Assuming AHF is true, ‘woman’ picks out the biological category adult human
female. The linguistic consequences of AHF go far beyond contemporary standard
English: for millennia, languages used by wildly diverse human cultures have had
single words for this category. Words mark useful distinctions, and this universal
pattern, highly robust with respect to social structure, suggests that having a simple
label for adult human females is not something we can easily do without.
Languages are not static, of course. Sometimes a word loses its earlier meaning
because the original distinction is no longer useful. (‘Cheater’ once meant ofﬁcer
appointed to look after the king’s property, or ‘‘escheats’’.) Sometimes it retains its
old meaning and acquires a new one. (‘Mouse’ was metaphorically extended to
mean handheld pointer-moving device.) Sometimes a word is replaced or demoted
by a synonym (as has happened with ‘sex’ and ‘gender’ (Haig 2004)), but that just
makes the old distinction by new means. There is no reason to think that the utility
of a word for the category adult human female will markedly decline in the
32 For critical discussion of Jenkins’ proposed adjustment see Bogardus 2019.
3800
A. Byrne
123

foreseeable future. Unlike scullery maids, cigarette girls and switchboard operators,
the mature females of our species will continue to be an important topic of thought
and talk. So even if ‘woman’ could somehow be coaxed to change semantically, a
new word for the category (a snappier version of ‘natal woman’ or ‘bio woman’,
already in occasional use) would very likely ﬁll the lexical vacuum. Ambitious
ameliorative projects for ‘woman’ should therefore be viewed with some
skepticism.
In order to get to where we should be, it is important to know where we are. And
that is what this paper has been about. Our starting point is not that woman is a
social category, as so many theorists have presumed. Rather, it is that women are
adult human females—nothing more, and nothing less.
Acknowledgements For conversations and comments thanks to Louise Antony, Ray Blanchard, David
Haig, Caspar Hare, Sally Haslanger, Debbie Hayton, Carole Hooven, Mark Johnston, Ari Koslow, Holly
Lawford-Smith, Miriam Schoenﬁeld, Kieran Setiya, Jack Spencer, Kathleen Stock, Alison Stone,
anonymous referees, and an audience at Princeton University. I am especially indebted to Tomas
Bogardus for suggestions that signiﬁcantly improved this paper.
References
Alcoff, L. M. (2006). Visible identities: Race, gender, and the self. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
A´ sta, (2018). Categories we live by. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Bach, T. (2012). Gender is a natural kind with a historical essence. Ethics, 122, 231–272.
Barnes, E. (2016). The minority body: A theory of disability. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Barnes, E. (2019). Gender and gender terms. Nouˆs. https://doi.org/10.1111/nous.12279.
Beauvoir, S. d. (1989). The second sex (H. M. Parshley, Trans.). New York: Vintage.
Beauvoir, S. d. (2011). The second sex (C. Borde, & S. Malovany-Chevallier, Trans.). New York:
Vintage.
Bettcher, T. M. (2009). Trans identities and ﬁrst-person authority. In L. Shrage (Ed.), ‘‘You’ve changed’’:
Sex reassignment and personal identity. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Bettcher, T. M. (2013). Trans women and the meaning of ‘‘woman’’. In A. Soble, N. Power, & R.
Halwani (Eds.), Philosophy of sex: Contemporary readings (6th ed.). Lanham, MA: Rowan &
Littleﬁeld.
Bogardus, T. (2019). Some internal problems with revisionary gender concepts. Philosophia. https://doi.
org/10.1007/s11406-019-00107-2.
Brison, S. J. (2003). Beauvoir and feminism: Interview and reﬂections. In C. Card (Ed.), The Cambridge
companion to Simone de Beauvoir. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Butler, J. (1986). Sex and gender in Simone de Beauvoir’s Second Sex. Yale French Studies, 72, 35–49.
Butler, J. (1990). Gender trouble: Feminism and the subversion of identity. London: Routledge.
Byrne, A. (2018). Is sex socially constructed? Arc Digital, November 30. https://arcdigital.media/is-sex-
socially-constructed-81cf3ef79f07. Accessed 23 Dec 2019.
Cappelen, H. (2018). Fixing language: An essay on conceptual engineering. Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Carter, J. A., Gordon, E. C., & Jarvis, B. (Eds.). (2017). Knowledge ﬁrst. Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Chalmers, D. J. (2011). Verbal disputes. Philosophical Review, 120, 515–566.
Chappell, S. G. (2019). Interview by Richard Marshall. 3:16. https://316am.site123.me/articles/glory-
beauty-epiphany-imagination-how-to-do-moral-philosophy. Accessed 23 Dec 2019.
Chu, A. L. (2018). On liking women. n ? 1(30). https://nplusonemag.com/issue-30/essays/on-liking-
women/. Accessed 23 Dec 2019.
County, J. (1996). Man enough to be a woman: The autobiography of Jayne County. New York: Serpent’s
Tail.
Daly, M. (1978). Gyn/ecology: The metaethics of radical feminism. Boston: Beacon Press.
Are women adult human females?
3801
123

Dembroff, R. (Forthcoming.) Real talk on the metaphysics of gender. Philosophical Topics.
Fausto-Sterling, A. (1993). The ﬁve sexes: Why male and female are not enough. The Sciences, March/
April, 20–24.
Firestone, S. (1970). The dialectic of sex: The case for feminist revolution. New York: William Morrow.
Gatens, M. (1983). A critique of the sex/gender distinction. In J. Allen & P. Patton (Eds.), Beyond
Marxism? Interventions after Marx. Sydney: Intervention Publications.
Goddard, C. (2001). Lexico-semantic universals: A critical overview. Linguistic Typology, 5, 1–65.
Greer, G. (2000). The whole woman. New York: Anchor.
Grosz, E. (1994). Volatile bodies: Toward a corporeal feminism. Bloomington, IN: Indiana University
Press.
Haig, D. (2004). The inexorable rise of gender and the decline of sex: Social change in academic titles,
1945–2001. Archives of Sexual Behavior, 33, 87–96.
Hale, C. J. (1996). Are lesbians women? Hypatia, 11, 92–121.
Hale, C. J. (2009). Tracing a ghostly memory in my throat: Reﬂections on ftm feminist voice and agency.
In L. J. Shrage (Ed.), ‘‘You’ve changed’’: Sex reassignment and personal identity. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Hames, R., Garﬁeld, Z., & Garﬁeld, M. (2017). Is male androphilia a context-dependent cross-cultural
universal? Archives of Sexual Behavior, 46, 63–71.
Haslanger, S. (2000). Gender and race: (What) are they? (What) do we want them to be? Nouˆs, 34, 31–55.
Haslanger, S. (2012). Resisting reality: Social construction and social critique. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Haslanger, S. (2017). The sex/gender distinction and the social construction of reality. In A. Garry, S.
J. Khader, & A. Stone (Eds.), The Routledge companion to Feminist Philosophy. New York:
Routledge.
Hayton, D. (2018). A plea to trans activists: We can protect trans rights without denying biology.
Quillette, March 30. https://quillette.com/2018/03/30/plea-trans-activists-can-protect-trans-rights-
without-denying-biology/. Accessed 23 Dec 2019.
Heyes, C. J. (2000). Line drawings: Deﬁning women through feminist practice. Ithaca, NY: Cornell
University Press.
Hirschfeld, M. (1991). Transvestites (M. A. Lombardi-Nash, Trans.). New York: Prometheus Books.
Hood-Williams, J. (1996). Goodbye to sex and gender. Sociological Review, 44, 1–16.
Jeffreys, S. (2014). Gender hurts: A feminist analysis of the politics of transgenderism. London:
Routledge.
Jenkins, K. (2016). Amelioration and inclusion: Gender identity and the concept of woman. Ethics, 126,
394–421.
Jones, Z. (2017). Medical professionals increasingly agree: Trans women are female, trans men are male.
http://bit.ly/35H3vBH. Accessed 23 Dec 2019.
Kahneman, D. (2012). Thinking, fast and slow. London: Penguin.
Kessler, S. J., & McKenna, W. (1978). Gender: An ethnomethodological approach. Chicago: University
of Chicago Press.
Lawrence, A. A. (2013). Men trapped in Men’s bodies: Narratives of autogynephilic transsexualism. New
York: Springer.
Manne, K. (2018). Down girl: The logic of misogyny. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
McCloskey, D. N. (1999). Crossing: A memoir. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
McGrath, T. (2019). Woke: A guide to social justice. London: Constable.
McKitrick, J. (2015). A dispositional account of gender. Philosophical Studies, 172, 2575–2589.
Mercier, H. (2017). How gullible are we? A review of the evidence from psychology and social science.
Review of General Psychology, 21, 103–122.
Mikkola, M. (2016). The wrong of injustice: Dehumanization and its role in feminist philosophy. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Mikkola, M. (2017). Gender essentialism and anti-essentialism. In A. Garry, S. J. Khader, & A. Stone
(Eds.), The Routledge companion to Feminist Philosophy. New York: Routledge.
Moi, T. (2001). What is a woman?: And other essays. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Oakley, A. (1972). Sex, gender, and society. London: Maurice Temple Smith.
Paglia, C. (1992). Sex, art, and American culture: Essays. New York: Vintage.
Passinsky, A. (2019). Finean feminist metaphysics. Inquiry. https://doi.org/10.1080/0020174X.2019.
1669984.
3802
A. Byrne
123

Piantadosi, S. T., Tily, H., & Gibson, E. (2012). The communicative function of ambiguity in language.
Cognition, 122, 280–291.
Prosser, J. (1998). Second skins: The body narratives of transsexuality. New York: Columbia University
Press.
Raymond, J. (1994). The transsexual empire: The making of the she-male. New York: Teachers College
Press.
Roscoe, W. (1991). The Zuni man-woman. Albuquerque, NM: University of New Mexico Press.
Roscoe, W. (1998). Changing ones: Third and fourth genders in native North America. New York: St.
Martin’s Press.
Rosen, G. (2015). Real deﬁnition. Analytic Philosophy, 56, 189–209.
Rubin, G. S. (1975). The trafﬁc in women: Notes on the ‘political economy’ of sex. In R. Reiter (Ed.),
Toward an anthropology of women. New York: Monthly View Press. Page reference to Rubin,
Deviations (2011).
Rubin, A. J. (2014). French ﬁlm goes viral, but not in France. New York Times, April 6.
Saul, J. (2006). Gender and race. Aristotelian Society Supplementary, 80, 119–143.
Saul, J. (2012). Politically signiﬁcant terms and philosophy of language. In S. L. Crasnow & A.
M. Superson (Eds.), Out from the shadows: Analytical feminist contributions to traditional
philosophy. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
SBS (2013). Fa’afaﬁne—The boys raised to be girls. https://www.sbs.com.au/news/thefeed/story/
faafaﬁne-boys-raised-be-girls. Accessed 23 Dec 2019.
Scheman, N. (1993). Engenderings: Constructions of knowledge, authority, and privilege. New York:
Routledge.
Scheman, N. (1999). Queering the center by centering the queer: Reﬂections on transsexuals and secular
Jews. In M. Rottnek (Ed.), Sissies and tomboys: Gender nonconformity and homosexual childhood.
New York: New York University Press.
Serano, J. (2007). Whipping girl: A transsexual woman on sexism and the scapegoating of femininity.
Berkeley, CA: Seal Press.
Spelman, E. V. (1988). Inessential woman: Problems of exclusion in feminist thought. Boston: Beacon
Press.
Stoljar, N. (1995). Essence, identity, and the concept of woman. Philosophical Topics, 23, 261–293.
Stone, A. (2007). An introduction to feminist philosophy. Cambridge: Polity.
Tuvel, R. (2018). Racial transitions and controversial positions: Reply to Taylor, Gordon, Sealey, Hom,
and Botts. Philosophy Today, 62, 73–88.
Vasey, P. L., & VanderLaan, D. P. (2014). Evolving research on the evolution of male androphilia.
Canadian Journal of Human Sexuality, 23, 137–147.
Vega-Frutis, R., Macı´as-Ordo´n˜ez, R., Guevara, R., & Fromhage, L. (2014). Sex change in plants and
animals: A uniﬁed perspective. Journal of Evolutionary Biology, 27, 667–675.
Vincent, N. (2006). Self-made man. New York: Viking.
Williamson, T. (2000). Knowledge and its limits. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Williamson, T. (2007). The philosophy of philosophy. Oxford: Blackwell.
Witt, C. (2011). The metaphysics of gender. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Yin, S. (2016). Why do we inherit mitochondrial DNA only from our mothers? New York Times, June 23.
Publisher’s Note
Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published
maps and institutional afﬁliations.
Are women adult human females?
3803
123

