This is a section of doi:10.7551/mitpress/14496.001.0001
Undue Hate
A Behavioral Economic Analysis of Hostile
Polarization in US Politics and Beyond
By: Daniel F. Stone
Citation:
Undue Hate: A Behavioral Economic Analysis of Hostile Polarization
in US Politics and Beyond
By:
DOI:
ISBN (electronic):
Publisher:
Published:
Daniel F. Stone
The MIT Press
2023
10.7551/mitpress/14496.001.0001
9780262372367
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/oa-monograph/chapter-pdf/2089559/c000400_9780262372367.pdf by guest on 14 June 2024

Introduction
If we could read the secret history of our enemies, we should find in each man’s 
life sorrow and suffering enough to disarm all hostility.
—­Henry Wadsworth Longfellow, Prose Works of Henry Wadsworth Longfellow
In 1968, Shirley Chisholm was the first Black woman to be elected to Con-
gress. In 1972, she became the first Black person, and first woman, to run for 
a major party’s nomination for president. A rival in the primary campaign 
was arch-­segregationist Alabama Governor George Wallace. On May 15 of 
that year, Wallace was shot five times in an assassination attempt, and in 
early June, Chisholm went to visit him in the hospital. “Shirley Chisholm! 
What you doing here?” Wallace asked. “I don’t want what happened to you 
to happen to anyone,” she replied. Wallace came to tears. When it was time 
for Chisholm to leave, Wallace did not want to let go of her hand.
The visit might have had a big impact on Wallace. His daughter Peggy 
said that “Chisholm had the courage to believe that even George Wallace 
could change. [She] planted a seed of new beginnings in my father’s heart.” 
Two years later, Wallace convinced a block of Southern Congressmen to 
support Chisholm’s minimum wage bill, leading to its passage. A few years 
after that, he publicly renounced racism and asked for forgiveness.
John Lewis said that Wallace’s apology was sincere: “I could tell that he 
was a changed man. He acknowledged his bigotry and assumed responsi-
bility for the harm he had caused. He wanted to be forgiven.” Alabama’s 
Black voters agreed too, with over 90 percent voting for him in the 1982 
gubernatorial election.1
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/oa-monograph/chapter-pdf/2089559/c000400_9780262372367.pdf by guest on 14 June 2024

4	
Introduction
Stranger than Fiction?
This story probably surprised you if you hadn’t heard it before. But it prob-
ably didn’t shock you. Redemption stories like this are uncommon but not 
unheard of. We’re all familiar with people who were once at odds with one 
another overcoming their conflict and recognizing that the other “side” 
was not as fundamentally and permanently “bad” as they thought.
Misguided conflict is also commonly found in fictional works. It’s an 
effective plot device because it resonates with our experiences—­it feels real 
because it so often is. An example I came across while writing this book 
occurs in Cobra Kai, a streaming television series set in the present day 
about the characters from the 1980s Karate Kid movie series. Cobra Kai is 
primarily about the now middle-­aged Johnny Lawrence. Johnny was the 
villain in the first movie but on the show discovers that he has a good heart 
after stumbling into becoming a mentor to his teenage neighbor.
Another villain from the movies, John Kreese, is an important character 
on the show as well. John was the teenage Johnny’s karate teacher and 
became furious at Johnny, and even physically attacked him, after Johnny 
failed to win a tournament. When the two characters reconnect on the 
show, Johnny is understandably still upset about this. But he still decides 
to give John a second chance, knowing firsthand the possibility that people 
can change. John turns out to be irredeemable, however.
This book is about our bias toward thinking that people with whom we 
have feuds are true villains like John when they often turn out to be John-
nys: complicated but good at heart. Even Daniel LaRusso—­the “Karate Kid,” 
consistently a “good guy” in both the movies and the show—­appears to be 
subject to this bias. Unaware of Johnny’s change of heart, Daniel’s negative 
misperceptions of Johnny drive much of the show’s plot.
We roll our eyes when we hear someone ask, “Can we disagree without 
being disagreeable?” (Or even worse, “Why can’t we all just get along?”) It 
seems trite to describe a conflict as “just a big misunderstanding.” The idea 
that conflict is typically caused by misperception is literally textbook con-
flict analysis.2 Misunderstandings cause conflicts at the smallest and largest 
scales—­misperceptions have even been considered “a central cause of both 
world wars” (Jervis, 2017, xv).3
Yet when we’re personally involved in a contentious disagreement—­and 
we all are at various points in our lives—­it’s clear to us, or so we think, that 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/oa-monograph/chapter-pdf/2089559/c000400_9780262372367.pdf by guest on 14 June 2024

Introduction	
5
the fault lies mostly, or even completely, with the other side. We have no 
doubt that our hostility, and hostile actions, are fully warranted. Often, we 
even think the other side is an irredeemable bad guy like John, or a bunch 
of Johns. But Johnnys are out there. They might be even more common in 
reality than they are on TV.
Partisan Conflict and Misunderstanding
An increasingly intense conflict that most Americans participate in, to 
various degrees, is the struggle between the two major political parties, 
the Democrats and the Republicans. It’s unclear how much the US has 
grown apart ideologically over recent decades. Research on this type of 
polarization, sometimes called issue polarization or ideological polarization, 
has yielded relatively mixed results.4 But it’s now widely recognized that 
affective polarization—­polarization in how partisans feel about each other 
(in psychology, affect is roughly synonymous with emotion)—­has grown 
steadily over this time and is now at an alarming level.5
The standard measure of affective polarization is the difference in survey 
“feeling thermometer” scores toward a respondent’s own party (often called 
the in-­party for short) and the opposition party (the out-­party). Feeling ther-
mometer scores range from zero to one hundred, with zero indicating feel-
ings that are as “cold” as possible and one hundred implying maximally 
“warm” feelings. Average scores for each presidential election year since 
1980 are shown in figure I.1. For partisans on both sides, the gap between 
in-­party and out-­party scores has approximately doubled between 1980 and 
2020, and the growth in this polarization is almost entirely due to a decline 
in feelings toward the out-­party.
Partisans have grown to feel much more hostility toward both the out-­
party’s voters and (especially) toward out-­party politicians and other elites 
(Druckman and Levendusky, 2019). Both mass partisans (voters) and parti-
san elites are now highly affectively polarized (Enders, 2021).6 Since 1980, 
affective polarization has increased more in the US than other Organisa-
tion for Economic Co-­operation and Development (OECD) nations with 
comparable data (Boxell et al., 2020). Some scholars argue that affective 
polarization is so severe in the US that the term polarization is too under-
stated and the conflict should instead be called political sectarianism (Finkel 
et al., 2020).
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/oa-monograph/chapter-pdf/2089559/c000400_9780262372367.pdf by guest on 14 June 2024

6	
Introduction
Maybe it’s wishful thinking, but I’m going to stick with the milder term 
polarization. Whatever we call it, it’s a problem—­maybe even America’s big-
gest problem, since it both prevents us from solving other problems and 
creates new problems in its own right. When we dislike the other side, we 
become less cooperative, more distrustful, and more likely to act unethi-
cally. We politicize issues that are not inherently political, like mask wear-
ing and vaccination during a pandemic. Affective polarization naturally 
snowballs over time, leading to potentially disastrous threats to demo-
cratic norms, institutions, and even violence.7 The exact negative conse-
quences are unpredictable—­but the platitude “divided we fall” has much  
truth to it.
Affective polarization is obviously a complex phenomenon, with many 
underlying causes. In this book, I’m going to talk about just one broad 
category of these causes: misunderstandings. I’ll argue that disagreement 
in US politics—­and other political and nonpolitical settings—­often leads 
to what I call affective polarization bias: objectively false and overly nega-
tive beliefs about the other side’s character traits, causing undue hostility 
and even hate. This bias isn’t a single cognitive process—­I’ll discuss how it 
Figure 0.1
Trends in partisan thermometer scores. Source: author’s analysis of data from the 
American National Election Studies, https://electionstudies.org/.
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
1980
1984
1988
1992
1996
2000
2004
2008
2012
2016
2020
Avg D therm score for D party
Avg D therm score for R party
Avg R therm score for R party
Avg R therm score for D party
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/oa-monograph/chapter-pdf/2089559/c000400_9780262372367.pdf by guest on 14 June 2024

Introduction	
7
results from a wide variety of other biases and contextual factors. I’ll also 
talk about why those of us who feel more hostility are likely to be more 
biased and why undue hostility has likely been exacerbated in US partisan 
politics over recent decades.
You might think you can’t be objectively wrong about something as sub-
jective as your interpersonal feelings. But you can misjudge another person 
by your own standards. As a result, you can dislike another person more 
than you should. This simple point is implied, but not discussed explicitly, 
in prior literature on affective polarization and clarifies how at least some 
of our interpersonal hostility is essentially mistaken.
I’m not saying that everyone should get along perfectly well with every-
one else. I’m not saying that all, or even most, of our negative feelings 
toward other individuals or groups are unjustified. I’m just pointing out 
that we can, of course, misunderstand other people. And since our feelings 
toward others are influenced by these misunderstandings, we can dislike 
others more than we should. I’ll argue that this “mistaken dislike” tends to 
result from disagreement in US politics—­and a wide range of other contexts.
US Politics, Groups, and One-­on-­One Relationships
There is no daylight between divorce court and Congress at this point.
—­Amanda Ripley, “How to Avoid High Conflict,” The Good Fight podcast
Previous studies and books on US affective polarization have focused on 
partisan identity and intergroup bias as the explanation for the growth in 
affective polarization that’s occurred here. In a nutshell, the idea is that 
since evolution has programmed us to favor our in-­group “teammates” and 
demonize the out-­group “opposition,” as partisanship has become a more 
important part of our identities for a variety of reasons, partisan warfare, so 
to speak, has grown.8
I don’t deny the central importance of group identity effects in parti-
san politics and affective polarization in the US. But group effects can’t be 
the complete explanation for hostile polarization in general since this type 
of polarization so often occurs within social groups and not just between 
them (as illustrated in figure I.2).9 We’re all familiar with examples from our 
personal lives and the public sphere: spouses, siblings, friends, neighbors, 
coworkers, and partners who grew apart, often not so peacefully. Famous 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/oa-monograph/chapter-pdf/2089559/c000400_9780262372367.pdf by guest on 14 June 2024

8	
Introduction
examples of close friends and partnerships that devolved to the point 
of bad blood, despite the partners sharing key social identities, include 
Thomas Jefferson and John Adams, Muhammad Ali and Malcolm X, Betty 
Friedan and Gloria Steinem, and—­founding fathers of behavioral econom-
ics, along with Richard Thaler—­Daniel Kahneman and Amos Tversky.10 The 
bible includes numerous examples of the age-­old phenomenon of “sibling 
rivalry.” Even twins sometimes grow apart to the point of not speaking to 
one another.11
The term affective polarization hasn’t been used in prior academic lit-
erature to describe interpersonal hostility in settings other than partisan 
politics. But it’s reasonable to use it in a wide range of contexts. Anytime 
two “parties” grow apart from each other emotionally, especially due to 
disagreement, it seems apt to say that affective polarization has occurred. 
Figure 0.2
An example of within-­group affective polarization. Source: Robert Leighton / The 
New Yorker Collection / The Cartoon Bank.
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/oa-monograph/chapter-pdf/2089559/c000400_9780262372367.pdf by guest on 14 June 2024

Introduction	
9
I’m certainly not the first person to compare American politics to a bad 
marriage. And if affective polarization can occur within social groups as 
well as between them, then there must be important causes of affective 
polarization other than social group differences.
In this book, I’ll argue that there are in fact many important causes of 
affective polarization bias (again, that’s undue affective polarization) unre-
lated to identity effects. So, while I’ll focus on political settings throughout 
the book, and US politics in particular—­because of the acute growth in 
affective polarization that’s occurred here and because it’s been the focus of 
my prior research—­I’ll also discuss examples of the bias occurring in non-
political relationships between individuals. These examples both show how 
widespread affective polarization bias is and serve as useful metaphors for 
better understanding US politics.
And while I’m well aware of the risks of “bothsides-­ism”—­discussing 
problematic behaviors on both sides of a dispute in a way that falsely 
implies equivalency—­I’ll mostly avoid the question of “who’s to blame” 
(for polarization in US politics and elsewhere) in this book. I’ll elaborate on 
my reasons for this later. For now, I’ll simply note that there’s plenty of evi-
dence indicating our trouble-­making tendencies are close to universal. Just 
about all of us are subject to this bias to different degrees, at different points 
in our lives. Just about all of us unwisely exacerbate conflicts at times—­
making ourselves worse off in the long run—­and can do better.
Why Me?
My PhD is in economics, and I’ve been an economics professor for 15 years 
now. Why is an economist writing about political feelings? Well, again, this 
book is about hard feelings being driven by misunderstandings and mis-
taken beliefs. I’m a behavioral economist, and the study of systematically 
mistaken beliefs, that is, biased beliefs, is an important part of behavioral 
economics. Behavioral economics is, broadly speaking, the study of devia-
tions from the “standard” assumptions of economic theory that people are 
optimal decision makers who use available information as well as possible 
to form unbiased beliefs when facing uncertainty. Behavioral economists 
thus seek to understand when economic agents (e.g., investors, entrepre-
neurs, and consumers) hold unduly positive or negative beliefs about all 
sorts of outcomes and the implications of these biases.12
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/oa-monograph/chapter-pdf/2089559/c000400_9780262372367.pdf by guest on 14 June 2024

10	
Introduction
In my past research, and in new ideas and data presented in this book, 
I argue that tools from behavioral economics—­mathematical models of 
beliefs and inference, game theoretic interaction and communication, 
and biases identified and studied primarily in behavioral economics—­help 
enhance our understanding of affective polarization. To be clear, though, 
while this framework for analyzing affective polarization is new and affec-
tive polarization bias is a new concept, I don’t claim to be proposing a 
fundamentally new theory of polarization. I’m far from the first person to 
suggest that cognitive biases contribute to affective polarization.
Throughout the book I’ll be making some new claims, but I’ll mainly be 
extending existing ideas and connecting dots based on research conducted 
by others, mostly from outside of economics. Two particularly well-­known 
books that mine builds on are The Righteous Mind, by psychologist Jona-
than Haidt, and Why We’re Polarized, by journalist Ezra Klein. Both discuss 
how affective polarization is influenced by cognitive bias and thus imply 
that affective polarization is often excessive—­but never say this directly. 
Another, quite distinct book that’s especially similar in spirit to mine is 
Buster Benson’s Why Are We Yelling? Benson discusses how a variety of cog-
nitive biases contribute to hostility in nonpolitical relationships but also 
doesn’t explicitly discuss how hostility itself can be mistaken.
In addition to my general interest in biased beliefs and the importance 
of affective polarization, there are two other reasons that I’m interested in 
this topic. The first is directly connected to my being an economist: the 
sheer inefficiency of undue polarization. Polarization wastes time, money, 
and effort; prevents mutual gains; and even creates unnecessary harm. 
Correcting biased beliefs about the other side leading to undue hate is, at 
least hypothetically, low-­hanging fruit for making the world a much better 
place. Much easier said than done, of course. Still, it’s undoubtedly simpler 
logistically than, say, building a high-­speed national rail system or ending 
a pandemic.
The second reason I’m particularly interested in polarization is personal 
experience. I admit I’ve never been politically radical or highly emotive, but 
I’ve still experienced my share of unduly hostile polarization. As a kid and 
teenager, it was mostly as a sports fan. Apparently, I used to have a habit 
of saying my favorite teams were always “underrated,” as my mom made 
fun of me about this for many years afterward. I also had theories for why 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/oa-monograph/chapter-pdf/2089559/c000400_9780262372367.pdf by guest on 14 June 2024

Introduction	
11
players, coaches, and even fans of rival teams were worse people for various 
reasons. (And I was happy to tell you why if you asked and maybe even if 
you didn’t ask.) In my late teens and early twenties, the same went for those 
with political views I disagreed with.
It felt good to be better than the other side, whether in sports or politics, 
and to have reasons for why this was the case. I didn’t know the term cogni-
tive bias but did “know” the media and refs were biased against my favorite 
teams and that those teams, and our fans, were even morally superior to 
the opposition. So, yes, I’d say that I was unduly polarized. I was far from 
a truth seeker—­instead, I believed what I wanted to believe (or thought 
I wanted to believe) and was naively unaware of doing this. And I’m no 
rocket scientist, but I’m confident that my self-­awareness and logical rea-
soning skills aren’t far below average. My experience made me think that 
irrational polarization can happen to just about anyone.
In more recent years my personal experience with polarization has often 
been secondhand with my spouse. (She has fully endorsed this paragraph, 
by the way.) She happily admits to being prone to many behavioral eco-
nomics biases—­and that there have been many times that she’s become 
unduly polarized toward people she’s had disagreements with, mistakenly 
“assuming the worst” about seemingly bad behavior. Sometimes these are 
disagreements with acquaintances, friends, and family—­and sometimes 
they’re with me. At other times, I’ve made the same mistake. We’ve helped 
each other recognize these tendencies and, at least sometimes, bite our 
tongues before saying things we’d regret. We’ve both observed that it’s all 
too easy to fail to recognize our own contributions to conflicts in relation-
ships and to be inclined to write off lost friends and estranged family mem-
bers as “bad people.” If my partner were a more stereotypically “rational” 
economist, I wouldn’t have seen so vividly and frequently how easily we 
can become unduly inflamed—­and, on the plus side, how easily we can 
forgive and move forward.
Audience and the Rest of This Book
My goal is to write this book in a way that’s both readable and informa-
tive for students and researchers in a variety of disciplines, and for people 
outside of academia interested in polarization. I don’t assume the reader 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/oa-monograph/chapter-pdf/2089559/c000400_9780262372367.pdf by guest on 14 June 2024

12	
Introduction
has any prior knowledge of either polarization or behavioral economics. 
Readers who are knowledgeable about these topics will be familiar with a 
fair amount of content. But as an old grad school classmate of mine once 
said, “repetition is not a bad thing.” Experienced instructors know this is 
almost always the case for students. I think it’s surprisingly often the case 
for seasoned scholars too.
I’ve written this book in a pretty informal style. That’s partly because I 
hope to have a wide-­ranging readership. But it’s also because I thought it 
would be easier for me to write it this way, and easier for you to read, no 
matter who you are. I’ve been an academic for a while now, however, and 
the book is still written accordingly, to some extent—­there’s a limit to how 
much I can lighten up. I’ve tried to be careful to not overstate claims, to 
provide evidence where necessary, and to note where I am essentially theo-
rizing. There is a little math used sporadically throughout the book—­I am 
an economist, after all. But it’s not much, and it’s only used to clarify points 
that might otherwise be muddled.
Before moving ahead, I think it will be helpful to quickly go over the 
book’s organization. Part I consists of this introduction and the first two 
chapters. In chapter 1, I discuss the general topic of interpersonal dislike 
as well as how “Bayesian ideal” belief updating can apply to beliefs about 
character traits. I also propose a more formal definition of affective polar-
ization bias. In chapter 2, I review an array of evidence indicating the exis-
tence of affective polarization bias in the US. This is the book’s most “meat 
and potatoes” chapter.
Part II, chapters 3–­6, discusses explanations for the bias. Chapter 3 pro-
vides my take on some major general biases that affect us in many parts of 
life, including partisan politics and interpersonal disagreement. Chapters 
4–­6 are each on a more specific “category” of explanations for affective 
polarization bias. Each of these chapters also includes some discussion of 
why the bias would increase over time and how the explanations could 
also apply to nonpolitical contexts. Chapter 4 covers theories for why we 
tend to excessively dislike those we disagree with in general, one that is 
relatively well known and one that is more novel. Chapter 5 discusses why 
strategic behavior in relationships exacerbates dislike and, in particular, 
causes dislike to tend to spiral. Chapter 6 is about why we tend to observe, 
and interpret, information in a way that exacerbates the effects discussed 
in prior chapters.
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/oa-monograph/chapter-pdf/2089559/c000400_9780262372367.pdf by guest on 14 June 2024

Introduction	
13
Part III is a single chapter, chapter 7, in which I briefly summarize and 
discuss implications of the prior chapters, considering a wide range of 
possibilities for short-­ and long-­run impacts. I don’t deny the many con-
straints impeding change, but I think it’s still worth thinking through and 
discussing a variety of options—­and maintaining optimism about potential 
progress. We should certainly strive to avoid a bias toward pessimism and 
undue certainty that these problems will never be resolved. And whatever 
the chances are for positive large-­scale political change, greater awareness 
and understanding of affective polarization bias can improve relationships 
in our everyday lives.
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/oa-monograph/chapter-pdf/2089559/c000400_9780262372367.pdf by guest on 14 June 2024

Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/oa-monograph/chapter-pdf/2089559/c000400_9780262372367.pdf by guest on 14 June 2024

© 2023 Daniel F. Stone
This work is subject to a Creative Commons CC BY-NC-ND license.
Subject to such license, all rights are reserved.
The MIT Press would like to thank the anonymous peer reviewers who provided 
comments on drafts of this book. The generous work of academic experts is essential 
for establishing the authority and quality of our publications. We acknowledge with 
gratitude the contributions of these otherwise uncredited readers.
This book was set in ITC Stone Serif Std and ITC Stone Sans Std by New Best-set 
Typesetters Ltd. 
Library of Congress Cataloging-­in-­Publication Data
Names: Stone, Daniel F., author.
Title: Undue hate : a behavioral economic analysis of hostile polarization in US 
politics and beyond / Daniel F. Stone.
Description: Cambridge, Massachusetts : The MIT Press, [2023] | Includes 
bibliographical references and index.
Identifiers: LCCN 2022018587 (print) | LCCN 2022018588 (ebook) |  
ISBN 9780262047500 (paperback) | ISBN 9780262372374 (epub) |  
ISBN 9780262372367 (pdf)
Subjects: LCSH: Polarization (Social sciences)—Economic aspects—United States. 
| Polarization (Social sciences)—Political aspects—United States. | Economics—
Political aspects—United States. | Economics—Psychological aspects. | Political 
culture—United States.
Classification: LCC HN90.P57 S766 2023  (print) | LCC HN90.P57  (ebook) |  
DDC 306.0973—dc23/eng/20221228
LC record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2022018587
LC ebook record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2022018588
10  9  8  7  6  5  4  3  2  1
MIT Press Direct
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/oa-monograph/chapter-pdf/2089559/c000400_9780262372367.pdf by guest on 14 June 2024

