
The Canonization of Greek Mathematics
Plan of the Chapter
Time for a survey, for a look back. What we may call “the Greek
achievement” is all in: Archytas, Archimedes, Ptolemy . . . Which does
not mean, of course, that history stopped. At around the third century ,
however, there is a marked shift. “Porphyry and a New Start” is where we
begin – an author of the second half of the third century whose works
include a Neoplatonist commentary on past mathematical works. To
understand this, we need to bring in two contexts. One is “Platonism
and the Return of Number,” where we survey the history of Platonism
until its remaking as Neoplatonism. This philosophy has mathematics –
and especially, number – at its center. From the third century onward,
practically all pagan philosophy becomes Neoplatonist. (To understand
this process, we also note several mathematical works of the imperial era,
more focused on number.) The other context, discussed in “Teachers,
Commentaries, Books,” is the rise of commentary as the major form of
creativity, starting in the third century .
With this in place, we survey our evidence for the mathematics of
the fourth to the sixth centuries, roughly in chronological order. “Pappus
and the Mathematicians of Alexandria” brings in three teachers of math-
ematics – Pappus, Theon, and Hypatia – active in Alexandria across a
century, from the early fourth century to early ﬁfth century . Especially
for Pappus, the mathematical remains are signiﬁcant and will exercise an
important inﬂuence on the future growth of science. From mathemati-
cians, we move back to philosophers. “Proclus and the Philosophical
Schools” concentrates on the ﬁgure of Proclus, the leading Neoplatonist
philosopher of the ﬁfth century and author of an inﬂuential commen-
tary to Euclid. This brings in the wider phenomenon of the reception of
mathematics, in this era, by philosophers. “Eutocius – and a Coda” looks,
ﬁnally, at an author trained in Neoplatonist philosophy but visible to us

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

only as an author of commentaries on advanced mathematics. Eutocius, of
the sixth century , already lived in a fully Christian Byzantium, and it is
thanks to the authors of his milieu that so much of Greek mathematics
survived into the Middle Ages – preparing the way for the many renais-
sances of Greek mathematics to come.
Porphyry and a New Start
“There are many schools of thought in musical science, Eudoxius, on
the subject of attunement, but there are two that one might reckon
pre-eminent, those of the Pythagoreans and the Aristoxenians.”
This is, in Barker’s translation, the beginning of a work from the late third
century .Which work, you ask? Well, let me cite, now, the title:
Porphyry’s Commentary on Ptolemy’s Harmonics.
Right there, a revolution. Several generations after Ptolemy’s death, his
works were not merely read: they were the subject of commentary. Surely
Ptolemy never anticipated this. But he would have been pleased by
Porphyry’s explanation of why he, Ptolemy, was chosen:
Before Ptolemy, Didymus, the writer on music, described the distinctions
between [Pythagoreans and Aristoxenians] very adequately in his pioneering
treatise about them, and Ptolemy examined them in his Harmonics,
making clear what is useful in each of them and reconciling the apparent
conﬂict between them. I have therefore decided to attempt an explication of
Ptolemy’s Harmonics, since . . . I know of no one up to this time who has
done it, and also because I recognize that reading it is no easy task for
people who have not made a detailed study of these schools of thought or
have been trained in the mathematical sciences. . . . I was led to undertake
this exposition also by the fact that only Ptolemy, or he above all, brought
the science of attunement to perfection, not so much by what he added . . .
as by his critical assessment. . . . He rejected in their entirety his predeces-
sors’ quarrelsome polemics . . . bringing out instead what had been well
said, and showing that it is in concord with the facts and with the criteria by
which they should be judged.
Porphyry singles out Ptolemy’s attitude – of ﬁnding common ground – as
a positive, indeed, as the reason for taking Ptolemy as his starting point.
A. Barker, Porphyry’s Commentary on Ptolemy’s Harmonics (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
), p. .

The Canonization of Greek Mathematics
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

This is not a matter of tone alone – Porphyry, in his own writings, could
often become a sharp, indeed vicious, polemicist. This is rather a matter of
intellectual goals. Porphyry’s stated aim is the ﬁnding of a lasting, overarch-
ing synthesis: it is therefore useful to take, as one’s starting point, an author
who covers the past well and aims, himself, at possible areas of agreement.
A few more observations. First, Porphyry’s main audience, we learn, was
those “not trained in the mathematical sciences.” Porphyry himself was no
mathematician. He does comment competently on the more arithmetical
passages in Ptolemy’s text, but he concentrates mostly on the methodo-
logical passages. The imagined audience is surely that of intellectuals who,
like Porphyry himself, seek to be erudite – and philosophically trained (the
“Eudoxius,” addressed in the ﬁrst sentence, is otherwise unknown). Here,
then, is where the mathematical sciences now ﬁt: within a large project of
philosophical erudition.
We also learn that Porphyry knew of no previous commentary to
Ptolemy’s Harmonics. This is, in fact, decisive. For Porphyry’s generation,
the writing of commentaries came naturally, but this may not have been true
of any previous generation. The one work mentioned so far in this book,
earlier than Porphyry, that was referred to as a “commentary” was the one
Hipparchus wrote on Aratus – and that was no commentary at all but,
instead, a critique. Until the third century , the writing of commentary
was restricted to a few domains (mostly the literary canon; we return to
survey the history of commentary later in the chapter). Commentary was
never the main vehicle of intellectual production and was never produced
for the exact sciences. From the middle of the third century onward,
however, commentary suddenly becomes the main form of intellectual
production, across all ﬁelds. Even noncommentary works take up some of
the characteristics of commentary, often interested in the production of
overarching synthesis, often organized around a canonical corpus that is
excerpted and rearranged. And so it remains. The triumph of the com-
mentary took but a generation or two in the third century, but from then
on: commentaries, encyclopedias, and various other compendia remain the
mainstay of cultural life, in the various Mediterranean languages – Greek,
Latin, Arabic, Hebrew, and more – for over a millennium. We transition
into Late Antiquity and, with it, into the Middle Ages.
Porphyry was there right at the beginning, and as it happens, we know
him rather well.Commentators, by the nature of their project, are
I provide a fuller account of Porphyry’s scholarly practice in R. Netz, Scale, Space and Canon in
Ancient Literary Practice (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, ), pp. –.
Porphyry and a New Start

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

proliﬁc. And although they tend to be self-eﬀacing, they often do show
through the cracks. Porphyry’s life mission was the dissemination and
elucidation of the works of his philosophical master, Plotinus. The cen-
terpiece of all that was an edition of Plotinus’s works, the Enneads,
introduced with a “Life of Plotinus” – a hagiography of the master with
the pupil, Porphyry himself, in prominent display. We learn that Porphyry
was a Phoenician, born in Tyre in the year /. He went to study
in Athens, which – in this age of rhetorical display and pageantry of the
past – had become once again something of a liberal arts college.
He became recognized for his good education in Greek literature and
philosophy and, at age thirty, got to Rome. Soon after, he became distin-
guished – in the very last years of Plotinus’s life – as Plotinus’s star pupil.
Plotinus died in ; over the following decades, Porphyry wrote millions of
words, editing, reintroducing, reproducing Plotinus’s philosophy.
Many works implore their readers to a life of learning (a short extant
work addressed to his wife, Marcella, encourages her to spend the time,
when Porphyry is away on travel, in philosophical study). This is often
polemical: you should study our philosophy, not another’s. Plotinus was a
Platonist, and late in the third century , the polemic was mostly against
Christianity. Once safely pagan, one was expected to study Plato as well as
Aristotle, seeking their synthesis. Indeed, a lot of Porphyry’s eﬀort was
invested in the commentary to Aristotle, including no fewer than three
known commentaries to one of Aristotle’s most elementary works – taken,
at this point, as a kind of introduction to philosophy as such – the
Categories. This then led to a great many commentaries on all of
Aristotle’s logical works and many others and then to commentaries on
many Platonic dialogues. But there are many further indications of
Porphyry’s erudition: works commenting upon Homer (the traditional
subject of ancient literary commentary). He went to study in Athens, so he
was obviously a competent rhetorician, and lo and behold, we ﬁnd that he
wrote a commentary on the works of Minucianus, a past theoretician of
rhetoric (as far as we know, this is the ﬁrst such commentary to rhetorical
handbooks). And he did indeed write commentaries and introductions to
the exact sciences: not only to Ptolemy’s Harmonics but also to his
Tetrabiblos (that is, Ptolemy’s astrological work) and also other introduc-
tions to astronomy.
Porphyry’s life is all about the teaching, within a close circle, of like-
minded erudites: above all, they become immersed in a philosophy, which
they learn in succession through Aristotle, Plato, Plotinus, and the many
commentaries along the way; they maintain their literary and rhetorical

The Canonization of Greek Mathematics
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

erudition; they add to this, also, a certain knowledge of music, and of the
stars. They are Platonists, after all. This Platonism is in many ways true to
the spirit of the original engagement between Plato and Archytas, with a
vision of a true world, hidden behind the visible one, made of abstract
structures: so, mathematics as an intimation of hidden realities. This
Platonism is also much more rigorous in its view of such hidden realities,
constructing speciﬁc cosmologies of the nonmaterial reality. It is a philos-
ophy that verges into a kind of cartography of the divine – even more so as
it comes to confront the outright blasphemy of newly assertive religions,
such as Christianity, that deny the gods.
All of this sounds incredibly speciﬁc. A particular variety of Platonism,
an exposition of the structure of the hidden divine; the writing of com-
mentaries to selected mathematical texts – surely this would be just a small
part of the history of mathematics? But in fact, from the third to the sixth
centuries, almost everything we see in mathematics is at least within the
ﬁeld of inﬂuence of this distinctive project, and indeed, the very transmis-
sion of mathematics into the Middle Ages seems to have depended on it.
We now have Ptolemy’s Harmonics to read, for which we should be
grateful, above all, to the tradition represented by Porphyry. Why did this
variety of Platonism become so signiﬁcant? How did culture come to be
ruled by Neoplatonist commentary?
Platonism and the Return of Number
Already in his lifetime, Plato made it into the canon. He was among the
small group of authors – made mostly of the leading cultural ﬁgures of
classical Athens – who were read and admired everywhere. This small
group included tragedians such as Euripides; public speakers such as
Demosthenes; historians such as Thucydides. Greek readers long contin-
ued to be able to read Athens’ dialect (even while they were speaking very
diﬀerent versions of the language), and they continued to feel at home
reading works that took place in that city (even while they were living far
away from it and under very diﬀerent regimes). Such is the power of
literary memory. It was through Plato, above all, that Greeks came to
know one of the most beloved characters of antiquity, Socrates: clever,
questioning, iconoclastic. Plato’s prose is supremely elegant, witty, and
precise. Greeks were schooled, from childhood on, to write like him. He
talked about love, about death: his readers came to think about the most
intimate parts of their lives in Platonic terms. The dialogues depict debate
at its best – powerful theses, logically demolished. This mattered a lot to
Platonism and the Return of Number

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Greek readers, who liked to imagine themselves reenacting Socrates’s wit
in their own conversations. Indeed, Plato had a memorable scene of a
symposium and many other scenes of social gatherings, all important
rituals in the lives of the elite. In short, Plato was an author to live by;
he still remains.
He died in . His immediate associates continued to meet near
Plato’s villa, just outside the city walls, in the gardens dedicated to the hero
Akademos: hence, they were “Academic.”This informal study group was
ﬁrst led by Plato’s nephew Speusippus (leader of the school, –),
then by his much younger associate Xenocrates (leader of the school,
–). Xenocrates – no longer a blood relation to Plato – replaced
Plato’s charisma with the routine of something akin to a formal school.
(Indeed, at the same time, another younger associate of Plato – Aristotle –
set up his own institution of teaching at Athens; the city was beginning to
build its apparatus of a college town.) Whereas readers of Plato elsewhere
emphasized his elegant prose, his wit, Socrates’s own irony, the Academic
group led by Speusippus and Xenocrates emphasized Plato’s doctrines,
especially those he held toward the end of his life. The emphasis was on the
hidden mathematical structure of the universe and the truth of proportion,
seen in music and the stars. In particular, there was a speciﬁc doctrine,
developed perhaps more by Plato’s followers than by Plato himself, of
numbers as foundational. Plato’s Timaeus describes the universe in quasi-
mythical terms, as constructed by a divine maker. There was a debate in
antiquity over how this was to be taken (as referring to a temporal
sequence of events in which the world is gradually made or as a conceptual
analysis of the structure of reality). At any rate, faithful readers of Plato’s
Timaeus came to think of the world as a well-ordered succession. There
were the ideal forms, among which “one” and “two” were paramount;
combined, they gave rise to the entire succession of numbers, which gave
rise, in turn, to geometrical ﬁgures, of which all the rest was made. It might
strike us as a ﬂight of fancy, but in fact, at this point, among this group –
heir to the encounter between Plato and Archytas – the idea that numbers
and their ratios underlay music, hence the stars, hence reality, was quite
uncontroversial. The Italian, that is, Pythagorean, pedigree of this view of
In the following couple of pages, I oﬀer a brief history of Plato’s ancient legacy up to the High
Empire. There is no single monograph surveying this tradition in its totality; essential resources
include J. M. Dillon, The Middle Platonists, to (Ithaca, : Cornell University Press,
); J. Dillon,The Heirs of Plato: A Study of the Old Academy (–) (Oxford: Clarendon
Press, ); J. Glucker, Antiochus and the Late Academy (Göttingen: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht,
).

The Canonization of Greek Mathematics
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

reality was noted (already by Plato: the eponymous, main speaker of the
dialogue Timaeus is a visitor from southern Italy), and so, because authors
such as Speusippus and Xenocrates thought of themselves as Platonists,
this also carried, for them, some measure of allegiance to Pythagoreanism.
Numbers, Plato, Pythagoras: an important alliance was formed.
We may imagine Arcesilaus, born in Pitane (modern-day Turkey) in
about , thinking, at the very last years of the century, of his future
study at Plato’s Academy; little wonder that he ﬁrst studied mathematics
with the local astronomer, Autolycus. Coming to Athens, he soon became
one of the most popular members of the Academy. At about ﬁfty years old,
he became head of the school. His mathematical education might have
been impeccable – but he threw it away. He was clearly more a public
dialectician, in the old Socratic manner, than the maker of doctrines
(Xenocrates, who, more than anyone, else created the doctrine of
Platonism/Pythagoreanism, wrote at least seventy books; Arcesilaus wrote
none). This dialectical prowess is probably why Arcesilaus was so popular
and also why he turned away from the doctrines of Speusippus and
Xenocrates to what must have appeared as a more “Socratic” version of
Plato, one where the emphasis was on dialectics and debate as such.
Technically, Arcesilaus was a skeptic. One should never assent to any
doctrine; instead, one should always continue “looking” (so, in the original
Greek, he was a skeptikos, a “looker”). Such was the force of Arcesilaus’s
stamp – and such was the stability of Athenian schools, at that point – that
for the remaining two hundred years of the school’s existence, it would
keep close to Arcesilaus’s skepticism (elaborated and made even more
radical by Carneades, in the second century ).
Like everything else, such stability was shattered by the coming of the
Romans. We recall Posidonius, pursuing Stoic philosophy away from the
Athenian school – but in the presence of Roman patronage from the likes
of Pompey and Cicero. Philosophy, we recall, moved away from Athens
and looked for various syntheses, combining the old philosophies with
other tendencies of Hellenism – always crafting original, eclectic packages
of “what the Greeks knew.” Science, literature, and philosophy all got
combined, in many distinct ways. Posidonius was not only a philosopher
but also a historian and a geographer. He even wrote on military tactics; he
even commissioned an astronomical device! The Stoa was not alone in this
new parade of novel combinations. We ﬁnd Antiochus of Ascalon, a
Platonist trained in Athens (so, obviously, trained in Carneades’s
skepticism), in Alexandria in the year , under the protection of
the Roman general Lucullus. The time and place are extremely speciﬁc
Platonism and the Return of Number

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

because Cicero (our witness to the event) recalled it as a famous scandal:
here was an “Academic” – follower of the school of Plato – claiming that
knowledge – gasp – was possible! This was explicitly advertised by
Antiochus himself as a return to original Platonism. It is indeed most
notable that Antiochus also returned to the form of the master – writing in
dialogue form (the ﬁrst philosopher to do so, it appears, after many
generations). In fact, many scholars think that Antiochus’s new philosophy
was not more than a Platonic variation of Stoicism. The main theme is not
of originality but of a combination of variety – and now the ﬂoodgates are
open. Labels can be ﬂuid. Potamon of Alexandria – a couple of generations
later than Antiochus – even called his philosophy “eclecticism.” We know
almost nothing of the contents of his philosophy, but what we do ﬁnd –
attested, almost as usual, by Simplicius – is a mathematical diagram
explicating Plato’s constructions in the Timaeus!
Clearly, throughout the ﬁrst century, there is a revival of interest in the
mathematizing philosophy of the Timaeus and of Plato’s immediate fol-
lowers. This philosophy is all about obscure realities: a world, behind a
world. It is natural for its adherents to look for secrets, lost theories, hidden
meanings. One has to tease out Plato’s allegories to look for new sources.
Throughout the ﬁrst century emerges a host of works purporting to
come from old Pythagorean masters, above all from Archytas. Those new
apocrypha state Pythagorean theses as the keys with which to understand
Plato’s hints. Other authors, such as Eudorus of Alexandria, argued for
similar theses in their own names. It is hard to know how much of this is
original, how much goes back to Speusippus and Xenocrates (whose works
are all lost). Broadly speaking, the emphasis in all these philosophies is the
same: the world is a layered emanation from numerical principles. This
abstract approach is provided with concrete meaning because beyond the
bare assertion that “one” and “two” beget the other numbers, one also
ﬁnds particular qualitative meanings of individual numbers, and through
them, one can produce signiﬁcant interpretations. Philo of Alexandria, for
instance, early in the ﬁrst century , produced his own eclectic mix of
Pythagoreanism with Judaism. Thus, Genesis has the world created in six
days. Of course! This is because is the ﬁrst female number, the ﬁrst
male (because even numbers are female, and odd are male, obviously), so six
is their combination. Also – a somewhat more serious point – six is the ﬁrst
perfect number (as deﬁned in Euclid’s Elements: a number equal to the sum
of its factors, in this case, þ þ ¼ ). Taking numbers as possessing
qualitative signiﬁcance may strike us as nonsense, but in a way, that was the
simple scientiﬁc consensus concerning music theory. And indeed, right at

The Canonization of Greek Mathematics
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

the same time that a new, Pythagorean and numerological version of
Platonism emerges, we see a revival of mathematical music. This, of course,
was a central area of research for the generation of Archytas, documented
down to the Euclidean Section of the Canon (if indeed this is a work of the
late fourth century ). From that point in time onward, right until the
ﬁrst century – with but one exception – no mathematical interest in
music is attested at all. Nothing in Archimedes, nothing in Apollonius,
nothing in Hipparchus: an entire ﬁeld that simply fell away. (The single
exception is intriguing: this is Eratosthenes, who was also – among many
other things – a philosopher, almost the only one attested for Alexandria of
the third century . To engage with music, then, was the mark of true
eccentricity!) Perhaps late in the ﬁrst century , we come across
Ptolemais, a daring new author – a woman, also, writing on mathematics
(interestingly, we will have more of this). Known now only through her
quotations by Porphyry – in the commentary just mentioned to Ptolemy’s
Harmonics – she seems to have reinvented the mathematical study of
music. It is clear that writings on music quickly burgeon. The ﬁeld
resonates with new, Pythagoreanizing philosophies and is also obviously
accessible to anyone with general education (music, after all, is song, which
is poetry: so everybody with literary education also had some musical
education). Late in the ﬁrst century – we are now not that far away
from the time of Ptolemy himself – we have extant Nicomachus’s Manual
of Harmonics, where this sense of an appeal to a wider audience is especially
palpable. Here is how the work is addressed to its patron:
Though [Harmonics] is in itself complex and diﬃcult . . . and though
I especially, because of the restlessness and hurry of a traveller’s life, am
unable to devote myself . . . nevertheless, best and noblest of women, I must
arouse my greatest eﬀorts, since it was you who have bidden me at least to
set out the major propositions for you in simple form.
The woman is not named (was it the empress?). It is in fact rare to see such
groveling in ancient dedications. (Ptolemy, as we recall, merely put the
name of the dedicatee – Syrus, perhaps the patron Sura – in between
commas.) The overall sense with Nicomachus is of an author seeking
patronage, on the power of his skill as a teacher. Elementary mathematical
education always involved, above all, such things as the manipulation of
number: actual counting and calculation. In this, it diﬀered from Euclid’s
Translation adapted. Context can be read in F. R. Levin, The Manual of Harmonics of Nicomachus the
Pythagorean (Grand Rapids, : Phanes Press, ), p. .
Platonism and the Return of Number

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Elements, where the three arithmetical books are much more abstract and
almost never refer to any actual numbers. Finally, arithmetic – in the sense
of manipulation and calculation with simple numbers, especially with their
ratios – is the basic tool required for mathematical music theory. In short,
there is little wonder that we have from Nicomachus not only a manual of
harmonics but also a manual of arithmetic. This is clearly a teacherly work,
an exposition of terms and a series of classiﬁcations, above all of ratios and
of means (arithmetic means, geometric means, harmonic means, etc. – the
terms are still familiar to us), all illustrated by concrete examples of actual
calculations. There are no proofs, and at ﬁrst glance, such works strike
modern readers hardly as mathematics at all. Nicomachus did ﬁll a gap,
and for his many readers of a philosophical bent, for centuries to come, he
was seen as the equal to Euclid if not greater than his predecessor. The very
meaning of mathematics, it appears, has changed: usurped, so to speak, by
the new Pythagoreanizing philosophy.
Of course, a new focus on number – and teaching – need not mean the
relatively superﬁcial treatment of Nicomachus. Nor was this era in any way
a nadir of scientiﬁc activity. It is possible that we should date to about this
era another of our extant authors – Diophantus – whose works take
numerical problems, essentially of the kind taught in elementary educa-
tion, and transforms them into sophisticated mathematics.
In fact, there’s very little evidence for the date of Diophantus. The one
work securely ascribed to him is addressed to one “Dionysius,” perhaps the
most common of all Greek names. There is nothing further in the work
concerning the person Diophantus. He is ﬁrst mentioned by Theon, a
mid-fourth-century author, and there was a commentary on him written
by Theon’s daughter Hypatia (on both of whom, see the following
discussion). He could have been active as late as the early fourth century,
then, but the late reference does not prove a late date: there was – as we
will note in the following section – very little literary, let alone mathemat-
ical, activity all throughout the third century. Diophantus could easily be a
second-century author, perhaps to be considered side by side with
Ptolemy. The extant work, the Arithmetic, is perhaps to be considered
side by side, in some sense, with the Almagest itself. It was a gigantic –
speciﬁcally, a thirteen-book – work. Unlike the Almagest, not all books are
now extant. In the Greek, we have six books, known in Europe since the
ﬁfteenth century: these formed an important impetus to the rise of
European arithmetic (Fermat’s Last Theorem was originally too long for
Fermat’s margins . . . of his printed text of Diophantus). Modern scholar-
ship came to know of an Arabic version thanks to a sensational ﬁnd by

The Canonization of Greek Mathematics
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Sesiano, published in :a manuscript with seven nonoverlapping
books. As it turns out, in the Greek, we had Books –, then (probably)
Books –; from the new Arabic manuscript, we can now recover the
complementary Books –(–appear to have been entirely lost).
That we did not even know that the Greek text was nonconsecutive goes to
show that Diophantus’s work, in fact, does not have a tight deductive
structure. It is, instead, a long list of example problems, arranged not by
axiomatic dependency but by growing complexity. To take one of the
simplest examples (.):
To two given numbers: to add to the smaller of them, and to take away
from the greater, and to make the resulting [number] have a given
ratio to the remainder.
Let it be set forth to add to , and to take away from the same
number, and to make the greater -times the smaller.
Let the [number] which is added and taken away from each number [sc. of
the two given numbers] be set down, [namely] ϛ, one. And if it is added
to twenty, results: ϛMo. And if it is taken away from , results:
Molacking ϛ. And it shall be required that the greater be -times the
smaller. Therefore four-times the smaller is equal to the greater; () but
four-times the smaller results: Molacking ϛ; these equal ϛMo.
Let the subtraction be added [as] common, and let similar [kinds] be
taken away from similar [kinds]. Remaining: ϛ, equal Mo. And
the ϛ results: Mo, .
To the positions. I put the added and the taken away on each number,
ϛ; it shall be Mo. And if Mois added to , result: Mo ; and
if it is taken away from , remaining: Mo . And the greater shall
stand being -times the smaller.
This passage is opaque only because of two strange symbols: “ϛ” is an ad hoc
abbreviation for the Greek word number; “Mo” is a more transparent abbrevi-
ation for the Greek word monas, or “unit.” In this problem, we are asked to ﬁnd a
number – the same in both cases – that, added to a certain value, removed from
another, makes the greater resulting number a certain multiple of the smaller
(four times is taken as the example). We would put it, perhaps, as follows:
given a p, ﬁnding, for a pair of m, n, the value of x that satisﬁes:
m þ x
ð
Þ ¼ p n  xÞ
ð
:
J. Sesiano, Books to of Diophantus’ Arithmetica (Berlin: Springer-Verlag, ).
Platonism and the Return of Number

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

And here, the fact that we use the same symbol, x, on both sides makes it
easier for us to see that it is the same number we subtract and add. The same
function is provided by the Greek by using not simply the word number but
by abbreviating this expression. Instead of p, m, and n, Diophantus takes
some token numbers that act, in this problem, rather like the way that an
individual diagram acts in a geometrical argument. Those are obviously
selected for ease of manipulation – in this case, they are , , and .
Diophantus refers to these as “monads,” which is, in practice, a way of
signaling that this is a problem in the ﬁrst degree and that Diophantus does
not refer here to “squares” or other exponents. Other problems might
demand that Diophantus ﬁnd, for instance, two square numbers equal to
a third one – the problem that inspired Fermat’s Last Theorem – and this
would be expressed by referring the token numbers chosen not as “monads”
but as “powers,” meaning the second power. Other problems might refer to
cubes, to power-powers, to power-cubes, to cube-cubes . . . In all such cases,
Diophantus would use a similar system of abbreviation: the Greek word for
“power” is dunamis, and so the abbreviation is Du; for “cube,” one has Ku
(kubos), and so forth. Not only does Diophantus use these abbreviations: he
explains them in his introduction to Book , which, otherwise, lacks any
more detail, neither a personal introduction (so, not helpful for the date)
nor any axiomatic material (other than, eﬀectively, a set of deﬁnitions of
the powers). The reliance on explicit symbolism is remarkable and could
be compared with Ptolemy’s reliance on the textual tool of the table.
As noted, Diophantus’s Arithmetic does not have Ptolemy’s or Euclid’s
logical structure of a chain. The various problems instead apply, to
diﬀerent conﬁgurations, the same techniques. Thus, a most basic tech-
nique is, in fact, explained in the introduction to Book :
If, from the terms of a problem, there arise some kinds equal to the same
kinds, but of diﬀerent multitudes, one should take away from either part,
similar [kinds] from similar [kinds], until one kind will be equal to one
[other] kind.
This elementary algebraic technique is clearly implemented here.
Diophantus starts from what we would write down as
20 þ x ¼ 4 100  xÞ
ð
:
Unpacked as
20 þ x ¼ 400  4x:
Which is turned, explicitly relying on “taking away similar [kinds] from
similar [kinds],” into
5x ¼ 380, or x ¼ 76:

The Canonization of Greek Mathematics
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

This is ﬁnally veriﬁed by plugging the number back into the terms of the
problem. Diophantus never proves anything, but it is signiﬁcant that the
problem is stated in general terms, and indeed, it is not diﬃcult to see how
this particular solution could be generalized: whatever terms one is given,
simply follow the same route, with the same algebraic technique.
Technique – replacing proof. There is no doubt that this is the attitude
of the schoolroom, and problems at this level of complexity were indeed
encountered in ordinary education, since the times of the ancient Near
East. Soon thereafter in Diophantus’s book, the problems begin to require
much more dexterity: one brings in higher powers; most problems are,
technically, “indeterminate” (they allow multiple solutions); and adding to
the complexity of sheer calculation, fractions are allowed. Here, for
instance, is .:
To ﬁnd a right-angled triangle so that the [number] in its perimeter is a
cube but adding on the [number] in its area, it makes a square.
We look for a Pythagorean triplet whose sum is a cube number; its sum,
together with half the multiple of the ﬁrst two terms, is a square number.
I leave this as an exercise (as noted already, there are multiple solutions;
also, “square” and “cube” numbers mean here the square or cube of what
we would now call a rational number). Who in the second century – or
later – was interested in such an exercise? It is hard to tell. As we have seen,
the work was very little cited or studied – in this, for sure, it diﬀered from
Euclid, Ptolemy, and from Nicomachus. Diophantus was a ﬁendishly
clever setter of arithmetical problems, but to most readers of his time,
what mattered about numbers was the much simpler classiﬁcations of
“ratio” and “mean.” If Diophantus did survive, it was thanks to Hypatia,
late in the fourth century, and in all likelihood thanks to her sense that
numbers – even in the level of complexity required by Diophantus – had
deep ontological signiﬁcance. For by the time we get to Hypatia, it appears
that even the practicing mathematicians, such as her, were always moti-
vated by Platonist and Pythagoreanizing philosophies. Perhaps the same
was true already for Diophantus himself.
Indeed, Platonizing, in one way or another, seems to be everywhere
already in the imperial era. We see it with scientists who are not even
mathematicians at all. Galen is explicit that he is not a Platonist, meaning
simply that he does not see himself as belonging to any philosophical
school. And yet he cites Plato abundantly and dedicates entire works to
him (so, for instance, he is the author of summaries of dialogues by Plato,
which are now extant in Arabic). On the Doctrines of Hippocrates and Plato
is one of Galen’s important works, showing – naturally enough – that the
Platonism and the Return of Number

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

two are in agreement (in practice, Galen tries to prove that both anticipate
Galen’s own positions: the title refers, of course, to Hippocrates of Cos,
the father of medicine). Why would a physician care so much to ﬁnd the
philosopher in agreement with him? Why would he write summaries of
Plato’s dialogues? Closer to home, let us consider Ptolemy himself.
Ptolemy is never as talkative as Galen, and his underlying metaphysics
needs to be extracted from hints left by his science. But those are clear
enough. We have already noted the obvious Platonizing thrust of Book 
of the Harmonics. (Indeed, in that book, Ptolemy analogizes the harmonies
not only to the stars but also to the soul. This soul is made to be tripartite,
which is possibly the clearest case of Ptolemy holding a speciﬁcally Platonic
position.) Wietzke suggests that we pay attention to the precise words in
which Ptolemy introduces this discussion in the Harmonics, in .:
Since it may follow for a person who has theorized on [θεωρήσαντι] these
matters to be ﬁlled with wonder immediately – if he wonders also at other
things of exceptional beauty – at the extreme rationality of the harmonic
power, and at the fact that it ﬁnds and creates with perfect precision the
diﬀerences of its own forms; and, on the other hand, [since it may follow for
him], owing to some divine love, to desire, to behold, as it were, the nature
of [the harmonic power].
I quote this at length because this is the clearest statement any ancient
mathematician provides, anywhere, for the goal of his pursuit. But this, as
Wietzke points out, is not quite an original statement. Essentially,
Ptolemy’s statement of the soul’s desire to learn about musical harmony
is a clever reweaving of words and themes from Plato’s narrative, in his
dialogue the Phaedrus, on the soul’s desire to perceive beauty, whether
material or (preferable, to Plato) abstract. This is, of course, apposite to the
Harmonics (whose business is the passage from the perceived beauty of
musical harmonies to their underlying mathematical structures, thence to
such structures in the soul as well as in the stars). But the main lesson from
Wietzke’s reading of this passage is that Ptolemy could produce a clever
allusion to Plato – and count on his readers to get it. There is a very simple
reason for this: Plato, quite simply, was everywhere. Throughout the
imperial era, we see Greek authors traﬃcking in a variety of eclectic
sciences, literary practices, and philosophies, but the one core assumption,
throughout, remains the literary canon. Everyone knows Euripides,
I follow the discussion in J. M. Wietzke, “A Fashionable Curiosity: Claudius Ptolemy’s ‘Desire for
Knowledge’ in Literary Context,” in S. Ju, B. Löwe, T. Mu¨ller, and Y. Xie (eds.), Cultures of
Mathematics and Logic (Cham: Birkhäuser, ), pp. –.

The Canonization of Greek Mathematics
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Homer, Demosthenes – and everyone knows Plato. (Indeed – this is why
Wietzke can be certain of his interpretation – allusions to the Phaedrus are
an absolutely standard trope of imperial-era literature.)
It is not precisely that everyone, all of a sudden, became a number
mysticist. But the revival of the old Platonism was, in fact, very successful.
Plato diﬀered from all other philosophers, in that he was part of the literary
canon.
His
old
“Pythagorean”
interpretation
by
Speusippus
and
Xenocrates diﬀered from the later, skeptical interpretation by Arcesilaus
and Carneades, in that the Pythagorean interpretation – unlike the skep-
tical one – could readily be synthesized with other sciences as well as other
philosophies. In short, Pythagorean-like Platonism provided a natural
point of intersection between science, philosophy, and literature. By Late
Antiquity, it would remain nearly alone – as the very practices of the
literary canon, ﬁnally, came to deﬁne science itself.
Teachers, Commentaries, Books
The literary canon survived because ancient readers liked a particular kind
of literature. They liked public performances with a sharp sense of conﬂict
and debate. Homer, and then, the classics of democratic Athens: the tragic
and comic stage, the orator’s podium, Socrates’s refutations. It also sur-
vived because ancient readers were trained, generation after generation,
through the same literary corpus. There are a handful of papyri of Euclid,
deriving from the mathematical classroom. There are also about a thou-
sand schoolroom literary papyri, providing the entire gamut of learning –
from the alphabet to sophisticated rhetoric – through the close study of a
very narrow range of works from the literary canon. Already in the early
third century , especially in Alexandria, a new ﬁeld of knowledge
emerges, “grammar” – literally, the knowledge of letters. This practice will
always remain close to that of elementary education. I have mentioned
medicine and astrology earlier as “service industries,” ﬁelds that, especially
under the Roman Empire, thrived under elite patronage. The same is true
of grammar: members of the elite would have tutors at hand to teach their
children and to serve as clever company: one needed to have the right
quotation ready at hand.
Grammarians always showed their mettle by the edition and commen-
tary of the literary canon. Homer was the primary subject, but one
As noted in the Suggestions for Further Reading, this section is based on R. Netz, Scale, Space and
Canon in Ancient Literary Culture (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, ), Chapter .
Teachers, Commentaries, Books

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

commented upon many other poets as well. Early on – perhaps already by
the middle of the third century – several medical authors started to
distinguish themselves by writing commentaries on the works ascribed to
Hippocrates. In this way, medicine created for itself something like a
canon, although physicians would continue to propose their own original,
radically conﬂicting medical theories. Other ﬁelds did not acquire any
comparable sense of a canon and deﬁnitely no tradition of commentary. As
noted already, it is not even clear that any commentaries were produced in
the exact sciences throughout the Hellenistic and imperial eras.
Philosophical commentaries were written from time to time. Early on in
the academy – while it was still Pythagoreanizing – Crantor, a pupil of
Xenocrates, wrote a commentary on the Timaeus. Was this the ﬁrst of its
kind? There were not many following that. Even in the Hellenistic
philosophical schools of Athens – structured around the works of the
masters – one expressed one’s admiration of the master’s words through
the writing of one’s own original works.
Let us now go back, once again, to Athens in the fourth century .
Alongside the Academic school led by Speusippus and Xenocrates, there
was yet another school led by a former pupil of Plato – that of Aristotle.
Aristotle’s school was even more structured, research based, than that of
Xenocrates. As the Academics sought to codify the master’s doctrine,
Aristotle and his followers set up something of a research seminar, with
working documents that went through the various problems related to a
given ﬁeld. Aristotle, of course, was a proliﬁc author besides that – how
else would he become famous? – and his writings (many, imitating Plato,
in the form of dialogue) were famous for their elegance. Thus the
Aristotelian corpus had two components: a widely reproduced one, elegant
and accessible; another, much less frequently copied and much harder to
read (because it was not exactly meant for publication): in a sense, no more
than the school’s internal documents. It is clear that after Aristotle’s death,
both types of works were available to the public, but it is also clear that
Aristotle was not very widely read, and his internal school works were in
some cases nearly forgotten. (Indeed, even his own school – just like the
Academy – lost interest in science, hence in the great bulk of the works of
the master; it is for this reason that we should assume that Hipparchus did
not, in fact, respond to Aristotle in his physics.)
As with so much else, this would change in the ﬁrst century . It
suddenly became important to be eclectic, encyclopedic. Well, Aristotle,
already, produced works on an encyclopedic range of topics! The school’s
internal works gained a new interest – but they were by no means

The Canonization of Greek Mathematics
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

accessible. To make them useful, one needed a re-edition and a rearrange-
ment. Andronicus of Rhodes – active perhaps in the middle of the ﬁrst
century ? – accomplished just that. Besides editing the school’s docu-
ments and republishing them as literary works, Andronicus went on to add
commentaries on works by Aristotle – certainly on the Categories, the most
basic of Aristotle’s works in logic, but likely on more works as well. This
transition now sticks: from this point onward, it seems that nearly anyone
who considered himself an Aristotelian philosopher wrote commentaries,
in particular on the more introductory, logical works. Platonism, from the
ﬁrst century , came to be bundled together with a Pythagoreanizing,
arithmetical science – of a sort. At the same time, Aristotelianism came to
be bundled with the grammarian practice of editions and commentary.
If we survey the literary landscape in the age of the High Empire – the
Pax Romana of the late second century , when Galen is still alive, the
ink still fresh on Ptolemy’s Almagest – we see a world dominated, ﬁrst of
all, by rhetoric. There are many authors vying for position in what I call
the “service industries,” above all, medicine. There are novels (a recent
innovation!), even new epics, all sorts of eclectic philosophies, all striving
for unique eﬀect, clamoring to make a name on a competitive, crowded
literary stage. The writing of commentaries is there on the literary scene, as
well – as a genre produced by grammarians, yet another important service
industry, displaying their mastery over the literary classics. It is also used
on occasion by a few medical authors, as well as by the followers of
Aristotle. But the writing of commentary on works outside the literary
canon represents, at around the year , no more than a tiny fraction
of total literary production.
At this point, many things begin to change at once.
Already Galen comments, in his writings, on repeated outbreaks of a
virulent illness that forced him to escape out of town. This might not be
clear from Galen’s descriptions – and it is likely enough that he himself did
not understand it – but what struck the empire roughly from the years
to was no ordinary disease. The empires have been growing
and pacifying their neighbors for quite some time: China, reaching
west, and Rome, reaching east. Finally, the germs met. Plagues hit both
empires – in Rome, was it smallpox? – killing millions. Even under the
conditions of extreme Roman inequality, we suddenly see wages rising for
ordinary working people: there were so few of them left, you see. The elite,
and the state, had to manage with less: fewer taxes collected, fewer
resources to redistribute as patronage. The empire became less of a well-
oiled machine, and soon enough, early in the third century, dynastic
Teachers, Commentaries, Books

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

troubles began. As soon as a new emperor would be installed, others would
conspire and rebel against him. The cycle of civil wars went on to drain the
coﬀers of the emperors, forcing them to debase the currency, which, in
turn, took its toll on the economy and so on tax collection. We begin to
see, in the second and third decades of the third century, a rapid collapse in
the building of new monuments. By the fourth decade, the currency and
the state nearly collapse. Civil war becomes essentially uninterrupted, the
empire often divided into several competing regions; the reality of endless
civil war means that the emperors, themselves, are now recruited directly
from the military. It is no longer soldiers in the service of competing
dynastic factions. Instead, the soldiers take control. Little wonder that
cultural patronage nearly disappears. It is not only that one does not
endow new temples, baths, theaters. It seems that the entourages of
patronage – doctors, astrologers, rhetors, grammarians – have drastically
thinned, as well. Intellectuals fall back to a few centers: mostly, indeed,
Athens. Then again, it is not as if the new soldier-emperors make the
borders any more secure. Incursions by nomads become ever more fre-
quent, and in the year , one tribe – the Heruli – reached as far as
Athens and burned it to the ground. In the archaeological record, this
appears as the most violent moment in the history of the city. It was
essentially gone. To be clear: Athens would remain, as cultural memory,
and so it would become inhabited again, and years later, it would brieﬂy
become a college town for one ﬁnal time. (Indeed, millennia later, it would
be re-created as the capital of a Greek state.) But for now, the last site of
Greek civilization was lost. The elderly Longinus – Porphyry’s teacher –
found refuge in faraway Palmyra, in the Syrian desert, protégé of the queen
Zenobia (who carved out this part of the empire as her own). Such was
Greek culture in the age of Porphyry: dispersed and small. I estimate that
there were, as an order of magnitude, perhaps ,authors active at
about the year and perhaps about active a century later.
Now, the picture was deﬁnitely dire right at the top. It was a bad time to
be an emperor (you would expect to last a year or two) – and so a bad time
to depend on the goodwill of emperors. Hence, the drying up of patronage
with the consequent drying up of cultural life – because, you see, for the
last couple of centuries, this cultural life had been sucked dry by the
corrupting inﬂuence of inequality and its consequence, cultural depen-
dence on the top elite. But below that, things look normal. At some level,
does it even matter if the emperor’s name keeps changing? The basic
contours of life remained, and the sons of the elite went on going through
the same education, learning the same Homer, the same Euripides,

The Canonization of Greek Mathematics
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

eventually marking themselves for their rhetorical abilities. Which means
that even as elite authorship collapsed, the experience of teaching and
education hardly changed. Indeed, if anything, we ﬁnd an expansion of
paideia. The Mediterranean began to fragment, and so local centers
emerge: one consequence being that one looked for elite status (which
still implied elite education) even in remote places such as the
Syrian desert.
The very few remaining authors were swamped by a rising sea of
teachers. And so, the very identity of the intellectual subtly changed,
perhaps without the authors even noticing it. Quite simply, teaching
became the natural model of culture. Philosophers came to think of
themselves primarily as teachers of philosophy. And what was teaching,
after all? This was enshrined in the old practice of the grammarians:
teaching was the brokering of the texts of the canon, leading pupils
through the reading of Homer, of Euripides, by the reading of a commen-
tary. Philosophers would do the same, then, for their own ﬁeld. Porphyry
was a philosopher, in the tradition of Plotinus, which means that he saw
himself as a teacher of the philosophy of Plotinus, which means that his
core project as an author was the collection, edition, and commentary to
the works of his master. He was also a polymath, erudite in many other
ﬁelds as well. And so, he saw himself as teacher in those ﬁelds, too, and
hence authored more commentaries: rhetoric, astrology, harmonics . . .
To be clear: I do not mean that Porphyry opened up a university with
that many classrooms. Indeed, the relation between a commentary and
“teaching” took many forms and was only rarely the commentary as the
actual write-up of lecture notes. A comparison might help. We recall,
perhaps, the ancient genre – made popular especially from the imperial era
onward – of sympotic literature, depicting elite members in polite conver-
sation around their wine cups. Of course, any literary work titled a
“symposium” is not the transcript of an actual banquet. It is the literary,
idealized version of what social gatherings aimed to be. This is the way we
should think about the ancient commentary. It was, generally speaking,
not actual lecture notes but rather a literary, idealized version of what
education aimed at. Indeed, the mention of the “symposium” is directly
relevant here. Hear the word lecture, and you think of a professor speaking
to a large auditorium full of eager eighteen-year-olds (actually, even this
image is a cultural construct, more Legally Blonde than genuine Harvard).
Advanced teaching in antiquity – conﬁned to a small slice of the elite – was
closer in nature to tutoring rather than to a lecture course. Even if several
learners were involved, the experience was closer to that of a social
Teachers, Commentaries, Books

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

gathering of elite members, seeking to better themselves under the guid-
ance of a teacher. This is ancient teaching, what the commentary was
about: the idealized picture of the perfect erudite teacher, ready to lead his
tutees into a master text. In some cases, perhaps the commentary did no
more than project this image – no further teaching even taking place.
Perhaps Porphyry’s “teaching” of harmonics consisted only in the author-
ship of that commentary to Ptolemy.
A new way of writing, then. And so, together with it, we ﬁnd a new
medium of writing. Ancient books were written on rolls of papyrus: you
took the stalks of papyrus reeds – grown in the marshes of Egypt – crushed
their pulp, and produced thin layers that, glued together, made for reliable
and surprisingly sturdy writing surfaces. They were, indeed, rolls – think of
a toilet roll, for instance – that one had to wind and rewind for every
reading. But then again, reading was understood on the model of
performance (most rolls had copied on them the works of the canon: an
epic poem, a play, a speech, a dialogue): they were meant to be read in
sequence. The roll made sense. So did the size. A play takes about an hour
or two to perform, perhaps ten thousand Greek words or ten yards’ length
of papyrus roll. The typical roll was about that size, the size of a normal
performance; longer works demanded more than a single roll or “book”
(which is why Homer has twenty-four “books,” for instance); but that was
just taken for granted.
There were other ways of packaging writing, and for various reasons, the
Christians, in particular, preferred their books bound together in a diﬀer-
ent way. Instead of a roll, the Christians adopted the form of a codex.
There, one takes individual leaves and sews them together. This is more
laborious, but the book produced in such a way can become much bigger,
especially if instead of sewing all leaves together in one single pile, one
produces individual “gatherings” (the typical size is four double-leaves,
making eight pages or sixteen sides, known technically as a “quire”),
sewing each separately and then sewing the many quires to each other.
With this arrangement, there is almost no limitation to a book’s size. For
various reasons – does papyrus not respond well to such complex handling,
or were there simply more animals slaughtered, more skins to use? – we
also ﬁnd, early on after the adoption of the codex, the rise of a new
material, the parchment. The skins of animals may be hardened to become
leather, or they can be stretched and scraped to become a very sturdy
writing surface. From the fourth century and for about a thousand years,
almost all European books would be made on such skins: our knowledge
of antiquity passed, literally, on the backs of cows.

The Canonization of Greek Mathematics
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Perhaps the Christians liked the size of the codex; perhaps they liked the
fact that it deﬁned a group of works as belonging together in a meaningful
way (the collection of the four gospels might have been signiﬁcant).
Perhaps they liked the fact that one could leaf through such a book,
identifying, with ease, chapter and verse. Perhaps they liked the very
complexity, even the expense, of the new kind of book: its production
(especially with parchment) involved some planning and elaboration; it
became much more natural to embellish and elaborate the spaces of the
writing. In short, this was a book one clearly valued; it was a good tool for
the religion of scripture, one organized, more and more, around the
learning of a canonical book.
But so, indeed, was the culture, everywhere! Christian books, already in
the second century, are codices, and late in the third century, they seem to
have become dominant everywhere. Book culture shifts: from the many,
ubiquitous small rolls, so closely associated with the old literary perfor-
mances to the bulky, expensive, rare, parchment codices, to be cherished,
sometimes worshiped, always – studied. The very make of the book
meant that from now on, literary culture was to be a culture of study.
Perhaps this – the material transformation of media – is one of the reasons
why the transformation of the third century was made to last.
For indeed, for a while at least, the empire did recover. A few soldier-
emperors were more successful than others. Diocletian rose to the throne
in , and through a sequence of successful campaigns and shrewd co-
optations of his rivals, he managed to stitch the empire back together and
to hold it – even more remarkably – for twenty-one years (always in
concert with other co-emperors). The usual dynastic crisis ensued when
Diocletian abdicated, but once again, an able soldier-emperor –
Constantine – managed to retain control of the entire empire until his
own death in . For several decades, the empire was mostly stable (a
major loss to the barbarians, in the Battle of Adrianople of , would
shatter that, but this is yet in the future). In many ways, this would be an
empire that any Roman, of earlier times, would easily identify. Sure, the
capital was moved, by Constantine, to the new, Greek-speaking city of
Constantinople: but then again, ancient culture was always predominantly
Greek speaking, anyway. Sure, the emperor converted to Christianity. But
throughout much of the fourth century, many members of the elite
remained pagan, nor was Christianity that alien by now: one could cherish
both Homer and the Bible. And so, some measure of the old patronage,
the old learning, returned. Alexandria had its scholars, and so, once again,
did re-founded Athens.
Teachers, Commentaries, Books

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

And yet, this was a distinctive culture, among other things, stamped by
the many transformations of the imperial era and of the third century.
There was perhaps almost no mathematical authorship to speak of in the
later parts of the third century itself – Porphyry’s commentary to the
Harmonics is, indeed, the closest we have to a mathematical text extant
from that era. From the early fourth century to the early sixth century, we
have a signiﬁcant body of writings. All of this body of writing is shaped by
these two forces: Pythagoreanizing Platonism, on the one hand, and the
practices of collection and commentary, on the other. Under the inﬂuence
of these forces, Greek mathematics was canonized.
Pappus and the Mathematicians of Alexandria
We have met Pappus on several occasions already throughout the book.
Indeed now, nearing the end of this book, we have something of a grand
reunion of the main characters. You recall Theaetetus producing some
meaningful classiﬁcation of irrationals – which we learn from Pappus’s
commentary to Euclid’s Elements, Book (partially extant, in Arabic). Or
you may recall several of the more surprising things we know about
Archimedes and Apollonius: Archimedes’s classiﬁcation of semiregular
solids or his alternative, nonrigorous proof for the area of the spiral;
Apollonius’s treatise on ﬁnding the value of a line of hexameter, as the
letters multiplying each other . . . All of this is from Pappus’s Collection. It is
from there that we have the handful of truly sophisticated results – or
attempted results – in mathematical mechanics (in Book of the
Collection); this is also our main witness for the position of optics as a
subsidiary science to astronomy (which is how Pappus positions it in Book
of the Collection). These are but a few examples, but the fundamental
point is that it is through the eﬀorts of memory and collection of late
antiquity, throughout the fourth to sixth centuries , that Greek math-
ematics survives. This gives us a sense of the signiﬁcance of the period –
but also raises a question about the period itself: Why did its authors care
so much about the mathematical past?
Pappus stands out in several ways, perhaps above all in that he had more
past than most at his disposal. Working in Alexandria, early in the fourth
century – in a city largely unscathed by the upheaval of the third
century – Pappus had access to very considerable collections. The erudi-
tion he wished to ﬂaunt (unlike most of his contemporaries) was primarily
not philosophical but mathematical. This means that Pappus was

The Canonization of Greek Mathematics
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

interested, speciﬁcally, in displaying diﬃcult mathematics. It is through
him, then, that we learn of the more advanced mathematics of the past.
Who remembers the rememberer? Pappus’s own works survive in a
multiplicity of mediated forms. It is likely enough that his most important
work, as far as his immediate readers were concerned, was a commentary to
Ptolemy’s Almagest – a massive undertaking. Only Books and are now
extant. Similarly, the commentary to Euclid is now known only through
an Arabic fragment. It is certain that Pappus also wrote a geography,
which, once again, would appear to be a reworking of Ptolemy’s work.
Our source for this is almost a parody of an indirect survival: an Armenian
abridgment and translation from the sixth century ! (Because this is an
abridgment, we have lost what interests us most, and the extant text is
almost entirely descriptive geography without any references to mathematics.)
A few other works are merely implied by the extant works: the most signiﬁcant is
Pappus’s mention, in passing – .– of a commentary by him to the
Analemma by one Diodorus. So, yet another commentary, concerning the
sundial? Pappus was by no means a shy author (he is often polemic with his
contemporaries), but – always surveying the works of others – he almost never
refers to his own works. In all likelihood, he authored many works, and it is
quite possible that many are even extant. We think of him as the author of a
single work – the Collection – and it is perfectly possible that he himself did the
collecting. It is also possible that the work was put together posthumously,
cobbling together eight of his works, of which but a single medieval copy
remains. This is most of what we know of Pappus, then: the Vatican Greek
manuscript number , a ninth-century codex, perhaps a direct copy of
the early codex produced not long after Pappus’s death. This is one of our
most precious witnesses to the Greek mathematical past. The collector was
collected – even if the rememberer was not that often remembered.
What was in this collection? The ﬁrst book is now lost, and with
Pappus’s lack of self-referential comments, we have no direct evidence
suggesting its contents. The second half of the second book is extant: it is a
formal commentary to Apollonius’s work on the counting of the hexam-
eter. Book is a critique on a solution to a geometrical problem by the
pupil of a rival teacher; this becomes, implicitly, a reﬂection on problem
solving as well as on teaching. Book is a medley of past problems and
solutions, arranged in an ascending order of complexity: so, once again, a
kind of implicit reﬂection on the methodology of problem solving. Book 
engages with a variety of theorems emerging out of the comparison of
ﬁgures, such as ﬁnding the largest area among plane ﬁgures with the
same perimeter. These problems give rise to a study of polygons and polyhedra
Pappus and the Mathematicians of Alexandria

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

that quite naturally evokes Plato’s solids – the comparison between ﬁgures
morphing, then, into a comparison between mathematics and philosophy.
Books –, ﬁnally, are more systematic surveys of entire ﬁelds:
astronomy (introduced, as noted previously, by optics) in Book ,
“analysis” (meaning, eﬀectively, geometrical problem solving) in Book
, and mechanics in Book . The entirety touches on a great variety
of recognized mathematical topics. (One wonders: Was Book dedicated
to music theory?) It seems natural enough that astronomy would have
mattered most to Pappus’s readers, which means that, in practice, he
would have been, in his lived experience, primarily the teacher of
Ptolemy’s Almagest. But his Collection surveys, above all – even in Book
– the mathematics of the generation of Archimedes. Early in the fourth
century , Pappus’s eye was keenly focused on a speciﬁc version of
ancient mathematics. Why that?
Thanks to Cuomo (see the Suggestions for Further Reading), we now
recognize that in surveying his past, Pappus made statements that mattered
to his present. We may follow her analysis of Book . She points out that
Pappus assumes surprisingly little of his reader (the book is actually
addressed to one Megethion, probably a stand-in for the intended audi-
ence). In other books in the Collection, one makes complex mathematical
assumptions; in this book, one spells out even the assumptions of Euclid’s
Elements. Much of the book revolves around the regular solids: obviously,
to a nonspecialist, known primarily through Plato’s Timaeus. Those ﬁve
are upended by Pappus through Archimedes’s much more complicated
thirteen semiregular solids. Pappus is quite clear about his ultimate point:
The philosophers say that the ﬁrst god, maker of all things, has opportunely
given to the cosmos the shape of a sphere, choosing the most beautiful
among things that are, and declare the natural properties inherent to the
sphere and add that the sphere is the greatest among solid ﬁgures with the
same area. They also say other things inherent to the sphere which are more
than clear and do not require great persuasion, whereas that the sphere is
greater than the other ﬁgures the philosophers do not prove, but only assert,
and it is not easy to be persuaded of it without further investigation.
Pappus presents to us, as “the philosophers’” position, the Pythagoreanizing–
Platonist project where the physical world is derived from more abstract
mathematical forms. That this is what philosophers believe, indeed, even
that this is true, does not seem in doubt: Pappus – like everyone else we
will see in the remainder of this chapter – simply takes for granted this
conﬂation of true philosophy with Neoplatonism. However true, however,
the Neoplatonists fail in their project because, this being a mathematical

The Canonization of Greek Mathematics
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

project, they ought to become true experts in mathematics – which Pappus
is, and they are not. Why is Pappus the expert? Because he can recruit to
his side the mathematical authority missing from the philosophical teach-
ing. And this is, ultimately, I would say, because the Neoplatonists –
bound by the tradition of their master – envisage the early mathematics,
literally that of the age of Archytas. Which is why the generation of
Archimedes meant so much to Pappus: it was his advantage, vis-à-vis the
philosophers.
Pappus positioned himself against the teachers of philosophy, as he did
against rival mathematical teachers.
In
Book ,
Pappus chides
Pandrosion, a teacher of mathematics, by telling her (yes, Pandrosion
was a woman!) that her pupil made a grave mathematical error. Trying
to oﬀer an original solution to the problem of ﬁnding four lines in
continuous proportion – the “duplication of the cube.” which we have
seen so many times, going all the way back to Hippocrates of Chios – the
pupil (if we are to trust Pappus’s report) eﬀectively assumed the required
construction. How does Pappus respond to the reported error? Essentially,
by two moves. First, he pursues the falsehood of the construction, not so
much from the abstract perspective of a general mathematical proof but,
rather, through speciﬁc numerical examples. He then proceeds to oﬀer
correct solutions by providing a historical survey of past solutions, culmi-
nating with his own. I believe that the concrete numerical examples
provide a hint to what Pappus is doing: although these are less compelling
than pure mathematics, they are indeed eﬀective in the actual experience of
teaching. Pappus, chiding a rival teacher of mathematics, shows her how to
teach. From this, Pappus moved on to add the history. These, then, are the
two tools of teaching: concrete examples – that is, the normal techniques
of mathematical pedagogy – and ancient texts. Because, after all, this is how
education was, at the time: the master, brokering a canonical corpus to
his followers.
This, then, is the purpose of the Collection as a whole but also of the
commentaries to the Elements and to the Almagest. Everywhere, Pappus
constructs a corpus and presents himself as the teacher most competent to
introduce it. It is perhaps this attitude of the teacher that makes Pappus –
with all his obvious polemic zest – somewhat self-eﬀacing. In the game he
played, the ability to cite ancient results was valued even more than the
ability to produce new ones; hence, no more than a few results are
explicitly presented by Pappus as his own original contribution. The same
is true, even, for the opinions oﬀered: these are often put forward as the
outcome of an ancient debate rather than as Pappus’s own. Perhaps the
Pappus and the Mathematicians of Alexandria

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

most “methodological” book is , with its crescendo of complexity.
Pappus speciﬁes that problems should be classiﬁed according to three types
– “planar” (based on the tools of Euclid’s Elements alone), “solid” (requir-
ing conic sections), and “linear” (requiring special curves, not producible
from either the Elements or the Conics). Now, one of the key results
surveyed throughout Book is Archimedes’s Spiral Lines, and so at the
end of this book, Pappus adds a ﬁnal discussion, introduced as a kind of
addendum:
I have inserted the analysis of the neusis that was taken by Archimedes in
the book on the Spiral Lines for you, so that you will not get into diﬃculties
when you go through the book.
This is, in fact, the most typical way in which Pappus introduces a text.
Books and , in particular, are constituted by long surveys where
Pappus picks a work and then produces a series of required results or
lemmas that are helpful for this treatise. The ﬁnale of Book can
therefore be seen as a mini-introduction to Spiral Lines: here is a diﬃcult
construction by Archimedes; here is how it should be achieved. However,
this serves an extra purpose, as Pappus explains:
They [the solutions produced by Pappus] are useful for many other solid
problems as well.
When one has a task that requires conic sections, this particular tool – a
certain construction making possible a neusis – is generally helpful. A brief
note: and we learn that our passage ﬁts a larger meta-mathematical project.
What is a neusis? In Spiral Lines, Archimedes has a series of propositions
where, for instance (SL ), given the line AX, a point B on the circle ABG,
and the length E, one ﬁnds the line BH (H on the line AX) so that the
segment QH – intercepted between the line and the circle (and “verging”
toward point B, “verging” being the literal meaning of neusis) – is equal to
the length E. It is obvious why such an intercept can be found (start the
line passing through B at BG, and the value of the intercept is zero; move
this line out toward H and beyond, and it extends indeﬁnitely; so,
obviously, its length will, at some point, pass through equality with E).
Archimedes does not provide a construction – I believe simply because this
I will look at this book a little more closely. It is translated into English in H. Sefrin-Weis, Pappus of
Alexandria: Book of the Collection (New York: Springer, ).
The following citations from the ﬁnal stretch of Book are from Sefrin-Weis (n. sup.),
pp. –.

The Canonization of Greek Mathematics
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

would have put too much weight on this part of the treatise (which is
intended as a mere prelude).
A
E
B
Q
H
G
X
Figure 
Pappus, introducing the text, sees an opportunity to expand on this
gap, but more than this, he senses that this is required so as to make
Archimedes’s solution whole. From his perspective – that of the commen-
tator – to imply “here is a mere prelude, and we allow ourselves to cover
this ground more quickly” is just not an option. And so he provides a more
general set of tools to neusis-type problems.
A couple of speciﬁc cases are taken, rather diﬀerent, in fact, from those
required by Archimedes! I will go through the ﬁrst. We are given the line
AB and the point C. We need to ﬁnd a point on line AB, such as D, so
that the line joined from D to C will have a given ratio to the line drawn
perpendicularly from D, up to some otherwise-deﬁned position.
In the typical move of Greek geometrical analysis – one especially
typical to Pappus – we imagine the construction already produced. We
then follow the consequences. The ratio of CD to DE is given; now draw
CKZTH, perpendicular to line AB. Line CZ is given (point C and line AB
are given). Points K, T are chosen so that
CZ : ZT:: CD:DE, CZ:ZK :: CD:DE ðthis is doable because CD:DE is givenÞ:
The clever move is that we now consider the same ratio, squared:
CD2 :DE2 ::CZ2 :ZT2:
CD:DEis still a given, and so is the second ratio. So, then, will be the
ratio of the diﬀerences:
CD2  CZ2 :DE2  ZT2:
Pappus and the Mathematicians of Alexandria

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Now, the diﬀerence between CDand CZis clear from Pythagoras’s
theorem: this is ZDor EH. The diﬀerence between DEand ZTis slightly
less obvious, but with the kind of manipulations used in Elements, Book ,
we can see that this is equal to the rectangle contained by KH, TH.
Now imagine the curve drawn through point E, T, with CH as its axis;
point K is a given. We have a line drawn as ordinate from the curve, on the
axis CH: this is the line EH. We have the line cut oﬀfrom the axis by this
ordinate: this is the line HT. The property of this curve is that the
following ratio is ﬁxed:
the square on the ordinate (= EH), to
the rectangle contained by (i) the line cut oﬀ, HT, and (ii) the line from the
same cutting point to a ﬁxed, given point (= HT  KH).
This deﬁnes a hyperbola whose diameter is KT. This means that once the
ratio CD:DE is provided, we can use it to determine the points K, T that
satisfy CD:DE::CZ:ZK, CD:DE::CZ:ZT, and then, with the line
KT as the diameter, we ﬁnd a hyperbola that always produces the required
ratio: the line joined from any point such as D to C will have the desired
ratio to the line joined perpendicularly to the hyperbola. With a conic
section, then, we produce a construction that is rather like a neusis.
K
Z
A
T
H
E
D
B
C
Figure 
I quote and explain all this in detail because it is otherwise impossible to
understand what Pappus’s text was like: sophisticated, rich in many details;
also, exasperating. It is often the case that we can barely see the point. How
does this relate precisely to the neusis required by Archimedes? Why
provide this?
Pappus extends this discussion a little further, and then, as the book
breaks oﬀ, he concludes by asserting, apparently, something along the lines

The Canonization of Greek Mathematics
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

of the following (the end of the book – it is now meaningful that we have
but a single manuscript – is in parts illegible):
Archimedes used this neusis . . . some, however, reproach him, alleging that
he did make use of a solid problem in an inappropriate way . . . [lacuna]
they show that it is possible by planar . . . [lacuna].
Which is where our text eﬀectively breaks oﬀ. Pappus seems to say that
there were those who criticized Archimedes for applying a neusis instead of
applying simple techniques from Euclid’s Elements. My guess is that
Pappus would have ended up defending Archimedes (which is perhaps
another reason why Pappus has shown how neuses are found through
conic sections, that is, are “solid” – ever the teacher, he was showing
through examples). But this guess, as to Pappus’s end point, is less signif-
icant than the terrain through which Pappus was making his moves –
which is far clearer. Pappus does not really tell us all that much, in the end,
about Spiral Lines. The turn to the past is motivated by present concerns: a
methodological, prescriptive discussion as to how mathematics should be
pursued. These are the tools, Pappus tells us, throughout – planar, solid,
and linear; analysis and synthesis; these are the disciplines; these are the
authorities – mathematics, made into a well-regulated endeavor. All of this
forms the attitude of the commentator-teacher, surveying the mathematics
available to him as a whole. The very breadth of the survey, its historical
detail but, in particular, its insistence on questions of methodology, would
be extremely signiﬁcant as soon as the work was read with an eye to
advancing its mathematics. We will return to this in the following chapter.
Pappus is not alone: cultural life did pick up in the fourth century, and
we see a few glimpses, even, of other teachers of mathematics. Still in
Alexandria of the fourth century, we have the evidence for yet another
mathematical school, that of Theon and Hypatia. This was, literally, a
two-generation event: a school led by a father, then by his daughter.
Astronomical observations date the father; political events date the daugh-
ter. The two were teaching for about ﬁfty years, from the s until
Hypatia’s death in . For each of these three Alexandrian teachers –
Pappus, Theon, Hypatia – our sources preserve a diﬀerent, complementary
slice. Perhaps the three were diﬀerent, but perhaps it is mostly our sources
that are diﬀerent, and we should use all three to get a fuller picture.
For Pappus, we have, above all, the Collection, a more sophisticated work
expounding, in a more personal and discursive voice, a wide range of
mathematical sciences, everything grounded in historical erudition. This is
to some extent misleading: Pappus did write more limited commentaries
and editions as well, but those are less well preserved.
Pappus and the Mathematicians of Alexandria

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

For Theon, explicit commentary and edition are all we have. These are three
safely attributed works: a commentary to the Almagest and two – diﬀerent –
commentaries to Handy Tables. There are some indications that he could have
also produced editions of works by Euclid, which we will brieﬂy revisit in the
following chapter (we already broach the ﬁeld of later reception). Did he write
more ambitious works, comparable to Pappus’s Collection? Perhaps not: the
extant works are much more technical and even practical in character. It is
telling, after all, that he wrote two commentaries to Handy Tables: the Little
Commentary, almost an instruction manual for the operation of the tables, and
the Great Commentary, a more detailed commentary with an account of the
derivation of the tables. A curious comparison between Pappus’s and Theon’s
astronomical commentaries is that we ﬁnd many computational errors in
Pappus and perhaps none in Theon. Perhaps Hypatia helped.
Even in the more theoretical commentaries, it is remarkable that Theon’s
extant works tend to avoid historiography. The beginning of Ptolemy’s
Almagest is very theoretical and reﬂective, which elicits from Theon a few
more general statements (in particular, though, he says quite clearly that he
will not write expansively, like a philosopher, but brieﬂy, like a mathema-
tician). He discusses the shape of the earth, which does bring out a brief
mention of Archimedes’s Sphere and Cylinder, and so forth; it is from Theon
that we hear that Hipparchus wrote a treatise in twelve books on trigonom-
etry (once again, this is for the sake of praising Ptolemy’s relative brevity).
What Theon mainly does is, like Pappus, provide theorems that will be
helpful for Ptolemy’s geometrical arguments. (The commentary to Book 
of Ptolemy’s Almagest, for instance, begins with a very general mathemat-
ical discussion of the meaning of “composition of ratios” – taking the ratio
A:C as composed of A:B and B:C. This is very far from astronomy as such
and instead is a basic mathematical technique applied more generally.) In
all of this, erudition is downplayed, the emphasis put instead on mathe-
matical skill and exposition. Perhaps all of this is simply comparable to
Pappus’s more commentary-like works. (Pappus’s own commentary to the
Almagest, in particular, is quite comparable to Theon’s.)
For Hypatia, our evidence is diﬀerent yet again. To be clear: her own
works are entirely lost. We hear from late (and not very reliable) reports
that Hypatia wrote commentaries on Diophantus’s Arithmetic and on
Apollonius’s Conics.It is possible that her commentary is reﬂected by
On the practice of commentary in Hypatia’s milieu, read A. Cameron, “Isidore of Miletus and
Hypatia: On the Editing of Mathematical Texts,” Greek, Roman, and Byzantine Studies ():
–.

The Canonization of Greek Mathematics
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

the Arabic translation of Diophantus (in which case we learn that, as
commentator, she added more calculations and veriﬁcations: this is in
the style of her father’s work). We do not have any indications of more
independent work, although the range of commentaries suggests a more
ambitious mathematical program than that of her father.
Many of Hypatia’s contemporaries, however, are extant. They wrote
directly to parchment codices, after all. In particular, we have several
contemporary collections of epistles. One of these collections is by
Bishop Synesius of Cyrene – who had been (how lucky can we be?)
Hypatia’s pupil. Synesius’s circle of correspondence included several other
former pupils, and they sometimes waxed lyrical about their learning.
A few letters are even addressed by the former pupil to his teacher. This,
then, complements our sense of education, adding the missing angle:
What would it mean for the students? Here we come across something of
a surprise. The Hypatia of Synesius’s letters is indeed a mathematician and
astronomer – so, for instance, in one of his letters, Synesius presents his
addressee, Paeonus, with a gift, an astrolabe, that Synesius knows how to
make thanks to his studies with Hypatia. But what is cherished about the
education seems to be the general philosophy or, indeed, even more, the
general good education in letters and in Greek style. Hypatia is referred to
as a philosopher, not as a mathematician; Synesius asks for her advice
concerning the literary quality of his writing. Even the letter accompanying
the astrolabe engages mostly not with astronomical details but with more
general erudition. The main theme of its introduction is that, in this time
and age, learning is not respected (Synesius, On the Astrolabe ):
For when Italy in bygone days possessed the same men as pupils of Pythagoras
and governors of cities, it was called Magna Graecia, and rightly so. Of these
men Charondas and Zaleucus gave laws, the Archytae and the Philolai were
masters of the ﬁeld. The greatest of astronomers ruled over a city, and was an
ambassador, besides taking other parts in political life, Timaeus himself, on
whose authority Plato discourses to us concerning the universe.
Synesius was a bishop; Paeonius, a high-ranking member of the court in
Constantinople. When Synesius addresses a gift with a scientiﬁc instrument to
Paeonius, saying, with a sigh, that there used to be a time that rulers were
erudite in ﬁelds such as astronomy (those were the days!), he is clearly making
a statement about the bonds that tie Synesius and Paeonius together, in the
present. These intellectual bonds are the main theme running through the
A. Fitzgerald, The Letters of Synesius of Cyrene (Oxford: Oxford University Press, ), p. .
Pappus and the Mathematicians of Alexandria

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

correspondence. The members of Synesius’s circle recall their learning not as a
mere gesture of nostalgia but as a statement of the distinction that marks them
as members of the ruling class of the empire.
Everything suggests that Hypatia’s family, too, was noble. Indeed, it
appears that she was a political force to reckon with in the city, and so
when a conﬂict emerged between the two main ﬁgures of Alexandria – its
governor, Orestes, and its bishop, Cyril – it was perhaps natural that
Hypatia would get sucked in. As it happens, she sided with Orestes, and
in , in one of those spasms of violence that regularly punctuate the
lives of late ancient cities, Hypatia was killed by Cyril’s supporters. This
image – a pagan female mathematician, torn to pieces by a mob incited by
the bishop – is rich in a symbolic freight that perhaps it should not be
made to carry. Perhaps her being a pagan, a mathematician, or a female
played some role in her death. Or perhaps it was just the bad luck of
picking the wrong side of the wrong dispute.
And yet, the implications of Synesius’s correspondence seem real enough:
Hypatia played a role in the elite precisely through her speciﬁc brand of
philosophy. Surely, Hypatia wrote technical commentaries to the likes of
Diophantus and Apollonius. Surely, she taught astronomy, like her father.
All this is technical mathematics, but surely, as well, all of this carried a
symbolic meaning. The glorious references evoked by Synesius’s letters are
not chosen by accident: Pythagoras, Archytas, Philolaus, Timaeus, Plato . . .
This is the Pythagorean pantheon. Platonism was everywhere: a teacher of
mathematics did not need to spell this out. For a student such as Synesius,
part of the attraction of mathematics must always have been that it carried
an added aura of philosophical, and therefore, cultural signiﬁcance.
The evidence for our three authors – Theon, Pappus, Hypatia (as seen
by Synesius) – encompasses the same mathematics in wider layers. In the
evidence for Theon, we mostly see the unvarnished technical details of
computation; in the evidence for Pappus, the technicalities are conveyed so
as to make the study of mathematics, itself, into a kind of erudite
endeavor, historiographic and methodological; Synesius seems to under-
stand Hypatia’s mathematics as part of a much larger project of Platonizing
philosophy and general erudition. Perhaps the authors did diﬀer between
them, Pappus the more prolix, Theon the more gruﬀ, Hypatia the most
humane. But should we really imagine the school of Theon turned upside
down by his daughter Hypatia? This is, of course, possible, but I would
prefer to place the three along a continuum. Theon’s and Pappus’s pupils,
no less than Hypatia’s, would come out of such education with the sense
that they had learned something deep, with a closer sense of belonging to a

The Canonization of Greek Mathematics
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Greek tradition where mathematics mattered, partly because Platonism
did. Even Pappus’s competition against the philosophers should not be
read, after all, as a break away from philosophy: his point, likely enough,
was not that one should ignore the Timaeus but, rather, that to learn the
Timaeus well, one should be aware of Archimedes no less than of Euclid.
The mathematician, Pappus implied, was a better Platonist than even the
Platonists; Synesius seems still to have believed that.
The Greek past mattered to everyone. It was the vehicle of one’s identity
and the mark of one’s merit. In diﬀerent places, one could express it in
diﬀerent ways. But Late Antiquity diﬀered from earlier eras because now –
in the age of the teacher – every ﬁeld was treated in the manner of the
canon. One could belong to the Greek past, in Alexandria of the fourth
century , not just through Homer and Euripides and Demosthenes, but
no less – if one found the right teacher – through Archimedes, Apollonius,
Diophantus, and Ptolemy. The canon has been expanded to encompass
mathematics.
It is very likely that from about to , Hypatia was the best
mathematician alive anywhere in the world. This is exhilarating – and
makes it so much more galling that none of her works survive.
Throughout this book, we see how social and historical contexts
determine the production of mathematics. People do the mathematics
they like – but they end up liking this or that based on the cues available
to them. It is obvious, then, that the kinds of people who will engage with
mathematics will also be determined by such social and historical forces.
We have seen the mathematics of scribal elites, working for courts; of free
citizens; of authors competing against each other for patronage. These
were all elite members and, nearly without exception, male. And now –
something new and, remarkably, not even unique. We recall Pandrosion,
Pappus’s rival teacher of mathematics; we should mention Sosipatra, a
Neoplatonist philosopher active in present-day Turkey in the ﬁrst half of
the fourth century. (Earlier, we recall Ptolemais, perhaps the re-founder of
mathematical music.) The cluster is meaningful, in time and in intellectual
aﬃnity. How to account for this? Perhaps, in terms of the recently changed
meaning of the canon and at the intersection of gender and public space in
antiquity. One theme running through the ancient treatment of gender
was the exclusion, in various ways, of women from the public sphere.
Now, in early Archaic times, Greek literature was understood primarily
through the intimate spaces of the symposium, and it is perhaps through
such spaces that we can understand the qualiﬁed phenomenon of female
poets (Sappho is the greatest among them but is far from alone). As the
Pappus and the Mathematicians of Alexandria

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

democratic ideal of public performance came to deﬁne the canon – in
drama, in speech, in Socratic performance – women were excluded. For a
woman to write a drama, for instance, would be for her, implicitly, to be
exposed in public. This was frowned upon, and so the public nature of
literature created a further barrier to female literary activity.
It was only in Late Antiquity that the canon was expanded to encompass
all ﬁelds, not only the performative ones. The signiﬁcance of literature
changed to become, as it were, more bookish and so, also, to some extent,
disembodied. This was most clearly the case for Neoplatonists who fol-
lowed their master in the disdain of the body (Plotinus – the ﬁrst thing
Porphyry tells us about him – was ashamed about his body). To engage in
the literary ﬁeld by commenting on the scientiﬁc canon, from a
Neoplatonist perspective, was – at long last! – no longer an exposure of
one’s body. The ﬁeld became open, in relative terms, to women.
There were all sorts of highly visible barriers to female participation in
ancient culture: women had less access to education and less control over
their lives. But even apart from such visible barriers, there were the more
subtle barriers, where the expected expression of one’s gender clashed,
implicitly, with the requirements of culture. Even if one was literate and
wealthy, still . . . writing drama was just not something that could ﬁgure in
a life lived in the female way. Writing mathematics, in the fourth century,
all of a sudden, could coincide with being a woman. This is exhilarating.
This is also an opportunity to pause and reﬂect: What subtle barriers do we
put, now, in the way of those who wish to participate in science?
Proclus and the Philosophical Schools
Throughout most of the third century, mathematics could have been
nearly dead. The fourth century presents a remarkable revival. Already
with Pappus, we see full mastery of its entire array, in control of both
technical detail and the history of the discipline. Ptolemy’s Almagest is one
of the more demanding works of science ever produced: we see that many
readers in the fourth century wished to learn it, and a few were perfectly
capable of expounding it. The fourth century also marks a clear transfor-
mation. Historians of astronomy often observe that whereas astronomers,
throughout antiquity, always wished to improve the astronomical models
of their predecessors, Pappus and Theon do not even broach this as a
possibility. The Almagest is seen as ﬁnal; the goal is not to change it but to
understand it. A commentator can be more or less competent, but no
matter how sophisticated, the very attitude of the commentator tends in

The Canonization of Greek Mathematics
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

the direction of conservatism. If you pride yourself on being the master,
capable of leading your fellow learners through the diﬃculties of the
master text, surely you do not wish to overturn it. What is Theon worth
if the Almagest is wrong?
There is a strong cultural bias to channel one’s work into the making of
commentaries and to aﬃrm, rather than overturn, the masterworks. This has
consequences in philosophy, as well. One philosophy had established itself,
already in the imperial era, as based on the genre of commentary:
Aristotelianism. Another was always entrenched in the canon as a set of master
texts: Platonism. These two philosophies survived through the transformation
into the culture of commentary, and the rest simply do not come back from
the upheaval of the third century. There are no more Skeptics, no more
Epicureans, even no more Stoics. All philosophy will be either Platonist or
Aristotelian, and because the cultural bias is toward an aﬃrmation and
synthesis of the past, the division loses its meaning. In the late fourth century
, the two schools, that of Xenocrates and that of Aristotle, were in
direct competition, but now a synthesis had to be found. Porphyry already
perfects this combination in works such as his commentary to Ptolemy’s
Harmonics; for three centuries, it will continue largely uninterrupted.
As usual, this is not a matter of institutional continuity. We ﬁnd many
local events ﬂickering through the Mediterranean. Porphyry himself does
not establish a school, but while he is still alive, toward the end of the
fourth century, Iamblichus attracts a following in Asia Minor. “When
Iamblichus had departed from this world, his disciples were dispersed in
diﬀerent directions, and not one of them failed to win fame and reputa-
tion,” Eunapius tells us (Lives of the Philosophers, –), a late member
of this tradition, writing its history – as a series of hagiographies – early in
the ﬁfth century. Sosipatra, mentioned already, belonged to this group.
Aedesius was another of Iamblichus’s followers who became his own
master, now in Pergamon: Emperor Julian (who reigned from to
) saw Aedesius as his master. Julian was a principled pagan who wished
to undo the Christianization of the empire. I am not sure if Hypatia’s fate
was really determined by religious animosities (her circle of pupils included
many pious Christians, including Synesius himself, a bishop). What is
clear is that beginning with Porphyry himself, but surely by the time of
Julian, Neoplatonism does not merely evoke the Greek past: it is, quite
simply, the ideology of the pagan elite. It was the surest go-to position of
the likes of Emperor Julian.
The best place to commemorate the past was Athens. Perhaps the ﬁrst of
the Athenian Neoplatonists was Plutarch (not the same as the author of the
Proclus and the Philosophical Schools

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

imperial era, famous for his biographies), active early in the ﬁfth century.
The power of the place was such that a local succession did form: Plutarch
was followed by Syrianus, and in , a twenty-ﬁve-year-old Proclus was
so precocious as to become head of the school – which he continued to
lead for almost ﬁfty years until his death in . Throughout those forty-
eight years, Proclus wrote the major corpus of Neoplatonism.
Already Porphyry wrote mathematical commentaries, the choice of works
to study (harmonics, astrology) closely related to the potential function of
mathematics within Neoplatonist religion and ontology. Iamblichus’s phi-
losophy verged much more powerfully into fully ﬂedged number mysticism.
His biography of Pythagoras was hugely inﬂuential; in general, he invented a
mythical Pythagorean past, which he tried to imitate as a model for his own
philosophical conduct and that of other Neoplatonists. So, Iamblichus’s
treatise On the Common Mathematical Science (Chapter ):
One of their methods was the one that proceeds by symbols in mathemat-
ics; for instance, showing that the number is the symbol of justice,
because it signiﬁes symbolically all the possible forms of what is just. This
kind of instruction was useful to them for philosophy as a whole. . . .
Nevertheless, the fact that they also taught the ﬁrst principles and the
discoveries made by mathematics, is clearly shown from the various
branches of mathematics, and is made apparent in particular by the
methods of arithmetic.
The two ways of approaching number – as a doctrine of grand symbolic
emanation and as a theoretical study – are reconciled by Iamblichus as if
they were the two faces of a single project. Thus, of all the mathematical
sciences, the most signiﬁcant one for Iamblichus is that of arithmetic, and
his most sober work is a commentary on Nicomachus’s Arithmetic.
Nicomachus became perhaps the central mathematical ﬁgure to this
tradition. Proclus believed that he was Nicomachus’s reincarnation, a
belief held in utter sincerity. Strident pagans, the philosophers of
Neoplatonist Athens held most devoutly to the religious aspects of
Platonism – but also with evident pride in their capacity to handle
Platonism’s mathematics. To be an expositor of numbers was the highest
a man could aspire to.
Alongside the many commentaries to Plato (many extant) and Aristotle
(all lost), Proclus was also the author of a commentary to Euclid and also of
L. Brisson, “Chapter of the De Communi Mathematica Scientia: Translation and Commentary,”
in E. V. Afonasin, J. M. Dillon, and J. Finamore (eds.), Iamblichus and the Foundations of Late
Platonism (Leiden: Brill, ), pp. –.

The Canonization of Greek Mathematics
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

a number of works that display original, interesting mathematical erudi-
tion. Proclus’s Commentary on the First Book of Euclid’s Elements stands
out, among other Neoplatonist works, in its engagement with (what we
would see as) strictly mathematical questions. It is from Proclus (as noted
on p. ) that we hear of Ptolemy’s attempted proof of Euclid’s parallels’
postulate – which Proclus competently refutes. Proclus recounts to us the
details of an exchange between an Epicurean, Zeno of Sidon, and
Posidonius: the Epicurean argued that Euclid’s ﬁrst proposition, construct-
ing an equilateral triangle, is false because one has to assume that the sides
of the triangle do not partly coincide; Posidonius claimed this could be
proved. Once again, Proclus competently surveys the arguments. He
understands his mathematics. As can be surmised from the examples –
and as is to be expected after all in this commentary – the emphasis is on
the most foundational aspects. (About half of the treatise is the general
introduction, followed by Proclus’s commentary on Euclid’s axiomatic
introduction, while the commentary of the forty-eight propositions is
handled much more rapidly.) Proclus is reasonably aware of more
advanced mathematics: when he cites Elements ., ﬁnding a parallelo-
gram equal to a given rectilinear ﬁgure, he suggests that this must have
prompted the ancient to look for the extension of this problem into the
squaring of the circle, and so Proclus mentions – barely – Archimedes’s
Measurement of the Circle. When he cites Elements .– to bisect a given
angle – he notes that the problem of cutting an angle into three equal parts
is much harder, and then surveys – once again, very rapidly – some past
solutions, barely mentioning the names of past authors (Nicomedes,
Hippias, and – once again – Archimedes). But this is about as far as
Proclus goes. It is especially remarkable that he never mentions any result
having to do with conic sections. This is not just a matter of Proclus
concentrating on the Euclidean, elementary mathematics at hand, avoid-
ing mere displays of erudition. To the contrary – as we have seen – Proclus
often brings up the past. But he tends to concentrate on a deeper past.
My predecessor Heath and many historians – up until the last
generation – gave credence to the view according to which Thales, and
then Pythagoras, made lasting contributions to mathematics. This derives
almost entirely from Proclus’s commentary, which, because of its overall
sobriety, was taken seriously even for such obviously unfounded assertions.
Proclus does, however, also discuss later and more historical mathemati-
cians. There is one extended historical passage in Proclus, near the begin-
ning. Introducing his topic, Euclid (for whom Proclus evidently had no
biographical information), Proclus provides a brief history of the writing of
Proclus and the Philosophical Schools

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

mathematics up to his time. This is most likely based (if perhaps indi-
rectly), as noted on page , on the history of geometry written by
Eudemus, Aristotle’s pupil. So, in some sense, this is as far as Proclus
needed his history to go, and it is also possible that this is all Proclus had:
There were no histories later than Eudemus, perhaps? But perhaps the
correct account is that for rather obvious reasons, having to do with his
Platonism, Proclus chose to emphasize – to use the terms of this book –
the generation of Archytas. (A generation that I reconstruct, in part, based
on Proclus’s own summary! Such is the charmed circle of historiography.)
Proclus and Pappus both belong to the same world, of Greek erudites of a
philosophically minded mathematics or a mathematically minded philos-
ophy. The opposition between them is that of a philosophical as opposed
to a mathematical emphasis, which is also the emphasis on the generation
of Archytas – or on the generation of Archimedes.
Proclus was clearly fascinated with the axiomatic structure of Euclid’s
Elements (two works, Elements of Physics and Elements and Theology,
attempt to present philosophical doctrine more geometrico, as a series of
proved theorems: from our perspective, the derivations can hardly be seen
as logically rigorous). This is where his heart was. He mentions actual,
advanced mathematics almost reluctantly, as if such considerations take
him away from the more elementary mathematics, which, through its
proximity to mathematical foundations, carries more philosophical weight.
This reluctance becomes explicit in the introduction to Proclus’s major
astronomical work, the Hypotyposis:
The great Plato, my friend, expects the true philosopher at least to say
goodbye to the senses and the whole of wandering substance and to transfer
astronomy above the heavens and to study there slowness-itself and speed-
itself in true number. But you seem to me to lead us down from those
contemplations to these periods in the heavens and to the observations of
those clever at astronomy and to the hypotheses they devised from these,
[hypotheses] which Aristarchuses and Hipparchuses and Ptolemies and
such-like people are used to babbling about.
Proclus’s (ﬁctional?) reader asks him to comment on astronomical theory,
and Proclus obliges, but with the (valid) caveat that true Platonists engage
not with the apparent astronomy of material stars but, rather, with the
more abstract contemplation of pure mathematical form. The ensuing
discussion takes oﬀ– of course – from Ptolemaic astronomy but is
G. E. R. Lloyd, “Saving the Appearances,” Classical Quarterly (): .

The Canonization of Greek Mathematics
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

fascinating precisely because of Proclus’s relative distance from the ﬁeld.
Approaching Ptolemaic astronomy not as an astronomical commentator
but as a philosopher, Proclus’s main observation is that Ptolemy’s tools –
epicycles and eccenters – are problematic for a philosophy that truly aims to
recover all the motions in the heavens as combinations of perfect spherical
rotations. (Does an epicycle not introduce a discontinuity within the sphere
that carries it?) Proclus’s critique shows that the philosophers in Athens
understood Ptolemy. But also: that even though the astronomical commen-
tators canonized Ptolemy, the canonized system, itself, was rich with internal
contradictions, suggesting potential avenues for future critique and develop-
ment. There will be much more of that in the later history of astronomy.
Proclus’s commentaries mark the high point of Neoplatonism and of
Neoplatonist reﬂection upon mathematics. Still, Neoplatonist commen-
tary literature is massive and very well preserved. There is a good deal
more. From Domninus – Proclus’s co-eval – we have a handbook sum-
marizing Nicomachus’s Arithmetic (this is essentially a stripping down of
Nicomachus into mere deﬁnitions, with numerical examples). Marinus –
Proclus’s heir in the school of Athens, by now a genuine institution –
wrote an introduction to Euclid’s Data, in Marinus’s case, a slight work,
not at all comparable to Proclus’s commentary to the Elements. The only
real signiﬁcance of such works is to show that it was important to
Neoplatonist philosophers to teach not only the works of Plato and
Aristotle but works of mathematics as well. This is indeed evident from
the extant philosophical commentaries themselves. Without this, we
would have known so much less! For instance: a passage from
Olympiodorus is our key source for Archimedes’s major contribution to
optics. In the middle of the sixth century, this Neoplatonist – active in
Alexandria – wrote commentaries to Plato and Aristotle. In the commen-
tary to Aristotle’s Meteorology, Olympiodorus gets to the rainbow; this
gives rise to a discussion of the general phenomenon of refraction and,
soon enough – a substantial treatment of a nine-hundred-year-old theory
(pp. –).
Boethius was an early-sixth-century Neoplatonist active in Italy (and so,
writing in Latin, and in many other ways somewhat distinct from the
Greek commentators discussed here). He writes a survey of music – and
that includes a brief extract from Archytas, the most suggestive piece of
information we have for the early interaction between music and arith-
metic (pp. –).
Philoponus – another Alexandrian, contemporary with Olympiodorus –
is in many ways a sui generis commentator, and more than other
Proclus and the Philosophical Schools

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Neoplatonists, he occasionally uses the commentary form not simply
to aﬃrm the positions of the master but to criticize them (he is famous,
above all, for suggesting a revision of Aristotle’s theory of motion, perhaps
akin to that of Hipparchus; see pp. –). Perhaps his unique stance
has to do with his identity as a Christian, rather than a pagan, Neoplatonist.
Still: he, too, produces the same standard arrays of commentaries to
Aristotle, occupies the same cultural space of philosophy and science, taken
together – and, on occasion, displays his historical erudition. A methodo-
logical passage in Aristotle’s Posterior Analytics raises the question of the place
of geometry within the system of sciences. Philoponus launches into a
historical excursus: he tells the legend according to which Plato’s Academy
had inscribed on its entrance the words “Let no one ageometrical enter.” He
tells another legend – that of how the problem of duplicating the cube arose
of an oracle posited to the Delians, who brought it to Plato – and then
proceeds, remarkably, to provide a solution for the problem of ﬁnding two
mean proportions, as found by Apollonius!
Proclus never engages in such sheer mathematical name-dropping. But
no one name-dropped like Simplicius. Simplicius was educated in
Alexandria, then in Athens – until the year , when the Christian
emperor ﬁnally resolved to close down that pagan school. Paganism was
becoming untenable. After a sojourn to Persia, he returned to the Greek-
speaking world; we do not know where. His massive, extant works are
witness to a successful career as a philosophical teacher. Much more than
other Neoplatonist philosophers, Simplicius brings to the fore, somewhat
in the manner of Pappus, his scientiﬁc erudition. Was this a safer
alternative to the religious emphasis of past philosophers, such as
Proclus? Whatever the reason, we are very much in Simplicius’s debt.
There is a fundamental tension in the Neoplatonist marriage of mathe-
matics and philosophy: the mathematics they cite most naturally – the
one associated with Plato’s time – was much earlier and so rather
diﬀerent from the science that eventually became canonical: that of
Archimedes and Ptolemy. Proclus was somewhat reluctant to address
this discrepancy. Simplicius, perhaps less philosophically sensitive to the
meaning of this gap, tackled it directly in his writing. Aristotle has his
theory of falling bodies; Simplicius provides us with the unique evidence
that an alternative theory was oﬀered by Hipparchus. Aristotle has a
cosmology based on nested spheres; Simplicius addresses the fact that this
is an old, discarded theory – and provides us with our most detailed
account of how, originally, this theory was produced. Aristotle mentions,

The Canonization of Greek Mathematics
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

in passing, the measurement of the circle; Simplicius cites in full the
relevant work, which Aristotle had in mind – the Quadrature of Lunules
by Hippocrates. It is thus, in the sixth century , that we have our
witness to what may be, perhaps, the earliest Greek mathematical work. In
our end is our beginning.
Eutocius – and a Coda
Eutocius of Ascalon appears, in our sources, strictly as a mathematical
commentator. Extant are commentaries to three to four works by
Archimedes (Sphere and Cylinder , Sphere and Cylinder , and
Measurement of Circle; a commentary to On Balancing Planes is ascribed
to Eutocius, as well, but might be by someone else from his milieu), as well
as the ﬁrst four books of Apollonius’s Conics (books that he also edited).
He is also known to have written on the Almagest. (This is no longer extant
under Eutocius’s name, but it is likely that some of this is now preserved
among the substantial corpus of anonymous scholia.) The commentaries
on Sphere and Cylinder are dedicated to Ammonius the philosopher, and
the terms of the dedication make it likely that Eutocius was the philoso-
pher’s pupil. It is hard not to identify this Ammonius with Proclus’s pupil
who, from the end of the ﬁfth century, was the head of a Neoplatonist
school in Alexandria. Yet there are no philosophical commentaries attested,
let alone extant, by Eutocius – indeed, no philosophical references in his
writings. We recall Simplicius, thrown out from Athens in : perhaps it
was really beginning to be unsafe to ﬂaunt a pagan philosophy, perhaps
indeed, mathematics became a safer alternative, the severable component
of the Neoplatonist agenda. Philosophy nearly discarded, what replaces it
is a revived mathematical ambition. Hypatia preceded Eutocius in her
commentary to Apollonius, but it is not clear that anyone wrote on
Archimedes before him. (There is a very late report of a commentary by
one Theodosius on Archimedes’s Method, and indeed, there are small
traces of scholiastic intervention in the text of the treatise as it now stands.
My own interpretation is that this Theodosius could have been active in
the generation immediately following Eutocius, on which, more in the
following discussion.)
Indeed, we see something of the mathematical ambition – in both
technique as well as erudition – we last saw with Pappus. On a couple of
occasions, Eutocius provides lengthy historical excursus, citing the authors’
names and trying to provide a modicum of historical provenance.
Eutocius – and a Coda

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Archimedes takes for granted, as one point of Sphere and Cylinder , a
solution to the problem of four lines in mean proportion (“duplicating the
cube”). This sends Eutocius on the longest of his detours, citing in
sequence solutions by “Plato” (this is certainly misascribed), Hero, Philo,
Apollonius,
Diocles,
Pappus,
Sporus,
Menaechmus,
Archytas,
Eratosthenes, and Nicomedes: a who’s who of Greek mathematics, pro-
viding a good deal of our knowledge of the history of the discipline. The
citation from Eratosthenes contains, among other things, information
about Hippocrates of Chios’s original contribution to the problem; the
citation from Archytas is said to be on the authority of Eudemus. Most of
the solutions, however, are from the generation of Archimedes, and the
fact that they extend to Late Antiquity itself suggests that Eutocius, at the
very least, could have revised whatever was available to him from his source
and did not simply plagiarize some previous scholar. This is indeed a more
general question that arises with all ancient authors but especially in Late
Antiquity: When they cite a work, does it mean they have read it, or did
they rely, instead, on its citation within a previous work? What were the
books still available to be read at the time? Another passage in Eutocius
brings this problem into focus.
In Book of Sphere and Cylinder, Archimedes divides a sphere and
requires for this purpose a solution to a more general problem: given a line
to be cut such as AB, a given length C, and a given area D, to divide the
line AB at point E so that
AE:C::BE2 :D:
D
B
E
A
C
Figure 
This, just like the problem of duplicating the cube, is rather like a cubic
equation. It was not solved prior to Archimedes, and so Archimedes
promised to provide it separately. Probably this was not intended as an
appendix, attached to the original roll of Sphere and Cylinder , but rather
as a challenge, to which there were a number of ancient responses – and so

The Canonization of Greek Mathematics
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Eutocius cites the solutions by Dionysodorus and Diocles. More impor-
tant, however, Eutocius managed to ﬁnd Archimedes’s own solution:
But – in a certain old book (for we did not cease from the search for many
books), we have read theorems written very unclearly (because of the many
errors), and in many ways mistaken about the diagrams. But they had to do
with the same subject matter we were looking for, and they preserved in
part the Doric language Archimedes liked using, written with the ancient
names of things: the parabola called “Section of a right angled cone,” the
hyperbola “section of an obtuse angled cone.”
And so – Archimedes! The text identiﬁed, Eutocius tells us he cleared its
errors and proceeds to cite it. Paideia was mostly about the display of one’s
acquired erudition, and it is rare for us to hear anything about the labor
involved in this acquisition. Were old books becoming harder to come by?
Pappus was active in the early fourth century; Eutocius, early in the sixth.
The diﬀerence is important: Pappus’s world was still awash in imperial-era
papyri, but by Eutocius’s time, everything was already transformed into
parchment codices; the papyri were already being discarded. Much of
antiquity had been tossed away, and those who sought the past had to
go out of their way to look for its traces. The commentator begins to
transform into the philologer. Eutocius is an “ancient” author, for sure,
but in some ways, he is already contemporary with the humanists of
the Renaissance.
The lead-up to Archimedes’s proof shows Eutocius as a philologer;
I believe the proof, as cited, shows Eutocius as a mathematician. Having
solved the original problem, Archimedes shows that it can be solved only
under certain conditions, which ends up equivalent to a statement on a
maximum: taking a line such as AB and cutting it at a variable point E, we
may consider the value of the ﬁgure whose base is the square on BE and
whose height is the length AB. Archimedes proves that the maximum
value of this ﬁgure (which, once again, to us, means the maximum on a
cubic equation) is when BE is twice AB, or the line AB is cut at one-third
of the way. He does so by setting E at one-third of the way, raising a
perpendicular, and drawing a parabola and a hyperbola passing through a
certain point through that perpendicular. Archimedes then takes an arbi-
trary point, such as S, on the segment EB. A complicated demonstration
shows that the fact that the hyperbola “above” S is contained within the
parabola yields the result that the three-dimensional ﬁgure produced by
R. Netz, The Works of Archimedes: Translation and Commentary, vol. (Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, ), p. .
Eutocius – and a Coda

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

the cut at point S is smaller than the three-dimensional ﬁgure produced by
the cut “above” E (where the parabola and hyperbola are tangent to
each other).
S'
A
E
S
B
Figure 
This is as beautiful and complex a result based on conic sections as
anywhere in Greek mathematics, and it is remarkable that Eutocius was up
to the task of identifying it and cleaning it up. (For several generations
before Eutocius, we do not even have the trace of anyone seriously reading
Apollonius’s Conics!) But then, I believe that Eutocius adds something of
his own. The proof continues, and there are textual indications that lead
me to believe that its continuation is by Eutocius’s own hand. Having
proved the result for the arbitrary point S, to the right of E, the text goes
on to pick another arbitrary point (I label it S0), to the left of E, and to
produce the same conclusion. This is redundant – it is clear already that
the proof works thanks to the unique tangency of the conic sections at
point E and so is automatically valid for both sides of E. Eutocius’s
addition is motivated, perhaps, by some urge at completion. This is the
same as a tendency we see in his edition of Apollonius’s Conic Sections.
In the text we now possess, Apollonius’s propositions are often accompa-
nied by several diagrams for the several possible cases that the proof
allows, even if the proof itself requires no more than a single case.

The Canonization of Greek Mathematics
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

As Decorps-Foulquier has shown, this is most likely the addition of
Eutocius, who, in this case, expanded not the text but the ﬁgures.
In my previous works on mathematical commentary, I have referred to
the “deuteronomic” character of late ancient mathematics: it takes texts
and transforms them into new texts. Commentary texts are always meta-
textual, and this, in mathematics, carries a special meaning. As you become
meta-textual, you might become meta-mathematical. Thus, in a case such
as Archimedes’s complicated proof for the maximum of a cubic equation,
the thrust of Eutocius’s contribution – perhaps, not even intentionally – is
to display the symmetry of solutions around the maximum. Authors such as
Apollonius and Archimedes, ludic, competitive, striving for that one
single, remarkable result, often produced isolated theorems. Late
Antiquity with its commentary – just by virtue of the practice of com-
mentary! – tended to make such isolated results more well regimented: so,
Pappus’s classiﬁcation of types of problems and their allowed solutions;
Eutocius’s surveying of possible solutions and cases, arranged side by side.
An even more worrisome question is that of Eutocius’s intervention in
the text. I suggested that he might have added, of his own, to one solution
by Archimedes; Decorps-Foulquier suggested that he might have added, of
his own, to Apollonius’s ﬁgures. Knorr has argued convincingly for an even
more radical intervention. Obviously, one of the requirements of
Archimedes’s solution is the construction of a hyperbola (we are reminded
of Pappus’s own solution, related to Archimedes’s neusis in Spiral Lines,
which also gave rise to the construction of a hyperbola). Now, what we are
given is a point through which the hyperbola is to be drawn, as well as its
two asymptotes. At the end of his discussion of this problem, Eutocius
provides a construction with these givens, asserting that he needs to do so
“as this is not a self-evident outcome of the Conic Elements.” Indeed,
Apollonius’s Conics .shows how to construct a hyperbola, given its
diameter and parameter. What Eutocius does is to show (a relatively easy
task, although still a tribute to his good understanding of conic sections)
that from a given point and the two asymptotes, one can ﬁnd the diameter
and the parameter, so that the problem required by Archimedes easily
reduces to the already available construction of Conics .. However, the
very same reduction provided by Eutocius in his commentary to Sphere
and Cylinder is now extant inside the transmitted text of Apollonius’s
Conics, as proposition .! Clearly – although no one noticed that prior
M. Decorps-Foulquier, “Sur les ﬁgures du traité des Coniques d’Apollonios de Pergé édité par
Eutocius d’Ascalon,” Revue d’histoire des mathématiques (): –.
Eutocius – and a Coda

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

to Knorr – Eutocius inserted his own solution, an extension of a result by
Apollonius, into Apollonius’s text.
Should we be alarmed? Can we even trust our texts of the ancient
authors? I would say that we should be on our guard. One must always
be aware of the mediated state of our evidence. But then again, let us
remember: Conics .was clearly a special case. Eutocius must have been
especially proud of his realization, within the commentary to Archimedes,
that a certain result, required by Archimedes, was not, in fact, directly
furnished by Apollonius – and by his ability to furnish it himself. This is a
unique case, and I do not think Eutocius, in general, interfered with his
text. But we must remember: if he shows something of the attitude of the
philologer, he is deﬁnitely not a modern textual editor. The point of his
project was not the establishment of the text, as such.
What was the point, then? Indeed, our sense of context becomes elusive.
We have very many writings from the world of Neoplatonist commenta-
tors, and we may recover their social context and agendas. But Eutocius
has perhaps already burst out of this milieu, without us knowing, precisely,
which milieu he joined instead. We have a handful of traces. The early
commentaries to Sphere and Cylinder are addressed, as noted, to the
teacher Ammonius; the later commentary to Apollonius’s Conics is
addressed to Anthemius, seen as something of an equal, perhaps almost
a colleague.
In fact, we know this Anthemius rather well. Several histories of the
sixth century are extant, and from them we learn of Anthemius of Tralles,
famous in the capital, Constantinople, as a master of mechanics. We hear,
speciﬁcally, of wonders produced with steam and mirrors. Indeed, there
are even traces of a treatise – comparable in scope and sophistication to
that by Diocles – on burning mirrors, and it appears that he wrote on
mechanical wonders in general. He was held to such prestige that the
emperor set him to plan the major church of the city – the famous Hagia
Sophia – an undertaking completed, after Anthemius’s death, by Isidore of
Miletus. And this Isidore, too, may be connected – albeit indirectly – with
Eutocius’s milieu. The text we now have of Eutocius’s commentaries
contains four interpolations inserted by a follower of Isidore; we learn that
Isidore wrote a commentary to a work by Hero (once again, we see an
interest in mechanics, then) and that he, Isidore, also proofread
Eutocius’s commentaries.
W. R. Knorr, “The Hyperbola-Construction in the Conics, Book : Ancient Variations on a
Theorem of Apollonius,” Centaurus (): –.

The Canonization of Greek Mathematics
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Another extant work, attached in our manuscripts to Euclid’s
Elements and titled in them “Book ,” is an elementary study of the
regular solids – and this, too, has a subscription by Isidore’s follower.
Finally, I note again that the commentary on Archimedes’s On Balancing
Planes, ascribed in our manuscript tradition to Eutocius, is of a far lower
quality, mathematically speaking, than Eutocius’s other commentaries.
I personally suspect that this was a work of, perhaps, a follower of
Eutocius? Perhaps here might be ﬁtted, too, the report that there was a
commentary on Archimedes’s Method, by one Theodosius. So, maybe, a
mid-sixth-century mathematical school?
Eutocius emerged from the Neoplatonist schools and then situated
himself in a strictly mathematical milieu, one that was associated with
the building projects of Constantinople in the sixth century. As we
contemplate the spheres and cylinders of the Hagia Sophia, it is easy to
imagine its construction as inspired by mathematical ideals. Is there an
echo, in there, even of Neoplatonism, mathematics as the divine? Did
Isidore’s follower – author of a study of the ﬁve regular solids – still care
about Plato? We do not know, and this, in itself, might be signiﬁcant.
Whether or not Eutocius or any of his followers, Anthemius, or Isidore
harbored any pagan sympathies, this did not manifest itself in their
mathematics. They could have been crypto-pagan, merely pretending to
adore the Christian god, or they could have been genuinely pious
Christians, simply carrying with them the mathematical souvenirs of a
pagan past. Either way, they maintained the traditional values of a certain
slice of the Greek elite: priding themselves on a particular kind of erudi-
tion, invested in the mathematical past, seeing in it the values of an
otherworldly, superior form of being.
The Marranos – originally, a pejorative term, “pigs” – are the Jews who
were forced to convert to Christianity in Spain and Portugal in the
fourteenth and ﬁfteenth centuries. Sometimes they just pretended to be
Christian, but most of them, after the passage of several generations,
became genuine Christians. And yet, habits persist. Generations ago, the
entrance to the house was sanctiﬁed by the presence of the ritual Mezuzah.
The Mezuzah was now long gone – but when sweeping the ﬂoor, one still
made the extra eﬀort to not let any dust settle near that once-holy ground.
Does one still remember the reason for doing so? Perhaps, perhaps not: the
fundamental point is the very persistence. And so: by the second half of the
sixth century, Neoplatonism has nearly disappeared. But mathematical
erudition persisted, the ﬁnal habit, so to speak, kept by the pagan
Eutocius – and a Coda

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Marranos. And so, they preserve and copy the works of Archimedes,
Apollonius, Hero, Euclid . . .
There are about extant Greek authors: this is what survives of an
ancient civilization of perhaps tens of thousands of authors. Of these
authors, about belong to the exact sciences (broadly deﬁned).
This is a remarkably high fraction, and I am quite conﬁdent that much
fewer than percent of all ancient authors were mathematicians. In
other words, Greek mathematical works have a surprising tendency to
survive through our manuscripts. Someone made an eﬀort to preserve
them, and I suspect that we see here why: at the moment that mattered
most – in the sixth century, when Constantinople consolidated its
holdings of ancient literature – a certain trace of the Neoplatonist past
was still alive. And so, the works of Greek mathematics were carried
inside the ark.
Not a moment too soon: the deluge was coming. The empire, stabi-
lized with great eﬀort at the beginning of the fourth century, was nearly
shattered, once again, by the terrible defeat in the battle of Adrianople in
. There was no option but to admit the victorious Goths as de facto
rulers of parts of the empire. The ensuing litany of calamities is familiar
to all: Vandals, Attila, the fall of Rome . . . A new pandemic – “the plague
of Justinian” – hit ﬁrst in the years –. It was a virus strain similar
to that of the Black Death, and just as deadly: killing perhaps percent
of the population of the cities in its very ﬁrst year, returning again and
again for decades and even centuries to come. As ever, it is hard to
apportion historical blame. We do not have the statistics. But something
shifts, irretrievably: from the second half of the sixth century onward, the
empire no longer has the same authority. This is certainly obvious in
cultural history. Anthemius and Isidore pursued science under the tute-
lage of the state – the last to do so, in the Mediterranean, for centuries
to come.
And yet, the books remained. We have seen hiatuses already. I suggested
that throughout much of the ﬁrst century , and then again throughout
much of the third century , there was very little original work in the
exact sciences. There was certainly no institutional continuity. But this was
not the continuity that mattered in ancient culture. Greek mathematics
was a literary genre, persisting through its books. As long as the books
could be read – and then inspire others to imitate their genre – the legacy
could be revived.

The Canonization of Greek Mathematics
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Suggestions for Further Reading
In the past, studies of Greek mathematics largely avoided the later, less
“creative” mathematics of Late Antiquity. An article of mine, R. Netz,
“Deuteronomic Texts: Late Antiquity and the History of Mathematics,”
Revue d’histoire des mathématiques (): –, was among the ﬁrst
seeking to understand the original contribution of this era. (I recently
returned to the question of why commentary was so signiﬁcant in Late
Antiquity, in Chapter of R. Netz, Scale, Space and Canon in Ancient
Literary Practice [Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, ]).
Much more has been written since, and on Pappus, in particular, one
should read S. Cuomo, Pappus of Alexandria and the Mathematics of Late
Antiquity (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, ), as well as
A. Bernard, “Ancient Rhetoric and Greek Mathematics: A Response to a
Modern Historiographical Dilemma,” Science in Context ():
–. (For Porphyry, we now have A. Barker, Porphyry’s Commentary
on Ptolemy’s Harmonics [Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, ].)
It is hard to single out further contributions on other individual authors
from Late Antiquity. The ﬁeld is emerging and is now mostly in the form
of individual article contributions or editions. An example of the recent
interest is the special volume of Historia Mathematica: M. Sialaros,
J. Christianidis, and A. Megremi (eds.), “On Mathemata: Commenting
on Greek and Arabic Mathematical Texts,” special issue, Historia
Mathematica ().
Suggestions for Further Reading

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

