153
   n 1959 C.P. Snow published an essay titled “The Two Cul­
tures” in which he described how the cultures of the natural 
and of the human sciences were evolving away from each 
other. This, according to Snow, was leading to the creation of 
two separate intellectual worlds, and he predicted that the 
failure of interaction between the two would harm scientific 
progress. Today, his prediction is confirmed—a good example 
is the field of so-called Artificial Intelligence (AI). 
The Two Cultures 
In the seventeenth century, Isaac Newton still saw himself 
as both a philosopher and a mathematician-physicist. Leib­
niz, too, the co-inventor of the calculus, was an important 
mathematician and philosopher. But by the eighteenth cen­
tury, mathematicians like Euler, Lagrange, and Gauss con­
centrated on mathematics and physics and rarely made 
statements of a philosophical nature. A conspicuous excep­
tion is Laplace, who thought that the universe could in the­
ory be formalized into one huge set of differential equations. 
(Laplace was wrong.) 
The first to detect the evolution of two separate branches 
of science was Wilhelm Dilthey, who introduced the termi­
nology of “Naturwissenschaften” and “Geisteswissenschaften,” 
referring, respectively to the sciences of nature and the sci­
ences of the human mind (or soul). (Unfortunately the term 
I
[ 10 ] 
Sam Harris and  
the Myth of Machine  
Intelligence 
JOBST LANDGREBE AND BARRY SMITH
Harris 6th.qxp_Layout 1  10/31/22  1:41 PM  Page 153

‘humanities’ does not convey the meaning of “Geisteswis­
senschaften” very well.) Indeed, by the 1920s the two cul­
tures had split so far apart from each other that it had 
become difficult for a non-physicist to make philosophical 
statements of any value about the meaning of physics, while 
the physicists themselves—those who paid any attention to 
philosophy at all—were disposed to dismiss it as an object of 
ridicule. Good examples from the middle of last century are 
Popper’s embarrassing statements about quantum mechan­
ics and Richard Feynman’s remarks on what he saw as the 
gibberish produced by philosophers. Each demonstrated a 
thorough lack of knowledge of the discipline they chose to 
write about. Nevertheless, Feynman was one of the greatest 
physicists of the second half of the twentieth century. 
Enter Sam Harris 
Sam Harris is a contemporary illustration of the difficulties 
standing in the way of coherent interdisciplinary thinking 
in an age where science and the humanities have drifted so 
far apart. 
Harris is a neuroscientist by training. His PhD is about 
experiments using functional magnetic resonance imaging 
(fMRI) to measure signal changes in the brains of believers 
and nonbelievers as they evaluated the truth and falsity of 
religious and nonreligious propositions. His conclusion is 
that there is a region of the brain involved in emotional judg­
ment that is also behind religious reasoning. This does not, 
unfortunately, reveal anything at all about the nature of 
human religious thinking as expressed, for example, in the 
writings of Luther or Bultmann. 
Harris knows a lot about the theory of neuroscience but, 
according to some of his critics, he didn’t himself perform any 
of the experiments discussed in his PhD dissertation (Peace­
ful Science 2018). 
We’re concerned here with Harris’s views on AI, and 
specifically with his view according to which, with the 
advance of AI, there will evolve a machine superintelligence 
with powers that far exceed those of the human mind. This 
he sees as something that is not merely possible, but rather 
a matter of inevitability. 
]obst Landgrebe and Barry Smith
154
Harris 6th.qxp_Layout 1  10/31/22  1:41 PM  Page 154

However, even though he is a self-described neuroscien­
tist, he does not ask himself what intelligence is and, starting 
out from there, consider the question of how a superintelli­
gence, or indeed any kind of intelligence, could be engineered 
inside a machine. He merely mentions scientists who claim 
that a superintelligent AI might come into being and then 
speculates, excitedly, about how a future superintelligence 
would treat human beings, namely, as he puts it, “like ants.” 
If, however, we look carefully at what intelligence is, and 
at how computers really work on the basis of mathematical 
models, then we can see that it is forever impossible to emu­
late inside a computer even the intelligence of crows or rab­
bits, let alone that of human beings. 
What Is Intelligence? 
Intelligence as it is exhibited in the behavior of organisms 
manifests in every case the following characteristics, as 
pointed out already in the 1920s by Max Scheler: 
 
1. It is a disposition (a capability) to adapt to new situations 
that is enabled by the organism’s physical makeup. 
 
2. It is a capability whose realization is sudden—springs 
suddenly forth—which means that it can happen at any 
time. 
 
3. It is realized in actions which are 
—meaningful, or in other words, appropriate to the situa­
tion, in the sense that the actions serve the achievement 
by the acting organism of its goals; 
—not primed by prior experiences; thus these actions are 
untrained, and not a product of repeated attempts involv­
ing trial and error; 
—novel from the perspective of the acting organism. 
 
Intelligence as exhibited by non-human organisms (in par­
ticular by birds and by higher mammals) exhibits these fea­
tures, but with the restriction that the goals mentioned 
under 3. are in every case instinctive, they relate to the 
organism’s inborn need to survive and reproduce in a certain 
ancestral environment. 
          Sam Harris and the Myth of Machine Intelligence
155
Harris 6th.qxp_Layout 1  10/31/22  1:41 PM  Page 155

For humans, in contrast, the range of actions exhibiting 
intelligence extends far beyond what is instinctive and 
includes the ability to act intelligently even in environments 
which are entirely novel. In addition, human intelligence is 
capable of mental and linguistic acts which enable abstract, 
propositional thinking. It is this objectifying intelligence which 
gives us the ability to conceive, and then deliberately plan and 
build—often collectively—artifacts that can allow us to survive 
even where there is no life at all—in polar barrens in the high 
arctic, for example, or in submarines, or in outer space. 
Why We Cannot Model Intelligence  
Mathematically 
We do not know at all how the brains of vertebrates (reptiles, 
birds, and mammals) produce the capability we call intelli­
gence. And we do not know how the human brain performs 
the impressive feats of objectifying intelligence. 
Neuroscience is limited by the fact that even the most pow­
erful neuroimaging technologies cannot penetrate to phenom­
ena at the level of the atoms and ions making up the 
phospholipids, proteins, and other organized molecules of which 
neurons are comprised. Moreover, even if, per impossibile, data 
were available regarding the electrochemical and other events 
taking place in the organism at this level, we still could not 
determine any general laws governing how these events occur, 
of the sort which we could use to build the mathematical models 
we would need to program a computer. This is not only because 
there are trillions of biochemical events occurring every second 
in the billions of cells of the human organism, but also because 
the ways these events occur differ from one individual organism 
to the next. It is thus no accident that textbooks of neuroscience 
contain very few mathematical equations. 
What we do know is that all vertebrates (like all living 
organisms) are animate complex systems made up of ele­
ments of many different types at different levels of granu­
larity (from atoms and ions up to cells and organs). Such 
systems have the following properties: 
 
1. Change and evolutionary character—complex systems 
are marked by sudden and continuous changes of ele­
]obst Landgrebe and Barry Smith
156
Harris 6th.qxp_Layout 1  10/31/22  1:41 PM  Page 156

          Sam Harris and the Myth of Machine Intelligence
157
ment types and element combinations, including chang­
ing behaviors on the part of instances of element types. 
The system as a whole has a creative character, which 
means that at any time new elements and new patterns of 
interaction between these elements can come into being. 
An example is the human language system, which reveals 
this sort of creativity every time a new word is coined. 
 
2. Element-dependent interactions—which lead to irregular­
ity and non-repeatability. Irregularity means that the sys­
tem does not behave in a way that can be formalized using 
equations. Non-repeatability signifies a behavior that can­
not be reproduced experimentally. Both features are man­
ifested by, for example, the stock market, or by the Earth’s 
weather, climate, and geothermal systems. 
 
3. Force overlay—complex systems involve several forces 
acting at the same time and potentially interacting, as for 
example when you are tempted by a chocolate éclair 
offered by your host at a party while reminding yourself 
that you need to lose weight. This property is often corre­
lated with anisotropy (which means that the effect result­
ing from force overlay does not propagate with the same 
magnitude in all directions). 
 
4. Non-ergodic phase spaces—logic systems have the prop­
erty that, over sufficiently long periods of time, the time in 
which a system element occupies any given region of the 
system’s phase space is proportional to the volume of this 
region. This holds for example in the case of molecules of 
gas in a sealed container. In complex systems, however, 
the accessible microstates of the system’s phase space 
are not equiprobable over a long period of time. This in 
turn means that predictions of the sort which we use when 
we have an ergodic phase space—for example when we 
predict how the molecules of gas will behave when the 
container is heated—are impossible. 
 
5. Drivenness—a driven system is one whose interactions 
involve use of some external or internal energy source, 
where the system then acts by dissipating this energy. 
Plants draw energy from the sun. The animals lower down 
the food chain draw energy from plants. Higher animals, 
including humans, draw energy from plants and animals. 
Humans in addition have furnished their environments 
Harris 6th.qxp_Layout 1  10/31/22  1:41 PM  Page 157

]obst Landgrebe and Barry Smith
158
with machines (engineered inanimate driven systems 
such as refrigerators or food processors), which they con­
trol by supplying them with energy. (The machines cease 
to operate when their energy supply is cut off.) A driven 
system, now, lacks any sort of equilibrium state towards 
which it would constantly be converging. It is, precisely, 
driven to move from one state to the next—something that 
we experience in our every waking moment. In engineered 
systems the drivenness (the fact that they dissipate 
energy) is not relevant for their main function. It is not rel­
evant to the ways you use your computer that it is also—
until you switch it off—constantly dissipating heat. 
 
6. Context-dependence—non-fixable boundary conditions 
and embeddedness in one or more wider environments. 
How you behave from one moment to the next depends 
on your (physical, social, . . .) environment. How the Moon 
behaves is determined by the simple force of gravity, 
which acts always in the same way to produce the very 
same sort of behavior. 
 
7. Chaos—inability to predict system behavior due to inabil­
ity to obtain exact measurements of starting conditions. 
We cannot predict how your brain will operate because 
the measurements we would need to make of the dispo­
sitions of your neurons at any given time would be 
orders of magnitude below the error threshold of our 
measuring instruments. 
 
The solar system, your toaster, your car radio, are logic sys­
tems—their behavior can be predicted using logic and laws 
of physics. But for complex systems with the seven just-men­
tioned properties—including human beings—we are unable 
to create mathematical models that can emulate anything 
more than consistently repeating patterns of their behavior 
(such as the sleep-wake cycle). This is because every AI sys­
tem is an algorithm that must run inside a computer. And 
every algorithm is a piece of mathematics. More precisely, to 
be executable on a computer an algorithm must be a piece 
of mathematics of a certain highly restricted sort (it must 
be, in the jargon of the trade, Church-Turing computable). 
AI systems are, in spite of this limitation, able to achieve 
remarkable results by means of algorithms which chain 
Harris 6th.qxp_Layout 1  10/31/22  1:41 PM  Page 158

          Sam Harris and the Myth of Machine Intelligence
159
together millions and sometimes billions of parameters, as 
in the case, for example, of machine translation. But such an 
algorithm works because its inventors have found a way to 
construct a logic system which is a sufficiently close approx­
imation to a subset of outputs from a complex system—in 
this case from the human language system—to yield useful 
results. For the reasons given above, there is no way to pro­
duce a logic system model of the complex system itself. 
Because of this limitation, we can never create artificial 
intelligence, where ‘intelligence’ means the capability that is 
possessed by humans and higher animals, described above. 
AI will never become intelligent in any sense of this term 
that can be applied to humans, let alone more intelligent 
than humans. Our inability to model properties of the mind 
also means that an AI system will never develop a will—
because we cannot model the will mathematically. Nor can 
a ‘machine will’ evolve spontaneously from some ‘machine 
evolution’, because we are neither able to create an environ­
ment that would mimic the processes of biological evolution 
nor are we able to emulate those subjects of evolution 
(hominids) that led to biological intelligence. We have ex-
plained all this in somewhat greater detail in our book, Why 
Machines Will Never Rule the World. 
What Sam Harris Knows 
Sam Harris does not seem to know anything about all of this. 
For like so many others, including many putative AI experts, 
he has failed to do the interdisciplinary work that is required 
to understand the opportunities and risks of AI. Instead, he 
talks about things he does not understand. 
This is damaging to the field in which he works, convey­
ing aspects of science to a broader public. Instead of respon­
sibly explaining the real issues around digitization and AI, 
he misleads his readers with exciting horror stories which 
have no basis in reality. This is irresponsible, especially given 
the fact that there are real dangers of digitization and AI, 
which include at least: 
 
1. Public and private surveillance of individual behavior, for 
example by media corporations. 
 
Harris 6th.qxp_Layout 1  10/31/22  1:41 PM  Page 159

2. Private systems designed to guide (manipulate) the  
perception, preferences, and acts of individuals so that 
they become optimized from the point of view of the 
manipulating entity. Examples are social media platforms 
such as Facebook, Twitter or YouTube. 
 
3. Public social credit systems imparting rewards and pun­
ishments in order to enforce (for example) political norms. 
 
The first trend is quite advanced; our Internet usage behav­
ior is being constantly recorded and supervised by corpora­
tions which increasingly play a role in deciding who gets to 
say what on social media. Even in the West, there is now a 
tendency on the part of the state to use data from social 
media platforms and other traces left by users of the Internet 
to drive the targeting of dissenters. A good example is the 
withdrawal of banking services from protesting truck drivers 
and their supporters in the winter of 2021–22 in Canada. 
The second trend, also called ‘nudging’, is very advanced 
in the world of interactive digital media. Users are system­
atically influenced via selective perception, targeted advertise-
ment and messaging as well as reinforcement of behavioral 
patterns. 
The third trend is well advanced in the urban centers in 
China, and was until recently being rolled out in Italy. 
These developments are some of the threats we’re facing 
from digitization and AI, and Sam Harris has indeed de-
scribed and criticized some of them. These, and not specula­
tions belonging to poorly conceived science fiction about 
superintelligences that will never exist, are the trends which 
should be in the focus of a neuroscientist like Harris, working 
to popularize the understanding of science and philosophy. 
 
References 
 
Feynman, Richard P., Robert B. Leighton, and Matthew Sands. 
2011 [1964]. The Feynman Lectures on Physics. Basic Books. 
Harris, Sam. 2016. Can We Build AI Without Losing Control Over 
It? TED Talk (September 29th) <www.ted.com/talks/sam_har­
ris_can_we_build_ai_without_losing_control_over_it?lan­
guage=en>. 
]obst Landgrebe and Barry Smith
160
Harris 6th.qxp_Layout 1  10/31/22  1:41 PM  Page 160

Harris, Sam. 2018. Superintelligence: AI Futures and Philosophy. 
(April 13th). <www.youtube.com/watch?v=rpsvcVWoC5s>. 
Kandel, Eric R., James H. Schwartz, Thomas M. Jessell, Steven J. 
Siegelbaum, and A.J. Hudspeth. 2012 [1991]. Principles of  
Neural Science. Fifth edition. McGraw Hill. 
Landgrebe, Jobst, and Barry Smith. 2022. Why Machines Will 
Never Rule the World: AI Without Fear. Routledge. 
Peaceful Science. 2018. Is Sam Harris a Legitimate Neuroscientist?  
<discourse.peacefulscience.org/t/is-sam-harris-a-legitimate- 
neuroscientist/2458 
Popper, Karl R. 1951. Indeterminism in Quantum-Mechanics and 
in Classical Physics. The British Journal for the Philosophy 
of Science 1:2. 
Scheler, Max. 1961 [1928]. Man’s Place in Nature. Noonday Press. 
Snow, Charles P. 1993 [1959]. The Two Cultures. Cambridge  
University Press. 
Wilson, Rhoda. 2022. Italy’s Dystopian Social Credit System. 
Exposé News (April 27th)  
<https://expose-news.com/2022/04/27/italy-dystopian-social-
credit-system>.
          Sam Harris and the Myth of Machine Intelligence
161
Harris 6th.qxp_Layout 1  10/31/22  1:41 PM  Page 161

