Science 
& Mathematics
Topic
Mathematics
Subtopic
Change and Motion:  
Calculus Made Clear,  
2nd Edition
Course Guidebook
Professor Michael Starbird
The University of Texas at Austin

PUBLISHED BY:
THE GREAT COURSES
Corporate Headquarters
4840 Westﬁ elds Boulevard, Suite 500
Chantilly, Virginia 20151-2299
Phone: 1-800-832-2412
Fax: 703-378-3819
www.thegreatcourses.com
Copyright © The Teaching Company, 2006
Printed in the United States of America
This book is in copyright. All rights reserved. 
Without limiting the rights under copyright reserved above,
no part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in 
or introduced into a retrieval system, or transmitted, 
in any form, or by any means 
(electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise), 
without the prior written permission of
The Teaching Company.

i
P
rofessor Michael Starbird is Professor of 
Mathematics and a University Distinguished 
Teaching Professor at The University of Texas 
at Austin. He received his B.A. degree from Pomona 
College in 1970 and his Ph.D. in mathematics from 
the University of Wisconsin, Madison, in 1974. That same year, he joined 
the faculty of the Department of Mathematics of The University of Texas at 
Austin, where he has stayed, except for leaves as a Visiting Member of the 
Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton, New Jersey; a Visiting Associate 
Professor at the University of California, San Diego; and a member of the 
technical staff at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California. 
Professor Starbird served as Associate Dean in the College of Natural 
Sciences at The University of Texas at Austin from 1989 to 1997. He is 
a member of the Academy of Distinguished Teachers at UT. He has won 
many teaching awards, including the Mathematical Association of America’s 
Deborah and Franklin Tepper Haimo Award for Distinguished College or 
University Teaching of Mathematics, which is awarded to three professors 
annually from among the 27,000 members of the MAA; a Minnie Stevens 
Piper Professorship, which is awarded each year to 10 professors from any 
subject at any college or university in the state of Texas; the inaugural award 
of the Dad’s Association Centennial Teaching Fellowship; the Excellence 
Award from the Eyes of Texas, twice; the President’s Associates Teaching 
Excellence Award; the Jean Holloway Award for Teaching Excellence, which 
is the oldest teaching award at UT and is presented to one professor each 
year; the Chad Oliver Plan II Teaching Award, which is student-selected and 
awarded each year to one professor in the Plan II liberal arts honors program; 
and the Friar Society Centennial Teaching Fellowship, which is awarded to 
one professor at UT annually and includes the largest monetary teaching 
prize given at UT. Also, in 1989, Professor Starbird was the Recreational 
Sports Super Racquets Champion.
Michael Starbird, Ph.D.
University Distinguished Teaching Professor 
of Mathematics
The University of Texas at Austin

ii
The professor’s mathematical research is in the ¿ eld of topology. He recently 
served as a member-at-large of the Council of the American Mathematical 
Society and on the national education committees of both the American 
Mathematical Society and the Mathematical Association of America. 
Professor Starbird is interested in bringing authentic understanding 
of signi¿ cant ideas in mathematics to people who are not necessarily 
mathematically oriented. He has developed and taught an acclaimed class 
that presents higher-level mathematics to liberal arts students. He wrote, 
with co-author Edward B. Burger, The Heart of Mathematics: An invitation 
to effective thinking, which won a 2001 Robert W. Hamilton Book Award. 
Professors Burger and Starbird have also written a book that brings 
intriguing mathematical ideas to the public, entitled Coincidences, Chaos, 
and All That Math Jazz: Making Light of Weighty Ideas, published by W.W. 
Norton, 2005. Professor Starbird has produced three previous courses for The 
Teaching Company, the ¿ rst edition of Change and Motion: Calculus Made 
Clear; Meaning from Data: Statistics Made Clear; and with collaborator 
Edward Burger, The Joy of Thinking: The Beauty and Power of Classical 
Mathematical Ideas. Professor Starbird loves to see real people ¿ nd the 
intrigue and fascination that mathematics can bring. Ŷ

Professor Biography ............................................................................i
Acknowledgments ............................................................................. vi
Course Scope .....................................................................................1
iii
Table of Contents
INTRODUCTION
LECTURE GUIDES
LECTURE 1
Two Ideas, Vast Implications ..............................................................4
LECTURE 2
Stop Sign Crime—The First Idea of Calculus—The Derivative ........12
LECTURE 3
Another Car, Another Crime—
The Second Idea of Calculus—The Integral.....................................18
LECTURE 4
The Fundamental Theorem of Calculus ...........................................23
LECTURE 5
Visualizing the Derivative—Slopes ...................................................28
LECTURE 6
Derivatives the Easy Way—Symbol Pushing ...................................34
LECTURE 7
Abstracting the Derivative—Circles and Belts ..................................39
LECTURE 8
Circles, Pyramids, Cones, and Spheres ...........................................44
LECTURE 9
Archimedes and the Tractrix .............................................................48

Table of Contents
iv
LECTURE 10
The Integral and the Fundamental Theorem ....................................52
LECTURE 11
Abstracting the Integral—Pyramids and Dams.................................58
LECTURE 12
Buffon’s Needle or ʌ from Breadsticks .............................................62
LECTURE 13
Achilles, Tortoises, Limits, and Continuity ........................................67
LECTURE 14
Calculators and Approximations .......................................................72
LECTURE 15
The Best of All Possible Worlds—Optimization ................................76
LECTURE 16
Economics and Architecture .............................................................80
LECTURE 17
Galileo, Newton, and Baseball .........................................................85
LECTURE 18
Getting off the Line—Motion in Space ..............................................89
LECTURE 19
Mountain Slopes and Tangent Planes ..............................................92
LECTURE 20
Several Variables—Volumes Galore ................................................96
LECTURE 21
The Fundamental Theorem Extended ............................................100
LECTURE 22
Fields of Arrows—Differential Equations ........................................105

Table of Contents
v
LECTURE 23
Owls, Rats, Waves, and Guitars ..................................................... 111
LECTURE 24
Calculus Everywhere ......................................................................115
SUPPLEMENTAL MATERIAL
Timeline ..........................................................................................119
Glossary .........................................................................................122
Biographical Notes .........................................................................127
Bibliography ....................................................................................133

vi
Acknowledgments
I want to thank Alex Pekker for his excellent help with every aspect of 
this second edition of the calculus course. Alex collaborated with me 
substantially on the design of the whole course, on the examples and À ow 
of the individual lectures, on the design of the graphics, and on the written 
materials. Thanks also to Professor Katherine Socha for her work on the ¿ rst 
edition of this course and for her help during the post-production process 
of the second edition. Thanks to Alisha Reay, Pam Greer, Lucinda Robb, 
Noreen Nelson, and others from The Teaching Company not only for their 
excellent professional work during the production of this series of lectures 
but also for creating a supportive and enjoyable atmosphere in which to 
work. Thanks to my wife, Roberta Starbird, for her design and construction 
of several of the props. Finally, thanks to Roberta and my children, Talley 
and Bryn, for their special encouragement. Ŷ

Scope: 
1
Change and Motion: Calculus Made Clear, 2nd Edition
T
wenty-¿ ve hundred years ago, the Greek philosopher Zeno watched 
an arrow speeding toward its target and framed one of the most 
productive paradoxes in the history of human thought. He posed the 
paradox of motion: Namely, at every moment, the arrow is in only one place, 
yet it moves. This paradox evokes questions about the in¿ nite divisibility of 
position and time. Two millennia later, Zeno’s paradox was resolved with the 
invention of calculus, one of the triumphs of the human intellect.
Calculus has been one of the most inÀ uential ideas in human history. Its 
impact on our daily lives is incalculable, even with calculus. Economics, 
population growth, traf¿ c À ow, money matters, electricity, baseball, 
cosmology, and many other topics are modeled and explained using the 
ideas and the language of calculus. Calculus is also a fascinating intellectual 
adventure that allows us to see our world differently. 
The deep concepts of calculus can be understood without the technical 
background traditionally required in calculus courses. Indeed, frequently, the 
technicalities in calculus courses completely submerge the striking, salient 
insights that compose the true signi¿ cance of the subject. The concepts and 
insights at the heart of calculus are absolutely meaningful, understandable, 
and accessible to all intelligent people—regardless of the level or age of 
their previous mathematical experience. 
Calculus is the exploration of two ideas, both of which arise from a clear, 
commonsensical analysis of our everyday experience of motion: the 
derivative and the integral. After an introduction, the course begins with a 
discussion of a car driving down a road. As we discuss velocity and position, 
these two foundational concepts of calculus arise naturally, and their 
relationship to each other becomes clear and convincing. Calculus directly 
describes and deals with motion. But the ideas developed there also present 
us with a dynamic view of the world based on a clear analysis of change. 
That perspective lets us view even such static objects as circles in a dynamic 

Scope
2
way—growing by accretion of in¿ nitely thin layers. The pervasive nature of 
change makes calculus extremely widely applicable. 
The course proceeds by exploring the rich variations and applications of 
the two fundamental ideas of calculus. After the introduction in the setting 
of motion, we proceed to develop the concepts of calculus from several 
points of view. We see the ideas geometrically and graphically. We interpret 
calculus ideas in terms of familiar formulas for areas and volumes. We 
see how the ideas developed in the simple setting of a car moving in a 
straight line can be extended to apply to motion in space. Among the many 
variations of the concepts of calculus, we see how calculus describes the 
contours of mountains and other three-dimensional objects. Finally, we 
explore the use of calculus in describing the physical, biological, and even 
architectural worlds. 
One of the bases for the power of calculus lies in the fact that many questions 
in many subjects are equivalent when viewed at the appropriate level of 
abstraction. That is, the mathematical structures that one creates to study 
and model motion are identical, mathematically, to the structures that model 
phenomena from biology to economics, from traf¿ c À ow to cosmology. By 
looking at the mathematics itself, we strip away the extraneous features of 
the questions and focus on the underlying relationships and structures that 
govern the behavior of the system in question. Calculus is the mathematical 
structure that lies at the core of a world of seemingly unrelated issues. 
It is in the language of calculus that scientists describe what we know of 
physical reality and how we express that knowledge. The language of calculus 
contains its share of mathematical symbols and terminology. However, we 
will see that every calculus idea and symbol can be understood in English, 
not requiring “mathese.” We will not eschew formulas altogether, but we 
will make clear that every equation is an English sentence that has a meaning 
in English, and we will deal with that meaning in English. Indeed, one of 
the principal goals of this series of lectures is to have viewers understand 
the concepts of calculus as meaningful ideas, not as the manipulation of 
meaningless symbols.

3
Our daily experience of life at the beginning of the third millennium contrasts 
markedly with life in the 17th century. Most of the differences emerged from 
technical advances that rely on calculus. We live differently now because 
we can manipulate and control nature better than we could 300 years ago. 
That practical, predictive understanding of the physical processes of nature 
is largely enabled by the power and perspective of calculus. Calculus not 
only provides speci¿ c tools that solve practical problems, but it also entails 
an intellectual perspective on how we analyze the world. 
Calculus is all around us and is a landmark achievement of humans that can 
be enjoyed and appreciated by all. Ŷ

4
Lecture 1: Two Ideas, Vast Implications
Two Ideas, Vast Implications
Lecture 1
It will be my great pleasure to guide you on a journey through a world 
of calculus during these 24 lectures. The tour begins at our doorsteps 
and takes us to the stars. Calculus is all around us every day of 
our lives.
C
alculus is the exploration of two ideas that arise from a clear, 
commonsensical analysis of everyday experience. But explorations of 
these ideas—the derivative and the integral—help us construct the 
very foundation of what we know of physical reality and how we express that 
knowledge. Many questions in many subjects are equivalent when viewed at 
the appropriate level of abstraction. That is, the mathematical structures that 
one creates to study and model motion are identical, mathematically, to the 
structures that model aspects of economics, population growth, traf¿ c À ow, 
À uid À ow, electricity, baseball, planetary motion, and countless other topics. 
By looking at the mathematics itself, we strip away the extraneous features 
of the questions and focus on the underlying relationships and structures that 
govern and describe our world. Calculus has been one of the most effective 
conceptual tools in human history. 
Calculus is all around us. When we’re driving down a road and see where we 
are and how fast we are going … that’s calculus. When we throw a baseball 
and see where it lands … that’s calculus. When we see the planets and how 
they orbit around the Sun … that’s calculus. When we lament the decline in 
the population of the spotted owl … that’s calculus. When we analyze the 
stock market … that’s calculus.
Calculus is an idea of enormous importance and historical impact. Calculus 
has been extremely effective in allowing people to bend nature to human 
purpose. In the 20th century, calculus has also become an essential tool for 
understanding social and biological sciences: It occurs every day in the 
description of economic trends, population growth, and medical treatments. 
The physical world and how it works are described using calculus—its terms, 
its notation, its perspective. To understand the history of the last 300 years, 

5
we must understand calculus. The technological developments in recent 
centuries are the story of this time, and many of those developments depend 
on calculus. Why is calculus so effective? Because it resolves some basic 
issues associated with change and motion.  
Twenty-¿ ve hundred years ago, the philosopher Zeno pointed out the 
paradoxical nature of motion. Zeno’s paradoxes confront us with questions 
about motion. Calculus resolves these ancient conundrums. Two of Zeno’s 
paradoxes of motion involve an arrow in À ight. The ¿ rst is the arrow paradox: 
If at every moment, the arrow is at a particular point, then at every moment, it 
is at rest at a point. The second is the dichotomy paradox: To reach its target, 
an arrow must ¿ rst À y halfway, then half the remaining distance, then half 
the remaining distance, and so on, forever. 
Because it must move an in¿ nite number 
of times, it will never reach the target. 
Looking at familiar occurrences afresh 
provokes insights and questions. Zeno’s 
paradoxes have been extremely fruitful. 
Zeno’s paradoxes bring up questions about 
in¿ nity and instantaneous motion. 
In this course, we emphasize the ideas of 
calculus more than the mechanical side. 
But I must add that one of the reasons that 
calculus has been of such importance for 
these last 300 years is that it can be used in 
a mechanical way. It can be used by people 
who don’t understand it. That’s part of its 
power. Perhaps we think calculus is hard 
because the word calculus comes from the Greek word for stones (stones 
were used for reckoning in ancient times). Calculus does have a fearsome 
reputation for being very hard, and part of the goal of this course is to help 
you see calculus in a different light.
In describing his college entrance examinations in his autobiography, Sir 
Winston Churchill says, “Further dim chambers lighted by sullen, sulphurous 
¿ res were reputed to contain a dragon called the ‘Differential Calculus.’ 
In the 20th century, 
calculus has also 
become an essential 
tool for understanding 
social and biological 
sciences: It occurs 
every day in the 
description of 
economic trends, 
population growth, and 
medical treatments.

6
Lecture 1: Two Ideas, Vast Implications
But this monster was beyond the bounds appointed by the Civil Service 
Commissioners who regulated this stage of Pilgrim’s heavy journey.” We 
will attempt to douse the dragon’s fearsome ¿ res. 
Another reason calculus is considered so forbidding is the size of calculus 
textbooks. To students, a calculus book has 1,200 different pages. But to a 
professor, it has two ideas and lots of examples, applications, and variations.
Fortunately, the two fundamental ideas of calculus, called the derivative and 
the integral, come from everyday observations.  Calculus does not require 
complicated notation or vocabulary. It can be understood in English. We 
will describe and de¿ ne simply and understandably those two fundamental 
ideas in Lectures 2 and 3. Both ideas will come about from analyzing a 
car moving down a straight road and just thinking very clearly about that 
scenario. The viewer is not expected to have any sense whatsoever of the 
meanings of these ideas now. In fact, I hope these technical terms inspire, 
if anything, only a foreboding sense of impending terror. That sense will 
make the discovery that these ideas are commonsensical and even joyful, 
instead of terrifying, all the sweeter. The derivative deals with how fast 
things are changing (instantaneous change). The integral provides a dynamic 
view of the static world, showing ¿ xed objects growing by accretion (the 
accumulation of small pieces). We can even view apparently static things 
dynamically. For example, we can view the area of a square or the volume of 
a cube dynamically by thinking of it as growing rather than just being at its 
¿ nal size. The derivative and the integral are connected by the Fundamental 
Theorem of Calculus, which we will discuss in Lecture 4. Both of the 
fundamental ideas of calculus arise from a straightforward discussion of a 
car driving down a road, but both are applicable in many other settings.
The history of calculus spans two and a half millennia. Pythagoras invented 
the Pythagorean Theorem in the 6th century B.C., and as we know, Zeno 
posed his paradoxes of motion in the 5th century B.C. In the 4th century B.C., 
Eudoxus developed the method of exhaustion, similar to the integral, to 
study volumes of objects. In about 300 B.C., Euclid invented the axiomatic 
method of geometry. In 225 B.C., Archimedes used calculus-like methods 
to ¿ nd areas and volumes of geometric objects. For many centuries, other 
mathematicians developed ideas that were important prerequisites for the 

7
full development of calculus.  In around 1600, Johannes Kepler and Galileo 
Galilei worked making mathematical formulas that described planetary 
motion. In 1629, Pierre de Fermat developed methods for ¿ nding maxima
of values, a precursor to the idea of the derivative. In the 1630s, Bonaventura 
Cavalieri developed the “Method of Indivisibles,” and later, René Descartes
established the Cartesian Coordinate System, a connection between algebra 
and geometry. The two mathematicians whose names are associated with 
the invention or discovery of calculus are Isaac Newton and Gottfried 
Wilhelm von Leibniz. They independently developed calculus in the 1660s 
and 1670s.
From the time of the invention of calculus, other people contributed 
variations on the idea and developed applications of calculus in many areas 
of life. Johann and Jakob Bernoulli were two of eight Bernoullis who were 
involved in developing calculus. Leonhard Euler developed extensions of 
calculus, especially in¿ nite series. 
Joseph 
Louis 
Lagrange 
worked 
on calculus variations, and Pierre 
Simon de Laplace worked on partial 
differential equations and applied 
calculus to probability theory. Jean 
Baptiste Joseph Fourier invented 
ways to approximate certain kinds of 
dependencies, and Augustin Louis 
Cauchy developed ideas about in¿ nite 
series and tried to formalize the idea of 
limit. In the 1800s, Georg Friedrich 
Bernhard Riemann developed the 
modern de¿ nition of the integral, one 
of the two ideas of calculus.  In the 
middle of the 1850s—about 185 years after Newton and Leibniz invented 
calculus—Karl Weierstrass formulated the rigorous de¿ nition of limit that 
we know today. 
Here is an overview of the lectures. In Lectures 2, 3, and 4, we will introduce 
the basic ideas of calculus in the context of a moving car and discuss the 
connection between those ideas. Then, we have a series of lectures describing 
partial differential equation: 
An equation involving a function 
of several variables and its partial 
derivatives. 
probability: The quantitative 
study of uncertainty.
limit: The result of an in¿ nite 
process that converges to a single 
answer. Example: the sequence 
of numbers 
1 1 1 1
1,
,
,
,
,...
2 3 4 5
converges to the number 0. 

8
Lecture 1: Two Ideas, Vast Implications
the meaning of the derivative graphically, algebraically, and in many 
applications. Following that, we have a similar series of lectures showing the 
integral from graphical, algebraic, and application points of view. The last 
half of the course demonstrates the richness of these two ideas by showing 
examples of their extensions, variations, and applications. 
The purpose of these lectures is to explain clearly the concepts of calculus 
and to convince the viewer that calculus can be understood from simple 
scenarios. Calculus is so effective because it deals with change and motion 
and allows us to view our world as dynamic rather than static. Calculus 
provides a tool for measuring change, whether it is change in position, 
change in temperature, change in demand, or change in population. Calculus 
is intrinsically intriguing and beautiful, as well as important. Calculus is a 
crowning intellectual achievement of humanity that all intelligent people can 
appreciate, understand, and enjoy. Ŷ
Cauchy, Augustin Louis (1789–1857). Proli¿ c French mathematician 
and engineer. He was professor in the Ecole Polytechnique and professor 
of mathematical physics at Turin. He worked in number theory, algebra, 
astronomy, mechanics, optics, and elasticity theory and made great 
contributions to analysis (particularly the study of in¿ nite series and of 
complex variable theory) and the calculus of variations. He improved the 
foundations of calculus by re¿ ning the de¿ nitions of limit and continuity.
Descartes, René (1596–1650). French mathematician and philosopher. He 
served in various military campaigns and tutored Princess Elizabeth (daughter 
of Frederick V) and Queen Christina of Sweden. Descartes developed 
crucial theoretical links between algebra and geometry and his own method 
of constructing tangents to curves. He made substantial contributions to the 
development of analytic geometry.
Fermat, Pierre de (1601–1665). French lawyer and judge in Toulouse; 
enormously talented amateur mathematician. Fermat worked in number 
theory, geometry, analysis, and algebra and was the ¿ rst developer of analytic 
geometry, including the discovery of equations of lines, circles, ellipses, 
    Names to Know

9
parabolas, and hyperbolas. He wrote Introduction to Plane and Solid Loci
and formulated the famed Fermat’s Last Theorem as a note in the margin 
of his copy of Bachet’s Diophantus. He developed a procedure for ¿ nding 
maxima and minima of functions through in¿ nitesimal analysis, essentially 
by the limit de¿ nition of derivative, and applied this technique to many 
problems, including analyzing the refraction of light.
Fourier, Jean Baptiste Joseph (1768–1830). French mathematical physicist 
and professor in the Ecole Polytechnique. Fourier accompanied Napoleon on 
his campaign to Egypt, was appointed secretary of Napoleon’s Institute of 
Egypt, and served as prefect of Grenoble. He carried out extensive studies in 
heat propagation, which form the foundation of modern partial differential 
equations with boundary conditions. He developed the Fourier Series, 
which represents functions by in¿ nite (trigonometric) series.
Riemann, 
Georg 
Friedrich 
Bernhard 
(1826–1866). 
German 
mathematician; professor of mathematics at Göttingen. He made great 
contributions to analysis, geometry, and number theory and both extended 
the theory of representing a function by its Fourier series and established 
the foundations of complex variable theory. Riemann developed the concept 
and theory of the Riemann integral (as taught in standard college calculus 
courses) and pioneered the study of the theory of functions of a real variable. 
He gave the most famous job talk in the history of mathematics, in which he 
provided a mathematical generalization of all known geometries, a ¿ eld now 
called Riemannian geometry. 
derivative: Mathematical description of (instantaneous) rate of change of 
a function. Characterized geometrically as the slope of the tangent line to 
the graph of the function. The derivative of a function f(x) is written f ƍ(x) or 
( ( ))
d
f x
dx
and is formally de¿ ned as 
0
(
)
( )
lim
x
f x
x
f x
x
' o
 '

'
.
exhaustion (the Greek method of exhaustion): A geometric technique by 
which formulas for areas of different shapes could be veri¿ ed through ¿ ner 
and ¿ ner approximations.
    Important Terms

10
Lecture 1: Two Ideas, Vast Implications
Fourier Series: An in¿ nite series of sines and cosines, typically used to 
approximate a function.
Fundamental Theorem of Calculus: The most important theorem in 
calculus. Demonstrates the reciprocal relationship between the derivative 
and the integral.
in¿ nite series (also called an in¿ nite sum): The sum of an in¿ nite collection 
of numbers. Such a series can sum to a ¿ nite number or “diverge to in¿ nity”; 
for example, 1
1
1
1
...
2
4
8
16




sums to 1, but 
1
1
1
1
...
2
3
4




 does not 
sum to a ¿ nite number.
integral: Denoted 
( )
b
a v t dt
³
. If we think of function v(t) as measuring the 
velocity of a moving car at each time t, then the integral is a number that is 
equal to the distance traveled, because the integral is obtained by dividing 
the time from to b into small increments and approximating the distance 
traveled by assuming that the car went at a steady speed during each of 
those small increments of time. By taking increasingly smaller increments of 
time, approximations converge to a single answer, the integral. This sounds 
complicated, but the naturality of it is the topic of Lecture 3. The integral is 
also equal to the area under the graph of v(t) and above the t-axis. The integral 
is related to the derivative (as an inverse procedure) via the Fundamental 
Theorem of Calculus. 
parabola: A conic section de¿ ned as the set of all points equidistant between 
a point and a line. 
paradox: Two compelling arguments about the same situation that lead to 
two opposite views. Zeno’s paradoxes of motion give logical reasons why 
motion cannot occur. On the other hand, we experience motion. The opposite 
conclusions deduced from Zeno’s logic versus our experience compose 
the paradox. 

11
Any standard calculus textbook.
Cajori, Florian. “History of Zeno’s Arguments on Motion,” The American 
Mathematical Monthly, Vol. 22, Nos. 1–9 (1915).
Churchill, Winston Spencer. My Early Life: A Roving Commission.
1. Find things or ideas in your world that you usually view as complete 
and ¿ xed and think about them dynamically. That is, view their current 
state as the result of a growing or changing process. 
2. Explore the idea of function by describing dependent relationships 
between varying quantities that you see in everyday life. For example, 
in what way is the amount of money in a savings account dependent 
on interest rate and time? Or, for a less quantitative example, how is 
happiness a function of intellectual stimulation, exercise, rest, and 
other variables?
3. Think of a scenario from your daily life that interests you. Keep it in 
mind as you progress through the lectures—can calculus be applied to 
understand and analyze it?
    Suggested Reading
    Questions to Consider

12
Lecture 2: Stop Sign Crime—The First Idea of Calculus—The Derivative
Stop Sign Crime—
The First Idea of Calculus—The Derivative
Lecture 2
In this lecture, the word for the day is derivative. Today the whole 
purpose of this lecture is to introduce the idea of derivative and to 
explain what it means.
C
hange is a fundamental feature of our world: temperature, pressure, 
the stock market, the population—all change. But the most basic 
example of change is motion—a change in position with respect 
to time. We will start with a simple example of motion as our vehicle for 
developing an effective way to analyze change. Speci¿ cally, suppose we run 
a stop sign, but in preparation for potential citations, we have a camera take 
a picture of our car neatly lined up with the stop sign at the exact instant that 
we were there. We show this photograph to the of¿ cer and ask to have the 
ticket dismissed, presenting the photograph as evidence. The of¿ cer responds 
by analyzing our motion in a persuasive way that illustrates the ¿ rst of the 
two fundamental ideas of calculus—the derivative. We get the ticket but can 
take some solace in resolving one of Zeno’s paradoxes.
Calculus has two fundamental ideas (called the derivative and the integral)—
one centered on a method for analyzing change; the other, on a method of 
combining pieces to get the whole. Both of the fundamental concepts of 
calculus arise from analyzing simple situations, such as a car moving down a 
straight road. This lecture presents an everyday scenario that leads to one of 
the two ideas of calculus—the derivative. 
The following stop-sign scenario is a modern-day enactment of one of 
Zeno’s paradoxes of motion. Let us suppose we have a car driving on a road, 
and there is a mileage marker at every point along the road. Such a simple 
scenario can be represented in a graph. The horizontal axis is the time axis. 
The vertical axis tells us the position of the car at each moment of time. For 
the sake of arithmetic simplicity, we will talk about measuring the velocity
(speed) of the car in miles per minute. Therefore, the vertical axis of our 
graph is in miles and the horizontal axis is in minutes.

13
Suppose Zeno is driving this car, and he goes through a stop sign without 
slowing down. Soon thereafter, he is pulled over by Of¿ cers Newton and 
Leibniz. (The corny names will make memorable how the roles in this 
drama relate to Zeno’s paradox and the invention of calculus.) The driver, 
Zeno, protests by showing a still picture of his car exactly at the stop sign at 
the exact moment, 1 minute after the hour, when he is supposed to have been 
running the stop sign. On this street, time is measured by stating the minutes 
only.  Zeno claims that there could be no violation because the car was in 
one place at that moment.  
Of¿ cers Newton and Leibniz produce additional evidence. The of¿ cers 
produce a still photo of the car at 2 minutes after the hour clearly showing 
the car 1 mile beyond the stop sign. Zeno argues, “So what? At 1 minute, I 
was stopped at the stop sign.” Newton: “But you must admit your average 
velocity between 1 and 2 minutes was 1 mile per minute.” To compute the 
average velocity during any interval of time, you need to know the position 
of the car at the beginning, the position at the end, and the amount of time that 
passed. The average velocity is change in position 
divided by change in time, that is, how far you 
went divided by how long it took. The average 
velocity does not rely on what happened between 
those two moments—just on where the car is at 
the beginning and at the end. Again, Zeno says, 
“So what?” Of¿ cers Newton and Leibniz produce 
an in¿ nite amount of additional evidence, all 
incriminating. They note that Zeno was at the 1.1 
mile marker at 1.1 minute, at the 1.01 mile marker 
at 1.01 minute, and so on, all of it proving that 
Zeno’s velocity was 1 mile per minute. The idea of instantaneous velocity 
is the result of an in¿ nite amount of data.  All the evidence is that, on every 
even incredibly tiny interval of time, the average velocity was 1 mile per 
minute. The cumulative effect of all the evidence—an in¿ nite number of 
intervals—leads to the idea of instantaneous velocity. 
Knowing the position of a car at every moment allows us to compute the 
velocity at every moment. This can be illustrated with a car whose velocity 
is increasing. Let’s now consider the example where at every time, measured 
“Motion is the 
ful¿ llment of what 
exists potentially 
insofar as it 
exists potentially.”
—Aristotle

14
Lecture 2: Stop Sign Crime—The First Idea of Calculus—The Derivative
in minutes and denoted by the letter t, we are at mileage marker t2 miles. 
For example, at time 1, the car is at position 1, but at time 2, it is at position 
4 (22), and at time 0.5, it is at position 0.25 (0.52). If 
we know where the car is at every time during an 
hour, we can tell how fast it was going at any selected 
moment by doing the in¿ nite process of ¿ nding 
instantaneous velocity. 
Let’s apply that in¿ nite process to this moving car at 
several different times t. First, if time t = 2 minutes, 
the position of the car is 22 = 4. Then, if time t = 1 
minute, the position of the car is 12 = 1. Subtracting 
1 from 4 and dividing by 1 minute, we have 3 miles 
per minute. In other words, by looking at where the car was 1 minute after 
the 1-minute mark, we ¿ nd that the average velocity was 3 miles per minute. 
However, when we look at shorter intervals of time, we get a different story, 
as shown in the chart below. We will ¿ nd the positions of the car at various 
nearby times, such as 1.1, 1.01, 1.001, and 0.99 minutes, and compute our 
average velocity between time 1 and those times. 
The whole collection of average velocities leads us to conclude that the 
instantaneous velocity is 2 miles per minute. This process of taking smaller 
and smaller intervals of time to arrive at the instantaneous velocity is called 
a limit; the instantaneous velocity is the limit of the average velocities as the 
intervals of time get smaller and smaller. The in¿ nite process used to ¿ nd the 
velocity at each time is the derivative. The derivative gives the instantaneous 
Position: p(t) = t2
Initial Time
Final Time
Average Velocity 
(mi/min)
1
2
3
1
1.1
2.1
1
1.01
2.01
1
1.001
2.001
0.999
1
1.999
Instantaneous velocity at t = 1 is 2 mi/min
The idea of 
instantaneous 
velocity is the 
result of an 
in¿ nite amount 
of data.

15
velocity at any given moment using this in¿ nite process, if we know the 
position of the car at each moment. 
If we look at the same question for other times, 0.7 minutes, for example, we 
have the following results: 
If we look at the same question for other times, such as 1.4, 2, or 3 minutes, 
we have similar results for the instantaneous velocity.  
We have been computing instantaneous velocities at various times for a 
car that is moving in such a manner that at every time t minutes, the car 
is at mileage marker t2 miles. If we 
look at a chart of all our examples 
of instantaneous velocity, we see a 
pattern that indicates that at every 
time t, the velocity is 2t miles 
per minute.
The ¿ rst idea of calculus, the 
derivative, quanti¿ es the idea of 
instantaneous velocity. We have 
taken a simple, everyday scenario (a 
moving car) and developed a simple, 
though in¿ nite, process that made sense of the intuitive idea of motion or 
velocity at an instant. We now have an equation that tells us the instantaneous 
velocity at each moment of time. 
Position: p(t) = t2
Time 
(min)
Instantaneous 
Velocity 
(mi/min)
0.7
1.4
1
2
1.4
2.8
2
4
3
6
Instantaneous velocity: v(t) = 2t
Position: p(t) = t2
Initial Time
Final Time
Average Velocity 
(mi/min)
0.7
1.7
2.4
0.7
0.8
1.5
0.7
0.71
1.41
0.7
0.701
1.401
0.699
0.7
1.399
Instantaneous velocity at t = 0.7 is 1.4 mi/min

16
Lecture 2: Stop Sign Crime—The First Idea of Calculus—The Derivative
The derivative of a function p(t) at time t is obtained by computing 
(
)
( )
p t
t
p t
t
 '

'
, where ¨t is a small increment of time, and then seeing what 
number those values approach as ǻt becomes increasingly small. The single 
number to which those values approach is called the limit: 
(
)
( )
p t
t
p t
t
 '

'
as ǻt approaches 0. Ŷ
Leibniz, Gottfried Wilhelm von (1646–1716). German diplomat, logician, 
politician, philosopher, linguist, and mathematician; president of the Berlin 
Academy. Leibniz is regarded, with Newton, as a co-inventor of calculus. 
He was the ¿ rst to publish a theory of calculus. Leibniz’s notation is used 
currently. He made substantial contributions to formal logic, leading to the 
establishment of symbolic logic as a ¿ eld of study. He discovered an in¿ nite 
series formula for 4
S . He was accused of plagiarism by British partisans of 
Newton, and his supporters counterclaimed that Newton was the plagiarist. 
Now, he is acknowledged to have independently discovered calculus.
Newton, Sir Isaac (1642–1727). Great English mathematician and scientist; 
Lucasian professor of mathematics at Cambridge. Newton was the ¿ rst 
discoverer of differential and integral calculus. He formulated the law of 
universal gravitation and his three laws of motion, upon which classical 
physics is based. In 1687, he published his results in Philosophiae Naturalis 
Principia Mathematica. He formulated the theory of colors (in optics) and 
proved the binomial theorem. He is possibly the greatest genius of all time. 
Newton was a Member of Parliament (Cambridge), long-time president of 
the Royal Society, and Master of the Mint. The controversy with Leibniz over 
attribution of the discovery of calculus poisoned relations between British 
and Continental scientists, leading to the isolation of British mathematicians 
for much of the 18th century. 
    Names to Know

17
Zeno of Elea (c. 495–430 B.C.). Ancient Greek dialectician and logician. He 
is noted for his four paradoxes of motion. He was a student of Parmenides, 
whose school of philosophy rivaled that of the Pythagoreans.
function: Mathematical description of dependency. A rule or correspondence 
that provides exactly one output value for each input value. Often written 
algebraically as f(x) = formula involving x (for example, f(x) = x2).
graph: A geometric representation of a function, showing correspondences 
via pairs of points (input, output) drawn on a standard Cartesian (x-y) plane.
velocity: Average velocity is total distance divided by the time it took to 
traverse that distance; units are length/time (for example, miles per hour). 
Instantaneous velocity is the speed at one moment of time, approximated by 
average velocity for smaller and smaller time intervals; units are also length/
time. The instantaneous velocity is the derivative of the position function for 
a moving object.
Any standard calculus textbook, section introducing the derivative.
1. Suppose a rocket is traveling along a road, and at each time t minutes its 
position is t3 miles from where it started. Use the derivative process (and 
a calculator) to guess the instantaneous velocity of the rocket at various 
times, such as 1 minute, 2 minutes, and 3 minutes after starting. 
2. Would it make sense to view position and time as discrete quantities 
having a little width to them? Then, a moving object could pause for an 
instant of time at one “point” before moving on. Zeno’s fourth paradox 
of motion treats this situation when he considers three objects on parallel 
tracks, one moving right, one moving left, and one ¿ xed. The relative 
velocities of these moving objects present a challenge. What is it? 
    Important Terms
    Suggested Reading
Questions to Consider

18
Lecture 3: Another Car, Another Crime—The Second Idea of Calculus—The Integral
Another Car, Another Crime—
The Second Idea of Calculus—The Integral
Lecture 3
In this lecture, we’re going to introduce the second fundamental idea of 
calculus, that is, the integral. And, once again, it’s going to involve an 
in¿ nite process, and it’s going to involve a process that comes about as 
a natural result of analyzing a situation once again of a vehicle moving 
along the road.
T
he second idea of calculus helps us understand how to take information 
about tiny parts of a problem and combine this information to 
construct the whole answer. To develop this idea, we return to the 
scenario of a moving car. In preparation, we take our car out to a straight 
road, say to El Paso. We then videotape only the speedometer as the car 
moves. We show some friends the video of the speedometer and ask them to 
predict where we were at the end of an hour. The process by which they use 
information about velocity to compute the exact location of the car at the end 
of the hour is the second of the ideas of calculus—the integral. 
In the last lecture, we introduced the derivative—the ¿ rst of the two basic 
ideas of calculus. The derivative allowed us to settle one of Zeno’s paradoxes 
of motion because it told us what we mean by the instantaneous velocity of a 
moving car or arrow. Note that we did not fall into the trap of trying to divide 
0 by 0 to get the velocity at an instant.
The second fundamental idea of calculus arises from a scenario involving 
another car and another crime. In this scenario, you are kidnapped, tied up 
in the back of the car, and driven off on a straight road. You cannot see out 
of the car, but fortunately, you can see the speedometer, and you have a 
video camera to take time-stamped pictures of the speedometer. (There is 
no odometer in sight.) After 1 hour, you are dumped on the side of the road. 
How far have you gone? 
What information can we extract from the videotape? Let’s take a simple 
case: The car was going at a constant velocity. At a constant velocity, 

19
computing how far we have gone in a given amount of time is easy. For 
example, if we go 1 mile per minute for 60 minutes, we will have gone 60 
miles during that hour. If we go 2 miles per minute for 20 minutes, we will 
have traveled 2 × 20, or 40 miles. On a graph, this constant velocity would 
appear as a horizontal line. 
Let’s take a harder case: Suppose our velocity changes. How do we compute 
the distance traveled? Let’s look at examples where our velocity is steady 
for some time, then abruptly changes to another velocity, and so on. Suppose 
we travel at: 1 mile per minute between times 0 and 10 minutes, 2 miles per 
minute for the time between 10 and 20 minutes, 3 miles per minute for the 
time between 20 and 30 minutes, 4 miles per minute for the time between 30 
and 40 minutes, 5 miles per minute for the time between 40 and 50 minutes, 
and 6 miles per minute for the time between 50 and 60 minutes. On a graph, 
this changing velocity would appear as “stair steps” going up. Our total 
distance traveled will be: (1 × 10) + (2 × 10) 
+ (3 × 10) + (4 × 10) + (5 × 10) + (6 × 10) 
miles; that is, 210 miles. (We were speeding.) 
We now know the process of computing the 
total distance traveled if we know the velocity 
at each time and the velocities are steady at 
one velocity for a while, then jump to another 
velocity and so on throughout the whole hour. 
We know, however, that velocities do not 
jump like this and, instead, increase smoothly 
from one velocity to another. Dealing with 
variable velocities involves doing a little at a 
time and adding them up. Our strategy is ¿ rst 
to underestimate the distance traveled, then to overestimate the distance 
traveled, then to determine that the distance traveled is somewhere between 
these two. Let’s consider a car that is moving at each time t at velocity 2t 
miles per minute. That is, at 1 minute, we are traveling at a speed of 2 miles 
per minute; at 2 minutes, we are traveling at 4 miles per minute; and so forth. 
Because our car is going so fast, let’s just see how far it goes during the ¿ rst 3 
minutes of travel.  In order to discover the distance covered, we will compare 
our car traveling smoothly at an increasingly higher velocity to a second car 
Our strategy is ¿ rst 
to underestimate the 
distance traveled, 
then to overestimate 
the distance traveled, 
then to determine that 
the distance traveled 
is somewhere 
between these two.

20
Lecture 3: Another Car, Another Crime—The Second Idea of Calculus—The Integral
that is moving in the “jerky” or “jumpy” fashion we have seen above. We 
will also break the 3 minutes into smaller intervals of time, for example, 
half-minute intervals. We then add up approximations of the distances 
traveled by the second “jerky” car during each short interval to approximate 
the total distance traveled. During each short interval of one-half minute, 
the car changed velocities. But if we assumed that the second “jerky” car 
continued at a steady velocity equal to the initial lower velocity during each 
little interval of time, we would get an approximation of the total distance 
traveled during that interval (7.5 miles). Because our car is always speeding 
up, the distance traveled by the second, “jerky” car will be an underestimate 
of the total distance our car traveled. Similarly, if we assumed that the second 
car went at a steady velocity equal to the fastest velocity our car actually 
went during each little interval of time, we would get an approximation to 
the total distance traveled during that 3-minute interval (10.5 miles). This 
approximation to the total distance traveled would be an overestimate. The 
correct answer would have to be somewhere between those two estimates.
The smaller the intervals, the more accurate will be the approximation to 
the distance traveled. Let’s try breaking the time into intervals 1/10th of a 
minute long. Once again, we can get an underestimate (8.7 miles) and an 
overestimate (9.3 miles). Notice that these over- and underestimates are 
closer to each other than before. As the intervals get smaller, it doesn’t matter 
what velocity we select from the range of velocities of the car in the intervals, 
because the car doesn’t change velocity much in the tiny intervals. Using 
increasingly smaller intervals produces increasingly better approximations. 
The exact distance traveled can’t be found with any single division of the 
interval of time. The exact answer is obtained by looking at in¿ nitely many 
increasingly improved approximations. The ¿ ner approximations get closer 
and closer to a single value—the limit of the approximations. This in¿ nite 
process is the second fundamental idea of calculus—the integral. If we know 
the velocity of a car at every moment in a given interval of time, the integral 
tells us how far the car traveled during that interval. Remember that the 
derivative was the limit of the average velocities as the intervals got smaller 
and smaller; likewise, the integral is the limit of the approximations as the 
intervals get smaller and smaller.

21
We can use the same analysis to ¿ nd out where we were at any moment. In 
the example above where the speedometer always reads 2t, where are we 
after 1 minute, 2 minutes, 2.5 minutes, 3 minutes? In each case, we will 
use this in¿ nite procedure 
to see how far we traveled 
from time 0 to these times. 
Let’s look at the table and 
see if there is a pattern. 
We can make a shrewd 
guess as to where we were 
after any time t: Namely, it 
appears that we are at the t2 
mileage marker. Distance 
traveled is, thus, the square 
of the time interval taken, or p(t) = t2. The integral can be used to ¿ nd the 
position of a moving car at each moment, if we know the velocity at each 
moment. The integral process involves dividing the interval of time into 
small increments, seeing how far the car would have traveled if it had gone 
at a steady velocity during each small interval of time, and then adding up 
those distances to approximate the total distance traveled. Therefore, the 
formula to determine the distance traveled between time a and time b is: 
(v(a) × ¨t) + (v(a+¨t) × ¨t) + (v(a+2¨t) × ¨t) +  … + (v(b – ¨t) × ¨t, as ¨t 
becomes increasingly smaller. By taking smaller and smaller subdivisions 
and taking a limit, we arrive at the actual value of the integral. Ŷ
variable: The independent quantity in a functional relationship. For example, 
if position is a function of time, time is the variable.
Any standard calculus textbook, the section introducing the de¿ nite integral.
Instantaneous velocity: v(t) = 2t 
Time (min)
Distance
0.5
0.25
1
1
1.5
2.25
2
4
3
9
Position: p(t) = t2
    Important Term
    Suggested Reading

22
Lecture 3: Another Car, Another Crime—The Second Idea of Calculus—The Integral
1. Suppose the speedometer on your rocket ship reads exactly 3t2 miles per 
minute at each time t minutes. Use the integral process to compute how 
far you will have traveled after 1 minute, 2 minutes, 3 minutes. Do you 
see an expression in t that gives the same answer?
2. Suppose your velocity is always 2t miles per minute at each time 
t minutes. How ¿ ne must your divisions of the interval of time be 
between time 0 and time 3 in order to be certain that your summation in 
the integral process is de¿ nitely within 1 mile of the correct answer? 
    Questions to Consider

23
The Fundamental Theorem of Calculus 
Lecture 4
You can’t take a derivative by just doing one thing and you can’t take 
an integral by just doing one thing; they’re both doing in¿ nitely many 
things, dividing the time integral into ¿ ner and ¿ ner bits in order to 
get better approximations, and then taking a limit to get an actual 
one answer.
T
he Fundamental Theorem of Calculus makes the connection between 
the two processes discussed in the previous two lectures, the 
derivative and the integral. Again, this theorem can be deduced by 
examining the generative scenario of the moving car. The derivative and the 
integral involve somewhat complicated procedures that appear unrelated 
if viewed in the abstract; however, they accomplish opposite goals—one 
goes from position to velocity, the other goes from velocity to position. The 
duality between the derivative and integral is exactly what the Fundamental 
Theorem of Calculus captures. This convergence of ideas underscores the 
power of abstraction, one of the global themes of this series of lectures.
The two fundamental ideas of calculus, namely, the methods for (1) ¿ nding 
velocity from position (the derivative) and (2) ¿ nding distance traveled 
from velocity (the integral), involve common themes. Both involve in¿ nite 
processes. Both processes involve examining a situation with increasingly 
¿ ner time intervals. Both processes involve deducing a single answer from 
the whole in¿ nite collection of increasingly accurate approximations.
We looked at the same situation—a car moving on a straight road—from 
two points of view. Knowing where we were at every moment, we deduced 
our velocity at every moment—the derivative. Knowing our velocity at 
every moment and where we started, we deduced where we were at every 
moment—the integral. The two processes are two sides of the same coin. 
Understanding implications of this relationship between these two processes 
is the fundamental insight of calculus. Indeed, it is known as the Fundamental 
Theorem of Calculus. 

24
Lecture 4: The Fundamental Theorem of Calculus 
Speci¿ cally, suppose we are given a velocity function; that is, we are told 
how fast we are traveling at every instant between two times. We can ¿ nd the 
distance traveled in a given time interval in two ways. First, we can compute 
the integral (by dividing the time interval into little pieces and adding up 
distance traveled over the little pieces). Second, if we know a position 
function whose derivative is the given velocity function, we can simply 
use the position function to tell us where we are at the end and where we 
were at the beginning, and then subtract the two locations to see how far 
we went. Method 2 is a lot quicker. It does not involve an in¿ nite number 
of approximations as the integral does. These two ways of computing the 
distance traveled give the same answer. That’s what makes the Fundamental 
Theorem of Calculus so insightful—it gives an alternative method for ¿ nding 
a value that would be hard or impossible or, at best, tedious to get, even with 
a computer.
The moving-car scenario presents a situation to analyze the Fundamental 
Theorem. Let’s do so where the position function is 
2
( )
p t
t
 
, and the 
velocity function is 
( )
2
v t
t
 
. We can ¿ nd the distance traveled from 
time 1 to time 2 via the integral. Remember all the sums involved: 
(v(1) × ¨t) + (v(1+¨t) × ¨t) + (v(1+2¨t) × ¨t) +  … + (v(2 – ¨t) × ¨t, 
as ¨t becomes increasingly smaller. Then we can ¿ nd the distance traveled 
knowing that 
2
( )
p t
t
 
 by subtraction. Because 
(2)
4
p
 
and
(1)
1
p
 , the 
car traveled 3 miles. We can consider other pairs of time values. The summing 
process of the integral will always yield the same result as just subtracting the 
positions, because all these processes are referring to the same scenario of a 
moving car. 
Suppose someone told us that the velocity of a car moving on a straight road 
at each moment t was ( )
2
v t
t
 
 but didn’t tell us the position function and 
asked for the distance traveled in the ¿ rst 3 minutes. We could either add 
up pieces via the integral process or we could ¿ nd the position function 
and subtract. The fact that both processes yield the same answer is the 
importance of the Fundamental Theorem of Calculus. The process of the 
integral (summing up pieces) tells us that the answer is what we want to 
know. That process refers directly to the commonsensical way of ¿ nding the 
distance traveled given the velocity. If we can ¿ nd a position function, it is 
much easier to just subtract.

25
The fundamental insight relates the derivative and the integral. The process 
of ¿ nding instantaneous velocity from position is the inverse of the process 
of ¿ nding position from velocity. We have two ways that give the same 
answer to the question of how far we have gone given the velocity that we 
have been traveling. One is by the in¿ nite process of adding up (the integral). 
One is by ¿ nding a function whose derivative is the velocity function (thus, 
it is a position function) and subtracting. The insight is that both processes 
give the same result. From an arithmetic point of view, the Fundamental 
Theorem notes that the process of subtraction and division that is at the 
heart of the derivative is the opposite of the 
process of multiplication and addition, which 
is at the heart of the integral. This insight has 
many other applications, which we will see in 
future lectures.
The 
development 
of 
calculus 
was 
an 
incremental process, as we saw when we 
spoke of mathematicians before Newton and 
Leibniz. Newton and Leibniz systematized 
taking derivatives and integrals and showed the 
connections between them. The development 
of calculus, however, was involved in considerable controversy. One type 
of controversy concerned who should get the credit for calculus, Newton or 
Leibniz. The second type of controversy concerned the validity of the ideas 
underlying calculus, particularly the tricky business involved in taking limits. 
Let’s take a few minutes to talk a bit about each of these controversies. 
Supporters of Newton and Leibniz had a lively and acrimonious controversy 
about who developed calculus ¿ rst. Newton was quite averse to controversy, 
and this aversion made him reluctant to publish his work. Newton developed 
the ideas of calculus during the plague years of 1665–1666 when Cambridge 
was closed, but he did not publish those results for many years, in fact, not 
until 1704, 1711, and posthumously, in 1736. He did, however, circulate 
his ideas to friends and acquaintances in the 1660s. Leibniz was the ¿ rst to 
publish his results on calculus. He conceived the ideas in 1674 and published 
them in 1684. In 1676, Newton learned that Leibniz had developed calculus-
like ideas. Newton staked a claim on his priority in the invention of calculus 
Supporters of 
Newton and Leibniz 
had a lively and 
acrimonious 
controversy about 
who developed 
calculus ¿ rst.

26
Lecture 4: The Fundamental Theorem of Calculus 
by writing a letter to Leibniz. In this letter, Newton indicated his previous 
knowledge of calculus by writing an anagram. 
The anagram consisted of taking all the letters from the words of a Latin 
sentence, counting them, and putting all the letters in alphabetical order, 
as follows: “6a cc d æ 13e ff 7i 3l 9n 4o 4q rr 4s 9t 12v x.” The sentence 
was, “Data æquatione quotcunque À uentes quantitates involvente À uxiones 
invenire, et vice versa.” This means, “Having any given equation involving 
never so many À owing quantities, to ¿ nd the À uxions, and vice versa.” Even 
the English version is not much of a hint of calculus. Some British supporters 
of Newton felt that Leibniz got the 
idea of calculus from Newton’s 
manuscript during a visit that Leibniz 
made to England in 1674. Newton’s 
supporters hinted at foul play in 
1699. Modern historians believe that 
Newton and Leibniz independently 
developed their ideas. In any case, the 
controversy led to a downhill trend in 
relationships between the supporters 
of the two men. The controversy had 
a bad effect on British mathematics 
for a long time. 
The other controversy associated 
with calculus involved its validity. 
One thing that we have to understand 
is that, at the time of Leibniz and 
Newton, ideas that we consider absolutely fundamental to even starting to 
think about calculus today simply did not exist at all, for example, the idea of 
function. Most vague, though, was the idea of the limit. Neither Leibniz nor 
Newton had ¿ rm ideas of the limit. The concept of the limit was not resolved 
until the mid-1800s. Ŷ
Newton, on limits
B
ut the answer is easy, for 
by the ultimate velocity is 
meant that with which the body 
is moved neither before it arrives 
at its last place, when the motion 
ceases, nor after, but at the very 
instant when it arrives. And, 
in like manner, by the ultimate 
ratio of evanescent quantities, 
is to be understood the ratio of 
the quantities not before they 
vanish, nor after, but that with 
which they vanish. 

27
Any standard calculus textbook, section on the Fundamental Theorem 
of Calculus.
Boyer, Carl B. The History of the Calculus and Its Conceptual 
Development.
1. The derivative of the position function 
4
( )
p t
t
 
 yields a velocity 
function 
3
( )
4
v t
t
 
. Given that fact, use the Fundamental Theorem of 
Calculus to compute the distance a moving object will have traveled 
between time 0 and time 2 if its velocity at each time t  is 
3
4t . If you 
like, you can check your answer by using the de¿ nition of the integral to 
compute the distance traveled.
2. We are here at one moment and there at another time. Thus, we know 
how far we traveled. Now let’s look at this scenario dynamically, 
namely, how did we get there? Explain how the Fundamental Theorem 
of Calculus shows the connection between the dynamic and static views 
of the world. 
    Suggested Reading
    Questions to Consider

28
Lecture 5: Visualizing the Derivative—Slopes
Visualizing the Derivative—Slopes
Lecture 5
[T]oday, what we’re going to do is begin a series of three lectures 
about the derivative as it relates to and reÀ ects its presence in 
different manifestations. Today we’ll talk about it’s relation to graphs, 
graphical relationship.
M
otion and change underlie our appreciation of the world, both 
physically and in many other realms. Change is so fundamental to 
our vision of the world that we view it as the driving force in our 
understanding of most anything. Frequently, the dependency of one variable 
on another is most easily described visually by a graph, for example, a graph 
that shows position as a function of time. The concept of the derivative 
provides a method for analyzing change. We explore the relationship between 
the graph of a function and its derivative. For example, we observe that an 
upward-sloping graph signals a positive derivative. Superimposing the graph 
of the derivative on the graph of a function reveals a visual relationship 
between a function and its rate of change.
In this lecture, we will look at the derivative and its relation to graphs. 
Graphs show a relationship between two dependent quantities. For example, 
when referring to our moving car, our interest in the derivative is to try to 
understand how the change in time affects the change in the position of 
the car. 
Change through time is of fundamental interest in many settings. Physical 
motion is change in position over time. Understanding such change over time 
is important. Cars moving, the idea of velocity, is a basic example. In biology, 
we can consider the change in human population in the world from 1900–
2000, for example. In economics, we consider changes over time to prices, 
employment, production, consumption, and many other varying quantities. 
With a graph, we can show the changes in the Dow Jones Industrial Average 
over the last century.

Understanding many important issues involves analyzing change in a 
characteristic over time. A graph can display the power output of the 
Chernobyl nuclear power plant on April 25–26, 1986. The steepness of the 
curve at 1:23 a.m. tells us how quickly the power output changed in a short 
amount of time, leading to the Chernobyl disaster. These changes can be 
visualized using graphs. 
Let’s again analyze the velocity of a car given its position on a straight road. 
Let’s look at the position graph and see how the velocity is related to the 
graph. First, looking at any position, we can ¿ gure out how fast the car is 
going. From the graph, we can deduce features about the motion of the car. If 
the graph is going up, the car is moving forward. If the graph is going down, 
the car is moving backward. 
The top or bottom of a graph 
means the car is momentarily 
stopped. Its velocity is 0. A 
steep graph corresponds to high 
velocity. A straight line means 
constant velocity—horizontal 
ļ stopped; 45° upward to the 
right ļ velocity of 1 mile per 
minute forward; 45° down to 
the right ļ velocity of 1 mile 
per minute backward.
Let’s be more quantitative in 
our description. The steepness 
of the graph corresponds to the velocity. How exactly does it correspond? 
A straight-line position graph corresponds to a velocity equal to the slope of 
the line, where the slope is a quantitative measure of the steepness. Slope of 
a line is just the ratio of upward motion over sidewise motion, or the vertical 
change divided by the horizontal change. A straight line going upward to the 
right has a positive slope. A straight line going downward to the right has a 
negative slope. A horizontal line has slope 0. 
Consider now motion with varying velocities. Recall the idea of the derivative 
and how that process gave the velocity. Let’s see it with a curved graph of 
29
Rate of Change of a Function
T
his ratio—this vertical change in 
position, divided by the elapsed 
time—was the ratio that we discussed 
in the de¿ nition of the derivative; and 
that ratio is also the slope of the straight 
line that we could draw between these 
two positions of the car. 
p t
t
p t
t
(
)
( )


'
'

position for a car with varying velocities. We look at nearby values and draw 
a straight line. The slope of that line is the change in position divided by 
the change in time. As ¨t becomes increasingly smaller, those straight lines 
converge to a tangent line whose steepness is telling us the instantaneous 
velocity. Let’s magnify the graph. Magni¿ ed, the graph looks more like a 
straight line, and the tangent line and the graph appear to coincide. In general, 
the derivative at a point gives the slope of the line we would see if we magni¿ ed 
the graph. Derivative, then, gives two equal quantities: (1) the velocity of the 
car and (2) the slope of the tangent line. An important concept to remember is 
that smoothly curving lines, when viewed very close, look like straight lines. 
That is why the Earth looks À at to us even though we know it is curved.
We can see acceleration in the graph of a moving car. Looking at examples 
of graphs, we can see where the velocity is increasing and decreasing. We 
see that an upward-cupping graph corresponds to an accelerating car and a 
downward-cupping graph corresponds to a decelerating car. Acceleration 
measures the change in the velocity over time. Acceleration is itself a 
derivative—the derivative of velocity, or equivalently, the second derivative 
of position. Given a graph of a derivative, we can sketch the graph of the 
function, and likewise, given a graph of a function, we can sketch the graph 
of the derivative. By sliding a tangent line along a graph and recording its 
slope at each point, we can generate the derivative graph.
30
Lecture 5: Visualizing the Derivative—Slopes
Relationships between Functions and Their Derivatives: 
• 
A function is increasing if and only if its derivative is positive. 
• 
A function is decreasing if and only if its derivative is negative. 
• 
A function is “À at” if and only if its derivative is zero. 
• 
A function is concave up if its derivative is increasing, or 
equivalently, if its second derivative is positive. 
• 
A function is concave down if its derivative is decreasing, or 
equivalently, if its second derivative is negative. 

31
Let’s look at the whole trip. If you take a trip, you can easily compute what 
your average velocity was by taking the total distance between the starting 
and ending points and dividing by the time it took to cover that distance. 
On a graph, that process is ¿ guring out the slope of the line between the 
beginning and ending points. Although your velocity may have varied during 
the trip, at some point, your instantaneous velocity will be exactly equal to 
your average velocity. This reasonable observation is known as the mean 
value theorem (where mean means “average” rather than “cruel”).
Let’s summarize the relationship between a graph and the derivative. The 
derivative of a graph at any point is equal to the slope of the tangent line. If 
we magnify a smoothly curving graph, it will look like a straight line—the 
tangent line. The perspective of a smooth curve looking like a straight line 
allows us to deduce various implications. One is known as L’Hôpital’s Rule, 
after the man who wrote the ¿ rst calculus textbook. L’Hôpital’s Rule states 
that the limit of a ratio of two smooth functions, 
both of which approach 0, is equal to the limit of 
the ratio of their derivatives. A historical feature of 
L’Hôpital’s Rule is that L’Hôpital did not discover 
it. He bought it from one of the Bernoulli brothers. 
When Newton and Leibniz de¿ ned the derivative 
in the 17th century, they used different words 
and different notation. Newton used a dot over a 
varying quantity to stand for the derivative. The 
problem with that notation is that an errant À y was 
capable of taking derivatives if it left its mark in the wrong place. Most people 
now use the notation for derivative that Leibniz introduced. Leibniz’s notation 
includes the fundamental feature of the derivative as a quotient of changes, 
with ¨’s becoming d’s. For example, if p(t) = t2, then dp/dt = (d/dt)(t2) = 2t.
Often, y is a function of x, and the notation for derivative is dy/dx. This 
notation reminds us that the derivative arises from looking at ratios. The letter 
d reminds us of “difference,” suggesting that the top value is, for example, 
a difference in the position of the moving car at two times, while the bottom 
is the difference in the time. If the function is presented as p(t), then another 
notation for the derivative is pƍ(t). Ŷ
Understanding 
many important 
issues involves 
analyzing change 
in a characteristic 
over time.

32
Lecture 5: Visualizing the Derivative—Slopes
L’Hôpital, Guillaume François Antoine (1661–1704). French marquis, 
amateur mathematician, and student of Jean Bernoulli. L’Hôpital provided 
one of the ¿ ve submitted solutions to Bernoulli’s Brachistochrone problem. 
He was the author of the ¿ rst calculus textbook (1696), written in the 
vernacular and based primarily on the work of Jean Bernoulli. This text went 
through several editions and greatly aided the spread of Leibniz’s calculus 
on the Continent.
acceleration: Rate of change of velocity; a measure of how fast the velocity 
is changing. The second derivative of position. Units are distance/time2.
Brachistochrone: A curve traced between two points (not atop one another), 
along which a freely falling object will reach the bottom point in the least 
amount of time.
slope (of a straight line): The ratio of distance ascended to distance traversed, 
sometimes known as “rise over run.”
smooth function: A function that is continuous and whose ¿ rst derivative, 
second derivative, and so forth are all continuous. 
tangent line: A straight line associated to each point on a curve. Just grazing 
the curve, the tangent line “parallels” the curve at a point.
Any standard calculus textbook, section introducing derivatives as slopes of 
tangent lines and section describing the connection between the graphs of 
functions and the graphs of their derivatives.
    Name to Know
    Important Terms
    Suggested Reading

33
1. When we look at a circle, we see a curve. Why is it that when we 
magnify a circle a great deal, it no longer looks curved? 
2. Understand slopes of lines. That is, how does the slope measure the 
steepness of a line? Why is the slope of a line the same at each point 
of a line? Is the angle from the horizontal of a line doubled if the slope 
is doubled?
3. Draw a graph of a function—any function—and call it p(t). Where is it 
increasing, decreasing, and constant? Where is it concave up or concave 
down? Can you sketch its derivative, pƍ(t)? Suppose what you drew ¿ rst 
is actually pƍ(t), can you sketch p(t)?
    Questions to Consider

34
Lecture 6: Derivatives the Easy Way—Symbol Pushing
Derivatives the Easy Way—Symbol Pushing
Lecture 6
Most of the functions that are used in physics, economics, geometry, or 
almost any area of study are expressions that involve basic arithmetic 
operations—addition, subtraction, multiplication, division, or taking 
exponents, or trigonometric functions, like sines and cosines. 
M
uch of the practical power of calculus lies in dealing with speci¿ c 
functions that model physical and conceptual situations. We 
now have a good conceptual sense of what the derivative means 
both physically and graphically. In this lecture, we’ll see how to compute 
derivatives algebraically. Most functions that are used in physics, economics, 
geometry, or almost any area of study are expressions that involve basic 
arithmetic operations—addition, subtraction, multiplication, division—or 
exponents or trigonometric functions. Here, we see how these functions give 
rise to neat expressions for their derivatives and how these expressions agree 
with the geometric properties of the graphs we observed in the previous 
lecture. If we have an algebraic expression that tells us the position of a 
moving car, then we can deduce the algebraic expression for the velocity 
of the car at each moment without having to carry out the in¿ nite process 
involved in taking derivatives at each point. 
In this lecture, we’ll look at the derivative as it is manifested in algebra. 
Most functions used in almost any area of study are expressions that involve 
basic arithmetic operations. Here, we see how these functions give rise to 
expressions for their derivatives and how these expressions are obtained in 
a mechanical way. We will also see how these expressions agree with the 
geometric properties of the graphs we observed in Lecture 5.
Derivatives would be of no practical value if we had to do an in¿ nite process 
at each point of time. Fortunately, we don’t. The simplest function describing 
a moving car would occur when the car is moving at a steady velocity. 
In this case, the position function is
( )
p t
ct
 
, where c is a constant. The 
velocity, which is the same as the derivative, is just c. Thus, if p t
ct
( )  
, 
then 
( )
p t
c
c
 
. 

Let’s look at a function we have 
already seen: f(x) = x2 (which we have 
seen previously as p(t) = t2). 
Notice in the table that for every 
number x, the derivative value was 2x. 
How can we see in general that this is 
the case? 
We can check this derivative algebraically by considering the de¿ ning 
quotient for the derivative, namely,
2
2
2
2
2
(
)
( )
(
)
2
(
)
f x
x
f x
x
x
x
x
x x
x
x
x
x
x
 '

 '


'  '

 
 
'
'
'
2
2
(
)
(2
)
2
.
x x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
'  '
 '
'
 
 
 
 '
'
'
Now we take the limit as ¨x gets smaller and smaller. Whether the function 
is p(t) = t2 or f(x) = x2 , the answer is the same: pƍ(t) = 2t or fƍ(x) = 2x.
Here are some related functions:
If
2
( )
5
f x
x
 
, then
( )
5(2 )
10
f
x
x
x
c
 
 
.
More generally, if f(x) = cx2, then f ƍ(x) = 2cx. 
Let’s consider other functions of the form xn. For the function
3
( )
f x
x
 
,
2
( )
3
f
x
x
c
 
. We can also understand this derivative algebraically 
by considering the de¿ ning quotient for the derivative, namely, 
(
)
x
x
x
x


'
'
3
3
, and looking at the limit as ¨x gets smaller and smaller. 
We can see the pattern for ¿ nding the algebraic formula for the derivative of 
powers. If
( )
n
f x
x
 
, then
c
 

f
x
nx n
( )
1.
Function
Derivative
x2
f '(x) = 2x
0.7
1.4
1
2
1.4
2.8
2
4
3
6
35

36
Lecture 6: Derivatives the Easy Way—Symbol Pushing
We see that if h (x) = f (x) + g (x), then hƍ (x) = f ƍ (x) + gƍ (x). Likewise, 
you can take one given function whose derivative you know and multiply 
it by a constant to get another function: For example, if h (x) = cf (x), then 
hƍ (x) = cf ƍ(x). This allows us to take derivatives of such functions as 5x3 + 
2x. We see this as a sum of two different functions, 5x3 and 2x, and we see 
each of those as a product of a constant times a function whose derivative 
we know. Therefore, if h (x) =5x3 + 2x, then hƍ 
(x) = 15x2 + 2. And if we add a constant to the 
same function, for example, h(x) = 5x3 + 2x + 
3, then we still have hƍ (x) = 15x2+ 2. Why? 
Because the derivative of a constant is 0, so it 
does not change the derivative. 
Note that the derivative of a product is not 
simply the product of derivatives. The product 
rule and the quotient rule (if you have a 
function that is the quotient of two functions) 
are both rather more complicated algebraic equations. At this stage, we can 
take the derivative of any polynomial, that is, a function of the form anxn + 
an-1xn-1 +…+ a1x + a0. For example, let’s take the function f (x) = x3 – 6x2 + 9x 
+ 1. Note that the graph depicting this function starts down at the left, goes 
up, then down, and then goes up again.  The derivative of this function is fƍ 
(x) = 3x2 – 12x + 9. Note that in the graph of this derivative, we see that it is 
the form of a parabola, going down and up again.
The derivative reduces the number of “bumps” in the graph of a function. 
A typical third-degree polynomial has a graph that goes up-down-up. Its 
derivative has a graph that goes down-up. A typical fourth-degree polynomial 
has a graph that goes down-up-down-up. Its derivative has a graph that goes 
up-down-up. We can see this geometrically by tracing the moving tangent 
line and recording the changing slopes. In looking at these examples, we see 
that the derivative has one less bump.
Let’s consider a function that is de¿ ned geometrically on a circle. If we take 
a right triangle whose angle is ș, the sine of the angle ș can be thought of 
as the ratio of the length of the side opposite ș divided by the length of the 
hypotenuse. The cosine of the angle ș is the ratio of the length of the side 
Derivatives would be 
of no practical value 
if we had to do an 
in¿ nite process at 
each point of time. 
Fortunately, we don’t.

37
adjacent to ș divided by the length of the hypotenuse. On a circle of radius 1, 
the hypotenuse is 1; thus, sine of ș is just the vertical coordinate, and cosine 
of ș is the horizontal coordinate. That is, (cos ș, sin ș) are the coordinates 
of the point on the unit circle corresponding to the angle ș. As ș changes, so 
does the sin ș: When ș is small, so is sin ș; when ș approaches 90 degrees 
(or ʌ/2 radians), sin ș approaches 1, and sin (ʌ/2) = 1. Similarly, when ș is 
small, cos ș is close to 1; when ș approaches 90 degrees (or ʌ/2 radians), 
cos ș approaches 0, and cos (ʌ/2) = 0. Notice that the graphs of sine and 
cosine oscillate because their values repeat each time we move around the 
unit circle. What is the derivative of sine? Look at the rate at which the line 
opposite the hypotenuse is changing in relation to a change in the angle. The 
derivative of sine is cosine, and the derivative of cosine is negative sine. We 
can graph these functions and see geometrically why their derivatives are 
related as they are. Neat.
An interesting question is this: Does there exist a function that is its 
own derivative at every point? That is, is there a function f(x), such that 
f ƍ(x) = f(x) at every x? Equivalently, we are looking for a function y that 
satis¿ es dy/dx = y . It turns out that the exponential function f (x) = ex, where 
e = 2.718281828…, satis¿ es these conditions.
This leads us to the following table of derivatives:
If we are trying to ¿ nd the answer to a question that involves derivatives, we 
will be able to solve it in a practical way. These equations help to mechanize 
the process of ¿ nding the derivative. If a law of nature, for example, involves 
derivatives, then we will often be able to express that law with a simple, 
Function
Derivative
f(x)
f ƍ(x)
1
0
x
1
x2
2x
x3
3x2
xn
nxn-1
sin x
cos x
cos x
–sin x
ex
ex
Function
Derivative
f(f x( )
fƍ(ƍ x( )
1
0
x
1
x2
2x
x3
3x2
xn
nxn-1
sin x
cos x
cos x
–sin x
exe
exe

38
Lecture 6: Derivatives the Easy Way—Symbol Pushing
computable formula. We will use this ability in the next lectures that show 
some applications of the derivative. Ŷ
cosine: A function of angle ș giving the ratio of the length of the adjacent side 
to the length of the hypotenuse of a right triangle, as well as the horizontal 
coordinate of a point on the circle of radius 1 corresponding to the angle ș.
sine: A function of angle ș giving the ratio of the length of the opposite side 
to the length of the hypotenuse of a right triangle, as well as the vertical 
coordinate of a point on the circle of radius 1 corresponding to the angle ș.
Any standard calculus textbook, sections on differentiation formulas.
1. Suppose 
(2)
3
f c
 
 and
(2)
4
gc
 
. If 
( )
( )
( )
h x
f x
g x
 

 for every x, 
why is
(2)
7
hc
 
? This shows that the derivative of the sum is the sum of 
the derivatives. Warning: This pattern does not hold up for products. 
2. Why do you believe that many aspects of nature and human creations 
are so well described by rather simple functions?
    Important Terms
    Suggested Reading
    Questions to Consider

39
Abstracting the Derivative—Circles and Belts
Lecture 7
[T]he true power of the derivative lies not only in its ability to help 
us understand change with respect to time, like the car moving down 
the straight road, but also to deal with dependencies of all different 
types—whenever we have one quantity dependent on another, that’s a 
place where the derivative can come into play. 
I
n the previous lecture, we saw how the derivative behaves algebraically, 
so we can easily compute algebraically the derivative of the function 
that tells us the area of a circle of a given radius. Here, we show how 
to interpret the answer geometrically. That is, we see what the derivative 
means visually when we apply the concept of derivative to formulas for area 
and volume. Our geometric insight leads to a surprising realization about the 
roominess of belts around the Earth. 
In this lecture, we continue our study of the derivative. In Lecture 5, we 
saw how the derivative is expressed graphically. In the last lecture, we saw 
how to express a derivative algebraically. In this lecture, we will see how to 
interpret a derivative geometrically. 
The concept of the derivative can be generalized to apply to any two 
dependent quantities. The derivative can be applied to all cases of two 
interrelated quantities. The derivative describes how a change in one 
quantity entails a change in the other. For example, the area of a circle is 
dependent on its radius. We can discuss quantitatively the rate at which an 
increase in the radius of a circle would change the area of the circle. The 
derivative measures the rate at which a change in a variable causes change in 
a dependent quantity.
We will now see that the algebraic formulas for derivatives developed in the 
previous lecture make perfect intuitive and geometrical sense in situations 
other than motion, as well. We start with the square. The area of a square is A 
(x) = x2, where x is its side length. Algebraically, we know that the derivative 

40
Lecture 7: Abstracting the Derivative—Circles and Belts
is A’ (x) = 2x. That is, for every unit increase in the side length x, the area 
increases by roughly 2x. But where does this come from?
Let’s see visually what the derivative means. That is, we want to compare 
the area of one square with the area of another square that is slightly bigger. 
Traditionally, we use the term ǻx to measure the change in the length of 
the side. At a given side length, we can compute how much the area would 
increase if we increased the length of the side. The inÀ uence of a change in 
the length of the side varies depending on how big the square is to start with. 
Note the fraction we get when we look at the ratio of the change in area over 
the change in the length of the side: 
2
2
(
)
x
x
x
x
 '

'
.
We ¿ nd the exact rate of change by taking the limit as ǻx goes to zero and 
arriving at the derivative. For the larger square, we take the augmented 
rectangular area of one side, which is xǻx, and add it to the augmented area 
of the other side, xǻx, and ¿ nally, we add the area of the smaller square 
where the added lengths meet (ǻx)2. 
We then divide by ǻx, so we have:
 
(x'x  x'x ('x)2)
'x
 2x  'x.
As ǻx gets smaller and approaches 0, it becomes negligible, and essentially, 
we arrive at 2x, exactly as predicted by the algebra.
Let’s now consider the volume of a cube. The volume is V(x) = x3, where x 
is its side length. Algebraically, we know that the derivative is Vƍ(x) = 3x2. 
That is, for every unit increase in the side length x, the volume increases by 
roughly 3x2. But where does this come from? As with the square, at a given 
side length, we can compute how much the volume would increase if we 
increased the length of the side. Let’s look at how much volume we add if 
we increase the length by ǻx on all three sides of the cube. The inÀ uence of 
a change in the length of the side varies depending on how big the cube is 
to start with. In any case, it adds a layer or “slab” of extra volume on three 

41
faces of the cube. The added volume for one side is x2 ǻx, where ǻx indicates 
the added thickness. We do the same for all three sides and arrive at 3x2 
ǻx. To ¿ nd the rate of growth, we divide by ǻx and arrive at 3x2. We have 
four other tiny additional pieces of volume right at three edges of the cube 
and at one corner, but as ǻx grows smaller 
and approaches 0, these tiny parts of the 
volume become increasingly negligible 
and tend to disappear, and we see the rate 
of growth is 3x2, exactly as predicted by 
the algebra.
Let’s consider how the derivative would 
be de¿ ned in the case of the area of a 
circle viewed as dependent on its radius, 
A(r) = ʌr2. Again, from the previous lecture, we know Aƍ (r) = 2ʌr; that is, 
for every unit increase in the radius, the area increases by roughly 2ʌ, or a 
little over 6 units. Why does this make sense? At a given radius, we could 
compute how much the area would increase if the radius were increased a 
certain amount ǻr. The ratio of that change in area divided by the change 
in radius ǻr would yield a rate of change of the area with respect to a 
change in the radius. The additional area (called an annulus) is in the shape 
of a thin washer or ring or belt whose width is ǻr and whose length is the 
circumference of the circle, 2ʌr. Thus, the additional area is approximately 
equal to the thickness of the ring times the length around the circle; that is, 
the additional area is about 2ʌrǻr. When we divide that change in the area by 
the thickness of the ring, ǻr, we get a number that is approximately equal to 
the circumference of the circle, 2ʌr. This ratio of change of area divided by 
change in radius again approximates the inÀ uence of radius on area. Thus, 
we obtain an intuitive understanding for Aƍ (r) = 2ʌr.
Suppose a belt is put around the equator of the Earth (about 25,000 miles). 
Suppose we increase the length of the belt by 7 feet so that it hovers above 
the Earth. How far away from the Earth will it be? The circumference of 
a circle of radius r is 2ʌr. From the previous lecture, we know that the 
derivative is 2ʌ. This means that every unit increase in r results in roughly 
2ʌ (or just over 6) units increase in the circumference. Most people guess 
wrong about the belted Earth, assuming that the longer belt will hover just 
Analyzing dependencies 
and change is one of 
the most fundamental 
things we do to try to 
understand our world.

42
Lecture 7: Abstracting the Derivative—Circles and Belts
slightly off the ground. In fact, the derivative tells us that adding 7 feet to the 
circumference of the belt will result in the belt being more than a foot away 
from the Earth! In other words, we have added more than a foot to the radius 
of the belt. We can understand this result better if we look at the derivative, 
2ʌ. A 1-foot change in the radius of the belt brings about roughly an addition 
of 6.28 feet to the length of the circumference of the belt. Therefore, adding 
7 feet to the length of the belt would indeed result in the belt being more than 
a foot away from the Earth. 
Now let’s consider a stalactite growing in a cave. How quick does a 
20,000-year-old stalactite acquire volume compared to its 10,000-year-old 
cousin? Depending on the environment, stalactites usually grow in cone-
like shapes at the rate of 1–4 inches every 1,000 years. We’ll assume our 
stalactites grow at the rate of 3 inches every 1,000 years. We’ll also assume 
that the ratio of the stalactite’s base radius to its height is 1:6. If a stalactite 
is x thousand years old, its height is 3x inches and its radius is x/2 inches. 
Therefore, at 10,000 years, the stalactite is 30 inches high and has a radius 
of 5 inches; at 20,000 years, the stalactite is 60 inches high and has a radius 
of 10 inches. The volume or weight of the stalactite when it is x thousand 
years old is W (x) = 1/3
 
base times height, or 
2
3
1
( )
3
3
2
4
x
x
W x
x
S
§
·
 
S
 
¨
¸
©
¹
. 
What is the growth rate of the weight of the stalactite? It is precisely the 
derivative of the weight. Using our table of derivatives, we see that 
2
3
( )
4
x
W
x
S
c
 
. Therefore, the derivative of the weight at 10,000 years 
is 75ʌ, while at the 20,000-year mark, it is 300ʌ. Thus, even though the 
20,000-year-old and the 10,000-year-old stalactites increase in height at 
the same rate, the older one increases in weight at 4 times the rate of the 
younger one!
Let’s consider how we would de¿ ne the derivative for dependencies 
involving supply and demand. We see that the supply curve shows how 
many items producers would produce if the price they could sell the item 
at were p. The demand curve shows how many items consumers would buy 
if the price were p. In this graphical representation of the curves, notice 

43
that if the price increases, the supply increases. Also notice that if the price 
increases, the demand decreases. The place where the demand curve and the 
supply curve cross is the point where we expect the price to be. What does 
the derivative measure, when applied to the supply and demand curves? If 
the curves are steep near the crossing point, slight increases in price would 
cause major increases in supply and major decreases in demand. These are 
elastic goods. Goods that are insensitive to price, for example, gasoline, are 
called inelastic.
We have now seen the importance of the derivative. The derivative analyzes 
change. The derivative gives a quantitative view of how one quantity will 
change when another quantity on which it is dependent changes. Analyzing 
dependencies and change is one of the most fundamental things we do to try 
to understand our world. The derivative in general arose from ¿ rst analyzing 
the simple case of a moving car. That example illustrated one example of 
dependency—position was dependent on the time. We then saw that the 
same analysis would serve in many cases where one quantity is dependent 
on another. Ŷ
Any standard calculus textbook, sections on applications and interpretation of 
derivatives. (These explanations may be dif¿ cult to ¿ nd in standard texts.)
1. Consider an animal whose weight varies according to height according 
to the function w(h) = h3. Suppose the strength of the animal’s legs at 
a given height is given by s(h) = h2. Could similar animals exist that 
are 10 times as tall? Does this help explain the limit to the size of 
land animals? 
2. Suppose the population increases by 1% each year. Does the derivative 
of the population function (that is, the function whose value is the 
population at each time) increase, decrease, or stay the same over time? 
    Suggested Reading
Questions to Consider

44
Lecture 8: Circles, Pyramids, Cones, and Spheres
Circles, Pyramids, Cones, and Spheres
Lecture 8
In this lecture, we’re going to ask the question how do we ¿ nd the 
formulas for areas of objects, such as circles, and for things like the 
volumes of solids that are more complicated than a cube—whose 
volume we can easily see—but, how about the volumes for things such 
as cones, or pyramids, or spheres?
W
e can deduce each of these formulas by dividing the object into 
small pieces and seeing how the small pieces can be assembled 
to produce the whole. The area of a circle, ʌr2, is a wonderful 
example of a formula that we may just remember with no real sense of why 
it’s true. But we can view the circle in a way that shows clearly whence the 
formula arises. The process involves a neat method of breaking the circle 
into pieces and reassembling those pieces. This example and others illustrate 
techniques of computing areas and volumes that were ancient precursors to 
the modern idea of the integral.
Greek mathematicians had a keen sense of integral-like processes. We look 
¿ rst at an ancient process for discovering the formula for the area of a circle.  
Remember that the number ʌ is the ratio of the circumference of a circle 
to its diameter. A circle of radius r can be broken into small wedges. The 
wedges can be assembled by alternately putting one up and one down to 
create a shape almost like a rectangle. As the wedges are made ever tinier, 
the assembled shape more and more closely approximates a rectangle. The 
top plus the bottom of the rectangle is precisely the circumference of the 
circle, therefore, of total length 2ʌr . Thus, the top is ʌr long. The height of 
the rectangle is ever closer to r.  The rectangle is approaching a rectangle of 
height r and width ʌr; hence, it has area rʌr or ʌr2 , the familiar formula for 
the area of a circle. 
The derivative gives a dynamic view of the relationship between the area of 
a circle and its radius. We ¿ nd that the derivative of the area (the change in 
area divided by change in radius) must equal the circumference of the circle. 
When we add thin bands to a circle to increase its size, then divide by the 

45
increment that we made to the radius, that division gives us the length of 
the circumference. Therefore, the derivative of ʌr2 equals 2ʌr. The derivative 
measures how fast the area of the circle is changing relative to a change in 
the radius.
The area of a triangle is dependent only on the height and base, not on 
whether or how much it is leaning. The area of a right triangle is easy to 
calculate because it is half of a rectangle. We can see that the area of any 
triangle depends only on its base and height by sliding thin pieces to the 
side to create a right triangle. Therefore, we ¿ nd that the area of any triangle 
is equal to 1/2 the base times the height. In fact, we can use this formula 
to calculate the area of a circle by imagining the circle divided into tiny 
triangles. All the triangles have the same height (r), and the sum of the bases 
of all triangles equals the circumference of 
the circle (2ʌr). Therefore, the sum of the 
area of all the triangles equals the total of 
the bases (2ʌr) times the height (r) divided 
by 2, or ʌr2, again, the familiar formula for 
the area of a circle. 
We can determine the volume of a 
tetrahedron (a pyramid over a triangular 
base) by thinking of sliding its parts as we 
did with the triangle. The volume of a tetrahedron is determined only by 
the area of the base and its height, regardless of where the top point of the 
tetrahedron lies. It is dif¿ cult to compute the volume of a tetrahedron, so 
we start with the volume of a prism. The area of a prism is the area of its 
base times the height. Three tetrahedra of the same volume ¿ ll up a prism; 
thus, the volume of a tetrahedron is 1/3 the area of its base times its height. 
Once we know the volume of a tetrahedron, we can determine the volume 
of a pyramid. A pyramid can be seen as two tetrahedra if its square base is 
divided into two triangles. The volume of the pyramid, therefore, is equal 
to1/3 the area of half of its base times its height plus 1/3 the area of half of its 
base times its height. In other words, the volume of a pyramid equals 1/3 the 
area of the base times the height.
The area of a triangle 
is dependent only on 
the height and base, 
not on whether or how 
much it is leaning.

46
Lecture 8: Circles, Pyramids, Cones, and Spheres
The volume of a cone is easy to compute once we know the volume of a 
tetrahedron. A cone can be approximately ¿ lled up by tetrahedra each with 
the same point as the cone point and with the bases of the tetrahedra on the 
base of the cone. Given that the volume of each tetrahedron is 1/3 the area of 
its base times its height and the height is the same as the height of the cone, 
then the volume of the cone is also 1/3 the area of the base of the cone times 
its height.
The surface area of a sphere can be computed by breaking that surface into 
small pieces. The area between latitude lines on a sphere is the same as 
the area of a band around the surrounding cylinder if the band is contained 
between parallel planes that intersect the sphere on the two latitude lines. 
The smaller radii for latitudes near the North Pole are accompanied by 
the “slantiness” at those higher latitudes in such a way that the area on the 
sphere between parallel planes near the North Pole exactly equals the area 
on the sphere between parallel planes of the same ¿ xed distance apart near 
the equator. We can see that this area equality holds by looking at a picture 
of a circle and ¿ nding two similar right triangles that tell the story. Thus, the 
surface area of the sphere is exactly the same as the area of the surrounding 
cylinder, or 4ʌr2.
These examples show ancient ideas that resemble the modern idea of the 
integral. The ancients did not have a well-de¿ ned idea of what happens 
at the limit, but their arguments are persuasive and can now be made 
mathematically rigorous. Ŷ
Boyer, Carl B. The History of the Calculus and Its Conceptual 
Development. 
Dunham, William. Journey through Genius: The Great Theorems 
of Mathematics.
    Suggested Reading

47
1. In thinking about the surface area of the sphere, why couldn’t we 
approximate the area of the northern hemisphere by just thinking of 
triangular wedges going from the North Pole down to the equator and 
viewing each wedge as a triangle? 
2. Is there a philosophical reason that the formulas for areas and volumes 
are so relatively simple? In other words, could you imagine a geometric 
world in which the area of circle or the surface area of a sphere was 
not so simple? There is a whole different world of ideas associated with 
non-Euclidean geometries in which such formulas are not as simple. 
    Questions to Consider

48
Lecture 9: Archimedes and the Tractrix
Archimedes and the Tractrix
Lecture 9
Today we’re going to look at a couple of examples of this strategy that 
preceded the de¿ nition of the integral, and then some examples that 
actually are very modern. 
I
n the 17th century, Bonaventura Cavalieri analyzed shapes using 
his method of indivisibles. If one thinks of the surface of a sphere as 
comprised of many tiny triangles, then the volume of the sphere can be 
viewed as made up of many tiny tetrahedra with those triangles as bases and 
the center of the sphere as the top of each tetrahedron. Because we know that 
the volume of each tetrahedron is 1/3 the area of the base times the height, 
then the volume of the sphere will be 1/3 the surface area of the sphere times 
the radius (the height of each tetrahedron).  Because the surface area of the 
sphere is 4ʌr2, as we saw in the last lecture, the volume of the sphere is 1/3 
of the product of that area times the height of each tetrahedron, which is r, 
thereby giving the formula for the volume of the sphere, namely, (4/3)ʌr3.
Archimedes had an amazing way to discover the formula for the volume of 
a sphere of radius r. His method involved a lever. He balanced a cone (with a 
base of radius 2r and a height of 2r) and a sphere (of radius r) on one side of 
the lever with a cylinder (with a radius of 2r and a height of 2r) on the other. 
Archimedes’s method for showing that the objects balance involved dividing 
the sphere, the cone, and the cylinder into thin slices and hanging those slices 
on the lever.  Originally, one could picture the cylinder being in its horizontal 
position with the cone and sphere neatly inside it. Archimedes’s insight was 
that if we take a thin slice through the cylinder (thereby cutting through the 
sphere and cone also), that thin slice of the cylinder (by itself, left where it 
is, at point x distance from the fulcrum) would be exactly counterbalanced 
if the slices of the cone and sphere were both moved to the other side of the 
lever at distance 2r from the fulcrum. Because that insight is true for each 
slice, the totality of all the slices all the way along the cylinder shows that 
the cylinder, cone, and sphere will balance on the lever as described above. 

49
In our demonstration, we can see that placing the sphere and cone exactly 
2r from the fulcrum balances the cylinder. The cylinder lies horizontally 
along the lever with one end at the fulcrum and the other at 2r. Both the 
cone and the sphere are hung from the same point on the other side of the 
lever, namely, at the point that is distance 2r from the fulcrum. If we know 
that the cone, sphere, and cylinder balance, and we know the volumes of all 
the objects except the sphere, then we can deduce the volume of the sphere.  
Thus, Archimedes found that a sphere of 
radius r has a volume of (4/3)ʌr3. Today, 
we would formalize this procedure of 
slicing up a sphere by using integrals. 
Let’s examine the relationship between the 
surface area of a sphere and its volume. 
Knowing the meaning of the derivative, 
we know that the derivative of the volume 
is telling us the rate at which the volume 
is changing relative to a change in the 
radius. Geometrically, that rate of change 
is the volume of a thin layer over the surface of the sphere divided by the 
thickness. As the thickness gets tiny, that fraction will simply equal the 
surface area. Using our knowledge of derivatives, we know algebraically that 
the derivative of (4/3)ʌr3 is 4ʌr2, which is the formula for the surface area of 
a sphere. The derivative of the volume of the sphere must give a formula for 
the surface area of the sphere—and we see it does. 
In the 21st century, Mamikon Mnatsakanian devised an ingenious method 
for computing areas by breaking up regions into pieces that are sectors of a 
circle. The area between two concentric circles can be computed in two ways. 
Just subtracting the area of the smaller circle from the area of the larger circle 
is one method to arrive at the area of the ring (annulus). The Mnatsakanian 
method is to view the annulus as a polygon with many, many sides. We can 
sweep and shift the small triangular segments that make up the annulus and 
see that the sum of those segments will be the area of a circle. We ¿ nd that 
the area of the annulus is ʌa2, where a is the distance from a tangent point on 
the small circle to the outer circle. This method also provides a proof of the 
Pythagorean Theorem. 
In the 21st century, 
Mamikon Mnatsakanian 
devised an ingenious 
method for computing 
areas by breaking up 
regions into pieces that 
are sectors of a circle.

50
Lecture 9: Archimedes and the Tractrix
This method can be used when computing the area under a tractrix. A tractrix
is a curve created by pulling one end of a string along the x-axis while the 
other end, attached to a pen, starts on the y-axis and is dragged along to create 
the curve. One way to compute the area under the tractrix is to view that area 
as a sweeping of tangent lines and to approximate the area as segments of a 
circle. The method shows that the area is simply equal to a quarter of a circle 
(1/4)ʌa2. The hard way to compute the area under the curve involves ¿ nding 
the formula for a tractrix. 
Both Archimedes’s and Mnatsakanian’s methods involve breaking up an 
object into small pieces and adding up their contributions. This strategy is 
the fundamental strategy of the integral. Ŷ
Archimedes (c. 287–212 B.C.). Ancient Greek mathematician, physicist, 
astronomer, inventor, and proli¿ c author of scienti¿ c treatises. He studied 
hydrostatics and mechanics and discovered the general principle of the 
lever, how to compute tangents to spirals, the volume and surface area of 
spheres, the volume of solids of revolution, many applications of the method 
of exhaustion, and an approximation of the value of ʌ, among other work. 
Archimedes was killed by a Roman soldier when Syracuse was conquered 
during the Second Punic War.
Cavalieri, Bonaventura (1598–1647). Italian mathematician; professor 
at Bologna; student of Galileo. He developed the method of indivisibles 
that provided a transition between the Greek method of exhaustion and 
the modern methods of integration of Newton and Leibniz. He applied his 
method to solve a majority of the problems posed by Kepler.
    Names to Know

51
Boyer, Carl B. The History of the Calculus and Its Conceptual 
Development. 
Dunham, William. Journey through Genius: The Great Theorems 
of Mathematics.
Mnatsakanian, 
Mamikon. 
Visual 
Calculus 
by 
Mamikon. 
www.its.caltech.edu/~mamikon.calculus.html. 
1. Experiment with a level to see that the formula for balancing on a lever 
is correct. See how putting two weights on one side is equivalent to 
putting one weight at a different location. What location?
2. Deduce the formula for the area of a circle using Cavalieri’s method 
of indivisibles. 
    Suggested Reading
    Questions to Consider

52
Lecture 10: The Integral and the Fundamental Theorem
The Integral and the Fundamental Theorem
Lecture 10
In the 21st century, Mamikon Mnatsakanian devised an ingenious 
method for computing areas by breaking up regions into pieces that 
are sectors of a circle. 
I
f a car goes at a constant velocity of 30 miles per hour, it is a simple 
matter to compute how far the car has traveled during an interval of time. 
We saw that to deal with varying velocity, we just break the total time into 
small intervals and add up approximations of how far the car traveled in each 
small interval of time. In this lecture, we will see the geometric implications 
of this integral process as we view it in graphical form. In particular, we see 
that the same process that computes the distance traveled by the car also 
computes the area between the graph of the velocity curve and the axis. We 
use Leibniz’s notation for the integral because the long S shape reminds us 
that the de¿ nition of the integral involves sums.
After our introduction to the precursors to the modern concept of the integral, 
we will start a series of lectures that correspond to previous lectures about 
the derivative. We will see, ¿ rst, the integral in its graphical interpretation. 
We will then study the integral in its algebraic interpretation.
Recall how the integral was de¿ ned in the case of the car moving down a 
straight road. We are given the velocity function v(t) and want to compute 
the total distance traveled.  For example, if we know the car was traveling a 
constant 2 miles per minute for 3 minutes, we know the car traveled a total 
distance of 6 miles.
Let’s look graphically at the scenario of a forward-moving car. Notice that 
the process of ¿ nding the distance traveled involves ¿ nding products that are 
equal to the areas of rectangles. That is, the distance is equal to the product 
of the height of the rectangle (the line representing a constant 2 miles per 
minute) times the width of the rectangle (the 3-minute mark on the horizontal 
axis) of the graph.

53
Let’s look at another velocity function in which velocity is two times the 
time, or 2t, so we know the car will be traveling along at an ever-increasing 
velocity. Our graph in this case shows an upwardly sloping line. To compute 
the distance traveled, we break the interval of time into small bits and do 
some adding. We then approximate the velocity traveled within those small 
intervals of time (half-minute intervals) by assuming our car remained at 
a constant velocity during that time, then “jumped” to the next constant 
velocity at the next interval and so forth. We then add the distance for the 
¿ rst interval of time plus the distance for the second interval of time and so 
forth. Notice again that the process of ¿ nding 
the distance traveled involves ¿ nding products 
that are equal to the areas of rectangles. As the 
little intervals get smaller, the total of the area 
of the thin rectangles is getting ever closer to 
the area between the curve and the axis; that 
is, the approximations improve. This in¿ nite 
process of taking ever-smaller intervals of 
time provides us with a single exact answer.
Let us add here that the notation for the 
integral is Leibniz’s, namely, 
( )
b
a v t dt
³
. 
The long S shape reminds us that the meaning 
of the integral involves sums. The a and b 
denote the starting and ending times, respectively. In the limit, the answer 
is exactly equal to the area under the curve. Thus, in integral notation form, 
( )
b
a v t dt
³
, which we know is the distance traveled by the moving car, is also 
equal to the area under the graph of v(t). 
Let’s look at the speci¿ c example where the velocity at each moment is 2t. 
Then, 
3
0 2tdt
³
 is equal to the distance the car traveled between time 0 and 
The de¿ nition of the 
integral just adds 
up the products, 
not of the height of 
the rectangles, but 
the signed height—
positive if the 
function is positive 
and negative if the 
function is negative.

54
Lecture 10: The Integral and the Fundamental Theorem
time 3. But 
3
0 2tdt
³
 is also equal to the area under the graph of 2t. We can 
check that area geometrically because the area under 2t between t = 0 and 
t = 3 is just a triangle with base 3 and height 6. Thus, the car traveled 
(1/2)(6×3) = 9 miles. And the area under the graph of 2t from 0 to 3 is 9 
square units.
We can think about the motion of the car to see some features of the integral. 
The integral from a to b plus the integral from b to c equals the integral 
from a to c. This is obvious because it simply says that we see how far we 
went during the time a to b and how far we went from time b to c; the total 
is how far we went from time a to time c. Suppose the velocity is negative. 
When the velocity is negative, we are traveling backward. Then, the integral 
is telling how far backward we traveled. More exactly, the integral of the 
velocity is telling us not how far we drove, but how far we end up from 
where we started.  Examples of when we are going forward part of the time 
and backward part of the time illustrate this concept. 
Let’s look at the graphical interpretation of integrals again. If the function 
is below the axis, then the integral is negative. If the function is part above 
the axis and part below, the integral combines the two. The de¿ nition of 
the integral just adds up the products, not of the height of the rectangles, 
but the signed height—positive if the function is positive and negative if 
the function is negative.It’s easy. When the graph goes below the axis, the 
integral is negative; when above, positive. 
The summation fact, a to b plus b to c equals 
a to c, works regardless of whether the graph 
goes above or below the axis. 
Integrals behave “opposite” of derivatives 
graphically. For a function f (x), we can 
de¿ ne a function F (x) as the integral of f 
from starting time a to ending time x. Think of f as the velocity and F as the 
mileage marker. Recall that if a function f(x) is increasing, then its derivative 
f ƍ(x) is positive, and if a function f(x) is decreasing, then its derivative f ƍ(x) 
is negative. For the integral, it’s the opposite: If the function f(x) is positive, 
then its integral F(x) is increasing; if the function f(x) is negative, then its 
integral F(x) is decreasing. If the function f(x) is zero, then its integral F(x) 
The Fundamental 
Theorem of Calculus
( )
( )
( )
b
a F
x dx
F b
F a
c
 
 
³

55
is constant—it’s just F(a) because we are not adding any area. In summary, 
notice that we have Fƍ(x) = f(x).
Now let’s turn to an algebraic representation of this same idea. Given the 
equation for the velocity of a body, we can deduce the equation for its 
position using the integral. The integral of the velocity is the position. Let’s 
look at an example where we know the answer. Suppose v(t) = 2t. We do 
some calculating and see that the distance traveled is the height times the 
width divided by 2, or t2. If we stop at any time, the integral will give an 
answer. The answer is always t2. 
Recall that the Fundamental Theorem of Calculus relates the integral and 
the derivative. If v(t) is the velocity at every moment of a car moving down 
a straight road, then the integral of v(t) between one time and another equals 
the net distance traveled. Thus, 
( )
b
a v t dt
³
 equals the net distance traveled 
between time a and time b. We saw before that if we can ¿ nd a position 
function p(t) whose derivative is v(t), then the integral is easy to compute. 
It is simply the position at time b minus the position at time a. If pƍ(t) = v(t), 
then 
( )
( )
( )
b
a v t dt
p b
p a
 

³
. Whether the variable is t or any other letter, the 
relationship is the same. Thus, the Fundamental Theorem of Calculus states: 
( )
( )
( )
b
a F
x dx
F b
F a
c
 
 
³
. 
Suppose we want to do the integral process (which involves doing in¿ nitely 
many approximations, each of which is a sum) for some function f(x). If we 
can ¿ nd an antiderivative G(x) for f(x) (that is, a function such that Gƍ(x) 
= f(x)), then we can get the answer to the integral process just by doing one 
subtraction, G(b) – G(a). An antiderivative is a function whose derivative is 
the function whose integral we are trying to take. When we are faced with an 
integral, our ¿ rst thought is, “Can we ¿ nd an antiderivative for the function 
that is under the integral sign?” 

56
Lecture 10: The Integral and the Fundamental Theorem
Let’s look at some examples. Every derivative formula leads to an 
antiderivative formula, because we can just go backward. For example, we 
know that the derivative of x2 is 2x. Thus, an antiderivative of 2x is x2. The 
derivative of a constant times x, f(x) = cx, is just c. That is, f ƍ(x) = c, or 
(d/dx)(cx) = c. Thus, an antiderivative of the constant function c is just 
cx. The derivative of (xn+1)/(n+1) is xn. Thus, an antiderivative of xn is 
(xn+1)/(n + 1).
Why do we say an antiderivative rather than the antiderivative? Any two 
functions that differ by a constant value will automatically have the same 
derivative at each point. We can see this fact graphically. If two functions 
differ by a constant, then their graphs are merely shifted up and down. The 
slope of the tangent line above each point will be precisely the same. The 
derivative is just measuring the slope of the tangent line. For each function, 
instead of just one antiderivative, we really ¿ nd one antiderivative, then 
add any constant to indicate that any shifting of the antiderivative is also an 
antiderivative of the same function. Just as we saw the table of derivatives in 
Lecture 6, now we have the table of antiderivatives.
Function
Antiderivative
f(x)
F(x)
x
x2/2 + C
x2
x3/3 + C
x3
x 4/4 + C
xn
(xn+1)/(n + 1) + C
sin x
–cos x + C
cos x
sin x + C
ex
ex + C

57
The most important thing to remember about integrals is what they mean. 
The integral is a number that is the result of doing an in¿ nite process. The 
process involves approximating the answer. Each approximation is obtained 
by taking a sum. As we divide the interval up into smaller subintervals, the 
approximation gets better. For positive functions, the value of the integral is 
equal to the area under the curve and above the axis. Ŷ
antiderivative (of a function f): A function with a derivative equal to f.
Any standard calculus textbook, section de¿ ning the de¿ nite integral and 
exploring its properties.
1. The integral is de¿ ned in terms of sums of products. One number in the 
product is the value of the function in a small interval. Why does it not 
matter which point in the interval you choose in de¿ ning the integral? 
2. Explain why an integral that gives the volume of a solid is somehow 
adding up pieces of area that have no volume and combining them to 
create volume. That almost paradoxical perspective was an obstacle to 
understanding the integral for many years. 
3. Use the Fundamental Theorem of Calculus to evaluate
2
3
1 x dx
³
.
    Suggested Reading
    Important Term
    Questions to Consider

58
Lecture 11: Abstracting the Integral—Pyramids and Dams
Abstracting the Integral—Pyramids and Dams
Lecture 11
In this lecture, we’re going to be talking about how the integral can be 
used to apply to questions that are beyond just the idea of a car moving 
on a straight road. 
W
e saw the power of the derivative in its applications beyond 
motion: the dynamic view of areas and volumes, the growth of 
stalactites in caves, and supply and 
demand curves in economics. Similarly, the 
integral, when viewed abstractly, is an important 
tool 
for 
understanding 
diverse 
dynamical 
situations such as (again) areas and volumes, as 
well as engineering. In this lecture, we work out 
the volume of a pyramid, the volume of a cone, 
and a solution to an engineering problem: the 
hydrostatic pressure on a dam.
Areas and volumes are natural applications of the 
integral. Consider a square with side length x and 
area A(x) = x2. When we studied the derivative, 
we saw that Aƍ(x) = 2x essentially represents 
the change in the area when we increase the 
side length by 1. This means that for each ¨x 
increase in the side length, the area increases by approximately 2x¨x. Thus, 
the total area of a square of side length 5 is the sum of all pieces for each 
¨x between 0 and 5, and it can be realized as an integral and evaluated by 
the Fundamental Theorem of Calculus: 
5
2
2
0
(5)
2
5
0
25
A
xdx
 
 

 
³
.
Now consider a cube with side length x and volume V(x) = x3. When we 
studied the derivative, we saw that Vƍ(x) = 3x2 essentially represents the 
change in the volume when we increase the side length by 1, remembering 
The integral is 
important because 
the process of 
summing that 
the integral is 
performing is 
precisely what we 
need to do to solve 
various problems 
in various settings.

59
that adding to the length of the side adds a layer of extra volume on three 
faces of the cube. Thus, again, for each ¨x increase in the side length, 
the volume increases by approximately 3x2¨x. The total volume of 
a cube of side length 5 is simply the integral of this function: 
0
(5)
V
 ³
 
5
2
0 3x dx
³
. We can compute the integral using the Fundamental 
Theorem of Calculus. Because an antiderivative of 3x2 is x3, we simply evaluate 
x3 at the upper limit of integration and subtract x3 evaluated at the lower limit 
of integration: 
(5)
V
 ³
 
5
2
3
3
0 3
5
0
125
x dx  

 
Now, let us look at more complicated examples, such as computing the 
volume of a pyramid with a square base of side length 200 ft and a height 
of 200 ft. We can approximate the pyramid by a stack of slightly thickened 
squares placed on top of one another, in which the squares get smaller as 
we get near the top of the pyramid. The volume of each thickened square is 
easy to write down, namely, it is the area of the square times the thickness. 
The area of a square h units from the top is h2, so the volume of each 
slice is approximately h2¨h. Adding up the volumes of those thickened 
squares gives an approximation to the volume of the pyramid. Thus, the 
total volume of the pyramid is 
200
2
0
.
h dh
³
 To evaluate the integral, we use 
the Fundamental Theorem of Calculus. An antiderivative of h2 is h3/3, so 
3
3
3
200
2
3
0
200
0
200
2,666,666ft
3
3
3
h dh  

 
 
³
.
Let’s compute the volume of a cone of base radius 3 and height 4. We can 
view the sideways cone as skewered on the x-axis, and we can think of 
slicing it up into thin slices as we would do to a loaf of bread Each slice is 
approximately the same volume as a slightly thickened disk, and the total 
volume of the cone is approximately equal to the sum of the volumes of 
those small slices. Using similar triangles, we can see that at point x, the 

60
Lecture 11: Abstracting the Integral—Pyramids and Dams
radius of the disk is 3x3/4, so the area of the disk is 
2
3
 
4
x
§
·
S¨
¸
©
¹
, or 
2
9
16 x
S
; 
thus, the volume of a slice is
2
2
3
9
 
4
16
x
x
x
x
S
§
·
S
'  
'
¨
¸
©
¹
 . The total volume of 
the cone is 
3
3
4
2
0
9
9
4
0
36
12 ,
16
16
3
3
3
x dx
§
·
S
S
S
 

 
 
S
¨
¸
©
¹
³
 or 1/3 times the area of 
the base (ʌ32) times height (4). Again, note the use of the antiderivative 
of x2: x3/3. 
The integral is important because the process of summing that the integral 
is performing is precisely what we need to do to solve various problems 
in various settings. Suppose we are building a dam and want to know the 
total hydrostatic force on the face of the dam. The pressure (that is, force 
per square foot) varies with depth. The pressure is greater near the bottom 
of the dam than at the top. The total force is obtained by adding up how 
much force there is at each depth. Suppose the dam is 100 feet wide and 
40 feet deep. Then, we could think about dividing the face of the dam into 
narrow strips of ¨h height for the width of the dam. The amount of force 
on a strip at depth h is the product of the area of the strip, 100¨h, and the 
pounds per square inch of water pressure at that depth. The water pressure 
at a depth h is about 62.5h pounds per square foot.Thus, the force on a 
strip of height ¨h that lies at depth h is about (62.5h)(100¨h) pounds, so 
that the total force is
40
0 (62.5 )100
h
dh
³
. We can evaluate this integral via the 
Fundamental Theorem of Calculus. Given that an antiderivative of h is h2/2, 
we can calculate that the total hydrostatic force on the face of the dam is 
5,000,000 pounds. Ŷ
Any standard calculus textbook, section on applications of the integral.
    Suggested Reading

61
1. How does the integral help us view the area of a circle in a 
dynamic way? 
2. Hooke’s Law states that, within certain limits, the force exerted by a 
spring that is stretched to x units beyond its resting length is a constant 
times x. Suppose that for a given spring, the spring constant is 5. Work
in physics is just force times distance. Write an integral whose value 
equals the work done to stretch this spring from its resting position to 
one that is 3 units longer. (Note: If a constant force F were applied over 
3 units, the work done would simply be 3F. With the spring, the force 
varies; thus, F(x) is the variable force where F(x) = 5x, and where x is 
the amount the spring is stretched. The integral is perfectly designed to 
add up force times distance products as the distance varies from 0 to 3.)
    Questions to Consider

62
Lecture 12: Buffon’s Needle or ʌ from Breadsticks
Buffon’s Needle or ʌ from Breadsticks
Lecture 12
[I]t should come as no surprise that calculus also is useful in many 
branches of mathematics. So in this lecture, we’re going to explore 
an example in which calculus is used to compute a surprising result 
in probability. 
H
ere, we explore an example in which calculus is used to compute a 
surprising result in probability. What’s especially surprising is that 
we can compute a de¿ nite number, namely, the number ʌ, using a 
random process. Random processes can lead to unrandom conclusions. In 
this lecture, we will explore an experiment called Buffon’s Needle, which 
involves dropping needles randomly on a sheet of paper. In order to analyze 
this scenario, we will need to use the sine and the cosine functions, so we 
begin today’s lecture with a review of what the sine and cosine functions are 
and what their derivatives and integrals are. 
In this lecture, we will compute a de¿ nite number, namely, the number ʌ, 
by exploring an experiment called Buffon’s Needle, which involves dropping 
needles randomly on a sheet of paper. To solve the Buffon’s Needle problem, 
we will use the Fundamental Theorem of Calculus to compute the integral 
of the sine function over a certain interval. First, however, we need to get 
a better understanding of sine. Recall that sine is a function that is de¿ ned 
geometrically on the circle and that associates a number with every angle. 
We use radian measurement of the angle to tell us the distance along the unit 
circle from the point (1,0) counterclockwise up to the point in question. Sine 
of the angle ș is the height of a right triangle with angle ș and hypotenuse 
1; the cosine is the width of that triangle. As ș changes, so does the sin ș: 
When ș is 0, sine is 0; when ș is small, so is sin ș; when ș approaches 90 
degrees (or ʌ/2 in radian measurement), sin ș approaches 1. More generally, 
the (cos ș, sin ș) are the coordinates of the point on the circle of radius 1 
corresponding to the angle ș radians. As we rotate our angle around the 
circle, the sine value varies from 0 up to 1, back to 0, down to –1, back to 0, 
and so forth. We can graph the sine function and see that it is an oscillating 
curve. The cosine function is the analogous computation for the horizontal 

63
distance to every point on the circle. The cosine measure of angle 0 is 1, and 
it then oscillates back and forth. 
Now let’s try to understand the derivative of sine. Look at the rate at which 
the line opposite the hypotenuse is changing in relation to a change in the 
angle. We ask ourselves how quickly the sine of angle ș will change as we 
change the angle a small amount. Notice that the graph of the cosine captures 
the slopes of the tangent lines on the sine graph. That is a visual indication 
that the derivative of the sine is the cosine. We use the fact that the tangent 
line of a circle is perpendicular to the radius and ¿ nd similar right triangles 
in a ¿ gure of the unit circle that illustrates the sine function. We see that 
the derivative of the sine is the cosine, and the derivative of the cosine is 
negative the sine. From the graphs of these functions, we see geometrically 
why their derivatives are related as they are. Neat. 
Now that we have derivatives of sine and cosine, by the Fundamental 
Theorem of Calculus, we also have their antiderivatives: An antiderivative 
of cos x is sin x. An antiderivative of sin x is –cos x.
We now look at something entirely different by taking a brief excursion to 
probability. We can quantitatively describe the chance of an uncertain event. 
For example, the chance of rolling a 3 when rolling a die is 1/6. In general, 
the probability of an event measures what percentage of the time that event 
will happen. One way to measure probability is to do the experiment many 
times and just count the fraction. For example, in the die case, we could 
roll a die many times and see what fraction of the time we get a 3. I did this 
experiment with the help of my children. They rolled the die 1,000 times and 
counted 164 3s. The fraction of 3s rolled was actually 164/1000, which in 
decimal form is 0.164. This result is close to the probability that we reasoned 
it must be, 1/6, which in decimal form is 0.16666… In general, the more 
times we perform an experiment, the closer the experimental fraction will be 
to the actual probability. This concept is called the Law of Large Numbers. 
Now we use probability and calculus to understand Buffon’s Needle. The 
18th-century French scientist Georges Louis Leclerc, Comte de Buffon, 
asked a question about a random experiment. The experiment involves 
dropping needles (or, in our case, breadsticks) on a lined paper. Drop a needle 

64
Lecture 12: Buffon’s Needle or ʌ from Breadsticks
randomly on a lined page where the distance between lines is equal to the 
needle length. What is the chance that the needle will hit a line? Repeat the 
process of dropping the needle a number of times and count the times it hits a 
line. The number of times the needle crosses a line divided by the number of 
times we dropped the needle is a measure of the frequency with which we hit 
a line. If we drop the needle more and more, 
that measure of the frequency should get close 
to the actual probability. What we will see is 
that by doing this experiment, we can estimate 
the value of ʌ.
We can use calculus to deduce what the exact 
probability should be. Let’s describe where the 
needle could land. There are two parameters 
we will consider associated with each needle’s 
landing. One is the angle at which it lands 
(the angular measurement). If it lands exactly 
parallel to the parallel lines, its angle is 0. As 
it rotates, we will measure its position in radial 
angle from 0 to ʌ. We will also measure where 
the center of the needle lands relative to the 
lines. The center could be on the line or somewhere between the lines. For 
convenience, we will say that the distance between the lines and the length 
of the needle are both 2 units. In this way, the position and the angle tell the 
story. Our challenge is to see how many of those positions hit the line. If the 
angle is close to 0, then the center must be very close to the line to cause a 
hit. If the angle is about ʌ/2, then the center can be far away and still cause 
a hit. Can we make that speci¿ c? For any angle ș, if the center’s distance 
is less than sin ș, the needle will hit the line. Every angle has a particular 
distance where a needle at that angle ¿ rst starts to encounter the line. 
We have, then, a rectangle describing possible positions of the needle. Within 
that rectangle, those positions under the sin ș curve are positions that hit, and 
those above the curve are positions that don’t hit. The total rectangle has area 
ʌ. The question is: How much area is under the curve? Calculus comes to the 
rescue. The integral of sin ș from 0 to ʌ is 2. Thus, the probability that the 
needle will hit a line is 2/ʌ.
In general, the more 
times we perform 
an experiment, 
the closer the 
experimental 
fraction will be to the 
actual probability. 
This concept is 
called the Law of 
Large Numbers.

65
This experiment shows a method for estimating the value of ʌ. We now know 
that the probability in the abstract of the needle hitting a line is 2/ʌ. If after 
many experiments, we ¿ nd that a needle hits the line x times in y droppings, 
then we would expect that x/y is about equal to 2/ʌ. That is, ʌ is about equal 
to 2y/x. 
Let’s see what happens with the data we collected before. When we dropped 
the needle 100,000 times, we hit a line 63,639 times. Using a calculator, we 
see that 2 100,000
3.1427269...
63,639
u
 
, quite close to ʌ, which is 3.1415926…. 
Buffon was able to give estimates for ʌ by, we kid you not, throwing 
breadsticks over his shoulder on a tiled À oor and seeing how often they 
hit the grouting. Hundreds of years after Buffon tossed his breadsticks, 
atomic scientists discovered that a similar needle-dropping model seems to 
accurately predict the chances that a neutron produced by the ¿ ssion of an 
atomic nucleus would either be stopped or deÀ ected by another nucleus near 
it—even nature appears to drop needles. Buffon’s Needle used calculus and 
gives one way of estimating ʌ. Another way to use calculus to estimate ʌ 
is by doing an in¿ nite addition problem, as we will see later. Perhaps this 
story could be called: Randomly dropping a needle from the sky gives us the 
ability to approximate ʌ. Ŷ
Buffon, Georges Louis Leclerc, Comte de (1707–1788). French naturalist 
and author of Histoire naturelle. He translated Newton’s Method of Fluxions
into French. He formulated the Buffon’s Needle problem, linking the study 
of probability to geometric techniques.
Law of Large Numbers: The theorem that the ratio of successes to trials in 
a random process will converge to the probability of success as increasingly 
many trials are undertaken. 
    Name to Know
    Important Term

66
Lecture 12: Buffon’s Needle or ʌ from Breadsticks
Any standard calculus textbook, sections on applications of the de¿ nite 
integral.
Burger, Edward B., and Michael Starbird. The Heart of Mathematics: An 
invitation to effective thinking. 
1. In what sense do repeated trials of an experiment lead us to conclude 
the probability of an event happening? Why do more trials result in 
increasing accuracy? 
2. Find a website about Buffon’s Needle and try the virtual experiment. 
    Suggested Reading
    Questions to Consider

67
Achilles, Tortoises, Limits, and Continuity
Lecture 13
The limit plays a technical role in making the derivative and the integral 
possible. But the intuitive idea of the limit has existed since ancient 
times; and, in fact, much of the development of calculus occurred 
without understanding what it is that the limits really are in the sense 
that we understand them today, the rigorous sense, the mathematical 
de¿ nition of the limits. 
I
n a race between Achilles and a tortoise, the tortoise gets a head start, 
say to position 1. Achilles zooms along to position 1, but the tortoise has 
moved a bit forward, to position 2. Achilles proceeds to position 2, but 
the tortoise, though slow, does move a bit to position 3. Achilles must then go 
on to position 3, but the tortoise has moved to position 4, and so on, forever. 
Zeno’s paradox is that Achilles will never pass the tortoise, because Achilles 
must always catch up, while the tortoise has moved forward. Because there 
are in¿ nitely many times that Achilles must catch up, the tortoise is con¿ dent 
he will win the race—that is, until Achilles 
passes him by. How can the in¿ nite number 
of times that Achilles remains behind be 
reconciled with the experience that Achilles 
wins the race? This paradox illustrates the idea 
of limit, which makes the in¿ nite processes 
in the de¿ nitions of the derivative and the 
integral meaningful and precise. The notion 
of the limit is also essential to understanding 
which kinds of functions are susceptible to 
the methods of calculus and which functions 
are not.
The limit plays an essential role in calculus. We 
could not really de¿ ne derivatives or integrals 
without the concept of limit. Historically 
speaking, however, limits were hard to formalize. The intuitive idea of limit 
existed since ancient times. Much of the development of calculus occurred 
The intuitive idea 
of limit is that if a 
quantity gets closer 
and closer to a ¿ xed 
value, then the ¿ xed 
value is the limit. 
Thus, we can state 
that .999999999… 
(repeat 9s forever) is 
the same as 1.

68
Lecture 13: Achilles, Tortoises, Limits, and Continuity
without an understanding of limits that today we would view as rigorous. 
Newton and Leibniz did not know the de¿ nition of limit. More than 150 
years elapsed between the invention of calculus and an adequate de¿ nition 
of limit. 
In this lecture, we will discuss not only the limit but also continuity and 
differentiability. One of Zeno’s paradoxes leads to an idea that is central to 
the mathematical underpinning of calculus—the idea of limit. The paradox 
involves a race between Achilles and a tortoise. The tortoise gets a head start, 
but Achilles zooms along and gets to the place where the tortoise started. 
However, the tortoise keeps moving along at the same time. Zeno’s paradox 
is that Achilles will never pass the tortoise! The relationship between the 
in¿ nite number of subjourneys and the ¿ nality of arrival captures the idea 
of limit. The intuitive idea of limit is that if a quantity gets closer and closer 
to a ¿ xed value, then the ¿ xed value is the limit. Thus, we can state that 
0.999999999… (repeat 9s forever) is the same as 1.
The derivative and the integral entail taking limits. Let’s recall what the 
derivative means for the function f(x) = x2 at the point x = 1. We choose small 
increments of x, by tradition denoted ǻx. 
Our notation is:
 
0
(1
)
(1)
lim
x
f
x
f
x
' o
 '

§
·
¨
¸
'
©
¹
. 
As we choose values of ǻx that get closer and closer to 0, we ¿ nd that the 
values of 
(1
)
(1)
f
x
f
x
 '

'
 are getting closer and closer to 2; hence, the 
derivative of f(x) = x2 at x = 1 is equal to 2. Likewise, the integral is a limit of 
the approximating sums. 
The formal de¿ nition of limit is challenging but illustrates an interesting 
approach to understanding. The intuitive idea of limit is that if a quantity 
gets closer and closer to a ¿ xed value, then the ¿ xed value is the limit. 

69
For example, consider the value of the expression 
2
2(
4)
2
x
x


 as x is chosen 
close to 2. Plugging in such values as x = 2.1, x = 2.01, and other values 
getting increasingly closer to 2, we see that 
2
2(
4)
2
x
x


 has values that get 
increasingly close to 8. Essentially, given any tiny neighborhood of 8, no 
matter how small, choosing numbers for x near enough to 2 will make 
2
2(
4)
2
x
x


 have a value in that tiny neighborhood of 8. Thus, we say that the 
limit as x approaches 2 of the expression 
2
2(
4)
2
x
x


 is 8. 
The formal de¿ nition of limit, ¿ nally formalized in the middle of the 19th 
century, makes that intuitive notion precise. This de¿ nition captures the 
idea that for every challenge İ > 0, there is a response į > 0 that satis¿ es a 
condition. Every challenge has a response. We can apply this formula in the 
example we saw before: 
2
2(
4)
2
x
x


. Because we know that limits are essential 
to the methods of calculus, we can ask what functions are susceptible to the 
methods of calculus, that is, what functions have derivatives. 
One idea associated with the limit is the concept of continuity. To hope to 
have a derivative, a function must be continuous: There are no gaps and there 
are no sudden, discrete changes. In the case of motion, position is dependent 
on time. From moment to moment, the position changes little by little; there 
are no jumps. Graphs show our position on a line at various times. Jumps 
on the graph showing a change in position are not physically possible. 
Likewise, predicted values cannot be different from the actual values of a 
The Formal De¿ nition of Limit 
lim
( )
x
c f x
L
o
 
 means for every İ > 0, there exists a į > 0, such that if x 
differs from c by less than į, then f(x) differs from L by less than İ. 

70
Lecture 13: Achilles, Tortoises, Limits, and Continuity
position function. Continuous means that at every point along the graph, the 
value is predictable in the sense of being the limit of the neighboring values. 
Graphically, a function is continuous if the graph is connected and can be 
drawn without lifting the pencil. Consider temperature changes at a given 
location. Temperature may change quickly but not instantaneously. We can 
record these temperature data with a graph.
Now we come to the concept of differentiability. When does a function 
have a derivative? Not all continuous functions have a derivative. A 
differentiable function is a function where you have a smooth curve, and if 
you magnify the curve, it begins to look like a straight line. Such a function 
has a derivative. A function that takes an angled turn and does not smoothly 
change direction, such as the path of light being reÀ ected in a mirror, is not a 
differentiable curve. It will not have a derivative. Functions that have sharp 
points are not differentiable, for example, the stock market. Graphically, a 
function is differentiable if it is continuous and has no “sharp points,” that 
is, kinks or cusps. It is easy to identify the graphs of functions that are not 
differentiable functions because they have sharp points. Many functions are 
differentiable, including polynomials, trigonometric functions, exponential 
functions, logarithmic functions, and combinations of these. In a precise 
mathematical sense, most functions are so in¿ nitely jagged that they have 
no place where they are smooth enough to talk about a derivative there. Yet 
smooth functions have been the ones on which calculus relies and from which 
all the wonderful developments and understanding we have seen arose. Ŷ
continuous function: A function that has no breaks or gaps in its graph; the 
graph of a continuous function can be drawn without lifting the pen.
differentiable function: A function whose derivative exists at every point 
where the function is de¿ ned; a continuous function without kinks or cusps.
    Important Terms

71
    Suggested Reading
Any standard calculus textbook, explanation of the limit.
Cajori, Florian. “History of Zeno’s Arguments on Motion,” The American 
Mathematical Monthly, Vol. 22, Nos. 1–9 (1915).
1. How does the limit concept avoid the problem of division by 0 in the 
de¿ nition of the derivative? 
2. Could a limiting process be used in nonmathematical settings, such as 
labor-management negotiations? 
3. Draw a smooth function. Now modify the graph so that your function is 
continuous but not smooth. Finally, modify the graph so that the function 
is discontinuous. Which of these three do you think occurs most often 
in nature?
    Questions to Consider

72
Lecture 14: Calculators and Approximations
Calculators and Approximations
Lecture 14
In this lecture we’re going to see how our calculators are able to work 
some of their magic. In fact, it turns out that the way calculators work 
and some of the processes that they do actually involve a resolution of 
another of Zeno’s paradoxes, namely his arrow paradox. 
Z
eno’s arrow paradox shows us that an in¿ nite addition problem, 1/2 
+ 1/4 + 1/8..., results in a single number, 1. In Zeno’s case, we know 
the answer in advance. However, for ʌ and the square root of 5 and 
others, we may not know the whole decimal expansion of the number, yet 
we may be able to show that it is equal to a speci¿ c in¿ nite sum, and we can 
approximate this sum by merely adding up, say, the ¿ rst few hundred terms 
of the in¿ nite sum. This is exactly what our calculators do to compute the 
answer when we press the sin key or square root key. Where do the in¿ nite 
sums come from? Some come from calculus, 
and we illustrate them both graphically and 
numerically. We also show what happens 
when we ask a computer to solve an equation 
numerically. Here, an in¿ nite process dating 
back to Newton’s time is automated and 
iterated suf¿ ciently many times to produce 
an answer that is as close to the true answer 
as needed for the application.
Zeno’s arrow paradox considers an arrow 
À ying through the air traveling toward your 
heart. The arrow goes 1/2
 
the distance from 
bow to heart, then 1/4
 
that distance, then 1/8 
that distance, and so on, forever. Because the 
arrow does, in fact, arrive at its destination, 
the totality of those fractions is 1. Every point between the bow and the 
target is passed during one of the fractional distances traveled. Written as 
an equation, we have noted that 
1
1
1
1
1
1
2
4
8
16
32
 




 … We call this an 
In the case of Zeno’s 
arrow, we know in 
advance what the 
sum is, namely, 1; 
however, the real 
signi¿ cance of in¿ nite 
series is that they are 
used to approximate 
quantities that we 
don’t otherwise know.

73
in¿ nite series. Notice that if we stop the summing process after hundreds or 
thousands or millions of terms, the sum of the distances traveled will be as 
close to 1 as desired. In other words, the sums of only ¿ nitely many of the 
fractions are as close to 1 as desired but will never equal 1. The limit of the 
¿ nite sums, however, is 1. In the case of Zeno’s arrow, we know in advance 
what the sum is, namely, 1; however, the real signi¿ cance of in¿ nite series is 
that they are used to approximate quantities that we don’t otherwise know. 
Polynomials are easy to calculate because they involve only addition, 
subtraction, multiplication, and division. We often want to approximate a 
nonpolynomial by a polynomial. The sine curve can be approximated by 
polynomials. That is, we can write down an in¿ nite polynomial that gives us 
the precise value of sin x for every angle x given in radians. 
Speci¿ cally, 
 
3
5
7
sin
3 2 1
5 4 3 2 1
7 6 5 4 3 2 1
x
x
x
x
x
 




u u
u u u u
u u u u u u
… 
Examples of in¿ nite series whose values involve ʌ: 
 
1
1
1
1
1
1
4
1
3
5
7
9
11
S  





 …
 
2
2
2
2
2
2
1
1
1
1
1
6
1
2
3
4
5
S  




 …
In each case, we can see how adding up the ¿ rst terms 
of each series allows us to deduce closer and closer 
approximations of ʌ. Each of the above equations is 
obtained using calculus, but for now, we leave their 
genesis as a mystery. 

74
Lecture 14: Calculators and Approximations
74
Using the more compact factorial notation, this is 
 
3
5
7
sin
3!
5!
7!
x
x
x
x
x
 



 … 
This means that we can take any number x and approximate its sine 
by plugging in x to the right-hand side of the equation and doing the 
multiplications and additions. The more terms we use, the closer we will 
be to the exact answer. The value of the sine at any angle is equal to an 
in¿ nite sum. Let’s consider some examples, such as the angle 30°, which 
is ʌ/6 radians. Notice that sin ʌ/6 (which equals 1/2) is increasingly better 
approximated by adding more numbers in the series. 
Let’s look at various curves that are becoming increasingly like the sine 
curve. That is, we can compare the graph of the sine function with the graphs 
of the polynomials obtained by using more and more terms of the right-hand 
side of the equation. We can see better how this process works using an 
example of a car moving on a straight road. Suppose the car never moves 
faster than 1 mile per minute per minute. If the car travels at its maximum 
speed, after 1 minute, the car would have traveled 1 mile. If the car starts 
traveling from a full stop and accelerates at 1 mile per minute per minute, 
then after 1 minute, the car would have gone 1/2
 
mile. If you have a function 
whose derivative starts at 0, and its derivative is 0, and the derivative of that 
is 0, and so on with in¿ nitely many derivatives all equal to 0, the car would 
not travel at all. Using series is exactly how calculators compute values of 
trigonometric functions, such as sine. 
Where do these approximations come from? We can compute the ¿ rst few 
derivatives of sin x, evaluate them at x = 0, and write an in¿ nite polynomial 
that has the same values for its derivatives evaluated at 0 as sin x. This gives 
the following:
 
3
5
7
3
5
7
sin
0
0
0
0
...
...
3!
5!
7!
3!
5!
7!
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
 








 




 

75
In addition to using derivatives to compute such values as ʌ or sin 1, 
calculators also use derivatives in the Newton-Raphson Method to solve 
equations. The Newton-Raphson Method for approximating a solution to an 
equation involves making an initial guess, then using derivatives to re¿ ne 
the guess.
Let’s actually work an example of ¿ nding a root of an equation using this 
method. Let’s try to ¿ nd the square root of 5. The square root of 5 is a 
solution to the equation x2 – 5. Let’s try a ¿ rst guess of 2. The method gives 
a second guess of 2.25, whose square is already pretty good, namely 5.0625. 
Using 2.25 as our next guess produces a third guess of 2.236111111…. That 
guess is really good, with a square of 5.000192852…. Using 2.236111111… 
as our next guess produces a fourth guess of 2.236067978…. This is as close 
as my calculator gets.  Now you know what really happens inside your trusty 
Casio, TI, IBM, or Macintosh once you press the sin or SOLVE button! Ŷ
Newton-Raphson Method: An iterative technique for ¿ nding solutions of 
an equation using graphs and derivatives.
Any standard calculus textbook, sections on in¿ nite series and the Newton-
Raphson method.
1. Consider this in¿ nite sum: 1 – 1 + 1 – 1 + 1 – 1 + …. Is there a single 
number to which it tends? Not all in¿ nite sums converge to a number.
2. Suppose you add up an in¿ nite number of terms and they converge to a 
single answer. Why must the terms that you are adding have a limit of 0? 
Why is that condition not a guarantee that the in¿ nite series converges?
3. Use the Newton-Raphson Method to approximate the cube root of 2. 
How close can you get with your calculator?
    Important Term
    Suggested Reading
    Questions to Consider

76
Lecture 15: The Best of All Possible Worlds—Optimization
The Best of All Possible Worlds—Optimization
Lecture 15
Today we’re going to explore one of the most practical applications 
of calculus, and derivatives in particular, namely the idea of trying to 
optimize things. 
O
ne of the most practical applications of calculus and of derivatives in 
particular is optimization. Suppose we want to build a box that holds 
8 cubic feet with material that costs $2 a square foot for the bottom, 
$1 per square foot for the sides, and another cost for the top. What shape will 
minimize the cost of the box? This type of problem brings students to tears, 
but it illustrates a process of enormous importance in the real world, namely, 
selecting, from a range of possible designs, the design that optimizes some 
feature—in this case, cost savings. In this lecture, we’ll look at several kinds 
of optimization problems, including optimizing the area that can be enclosed 
given a certain amount of fencing and optimizing the shape of a soda can. 
Optimization enables us to select, from a range of possible designs, the 
design that optimizes some feature, perhaps cost savings, time, materials, or 
use of space. The strategy for solving such problems involves an intriguing 
application of derivatives. This kind of problem is the bane of the lives of 
calculus students everywhere.
Suppose you have 600 feet of fencing with which you want to enclose a herd 
of camels in a rectangular ¿ eld, one edge of which is bounded by a straight 
river. What dimensions should you make the fence to enclose the largest 
possible area? The interesting strategy involved in analyzing this question 
is that, in a sense, we look at all possible answers at once. The question is 
one of trying to maximize a quantity—the area of the ¿ eld. Let’s think about 
some possibilities for the shape of the ¿ eld—long and narrow, tall and thin, 
and shapes in between. We can experiment with different choices. Thinking 
about listing all the choices gives us the realization that any allowable choice 
of length and width determines an area. The area depends on length and 

77
width. The width can be any value from 0 (laying the fence right along the 
riverbank) to 300 (having the fence just go up and back right next to itself). 
Of course, the answer will lie somewhere in between.
Calculus is, of course, the hero or heroine. The clever strategy is to ask a 
question about change in area (as a function of change in width), rather than 
the more natural question about values of the area. If we make a guess for 
an optimal width, what would be the effect on the area if we changed our 
guess a little? A change in width results in a change in the area, because 
the area is determined once we know the width. This situation is exactly 
what calculus is for. Calculus (in particular, the derivative) deals with 
cases where the change in one quantity produces a change in another. For 
example, suppose we make the reasonable guess that the optimal shape 
for the ¿ eld would be a square. The area would be 40,000 square feet. 
If we change the dimensions to 201(length) × 
198(width), we have an area of 39,798 sq ft, 
so we know the square has more square feet. 
However, if we change again to 199(length) × 
202(width), the square footage is 40,198. Thus, 
we know the square is not the optimal fencing 
shape. All possible con¿ gurations of the area 
enclosed within the fence can be expressed 
in the following formula, where w = width: 
A(w) = (600 – 2w) × w = 600w – 2w2.
Let’s organize the possible widths and areas in 
a convenient form. For every choice of width, 
we can record the area by graphing the function 
of area as it depends on width. Looking at the 
graph of possible areas, it is easy to pick out by 
eye the maximum area; it’s the one on top. Notice that at that peak point, the 
blown-up picture of the graph would look like a horizontal line. When the 
graph looks like a horizontal line, the derivative is 0. Thus, we know that the 
maximum area will occur at a point where the derivative is 0. 
The clever 
strategy is to ask 
a question about 
change in area 
(as a function of 
change in width), 
rather than the 
more natural 
question about 
values of the area.

78
Lecture 15: The Best of All Possible Worlds—Optimization
How can we ¿ nd a point where the derivative is 0? The answer is to ¿ nd an 
expression for the derivative and set it equal to 0. In this case, the derivative 
of 600w – 2w2 is 600 – 4w. We set the derivative equal to 0 and solve for w, 
as follows:
 
0 = 600 – 4w
 
4w = 600
 
w = 150
Here is an overview of our method: The strategy for ¿ nding the maximum 
area was not to compute the area for different values of possible widths. 
Instead, we considered the whole collection of possible areas created by all 
possible choices of widths. Among those, we looked for a value of the width 
at which the rate of change of the area with respect to width was 0. In other 
words, we looked for features of the dependency of the area on the width. In 
particular, we looked at the rate of change of the area when the width was 
changed and found a place where the rate of change was 0. 
This strategy of ¿ nding maxima and minima is extremely useful. The 
strategy is to realize that maxima and minima will occur at places where the 
derivative is 0. Generally, in a graph there aren’t very many places where that 
happens, so we don’t have too many values to look at. This max-min strategy 
is valuable in many settings. Here is an optimization problem from human 
physiology: When we cough, the trachea (windpipe) contracts to increase 
the velocity of the air going out. How much does it contract to achieve the 
maximum velocity for the escaping air? Biologists have observed that a good 
model for the velocity of the air escaping from the trachea as a function of 
its radius is given by the equation v(r) = c(r0r2 – r3), where c is a constant 
and r0 is the radius of the trachea at rest. The strategy is then to ¿ nd where 
vƍ(r) is zero: vƍ(r) = c(2r0r – 3r2) = 0 exactly when r = (2/3)r0, that is, when 
the trachea is about 2/3 contracted. Amazingly x-ray photographs con¿ rm 
this observation!
Our ¿ nal example comes from product design. Suppose we are designing 
a soda can that is to hold 12 À uid ounces. What dimensions minimize the 
amount of aluminum used? We will assume that our soda can is cylindrical. 
If it has base radius r and height h, its volume is V = ʌr2h and its surface area 

79
is A = 2ʌrh + 2ʌr2. One À uid ounce is approximately 1.8 cubic inches, so our 
volume V is 21.6 cubic inches. Solving for h, h = 21.6/ʌr2, and substituting 
into the equation for A, we ¿ nd A = 43.2/r + 2ʌr2. Finding the derivative, 
setting it to zero, and solving for r, we ¿ nd r = 1.51 inches, which in turn, 
yields h = 3.02 inches. Does this agree with the actual dimensions of soda 
cans? In reality, many other factors must be taken into consideration when 
designing soda cans, changing the function to be optimized and, thus, 
resulting in different measurements. Ŷ
maximum: The largest value of the outputs of a function. The y-value of the 
highest point on the graph of a function. It does not always exist.
Any standard calculus textbook, section on max-min problems.
1. Find two numbers such that their sum is 20 and their product 
is maximum. 
2. Issues of balance and proportion are often problems of maximizing or 
minimizing something. What is the balance of daily activities, such 
as work, social activity, and exercise, that maximizes happiness? Do 
you think that the philosophy of the mathematical strategy for ¿ nding 
maxima and minima is useful when considering such completely 
nonmathematical issues as human happiness?
    Important Term
    Suggested Reading
    Questions to Consider

80
Lecture 16: Economics and Architecture
Economics and Architecture
Lecture 16
In the last lecture we saw how to optimize various quantities by looking 
at how those quantities were changing and looking, in particular, at the 
derivative; setting the derivative equal to 0. In this lecture we’re going 
to illustrate these same concepts of optimization, but apply them in the 
context of other things: economics and architecture. 
M
any aspects of business and economic conditions are described by 
functions that relate one feature of the situation to another. Heads 
of business wish to optimize and maximize the pro¿ ts for their 
companies. Remember: Maximization is a process that calls for calculus! 
The cost function C(x) tells us how much it costs to produce x items. The 
revenue function R(x) tells us the total revenue expected if we sell x items. 
Pro¿ t P (x) is simply the revenue minus the cost: P(x) = R(x) – C(x). Our job 
is to maximize that difference. If we change the number of items produced, 
the change in the cost can be measured as a derivative of the cost curve. The 
change in cost is called the marginal cost, MC, and it measures the additional 
cost of producing one more item when x are already produced. MC is the 
derivative of the cost function. Similarly, the marginal revenue, MR, is the 
rate at which the revenue grows, and it measures the additional revenue we 
get by selling one more item when x are already sold. MR is the derivative of 
the revenue function.
The maximum pro¿ t will occur when the marginal cost and the marginal 
revenue are equal. Why? If, at a particular production level, the marginal 
revenue is greater than the marginal cost, then producing one more item will 
yield greater pro¿ t—the increase in revenue will exceed the increase in cost. 
On the other hand, if the marginal cost is greater than the marginal revenue, 
then decreasing production will lead to more pro¿ t, because the cost will 
be reduced more than the revenue is reduced. Mathematically, we know 
that the maximum of the function P (x) occurs where 
( )
0
P x
c
 
. However, 
( )
( )
( )
0
P x
MR x
MC x
c
 

 
 exactly when MR = MC. Thus, mathematical 
reasoning agrees with our intuitive understanding. 

81
Here is an example of a business problem with the goal of choosing 
production and price levels that will maximize pro¿ t. Suppose our company 
wishes to manufacture and sell a product. The ¿ xed cost for designing and 
modifying manufacturing equipment is $100,000. After those ¿ xed expenses, 
the cost for producing and marketing the item is $30 per unit. Experience has 
shown that if the items are sold at price p, then approximately 20,000 – 50p 
will be sold. Notice that this means that if the price is $400, no one will buy 
any, and if the price is extremely low, about 20,000 people will buy them. 
As we have learned, MC is 30. MR, a somewhat more complicated ¿ gure, is 
calculated to be 400 – x/25. What price should be set, and how many items 
should be manufactured? The answer is 9,250 at a price of $215 each. 
Even an architectural issue, such as where to stand to get the best view of a 
painting in a museum, is a problem of maxima and minima. First, we need 
to draw a picture to see what we are trying to optimize. In this case, we are 
looking to optimize the angle at which we can 
best view the painting; therefore, our goal is to 
¿ nd the distance from the wall at which the angle 
is biggest. Once again, we use the derivative—
in this case, the derivative of the arc tangent—to 
arrive at the answer. A similar calculation can be 
effective in determining where to sit at a movie 
theater to optimize the angle to the screen.
Challenge problems were a feature of European 
mathematics in the 17th century. We’ll look 
brieÀ y at two such questions. One such problem 
was to ¿ nd an equation to describe the shape 
of a hanging chain. Galileo had mistakenly 
thought that such a chain hung in the shape of 
a parabola, but Jungius, another mathematician, 
had disproved that proposition in 1669. In 1690, Jakob Bernoulli posed the 
challenge to ¿ nd the correct equation for the shape, and his challenge was 
solved by Huygens, Johann Bernoulli, and Leibniz in 1691; of course, the 
solution used calculus. 
A strange property 
of the catenary is 
that if you made 
a road of inverted 
catenaries, 
you could ride 
a bicycle with 
square wheels on 
that road and be 
perfectly level.

82
Lecture 16: Economics and Architecture
The shape is called a catenary, and it has several interesting properties. 
The horizontal forces on each link are in equilibrium. An inverted catenary 
is a particularly good shape for an arch because the forces are tangential 
along the arch. A beautiful example of an inverted catenary arch is the St. 
Louis Arch. A strange property of the catenary is that if you made a road of 
inverted catenaries, you could ride a bicycle with square wheels on that road 
and be perfectly level. 
Galileo was almost right about the parabola shape. A catenary and a parabola 
are similar in shape, and a catenary actually turns into a parabola if you 
construct a bridge using hanging cables, then suspend weights evenly along 
it. For example, at the Golden Gate Bridge in San Francisco, the tension in 
the cable must support a certain load, so the arch that was a catenary became 
a parabola after the road was hung from it.
The other challenge problem is called the Brachistochrone problem. In 1696, 
Johann Bernoulli posed the problem; namely, down what shaped curve 
between two points would a ball reach the lower point fastest? Newton was 
tired from a hard day at the mint when he received the problem. Because he 
was intrigued and annoyed by the problem, he stayed up until 4:00 a.m. until 
he had solved it. Five people solved the Brachistochrone problem correctly, 
and all are famous in calculus: Johann Bernoulli, Jakob Bernoulli, the 
Marquis de L’Hôpital, Leibniz, and Newton. The solution is a cycloid, which 
is a curve created by a rolling wheel. A straight line is not the answer. We can 
perform the experiment to demonstrate this fact. Intuitively, it is reasonable 
to think that if the curve starts steeply down, the ball will gain velocity faster. 
This curve is also called an isochrone because, no matter where on the curve 
you release the ball, it arrives at the end at the same time. 
Virgil’s Aeneid refers to an optimization problem now known as Dido’s 
problem. Queen Dido was granted the amount of land that could be enclosed 
by an ox’s hide. She cut the hide into a long, thin strip and made a large 
circle. How do we know that the circle encloses the biggest area given the 
length of the string? The solution to the optimization question is to ¿ nd 
the pattern of a curve and not just a number. The solutions to this problem 
and the Brachistochrone problem involve a method of calculus known as 
calculus of variations. Ŷ

83
Bernoulli, Jacques (often called Jakob or James) (1654–1705). Professor 
of mathematics at Basel and a student of Leibniz. He studied in¿ nite series 
and was the ¿ rst to publish on the use of polar coordinates (the lemniscate 
of Bernoulli is named for him). He formulated the Law of Large Numbers in 
probability theory and wrote an inÀ uential treatise on the subject. Together, 
Jacques and brother Jean were primarily responsible for disseminating 
Leibniz’s calculus throughout Europe.
Bernoulli, Jean (often called Johannes or John) (1667–1748). Swiss 
mathematician. He was professor of mathematics at Groningen (Holland) 
and Basel (after the death of his brother Jacques). He was a student of 
Leibniz and applied techniques of calculus to many problems in geometry 
and mechanics. He proposed the famous Brachistochrone problem as a 
challenge to other mathematicians. Jean Bernoulli was the teacher of Euler
and L’Hôpital (who provided Jean a regular salary in return for mathematical 
discoveries, including the well-known L’Hôpital’s Rule).
Euler, Leonhard (1707–1783). Swiss mathematician and scientist. Euler was 
the student of Jean Bernoulli. He was professor of medicine and physiology 
and later became a professor of mathematics at St. Petersburg. Euler is 
the most proli¿ c mathematical author of all time, writing on mathematics, 
acoustics, engineering, mechanics, and astronomy. He introduced 
standardized notations, many now in modern use, and contributed unique 
ideas to all areas of analysis, especially in the study of in¿ nite series. He lost 
nearly all his sight by 1771 and was the father of 13 children.
Galilei, Galileo (1564–1642). Italian mathematician and philosopher; 
professor of mathematics at Pisa and at Padua. He invented the telescope 
(after hearing of such a device) and made many astronomical discoveries, 
including the existence of the rings of Saturn. He established the ¿ rst law of 
motion, laws of falling bodies, and the fact that projectiles move in parabolic 
curves. Galileo made great contributions to the study of dynamics, leading 
to consideration of in¿ nitesimals (eventually formalized in the theory of 
calculus). He advocated the Copernican heliocentric model of the solar 
system and was subsequently placed under house arrest by the Inquisition.
    Names to Know

84
Lecture 16: Economics and Architecture
Any calculus textbooks on applications to economics and calculus 
of variations.
1. Recall your last trip to the supermarket. What function are you 
optimizing as you shop for groceries? What is your constraint for the 
optimization? Do you think it’s possible to write down equations for 
both functions?
2. What other shapes, coming from nature or architecture, do you think 
solve some kind of a physical optimization problem? (Think of arches, 
for example.)
    Suggested Reading
    Questions to Consider

85
Galileo, Newton, and Baseball
Lecture 17
One of the most direct applications of calculus concerns the description 
of moving objects. In fact, we introduced the derivative and the 
integral by analyzing a car that was moving down a straight road. 
But, when objects are À ying through the air, we have to deal with 
some complications. 
I
t is vitally important to be able to predict where a projectile will land and 
what path it will take. Certainly in using any military device, such as a 
cannon, we need to know the path of the cannonball so we can ¿ gure out 
where to aim it. Perhaps more important, an out¿ elder needs to know where 
to stand to catch a À y ball. Galileo performed a famous experiment at the 
Tower of Pisa to demonstrate a feature of the velocity at which falling bodies 
fall; Kepler studied planetary motion; and Newton devised a general theory 
of gravitation. All these examples illustrate how methods of calculus can 
describe the path and velocity of projectiles from cannonballs to baseballs 
to planets. 
One of the most direct applications of calculus concerns the prediction of 
where a projectile, whether a cannonball or baseball, will land and what 
path it will take. The work of Galileo, Kepler, and Newton all illustrate 
how methods of calculus can describe the path and velocity of projectiles. 
Aristotle wrote that heavier objects fall faster than lighter ones. Galileo 
refuted Aristotle’s assertions by direct experiment. He may or may not have 
dropped balls from the Tower of Pisa to show that heavier bodies do not fall 
faster than lighter ones. In a vacuum, a feather falls exactly as fast as an iron 
ball. Galileo devised a formula for how far a body will fall in a given amount 
of time. Galileo also formulated the idea that a body in motion will tend to 
remain in motion at the same velocity and in the same direction until some 
force acts on it.
In 1665, the plague closed Cambridge University and Newton spent a couple 
of years on his family farm thinking about mathematics and the universe. 
(Perhaps years with less instruction would improve our creativity, as well.) 

86
Lecture 17: Galileo, Newton, and Baseball
Newton devised the law of universal gravitation, namely, that the force 
of gravity between any two objects is proportional to the product of their 
masses and inversely proportional to the square of their distance apart. A 
falling apple actually may have suggested to Newton the idea that the force 
pulling the apple was the same as the force holding the Moon or the planets in 
orbit. Newton also formulated other laws of physics, the ¿ rst one following 
Galileo. A body in motion will stay in motion unless a force is applied 
to it. The second law is written F = ma. This law connects force (such as 
gravity) to acceleration. A uniform force applied to a body creates a uniform 
acceleration. The third law is stated: For 
every action, there is an equal and opposite 
reaction. From the inverse square law of 
gravitation and his other laws of motion, 
Newton was able to deduce Kepler’s laws 
of planetary motion, including the fact 
that the planets revolve around the Sun in 
elliptical orbits.
Using Newton’s laws, we can analyze the 
motion of a falling body. The force of gravity 
at the surface of the Earth will cause a body 
to accelerate at about –32 feet per second 
per second, where the minus sign indicates 
that the acceleration is in the downward direction. From this insight, we can 
conclude that a falling body will accelerate at a constant rate. That is, if we 
drop a ball, after 1 second, it will be traveling –32 ft/sec; after 2 seconds, 
–64 ft/sec; after 3 seconds, –96 ft/sec; and so on. Notice that it is the velocity 
that is increasing with each second. The distance traveled is increasing far 
more each second. It is an easy matter, then, to write down the velocity of 
the object at each second. Namely, –32t ft/sec, where t is the time in seconds 
since the ball was dropped. Now we can use our insights about the relation 
between distance traveled and velocity to compute the distance the falling 
ball will have fallen after any given amount of time. Notice that –16t2 is a 
position function that would give –32t as the velocity at each time, because 
the derivative of –16t2 is –32t. The distance that the ball falls after t seconds 
is –16t2. After 3 seconds, the ball will have fallen –16(32) = –144 feet. 
One of the most 
direct applications of 
calculus concerns the 
prediction of where 
a projectile, whether 
a cannonball or 
baseball, will land and 
what path it will take.

87
Throwing balls lets us analyze the paths that projectiles take. Let’s ¿ rst 
consider throwing a ball straight up, then catching it. Let’s say the initial 
velocity is 48 ft/sec. If we throw the ball up at v0 ft/sec, then the velocity will 
decrease at 32 ft/sec each second, where a negative velocity is the velocity at 
which the ball will fall after it reaches its peak height. Thus, the velocity at 
time t will be v0 – 32t ft/sec. For example, if we throw the ball up at 48 ft/sec, 
it will rise for 1.5 seconds before it reaches its highest point. At 1.5 seconds, 
its velocity will be 0 right before it descends. The height of the ball at time t 
will be v0t – 16t2; that is a position function whose derivative would yield the 
velocity we know we have at each time, namely, v0 – 32t.
Let’s analyze the path of a À y ball with the help of a graph. Putting these 
ideas together, a ball thrown or hit at a certain velocity upward (in this case, 
48 ft/sec) and a certain velocity forward (100 ft/sec) will rise and fall along 
a curved path. The height at each second t is given by v0t – 16t2, where v0 is 
the initial vertical velocity. We know the ball will land when the height of the 
ball is 0 again. Using the calculation 48t – 16t2 = 0, we ¿ nd that the ball will 
land after 3 seconds. The horizontal velocity will be a steady velocity equal 
to the initial horizontal velocity. Therefore, after 3 seconds, the ball will land 
300 feet away from home plate (100 ft/sec × 3 sec).
Consider a À y ball. How does the out¿ elder know where to stand to be in 
the place where the ball will land? The answer is neat. At each moment, 
the out¿ elder can measure the slope of the line from the out¿ elder’s eye to 
the ball. If the rate at which the slope is changing is a constant, that is, the 
derivative of the slope of the line to the moving ball is a constant, then the 
ball will land right in the out¿ elder’s eye. Perhaps Willie Mays was doing 
calculus when he made an incredible catch in the 1954 World Series, winning 
the series for the New York Giants.
Another way to catch the ball would be available to a baseball player who 
was playing on a more theoretical ¿ eld. Suppose the batter hit the ball, but 
the Earth itself was not there. Instead, suppose that all the mass of the Earth 
were concentrated in a single point at the center of the Earth. The baseball 
would then take on an elliptical orbit around that point. It would zoom down, 
whip around the concentrated center of the Earth, and return. The out¿ elder 
could leisurely stroll up to where the batter hit the ball and simply wait. In 

88
Lecture 17: Galileo, Newton, and Baseball
about half an hour, the ball would return, traveling at precisely the velocity at 
which it was hit but coming from the opposite direction. Conclusion: Every 
out¿ elder knows calculus. Ŷ
Kepler, Johannes (1571–1630). German astronomer and mathematician; 
mathematician and astrologer to Emperor Rudolph II (in Prague). Kepler 
assisted Tycho Brahe (the Danish astronomer) in compiling the best collection 
of astronomical observations in the pre-telescope era. He developed 
three laws of planetary motion and made the ¿ rst attempt to justify them 
mathematically. They were later shown to be a consequence of the universal 
law of gravitation by Newton, applying the new techniques of calculus. 
Any standard calculus textbook, section on falling bodies.
1. If you are skeptical that every out¿ elder knows calculus, then how does 
the out¿ elder know where to run? 
2. Is it surprising to you that such an easily contradicted assertion, such as 
Aristotle’s assertion about heavy bodies falling faster, could nevertheless 
be believed for centuries?
    Name to Know
    Suggested Reading
    Questions to Consider

89
Getting off the Line—Motion in Space
Lecture 18
The idea of calculus, and, in fact, mathematics in general, is that we 
develop concepts in some simple setting, and then we can extend those 
ideas and apply them in different settings. 
C
ars do not really drive in straight lines. They move about on roads 
that turn. A mosquito À ying through the air has a position at each 
moment that is varying in all three spatial dimensions. Planets move 
around the Sun. After developing the ideas of calculus for cars moving in a 
straight line, we have gained enough experience and expertise to apply the 
same methods of reasoning to things moving around anywhere in space. We 
can ask all the same questions that we considered when talking about the 
simple case of cars on straight roads. We can talk about their instantaneous 
velocity and we can ask how far they travel. One of the strengths of calculus 
is its versatility. Ideas developed in simple settings can be modi¿ ed and 
expanded to apply in more complicated settings. 
How can we describe motion in space? At each moment in time, a À ying 
mosquito is at some speci¿ c position in space. That position can be described 
by three spatial coordinates. The position of the moving mosquito is an 
example in which each time yields a more complicated quantity than just a 
single number. Each time yields all three spatial coordinates. 
Let’s consider an example of a bug (VW, that is) moving around a plane. 
Notice that the positions are time-stamped, so we know where the bug was 
at each moment. Speci¿ cally, we know its x- and y-coordinates at each 
time. Here are some questions we can consider: In what direction is the bug 
going at each moment? How fast is the bug moving at each moment? The 
combination of these two pieces of information—the direction the bug is 
moving and the velocity with which it’s moving—is the velocity vector of 
the bug. How far did the bug travel? This last question seeks the length of a 
curved path. These are all calculus questions.

90
Lecture 18: Getting off the Line—Motion in Space
Let’s revisit the scenario of the trajectory of a baseball.  Recall that the 
position of the moving ball can be given by stating at each time how far it 
has moved horizontally and how high it is. Therefore, this is a vector-valued 
function. Speci¿ cally, suppose the ball leaves the bat with a horizontal 
velocity of 100 feet per second and a vertical velocity of 48 ft/sec. As we 
learned in Lecture 17, at any time t seconds after being hit, the ball will be 
located 48t – 16t2 feet up in the air and 100t feet horizontally from the plate. 
At any time t seconds after being hit, the ball will have vertical velocity 48 – 
32t, because gravity is changing the vertical velocity by 32 ft/sec downward 
during each second of travel. Its horizontal velocity will continue to be 100 
ft/sec. From this information, we can compute 
how fast the ball is actually traveling at every 
moment and in what direction. To ¿ nd that 
out, we ¿ nd derivatives, one of which will 
give us the rate at which the ball is moving 
horizontally and one of which will give us 
the rate at which the ball is moving vertically. 
We combine those two rates to ¿ nd the actual 
velocity and direction of the ball. 
To combine the motion in the two directions, 
we make use of a right triangle and the 
Pythagorean 
Theorem. 
We 
have 
one 
component of velocity in the horizontal 
direction (vx) and another in the vertical direction (vy). To ¿ nd the diagonal 
length of the triangle, which represents the speed at which the ball is moving 
at any time and in any direction, we take the square root of v[x](t) 2 + v[y](t)2. 
We can compute this value for a variety of times and vertical velocities.
We found the velocity and direction of travel of a car; however, we have not 
yet ¿ gured out how far it travels over time. In this case, the car’s x coordinate 
is the horizontal component p[x] (t) = t3/2 – t. Its y coordinate is p[y] (t) = t2. We 
consider t as measured in minutes and p as measured in miles. The distance 
traveled is the same as the length of a curved path.
By adding up the 
small increments of 
distance traveled in 
each hundredth of a 
minute, we obtain an 
approximation of the 
total distance the car 
traveled from time 0 
to time 3.

91
Let’s obtain an approximation of the distance the car traveled from time 0 
to time 3. At each time, we can ¿ nd the velocity at which we are traveling, 
as described before, by taking derivatives in each coordinate and using the 
Pythagorean Theorem. We can approximate the distance traveled in a short 
amount of time by multiplying the velocity times a small increment of time. 
We can choose small increments of time between 0 and 3, such as increments 
of a hundredth of a minute. By adding up the small increments of distance 
traveled in each hundredth of a minute, we obtain an approximation of the 
total distance the car traveled from time 0 to time 3. This whole process 
is naturally represented as an integral, because the distance traveled is 
approximated by taking sums that are in the form of the integral. Finding the 
lengths of curves is generally accomplished by using an integral. 
Let’s close with a word about the Pythagorean Theorem. We have used it 
several times, but we have not proven it. We can do so in a number of ways. 
The 12th-century Indian mathematician Bhaskara provided an exceptionally 
elegant demonstration of the truth of the Pythagorean Theorem that we can 
understand best with a simple diagram. Ŷ
vector: An arrow indicating direction and magnitude (usually of motion in 
two-dimensional or three-dimensional space).
Any standard calculus textbook, sections on vector calculus.
1. Explain why the positions of yourself at every moment during your life 
form an example of a vector-valued function. 
2. In English, explain the relationship between the velocity and position of 
the motion of the second hand versus the motion of a minute hand on a 
standard clock. 
    Important Term
Suggested Reading
    Questions to Consider

92
Lecture 19: Mountain Slopes and Tangent Planes
Mountain Slopes and Tangent Planes
Lecture 19
In this lecture we’re going to explore the situation where one value 
is dependent on two or more independently varying values. This 
kind of situation happens all the time in the real world, so this is 
very common. 
T
he volume of a box depends on its length, width, and height. In other 
words, the volume of the box is a quantity that depends on several 
features, each of which can vary independently. This situation of a 
single value being dependent on several others is another arena in which to 
explore the strategies of thought that make up the world of calculus. Here, 
the representation of the dependency produces intriguing pictures in several 
dimensions. The derivative measures how much the change in one varying 
quantity will affect another dependent quantity. We also analyze how changes 
in each of several factors individually inÀ uence the whole result. The idea 
of a partial derivative is essential to the study of relationships involving 
several varying quantities. 
In this lecture, we will study situations in which one value is dependent on 
two or more independently varying values. This concept is called a function 
of several variables. We will take the concepts of calculus, particularly the 
derivative, and see how to adapt them to functions of several variables. 
Measuring the altitude at different places is a good example of a quantity (the 
altitude) that varies according to position, which is given by two coordinates 
(latitude and longitude). Imagine that we are standing on a mountain. The 
mountain has varying steepness depending on where we are and which 
direction we turn. The steepness refers to change in altitude with respect to 
a change in position, but here, the position can change in many ways, unlike 
the case of a car moving on a straight road. This leads to an idea of measuring 
the change in any direction we consider—a directional derivative. Think 
about expanding the location on the side of the mountain. In a small enough 
region, it is À at, a plane. 

93
Let’s explore the area of a rectangle. A rectangle is a simple shape. Its area 
is length times width (A = l × w). Its area depends on two choices; thus, we 
can ask: How fast is the area changing with respect to a change in the length? 
How fast is the area changing with respect to a change in the width? If we 
have a rectangle 2 units wide × 5 units long, we could add a small amount to 
its length and see that the area would increase slightly, as well. In this case, 
we could ask, “What is the rate at which the area is increasing for a unit 
increase in length?” or we could ask, “What is the rate at which the area is 
increasing for a unit increase in width?” 
These two rates of change in the total when the variables are altered 
individually are called partial derivatives. When we change the length by 
ǻl, how much additional area do we get? We see that we get ǻl times the 
width. If we divide that incremented area by the change in the length, we 
see that the rate of change in the area per unit change in length is w. If we 
change the length of our rectangle by 1 unit, we see that we will increase 
the area by only 2 units per additional unit of 
length. Likewise, if we change the width of our 
rectangle by 1 unit, we see that we will increase 
the area by 5 units per additional unit of width.
Suppose we alter both the length and the width 
at once. Suppose we simultaneously increase the 
length and width the same amount, 1 unit each? 
We can calculate the rate at which the area of 
the rectangle will increase for such a change. 
This is an example of a directional derivative.
Let us now look at the function f(x, y) = 
– (x2 + y2). The analog of the tangent line is the 
tangent plane. When we had a graph, it was 
natural to magnify it and see that it became 
more like a straight line. When we have two variables, when we magnify the 
graph, it becomes more like a plane. This gives the idea of a tangent plane. 
We can interpret the partial derivatives with respect to x and with respect to 
y of this function. For the function f (x, y), at any given point, if we stand at 
the point (x, y) and we move in the positive x direction, we are ¿ xing the y 
A tangent plane 
is that plane that 
contains the 
tangent line in the 
x direction and the 
tangent line in the 
y direction—lines 
whose slopes are 
determined by the 
partial derivatives.

94
Lecture 19: Mountain Slopes and Tangent Planes
coordinate, so the y direction is a constant. Thus, we are seeing the rate at 
which we are rising and falling. Computing that rate would be the partial 
derivative with respect to x. Likewise, if we stand at the point (x, y) and 
we move in the positive y direction, we are ¿ xing the x coordinate, so the x
direction is a constant. In this case, we are computing the partial derivative 
with respect to y.
These partial derivatives with respect to x and with respect to y tell us 
geometric features about the graph of the terrain. A tangent plane is that 
plane that contains the tangent line in the x direction and the tangent line in 
the y direction—lines whose slopes are determined by the partial derivatives. 
Finding where tangent planes are horizontal locates places where the values 
might be maximum or minimum. Such places would indicate a peak or a 
downward-facing peak. In other words, if we ¿ nd a place where both the 
partial derivatives with respect to x and with respect to y are 0, we would say 
that is a candidate for a maximum or minimum point.
Real-world situations often involve several variables. Our weight is 
dependent on how much we eat, what we eat, genetic factors, and how much 
we exercise. Our bank balances are the result of two variables, how much we 
earn and how much we spend. Many complicated situations are dependent 
on many variables. The methods of calculus give a strategy for analyzing 
such situations. Ŷ
directional derivative: The rate of change of a function of several variables 
in the direction of a given vector.
minimum: The smallest value of the outputs of a function. The y-value of 
the lowest point on the graph of a function. It does not always exist.
partial derivative: The rate of change of a quantity relative to the change of 
one of several quantities that are inÀ uencing its value when the other varying 
quantities remain ¿ xed. 
    Important Terms

95
Any standard calculus textbook, chapters on functions of several variables.
1. Choose an everyday phenomenon and describe how it can be viewed as 
a function of several variables. For example, the price of a stock may 
depend on performance of the company, global money supply, fads, and 
so on. 
2. How could we visualize (as a graph does) a function of three variables? 
    Suggested Reading
    Questions to Consider

96
Lecture 20: Several Variables—Volumes Galore
Several Variables—Volumes Galore
Lecture 20
In the last lecture we were talking about an extension of the ideas 
of calculus to functions of more than one variable, when we talked 
about mountain slopes, and functions of two variables. In particular, 
we were talking about analogs of the derivative in that new situation. 
Today we’re going to talk about the analog of the integral in that 
new situation. 
W
e have seen that integration is a way to measure area and volume. 
In this lecture, we extend our techniques to measure volumes and 
surface areas of solids obtained by a process of revolution, and 
we construct a theoretical solid that has ¿ nite volume but in¿ nite surface 
area—that is, we have a full can of paint that does not hold enough paint to 
paint its own walls! Solids of revolution are nice and regular, but how can we 
measure volumes of stranger objects? To do this, we introduce integration in 
several variables, thus extending the second main idea of calculus from a 
line to space. Both the derivative and the integral have rich applications in 
settings of higher dimensions.
We have extended the ideas of calculus to functions of more than one 
variable, including analogs of the derivative. Now, we will discuss computing 
the volumes of solids of revolution. Suppose that we rotate around the x-axis 
the area under a curve f (x) between points a and b. The speci¿ c function we 
will look at is f(x) = x2. The radius of each disk at a point x is then f (x) or
x2, so the volume of a thin slab is just the area of a disk of radius x2 slightly 
thickened. The volume of the thin hockey puck is ʌ (x2) 2¨x. 
Consequently, the volume of our solid is approximated by adding up those 
volumes. In the limit, that sum is the integral: 


2
2
2
( )
(
)
b
b
a
a
V
f x
dx
x
dx
 
S
 
S
³
³
.

97
Now, suppose we have a weirdly shaped but symmetrical vase, with its 
shape given by the function f(x) = x2 between a = 0 and b = 2. At each 
point x, its radius is just x2, so its volume is 
2
2
2
0
(
)
V
x
dx
 
S
³
, which with 
a little bit of work, evaluates to ʌ(32/5). The same volume can be computed 
by viewing the volume as the sum of cylinders. In this case, for each y 
between 0 and 4, we have a boundary of a “tuna can” of radius y and height 
2
y

. Thickening up that cylinder slightly, 
by thickness ǻy, at location y, gives a 
volume of 
2
(2
)
y
y
y
S

'
. Adding up 
those pieces of volume and passing to the 
limit gives us an integral whose value is the 
volume of that solid of revolution, namely, 
4
0 2
(2
)
y
y dy
S

³
, 
which 
as 
expected, 
has the same value as the previous 
integral, ʌ(32/5). 
Solids of revolution also provide us with 
contradictory objects, including one that has 
¿ nite volume but in¿ nite surface area. This 
apparently nonexistent object involves the 
use of in¿ nity. The object is an in¿ nite horn obtained by revolving a curve 
around the x-axis. We can estimate the area and the volume of the in¿ nite 
horn. Using the Fundamental Theorem of Calculus, we conclude that the 
total volume is ¿ nite; in fact, we discover that the volume is ʌ cubic units. To 
see that there is in¿ nite area, we divide the surface of the horn into pieces. 
Each piece is larger than a corresponding cylinder. Each of the in¿ nitely 
many cylinders has area ʌ; hence, the horn has in¿ nite area. Therefore, this 
horn, if put upright, would be a can that would hold only ʌ gallons of paint, 
yet we could not paint its walls! Integrals can be used to compute the volume 
and area of this in¿ nite horn. This solid with in¿ nite surface area but ¿ nite 
volume shows that in¿ nity can be a tricky place to sell paint.
Solids of revolution 
also provide us with 
contradictory objects, 
including one that 
has ¿ nite volume 
but in¿ nite surface 
area. This apparently 
nonexistent object 
involves the use 
of in¿ nity.

98
Lecture 20: Several Variables—Volumes Galore
We now look at how to extend the concept of integration to functions of two 
variables. Recall that the integral for a regular function gave the area under 
the curve. For a function of two variables, the integral gives the volume 
under the surface. A surface is the graph of a function with two variables. 
We can consider them in analogy to the familiar case of only one variable. 
Our strategy is to divide the volume into slices that run parallel to one of 
the axes, compute the volume of each slice using an integral, and add those 
together, again using an integral. Thus, we use a double integral. In other 
words, computing a double integral requires us to perform an iterated process 
of integration. 
The notation is really neat—a double integral symbol, for example: 
 
( , )
f x y dxdy
³³
.
Here’s an example: Suppose we want to compute the volume contained 
beneath the graph of the function of two variables over a particular rectangle 
in the plane where the x values are between 0 and 2 and the y values are 
between 0 and 3; that is, 
2
R
x ydxdy
³³
, where 
[0, 2] [0,3]
R  
u
. Our double 
integral becomes a matter of taking a single integral with respect to y, where 
at each value of y, the value we want to add is itself computed by taking an 
integral. Here is the equation:
 
3
2
2
2
0
0
R
x ydxdy
x ydx dy
§
·
 
¨
¸
©
¹
³³
³ ³
. 
Alternatively, we can take a single integral with respect to y:
 
2
3
2
2
0
0
R
x ydxdy
x ydy dx
§
·
 
¨
¸
©
¹
³³
³ ³
. 

99
Through our calculations, we arrive at the same answer for both equations: 
12. We can think of our volume like a loaf of bread and compute the double 
integral by adding up thickened slices. We can conclude that calculus is the 
best thing since sliced bread! Ŷ
Any standard calculus textbook, chapters on solids of revolution and 
functions of several variables.
1. The integral 
2
2
0
x dx
S
³
represents the volume of what geometric object? 
Can you compute it?
2. Do you think it’s possible to construct a horn with ¿ nite surface area but 
in¿ nite volume?
3. The temperature of a rectangular plate at each point (x,y) is given by the 
function T(x, y). How would you compute the average temperature of 
the plate?
    Suggested Reading
    Questions to Consider

100
Lecture 21: The Fundamental Theorem Extended
The Fundamental Theorem Extended
Lecture 21
Now we’ve extended the idea of derivative and the idea of integral 
to apply to more complicated situations, so let’s now extend the 
Fundamental Theorem of Calculus to apply to our extended notions of 
derivatives and integrals, and talking about curved paths and multiple 
functions of several variables. 
Y
ou will recall that after we introduced the derivative and integral, 
our next step was to describe their relationship via the Fundamental 
Theorem of Calculus. In this lecture, we’ll talk about extensions of 
the Fundamental Theorem of Calculus that apply to our extended notions 
of derivatives and integrals in curved paths and several dimensions. In 
particular, we will study the Fundamental Theorem for Line Integrals, and 
we will look into the background of George Green, the brilliant but largely 
self-taught man who developed the theorem that bears his name. 
Recall that the Fundamental Theorem of Calculus connects the derivative 
with the integral. Basically, it observes that the accumulation of small changes 
(the integral) is equal to the net effect. We ¿ rst saw the Fundamental Theorem 
of Calculus illustrated in the motion of a car. Suppose a car is moving on a 
straight road and its position at each time t is given by p(t). We noticed that 
there are two ways of ¿ nding the net distance the car traveled between time 
a and time b. On the one hand, the distance is p(b) – p(a). On the other 
hand, that distance equals the integral of the velocity. And the velocity is 
the derivative of the position function. Thus, the Fundamental Theorem of 
Calculus states that 
( )
( )
( )
( )
b
b
a
a
v t dt
p t dt
p b
p a
 
c
 

³
³
. In general then, the 
Fundamental Theorem of Calculus states that for any differentiable function 
F(x),
( )
( )
( )
b
a F x dx F b
F a
c
 

³
. The Fundamental Theorem of Calculus can 
be rephrased as: “Accumulated change equals net effect.” 

101
With regard to a mountain slope, we considered functions of two variables. 
That is, for each point in the plane, we associate a number. Here, we examine 
what variations on the Fundamental Theorem might apply to this setting. To 
ground our discussion in a real situation, suppose we have a map that tells 
us the height of the terrain. At each point on the map, we could associate the 
altitude or elevation at that point, such that the map acts as a function of two 
variables, the x and y coordinates of that point on the map. Surveyors used to 
start at a point at sea level, then go a short distance and measure the rise or 
fall at that point, then go another short distance and repeat the measurement, 
and so forth. This method is suggestive 
of an integral because it accumulates the 
change in altitude. Consider the following 
scenario. We start at one point and draw 
some circuitous path on the map. 
There are two ways to compute the net 
change in altitude from start to ¿ nish. If we 
could measure our altitude at the beginning 
and the end, then of course, we could simply 
subtract. Another method would be to see how steep it is at every step, then 
compute how much we rise or fall with each step on the map and add up 
those changes to get the total change. This method of adding up the increases 
and decreases in altitude is reminiscent of the method that surveyors used to 
measure the altitude of mountains and the whole terrain. We can formulate 
this insight to give us a variation on the Fundamental Theorem of Calculus. 
Suppose we have a function of two variables f(x, y). Think about the function 
that tells the altitude at each point on a map. Now we draw a path on the 
plane or the map. The value at the end minus the value at the beginning (the 
net change in altitude) is equal to the integral taken along the path of the 
incline at each point. The incline at each point just means the steepness at 
each point in the direction that we are walking. The partial derivative with 
respect to x of f(x, y) at a particular point on the map tells us how steep the 
terrain is if we took a step in the positive x direction. Likewise, the partial 
derivative with respect to y of f(x, y) at a particular point on the map tells us 
how steep the terrain is if we took a step in the positive y direction. If we 
take a step diagonally, c units in the x direction and d units in the y direction, 
As always, the 
Fundamental 
Theorem compares 
the accumulation of 
change to a net effect.

102
Lecture 21: The Fundamental Theorem Extended
we can estimate how high we rise by multiplying the partial derivative with 
respect to x times c units and adding it to the partial derivative with respect to 
y times d units. In other words, if we take that incline or slope and multiply 
by the length of each step on the map, we are really taking an integral along 
the path—the integral of the function that tells us the rate of change of the 
altitude at each point, that is, the slope or steepness at each point. That 
integral is called a line integral because we are doing our familiar process of 
adding function value times small length, but we’re doing it along a path or a 
potentially curvy line rather than just along the x-axis. 
We can phrase a variation of the Fundamental Theorem of Calculus in this 
setting by saying that the line integral of the function that tells the steepness 
at each point along a path from one time to another equals the difference of 
the altitude at the end minus the altitude at the beginning of the path. Notice 
that taking this line integral along any path between two points will result in 
the same value. 
Calculus is used to model and describe many physical phenomena. One 
example is the behavior of À uids and gases. For instance, how would we 
describe the situation of the wind blowing?We can measure its velocity and 
direction at each point. This gives a velocity vector ¿ eld at each moment 
in time. Now let’s think about a region of space bounded by a surface. 
For example, we can think about space bounded by a sphere. There is 
a mathematical statement that is a variation of the Fundamental Theorem 
of Calculus that helps us understand this situation. This version of the 
Fundamental Theorem of Calculus is called the Divergence Theorem. As 
always, the Fundamental Theorem compares the accumulation of change to 
a net effect. In this case, we need to describe what change we are talking 
about and what net effect we are talking about. The change refers to a local 
analysis at each point in the region of space that describes the rate at which 
The technical notation for the 
Fundamental Theorem for Line Integrals 
( ( ))
( ( ))
C
f dp
f p b
f p a



 
³
. 

103
the gas is expanding or contracting at that point. The net effect refers to the 
volume of gas that is crossing the containing surface per unit time. 
Two other variations of the Fundamental Theorem, Green’s Theorem and 
Stokes’ Theorem, have critical applications in À uid dynamics, electricity, and 
magnetism. Both measure different properties accumulated over a surface 
compared to going around the bounding curve. Green’s Theorem is named 
after its discoverer, George Green (1793–1841). George Green, who had 
little formal education, worked in his father’s bakery for most of his life and 
taught himself mathematics from books. He proved his famous theorem in a 
privately published book that he wrote to describe electricity and magnetism. 
He did not attend college until he was 40. He had seven children, all with the 
same woman, Jane Smith, but never married. This factor became important 
when he secured a position in college that required that he be unmarried! He 
never knew the importance of his work, but it and its consequences have been 
described as “leading to the mathematical theories of electricity underlying 
20th-century industry.” 
The Fundamental Theorem for Line Integrals, the Divergence Theorem 
(also known as Gauss’s Theorem), Green’s Theorem, and Stokes’ Theorem 
are all variations of the Fundamental Theorem of Calculus. Each of these 
variations can be predicted to be true by understanding the philosophy of 
the Fundamental Theorem of Calculus in its most basic form: “Accumulated 
change equals net effect.” People are adept at generalizing and extending 
ideas. Those generalizations and extensions are important. In these 
examples, those generalizations are central to the way we understand 
and describe various physical phenomena, from À uid À ow to electricity 
and magnetism. Ŷ
Gauss, Carl Friedrich (1777–1855). German mathematician; commonly 
considered the world’s greatest mathematician, hence known as the Prince 
of Mathematicians. He was professor of astronomy and director of the 
observatory at Göttingen. Gauss provided the ¿ rst complete proof of the 
Fundamental Theorem of Algebra and made substantial contributions to 
geometry, algebra, number theory, and applied mathematics. He established 
    Names to Know

104
Lecture 21: The Fundamental Theorem Extended
mathematical rigor as the standard of proof. His work on the differential 
geometry of curved surfaces formed an essential base for Einstein’s general 
theory of relativity.
Green, George (1793–1841). Most famous for his theorem known as 
Green’s Theorem. He worked in his father’s bakery for most of his life and 
taught himself mathematics from books. He proved his famous theorem in a 
privately published book that he wrote to describe electricity and magnetism. 
Green did not attend college until he was 40. He had seven children (all 
with the same woman, Jane Smith) but never married. He never knew the 
importance of his work, but it and its consequences have been described 
as “…leading to the mathematical theories of electricity underlying 
20th-century industry.”
vector ¿ eld: A ¿ eld of arrows associating a vector to each point (x,y) in the 
two-dimensional plane; usually represented graphically.
Any standard vector calculus book. 
Schey, H. M. Div, Grad, Curl, and All That: An Informal Text on 
Vector Calculus.
1. Explain how surveying, together with global positioning technology, 
describes the meaning of the Fundamental Theorem for Line Integrals. 
2. Suppose a function of three variables described the exact temperature at 
every point in a large volume of space. What are two ways to measure 
the difference in temperature from the starting point to the ending point 
of a path that a À ying object might take in this volume? State a version 
of the Fundamental Theorem for Line Integrals for paths in space. 
    Important Term
    Suggested Reading
    Questions to Consider

105
Fields of Arrows—Differential Equations
Lecture 22
Mathematics in general—and calculus in particular—are incredibly 
powerful tools for allowing us to understand and manipulate 
the world. 
I
n this lecture, we introduce the idea of a differential equation, an 
equation that involves not only a function but also its derivatives. 
Differential equations govern numerous scienti¿ c, biological, and 
economic processes. The solution of a differential equation is not a number 
but a function or, formally speaking, a family of functions. Because algebraic 
solutions are rather dif¿ cult to obtain, we use a geometric approach to 
understand the behavior of the solutions. We will see these ideas applied to 
real life when we examine illustrative models of population growth and the 
behavior of springs and pendulums. 
Mathematics and calculus are incredibly powerful at allowing us to 
understand and manipulate the world. For example, suppose we want to 
know how much money will be in our savings account if we deposit $1,000 
today in an account that pays 5% per year compounded continuously. The 
rate at which the account is growing is really information about the rate of 
change of the function that tells us how much money is in the account at 
every moment. Rate of change means derivative. We can write down an 
equation that captures this information: dm/dt = 0.05m(t), where m = money 
and t = time. We see that the function of the amount of money in our account 
will become increasingly steep as money accumulates. This equation is a 
differential equation. It talks about a function, in this case m(t), and relates 
the function’s values with the value of its derivative. Thus, the answer to a 
differential equation is not a number; it is a function. 
Differential equations arise in applications to many areas. Newton and 
Leibniz wrote down the ¿ rst differential equations; they came about at the 
very dawn of calculus. Differential equations have central applications 
in all areas of physics, as well as biology, economics, the social sciences, 
and basically any area you can think of. Let’s look at a basic example of a 

106
Lecture 22: Fields of Arrows—Differential Equations
differential equation in physics. Suppose you know from observations that a 
dropped object after t seconds will travel at –32t feet per second. You might 
want to know how far it has fallen after t seconds. The information given 
presents us with a differential equation, namely, dp/dt = –32t. Our challenge 
is to ¿ nd a function p (t) whose derivative is –32t. We know how to ¿ nd such 
an antiderivative: p(t) = –16t2 + C. (where 
C = the position of the ball at time 0). When we 
have a differential equation, its solution often 
gives us a family of functions. Differential 
equations are equations involving functions 
and their derivatives, and their solutions are 
not numbers but, rather, functions. 
Physics is abundant with situations modeled by 
differential equations. For example, Newton’s 
law, F = ma, is a differential equation, if we 
remember that acceleration is the second 
derivative of position. If you have an initial 
value problem for a differential equation, 
it means you are given the initial conditions; thus, we get one solution 
equation instead of a family of equations. Often when we are dealing with 
differential equations, we may want to model some particular behavior. In 
this case, we re¿ ne the model and add more conditions to make it more 
realistic. For example, when we drop an object in the air, we need to account 
for air resistance, which is proportional to the velocity. Therefore, the more 
accurate equation for measuring the speed of a falling body becomes:
 
2
2
32
d p
dp
m
m
cm
dt
dt
 

.
That is, the force, and hence acceleration, is a function of time, position, and 
velocity! Another physical situation that is modeled by a differential equation 
is that of the pendulum, if we wish to know what the angle is at each time. 
For a spring of mass m stretched a distance x from equilibrium, Hooke’s Law 
asserts that the force is kx. Thus, the differential equation is 
2
2
d x
m
kx
dt
 
.
Differential equations 
have central 
applications in all 
areas of physics, 
as well as biology, 
economics, the 
social sciences, and 
basically any area 
you can think of.

107
As we see, differential equations involve discovering that a certain physical 
process is governed by a differential equation, then ¿ nding a method to 
solve that equation. Many mathematicians contributed to the growth of this 
¿ eld in the 17th and 18th centuries. Newton and Leibniz, having invented the 
notion of derivatives, were the ¿ rst to write down differential equations. 
The Bernoulli brothers, Jakob and Johann, and Johann’s son, Daniel, 
solved many problems in mechanics and applied differential equations 
to complex physics problems, such as À uid dynamics. Their jealous and 
quarrelsome nature did not deter progress in calculus in the late 17th and 
early 18th centuries. Signi¿ cant contributions toward algebraic solutions of 
differential equations were developed by Joseph Louis Lagrange, whose 
1788 work Méchanique Analytique is an elegant and comprehensive treatise 
on Newtonian mechanics. Another important contributor to the solutions of 
differential equations was Pierre Simon de Laplace, an expert in celestial 
mechanics; his method of transforming differential equations into algebraic 
ones, the Laplace Transform, is a key tool in solving differential equations, 
even today.
We can use differential equations and direction ¿ elds to study population 
dynamics. The simplest model, attributable to British economist Thomas 
Malthus in 1798, is the exponential growth model that we have already seen: 
dy/dt = ry, where r is the growth rate and y is the population. The problem 
with Malthus’s model is that it assumes an in¿ nite supply of resources. 
Because resources are limited, the population cannot grow forever.
Before we continue, we need to look at a simple geometric approach to 
solving such a differential equation without ¿ nding a formula for the solution. 
We consider an entire plane viewed as having a horizontal time axis (t) and 
a vertical population axis (y). Although we don’t know what the function is 
that satis¿ es the differential equation, we do know that the derivative of the 
function y is some constant r times the value of the function, and we know 
that the derivative is the slope of the tangent line. Thus, to obtain a direction 
¿ eld, at each point (t, y), we draw a little arrow that captures the slope of 
the tangent line. Then, if we start at a given point, that is, at some initial 
condition, we simply follow the arrows to trace out our function.

108
Lecture 22: Fields of Arrows—Differential Equations
An alternative to Malthus’s model is the logistic model, or Verhulst model. 
Once the population reaches the saturation level, or carrying capacity K, it 
requires too many resources and begins to decline. This means that for y 
> K, dy/dt < 0. The differential equation is: 
1
dy
y
ry
dt
K
§
·
 

¨
¸
©
¹
. Notice that 
for small y, we essentially have exponential growth, and for y > K, dy/dt is 
negative, as needed. When we look at the direction ¿ eld, we notice that no 
matter what the initial condition is, as time goes on, all solutions approach 
the carrying capacity K.
Another alternative to Malthus’s model is the critical threshold model. 
We assume that unless the population is above some critical threshold T, 
it cannot grow at all. For example, if you don’t have enough people in the 
population, the population will not grow! This means that for y < T, dy/dt < 
0. The differential equation is:
 
1
dy
T
ry
dt
y
§
·
 

¨
¸
©
¹
. 
We can put together the two models. The combined model satis¿ es both 
assumptions: that there is a minimum threshold for population growth and 
limited resources. The direction ¿ eld shows that if the initial population is 
less than T, then as time goes on, it declines to zero. Otherwise, it approaches 
the carrying capacity K. We can use computers to put in as many points 
in the direction ¿ eld as we wish to get very accurate estimations of the 
actual answer. A variation of this model describes the passenger pigeon 
population in the United States. The pigeons had a very high critical 
threshold T, so when they were hunted down to such small numbers in the 
late 1800s, the population could no longer grow, and they became extinct 
in 1914. Differential equations also appear in a variety of other contexts, 
including the spread of epidemics, hormone balance, chemical reactions, and 
planetary motion. Ŷ

109
Lagrange, Joseph Louis (1736–1813). French mathematician; professor 
at the Royal Artillery School in Turin, at the Ecole Normale and the Ecole 
Polytechnique in France, and at the Berlin Academy of Sciences. He 
studied algebra, number theory, and differential equations and uni¿ ed the 
theory of general mechanics. He developed classical results in the theory 
of in¿ nite series and contributed to the analytical foundation of the calculus 
of variations.
Laplace, Pierre Simon de (1749–1827). French mathematician and 
astronomer; professor at the Ecole Normale and the Ecole Polytechnique. 
Laplace was the author of the inÀ uential Mécanique Céleste that 
summarized all contributions to the theory of gravitation (without credit to 
its contributors). He developed potential theory, important in the study of 
physics, and partial differential equations. He made great contributions to 
probability theory based on techniques from calculus.
differential equation: An equation involving a function and its derivatives; 
a solution of a differential equation is a family of functions.
direction ¿ eld: A two-dimensional ¿ eld of arrows indicating the slope 
of the tangent line at each given point for a curve that is a solution of a 
differential equation.
Any standard calculus textbook, chapters on differential equations. For 
population dynamics, see Boyce and DiPrima, Elementary Differential 
Equations and Boundary Value Problems, 8th ed., Section 2.6.
    Important Terms
    Names to Know
    Suggested Reading

110
Lecture 22: Fields of Arrows—Differential Equations
1. In the Verhulst model, at what population level is the population 
growing fastest?
2. In a ¿ shery, a fraction E of the population is culled every year. Assuming 
the Verhulst model, what would be the differential equation for this 
¿ shery? If E > r, what is the long-term behavior? If E < r, what is the 
long-term behavior?
    Questions to Consider

111
Owls, Rats, Waves, and Guitars
Lecture 23
In this lecture what we’re going to do is to take a slightly different 
approach. In particular, most physical phenomena that we’re trying 
to look at, or biological phenomena for that matter, include more than 
one variable. So, we have a reÀ ection of that reality in the concept of 
differential equations, and that’s going to be the topic of this lecture. 
W
e have seen that differential equations describe physical and 
biological phenomena. We have been primarily interested in 
functions of one variable, namely time. We have also seen that 
we can understand solutions of differential equations geometrically without 
knowing the exact algebraic form. Most physical phenomena include more 
than one variable, and the topic of this lecture is differential equations in 
several variables.
Once again, we will attempt to develop a mathematical model that describes 
population dynamics, but in this case, we have two species involved that 
are related to one another in a predator-prey relationship. In the northern 
California redwoods, the woodrat provides 80% of the food for the spotted 
owl, which is the main predator of the woodrat. Let w(t) be the population 
of the woodrat and s(t) be the population of the spotted owl as functions of 
time. If there are no owls, that is, y = 0, we assume that the population of the 
woodrat grows exponentially: dw/dt = w. Similarly, if the are no woodrats, 
that is, w = 0, we assume that the owls die out exponentially with rate 
r = 0.75: ds/dt = –0.75s. (We use 0.75 for the purpose of illustration.) 
Whenever an owl and a woodrat meet, we assume that there is some chance 
that the owl eats a woodrat, hence survives and is able to reproduce, resulting 
in an increase of the owl population and a decrease in the woodrat population. 
Thus, the system of differential equations becomes the following:
0.5
0.75
0.25
dw
w
ws
dt
ds
s
ws
dt
 

 

.

112
Lecture 23: Owls, Rats, Waves, and Guitars
How do we analyze such a system? Consider the direction ¿ eld approach 
again. At each point (w,s), regardless of t, we know the rates of change dw/dt 
and ds/dt. Thus, we know the rate of change of dw/ds, as well, and we draw 
an arrow in the direction (ds/dt, dw/dt). Then, if we start at a given point, that 
is, at some initial condition (w,s), we simply follow the arrows to trace out 
the evolution of w and s as functions of t.
In this system, we observe a cyclical nature for the populations of the woodrat 
and the spotted owl. Notice ¿ rst that the populations are constant exactly 
when dw/dt = 0 and ds/dt = 0. This occurs at (0,0) and (3,2). The population 
is stable at these points. Otherwise, if we start at another point such as 
(3.5,1), as the population of the woodrat increases, so does the population 
of the spotted owl. Eventually, the population of the woodrat decreases, 
and this results in a decrease in the population of the spotted owl. This, in 
turn, fuels the growth of the population of the woodrat, and we are back 
to the beginning of the cycle. With different initial conditions, for example, 
(2,1.25), we see a different curved pattern. 
These models for predator-prey relationships were pioneered by American 
biophysicist Alfred Lotka and Italian mathematician Vito Volterra in the 
early 20th century. They have been veri¿ ed in several examples, including by 
the records of the Hudson Bay Company of Canada, which traded lynx and 
snowshoe hare pelts in 1845–1935. In these examples, the cyclical nature 
with a period of 9–10 years is distinctly pronounced.
Now we look at an example of differential equations that model the behavior 
of a vibrating string, the wave equation. In this case, we will ¿ nd that we 
are seeking a function of two variables. Consider an elastic string of length 
L tightly stretched between two supports at the same horizontal level, for 
example, a guitar string. Now, pluck the string and let it vibrate freely. To 
describe the behavior of the string, we are interested in how each point on 
the string moves. That movement is captured by a function of two variables: 
the position along the string, x, and the time, t. At each such position x and 
time t, we are interested in the vertical displacement u(x, t) of the string.

113
What do we know about a vibrating string that would allow us to ¿ gure 
out the function u(x, t) that would capture the string’s motion? If the string 
is exactly straight, no force is causing it to rise. But we imagine that the 
string is moving and we see what forces are acting on each piece of string. 
The forces are those that come from the tension of the string. Newton’s 
famous law, F = ma, tells us how the forces pulling on a point of the string 
impel that point to accelerate. The derivation of the wave equation involves 
drawing pictures of a piece of the 
string and resolving the forces 
that are pulling at angles to tell 
us how the string is accelerating. 
We ¿ nd that the wave equation is: 
2
2
2
2
2
( , )
( , )
u x t
u x t
c
t
x
w
w
 
w
w
.
These equations mean that the 
acceleration of a point on the string 
at a ¿ xed point x as time varies is 
proportional to the acceleration of the height with respect to the position 
along the string. If we attempt to describe the vibration of a guitar string or a 
violin string, we have additional constraints, namely, the string is ¿ xed at the 
endpoints of the string and we assume that the string is displaced in a certain 
way to start the vibration. That is, the string is plucked (imagine its being put 
into a shape and then released at time t = 0). 
The solutions of the wave equations involve the sine function. This function 
is periodic, as we would expect. We can look at the solutions to the wave 
equation and see how the behavior of the string can be thought of as a sum 
of sine curves that corresponds to integer divisions of the total length of 
the string. Therefore, every integer fraction of the length of the string will 
give a different rate of vibration; thus, the actual notes of the string can be 
viewed as a combination of those sine-like functions that contribute higher 
pitches. We have a combination where the string will naturally vibrate up 
and down like a sine curve at all times; then inside it, we have the more 
re¿ ned numbers of vibrations. That is why the notes we hear from a guitar 
are so rich sounding. 
Once again, we will attempt to 
develop a mathematical model 
that describes population 
dynamics, but in this case, we 
have two species involved that 
are related to one another in a 
predator-prey relationship.

114
Lecture 23: Owls, Rats, Waves, and Guitars
Lotka, Alfred J. (1880–1949). An American biophysicist and the father of 
mathematical biology; he published the ¿ rst book in this ¿ eld in 1924. With 
Vito Volterra, he is chieÀ y known for the formulation of the Lotka-Volterra 
equations for the study of predator-prey models in population dynamics.
integer: A whole number (positive, zero, or negative); …–2, –1, 0, 1, 2,…
wave equation: A partial differential equation governing the displacement 
of a string as well as more complex phenomena, such as electromagnetic 
waves; it relates the second derivative of position to the second derivative 
of time.
Any standard differential equations book on partial differential equations 
and systems of differential equations.
1. What are some of the pitfalls of relying entirely on mathematical models 
for setting environmental (or other) policy?
2. The solutions to the wave equation for a string of length ʌ have a factor 
of sin(kʌx), where x gives the position on the string and k is a positive 
integer. Verify that this sin (kʌx) term corresponds to having (k – 1) 
equally spaced points along the string, besides the endpoints, where 
the string does not move up and down at all. This result was physically 
demonstrated in the lecture using a guitar string. 
    Name to Know
    Suggested Reading
    Important Terms
    Questions to Consider

115
Calculus Everywhere
Lecture 24
It would be really dif¿ cult to exaggerate the importance of calculus and 
its inÀ uence on our real lives and how we live. It’s so effective, because 
it’s a tool that gives us the ability to quantitatively study change and 
how parts combine to make the whole.
Calculus is so effective because it is a tool for quantitatively studying change 
and how parts combine to create the whole. The techniques and strategies 
of calculus all arise from two fundamental ideas—the derivative and the 
integral. Further extensions of the ideas of calculus and further applications 
of these ideas are actively pursued to this day. 
We have touched the wealth of ideas related to calculus, and each idea is 
the tip of the iceberg. For example, we started the course by considering the 
motion of a car and developing the two fundamental ideas of calculus, the 
derivative and the integral, in that context. But calculus is also extensively 
used in the inner workings of the car: the physical motion of the engine 
pistons, the optimization problem for optimal fuel consumption, and the 
differential equations guiding the heating and cooling systems. Likewise, 
the heat equation not only helps us to understand the way heat moves in 
the engine, but its variations are among the tools used in the analysis of the 
pricing of ¿ nancial derivatives. As well, electric circuits are described by 
differential equations. 
Let’s remember some of the concepts we have covered in the course and 
how we could have expanded those concepts. We considered the problem of 
hydrostatic force acting on a dam. But we could have talked about any number 
of other optimization problems involving power generation at a dam. We 
have also seen how calculus helps determine optimal architectural structures, 
such as suspension bridges and arches. We saw an example of using calculus 
as part of product design when we studied how calculus helps us design soda 
cans that minimize the amount of aluminum used. The same optimization 
techniques are used to design rockets that put telecommunications satellites 
in orbit. The rocket consists of several propulsion stages with the satellite on 

116
Lecture 24: Calculus Everywhere
top. Each stage accelerates the rocket by burning fuel. Once a stage burns all 
its fuel, it is simply jettisoned, and the next stage is activated. Calculus is used 
to minimize the mass of the rocket while achieving the desired velocity.
The potency of calculus is a testament to the power of abstraction. We have 
seen repeatedly that the methods of solving problems in a bewildering 
array of ¿ elds magically involve the same processes that are captured in the 
derivative, the integral, and the limit. We can view even apparently static 
objects as dynamically growing or changing. This perspective allows us to 
analyze them in a different and often effective way. The habit of recasting 
a problem to see it dynamically creates 
new insights. Calculus gives us speci¿ c 
tools and an underlying philosophy about 
how to view and interpret the world. It 
gives a perspective that can be applied or 
attempted in many settings. Often, looking 
at an issue from the calculus point of view 
can lead to productive insights. 
From one point of view, the story of 
calculus is the story of the intellectual 
conquest of in¿ nity. The derivative and 
the integral are the two fundamental ideas 
of calculus. We saw them arise through a 
commonsensical analysis of the everyday 
phenomenon of motion—a car on a straight 
road. But the derivative and the integral 
were processes that had amazingly rich 
structures. The de¿ nition of the derivative 
arose from the analysis of the car moving on a straight road, studying the 
average velocity of the car in increasingly small increments of time. The 
derivative is the limit of those average velocities as ¨t goes to 0. The integral 
is a sum. It allowed us to add up little pieces—thin sections of areas or slices 
of volumes to create the whole from its parts. We also talked about in¿ nite 
series, which is a way of taking a complicated function and dealing with 
it as a simple function. The sine function, for example, can be viewed as 
an in¿ nite polynomial. In the last two lectures, we talked about direction 
[C]alculus is also 
extensively used in 
the inner workings 
of the car: the 
physical motion of the 
engine pistons, the 
optimization problem 
for optimal fuel 
consumption, and the 
differential equations 
guiding the heating and 
cooling systems.

117
¿ elds as solutions to differential equations. If we imagine the arrows being 
more and more numerous, to in¿ nity, we could ¿ nd a smooth solution to a 
differential equation. 
One of the geometric views of calculus was that if you magni¿ ed a graph of 
a differential function closely, it would look like a straight line. Likewise, if 
you have a function of two variables that is differentiable, it will look like 
a À at plane. In the 19th century, however, mathematicians Weierstrass and 
Bolzano both showed a function that was continuous but not differentiable. 
It was not smooth at all. In the world of fractals, the Koch Curve uses an 
in¿ nite process to produce a curve that is not smooth-looking when viewed 
arbitrarily closely. The Devil’s Staircase is an example of a graph of a 
perfectly continuous function that is À at almost everywhere. This is another 
example of applying the idea of in¿ nity to different situations.
There is much more to come in calculus and beyond. Thousands of papers 
are written about calculus today, and hundreds of thousands of papers in 
engineering, physics, biology, and other arenas use calculus. Newton said, 
“If I have seen farther than others, it is because I have stood on the shoulders 
of giants.” In exploring calculus, we have stood on Newton’s shoulders, on 
Leibniz’s shoulders, on Archimedes’s shoulders, and those of many other 
great thinkers. We have communed with some truly spectacular highpoints of 
human thought. All of us can share an appreciation for that giant conceptual 
development that shaped and continues to shape history—calculus. Ŷ
Weierstrass, Karl (1815–1897). German mathematician. He left the 
University of Bonn without a degree and taught secondary school for more 
than 12 years while independently studying analysis. His 1854 paper led to 
a professorship in Berlin. He provided a rigorous de¿ nition of the limit, thus 
placing calculus at last on solid mathematical ground, and he provided a 
precise de¿ nition of real numbers.
    Name to Know

118
Lecture 24: Calculus Everywhere
heat equation: A partial differential equation governing the heating and 
cooling of objects; it relates the second derivative of position to the ¿ rst 
derivative of time. 
real number: Any decimal number.
Any standard calculus textbook with applications.
Boyer, Carl B. The History of the Calculus and Its Conceptual 
Development.
1. What intellectual developments in history compare to calculus in 
their inÀ uence? 
2. To what realms of the world is mathematical analysis appropriate or not 
appropriate? How has the answer to that question changed over time?
    Important Terms
    Suggested Reading
    Questions to Consider

Timeline
All dates are approximate in the sense that the mathematical activities 
mentioned each spanned several or many years.
540 B.C. .......................................... Pythagoras founded his school and 
proved the Pythagorean Theorem.
450 B.C. .......................................... Zeno posed his paradoxes of motion.
355 B.C. .......................................... Eudoxus was associated with the 
method of exhaustion that was an 
integral-like process.
300 B.C. .......................................... Euclid presented the axiomatic method 
in geometry in his Elements.
225 B.C. .......................................... Archimedes used integral-like 
procedures to ¿ nd formulas for 
various areas and volumes of 
geometrical ¿ gures.
225 B.C. .......................................... Apollonius described the geometry of 
conic sections.
A.D. 1545 ........................................ Tartaglia, Cardano, and Ferrari were 
involved with the algebraic solution of 
cubic and quartic equations.
1600................................................. Kepler and Galileo did work on motion 
and planetary motion, describing those 
mathematically.
1629................................................. Fermat developed methods of ¿ nding 
maxima and minima using in¿ nitesimal 
methods resembling the derivative.
1635................................................. Cavalieri developed a method 
of indivisibles.
119

120
Timeline
1650................................................. Descartes developed connections 
between geometry and algebra and 
invented methods for ¿ nding tangents 
to curves. 
1665–1666....................................... During these plague years, Newton 
devised calculus, his laws of motion, the 
universal law of gravitation, and works 
on optics.
1669................................................. Barrow formulated ideas leading to the 
Fundamental Theorem of Calculus and 
resigned his chair at Cambridge in favor 
of Newton.
1672................................................. Leibniz independently discovered 
calculus and devised notation 
commonly used now.
1700................................................. The Bernoullis were involved with the 
development and application of calculus 
on the continent.
1715................................................. Brook Taylor and Colin Maclaurin 
developed ideas of approximating 
functions by in¿ nite series. 
1750................................................. Euler developed a tremendous amount 
of mathematics, including applications 
and extensions of calculus, especially 
in¿ nite series.
1788................................................. Lagrange developed ideas about in¿ nite 
series and the calculus of variations.
1805................................................. Laplace worked on partial differential 
equations and applications of calculus 
to probability theory.
1822................................................. Fourier invented a method of 
approximating functions using 
trigonometric series.

121
1827................................................. Cauchy developed ideas in in¿ nite 
series and complex variable theory 
and re¿ ned the de¿ nitions of limit 
and continuity.
1851................................................. Riemann developed a modern de¿ nition 
of the integral. 
1854................................................. Weierstrass formulated the rigorous 
de¿ nition of the limit used today.
1700–present day ............................ Innumerable mathematicians, scientists, 
engineers, and others have applied 
calculus to all areas of mathematics, 
science, economics, technology, and 
many other ¿ elds. Mathematicians 
continue to develop new mathematics 
based on the ideas of calculus.

Glossary
acceleration: Rate of change of velocity; a measure of how fast the velocity 
is changing. The second derivative of position. Units are distance/time2.
antiderivative (of a function f): A function with a derivative equal to f.
Brachistochrone: A curve traced between two points (not atop one another), 
along which a freely falling object will reach the bottom point in the least 
amount of time.
continuous function: A function that has no breaks or gaps in its graph; the 
graph of a continuous function can be drawn without lifting the pen.
cosine: A function of angle T giving the ratio of the length of the adjacent side 
to the length of the hypotenuse of a right triangle, as well as the horizontal 
coordinate of a point on the circle of radius 1 corresponding to the angle T
delta (ǻ): The Greek letter capital delta is used in such expressions as ǻt or 
ǻx to denote a small change in the varying quantity. We should think of the 
ǻ as shorthand for “difference.” In the de¿ nition of the integral, ǻx or ǻt 
appears in the long sums used to de¿ ne the integral. The ǻ is transformed 
into a dx or dt in the integral symbol to remind us of the origins of the 
integral as a sum. 
derivative: Mathematical description of (instantaneous) rate of change of 
a function. Characterized geometrically as the slope of the tangent line to 
the graph of the function. The derivative of a function f(x) is written f ƍ(x) or 
( ( ))
d
f x
dx
and is formally de¿ ned as 
0
(
)
( )
lim
x
f x
x
f x
x
' o
 '

'
.
differentiable function: A function whose derivative exists at every point 
where the function is de¿ ned; a continuous function without kinks or cusps.
122
Glossary

123
differential equation: An equation involving a function and its derivatives; 
a solution of a differential equation is a family of functions.
direction ¿ eld: A two-dimensional ¿ eld of arrows indicating the slope 
of the tangent line at each given point for a curve that is a solution of a 
differential equation.
directional derivative: The rate of change of a function of several variables 
in the direction of a given vector.
epicycles: A circle on a circle. For centuries before Kepler, people believed 
that planets’ orbits were circular, but because that image did not accord with 
observation, the planets were viewed as revolving around on little circles 
whose centers were going in circles. The smaller circles with centers on 
circles are epicycles. 
exhaustion (the Greek method of exhaustion): A geometric technique by 
which formulas for areas of different shapes could be veri¿ ed through ¿ ner 
and ¿ ner approximations.
Fourier Series: An in¿ nite series of sines and cosines, typically used to 
approximate a function.
function: Mathematical description of dependency. A rule or correspondence 
that provides exactly one output value for each input value. Often written 
algebraically as f(x) = formula involving x (for example, f(x) = x2).
Fundamental Theorem of Calculus: The most important theorem in 
calculus. Demonstrates the reciprocal relationship between the derivative 
and the integral.
graph: A geometric representation of a function, showing correspondences 
via pairs of points (input, output) drawn on a standard Cartesian (x-y) plane.
heat equation: A partial differential equation governing the heating and 
cooling of objects; it relates the second derivative of position to the ¿ rst 
derivative of time.

124
Glossary
in¿ nite series (also called an in¿ nite sum): The sum of an in¿ nite collection 
of numbers. Such a series can sum to a ¿ nite number or “diverge to in¿ nity”; 
for example, 1
1
1
1
...
2
4
8
16




sums to 1, but 
1
1
1
1
...
2
3
4




 does not 
sum to a ¿ nite number.
integer: A whole number (positive, zero, or negative); …–2, –1, 0, 1, 2,…
integral: Denoted 
( )
b
a v t dt
³
. If we think of function v(t) as measuring the 
velocity of a moving car at each time t, then the integral is a number that is 
equal to the distance traveled, because the integral is obtained by dividing 
the time from a to b into small increments and approximating the distance 
traveled by assuming that the car went at a steady speed during each of 
those small increments of time. By taking increasingly smaller increments 
of time, approximations converge to a single answer, the integral. This 
sounds complicated, but the naturality of it is the topic of Lecture Three. 
The integral is also equal to the area under the graph of v(t) and above the 
t-axis. The integral is related to the derivative (as an inverse procedure) via 
the Fundamental Theorem of Calculus. See also antiderivative.
Law of Large Numbers: The theorem that the ratio of successes to trials in 
a random process will converge to the probability of success as increasingly 
many trials are undertaken. 
limit: The result of an in¿ nite process that converges to a single 
answer. Example: the sequence of numbers 
1 1 1 1
1,
,
,
,
,...
2 3 4 5
converges to the 
number 0. 
maximum: The largest value of the outputs of a function. The y-value of the 
highest point on the graph of a function. It does not always exist.
minimum: The smallest value of the outputs of a function. The y-value of 
the lowest point on the graph of a function. It does not always exist.

125
Newton-Raphson Method: An iterative technique for ¿ nding solutions of 
an equation using graphs and derivatives.
parabola: A conic section de¿ ned as the set of all points equidistant between 
a point and a line. 
paradox: Two compelling arguments about the same situation that lead to 
two opposite views. Zeno’s paradoxes of motion give logical reasons why 
motion cannot occur. On the other hand, we experience motion. The opposite 
conclusions deduced from Zeno’s logic versus our experience compose 
the paradox. 
partial derivative: The rate of change of a quantity relative to the change of 
one of several quantities that are inÀ uencing its value when the other varying 
quantities remain ¿ xed. 
partial differential equation: An equation involving a function of several 
variables and its partial derivatives. 
ʌ (pi): Greek letter denoting the value 3.1415926… equal to the ratio of the 
circumference of a circle to its diameter.
probability: The quantitative study of uncertainty. 
real number: Any decimal number.
sine: A function of angle T giving the ratio of the length of the opposite side 
to the length of the hypotenuse of a right triangle, as well as the vertical 
coordinate of a point on the circle of radius 1 corresponding to the angle T
slope (of a straight line): The ratio of distance ascended to distance traversed, 
sometimes known as “rise over run.”
smooth function: A function that is continuous and whose ¿ rst derivative, 
second derivative, and so forth are all continuous. 

126
Glossary
tangent line: A straight line associated to each point on a curve. Just grazing 
the curve, the tangent line “parallels” the curve at a point.
variable: The independent quantity in a functional relationship. For example, 
if position is a function of time, time is the variable.
vector: An arrow indicating direction and magnitude (usually of motion in 
two-dimensional or three-dimensional space).
vector ¿ eld: A ¿ eld of arrows associating a vector to each point (x,y) in the 
two-dimensional plane; usually represented graphically.
velocity: Average velocity is total distance divided by the time it took to 
traverse that distance; units are length/time (for example, miles per hour). 
Instantaneous velocity is the speed at one moment of time, approximated by 
average velocity for smaller and smaller time intervals; units are also length/
time. The instantaneous velocity is the derivative of the position function for 
a moving object.
wave equation: A partial differential equation governing the displacement 
of a string as well as more complex phenomena, such as electromagnetic 
waves; it relates the second derivative of position to the second derivative 
of time.

Biographical Notes
Archimedes (c. 287–212 B.C.). Ancient Greek mathematician, physicist, 
astronomer, inventor, and proli¿ c author of scienti¿ c treatises. He studied 
hydrostatics and mechanics and discovered the general principle of the 
lever, how to compute tangents to spirals, the volume and surface area of 
spheres, the volume of solids of revolution, many applications of the method 
of exhaustion, and an approximation of the value of ʌ, among other work. 
Archimedes was killed by a Roman soldier when Syracuse was conquered 
during the Second Punic War.
Barrow, Isaac (1630–1677). Lucasian professor of mathematics at 
Cambridge. In 1669, Barrow resigned from his chair to give Newton the 
professorship. He contributed to the development of integral calculus, 
particularly through the recognition of its inverse relationship with the 
tangent. He published works in optics and geometry and edited the works of 
ancient Greek mathematicians, including Euclid and Archimedes.
Bernoulli, Daniel (1700–1782). Swiss professor of mathematics at St. 
Petersburg and at Basel. He is best known for work in À uid dynamics 
(the Bernoulli principle is named for him) and is also known for work in 
probability. He was the son of Jean Bernoulli.
Bernoulli, Jacques (often called Jakob or James) (1654–1705). Professor 
of mathematics at Basel and a student of Leibniz. He studied in¿ nite series 
and was the ¿ rst to publish on the use of polar coordinates (the lemniscate 
of Bernoulli is named for him). He formulated the Law of Large Numbers in 
probability theory and wrote an inÀ uential treatise on the subject. Together, 
Jacques and brother Jean were primarily responsible for disseminating 
Leibniz’s calculus throughout Europe.
Bernoulli, Jean (often called Johannes or John) (1667–1748). Swiss 
mathematician. He was professor of mathematics at Groningen (Holland) 
and Basel (after the death of his brother Jacques). He was a student of 
Leibniz and applied techniques of calculus to many problems in geometry 
127

128
Biographical Notes
and mechanics. He proposed the famous Brachistochrone problem as a 
challenge to other mathematicians. Jean Bernoulli was the teacher of Euler 
and L’Hôpital (who provided Jean a regular salary in return for mathematical 
discoveries, including the well-known L’Hôpital’s Rule).
Buffon, Georges Louis Leclerc, Comte de (1707–1788). French naturalist 
and author of Histoire naturelle. He translated Newton’s Method of Fluxions 
into French. He formulated the Buffon’s Needle problem, linking the study 
of probability to geometric techniques.
Cauchy, Augustin Louis (1789–1857). Proli¿ c French mathematician 
and engineer. He was professor in the Ecole Polytechnique and professor 
of mathematical physics at Turin. He worked in number theory, algebra, 
astronomy, mechanics, optics, and elasticity theory and made great 
contributions to analysis (particularly the study of in¿ nite series and of 
complex variable theory) and the calculus of variations. He improved the 
foundations of calculus by re¿ ning the de¿ nitions of limit and continuity.
Cavalieri, Bonaventura (1598–1647). Italian mathematician; professor 
at Bologna; student of Galileo. He developed the method of indivisibles 
that provided a transition between the Greek method of exhaustion and 
the modern methods of integration of Newton and Leibniz. He applied his 
method to solve a majority of the problems posed by Kepler.
Descartes, René (1596–1650). French mathematician and philosopher. He 
served in various military campaigns and tutored Princess Elizabeth (daughter 
of Frederick V) and Queen Christina of Sweden. Descartes developed 
crucial theoretical links between algebra and geometry and his own method 
of constructing tangents to curves. He made substantial contributions to the 
development of analytic geometry.
Euler, Leonhard (1707–1783). Swiss mathematician and scientist. Euler was 
the student of Jean Bernoulli. He was professor of medicine and physiology 
and later became a professor of mathematics at St. Petersburg. Euler is 
the most proli¿ c mathematical author of all time, writing on mathematics, 
acoustics, engineering, mechanics, and astronomy. He introduced 
standardized notations, many now in modern use, and contributed unique 

129
ideas to all areas of analysis, especially in the study of in¿ nite series. He lost 
nearly all his sight by 1771 and was the father of 13 children.
Fermat, Pierre de (1601–1665). French lawyer and judge in Toulouse; 
enormously talented amateur mathematician. Fermat worked in number 
theory, geometry, analysis, and algebra and was the ¿ rst developer of analytic 
geometry, including the discovery of equations of lines, circles, ellipses, 
parabolas, and hyperbolas. He wrote Introduction to Plane and Solid Loci 
and formulated the famed Fermat’s Last Theorem as a note in the margin 
of his copy of Bachet’s Diophantus. He developed a procedure for ¿ nding 
maxima and minima of functions through in¿ nitesimal analysis, essentially 
by the limit de¿ nition of derivative, and applied this technique to many 
problems, including analyzing the refraction of light.
Fourier, Jean Baptiste Joseph (1768–1830). French mathematical physicist 
and professor in the Ecole Polytechnique. Fourier accompanied Napoleon on 
his campaign to Egypt, was appointed secretary of Napoleon’s Institute of 
Egypt, and served as prefect of Grenoble. He carried out extensive studies in 
heat propagation, which form the foundation of modern partial differential 
equations with boundary conditions. He developed the Fourier Series, which 
represents functions by in¿ nite (trigonometric) series.
Galilei, Galileo (1564–1642). Italian mathematician and philosopher; 
professor of mathematics at Pisa and at Padua. He invented the telescope 
(after hearing of such a device) and made many astronomical discoveries, 
including the existence of the rings of Saturn. He established the ¿ rst law of 
motion, laws of falling bodies, and the fact that projectiles move in parabolic 
curves. Galileo made great contributions to the study of dynamics, leading 
to consideration of in¿ nitesimals (eventually formalized in the theory of 
calculus). He advocated the Copernican heliocentric model of the solar 
system and was subsequently placed under house arrest by the Inquisition.
Gauss, Carl Friedrich (1777–1855). German mathematician; commonly 
considered the world’s greatest mathematician, hence known as the Prince 
of Mathematicians. He was professor of astronomy and director of the 
observatory at Göttingen. Gauss provided the ¿ rst complete proof of the 
Fundamental Theorem of Algebra and made substantial contributions to 

130
Biographical Notes
geometry, algebra, number theory, and applied mathematics. He established 
mathematical rigor as the standard of proof. His work on the differential 
geometry of curved surfaces formed an essential base for Einstein’s general 
theory of relativity.
Green, George (1793–1841). Most famous for his theorem known as 
Green’s Theorem. He worked in his father’s bakery for most of his life and 
taught himself mathematics from books. He proved his famous theorem 
in a privately published book that he wrote to describe electricity and 
magnetism. Green did not attend college until he was 40. He had seven 
children (all with the same woman, Jane Smith) but never married. He never 
knew the importance of his work, but it and its consequences have been 
described as “leading to the mathematical theories of electricity underlying 
20th-century industry.”
Kepler, Johannes (1571–1630). German astronomer and mathematician; 
mathematician and astrologer to Emperor Rudolph II (in Prague). Kepler 
assisted Tycho Brahe (the Danish astronomer) in compiling the best collection 
of astronomical observations in the pre-telescope era. He developed 
three laws of planetary motion and made the ¿ rst attempt to justify them 
mathematically. They were later shown to be a consequence of the universal 
law of gravitation by Newton, applying the new techniques of calculus. 
Lagrange, Joseph Louis (1736–1813). French mathematician; professor 
at the Royal Artillery School in Turin, at the Ecole Normale and the Ecole 
Polytechnique in France, and at the Berlin Academy of Sciences. He 
studied algebra, number theory, and differential equations and uni¿ ed the 
theory of general mechanics. He developed classical results in the theory 
of in¿ nite series and contributed to the analytical foundation of the calculus 
of variations.
Laplace, Pierre Simon de (1749–1827). French mathematician and 
astronomer; professor at the Ecole Normale and the Ecole Polytechnique. 
Laplace was the author of the inÀ uential Mécanique Céleste that 
summarized all contributions to the theory of gravitation (without credit to 
its contributors). He developed potential theory, important in the study of 

131
physics, and partial differential equations. He made great contributions to 
probability theory based on techniques from calculus.
Leibniz, Gottfried Wilhelm von (1646–1716). German diplomat, logician, 
politician, philosopher, linguist, and mathematician; president of the Berlin 
Academy. Leibniz is regarded, with Newton, as a co-inventor of calculus. 
He was the ¿ rst to publish a theory of calculus. Leibniz’s notation is used 
currently. He made substantial contributions to formal logic, leading to the 
establishment of symbolic logic as a ¿ eld of study. He discovered an in¿ nite 
series formula for ʌ/4. He was accused of plagiarism by British partisans of 
Newton, and his supporters counterclaimed that Newton was the plagiarist. 
Now, he is acknowledged to have independently discovered calculus.
L’Hôpital, Guillaume François Antoine (1661–1704). French marquis, 
amateur mathematician, and student of Jean Bernoulli. L’Hôpital provided 
one of the ¿ ve submitted solutions to Bernoulli’s Brachistochrone problem. 
He was the author of the ¿ rst calculus textbook (1696), written in the 
vernacular and based primarily on the work of Jean Bernoulli. This text went 
through several editions and greatly aided the spread of Leibniz’s calculus 
on the Continent.
Lotka, Alfred J. (1880–1949). An American biophysicist and the father of 
mathematical biology; he published the ¿ rst book in this ¿ eld in 1924. With 
Vito Volterra, he is chieÀ y known for the formulation of the Lotka-Volterra 
equations for the study of predator-prey models in population dynamics.
Newton, Sir Isaac (1642–1727). Great English mathematician and scientist; 
Lucasian professor of mathematics at Cambridge. Newton was the ¿ rst 
discoverer of differential and integral calculus. He formulated the law of 
universal gravitation and his three laws of motion, upon which classical 
physics is based. In 1687, he published his results in Philosophiae Naturalis 
Principia Mathematica. He formulated the theory of colors (in optics) and 
proved the binomial theorem. He is possibly the greatest genius of all time. 
Newton was a Member of Parliament (Cambridge), long-time president of 
the Royal Society, and Master of the Mint. The controversy with Leibniz over 
attribution of the discovery of calculus poisoned relations between British 

132
Biographical Notes
and Continental scientists, leading to the isolation of British mathematicians 
for much of the 18th century. 
Riemann, 
Georg 
Friedrich 
Bernhard 
(1826–1866). 
German 
mathematician; professor of mathematics at Göttingen. He made 
great contributions to analysis, geometry, and number theory and both 
extended the theory of representing a function by its Fourier series and 
established the foundations of complex variable theory. Riemann developed 
the concept and theory of the Riemann integral (as taught in standard college 
calculus courses) and pioneered the study of the theory of functions of a real 
variable. He gave the most famous job talk in the history of mathematics, in 
which he provided a mathematical generalization of all known geometries, a 
¿ eld now called Riemannian geometry. 
Weierstrass, Karl (1815–1897). German mathematician. He left the 
University of Bonn without a degree and taught secondary school for more 
than 12 years while independently studying analysis. His 1854 paper led to 
a professorship in Berlin. He provided a rigorous de¿ nition of the limit, thus 
placing calculus at last on solid mathematical ground, and he provided a 
precise de¿ nition of real numbers.
Zeno of Elea (c. 495–430 B.C.). Ancient Greek dialectician and logician. He 
is noted for his four paradoxes of motion. He was a student of Parmenides, 
whose school of philosophy rivaled that of the Pythagoreans.

Bibliography
Readings
Bardi, Jason Socrates. The Calculus Wars: Newton, Leibniz, and the Greatest 
Mathematical Clash of All Time. New York: Thunder's Mouth Press, 2006. 
This book tells the story of the controversy between Newton and Leibniz 
and their supporters over who should receive credit for the discovery or 
invention of calculus. The fact that a book on this topic for the general reader 
is published in 2006 is a testament to both the signi¿ cance of calculus and 
the level of rancor of the dispute.
Bell, E. T. Men of Mathematics. New York: Simon & Schuster, 1937. A classic 
of mathematics history, ¿ lled with quotes and stories (often apocryphal) of 
famous mathematicians.
Berlinski, David. A Tour of the Calculus. New York: Pantheon Books, 1995. 
This book is written in a À owery manner and gives the nonmathematician a 
journey through the ideas of calculus.
Blatner, David. The Joy of ʌ. New York: Walker Publishing Company, 1997. 
This fun little paperback is ¿ lled with gems and details about the history of 
the irrational number ʌ.
Boyer, Carl B. The History of the Calculus and Its Conceptual Development. 
Mineola, NY: Dover Publications, 1959. A scholarly history of calculus from 
ancient times through the 19th century. 
. A History of Mathematics. Princeton: Princeton University Press, 
1968. An extensive survey of the history of mathematics from earliest 
recorded history through the early 20th century. Each chapter includes a good 
bibliography and nice exercises.
Burger, Edward B., and Michael Starbird. The Heart of Mathematics: An 
invitation to effective thinking. Emeryville, CA: Key College Publishing, 
133

134
Bibliography
2000. This award-winning book presents deep and fascinating mathematical 
ideas in a lively, accessible, and readable way. The review in the June–July 
2001 issue of the American Mathematical Monthly says, “This is very 
possibly the best ‘mathematics for the non-mathematician’ book that I have 
seen—and that includes popular (non-textbook) books that one would ¿ nd in 
a general bookstore.” 
. Coincidences, Chaos, and All That Math Jazz: Making Light of 
Weighty Ideas. New York: W.W. Norton & Co., 2005. This book fuses a 
professor’s understanding of rigorous mathematical ideas with the distorted 
sensibility of a stand-up comedian. It covers many beautiful topics in 
mathematics that are only touched on in this course, such as probability, 
chaos, and in¿ nity. “Informative, intelligent, and refreshingly irreverent,” in 
the words of author Ian Stewart.
Cajori, Florian. A History of Mathematics, 5th ed. New York: Chelsea 
Publishing Co., 1991 (1st ed., 1893). A survey of the development of 
mathematics and the lives of mathematicians from ancient times through the 
end of World War I.
. “History of Zeno’s Arguments on Motion.” American Mathematical 
Monthly. Vol. 22, Nos. 1–9 (1915). Cajori presents a philosophical 
and mathematical discussion of the meaning of Zeno’s four paradoxes 
of motion. 
Calinger, Ronald. A Contextual History of Mathematics. Upper Saddle 
River, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1999. This modern, readable text offers a survey of 
mathematics from the origin of numbers through the development of calculus 
and classical probability. It includes a nice section on the Bernoulli brothers.
Churchill, Winston Spencer. My Early Life: A Roving Commission (available 
through out-of-print bookstores only). Winston Churchill won the Nobel 
Prize in literature. The writing in this autobiography of his early life is 
absolutely delightful. We refer to only a few pages about his struggles with 
mathematics, but the whole book is a joy.

135
Davis, Donald M. The Nature and Power of Mathematics. Princeton: 
Princeton University Press, 1993. This wide-ranging book does not study the 
history of calculus in particular; rather, it describes an array of ideas from 
all areas of mathematics. It includes brief biographies of Gauss and Kepler, 
among other mathematicians.
Dunham, William. Journey through Genius: The Great Theorems of 
Mathematics. New York: John Wiley & Sons, 1990. Each of this book’s 12 
chapters covers a great idea or theorem and includes a brief history of the 
mathematicians who worked on that idea. Mathematicians discussed include 
Archimedes, Newton, the Bernoullis, and Euler.
Eves, Howard. Great Moments in Mathematics (after 1650). Washington, 
DC: The Mathematical Association of America, 1981. This collection of 
lectures includes four entertaining chapters relevant to the development of 
calculus. These begin with the invention of differential calculus and conclude 
with a discussion of Fourier series.
Goodstein, David L., Judith R. Goodstein, and R. P. Feynman, Feynman’s 
Lost Lecture: The Motion of Planets around the Sun. New York: W.W. Norton 
& Co., 1996. This book and CD give Feynman’s geometric explanation 
for elliptical orbits of planets, as well as a history of the problem from 
Copernicus and Kepler to the present day.
Kline, Morris. Mathematics: A Cultural Approach. Reading, MA: Addison-
Wesley Publishing Co., 1962. This survey of mathematics presents its topics 
in both historical and cultural settings, relating the ideas to the contexts in 
which they developed.
Priestley, William M. Calculus: An Historical Approach. New York, 
Heidelberg, and Berlin: Springer-Verlag, 1979. Develops the standard theory 
of calculus through discussions of its historical growth, emphasizing the 
history of ideas rather than the history of events.

136
Bibliography
Schey, H. M. Div, Grad, Curl, and All That: An Informal Text on Vector 
Calculus, 4th ed. New York: W.W. Norton, 2005. This book has been a 
favorite introduction to ideas of vector calculus for more than 30 years. 
It is short and clearly written. It presents vector calculus in the context of 
electrostatics, so it is especially attractive to people who have a feel for the 
physics of electricity and magnetism.
Simmons, George F. Calculus with Analytic Geometry. New York: McGraw-
Hill, 1985. This college-level mathematics text provides a standard 
development of calculus along with appendices that include biographical 
notes and supplementary topics.
Thompson, Sylvanus P., and Martin Gardner. Calculus Made Easy, 
New York: St. Martin’s Press, 1998. This book is a revision, by the great 
mathematical expositor Martin Gardner, of a classical exposition of calculus 
for the general public. 
Standard Textbooks
There are dozens of standard calculus and differential equations textbooks, 
usually titled Calculus and Differential Equations. Two of them are:
Boyce, William E., and Richard C. DiPrima. Elementary Differential 
Equations and Boundary Value Problems, 8th ed. New York: John Wiley 
& Sons, 2005. This is the bestselling introductory differential equations 
textbook. It presents differential equations from the applied mathematicians’ 
point of view and includes explanations of both the theory and applications, 
as well as many examples, applications, and exercises.
Stewart, James. Calculus, 5th ed. Belmont, CA: Brooks/Cole, 2003. The 
Stewart textbook is the best-selling calculus textbook in the United States. 
It is well-written and comprehensive and contains many worked examples, 
applications, and exercises.

137
Internet Resources
A History of the Calculus. School of Mathematics and Statistics, University 
of St. Andrews, Scotland. www-history.mcs.st-andrews.ac.uk/ history/
HistTopics/The_rise_of_calculus.html. This site presents a synopsis of the 
history of calculus from ancient times through the time of Newton and 
Leibniz and includes links to many more history sites.
Index of Biographies. School of Mathematics and Statistics, University of St. 
Andrews, Scotland. www-history.mcs.st-andrews.ac.uk/~history/BiogIndex.
html. This site contains biographical articles on many of the world’s 
mathematicians from ancient times to the present. Both chronological and 
alphabetical indexes are presented, as well as such categories as famous 
curves, history topics, and so forth. 
The Math Forum @ Drexel. Drexel School of Education, Drexel University. 
www.mathforum.org/library/topics/svcalc/. Includes links to many other 
sites that contain articles and demonstrations of concepts in calculus. 
Mnatsakanian, Mamikon. Visual Calculus by Mamikon. California Institute 
of Technology. www.its.caltech.edu/~mamikon/calculus.html. This site 
offers animations demonstrating some of Mnatsakanian’s applications of his 
clever sweeping tangent method for solving calculus problems. 
Predator-Prey Models. Department of Mathematics, Duke University. 
www.math.duke.edu/education/webfeats/Word2HTML/Predator.html. This 
site provides an interactive location for creating direction ¿ elds and solutions 
to differential equation predator-prey models.
Weisstein, Eric. Wolfram MathWorld, The Web’s Most Extensive Mathematics 
Resource. mathworld.wolfram.com. This website is like a mathematical 
encyclopedia. If you come across a mathematical term or concept, no matter 
how trivial or how involved, it’s likely to be described here.

