 
- 52 - 
Chapter 6:  
First Steps Towards Synthetic  
Psychology 
 
 
6.1 INTRODUCTION 
  
 
The previous three chapters have provided a brief exposure to a variety of different types 
of models that can be found in psychology.  We are now in a position to use this background 
knowledge to focus our attention on synthetic psychology.  The purpose of this chapter is to pro-
vide a brief introduction to some of the basic properties that will be found in the synthetic ap-
proach.  These properties will be introduced by considering how to build a toy robot that walks. 
 
 
Even within one class of models, computer simulations, we saw that there can be a great 
deal of variety.  In particular, some computer simulations are analytic in nature.  For example, one 
creates a production system by taking a complicated phenomenon, breaking it down into its com-
ponents, and using these components to construct the simulation.  This analytic approach has 
been highly successful in psychology and in cognitive science.  However, this approach is not the 
primary focus of this book. 
 
 
We are instead primarily concerned with models that are synthetic in nature.  An example 
of a computer simulation consistent with the synthetic approach is a connectionist network of the 
sort that was introduced in Chapter 5.  When the synthetic approach is adopted, a set of basic 
building blocks is taken and is assembled into a working system.  The question of interest is 
whether these basic components can be organized into a system that does something compli-
cated, interesting, or surprising. 
 
 
Why is this book focusing on the synthetic approach?  One reason is that in modern cog-
nitive science there is a growing interest in developing models from the synthetic perspective.  A 
number of fairly recent simulation methodologies that are popular in cognitive science are essen-
tially synthetic in nature.  These methods include neural networks (e.g., Bechtel & Abrahamsen, 
1991; Dawson, 1998), genetic algorithms (e.g., Holland, 1992; Mitchell, 1996), and artificial life 
(e.g., Langton, 1995; Levy, 1992). 
 
 
A second reason for exploring the synthetic approach is that it melds quite nicely with a 
new tradition in robotics, artificial intelligence, and cognitive science.  This new tradition is viewed 
as defining a new field, a field that has been associated with a variety of labels in recent years.  
These labels include behaviour-based robotics (Brooks, 1999), new artificial intelligence, based-
based artificial intelligence, and embodied cognitive science (Pfeifer & Scheier, 1999).  The em-
bodied cognitive science movement is gaining popularity, and is challenging the traditional sym-
bol-based conception of artificial intelligence and cognitive science along many of the same lines 
that were adopted by connectionist researchers in the early 1980s. 
 
6.1.1 Synthetic Psychology Vs. Embodied Cognitive Science 
 
 
Importantly, embodied cognitive science and synthetic psychology are not identical fields.  
Embodied cognitive science is a reaction against the traditional view that human beings as infor-
mation processing systems “receive input from the environment (perception), process that infor-
mation (thinking), and act upon the decision reached (behaviour).  This corresponds to the so-
called sense-think-act cycle” (Pfeifer & Scheier, 1999, p 37).  This has also been called the 
sense-model-plan act framework (Brooks, 1999).  The sense-think-act cycle, which is a funda-
Connectionism And Psychological Modeling  
© M.R.W. Dawson 
Please do not quote! 

 
- 53 - 
mental characteristic of conventional cognitive science, is an assumption that the embodied ap-
proach considers to be fatally flawed. 
 
 
One of the aims of embodied cognitive science is to replace the sense-think-act cycle 
with a principle of sensory-motor coordination (Pfeifer & Scheier, 1999), which might be con-
strued as a sense-act cycle.  The purpose of this change is to reduce, as much as possible, think-
ing -- the use of internal representations to mediate intelligence.  What makes this a plausible 
move to consider is the possibility that if one situates an autonomous agent in the physical world 
in such a way that the agent can sense the world, then no internal representation of the world is 
necessary.  “The realization was that the so-called central systems of intelligence – or core AI as 
it has been referred to more recently – was perhaps an unnecessary illusion, and that all the 
power of intelligence arose from the coupling of perception and actuation systems” (Brooks, 
1999, p. viii). 
 
 
The synthetic approach is an important component of this movement, because it opens 
the door to discovering behaviours that emerge from the interaction between an agent and its 
environment. Embodied cognitive scientists seek this kind of emergence because they do not 
want to explain complex behaviour by only appealing to internal mechanisms.  Instead, “if we 
want to achieve wall-following behaviour, we should design not a module for wall-following within 
the agent, but instead basic processes that together, interacting with the environment, engender 
this desired behaviour” (Pfeifer & Scheier, 1999, p. 307).  However, the synthetic approach is not 
equivalent to this embodied movement.  For instance, and as we will see throughout this book, 
connectionist modeling can easily be construed as synthetic simulation (Pfeifer & Scheier, 1999, 
Chapter 5).  Nevertheless, much of what is interesting about connectionist networks are the rep-
resentational properties that stand between “sensation” and “action” (Dawson, 1998). 
 
6.1.2 Overview: Synthesis, Emergence, Analysis 
 
 
The purpose of this chapter is to introduce the key characteristics of the synthetic ap-
proach as it is used in synthetic psychology.  These characteristics can be summarized with the 
acronym SEA, which stands for synthesis, emergence, and analysis.  In my view, these are the 
three fundamental steps required for the synthetic approach to make contributions to psychology 
and to cognitive science. 
 
 
In very general terms, synthetic psychology should proceed by carrying out these three 
steps in succession.  First, a set of basic building blocks is used to synthesize a model.  Second, 
the performance of the model is explored, with particular attention being paid to emergent proper-
ties.  Third, the emergent properties are explained in a theory that accounts for them by appealing 
to internal mechanisms, to the environment, or to an interaction between the two. 
 
 
For our first exposure to these three steps, this chapter describes a class activity that I 
have used in one of my graduate courses.  This example as it stands is not particularly psycho-
logical – a characteristic that is unfortunately true of many of the phenomena modeled by embod-
ied cognitive science.  However, it provides a concrete example of the three components of SEA.  
In later chapters, we will use these foundations to build synthetic models that seem more relevant 
to higher-order psychological processes. 
 
6.2 BUILDING A THOUGHTLESS WALKER 
 
 
It has been my experience that when you try to teach modeling, students really benefit 
from hands-on work.  So, when I was teaching a course on the synthetic approach in the fall of 
2000, I thought that it was important to spend at least some time having students actually con-
struct a working model.  This was not merely to expose them to modeling per se.  The activity that 
I had in mind was intended to expose them to the realization that a phenomenon that they took 
for granted was actually quite complicated. 
 
Connectionism And Psychological Modeling  
© M.R.W. Dawson 
Please do not quote! 

 
- 54 - 
 
One of the problems that I faced in doing this was that different students had enormous 
differences in their backgrounds of computer programming.  This meant that the class activity 
couldn’t involve hands-on computer simulation, because I was not really interested in spending a 
great deal of time teaching programming as part of this course.  My solution was to have students 
build a walking robot from a particular kind of toy buildings set, K’NEX. 
 
 
One week I brought two large containers of K’NEX materials into class, along with an as-
sortment of text aids.  The class was asked to build a robot that could walk forward.  The text aids 
were used to provide inspiration, but I didn't give any specific instructions.  The class was quite 
small (8 or 9 students), and they spent the first little while organizing themselves as a group, ex-
ploring K’NEX, and thinking about how they were going to approach this class problem. 
 
 
By the end of class a week later, and only working during class time, the students had 
constructed a set of modular components that could be used to create a two-legged system, a 
four-legged system, or a six-legged system.  Under certain conditions, described in more detail 
below, the students were successful in creating a robot that could walk the length of the class-
room. 
 
 
In the sections below, I will describe the next-generation of the robot built in the style that 
was created by the students.  It represents a next-generation system only to the extent that I took 
the liberty of making some minor improvements to their original model.  The original robot, con-
structed under conditions that weren't necessarily ideal, had a few flaws that needed to be cor-
rected.  Some of the flaws involved robot parts that were intended to be identical in each module, 
but were not.  Some of the flaws were structural problems that required solutions involving parts, 
such as elastics, that were not pure K’NEX.  The robot described below is built purely from K’NEX 
parts in the spirit of the robot that was constructed in class. 
 
 
The sections below describe this robot as a project that could be built by the reader.  It 
only mentions the parts and the properties of the final system.  However, it is important to re-
member that when it was designed, students made explicit decisions to build in one way, and not 
in another.  This was because they had many more materials available to them than those that 
are mentioned below.  The reader of this section should keep in mind that other designs are eas-
ily possible, and might want to consider alternative approaches to building the robot if they decide 
to try to replicate the efforts of this class. 
 
6.2.1 A Class Project 
 
  
The purpose of this project is to build a robot that can walk at least a few steps forward 
independently.  It is not required to be able to turn, or to avoid obstacles.  One goal of building the 
system is to start to have some appreciation for some of the properties that are characteristics of 
walking systems. 
 
6.2.2 Materials 
 
son 
Please do not quote! 
 
The entire robot was constructed out of a 
large set of K’NEX building materials that my 
daughter and son had accumulated over the 
years.  K’NEX is a toy building system comprised 
of rods that can be inserted into geometric 
connectors that hold the rods together to create 
larger structures.  Rods and connectors are made 
from plastic, and are colour-coded to indicate 
length or shape.  Figure 6-1 illustrates the types of 
rods and connectors used in the robot project. 
While structures built from K’NEX can be quite 
sturdy, there is a fair amount of “give" in these 
 
building materials.  This turns out to be 
Figure 6-1. K’NEX parts used to build 
the robots. 
Connectionism And Psychological Modeling  
© M.R.W. Daw

 
- 55 - 
This turns out to be advantageous in providing emergent walking behaviour in the robot. 
 
 
 
In addition to the rods and connectors, the 
robot-building students also had available to them 
three identical motors that can be used to provide 
movement to K’NEX structures.  As can be seen 
from Figure 6-2, these motors drive plastic gears 
that can rotate a K’NEX rod inserted as an axle.  
One of the advantages of using such motors for 
this project is that they too have a little bit of “give” 
in them, which was important for getting the robot 
to work.  Having three of these motors was a lux-
ury, as well as an indicator of how many raw mate-
rials the students had available.  Usually K’NEX 
kits that use motors of this type only include one. 
 
 
The only additional material required for 
building the robot was some literature that de-
scribed a number of different robot projects, none of which use K’NEX.  As we will see below, one 
important problem the students needed to solve was how to convert the rotating motion of the 
motors into a stepping action.  They found one chapter in McComb (1987) that was particularly 
useful for providing a solution to this problem. 
Figure 6-2. A K’NEX motor. 
 
 
Table 6-1 provides a complete parts-list 
for building a single two-legged module.  To build 
the entire robot, three of these modules must be 
created, and as a result three times the number 
of parts listed in the table are actually required. 
 
 
 
6.3 STEP 1: SYNTHESIS 
 
 
In adopting the synthetic approach, the 
first general step is to take a group of basic build-
ing blocks and assemble them into a working 
system.  This contrasts with the analytic ap-
proach because the researcher does not start 
with a complete system, and decompose it into 
component parts or functions. 
 
 
In the first phase of synthesizing the 
walking robot, the basic building blocks are the 
K’NEX parts listed in the table above.  In the later 
phase, a more abstract sense of building block is 
adopted.  This is because you can create larger 
walking systems by linking together smaller identi-
cal walking modules. 
Connectors Required For One Module 
Colour 
Number 
Blue 
12 
Purple 
4 
Red 
2 
White 
14 
Yellow 
8 
Beige 
6 
Grey 
4 
Rods Required For One Module 
Colour 
Number 
Red 
3 
Yellow 
4 
Blue 
7 
White 
18 
Green 
26 
Additional Materials 
1 K’NEX Motor 
4 white rods to connect module to an-
other 
Table 6-1. The number of K’NEX parts 
required for one robot module. 
 
 
Section 6.3.4 provides detailed instructions on how to build the walking robot.  Before 
these instructions are encountered, however, it is interesting to consider three basic design deci-
sions that the students had to make in order to create a module that moved its legs in a stepping 
fashion. 
 
Connectionism And Psychological Modeling  
© M.R.W. Dawson 
Please do not quote! 

 
- 56 - 
6.3.1 From Rotation To Stepping 
 
 
In order to create a walking robot, the students decided that the fundamental engineering 
problem to be solved was converting the rotation of an axel into a stepping motion.  In making this 
decision, the students also made some progress in terms of organizing their work on the whole 
robot.  They had decided to convert each motor into a system that would cause two legs to step.  
They divided themselves into three small groups of students, each working with one of the mo-
tors.  When one group had some insight into solving a particular design problem, they communi-
cated it to the other two groups. 
 
 
The primary inspiration for converting rotation into stepping came from Figure 16-15 in 
McComb (1987).  This figure demonstrated that 
if one attached a leg to the outside of a rotating 
wheel, and also permitted the leg to rotate freely 
at the point of attachment, then the rotation of 
the wheel would result in the leg being lifted up 
and pushed down in a stepping motion.  This 
general principle is illustrated here.  In this fig-
ure, the black circle represents a wheel that is 
being rotated about its centre in the direction 
shown by the blue arrow.  The black line repre-
sents a robot leg.  It is attached to the wheel at 
the point represented by the small circle, and 
this connection can freely rotate (as indicated by 
the small blue arrow).  When the wheel is ro-
tated (from A to B), the leg can be lifted up and 
placed down in a stepping motion. 
Figure 6-3. A general principle for con-
verting rotation into stepping. 
 
 
As is shown in Figure 6-4, the students 
exploited this design in creating the axle to be ro-
tated by the K’NEX motor.  The axle was a red 
rod.  On one end of the rod, a white connector was 
attached sideways.  At the other end of the rod, 
another white connector was attached sideways, 
but on the opposite side of the rod.  These two 
white connectors represent wheels that would be 
rotated when the motor (which is not shown in the 
figure) rotates the red rod.  The white connectors 
are placed on opposite sides of the rod so that the 
two legs moved by the motor would do so coop-
eratively (i.e., one would be stepping in front of the 
other).  A blue rod is placed through the middle of 
each white rod, and a beige connector is attached to one end to keep it from falling out.  When 
constructed in this way, the blue rod can freely rotate in the white connector, and is thus equiva-
lent to the red point of connection in the preceding figure.  If the leg is attached to the blue rod, 
then it is possible to make it “step” when the red axle rotates. 
Figure 6-4. Arrangement of K’NEX 
parts to create an axle. 
 
6.3.2 Balance 
 
 
A second design issue to be faced by the students was the nature of the legs that were to 
be attached to the axles.  The problem to be dealt with was this: the legs had to be constructed in 
such a way that a two-legged module would stand, even if the motor was not turned on.  This was 
a problem because the “body” of the module – which was essentially the motor – was fairly heavy 
in relation to other components, and the legs were mounted in the middle of this body.  The feet 
at the end of the legs had to be constructed so that the module would balance. 
 
Connectionism And Psychological Modeling  
© M.R.W. Dawson 
Please do not quote! 

 
- 57 - 
 
Balance was achieved by attaching a fairly large and wide 
“foot” to a red rod that served as a leg.  As can be seen from Figure 
6-5, the foot was constructed from four white connectors and two yel-
low connectors held together very 
solidly with white and green rods.  
The robot’s point of contact with 
the ground was the two yellow 
connectors. 
Figure 6-5. A robot 
leg. 
Figure 6-6. Attaching the 
leg to the axle. 
 
 
The leg was attached to 
the axle by connecting the blue rod 
from the axle sideways to the lower 
white connector of the foot, as can 
be seen in Figure 6-6.  This kind of 
connection is very firm, so that it 
was possible for the leg to push 
upwards with enough force to lift 
the “body” of the module.  How-
ever, because the other end of the 
blue connecting rod could rotate in 
the white connector attached to the 
axle, the foot could still be moved 
in a “stepping” fashion. 
 
 
 
 
6.3.3 Leg Support 
 
In order to create a successful stepping mo-
 
In order to deal with this problem, the stu-
 
Figure 6-7 also demonstrates some of the 
ive” in the K’NEX building materials that aids in 
aking 
 
tion, it is not sufficient to connect the foot to the axle. 
A support must also be provided to the top of the red 
leg, in order to prevent the entire leg from being ro-
tated around the axle and hitting the ground.  In 
other words, the support must be used to restrain 
the leg in such a way that it keeps pointing (roughly) 
up and down during movement. 
 
 
dents designed a structure that was used to contain 
the motor, and was also used to loosely constrain 
the top of the leg.  This structure is shown in Figure 
6-7.  One end of a blue rod is firmly attached to a 
purple connector at the top-middle of this “body”.  A 
grey connector is attached to the other end of the 
blue rod.  A red leg is placed through the hole in the 
grey connector.  This arrangement allows the leg to 
move fairly freely in an up and down motion, but 
prevents the top of the leg from being rotated down-
wards to interfere with any stepping movement.  
 
“g
m
the movement of the system appear more 
lifelike.  In this figure, the “foot” at the back of the 
figure is lower than the “foot” in front.  If you look 
Figure 6-7.  Leg support by the frame 
in a two-legged module. 
Connectionism And Psychological Modeling  
© M.R.W. Dawson 
Please do not quote! 

 
- 58 - 
closely at the front leg, you will see that its red rod is slightly bent.  Also, the blue rod/grey con-
nector that is attached to the top of this leg is being pushed upwards in comparison to the same 
restraint that is attached to the other leg. 
 
6.3.4 Detailed Instructions 
 
The previous figure illustrates a complete two-legged module that the students used to 
6.4 STEP 2: EMERGENCE
 
explore walking in two-, four-, and six-legged systems.  The reader might be interested in using 
K’NEX to build a similar robot to explore its behaviour, and to explore how its behaviour is af-
fected by modifications of some of these design decisions.  A set of web-based, step-by-step in-
structions is included with the CD that accompanies this book.  For those looking at an electronic 
version of this text, the link to these instructions is included at the end of the chapter. 
 
 
 
The first general step in synthetic psychology is to construct a working system.  The sec-
What is an emergent property?  One way to think about emergence is in terms of the lin-
Holland (1998) points out that while emergence is a ubiquitous phenomenon in the natu-
The walking robot that was constructed by the class is exceedingly simple.  Nevertheless, 
6.4.1 Two-Legged System 
 
Figure 6-7 has already provided us with a glimpse of a complete two-legged system.  In 
The behaviour of this system was interesting in some respects, but disappointing in oth-
 
ond general step is to watch it work, paying attention to surprising or emergent properties.  As we 
will see in Chapters 7 and 8, a practitioner of the synthetic approach expects that a system of 
simple components will generate far more interesting behaviour than would be expected, particu-
larly when it is embedded in an interesting environment. 
 
 
ear/nonlinear distinction that we explored when discussing models of data, mathematical models, 
and computer simulations.  In a linear system, the behaviour of the whole system is exactly equal 
to the sum of the behaviours of its parts.  If one understands the behaviours of all of the parts of a 
linear system, then this means that there should be no surprises when observing the behaviour of 
the system as a whole.  In contrast, in a system in which the components interact nonlinearly, 
then surprises can emerge.  “The hallmark of emergence is this sense of much coming from little” 
(Holland, 1998, p. 2). 
 
 
ral world, it is exceedingly complicated, and therefore defies definition.  However, he argues that 
the scientific study of emergence is in a position to take advantage of some essential characteris-
tics.  First, emergence should be studied in systems that can be described as being governed by 
rules or laws.  Second, an emergent phenomenon should be a pattern that is both recognizable 
and recurring.  Third, theories of emergent phenomena will depend crucially upon modeling.  
Fourth, emergent phenomena will often be seen in systems that are either adaptive or dynamic 
over time.  Fifth, “emergence usually involves patterns of interaction that persist despite a contin-
ual turnover in the constituents of the patterns” p. 7.  These persistent patterns can be used as 
building blocks for larger systems. In other words, emergent phenomena will often be observed in 
systems that are organized hierarchically. 
 
 
when its behaviour was observed and manipulated, it exhibited many of these fundamental prop-
erties of emergence.  In the sections below, we will consider observations made concerning three 
different versions of the robot: a two-legged robot, a four-legged robot, and a six-legged robot. 
 
 
order to examine emergent behaviour, and to test its ability to walk, the students placed it on a 
table in the classroom and turned its motor on. 
 
 
ers.  When the motor was turned on, the robot began to sway back and forth in a surprisingly life-
like fashion.  The “body” of the system also rotated back and forth.  If one was to call each yellow 
Connectionism And Psychological Modeling  
© M.R.W. Dawson 
Please do not quote! 

 
- 59 - 
connector at the base of the leg a “toe”, then the stepping behaviour of this robot could be de-
scribed as follows:  three “toes” were always in contact with the table.  Two were on the leg on 
one side of the robot; the third was the toe on the back of the other leg.  In short, when the robot 
stepped, it raised the front “toe” of one leg, and then it raised the front “toe” of the other leg. 
 
 
All of this behaviour was interesting, in the sense that it was quite a bit more complicated 
6.4.2 Four-Legged System 
 
The next stage of exploring the walking behaviour of the robot was to take four additional 
 
K’NEX motors can be run in two different 
When the students drove the motors in the 
ally two “toes” would be seen in contact with 
Interestingly, every so often the movement of the two component modules would become 
In short, this first test of the four-legged system led to results that were essentially the 
than the students predicted prior to turning the robot on.  However, with all of this swaying, rock-
ing, and toe lifting, one disappointing fact was obvious: the robot did not walk.  It carried out all of 
this movement while staying in one place on the table.  An mpeg file showing the behaviour of 
this robot is included with the CD that accompanies this book.  For those looking at an electronic 
version of this text, the link to this video is included at the end of the chapter. 
 
 
white rods, and to connect two two-legged modules together to create a four-legged robot.  When 
the modules were connected together, care was taken to ensure that both motors were pointed in 
the same direction.  By convention, the rear of a module was the end where the motor switch, 
and the wire connecting the motor to the battery case, was found.  Figure 6-8 illustrates the re-
sulting system. 
 
directions, clockwise and counter-clockwise, de-
pending upon the setting of the motor’s switch.  In 
the first test of the four-legged robot, both motors 
were turned on in the same direction.  The behav-
iour of the robot didn’t depend on whether this di-
rection was clockwise or counter-clockwise, and 
also was not affected by whether the motors were 
started at the same time or not, or by the starting 
positions of the two legs. 
 
 
same direction, the robot as a whole began to 
sway and to rotate in a very similar fashion to the 
two-legged system.  If one were to watch only one 
side of the robot, then one would typically see 
three “toes” in contact with the ground. Occasion-
the ground – one from each foot.   Sometimes all 
four “toes” in contact with the ground.  When these observations were made, the robot was not 
walking.  All of its swaying movement was being done on the spot. 
 
Figure 6-8. The four-legged robot. 
 
uncoordinated.  When this happened, the “give” in the K’NEX motor became important.  The stu-
dents would hear a definite clicking sound as the gears of one of the motors jammed, and the 
rotation of one of the axles would cease for a short period (a second or less).  Then, the motor 
that had stopped would start again, and at that moment the robot would lift one entire foot off the 
ground, and take a definite step forward.  The extent of this forward movement was about 1 or 2 
centimetres.  Unfortunately, when the next step occurred, it was often in the opposite direction!  
So, when walking did occur, it was forward, then backward, one laboured step at a time. 
 
 
same as the results observed in the two-legged system: there was lots of robot movement, but 
essentially no walking.  However, every now and again a definite step would emerge, suggesting 
that the robot’s design was on the right track. 
 
Connectionism And Psychological Modeling  
© M.R.W. Dawson 
Please do not quote! 

 
- 60 - 
 
From observing the first test of this robot, it appeared that the coordination between the 
This observation led to a simple manipulation that had dramatic results.  If walking in this 
ystem 
When this second test was conducted, the results were much more encouraging.  At first, 
An mpeg file showing the behaviour of the four-legged robot is included with this book.  It 
6.4.3 Six-Legged System 
 
The final exploration of walking by the students involved studying the behaviour of a six-
 
In the first test of the six-legged robot, the 
 
On occasion, because the motors were running independently, this relatively stable con-
two leg modules was critical.  For the most part, the two modules were in step, and as a result the 
robot did not walk.  Walking only appeared when the stresses on the robot’s legs caused a dis-
ruption between the coordination of the two legs. 
 
 
s
required that the two leg modules be out of synch, then perhaps it would walk better if the 
two motors were run in opposite directions.  At face value, this prediction is counterintuitive, be-
cause one would expect that if walking were to be achieved, then the two sets of legs would have 
to be moving in the same direction.  However, the students could quickly test their hypothesis 
simply by setting the two motor switches in opposite directions. 
 
 
the robot motors protested loudly – angry clicks were heard from both.  However, after a few 
moments of this, the clicks were heard less frequently, and the robot did begin to walk forward.  
When it was walking optimally, it would lift one rear foot completely off of the table’s surface, and 
at the same time lift the front foot on the opposite side.  It would then move about 2 cm.  In some 
instances, the motors would lose this nice walking coordination, the stepping behaviour would 
attenuate, and the robot would either slow down or stand still.  This only lasted for a moment 
though – when the robot was in this state, the motors would start clicking back and forth again, 
and then the robot would begin to step forward. 
 
 
shows the difference between the behaviour of the system with the motors running the same way, 
and the behaviour with the motors reversed. 
 
 
legged robot.  This robot was created by connecting a third two-legged module to the four-legged 
robot.  Once again, care was taken to ensure that all three motors pointed in the same direction.  
The resulting robot is presented in Figure 6-9. 
 
Figure 6-9. The six-legged robot. 
behaviour of the system was very similar to that of 
the four-legged robot.  The motors would complain 
when they were first all started in the same 
direction.  The robot would begin to sway back 
and forth, and rotate a bit towards the left and 
right.  Shortly thereafter, the three different motors 
would be coordinated in a pattern in which all 
three legs on each side of the robot moved in 
synch.  In this configuration, the robot essentially 
swayed back and forth in one place, and the clos-
est that it came to stepping would be raising only 
one “toe” of any of its legs off the table’s surface. 
 
figuration was disrupted.  One or more of the motors would click, the axle would momentarily 
stop, and suddenly one of the robots legs would lift completely off the surface.  A similar stepping 
motion would then be initiated in one or both of the other modules, and the robot would take a 
fairly large step (in the order of 5 cm) in one direction.  Shortly afterwards, the system would 
again stablize into the configuration in which the legs on each side were in synch, and the ma-
chine swayed back and forth on the spot.  As was the case with the four-legged robot, when the 
next stepping action occurred, it was often in the direction opposite to the last step taken. 
 
Connectionism And Psychological Modeling  
© M.R.W. Dawson 
Please do not quote! 

 
- 61 - 
 
The second experiment with this robot was conducted by trying to affect the coordination 
When the motors were set in these directions, the robot walked quite effectively.  After an 
itial pe
An mpeg file showing the behaviour of the six-legged robot is included with this book.  It 
6.4.4 Emergence And Surprise 
 
Let us now briefly summarize the main results of this phase of working with the K’NEX 
A second point to be made from this demonstration concerns the notion of surprise.  In 
Nevertheless, demonstrating that the synthetic approach can generate surprise is a fairly 
6.5 STEP 3: ANALYSIS
of the three leg modules by manipulating the direction of the motors.  In particular, the motor driv-
ing the middle pair of legs was set to run in a direction opposite to that being run by the other two 
motors. 
 
 
in
riod of competition between the three motors, all three modules coordinated themselves 
into an arrangement in which each module raised one “foot” entirely off the table surface.  In gen-
eral, the three modules coordinated themselves in such a way that walking was achieved by rest-
ing the weight of the robot on one triangle of “feet” while the second triangle of “feet” was stepped 
forwards.  Each triangle was defined by a front and rear leg on the same side of the robot, ac-
companied by the middle leg on the other side of the robot. 
 
 
shows the difference between the behaviour of the system with the three motors running the 
same way, and the behaviour with the middle motor running in the opposite direction. 
 
 
robots.  One nice aspect of this demonstration project is that it provides an excellent example of 
emergence.  By themselves, none of the two-legged modules built by the students were capable 
of walking.  However, if two or three of these non-walking modules were coupled together, then 
walking was possible.  It is clear that the walking behaviour emerged from an interaction between 
the modules. 
 
 
particular, when reliable walking behaviour was observed in a robot, this was only achieved when 
the motors of adjacent two-legged modules were turning in opposite directions.  This finding was 
counterintuitive, because at the outset it was natural to expect that all of the motors needed to 
turn in the same direction to get the machine stepping forwards.  The robot project provides a 
very nice example of the possibility for surprise in a synthetic project. 
 
 
trivial result, and as such does not mark the end of the research program.  “It is true that surprise, 
occasioned by the antics of a rule-based system, is often a useful psychological guide, directing 
attention to emergent phenomena.  However, I do not look upon surprise as an essential element 
in staking out the territory” (Holland, 1998, p. 5).  The lasting value of surprise in the synthetic 
framework occurs when it directs attention to emergent behaviours that can be explained by ap-
pealing to properties of system components.  For this reason, after a system has been synthe-
sized, and after emergent phenomena have been observed in its workings, the researcher must 
step back and analyze in an attempt to explain their creation. 
 
 
 
One of the fundamental characteristics of the synthetic approach is the assembly of com-
A second, less explicit, characteristic of much synthetic research is the assumption that it 
 
ponents into a working system that exhibits surprising, emergent behaviour.  The class project 
that we have been describing has provided a concrete example of this. 
 
 
leads more directly or more easily to explanations than does analytic research.  Chapters 7 and 8 
will provide more information about this assumption.  For the time being, let it suffice to say that it 
is quite natural to assume that if you build a system, and engineer it out of parts whose workings 
you understand, then you should be in a position to explain the mechanisms from which surpris-
ing regularities emerge. 
Connectionism And Psychological Modeling  
© M.R.W. Dawson 
Please do not quote! 

 
- 62 - 
 
 
We will see that this assumption is not correct.  In many of the examples that we will con-
sider, building a system, and observing surprises in it, is pretty easy.  The difficult – and interest-
ing – work starts when an attempt is made to generate theories of regularities that emerge from 
what we synthesize. “Understanding the origin of these regularities, and relating them to one an-
other, offers our best hope of comprehending emergent phenomena in complex systems.  The 
crucial step is to extract the regularities from incidental and irrelevant details” (Holland, 1998, p. 
4).  A good deal of analysis is required to carry this crucial step out. 
 
 
The walking robots that we have been describing in this chapter are not particularly so-
phisticated machines, and were not designed to provide deep insights into the nature of locomo-
tion.  Nevertheless, it is instructive to analyze aspects of their behaviours, because even these 
simple machines reveal some very interesting properties. 
 
6.5.1 Emergence And The Thoughtless Walker   
 
 
For a first pass at analyzing the walking robots, it is instructive to consider their behaviour 
in terms of the criteria for emergence that have been proposed by Holland (1998).  One reason 
for doing this is because it helps to support the claim that the walking behaviour of the robots 
really is emergent.  A second reason for doing this is because it draws our attention to a number 
of different properties of these robots.  These properties demonstrate that even with these simple 
toy components, the behaviour of the robots is complicated and interesting. 
 
6.5.1.1 Recognizable, Recurring Patterns 
 
 
One of the criteria proposed by Holland (1998) as being necessary for emergence is the 
discovery of recognizable and recurring patterns.  Emergent behaviours can’t simply be those 
that are rare and surprising; they have to be results that are replicable.  Are the behaviours in our 
robots of this type? 
 
 
The moment-by-moment behaviour of all of the robots is quite complicated, and a de-
tailed classification of the behaviours would likely require a detailed, frame-by-frame analysis of 
video images of their performance.  However, even a casual observation of their movements 
suggests that there are two general states that the robots “prefer” to be in. 
 
 
The first state is one in which as many robot “toes” as possible are in contact with the 
ground.  In this state, the motors cause the robot to sway from side to side, and to turn back and 
forth, but the robot does not step forward.  Usually, when a foot moves, it only is a slight move-
ment that causes only one of its two “toes” to be raised off the ground.  In multi-module robots, 
this state is associated with all of the legs on the same side of the robot moving together.  The 
two-legged robot is always in this state. 
 
 
The second state is one in which a robot is actually walking forward.  In this state, more 
than one leg is lifted completely off the ground, usually at roughly the same time.  As the robot 
steps forward, it still sways and turns, but not to the degree seen in the other state.  For the robot 
to be in this state, there must be definite coordination between different two-leg modules.  In par-
ticular, modules that are connected to each other are coordinated in a “diagonal” fashion: if one 
module is lifting the left leg when the robot is in this state, then any attached modules will be lift-
ing the right leg. 
 
 
The robot is not only seen in these two states.  However, other robot states appear to be 
quite transitory.  They occur for fairly brief periods of time as the robot changes from one of the 
above states to the other.  These transitions appear to be more stressful on a robot’s structure 
than either of the two states described above.  This claim is supported by the fact that it is during 
these transitions that the motors stop functioning properly, grinding their gears with a distinctive 
clicking sound, and failing to rotate the red axle.  In order to determine whether any of these tran-
Connectionism And Psychological Modeling  
© M.R.W. Dawson 
Please do not quote! 

 
- 63 - 
sitory behaviours represent recurrent patterns would require detailed analysis (e.g., of slow mo-
tion video) of the robot. 
 
 
When all of the motors are turning in the same direction, the robots are much more likely 
to be in the swaying state than in the walking state.  Every 15 or 20 seconds, there will be a brief 
transition into the walking state (for one step), followed by a transition back into the swaying state.  
This situation is reversed when adjacent motors are turning in the opposite direction.  In this case, 
the robots are much more likely to be in the walking state, except that every 15 or 20 seconds 
there is a brief transition into the swaying state, almost immediately followed by a transition back 
into the walking state. 
 
6.5.1.2 Rule Governed System 
 
 
Holland (1998) suggests that a second criterion for the scientific study of emergence is 
that it occurs in a rule governed system.  “Emergent phenomena also occur in domains for which 
we presently have few accepted rules; ethical systems, the evolution of nations, and the spread 
of ideas come to mind” (p. 3).  Holland suggests that an understanding of emergence in these 
domains will have to wait until we have a better understanding of the laws that govern them. 
 
 
The robots that we have been describing are governed by laws, but not in the usual 
sense that comes to mind in psychology or cognitive science.  Usually, the phrase “rule gov-
erned” in cognitive science immediately brings to mind a system that is controlled by a computer 
program.  Furthermore, the computer program is usually thought be of a classical or symbolic 
type, such as the production system that was discussed in Chapter 5.  However, it is obvious that 
no such program is responsible for the behaviour of the robots.  I call them thoughtless walkers 
because they have not capacity to use symbolic representations to control their actions. 
 
 
Instead, the robots are governed completely by the laws of physics.  The motors are sup-
plying kinetic energy that causes robot parts to move, and the movement of these parts generate 
forces against the surface upon which robot rests.  The surface reflects forces back through the 
robot, which results in other emergent behaviours, such as the side-to-side swaying of the robot 
body.  As we will see below, a great deal of analytic research on the locomotion of multi-legged 
animals proceeds by analyzing the distribution of forces through the walking system. 
 
 
Describing the robots as being governed by the laws of physics leads to an interesting 
speculation that would require detailed physical analysis to validate.  Each robot represents a 
physical system that holds kinetic energy, and is subject to a variety of forces.  We could imagine 
measuring a robot in such a way that we could come up with a single number that represents its 
total stress or energy at any given time.  My suspicion is that the two main states of the robot that 
were described above represent low-energy configurations.  When a robot is in either of these 
two states, it is under the least amount of stress that it can be in when its motors are running.  
When the physical situation changes – for instance, when forces get redistributed because differ-
ent motors are out of sequence – a robot moves to a higher energy state.  When it is in such a 
state, it attempts to distribute forces again in such a way that the overall energy is again reduced.  
This results in the transitory behaviour, and the accompanying complaints from one or more of 
the motors.  From this perspective, the swaying state might represent the least energy state for 
the robot when its motors are running, because this state is the easiest to produce.  The walking 
state might represent a higher energy state (which could explain why walking has unexpectedly 
hard to produce).  However, the energy of the walking state is still lower than any of the transition 
states.  When the motors are running in the opposite directions, the robot is unable to reach the 
ideal swaying state, and instead has a preference for the next best configuration – walking.  In 
Part II of this book, we will see examples of artificial neural networks whose behaviour is fre-
quently explained by appealing to the physical analogy of seeking a least-energy state. 
 
6.5.1.3 Dynamic System 
 
Connectionism And Psychological Modeling  
© M.R.W. Dawson 
Please do not quote! 

 
- 64 - 
 
Holland (1998) proposes that emergent phenomena are to be expected when the laws 
governing a system are invariant, but the system components governed by the laws are changing 
or dynamic.  The thoughtless walkers that we have been discussing are obviously dynamic sys-
tems, because they are built from parts that are designed to move. 
 
 
However, these robots are also dynamic in a subtler and more interesting sense.  We 
have already described the robots in terms of two general lower-energy states, and have pointed 
out that both of these states depend upon a particular type of coordination between modules con-
trolling different pairs of legs.  We have also pointed out that there is no central computer that 
runs a program that coordinates the different modules.  How, then, is coordination between leg 
modules possible? 
 
 
The answer to this question is that different modules communicate to one another, but 
not in the symbolic fashion that is typically thought of in psychology and cognitive science.  A dif-
ferent kind of communication is enabled by the dynamic nature of a robot’s parts, and of the 
forces at play through its structure.  When two modules become uncoordinated (e.g., because 
they are rotating a slightly different speeds), a robot’s balance is altered in such a way that one 
module can run easily, but another cannot.  In other words, changes in the physical configuration 
of the robot could be described as one module communicating to another that it is becoming un-
coordinated.  This message is communicated by changing the forces in the robot in such a way 
that one of the motors actually stops for a moment, until forces change again in some fashion that 
permits the motor to resume turning.  In other words, even though these robots are thoughtless 
walkers, they can still be described as information processors. 
 
6.5.1.4 Adaptive System 
 
 
“The possibilities for emergence are compounded when the elements of the system in-
clude some capacity, however elementary, for adaptation or learning” (Holland, 1998, p. 5).  The 
thoughtless nature of the robots that we have been considering precludes most of the possibility 
for learning.  While this is a limitation of these robots (in terms of their generating theories about 
locomotion), such limitations are not surprising.  After all, the robots are simply toys that are being 
used in a demonstration to reveal some of the general characteristics of the synthetic approach. 
 
 
Nevertheless, if one were interested in exploring the properties of these robots in more 
detail, then there is a possibility for adaptation that could be explored with more detailed analyses 
than those we have reported above.  It was mentioned earlier, and illustrated in Figure 6-7, that 
one of the advantages of the K’NEX components was the “give” in many of the components.  
Several of the parts of the robot structure are firm, but flexible.  For example, rods can bend, can 
rotate within the joint of a connector, and can also be rotated a bit in the joint, without the overall 
structure breaking apart.  It would be interesting to determine whether the physical structure of a 
thoughtless walker changed, because of the forces that the robot is subject to, in such a way that 
a physical configuration of a rod that was seen early in an experiment was never seen later.  This 
might be evident if there were fewer transition periods between lower-energy states after a robot 
had been operating for a while.  If indeed forces acting upon the robot adjusted its physical struc-
ture in this fashion, then this would be an example of elementary learning in a thoughtless sys-
tem. 
 
6.5.1.5 Persistent Patterns, Changing Components 
 
 
Holland (1998) points out that emergent phenomena frequently exhibit a dynamic, hierar-
chical organization.  At one level of analysis, parts of a system might be changing very frequently.  
At a broader level of analysis, though, the system might exhibit stable regularities.  “A simple ex-
ample is the standing wave in front of a rock in a white-water river.  The water molecules making 
up the wave change instant by instant, but the wave persists as long as the rock is there and the 
water flows” (p. 7). 
 
Connectionism And Psychological Modeling  
© M.R.W. Dawson 
Please do not quote! 

 
- 65 - 
 
When the robots are successful in walking, they clearly exhibit this kind of hierarchical 
organization.  For example, walking in the six-legged robot can broadly be described as the suc-
cessive placing of a triangular configuration of legs onto the ground.  However, the legs that make 
up this stable triangle change from step to step.  A more detailed analysis of a robot’s behaviour 
would probably provide many more examples of this.  For instance, given all of the movement in 
a robot, and all of the “give” in its components, it would not be surprising that a wide diversity of 
physical configurations of robot parts could all be classified as a step. 
 
6.5.2 Comparison To Biological Walking 
 
 
The previous section has shown that there are a number of interesting and surprising 
emergent properties in the walking robots that we have constructed.  This illustrates one of the 
main advantages of the synthetic approach.  We could have taken a complicated phenomenon 
and analyzed it into putative component functions.  Instead, we took a very simple set of building 
materials and a very general construction goal and were able to create a system that delivered 
several properties that were not explicitly intended. 
 
 
To my mind, the robot example demonstrates another important advantage of the syn-
thetic approach.  By observing the regularities in the behavior of the working system, we started 
to learn important facts about walking in general.  In many cases, the synthetic approach will pro-
vide us with insights into the problems that are being solved by the system is that we build, and 
these general insights will often be more important than a specific account of how a particular 
system works.  Synthetic models provide a medium in which to explore phenomena.  This me-
dium can be so rich that one can learn a great deal by exploring the properties of models for their 
own sake. 
 
 
A complementary approach, though, is to consider of the system in the context of other 
types of knowledge.  For instance, when a model is being analyzed one fruitful approach is to 
relate its observe properties to known properties of other systems.  In the case of our current 
demonstration, we could attempt to do this by relating characteristics of our walking robots to 
knowledge that other researchers have collected in their study of animal locomotion. 
 
6.5.2.1 Lifelike Motion 
 
 
The claim that was made earlier about the appearance of the walking robots was that 
their movement appear to be “ lifelike".  What exactly is meant by this claim?  What kind of evi-
dence can be cited to support this position?  Research on animal locomotion can provide some 
answers to these questions, and can also provide some guidance about what properties of the 
walking robots deserve our attention. 
 
 
At first glance, we might be tempted to think of legs as being kind of wheel.  If legs func-
tioned exactly like wheels, then movement would be uniform.  However, analyses of the locomo-
tion of many different animals have shown quite clearly that movement is not uniform at all.  Legs 
are not wheels; a different metaphor is required to model actions like walking or running. 
 
 
During a slow motion like walking, a better mechanical metaphor is an inverted pendulum 
(Dickinson et al., 2000).  In this metaphor, the pendulum's cable becomes a rigid leg that is at-
tached to a body of mass.  When the leg is used for walking, the mass is vaulted over the leg, as 
a shown in Figure 6-10.  In the first half of this movement, kinetic energy is transformed into gravi-
tational potential energy.  In the second half of this movement, when the body descends, this po-
tential energy is partially recovered as kinetic energy.  One consequence of this cycling between 
kinetic and gravitational energy is that the body of the animal decelerates in the first half of the 
movement, and accelerates in the second half of the movement.  During a faster motion like run-
ning, the rigid leg of the inverted pendulum is better viewed as a spring, kinetic and gravitational 
potential energies are stored as elastic energy, and the system bounces as if it were on a Pogo 
stick cycling between breaking and propulsive phases.  Again, the running system does not move 
Connectionism And Psychological Modeling  
© M.R.W. Dawson 
Please do not quote! 

 
- 66 - 
uniformly.  Instead it accelerates and decelerates with every step.  Interestingly, these two meta-
phors can be applied to describe the locomotion of bipedal, quadrapedal, and polypedal organ-
isms (Blickhan & Full, 1993). 
 
 
One in respect in which the 
walking robots are lifelike is that their 
forward movement is not uniform.  Even 
though the motors work by providing a 
uniform rotation of an axle, when his 
motion is converted into a step, the legs 
work like pendulums.  When legs are 
being 
lifted 
up, 
the 
robots 
forward 
movement is very slow because the feet 
that are in contact with the ground are in 
the process of converting kinetic energy 
into gravitational potential energy.  When 
the legs are being placed down, the robot 
lunges ahead noticeably faster.  This is 
because the center of mass over each 
supporting leg is descending and acceler-
ting. 
monly seen in the walking of the six-legged 
rganisms such as insects (Dickinson et al., 2000). 
yed back and forth very noticeably, in the front of the robust 
tated between the left and right. 
 
he animal changes the, moves over uneven ground, 
r is not to skew by uneven terrain” (p. 101). 
.5.2.2 Control With No Brain 
ion system works, but also how all of the components 
nction together as an integrated system. 
Figure 6-10.  The inverted pendulum model of 
walking.  The body (grey circle) is vaulting 
over a rigid leg in the direction of the arrow. 
a
 
 
Animal locomotion research points to a second fashion in which the walking robots are 
lifelike.  We saw earlier that getting the robot to walk depended heavily upon leg coordination.  
For example, the six-legged robot would only walk forward when its motors ran in such a way that 
the six legs were coordinated to act like two sets of tripods.  Walking was accomplished by having 
one tripod serve the function of the rigid legs of an inverted pendulum, while the other tripod was 
moved ahead.  This kind of leg coordination is com
o
 
 
A third respect in which the walking of our robots was lifelike involves the many move-
ments of their bodies that were not at first glance directly related to walking per se.  In particular, 
the bodies of all of the robots swa
ro
 
 
Interestingly, these kinds of movements are becoming a more interest to researchers to 
analyze animal locomotion.  The legs of sprawled-posture animals, such as insects and crabs, 
generate substantial lateral and the forces (Dickinson et al., 2000).  These forces are orthogonal 
to the direction of motion.  Analyses of these forces suggest that elastic energy storage and re-
covery may occur within the horizontal plane.  “By pushing laterally, legs create a more robust 
gate that can be passively self-stabilizing as t
o
 
6
 
 
One of the predominant themes in the study of animal locomotion is the integration of 
many different systems, both neural and mechanical.  “An integrative approach to locomotion fo-
cuses on the interactions between the muscular, skeletal, nervous, respiratory, and circulatory 
systems ” (Dickinson et al., 2000, p. 100).  Researchers are not only interested in determining 
how each individual component of locomot
fu
 
 
The integration of motor, sensory, and control systems is also evident in behavior-based 
robotics.  Consider Genghis, a six-legged robot built in 1988 by robotocist Rodney Brooks 
(Brooks, 1989; reprinted in Brooks, 1999).  Two motors drive each leg, one for swinging it back 
Connectionism And Psychological Modeling  
© M.R.W. Dawson 
Please do not quote! 

 
- 67 - 
and forth, the other for lifting it up and down.  A simple walk is achieved by manipulating the be-
havior of all of the motors in the robot, on the basis of sensing different positional characteristics 
of its legs.  For example, one reflex notices whenever a leg is not down, and attempts to bring the 
leg down by turning one motor on in the appropriate fashion.  A second reflex notices if any one 
of the legs happens to move forward for some reason.  When this is detected, all of the legs will 
receive a series of messages that caused them to move backwards slightly.  Other reflexes will 
advance a leg forward when it is noticed that the leg is raised, and will raise legs under appropri-
ate conditions.  The combination of these sensory measurements and motor signals lead to a 
ery robust emergent walking behavior in the robot. 
 this is mediated completely by the transmission of physical forces through the 
bot structure. 
hat we encountered when examining the conditions under which our robots were 
ble to walk. 
.5.2.3 Limitations And Future Explorations 
hat animal locomotion requires the integration of multiple 
ensory, motor, and control systems. 
hat generate a far 
cher set of emergent properties then could have been predicted at the outset. 
 
6.6 ISSUES CONCERNING SYNTHETIC PSYCHOLOGY
v
 
 
We have already pointed out that no sensory control system has been built into our 
thoughtless walkers.  To the extent that there is control or coordination between different two-
legged modules,
ro
 
 
Recent work by researchers on animal locomotion has explored the capabilities of such 
thoughtless systems.  Kubow and Full (1999) simulated a walking cockroach in which there was 
no feedback from the equivalent of neural reflexes.  The only feedback in the model resulted from 
the musculoskeletal properties of the cockroach legs that were included in the simulation.  When 
walking was simulated, and the forward movement of the model was perturbed by external 
forces, the model was self-stabilizing.  Depending on the type of perturbation, the model was able 
to recover in one or more steps.  “Essentially, control algorithms can be embedded in the form of 
the model itself.  Control results from information being transmitted through mechanical arrange-
ments.  Perturbations change the translation and/or rotation of the body that consequently pro-
vide ‘mechanical feedback’ by altering legged moment arms” (p. 858).  This is exactly the kind of 
coordination t
a
 
6
 
 
Animal walking can be very complicated.  Locomotion is required to accomplish many 
different goals, and each goal might be achieved by a completely different gait in the same ani-
mal.  A cockroach that walks slowly coordinates six legs in a fashion similar to the six leg and ro-
bot described earlier; when fleeing at a speed of fifty body lengths per second the same cock-
roach runs on only two legs (Full & Tu, 1991).  The ecological roles of different types of locomo-
tion are also reflected in the structure and function of different anatomical parts. “Forty percent of 
the body mass of the shrimp is devoted to the large, tasty abdominal muscles that produce a 
powerful tale flick during rare, but critical, escape behaviors” (Dickinson et al., 2000, p. 102).  
Animals to move in the real world are subject to a bewildering variety of different forces.  All of 
these factors contribute to the view t
s
 
 
In comparison to biological systems, the thoughtless walkers described in this chapter 
are very simple.  Near only designed to step forward.  They cannot turn, change gate to achieve 
different goals, or manipulate stepsize to deal with encountered obstacles.  They do not have any 
neural or sensory control systems.  Nevertheless, we have seen that even these exceedingly 
simple toy robots as many interesting emergent properties that are relevant to the scientific study 
of animal locomotion.  They illustrate one of the main reasons that there is a growing interest in 
the synthetic approach: very simple components can be used to build systems t
ri
 
 
 
In this chapter, I have proposed a general approach for conducting synthetic psychology.  
This approach can be represented with the acronym SEA that stands for synthesis, emergence 
and analysis.  In the first stage, a researcher will build a working system from known components.  
Connectionism And Psychological Modeling  
© M.R.W. Dawson 
Please do not quote! 

 
- 68 - 
In the second stage, a researcher will observe the actions of this system, looking for emergent 
phenomena.  In the third stage, a researcher will perform an analysis of the working system in an 
attempt to explain the emergent phenomena by appealing to properties of the system, its envi-
ronment, or the interaction between them.  A simplified example of this approach was illustrated 
y the construction, observation, and analysis of walking robots built from K’NEX parts. 
t us briefly mention these issues, and then con-
ont them in more detail in subsequent chapters. 
nthetic psychology, will hopefully provide a more 
ccurate reflection of actual research practices. 
ponent of SEA – that synthetic research cannot be performed without 
lso performing analysis. 
hetic models that have representational properties 
re the true products of synthetic psychology. 
 
6.7 INSTRUCTIONS AND MOVIES
b
 
 
The simplified nature of this example can be used to raise, but not adequately deal with, 
a few issues related to the synthetic approach.  Le
fr
 
 
One issue concerns the sequential nature of applying the steps in SEA.  As portrayed in 
this chapter, each step is done independently of the other, and there is a definite sequence of 
steps to be carried out.  This portrayal does not do justice to the problem-solving practices of my 
robot-building students, and does not completely reflect how synthetic psychology is conducted in 
practice.  In particular, in building the robots the students moved back and forth between synthe-
sis, emergence, and analysis.  They would attempt to solve a problem in one fashion, observe the 
system to see if the problem was solved, and if the problem remained, then they would analyze 
the situation to see if they could come up with an alternative solution.  Part II of this book, with the 
hands-on demonstrations of connectionism as sy
a
 
 
A second issue concerns the advantages of the synthetic approach.  While this chapter 
has attempted to illustrate how one might conduct a synthetic research program, it hasn’t made a 
strong case for why this program would be conducted.  Chapter 7 addresses this issue with an 
historical overview of the synthetic reaction against analytic research.  It will make the argument 
that the synthetic approach does have many advantages.  But it will also make the argument – 
hinted at by the final com
a
 
 
A third issue concerns the domain of “synthetic psychology” and its relation to embodied 
cognitive science, including the reaction against the sense-think-act cycle.  While the robots de-
scribed in this chapter have given an example of viewing walking synthetically, they certainly do 
not qualify as being psychological models.  The rejection of the sense-think-act cycle is explicit in 
their thoughtless nature.  But how can such models be psychological?  In Chapter 8, I am going 
to make a stronger argument that the synthetic approach can be conduced without rejecting the 
sense-think-act cycle.  My position is that synt
a
 
 
 
The reader might be interested in getting a hold of some K’NEX parts in order to replicate 
the robots that have been described in this chapter, and to explore modifications of some of the 
design decisions that were made by my students.  In the electronic version of this book, if you 
press this link, you will be taken to a web page that provides step-by-step instructions for robot 
building.  This web material is included with the book’s CD-ROM. 
vies are included on the CD-ROM to dem-
nstrate the behaviour of the robots described above. 
 
Here is a short mpeg movie of the behaviour of a two-legged module. 
 
 
 
The reader might also be interested in seeing how the robots behave without having to 
go to the trouble of building them.   Three different mo
o
Connectionism And Psychological Modeling  
© M.R.W. Dawson 
Please do not quote! 

 
- 69 - 
 
 
Here is an mpeg movie of the behaviour of a four-legged robot. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Here is an mpeg movie of the six-legged thoughtless walker. 
 
 
 
 
All of the movies were recorded in the summer of 2001 on the paved sidewalks outside of 
the Biological Sciences Building at the University of Alberta.  I’d like to thank my son Christopher 
for his invaluable assistance in making these records of robot behaviour. 
 
6.7 REFERENCES 
 
Bechtel, W., & Abrahamsen, A. (1991). Connectionism And The Mind. Cambridge, MA: Basil 
Blackwell. 
Blickhan, R., & Full, R. J. (1993). Similarity in multilegged locomotion: Bouncing like a monopode. 
Journal of Comparative Physiology A, 173, 509-507. 
Brooks, R. A. (1989). A robot that walks; emergent behaviours from a carefully evolved network. 
Neural Computation, 1, 253-262. 
Brooks, R. A. (1999). Cambrian Intelligence: The Early History Of The New AI. Cambridge, MA: 
MIT Press. 
Dawson, M. R. W. (1998). Understanding Cognitive Science. Oxford, UK: Blackwell. 
Dickinson, M. H., Farley, C. T., Full, R. J., Koehl, M. A. R., Kram, R., & Lehman, S. (2000). How 
animals move: An integrative view. Science, 288, 100-106. 
Full, R. J., & Tu, M. S. (1991). Mechanics of a rapid running insect: two-, four-, and six-legged 
locomotion. Journal of Experimental Biology, 156, 215-231. 
Holland, J. H. (1992). Adaptation In Natural And Artificial Systems. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 
Connectionism And Psychological Modeling  
© M.R.W. Dawson 
Please do not quote! 

 
- 70 - 
Holland, J. H. (1998). Emergence. Reading, MA: Perseus Books. 
Kubow, T. M., & Full, R. J. (1999). The role of the mechanical system in control: a hypothesis of 
self-stabilization in hexapedal runners. Philosophical Transactions Of The Royal Society 
B, 354, 849-861. 
Langton, C. G. (1995). Artificial Life: An Overview. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 
Levy, S. (1992). Artificial Life. New York, NY: Vintage Books. 
McComb, G. (1987). The Robot Builder's Bonanza: 99 Inexpensive Robotics Projects. Blue Ridge 
Summit, PA: TAB Books. 
Mitchell, M. (1996). An Introduction To Genetic Algorithms. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 
Pfeifer, R., & Scheier, C. (1999). Understanding Intelligence. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 
Connectionism And Psychological Modeling  
© M.R.W. Dawson 
Please do not quote! 

