Choreographic Objects
Abstractions, Transductions, Expressions
Carlos Manuel Carvalho Santos Oliveira
Doctoral Thesis in Digital Media
July, 2015

Thesis submitted in accordance with the requirements for the degree of 
Doctor of Philosophy in Digital Media, 
specialization: Production of Audiovisual and Interactive Content, 
under the scientific supervision of Prof. Carla Fernandes, Ph.D.
Tese apresentada para cumprimento dos requisitos necessários à obtenção do grau de
Doutor em Media Digitais, especialidade Criação de Audiovisual e Conteúdos Interactivos 
realizada sob orientação científica de Prof. Carla Fernandes, Ph.D.
Financial Support



 This work is dedicated to the infinity of potentials reserved in life, 
and to all those who committedly resist becoming disconnected from it.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The present text synthesizes a multifarious research, which was to a great extent
marked by a growing indiscernibility between work and life. Not only formal contexts
of artistic and academic research have contributed to it, but also the many people with
whom this path was, in one way or another, shared, are too here present. The following
remarks are intended to manifest my deep appreciation for all those who have affected
and have been affected by the stream of forces moving me throughout this period.
I would like to thank Prof. Carla Fernandes—my supervisor—for her
unconditional support, despite all difficulties. I would like to thank the Transmedia
Knowledge Base for Performing Arts' team for allowing me to accompany their work. I
would like to thank the UT Austin|Portugal International Collaboratory for Emerging
Technologies (CoLab), for supporting this research. And I would like to thank the
Portuguese Foundation for Science and Technology (FCT), for having sponsored it. I
would like to thank Prof. Nik Haffner—director of the Inter-University Dance Centre
Berlin—for all the opportunities he has offered me. And I would like to thank all the
people at this school, for having had me around and allowing me to be part of the
adventure of their lives. I would like to thank Kattrin Deufert and Thomas Plischke—
artists and choreographers—for having invited me to work with them. I would like to
thank João Fiadeiro—artist, choreographer, researcher and friend—for the sympathy in
feeling, for the learning in management, and for the resonance in process. I would like
to thank the AND_Lab—Lisbon's Laboratory for Anthropology and Dance—for having
provided me with an honest context of work. I would like to thank Alex Baczynski-
Jenkins—dancer and friend—for all the adventures we have shared. I would like to
thank Ana Trincão—friend and housemate—for having eased up my life. I would like to
thank Diethild Meier—lover and friend—for having been there throughout the storm. I
would like to thank Urândia Aragão and David Leitão, for having provided me a cozy
home, whenever I needed. And, finally, I would like to thank my parents—Carlos and
Alice—for conserving some of my roots.

CHOREOGRAPHIC OBJECTS
ABSTRACTIONS, TRANSDUCTIONS, EXPRESSIONS
CARLOS MANUEL CARVALHO SANTOS OLIVEIRA 
ABSTRACT
KEYWORDS: Expanded Choreography, Process Philosophy, Dance and Technology,
Choreographic Knowledge, Digital Media, Transductive Thought.
The present text attests a speculative tentative to define choreographic objects.
Not only is this to be done by looking into a series of study cases, but also by looking so
with a major concern: if such are the objects of choreographic knowledge, how can they
be created anew? On the one hand, since all the cases discussed express knowledge by
digital means, this question of novelty is to be framed by the “encounter between dance
and technology”. On the other hand, since novelty is a potential outcome of process, this
question is to be framed by the ontogenetic concerns of process philosophy.
The method of inquiry here essayed can therefore be said to be an encounter in
itself. To bring the encounter between dance and technology into contact with the
conceptual framework of process philosophy is to problematize their potential relation
and, in this way, to create conditions for resolving such problems into the form of
propositional cases of solution. According to this, the encounter between dance and
technology is itself a field of problematic relations. In the cases discussed, it attests the
resolution of problems between dancing bodies and digital machines with each novel
expression of choreographic knowledge. When looked upon by the ontogenetic
concerns of process philosophy, these choreographic expressions are but particular cases
of solution with regard to problems between potentials. Potentiality is therefore
understood to be not only a fundamental condition of novelty but also the general field
of relatedness in regard to which determinate cases stand as particular solutions. As
such, to resolve a problem is always to propose one of its many potential solutions. To
resolve the general question of novelty in the encounter between dance and technology
is to express its potentials in the form of propositions. This is neither induction nor
deduction, but rather transduction. 
As a mode of thought, transduction will also be argued to be characteristic of
choreographic transmission. If a choreographic object is to be created anew, it needs to
be transduced from the milieu of potentials wherein the knowledge of dance has formed.
Transduction operates the passage between states of knowledge by moving the milieu
and affecting in this way what is known with what is not (i.e. undetermined potentials).
In this sense, choreography cannot be but an encounter between dance and technology:
it structures the knowledge (logos) of dancing (tekhné) in determinate and transmittable
ways. Because of this, it will be here contended that choreographic objects are both
diagrammatic and algorithmic. Even before being expressed, they are structured in
abstraction, i.e. diagrammatically. And they can only be expressed in different milieus
because their structure is resumable, i.e. algorithmic. For this reason, the digital milieu
presents itself as a most adequate medium to express choreographic knowledge.
Notwithstanding, here, the question of novelty remains: how should the potentials of
digital choreography be thought? By following such problem, this study will propose
that the algorithmic computation of choreographic ideas is necessarily pervaded by
incomputabilities and that novelty can be prompted by saturating the relationship
between structures and potentials or, in other words, between what is known and the
unknowable. 

OBJECTOS COREOGRÁFICOS
ABSTRACÇÕES, TRANSDUÇÕES, EXPRESSÕES
CARLOS MANUEL CARVALHO SANTOS OLIVEIRA 
RESUMO
PALAVRAS CHAVE: Coreografia Expandida, Filosofia do Processo, Dança e
Tecnologia, Conhecimento Coreográfico, Media Digitais,
Pensamento Transdutivo.
Esta tese tem por fim não só definir as principais características dos objectos
coreográficos, mas também determinar como pode o conhecimento coreográfico ser
expresso com novidade. Por um lado, porque todos os casos aqui estudados expressam
conhecimento por meios digitais, tais especulações serão enquadradas pelo “encontro
entre a dança e a tecnologia”. Por outro lado, porque a novidade resulta necessariamente
do desenvolvimento de processos, tais especulações serão enquadradas por uma série de
questões fundamentais da filosofia do processo. 
O método de pesquisa aqui seguido é, sucintamente, um encontro em si mesmo.
Ao colocar a filosofia do processo em contacto com o encontro entre a dança e a
tecnologia este método problematiza as relações que potencialmente daqui resultam e,
com isto, estabelece as condições necessárias para que tais problemas sejam resolvidos
na forma de proposições. Neste sentido, o próprio encontro entre a dança e a tecnologia
é problemático. Nos casos aqui estudados, cada nova expressão de conhecimento afirma
a resolução de problemas na relação entre corpos dançantes e máquinas digitais. Da
perspectiva da filosofia de processo, tais expressões são soluções particulares relativas
aos problemas potenciais. A potência é assim entendida tanto enquanto condição
fundamental da novidade como enquanto capacidade geral de relação. Com isto, a
resolução de um problema corresponde sempre à expressão da sua potência na forma de
uma proposição. Isto não é nem indução nem dedução. É transdução. 
Enquanto modo de pensamento, a transdução será aqui afirmada como
característica fundamental da transmissão coreográfica. Ou seja, para um objecto
coreográfico ser novo, necessita de ser transduzido juntamente com o meio em que o
seu conhecimento se formou. A transdução opera assim a passagem de um estado de
conhecimento a outro, mobilizando um meio potencial que afecta o que é sabido com o
que não se pode saber (i.e. as potências, porque são indeterminadas). Neste sentido, a
coreografia em si mesma não pode senão resultar de um encontro entre dança e
tecnologia. A coreografia estrutura o conhecimento (logos) do dançar (tekhné) de
maneira determinada e transmissível. Por isto mesmo, será proposto que os objectos
coreográficos são tanto diagramáticos como algorítmicos. Ou seja, mesmo antes de
serem expressos, estes objectos são estruturados em abstracto, i.e. diagramaticamente. E
podem apenas ser expressos em diferentes meios devido à iterabilidade da sua estrutura
(i.e. são algorítmicos). O digital coloca-se então como meio optimamente adequado à
expressão do conhecimento coreográfico. Não obstante, aqui, a questão da novidade
permanece: como entender as potências da coreografia digital? Ao seguir tal problema,
este estudo proporá que a computação algorítmica de ideias coreográficas é
necessariamente infectada por incomputabilidades, e que a novidade pode ser facilitada
com a saturação das relações entre estrutura e potência ou, por outras palavras, entre o
cognoscível e o incognoscível.

LIST OF CONTENTS
INTRODUCTION........................................................................................................1
Chapter 1 -A TOPOLOGICAL ENCOUNTER..........................................................26
1.1 -Multiplicities in Movement............................................................................27
1.2 -Creativity in Encounter...................................................................................37
Chapter 2 -SIMONDON ON INDIVIDUATION.......................................................50
2.1 -Ontogenesis.....................................................................................................51
2.2 -Physical Paradigm...........................................................................................58
2.3 -Transindividuation..........................................................................................64
2.4 -Analogical Knowledge...................................................................................70
2.5 -Networks.........................................................................................................76
Chapter 3 -CHOREOTECHNICS...............................................................................87
3.1 -Choreography's Excess...................................................................................88
3.2 -The Choreographic Object..............................................................................96
3.3 -Topological Continuity, Differential Expressivity........................................102
Chapter 4 -DIAGRAMMATIC IDEAS....................................................................112
4.1 -From Idea to Proposition...............................................................................113
4.2 -Individuating Choreo-Knowledge................................................................121
4.3 -Between Abstraction and Expression...........................................................131
Chapter 5 -ALGORITHMIC CHOREOGRAPHIES................................................149
5.1 -Diagramming Gesture...................................................................................150
5.2 -Gestural Bodies, Extended............................................................................160
Chapter 6 -DIGITAL POTENTIAL..........................................................................181
6.1 -Problems in Potential....................................................................................182
6.2 -Algorithmic Complexity...............................................................................191
6.3 -Object Orientation.........................................................................................201
6.4 -Process Orientation.......................................................................................213
6.5 -Thoughtful Character....................................................................................223
6.6 -Speculative Proposition................................................................................233
CONCLUSION.........................................................................................................241
LIST OF REFERENCES..........................................................................................253
LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS....................................................................................260

LIST OF ABREVIATIONS
CD-ROM
Compact Disk Read-Only Memory
CLA
Choreographic Language Agent
CT
Creation Tool
DS|DM
Double Skin | Double Mind
ECHO
 
Enhancing Choreographic Objects
EM|PC
Emio Greco | Pieter Scholten
GF
Gesture Follower
GUI
Graphical User Interface
HMM
 Hidden Markov Models
IMK
Inside Movement Knowledge
IT
Improvisation Technologies: A Tool for the Analytical Eye
KB
Knowledge Base
MB
Motion Bank
NRP
Notation Research Project
NTTF
No Time to Fly
OFTr
One Flat Thing, reproduced 
RAM
Reactor for Awareness in Motion
SOfOFTr 
Synchronous Objects for “One Flat Thing, reproduced”
TKB
Transmedia Knowledge-Base for the Performing Arts
VAT
Video Abstraction Tool

CHOREOGRAPHIC OBJECTS
ABSTRACTIONS, TRANSDUCTIONS, EXPRESSIONS 

INTRODUCTION
The recent years have witnessed a growing number of research projects that,
either stemming from the side of academic and scholarly work or from the side of
artistic practices and the various types of economy in which these exist, strive for
asserting choreographic knowledge in yet unexplored ways.1 This is a growth that can
be said to manifest a general intent of proliferation, an expansion towards a larger
diversity in practices, knowledge and networks, and towards a better adequacy of all of
these to the fast-paced changing economic environment. Together with the
establishment of a globalized, distributed and networked cognitive capitalism, the
production of choreographic knowledge has been changing towards novel forms of
expression. With this, not only have these projects been contributing to the overall and
ongoing expansion of choreographic practices, but they have also been expanding the
very notion of choreography. 
One exemplary assertion of this expansion was the conference “Expanded
Choreography: Situations, Movements, Objects ...”, which occurred on the occasion of
the exhibition “Retrospective” by French choreographer Xavier Le Roy at the Fundació
Antoni Tàpies, in Barcelona, March 2012. Devised by Mårten Spångberg and co-
organized by the University of Dance and Circus Stockholm, the Museu d'Art
Contemporani de Barcelona (MACBA), the Fundació Antoni Tàpies, and the Mercat de
les Flors, with the support of the Swedish Research Council and the Swedish Arts
Grants Committee, this conference was intended to “introduce different perspectives
and locate a departure point for a discourse particular to choreography as an expanded
practice, away from artistic research and into other worlds”. Following from the
diagnosis that choreography is already “turning away from established notions of dance
and its strong association with skill and craft, to instead establish autonomous
discourses that override causalities among conceptualization, production, expression
and representation”, this conference strived to affirm how choreography exceeds, on the
one hand, being just “a set of protocols or tools used in order to produce something
predetermined, i.e. a dance” and, on the other hand, being “a priori performative, [...]
bound to expression and reiteration of subjectivity”. In contrast to these perspectives,
the conference served as a platform to affirm choreography both as an “an open cluster
1
A list of paradigmatic examples can be found at the online knowledge-base of the “Motion Bank”
(http://motionbank.org/en/content/knowledge-base), a project which will be discussed in Section 5.2.
1

of tools that can be used in a generic capacity for both analysis and production” and as
“an expanded practice, a practice that is political in and of itself”. A statement made
against a background of knowledge fields2, which were summoned to set the conference
off to explore how “Situations, Movements, Objects …”, and all the more that the
ellipsis holds in potential, can express choreography beyond what choreographers
traditionally do.3 
It is from the equation made here between choreography's expansion and its
politics that this study has proceeded. And not just in any way. For it is its contention
that such equation problematizes the affective conditions of knowledge production and
the effects of its circulation. Despite expanded choreography's proffered disassociation
from skill and craft, its instantiations necessarily implicate an epistemological
dimension in process. The assertion that choreography is no longer bounded to the
expression and reiteration of subjectivity can therefore be understood from the
viewpoint of knowledge's political dimension. A knowledge that is neither a stable
reality nor an immutable set of axioms, but rather an intricate dynamism of affects and
effects in the political realm of the social. A knowledge that, in sum, is the trans-
subjective resolution of a series of problems constitutive, in this case, of choreography.
In parallel to the conference's activities, Xavier le Roy's “Retrospective” stood as
an example of what an expanded choreography can be like.4 Perhaps unavoidably, the
whole exhibition revolved around the transmission of knowledge and its political
conditions. Meaning that, by bringing choreography into the art gallery, Le Roy
conveyed the necessary conditions for his work to be presented not only as
performance, but more fundamentally as an interface for the transmission of
2
Some of the conference's speakers were: performance theorist and practitioner Bojana Cvejić, art
historian Dorothea von Hantelmann, philosopher Graham Harman, curator Ana Janevski, dance
scholar and performance theorist André Lepecki, choreographer and performer Xavier Le Roy,
curator and theorist Maria Lind, dance researcher Isabel de Naverán, media theorist Luciana Parisi,
dramaturge and performer Goran Sergej Pristaš, choreographer and theoretician Mårten Spångberg,
sociologist Francisco Tirado, and curator and dance researcher Christophe Wavelet.
3
All quotes retrieved 24/03/2014, from the conference's webpage, at the Museu d’Art Contemporani
de Barcelona's website (www.macba.cat/en/expanded-choreography-situations).
4
At the choreographer's website one can read the following description of this exhibition:
“'Retrospective' by Xavier Le Roy is an exhibition conceived as a choreography of actions that will be
carried out by performers for the duration of the exhibition. These actions will compose situations
that inquire into various experiences about how we use, consume or produce time. This exhibition
employs retrospective as a mode of production rather than aiming to show the development of an
artist’s work over a period of time. It seeks to recast the material from the solo choreographies in
situations with live actions where the apparatuses of the theatre performance and the museum
exhibition intersect. Based on solo works by Xavier Le Roy created between 1994 and 2010, the
work unfolds in three time axes: the duration of the visit composed by each visitor, the daily basis of
labor time of 16 performers and the time of the growth of a new composition during the length of the
exhibition.” Retrieved 14/02/2014, from www.xavierleroy.com.
2

choreographic knowledge. In this sense, “Retrospective” can be said to be a sort of
performative knowledge base, one that is charged with potentials belonging to the
choreographer's work and that, instead of foreclosing the experience of the work with a
predetermined set of definitions, allows for these potentials to resolve into expressions
explicitly determined by the political conditions of their context of occurrence. 
With “Retrospective”, Le Roy proposes different ways for the memory of some
of his previous works (notably, a series of solos) to be reactivated. Not for re-enacting
any sort of identity proper to each work, but for allowing these works to be rediscovered
and, ultimately, known anew. In “Retrospective”, what is exhibited together with some
documental registers of Le Roy's first performances, are sixteen performers to whom the
knowledge of these works has been transmitted. Each of them is then capable of re-
enacting the potentials of what they know and, together with the visitors, discover what
choreography can do.5 For the duration of the exhibition, the performers' remember Le
Roy's works by conversing with visitors, by re-enacting scores and performing dances,
by showing artifacts related with the work, and other actions of this kind. Perhaps
precisely because of being like a performative knowledge base, “Retrospective” has
been argued by dance and technology scholar Johannes Birringer to be an exhibition
that epitomizes the principles of expanded choreography. In his words: “this exhibition
proposed to investigate new discourses specific to dance/choreography, but also to the
curatorial remit, challenging us to connect a body of work to research processes and
reinterpretation-as-production, i.e. approaching specific structures and strategies of
performance disconnected from subjectivist bodily expression, style and representation
– re-transforming them from a set of protocols or tools used in order to produce
something predetermined (a dance) to an open cluster of tools that can be used in a
5
This question, “What can choreography do?”, was taken up by choreographer and theoretician Petra
Sabisch as a guideline to write the book “Choreographing Relations: Practical Philosophy and
Contemporary Choreography, in the Works of Antonia Baehr, Gilles Deleuze, Juan Dominguez, Félix
Guattari, Xavier Le Roy and Eszter Salamon”. “Rather then delimiting the field of choreography to a
definition of what choreography is – definition which then functions as prescriptive exclusion of that
which choreography can also be, this book attempts to stretch ontology to the capacity of
choreography, which is expressed in the practical question: what can choreography do? By shifting
the focus from an inventory of the empirically given to the potential of choreography, a potential
which encompasses the capacity of creating new relations, a stable demarcation of the object of
choreography can be deviated from. This is a key aspect to an onto-ethical agenda of choreography:
to unfold with precision that which choreography actually does as a can-do-determination of what
choreography is. The question what can choreography do thus opposes the predetermination of
choreographic operations and their generalization into a static and merely actual image of
choreography's ontology. A consideration of the ontological modes of existence of choreography
requires an analysis of the specific procedures of choreographies whilst encompassing,
simultaneously, the genetic conditions through which their 'doing' comes into being and provides new
options. Depriving the ontology of choreography of the ethical aspect of what can choreography do
means to subtract from choreography the power to let new relations emerge and to divest from
philosophy the capacity to explain the conditions of the new.” (2011, p. 8).
3

generic capacity for both public observation/analysis and production” (2013, p. 10).
That for Birringer the generic capacity of choreography for analysis and
production is public should be understood as a recognition of this exhibition's capacity
to individuate knowledge in a trans-subjective and processual way. In other words, it
individuated instances of knowledge that were not given in advance, but which instead
resulted from potentials and possibilities that could only be activated under the
condition of a political relationship between all implicated agents (including, of course,
choreographer, performers and visitors). Together with expanded choreography's
disconnection “from subjectivist bodily expression, style and representation”, what is
put at stake is the very substance of choreography. As with the question “What can
choreography do?”, the focus here moves from a substantialist and ontologically
deterministic approach to choreography (i.e. choreography being this or that closed set
of unchanging attributes) to an exploration of how, with each event, choreography can
become not only what is known to be capable of becoming but also what cannot be
known in advance.
Implicitly, it is here being suggested that the political dimension of any technical
process whatsoever—including choreographic ones—is a necessary condition for the
constitution of knowledge. In other words, it is being suggested that the political
dimension of affect and relation precludes knowledge from being only individual (i.e.
subjective or objective) and instead introduces at its very definition a transindividual
(i.e. trans-subjective and transobjective) dimension. The political should thus be here
understood as corresponding to conditions which allow for the formation of a
transindividual whose knowledge is characteristically processual. A knowledge that is
not given in advance, completely, but that corresponds instead to a collective field of
potentials from which both reactivations and novel experiences can emerge. 
From this standpoint, it matters to indicate that it is precisely from the
perspective of the transindividual character of knowledge that this study will approach
choreography and its potentials to expand, i.e. to become something else than what it
already is or has been. If a political non-subjectivity can be said to characterize
expanded choreography, it is because the political can be conceived without recourse to
constituted subjects and objects. Or, which amounts to the same, it is because the
political is constitutively transindividual, always in process and exceeding any
perspective standpoint that from it and in it might emerge. Transindividuation cannot be
conceived but from a political point of view, one that in turn must be conceived as the
4

affective reality of relation. This reality does not require pre-constituted subjects and
objects, for it corresponds to process itself. Process, here defined as a dynamic whole
where virtuality verges towards actuality and actuality towards virtuality, can very well
occur without any sort of cognitive apprehension. The emergence of correlated subjects
and objects in a process of transindividuation is but one way for the latter to be realized.
In this one way, knowledge individuates amidst the excess of process's creative
potentials. It cannot but be embedded in the field of creative potentials from which it
results and in relation to which it remains; not as an unchanging reality, but rather as the
dynamic unity of subjective and objective standpoints. Once this unity is disrupted by
the excessive forces of process, knowledge transforms. And, together with it, so do its
subjects and objects (which are just circumstantial perspectives of one particular
relationship attained by the ongoing dynamisms of process). Hence, it is from process's
perspective that both subjects and objects must be tackled. For they are in process,
embedded in it, rather than the opposite. This is their political reality.
Regarding process's excess of potentials over constituted individuals, it was
Gilbert Simondon (1969, 2005)—the French philosopher who in the fifties and sixties
engaged in reactivating the philosophy of individuation, in order to deal with
contemporary issues such as the rise of machines and the relationship between culture
and nature—who consistently developed not only a theory of transindividuation but also
a conflation of ontology and epistemology, positing that knowledge can only form by
means of that same process. Knowledge is therefore said to result from the same
relation from which individuals derive, a transindividual relation with the capacity to
generate and connect different perspective standpoints. 
Simondon's philosophy has been a guideline for the inquiry synthesized in this
text. It has offered a conceptual framework to approach choreography as a system of
potentials and to inquire into the processes by means of which choreographic
knowledge is constituted. In contrast to other theoretical standpoints, such as idealism
and realism, Simondon's theory of individuation offers the possibility of taking that
which most fundamentally defines expanded choreography—i.e. potentiality as such—
to be a necessary condition for the constitution of knowledge (which is also the
transindividual co-constitution of its subjects and objects). As such, it will be argued
here that the political transindividuation of choreographic knowledge can only be
understood together with a constitutive field of potentials, i.e. a field that pervades
individuals to the point of being the very ground of their relation. 
5

To think the expansion of choreography potentially corresponds to thinking how
the different contexts where knowledge is produced and transmitted condition these
same processes. It is to think how a field of relations transports potentials that, though
undetermined, allow for knowledge to emerge in determinate ways. Xavier Le Roy's
“Retrospective” can be situated at the intersection of different contexts where
choreography has been expanding. There is the context for which re-enactment is only
one possible designation—the re-enactment of previous performance art works—, there
is the context of the encounter between dance and the museum—by means of which
dance is brought into spaces traditionally dedicated to the visual arts—, and there is the
context of remediation6—the one making use of media other than performance to
convey choreographic knowledge. In each of these contexts, choreography is reaching
beyond what is known to be and towards the constitution of novel instances of
knowledge. In many cases these contexts overlap: re-enactments have occurred at art
galleries but they also have occurred at theatres; theatres on their turn have received the
occurrence of durational events, the character of which is closer to art exhibitions than
to traditional theatrical formats; the remediation of choreographic knowledge has been
used both to set up exhibitions and to create theatrical performances; in turn, both
exhibitions and theatrical performances have sourced the creation of remediated
archives and transmedia knowledge-bases. It is against this background that this study
must be situated. It is in relation to this variety of expansions that it must be thought.
For if it can be read as a thesis, then it is one about the transformative capacities of
choreography. In order to facilitate this, a commentary on each of these contexts will
now follow.
If seen as a context that has been growing throughout the last ten to fifteen years,
the wave of re-enactments in dance and choreography can be pinpointed as having had a
marking beginning when, in 1994, the French constellation of dance-related artists
designated as Quatuor Albrecht Knust7 performed what were by then somewhat
forgotten choreographies, notably by Doris Humphrey and Kurt Jooss. In this particular
case, there were scores written in Labanotation8 that allowed for the works to be re-
6
To name this context in such a way is to frame it under the auspices of new media theory, as this has
been formulated by Jay David Bolter and Richard Grusin in their famous book “Remediation:
understanding new media” (1998).
7
The Quatuor Albrecht Knust included, at different moments of its life span, artists such as Christophe
Wavelet, Jerome Bel, Xavier LeRoy, Boris Charmatz, Emmanuelle Hyunh, Anne Collod, Dominique
Brun, Simon Hecquet, Martha Moore, Matthieu Doze and Alain Buffard. Notably, Albrecht Knust is
the name of a renowned German dancer, choreographer and Labanotation specialist, who lived
between 1896 and 1978.
8
As explained by Labanotation specialist Ann Hutchinson Guest, “Labanotation, or Kinetography
Laban, is the system of recording movement originated by Rudolf Laban In the 1920's. By this
6

incarnated and performed again (Burt, 2004). By the same token, the Quatuor
reconstructed, in 1996, both Steve Paxton's “Satisfyin' Lover” (1967) and Yvonne
Rainer's “Continuous Project Altered Daily” (1970), and finally, in 2000, three versions
of “L'Après midi d'un faune”, outsourced from Vaslav Nijinsky's choreographic
notations of the piece, in a single work titled “....d'un Faune (éclats)”. From this
moment onwards, a series of seminal examples engaged in reactivating iconic
choreographic works from dance's history can be found. Drawing from Quatuor
Albrecht Knust's experience, the French choreographer and dancer Boris Charmatz has
curated, in 2000, an open air event at Annency, in the French Alps, named “Ouvrée –
artistes en alpage” (in the guise, it could be said, of the same kind of event that Rudolf
Von Laban used to organize at Monte Verita). Here, pieces such as “Feierlicher Kanon”
(1933) by Grete and Harry Pierenkämper, and “Die Welle” (1935) by Albrecht Knust,
were too reinterpreted with the aid of Labanotation scores. In 2001, dancer and by now
most influential British-German artist Tino Seghal, performed an “Untitled”9 piece that,
while being announced as a “museum of dance”, instead of artifacts and concrete
objects, exhibited movements and gestures from iconic western dance styles of the
twentieth century. More recently, in 2008, French dancer Anne Collod, one of the
members of the Quatuor Albrecht Knust, dedicated herself to the remaking of “Parades
and Changes”, a 1965's piece by Anna Halprin. From the same year, two other pieces
produced in Germany are worth noting: one is Ecuadorian dancer Fabian Barba’s
“Schwingende Landschaft”, a reinterpretation of Mary Wigman’s seven solo pieces from
1929; the other is German dancer and choreographer Martin Nachbar’s “Urheben
Aufheben”, a revival of Dore Hoyer 1962-64's dance series “Affectos Humanos”. Even
more recently, in 2012, Spanish dancer and choreographer Olga de Soto realized a
scientific method all forms of movement, ranging from the simplest to the most complex, can be
accurately written. Its usefulness to dancers is obvious. The system has also been successfully applied
t o every field in which there is the need to recor d motions o f the human body – anthropology,
athletics, and physiotherapy, to name just a few.” (1977, p. 6). Further, scholar Natalie Lehoux has
recently described it in the following way: “Labanotation is documented on vertical staffs that are
read from bottom to top [...]. The staffs are made up of three lines that are divided by a centreline, to
indicate the left and right side of the body. This results in a visual representation of the symmetry of
the body in which each column of the staff is reserved for a specific body part. Information pertaining
to the time, direction, level and specific body part, which perform movement, are contained within a
single Labanotation symbol [...]. This is identified by the particular shape, shading and size of each
symbol. Hutchinson Guest (1977) tells us that such an economy of information cannot be found in
other notation systems. Labanotation represents the duration of movement through the length of its
symbols that is proportional to the time it takes to perform. The design of a system that embodies
elements of time in this manner eliminates the need for a visual reference to a musical score
alongside the movement notation.” (2013, p. 162).
9
It is worth noting that this was the last work Tino Sehgal created for theatre before he moved into
visual arts. Moreover, recently (twelve years after), this piece was presented in the form of three
different solos performed by dancers Andrew Hardwidge, Frank Willens and Boris Charmatz.
7

research-creation titled “Débords: Reflections on The Green Table”, which, as the name
indicates, took Kurt Jooss's piece as its focus of concern.
The engagement with the re-enactment of canonic choreographies is not
exclusive of artists. Institutions have been, to a large extent, responsible for creating the
conditions for them to so. One very good example of this is the recent Tanzfonds Erbe, a
funding initiative by the German Federal Cultural Foundation that, running since 2011,
has been intending to “support the reconstruction and restaging of classic [German]
dance works from the 20th century and making them available to audiences.”10 Olga de
Soto's “Débords ...” has been one such piece.11 By staging video recordings where
different interviewees talk about their experience of the piece, from its creation in 1934
up to today, “Débords ...” demonstrates how much the revisitation and restaging of
historical works does not need to reproduce what they looked like, but can instead
render a creative archaeology of mnemonic instances. In fact, all the works mentioned
so far do this. None of them is a simple function of reproduction. Rather, they are
critical archaeologies of the memories at stake. And it is precisely to this kind of critical
approaches to memory and history that funding initiatives such as the Tanzfonds Erbe
have been dedicated. 
Other curatorial initiatives of this sort, such as conferences and symposia, but
also theatrical programmes dedicated to the general themes of re-enactment and the
archive in contemporary dance and performance, can be listed as follows: the
“re.act.feminism” curatorial project, which started in 2009 with an exhibition at the
Akademie der Künste, in Berlin, and continued as a “performing archive, a growing
archive and exhibition project on feminism and performance art travelling through
Europe, from 2011 to 2013”12; the symposium “Archive/Practice”, which took place at
the Dance Archive in Leipzig, in 2009; also in the same year, the “Re-constructions and
Re-imaginations” event at the Performance Space in New York; the research project
“Performing the Archive: The Future of the Past”, hosted from 2009 to 2012 by the
University of Bristol Theatre Collection’s Live Art and focused on developing “the
interrelationship and interactivity between the archives and the communities of
practitioners and scholars: to extend how academics and artists use documents of
performance to inflect and inspire their own particular concerns”13; the 2010's
10 Retrieved 25/10/2014, from http://www.tanzfonds.de/en/projekte/gefoerderte-projekte-erbe.
11 A list of projects supported by the Tanzfonds Erbe can be found at the following web address:
www.tanzfonds.de/en/projekte/gefoerderte-projekte-erbe.
12 Retrieved 25/10/2014, from www.reactfeminism.org.
13 Retrieved 25/10/2014, from http://www.bris.ac.uk/theatrecollection/liveart/liveart_GWR_project.html
8

“Re:Move” festival at the Kaai Theater in Brussels, dedicated to “presenting performers
who make transmitting or reconstructing dance the subject of their production”14; the
“Re-mix” cycle, at the Komuna Warsawa, in Warsaw, which ran from 2010 to 2012, and
which “consisted of new productions that refer to classic works, primarily of theatre and
dance, but also literature and film”15; and more recently, in 2013, the “Sacre 100”
festival, at the Hebbel am Ufer theatre, in Berlin, exclusively dedicated to restagings of
Les Ballets Russes' production “The Rite of Spring”. 
Some of the works presented at the “Re:Move” festival are as marking to the
context of choreographic re-enactments as the ones already listed. Some notable works
are: Xavier Le Roy's restaging of Igor Stravinski's orchestral work “The Rite of Spring”,
which instead of reviving Nijinsky's choreography, allowed for the choreographer
himself to dance to the music as if he was conducting an orchestra; Boris Charmatz's
“Flip Book”, a dance performance made from a series of photos included in the book
“Merce Cunningham: Fifty Years”, by David Vaughn; British dancer and choreographer
Rachel Krische's re-adaptation of a solo by Deborah Hay; and French choreographer
Jérôme Bel's biographical staging of dancer Lutz Förster's experiences while working
with Pina Bausch. 
As these references suggest, some choreographers have been busy with dance
repertoires in a consistent and iterative way. Beyond the already mentioned projects by
Xavier Le Roy and Boris Charmatz, Jerome Bel has been an important figure in what
regards the staging of dance history. In a series of pieces dedicated to the self-
presentation of remarkable performers, Bel has managed to provide the audiences with
insights into the singular life of dancers. Notable examples are: “Véronique Doisneau”,
commissioned from Bel by the Paris Opera in 2004 (where the ballet dancer with the
same name tells the audience stories from her dance career); “Isabel Torres”, a show in
the guise of the previous one, but with the Brazilian dancer; “Pichet Klunchun &
Myself”, a dialogue between Bel and the traditional Thai dancer Pichet Klunchun; the
already mentioned “Lutz Forster” show; and “Cédric Andrieux”, a solo piece for and
with Lyon Opera's dancer Cédric Andrieux, who danced for a long time with the Merce
Cunningham's dance company. 
Another remarkable project focused on choreographic transmission was the
“Solo Performance Commissioning Project”, by American choreographer and dancer
Deborah Hay, running from 1999 to 2012. In this project, “[d]ancers commissioned a
14 Retrieved 25/10/2014, from www.kaaitheater.be/en/f17/re-move?p=extra&lang=en. 
15 Retrieved 25/10/2014, from http://komuna.warszawa.pl/1998/12/12/re-mix-cycle-20102011.
9

solo dance from Deborah Hay. She guided and coached them in the performance of the
solo during an 11-day period in a residency setting. At the conclusion of the residency
each participant signed a contractual agreement to a daily solo practice of the new piece,
for a minimum of three months before their first public performance.”16 Rachel Krische
was one of these dancers. She learned from Hay the solo “The Swimmer”, which she
presented at the“Re:Move” festival.17
This list of initiatives, from artistic projects to curatorial ones, is not intended to
be comprehensive of the context of choreographic re-enactments. It has the sole purpose
of demonstrating the large investments that have been recently made by the dance
community to deal with its own history. Another perspective that reflects this great
investment regards theoretical practices and scholarly work. The context of re-
enactments has been extensively discussed by scholars such as Gabriela Brandstatter
(2000), Diana Taylor (2003), Myriam van Imschoot (2005), Rebecca Schneider (2011),
Inge Baxmann (2007), André Lepecki (2010) Amelia Jones and Adrian Heathfield
(2012), amongst others. Both from this perspective and from the perspective of artistic
research, re-enactment is only one possible designation for this context. In fact, the
variety of procedures used by artists to activate past choreographies is great and many
different approaches can be depicted in them. Reactivation, re-performance,
reinterpretation, revisitation, remaking, revival, restaging, reformulation, resetting,
reappropriation, retrospective, retransmission, retranslation, reconstruction,
reimagination, reactualization, reproduction, remix, and so on, are all possible notions
for understanding what these artists and initiatives have been doing and how.
Importantly, all these notions can be said to share an archaeological character. All of
them perform the archaeology of choreographic sites, a methodological umbrella that
allows for artists, theoreticians and institutions to not only bring into the present what
has been generated in the past, but also to assure that such reactivation is to some extent
performative. 
The second context mentioned above regards the encounter between dance and
the museum. In a way, many of the examples already mentioned fit into this category.
The fact that Tino Sehgal conceived his 2001's “Untitled” piece as a “museum of dance”
can be seen as corresponding to the same approach that later took him to develop an
16 Retrieved 25/10/2014, from http://www.deborahhay.com/about.html. 
17 The “Re:Move” festival has shown other examples engaged in the transmission of choreographic
principles between artists. American choreographer and dancer DD Dorvillier has reformulated the
work of German artists deufert+plischke, Vincent Dunoyer has transmitted to five dancers repertoire
that he himself had once performed, and Jonathan Burrows has also worked on the theme of
translating dance. 
10

influential series of “situations” for art galleries. Sehgal, who studied dance and
economy, has not ceased imprinting in his own artistic work the mark of a
choreographic thought. Furthermore, the fact that the context of re-enactments is
fundamentally based on an archaeological drive, one that is engaged in creating the
necessary tools, methods and dispositifs for transducing choreographic knowledge from
the past into the present, attests its museological character. It attests its attunement to
methods of excavation and exhibition, which are proper to the museological drive.18
Insofar as the encounter between dance and the museum shows in the latter are the re-
enactments of the former, both this context and the one of re-enactments are to a large
extent inextricable from one another.
A most outstanding example of how these two contexts conflate with one another
can be found not in a museum of dance but in a “Dancing Museum”, the project
initiated with Boris Charmatz's uptaking of Rènnes's Choreographic Centre, in France.
This is not a museum where artifacts are exhibited. It is rather one that exhibits the
movements of dance, to the point of itself dancing. The character of this project, and of
what is being her designated as the encounter between dance and the museum, is well
conveyed in some passages Charmatz's “Manifesto for a Dancing Museum”. In it, the
choreographer and curator writes: “We are in an exciting era in which museography is
opening itself up to ways of thinking and technologies which are enabling something
completely different to emerge rather than simply having exhibitions of remnants, faded
costumes, models of stage settings, and rare photographs of productions. We are at a
time in history where a museum can be alive and inhabited as much as a theatre, can
include a virtual space, and offer a contact with dance that can be at the same time
practical, aesthetic and spectacular. We are at a time in history where a museum in no
way excludes precarious movements, nor nomadic, ephemeral, instantaneous ones. We
are at a time in history where a museum can modify BOTH preconceived ideas about
museums AND one’s ideas about dance. Because we haven’t the slightest intention of
creating a dead museum, it will be a living museum of dance. The dead will have their
place, but among the living. They will be held by the living, brandished at arm’s
length.”19 
All in all, this is a plea for the potentials of knowledge, i.e. for the conditional
18 Here, I'm thinking of this museological drive as an archival drive—the museum as archive—, a
dynamic dispositif of enunciation whereby specific regimes of visibility are conveyed. For more on
the archive as a dispositif of enunciation see page 91.
19 The full Manifesto can be downloaded from www.borischarmatz.org/sites/borischarmatz.org/files/im
ages/manifesto_dancing_museum100401.pdf.
11

basis of novelty in the shared ground of the political. The “Dancing Museum” is a site
of transindividuation. It is a site where the subjects and the objects of knowledge
emerge from processual and political conditions. It is a site where knowledge can
emerge without being predetermined by a given model or by images of what it could
possibly be like. The very conflation of dance with the museum, in the processual
project of the “Dancing Museum”, blurs the distinction between the two to the point that
dance cannot result but from an archaeological endeavour and the museum cannot be
but the very process by means of which the memory of the past is made active in the
present. The conflation of the two puts things into movement. By mobilizing the politics
of dance, it makes of the “Dancing Museum” a political movement for dancing
knowledge.
Recently (June-July, 2014), the “Dancing Museum” was a focus at the festival
“Foreign Affairs”, in Berlin. In its program featured some examples of how the
“Dancing Museum” is realizing its manifesto. It is enough mentioning two: the “Expo
Zéro” and the “20 Dancers for the XX Century”. The latter, as the name indicates,
consists of twenty dancers who, individually, “perform, recall, appropriate, and transmit
solo works of the last century that were originally conceived or performed by some of
the most significant modernist and postmodernist artists, dancers, and choreographers.
Each performer presents his or her own museum of sorts, wherein the body becomes the
primary museological container and object.”20. On its turn, the “Expo Zéro” “is an
exhibition without works: there are no photos, no sculptures, no videos, and no
installations. Zero things, no stable object. There are, instead, artists. Spaces occupied
by the gestures, by the bodies, by the stories and by the dances that each artist might
think of.”21 Both projects not only exhibit dance but, like LeRoy's “Retrospective”, act
as performative knowledge bases. They convey the necessary conditions for
choreographic knowledge to be discovered anew, time and again. 
The encounter between dance and the museum can be traced back to a series of
exhibitions that, in contrast to Charmatz's “Dancing Museum”, have shown performance
by means of objects. Notable examples are the exhibition “Outside the Frame:
Performance and the Object”, at the Cleveland Centre for Contemporary Art in Ohio, in
1994, and the exhibition “Out of Actions: Between Performance and the Object, 1949–
1979”, at the Museum of Contemporary Arts in Los Angeles, in 1998. The emphasis on
20 Retrieved 24/10/2014, from the website of the Museum of Modern Art of New York, where this
exhibition has also been hosted (http://www.moma.org/visit/calendar/events/18898).
21 Retrieved 24/10/2014, from the “Dancing Museum's” website (http://www.museedeladanse.org/fr/arti
cles/expo-zero).
12

the relation between performance and objects that these exhibitions' names indicate is
somewhat telling. For if one considers the transient character of performative events and
its resistance to the requirements of traditional museological exhibitions, according to
which, for anything to be exhibited, it must persist throughout the exhibition's duration,
then performance itself must become permanent, that is, it must be expressed in ways
determined not by its own bias but rather by the bias of the context of its presentation. It
is, of course, in reaction to this exercise of power of the museum over performance that
a project such as the “Dancing Museum” stands up as an alternative. Notwithstanding,
these exhibitions are a link between the conflation of dance with the museum and the
context previously referred to as the one of remediation.
A recent example of choreographic remediations at the art gallery is the
exhibition “Move: Choreographing You”, which took place in 2010 at the Hayward
Gallery, in London. In order to explore “how dance has been a driving force in the
development of contemporary art since the 1960s”, this exhibition presented a series of
installations, sculptures, objects and scores by seminal artists in dance and the visual
arts.22 Here, the visitor was invited to “become a participant – or even a dancer –” in the
“choreographic objects” being exhibited.23 The visitor could, for example, handle Lygia
Clark’s “Relational Objects”, play around in Mike Kelley’s “Test Room Containing
Multiple Stimuli Known to Elicit Curiosity and Manipulatory Responses”, move
through the suspended rings of William Forsythe’s installation “The Fact of Matter”,
amongst other things. To say that these objects are choreographic, even those belonging
to visual artists, pinpoints their capacity to elicit movement. Not just any movement, but
the movement that their own structure implies. As this study will contend, such capacity
corresponds to the propositional character of choreographic objects. Objects that
propose possibilities of movement as the conditional basis for the exploration of
potentials and the learning of processes. 
From this standpoint, the subject of this study can be now clarified:
“Choreographic Objects” correspond to the potentials that certain political conditions
have to individuate choreographic knowledge. This individuation can result from
learning how to move across a room full of suspended rings (the very disposition and
size of which limits the possibilities of movement and its quantitative range) or from
learning a complex choreographic pattern by means of a choreographic score. In any
22 Namely, Tania Bruguera, Rosemary Butcher, William Forsythe, Dan Graham, Isaac Julien, Mike
Kelley, Xavier le Roy, Mårten Spångberg, Wayne McGregor, Robert Morris, Bruce Nauman, La
Ribot, Franz West, Lygia Clark, and the OpenEnded Group with Wayne McGregor.
23 Retrieved 24/10/2014, from http://move.southbankcentre.co.uk/microsite.
13

case, the individuation of choreographic knowledge corresponds here to the
transmission of potentials and possibilities of movement. Choreographic objects allow
both for a choreographer to express thoughts and for a dancer to learn how to move
accordingly. Choreographic objects will thus be argued to correspond to the vectorial
arrangement of forces by means of which what is potential in thought, i.e. in a
choreographic thought, is transmitted to bodies capable of learning anew how they can
move.
Here implied is the fact that an object can be both concrete, such as the ones
exhibited at the art gallery, and abstract, such as the virtual image of a choreographed
dance. Inasmuch as a choreographic object must be imagined before being expressed, its
expressions necessarily implicate its abstractions. The actual determination of a
choreographic object requires that the concepts of the understanding regarding a
determinate arrangement of ideas are transposed, from their virtual and abstract reality,
to the concrete reality of material expressions. Notwithstanding, in order to exist, the
choreographic object does not require concretization, it can exist solely in abstraction.
The fact that one can remember a dance without recourse to external supports attests the
abstract autonomy of a choreographic object. But insofar as expression brings the
fuzziness of ideas into a higher degree of determination, it is a fundamental condition
for the transmission of choreographic ideas between bodies. From abstraction to
abstraction, necessarily through expression. 
The process of choreographic transmission will be here tackled through the
notion of transduction, an important concept in Simondon's philosophy of
transindividuation. Simply put, transduction concerns the operation by means of which
abstractions are expressed and expressions abstracted, i.e. a transfer and reconfiguration
of potentials in a process of transindividuation. As this study will contend, the
transmission of choreographic knowledge cannot truly occur but by means of a
transductive process. Transduction informs the individuation of choreographic objects
with the transindividual relation of knowledge. It allows for understanding
choreographic objects as processes, rather than as finalized forms. Neither exclusively
abstract nor exclusively concrete, but a processual structuration of potentials.
It is from the perspective of process itself that this study will approach the
excessive and transindividual character of choreographic objects. Choreography will be
considered as a system of individuation where abstractions and expressions dynamically
relate to one another, i.e. where what most fundamentally defines it is both its
14

processual character and its transductive potential. Following from this definition, this
study will proceed by inquiring into the dynamisms of choreography. It will explore
how transduction operates in particular choreographies and how in fact both
abstractions and expressions exist in such dynamic system of transindividuation. The
whole study can be said to consist in various approaches to the processual character of
choreographic objects. It both iterates the concern with the ingression of undetermined
potentials into determinate instances of knowledge and follows the relation between
abstract and concrete structures in order to provide a means of understanding how the
transduction of potentials is conditioned by what is given in process. All in all, it tries to
tackle in different rounds how novelty exists in process and how it exceeds the
determination of any object whatsoever. 
The concern with novelty in choreographic processes has been here approached
under the general frame of process philosophy, of which some of the main references
are the works of Henri Bergson, Alfred N. Whitehead, Gilbert Simondon, Gilles
Deleuze, Felix Guattari, Brian Massumi, Erin Manning, Stamatia Portanova and
Luciana Parisi. It should be noted that the novelty here at stake does not concern the one
that the art markets came to praise as the very substance of their capitalistic
development. Instead of being understood as what result from a theological capacity
that the artist performs in the process of making art, it should be viewed as what results
from a process that, far from being under control or serving artistic intents, manifests
the very powers of its more-than-human dimensions. Therefore, it is not the novelty that
comes to be recognized as such according to a set of historically situated values, but the
novelty that allows for any development to occur, be this the development of processes
that only create what is already known or the development of processes from which the
unrecognisable itself emerges. Novelty is only another name for potentiality and
creativity. This study should be viewed in accordance with such equation. Novelty
doesn't regard the result of artistic production, but rather the infection of processes by
undetermined potentials. It is the manifestation of an immanent capacity of processes to
drive change and continuously reconfigure the conditions of their own development.
Novelty as such is the antithesis of commodification. It is the anarchy within all that
doesn't rest. Many writings of the authors just mentioned conform to this. This is the
ground that this work shares with them.
To say that this study iterates concerns or that it inquires in different rounds is
saying that it proceeds by trials where what is at stake is the encounter between some
key notions of process philosophy and a series of choreographic examples. All the
15

choreographic objects discussed in this study resulted from interdisciplinary research
projects. All of them correspond to the individual resolution of problems in technical
individuations committed to assert choreography in the form of objects. Throughout this
study, the references to the research projects in case will help to provide glimpses into
the conditions of emergence of the choreographic objects discussed. For now, it matters
only to indicate that the latter are: “Improvisation Technologies, a Tool for the
Analytical Dance Eye”, a collection of choreographic objects meant to be used as
modular tools for the composition of choreographed dances, devised by choreographer
William Forsythe and published in the form of a CD-ROM (1999) by the Centre for Art
a n d Media (ZKM) i n Karlsruhe; “Double Skin | Double Mind” (2004-2010), a
choreographic object devised by choreographer Emio Greco together with dramaturge
Pieter C. Scholten and expressed in different ways, such as a dance workshop, an
interactive installation and a CD-ROM; the choreographic objects of the “Motion Bank”
project (2009-2013), namely, “Synchronous Objects, for One Flat Thing Reproduced”
by William Forsythe, “No Time to Fly” by Debora Hay, “Seven Duets” by Jonathan
Burrows and Matteo Fargion, and “Two” by Bebe Miller and Thomas Hauert; and
finally the choreographic objects of the “Reactor for Awareness in Motion” (2011-...), a
research project of the Yamaguchi Centre for the Arts intended to develop software and
hardware tools for dance creation and education.
The encounter between some key notions of process philosophy and a series of
choreographic objects is not here intended to provide an interpretation of the latter with
the notions of the former. It is rather intended to create a field of tensions by means of
which a whole other level of individuation is to be attained. In this sense, this text is a
synthetic resolution of the tensions that this encounter has engendered. It is by
confronting the ideas of process philosophy with a series of choreographic ideas that
this study will proceed. It will strive to posit the problems of this encounter and bring
them into some sort of resolute determination, i.e. into the point at which possible cases
of solution can be proposed, if not as definite answers, at least as indicative orientations.
All the choreographic objects discussed here participate in the context of
remediation. As the other two, this context is characteristically driven by archival and
archaeological tendencies. Some of the examples already mentioned attest how the
remediation of choreographic knowledge has been used both in the context of re-
enactments—of which Olga de Soto's “Débords ...” is a good example—and in the
context of the encounter between dance and the museum—of which exhibitions such as
“Move: Choreographing You” are good examples. But what is perhaps most determinant
16

in its regard is its history. For if choreography can be, to a great extent, equated with the
encounter between dance and writing,24 then it can be said that, since the moment in
which it appeared as an “apparatus of capture” (Lepecki, 2007), choreography didn't
stop making use of technological modes of retention, creating mnemonic artifacts for
the transmission and remembrance of dances. Out of the three, it is perhaps this one
context that is most endemic to choreography. But despite its historical character, it
matters here to approach it as a specific mode of expanding choreography. This is not to
say that choreography's history doesn't matter. It is in contrast to and in relation with its
history that choreography's expansion can be best tackled. For this reason,
choreography's history will be briefly discussed throughout this study, specially in
regard to the problematic relation between the excess of the dancing body and the
limitations of writing. The expansive remediations of choreography should be thought
as relaying this relation and as striving to deal with its problematic structure in new
ways, i.e. to explore novel solutions for an old problem. Such capacity does not come
without an activation of technology's potentials. The remediated expansion of
choreography proceeds by interweaving its technological potentials with the potentials
of a broader field of technical transindividuation. The very notion of choreographic
expansion finds in this interweaving its fundament. It is in relation to the potentials of
technology at large that choreography enhances its capacity to transform and differ from
itself.
The particular cases approached in this study are not the only examples of
choreography's remediated expansion. In order to provide a glimpse into the
contemporary context of research-creation where the remediation of choreographic
knowledge is a main focus, it is worth mentioning a series of other projects. One of
these projects is the “Enhancing Choreographic Objects” (EChO). Co-directed by social
anthropologist James Leach and dance and new media scholar Scott DeLahunta at the
University of Aberdeen, this was a research-creation project running in between 2012
and 2013 and intending to bring into collaboration scholars from various fields, digital
artists, exhibition and performance venues, and the Wayne McGregor | Random Dance
Company (WM|RD). This collaboration resulted in a variety of things: the dance
performance “Atomos”, which premièred at Sadler's Wells in London; the exhibition
“Thinking with the body: Mind and movement in the work of Wayne McGregor |
Random Dance”, which took place at the Wellcome Collection, in London as well; the
construction of a choreographic software named “Choreographic Language Agent”
24 See reference to the beginnings of choreography in the European Renascence on page 89.
17

(CLA); the digital installation “Becoming”, which was created with the CLA software
and featured at the afore mentioned exhibition; and the “Mind and Movement –
Choreographic Thinking Tools” publication, a “choreographic resource [...] designed to
develop students' personal imagination skills in order to enhance the creation of new
and original dance movement”25. All of these outcomes can be seen as choreographic
objects. But specially those expressed with writing, be this digital or not, were said to
provide “insights into the valuable knowledge that choreographers and dancers create
when they investigate form and structure through movement in the context of making
dances. The result is that 'choreographic thinking' is becoming available not only for the
purpose of educating audiences, but also in ways that scientists and philosophers can
study, architects and designers can utilize, and other artists can draw upon.”26
The EChO project draw on a previous one, called “Choreographic Objects:
traces and artifacts of physical intelligence”, also coordinated by Leach. This latter
project consisted of three workshops, occurring throughout 2008 and 2009, and it was
intended to engage theories of knowledge production and knowledge transfer, as
established in the social sciences, with the choreographic work of Wayne McGregor,
Siobhan Davies, William Forsythe and Emio Greco | Pieter Scholten. Attesting the
transindividual character of knowledge production involved in the individuation of
choreographic objects, “social scientists were able to show how the social relations
involved in the production of Choreographic Objects were important in shaping them,
highlighting both positive and negative potentials generated by the context and process
of their construction. The social scientists were able to draw on theories of embodied,
skilled and practiced-based knowing, and of its translation into representational media
to illuminating effect. This project demonstrated that social science has a key role in
enhancing the awareness of the makers of Choreographic Objects and thereby ensuring
more effective outcomes from their endeavours.”27 All the results of the EChO project
attest precisely this: they attest how the exchange between contexts of research
(academic, artistic, technological and social) informs the technical process of
transindividuation with potentials that belong to neither one of the parts exclusively, but
that are activated only on the condition of their singular relation.
Another relevant project in what regards bringing different disciplines together is
25 Retrieved 12/10/2014, from http://www.randomdance.org/creative_learning/mind_and_movement_ch
oreographic_thinking_tools.
26 Retrieved 12/10/2014, from http://gtr.rcuk.ac.uk/project/EF772A21-502F-4A7E-B105-A7B35407485
C.
27 Retrieved 12/10/2014, from http://gtr.rcuk.ac.uk/project/EF772A21-502F-4A7E-B105-A7B35407485
C.
18

the “Transmedia Knowledge Base for Performing Arts” (TKB). Coordinated by
cognitive linguist Carla Fernandes at the New University of Lisbon, from 2010 to 2013,
the TKB was “a transdisciplinary project at the crossings of cognitive linguistics, video
annotation, performing arts documentation and new media technologies, [aimed] at
building a dynamic “Knowledge-Base” (KB) to host different kinds of working
materials, annotated documents and complete pieces of all interested authors in sharing
their creative processes […].”28 With such intent, two software tools were developed: a
video annotation software for tablet computers called “Creation Tool” (CT) and the KB,
a web based platform conceived to host contents of various sorts and specially those
created with annotation softwares such as the CT or the ELAN29. In the frame of this
project, what is perhaps the closest expression to an object capable of conveying
choreographic knowledge, is the annotation made on the video registers of Rui Horta's
choreographic piece “Set Up” by a group of linguists.30 This choreography has been
dissected into sections and categories where each remarkable event is indexed and
commented upon. In this way, the implicit knowledge of a complex choreographic work
was meant to become more explicit.
In this guise, the “Siobhan Davies Archive” project, dedicated to the work of the
choreographer and co-ordinated both by her and by dance scholar Sarah Whatley, in a
collaboration between the Siobhan Davies Dance and the Coventry University, “began
in January 2007, with the aim of bringing together all of the materials and
documentation associated with Davies' choreographies into a single collection.” In
regard to the transmission of choreographic knowledge, this archive holds what have
been called “Kitchens”—“prototyped new presentations of the digital objects”—for
Davies' choreographies “Bird Song” and “In Plain Clothes”. These are digital objects
that bring together the “'ingredients' organised according to their role in the making or
the 'cooking' of a work”.31
Perhaps it is not by chance that all these projects, and the ones to be further
discussed, have explored in unprecedented ways the possibilities that digital
programming offers to the creation of choreographic objects. On the one hand, the
multimedia capacities of the digital domain allow for hosting and interrelating the
different knowledge fields brought together by these projects. On the other hand,
28 Retrieved 12/10/2014, from tkb.fcsh.unl.pt/.
29 https://tla.mpi.nl/tools/tla-tools/elan/.
30 Which can be accessed at: http://img.di.fct.unl.pt/tkb/content/setup-part-1-0.
31 Retrieved 12/10/2014, from http://www.siobhandaviesreplay.com/index.php?view=sddda. The
“Kitchens” of both choreographies can be accessed at http://www.siobhandavies.com/thekitchen/.
19

inasmuch as digital programming is capable of automating procedures, it can simulate
creative processes, being as such a most suitable platform for conveying the
transduction of choreographic knowledge and stimulating learning. The coincidence
between the capacities of both choreographic and digital objects has been a guideline
for this study. Because, if in a first approach the two can be said to be fundamentally
different, at a closer look the transductive capacities of choreographic objects can be
addressed to the determination of ideas, in the same way as the algorithms of digital
programming can. In fact, to say that the coincidence between choreographic objects
and digital objects has guided this study is to say that its main problem resulted from
bringing into relation the notion of diagrammatic ideas and the notion of algorithmic
procedures. Both these notions can be said to characterize choreographic objects: for a
dance to become choreographed, an idea of coordinated movement needs to acquire
determination, i.e. to acquire a structure that is both knowable and transmittable. The
structure of an idea is its diagram, it “maps the interrelation of relations” (Massumi,
1992, p. 16) necessary for a determinate field of potentials to participate in the
individuation of a corresponding expression. As it will be argued here, the
choreographic object itself cannot be considered without the dynamic processes by
means of which an idea and its expressions are related. And precisely because of this,
i.e. because of the fact that the same diagrammatic arrangement of ideas can give birth
to a series of different expressions (such as the many results of the EChO project, all of
which express differently the same choreographic object or, in other words, the same
assemblage of choreographic ideas), the choreographic object must be acknowledged to
have an iterative character, i.e. to be capable of resuming itself in accordance with a
determinate model of transduction. Which brings us to one of the definitions of
choreographic objects used throughout this study: a choreographic object is a “model of
potential transition from one state to another in any space imaginable” (Forsythe, 2008,
pp. 5 – 6). The fact that this definition was proffered by choreographer William
Forsythe to define all the objects of his choreographic work (i.e. installations,
performances and digital objects) attests not only the general potentials of
choreographic objects but also their iterability. Saying that a model is iterative
corresponds to saying that it is algorithmic, i.e. that it can be repeated automatically or
not for generating a series of expressions. In sum, it will be the contention of this study
that the choreographic object is both diagrammatic and algorithmic. Or, in other words,
that it is because of the algorithmic character of its diagrammatic ideas that the
choreographic object can acquire a technological status, i.e. that it can be said to
20

correspond to a knowledge (logos) pertaining to a way of dancing (tekhné).
In order to pursue such thesis, this study will start by laying out the fundamental
concerns to any thought of choreographic knowledge. It will inquire into the ontology
of bodies and movement because they are fundamental for the constitution of
choreographic objects. But instead of asking “what is a body?” and “what is
movement?”, the initial questions here posed are processual, such as “how does a body
move?” and “what happens to a body when it moves?”. Such concerns are expressly
addressed throughout Chapters 1 and 2. The first Chapter will discuss the relationship
between time and space in the movement of bodies via the philosophy of Henry
Bergson (Section 1.1). It will specifically address the philosopher's take on the theory of
multiplicities and, with this, discuss the relationship between intensity and extension.
This will serve to make the case that bodies in movement are irreducible to positions
and that, therefore, they must be granted to implicate undetermined potentials, which
are unaccountable only in terms of extension. Moreover, this first Chapter will also
introduce the encounter between dance and technology as a problematic field of
potentials (Section 1.2). It will argue that such encounter is only capable of creating
novel instances of choreographic knowledge if the indetermination of its constitutive
potentials is not only acknowledged but also inclusively mobilized. How can this be
done and, in particular, how can it be done when choreographic knowledge is to be
expressed by digital means, will be the question posed here. In a sense, this study's
remaining Chapters will build upon one another to answer such question. In relation to
the hypothesis that choreographic objects are necessarily diagrammatic and algorithmic,
such question can be understood in the following way: a diagram is a structure of
potentials that can be resumed algorithmically. Hence, it is the question of how to create
choreographic objects that express novel instances of knowledge. 
This question has been formulated by philosopher Erin Manning (2009, pp. 61–
76) in terms of how to create a truly “technogenetic body” by means of the encounter
between dance and technology. The answer she essays by drawing from Simondon's
philosophy is somewhat expectable: the virtuality of movement must be tapped into, by
the encounter itself. Even when the case regards the digital computation of gestural
data, the encountering parts must be made to affect one another beyond what is given by
each of them. Only in this way are the potentials of the encounter between dance and
technology to be mobilized beyond what is known and knowable. Only this will allow
for the encounter to be truly technogenetic, i.e. technically creative, and individuate
novel instances of knowledge. In this argument, one question remains problematic: how
21

do digital media and potentials relate? Manning's approximation to this question is
short: “Techniques for technogenetic emergence must become part of the technology’s
interface: we must develop techniques that create new associated milieus never distinct
from the ontogenetic body. Technological recomposition must no longer be inserted into
a body-system: it must be emergent with it.” (Ibid., p. 75). In fact, this does not really
answer the question. Rather, it is a corollary that expresses how the encounter between
dance and technology must be thought and developed in order to be creative. From this
standpoint, this study will follow Manning's direction in drawing from Simondon's
philosophy in order to develop it further. As already mentioned, this will allow for
defining choreographic objects in terms of potentiality, i.e. as processes that implicate
the potentials mobilized by the encounter between dance and technology. Since all the
choreographic objects here studied express knowledge by digital means, such definition
brings to the fore the question of a digital potential, i.e. does the digital domain have
potentials of its own? A question to be addressed in Chapter 6.
Chapter 2 will expound Simondon's philosophy of individuation. This will allow
for justifying the substitution afore mentioned of an ontological concern (i.e. “what
is?”) by an ontogenetic one (i.e. “how is?). Simondon's argument that “being is
becoming” postulates the primacy of difference over identity in a way tantamount to the
excess of being over itself. In a sense, this coincides with Bergson's understanding that,
for a body to be in movement, it must move as a whole, i.e. as a dynamic system of
potentials constantly moving in between abstraction and expression. Beyond this,
Simondon's philosophy will also allow for the understanding that movement can be in
fact creative, out of mobilizing a system's potentials. Such understanding will provide
the means to think movement not only in relation to one single body, but also in relation
to processes of individuation, i.e. in relation to any kind of system that is capable of
constituting novel individuals. Of the many domains approached by Simondon's
philosophy—the physical, the vital, the psychic, the social and technical—, the concern
here is with the latter. It matters to understand the implications that Simondon's thought
has in regard to technical systems, so that the encounter between dance and technology
can be approached in terms of the relationship between creativity and potentiality.
Chapter 3 will develop concepts with regard to choreography that can only be
properly understood under the light of Simondon's philosophy. Or, better yet, it is not
that choreography is here to be thought in accordance with this one philosophical
system of thought. Rather, it will be argued that, insofar as choreography can be
creative, the fundamental concerns of Simondon's philosophy are most apt to
22

conceptualize it. Hence, this philosophy will be used to approach choreography and
inquire into the dynamisms by means of which it comes to express itself in novel ways.
Throughout this chapter, the notion that choreography is not tied to the performance of
dance will serve both the assertion that one same choreographic object can be expressed
in many different ways and the argument that, in order for this to be so, the object must
be topological, that is, it must be a continuum of potentials capable of expressing itself
differently while remaining the same (Section 3.2 will discuss such definition). The first
case to be discussed is the generic relationship between dancing and writing,
constitutive of Western choreography (Section 3.1). It will be shown that, when these
different domains express one same object, such expressions necessarily derive from
one same structure of potentials. They express identical instances of choreographic
knowledge, according to the limits of the matters in individuation. The second case to
be discussed is William Forsythe's seminal collection of choreographic objects:
“Improvisation Technologies: A Tool for the Analytical Eye” (Section 3.3). By looking
into one of this technologies' topological character, the choreographic object will be
defined as being, first and foremost, an abstract system of potential transductions. The
choreographic object will be shown to be apt to transfer its potentials across domains
and, with this, not only express itself differently but also instantiate the individuation of
knowledge. For such reasons, it will be contended that the choreographic object is
irreducible both to its expressions and to its abstractions. It is as an open whole that
always exceeds its own determinations.
What is here being called a structure of potentials will be also designated as
“diagram”. This notion will not only be addressed in Chapter 2 with Simondon's
concept of “technicity”, i.e. the diagram of technical individuation, but it will also be
approached in different ways throughout Chapters 4 and 6. The former Chapter will
start by discussing philosopher Gilles Deleuze's theory of ideas in order to layout how
choreographic ideas exist in between abstraction and expression (Section 4.1). It will be
shown how, according to this theory, ideas are diagrammatic in the same way that
choreographic objects are: they relate virtuality with actuality according to a topological
structure of potentials. Deleuze's postulate that such structure is inherently problematic
and that the highest degree of an idea's determination corresponds to actual cases of
solution for the problems in case will facilitate the understanding that, in the case of
choreographic transduction, the transmission of movement principles between domains
is necessarily accompanied by a transmission of concepts. To exemplify the conceptual
structuration of choreographic ideas, Section 4.2 will discuss Emio Greco and Pieter
23

Scholten's Double Skin/DoubleMind choreographic object. Since this is expressed in
different domains, the relationships between its topology, its problematic potentials, its
conceptual structure and its expressions will be tackled via the notion of diagram.
Section 4.3 will continue developing this notion, still in relation to Deleuze's
philosophy, but also in relation to its use by philosophers such as Charles S. Peirce,
Michel Foucault, Deleuze & Guattari, Brian Massumi and Manuel DeLanda. Such
discussion is intended to provide the means for better understanding how, in the
encounter between dance and technology, that which cannot be known is determinant
with regard to the emergence of individuals. The unconscious diagram of ideas—
designated here as “abstract machine”, cf. Deleuze & Guattari (1987)—will in this way
be argued to be not only a fundament of choreography, but also the very ground of
novelty as such. 
The expression of novel cases of solution with regard to the problematic ideas of
choreographic objects will be addressed from the perspective already posed (Section
3.1) of the asymmetry between dancing and writing. In order to do so, Chapter 5 will
discuss a series of choreographic objects, which were programmed as digital algorithms.
This will allow both for defining gesture as the representation of movement and for
discussing these examples as cases of solution for the problematic relation between the
dancing body and what will be here designated as gestural body. It will also allow for a
better understanding of how different choreographic ideas can be computed and
digitally expressed. Throughout Sections 5.1 and 5.2 the choreographic objects to be
discussed are the “Gesture Follower”—a software built into the digital expressions of
the “Double Skin/Double Mind”—, the already mentioned “Motion Bank's” online
scores and the “Reactor for Awareness in Motion's” motion capture and animation
software. Since these choreographic objects' have been transduced into automations of
the digital domain, their diagrammatic ideas will be posited as being characteristically
algorithmic and, therefore, resumable across domains. Hence, in accordance with
William Forsythe's definition, choreographic objects can be seen as diagrammatic
algorithms capable of transducing problematic ideas (of movement).
If such capacity is to be granted to digital choreography itself, then the question
is: how to conceive of potentiality within the binary possibilities of the digital domain?
In this study's final Chapter, the understanding that the encounter between dance and
technology is capable of creating novel instances of knowledge will be furthered by
coming to terms with the hypothesis that the digital domain has potentials of its own.
Beyond the argument that, in order for technogenesis to occur, the digital domain must
24

be embedded in a milieu of potentials other than its own, i.e. in an analog milieu,
Chapter 6 will pursue the notion that there is more to digital computation than itself can
compute. As it will be shown, this is tantamount to the hypothesis that digital
computation is infected by random quantities of data and that, precisely because of this,
it is open to an infinity of quantitative potentials that grant it the very status of thought.
In contrast to reductionist perspectives of the digital domain, the algorithmic
computation of data will be argued to be always excessive in relation to itself. Such
notion will be supported by Andrew Goffey's conception of algorithms, Gregory
Chaitin's theory of algorithmic complexity and Luciana Parisi notion of “soft(ware)
thought”. Such perspectives will be contrasted upon two different approaches to objects:
Graham Harman's object-oriented ontology and Alfred N. Whitehead's process-oriented
ontology. With this, it will not only be shown that digital potentials must be conceived
as random and irreducible quantities of data, but also that algorithmic objects must be
defined as the physical and conceptual prehension of these same quantities. Even if
choreographic objects are digitally expressed, this will make the case that they are
capable of more than what, at any moment, might have been determined as a case of
solution for the problems of their ideas. In short, choreographic objects as the excessive
but yet structured potential to individuate novel instances of knowledge with regard to
the movement of bodies.
Finally, this study will conclude with a proposition regarding the necessary
conditions for activating potentials in processes of technical individuation. It will be
argued that, inasmuch as potentiality is a conditional force of technogenesis, the latter
can only come about by means of a constitutive, yet subjectable to enhancement,
openness to infinity. This infinity is none other than the one of the undetermined
potentials of ideas existing amidst, immanently, the actual possibilities of technical
individuation. The more this indetermination is made to ingress, affectively, into the
technical resolution of the problems of ideas, the more novelty will appear and the more
the overall development of a system of individuation will become infected with its
creative potentials. Hence, it will be argued that, though novelty as such is, by
definition, not predictable and thus not subjectable to direct regulation, there are actual
conditions that can intensify its occurrence and amplify the technical system's capacity
to be truly creative and evolutive. 
25

Chapter 1 - A TOPOLOGICAL ENCOUNTER
This first Chapter will open this study not only by inquiring into the relationship
between movement and bodies, but also by doing so in a speculative manner.
Speculation can be said to have marked much of this study's writings, mostly because it
is a characteristic mode of thought in process philosophy.32 Not only has this study
inherited this mark from such tradition, but it has also used it as a means to discuss a
reality of movement and bodies that cannot be tackled otherwise, i.e. their incorporeal
reality. The purpose of inquiring into the relationship between the incorporeal and the
corporeal realities of movement and bodies is here twofold: on the one hand, it aims at
establishing a first approach to ontology (Section 1.1); on the other, it aims at
establishing a conceptual ground to better tackle what will be here designated as “the
encounter between dance and technology” (Section 1.2). The ontology of movement
and bodies will be explored via French philosopher Henry Bergson's work on
movement, space and duration. His take on the theory of multiplicities, according to
which bodies must be acknowledged to comprise potentials that are, not only irreducible
to stationary perspectives of extension, but also fundamental to their very movement,
will serve the purpose of conceiving the incorporeal reality of moving bodies precisely
in terms of potentiality. From this standpoint, this Chapter's second section will be
dedicated to positing the problem of creativity in the encounter between dance and
technology. Inasmuch as this encounter can and will be defined as the constitution of
choreographic knowledge, the question of how can knowledge be created anew will be
posited in terms of the potentials that such encounter can mobilize. 
32 In this regard, it should be noted that philosopher Alfred N. Whitehead's series of lectures on
“Speculative Philosophy”, published under the title “Process and Reality” (1978), not only are, still
today, a canonical landmark in process philosophy, as they also define what, in this tradition, means
to think speculatively. In the philosopher's words: “Speculative Philosophy is the endeavour to frame
a coherent, logical, necessary system of general ideas in terms of which every element of our
experience can be interpreted. […] It i s the ideal of speculative philosophy that its fundamental
notions shall not seem capable of abstraction from each other. In other words, it is presupposed that
no entity can be conceived in complete abstraction from the system of the universe, and that it is the
business of speculative philosophy to exhibit this truth. […] Thus the philosophic scheme should be
necessary, in the sense of bearing in itself its own warrant of universality throughout an experience,
provided that we confine ourselves to that which communicates with immediate matter of fact. But
what does not so communicate i s unknowable, and the unknowable i s unknown; and so this
universality defined by 'communication' can suffice. This doctrine of necessity in universality means
that there is an essence to the universe which forbids relationships beyond itself, as a violation of its
rationality. Speculative philosophy seeks that essence.” (Ibid., p. 3).
26

1.1 - Multiplicities in Movement
Movement cannot be reduced to the positions it connects. A grid of positions
does not encompass the reality of change occurring in the in-betweenness of the
interval. When subsuming movement to positions one can only get a static world where
only beginnings and endings coincide with bodies. Potentiality lacks. To be in
movement means to coincide with a potential to vary, to be in transit. It is a matter of
including forces in the world. From them, change unfolds. (Massumi, 2002, pp. 3–6).
Displacement, the non-transitional leap from one position to the next,
discontinues the world in immobilities, leaving the in-betweenness of which only to be
construed as an infinite succession of positional instants. In displacement movement
does not take place. Each intervening point in the intervalic succession between two
other points remains identical to itself, arresting movement in a motionless grid where
no differentiation can occur, i.e. where nothing can vary from itself. As French
philosopher Henri Bergson rightly argued, such view of the world can only result from
excluding what, imperceptibly, forces movement to occur and processes to unfold. “Just
because we close our eyes to the unceasing variation of every physical state, we are
obliged when the change has become so formidable as to force itself on our attention, to
speak as if a new state were placed alongside the previous one. Of this new state we
assume that it remains unvarying in its turn and so on endlessly.” But in fact, “there is
no essential difference between passing from one state to another and persisting in the
same state. If the state which 'remains the same' is more varied than we think, on the
other hand the passing from one state to another resembles, more than we imagine, a
single state being prolonged; the transition is continuous”. (1944, pp. 4–5).
Positionality is thus a model of representation that overrides the variation within
that which, at different scales, might be said to be static. In this way, it ignores what
most fundamentally defines movement: the fact that it is always already there,
expressing the qualitative change implicated in the passage from one physical state to
another. Importantly, for such change to occur, space and time must as well evolve in
ways that are irreducible to positions. In the continuous transitioning between states,
neither time nor space can function as fixed coordinates. Rather, they cannot but result
from movement's own qualitative development. In this regard, Bergson's work on
duration has been a guiding precursor (2002, pp. 49–80). For it provides a full-fleshed
theory of virtuality, proffering that the experience of space and time results from
27

subtracting actual positions from virtual potentials. Or, in other words, that movement's
expressions are subtracted from the infinity of potentials that implicates the virtual in
the actual. Between virtuality and actuality, i.e. between the one's continuous potentials
and the other's discontinuous extensions, movement is key. It is through movement that
Bergson relates coordinated positions with the experience of continuous change. For
him, only movement unites virtuality with actuality. Conversely, movement cannot be
approached exclusively by either one of its poles. What can be said to correspond to the
subjective experience of movement, i.e. to the durational experience of a non-spatial
and virtual time, must be acknowledged to necessarily correspond to movement's
objective expression. The unity between the one and the other, i.e. the implication of
virtuality in actuality and the explication of virtuality by actuality, is realized in
movement. Here, neither subjects nor objects can be said to be stable and unchanging
unities, distinct from one another from the outset. Rather, they must be seen as resulting
from movement's dual reality. 
The point here is that movement can be neither reduced to emergent positions
nor it can be fully abstracted from a physical ground. Their relation, i.e. the relation
between actuality and virtuality, must be thought immanently. The force of movement
must be granted to belong to movement itself. Movement must be understood as the
common ground against which all forces can be considered. The principle of
immanence can be also expressed in the following way: virtuality is immanent in
actuality and actuality is immanent in virtuality. Which is to say that, in movement,
there is one same “plane of immanence”33 where actuality becomes virtual and virtuality
becomes actual, simultaneously and interdependently. In order for virtual movements to
occur, there must exist somewhere an actual ground conditioning them, coincident but
disjunct. Likewise, for any displacement to take place there must exist somewhere an
opening towards virtuality, towards the infinity that necessarily feeds the actuality of
movement.34 From this standpoint, movement's virtual-actual dynamisms can be
33 The “plane of immanence” is a concept developed by philosopher Gilles Deleuze in order to facilitate
the understanding that movement, with its virtual-actual dynamisms, necessarily opens the world's
finitude to an inexhaustible source of renewal and creativity. As the author himself explains: “The
plane of immanence is the movement (the facet of movement) which is established between the parts
of each system and between one system and another, which crosses them all, stirs them all up
together and subjects them all to the condition which prevents them from being absolutely closed. It
is therefore [...] a mobile section, a temporal section or perspective. It is a bloc of space-time, since
the time of the movement which is at work within it is part of it every time. There is even an infinite
series of such blocs or mobile sections which will be, as it were, so many presentations of the plane,
corresponding to the succession of movements in the universe. And the plane is not distinct from this
presentation of planes. This is not mechanism, it is machinism. The material universe, the plane of
immanence, is the machine assemblage of movement-images.” (Deleuze, 1986, p. 59).
34 Though this study will not dwell upon the possibility of a radical reduction of virtuality to actuality
28

summarized as follows: whereas the virtual contributes to actuality, actuality constrains
such contribution. Loops of feedback and feedforward are thus prevalent modes of
affectivity between movement's multiple dimensions. Movement cannot be accounted
for without this dynamic character, i.e. it cannot be properly understood if not with the
virtual implications of actuality and the actual explications of virtuality. 
How virtuality and actuality relate to one another when a body moves can be
further understood by reading, with Bergson, Zeno's paradoxes of motion. Such
paradoxes have been ascribed to pre-socratic philosopher Zeno of Elea, who hasn't left
any known writings of his own, by Aristotle (1999). Though Bergson commented upon
several of these paradoxes—four in total—, it is here enough to mention the “Paradox
of the Arrow” (1944, pp. 335–338).35 In Aristotle's “Physics” (Ibid., p. 161), this paradox
is described as follows: “if everything when it occupies an equal space is at rest, and if
that which is in locomotion is always occupying such a space at any moment, the flying
arrow is therefore motionless”. With such formulation, it becomes clear why Zeno's
paradoxes are designated as such. All of them equate the metric divisibility of space
with the movement of bodies. An equation from which results, in a very straightforward
way, the very impossibility of movement. Such impossibility can be further explained in
the following terms: if space is given, then the arrow in flight can only reiterate it.
Movement's impossibility therefore depends on the conflation of time with space. In
Zeno's “Paradox of the Arrow”, space is given such prevalence over time that time itself
cannot be thought but in spatial terms. By coinciding with a preformed and metric
space, the flying arrow cannot but be static at any point of its transition between two
other points (e.g. before being shot and after having hit the target). Here implied is the
fact that, between any two given points of the arrow's trajectory, an infinite number of
other points can be found. This is the infinitesimal divisibility of space after which only
the transcendental image of a non-chronological time is to be found. But precisely
(for it assumes from the outset a holistic approach to process, bodies and the world), atomism will be
briefly criticized when accounting for Gilbert Simondon's understanding of creativity (see Section
2.1). It will be argued that it is only by virtual means that actuality can partake movement, i.e. that
extension can only unfold by means of intensive contributions. Moreover, a brief critique of idealism
will also be posited from the perspective of immanence's principle. It will be argued that, for a
movement of thought to occur, an immanent and actual ground is required. Actuality will thus be
defined as the constraining order by means of which the virtual contributes in determinate ways to
movements in extension. For such reasons, this study will take neither the side of a radical
materialism nor the side of a radical idealism. Rather, it will make its stand based on the inextricable
relation between virtuality and actuality, i.e. it will proceed with a focus on process.  
35 It is worth noting that Alfred N. Whitehead (1978, pp. 68–69), the English mathematician and
philosopher who would soon after Bergson set the agenda for thinking the world from a processual
perspective, has also chosen to comment upon this one paradox. The differences between Bergson's
theory of duration and Whitehead's conception of movement will be briefly discussed in Section 6.4.
29

because the flying arrow is not a transcendental object, it is said to coincide with the
spatial discontinuities that it traverses. In this sense, whatever the magnitude
considered, the unchanging self-coincidence of space determines all actuality as static
reality. In which case, the arrow cannot really fly. 
Zeno's equation of space with movement has been commented upon by Aristotle
himself in the following way: “[t]his [equation] is false, for time is not composed of
indivisible moments any more than any other magnitude is composed of indivisibles”
(1999, p. 161). What is here at stake is therefore the relation between continuity and
discontinuity, i.e. between qualities and quantities. For if movement is said to be
discontinuous and thus impossible, then it is time itself that is said to not exist. After the
infinitesimal division of space, nothing but space remains. Or, which amounts to the
same thing, in between any two given points there is only a succession of restful,
spatially self-coincident instants. The assertion that time is not composed of indivisible
moments should therefore be understood in the sense that positions are gregarious with
one another and, as such, inconsiderable in isolation. If they are gregarious, they are
continuous with one another. For if movement is to occur, i.e. if change is to overcome
the metric divisibility of space, then any instant whatsoever must be considered as being
possibly continuous with any other instant in its vicinity. This continuity corresponds, of
course, to the very indivisibility of time. But this shouldn't be understood as
contradicting Aristotle's comprehension of a divisible time. Rather, this argument should
be understood to assert both the metric character of magnitudes and the gregarious
character of quantities. To say that time is not composed of indivisible moments is to
argue for a necessary and reciprocal implication of quantities in one another. Precisely
because of being divisible, quantities open the metric character of space to the non-
metric character of time (granted that a function of gregariousness is applicable to the
relation between discontinuous elements). From this, change unfolds. This might still
appear to be a contradiction, for time is being said to be both divisible and indivisible.
And it is true that, in order for positions to be gregarious (and not only non-
communicating unities), divisibles must relate in some way with indivisibles. What is
missing both from Zeno's account of motion, and from Aristotle's commentary upon it,
is a conception of relation between quantities and qualities that includes change in
space. 
Bergson's philosophy in general and his theory of duration in particular have
strived to account for this missing relation. In regard to Zeno's paradoxes of motion, the
philosopher proposed to not think from the standpoint of a given space, but rather from
30

the standpoint of the variations undergone by the relation between time and space. As
such, instead of the arrow's movement being equated with space's discontinuous
invariability, it is to be thought as transitioning between states: from a null velocity
(before being shot) to a positive one (when in flight) and back again to a stop (after
having hit the target). In this way, movement is seen to result from the difference
between a body's dimensions of space and time. As it will be argued below,36 related
terms cannot be said to preexist their relation. Inasmuch as any relation is processual,
what it relates cannot be given in advance. Whatever is of the relation, necessarily
emerges with it. Hence, space and time are here seen to result from the arrow's
differential of movement. In other words, the arrow's movement is seen under the light
of determinate ratios, such as velocity's rate of change (i.e. acceleration). According to
this non-positional view, the flying arrow constitutes, with its differentials of movement,
the spatio-temporal conditions of its own experience. A corollary that led Bergson to
propose a different image for the traversing of space: “Suppose an elastic stretched from
A to B, could you divide its extension? The course of the arrow is this very extension; it
is equally simple and equally undivided. It is a single and unique bound.” (1944, p.
335). Notably, this is also one of Bergson's definitions of “duration”, a concept which he
devised to account for what in movement is indivisible (2001, pp. 85–87). The unique
bound of movement corresponds therefore to the durational becoming of an
indecomposable mobile section of space and time.37
Still in contrast to this, when considering that, in order for the arrow to go from
A to B, it needs to cross two different halves of the total space traversed (or any number
of parts resulting from the latter's division), it can be argued that a determinate
articulation needs to be included in the elastic duration of the arrow's whole movement.
From to this perspective (which is Zeno's), each mobile section resulting from the
division of space needs to be articulated by some means with the mobile sections in its
vicinity. From which it follows that, with articulation, the indivisible duration of
movement is disrupted. Once again, the infinitesimal divisibility of space brings to the
fore the realization that, if any mobile section is infinitely decomposable, what results
36 See pages 63-63.
37 Though the concept of duration tries to grasp the heterogeneity of qualitative change, it is merely a
representation. Nevertheless, it results from its very own subjective experience. To the method by
means of which, from immediate experiences, concepts are engendered, Bergson calls “intuition”
(2007, pp. 164–165). As method, intuition corresponds to the movements of thought that develop
with experience's qualitative change. It corresponds to experiencing duration, which is the experience
of time as such (i.e. a non-chronological time). Intuition is not an intellectual mode of thought
deployable into discrete units of actuality. It is rather a mode of reflection capable of grasping what
has no extension whatsoever. It is thought moving itself in duration. 
31

after such division is but a radical reduction of movement to discontinuous positions. In
Bergson's words: “To suppose that the moving body is at a point of its course is to cut
the course in two by a snip of the scissors at this point, and to substitute two trajectories
for the single trajectory which we were first considering. […] it is to attribute to the
course of the arrow itself everything that can be said of the interval that the arrow has
traversed, that is to say, to admit a priori the absurdity that movement coincides with
immobility.” (1944, p. 336). This is Bergson's direct answer to Zeno's paradoxes of
motion. Hence, instead of movement being thought as coinciding with the immobile
character of space, it should be thought as corresponding to an elastic interval capable
of connecting all its transient states.
It should be noted that movement can only be divided after it has occurred. To
say that the flying arrow coincides with any given point of its trajectory is an
affirmation that can only be made after the fact, i.e. after the arrow has in fact come to
connect a determinate point of rest with its preceding ones. Importantly, the
retrospection of movement can only be performed by adding an abstract idea of
succession to the given space. In this sense, succession corresponds to a spatial idea of
time: a homogeneous, mechanical spatialization that subsumes the continuity of interior
change to the measurability of exteriority. In succession, no real movement occurs,
except for the thought that abstracts an idea of time from the space given. In regard to
the arrow's real movement, such thought is but a representation. Because of this,
Bergson affirms that we habitually think according to a “cinematographic mechanism of
thought” (Ibid, pp. 335–343). Which is to say that, frame by frame, thought proceeds on
retrospecting the representation of what might have happened in the intervals of
perception.
Rather than being discontinuous, the elastic interval of durational movement is
an indivisible whole, i.e. there is more to it than a succession of points. For this reason,
movement's indivisibility is argued by Bergson to pertain to a type of multiplicity
distinguishable from any line's multiple points. For him, there are discrete multiplicities,
which are series of elements numerically accountable. In contrast, the elastic bound of
movement is of another kind, i.e. it pertains to a type of multiplicity that is continuous
rather than discontinuous, variable in kind rather than variable in degree. The
differences between these two types of multiplicity are clearly explained in the
following passage from French philosopher Gilles Deleuze's readings of Bergson's
philosophy: “[The actual multiplicity] is represented by space (or rather, if all the
nuances are taken into account, by the impure combination of homogeneous time): It is
32

a multiplicity of exteriority, of simultaneity, of juxtaposition, of order, of quantitative
differentiation, of difference in degree; it is a numerical multiplicity, discontinuous and
actual. The other type of multiplicity appears in pure duration: It is an internal
multiplicity of succession, of fusion, of organization, of heterogeneity, of qualitative
discrimination, or of difference in kind; it is a virtual and continuous multiplicity that
cannot be reduced to numbers.” (1988a, p. 38). With such distinction, the discontinuous
elements of an actual multiplicity can only be said to be gregarious if granted that the
two types of multiplicity are related to one another by a principle of immanence. The
antidote to the cinematographic mechanism of thought, from which result paradoxes
such as Zeno's, is the relation of immanence between actuality and virtuality. Only by
reason of them being immanent in one another can the discontinuity of metric space be
said to include a field of succession that is qualitative rather than quantitative,
durational rather than organized in frames. In short, for movement to occur the
continuity of duration must exist together with and inextricably from the same
conditions of experience that allow space to be abstracted in numerical terms.
This distinction between continuity and discontinuity was formulated by
Bergson on the wake of the topological studies developed by German mathematician
Bernhard Riemann (1873). Riemann proposed that a discrete multiplicity can be
counted according to its divisibility and that a continuous multiplicity can be measured
according to the forces that in it are active.38 Measuring a continuous multiplicity refers
here to superposing magnitudes so that either one is used as a standard for the other in
determining the amount of relative variation. Accordingly, for Bergson, as for his
commentator Deleuze, a continuous multiplicity does not simply correspond to what
cannot be counted or divided. Instead, it is rather “that which is divided only by
38 The mathematical calculus of topological multiplicities developed by Riemann can be traced back to
the works of mathematicians such as Euler, Listing, Mobius and Gauss (Riemann's mentor). It was
nonetheless earlier, in the 17th century, that Gottfried Wilhelm von Leibniz worked towards making
topology a rigorous mathematical discipline. Topology can be generally defined as the study of the
properties preserved in processes of deformation and of the objects that might possess such
properties. A common example is the deformation of a coffee cup into a doughnut (or vice-versa).
From the one to the other, deformation can unfold without any break in the continuity of the
intervening points. Both the coffee cup and the doughnut belong to the same topological figure.
Topological studies bring to the fore functions of deformation. They give prevalence to the ways in
which a form becomes another by means of continuous changes. Since it encompasses the potential to
be expressed in multiple forms, the same topological figure is in itself a multiplicity. And precisely
because topological variations are continuous, without cuts in the set of intervening points, it is
impossible to account for the infinity of intermediary states in any interval of space-time considered.
Topological continuity thus refers to what two different states of one same system share with one
another. It refers to invariabilities in processes of deformation. This continuity of the same, at the
same time that connects the actual expressions of form, presupposes difference as discontinuity, i.e.
as the interruption of invariance. Therefore, topology poses the problem of how to reconcile
continuity with discontinuity, similitude with difference, infinity with finitude, and so on.
33

changing in kind, that which is susceptible to measurement only by varying its metrical
principle at each stage of the division” (Deleuze, 1988a, p. 40). In fact, it is only
because duration divides and differentiates itself that multiplicities can be considered as
being implicated in continuity, i.e. in non-numerical multiplicities. For Deleuze, this
means that “there is other without there being several; number exists only potentially. In
other words, the subjective, or duration, is the virtual” (1988a, p. 42). By asserting the
coincidence between duration and virtuality, that which is heterogeneous in kind is
reconciled with what is continuous in nature. 
Duration can be reduced neither to numbers nor to logical and mathematical
analyses. By the same token, the time derivable from actual divisions is but a
mechanical time. Whereas space can be quantified in terms of external relations,
duration elasticises a body's differentiations in kind. In this sense, duration cannot be
made spatial. Relations of exteriority belong to homogeneous spaces and relations of
interiority belong to heterogeneous movements, irreducible amongst themselves.
Whereas the division of space changes its numerical degree, the division of movement
changes the very identity of what is divided. It follows that interior movement is a field
of intensive differentiation and exterior movement just a rearticulation of given
relations. To say that duration has no exteriority is the same as saying that it has no
spatial determination. It allows for the interior experience of a subject that feels its own
becoming and imagines it in retrospective as a succession of states. At each instant of
the imagined succession, space is objectified as a divisible multiplicity to which more
abstractions can be added. Be it possible or real, imagined or extended by external
relations, space doesn't change in kind and, for this very reason, as Bergson says, it can
be “known in such a way that a constantly increasing number of new impressions could
be substituted for the idea which we actually have of it” (2001, p. 83). It is by and in
thought that divisibility is performed. For Bergson, this operation of the mind is in itself
actual. As he writes: “This actual, not merely virtual, apperception of subdivisions in the
undivided is precisely what we call objectivity.” (Ibid, p. 84). Hence, exterior
objectivity is structured by a multiplicity of differences in degree, which has no
virtuality whatsoever but which can be either possible (i.e. the image of divisibility) or
factual (i.e. the very act of division).
Continuous and discontinuous multiplicities are inseparable from one another in
movements that, at the same time that propel qualitative changes, add actual elements to
one another in spatial succession. Actualization is a process that not only creates
actualities and, with them, the possibility of numerical order, but one that also changes
34

the virtual multiplicities from which actuality results. The immanence between
virtuality and actuality corresponds therefore to the inextricable relation between space
and time in movements that simultaneously quantify and qualify their own effects. If the
mobility of bodies in space corresponds to changes of state, it is only because
movement as such cannot be reduced to numerical successions. The series of spatial
instants (be them constitutive of geometric relations or of temporal mechanisms) do not
account for the reality of change that necessarily accompanies displacements. To
account for such reality, the initial conditions of a movement-event must be considered.
Already in the conditions that allow for a movement to initiate, a plane of differentiation
must occur, for it is from the event of difference that both the spatialization of
movement and its durational becoming are energized. Whatever makes a body move
necessarily corresponds to forces that partake its changes. As an example of the action
of such forces in the dislocation of bodies, Bergson talks about survival impulses and
the movement that follows from them (1944, pp. 274–278). Animals move to feed
themselves, to occupy more favourable climacteric conditions, to procreate, and so on.
Such movements correspond not only to spatial displacements, but also to
transformations that, when completed, have changed the difference of potentials that
initially forced them to occur. This intensive change is no different in the case of
planets, plants and bacteria. Intensive forces are the necessary condition for any body to
actually move.
It follows that movement needs to be thought as an assemblage of virtual
alterations and actual additions. Space is traversed and discrete multiplicities are
created. But that which traverses space always changes qualitatively with each division
(i.e. with each number that it creates). What from an external perspective can be
depicted as numerical divisibility, from an internal perspective can be experienced as a
change of state (number in potential). In Bergson's words: “the line traversed by the
moving body lends itself to any kind of division, because it has no internal organization.
But all movement is articulated inwardly. It is either an indivisible bound (which may
occupy, nevertheless, a very long duration) or a series of indivisible bounds” (1944, p.
337). Movement needs therefore to be considered as a whole. What changes when a
body moves is the whole of the ecology of relations that the body partakes. This
amounts to saying that a difference of potentials can only be cancelled by a change of
state in the relational field that allowed it to appear. When an animal moves to feed
itself, it not only transforms its own state but also the state of the whole that it partakes.
It transforms the food that it eats and the whole ecology of which that food is part.
35

When a meteorite enters the gravitational pull of a planet to the point of collision, it is
the whole that changes and not only one of its parts. The numerical reduction of
movement to the spatial parts that it explicates cannot account for the changes in
potential of a whole encompassing all the forms and all the forces of an ecology of
relations. Altogether, the intensities and extensions of a whole ecology of relations are
necessarily open to what is not yet formed as a possibility of movement, i.e. to what
exists as potential and cannot be anticipated. 
Considering that potentiality is a fundamental condition for the occurrence of
movement and that this needs to be taken as a whole, potentiality must therefore be
understood as the openness of an ecology of relations to what in itself is undetermined.
As Deleuze once more clarifies: “According to Bergson the whole is neither given nor
giveable. […] if the whole is not giveable, it is because it is the Open, and because its
nature is to change constantly, or to give rise to something new, in short, to endure. […]
So that each time we find ourselves confronted with a duration, or in a duration, we may
conclude that there exists somewhere a whole which is changing, and which is open
somewhere.” (1986, p. 9). Duration can thus be thought as the inscription of time in a
body open to its own indetermination, i.e. to what in it is neither given nor giveable. If
duration corresponds to a whole's capacity to remain open, to maintain the
indetermination of its own potentials unresolved throughout the changes endured, then,
as long as a body transforms, it can be said to be open. And it is precisely because of
this that Bergson says: “wherever anything lives, there is, open somewhere, a register in
which time is being inscribed”39 (1944, p. 20). If the openness that the whole of duration
introduces in the stability of objectified space allows for its qualitative change and for
creativity to bring into existence that which did not yet existed, then it is also from this
very openness that space can be objectified in extensive series. Objective space, as a
series of immobile sections to which time can be added as mathematical abstraction,
results from divisions that transform the whole and condition duration. And this is so
because movement can only occur in the interval of what does not change, i.e. from the
difference of potentials existing in-between given immobilities. With Deleuze, “we can
therefore say that movement relates the objects of a closed system to open duration, and
39 In regard to the indetermination of potentials as a necessary condition for real movement, Deleuze
says the following: “In fact, to recompose movement with eternal poses [ideal images] or with
immobile sections [after-images] comes to the same thing: in both cases, one misses the movement
because one constructs a Whole, one assumes that 'all is given', whilst movement only occurs if the
whole is neither given nor giveable. As soon as a whole is given to one in the eternal order of forms
or poses, or in the set of any-instant-whatevers, then either time is no more than the image of eternity,
or it is the consequence of the set; there is no longer room for real movement.” (1986, p. 7).
36

duration to the objects of the system which it forces to open up” (1986, p. 11).
1.2 - Creativity in Encounter
The quantification and measurement of moving bodies by technical means is a
prevalent phenomenon in examples of the so called encounter between “dance and
technology” (Birringer, 1998, 2008; Leeker & Dinkla, 2002). The encounter that this
expression usually refers to is embedded in the technical advances of the digital age,
with a genealogy that can be traced back to a series of encounters between dance and
film (Deren, 2005; Garelick, 2007).40 The term itself, dance and technology (or dance-
tech, for abbreviation), appeared in the early nineties to encompass the convergence of a
variety of dance-related artists who, in different ways, were also busy with the new
possibilities offered by the widespread use of computational machines and their
increasing capacity to process data.41 Nonetheless, it is the contention of this study that
this term corresponds to a larger project within the historical practice of dance, namely,
choreography. For if it can be acknowledged that technology necessarily refers to
instances of knowledge that regard ways of doing (and in this specific case, ways of
dancing), then it must also be acknowledged that the encounter between dance and
technology, rather than corresponding only to the encounter between dancing bodies and
computational machines, corresponds first and foremost to the interface of dance-related
knowledge with different modes of representative expression.
Choreography42 has first appeared from the necessity of registering, by means of
symbolic representation, forms of dance. Throughout its historical development, both as
an apparatus of representation and as a technology of dance, choreography has strived to
express and transmit dance-related knowledge. On the one hand, such knowledge is
diagrammatic: it organizes the experience of dance in space and time according to
relational concepts and representative expressions. On the other hand, it is algorithmic:
its diagrams are resumable in space and time, regardless of their expression (i.e. they
40 For a small collection of seminal examples of the encounter between dance and film see
http://www.ubu.com/film/dance-with-camera.html.
41 There was a series of conferences held between 1992 and 1995 in North America that later gave place
to the “International Dance and Technology Conference”, which has been happening since 1999 (also
under the name of “Dance Tech Inc.”). Not only this, but some key figures in this field's
development, namely Scott deLahunta, Marc Coniglio and Scott Sutherland, were responsible at the
time for setting up a website called “Dance & Technology Zone” (http://art.net/~dtz/), which served
as an important platform to reify and support this convergence.
42 The advent of which will be briefly discussed in Section 3.1.
37

can be expressed both by dancing bodies and by choreographic notations). By being
organizable and resumable in space and time, dance becomes complied to be the object
of a knowledge that, because it regards ways of doing, it is technical (i.e. tekhné as skill
or craft). The knowledge of dance that choreography has allowed to transmit across
generations of dancing bodies is, literally, its main legacy. As such, it is its main
capacity. The encounter between dance and technology must be understood in relation
to this historical frame, i.e. it must be understood in relation to the constitution of
choreographic knowledge within the overarching project of Western epistemology.
From this standpoint, it can be proposed that using digital tools to express dance-
related knowledge is but one specific mode of choreographing. Of course digital tools
offer possibilities to represent dance that are far more complex and varied than simpler
modes of symbolic expression, such as systems of choreographic notation. 43
Notwithstanding, in relation to the overall historical project of choreography, such
specification remains tied to the representation of dance-related knowledge.
Choreography as such remains unchanged by the use of digital tools. The digital domain
continues to serve the same technological character of dance that choreography has
always served, but with more and new possibilities.
The encounter between dance and technology can therefore be said to
correspond, most fundamentally, to the technical modes of thought that have given rise
to choreographic techniques. Which is also the reason why choreography can be
subjected to computation and, more specifically, to digital computation. Not in the sense
of digital computation being simply a function of registration and representation, but
rather in the sense of being itself organized diagrammatically and algorithmically.
Digital choreography can in this way iterate the diagrams of dance and express
representations of the dancing body in ways that, at once, conform to the latter and
express it otherwise.44 Simply put, the transition towards the use of computational
machines in choreography can be said to correspond to a passage from non-automated
procedures to automated ones. A passage that changes what choreography can do only
insofar as the possibilities of digital programming are more vast than any other
computation performed by non-automated means.
Despite the possibilities offered by digital programming to choreographic
processes, it is true that many times the dancing body has been represented only by
43 For a series of examples regarding the digital representation of dancing bodies, see Chapters 4 and 5.
44 For a discussion of the digital as a domain of possibilities see Chapters 5 and 6.
38

metrical principles of organization,45 principles that regard, first and foremost, the
workings of computational machines. Many times the dancing body has been
automatically captured into the digital domain only to become a determinate set of
numbers in representation of its movement wholeness. In this case, due to the reduction
of analog media to arrays of 0's and 1's, whatever is hold intensively and durationally in
the source domain remains cast out of numbers. The digital, which is discontinuous and
coded according to Boolean46 logics, can only represent the analog. Conversely, the
analog is to a large extent incompressible.47 
This regards the argument that what has no external organization cannot be
transposed to a domain exclusively based on numbers. The virtual reality of the dancing
body has no parallel in digital arrays. The dancing body is always more than all the
extensions that from it might be derived, not only because it comprises too many
variables, but also because it possesses varieties of reality that are not quantifiable and,
as such, not organizable in extension. The analog's incompressibility regards as well the
argument that qualities and quantities are irreducible to one another, leaving aside in any
translation that which is untranslatable. It is true that the representation of the dancing
body in domains other than its own is necessarily expressive, for the sake of being
perceivable, and therefore comprises its own qualities. But these are to be
acknowledged as corresponding to events of perception that discard the dancing body's
presence. The digital domain is, in this respect, a multilayered and multidimensional
mediatic domain wherein code is translated into code and, eventually, into audio-visual
expression. Each translation overrides what the digital cannot articulate, only to bring
into expression qualities that are but a resumption of given quantities. Translation can
be here defined as the reduction of perception into arrays of binary code. From
45 In this regard, all possible examples share one same aspect: the digital representations of the dancing
body are constructed solely on the basis of computation. “Lifeforms”, a seminal software in digital
choreography, is a paradigmatic example of this. Being a digital program for animating and notating
choreographic ideas, “Lifeforms” allows for representing dancing bodies in a euclidean fashion. Here,
the dancing body is reduced to a series of computational possibilities, which notwithstanding can be
creative of choreographic ideas impossible for real dancers to perform. There is no input apart from
user-determined data, to be computed according to built-in parameters. On the other hand, throughout
the years, choreographic softwares became more prone to compute motion-capture data (see Chapter
5). Motion-capture devices do no more than sampling data from sensed variations, i.e. they organize
the numerical representation of these variations according to predetermined parameters of
articulation. Which is to say that, for motion data to be computed, it first needs to be structured. Such
structuration is itself computed by parametric algorithms predetermined into the devices' software.
Hence, this passage from raw to structured data corresponds to the articulation of numbers with one
another in accordance with digital representations of space and time. All in all, the digital demands
the analog to be reduced to a binarism that is but a metrical mode of organizing space and time.
46 See footnote 147.
47 For a discussion regarding incompressible quantities of data existing together with finite quantities of 
data, see Chapter 6.
39

perception to abstraction and from abstraction to expression, translation proceeds first
as reduction, and then as additive speculation. Reduction, because various quantities of
data are synthesized into the limited articulation of numbers. Additive speculation,
because whatever is missed by the discrete quantities of data needs to be generated
anew when expressively qualified.48 This necessity of adding data to what is given
attests the reduction that occurs when going from qualitative experiences to quantitative
expressions. The digital samples the analog and simulates it to the point of coincidence.
But this neither means that they are one nor that they are the same. The possibilities of
the digital domain are sufficient neither to constitute a whole dancing body nor to
reproduce the analog in its full depth. Translating the dancing body into digital code is
always to register data predetermined to be of choice and to compose a double of reality
defined only to the extent of its useful participation in the field of perception (i.e. what
cannot be perceived can be discarded).
If the digital representation of dancing bodies always misses their virtuality, how
is it then that choreographic knowledge can be constituted anew? Clearly, the
speculative addition of reality has a role in creativity. But if the invention of digital
machines only adds to preconceived notions of what dance is, translations from the
analog to the digital can only represent what the dancing body is assumed to be. In this
case, before the encounter, dance is given as a preformed idea. Additive speculation can
then only follow its own biases, which pertain to specific points of view, each informed
by a past of its own. For novel instances of choreographic knowledge to emerge in the
encounter between dance and technology, translations need to be infected by potentials
with the capacity to constitute what cannot be predicted. If novelty is to occur, neither
what dancers know nor what anyone else might suppose to be dance should be assumed
to define the encounter between dance and technology. For such encounter to be the site
of novelty, choreographic potentials must be activated. This is to be done by means of
transduction, rather than translation. As it will be argued below,49 transduction is an
48 Speculative addition can be understood both as abstract invention and as concrete operation. The
latter case regards the addition of inexistent data that, if it were to exist, would probably be as it is
added. In this sense, what is added is what the present lacks for experience to be consistent with its
past. This can also thought as recollection: whatever lacks in the present is filled with past memories.
In this way, the present becomes consistent and coherent with its own past. As an example,
philosopher Brian Massumi's take on the field of vision can be mentioned: “The 'pure' field of vision
is a virtual field. No matter how carefully an experimental setup approximates it, actual 'impurities'
will sneak in. For there will always already have been experience. What are the formlike emergences
of the "pure" field of vision as isolated in the laboratory if not traces of past intermodal experiences
straining to reactualize their ratio of constancy, to refresh already-objects they have been, to regain
the world, preknown anew?” (2002, p. 155). See Ibid, pp. 144-161.
49 See page 74, Section 2.4.
40

operation that, rather than proceeding only on the basis of what is given (having to fill
what is not), proceeds as well on the basis of what is not given (including, or practically
acknowledging, the unconscious as a constitutive part of the process). Transduction is
energized by undetermined potentials, which can bring novelty into emergence. Here,
speculation does not add what is already known, but rather what is not. It expresses the
difference implied in potentials that cannot resemble the past. Which is to say that
novelty necessarily results from differences between potentials implicated in the
encounter between dance and technology. Novelty speculates the resolution of such
differences with what cannot be known in advance.
At this point, an argument regarding the creative capacities of any encounter
whatsoever, and more specifically regarding the creativity of the encounter between
dance and technology, must be made. For if it were not for these capacities, the
encounter between dance and technology would not be capable of generating novel
instances of knowledge and would, therefore, not even be this one generic encounter.
On the basis of this argument is the assumption that dance can occur without generating
a transmittable and repeatable know-how. Of course the one who dances (or even the
one who watches dance) experiences the occurrence of dance. But this occurrence is not
the sole condition for the formation of a diagrammatic and algorithmic kind of
knowledge. The choreographic knowledge of dance requires a stabilization, if not of
form, at least of the generative principles of one specific diagram. It requires a degree of
determination regarding an interplay of forces. Only such stabilization allows for
choreographic transmission. The formation of choreographic knowledge requires that
the conditions of possibility of the experience of dance are known to the point of being
reproducible. A knowledge that, at the same time that it is formed, defines the very
diagram according to which it is organized. It is not important at this point to clarify the
processes by means of which the formation of knowledge acquires a diagrammatic
character.50 It matters only to assert that, be it from a subjective point of view (i.e.
interiority) or from an objective point of view (i.e. exteriority), the formal determination
of experiential knowledge is a fundamental condition for the iteration of choreographic
principles. In sum, if the experience of dance is to be repeated according to certain
parameters, these must be determined accordingly.
It is therefore from the interplay between what dance is known to be and the
unknowable itself that choreographic knowledge can be constituted as what regards,
50 This is one of the central concerns of Chapter 4.
41

simultaneously, the emergence of experience and the necessary conditions for the latter
to eventuate in this or that particular fashion. Since the constitution of this sort of
knowledge necessarily results from focusing corporeal potentials towards the
determination of repeatable parameters, it is in itself processual. Additionally, it
objectifies the very process by means of which dance is experienced, a process that
unfolds in-between the cognitive and the uncognizable towards the resolution of
problems related with such indeterminate in-betweenness.
It can be advanced that the conditions of a creative encounter must necessarily
involve a degree of indetermination capable of bringing into emergence that which
cannot be anticipated. If the encounter between dance and technology is to constitute
novel instances of knowledge, it must overcome predetermination with what in its
conditions remains indeterminate. This regards the assumption that the ontic
determination of dance is limited by reason of its own definition: when dance is defined
as being this and not that, its knowledge remains bound to what dance is said to be. But
it also regards the assumption that, if novel choreographies are to be attained by
diagramming and iterating dance, the latter must not be given in advance. Rather, dance
must be in itself, at least to a point, indeterminate. It must include in its own conditions
of possibility the potentials to become more than what it already is. Only in this way is
it possible to talk about an encounter between dance and technology. Not only because
an encounter is an event and, therefore, by definition51, creative of more than what there
was, but also because creativity requires conditions of possibility that are to a great
extent indeterminate. 
If new choreographies are to be created, movement needs to be acknowledged in
its full scope. Not only must the dancing body be seen as encompassing both extensive
and intensive realities, but also the constitution of knowledge must be acknowledged to
involve both indeterminate and determinate realities. All in all, the assumption that
movement occurs in space, but not without being open to the inscription of a durational
time, corresponds to assuming that it effectuates its own conditions by moving through
a constitutive degree of indetermination. It is by reason of potentiality that movement
can create, even if in a series of replicas, images consistent with what has moved, i.e. a
knowledge of what has been created. The conditions of knowledge therefore coincide
with the conditions of movement. An equation that, as it will be argued below,52
conflates the conditions of possibility of both process and knowledge. Which is to say
51 For an overview of different definitions of the event see Zizek (2014).
52 See Section 2.4. 
42

that the enabling conditions of the becoming of things (i.e. ontogenesis) are the same
that enable the knowledge of them (i.e. epistemology).
If the encounter between dance and technology is to take the form of a
determinate relationship between dancing bodies and computational machines, the
resulting knowledge should therefore be understood as resolving a problematic process.
In this sense, the expression of choreographic knowledge by digital means shouldn't be
understood only in representational terms. Instead of choreographic knowledge being
determined previously to digital expression, it must be determined with the very
resolution of the problems implied by such relationship. This is not to saying that the
iterations of choreography into the digital domain do not entail conditions of possibility
with regard to the formation of novel instances of knowledge. In this latter case,
whereby formed instances of choreographic knowledge are given to the digital domain
as data to be expressed by any of its possible means, it is possible that, from the simple
resolution of problems of translation, novel ideas and their corresponding expressions
are formed. In this way, the transference from determinate instances of knowledge from
one domain of expression to another can generate choreographic ideas that are not only
novel but also disembodied in regard to the dancing bodies that they might refer to.
Here, with the possibility of thinking choreographically without the actual ground of a
dancing body, choreography reliefs its abstract capacities, i.e. it manifests diagrammatic
arrangements that do not necessarily correspond to the traditional bodies of theatrical
dance. Notwithstanding this possibility,53 the constitution of novel instances of
knowledge by means of the encounter between dancing bodies and computational
machines, if it is to have its genesis in the conditions of possibility of this same
encounter, it must be understood as a process that implicates heterogeneous problems,
i.e. a process conditioned by bodies that comprise singular and heterogeneous
differences at the level of their constitutive multiplicities. As such, it is not a case of
translation, from given instances of knowledge to novel domains of expression, but a
case of transduction—the transmission of potentials between domains of expression.
Transduction is not fully measurable. Inasmuch as it regards the resolution of
problems posed at the level of what in choreographic systems remains without referent,
it encompasses the durational movement of a process that creates the correlated subjects
and objects of singular epistemological relations. It is in transduction that the creative
powers of movement are to be attained, especially if the case regards the heterogeneous
53 Which will be explored mostly in Chapters 5 and 6.
43

multiplicity of a whole that, at the same time that it is open to and by undetermined
potentials, it is actually composed by a variety of extensions. It is not worth at this point
to discuss possible definitions of transduction and their related implications.54 It is
enough to say that it is through transduction that problems are transferred across scales
and domains. Transduction regards the transference of diagrammatic ideas across the
possible resumptions of choreographic expression.55 It knows nothing about
representation but instead informs unfolding processes with problems and resolutions.
In short, transduction resumes problematic conditions throughout the iterative
expression of correlated resolutions. It gives prevalence to creative differences rather
than to the image of what might express the resolution of a problem. 
If the encounter between dance and technology is to create novel instances of
knowledge, the dancing body and its expressive movements shouldn't be taken as a
representational referent for translation. Rather, the dancing body must be activated to
the point of being creative of what it does not yet know. In that which regards the
encounter between dance and technology, such activation corresponds to the interplay
between the giveable and the not giveable. To measure movement, as it is commonly
performed by the kinds of computational machines that intake sensorial feeds according
to their structure,56 is to translate the given, i.e. data, into a different domain. To assume
that movement is only this, i.e. an expression as extensive as numerable, and that the
conditions of possibility for the constitution of knowledge do not implicate continuous
multiplicities, is to freeze choreography in one given form, of which the dancing body is
a primary condition, but which cannot but act as a representational referent for
translation. 
In contrast to this, the involvement of computational machines in the encounter
between dance and technology, as a condition of possibility for the constitution of
knowledge, can be regarded as part of one open whole. Even if computational machines
are programmable only on the basis of possibility (i.e. digital coding), the encounter
between dance and technology instantiated with their aid should be thought as
encompassing a variety of bodies and domains and as including in its development a
durational dimension irreducible to counting and computation. It is by activating
54 For a discussion of the notion of transduction within the frame of French philosopher Gilbert
Simondon's philosophy of individuation, see Sections 2.4 and 2.5 (a definition is given on page 74).
Transduction, and more specifically Simondon's definition of it, has been a key notion throughout the
development of this study, and it can be perhaps best understood in relation to the subject matters
here discussed in the final Sections of Chapter 4.
55 For a discussion of problems as the objects of ideas, see Section 4.1.
56 For a series of examples of such computational systems, see Chapter 5.
44

potentials in a process of technological individuation that novel instances of knowledge
can come about. Not as the iterative resumption of determinate cases of solution, but
rather as the transduction of diagrammatic ideas that, notwithstanding, can be iterated
without end. That which is without measure, without extension and without formal
organization must be assumed to have a generative role and to be a constitutive
dimension of creativity. The encounter between dance and technology, like any other
creative encounter, must be acknowledged as having at its core a differential relation
between indeterminate forces and determinate forms. Because, if the dancing body is
defined according to a finite set of axioms out of which only a series of possibilities is
renderable, nothing but that which conforms with what is already known can emerge as
a valid proposition. Presumptions restrict potentials with possibilities that can be
imagined beforehand. Predetermining the terms of a relation precludes creativity by
setting possibility as the ground from which any development can occur. Possibility, as
large as the set may be, is always limited and finite. It preforms images of what the
future may bring, foreclosing the openness towards that in regard to which there is no
possible anterior image. Assuming what dance and technology can do corresponds to
premapping what their encounter can generate as a possibility that can be known in
advance. As much as the results of this encounter can be imagined in anticipation to its
particular resonances, no true novelty can be expected. In such conditions, creativity is
subsumed by technical reproduction.57 
Possibility is inevitable. Forms are always already there to be abstracted by
images of their possible participation in the future. On its turn, indeterminacy is present
in the interval of forms, in the relational field that they establish by affecting one
another to the point of a reciprocal transformation. From the initial conditions of an
encounter to the emergence of novelty, creativity reconfigures the implications and
explications of possibility and potentiality. It transforms the ways in which the order of
what is determinate and the order of what is not relate to and affect one another. It
brings into emergence novel facts of unity by changing the state of the whole to which it
belongs. It is by means of actual contingencies that the encounter between dance and
technology can be performed. But it is by means of potentials that both parts can affect
one another beyond possibility. Affect, defined here as the simultaneous participation of
57 Let us briefly recall that Walter Benjamin, like many after him, saw in the technical reproduction of
the work of art a process that destroys the “aura” of the object. In other words, for the author,
technical reproduction is but a mechanism that dispossesses the object of creation from “its unique
existence in a particular place” (2008, pp. 19–55). The uniqueness of creativity can thus be thought in
terms of the interpenetration of particular conditions that allow for the emergence of singularities.
45

intensity in extension and of extension in intensity, corresponds to the order of process
whereby potentials escape the containment of their formal structuration and resolve
themselves into the emergence of novel structures. Only by means of an encounter can
potentials energize processes of creation. Encounter is the event of self-differentiation
of its own initial conditions. When these conditions are moved by what in them is
potential to the point of becoming different from themselves, what remains in relation
can no longer be what it was. Hence, the emergence of novelty corresponds to a
determinate transformation of its own enabling conditions.
For the encounter between dance and technology to be open to the potential
creation of the unpredictable, neither dancing bodies nor apparatuses of capture can be
given in advance. This means to move from a set of predictable possibilities to the
indetermination of potentials in a creative movement, i.e. to activate an a-parallel
evolution of dancing bodies and technical objects. From this, only one expectation can
be maintained: that a creative process, rather than following a hylomorphic
determinism, modulates its constitutive forces towards the creation of novelty. The
constitutive creativity of an encounter regards not what might result from one given part
entering in relation with one other, but rather what can result from a whole's openness:
novelty not as what regards the absolutely different, but rather as what instead follows
from conditions that involve both the possible and the potential. Indetermination is
therefore a fundamental condition of an encounter's creativity. Only with the potentials
of an encounter can what is given in possibility become different from itself and what is
not yet given come to be. A true encounter engenders the unimaginable, it foregrounds
what cannot be known in advance.
If letting go of assumptions on what a body can do is to move from ontological
predicates to ontogenetic processes, to let go of assumptions on what technology can do
is to embrace “technogenesis” (Simondon, 2005). In regard to the encounter between
dance and technology, philosopher Erin Manning calls forth the composition of a
“technogenetic body” (2009, pp. 61–76), conceived as a body that is not extended in
capacity by prosthetic technologies but rather as one that is fully capable of becoming
different from itself. As the author points out “concepts such as the Machinic (Deleuze
& Guattari, 1987, pp. 71–74), the Body without Organs (Ibid., pp. 149–166), the
Posthuman (Hayles, 2008), and Originary Technicity (Derrida, 1976, pp. 242–246), [...]
suggest that a body is always already 'more-than', refuting the logic of the 'than' that
would need to be prosthetically enhanced to reach its 'more-than' state.” (2009, p. 63).
Such excess of the body over itself allows for thinking about the relationship between
46

dance and technology not as an encounter between self-identical parts, supplementing
one another in what each one lacks, but rather as a becoming that, far form being
predictable, holds in itself an excessive potential, a potential for becoming “more” than
itself. Whereas possibility comprises images that can be concretized without differing
from themselves, potentiality is the force of self-differentiation that opens the becoming
of each encounter to the indetermination of what cannot be predicted. But what does it
mean for a body to be “more-than” itself? What are the conditions that enable a body's
capacity to create novel appearances? Perhaps the most complete answer given to these
questions can be found in the theoretical works of philosopher of science Gilbert
Simondon (1969, 2005)58. For, while striving to understand the dynamisms by means of
which domains such as the physical, the vital, the psychic and the collective come into
existence, Simondon has proffered that the potentials of an individual exist in it as a
reserve for more (2005, pp. 9–30). From this perspective, due to its own potentials, the
individual can differ from itself and become other. 
In Simondon's theory of individuation, potentials are said to be “preindividual”.
Or, to be more correct, potentials are the means by which individuals access a
preindividual reality, which is the reason of their self-incompatibility. The self-
incompatibility of an individual is the condition whereby the latter accesses enough
energy to prompt itself into a different state. The difference of potentials corresponding
to an individual's self-incompatibility corresponds as well to its pre-individual reality. It
is the force exerted by an energetic excess—the individual's 'more-than-individual' share
—, with the power to overturn a determinate structural state. Having to resolve its own
disparity, the individual cancels the incompatibility between potentials by creating
novel structures. With each structural state, the individual keeps in form its own
potentials, i.e. it keeps them within the limits of force required for the preservation of
form (metastability). Structural transitioning can therefore be said to correspond to the
transduction of force between formal appearances, i.e. it corresponds to the process by
means of which an initial incompatibility is resolved with the emergence of a novel
structure. Together with an individual's potentials, the preindividual can be said to
correspond to what in the individual lacks formal determination. Or, to be more correct,
if what is potential is undetermined in regard to actual expressions, the preindividual is
58 Because these texts are written in French, it should be noted that most of the quotes used in this study
were in fact taken from partial translations of other authors. As such, the main translations from
where references were taken are Simondon (1992), Lamarre (2012), Combes, (2013).
Notwithstanding this adequation, when quoting Simondon, this text will reference primary sources
(his own texts).
47

the source of the movement by means of which an individual comes to be. It is what
comes before the individual, but not in a chronological sense. The preindividual is a
reserve for more that the individual can access whenever becoming incompatible with
itself. It is either dormant or active, but always contemporary to the individual. As such,
in what regards the latter, the preindividual is a non-temporal anteriority.59 It is the
movement by means of which the pattern of a higher dimension resolves itself into the
pattern of a lower dimension, i.e. force giving birth to form. Individuation—the
becoming of an individual—should thus be understood as the process whereby the latter
accesses its preindividual share, only to become something else: the effect of a
transductive resolution. Transduction occurs while the individual and the preindividual
are kept in communication. It transfers the force of disparity into the metastable
agreement of forces and forms. Conversely, the individual should be understood as
corresponding to a state of compatibility between potentials. In a state of self-
compatibility, no communication between the individual and the preindividual occurs. 
For this reason, it is said in Simondon's theory of individuation that being does
not exhaust itself with its actual expressions. After each individuation, the order of
potentials is kept in the formed individual, exceeding its actuality and endowing it with
the capacity to participate in subsequent individuations. In this sense, a system of being
corresponds not only to its actual expressions but also to its developmental processes.
As much as potentials exist in actuality, being cannot be reduced to its individuals. It is
more than them, for it encompasses all the individuals that it can potentially form. The
same system of being can become different individuals, changing with each
individuation the structures that keep in form its own potentials. The excess of a body
over itself can thus be conceived as a preindividual “more-than-unity and more-than-
identity” coexisting with and conditioning the “unity and identity” of “the phases of
being, subsequent to the operation of individuation”. (Simondon, 2005, pp. 25–26).
Having said this, a couple of questions must be posed: Which kind of conditions
enable technogenesis? Or, to be more precise, what are the necessary conditions for the
encounter between dance and technology to individuate a technogenetic body, i.e. for it
to bring forth an ecology of relations between dancing bodies and technical objects that
is charged with potentials? How should the preindividual potentials of a technogenetic
body be thought, given that its specificities are necessarily tied to what actually
constitutes dancing bodies and technical objects? In order to essay some answers, this
59 As Simondon points out, even time “develops out of the preindividual just like the other dimensions
according to which the process of individuation takes place” (Simondon, 2005, p. 34).
48

study will now turn towards Simondon's philosophy, not only because of what has been
indicated, but also because his theory of individuation deserves to be granted the status
of being one of the most thorough inquiries made throughout modernity regarding the
problematic relation between man and machines, from the standpoint of the relationship
between potentiality and actuality. Or, as Simondon himself says, because technology,
as the scientific study of technics, serves to reintroduce into culture—“that by which the
human being regulates its relation to the world and its relation to itself” (1969, p. 227)
—“a consciousness of the nature of machines, of their mutual relations and their
relations with the human being, and of values implied in these relations” (Ibid., p. 13).
Before proceeding, one remark regarding the encounter between dance and
technology must be made: there is no general category of this encounter from which
principles of technogenesis could be extracted. What exists instead are series of singular
encounters, each of which with its own ecology of relations. In each encounter, there is
the potential for singular dances and technologies to emerge, as what results from an
affective individuation between parts that do not remain unaltered. And in spite of
dancing bodies and technical objects being capable of existing on their own and
possibly coming together in order to compose functional aggregates, this doesn't assure
the activation of their potentials. The fact of contact between encountering parts does
not necessarily stand for incompatibilities in the choreographic system and therefore
does not assure resolutions into novelty. In the set of mutually inclusive possibilities
shared by dancing bodies and technical objects nothing more than what is already given
can occur. The singularity of an encounter thus requires more than possibility. It
requires the activation of potentials that, belonging to each of the encountering parts,
can affect one another to the point of realizing an encounter's creativity. Affect is the
fundamental order of the creative encounter. It exceeds the possibilities of contact
between the encountering parts with unimaginable events.
49

Chapter 2 - SIMONDON ON INDIVIDUATION
This Chapter will synthesize Gilbert Simondon's philosophy of individuation in
five Sections. With regard to this study's overall frame, this should be understood in two
distinct ways. On the one hand, it has the purpose of essaying a second approach to
ontology. If Bergson's theory of multiplicities has allowed for a first approximation to
the thought of creativity, from the perspective of potentiality, Simondon's conception of
this latter notion will more specifically allow for this same thought in regard to
technical systems. This concerns, of course, the encounter between dance and
technology. On the other hand, Simondon's philosophy of individuation will be here
expounded in order to provide a conceptual framework apt to approach the constitution
of choreographic knowledge from a processual viewpoint. Despite this being a chapter
that does not refer one single time any concern with choreographic issues, it will prove
itself not only fundamental for the remaining chapters' development but also valuable
for their understanding. Section 2.1 will discuss Simondon's fundamental concerns with
process and the ontogenesis of being. It will continue to conceptualize the notions
already mentioned in the previous Chapter (i.e. individual and preindividual) and it will
introduce concepts as fundamental to this philosophy as “phase”, “dephasing”,
“principle of individuation”, “information”, “associated milieu” and “metastability”.
Section 2.2 will introduce the “physical paradigm” that Simondon engendered to sustain
most of his thoughts on individuation. It will not only situate the function of a paradigm
in the structuration of this system of thought, but also discuss how the parameters of
individuation extracted from it are used as a lens to look upon any kind of individuation.
Section 2.3 will delve into the increment of complexity in the structuration of
individuals to explicit how Simondon goes from the physical paradigm of individuation
to the “psycho-collective” individuation of what he calls the “transindividual”. Section
2.4 will built upon the previous Section to argue about the conflation of ontology with
epistemology. It will present the dynamisms of knowledge formation in accordance with
Simondon's philosophy and, in this guise, explicate the concepts of “analogy”,
“transduction”, “transindividual” and “allagmatics”. Finally, Section 2.5 will discuss the
formation of technical individuals and their networks. Notions such as “machine”,
“reticularity” and “technicity” will not only allow for defining the technical individual
but also to indicate a possible way to approach the encounter between dance and
technology from its processes' perspective.
50

2.1 - Ontogenesis
Gilbert Simondon's theory of individuation is preoccupied with accounting for
the formation of individuals while putting forth the implication of forces in forms and
the ways by which the former condition the latter. Which is to say that, rather than
considering individuals according to a principle of self-identity, it gives primacy to the
force of self-differentiation by means of which individuals come to be and transform. 
Against the stakes of substantialism and hylomorphism, Simondon's philosophy
proposes that any process of individuation encompasses more than its resulting
individuals. It puts forth the primacy of ontogenesis over ontology, to the point of
determining the individuation of knowledge itself. According to the author, knowledge
cannot result but from a process of individuation.60 Even the knowledge of individuation
individuates. Upon such premise, it is further said that only by means of an
individuating knowledge can individuation itself be known. This not only conflates the
processes by means of which both knowledge and its individuals come to be, but it
conflates epistemology and ontology themselves with the overall development of one
system of being (i.e. ontogenesis). Here implied is the assumption that the knowledge
derived from given individuals cannot be but an after-effect of their individuation. On
its turn, the knowledge of individuation is one that individuates with the individuals to
be known. In contrast to a knowledge constituted on the basis of givens, with which
processes can only be known in respect to an articulated succession of formed
individuals, the knowledge of individuation is in itself a processual knowledge. It is a
knowledge that individuates together with the individuation of what will come to be
known and that, therefore, results from the openness of the system in which it emerges
to its own constitutive and implicit potentials. A conflation that it is only possible
inasmuch as both processes are capable of affecting one another, reciprocally, to the
point of becoming intrinsically related. This is, of course, the co-constitution of subjects
and objects. A relation that, rather than being given, constitutes itself simultaneously to
the constitution of its own terms.
The formation of knowledge not only encompasses the constitution of subjects
and objects, but also a plurality of processes and structures that exist independently
from epistemological relations. Regardless of acquiring a subjective or an objective
point of view, the many individuals of one same system of individuation are primarily
60 See Section 2.4.
51

related to one another by a shared field of potential affects. As already mentioned, such
field comprises what Simondon designates as “preindividual”—the primary force of
individuation. It is at the level of the preindividual that the plurality of individuation is
unified. Not as set, but as whole. As the continuous charge that underlies any of the
system's individuals, which is also the principal cause of their individuation. The
different individuals of one same system of individuation correspond in this way to “the
phases of being, subsequent to the operation of individuation” (Simondon, 2005, pp.
25–26). They express the system's potentials to endure under different conditions and
manifest one same preindividual potential.
In contrast to an ontological approach, which defines entities on the basis of self-
identity, ontogenesis regards the development of the system of being as a whole. It
privileges the self-differentiation of individuals and, rather than granting them an
existential autonomy, i.e. the self-sufficiency of ontological determinations, it considers
them only as transient expressions of one open whole. From an ontogenetic perspective,
the system's openness to preindividual indetermination is given as much value as its
individual expressions. Which amounts to the conception that the overall development
of a system of being can only be grasped if this is taken to be becoming.  The implicit
and potential difference constitutive of any becoming is in this way made to be as
constitutive of being itself. Being is both preindividual and individual; it is virtual,
potential and actual; and it is ordered in relation to the dynamic interplay of these many
dimensions by a generative, i.e. ontogenetic, principle of immanence.
As an example, one can think of water: its molecules are the same but they can
be arranged in different ways. Water can be solid, gaseous and liquid, depending on the
intensity of forces such as temperature and pressure. The system of being named water
encompasses all of this: its molecules and its states, its transitionings and the necessary
conditions for different individuations to occur. Water, as being, is a multiplicity. It
relates its many expressions to one another as different phases of one same system.
Solid, gaseous and liquid are all such expressive phases, granted that they are
continuous to one another by means of some preindividual share. The very potential of
ice to become liquid, for example, attests water's irreducibility to each of its expressions
and calls forth the necessity of acknowledging that the whole of it includes ever present
potentials. Being as becoming encompasses all of this, it encompasses the plurality of
its system's whole development.
The opposition between being and becoming that the ontogenetic perspective
52

overcomes generally results from a perspective that gives prevalence to the static over
the mobile. From this perspective, the individual first needs to be given in order for its
individuation to be known, after the actual fact. In a kind of reverse engineering,
individuation is reduced to a succession of facts, connected to one another by means of
actual causalities. Qualitative change is subsumed by quantitative variation, i.e. by the
after-effect of change itself, to which only formed individuals correspond. For
Simondon (2005, pp. 23–24), this oppositional standpoint between being and becoming
can be reduced to two different perspectives: substantialism, which considers the
individual as self-coincident and separated from others; and hylomorphism, which
considers the individual as a conjunction of matter and form. Both perspectives assume
a principle of individuation, but one which derives from stable things, from the formal
invariance of individuals. In this way, the significance of individuation is overridden.
Both substantialism and hylomorphism ignore the potential becoming of being, i.e. that
being develops with each individuation, but only partially. Both perspectives do not
account for the excess of individuals, i.e. for what impedes them from being the total
expression of the system to which they belong. The plurality of individuation, in its
continuous multiplicity, is missing. By ignoring this intrinsic force of self-
differentiation, both substantialism and hylomorphism postulate the self-identity of
individuals as a fundamental definition of being. 
In contrast to these perspectives, Simondon's theory of individuation not only
postulates the continuity of being by reason of potentiality, as it also asserts that none of
its expressions is primary relatively to the others. In fact, inasmuch as being is
becoming, its different phases must be acknowledged to exist continuously with its
overall development, if not actually, at least potentially. They are not related to one
another in the fashion of a discontinuous temporal succession, i.e. one after the other,
but rather implicated in the potentials that energize each individuation. As such, they are
as contemporary to one another as they are to the one system to which they belong. As
Simondon writes, “[...] the idea of a discontinuity [discontinu] becomes that of a
discontinuity [discontinuité] of phases, which is linked to the hypothesis of the
compatibility of successive phases of being: a being, considered as individuated, can in
fact exist according to several phases that are present at the same time, and it can
change phases in itself; there is a plurality in being that is not the plurality of parts (the
plurality of parts would be below the level of the unity of being), but a plurality that is
above this unity, because it is that of being as phase, in the relation of one phase of
being to another phase of being” (2005, p. 317). Not only is the hypothesis that the
53

relativity between phases corresponds to the reality of being as phase consistent with the
latter's plurality, but also consistent with what in it is without phase—i.e. the
preindividual. In this sense, the multiphasic reality of being can be said to be immanent
in its system's preindividuality, and vice-versa. The passage from one phase of being to
another must correspond to a transference of potentials between the preindividual and
the individual levels of an individuating system. “Dephasing”, a term borrowed by
Simondon from thermodynamics, denotes such passage. It depicts the event whereby
being becomes self-incompatible and falls out of phase with itself. A dephasing is a
phase-shift; it remarks the point at which two phases intersect and charge the system
with preindividual potentials. Its aftermath is none other than the most adequate solution
for the problem posed, a singularity corresponding to one of the concurrent phases'
expression. Because in Simondon's theory of individuation being is conflated with
becoming, and because becoming is necessarily polyphased, then any system of being
can be said to comprise its many phases in potential.
An individuated system of being possesses therefore the capacity to become self-
incompatible by reason of the preindividual charge immanent in it. If strong enough,
such incompatibility can force the system into resolution, that is, into the process
whereby a problem is posed and further cancelled. The system's overall development
proceeds on the basis of this dynamic interplay between implicit disparities and explicit
solutions. Dephasing manifests a problem as the very potential of its own resolution.
Each phase expressed should thus be understood as the cessation of its own
individuation. In regard to knowledge, this amounts to saying that an individual can
only be known if the whole system to which it belongs is taken into consideration. Not
that everything in the system is knowable. But only a knowledge that individuates on
the same basis of the individuations to be known, a basis which includes the
unconscious itself, allows for the understanding of individuals as actual manifestations
of a more-than-individual whole. Once more, this corresponds to the primacy of
movement over positions. It corresponds to the understanding that difference is primary
to identity, not only because of being immanent in it but also because of being a
fundamental condition for the latter's appearance and conservation. 
Being is excessive in relation to itself and, precisely because of this, generative
of its own resolute expressions. It is a system laden with potentials, which are kept in
form with each individuation. Each phase of the system of being corresponds to the
singular structuration of its own potentials. It is the form of the system's self-
consistency. This means that, even when expressed with a certain form, the system of
54

being shouldn't be thought as being at rest. It continues to individuate by reason of its
openness to undetermined potentials. In fact, as Simondon says, “the sole principle by
which [individuation] is guided is that of the conservation of being through becoming”
(1992, p. 301). Which amounts to saying that individuation is the process by means of
which the potentials of one system of being are conserved. In each of its phases, the
system holds the potentials to individuate further phases and, by doing so, resolve
inescapable problems. Difference is a necessary condition for being to become and to
conserve itself through becoming. If the system of being conserves itself through
becoming, the disparity of its potentials is fundamental to its existence because only by
resolving an internal problematic can it transfer its own potentials (i.e. the potentials to
continue becoming) to yet another unproblematic phase. In sum, in order to endure, the
system of being must remain potentially incompatible with itself.
A brief remark regarding the notion that individuation is guided by an intrinsic
principle must be made. While constructing an approach that moves away from the
premises of substantialism and hylomorphism, Simondon adverts: “[t]he idea that
individuation might have a principle at all is a crucial postulate in the search for a
principle of individuation” (1992, p. 298). Searching for a principle of individuation
located before or after individuation, as substantialism and hylomorphism do, can only
result in the transcendental or essential determination of reality. In such cases, either
being corresponds to a pure ideality that acts on matter from the outside, determining in
this way its actual expressions (hylomorphism), or being is given by the infinitely
variable combination of unchanging atoms (essentialism). In one way or the other, the
indetermination of potentials is missed. In opposition to such stances, which take
individuation to be a “region of uncertainty […] that needs to be explained”, Simondon
proposes that individuation itself is where “explanation is to be found” (1992, p. 298).
From an ontogenetic perspective, the principle of individuation corresponds to the
operation by means of which “the system of energy that is individuating [...] realizes in
the individual this internal resonance of the matter taking form and a mediation between
orders of magnitude” (Ibid., 2005, p. 44). From the outset, the system of individuation
conserves in communication potentials belonging to different orders magnitude, which
can exert a force strong enough to dephase it. Such force is the potential of disparity.
From phase to phase, the system restructures the distribution of its energetic potentials,
only to keep itself becoming. As such, as Simondon writes, “the true principle of
individuation is mediation, which generally presumes the existence of the original
duality of the orders of magnitude and the initial absence of interactive communication
55

between them, followed by a subsequent communication between orders of magnitude
and stabilization” (1992, p. 304). The becoming of being is tantamount to the internal
resonance of its system. As long as potentials belonging to different orders of magnitude
keep affecting one another, the system of individuation can access its preindividual
share and individuate adequate resolutions to its self-incompatibility. The principle of
individuation is a principle of resonance. 
There are, here implied, three important concepts in Simondon's theory of
individuation: “information”, which corresponds to the resolution of an internal
problem; “associated milieu”61, which corresponds to the energetic field situated across
a collective of individual structures; and “metastability”, which corresponds to the
overall state of a system when no disparity is to be found. It follows that, with these
three concepts, individuation can be defined as follows: it is the process whereby a
disparity between potentials belonging to the individual's associated milieu disrupts the
system's metastability and informs it into a novel state of resolution. Further, by
defining information as “that by which the incompatibility within the unresolved system
becomes an organizing dimension in its resolution”, Simondon deliberately moves away
from how this notion was conceived by information theory—i.e. information as a given
unity—, in order to fully encompass the ontogenetic reality of being. For the author
information pertains to the affective exchange provoked by an incompatibility in the
system's potentials and to the process by means of which these same potentials are
restructured in the form of a metastable solution. Hence, information “is the
signification that emerges when a process of individuation reveals the dimension
through which two disparate realities together become a system” (Simondon, 1992, p.
311). 
To say that individuation resolves an initial incompatibility by restructuring the
system's potentials corresponds to saying that what it individuates is both a structure of
remarkable points and a formless field of potentials, i.e. the individual's associated
milieu. When commenting upon Simondon's theory of individuation, media theorist
Thomas LaMarre has defined the latter in the following way: “the associated milieu is
what runs across the structure's contrast (external milieu) and spacing (internal milieu).
61 Philosopher Brian Massumi recently gave a brief explanation of the term “milieu” that is worth
mentioning: “The word, often qualified by 'associated', is a favourite of both Simondon and Deleuze
and Guattari for its double entendre in French. In French milieu means both 'middle' and
'surroundings'. To put the two meanings together without falling back into an outside/inside division
that calls for a subject or object to found or regulate it, you have to conceive of a middle that wraps
around, to self-surround, as it phases onward in the direction of the “more” of its formative
openness.” (Manning, 2013, p. xii).
56

And, where terms such as 'contrast' and 'spacing' have largely spatial and static
connotations, the associated milieu is energetic, charged, potentiality. [...] In sum, the
associated milieu is the energetically charged field running across internal spacing and
external contrast.” (2012, p. 40). The associated milieu is a fundamental condition of
individuation. It is the very ground from which and on which the internal resonance of
an individuating system unfolds. In order for individuation to occur, the internal milieu
and the external milieu need to communicate with one another. Without their
communication, the system remains charged with potentials, but latent in a metastable
phase. The individual's associated milieu facilitates the communication between the
system's potentials; it is its medium. It's activation is tantamount to the inevitable
exchange between milieus that follows from a disparity between potentials. Only by
means of an associated milieu can a system of individuation resolve its self-
incompatibility. 
After resolution, the system of individuation remains metastable, a notion that
was borrowed from thermodynamics too, remarkably not only by Simondon but also by
mathematician Norbert Wiener in his account of cybernetics (1965, pp. 58–59). The
notion of metastability depicts the state of a phase. It depicts the fact that a phase of
being is not stable, but rather charged with differences of potential that keep on exerting
their forces, not only on one another, but also on the phase's individual structures. In a
metastable state there's no disparity. In spite of the system being charged with
differences of potential, none is problematic enough to dephase it. In a metastable state
being is conserved within the limits of a phase. Such notion can be exemplified with a
standing posture: in order to stand on its two legs, the human body needs to constantly
modulate the distribution of forces exerted on it. In standing, the body keeps itself
within the limits of force holding it in such state. This corresponds to saying that, in
equilibrium, the standing body is far form being stable: it continuously mediates
differences of potentials belonging, for example, to earth's gravitational pull and to the
body's muscular activity.62 Any variation in the conditions of the metastable stand strong
enough to disrupt it suffices to inform the body into another state of resolution (a
62 In order to feel the metastability of any standing posture, one just needs to stand, close the eyes,
breath into any part of the body that feels tight, and let the weight fall down through the vertical
stacking of the bones. By doing this, one can easily feel the ongoing movement occurring at the level
of the hip joints, knees and ankles. In order for the body to stand, the muscles crossing these joints
can't stop moving. Notably, dancer and choreographer Steve Paxton has developed this exercise as a
dance practice, with the name of “Small Dance”. Similarly to what has just been described, the
“Small Dance” exercise consists in bringing one's attention to the ongoing adjustments of the body's
musculoskeletical system, while this keeps the distribution of energies throughout the body in a
standing balance (Paxton, 2008).
57

moving floor, such as in a bus, with all its variations in acceleration, is all is needed).
While standing, there is movement. In fact, this is one possible definition of
equilibrium: a state of relatedness in which a multiplicity of forces is kept under a
determinate threshold of transformation. In the case of the standing body the negotiating
forces can be located, for example, at the level its musculoskeletal system. And the
reason for this is that muscles work in antagonistic pairs: whenever one group of
muscles shortens (e.g. the hamstrings), another one stretches (e.g. the quadriceps).
There is, even at this level of muscular antagonism, a metastability between different
regions of the body (e.g. anterior and posterior, left and right, high and low). While
standing, the body remains charged with potentials that can bring it whenever required
into novel states of resolution. 
2.2 - Physical Paradigm
Following the developments of twentieth century's science, and more
specifically of thermodynamics, Simondon made of the concept of metastability a
central notion to his theory of individuation. For the author it mattered that the principle
of individuation guiding the passage from one metastability to another could account for
the developments of a system across domains as different as the physical, the vital, the
psychic, the social and the technical. While looking for the “first domain in which an
operation of individuation can exist”, Simondon found in physical individuation “a
[paradigmatic] case of the resolution of a metastable system”. From this case, it was
crystallization that came to provide the theory of individuation with an “abundant fund
of notions”. But granting physical individuation the status of paradigm in relation to
individuation in general, one that provides the necessary notions for thinking
individuation in domains other than the physical one, does not stand for reducing non-
physical individuations to the simplicity of crystallization. While progressing in the
knowledge of individuation, from a simple case to a more complex one, “the
transposition of the schema [of individuation] is in turn accompanied by a composition
of it”. Which means that, when passing from one structural domain to another, it is the
very operation of individuation that, while conforming to its paradigm, is composed and
therefore differentiated. Despite all individuations having the physical domain as their
fundamental ground, each domain still has its own proper dynamisms of individuation.
The differences between individuations are, therefore, to a great extent, the same
58

differences that can be found between domains. What differs from the paradigm of
individuation to the individuation of non-paradigmatic domains are the dynamisms that
unfold beyond the ones characteristic of the physical domain. A differentiation which is
grounded on what is most paradigmatic to individuation and which unfolds into the
concretization of more-than-physical expressions. In this sense, when individuating
more-than-physical domains, the paradigmatic schema of physical individuation is
further composed with aspects of different and more complex individuations.
(Simondon, 2005, p. 319).
The parameters of individuation that Simondon extracts from crystallization are
indicated by Thomas LaMarre as follows: “(1) remarkable points, that is, form or
structure of the individual; (2) the charged ground or potentialized associated milieu of
the individual that is at once external contrast and internal spacing; (3) the neutral point
of the event (absolute origin) of individuation that simultaneously sets off individuation
and arises in it; and (4) the field of preindividual being, which is the specific activation
associated with a specific neutral point, that is, the specific activation of a relation
between disparate orders of magnitude that 'potentializes' or 'energizes' the process of
individuation.” (2012, p. 40) And, as LaMarre also notes, in order to not take this
paradigm as a metaphor, but rather as a process analogous to the individuation of other
domains, “we need to look at the individual in terms of a sort of energized topological
configuration that has remarkable points, a charged ground (contrast and spacing), a
neutral point, and a plane of disparity crossing orders of magnitude” (Ibid., p. 40). With
such definition, and because of its centrality in Simondon's theory of individuation, it is
worth discussing each one of these parameters at length.
The associated milieu is distinguished from the preindividual due to a difference
existing between the former's internal spacing and external contrast and the latter's
potentials. It is plausible that the one does not correspond to the other insofar as internal
spacing and external contrast pertain to one same order of magnitude. In the case of
crystallization, the structure's associated milieu is the crystal's aqueous solution. As the
ground against which the crystal's structure is remarked, this solution surrounds and
pervades it. It is simultaneously external and internal to it, as long as their relation is
kept active. The crystal's remarkable structure is in this way contrasted against the
ordinary ground of its aqueous solution. Contrast is said to be external to the crystal
because it corresponds to differences between the structure's remarkable points and the
ordinary points of its associated milieu. By the same token, internal spacing does not
correspond to what is inside the crystal. Instead, it corresponds to the spatial relations
59

held between the crystal's remarkable points. The absence of contrast either defines the
crystal or its associated milieu. And when this absence defines the crystal, it defines as
well its internal spacing, that is, it defines the crystal's remarkable points relation to one
another. For these reasons, both internal spacing and external contrast can be said to
belong to one same order of magnitude. The associated milieu is therefore
distinguishable from the preindividual, which brings into relation different orders of
magnitude.
Further, crystallization depends neither only on the internal milieu nor only on
the external milieu. Rather, it depends on their affective relation. The very fact that
crystallization can only occur as long as the crystal's internal and external milieus are
kept communicating with one another attests precisely this. When taken out of its
solution, the crystal stops growing. When put back into it, it restarts its growth. What
matters then for individuation is the reciprocal affectiveness between internal spacing
and external contrast. Their exchange allows for the system to access its preindividual
reality and resolve itself into novel states. Again, the preindividual is distinguishable
from the associated milieu as what is activated when internal and external milieus
communicate with one another. 
In this guise, LaMarre (2012, p. 38) tells us that the preindividual is “a disparity
between orders of magnitude that is deeper than or prior to potentiality or potential
energy itself”. What does this mean? Here we are confronted with the problem of
understanding what exactly triggers individuation. As mentioned before, individuation
follows from an initial incompatibility between potentials belonging to different orders
of magnitude within one same system of individuation. But in order to understand why
the resulting individual acquires a specific form, i.e. this one and not that other, it is
important to account for the fact that the initial conditions of individuation necessarily
implicate developmental tendencies. While Simondon talks about a “seed of form”,
LaMarre talks about a “neutral point”. Both terms refer to structural tendencies
implicated in the initial conditions of individuation, from which result individual
expressions. It is by means of a structural seed that is nowhere to be found (which is
why it is a neutral point) that the resolutions of individuation express determinate
structural characteristics. 
When a crystal forms, for example, it follows the shape of the surfaces on which
it depends as structural support. In the case of supersaturated solutions, such as
supercooled water or sodium acetate, the potentials to individuate a determinate
60

structure are all there, latent in the solution itself. But in order for crystallization to
commence, the solution needs to become impure, to become disparate relatively to
itself. Crystallization follows from this disparity, forming structures that directly depend
on the formal tendencies implicated in the initial impurity. This does not mean that the
resulting crystals will necessarily be isomorphic to whatever form the impurity has.
Other variables, such as the concentration of salt and temperature, also enter in the
processual equation. Whatever results from this, from the process of individuation itself,
follows from the system's internal resonance and therefore from non-localized relations.
Which means that the shape of an individual does not result directly from a process's
seed of form. The relation between the two must rather be thought in accordance with
structural tendencies that the seed of form implicates in individuation itself.
Notwithstanding this non-localisable relation, what here matters is that potentiality is
not tantamount to preindividuality. The system can be charged with potentials, yet
without moving them into other states of metastability. For individuation to unfold, a
disparity between potentials needs to occur. The assertion that the preindividual is
“deeper than or prior to potentiality” (Simondon, 1995, p. 203) can be therefore
understood in the same way that disparity is deeper than the terms in relation. 
This is a depth that can be approached with regard to a process's initial location.
The fact that a difference between concentrations of salt belonging to different regions
of the individual's associated milieu can be infinitely divided in order to precise the
location of the seed of form or, in other words, the very beginning of process, means
that at the end of the infinitesimal division of space only a virtual image of what that
might be will be found.63 As such, the actual seed can only be accessed by an
imagination based on what is actually perceived. Difference remains inaccessible
throughout the infinitesimal regression of a negative dialectics (i.e. this is this because it
is different from that, and from that, and from that, and so on ad infinitum). The self-
coincidence of each actual form corresponds to a difference that is always external to it.
63 It is worth noting that, with this division, qualities are overridden in order to give place to the
absolute extension of actuality. A difference between concentrations might very well be understood as
a qualitative multiplicity, one that is continuous and that therefore cannot be divided. Nonetheless,
inasmuch as a process can be reduced to expressions, the qualitative relations hold between any terms
can be cast into the intervals of actual space, i.e. into the in-betweenness of ever smaller and
discontinuous parts. Hence, when dividing space according to a fundamental difference between
quantities and qualities, nothing but a virtual image is to be found beyond given forms: the image of
an origin. In this way, a crystal is defined exclusively in accordance with quantitative determinations
(concentration as a relation between quantities) and the qualitative dimension of relations is cast way
from any actuality whatsoever. The conception of a difference between potentials is as problematic as
the very split between the virtual and the actual, which is a split between quantities and qualities. For
more on this split see Section 1.1, in articulation with Sections 6.3 and 6.4.
61

This is a virtual difference. It is nowhere to be found in actuality. The “absolute origin”
of individuation, as Simondon (1969, pp. 40–43) calls it, is therefore the transcendental
difference located at the heart of process. Implicit, but imperceptible; generative, but
inaccessible. Fated to be known only by means of what is possible to imagine.
With regard to the difference between the neutral point and the absolute origin of
individuation, Thomas LaMarre writes the following: “We can think of the neutral point
in relation to the physical form of the crystal, as a given, while the absolute origin refers
to the eventfulness that is triggered by the neutral point, the activation of the field of
potential energy. The proximity of neutral point and absolute origin helps us to
understand how this neutral point functions: the relations triggered or activated by the
neutral point are relative, but the entire set of relations, potential and actual, are relative
to an absolute origin (an eventfulness), which allows for them to be operative as well as
measurable within a frame of reference, or more precisely, within a concerned relation.”
(2012, p. 37). As such, the event of initiation simultaneously generates individuating
structures and that which acts as their seed. Before its commencement, what will have in
fact initiated individuation cannot be known. And after its initiation, the origin of
process can only be idealized in abstraction. There is thus in each beginning of
individuation a concrete point—the seed of form—and an abstract point—the absolute
origin of individuation. From which it follows that individuation corresponds to a
passage from the formless to the formal, which simultaneously determines the seed of
form and its subsequent structures.
This passage depends on potentials. In spite of the possible split between the
virtual and the actual—so characteristic of topology, differential calculus and Leibniz's
theory of infinitesimals—, potentials belonging to different orders of magnitude do
enter in relation with one another. Only this allows for individuation to commence and
terminate. This is clearly explained by Simondon in the following passage: “There is a
'disparity' when two twin sets that cannot be entirely superimposed, such as the left
retinal image and the right retinal image, are grasped together as a system, allowing for
the formation of a single set of a higher degree which integrates their elements thanks to
a new dimension” (1995, p. 203). It is therefore the conjunction of what is disjunct and
not compatible in absolute that allows for the emergence of novel dimensions in the
overall development of a system of individuation. Only on the condition of this sort of
incompatibility can a system of potentials access its preindividual reality and
individuate what is not yet completely determined. In sum, the preindividual can be
distinguished from a system's potentials insofar as it corresponds to the activation of an
62

amplification in resonance.
From this standpoint, and confirming what has already been said, it can be
posited that the preindividual is activated only on the condition of a disparity between
potentials belonging to an individual's associated milieu. From such activation follows
the structuration of a new individual order. In regard to such order, what is most
important to retain is the fact that the novel structure is primarily defined as relation, i.e.
as being both the relation of its remarkable points to one another and the relation of the
structure to its ground. This definition of the individual as relation results in fact from
the system's internal resonance. For, as Simondon recalls, relation is “an aspect of the
internal resonance of a system of individuation” (2005, p. 29). The individual is not
determined relatively to an external world, such as an outside observer, but determined
relatively to itself. This aspect of the internal resonance of individuation can be best
understood together with the following passage of French philosopher Muriel Combes's
commentary on Simondon's theory of individuation: “Unless we grasp the importance
of its relation with an associated milieu, we do not understand what the reality of the
individual consists in: the individual, in effect, is not an absolute; by itself alone, it is an
incomplete reality, incapable of expressing the entirety of being; and yet it is not
illusory either, and, associated with a milieu of the same order of magnitude retaining
the preindividual, the individual acquires the consistency of a relation.” (2013, p. 21).
Being relative to itself, the individual consists with itself by reason of its difference to
itself. The difference between its remarkable points and its associated milieu assures the
individual's self-consistency. From which it follows that relation itself emerges with the
constitution of individuals. Relation shouldn't be conceived as what is established
between two preexisting individuals, but rather as what individuates with the
constitution of individuals as relation. Simondon adverts: “it is because terms are
conceived as substances that relation is a relationship between terms, and being is
separated into terms because it is conceived as substance, primitively, prior to any
examination of individuation.” (2005, p. 32). Hence, if individuation is granted to
encompass as many individuals as allowed by the plurality of a system of being,
individuals themselves must be conceived as relation. And how could it not be so, if
what defines an individual is the internal spacing and the external contrast of an
associated milieu?
63

2.3 - Transindividuation
When passing from the physical domain to the domain of living beings,
Simondon asserts one major difference: while the individuation of the physical being
happens “in one step, […] the living being conserves in itself an activity of permanent
individuation” (1992, p. 305). The reason for this lies precisely in what the living stands
for: an ongoing constitution of problems, from which follows the continuous emergence
of novel states of resolution. “[I]n order to exist, [the living being] needs to be able to
continue individualizing by resolving problems in the milieu surrounding it, which is its
milieu” (Ibid., p. 305).
In contrast to other systems, such as machines (which can also organize
compatibilities out of problematic relations), the living being stands out with yet another
specific characteristic: its internal resonance. Because its first individuation is further
amplified by the same field of resonance that emerges with it, the living being not only
solves problems by changing its relation to the environment but also by modifying its
own internal structure. It can thus be said, together with Simondon, that “[t]he living
individual is a system of individuation, an individuating system and also a system that
individuates itself.” (Ibid.). All these aspects express the continuous relation occurring
between its interiority and its exteriority, throughout an ongoing resolution of problems.
The multiple orders of magnitude that compose the living system keep communicating
with one another in order to solve problems that inevitably result from this same
communication. There is thus a constitutive loop-character to living systems: they are
capable of self-regulation as long as their multiple orders keep communicating with one
another, feeding-back and feeding-forward. In this way, the living system's internal and
external milieus endure in a permanent and reciprocal exchange of energies, which is
simultaneously the cause and effect of the system's self-resonance. For example: in
order to prolong its existence in time, a living body needs to mediate the communication
between the atmospheric order, which provides it with oxygen, and the metabolic order
of its cellular activity. A small variation in one of these orders (e.g. the lack of oxygen)
can generate a difference that is strong enough to energize transformations (e.g. cellular
death).64 As long as such disparity does not occur, breath can keep itself on a steady
64 Interestingly, the fact that breathing techniques enable a body to modulate differences of potential
between these two orders, indicates that one of the conditions of technical activity is precisely the
ongoing communication between different orders of magnitude (a topic to be discussed, together with
Simondon's conception of machines and technical life, at Section 2.5). Breathing techniques are used,
for example, in sports to enhance performance: the modulation of the muscular activity related with
breath is used to decrease energetic consumption and thus to optimize endurance and effortlessness.
64

pace. From which it follows that the dephasing of breath corresponds to the
individuation of a novel period in the cycles of respiration.
There are two distinct yet correlated aspects of an individuating system's
ongoing individualizations that are argued by Simondon to belong to the living system's
potentials: one is perception and the other is thought. While perceiving, the individual
resolves disparities that have become implicit in its associated milieu. Instead of this
being the case of a given subject grasping a given object, it rather corresponds to the
resolution of a problem in the relation of a living individual with its associated milieu.
As such, subjects and objects come to be, as the transient sense of an event of
perception. They are neither given nor giveable, and can only be considered from the
standpoint of the metastability that is inherent to any perception whatsoever.
(Simondon, 2006a). In addition, “[e]ach thought, each conceptual discovery, each surge
of affection reprises the first individuation; thought develops as a reprise of this schema
of the first individuation, of which it is a distant rebirth, partial but faithful” (Simondon,
2005, p. 264). As a reprise of individuation, thought is usually designated in the theory
of individuation as “psychic individuation”. But it is Simondon himself who adverts that
the individuation of thought in a living system is “not properly [...] a psychic
individuation”; instead, it is “an individualization of the living being that gives birth to
the somatic and the psychic” (Ibid., p. 268). 
These two domains, the psychic and the somatic, are here said to result from a
series of correlated individuations, rather than pertaining to an irreducible
psychosomatic unity. Which is by no means a “body-mind” Cartesian duality. The
reason why Simondon doesn't understand the psychosomatic individual as a seamless
unity should rather be understood in terms of the rhythm of individuation that occurs in
a heterogeneous field of potentials. Such rhythm follows from the conjunction of
disjunctive series (psychic and somatic) in the system's overall development. There is an
affective correlation between series that punctuates their differences and creates a
singular psychosomatic nexus. Rhythm is key for understanding the differences between
nexus and unity. When capturing one another, the series intensify their correlative
differences and pose problems for the system to cancel. But since the system continues
to individuate, because it is alive, these series can continue to affect one another and to
intensify their differences. The result is a psycho-somatic rhythm of problematization
Another example are breathing techniques used in yogic traditions (i.e. pranayama): they also effect
changes at the level of cellular metabolism, to the point of being used by apnea divers to lower the
body's consumption of oxygen and prolong the duration of aquatic submersion.
65

and resolution that, inasmuch as it results from the remarked correlation of one same set
of series, has a proper nexus.65 Hence, the psychosomatic nexus, instead of being a
homogeneous unity, as it tends to be considered by some holistic approaches, or what
results from a relation between distinct systems, as proponents of the body-mind duality
such as Andy Clark (1998) would have it, is to be thought as a heterogeneous field that,
even after individuation, does not cease to be plural and differentiated. In each living
system there is a characteristic nexus composed by disparate series of somatic and
psychic resolutions that, while intensifying their difference by means of a reciprocal
affectivity, structure the individual across different levels of psychosomatic resonance.66 
The degree of psychosomatic structuration depends on the heterogeneity of
forces and forms constitutive of the living being. As Simondon says, “the problem [for
the psychosomatic individual] is that of the heterogeneity between perceptual worlds
and the affective world, between the individual and the preindividual”. In a sense, the
living being is defined by relating a problematic of perception with a problematic of
affection. Whereas the former is resolved at the somatic level, creating compatibilities
between the individual and the milieu of its perception, the latter is resolved at the
psychic level, creating compatibilities of the individual with itself. Notwithstanding the
imbrication of the two domains, it is via the affective problematic that the living
individual accesses its preindividual share and becomes incompatible with itself. The
resolution of the affective self-incompatibility corresponds to the psychic individuation
of a subject with a proper metastability. As Simondon says, “the subject is individual
and more-than-individual; it is incompatible with itself”. (2005, p. 253).
If the resonance of the living system in relation to itself, its self-affectivity,
brings into communication its individuated reality with its preindividual share, then it is
by means of this same communication that perception can put the individual in relation
to its milieu. This is a fundamental condition for the living individual to solve its self-
incompatibility, for it cannot cancel its problems only by own its means. It needs to find
in its associated milieu the resources required for such resolution. For Simondon, this
incapacity of the living individual to deal by itself with its own problems corresponds to
a state of anxiety: “If the individual being puts itself, but nothing else, into question,
then it will not be able to move beyond the limits of anxiety, for anxiety is a process
without action, a permanent emotion that does not succeed in resolving affectivity, a
65 It is worth noting that, later on this study, choreography will also be discussed according to this
definition of nexus. See Section 3.1.
66 The upshot of this being that what distinguishes man from animal is not a difference in nature but a
difference in degree of structuration (Simondon, 2005, p.272). 
66

challenge in which the individuated being explores the dimensions of its being without
being able to progress beyond them.” From which it follows that the conditions of
psychic individuation, whereby the individual resolves its self-incompatibility,
necessarily comprise potentials other than those of the system in tension. The conditions
of psychic individuation coincide with the conditions of what Simondon calls
“collective individuation”. This corresponds to saying that the resolution of the living
individual cannot take place without the plural dimension of its affective-perceptive
nexus, i.e. without the fact that, in order to individuate thought, a living individual must
enter in relation with other individuals. As such, psychic individuation is necessarily
accompanied by the individuation of a collective, that is, by the constitution of a field of
relations comprising different individuals.
The affective problematic can thus be seen as a tendency in the living individual
towards participating in collective individuations. And inasmuch as the collective is a
fundamental condition for the individuation of psychic resolutions, both individuations,
the psychic and the collective, cannot be accounted for but in relation to one another.
Precisely because of their inextricable relation, the affective-perceptive field of a living
system should be understood as belonging to one overall psychic-collective
individuation. This overall character of the living is explained by Simondon in the
following way: “the psyche is composed of successive individuations, which allow the
being to resolve its problematic states by effectuating permanent communications
between that which is larger than it and that which is smaller than it” (1992, p. 310). In
a sense, this posits that the external milieu of the psychic individual cannot be but a
collective of other psychic individuals with which the former communicates and co-
individuates. Similarly, in the individuation of the living in general, any individual is the
intermediate process of an ongoing communication between individuals belonging to
orders of magnitude that are larger and smaller than it. 
It follows that psychic individuation corresponds to the collective structuration
of an individuals' affective potentials. The constitution of the collective occurs via the
same shares of preindividual reality that affect subjects to the point of self-
incompatibility. Conversely, all the subjects of collective individuation individuate from
the same preindividual reality underpinning the emergence of the collective to which
they belong. The relation between the subjects of psychic individuation and the
collective that together they form is therefore not a relation between pre-constituted
subjects, but a relation that is the collective itself. As Simondon clarifies, since relation
is “a reciprocal regime of exchanges of information and of causality in a system that
67

individuates”, it is not the relation between individuals that constitutes the collective but
rather the “individuation of the collective that is relation between individuated beings”
(2005, p. 313). Relation, as event, does not precede the collective. Instead, it coincides
with its very individuation. It emerges in the individuating system together with the
terms that will end up relating. Neither relation nor its terms precede one another. And
neither the one nor the others anticipate the individuation that constitutes them. 
 The co-constitution of different subjects belonging to one same collective attests
the inextricable character of the occurrent psychic and collective individuations. To this
co-emergence of the “systematic unity of internal individuation (psychic) and external
individuation (collective)”, Simondon calls “transindividuation” (1992, p. 307). The
notion of the collective in transindividuation shouldn't be confused with the notion of
community. The collective is not the social realm in which the subject is “grasped as a
character by way of the functional representation that others make of it” (2005, pp. 279–
280). It is rather what comes to constitution by means of what is not yet constituted, i.e.
the preindividual. In transindividuation, neither already formed individuals nor social
entities suffice to allow for the emergence of the collective. The collective is what
“comes into existence when the forces of the future harboured within a number of living
individuals lead to a collective structuration” (Ibid., p. 298). Collective individuation
requires more than individuals and social connections, it requires the preindividual that
they all share. The collective thus corresponds to the transindividual resolution lived by
a multiplicity of co-individuating subjects. It “is real insofar as it is a stable relational
operation; it exists physikos and not logikos” (Ibid., p. 314). 
 As with the physical individual, after having individuated, the living individual
keeps with itself the potentials that first allowed for its structuration. There is a process
that goes from the individuation of the physical domain to the individuation of the vital
domain and further into transindividuation, all by means of the potentials that each
individual conserves with itself after cancelling an initial difference. Accordingly, there
is for Simondon an individuation of the universe that comprises in its different phases
its multiple manifestations. In transindividuation, the animal and the human, the
individual and the collective, rather than being different in nature, are conceived as
different phases of one same big system of individuation. The human, “having available
more extended psychic possibilities, in particular due to the resources of symbolism,
more frequently calls on psyche [...]”. Conversely, “[...] the vital situation is exceptional
in the human, and thus humans feel more destitute. But it is not a matter of a nature, an
essence serving to found an anthropology; it is simply that a threshold is crossed”.
68

(2005, p. 165). The same goes for the history of technics, in regard to which the
philosopher identifies different phases of development: the phase “anterior to the use of
the tool and the instrument”; the phase “of the tool, the instrument”; the phase “of the
machine-tool and the machine”; and the phase of “reticulation” (2006b, p. 104).67 All
these different phases of one same system of individuation result from its progressive
structuration across domains. From which it follows that the domains of
transindividuation cannot be considered separately from one another. As Simondon
notes, there is a “persistence of the primitive and original phase of being in the second
phase, and this persistence implies a tendency toward a third phase, which is that of the
collective” (2005, p. 305). All domains, as phases of one overall individuation, share
this primitive and original phase, which is the very field of their immanent and
continuous relationship. 
“To the collective understood as an axiomatic that resolves the psychic
problematic corresponds the notion of the transindividual”, tells us Simondon (1992, p.
310). If seen from the perspective of the collective, the transindividual is objective. If
seen from the perspective of its individuals, the transindividual is subjective. When
discussing these two different perspectives, Muriel Combes elaborates the following
commentary: “We will thus speak of subjective transindividual when our aim is to
clarify how the elaboration of psychic individuality is transindividual, that is, how an
individual cannot psychically consist in itself. Indeed it is apparent that what gives
consistency to individual psychic life is found neither inside the individual nor outside
it, but in what surpasses it while accompanying it, that is, the share of preindividual
reality it cannot resolve in itself. Thus, while it is the condition for the collective in the
subject (by constituting [...] the basis for objective transindividual), it is also the
foundation for psychological individuality: it is impossible to stress this point enough,
that it is not relation to self that comes first and makes the collective possible, but
relation to what, in the self, surpasses the individual, communicating without mediation
with a nonindividual share in the other.68 What gives consistency to relation to self, what
gives consistency to the psychological dimension of the individual, is something in the
individual surpassing the individual, turning it toward the collective; what is real in the
psychological is transindividual. To propose a distinction between subjective and
objective transindividual is ultimately to make clear that transindividuality illuminates
67 The technical aspect of transindividuation will be discussed in Section 2.5. 
68 Which is also why the individual “begins to participate [in the individuation of a collective] by
association within itself before any manifest presence of some other individuated reality” (Simondon,
2005, p. 304). 
69

not only the nature of the collective as reality in becoming, but also the nature of
psychic individuality.” (2013, pp. 40–41).
In the collective milieu of psychic individuation, the transindividual is the
antithesis to a deficiency that can only be supplemented with prosthetic extensions and
amplifications.69 The constitutive incompleteness of individuals does not correspond to
a negative lack, but rather to the creative potentials of the transindividual in them.
“Together, all individuals thus have a sort of unstructured ground from which new
individuation may be produced” (Simondon, 2005, p. 313). Which is to say that the
unity of the transindividual is that of being a relation between relations.
2.4 - Analogical Knowledge
The determination of a subjective standpoint in the constitution of the
transindividual corresponds to the constitution of a determinate instance of knowledge.
For Simondon, there is a most important aspect to this process. In his words: “[t]he
individuation of the reality that is exterior to the subject is grasped by the subject using
the analogical individuation of knowledge within the subject; but it is through the
individuation of knowledge, and not through knowledge alone, that the individuation of
non-subject beings is grasped. Beings may be known by the subject’s knowledge, but
the individuation of beings can only be grasped by the individuation of the subject’s
knowledge.” (2009, p. 13). There is a knowledge that pertains to the structures of being
and an individuation of knowledge that individuates with the known individuation. If
Simondon's postulate that individuals are to be understood “from the perspective of the
process of individuation rather than the process of individuation [understood] by means
of the individual” (1992, p. 300) is to be taken seriously, then any knowledge regarding
non-subjects depends on the individuation of knowledge itself. Furthermore, insofar as
69 That the human is constitutively deficient and that it depends on technical individuation to
supplement this originary lack is a premise that has guided French philosopher Bernard Stiegler in his
theoretical project “Technics and Time” (1998). Since Stiegler's philosophy is much influenced by
Simondon's theory of individuation, it is here worth noting that, notwithstanding this influence,
Stiegler has been pointed to misread Simondon and to not account for the creative capacities of the
transindividual. This critique is, for example, addressed to Stiegler by Combes in the following way:
“While he thoroughly stigmatizes those who 'do not accept that […] humans are prosthetic beings',
Stiegler does not seem to countenance the possibility that humans share more than default or lack. Yet
such a possibility seems to me to be the lesson to draw from Simondon's hypothesis on the existence
of preindividual potential associated with individuals, on their common belonging to an ontological
dimension preceding them; and nothing in it forces us to conceive of preindividual as technological.
If human individuals should not be conceived on the basis of fixed bioanthropological nature, I do not
see why they should be conceived on the basis of original defect that we then take pains to call
originary in entirely metaphysical nostalgia for foundations.” (2013, p. 69).
70

the individuation of knowledge depends on the constitution of a transindividual order,
knowledge cannot but result from the relation between two distinct individuations: the
one of the subject and the one of the object. Hence, as Simondon puts it, “[i]t is neither
immediate nor mediate knowledge that we can have of individuation, but a knowledge
that is an operation that runs parallel to the known operation. We cannot, in the common
understanding of the term, know individuation, we can only individuate, individuate
ourselves, and individuate within ourselves.” (2009, p. 13). Knowledge is a relation
between two operations, of the analogical kind.
Whereas the knowledge of structures follows a method of “structural analogy”,
which is guided by a principle of identity between individuals, the knowledge of
processes follows an “operational analogy”, which is guided by a “transfer [to the
knowing subject] of an operation that reproduces the operative schema of the being
known” (2005, pp. 562–563). As such, the knowledge of individuation is itself a
processual knowledge. In transferring the operative schema of the being known to the
individuation of the knowing subject, thought individuates subjectively in analogy to
the objective individuation. This happens not by following the individuation of what is
grasped in a deterministic kind of way, but rather by resolving the self-incompatibility
of the system of being on the basis of what exceeds the subject's individuation, that is,
on the basis of the individuation of non-subject beings. It is in individuations other than
its own that the knowing subject finds the necessary conditions for its own structuration.
The operational analogy of knowledge distributes across the multiplicity of processes in
transindividuation one same operative schema, from which result both the subjective
and the objective perspectives of the transindividual, as two poles of one same
epistemological relation. 
This analogical character of knowledge in Simondon's philosophy is the
condition upon which a paradigm of individuation can be found. The knowledge of
crystallization, while individuating in a domain different from the physical one, only has
a significant epistemological value insofar as it corresponds to the manifest instance of a
relation between processes. As a relation between objects and subjects, knowledge is
neither the condition of projection, i.e. imagination, nor the condition of retrospection,
i.e. memory. In Simondon's words, it “is neither a priori nor a posteriori but a
praesenti, because it is an informative and interactive communication between that
which is larger than the individual and that which is smaller than the individual.” (2009,
p. 15). Since it is characteristically processual and transindividual, “defined by the
operation that constitutes it more than by the reality it objectively aims for” (Ibid, p.
71

554), knowledge is said to result from “an initial tropistic or taxonomic unity, a pairing
of sensation and tropism, an orientation of the living being in a polarized world” (Ibid.,
p. 4). As such, it is not something that occurs inside an individual. The very notion of
transindividual invalidates any idealistic conception of representation positing that the
external world is reproduced, or even reproducible, by an individual's thought. This is a
notion similar to the ones of embeddedness and embodiment, as these were developed
by theories that strived both to put aside the Cartesian split between idealism and
materialism and to reconsider the co-implication of individuals and environment in the
constitution of knowledge (Maturana, 1975; Varela et al., 1992; Johnson, 1987, 2012;
Clark, 1998, 2008; Noë, 2004; Gallagher, 2005). And here too, in Simondon's theory of
individuation, this co-implication is a fundamental condition for the constitution of
knowledge. The polar forces that pervade an individual because of its embeddedness in
an associated milieu are the ground on which both problems and resolutions can occur,
providing therefore the system of individuation with the capacity to generate novel
states of relation. Be it from the perspective of perception or from the perspective of
thought, these novel states of relation correspond to determinate orientations of the
individual in its milieu. They correspond to the tendencies that the relation between the
two generates within the mediation of what is both larger and smaller than the
individual.
In regard to the concepts of the understanding, this orientation is an axiomatics.
It is the epistemological value of the transindividual. Simondon tells us: “If knowledge
rediscovers the lines that allow for interpreting the world according to stable laws, it is
not because there exist in the subject a priori forms of sensibility, whose coherence with
brute facts coming from the world would be inexplicable; it is because being as subject
and being as object arise from the same primitive reality, and the thought that now
appears to institute an inexplicable relation between object and subject in fact prolongs
this initial individuation; the conditions of possibility of knowledge are in fact the
causes of existence of the individuated being” (2005, p. 264). In a system of
individuation, the relation between being and knowledge is that of a double becoming.
Since the ground of knowledge coincides with the conditions of individuation, the
transindividual necessarily coincides with the axioms of the epistemological relation
between subjects and objects. The transindividual and its knowledge co-emerge. They
are inextricable from one another because they result from the ingression of the
preindividual that they share into the transindividual coordination of subjective and
objective correspondences. It is in the ground of the transindividual relation that
72

knowledge finds its own validity. Or, in other words, the resolution of a problem of self-
incompatibility in the system of being finds its emergent sense in the latter's tropisms
relatively to the charged ground of its associated milieu. Any instance of knowledge is
therefore most valid when with regard to the inextricable relation between individual
and milieu from which it stems and to which it belongs. Valid knowledge must be
situated.
Muriel Combes emphasizes this contextual aspect of knowledge in a very clear
way: “Like all real being, like any fragment of the real that is individuated, thought is
rooted in a milieu, which constitutes its historical dimension; thoughts are not
ahistorical, not stars in the heaven of ideas. They emerge from a theoretical
environment, drawing the seeds of their development from it; but of course, not
everything is a seed for thought, and all thought entails operative selection within the
theoretical milieu of the era in which it is immersed. Taking on structure through its
selective inscription in an era, thought gradually resolves its problems, and in resolving
them, justifies itself.” (2013, p. 12). It follows that there is no reality outside of the
individual to be learnt in a sort of reproductive manner. Instead, knowledge emerges
with the individuation of being, with the resolution of the same problems that
fundamentally condition individuation. It finds in the problematic conditions of
individuation the ground of its own structuration, that is, the fundament of its own
determination as a determinate standpoint in regard to the reality of relations. Since it
does not exist before its own individuation, real thought is not something given. It
requires the composite constitution of a transindividual reality.
The transindividual constitution of knowledge corresponds neither to induction
nor to deduction. Both methods follow from the assumption that what is known is
identical to itself. Both assume that individuation can only be understood after the
knowledge of individuals. They do no more than relating self-identical and
discontinuous images to one another, creating lines of causality at the cost of
overlooking the immanent field of undetermined potentials that pervades all actuality.
For Simondon, in both methods “[t]here is, therefore, the presupposition of the
existence of a temporal succession: first there is the principle of individuation, then this
principle undertakes an operation of individuation, and finally the constituted individual
appears. If, on the contrary, one supposes that individuation does not only produce the
individual, one would not attempt to pass quickly through the stage of individuation in
order to arrive at the final reality that is the individual – one would attempt to grasp the
ontogenesis in the entire progression of its reality, and to know the individual through
73

the individuation, rather than the individuation through the individual.” (Simondon,
2009, p. 5). The entirety of process must be acknowledged and accounted for. For if an
individual is never only a structure, coincident with itself, but also the contrasting
ground of its associated milieu, then the intricate relation between sameness and
difference needs too to be accounted for in what regards the constitution of knowledge.
The point is that the conditional problems of individuation can only appear at the level
of this relation, that is, at the level at which the individual's excess over itself marks not
only its self-coincidence but also its self-differentiation. Only by taking into
consideration this relationship between identity and difference, between structure and
milieu, can individuation be properly understood. Likewise, knowledge needs to be
approached in accordance with the dynamisms of affect between what is both different
and identical to itself in the process of its own individuation.
There is therefore a differential topology of individuation that needs to be given
primacy over its conditions and resolutions, i.e. over the different states to be connected
in retrospective after the individuation of knowledge. Instead of knowledge being
understood as a determinate state of affairs, resolved in itself and only capable of
proceeding by means of comparison, it should be understood as a transfer of potentials
between domains. In contrast to both induction and deduction, of which comparison is
the veritable operation, Simondon designates this transfer as “transduction”: the process
whereby the individuation of the being known acts as a functional and structural source
for the individuation of the knowing subject. For Simondon, transduction “denotes a
process – be it physical, biological, mental or social – in which an activity gradually sets
itself in motion, propagating within a given domain, by basing this propagation on a
structuration carried out in different zones of the domain: each region of the constituted
structure serves as a constituting principle for the following one, so much so that a
modification progressively extends itself at the same time as this structuring operation.
[...] The transductive operation is an individuation in progress; it can physically occur
most simply in the form of progressive iteration. However, in more complex domains,
such as the domains of vital metastability or psychic problematics, it can move forward
with a constantly variable step, and expand in a heterogeneous field.” (1995, pp. 30–31).
In the domain of knowledge, transduction corresponds to the formation of
correlated subjects and objects. By transferring principles of individuation from one
domain to the next, transduction facilitates the operational analogy of knowledge. It
distributes across domains the excessive resources from where the constitution of
knowledge draws its emergent axiomatics. According to Simondon, the fact that
74

transduction is used “to understand a domain of reality, indicates that this domain is
indeed the location of a transductive structuration” (1992, pp. 313–314). In fact, only
because the individuation of being unfolds through a progressive structuration of
potentials, can knowledge receive from this same individuation the principles necessary
for its own constitution. “Logically”, concludes Simondon, transductive knowledge
“can be used as the foundation of a new species of analogical paradigms so as to enable
us to pass from physical individuation to organic individuation, from organic
individuation to psychic individuation, and from psychic individuation to the subjective
and objective level of the transindividual [...]” (Ibid., pp. 311–314). 
From this standpoint, the analogical character of knowledge can be better
understood. To say that knowledge is a relation between two operations corresponds to
saying that it results from a principle of individuation transferred across domains.
Rather than being a comparison between processes, knowledge derives from a co-
individuation of perspectives that, instead of following from given terms, transfers
across domains one same field of problematic potentials. Whereas deduction and
induction facilitate the comparative relation between self-coincident terms, transduction
integrates in the progressive structuration of potentials the initial problems from which
it follows. It both transfers information from one domain to the next and conserves its
active principles so as to allow for different domains to be known accordingly. The
processual analogy of knowledge fundamentally depends on the operation of
transduction. 
In order to account for the fact that knowledge individuates with the
individuation of the being known and that, as such, it depends on the fundamental
conditions of transindividuation, Simondon engendered the concept of the
“allagmatic”70. In itself a theory of knowledge, the allagmatic strives to account for
constitutive differences in the relationship between structures and processes. It is based
on the speculation that transduction transfers information not only across domains but,
primarily, across states of structural organization. The neutral point of individuation
necessarily occurs together with the seed of form and therefore with structures of
remarkable points. From which it follows that the individuation of knowledge depends
on transfers of energy between the given and the emergent, i.e. between the initial
conditions of individuation and what emerges from them. The allagmatic refers to this
70 The Greek root of this term is allagma, which can mean either change or vicissitude. But in
Simondon's use of it, allagma is more correctly understood as that which can be given or taken in
exchange.
75

conversion of structures into processes and of processes into structures. It refers to the
primacy of relation in process, which regards the inextricable affectivity between the
determinate and the undetermined. The mutual convertibility between structures and
operations that the allagmatic proposes regards the transfer of information in dephasing:
from one phase to the next the system operates its potentials for resolution, enhancing
the power of undetermined potentials over determinate structures (structure-operation
conversion) and resolving co-related problems with the structuration of potentials
(operation-structure conversion). For this reason, Simondon tells us that the allagmatic
is “prior to any distinction or opposition between operation and structure” (1992, p. 29).
Because it is mostly concerned with “the rigorous and valid relation between structural
knowledge and operative knowledge” (2005, p. 565), it strives for encompassing the
whole of individuation, that is, for encompassing both analytical perspectives, which
reduce the whole to parts, and analogical ones, which equate the whole with structural
change. The pertinence of the allagmatic derives therefore from the fact that neither
structural knowledge nor operational knowledge suffice to know the whole of being.
Only their relation, which is an individuation in itself, can provide the necessary
insights into the immanent principle of relation between structures and operations,
which is the very unity of being.
2.5 - Networks
When considering the relation between humans and machines and the possibility
of technogenesis, one of the first questions that comes to mind is: how should the
associated milieu of machines be understood? In other words, if a technical system is to
be granted the capacity of changing, how is it that the potentials of individuation are
related to technical individuals, such as machines and larger technical ensembles? How
is the becoming of technical individuals to be understood if, in any case, it is arguable
that technics are a mere result of humans' cognitive life? In order to address these
questions, the notion of machine in Simondon's theory of individuation must be first
addressed. 
As Simondon (1969) recalls, machines need to be invented. From an abstract
diagram to a concrete network of technical objects, invention proceeds as heuristic
experimentation: probing the concrete attributes and capacities of matter, it adjusts the
initial abstraction to the machine's best possible functioning. In this passage from
76

abstraction to expression, what emerges with invention is both a technical individual
and its associated milieu. Whereas the abstraction of the machine lacks concreteness
and therefore possesses no associated milieu, the concrete machine individuates
together with its own internal and external milieus. Technical individuation thus opens
the internal character of pure abstraction to the indetermination of potentials belonging
to the machine's associated milieu. Simondon approaches the machine's internal milieu
in terms of its “recurrent causality” (Ibid., p. 53). When being invented, the machine
becomes progressively concrete and, in this way, determined. With such progression, a
set of possibilities is formed and limited by the actual affordances of the elements in the
composition. If subtracting possibilities corresponds to building one particular machine,
the resulting affordances relate its elements to one another according to an equally
particular mode of recurrence. In short, the machine recurs in the possibility of its own
functioning. On its turn, the external milieu of the machine corresponds to what
Simondon calls a “technogeographical milieu” (Ibid., p. 48). Only by being open to
what is different from itself can the machine exchange information and be in relation
with, most notably, other machines. In this case, and because each machine has its own
internal milieu, the associated milieu is that which connects an internal spacing of
recurrent causality to an external contrast of recurrent causality. It is by exchanging
information between internal and external milieus that machines can assure their
metastability. The machinic character of technical individuals assures a dependence
between the recurrent causalities of different milieus. This dependency attests that
variations in the recurrence of internal milieus necessarily induce changes in the
recurrence of external milieus, if granted that machines are to be kept in form. This is a
metastable self-regulation that brings machines closer to living beings than to physical
ones, for what results from it is their very capacity to process information.
Simondon also defines the machine as that “which carries tools and directs
them” (1969, p. 78). For the author, there are “simple, passive machines”, such as “the
handle”, defined by being capable of transforming movement; there are “machine-tools”
or “active machines”, which are “semi-autonomous”, that is, “autonomous for their
energy and heteronomous for information”; and finally there are “reflexive and
informational machines”, defined by being “autonomous for both alimentation and
information during its functioning, with information being delivered as a ground before
the functioning”. (2006, pp. 97–98). And in regard to the latter, he establishes an
important distinction between the automaton of cybernetics and that which he calls the
open machine: “The notion of a perfect automaton conceals a contradiction: the
77

automaton would be a machine so perfect that the margin of indetermination in its
functioning would be non-existent, while it would still be able to receive, interpret, or
send out information” (1969, p. 140). Being that, for Simondon, information is the
process whereby an incompatibility between potentials is resolved, the inherent
contradiction of the automaton lies precisely in the fact that its closure doesn't allow for
the indetermination of the potentials in information. Being closed in itself, the pure
automaton is incapable of accessing its preindividual reality and cannot therefore
transform and resolve its own disparities. For this reason, Simondon proffers that “there
is no such thing as a robot” (1969, p.10).
On the contrary, he says, it is “by the medium of this margin of indetermination,
and not by automatisms, that machines can be grouped into coherent ensembles so as to
exchange information with each other through the intermediacy of the human interpreter
as coordinator. Even when the exchange of information between two machines is direct
(such as between a pilot oscillator and another oscillator synchronized by impulses),
man intervenes as the being who regulates the margin of indetermination so as to make
it adaptable to the greatest possible exchange of information” (Ibid., p. 12). The
machine's undetermined openness is what allows for it to partake larger “technical
ensembles”. These ensembles, tells us Thomas Lamarre, comprise “specific human
assemblages, technical individuals or machines, technical elements, resources, and
milieus” (2012, p. 48), and correspond to the machine's associated milieu. The
machine's margin of indetermination not only corresponds to potentials that in the first
place allowed for its individuation, but also to the means by which the machine accesses
what in itself is undetermined and opens it to the informational exchange with other
machines (provided that the margin of indetermination is regulated). 
Remarkably, Simondon gives us a telling example of the position of man
amongst technical ensembles, drawn from the collective performance of a musical
score: “Far from being the supervisor of a squad of slaves, man is the permanent
organizer of a society of technical objects which need him as much as musicians in an
orchestra need a conductor. The conductor can direct his musicians only because, like
them, and with a similar intensity, he can interpret the piece of music performed; he
determines the tempo of their performance, but as he does so, his interpretative
decisions are affected by the actual performance of the musicians; in fact, it is through
him that the members of the orchestra affect each other's interpretation; for each of them
he is the real, inspiring form of the group's existence as group; he is the central focus of
interpretation of all of them in relation to each other. This is how man functions as
78

permanent inventor and coordinator of the machines around him.” (1969, pp. 11–12).
This description is somewhat close to examples given by theories of distributed
cognition, such as the one proffered by Edwin Hutchins (1995a), which focus on the
interaction between the external and internal structures of representation. “Distributed
cognition allows the examination of the role of the material media in which
representations are embodied, and the physical processes that propagate representations
across media” (Hutchins, 1995b, p. 226). It emphasizes the fact that cognizing processes
are not exclusive of any single, isolated agent, but rather occur across the interiority of
human agents and the exteriority of media. A paradigmatic example of distributed
cognition is the way in which an airplane's cockpit remembers its speeds: the cockpit
performs this task via a system of memory comprising both humans and machines (i.e.
pilots, co-pilots, air controllers, satellites, on-board and on-ground computers); no
single part of the system is sufficient for retaining and further remembering the
airplane's speed. Like with Simondon's example of the orchestra, here, the human
coordination of technical objects and machines assures that information is intensive
enough to prompt the technical system into a state of metastability.
Between the machine's self-regulation and the regulation of information's margin
of indetermination there's no contradiction whatsoever. While inventing the machine,
man regulates the margin of indetermination necessary for its proper functioning.
Without this regulation, the individuating being would become a physical individual, a
natural object or a tool, rather than a machine. A machine-like functioning effectuates its
informational and networking capacities, which are simultaneously the cause and the
effect of its self-regulation. With this, it must be acknowledged that the intrinsic
normativity of the machine's self-regulation is not given. Rather, it emerges with the
machine itself. For this to accord with the technical system of individuation, it must also
be granted that there is a preindividual of norms from which the machine's self-
regulation acquires its own normativity. The technical system individuates norms, for it
is by them that its individuals are provided with an associated milieu, i.e. with the
technical networks that they partake. Together with the individuation of norms,
potentials for further normativity are restructured and constituted as the associated
milieu of norms. After the disparity of its normative potentials, the technical being can
access the preindividual of norms and resolve itself into a new state of self-regulation,
with its proper normativity. The upshot of this emergent self-regulation is that not only
can machines be transformed because of partaking technical ensembles, but also the
latter can transform as a whole. In this sense, the normativity granted to technical
79

ensembles is not a fundamental characteristic to them. What is most fundamental to the
technical system are instead the conditions of emergence from which norms individuate.
Such conditions are primary in regard to individuated norms, which are but an
expression of those same conditions. This stands for the case that the technical
individual is more-than-individual, i.e. that it is excessive in relation to itself. The very
fact that the technical individual can only emerge out of already existing networks
attests its incompleteness and specifies that its excess regards the technical network
itself.
It follows that the technical preindividual can only become active by means of
networking. At whatever scale of technical systems, reticulation is what allows them to
become incompatible with themselves and resolve into novel phases. Networks are in
this sense opposed to the kind of hylomorphism that determines the formality of tools.
For, as Simondon says, “we cannot change networks or construct a network ourselves,
[as we do with tools, but only] join up with the network, adapt to it, participate in it”
(1969, p. 221). In short, we can only be an element in the life of technical ensembles.
But it is by means of information that networks are established. Only the self-
incompatibility of a technical system assures necessary conditions of its own internal
resonance. Networks are informed, but they are also the very condition of informational
exchange and resolution. The reticular character of technical systems allows for the
propagation of information, which is the very means by which networks become
topographically determined. In this sense, says Muriel Combes, “[r]eticularity [...] takes
us from a normative horizon to a horizon of amplification of action” (2013, p. 66).
Which means that networks constitute the very condition for information to be
transferred and amplified, without normative predetermination. 
Precisely because of this, networks can be seen as the ground of an ethics. For
Simondon, ethics does not pertain to any model of norms imposed on the networkability
of individuals. Rather, it corresponds to the technical act's capacity to transfer and
amplify itself across networks. As the author says, “[e]thical reality is indeed structured
in a network, that is, acts take on resonance in relation to one another […] within the
system they form, which is becoming of being” (2005, p. 333). Since the individuating
system's internal resonance is the conditional network of technical transfers and
amplifications, it is as well the very condition of an ethical relation between different
acts of resolution. Further, it is what results from this same relation. Ethics, as an
individuating resonance that goes “from one act to others in the same way that one may
go from yellow-green to green and to yellow through augmentation in the amplitude of
80

the band of frequencies” (1995, p. 245), depends therefore upon the network's
materiality. The value of an ethical act is given by the amplitude of its effects in a
network of informational exchanges.
Reticularity is a mode of being that, in its collective plurality, individuates
technical individuals and their associated milieus. Simondon designates such mode as
“technicity”, which he defines in the following manner: “a mode of being only able to
fully and permanently exist as a temporal, as well as spatial, network. Temporal
reticulation consists of resumptions of the object in which it is reactualized, renovated,
repeated under the very conditions of its initial fabrication. Spatial reticulation consists
in the fact that technicity cannot be contained in a single object. An object is only
technical if it occurs in relation with other objects, in a network where it takes on the
meaning of a keypoint; in itself and as an object, it only possesses virtual characters of
technicity which actualize themselves in active relation to the ensemble of a system”
(Simondon, 1958, p. 325). The technicity of a technical ensemble is not reducible to the
sum of its parts, but rather found in the networks formed by them. Here again, the
paradigmatic principle of individuation is guiding: technics individuate from a
preindividual reality that becomes structured without being exhausted. From it, further
technical individuations can occur. Reticularity is thus tantamount to the technicity of
the technical system, for it is what allows its elements to become disparate with
themselves and access the preindividual charge necessary for the individuation of novel
states.
The emergence of a technical individual thus necessarily corresponds to the co-
emergence of a technical network, which is its associated milieu. From a conditional
network to an emergent one, information is transferred and amplified by means of
transduction—the characteristic operation of Simondon's theory of individuation.
Transduction acts in all domains of individuation and, for this reason, it allows for
thinking about the differences between these domains not as differences in nature or
substance, but rather as differences in degree of structuration (i.e. lower degrees
corresponding to less complex individuals, such as physical ones, and higher degrees
corresponding to more complex individuals, such as technical ones). In this sense, it is
with transduction that the contribution of lower degrees of complexity to higher degrees
can be understood. Accordingly, transduction allows for conceptualizing and
understanding the overall development of technical systems in terms of progressive
structurations. As much as the conditions of technical individuation necessarily
comprise networks, the individuation of novel structures acquire from this same ground,
81

which is its milieu, both its constitutive principles and its technical character.
An example of a simple transduction is a microphone in action. The transduction
occurs when the air's pressure of a travelling sound is converted into electric current.
The energy of one event is transferred to an event of another kind. But this process
shouldn't be thought as a simple informational resolution. Though transductions are
necessarily energized by information, what is at stake in this process is the mode by
which a given structure comes to inform the formation of novel structures with a
principle of individuation. Rather than mechanically reproducing forms, a transduction
transfers from one form to another a principle of activity. In this sense, not only sound
can transform from aerial pressure to electric signal and back again to aerial pressure,
but also a more complex technical ensemble, such as a soccer team, can transfer its
energetic state into another complex technical ensemble, such as another soccer team.71
When increasing the degree of complexity of the events being transduced, the principle
of energetic transfer, which is the principle of an individuation in progress, remains. In
any case, from a network of technical objects to another, individuation necessarily
progresses through a dedicated milieu.
The individual structures that result from transductions can be thought as
corresponding to the complexity of the problems posed. Depending on the degree of
complexity of an initial incompatibility between potentials, the corresponding solution
will be more or less complex. It is worth mentioning that complexity pertains here to the
number of interdependent dimensions implicated in and explicated from technical
individuals. In this sense, a technical individual with a lower degree of complexity
corresponds to a simple element, such as silicon in digital computers or a flat floor for
dancing. In contrast, a technical individual with a higher degree of complexity
corresponds, for example, to a network of computers or to the many interrelated
techniques necessary for flattening a floor. Variations in the complexity of technical
problems will require different degrees of complexity in each corresponding solution.
Less complex problems will require less complex solutions, and more complex
problems will require more complex solutions. Hence, the individuals that result from
transductions will necessarily correspond to the complexity of the problems given at
start.
There is, according to this, a variable degree of structuration that follows from
transduction. At lower degrees of structuration, the general schema of potentials tends to
71 For a compelling account of soccer's transductive character, see Massumi (2002, pp. 71–83).
82

remain at its own phase, i.e. it is not informed otherwise.72 The more complexity is
brought to the network, by ingressing and emergent individuals, the more tendencies
will form in the process of transduction itself. With this, novel phases can arise and
reconfigure the system's technicity. At higher degrees of structuration, in which the
formation of an individual does increase the complexity of the network to which it
belongs, technicity changes. There are limit-points in the process of technical
transduction where the progressive structuration of potentials moves from a lower level
of complexity to a higher one. These are the singularities—attractors and bifurcations—
in the vicinity of which an accumulation of tendencies occurs, towards dephasing. When
dephasing, the technical system goes from one state of recurrence to another through a
reconfiguration of its own technicity.
If technicity is, as Simondon says, “the quality of an element by which what has
been acquired in a technical ensemble expresses and conserves itself in being
transported to a new period” (1969, p. 73), then it corresponds to the potentials moved
with each transduction. But since these potentials implicate their own schema,
technicity also needs to be considered in abstraction, that is, in accordance with the
abstract facet that, beyond potentiality, thinks technics. As mentioned before in regard to
the invention of machines, the concretization of technical thought necessarily moves
from the inexistence of a milieu to the creation of one associated with the emergent
individuals. At the level of pure abstraction, there is no technicity whatsoever. But for
what matters here, i.e. for the relation between abstract schematics and concrete
technics, what is important to retain is the fact that abstraction is not temporally anterior
to concretization. Abstraction is immanent in this process and in the resulting
individuals. It is immanent in the potentials mobilized with transduction and in the
emergent technicity. From this standpoint, it is important to acknowledge that the
abstractions from which invention draws its predicaments are transformed with the
process of invention itself. The technical qualities expressed and conserved by
transduction not only correspond to the moved potentials but also to the virtual ideas
from which actual solutions are drawn. With the inventive restructuration of potentials,
abstractions can themselves change. For technical novelty can actually convey ideas
capable of reforming previous ones. Hence, it is here, at the level of technicity's
72 This is the case when, for example, in the serial fabrication of technical elements at an industrial
facility, a novel element comes to being, but only as one amongst a discrete multiplicity of many
others like it, which in themselves don't change the technicity of the system to which they belong.
Any element repeating without difference the technicity already present in its own enabling
conditions cannot be said to contribute to changes in the technicity of the system to which it belongs,
i.e. it cannot be said to change the schema of the larger technical ensembles conditioning it.
83

immanent relation between abstraction and expression, that its transduction can be fully
understood: while transferring and amplifying resolutions and their implicated
problems, transduction simultaneously prompts the emergence of novel expressions and
the determination of implicated ideas. 
If technicity corresponds to the virtual schema according to which the actual
connectivity of an individual becomes structured, then it can be said to be
diagrammatic. The same technical diagram can be transmitted from individual to
individual, determining in the same manner their regulation. This is, for example, the
case of techniques. According to media theorist Adrian Mackenzie and his readings of
Simondon's philosophy, techniques are “somewhere between a transient, unstable event
and a durable, heavily reproduced structure” (2002, p. 14). Technique and technicity are
not independent from one another. Whereas the concretization of a technique brings into
emergence a new ecology of relations, technicity corresponds both to the enabling
conditions of this emergence and to the technical act's reticular result. Technicity is
transduced with the concretization of techniques. It ingathers the potentials that energize
and structure the technical act, but also creates with those same potentials the singularity
of each event. At once, it allows both for the iteration of techniques and for the
expressive variations that result from their repeated concretization. As such, it can be
thought as the associated milieu of techniques. It is by means of their technicity that
techniques access the preindividual and are transformed. Only because of its implicit
technicity can a technique not only yield different results but also transform itself to the
point of becoming something else, i.e. to the point of becoming a novel technique. 
If a new technique can emerge from the transductions of technicity, then it is a
solution with regard to problems in potential. But it is not the case that a technique is a
simple individual. For a technique to individuate it needs to follow a heuristic
succession of experiments. For it to be learnt it needs to be actualized repeatedly to the
point of a coincidence between its abstractions and its expressions. Such coincidence
stands for its iterability. For only when a technique results repeatedly in outcomes that,
despite their possible differences, can be said to correspond to one same diagrammatic
structure, has it fully individuated. Only after having been learnt with such consistency
can a technique be repeatedly performed and transmitted. Which implies, of course, that
a technique only individuates by means of embodiment, i.e. when its abstraction
ingresses into a milieu of potential concretization. Take the case of the physical skills
required for performing technical tasks such as making caramel, singing, surfing, or the
likes. Such techniques can only be expressed with different bodies after their
84

diagrammatic structure has been transmitted from body to body. What happens in the
body-to-body transmission of physical skills is precisely a transduction. The diagram
that organizes the potentials of one's body will in the same way organize the potentials
of someone else's body, despite their different expressions (just think of a dance class).
The technical act's transductive character is manifested in the different expressions that
different bodies can yield by affecting one another. As such, it is not guided by
principles of formal identity but rather by principles of individuation. More than
knowing the technical act by its results, it matters to know it by the forces of resonance
with which its abstractions affect its expressions. It matters to know it in accordance
with the mode by which its technicity ingresses into the actual constraints of bodily
expression. Only in such processual way can a technique be known, not as static form,
but as generative force.
Technique acts upon the implicit potentials of what is already affectively
connected. It acts upon the technicity of the very conditions that allow for its
deployment. The technical act, with its repetitive mode of specification, is responsible
for making potentials move towards the resolution of problems posed by its own
deployment. In this sense, there is both a general potential of abstraction and a relative
potential of expression. The technical act is generic insofar as its ideal character is
invariable. And it is singular insofar as, with concretization, the general potentials of
such abstraction necessarily become relative to determinate conditions of individuation.
The singularity of technical ideas is, therefore, immanent in the problem that its generic
diagram poses to a concrete field of potentials. Relatively to one another, technicity and
technique are one individuating system of resonance. Technicity is not a given medium
but rather a field of informational exchange where the resolution of technical problems
can take this or that form (only and always as the singular expression of a unique and
unrepeatable encounter between abstract ideas and concrete potentials). The
transmission of techniques needs to unfold through concrete milieus and, with this,
necessarily singularize them. Hence, together with Mackenzie, it is possible to say that
techniques are always in-between ideal abstractions and singular expressions. Never
reducible to either the one or the other, but always potentially becoming (something
else).
With all this, it is comprehensible why Simondon's thought of technics is
pertinent to the question of novelty in the encounter between dance and technology. Not
only is the preindividual reality of technical systems a notion that allows for
conceptualizing the necessary conditions of novelty in such encounter, as it also allows
85

for the understanding that choreographic knowledge can only be constituted anew by
means of a dynamic and affective interplay between abstraction and expression. In this
sense, choreographic objects can and will be defined as technical objects. Because of
their networks, they can be understood neither exclusively in abstract terms nor
exclusively in concrete terms. Their processual character calls for the understanding
that, only by means of a difference between potentials, can they be determined and
expressed as singular movements of choreographic thought. 
It follows that choreographic transmission necessarily occurs by means of
transduction. In this sense, it becomes possible to think of choreographic objects as
models of transduction that assure the connection between different and discontinuous
expressions by means of a continuous multiplicity of potentials. As such, they are
topological, i.e. each choreographic object assures that its different expressions take
place in accordance with one same diagram of potentials. This stands both for the fact
that the ideal and invariable character of choreographic objects is diagrammatic, i.e. a
general potential of individuation, and for the fact that each expression of one same
choreographic idea is necessarily singular and always relative to the actual conditions of
its own individuation. Here, is implied the fact that the choreographic object, instead of
being just a technical individual, is rather a system of individuation. Or, better yet, a
system defined by determinate margins of indetermination. To think choreographic
objects in this way is to think that their diagrammatic structure corresponds in fact to an
idea of limits and of how these relate to one another. Once again, this is a matter of
norms. Which is to say that, as technical individual, the choreographic object has
individuated together with the becoming of its own norms. But, as technical system, it
can express these same norms in as many different ways as the milieus and specific
conditions of individuation that it might come to affect and be affected by. For this very
reason, choreographing, as technical act, has its own ethical reality. Each choreographic
expression necessarily occurs by co-individuating together with an associated milieu,
which realizes the object's reticular character and, therefore, its technical mode of being.
From this standpoint, it matters to continue unfolding the resonance that the
thought of technical individuation might have with choreography in general and with a
series of choreographic objects in particular. The following Chapter will follow this
relation and start to layout the terms of a theory of choreography that looks upon objects
as processes and upon processes as movements of thought. 
86

Chapter 3 - CHOREOTECHNICS
This chapter's three sections will essay a conception of choreography under the
light of Simondon's philosophy. More specifically, the notions of choreographic system,
choreographic knowledge and choreographic object will be explored in accordance with
the abstractions, transductions and expressions of individuation. First, the potentials of
choreography will be tackled from the perspective of dance's relationship with writing.
Such relationship will be conceived as being problematic and, precisely because of this,
potential with regard to the individuation of novel instances of choreographic
knowledge. Moreover, the resolution of such problematic potentials will be defined in
terms of a continuous differentiation of serial parts that, inasmuch as the latter regard
movement-events, expresses choreography as such. Second, the choreographic object
will be defined after the argument that choreography can exist without dance. Such
argument allows not only for thinking choreography in abstraction, but also for defining
the choreographic object as a diagrammatic structure of potentials, from which many
different expressions can result. By defining the choreographic object is this way, it will
be emphasized that, rather than this being an ideal form, it is a system of potential
transductions most apt to elicit the transindividuation of subjective and objective
perspectives upon one same epistemological relation. Third, the notion of choreographic
object will be further explored by analyzing a paradigmatic example of how
choreography can be expressed by means other than dance. By looking into William
Forsythe's collection of choreographic objects “Improvisation Technologies”, it will be
argued that the choreographic object is characteristically topological and, as such,
capable of expressing the same diagram of potentials, not only in different ways but
also, and more importantly, in different domains of expression. From this, the
choreographic object's topological character will be explored together with notions of
memory and rhythm. It will be argued that only by means of conceiving memory both in
terms of perception and forgetting can the choreographic object's topological potentials
be understood to be creative. Additionally, it will be argued that neither abstraction nor
expression suffice to define choreography. Their affective becoming needs to be
considered as an irreducible whole, most fundamentally defined by rhythmic ideas of
movement.
87

3.1 - Choreography's Excess
After the previous incursion into Simondon's theory of individuation, we are
now better equipped to tackle the question previously posed with regard to the
conditions of technogenesis in the encounter between dance and technology. To say that
an encounter is defined by the event of novelty, by the concretization of a creative
potential present in a process's initial conditions, is to say that novelty itself cannot
result but from an encounter. In this sense, encounter and novelty can be conflated into
the kind of event whereby a system's disparities are resolved into unpredictable facts. A
truly creative process will at some point of its development allow for an encounter's
perspective, for a perspective corresponding to the multiplicity of concrescent parts
conditioning the emergence of novelty. But this perspective does not correspond only to
the multiplicity of given parts. Inasmuch as this multiplicity is immanent in the
multiplicity of what is not given, the encounter's perspective corresponds as well to the
qualitative field of undetermined potentials from which novelty necessarily results. As
such, the actual-virtual dynamisms of process already mentioned to be a fundamental
force of creativity can be understood as being characteristic of an encounter, for what
results from a principle of immanence active in a creative process is precisely the
relation between forces and forms necessary to the resolution of a system's problems.
The principle of immanence is the principle of an encounter. It supposes the relation
between parts that are simultaneously given and not given and that therefore are
potentially problematic in regard to the overall development of the system to which they
belong. From this standpoint, the conditions of technogenesis in the encounter between
dance and technology can be said to include the principle of immanence defining any
creative process whatsoever. Only by reason of the virtual-actual dynamisms active in
individuation can the encounter between dance and technology be said to be so, that is,
to be considered as a truly creative process. Such potentials of creativity are none other
than the ones of its excessive reality, i.e. its more-than-individual reality. From which it
follows that, despite the possible constraints given by what is determinate at any point
of a system's technical development, what the singular encounters between dance and
technology share, beyond possibility, is the fact that they emerge from a network of
relations where information mobilizes the becoming of technics. Independently of how
the actuality of these networks conditions informational exchange, what in the end
attests the event of the encounter between dance and technology is the very fact of
novelty, the fact that the emergent encounter is singular in that it results from irreducible
88

resolutions.
Amidst the general becoming of technics, and alongside its many different
expressions, the encounter between dance and technology must be defined by means
with a proper character. The question is: which kind of networks are proper to this
species of encounter? Or, in other words, what is its characteristic technicity? The
answer resides in what has been, from its first manifestations to the present, a prevalent
mode of individuation in the history of encounters between dance and technology,
namely, choreography. From the outset, choreography has established a relation
between dance and writing: Thoinot Arbeaus's “Orchesography” (1925), choreography's
first treatise, founded the writing of dance in the European Renaissance as a technology
of transmission and regulation; from this moment onwards, the organization of gestures
and bodies in time and space had no longer to be passed directly from a dance master to
his students, but could be learnt at a distance, via writing. About this fundamental
project, dance scholar André Lepecki comments that it was established on the basis of a
“semiotic symmetry between writing and dancing that guarantees the unproblematic
traffic from one to the other” (2004, p. 126). This equation, between dancing and
writing, served to further establish conventional codes, such as Feuillet's notation (1701),
the use of which facilitated choreographers' hermeneutic authority over the dances. In
this sense, what might have been first a drive to not forget and remember the dances, led
to an “apparatus of capture” that mostly served their regulation. “To conceive
choreography as an apparatus”, says Lepecki, “is to see it as a mechanism that
simultaneously distributes and organizes dance’s relationship to perception and
signification. For it is precisely this kind of organization of the perceptive-linguistic
field that apparatuses perform” (2007, p. 120). But the incapacity of writing to transmit
the essential traits of dance was a preoccupation that soon became manifest, most
notably with dance master Jean-Georges Noverre. Identifying this transition, Lepecki
further writes: “[...] from a perception of dance as unproblematically translatable from
code to steps, and from steps back to code again (a peacefully symmetry between
inscription and dancing that characterizes […] Arbeau's and Feuillet's perception), we
arrive, with Noverre, to an understanding of dance as elusive presence, dance as the
fleeting trace of an always irretrievable, never fully translatable motion: neither into
notation, nor into writing.” (22004, p. 127). Which is an argument that came to define a
longstanding tradition in claiming that performance is fundamentally irreducible and
irretrievable; a tradition that has had as prominent advocates figures as influent as
Antonin Artaud (Derrida, 1978), Richard Schechner (2011, p. 50) and Peggy Phelan
89

(1993, p. 146). This is the argument that performance is defined as that which comes
into presence—a unitary, self-identical, and non-linguistic presence conveying that
which nothing but performance itself can convey. In this sense, and in spite of possible
recursions of the live event, immediate presence is taken to be that which holds the
truth-value of performance, for only through performance can there take place an
irreducible experience that cannot be mediated otherwise. Reinforcing the irreducibility
of performance is the argument that the event of presence in performance is a fleeting
one, vanishing at the very moment of its appearance. Performance, as such, is
irretrievable, for it is impossible to retain it without loosing its fundamental character,
that of being always transient. 
But performance does recur. It creates correspondences between different modes
of expression, from performative events to writing and back. Considering this fact,
expressed by the variety of ways in which performance can be acted, written and
remembered, performance art theorist Adrian Heathfield writes that “[...] one of
performance's most consistent and recurring conditions is transformation” (2012, p. 32).
Across its multiple instances of experience, the recurrence of performance enacts its
transformation. It moves from one event to another through writing, and from one
writing to another through all kinds of events, forming a system of assertion that, rather
than attributing any kind of essential authenticity to its different expressions, is
fundamentally defined by its transformative capacities. As a system of assertion,
performance is capable of conveying both the immediacy of its events and the
mediation of its written inscriptions. In either case, the experience of performance
occurs. With writing, the knowledge conveyed by the transient events of performance
can be reactivated, notwithstanding the fact that this passage, which implicates
remembrance, necessarily leads to novel experiences. By the same token, which regards
the potentials of the overall system of assertion comprising performance and writing,
the experiences of writing can lead to new experiences in performance. As an example
of this encompassing capacity of performance to recur repeatedly, but not without
difference, one can think of “Le Sacre du Printemps”. This well known piece, first
choreographed and performed in 1913 by Vaslav Nijinsky for Sergei Diaghilev's Les
Ballets Russes, accompanied by the also well known musical score by Igor Stravinski,
has been to the present date one of the most reenacted and recurrent pieces in the history
of theatrical production.73 Despite the controversy provoked by its presentation in Paris
73 For a list of reenactments of “Le Sacre du Printemps”, see “Stravinsky: The Global Dancer: A
Chronology of Choreography to the Music of Igor Stravinsky”, in http://ws1.roehampton.ac.uk/stravi
90

of that time, it is symptomatic that 2013 was the year in which a wide range of
expressions took place, commemorating the work's centenary and showing its influence
to this date. Today, not only all sorts of artistic reformulations and reinterpretations of
“Le Sacre du Printemps” can be seen, from video works to performances and festivals
dedicated to it (many due to the fact of its everlasting influent and still today actual
soundtrack), but also discursive embeddings of the work can be found allover, notably
in the theoretical production of disciplines such as performance and dance studies. “Le
Sacre du Printemps” can be seen as one big system of performance, encompassing all of
its variable expressions and potentials of transformation.
In the whole field of performance, choreography attests the systemic relation
between possible modes of expression, for the relationship between writing and dancing
is paradigmatic of the causality that performance's various recurrences can establish
among themselves. The causation of a system of performance where relationships
between writing and dancing are determinate is nonetheless not complete, given in its
logics, but rather a process open both to what cannot be predicted and to what cannot be
known subsequently (because imperceptible and unconscious). An openness that should
be understood neither in opposition to the choreographic regulation of dances nor in
opposition to the idea of performance's irreducible character, but rather as encompassing
both. Positing choreography as an open system of performance, where all sorts of
expressions can take place, stands for acknowledging difference as an operative
dimension of process, constitutive of a system's overall development. As such, it is
present both in writing and in dancing, and also in the operations whereby one gives
place to the other. The differences between choreography's modes of expression are the
motor of its individuation. Only by means of ingressing problems, to be resolved in the
transition from one expression to another, can the creative powers of this system of
assertion be activated and allow for transformations where the referent remains the
same, but not without being differently expressed.
With all its creative capacities, choreography corresponds in a very precise way
to what French philosopher Michel Foucault has defined as “archive”. For the author,
the archive is that which “reveals the rules of a practise that enables statements both to
survive and to undergo regular modification. [The archive] is the general system of the
formation and transformation of statements” (2007, p. 102). In this sense, the
ontological predicate according to which performance is irreducible and irretrievable
nsky/index.asp.
91

must give way to the ontogenetic depiction of choreography's overall development as a
system of assertion. Which is not to say that the event of performance does not possess
a singular and irretrievable character, but rather to affirm that this uniqueness partakes
in a larger context of enunciation that also conditions its transformed recursions. As
archive, choreography can be said to be a system of assertion that most fundamentally
regards ideas of movement. Between a field of potentials and a series of assertions, what
forms and transforms in the archive of choreography are problems and resolutions of
movement. Choreography's capacity for expressing movement ideas in different ways
attests its excessive reality, i.e. it attests the fact that it is itself a system of individuation
including both a preindividual reality and an individual order of assertion. The very
asymmetry between dancing and writing corresponds to the problems that determinate
ideas of movement posit to the system to which they belong in the process of their own
assertion. When asserted in several instances, the same idea can differ from itself by
creating problems to the choreographic system. Once again, it should be acknowledged
that what intensifies the becoming of a choreographic system is the dynamic interplay
between the virtual and the actual, i.e. the interplay between an idea of movement and
the actual constraints exerted upon its own assertion. The asymmetry of choreography's
expressions, rather than revealing the incompleteness of each of them relatively to one
another, simply manifests the system's transformative capacities. With each
individuation, choreography expresses differently the problematic reality of its own
ideas. Writing and dancing do not complete one another for the expression of one
choreographic totality, but rather correspond to the expression of ideas that, moving
through different conditions, express each time anew the ground from which they stem. 
The argument that writing supplements the event is in this way converted into a
productive relation between the two. The asymmetry between writing and dancing
corresponds precisely to choreography's capacity for activating potentials, resolving
itself into the emergence of yet another actual expression. Even Jacques Derrida's
deconstructions accord to this in their own way: having extensively dwelt upon the
conception that writing supplements the event, compensating its irretrievability, Derrida
has shown how in fact the “supplement” is “undecided [between] accretion and
substitution”; it is “not a signified more than a signifier, a representer than a presence, a
writing than a speech” (1976, p. 315). This undecidability of writing marks the fact that
what recurs with its assertion can both supplement its referent, and thus remain indexed
by it, and substitute it with its own autonomy, as a generative regime of signs. Writing
can both depend on the contexts of its inscription and be an autopoietic system. Beyond
92

the supplementary logic that writing may be said to commit to, adding to the event,
writing is also capable of generating reality by its own means. Regarding its autonomy,
Derrida further says that “[f]or a writing to be a writing it must continue to 'act' and to
be readable even when what is called the author of the writing no longer answers for
what he has written, for what he seems to have signed, be it because of a temporary
absence, because he is dead or, more generally, because he has not employed his
absolutely actual and present intention or attention, the plenitude of his desire to say
what he means, in order to sustain what seems to be written 'in his name'.” (1982, p.
307). An argument that, at once, invokes the fact that the intentions of a writer aren't
assured to be accessed via the written, and that the written can in fact act on its own,
away from hermeneutic regulations. In the cases where dances are transmitted via
writing, not only characteristic of the Renaissance but also of such massive projects as
the development of Labanotation throughout the twentieth century, or even of more
recent projects such as those discussed throughout in this study, this autonomy of
writing attests the fact that, regarding the overall system of assertion that it partakes,
writing stands on its own feet as the choreographic expression of movement ideas.
Hence, writing doesn't require supplements of any sort. It is fully capable of expressing
movement ideas. A corollary that, in relation to the ontological definition of
performance as transient and irreducible, posits as well the singular capacities of other
modes of expression. If performance conserves an irretrievable character, then writing
itself is capable of conveying that which only writing can convey. Both dancing and
writing are fully capable of problematizing and resolving ideas of movement.
In what regards choreography, writing should be understood not only as the
inscription of graphemes characteristic of notation, but as a more encompassing creation
of invariant functions, that is, as the creation of what does not vary throughout one same
choreography's different expressions. The structures shared both by choreographic
notation and by the performance of dance, inasmuch as they don't vary, can be said to
correspond to one same written choreography. Choreography is in this way equated with
the formation of recursive structures, which makes of the writing of dance the
choreotechnical formation of stable memories. With them, choreographic ideas can be
transposed from one individuation the next, to be possibly resolved only by means of an
interplay between the given and the ungiven. Such interplay corresponds to the affective
reality of memory in processes of choreographic individuation. Memory acts both
virtually and actually towards the resolution of problematic ideas of movement. When,
for example, a group of dancers performs, once again, a choreography that they have
93

been performing repeatedly for some time, what necessarily takes place is a resolution
of the problems posed by the emergent relation between what is actuality given (e.g. the
muscular memory, or patterned habit, of each dancing body) and what is not (i.e. the
indetermination implied in recollecting what had not been remembered until that very
moment). Despite the fact that each performance necessarily corresponds to the singular
resolution of problems, what is transposed from one event to the next is precisely this
problematic potential of choreographic memory, as it persists in each dancing body. 
The invariant functions of choreography are not the substances of its identity. To
say that a system of choreographic individuation does not vary throughout its
development and across its expressions corresponds to saying that a principle of
individuation is transduced throughout the multiple modulations of the system's
potentials. To ask what is a choreographic principle of individuation is to ask “what is a
choreography?”, a question to which Portuguese philosopher José Gil answers with: “it
is a nexus of movements” (2001, p. 81, my translation). With this answer, the author
already acknowledges that movement is double. On the one hand, movement is virtual
and contributory, ingressing into actuality and traversing all occasions of experience
(what the author calls “whole movement”). On the other hand, it corresponds to the
actual expressions of the ongoing transformation of states. Understanding choreography
as a nexus of movements is to acknowledge the dynamic interplay between the virtual
and the actual. In this way, choreography is understood as comprising simultaneously
the movements of thought initiated by a problematic idea and the expressive movements
of the latter's resolution. Furthermore, for Gil, a nexus “is dictated neither by its
expressivity nor by its finality” (Ibid). Rather a nexus is said to result from the
combination of series that, notwithstanding the fact of being divergent, are continuous
to one another. This is no paradox, for their continuity is the continuity of their
differences. Only by means of relating continuously to one another, can divergent series
intensify their differences. From which it follows that a nexus can be defined as the
rhythmic intensification of differences between series that, in this way, become
continuous to one another as the multiple parts of one whole. According to Gil, “[t]he
rhythm assures the distances [between the series] in continuity, allowing for an
uninterrupted movement of differentiation that modulates time [...] and the internal
distance to the intervals” (Ibid., pp. 86–87, my translation). This can be understood by
simply considering a dancing body and the movement of its musculoskeletal regions.
For example, the movement of one foot and the movement of one hand involve different
regions of the musculoskeletal system. While moving simultaneously, the different
94

series of each movement region form a rhythm by continuously intensifying their
differences. The differential intensification of the series actually defines each of them in
the continuous relation to the other. This is the nexus of their choreography, be the
dance a more or less determinate one.74 The nexus, rather than being given, is emergent.
From which one possible conclusion can be drawn: the choreographic nexus is not
given and emerges with each choreographic process that it comes to define because of
being relative to the absolute event of its own appearance.75 What is transduced
throughout a choreographic system's development is the relativity of its nexus' formal
structure to its own “absolute origin”. This allows for one same principle of
individuation to resume itself across different events of expression. Hence, the invariant
function of choreography, which is its principle of individuation, corresponds to the
event of rhythm, which is the recurrent intensification of differences between the series
of a multiplicity. Choreography is the nexus that forms when the series of movement-
events intensify their differences to the point of becoming continuous to one another
and, by these means, constituting a whole. 
From this standpoint, it can be said that the technicity of the encounter between
dance and technology regards most fundamentally the rhythm of individuation of
movement ideas. Which is also to say that choreography's associated milieu, its
technical network, is informed with the resolution of the problems posed by such ideas
to the dedicated domains of individuation. And if the principle of choreographic
individuation corresponds to a nexus' relativity to its own “absolute origin”, then this
relativity must be related to what lies at the heart of an incompatibility between
potentials, notably the disparity of a movement idea. This disparity can be thought as
pertaining to the problems posed to a process when in face of its actual conditions. A
movement idea is never exactly the same as its possible expressions because, in
individuation, undetermined potentials persist in exerting their force upon what is given.
Despite the margins of indetermination built into a system, movement ideas will always
bear a difference in regard to the possibilities of their own expression. Besides, this
disparity can be thought as pertaining to the fact that, without actuality, an idea cannot
acquire a resolute definition. Its abstract reality is fundamentally indefinite and therefore
74 For Gil (2001, p. 81), the requirements of a choreographic nexus are as strong in improvised dances
as in choreographed ones, a demand that attests how much choreographic individuation involves a
multiplicity of processes and structures (i.e. a whole of which the choreographic nexus is only one
part), each of them with its proper nexus.
75 Much in the same way as the “seed of form” of individuation is not given but nonetheless determines
the tropisms of the individuating system where it comes to occur. For more on this subject see pages
60-62.
95

assures its openness to the potentials of the system to which it belongs,. Only by means
of this relation can a movement idea be not only relative to its different modes of
expression but also relative to the absolute potential of its own appearance. It is
disparate in relation to itself because it mediates between the virtual and the actual the
rhythm of its own choreographic nexus. And if, as Adrian Mackenzie tells us, “[t]o think
transductively is to mediate between different orders, to place heterogeneous realities in
contact, and to become something different” (2002, p. 18), then the nexus of the
encounter between dance and technology is that which results from this very mediation.
Choreography can thus be said to correspond to a transductive mode of thought that
differentiates its movement ideas according to a rhythm of individuation: it
differentiates them in relation to themselves with the disparition of the problematic
conditions of their own appearance; and it differentiates them and in relation to the
progressive structuration of potentials, by means of which multiple series
simultaneously diverge and intensify their differences. In sum, the technicity of
choreography corresponds to the rhythm with which a network of movement ideas is
(in)formed, to the point of expressing a determinate nexus.
3.2 - The Choreographic Object
In face of choreography’s transformative capacities, choreographer William
Forsythe calls forth the opening of its definition: “To reduce choreography to a single
definition is not to understand the most crucial of its mechanisms: to resist and reform
previous conceptions of its definition” (2008, pp. 5–6). As mentioned before, these
“mechanisms” exist not only where different expressions do in fact resist and reform
one another, but also where the potentials of choreography reside. It is only because of
such potentials that choreography can express itself in this or that novel way. Its renewal
depends on this implicit capacity. And when expressed otherwise, choreography can be
the subject of an individuation that does not even require dancing bodies. As such, it is
possible to look for choreography elsewhere than in the performance of dance. It is also
from this standpoint that Forsythe has proffered the disjunction of dance and
choreography: “Choreography and dancing are two distinct and very different practices”
(Ibid.). Which corresponds both to the fact that dance can occur without a
choreographic nexus and that a choreographic nexus can be expressed by forms other
than dance. Following from this capacity, Forsythe came to define the choreographic
96

object as “a model of potential transition from one state to another in any space
imaginable” (Ibid.). A definition which accords with the theory of individuation
expounded before insofar as the model in it included corresponds to the diagram of
choreographic individuation. As already mentioned,76 such diagram is virtual as long as
its potentials are kept apart from concrete individuals. But when mobilized, these are
potentials that tend to be expressed as network: the diagram becomes concrete as a
network of technical objects, of which the choreographic one is a keypoint. Despite its
possible expressions, the choreographic diagram is always abstract and more-than-
individual. In abstraction, it verges towards possibility, creating tendencies in an
otherwise flat field of potentials. This is an asymmetric distribution of possibilities, of
which only particular nexuses can result.77 Hence, to each choreographic object
corresponds a diagram of forces and a rhythm of individuation.
The choreographic diagram is closer to Felix Guattari's notion of “metamodel”
(2012) than to the notion of model as understood by structuralism and cybernetics.
Though Guattari's notion has been engendered in reaction to prevailing modes of
analysis in fields such as psychology (i.e. Jacques Lacan), anthropology (i.e. Claude
Levi-Strauss) and philosophy (i.e. Louis Althusser), to name a few, it draws its
predicaments from several other influences, such as linguistics, semiotics, cybernetics,
information theory, systems theory, ethology, thermodynamics and mathematics
(Watson, 2011, pp. 1–14). A multiplicity of sources that grants it with the capacity to
adapt itself to any field of inquiry. As Guattari himself states, a metamodel pertains
“[n]ot to a general model, but to an instrument for deciphering modelling systems in
diverse domains [...]” (2012, p. 17). More importantly, the author writes elsewhere,
“[w]hat distinguishes metamodelization from modelization is the way it uses terms to
develop possible openings onto the virtual and onto creative processuality” (1995, p.
31). The metamodel is a general potential of creativity that, while addressing the
problems posed by the realization of models, proceeds by forging “new coordinates for
reading and to ‘bring into existence’ new representations and propositions” (2012, p. 17).
If a technical object can in any way be approached as model, it is only because it has
become one. Conversely, before becoming, such model exists only in potential.78 The
choreographic diagram must therefore be understood as that which opens the object
76 See Simondon's notion of technicity on pages 83-86.
77 For a discussion on how the diagram acts in processes of individuation, see Section 4.3.
78 The topic of general potentiality will be addressed at length when discussing its distinction with the
notion of relative potentials in Alfred N. Whitehead's theory of the “extensive continuum”. See page
219.
97

onto the virtual. It opens it onto potentials that, though not choreographic per se, assure
the object's capacity to express a determinate nexus of movements. 
The choreographic object's processual character, as defined above, corresponds
as well to its transductive character. Its potential transitions between states, in any space
imaginable, regard the modulation of forces performed by its diagram. Individuation
proceeds, but not without being subjected to tendencies implied by the latter. What
moves with choreographic transduction is less a form than a principle of individuation.
In the brief essay where Forsythe defines the choreographic object, as just quoted,
instead of providing examples of it, the choreographer invokes the musical score, which
for him is an object of the same kind. The musical score, as it is known, holds the
necessary potentials for transducing the organization of musical ideas into the actual
performance of music. Or, better yet, the potentials for such transduction exist within
the system of assertion to which the musical score belongs, for these are potentials
related with the representation that the signs in the score can elicit in a signifying agent.
This process attests both the incompleteness of each expression relatively to the whole
and the latter's capacity for existing in between forms, that is, the object's capacity to
conserve its diagrammatic potential throughout the incorporeal phases of each
transduction. The simple fact that music can be memorized and remembered, without
any need for mnemonic artifacts such as scores, attests that it is as well open onto the
virtual. As much as the musical object is finalized neither by scores nor by
performances, its definition must comprise the diagram of its own ideas. Only by means
of a diagrammatic arrangement of potentials can musical transductions be understood.
From performance into score and from score into performance, one same object can
only be iterated as long as its diagram persists across transitions. 
All of this applies equally to choreographic objects. While understanding that a
musical score “represents the potential of perceptual phenomena to instigate action, the
result of which can be perceived by a sense of a different order: a transition via the body
from the visual to the aural”, Forsythe understands as well that a “choreographic object,
or score, is by nature open to a full palette of phenomenological instigations because it
acknowledges the body as wholly designed to persistently read every signal from its
environment.” (2008, pp. 5–6). There is therefore a degree of indetermination to the
choreographic object that is larger than the one of the musical object. The lesser degree
of the musical object is given by the conventional bias that its transductions must
necessarily engage, at some point, the aural domain. In turn, choreography's larger
degree of indetermination regards the fact that the body is capable of transducing any
98

signal whatsoever into different domains of expression. In this sense, it is more likely
for a musical object to be perceived as being as well choreographic than the opposite.
Insofar as music conveys movements with nexus, it can be read as choreographic. To
say that choreographic transductions occur between “any space imaginable” not only
stands for acknowledging the body's capacity to perceive movements with nexus out of,
virtually, anything, but also for acknowledging its capacity to transduce such nexus into
other domains of individuation.
The potentials of choreography are deeply rooted in the transductive capacities
of the body. Such capacities, which rely on the body's “wholly design to persistently
read every signal from its environment”, pertain most evidently to the ongoing
resolutions of perception and affection. According to the preindividual of individuation,
there is here a level of indistinction between the senses because perception is yet to be
determined. The choreographic object addresses such indetermination. It addresses
sense-making in its processual unfolding, which does not occur without a confusion of
senses yet to be determined. It acknowledges the body as an open system and uses its
capacity to “persistently read every signal from its environment” to attribute nexus to
any possible conjunction of perceptions. Besides Simondon's understanding of the role
of the preindividual in perception and thought, the undifferentiated resonance of the
senses can be thought together with the notion of synaesthesia. A concept traceable back
to Stoic philosophy, synaesthesia (sunaisthêsis) can be understood as a “joint-sense”
(Elo, 2012, p. 4), as a capacity of the senses to “feel-with” one another (Heller-Roazen,
2007, p. 108). This capacity gives place to what the body senses by means of what it
doesn't. It is a process that, before resolving itself into the perceptual differentiation of
senses, proceeds unresolved. The case of synaesthesia posits that the emergence of
sense does not occur without a process that is without mode. Before becoming modally
disjunct (e.g. hearing, seeing, touching, tasting and smelling), sense is amodal. It
belongs to the unresolved of bodily processes where the incorporeal relates to the
excessive regime of affects. Amodal sense-affectivity is part of the unconscious process
of being in/with the world. Accordingly, synaesthesia can be thought as the self-
affectivity through which the body folds over itself, imbricating into one another events
yet to be associated with this or that specific sense. Even after having individuated, each
sense does not cease to be embedded in such activity. It is not possible to consider each
mode of sense-perception without considering as well the regime of affects on which it
depends. Hearing, for example, does not take place as it does without a related body-
schema, which is partially constituted by proprioceptive, vestibular and kinaesthetic
99

orientations (Lingis, 1993). Any sufficiently strong change in the latter will inevitably
change the former, such when the subject experiences the absence of echo (in an
anechoic chamber), only to notice how much its own proprioception depends on the
perception of sound. To a large extent, the synaesthetic resonance of the senses can only
be felt in effect. In the case of heightened synaesthesia, for example, perception informs
the subject of ongoing affects between that which, from a habitual perspective, might be
said to be disjunct, but which from the eventful disruption of the associative habit
indisputably reveals itself as associate and in some way dependent, even if the logic of
such dependence remains unknown, because inaccessible (Campen, 2010). 
From this standpoint, it matters to acknowledge that choreographic objects
cannot be associated with any one specific modality of sense. Rather, they must be
defined in terms of processes that convey ideas independently from domains of
expression, as these may be associated with specific modes of sense-perception. What
pertains more precisely to the definition of such objects is their potential to elicit
thoughts that, in retrospective, might be said to be choreographic. This, of course,
depends on the context of assertion where each thought takes place. As already
mentioned when quoting philosopher Muriel Combes,79 each psychic individuation
intricately depends on the collective milieu of ideas from which it stems and where it
finds its conceptual value. A choreographic thought can only be said to be so because of
a context where other choreographic abstractions are collectively transduced and in
relation to which it concurs, with variable degrees of contrast. The choreographic object
exists upon this relation. It persists as a principle of individuation with the potential to
relate emerging thoughts with a co-individuating milieu of choreographic abstractions.
A relation which depends on transductions where the conceptual seed of choreography
must be potentially present. Together with the expression of a choreographic nexus, it
must also be transduced the potential for it to be thought and recognized as such.
The independence of choreographic thinking from specific domains of
expression runs in parallel to its reliance upon the body's capacities of abstraction. But
such capacities necessarily depend from its actual experiences. Which means that there
is at the heart of thought an implication of processes, making of concepts a resolution
that does not go without the synaesthetic resonance of sense-making. In other words, the
sense of thought emerges itself from the senses' indistinct junction, as any other
modality of sense (Aristotle, 1931, p. 421a; Heller-Roazen, 2007, pp. 291–300). Not
79 See page 73.
100

only does this comply with the immanence of abstraction in expression, but more
specifically with the immanence of choreographic thoughts in a relationship between
individual and milieu, where the resolution of problems in perception corresponds to the
individuation of movements with nexus. And how could it not be so, if for there to be a
correspondence between thought and nexus both must individuate from one same
preindividual reality. They both follow from the transductive analogy of their own
processes. An analogy which accords with Simondon's argument that knowledge does
not follow from an inexplicable relation between subjects and objects given by “a priori
forms of sensibility”, but rather from their co-individuation “from the same primitive
reality”.80 To equate choreographic principles with “models of potential transition”
regards not only the fact that any relation between subjects and objects has its proper
nexus, but also the fact that any principle of individuation can only be understood
together with what it gives birth to. Once more, this is the case of the nexus' relativity to
its own absolute origin.81 The case that choreographic principles are not given in
advance to the individuations that they come to energize and structure, but that they are
defined only with the process of individuation itself. A choreographic principle is the
choreographic nexus that comes to be known, it is the diagrammatic arrangement of
forces implicit in the thoughts that from them might result. 
It should nonetheless be made clear that, because of its technical character, the
choreographic object relies upon the application of technical acts. Only by becoming a
keypoint in a technical network can the choreographic object transduce its potentials
and become known as such. In contrast to other technical acts, the choreographic one
can be defined by its potentials for eliciting synaesthetic resonances. Only by these
means can thoughts which are truly choreographic acquire some resolute determination.
And due to the analogies of transductive knowledge, what will have become a
choreographic thought must necessarily regard actual forms of informational exchange
defining the relative nexus of movements. The choreographic object is known as such
only within the limits defined by its margins of indetermination, which are determined
by the act itself. The choreographic act modulates the ingression of undetermined
potentials into processes of individuation by determining parameters that will define
each object's choreographic nexus. The readership of choreographic notation makes a
good case for what is a technical act, in the choreographic sense. Once a choreographic
object has been notated, it can only elicit transductions if the body coincides with a
80 See page 72.
81 See pages 94-96.
101

signifying agent, i.e. if the subject is constituted on the basis of a capacity to read
notations according to a particular nexus. Choreographic readership is a capacity which
focuses the “wholly design [of the body] to persistently read every signal from its
environment” towards the justification of what it reads as a nexus of movements. It
allows for the body to access choreographic rhythms of intensification and
differentiation, in a continuous relation between signifying series. Such continuity is
assured by the act of reading itself. Reading transduces the choreographic principles
implied in written parameters and allows for modulating processes with determinate
margins of indetermination.
While setting margins of indetermination for individuating systems, technical
acts constrain informational exchanges and define the resulting networks. To say that
the choreographic object is a “model of potential transition” stands for saying that, as
model, it constrains the rhythmic differentiation of a multiplicity of series with
determinate parameters. This is the expression of its technicity. A standpoint implying
that a parameter is a relation between variables and that each choreographic parameter
is defined by margins of indetermination that assure its very continuity. The parametric
constraining of choreography determines the continuity of its nexus and allows for it to
be recognized as such. In other words, an object will only be recognized as being
choreographic on the condition that its individuation differentiates series of sense-events
at the same time that it constrains their relation in continuity. Individuating
choreographies at once differentiate series of sense-events, assure their differential
relation in continuity and allow for co-individuating movements of thought. 
3.3 - Topological Continuity, Differential Expressivity
When accounting for the choreographic object's features, for the fact that it is
capable of eliciting technical action, for the fact that it does so with an emphasis on
synaesthesia, and for the fact that synaesthetic indetermination is limited by a set of
parametric constraints, its expression in domains other than the dancing body becomes
somewhat problematic. After all, if all these aspects are to be attained, it is necessary
that the choreographic object is expressed in ways that are worthy of the body's
complexity. Despite Forsythe's assertion that “[c]horeography and dancing are two
distinct and very different practices” (2008, pp. 5–6), in most cases they still remain
bound to each other. Even if they are taken to be autonomous practices, it is via their
102

relationship that the powers and limitations of the one are transferred to the other. When
dancing is put in relation with choreography, the latter's expressions must necessarily
comply with the dancing body's potentials. As such, to express choreography in
domains other than the dancing body while keeping it as referent, i.e. as a possible
receptacle of choreographic transductions, stands for solving the problem of how to
individuate expressions as potential as the dancing body itself.
This is a problem well known to dance notators. As much as the dancing body
implies a variety of infinities, the notation of dance is primarily defined by an exclusive
selection of data. Already in 1930, choreographer Fritz Klingenbeck wrote: “The dance
notator must, along with a trained eye for the rapid perception of movement events,
possess above all an understanding of the actual elements of the dance movement. In
this consideration three factors stand out as particularly important, which the dance
notator must be able to keep apart reliably. First, the actual composition, the naked,
clear structure of the dance, second, the performance, the personal interpretation of the
artist, and third, there are in most cases the factors determining style. It may not be
entirely simple to draw the boundaries between these three factors, especially between
the first two, the composition and the interpretation. […] Thousands of small
movements, phrasings, head, feet, are mainly idiosyncrasies of the performing artist, for
whom it would be absurd to prescribe something else. Thus, there falls on the dance
writer the same difficult and responsible task, namely to strip away all these secondary
manifestations from his notation score and to leave them out of consideration. To
recognise what must be written down, and what not, is not entirely easy, because the
boundaries are always fluid and in most cases it is exactly the secondary manifestations
belonging to the interpretation, which can make a dance interesting and valuable.
Nevertheless, composition and interpretation must be clearly separated from each other
by the dance notator, if another artist is to be able to recreate thereafter.” (1990). More
recently, dance notator Marion Bastien also wrote: “When I was notating with some
maturity [...], I was often thinking that my expertise was not based on how many details
I could write down in the score, but on what I was able to throw away. My greatest
expertise was the ability to filter, to select.” (2007, p. 51). From this standpoint, it
should be noticed that what is actually written from the performance of dance is its
choreographic character. What is selected from the dancing body's varieties are the
parameters of its structured movement. And inasmuch as such parameters individuate
amidst a milieu of bodily potentials, their recognition and notational inscription must
necessarily subtract all that in the dancing body is indivisible. The writing of dance
103

must go from the body's continuous infinity of potentials to the finite and discontinuous
articulation of symbolic notations. In this passage, the notator selects what appears to
define the choreographic nexus, leaving aside all the rest. A subtraction of all that is not
accessible and of all that does not appear to define the nexus of movements. From
which it follows that the choreographic score cannot be but a partial fragment of what
moves when a body dances. A fragment that nonetheless implicates potentials for a
choreographic principle to be further transduced.
In order to experiment with novel ways of expressing choreographic objects,
ways that are both worthy of the dancing body and alternative to traditional modes of
choreographic notation, Forsythe set himself to create what would become a landmark
in the field of choreographic expression, mostly due to its use of new media. The
interactive CD-ROM “Improvisation Technologies: A Tool for the Analytical Dance
Eye” (2012), created together with dancer Nik Haffner, media artists Volker
Kuchelmeister and Christian Ziegler, and first published by Karlsruhe's Center for Art
and Media Technology (ZKM) in 1999, comprises a collection of objects devised as a
toolbox for choreographic creation. Which is to say that these are choreographic objects
which can be assembled in a wide range of ways in order to compose ever more
complex choreographies. Notably, these are some of the resources that Forsythe used to
create choreographic work with the Ballet Frankfurt at that time.82 A fact that brings to
the fore how a choreographic technology such as this one is not neutral with regard to
the aesthetics that it allows for. Despite its bias, it is nevertheless remarkable that the
publication of “Improvisation Technologies” (IT) constituted a turning point in the
dissemination of choreographic tools and in the practice of “open source choreography”
(Delahunta, 2003). Its use of the multimodal capacities of digital media have influenced
to a great extent, not only the publishing of choreographic knowledge, but more
fundamentally the very means of its production. An influence that has reached into the
development of this study and of all the cases here discussed.83 
The choreographic objects of this collection (around 60) are expressed in the
form of short video recordings over which graphemes are further laid. In each video,
one can watch both Forsythe himself explaining the object's parameters and the graphic
(animated) notation of their formal results. At once, these objects resonate with the
practice of choreographic notation and with the practice of dancing as drawing, a double
82 This CD-ROM was a follow up of a digital archive of movement material used in the making of
performances such as “Loss of Small Detail” (1991) and “Self Meant to Govern” (1994), by the
Ballet Frankfurt.
83 For a listing of these projects, see pages 15-19.
104

connection that is synthesized in the notion of writing, as previously argued.84 To say
that a gesture can be traced by mapping parameters corresponds to saying that it can be
written for further use. Correspondingly, what in the case of Forsythe's IT is in fact
written are less the resulting forms, as traced by the graphemes, than the ideas
underlying the dancing body's parametric constraining. In this sense, to move the body
according to the idea of, for example, “Dropping Curves” (see Illustration 1, below) is
less to move it in accordance with a given form than with potentials capable of
expressing it. And this is so simply because the diagram of this choreographic object
doesn't map this or that specific curved line, but rather the general potential of any
dropped curve whatsoever.85
In this respect, it is worth noticing that this specific collection of objects results
from an analytical approach to dance where movements are geometrically organized.
This is an approach that can be traced back to Rudolf von Laban’s “kinesphere” (1956),
a geometry which depicts the constant limits of the dancing body. Simply described, this
is a volume the centre of which is placed over the dancer's centre of gravity and further
defined by the multiple points that the body can reach while unchanging its centre. In
short, it is a sphere located around the body, at the distance of its centred reach. In
contrast to this univocal approach, Forsythe grants the body with the capacity to
84 See page 93.
85 It should be noticed that philosopher Erin Manning, in her recent book “Always More Than One:
Individuation's Dance”, also discusses the choreographic object “Dropping Curves” in Forsythe's
work (2013, p. 77). In contrast to the reference here at stake—the “Improvisation Technologies'”
collection—, Manning discusses it in the context of her own observations of Forsythe Company's
rehearsals. For more on Manning's own take on this choreographic object, see pages 119–121.
105
Illustration 1: William Forsythe exemplifying the object “Dropping Curves”, plus the graphic
notation of the curved line, in “Improvisation Technologies'” CD-ROM (Forsythe, 2012).

displace its centre or even to have multiple centres. Its geometries are mobile and
transformative. Not only can the centre of movement migrate throughout the body, but
also can its relative geometries be converted into one another, much in the manner of a
topological form. In fact, it seems to be more correct to consider Forsythe's analysis of
movement in topological terms than in terms of euclidean geometries. After all,
inasmuch as the dancing body serves here as a transducer of abstract potentials, it
cannot know them but by moving (with) them. Such transductions do not occur when
movement just conforms to the reproduction of static figures. 
It is perhaps the IT's topological character that is better attained with the
multimodality of each videogram. If on the one hand each choreographic object is
irreducible to danced expressions, verbal explanations and graphemes, on the other hand
it is their articulation that offers insights into the object's potentials. This insight, of
course, is here enhanced by the fact that these expressive modalities are overlapped onto
one another in one same plane of expression. In this way, not only each modality offers
insights into the object's parameters, but their relation forms a nexus with the
multimodal possibilities of digital articulation. What results from the object's
multimodal expression is a relation between nexuses: there is the nexus of each
expressive modality and there is the nexus of their articulate relation. The more nexuses
are articulated, the better the object that they all express becomes defined. The
choreographic object's multimodal expression allows for its parameters to be defined as
what remains invariant across the different modalities involved. As mentioned before,
this invariant function of choreography corresponds to its principle of individuation,
which in turn corresponds to the nexus' relativity to its own absolute origin.86 Insofar as
the nexus' absolute origin is inaccessible, this relativity is nowhere to be found. It is a
virtual potential that can only be accessed in effect. Therefore, if the multimodality of
each IT's videogram expresses invariant parameters, it is only because it implicates
virtual potentials. And it is only by reason of these potentials, which assure each
parametric structure's topology, that a nexus is expressed. 
Depending on each domain's possibilities of expression, one same choreographic
object can appear differently. The parameters possibly depicted from written graphemes
are not exactly the same as the depictable in either the object's danced expressions or its
verbal explanations. It is only by relating these differences that what they share becomes
explicit. In regard to the choreographic object shown above (see Illustration 1), the
86 See page 95.
106

following parameters can be depicted: a starting point, a final point and a series of
intermediate points connecting the previous two, not in a straight line, but in a
descendent arc (the final point being lower than the starting point). This structure can be
depicted as well in the dancing body's expressions. But whereas the grapheme doesn't
express data with regard to the dancing body, it is with the latter that the object's
parameters acquire further definition: all the points of the descendent arc coincide with
one single bodily point—in this case, the right hand. Despite its appearance, this is not a
simple parameter. For here it is implied that, while the hand follows the descendent arc,
there occurs a progressive structuration throughout the rest of the body, which organizes
its movements with spiralling forms. This is somewhat inevitable, since spiralling is the
organizational tendency of the musculoskeletal system in movement. In this sense, the
descendent arc, rather than being given, emerges when the dancing body follows the
given parameters, determining in this way the arc's amplitude and length. From this
organizational tendency follows a final parameter, which is made explicit with the
videogram's multimodal nexus: the arc's final point corresponds to the place where the
body's spiralling movement can no longer progress (i.e. most probably the floor). It is
the multimodal nexus that defines most clearly the object's parameters. What is not
expressed with one modality can be made explicit with others. And their relation in
continuity can definitely express what remains without variation.
If what is transduced across choreography's variable recurrences are principles
of individuation, it remains to be explained how this transduction occurs. Or, better yet,
it remains to be said how choreographic principles are preserved throughout a process
of cross-domain transduction. This is clearly a problem of memory. It regards the
problem of how choreographic memory moves through the actual-virtual dynamisms of
process. In order to tackle this problematic, it is perhaps useful to draw upon
philosopher Gilles Deleuze's theory of memory, since his distinction between
“transcendental memory” and “empirical memory” can facilitate the understanding that,
between the choreographic object's parametric structure and its virtual potentials, there
exists a process which fluctuates between perception, forgetting and remembering. For
Deleuze, “[e]mpirical memory is addressed to those things which can and even must be
grasped: what is recalled must have been seen, heard, imagined or thought. That which
is forgotten, in the empirical sense, is that which cannot be grasped a second time by the
memory which searches for it (it is too far removed; forgetting has effaced or separated
us from the memory). Transcendental memory, by contrast, grasps that which from the
outset can only be recalled, even the first time: not a contingent past, but the being of
107

the past as such and the past of every time. In this manner, the forgotten thing appears in
person to the memory which essentially apprehends it.” (1994, p. 140). In a sense, this
notion of transcendental memory corresponds to the general potentials without which no
actualization can ever occur. Only because the potentials of abstraction are in fact the
objects of transcendental memory, can these ingress into particular forms. In contrast,
empirical memory is always relative to the objects of perception. What is given in
perception will become a referent for recognition and prediction. Which implies that the
potentials of the one and the potentials of the other affect one another in the same way
that the virtual and the actual do. In fact, transcendental memory and empirical memory
are just alternative designations for the virtual and for the actual, respectively.
Individuation is conditioned both by what is determinately given—empirical memory as
the actuality of what has already individuated and got to be inscribed in the experience
of the world—and by the indetermination of an initial disparity, which in a sense
equates the absolute origin of individuation with the potentials of transcendental
memory. 
From this standpoint, it can be posited that, in regard to choreographic objects,
not only the virtual dimension of transcendental memory assures the necessary
potentials for them to be created anew, as it assures the capacity for what has been
empirically given to be reactualized in a novel manner. This creative capacity of
transcendental memory is what allows for the recurrences of choreography to differ
from one another. It assures degrees of indetermination necessary for differences to take
place. But it is also what allows for recurrence itself, even when what was once
perceived has been forgotten. It is this capacity of the virtual to retain the forgotten that
allows for similar resolutions to occur in processes that have no relationship whatsoever
with one another. Transcendental memory allows for the inexplicable coincidence of
unrelated events. And despite the recollection of what has been forgotten being said by
Deleuze to “appear in person to the memory which essentially apprehends it”, this
should not be understood as a corresponding to a conception of transcendental memory
as essence, i.e. as an essential trait capable of defining seamlessly its own different
expressions. In contrast to any kind of idealism, the objects of transcendental memory
should be understood as virtual potentials that, because they tend towards possibility
with probabilistic distributions that favour some events in detriment of others, are in
themselves fields of intensive differentiation. The objects of transcendental memory are
diagrammatic in both the sense that they are real but imperceptible and in the sense that
they can be so problematic that their resolution actually defines determinate
108

expressions. The fact that one same diagram allows for the emergence of different
expressions (as different as dancing, speaking and writing) can thus be said to result
from a differentiation of tendencies that depends on its relation with actual conditions of
individuation. Depending on the domain of individuation and on its possibilities of
expression, the diagrammatic forces of abstraction will be differently expressed. If the
domain is the dancing body, the expression of a choreographic diagram's will conform
to its possibilities. Conversely, there are choreographic objects that are beyond the
expressive possibilities of the dancing body.87 If the domain is the kind of graphical
writing that, at the time of the IT's release, was available to be used with video
recordings, then the choreographic diagram will conform to the possibilities offered by
the technical devices in use. Insofar as each domain limits virtual potentials with
determinate possibilities, each diagram can be expressed differently. Which is not to say
that several recurrences of one same diagram in one same domain will, in contrast, be
expressed similarly. This depends much on the domain's degree of indetermination. The
dancing body, for example, implicates such a degree of indetermination that it will
never express one same diagram the same way twice. 
Arguing that indetermination is precisely what both idealism and realism fail to
acknowledge in relation to the necessary conditions of individuation, dance and media
theorist Stamatia Portanova argues in her book “Moving without a Body: Digital
Philosophy and Choreographic Thoughts” (2013) that in both perspectives “[t]he
fundamental question that remains unanswered is how to explain difference and
repetition, what persists and what mutates in the form of a step, or how to preserve
immanent patterns of being and becoming, of nature and reason, in dance.” (Ibid., p.
66). Both from the perspective that repetition is transcendentally determined and from
the perspective that repetition follows from physical laws, the fact that difference
occurs, even when identity and similitude seem to prevail, is largely neglected. Both
views override the indetermination of potentials, only to posit an identitary mode of
causality at the heart of process. If this would be so in the case of choreography, neither
could the perception of dance be forgotten nor could its remembrance be expressed with
a difference. For Portanova, choreography has always been “afflicted by an essential
87 It is enough to recall that choreographer Merce Cunningham used such strategy to challenge the
dancers with whom he worked. It is well known that “the first choreographer of international renown
who routinely utilized the computer as a choreographic tool” (Copeland, 2004, p. 168) used the
choreographic software “LifeForms” (www.charactermotion.com) to generate improbable and even
impossible images of movement that the dancers would then try to execute. Importantly, these
computer generated images were not intended to be reproduced as such, but rather to act as catalysts
for the dancers to discover new ways of moving. 
109

form of forgetting” (Ibid. p. 65), which accords with the already mentioned excess of
the body over writing. Forgetting, in this sense, corresponds to the definition of
performance as that which is transient and irretrievable. But, beyond this, it corresponds
as well to the non-actualized potentials of movement. A potentiality that, for Portanova,
constitutes the very heart of a movement that is not a repetitive mode of differentiation,
i.e. repetition without difference, but rather a differentiating mode of repetition, i.e.
repetition with difference. In her words: “one step is always in relation not only to the
following one, but to a multiplicity of potential steps not actually taken. It is this
particular relation of the step to its intensive potential that constitutes movement’s
rhythm: the in-between of movement continuously folding into a centrifugal vortex or a
spiral. Impossible to repeat.” (Ibid. p. 65). It is the immanence between virtual
potentials and actual constraints that not only allows for the virtualization of actuality
but also for the continuous, i.e. rhythmic, relation of what would otherwise be
discontinuous (because perceived as such). The rhythmic character of repetition attests
the return of difference within individuation. “It is the difference that is rhythmic”, say
Gilles Deleuze and Felix Guattari, “not the repetition, which nevertheless produces it:
productive repetition has nothing to do with reproductive meter” (1987, p. 314).
The differentiation of repetition corresponds precisely to what has been here
designated as encounter. In Portanova's words: “Every time a remarkable or distinctive
point of a body (for example, the ankle as an abstract point of the notation’s score)
combines with, or relates to, that of another body (for example, the dancer’s ankle as a
concrete anatomical point), a difference is generated: from one gesture to the other,
difference is carried not alongside imitation but throughout a progressive repetition of
singularities” (2013, p. 67). Novelty is not added to the repetition of the same. Rather, it
is rhythm itself, with its differential character, that follows from the combination of
implicit potentials with explicit forms. Such is the diagrammatic capacity of repetition.
The problematic difference between all the possible curves that a dancing body can
express when combining itself with the object “Dropping Curves” corresponds in this
way to a difference between potentials that is immanent in the object's possible
expressions. To remember the object in a certain way is to differ from what is given and
therefore already known. It is to individuate novel instances of knowledge and,
correspondingly, novel relations between subjects and objects. Which is also the reason
why, for Portanova, the rhythmic repetition of a diagrammatic combination between
formal and formless potentials corresponds to memory itself. Or, in her own words, this
combination is “what makes of the repeating body a remembering mind”. As such,
110

“[r]ather than being physically contingent and external to the abstract concept, or rather
than being conceptually programmed and external to the physical body, the difference of
a dance form becomes internal to an idea”. (Ibid.). A corollary from which it follows
that the choreographic diagram is in itself an idea of dance. And insofar as an idea is
neither fully removed from actuality nor fully disconnected from what is, the
choreographic object can be said to be an idea of movements with nexus. It is a dynamic
whole primarily defined by the creative relation between its general and relative
potentials. A whole that can be reduced neither to pure abstractions nor to pure
expressions, but which is a topology with the capacity of expressing itself differently
without ceasing to be itself.
In order to pursue such understanding of choreographic objects, this study will
now turn towards the notion that ideas are fundamentally topological and that, as such,
they structure the immanent relation between abstractions and expressions. Both in
regard to the notion of diagram and in regard to the movements of choreographic
thought, it should now be asked: How does rhythm partake the complex interplay
between the unconscious, the intelligible and the sensible? And, moreover, how does
this interplay acquire a truly choreographic character? What seems to be most evident is
that, in any case, a multiplicity of movements must connect the abstract with the
concrete according to its own nexus. But how this nexus manifests itself and endures
throughout the rhythmic affectivity of all dimensions of movement's wholeness remains
to be clarified.
111

Chapter 4 - DIAGRAMMATIC IDEAS
The choreographic object has been here defined as an idea that, because it
necessarily pertains to a nexus of movements, is problematic and therefore potential
with regard to being expressed differently across domains. This next chapter will start
by exploring French philosopher Gilles Deleuze's theory of ideas in order to provide a
better understanding of how the choreographic object's topology behaves in between
abstraction and expression. This will lead the discussion towards a definition of ideas as
propositions, which will allow for better tackling the relationship between
choreographic ideas and the processes by which a dancing body learns how to move
accordingly. Moreover, this chapter's second Section will look into a concrete study case
—Emio Greco and Pieter Scholten's “Double Skin / Double Mind” choreographic object
—in order to exemplify how a choreographic object is charged with potentials and how
these can be resolved into different kinds of expression. Since this one object has been
created with the intent of transmitting determinate instances of choreographic
knowledge, its transductive character will be approached via the relationship of its
topology with the conceptual structure used to express it across domains. This will
provide a basis upon which to conceptualize the notion of diagram, to be developed
throughout this chapter's third Section. Such development will continue to draw upon
Deleuze's philosophy, articulating it with sources that itself draws from: Charles S.
Peirce semiotic framework, Michel Foucault's work on the social diagram, and Brian
Massumi and Manuel DeLanda's commentaries upon this notion (which are directly
related to Deleuze's joint work with Felix Guattari). Dwelling upon the notion of
diagram will not only allow for a better understanding of the dynamisms by which ideas
come to determine concrete cases of solution with regard to their own problematic
structure, but also of how encounters and their results are never only a matter of
determination but also a matter of indetermination. This will make the case that, in order
for the encounter between dance and technology to be truly creative, it must openly
engage with unconscious forces that, despite being inaccessible, are absolutely
determinant in regard to the ingression of novelty into the expression of choreographic
ideas.
112

4.1 - From Idea to Proposition
A choreographic object is a technical object. It undergoes invention and
concretization. And as much as this process follows heuristic iterations of concretization
with feedbacks to abstraction, i.e. to the level of the abstract diagrams from which
technical concretization is drawn, the actual resolution of a choreographic object
corresponds as well to the resolution of corresponding instances of knowledge. Simple
objects, such as “Dropping Curves”, require less experimentation than complex ones,
such as a choreography assembled from many different objects. Whenever a complex of
choreographic objects is assembled, the problems posed to its concretization correspond
not only to the sum of its constituent parts, to the different ideas of the assembled
objects, but also to a multiplicity of problems that necessarily emerges from the
assemblage itself. Which is to say that, not only is the underlying idea of each
choreographic object problematic and therefore potential of being expressed anew, but
also the relation between different choreographic objects (be this a relation in
succession, such as when one dancer improvises and composes with different objects,
one after the other, or a relation in simultaneity, such as when different objects are
juxtaposed in space by different dancers) is in itself problematic and therefore capable
of expressing novel choreographic ideas. Depending on the degree of indetermination of
a choreographic object, the resolution of its implicit problems will require more or less
experimentation. As such, this is a requirement that directly concerns the resolute
knowledge of each choreographic object. In other words, without a process that
iteratively experiments with the actual possibilities of the technical system, no possible
resolution of the problems posed will come to knowledge. The analogous co-
individuation of subject and object in the technical concretization of choreography
requires that the epistemological link between them is constituted on the basis of a
process that, rather than taking the objects' parametric structures as given, actually
invents them (always with and from a difference).
In regard to this relation between problematic ideas and actual experimentation
in processes of technical individuation, it is perhaps Gilles Deleuze's theory of ideas
(1994, pp. 168–221) that is most guiding. While drawing from Simondon's theory of
psychic individuation (though in many cases not explicitly), but with a more explicit
take on topology, Deleuze's theory of ideas not only characterizes thought in
problematic terms but also proposes that the solutions for the problems posed by ideas
113

can only be found by means of actual experimentation. For the author, “the Idea is not
the element of knowledge but that of an infinite 'learning', which is of a different nature
to knowledge. For learning evolves entirely in the comprehension of problems as such,
in the apprehension and condensation of singularities and in the composition of ideal
events and bodies. Learning to swim or learning a foreign language means composing
the singular points of one's own body or one's own language with those of another shape
or element, which tears us apart but also propels us into a hitherto unknown and
unheard-of world of problems. To what are we dedicated if not to those problems which
demand the very transformation of our body and our language? In short, representation
and knowledge are modeled entirely upon propositions of consciousness, which
designate cases of solution. But those propositions by themselves give a completely
inaccurate notion of the instance which engenders them as cases, and which they resolve
or conclude. By contrast, the Idea and 'learning' express that extra-propositional or sub-
representative problematic instance: the presentation of the unconscious, not the
representation of consciousness.” (1994, p. 192). As such, technical experimentation
involves not only what is possible to concretize but also the preindividual depth of the
individuating system. It implicates the continuum of affects engendered intensively
between encountering elements. It encompasses both what is proposed to the encounter
and what exceeds the possibilities of knowledge by reason of belonging to the very
plane of disparition where potentials differentiate. Learning pertains, therefore, to the
resolution of problems in potential. It pertains to the resolution of what cannot be
known in advance but which notwithstanding can come to constitute novel instances of
knowledge. The presentation of the unconscious in the problematic encounters of
technical individuation regards therefore an experience that must be lived, processually,
rather than represented as a proposition of resolution. 
Accordingly, for Deleuze, ideas implicate the sensible by difference rather than
by identity. For him, “[a]n Idea is an n-dimensional, continuous, defined multiplicity”88
88 A definition in all too close to Bergson's concept of “duration”. Already in Section 1.1, Deleuze was a
guiding voice for discussing this concept. Which not only attests the direct influence of one's work on
the other's, but more broadly the fact that Deleuze, like Bergson, was also concerned with the insights
brought about by the fundamental sciences, most notably mathematics and physics. Besides Deleuze's
well known take on topology, it is worth noting the one he took on the work of René Thom, the
french mathematician who in the sixties formulated the mathesis of catastrophe or chaos theory
(Deleuze, 1993, p. 16). In this regard, philosopher of science and known commentator of Deleuze's
philosophy, Manuel DeLanda remarks that: “In [Difference and Repetition], Deleuze repeatedly
makes use of these 'spaces of energetic possibilities' (technically referred to as 'state spaces' or 'phase
spaces'), and of the topological forms (or 'singularities') that shape these spaces. [...] Since these ideas
reappear in his later work, and since both the concept of 'phase space' and that of 'singularity' belong
to mathematics, it is safe to say that a crucial component of Deleuzian thought comes from the
philosophy of mathematics. And, indeed, chapter four of Difference and Repetition is a meditation on
114

(1994, p. 182), a formula which entails that, rather than being a homogeneous unity, an
idea necessarily organizes heterogeneous elements in relations of difference.
Remarkably, these are intensive differences. Problems internal to the continuous
multiplicity where potentials belonging to different orders of magnitude relate to one
another in one single field of heterogeneous composition. Technical resolution must
implicate a durational experience which relates the past with the present for the sake of
relating an idea's virtual potentials with its actual cases of solution. Technical
individuation is a perfectly positive process of invention, it knows nothing about
negation. In fact, this is clearly a standpoint that disables the possibility of a dialectical
negativity, for which an idea, being identical with itself, can negate another self-
identical idea. For Deleuze, an idea has neither form nor identity: it is without “sensible
form, conceptual signification, nor any assignable function” (Ibid., p. 183). It is a
differential variety that is always more-than-itself, a general potential which exceeds
representation. Because of this, the idea is potentially problematic. It is the differential
field of problematization from which determinate solutions can be drawn. The idea is a
necessary condition with regard to technical resolution, a condition that goes together
with what is possible to be resolved in each domain of individuation. Experimentation
results out of such condition. It is the necessary procedure for individuating instances of
knowledge that both attain and not attain the resolution of a given problem.
Additionally, the idea's problematic stance implicates in process the extra-propositional
and unconscious reality of virtual potentials. This allows for determining solutions that
cannot be but singular expressions of unpredictable affects. The need to experiment
results as well out of such reality. To access in effect to what, being inaccessible, can
notwithstanding contribute to resolute determinations. Both problems and possibilities,
affects and effects, are a condition of technical experimentation. On its turn, technical
experimentation is the means by which both resolution and the knowledge of how to
attain it can come about. 
Deleuze further distinguishes ideas from propositions in the following way:
“Spatio-temporal relations no doubt retain multiplicity, but lose interiority; concepts of
the understanding retain interiority, but lose multiplicity, which they replace by the
the metaphysics of the differential and integral calculus. On the other hand, given that 'phase spaces'
and 'singularities' become physically significant only in relation to material systems which are
traversed by a strong flow of energy, Deleuze's philosophy is also intimately related to that branch of
physics which deals with material and energetic flows, i.e. with thermodynamics. And, indeed,
chapter five of Difference and Repetition is a philosophical critique of nineteenth-century
thermodynamics, an attempt to recover from that discipline some of the key concepts needed for a
theory of immanent morphogenesis.” (2000, p. 35). 
115

identity of an 'I think' or something thought. Internal multiplicity, by contrast, is
characteristic of the Idea alone” (1994, p. 183). Which is a distinction that facilitates a
better understanding of Stamatia Portanova's assertion that the difference of a dance
form is internal to its idea.89 The idea is different from the concepts of the understanding
because these correspond to the subjective side of the transindividual. They result from
a process that, even if it does not solve the problems of ideas, individuates subjective
instances of knowledge. They “retain interiority, but lose multiplicity” precisely because
they attest the self-compatibility of a subject. They attest the state at which there's a
minimum exchange of information between the subject and the milieu that the concepts
regard. In addition, the idea is different from spatio-temporal relations because these
correspond to the objective side of the transindividual. In contrast to the concepts of the
understanding, they are the objective side of determinate instances of knowledge. They
“retain multiplicity, but lose interiority” because they express the objective reality that
the concepts of the understanding regard. The idea pertains neither to the one side nor to
the other. Rather, it pertains to the differential variety of problems implicit in the
constitution of a transindividual relation. It pertains to the problematic condition
underlying both the concepts of the understanding and determinate spatio-temporal
relations. It is not an external factor of determination but an immanent force of
individuation. In fact, “[i]t is sufficient to understand that the genesis takes place in time
not between one actual term, however small, and another actual term, but between the
virtual and its actualization – in other words, it goes from the structure to its incarnation,
from the conditions of a problem to the cases of solution, from the differential elements
and their ideal connections to actual terms and diverse real relations which constitute at
each moment the actuality of time.” (Deleuze, 1994, p. 163). The idea is a genetic
element in regard to solutions. 
Noteworthy is the fact that Deleuze's theory of ideas inherits much from
Immanuel Kant's philosophy. “Kant likes to say that problematic Ideas are both
objective and undetermined” (Ibid., p. 169). From which Deleuze draws both the
postulate that problems are “the real object of the Ideas” (Ibid.) and the postulate that
ideas are divided in three distinct moments. In their “first objective moment”, ideas are
“undetermined with regard to their object” (Ibid.). Importantly, for Deleuze, “[t]he
undetermined is not a simple imperfection in our knowledge or a lack in the object: it is
a perfectly positive, objective structure which acts as a focus or horizon within
perception” (Ibid.). Hence, the idea is undetermined with regard to its problems because
89 See page 110.
116

its differential variety connects heterogeneous elements in non-localisable relations. In
its second moment, the idea becomes “determinable with regard to the objects of
experience” (Ibid.). Which is to say that it becomes relative to the possibilities of
representation. Its potentials become limited by what has been given to experience.
From which it reversely follows that “an object outside experience can be represented
only in problematic form” (Ibid.). The third moment of the idea, in which this bears “the
ideal of an infinite determination with regard to concepts of the understanding” (Ibid.),
corresponds to the resolution of its problems in thought. Here, the idea becomes
objective and thus acquires its highest degree of determination. While in a first moment
the problems of ideas are undetermined and in a second moment determinable with
regard to the objects of experience, in a third moment they acquire a positional status.
Problems are posited together with determinate cases of solution. To say that the idea
has an infinite capacity of determination with regard to the concepts of the understating
thus stands for saying that the cases of solution determinable with thought can be many.
Despite its three moments, the idea is one single whole. It is continuous with
itself because it is primarily a differential variety. The unity of the idea's three different
moments is the continuity of its topology. As such, the undetermined problems of the
idea's first moment are not withdrawn from the cases of solution objectified in its third
moment. As Deleuze notes, “[a] problem does not exist, apart from its solutions. Far
from disappearing in this overlay, however, it insists and persists in these solutions. A
problem is determined at the same time as it is solved, but its determination is not the
same as its solution: the two elements differ in kind, the determination amounting to the
genesis of the concomitant solution. (In this manner the distribution of singularities
belongs entirely to the conditions of the problem, while their specification already refers
to solutions constructed under these conditions.) The problem is at once both
transcendent and immanent in relation to its solutions. Transcendent, because it consists
in a system of ideal liaisons or differential relations between genetic elements.
Immanent, because these liaisons or relations are incarnated in the actual relations
which do not resemble them and are defined by the field of solution.” (1994, p. 163).
Whereas the differential distribution of singularities attests the problem's ideal character,
its concomitant solution attests the distribution of particular cases, which are but
possible cancelations of the problem's implicit disparity. The difference between
determinate problems and their cases of solution is one of kind, not only because
problematic potentials are general and their specification relative to actual conditions,
but also because problems are propositions for a subject to learn how to solve them
117

accordingly. Individuating cases of solution requires experimenting with possibilities of
representation and concretization. It requires an exclusive selection of what might
possibly stand both as solution and as problematic expression. 
Importantly, says Deleuze, “[a] proposition by itself is particular, and represents
a determinate response. A series of propositions can be distributed in such a way that the
responses they represent constitute a general solution (as in the case of the values of an
algebraic equation). But precisely, propositions, whether general or particular, find their
sense only in the subjacent problem which inspires them. Only the Idea or problem is
universal. It is not the solution which lends its generality to the problem, but the
problem which lends its universality to the solution. It is never enough to solve a
problem with the aid of a series of simple cases playing the role of analytic elements:
the conditions under which the problem acquires a maximum of comprehension and
extension must be determined, conditions capable of communicating to a given case of
solution the ideal continuity appropriate to it. Even for a problem which has only a
single case of solution, the proposition which designates this case would acquire its
sense only within a complex capable of comprehending imaginary situations and
integrating an ideal of continuity. To solve a problem is always to give rise to
discontinuities on the basis of a continuity which functions as Idea. Once we 'forget' the
problem, we have before us no more than an abstract general solution, and since there is
no longer anything to support that generality, there is nothing to prevent the solution
from fragmenting into the particular propositions which constitute its cases. Once
separated from the problem, the propositions fall back into the status of particular
propositions whose sole value is designatory. Consciousness then attempts to
reconstitute the problem, but by way of the neutralised double of particular propositions
(interrogations, doubts, likelihoods, hypotheses) and the empty form of general
propositions (equations, theorems, theories)” (1994, p. 162). Which amounts to saying
that both the idea's determinability with regard to the objects of experience and its
determination with regard to the concepts of the understanding are phases that remain to
be given while the idea persists as problematic and unresolved. The phase of the idea
that is outside of experience cannot but create the unpredictable. In contrast, the objects
of experience and the concepts of the understanding can occur only on the basis of what
is giveable. This difference between the first and the other two moments of the idea
coincides with the difference between its potentials and possibilities. Would potentials
be detached from possibilities, nothing but what is giveable could follow from the idea.
If this would be the case, for example, with technical individuation, then nothing but a
118

reproduction of givens could be concretized, i.e. to be “produced after the fact, as
retroactively fabricated in the image of what resembles it” (Ibid., p. 21).90 In such case,
there is no invention. Because for invention to occur, for an idea's potentials to manifest
the unpredictable, its problematic structure needs to be active throughout the whole
process. The idea's unity must be prehended so that, together with the proposition of its
solutions, problems remain potential, differentiating in this way what would be
otherwise a reproduction of the same. To solve a problem is to learn how to determine
conditions capable of integrating the problem itself in the form of its relative solutions.
This requires the necessary trials for not only solving the problem, but to solve it in
relation to the idea to which both problem and solution belong. Technical resolution
discontinues what nevertheless remains in relation to the idea. It individuates cases of
solution that necessarily imply a constitutive difference. This is why it is always a
creative act. 
From the perspective of Deleuze's theory of ideas, choreographic objects are but
ideal systems of individuation. Each choreographic object corresponds to a differential
variety with the capacity to problematize the encounter between virtual potentials and
actual possibilities. Subsequently, it corresponds as well to the potential of expressing
cases of solution in accordance with what the dedicated domains actually allow for. To
express choreographic objects is to learn how to posit their constitutive problems in
relation to determinate conditions. Different possibilities of expression will necessarily
conduce to learning how to posit choreographic problems in different ways. And
inasmuch as the problems of ideas are implicated in the cases of solution, different
choreographic expressions can only be said to pertain to one same object if they share
the same problematic structure. In this sense, in spite of being expressed
discontinuously in relation to one another, the different cases of solution of one same
problematic choreography belong to the same topological continuity, i.e. they share the
same potentials of problematization. From which it follows that the choreographic
problem is necessarily propositional. Its capacity to instigate action is as well the
capacity of the subject to learn how to posit problems. To express choreographic objects
is to experiment with possibilities and concretize given solutions with regard to the
problems posed. An aspect that is clearly emphasized in Erin Manning's following
90 Importantly, for Deleuze, the relation between the possible and the actual is organized in accordance
with principles of “identity with regard to concepts, opposition with regard to the determination of
concepts, analogy with regard to judgement, and resemblance with regard to objects” (1994, p. 137).
According to such principles, the realization of the possible-actual relation cannot but double the
images of what is possible with the actualization of determinate cases of solution. 
119

commentary on William Forsythe's choreographic object “Dropping Curves”: “When
Forsythe proposes 'drop a curve' what he means is not 'reconfigure the habit' but 'move
through contrast'. If you tend to drop through your side, creating a curve from hip to
shoulder, begin there. But go elsewhere with it – let it take you elsewhere. Feel the
movement’s differential and move with its inflection in the event, letting it move the
you you are becoming.” (2013, p. 77). Though this is not necessarily what Forsythe
himself would say (despite the fact that in the quoted text there's a clear confusion
between the two authors' words), what is most important to retain from this passage is
the fact that, in this way, propositions are made to be a necessary condition to the
transduction of choreographic knowledge. Importantly, Manning's notion of proposition
derives from Alfred N. Whitehead's philosophy. For the latter, as for Deleuze,91
propositions are not added to the solutions, but they are of and with the solutions. They
work as intensive catalysts for learning what is yet unknown. A proposition “is a datum
for feeling, awaiting a subject feeling it. Its relevance to the actual world by means of its
logical subjects makes it a lure for feeling. In fact many subjects may feel it with
diverse feelings, and with diverse sorts of feelings” (Whitehead, 1978, p. 259). What
becomes a proposition is thus what the subject makes of it. The proposition itself is not
given and what it will have become depends on the feeling subject, which also
individuates with the feeling. “If [...] the proposition has been admitted into feeling,
then the proposition constitutes what the feeling has felt” (Ibid., p. 186). From which it
follows that both the subject and the proposition co-individuate to become the dialogical
poles of one system of co-determination. Or, if one is to say instead that what
individuates is both a subject and an object, then the proposition is the very movement
of their co-constitution. The proposition constitutes the feeling subject as much as what
is felt. The proposition is an idea in movement. The formal conditions of the idea's
propositional movement can, and to a certain extent must, be given. But the proposition
itself is not giveable. Though any form can become propositional, it needs a subject to
make it so.
It is precisely from this standpoint that it is possible to say, with Manning, that
the proposition “drop a curve” does not stand for “reconfiguring a habit” but rather to
“moving through contrast”. Manning's own reading of Whitehead's notion of
proposition is here too elucidative: “The proposition, for Whitehead, works as an
inflection that affects how a given occasion comes to expression: propositions elicit
91 For Deleuze's comments upon Whitehead's philosophy, see his book on “Leibniz and the Baroque”,
titled “The Fold” (1993).
120

action in an environment of change. The proposition is a lure. It is a force that cuts into
the incipient event to alter its experiential vectorization. The proposition, however, is
never added on to an occasion. It is of and with the occasion – its immanent cleaving.
This cleaving activates the force of contrast within the occasion, opening the occasion to
its difference. Contrast is here understood as the force of difference that activates the
dephasing through which the occasion is felt as such.” (2013, p. 77). In this guise,
Manning further explains that to “[d]rop a curve reaches its propositional potential
when contrast is activated such that the becoming-body fields the curving of space-time
in a new way, itself co-constituted by this newness. If this happens, what is experienced
is the creation of a previously unfelt sensation that now permeates the welling occasion.
[…] Drop a curve is propositional not when a body has been defined but when the force
of movement-moving activates a field of relation that alters the affective and
compositional ecology of the larger event of movement-moving.” (Manning, 2013, p.
78). The choreographic object becomes propositional when its differential variety is felt
by its logical subject. While emerging from the encounter between a dedicated domain
and the difference internal to an idea of dance, the proposition participates in the
“distribution of the sensible” (Rancière, 2004, 2010) occurring within the individuating
system where both the feeling and what the feeling feels co-constitute one another. The
proposition of choreography therefore attests the latter's creativity. It attests the fact that
the becoming propositional of the choreographic object necessarily divests the
reproduction of what is already known, only to increase the potentials for something
new to be learnt. 
4.2 - Individuating Choreo-Knowledge
When asked to deliver a workshop at the Internationale Tanzwochen Wien in
1998, choreographer and dancer Emio Greco and dramaturgist Pieter C. Scholten (EG|
PC) decided to create a structure capable of transmitting their creative method, which
they named “Double Skin / Double Mind” (DS/DM). After delivering this workshop in
different contexts for some years, the two artists felt “the need to understand the logic of
the workshop and its structure better” (Delahunta, 2007b, p. 20). In order to do this, the
EG|PC dance company, in cooperation with the research group Art Practice and Artistic
Development, of the Amsterdam School of the Arts, headed by Marijke Hoogenboom,
121

developed from 2004 to 2007 the “Notation Research Project” (NRP).92 With this
project, the two artists and a multi-disciplinary team of specialists strived for finding a
notation system capable of capturing “the inner intention as well as the outer shape of
gestures and [dance] phrases” (Delahunta, 2007b, p. 5). Remarkably, this research
generated multiple outcomes: a documentary, a DVD-ROM, a book and an interactive
installation, all published together under the title “(Capturing Intention):
Documentation, Analysis and Notation Research Based on the Work of Emio
Greco/PC” (CI).93
The workshop DS/DM was intended to facilitate the transference, from Emio
Greco's dancing body to the body of other dancers, of a series of movement principles.
As it can be seen in the DS/DM documentary,94 such transference is based on
exemplification and reproduction. The dancers watch Greco dancing, listen to his oral
instructions and then try to dance in accordance with the same movement principles. To
say that a movement principle is reproduced from body to body is not the same as
saying that one body mimics another. Rather than formal outcomes, what is here
transferred across bodies is a principle of individuation. In dance, movement principles
are principles of individuation. To transfer movement principles across bodies is a
transductive process.
The movement principles of Greco's characteristic dancing are known to
comprise a strong component of internal movement, that is, of bodily movements that
occur at orders of magnitude unperceivable to other bodies. Hence, the name of the
publication: “Capturing Intention”. For intention, here, regards the intensive qualities of
bodily movement and the problematic potentials that these pose to the individuation of
resolute expressions. And if it can be argued that it is an impossible task to express
continuity as such either with film, software or text, it can also be argued that each of
the CI's objects attests the systematic tentative of dealing with this one problem: the
92 This project was followed by the “Inside Movement Knowledge” Project (IMK), which occurred
between 2008 and 2010. For a detailed account of both projects' history see
www.insidemovementknowledge.net.
93 I had the chance to meet part of the NRP's team at the first Annual Arts and Sciences Laboratory of
the “Transmedia Knowledge Base for Performing Arts” Project (TKB), which took place at the
choreographic centre “O Espaço do Tempo” in Montemor-o-Novo, Portugal, between 22 and 28 May
2010. For more on the TKB Project, see http://tkb.fcsh.unl.pt/. By then the NRP had already finished,
but its outcomes were still being developed in the frame of the IMK Project. Since this Laboratory
was dedicated to “New models of documentation for contemporary dance”, the NRP/IMK's team had
there the opportunity to set up the interactive installation DS/DM and present their remaining work.
This was the only time I accessed the interactive installation's actual set up and experienced its
workings. 
94 The DS/DM documentary can be watched at https://vimeo.com/38974588, or found enclosed in the
publication “(Capturing Intention): Documentation, Analysis and Notation Research Based on the
Work of Emio Greco/PC” (Delahunta, 2007a).
122

fundamental and apparently unsurmountable difference between qualitative and
quantitative multiplicities. Because of this, each of these objects can be said to express,
if not a solution, at least an approximation to the problem itself. To transfer principles of
intensive movement, either across bodies or from the dancing body to each of the CI's
different domains, is tantamount to transduce choreographic problems. First, this
regards the fact the intensive body is constitutively problematic and therefore capable of
transducing the principles according to which itself moves. Second, it regards the fact
that the expressive resolution of such intensive problems necessarily implies problems
that are of the domain of expression itself. When the ones do not coincide with the
others, i.e. when the problems of the source domain do not coincide with the problems
of the target domain (e.g. the transduction of movement principles from the dancing
body to the digital domain), not only is the heterogenous multiplicity doubled with a
difference, as it is also submitted to conditions of individuation that require different
modes of experimentation. In this sense, EG|PC's knowledge of the DS/DM's movement
principles is much more easily (i.e. without other kinds of problems) transferred to other
dancing bodies than to the target domains used to express the CI's objects. Expressing
movement principles in these latter domains requires specific modes of experimentation
and the resolution of problems that are foreign to the knowledge that comes with the
experience of dancing. It should nonetheless be noticed that, of the four CI's objects
mentioned above, only the DVD and the Interactive Installation were in fact created
with the intent of being autonomous transducers of the DS/DM's movement principles.
Which is to say that, even if all the CI's objects resulted primarily from the knowledge
that EG|PC had of the DS/DM workshop, only these two expressions have individuated
from the resolution of problems posed by the encounter between determinate ideas of
dance and the domains targeted to express these same ideas. With such resolution, these
objects acquired a truly choreographic character. They have become choreographic
propositions. With them, it is possible to learn how to dance according to the DS/DM's
movement principles, similarly to what happens in a workshop delivered by EG|PC
themselves. These two objects are capable of transducing the DS/DM's movement
principles into other dancing bodies, facilitating in this way the individuation of a
renovated knowledge with regard to the intended dancing. Together with the workshop
itself, these two choreographic objects attest once more the actual variability that one
same system of choreographic individuation if capable of.
In spite of this, it is here worth following the NRP's development and the fact
that its first objective expression was the workshop's video documentary, filmed and
123

directed by Maite Bermúdez in 2005. Curiously, the structure of the documentary
follows the structure of the workshop, as delivered at ImPulsTanz Festival, in August
that year. The latter is shown to be divided in five main parts, designated respectively in
regard to their succession as: 1) “Breathing”; 2) “Jumping”; 3) “Expanding”; 4)
“Reducing”; and 5) “Transfer”. Whereas the first four of these parts correspond to
different principles of movement (or, in other words, movement qualities), the last part
is shown to be structured by a dance phrase that is to be filled with (or fuelled by) them.
The fact that these successive parts are designated like this shouldn't be understood in
any general way whatsoever. Their names are not meant to correspond to the common
understanding that they might pertain to in any other particular context. Rather, they are
meant to specifically depict the problematic structure of the DS/DM's movement
qualities. The fact that there is a tension between the territorialization that signifiers
perform over signified multiplicities and the latter's characteristic deterritorialization, is
remarked by Scott deLahunta—one of NRP's specialists in dance and technology—as
having been one of the difficulties faced by EG|PC when naming and describing the
workshop's structure. “This difficulty of finding the right words and explanations was,
in part, due to the dialectical tension between [the artists] that is inherently a feature of
their artistic work [...]. To ‘decide’ what and how to name or explain these parts of
DS/DM, was to allow it to become fixed, to make it concrete in terminology. However,
as mentioned, the result of this difficult work served the needs of the making of the
documentary. It also produced the hierarchy of sections and subsections so that the
DVD and Installation versions of DS/DM could be created.” (2007b, p. 21). Which is to
say that the tension between signifieds—the variable experiences and expressions of
dance—and signifiers—the words used to name the workshop's movement qualities—
was sufficiently problematic to foster the technical individuation of these two
choreographic objects. After all, despite their possible reduction to the homogeneous
explication of phonetic or graphic signifiers, monemes are but multiplicities of
heterogeneous elements.
With no regard with the structures that followed from naming movement
principles in this way, the DS/DM workshop always had a linguistic dimension. As
dancer (of the EG|PC dance company) and researcher Bertha Bermúdez explains,
“passing these dances onto others is [normally] done through instruction with the body
and words. [As such] the body has to be clear and the words have to be right.”
(Delahunta, 2007b, p. 6). And it is to this latter requirement that the specification of
names attends. If both the DVD and the Interactive Installation are to be capable of
124

transmitting the DS/DM's dance ideas, their expressions have to be structured in a
precise and determinate manner. It could nonetheless be argued that, instead of being
given names, the different parts of the workshop could have been given numbers. But in
contrast to numbers, what the artists' endeavour to find the right words for each of the
workshop's movement qualities attests, is the existing connection between the somatic
experience of the moving body and the ways in which language and conceptual
knowledge are structured, in and by the body. In this sense, the oral explanation of
dance ideas is directly related to the conceptual structures according to which the
DS/DM's movement principles are organized. It allows for understanding both the
knowledge that the artists have of what they do and how this is structured.
That both the NRP and the IMK have turned towards cognitive linguistics to
think and analyse the conceptual structures implicated in the DS/DM's movement
qualities, attests not only these projects' concern with the underlying principles of
dancing but also the acknowledgement that the latter are known both somatically and
conceptually. Bertha Bermúdez and cognitive linguist Carla Fernandes, two of the
researchers here involved, claim to be “interested in searching for the implicit
knowledge that is embedded in choreographic processes and the possible ways of
presenting or expressing it. In practice this means [to] start from the premise that the
translation and transmission of the imagetic thought of a contemporary choreographer
into an embodied-type of thought, via the dancers’ bodies, is above all metaphoric (cf.
Johnson, 1987 on image schemata in the human brain as being prior to awareness).”
(2010, p. 29). This metaphorical character of choreographic transductions can be
understood both in regard to the dancing body's orientation relatively to the charged
ground of its perceptive-affective milieu (i.e. imagetic thought being structured in
accordance with this orientation) and in regard to the influence that knowledge has on
dancing (i.e. expressive movement being determined by the structures of thought). It
regards both the transfer of physical resolutions to the resolution of thought and the
transfer of conceptual resolutions to the resolution of dance. After all, “the essence of
metaphor is understanding and experiencing one kind of thing in terms of another”
(Lakoff & Johnson, 1980, p. 5). Notwithstanding, this is not a symmetric process. The
process by means of which the resolutions of thought follow from the body's physical
orientation is not the same as the one whereby conceptual structures affect the actual
organization of dance. On the basis of this asymmetry is the assumption that knowledge
is characteristically imagetic. It structures images (or imagines structures) that are
neither the body's actual orientation in its milieu nor any of its other possible
125

expressions. To better understand these processes and the relation between metaphors
and the images of thought, it is here worth quoting a long passage from cognitive
linguist Mark Johnson's seminal book “The Body in the Mind” (1987). “To illustrate the
important and undervalued notion of embodied, imaginative understanding, let us
consider two types of imaginative structure [...]: image schemata and metaphorical
projections. An image schema is a recurring, dynamic pattern of our perceptual
interactions and motor programs that gives coherence and structure to our experience.95
The VERTICALITY schema, for instance, emerges from our tendency to employ an
UP-DOWN orientation in picking out meaningful structures of our experience. We
grasp this structure of verticality repeatedly in thousands of perceptions and activities
we experience every day, such as perceiving a tree, our felt sense of standing upright,
the activity of climbing stairs, forming a mental image of a flagpole, measuring our
children's heights, and experiencing the level of water rising in the bathtub. The
VERTICALITY schema is the abstract structure of these VERTICALITY experiences,
images, and perceptions. […] experientially based, imaginative structures of this image
schematic sort are integral to meaning and rationality. A second, related type of
embodied imaginative structure […] is metaphor, conceived as a pervasive mode of
understanding by which we project patterns from one domain of experience in order to
structure another domain of a different kind. So conceived, metaphor is not merely a
linguistic mode of expression; rather, it is one of the chief cognitive structures by which
we are able to have coherent, ordered experiences that we can reason about and make
sense of.96 Through metaphor, we make use of patterns that obtain in our physical
experience to organize our more abstract understanding. Understanding via
95 Elsewhere Johnson writes: “I call these patterns 'image schemata' because they function primarily as
abstract structures of images. They are gestalt structures, consisting of parts standing in relations and
organized into unified wholes, by means of which our experience manifests discernible order. When
we seek to comprehend this order and to reason about it, such bodily based schemata play a central
role. For although a given image schema may emerge first as a structure of bodily interactions, it can
be figuratively developed and extended as a structure around which meaning is organized at more
abstract levels of cognition. This figurative extension and elaboration typically takes the form of
metaphorical projection from the realm of physical bodily interactions onto so-called rational
processes, such as reflection and the drawing of inferences from premises. […] what are often
thought of as abstract meanings and inferential patterns actually do depend on schemata derived from
our bodily experience and problem-solving. There are two especially controversial aspects […]
concerning the centrality of image schematic structures in the organization of meaning and in the
nature of our inferences. The first is their apparently nonpropositional, analog nature. The second is
their figurative character, as structures of embodied imagination.” (1987, p. xx).
96 Another prominent cognitive linguist, George Lakoff, with whom Johnson wrote the book
“Metaphors We Live By” (1980), argues that metaphors can be considered as a mode of thought in
their own right because of three fundamental characteristics: “1) The systematicity in the linguistic
correspondences; 2) The use of metaphor to govern reasoning and behaviour based on that reasoning;
3) The possibility for understanding novel extensions in terms of the conventional correspondences”
(2006, p. 191). From these characteristics follows that metaphors organize the experience of the
world in specific ways and that they can be expressed by means other than speech.
126

metaphorical projection from the concrete to the abstract makes use of physical
experience in two ways. First, our bodily movements and interactions in various
physical domains of experience are structured (as we saw with image schemata), and
that structure can be projected by metaphor onto abstract domains. Second,
metaphorical understanding is not merely a matter of arbitrary fanciful projection from
anything to anything with no constraints. Concrete bodily experience not only
constrains the 'input' to the metaphorical projections but also the nature of the
projections themselves, that is, the kinds of mappings that can occur across domains.”
(Johnson, 1987, p. xv).
From this standpoint, it is possible to understand how dance and speech are both
capable of providing access to underlying conceptual structures and implicit instances
of knowledge. Since the focus here is the dancing body, both modes of expression can
be said to correspond to resolutions that not only implicate movement principles but
also the thoughts that with them arise. Insofar as knowledge in general can be addressed
on the basis of image schemata, and therefore as being grounded on bodily experiences,
both knowing how to dance and knowing how to verbalize this experience necessarily
correspond to one same conceptual structure. It follows that it is possible to not only
address this relation between expressions and abstractions on the basis of the mappings
that occur across domains, but also to use these mappings to further express choreo-
knowledge. It is precisely this that both the DVD and the Interactive Installation
express. By determining the ideas of dance in the form of concepts, here synthesized by
words, and by using these structures to individuate digital expressions, the
concretization of these objects has extended the knowledge of the DS/DM workshop
into domains that, because they are problematic on their own, have allowed for novel
resolutions and renovated perspectives on the workshop. As Pieter Scholten remarks,
the knowledge of the workshop didn't change “but it has gotten more layers through this
research project” (Delahunta, 2007c, p. 21). Such layers correspond both to a glossary
that, beyond the names already mentioned, was fabricated with the intent of
discontinuing movement qualities into a greater degree of resolution, and to the
multimodal contents created to provide different perspectives on the DS/DM, as
structured by the glossary. 
“The DS/DM's glossary has been the first attempt by EG|PC to break down the
creative process through the use of words. Such a process provided the different
127

disciplines involved97 within the research project with a common basis of understanding
around the Double Skin/Double Mind workshop.” (Fernandes & Bermudez, 2010, p.
31). Not only this, but it allowed to depict the conceptual structure of the workshop to a
point that was new even to the artists. As much as the DS/DM's glossary comprises a list
of interrelated terms—a signifying double of the heterogeneous multiplicity that it
represents—, and each of these terms implicates a concept, the glossary can be said to
represent the conceptual structure of the workshop. A fact reiterated by the very process
of its individuation, since that, in order for the glossary to result as it did, “[d]efinitions
and descriptions were constructed through interviews and different transcriptions of the
live transmission of the workshop, in some cases complemented by visual
demonstrations. Divided in two parts, Inside and Outside, the glossary tried to present
the language used by the company (Inside section) versus a more general definition of
the same terms gathered from dictionaries (Outside section)” (Ibid.). It is not of interest
here to consider the specificities of the lexicon used in the DS/DM's glossary. It rather
matters to acknowledge that all its terms refer to resolutions of the dancing body. The
glossary didn't result from a random depiction of choreographic expressions, but rather
from a knowledge that primarily regards the dancing body's capacity to differentiate
movement qualities. Rather than being an external factor of determination imposed on
the workshop for the expression of resolute forms, the glossary should be understood as
a possible expression of the diagram according to which the dancing body develops and
undergoes phase-shifts, from one movement quality to the next. It is nonetheless
noticeable that, in order to create it, much effort was put into defining the terms in
relation to the narrow context of the DS/DM workshop, in relation to the broader
context of EG|PC's artistic work, and in relation to the even broader context of dance
and movement analysis. Here, there are different individuations at stake. There is the
individuation of the DS/DM's movement qualities and there is the individuation of the
concepts created by the multi-disciplinary team of specialists. Whereas the results of the
former correspond to the glossary's structure, the results of the latter correspond to its
contents. The one condition that these two individuations share is the DS/DM's dancing
body. After all, both take it to be a body capable of moving ideas with the potential to
determine conceptual and physical resolutions. By using the glossary for indexing and
organizing the different contents of the DS/DM's DVD (as shown in Illustration 2,
below) and of the Interactive Installation, it became possible to express digitally not
97 Dance notation, motion capture, new media design, cognitive neuroscience, cinematography and
dance analysis (Delahunta, 2007a).
128

129
Illustration 2: “Double Skin / Double Mind” DVD-ROM's conceptual structure. Sections and
subsections as seen from the perspective of the videos' folder and as named after the glossary.

only the workshop's structure but also the diagram of its potentials. Precisely because of
this, says Bermúdez, “[t]he structure that is used in the Installation and the DVD
contains the core of what DS/DM [i.e. NRP and IMK] has achieved in ten years”
(Delahunta, 2007b, p. 21).
Each of the DS/DM workshop's sections and subsections is expressed in the
DVD and in the Interactive Installation with a variety of contents. For example, the
section “Breathing” is expressed in the DVD (see Illustration 3, below) with: 1) a
written explanation; 2) an oral explanation, i.e. the video recording of a “talking head”;
3) the dancing body's video recording; 4) a close up of the previous; 5) a Labanotation
score; 6) a Benesh notation score; and 7) and the “Gesture Follower” software. All
these contents express the DS/DM's choreographic nexus and define it further by being
in relation with one another. This is what the interface designs of the DVD and
Interactive Installation allow for: to relate in continuity, i.e. the continuity of the user's
experience, the differences between the expressive series.98 As with the previously
98 The designer of these interfaces is the same who designed William Forsythe's “Improvisation
Technologies'” DVD-ROM, namely, Chris Ziegler.
130
Illustration 3: Interface of the “Double Skin / Double Mind” DVD-ROM, showing one of the
workshop's sections (with the dancing body's full figure, oral and written explanations, close ups,
notational scores and the “Gesture Follower” software). 

discussed “Improvisation Technologies'”,99 the expressive multimodality of these
graphic interfaces not only explicits the contents' similarity but also the ways in which
they differ. In fact, it is precisely this contrast between the same and the different that
offers an insight into the DS/DM's invariant functions, that is, into the principles of
individuation of the choreographic ideas that these objects simultaneously express and
hold in potential.
Importantly, the glossary's structure is the formal condition of the different
contents' relation. Both in the DVD and in the Interactive Installation the matters of
content are differentiated from and related to one another by means of indexation. For
example, all the contents indexed with “Breathing” are enclosed within one same set,
which is determined not only by the index itself but also by the nexus resulting from the
contents' relation. This function of indexation is therefore a function of expression. It
constrains the many possible relations between matters of content with determinate
ideas. In a sense, such function is the same required for a body to dance in accordance
with the DS/DM's movement qualities. Only by having in mind the concepts according
to which to move, can the dancing body move accordingly. From which it follows that
this capacity of the DS/DM to structure different domains is a force that, when
encountering contents with a variable degree of indetermination, overpowers any
incompatible tendency. This is the force of the DS/DM's choreographic ideas. Their
determination holds in potential the capacity to constrain matters of content, regardless
of the domain of individuation. It should nonetheless be noticed that one does not go
without the other. If the DS/DM's choreographic nexus is to be expressed, the structure
of its abstractions needs to be related with actual matters of content. Only by means of
their encounter, which is the concretization of cases of solution concomitant with the
determination of choreographic ideas, can the latter be expressed and constituted as the
actual ground of potential transductions.
4.3 - Between Abstraction and Expression
These terms, matters of content and functions of expression, have been used by
Gilles Deleuze and Felix Guattari to depict the workings of what they call the “abstract
machine” (1987, pp. 510–514). This concept is intrinsically related to their conception
of the notion of “diagram” (Ibid. pp. 141–143), which they borrowed from American
99 See pages 106-106.
131

philosopher Charles S. Peirce. For the latter, the diagram is a tool for knowledge-
making. To be more correct, Peirce considered diagrams to be a special case of “icons”,
which he defined as signs with the capacity to generate kinds of knowledge different
from the ones implicated in their use. “For a great distinguishing property of the icon is
that by the direct observation of it other truths concerning its objects can be discovered
than those which suffice to determine its constructions.” (1895, p. 2.279). In Peirce’s
1903 “Syllabus”, the diagram is said to be a “hypoicon”, a subspecies of the icon.
Hypoicons are defined by the fact that they cannot stand out in purely formal terms. As
such, all the three species of hypoicons identified by Peirce—“images, diagrams and
metaphors”—are operational, rather than formal. They can only be considered with
regard to the processes that they comprehend. In this sense, an image is not a pictorial
form, but rather a qualitative becoming; a diagram is not a visual scheme, but rather the
processes by it depicted; and a metaphor is not the linguistic expression of one thing in
terms of another, but rather the abstract projection of determinate structures across
domains. Furthermore, the three species of hypoicons are distinguished from one
another in the following way: an image is defined in terms of an object's qualities; a
diagram is defined in terms of the knowledge that it provides of the object in
representation; and a metaphor is defined in terms of the relation that it establishes
between objects. (Ibid., p. 2.277). 
Peirce also distinguishes icons from “indexes” and “symbols” (1998, pp. 258–
299), a distinction that Deleuze and Guattari commented upon, in their famous book “A
Thousand Plateaus” (1987), in the following way: “The distinction between indexes,
icons, and symbols […] are based on signifier-signified relations (contiguity for the
index, similitude for the icon, conventional rule for the symbol); this leads [Peirce] to
make the 'diagram' a special case of the icon (the icon of relation). Peirce is the true
inventor of semiotics. That is why we can borrow his terms, even while changing their
connotations. First, indexes, icons, and symbols seem to us to be distinguished by
territoriality-deterritorialization relations, not signifier-signified relations. Second, the
diagram as a result seems to have a distinct role, irreducible to either the icon or the
symbol.” (Ibid., p. 531). To say that the diagram is irreducible both to the symbol and to
the icon is thus to say that it does not operate by means of similarity or convention.
Conversely, it is to say that it rather operates on the basis of a constitutive difference.
For Deleuze, the diagram “is the map of relations between forces, a map of destiny, or
intensity, which proceeds by primarily non-localizable relations and at every moment
passes through every point, or ‘rather in every relation from one point to another'”
132

(1988b, p. 36). The diagram is preindividual and, as such, pre-subjective and pre-
objective. To say that it maps relations between forces is to say that it distributes affects
throughout the intensive field of relatedness where potentials differ from one another.
Rather than depicting tendencies of individuation, the diagram is the very plane where
they take place. It is the plane where the differentiation of potentials is engendered with
the highest intensities. The diagram is a cause, not an effect. It is “a cause which is
realized, integrated and distinguished in its effect. Or rather the immanent cause is
realized, integrated and distinguished by its effect. In this way there is a correlation or a
mutual presupposition between cause and effect, between abstract machine and concrete
assemblages” (Ibid.). From which it follows that, not only is the diagram distinct from
indexes, icons and symbols, but also from Peirce's remaining hypoicons, that is, from
images and metaphors. In this sense, the diagram is the very plane where both the
qualitative becoming of images and the structures of metaphorical projection are
engendered. The diagram underpins both imagetic and metaphorical thinking. After all,
inasmuch as both images and metaphors rely on the problematic reality of ideas, they
rely as well on the diagrammatic structurarion of potentials. Hence, movements of
thought are diagrammatically structured.
In regard to the notion of diagram, Deleuze's philosophy owes more to the
political philosophy of Michel Foucault than to Peirce's formulations. Whereas Peirce
conceives the diagram as an abstract operation related with linguistic expressions, both
Foucault and Deleuze acknowledge as well its social and material dimensions. For
Foucault (2012a, p. 9), the diagram regards the interplay of social forces of power and
resistance, where power is defined in terms of relations between forces. The diagram
diagrams these relations. It diagrams relations of power and resistance between forces.
It composes a topology of affects where singularities mark the disparition and resolution
of dynamic relations between forces. Here too, force is understood as a difference of
potentials belonging to different orders of magnitude. Across undetermined potentials
and determinate solutions, the diagram engenders the singularities in the vicinity of
which the social field tends to change. As such, says Deleuze, “[t]his is a different kind
of diagram, a different machine, closer to theatre than to the factory; it involves a
different relation between forces. [...] This is because the diagram is highly unstable or
liquid, continually churning up matter and functions in a way likely to create change.
Lastly, every diagram is intersocial and constantly evolving. It never functions in order
to represent a persisting world but produces a new kind of reality, a new model of truth.
It is neither the subject of history, nor does it survey history. It makes history by
133

unmaking preceding realities and significations, constituting hundreds of points of
emergence or creativity, unexpected conjunctions or improbable continuums. It doubles
history with a sense of continual evolution.” (1988, p. 35). The diagram recomposes
metastabilities for the becoming of others. In Foucault's writings (2012a), the most
famous example of a social diagram is the panopticon, a “dispositif” where determinate
matters of content, i.e. prisoners, encounter determinate functions of expression, i.e.
laws. The social expression of the panopticon, its life, results from the encounter
between the prisoners' bodies and the abstract laws to which they must comply. The
panopticon is an idea with a difference. Diagrammatically, it is the plane where the
difference between functions of expression and matters of content is intensified, only to
bring into expression a disciplined life. From this standpoint, it is possible to better
understand why for Foucault, as for Deleuze and Guattari, the diagram is an abstract
machine. The diagram corresponds to the differential distribution of potentials
underlying any individuation whatsoever. As such, it is virtual. It runs throughout the
plane of immanence where the dynamisms of affect between the virtual and the actual
occur with the highest intensities. In fact, it is the very topology according to which
these dynamisms occur. It is the territory of singularities and bifurcations,
intensifications and disparitions, where problems are drawn. In Deleuze's words, “[t]he
diagram is no longer an auditory or visual archive, but a map, a cartography that is
coextensive with the whole social field. [...] If there are many diagrammatic functions
and even matters, it is because every diagram is a spatio-temporal multiplicity” (1988b,
p. 34). The diagram is as much a preindividual absolute as the expressive varieties that
from it might emerge. Qualities, images, objects and metaphors can all result from it,
but not the other way around. Notwithstanding, as it is the case with any affective
dynamism between the emergent and the emerged, all these results can condition the
diagram's activity. 
To understand the diagram as abstract machine is to assume a creative principle
of immanence existing at the heart of individuation. In this guise, and in order to do
away with hylomorphic logics of creation and conceding matter with creative capacities
of its own, Deleuze and Guattari devised a theoretical framework that they designated as
“abstract materialism” (1987, pp. 39 – 74). As the name indicates, this is a mode of
thought following from the premise that the virtual and the actual cannot be considered
independently from one another. It is a theory regarding principles of individuation and
their conditions. A theory of the virtual-actual immanence and of these dimensions'
dynamic and affective co-implication. Instead of conceiving matter as a reality that can
134

only partake individuation if informed from the outside, i.e. by an external factor of
determination, a theory of abstract materialism affirms matter's immanent
morphogenetic capacities and its undetermined potentiality. Only under these conditions
can novelty emerge. In contrast, this is also to say that transcendent determinations
preclude the emergence of novelty by giving in advance what is possible to occur.
Contrary to hylomorphic determinations, matter's diagrammaticality implies
autonomous potentials of creativity. It implies its own potentials of abstraction and
possibilities of expression. A good example of matter's diagrammaticality is given by
philosopher of science and known commentator of Deleuze's philosophy, Manuel
DeLanda, when arguing that embryogenetic processes are not fully determined by
genetic information. In his words, “the DNA that governs the process does not contain,
as it was once believed, a blueprint for the generation of the final form of the organism,
an idea that implies an inert matter to which genes give form from the outside. The
modern understanding of the processes, on the other hand, pictures genes as teasing out
a form out of an active matter, that is, the function of genes and their products is now
seen as merely constraining and channeling a variety of material processes, occurring in
that far-from-equilibrium, diagrammatic zone, in which form emerges spontaneously.”
(2000, p. 37). The diagram must be considered from the perspective of this encounter
between formal constraints and spontaneous processes of emergence. Like with the
panopticon, there is here a function of expression—the genes—and a matter of content
—matter's forces. Matter's intensive multiplicities are in this way focused towards the
resolution of what, out of this encounter, is given a predominant probability of
occurrence. In a sense, the function of expression is responsible for the asymmetric
distribution of probabilities, favouring some possibilities in detriment of others. Yet, this
does not occur without matter's latent potentials, i.e. without the fact that, for an
individuation to occur, a plane of indetermination, differentiation and disparition must
be constitutive of matter itself. For “it is only in these far-from-equilibrium conditions
that the full variety of immanent topological forms appears (steady state, cyclic or
chaotic attractors). It is only in this zone of intensity that difference-driven
morphogenesis comes into its own, and that matter becomes an active material agent,
one which does not need form to come and impose itself from the outside.” (Ibid., p.
37). Here, preindividual potentials diagrammatically verge towards a tendentiously
distribution of topological singularities. An activity prior to the conscious determination
of ideas. Which is to say, with Deleuze and Guattari, that the diagram “has no way of
making a distinction within itself between a plane of expression and a plane of content
135

because it draws a single plane of consistency, which in turn formalizes contents and
expressions according to strata and reterritorializations. The abstract machine in itself is
destratified, deterritorialized; it has no form of its own (much less substance) and makes
no distinction within itself between content and expression, even though outside itself it
presides over that distinction and distributes it in strata, domains, and territories. An
abstract machine in itself is not physical or corporeal, any more than it is semiotic; it is
diagrammatic (it knows nothing of the distinction between the artificial and the natural
either)” (1987, p. 141). It is process in its most acute definition. And if the encounter
between matters of content and functions of expression is a necessary condition for
positing problems, then the abstract machine is a necessary condition for their
resolution. In their encounter, matters of content and functions of expression mutually
presuppose one another. They are defined by the individuation that they give rise to.
From this standpoint, it can be posited that the choreographic object can only be
said to be a model of potential transition inasmuch as it is capable of acting as a
function of expression over matters of content belonging to different domains (i.e. any
space imaginable). Not only does this capacity grant choreography with the necessary
autonomy for it to be expressed in domains other than the dancing body, but also with
the abstract character of formal constraints, i.e. with ideas that, because they have
acquired a certain degree of determination, remain unchanged regardless of the domain
into which they are transduced. According to this, choreography is primarily defined by
the formal abstraction of each of its objects. It is a function of expression disjunct from
the means by which it might be expressed. A fact that does not prevent its expressions
from depending on specific matters of content. A law of discipline, for example,
generates different results depending if it is applied on humans or animals. Likewise, if
the DS/DM workshop is considered, its conceptual structure constrains the emergence of
different expressions depending if the domain is the dancing body or digital media. But
insofar as these expressions follow from one same function of expression, a structural
similitude can nonetheless be depicted from them. This, of course, depends as well on
the degree of indetermination of the matters of content in case: different recurrences of
one same idea will be expressed with a variability higher in the case of the dancing body
than in the case of digital media. Whereas in the former case such variability derives
from the body's constitutive indetermination (of potentials), in the latter case it derives
from digital media's constitutive determination (of possibilities). The choreographic
diagram is therefore not the choreographic model, but rather what results from the
latter's encounter with specific matters of content. It is the abstract machine of
136

differentiation and disparition activated when determinate functions of expression
constrain matters of content charged with potentials. Nonetheless, it can be said that the
choreographic model is diagrammatic, for it is the structure which modulates matter's
potentials towards resolutions that, rather than being contingent, are constrained by an
asymmetric distribution of probabilities.
Technical individuation necessarily results from the encounter between matters
of content and functions of expression. The abstract machine is its condition. But its
expressions are not diagrammatic as the abstract machine is. Rather, from them,
diagrams can be drawn. As philosopher Brian Massumi writes, “[a]ny sign, quality, or
statement, as the trace of a process of becoming, can be considered a de facto diagram
from which a formal diagram of the operative abstract machine could be developed”
(1992, p. 17). Which is to say that, from the analogical individuation of knowledge,
determinate icons can be used to represent individuation itself. In contrast to Foucault,
Deleuze and Guattari's notion of diagram, the iconic representation of processes can in
fact be better understood with Peirce's taxonomy. Since all species of icons are
intimately related to one another, such representation is simultaneously diagrammatic,
imagetic and metaphorical. As architect Kenneth Knoespel notes, the “diagram should
not be separated from metaphor. Similar to metaphor, the diagram never exists by itself
but always works by establishing linkages. Since both diagram and metaphor become
situated within narrative and may at times even embody or represent such narrative,
they are both cognitive vehicles for modeling and exploration.” (2002, p. 22).100 The
DS/DM's glossary is one example of this kind of representation, since it expresses with
icons the diagrammatic form of the workshop's movement qualities. For these reasons,
in spite of being diagrammatic, the abstract machine should be distinguished from the
iconic diagrams representing its processes.
The glossary is just one example of the DS/DM's diagrammatic representations.
In fact, all objects of the DVD and Interactive Installation represent operations implicit
in the content-expression encounter of the workshop's movement qualities. And this is
so because each object's expression confuses in its own way different signifying
functions. The glossary provides terms with the purpose of indexing contents, but not
100 Knoespel acknowledges having discussed with George Lakoff the functions of metaphorical thinking
in cognitive processes. A discussion “particularly directed by his work with Mark Johnson,
Metaphors We Live By (1980) and by his recent book with Rafael E. Nunez, Where Mathematics
Comes From: How the Embodied Mind Brings Mathematics into Being (2000).” (2002, p. 35). More
specifically, he notes that “[t]he cognitive setting provided by Lakoff provided a means not only for
linking diagram to metaphor but for seeing both diagram and metaphor as vehicles of bodily
extension.” (Ibid., p. 26).
137

without implicating as well iconic potentials. The symbols of choreographic notation
articulate discontinuities, implicating simultaneously imagetic and metaphorical
potentials. The “movement-images”101 of the dancing body presented with each video
also implicate the workshop's conceptual structure. Finally, the written explanations
make an explicit use of images and metaphors. This confusion of indexes, symbols and
figures (of the dancing body) with icons shouldn't come as a surprise. Insofar as icons
correspond to movements of thought, they are implicated in indexical, symbolic and
figurative expressions. As such, not only are these expressions cases of solution with
regard to the workshop's problems, as they also implicate the diagrammatic potentials of
the abstract machine from which they derive. For these reasons, it should be
acknowledged that the actual representation of the DS/DM's diagrammatic structure
necessarily depends on non-iconic signs.
In relation to the abstract machine, each type of sign works differently. To each
sign its function. Insofar as indexes function by contiguity, they can be used to indicate
a whole field of relations. Each of the terms of the DS/DM's glossary not only indexes a
movement principle, but also its subsequent expressions. Indexation works here as a
function of remembrance, which can be used both by humans and machines. Once a
series of past events has been registered, it can be recalled by means of an index. In this
way, remembrance and recollection make of the index the very medium through which
what was once given to experience can once again be brought into it. Once a word such
as “Breathing” is given an indexical function, it can be used both by a team of
researchers and by computers to recall what is contiguous to the index. On their turn,
symbols work by convention. To know that, in Labanotation, horizontality stands for
simultaneity and verticality for succession, is a requirement without which the
diagrammatic implications of these symbols cannot be comprehended. Additionally, in
the DS/DM's choreographic objects, metaphors and images can be found in each of the
written explanations. For example, in the DVD the movement quality “Breathing” is
described as follows: “A very thin line of air runs inside your body. Visualize the
101 This term has been poignantly reintroduced by Gilles Deleuze when discussing cinema through the
lens of Henri Bergson's philosophy. Simply put, the movement-image regards the fact that, in cinema,
it is not a series of figures that describes movement (which would be the case of the infinitesimally
divisible space of Zeno's paradoxes), but rather the continuity of movement that describes figures. In
Deleuze's words: “Cinema proceeds with photogrammes—that is, with immobile sections—twenty-
four images per second (or eighteen at the outset). But it has often been noted that what it gives us is
not the photogramme: it is an intermediate image, to which movement is not appended or added; the
movement on the contrary belongs to the intermediate image as immediate given. […] In short,
cinema does not give us an image to which movement is added, it immediately gives us a movement-
image. It does give us a section, but a section which is mobile, not an immobile section + abstract
movement.” (1986, p. 3).
138

internal path of the air and feel it running through all your joints. Start from the toes,
move up through your feet, ankles, knees, pelvis, lower back, stomach, spine, chest,
shoulder, arms and then, at the end, reach beyond your fingertips. Grow, keep growing
inside this thin line. Imagine an endless sense of reaching, reach the limit of your body
and try to go even further. Release the length of the body, while disappearing inside
yourself. Go back through the same thin line, very deep inside and become very small,
always ready to appear again”. The imperative tone of this proposition marks the
intention for it to act as a transducer of the movement principles from which itself
stems. The images and metaphors that it proposes are in this way to be incarnated by the
dancing body of the learning subject. They are to be experimented with, a model with
which to focus potentials towards resolute expressions. The DS/DM's transduction by
means of all these expressions—metaphorical descriptions, choreographic notations,
videographic registers and indexical organizations—attests their common potential.
They are diagrammatically consistent with one another. Which doesn't mean that they
express the same knowledge as the dancing body. The differences between the instances
of the ones and the instances of the other remarks the abstract machine's meaningful
capacity. Insofar as a content-expression encounter is capable of individuating
knowledge, it is a meaningful process.
When commenting upon Deleuze and Guattari's joint project “Capitalism and
Schizophrenia”, Massumi relates the emergence of meaning with the workings of the
abstract machine in the following way: “Meaning is not in the genesis of the thing, nor
in the thought of that genesis, nor in the words written or spoken of it. It is in the
process leading from one to the other. […] If meaning is a process of translation from
one substance to another of a different order and back again, what it moves across is an
unbridgeable abyss of fracturing. If meaning is the in-between of content and
expression, it is nothing more (nor less) than the being of their “nonrelation.” (1992, pp.
15-16). Paradoxically, meaning is in this way related with the indetermination of an
individuating system. Rather than being associated with the resolution of problems in
potential, it is associated with their very disparition. It is the process of resolution, rather
than the resolution itself. Which is also why Simondon postulates that the knowledge of
individuation can provide insights with regard to the resulting individuals but not the
other way around. Meaning necessarily regards the topological depth of translation's
continuity. It regards the continuity of potentials underlying transduction. From which it
follows that meaning can be understood as the continuity of relatedness between that
which emerges as knowledge and the abstract machine's unconscious reality. The non-
139

relation of content and expression is precisely this topological depth of the abstract
machine. A depth that, because it is preindividual, cannot be known as such. In Deleuze
and Guattari's words, it is the very plane of consistency where the highest intensities are
engendered. For “the plane of consistency is the abolition of all metaphor; all that
consists is Real. These are electrons in person, veritable black holes, actual organites,
authentic sign sequences. It's just that they have been uprooted from their strata,
destratified, decoded, deterritorialized, and that is what makes their proximity and
interpenetration in the plane of consistency possible. A silent dance. The plane of
consistency knows nothing of differences in level, orders of magnitude, or distances. It
knows nothing of the difference between the artificial and the natural. It knows nothing
of the distinction between contents and expressions, or that between forms and formed
substances; these things exist only by means of and in relation to the strata.” (1987, pp.
69–70). The plane of consistency is the plane of immanence is the abstract machine. It
is where all consists and from which all forms derive. It is a preindividual disparity
resulting from the communication between matters of content and functions of
expression. Such communication can create problems and solutions, but never the
knowledge of what, virtually, underpins their determination. One cannot know what is
outside of thought. 
Equating the abstract machine with the being of the nonrelation between matters
of content and functions of expression can be better understood with the following
passage from Massumi's own take on the notion of diagram, where he uses the example
of carpentry to argue about its duplication in time and space: “What the diagram
diagrams is a dynamic interrelation of relations. The dynamism occurs twice: once as
genesis in a state of things (tool to wood), and again in ideality (concept to concept).
The diagram combines a past (the working of the wood) and the future of that past (the
thought of the woodworking), but it skips over its own genesis – the present of the
content-expression encounter constitutive of thought (the unthought of thought).
Actually, the dynamism occurs twice twice: after being translated into ideality (concept
to concept) it is reexternalized in words (phoneme to phoneme; letter to letter) to resume
its life among things in a new capacity. The diagram again combines a past (the thought
of the woodworking) and the future of that past (pronunciation, publication), skipping
over its own genesis, in this case the present of the content-expression encounter
constitutive of speaking or writing (the unsaid of communication: afterthought). In each
instance, the elided present, like the in-between of tool and wood, is at any rate a
140

void.102 In skipping it, the diagram reduplicates the process it diagrams. The diagram is
false, in that it contracts a multiplicity of levels and matters into its own homogeneous
substance. But it is true, in that it envelops in that substance the same affect, and
because it reproduces the in-betweenness of the affect in the fracturing of its own
genesis. The expression of meaning is true in its falseness to itself, and false in its
trueness to its content. Translation is repetition with a difference. If meaning is
becoming, it is a becoming-other. It is the alienation of the same in the different, and the
sameness of the different in its alienation from itself. The (non)relation is a separation-
connection.” (1992, p. 16).
Deleuze and Guattari had another designation for this separation-connection of
the content-expression encounter. They called it a “double articulation” (1987, pp. 40–
41, 54–59), a term borrowed from the work of French linguist André Martinet (1984),
who formulated this concept to account for the linguistic relation between a first
articulation—the articulation between meaningful units (i.e. monemes)—and a second
articulation—the articulation between meaningless units (i.e. phonemes and
graphemes).103 This articulatory regime of correspondences served the consolidation of
a structural linguistics and allowed for semiology to assert the inexhaustibility of
languages as systems that can combine phonemes and graphemes with monemes in
multiple ways. This multiplicity of structural languages' double articulation is none
other than the one of the diagram. It separates and articulates monemes from and with
one another, as it does with the relationship between phonemes and graphemes. Further,
it connects monemes with phonemes and graphemes for the very expression of content.
This connection is not without randomness. It brings the two orders of language to a
point of affectivity that, in itself, cannot be expressed. It is the unspeakable core of
meaning, at the heart of its generative process. With this double dynamism of meaning
—from event to concept and from concept to language—it becomes clear how, in the
DS/DM, the same diagram generates movement qualities, their knowledge and
corresponding linguistic expressions. In this regard, what Massumi's assertion perhaps
clarifies the most is the diagram's dynamism of self-elusion amidst the processes that it
102 This conforms with what Thomas Lamarre identifies as being “the neutral point of the event (absolute
origin) of individuation that simultaneously sets off individuation and arises in it” (2012, p. 40). See
page 59.
103 Jacques Derrida famously made the case that it is not articulation that results out of language, but
precisely the other way around. “It is once again the power of substituting one organ for another” he
writes, “of articulating space and time, sight and voice, hand and spirit, it is this faculty of
supplementarity which is the true 'origin'—or nonorigin—of languages: articulation in general as
articulation of nature and convention, of nature and all its others.” (1976, p. 241). For Derrida's own
reading of Martinet's concept of double articulation, see Derrida, 1976, p. 228.
141

generates. The diagram diagrams the interrelation of relations, but on the condition that
it remains inaccessible. Conversely, any diagrammatic expression can be considered a
map of what the diagram diagrams. In fact, to say that the diagram diagrams is to say
that, rather than corresponding to expressive mappings, it corresponds to the content-
expression encounters of thought and language. The constitution of thought by the
diagrammatic encounter of content and expression conforms with Simondon's theory of
psychic individuation. It corresponds to the resolution of problematic states in the
affective reality of a self-reflecting organism. As such, it corresponds to the movements
of thought by means of which knowledge is determined. On its turn, the content-
expression encounter constitutive of linguistic expression corresponds to language's
double articulation, as just presented. The diagram's topological continuity assures the
different encounters' relation. It assures the implication of diagrammatic potentials
across movements of thought and linguistic expressions. Nevertheless, to say that in this
process the diagramming occurs twice twice is the same as saying that in each encounter
the diagram's problematic potentials are resolved differently. When transferring the
DS/DM's conceptual structure into the digital domain, there necessarily occur
resolutions with regard to the content-expression encounter of thought and resolutions
with regard to the content-expression encounter of language. To say that knowledge can
derive from the formation of novel instances of language is to say that this does not
occur without a parallel individuation of thought. Only in this way is it possible to learn
with technical individuation, that is, to learn not only about what is expressed but also
about how it is expressed. Only in this way is it possible to experiment and learn how to
faithfully express a determinate idea, regarding the many potentials of its diagrammatic
structure. One cannot learn how to speak or write if not through actual experimentation.
A process the potentials of which are also of error. When expressions do not conform to
the intended idea, there also individuates the knowledge of how to not do it.
Experimentation and learning: two poles of technical individuation that necessarily
resonate with one another.
From this standpoint, the diagram can be related with Deleuze's three moments
of the idea. It can be said to be unconscious, i.e. undetermined with regard to its
problems; it can be said to be sensible, i.e. determinable with regards to the objects of
experience; and it can be said to be intelligible, i.e. determinate with regard to the
concepts of the understanding. The first diagrammatic moment corresponds to the
fracture of the content-expression encounter. It is the abstract machine's very plane of
composition. The second diagrammatic moment corresponds to the association between
142

problems in potential and the possibilities of representation. It is the mapping of
contrasts between the unknown and what has already come to knowledge. The third
diagrammatic moment corresponds to the objective determination of cases of solution,
which can be both immaterial and material. In either case, it is always a conceptual
structure, either a diagram of speculation or a diagram of confirmation. All these
moments are diagrammatic not only because they are related to one another by means of
the abstract machine's topological continuity, but also because they are structured in
relation to this same topology's singular problems.
Here implied is the assumption that objects can have no correlate expression.
Structures can be thought without being expressed, and still be objective. Mermaids,
unicorns and pure mathematical objects are abstract objects. But by a principle of
immanence between abstractions and expressions, such objects are necessarily related
with materials grounds. They are the partial effect of metaphorical projections. Unicorns
are imagined to stand upright and mermaids to swim horizontally. Imagination proceeds
on the basis of material experiences: the concrete body of an imagining mind. Image
schemata and bodily tropisms, co-individuating together from the plane of composition
where no distinction can be made between content and expression. From this, much can
be imagined, even if with no concrete correlation. Such abstractions are,
notwithstanding, potentially expressible. Unicorns and mermaids can be drawn and
spoken, a process which necessarily requires learning and experimentation. Such
requirement follows not only from the idea's potentials of infinite determination with
regard to the concepts of the understanding, but also from the multiplicity of expressive
possibilities. The idea of a unicorn can be expressed with water-colours on paper, with
sand at the beach, or with computer graphics, all being different cases of solution for
one same problem of expression. Even the impossibility of expressing the same idea in
the same way twice entails the necessity of technical experimentation. If one
experiments drawing a unicorn but instead gets a horse, other experiments need to
follow until what is expressed conforms to what is imagined. Infinite cases of solution
can be drawn, but also infinite expressions can disconform to determinate ideas. Many
are the possibilities and the potentials of individuation. 
The expressive variability of diagrammatic objects has been pertinently argued
by Knoespel when addressing the diagram's creative potentials. For him, “diagramma104
104 Diagramma is the Greek word for diagram. Knoespel explains that “[t]he root verb of diagramma
means not simply something which is marked out by lines, a figure, form, or plan, but also carries a
secondary connotation of marking or crossing out. In contemporary Greek the verb diagrapho, noun
diagraphe, means to write someone off.” (2002, pp. 20–21).
143

embodies a practice of figuring, defiguring, refiguring, and prefiguring. What is
interesting is that the diagram participates in a geneology of figures that moves from the
wax tablet to the computer screen. From a phenomenological vantage point, the Greek
setting of diagram suggests that any figure that is drawn is accompanied by an
expectancy that it will be redrawn. Within such a dynamic framework, such expectancy
must also be accompanied by an understanding of the ways in which diagram can shift
in status. Here diagram may be thought of as a relay. While a diagram may have been
used visually to reinforce an idea one moment, the next it may provide a means for
seeing something never seen before. Because diagrams mark a gesture or momentum
toward definition, they function as vehicles that employ and invite elaboration through
narrative.” (2002, p. 21). Diagrammatic relaying regards not only a capacity of such
objects to foster the individuation of cases of solution but also a capacity to repeat with
a difference their own constitutive topology, in continuity. Diagrams are therefore
capable of creating expressive nexuses across different cases of solution. Their
expressions are iterations of their potential structure. In its most basic expression,
diagrammatic iterability corresponds to language's expressive variability. Singular
expressions for singular encounters. To say that the relaying of an object's diagram can
“shift its status” (Ibid.) means that the knowledge by it provided can be constituted
anew. The individuation of knowledge that comes with a diagram's objective expression
attests its participation in transducing what it represents. Which is not to say that such
expressions are by themselves capable of informational exchange. It is rather to say that,
insofar as they partake of technical individuation, they are correlated with the
conceptual structures that they represent. After all, an objective diagram is but one
possible case of solution for an idea's problems. It emerges with knowledge as much as
knowledge can also emerge from it. It is a vehicle of technical transduction because it
can condition learning. As media theorist and artist Sher Doruff notices, “one of many
ways that transduction is actualized is through the diagrammatic contours of conceptual
space in which diverse realities are connected, coupled and erased” (2006, p. 92). From
this perspective, even the most simple representation of an abstract schema conserves
with itself the necessary potentials to become different from itself and, with this
movement, individuate novel instants of knowledge. This, of course, is an operation
based on the condition of an intrinsic difference. And what is perhaps most evident in
regard to this difference is the fact that, as much as individuation comprises a
preindividual share, there is always more to it than what can be known. The concepts of
the understanding can only regard what is somewhat determinate in individuation. Not
144

only has this to do with the limits of experience, i.e. with what a body can in fact access,
but also with the fact that, because of being by definition undetermined, potentials
cannot be known as such. 
If there is the case of what cannot be empirically known, there is also the case of
what can come to be known only by means of abstraction. In this latter case,
metaphorical projections are used to abstract knowledge from the body's concrete
experiences. Even what cannot be directly experienced can come to be known,
indirectly. This is, for example, the case with mathematical reductions of matter and
energy, which allow for non-empirical instances of knowledge to be attained. But
insofar as mathematical abstractionism proceeds by a speculative type of reasoning, it
can only be said to constitute knowledge that is proper to technical invention, if this is
to some degree consistent with what can be empirically experienced. The limits of
technics are therefore coincident with the limits of the body, be these concrete or
abstract. This does not mean however that the body's limits are the limits of technics.
Mathematical abstractions can generate knowledge that goes beyond the possibilities of
technical experience. And the former can only condition the latter if correlated in any
way to what can be actually experienced by the technical subject.
The limits of technical invention are tantamount to the limits of the
phenomenological and eidetic reductions of phenomenology, as first proposed by
German philosopher Edmund Husserl (1960, 2013). Whereas, here, eidos refers to what
cannot be removed from a thing or, in other words, to the thing's fundamental capacity
to endure self-coincidently, the phenomenological refers to the coincidence between the
thing's objectivity and its subjective presence. Which is to say that eidetic reductions
constitute a knowledge independent from subjective experiences and that
phenomenological reductions imply the constitution of what Husserl calls “objects of
intentionality”, i.e. objects that depend upon subjective experience. This, of course, is
somewhat opposed to Simondon's theory of analogical knowledge, not only because of
all the most evident reasons, but first and foremost because of the fundamental fact that,
whereas Simondon grounds his theories in a critique of essentialism, Husserl seems to
not do away with the notion of essence (which is the only legitimate reason for the
pursue of eidetic reductions). Notwithstanding this brief note of comparison, it is not the
intent here to discuss Husserl's reductions at length.105 It is enough to note that the limits
of knowledge are given both by what is possible in intentionality and by what can be
105 Further considerations on Husserl's reductions can be found in Section 6.3.
145

abstracted from intentionality itself. Either knowledge is taken to be experiential and
thus dependent on its conditions of possibility, or it is taken to be mathematical and thus
abstractable from concrete experience. With this, and in what regards the pursue of
eidetic knowledge, it is easy to understand why mathematics have become so pervasive
in modern science. The sole fact that mathematics are designated as fundamental
sciences points towards the very assumption of a fundament of things, i.e. of an
essential kernel constituting the invariable and self-coincident identity of things. And
despite possible criticisms upon the conceptual fundaments of eidetic reductionism,
what is perhaps most striking and informing in regard to the relation between abstract
and concrete diagrams is the fact that it is both possible to know, through mathematical
abstraction, objects that are beyond any possibility of concrete experience, and possible
to experience things that cannot be known in abstraction. In contrast, it can also be said
that there are many experiential events, i.e. objects of intentionality, that coincide with
what is possible to be abstracted from experience. For example, computational models
can simulate processes, yielding results similar to their referents. In order to do so, they
must share the same possibility space (DeLanda, 2011, pp. 17–21).
A process's possibility space is its topology. It is the state space where the many
potentials and possibilities of occurrence are distributed according to a function of
probability. In any content-expression encounter there is a distribution of probabilities
regarding the affective relation between matters and functions. The topological
definition of each encounter is also singular because of this: to each encounter, its
singular distribution of probabilities. The diagrammatic identity of the DS/DM is
assured by the probability that it has of relating different contents to one another in
specific ways. Its possibility space is determined by the way in which expressive
functions constrain the contents of its expression. If other diagrams are considered,
different problems will be posed to their expression. This, of course, regards the fact
that each content-expression encounter not only unfolds in accordance with the
topological distribution of its probabilities, but also in accordance with an individuation
of thought that is necessarily determined by such structure. And if it can be argued that
each topological structure is invariable in the way that it constrains its own
choreographic expressions, it can also be argued that what comes to be known with each
choreographic idea is necessarily singular. Since a problem's resolution cannot unfold
but in accordance with the singularity of each encounter, any co-individuating thought
will be equally singular. 
From this standpoint, there are a couple of aspects that can be further
146

problematized. First, it seems necessary to look into the resolution of different problems
in the expression of choreographic ideas by digital means. In this respect, the two case
studies till now discussed have allowed for the understanding that choreographic objects
are diagrammatic, but not for the understanding that they are algorithmic. Of course the
resumption that these objects endured into the digital domain already attests such
character. Nevertheless, the digital domain seems to be capable of confirming the
algorithmic capacity of choreography by reason of its own workings. Since the digital
domain functions on the basis of algorithmic programming, it can be that an object's
possibility space, instead of being expressed just as one case of solution (as it is with the
“Improvisation Technologies” and with the DS/DM, as till now discussed), can be
expressed as a series of solutions, all related to one another by one same algorithmic
function of expression. The difference between this and the previous examples regards
the fact that, here, the matters of content are the same. As such, what digital
programming offers as a possibility of expression is the very algorithmic computation of
choreographic ideas. Between such possibility and the digital expression of the previous
examples what differs is the automatic degree of computation. Choreographic ideas can
in this way be programmed into the digital domain so that such algorithms compute a
multiplicity of expressions. In order to pursue such confirmation, this study's next
Chapter will look upon a series of digital choreographies, which have expressed
determinate ideas by means of algorithmic computation. The parametric automation of
choreographic ideas will make the case that its topological structure is not only
diagrammatic, but also algorithmic. A case that shouldn't be understood in the sense that
a choreographic idea is algorithmic because it is digitally programmable, but rather in
the other way around: the choreographic idea is digitally programmable because it
already is, in itself, algorithmic. After all, an algorithm is but a determinate structure of
potentials. Second, it will be also necessary to tackle the question of novelty from the
perspective of digital choreography. This regards not only the overarching problem (that
this study has been dealing with from the beginning) of technogenesis in the encounter
between dance and technology, but also the more specific problem of a digital sort of
potentiality. In other words, in regard to the algorithmic computation of choreographic
ideas, it matters to ask: are there, in the digital domain itself, the necessary potentials for
novel instances of choreographic knowledge to be expressed? And, if so, how are these
potentials to be thought if, in any case, it is arguable that the digital domain is based
upon possibilities rather than potentials, i.e. on binary sets rather than continuous
multiplicities? In regard to the encounter between dance and technology, such questions
147

are pertinent not only to pursue a better understanding of how this encounter is to
individuate a technogenetic body, but also to broaden the scope of the creative modes
that itself is capable of. This, of course, regards the understanding that thought
individuates in ways that are as different as the modes of relation between the topology
of ideas and the material constraints of each domain. Such variety of thoughts entails
the hypothesis that the creative potentials of digital programs are as well thoughtful
potentials. As such, it is also the hypothesis that, if this is to occur, computation must be
open to what it cannot compute, in the same way that any movement of thought is open
to what it cannot know—the unconscious. Such questions and hypotheses will be
pursued throughout Chapter 6 and, hopefully, result in propositions for teasing creativity
and individuating novel instances of choreographic knowledge.
148

Chapter 5 - ALGORITHMIC CHOREOGRAPHIES
This fifth Chapter will focus upon a series of examples that express
choreographic knowledge by digital means. In contrast to the examples previously
mentioned, these choreographic expressions result from algorithmic procedures that, as
particular cases of solution to the problems of choreographic transduction, were
automated digitally. The first case to be discussed (Section 5.1) is the “Gesture
Follower”, a software built into the digital expressions of the “Double Skin/Double
Mind”. As the name indicates, this is a software apt to recognize and follow the
performance of gesture. This will allow for essaying a distinction between the dancing
body and the gestural body and, from the perspective of digital algorithms, discuss once
more the relationship between dancing and writing in the constitution of choreographic
knowledge. The following Section will unfold by considering a series of choreographic
algorithms retrieved from two distinct projects: the “Motion Bank” and the “Reactor for
Awareness in Motion”. Different aspects of the so called online scores, created in the
frame of the first project, will be discussed in order to assess how, from different bodies
of artistic work, the problems of choreographic transduction have been resolved into the
algorithmic generation of digital expressions. These are the online scores of William
Forsythe's “One Flat Thing, reproduced” (called “Synchronous Objects”), Deborah
Hay's “No Time To Fly” (with the same name), Jonathan Burrows and Matteo Fargion's
series of duets (called “Seven Duets”), and Bebe Miller and Thomas Hauert's strategies
of choreographic improvisation (called “Two”). Insofar as the digital algorithms used in
these scores synthesize instances of choreographic knowledge, their transductive
capacity will be looked upon by considering instead the “Reactor for Awareness in
Motion's” software. Since this software's algorithms are meant to be “danced with”, in
real-time by dancing bodies, they will facilitate a better understanding of how all these
algorithms are capable of conveying choreographic knowledge.
149

5.1 - Diagramming Gesture
Regarding the encounter between dance and technology, Erin Manning notes
that one recurrent problem has to do with the definition of gesture. In her words,
“[e]xplorations of new technologies and dance, led by Mark Coniglio, Scott DeLahunta,
Antonio Camurri, and others, have often focused on the difficulty of locating gesture-as-
such” (2009, p. 61). Despite the fact that, here, the philosopher is specifically referring
to the encounter between dancing bodies and digital computers and, precisely because
of this, to the “embedding into the software program” (Ibid.) of gesture's definition, this
difficulty is common to all practices of dance notation. In fact, in what regards the
definition of gesture, between automated processes of gesture recognition and non-
automated ones, the difference is hardly one of quality.106 And this is not to say that the
subjective experience of someone who translates dance into choreographic notation is
not a qualitative one. Qualitative experience is necessarily implicated in the
transductions of knowledge conveyed by subjects for whom indetermination (of the
body) is a fundamental condition. It is rather to say that, insofar as in both cases the
content-expression encounter of writing is conditioned by symbolic conventions, what
can in fact come to be defined as gesture remains within the limits of what language can
possibly express. This is a quantitative limit. Whereas in the case of computers these
possibilities are necessarily located at the level of binary code, in the case of notational
systems they are located at the level of the symbols used to express choreography. And
of course that, if the former is used to express the latter what one necessarily gets is a
possibility space resulting from the concurrent set of binary code and choreographic
notations. In sum, besides being conceptually determined, gesture is here defined by
what is possible to be written.
From this standpoint, the written expressions of gesture can be said to coincide
with its conceptual structure. By limiting the possibilities of expression both with
discrete signs and with the articulatory nexuses of its significations, writing
discontinues the dancing body and, in this way, defines gesture as such. Conversely,
106 To say that computers recognize and notate gesture automatically is just a matter of expression. For,
as Simondon asserts, “there is no such thing as a robot” (1969 p.10). As such, computational
machines must be considered from the perspective of the context from which they result and in which
they evolve. In other words, as technical individuals, they must be considered together with the
associated milieu of their technicity. After all, what a computer comes to recognize as gesture needs
first to be defined by its inventors. Not only this, but the very definition of gesture embedded within a
computer's software depends as well on what the computer can in fact recognize as gesture. In this
sense, both computer and its definition of gesture individuate depending on one another.
150

such writing does not occur without the implicit determination of the concepts of the
understanding. At once, the definition of gesture regards what gets to be determined
when a body dances and the limits of writing itself. In regard to this relationship of the
dancing body with writing, through the determination of concepts, Manning quotes
dance and technology scholar Scott DeLahunta, for whom “the best way of coming to
an understanding of gesturality is to work collaboratively with dancers such that 'the
choreographic and computational processes are both informed by having arrived at this
shared understanding of the constitution of movement. This means descriptions (what
we think of as co-descriptions) of movement that can exist in both its own terms (as in
physical) as well as in the symbolic abstractions that are necessary in order to use these
techniques of gesture modeling, simulating, learning, following etc. with the computer.”
(Manning, 2009, p. 61; Delahunta, 2006). Though in the writing of gesture the
determination of concepts does not go without expressive determinations, they differ
and can therefore be distinguished from one another. First and foremost, this difference
regards the fact that the dancing body moves on the basis of continuous and
undetermined potentials. As mentioned before, the determination of concepts proceeds
from this bodily excess and cannot be understood without it, at least from a processual
perspective. Though writing occurs as well in relation to a degree of indetermination,
which ultimately is of the body itself, its limits are different and depend on the domain
of expression. Nonetheless, and regardless of this latter dependence, a written gesture
can only only come about with the discontinuous expression of determinate
possibilities. If the dancing body is the plane where undetermined potentials and
determinate concepts are related, the gestural body is the plane where the determination
of concepts gets to be related with determinate expressions. The one is unbounded and
the other limited, for example, by convention.
The DS/DM's software of gesture recognition—Gesture Follower (GF)107—is a
good example of how conceptual conventions of gesture can be embedded into digital
code. This software is used both in the DVD and Interactive Installation versions of the
DS/DM to recognize certain movement patterns of the system's user. Such patterns
correspond to the workshop's movement qualities. But here, instead of being known by
107 The GF started to be developed by Frédéric Bevilacqua, in the end of 2009, in the frame of his
research in gesture analysis and interactive music systems, at the IRCAM (Institute for
Music/Acoustic Research and Coordination in Paris), as included in the Real Time Musical
Interactions team (Bevilacqua, 2007, p. 27). The GF “is implemented as a collection of modules in
the Max environment [...], taking advantage of the data structures of the FTM library such as matrices
and dictionaries. Recently, the core algorithm was developed as an independent C++ library and can
therefore be implemented in other environments.” (Bevilacqua et al., 2010, p. 9).
151

the system's user, they are known by the computer itself. Specific definitions of gesture
have been embedded into the software so that this can recognize which user's
movements conform with them. As computer scientist Frédéric Bevilacqua writes,
“[t]he general idea behind the Gesture Follower is to compare a performance with
prerecorded ones. Basically, the first step corresponds to choosing one or several
phrases that will be recorded and stored in the computer memory. The choice of these
phrases is a crucial step; they should be representative of a gesture vocabulary or
contain meaningful qualities for the artist. The second step occurs during the
performance: the computer program assesses in real-time whether similar
vocabulary/qualities are present. The results can be output as ‘likelihood scores’
expressing the similarities of a given performance to the stored ones in the database.”
(2007, p. 28). As such, this software follows gestures on the basis of what it already
knows. The definitions of gesture embedded into it are digital memories that can be
recalled for the sake of recognition, memories that consist not only of registered events
but also of their indexation. “Finding similarity between the performance and stored
ones in a database can be one mechanism to characterize motion qualities, if each
phrase of the database has been labeled.” (Ibid., p. 30). Moreover, what allows for the
software to compare the two datasets is an algorithmic procedure of calculation that
takes each definition of gesture to be quantitatively determined. The GF converts the
DS/DM's movement qualities into determinate quantities of binary code and defines
each gesture as a digital patch against which to compare the real-time displacements of
the user's body. Such comparison serves to inform the system's user if the movements
performed conform or not with the given definitions and to instigate him or her to move
accordingly.
There is, notwithstanding, a determinant difference between the DVD and the
Interactive Installation versions of the DS/DM, which regards the sensors used by each
system to create motion data from the user's activity. Whereas in the Interactive
Installation the dancing body is captured with video cameras, in the DVD it is captured
with the computer's mouse. Such difference necessarily results in different types of
dataset, for their structure depends upon the input device. Whereas the computer mouse
is capable of capturing motion with regard to one moving point, the motion capture
made with video cameras can create arrays of data regarding the many moving points of
one pixelated plane of expression. If infrared cameras are instead considered, it is
possible that the datasets from them derived are structured in accordance with a three-
dimensional grid of variable points. These differences necessarily imply that the
152

datasets in comparison must be structured similarly. The GF's gestural definitions must
be structured as to be compared with the datasets derived from the input devices in use.
Which is to say that the very possibilities of motion capture play a part in structuring the
definitions of gesture embedded into the software. They act as a frame of reference that
limits and determines the quantities that the GF must calculate out of the examples to it
provided. In this sense, given gestures can only be recognized if the memory of what
has been previously registered is mappable onto the novel data. Of course that on both
sides this occurs on the basis of algorithmic calculations, which structure data in
determinate ways. The datasets reciprocal mappability depends on how raw data is
structured by the softwares in use, i.e. belonging both to the G F and to the motion
capture devices.108 It is also here that the conventional agreement of what gesture is
comes in. The structuration of data occurs both in accordance with what is possible to
be computed and in accordance with what gesture is known to be. This mixed procedure
is explained by Bevilacqua to be “based on the recognition that both our abstract gesture
representation and actual gesture data generally share common time properties, and the
links between them can be expressed as time relationships. For example, features
occurring simultaneously in both representations can be made explicit. This can
correspond to adding markers and profiles to a timeline [...]. The gesture follower
108 To say that the captured data is raw stands for saying that there is a structure to it. If such structure is
to be computed with determinate functions of expression (i.e. the algorithms themselves), it needs to
be transformed. That the data provided by motion capture systems does not correspond to an intuitive
image of the dancing body and that, for this reason, if it is to be rendered into the expression of a
recognizable figure, it needs to be processed and restructured, is noted by Frédéric Bevilacqua in the
following way: “Making links between our abstract gesture representation and the gesture data is
problematic. I always find it difficult to explain this to people who have little experience with motion
capture systems: they often do not realize this frustrating gap between how they think about gesture
and how actual capture systems behave. As a matter of fact, data often corresponds to a sparse and
non-intuitive representation of what body motion is. This leads to practical difficulties when working
with gesture capture technology, which sometimes gives the impression that the problem is with the
technology itself, while it is more often with the methods of tool use.” (2007, p. 30). As such, to say
that datasets' structures are raw stands for saying that they need to be restructured, for the purpose of
recognition. Likewise, it stands for saying that they are already structured in ways that are determined
by the algorithms of motion capture themselves, notwithstanding the fact that such structures do not
comply with the purposes of recognition. For example, the infrared camera of a Kinect sensor has
been used in the DS/DM's Interactive Installation for capturing the movements of the system's user
(Alaoui, 2012, p. 72). This sensor infers the position of the dancing body in two steps. It first
computes a depth map (using structured light) and then infers body position (using machine learning)
(Freedman et al., 2012; Khoshelham & Elberink, 2012). It is not worth here to describe these
computations in detail. It is enough to note that the image of the dancing body generated by such
sensor is the result of a set of algorithmic procedures belonging to the motion capture system itself.
As computer scientist Sarah Fdili Alaoui notes, “these data need to be subjected to a supplementary
treatment in order to be possible to extract from them, for example, the positions of certain parts of
the body”. In other words, these data need to be restructured in order to be used for determinate
purposes. “In the frame of the DS/DM”, says Alaoui, “we have developed a patch in Max/MSP/Jitter,
which makes use of the cv.jit library (for image processing), in order to subtract the background of
the captured image and, with this, generate a silhouette of the dancing body defined by certain
geometrical characteristics.” (2012, pp. 79–80).
153

embodies such an approach, as it considers phrases as temporal objects we can observe
– we can ‘look inside the phrase’ to find salient moments or try to predict what is going
to happen. These temporal objects can also interact with other objects, sounds for
example. This represents a different view on the usual interaction paradigm considering
frame/posture as basic elements. Typically, the relationship between gesture data and
sound or visuals is referred to as ‘mapping’, a clear reference to the consideration of
primarily spatial relationships”. (Bevilacqua, 2007, pp. 30–31). Such mapping onto
sound files is used by the GF to inform the system's user of the coincidence between the
movements performed and the salient moments of a temporal digital object. In this way,
all three datasets are mapped onto one another so that the software is capable of
following the movements performed by stretching or shortening both the reproduction
of sound and the reproduction of the registered examples.
The conventional representations of gesture used in the DVD for the workings of
the GF exemplify how the problem of their expression had to comply with the fact that
motion data is here retrieved from the computer's mouse. Instead of being defined with
video registers of the dancing body, each of the DS/DM's movement qualities is
represented by an ideogram (see Illustration 4, below) which allows it to be defined as a
determinate succession of points across one or several lines. Though such ideograms
have been specifically created for this software, they derive from a system of
choreographic notation used in Japanese Butoh-Fu, called Butoh-Kaden109. The reason
for this choice is explained by Bertha Bermúdez in the following way: “The issues
treated in the Notation Research Project that EG|PC initiated in 2004, deal with dance
documentation, notation and their relation with movement intentionality – the inner
motivation for the movement. It is around the very problematic question of how to
notate intentionality that the Butoh-Fu system shares some principles and tools with this
research project.” (2007, p. 59). It follows that the GF's ideograms are meant to convey
the movements of thought implicated in each of the DS/DM's movement qualities.
Though expressed symbolically, they implicate the metaphorical, imagetic, and
diagrammatic character of the choreographic ideas intended to be transduced.110 They
109 In Bertha Bermúdez's words, “Butoh-Kaden is based on the idea that 'physicality exists through
acquired knowledge. The images refer to form and the words refer to symbols. Words are important
in the Butoh-Kaden system because they express matters that cannot be symbolized and they are the
medium to expand physicality through the use of imagination. [Yukio Waguri, Butoh-Kaden's creator]
has structured eighty-eight Butoh-Fu (i.e. scores) that are connected to seven different worlds. These
seven worlds have different qualities that are described through images, words, sounds, workshop
experiences and performance demonstrations.” (2007, p. 59)
110 It should be noted that, in order to facilitate the transduction of choreographic ideas, both the DVD
and the Interactive Installation allow for the GF to be used in different ways. In both cases, one can
“watch” examples of how to move, one can “learn” how to move by following the registered cases of
154

are specific cases of solution with regard to these ideas. Also, it is worth noting that
determinate patterns of displacement along the lines of these ideograms were registered
in order to be compared with the displacements of the computer's mouse. These are the
referential definitions of gesture given to the software to be compared with what this
may capture from the user's activity. What here gets to be recognized as gesture is but
the synthetic resolution of a point's expressive displacements along the lines of
symbolic notations.
In this respect, the Interactive Installation's GF is different, for its definitions of
gesture must comply with the data structures derivable from the input sensors in use.
Bevilacqua mentions two different methods used here to create the digital definitions of
gesture. On the one hand, in “a particular section of the Double Skin/Double Mind
workshop […] the breathing phases – inhale/exhale – [were] defined as contours/ shapes
(but not measured by sensors). After recording this gesture, an ‘ideal’ breathing contour
was drawn manually on the timeline representing the phrase. […] The follower makes
possible a precise synchronization [between the] drawn curve, generating a breathing
solution, and one can “play” freely with the different movement qualities in order to be signalled by
the software about which one is being performed. All these modalities of use complement one another
with regard to the transduction of the different choreographic ideas being expressed. By watching,
learning and playing with the GF, the user experiences the workshop's movement qualities in
different ways and can therefore more consistently learn how to move accordingly.
155
Illustration 4: The symbolic notations of each of the
DS/DM's movement qualities, as seen on the GF's
interface of the DVD. Here, the black dots represent the
mouse's cursor. (Delahunta, 2007a).

sound, with the body movements. The dancer is then ‘followed’ by a breathing sound,
either stretched or shortened, depending on how slow or fast the phrase is performed.”
On the other hand, “[s]everal phrases from the workshop Double Skin/Double Mind
were recorded with a mixed capture system using both sensors attached to the body and
video analysis (EyesWeb). In particular [they] focused on two choreographed phrases
danced by Bertha Bermúdez and Emio Greco (around 30 seconds long) that [were]
recorded several times. This choice was driven by the need for having phrases with
precisely specified movements, which greatly facilitates the comparison mechanism of
the gesture follower. Different tests were tried. First, [they] segmented one of the
recorded phrases into subsections [..]. When performing the phrase again, the gesture
follower was set to recognize these subsections and output a sonic signal (a ‘click’).
According to both the dancer (Bertha Bermúdez) and the viewers, the sound was heard
at the right time, indicating that the system was able to segment the phrase correctly”.
(2007, pp. 29–30). One of the differences between these two notation methods thus
regards the moment in technical transduction when cases of solution for the
structuration of movement qualities are determined. In the first case, gesture is
determined with notation itself. Drawing the contour of a dance form on video is a
qualitative determination that depends both on the chosen registers and on the specific
way in which the contours themselves are drawn. Here, the determination of gesture
occurs after the dance event and in concomitance with the conventional agreement that
gesture can be defined as it is drawn. In the second case, gesture is determined with the
structuration of a dance phrase by the dancing body, constraining already here the
undetermined potentials of each movement quality with a given form. In this case, the
digital definition of gesture then just simply remarks a structure defined from the outset,
in the very moment of the dance event. Such definition corresponds to the conversion of
the dance's remarkable points into definite quantities of data. It is the conversion of this
choreography's conceptual structure into determinate quantities of data retrieved from
the dance's video registers. In both methods, the definition of gesture by means of video
attests that, for the GF to recognize and follow the movements performed by the
system's user, it must take as reference gestures depicted from the same kind of data
generated with the input sensors in use, that is, video data. The positional character of
these models cannot be emphasized enough. Gesture is defined by an array of points,
each with a determinate value. Regardless of the fact that these values can vary in
accordance with given probabilities, the models at stake discontinue movement into a
series of numbers. They not only discontinue movement into measurable quantities but
156

do this by codifying them with determinate arrays of binary states. At the level of
computation, this is gesture's conceptual structure. If granted that gesture's matters of
content belong to the computational system's electronic circuits (including the
interfacial and qualitative expressions of sounds and visuals), then its functions of
expression must be granted to belong to the mathematical abstractions of computational
algorithms. From which it follows that, computationally, choreographic objects are
mathematical abstractions. In other words, they are the algorithmic models that bring
electronic circuits into qualitative expressions capable of conveying choreographic
ideas. 
Both in regard to the data structured from the referential examples of dance and
in regard to the data structured via input sensors, the GF's algorithms act as functions of
expression. They restructure the datasets by computing them in accordance with
determinate parametric constraints. “The system outputs continuously parameters
relative to the gesture time progression and its likelihood. These parameters are
computed by comparing the performed gesture with stored reference gestures. The
method relies on a detailed modeling of multidimensional temporal curves.”
(Bevilacqua et al., 2010, p. 1). What is compared are the quantities calculated from
treating the datasets with these constraining parameters. Such computation not only
allows for predicting gesture's progression according to a statistical distribution of
probabilities (associated with each calculated value), as it also allows for the datasets to
be compared precisely on this basis. The GF's algorithms sample points from the
temporal profile of the video registers, translating them into values that define gesture in
each specific location of its development. It can therefore be said that the interest here is
both “in computing the time progression of the performance, or in other words
answering the question 'where are we within the gesture?'” and “in computing
likelihood values between a performed gesture and pre-recorded gestures stored in a
database. This can be used to perform a recognition task, but also to characterize
gestures. [...] Moreover, the estimation of both the time progression and likelihood
values enable another important feature of such a system: the possibility to predict the
evolution of the current gesture.” (Ibid., pp. 1-2). The parameters computed by the GF's
algorithms rely on the calculation of temporal and spatial descriptors of the dancing
body. This is described by computer scientist Sarah Fdili Alaoui in her doctoral thesis,
dedicated to the problems of gesture's analysis in the context of the DS/DM's research
projects, in regard to the use of infrared cameras.111 “The spatial descriptors define the
111 It is worth noting that Frédéric Bevilacqua was Alaoui's thesis co-supervisor.
157

geometries of the dancing body, in relation to its surrounding space. The temporal
descriptors define the gesture's temporal evolution.” (Alaoui, 2012, p. 81, my
translation). The spatial descriptors are: 1) body's verticality (calculated as the ratio
between the silhouette's height and width); 2) shoulder's angle (calculated as the angle
held between one arm and the silhouette's vertical axis); 3) body's extension (calculated
as the maximum distance between the silhouette's centre of mass and the sum of its
extremities); 4) legs' width (calculated as the distance held between the two feet); 5)
weight transference (calculated as the distance between the mass centre's abscissa and
the centre of the segment connecting the two feet). The temporal descriptors are: 1)
periodicity and frequency (calculated as the average of the coefficient of statistical
correlation between the four extremities of the silhouette); 2) increment and decrement
(calculated as the temporal evolution of any of the previous spatial descriptors); 3)
quantity of movement (calculated as the frame-by-frame variation of the silhouette's
number of pixels, when translated into a digital display). (Ibid., pp. 81–82). From the
calculation of such descriptors, the GF can then express the gestural body as a series of
solutions with regard to the problem of how to represent the movement qualities in case
with digital possibilities. According to Alaoui, “[t]he reason for this choice has to do
with the fact that the descriptors […] allow for the GF to account for the very fine
nuances of movement that are characteristic of the DS/DM's dancing body. The
algorithms are in this way capable of recognizing movement qualities that more general
approaches, such as Labanian ones, aren't.” (Ibid., pp. 80–81). Since such descriptors
are calculated relatively to the dancing body's silhouette in order to output visual
representations of gesture, i.e. quadrilateral shapes, which allow for the system's user to
grasp how the computational system is processing such translation (see Illustration 5,
below), it can in fact be said that this is a Labanian method of analysis. Expressively,
this is a method which reduces the dancing body to a geometrical form that, despite
being different from Labanotation, results from the same kind of movement analysis.
The GF's capacity of recognizing nuances in movement can instead be addressed to
gesture's temporal progression, since the 30 frames per second that these sensors output
allow for movement to be notated with a resolution much greater than the one usually
attained by traditional methods of choreographic notation. 
This notation method is somewhat different from the two previous ones, for the
calculation of descriptive variables is from the outset a quantitative procedure. Of
course all these methods rely on the conversion of conceptual structures into structured
quantities of data. But in this latter method definitions of gesture are not given to the
158

software on the condition of being relative to a set of examples, but rather on the
condition of being primarily unrelated to actual matters of content. In this sense, the
algorithms that structure the sensors' raw data can be understood as definitions of
gesture in themselves. And though these algorithms are specifically designed to act as
functions of expression, what will come to be defined as gesture depends solely on the
descriptive values computed by them. As such, they are perfect examples of what a
choreographic object can be like in the digital domain. They express the DS/DM's
conceptual structure independently from the matters of content generated with the input
sensors.112 Conversely, the definitions of gesture necessary for the workings of the GF
112 It should be noted that, in her doctoral thesis, Alaoui develops still another method where gesture is
defined with the computation of determinate parametric structures (2012, pp. 66–78). This is a
method said to follow from the intuition that the DS/DM's movement qualities correspond to the
dynamic behaviours of spring-mass systems (Ibid., p. 64). A spring-mass system is defined on the one
hand by an object composed with a mass attached to a spring and on the other hand by the fact that
this object's displacements, in one dimension only, are conditioned by forces of elasticity and
viscosity. With this method, gesture is first coordinated in regard to the relative position of body parts
to be analysed (i.e. the extremities of the dancing body) and then calculated according to differential
equations in regard to variables such as speed and acceleration. Since these differential equations are
capable by themselves of modeling gesture, this is a model that neither requires that the software is
provided with a set of referential gestures (and therefore with a learning phase) nor that it is
programmed to work according to a set of gestural descriptors (Ibid, pp. 65–66). Even without such
159
Illustration 5: In this picture, it can be seen how the learning subject is placed in front of a screen,
where two different figures are displayed. There is the figure of Emio Greco's dancing body, as
recorded with video. And there is also the silhouette of the dancer's body, as processed by the
software after motion capture. As it can also be seen, the software not only extracts the silhouette
of the dancer's body from motion capture data, but also draws its geometries with moveable boxes.
Such boxes describe gestures parametrically. Retrieved 04/06/13, from http://sarah.alaoui.free.fr
(Alaoui's Ph.D Webpage).

can only be determined after the calculation of cases of solution for the problems
implicit in the software's algorithmic functions of expression. From which it follows
that, because such choreographic objects are constrained by the possibilities of the
digital domain, instead of being just models of potential transition, they can also be
thought as models of possible transition. For as much as the GF acts as an insert of
possibilities amidst the potentials of a milieu of technical individuation, it limits the
latter with what the software can in fact calculate. The abstract character of
choreographic objects is in this way reduced to the possibilities of the digital domain. A
constraining of potentials with the possibilities of digital code. Nonetheless, such
choreographic objects should be seen as being embedded in a milieu of technical
individuation, full with undetermined potentials. After all, not only are these algorithms
technical individuals, as they are also the necessary condition for a choreographic
transduction to occur into dancing body's domains. 
5.2 - Gestural Bodies, Extended 
The capacities of algorithmic calculation have been used for writing dance in
ways that extend the image of the body in space and time. This is not new to
choreographic notation. Writing dance with symbols not only gives form to the
problems in translation, as it brings past experiences into spatial juxtaposition. What in
the dancing body unfolds in succession, in traditional notation stands side-by-side.
Accordingly, one of the problems that is possibly solved with choreographic notation
regards the sense-making of what in experience is both immediate and diachronical. The
individuation of thought is mirrored by the individuation of writing and resolved into
expressions that convey both their own logic and a sense proper to the ideas in regard to
which they stand as solution. What is mirrored between individuations is the idea's
diagrammatic structure, i.e. the same problems that relate the different modes of
expression. In regard to memory, the expressive variations of choreography can result in
different instances of retention, each with its proper character. Whereas dance is
experienced empirically only to be, sooner or later, forgotten, writing retains such
experience by representing its diagrams. Without writing, memory remains abstract.
requirements, it was concluded that “spring-mass models are good candidates for the visual
presentation of dynamic renderings of the DS/DM movement qualities” (Ibid, p. 64, my translation).
For more developments on the expression of spring-mass models in the context of the DS/DM's
Interactive Installation, see Chapters 5 and 7 of Alaoui's doctoral thesis (Ibid., pp. 87–115, 131-149).
160

Writing overwrites the actual conditions of its own individuation by compressing
memory into the actuality of the present.
In contrast to traditional methods of choreographic notation, what algorithmic
procedures of digital computation allow for, in a truly novel manner, is the automation
of writing. For if it is true that such algorithms require being invented and concretized,
it is also true that the solutions that they may compute can result without human
intervention. Once digital automatisms are put to work, they can be seen as operating
independently from external determinations. This also stands for the case that, insofar as
in such computation all is written, all occurs in actuality. From which it is possible to
argue that there is no durational dimension to digital computation and that this
necessarily occurs on the basis of articulations between discrete symbolic elements.
Only by articulating arrays of data can computation proceed and generate solutions for
the problems in case, a standpoint from which it is also possible to assert the difference
between traditional methods of notation and digitally automated ones. Whereas the
automatic computation of solutions depends solely upon sets of possibilities, the
durational and subjective notation of dance cannot generate solutions but with regard to
problems in an affective-perceptive field. In this latter case, memory is empirically
formed, but soon forgotten only to be recalled, from a transcendental point of view, into
the subjective experience of duration, which does not cease to be related with the
actuality of an empirical experience. The subjective and durational notation of
choreographic ideas results from technical individuations that can not only create what
cannot be predicted, but also remember what has already been forgotten. 
In contrast to this, the digital notation of choreography can be understood from
an exclusively objective perspective. This not only regards a conception of algorithms
defining them as “specific sets of instructions for carrying out procedures or solving
problems, usually with the requirement that the procedures terminate at some point”
(Weisstein, 2002), as it also regards the possibilities of digital coding. When a finite set
of instructions is digitally programmed, what one gets is an automated object, that is, a
system capable of iterating its own programmatic determinations. Of course digital
algorithms are not disembedded from technical milieus, with all that is subjective in
them. But insofar digital computation can proceed without further regulated, automated
algorithms can be seen independently from the subjects of technical invention and
control. Which is also the reason why, when computing vast spaces of possibilities,
digital algorithms might express what can hardly be anticipated by their inventors (i.e.
computers count much faster).
161

The possibilities of algorithmic computation are many. As many as the ones
comprised by the possibility space of the content-expression encounter calculated
between two datasets. Even in the case where both functions of expression and matters
of content remain the same, relatively to one another, differences in expression can
occur. The same set of actual expressions can vary in space and time, contracting or
expanding the perception of a first calculated order of magnitude. In regard to
choreographic notation, this stands for the fact that the gestural body can be contracted
or expanded and, with each of these procedures, express otherwise imperceptible data.
In fact, these are not two distinct procedures but only different perspectives upon one
same operation. Insofar as this operation is characteristic of choreographic notation, any
of its expressions serves to understand the duality in case. It suffices to say that, because
writing compresses time into one same plane of expression, it also expands space. This
duality is, for example, expressed when the graphic symbols of choreographic notation
are used to inscribe the memory of a succession of states onto one same surface,
accreting in this way matters of content to the plane of their own expression. The more
time is compressed onto the surface of graphic inscription, the more space is created.
The compression of time into one same plane of expression can in this way densify or
disperse the number of occurrences within one same referential metric. In either case,
the objective space is extended. 
Several examples of gesture's extendability by means of digital computation can
be found in the “Motion Bank” (MB), “a four-year project of The Forsythe Company,
[developed between 2010 and 2013], providing a broad context for research into
choreographic practice.”113 In fact, this project can be said to have been initiated before.
The “Synchronous Objects for One Flat Thing Reproduced” (SOfOFTr) website,114
which is presented as one of MB's choreographic scores, resulted from a project that
ended just before the initiation of the MB. One of the reasons for this contributive
development regards the fact that the SOfOFTr's website is dedicated to the quantitative
analysis and notation of William Forsythe's choreography “One Flat Thing,
reproduced” (OFTr). The MB developed this type of choreographic endeavour into the
artistic work of other choreographers, such as Deborah Hay, Jonathan Burrows and
Matteo Fargion, Bebe Miller and Thomas Hauert, and generated for each of them an
online score.115
113 Retrieved from the MB's website (http://motionbank.org). All references from online sources quoted
in this section were retrieved during August, 2014. 
114 http://synchronousobjects.osu.edu
115 http://scores.motionbank.org
162

In the case of William Forsythe's choreographic work, the website SOfOFTr
represents a series of efforts for “visualizing choreographic structure from dance to data
to objects”116. Such efforts were coordinated by Forsythe himself, together with artist
and scholar Norah Zuniga Shaw, from the Ohio State University’s Department of
Dance, and Maria Palazzi, the director of Ohio State University’s Advanced Computing
Centre for the Arts and Design. Together with a group of designers and scientific
researchers, they “worked with the Forsythe Company to unearth the choreographic
building blocks of OFTr, quantify them, and repurpose this information visually and
qualitatively” (Forsythe et al. 2009, pp. 2–3). The result was a series of digital objects
that, because they are all mapped onto the same spatiotemporal grid (i.e. the
choreographic metric depicted from the dance performance), are synchronous in regard
to one another. Because their temporality is organized with the same metric, they can be
seen not only as different expressions of one same topological object, but also as the
overall expression of the OFTr's multidimensionality. To visualize the different objects
synchronously is to relate in perception the many nexuses that the OFTr not only
expresses, but also holds in potential. Also, such objects can be synchronized with one
another because all of them have taken the video registers of the OFTr's performance as
the referential data from which to depict this choreography's diagrammatic (i.e.
temporal and spatial) character.117 Many of the SOfOFTr are but choreographic notations
of the OFTr's performance, made on its video registers. Such notations resulted from
two specific types of data. They resulted from the spatial data generated “by tracking a
single point on each dancer in both the top and front views of the source video of OFTr.
By combining the coordinates from both views, [the animators] were able to generate a
three-dimensional data point for each dancer’s location at every moment of the dance”.
And they resulted as well from the attribute data “built from the dancers’ firsthand
accounts. […] The attribute data catalogs the three systems of the dance: movement
material, cues, and alignments”. (Forsythe et al. 2009, pp. 2–3). Whereas attribute data
served the dance's qualitative notation, spatial data served its algorithmic notation. Both
modes of notation are expressed digitally in the SOfOFTr's website, together with the
video recordings, on top of which they are drawn. But whereas the notation derived
from attribute data has been subjectively drawn, the notation derived from spatial data
has been objectively drawn, that is, it has been drawn by means of digital algorithms
116 Retrieved from http://synchronousobjects.osu.edu.
117 Though the public performance of “One Flat Thing, reproduced” was premiered at the Bockenheimer
Depot, Frankfurt, in 2000, the video recordings used for creating the SOfOFTr website were recorded
from a performance presented in 2005, at the same site of its première. (Forsythe et al., 2009, p. 1).
These recordings can be viewed at: http://synchronousobjects.osu.edu/content.html#/TheDance.
163

programmed to compute the quantities of data retrieved from analyzing the dance's
video recordings.
It is therefore with the spatial data used to create the SOfOFTr that the issues of
spatial compression before mentioned can be best understood. Not only has this to do
with the fact that, “[a]s in many forms of inquiry, quantification requires a reductive
process that necessarily obscures certain aspects of knowledge (the dancers’ intentions,
performance quality, and kinaesthetic awareness) in order to reveal others (in this case,
choreographic structure)” (Ibid.), as it has to do with the fact that the SOfOFTr created
with spatial data resulted precisely from the accretion of data on data. The objects
created with the “Video Abstraction Tool” (VAT)118 (see Illustration 6, below) are
examples of this. This tool was invented “to demonstrate novel ways of visualizing the
dance itself. [With it] patterns that are hidden due to the overall complexity of the entire
scene can be brought out by visually emphasizing movement so that both the short- and
long-term patterns of the dance, temporal relationships between movements, and spatial
information regarding how the performance area is being utilized, are revealed”
(Andereck, 2009). This is done by applying a number of possible algorithms, i.e. filters,
118 This tool is available for download at the SOfOFTr's website (http://synchronousobjects.osu.edu/cont
ent.html#/VideoAbstractionTool). Notably, it is a piece of software programmed with the
MAX/JITTER environment. 
164
Illustration 6: Video Abstraction Tool's GUI. The yellow circles, here designated as “crumbs”,
trace each dancer's displacements within the video frame according to a determinate temporal
metric. The filter “crumbs” has been used to create the “Difference Marks” object.

to the choreography's video recordings. When a filter or a combination of filters is used
as a function of expression for processing video, this is brought into results that, rather
than expressing the transformation of what is given, i.e. the video itself, express the
accretion of novel data onto it. In this way, new datasets can be mapped from and onto
the very video from which they result. Space is mapped onto space. Not just any space,
but the space formed with choreographic resolution. Each of the VAT's filters compress
spatio-temporal data in order to double the video's movement-images with other images
of movement. These latter images can be described as deformations of the spatio-
temporal patterns belonging to the referential movement-images. Space is extended in
order to be perceived as an extension of time. When time (i.e. a spatial time) is
extended, what wasn't perceived by reason of being either too fast or too small, or even
either too large or too slow, becomes information. It informs subjects with novel
perceptions regarding the OFTr. 
All the objects created with the VAT express differentials belonging to the
performance of the OFTr. This is so not only because the performance itself expresses
the OFTr's choreographic system, i.e. the differential topology to which it belongs, but
also because this tool's algorithms are programmed to compute the frame-by-frame
variation of its video registers. As Norah Zuniga Shaw (2009) notices, the VAT was
created “in order to share aspects of the software filters used in making the 'Difference
Forms', 'Difference Marks' and 'Noise Void' animations.119 Each small adjustment in the
filters [used] for these animations creates interesting aesthetic results and analytical
discoveries”. Further, these objects' names indicate the algorithmic computation of
differences in the video's frame-by-frame progression that they express. Perhaps the
most clear expression of this is the “Difference Marks” object. As shown in Illustration
6 (above) the expression of this object notates, with a series of small circles, the
displacements of each dancing body. As the dance develops, the graphemes accumulate,
expressing in simultaneity what is given with the frame-by-frame videographic
succession. As it can be read in the SOfOFTr's website: “This object visualizes the
accumulation of the dancers' motion over time. Here the duration of the dance is
compressed from 15 mins. 30 secs. to 1 min. 30 secs., and any instance of motion (what
we call localized difference) is noted with a small mark. The colours of these marks
change over time from red to blue, revealing distinct layers and patterns of motion as
119 These animated objects can be seen, respectively, at: http://synchronousobjects.osu.edu/content.html#
/DifferenceMarks; http://synchronousobjects.osu.edu/content.html#/DifferenceForms; and http://sync
hronousobjects.osu.edu/content.html#/NoiseVoid.
165

the piece progresses. One of the goals for this object, which looks down at the dance
from above, was to see how much the dancers both reinforce the grid of tables and
subvert it. As the animation progresses, outlines of the tables grow distinct as the
dancers interact with them.”120
In contrast to the VAT's algorithms, the synchronous notation of the OFTr's
attribute data regards, first and foremost, the qualitative expression of technical
transductions. Most of the objects created with such attributes are but notative
expressions of the marks allowing for this choreography's remembrance. The first object
created with such remembrance is a graphic score (Illustration 7, below) where
movement materials are disposed across the performance's time frame, and cues and
sync-ups notated relatively to them. This score expresses how the OFTr is focused on
examining and reconfiguring classical choreographic principles of counterpoint. Here,
counterpoint is defined as “a field of action in which the intermittent and irregular
coincidence of attributes between organizational elements produces an ordered
interplay” (Forsythe et al., 2009, p. 1). The interaction between the OFTr's different
attributes creates the choreography's counterpoint. Additionally, a series of different
120 Retrieved from http://synchronousobjects.osu.edu/content.html#/DifferenceMarks. Moreover, the
algorithms used for creating the “Difference Marks” object were also used to create the “Center
Sketch” (http://synchronousobjects.osu.edu/content.html#/CenterSketch) object and the “Movement
Density” object (http://synchronousobjects.osu.edu/content.html#/MovementDensity).
166
Illustration 7: “Cues and Themes - Graphic score of movement material, cueing and sync-ups
generated from the data gathered from One Flat Thing, reproduced. Credit: Synchronous Objects
Project, The Ohio State University and The Forsythe Company.” Retrieved from
http://synchronousobjects.osu.edu. 

objects have been created after such notation. There are the objects where these
notations are overlaid on the OFTr's video registers and visually synchronized with the
dancers' performance (as seen, for example, in Illustration 8, below), and there are the
objects that translate the OFTr's attributes into parametric structures, which can be
operated by altering the parameters' values (for example, the “Cue Visualizer Tool”, as
seen in Illustration 9, below). The latter are generative tools, similar to the VAT, which
allow for visualizing the different possibilities of expression that the rearticulation of the
OFTr's attributes allows for.
These procedures of data quantification and qualification have been iterated in
different ways in the remaining scores of the MB project. For example, in the case of the
score “No Time to Fly” (NTTF)121, a choreographic work for a solo performer by
Deborah Hay, data was quantified with a computer vision procedure similar to the one
used in obtaining the SOfOFTr's spatial data.122 But whereas the OFTr's video registers
were taken to render unproblematically the choreography's structure, i.e. representing its
invariant functions adequately, each of the NTTF's video registers was taken to record
only one possible case of solution for the problems posed by this choreography's ideas.
Which is to say that this choreography's principles are to a great extent undetermined,
121 The full MB's score of No Time to Fly can be accessed at http://scores.motionbank.org/dh/.
122 The full explanation of this procedure can be accessed at http://motionbank.org/en/event/deborah-
hay-score-project-solo-filming. 
167
Illustration 8: “Cueing System - Still from annotated video illustrating the complex system of
cueing in One Flat Thing, reproduced Credit: Synchronous Objects Project, The Ohio State
University and The Forsythe Company.” Retrieved from http://synchronousobjects.osu.edu.

leaving space for highly variable expressions. Whereas the OFTr is a choreography with
a great degree of formal structuration, one which assures its invariance across different
instances of performance, the NT TF is a choreography with large margins of
indetermination, i.e. its expressions in performance are highly variable (given that it is
nonetheless determined by constraints such as being a stage performance for one dancer
only). In order to deal with this problem, the MB project video recorded a series of
performances by three different dancers—Ros Warby, Juliette Mapp and Jeanine
Durning—so that their differences could be juxtaposed and, in this way, facilitate the
perception of this choreography's nexus. One of the expressions rendered after the
motion capture of this choreography's different interpretations is the overlay of all the
pathways performed across the stage (see Illustration 10, below), a sort of visualization
that does not differ much from the ones created with the quantitative analysis of the
SOfOFTr's spatial data.
The transduction of the NTTF's movement qualities into the digital domain has
instead rendered a sort of algorithmic expression that is nowhere to be found on the
SOfOFTr's website. This is a 3D digital animation of algorithmic parameters, designed
by programmer Amin Weber (see Illustration 11, below), after the experience that the
168
Illustration 9: Cue Visualizer Tool's GUI. Retrieved from http://synchronousobjects.osu.edu/tool
s/cueVisualizer.html.

169
Illustration 11: Still from the final version of the digital adaptation of the solo “No Time to Fly”
by Deborah Hay, as programmed by Amin Weber. Retrieved from http://scores.motionbank.org/d
h/#/set/digital-adaptation-of-no-time-to-fly.
Illustration 10: “21 solos overlaid. 7 x 3 performers.” (seen from
above). Retrieved from http://motionbank.org/sites/motionbank.org/fil
es/glossary.pdf.

dancers, the choreographer and the programmer had of the different performances.123 In
contrast to quantitative analyses of motion data, what is here expressed by digital means
is the programmer's own conception of this choreography. Which is why this digital
animation is referred to as an “algorithmic metaphor”. It expresses the resolution of
problems located at the many levels of a transduction, which goes from the dance to the
viewer and from the viewer turned programmer into the digital domain. This is really
not a matter of translation. It is a process that unfolds on the basis of thoughts, which
move towards resolutions of the problems at stake. Such problems necessarily pertain
both to the content-expression encounter of thought and to the content-expression
encounter of writing. And if the problems of the former can be located at the level of the
affective-perceptive order of subjective experience, the problems of the latter
necessarily pertain to the relationship between the excessive potentials of thought and
the limited possibilities of digital coding. If what is transferred between domains are not
only forms but also forces, what in the end attests the transductiveness of such process
is the metaphorical character of its digital expressions. What is expressed is less what
was seen to be danced, but more what was experienced as a whole, that is, the very
openness of the dancer to its excessive reality. What is expressed are the principles of
individuation felt by the viewer when acting upon the dancer. It can even be said that
the kinds of image schemata underlying the many metaphorical projections taking place
in this whole process are the ones that mirror in the viewer the forces active in the
dancer. Empathy in kinaesthesia. And from the internal resonance of such senses in the
body follows the challenge of expressing within the limits of writing the forces in
transduction.
The gestural bodies created by the MB from the joint work of choreographer
Jonathan Burrows and composer Matteo Fargion are also algorithmic metaphors. The
“SEVEN DUETS”, dedicated to “[f]ragments, movements and insights from the
interplay between”124 the two artists, comprises collections of what have been
designated as “Generators” and “Performers”.125 “Generators” are pulse patterns used
123 For insights on the programmer's own experience see: http://scores.motionbank.org/dh/#/set/digital-
adaptation-of-no-time-to-fly.
124 The “SEVEN DUETS” scores, as created for the MB platform, can be accessed at
http://scores.motionbank.org/jbmf/. “Fragments, movements and insights from the interplay between
Jonathan Burrows and Matteo Fargion” is the subtitle of this MB's section. 
125 This section, “SEVEN DUETS”, is titled after the fact that, for it to be created, seven different
choreographic works of Burrows and Fargion were video recorded. The “Generator/Performer” pairs
were composed not only from these registers, but also from a series of recorded insights where the
choreographer and the composer discuss their artistic work. For the artists insights see the set titled
“Patterns and Pulse” at http://scores.motionbank.org/jbmf/#/set/patterns-and-pulse. For the fragments
of the video registers used to trigger the digital “Perfomers” see the set titled “Fragments and
170

to animate the digital “Performers”. These pulse patterns were created by adding
markers to the video recordings of different works with the “Piecemaker”, a video
annotation software developed by David Kern for The Forsythe Company to “support
the organization and recall of materials created in the rehearsal studio”126. With this
software, time markers output pulse patterns, which are then used for animating the
digital “Performers”. At the “Meanwhile in parallel worlds...”127 set (where the
collection of “Generators/ Performers'” is presented), one can watch how animated
“Performers” respond to the video registers of dance events. Illustration 12 (below),
shows a montage of the “Piecemaker's” GUI with the digital “Performers”. The latter
are simple algorithms, programmed with Javascript, which animate the figures with
each pulse received. In this illustration it can also be seen how the software's GUI
comprises a video frame and the video's annotated timeline. Each of the timeline's
coloured bands (in grey) corresponds to an annotation, which is also part of a list
disposed below the timeline. Whenever the annotated video is read, the software outputs
corresponding values. Such triggers can also be visualized while the annotations are
highlighted on the list.128
The representation of Burrows and Fargion's dancing bodies by these animated
“Performers”  cannot be understood without acknowledging that the latter graphically
express discrete quantities of data. They express the marks with which the videos have
been annotated. What has been articulated by being cut can be rearticulated in as many
ways as allowed by the possibility space of the encounter between two datasets. What
perhaps distinguishes these graphic animations from other gestural bodies is the fact
Movements” at “http://scores.motionbank.org/jbmf/#/set/2012-recordings. For each video register of
the seven choreographies see the set titled “The 7+1 Duets” at http://scores.motionbank.org/jbmf/#
/set/all-duets.
126 Retrieved from http://motionbank.org/en/content/education-piecemaker. Furthermore, at
http://motionbank.org/de/node/394 it can be read that “[i]n the context of the MB research project,
“Piecemaker” has been reprogrammed for use in the development of the on-line digital scores and as
a standalone tool for use in the studio by those working in dance creation and education. Now titled
PM2GO (Piecemaker2GO) a free beta version can be downloaded along with instructions here
[motionbank.org/en/event/pm2go-easy-use-video-annotation-tool]”.
127 http://scores.motionbank.org/jbmf/#/set/a-parallel-world.
128 The explanation of how the “Generator/Performer” pairs were composed and how the relation
between the two was programmed, notably by means of the workings of the one “Piecemaker”
software version used for this task, can be accessed at the following address:
http://vimeo.com/93275260. It is here worth noting that, just before the “Piecemaker” was developed
in the frame of the MB project, another video annotation software with a focus on choreographic
creation had already been developed. This is the already mentioned “Creation Tool” (CT) software,
developed in Lisbon by the “Transmedia Knowledge-Base for Performing Arts” (TKB) project (see
page 18). With it, it is possible to annotate video both while this is being recorded and in editing
mode. Alongside with having been conceived to be specifically used with tablet computers (since it
allows for writing with a pen directly on the video), the CT allows for a variety of other modes of
annotation (annotations with voice, with hyperlinks, with predefined graphemes, such as the marks of
the “Piecemaker”, with the writings of the tablet's pen, with local files, and typewritten text). 
171

that these “Performers” have reduced degrees of freedom. For example, the “Performer
Watcha Looking At?”129, figured as two round eyes (see Illustration 12, above), and its
paired “Generator”, drawn only from video registers where Jonathan Burrows performs
a series of arms' movements, has only eight degrees of freedom—closing the eyes,
moving the eye balls to the right, and so on. These degrees of freedom are this
“Performer's” expressive range. The data computed from the video recordings
eventuates only the possibilities programmed into their digital determinations.
Moreover, this figure's animation iterates its expressive possibilities in different
combinations of succession according to the distribution of annotations in the temporal
profile of the video registers used to create its “Generator”. Which is to say that,
because the “Performers” are spatial objects, possessing no determination with regard
129 http://scores.motionbank.org/jbmf/#/set/watcha-looking-at.
172
Illustration 12: Montage with the GUI of the Piecemaker software and the figures of the animated
“Performers”, which have been programmed to react to the software's cues. Images retrieved
from the “Meanwhile in parallel worlds ...” set (http://scores.motionbank.org/jbmf/#/set/aparallel-
world) and from the video explanation of the workings of the Generator/Performer's pairs
(http://vimeo.com/93275260).

to the temporal disposition of events, their animated expressions depend on temporally
determined objects, i.e. the “Generators”. Though such temporal objects can have no
correspondence with Burrows and Fargion's dancing,130 if the “Performers” are to be
animated in accordance with the patterning structures of these choreographic works,
they must be fed with the digital expression of representative conceptual structures, i.e.
the discrete data of the video annotations. In regard to the formal differences expressed
between these digital objects and the dancing bodies to which they refer, it seems most
adequate to define the former as algorithmic metaphors. After all they express one thing
in terms of another.
The notion of “algorithmic metaphor” seems to have been key for developing
some choreographic objects of the “TWO” score.131 This score “begins and ends with
two choreographers, unrelated to each other. Bebe Miller (North America) and Thomas
Hauert (Europe). […] two working strategies from each of the two choreographers
[were selected], that together [deal] with the dancing mind and the thinking body”. Or,
in other words, this score “examines choreographic thinking in the construction of
performance improvisation for small groups”.132 This score's algorithmic metaphors are
designated as “Attentive Agents”. They represent an improvisational practice, called
“Assisted Solos”, which is used by choreographer and dancer Thomas Hauert to
generate movement material. The “Assisted Solos” practice consists in a series of
exercises where “partners or assistants provide external impulses for a soloist in a series
of different improvisation strategies from the introductory Light Touches to more
complex forms involving several people and changing roles”133. For each improvisation
strategy, an “Attentive Agent” was developed.134 Each “Attentive Agent” is expressed by
a GUI (as seen, for example, in Illustration 13, below) where gestural forms
representing the dancing bodies are animated both according to the parametric structure
of determinate algorithms and according to the “tactile” inputs that the system's user
might provide to them (by clicking with the mouse's cursor on one of the GUI's
remarkable points). If the latter case occurs, the gestural form reacts, simulating in this
way the touches that might occur in dancing the “Assisted Solos”. But this is not to say
that these algorithmic metaphors simulate the dancing body as such. Rather, they
130 Which is the case of the object named “Count for Nothing”. This object's generator is a Youtube
video with no apparent relation with Burrows and Fargion's choreographic work. This object can be
accessed at http://scores.motionbank.org/jbmf/#/set/count-for-nothing.
131 http://scores.motionbank.org/two.
132 Retrieved from http://motionbank.accad.ohio-state.edu/about.
133 Retrieved from the same address where the “Assisted Solos” data can be accessed:
http://scores.motionbank.org/two/#/set/impulse.
134 The different “Attentive Agents” can be viewed at http://scores.motionbank.org/two/#/set/impulse.
173

simulate the parameters derived from knowing how to improvise in such a manner.
They are digital objects primarily defined by parametric structures that express
determinate conceptions of choreography.
To say that an algorithm is metaphorical is to posit the hypothesis that, as a
computational procedure, it is capable of thinking in its own terms. In other words,
rather than being only the expression of a concept, the metaphorical character of digital
algorithms can be thought as pertaining to digital computation itself, but beyond its
limited possibilities and the towards the resolution of problems in potential. This is the
hypothesis that digital computation is a mode of thought in its own right, one that like
any other mode of thought opens processes' actuality to an infinity of potentials. If this
is the case, these digital objects can be said to be not only algorithmic metaphors but
also metaphorical algorithms. But this of course bears the contradiction of a digital
potential, that is, the contradiction that the digital domain is defined both in terms of
possibilities and in terms of potentials. Or, better yet, instead of a contradiction, this
hypothesis posits the problem of how to relate discrete quantities of data with the
continuous character of qualitative potentials. For it to hold, such relation must be
thought in relation to potentials existing at the very heart of the digital domain's binary
code.135 The next chapter will be dedicated to such problem.
135 In her book “Moving Without a Body”, Stamatia Portanova asks: “Can objects be processes?”, which
is the title of one of the book's chapters (2013, pp. 85–96). In this chapter, the author engages herself
in a discussion about choreographic objects, from the perspective of Alfred N. Whitehead's process
174
Illustration 13: “Interactive Attentive Agent, an algorithmic metaphor for the Pressure Assisted
Solo strategy devised by Thomas Hauert.” Retrieved from http://motionbank.accad.ohio-state.edu.

In contrast to these algorithmic metaphors, the TWO's 3D animations simply
represent dancing bodies, after they have been motion captured.136 Though these
animations reproduce determinate expressions of dance, they do not necessarily express
the choreographic thoughts that moved with the dancers' performance. They correspond
more to the result of a translation than to the result of a transduction. Of course motion
capture itself follows from technical transductions, which determine the kinds of
gestural bodies that in the end will be expressed. But such gestural bodies only serve the
presentation of what, after the dances have been registered, is possible to reproduce. The
animation of these gestural bodies is no more than the reproduction of the motion
capture registers. There is no parametric structure by them expressed that derives from
transducing choreography's conceptual structure, that is, from resolving with a process
of transduction the implicit problems of choreographic ideas. When motion data is used
only to replay what has been registered, these procedures of digitalization cannot be said
to be choreographic. If, in any case, the dance's choreographic structure is expressed
with these animations, it is not because novel choreographic solutions were attained
with digitalization, but only because what has already been determined (in dancing) has
also been retained (digitally). The algorithms involved in capturing the dance and
animating derivative gestural bodies are therefore functions of reanimation. They render
the motion data in terms of what is necessary—a gestural figure recognizable as the
dancing body—and sufficient—no deformations beyond the expression of these
recognisable forms—to express the memory of past experiences.137
The possibilities that these 3D spaces of digital animation allow for, both in
relation to the dancing body and in relation to the gestural body, have been far more
explored by the “Reactor for Awareness in Motion” (RAM) project. Developed since
philosophy, taking as a case study the work of choreographer William Forsythe and the digitalizations
performed on it with the “Synchronous Objects for One Flat Thing Reproduced” platform. Here, it
matters to emphasize that Portanova looks at the algorithmic character of choreographic objects and
discusses the possibility of considering both their parametric structure and their generative capacities
from the standpoint of a potentiality that exists not only with dancing bodies but also with numbers.
In this regard, Whitehead's philosophy allows for thinking algorithms, even digital ones, not only as
finite sets of instructions, but rather as processes that are open to and by undetermined potentials
(from which results the possibility of radical novelty in whatever case of algorithmic computation). 
136 These animations can be view in each of the TWO score's sets (http://scores.motionbank.org/two/#/set
/sets).
137 It should nonetheless be noted that the “TWO” score's 3D animations allow both for zooming in and
out the scene and for changing the viewpoint in all cardinal directions. The fact that one can roam
freely throughout the three-dimensional space allows for visualizing the motion capture registers in
ways that video registers don't. If programmed into the animation space, different modes of
interaction are possible as well. For example, in the animation “Redux Interactive” the user can
generate a random series of objects which become actual constraints for the animated gestural bodies,
by clicking with the mouse's cursor on the animation space (see http://scores.motionbank.org/two/#/s
et/memory).
175

2011, by the Yamaguchi Centre for Arts and Media (YCAM), together with Yoko Ando
(a dancer from The Forsythe Company), the RAM comprises a kit of digital tools for
dance research, creation and education. The “RAM Dance Toolkit” is an open-source
software application, written in C++, which contains a “graphical user interface and
functions to access, recognize, and process motion data to support creation of various
environmental conditions”138. This toolkit can be fed by motion capture systems such as
the MOTIONER139 or the “Kinect” sensor140. With these data, its algorithms can
represent the gestural body in various ways, from more common expressions of
choreographic writing, such as Labanotation, to all sorts of geometrical abstractions.
The gestural bodies generated with the RAM algorithms can then be fed-back to the
dancers through audio-visual displays (as seen in Illustration 14, below). With the
creation of such responsive environments, the dancers are said to “decide their next
movement” on the basis of what is calculated and expressed by the software's
algorithms. In this way, together with the RAM, they create the “rules” by which they
move. Dancing with the RAM “is a means to create and clarify problems, and to address
deeper issues”. For such reasons, the RAM is said to be “a technological inquiry into the
nature of dance”, driven by questions such as: “how do contemporary dancers
themselves decide on their next movement?” and “what pattern of thought underlies
their movement?”.141
Since the “RAM Dance Toolkit” is also an open-source platform for
programming environments that can respond to the dancers' movements, it allows for
yet determined ideas to be expressed. Beyond what has been already programmed, the
software is open for the inclusion of not yet programmed objects. Anyone with
programming skills and choreographic ideas can use this platform to express the latter
138 Retrieved from http://interlab.ycam.jp/en/projects/ram/. For all the information on the RAM project,
see the same address.
139 “MOTIONER is the inertial motion capture system developed for RAM. The computer captures the
dancer’s movements via 18 sensors attached to the dancer’s body. […] Using MOTIONER, you can
capture, record and playback body movements, and send the data via OSC messages over a network.
MOTIONER is designed to work with RAM Dance Toolkit using openFrameworks, and will work
with creative coding environments that provide OSC. […] In general, motion capture systems are
very expensive and very accurate, or very cheap and very inaccurate. To address this problem [the
RAM team] designed one which is relatively low in cost and fairly accurate. MOTIONER has been
developed with feedback from Yoko Ando and other dancers that resulted in a light weight, low-
stress, and low latency system. Because it’s an inertial system, users can attach the sensors inside or
outside their clothing. [...] Special straps for the sensors were developed. The straps allow the sensors
to be installed properly and flexibly, regardless of the dancer’s body shape. This makes effective
measurement possible.” Retrieved from http://interlab.ycam.jp/en/projects/ram/motioner and from
https://github.com/YCAMInterlab/MOTIONER/wiki/Overview. For a complete and detailed
description of the whole system (including hardware and software) see https://github.com/YCAMInte
rlab/MOTIONER/wiki.
140 See footnote number 108 on page 153 for a short description of the workings of the “Kinect” sensor.
141 Retrieved from http://interlab.ycam.jp/en/projects/ram/.
176

in relation to motion data. In the same way, the digital algorithms already programmed
into the software express the choreographic ideas developed in the context of the RAM
project. These can be divided into two categories. Those regarding possibilities of
visualization and those regarding expressive derivations from motion data. In regard to
the former there is here too the possibility of roaming freely across the 3D space while
the animation is rendered, i.e. visualizing it from different perspectives. But beyond
this, there is also the possibility of addressing functions to the viewpoint's perspective
(here designated as camera). For example, there is the possibility of constraining the
camera with one of the gestural figure's nodes (i.e. articulations). It is both possible to
direct it towards the figure's nodes and to make it coincide with them (in which case the
animation is viewed from the gestural body's perspective). Moreover, it should be
noticed that the RAM's scenes also allow for different motion registers to be reproduced
simultaneously. Since each dancing body is here represented with a dataset of its own,
different gestural bodies can be animated independently from one another, while still
being viewed together in one same animation space. In regard to the expressive
derivations from motion data, is it notable that the RAM software is equipped with
algorithms that allow both for creating extensions, which respond to the gestural body 's
expressions, and for notating the latter's displacements. At once, these algorithms
express choreographic ideas and allow for the expression of new ideas. In the RAM
177
Illustration 14: Still from a movie where it is shown how “dancers react to the information from
'Line', which is one of the 'scenes' programmed into the environmental conditions of the 'RAM
Dance Toolkit'”. Retrieved from https://vimeo.com/64772291.

software, the expression of each choreographic idea is designated as “scene”. There are
nineteen scenes programmed into the available software,142 each expressing a
choreographic idea of how to extend the gestural body. The correspondence between
each scene's algorithmic set and a determinate choreographic idea is confirmed by the
project's team when affirming that, by “[t]aking advantage of the power of computer
programming, RAM externalizes the scenes dancers have in their minds. With RAM,
dancers can visually observe their ideas and gain a real-time feedback of their
movement from the environment. It enables them to experiment more with their
perception and movement”143. Each of these scenes is therefore a case of solution for
determinate choreographic problems.
The RAM software also comes with a series of presets, which combine different
scenes. For example, one of the presets combines the choreographic idea of dancing
with a temporal delay and the choreographic idea of snap-shooting the gestural body (as
seen in Illustration 15, below). The algorithm that here computes the temporal delay is
called “Hasty Chase”. This scene is rendered after the algorithmic compression of the
gestural body into a buffer, which is then computed into a replicant expression, but in
delay. This delay can be stretched or shortened and reproduced faster or slower,
according to the user's determinations. Moreover, it is possible to visualize the two
142 Which can be downloaded at: https://github.com/YCAMInterlab/RAMDanceToolkit/wiki/Overview.
143 Retrieved from http://interlab.ycam.jp/en/projects/ram/about_ram.
178
Illustration 15: Still from RAM's motion capture registers of one of Yoko Ando's dancing sessions.
Processed with the algorithms “Hasty Chase” (the figure in blue), “Stamp” (the black boxes), and
“Natto” (the lines in blue).

figures' connection with the elastic strings of the “Natto” scene. With it, it can be seen in
a precise way how this choreographic idea is expressed digitally while being thought
(i.e. moved) by the dancing body. Here, as in many other RAM's scenes, the gestural
body's extensions depend directly on the dancing body's responses. Finally, this preset
combines these algorithms with the scene “Stamp”. This scene allows for the user to
define a temporal metric according to which the gestural body's position is marked with
a box. While the dance develops, the animation space gets increasingly populated with
these boxes, which can contain (or not) the gestural body's figure as captured by the
snapshot. Both this one combination and the remaining presets are but a few examples
of the variety of ways in which the RAM software is capable of extending the gestural
body. 
Importantly, the RAM is said to “provide the dancers with a way to recognize
their subconscious movements by altering the dimensions of their everyday physical
perception and creating a disparity from what they are used to”. As such, this is a
software that “inspires new ideas for dance”.144 This could not express more bluntly how
much the RAM is a system of technical individuation. There is the choreographic
individuation of this software's scenes and there is the individuation of ideas expressed
by those who learn how to dance with the software. In this sense, the RAM is a whole
system of choreographic individuation, one that co-individuates choreographic ideas in
the digital domain and in the domain of the dancing body. In fact, as much as the
algorithmic determinations of choreographic ideas in the digital domain consist of
different possibilities, the learning subjects can think differently of their movements. In
these conditions, it is possible for the dancing body to know itself on the basis of a
difference regarding not what it can perceive immediately of itself, but rather what it
can perceive of what is digitally computed. At the same time that the content-expression
encounter of choreographic writing provides the conditions for a difference to be
expressed, the content-expression encounter of choreographic thinking individuates the
knowledge of an extended perception. In this guise, perception can be seen as a variety
of differences that condition the individuation of knowledge. Differences that, in
relation to one another, bring the overall system of individuation to novel states of
resolution.
All these examples of digital choreography attest one thing: the diagrammatic
topology of choreographic ideas is also algorithmic. As mentioned before, this shouldn't
144 Retrieved from http://interlab.ycam.jp/en/projects/ram/about_ram.
179

be understood as the choreographic object being algorithmic because it is digitally
programmable, but precisely the opposite: it is programmable because it is algorithmic
in itself. Such algorithmic character of choreographic objects regards the fact that they
are resumable across domains. It regards the fact that they are known and, as such,
conceptually structured. In relation to technical individuation, it is this intelligibility that
allows for choreographic objects to be transduced across domains and, in this case,
digitally programmed and expressed. All the algorithms discussed above are
choreographic functions of expression. They not only express choreographic diagrams,
but they also express how such functions are manifested when in relation with given
quantities of data, i.e. matters of content. The fact that both parts in this content-
expression encounter are sets of digital data attests their codification and
programmability. It is this last feature that allows for digital data to express the dynamic
character of choreographic objects. A program, instead of just expressing one possible
solution for the problems in case, can iterate computations and express the many
solutions existing in the content-expression encounter of each digital choreography.
From this standpoint, it should be asked: are these digital choreographies
capable of novel ideas? Of course the case just mentioned, of the RAM, attests precisely
this. But it does so with potentials belonging not only to the digital domain but to the
overall technical system of individuation (including all that is analog). Instead, the
question that remains to be asked is: are algorithmic computations capable of expressing
novelty as such, when only the digital domain is considered? If so, it should be
acknowledged that this can lead to non-programmed expressions, being themselves
charged with the potentials of novel ideas. The next Chapter will follow this hypothesis.
180

Chapter 6 - DIGITAL POTENTIAL
In accordance with the exposed at Section 4.3, the notion of “algorithmic
metaphor” accompanying the last Section's examples entails the possibility of
considering digital computation as a mode of thought with its own potentials. Such
possibility is a plausible way to delve into the question posed in Section 1.2 of whether
the encounter between dance and technology can ever be granted its own potentials and,
therefore, the capacity to individuate novel cases of solution with regard to
choreographic knowledge (i.e. the question of the technogenetic body). This next and
final chapter will pursue this possibility and discuss its implications. Section 6.1 will
posit the problem of a digital potential. It will departure from Erin Manning's plea for a
vocabulary of process, capable of tapping into the unmappable reality of movement, in
order to posit the hypothesis that digital computation mobilizes its own potentials,
beyond the usual conception that such operation is dependent upon possibility only.
Section 6.2 will pursue this hypothesis by drawing both from Andrew Goffey's
conception of algorithms and from Gregory Chaitin's theory of algorithmic complexity.
Specially the latter will be useful to consider that, at the very level of binary
computation, there exist incomputable quantities of data that exceed the synthetic
resolution of digital expressions. Such notion will be then contrasted with two
ontologically distinct conceptions of objects. Respectively, Sections 6.3 and 6.4 will
expound Graham Harman's object-oriented philosophy and Alfred N. Whitehead's
theory of the “extensive continuum”. If the first approach will provide the means to
consider digital algorithms in phenomenological terms, the second approach will allow
for considering objects as processes. Both the one and the other will attest the
ontological implications of Chaitin's theory of algorithmic complexity and, in this way,
provide the means to understand how can a digital potential be like. From this
standpoint, Section 6.5 will discuss Luciana Parisi's notion of “soft(ware) thought”,
which draws greatly upon both Chaitin's theory and Whitehead's philosophy. It will be
shown how this notion is opposed to theories of cognition and, as such, proposes digital
algorithms to be related to an infinity of uncountable parts, which cannot computed. 
181

6.1 - Problems in Potential
By now it comes with no surprise that the gestural body of choreographic
notation is capable of becoming propositional. Not in itself, but rather as the expression
of a choreographic knowledge that can elicit further learnings. Be it in the case of
traditional systems of choreographic notation or in the case of algorithmic calculations
of quantitative data, the expressions of choreographic knowledge can propose the
individuation of novel solutions for the problems that in the first place originated them.
For the learning subject, the expressions of a choreographic idea necessarily act as a
sign of difference. They can elicit the feeling of a contrast sufficiently intense to prompt
novel resolutions. Notwithstanding, from the perspective of choreographic transduction,
the expressions of a choreographic object are a point of rest. As what results from
technical individuation, they represent cases of solution with regard to the object's
problematic ideas. They arrest the potentials of choreographic ideas with determinate
forms of expression. And insofar as choreographic expressions implicate conventional
definitions of gesture, they can be said to hold in form the same potentials of the
technical contexts in which they have obtained a determinate value of signification. The
expression of choreographic knowledge in the form of gesture is thus not a matter of
truth, but rather a matter of negotiation (what does that sign really mean?). What is kept
in form is convention itself.
Beyond the conventional agreements that define gesture in terms of its
conformity to the requirements of written language, Erin Manning proposes something
different. Instead of a gestural body established in these terms, the philosopher rather
suggests “establishing a kind of grammar of movement that would—paradoxically—be
more likely to tie the body to some preestablished understanding of how it actualizes”,
that is, to “[…] the potential of the wholeness of movement, including its 'unmappable'
virtuality” (2009, p. 61). A grammar of process according to which neither dancing
bodies nor technologies of writing are conceived as being external to one another, i.e. as
being the supplemental extension of one another, but rather as being varieties of one
same process of technical individuation. In short, the grammar developed throughout
this study.
It is important to notice why, for Manning, such grammar holds the status of a
paradox. On the one hand, as much as “[a]n engagement with technology and dance
demands an encounter with the syntax of the moving body” (2009, p. 61), the body
182

needs to be approached grammatically, that is, it needs to be understood as being
articulable with itself by means of expression. On the other hand, as much as the
dancing body is defined by a plane of movement where actuality and virtuality
rhythmically co-compose one another, it necessarily resists articulatory reductions. In
this sense, the dancing body is unmappable. Its expressions are but partial samples of its
whole movement. To create gestures with the dancing body is thus to cut the latter's
potentials into discrete and articulable sections. Which is the reason why “a focus on
gesture (defined as extensive displacement of body parts divisible from a wholeness of
movement) tends to lose sight of movement’s incipiency, thus overlooking the virtual
opening [that] sensitive technologies wish to encounter.” (Manning, 2009, p. 62).
It is true that digital technologies such as the ones discussed in the previous
chapter are not always developed together with dancing bodies. In such cases, dancing
bodies and digital softwares can only encounter one another by means of what is
possibly given, i.e. predetermined and preset before their encounter. This is, for
example, the case of the relation between the “Gesture Follower” (GF) software,145
which requires being given determinate definitions of gesture to recognize determinate
expressions of motion, and the learning subject's dancing body. From the latter's
perspective, the definitions of gesture given to the software determine what is to be
learnt. Even if granted that what is learnt is not a given form but a principle of
individuation, the dancing body remains nonetheless limited by the possibilities
inscribed into the software's algorithms. It needs to conform with the software's
definitions of gesture for this to recognize its motion and for it to learn what its relation
with the software holds in potential. The dancing body can, notwithstanding, express
more than what is defined as gesture. Its excess can easily not conform to the definitions
of gesture inscribed in the software (just think of all that is too small or too large for the
motion devices to capture). But if a determinate gesture is to be learnt, then what is
expressed with an excessive body needs to conform to what has been programmed into
the software.
This doesn't regard, of course, the fabrication of the software itself. If, from the
perspective of the learning subject, the GF corresponds to a set of possibilities, from the
perspective of its own individuation there's necessarily more to it than possibility only.
After all, the definitions of gesture embedded into the software express the knowledge
that, in a first moment, existed with the dancing body and that, in a second moment, has
145 See Section 5.1.
183

been transduced into the digital domain. The fact that such transduction individuated
novel instances of knowledge with regard to the dancing body itself, attests that this was
not a unilateral process. The GF's concretization individuated instances of knowledge
that were expressed digitally and understood abstractly (by the dancing body itself).
This process can therefore be said to have been a co-individuation through which the
resolutions of the one domain depended on the resolutions of the other. A technical
individuation that, while moving the potentials of its system's multiplicities, co-
individuated dancing bodies and gestural bodies.
The same can be said in regard to the other examples discussed in this study.
Though these projects might not have been specifically focused on Manning's call for
the constitution of a grammar of process, all of them have notwithstanding individuated
instances of knowledge that, while concerning the dancing body, became expressed
gesturally. Moreover, as exemplified by the GF, some expressions of gesture
individuated precisely from dwelling upon the dancing body's emergent character and
its principles of individuation. But what Manning proposes is of another order. It is of
the order of technogenesis itself: a vocabulary that, rather than only objectifying the
dancing body for the purpose of transducing its principles of individuation, can express
the very processes by means of which dancing bodies and gestural bodies co-
individuate with and co-constitute one another. In her words: “If a vocabulary of gesture
is to be reclaimed as part of what can be stimulated in the encounter between dance and
new technology, I believe it must be done through the continuum of movement, through
the body’s emergence in the realm of the virtual becoming of preacceleration. Rather
than moulding the body to the measure of motion-detecting technology, I propose we
begin with pure plastic rhythm, situating the sensing body in movement in a mutating
matrix of technological becoming. Let’s call this body-emergent technogenetic.” (2009,
p. 62).
What Manning's plea stresses is the fact that, in this movement of co-
individuation, there is a continuum where both dancing bodies and digital technologies
are in contact with one another and where they affect one another, reciprocally, for a
mutual becoming. Hence, this continuum of movement does not correspond only to the
dancing body's plane of composition. It is also the continuum of movement through
which technogenesis unfolds and therefore the very plane of composition from which its
expressions derive. This is also what Manning understands by preacceleration, i.e. the
movement before expression. It is the process through which the abstract machine
ingathers potentials and engenders the greatest forces. A process with a topology where
184

tendencies inform the system to compress the virtual into the actual present. Whereas
acceleration can be understood as a relation between metric spaces, preaccelaration is
the very movement by means of which the virtual tends towards actual incipiency.
Insofar as this is a durational movement, preaccelaration is the movement through
which the unconscious tends to become sensible and intelligible. Hence, it is an
intensive movement, of intuition, rather than an extensive one, of expression.
The virtual-actual continuum through which dancing bodies and gestural bodies
co-compose one another should therefore be thought in terms of the individuating
system's associated milieu. It is with the system's excessive reality, i.e. its technicity,
that both dancing bodies and gestural bodies can come into relation, not as
supplementary extensions of one another, but rather as different actualizations of one
same field of potentials. It is in this sense that, according to Manning, “[w]e must move
beyond the prosthetic as an external category toward an exploration of the originary
technicity that technogenesis taps into” (2009, p. 66). This originary technicity
corresponds to the system's capacity to compose technical individuals. It corresponds to
its capacity to bring into emergence the resolution of its implicit problems in different
domains. This is a capacity that only acquires an operative value by means of
transduction. It is only through transduction that the system's abstract machine becomes
capable of acting out resolutions in different domains. It is only by its means that
dancing bodies and gestural bodies can be said to derive from one same choreographic
idea. 
Transduction is not a simple passage from one state to another. Rather, it
reconfigures the very context in which it occurs. As a process of informational transfer,
it changes the milieu of its own individuation. It is by means of transduction that
technogenesis can tap into the field of its system's originary technicity. Precisely
because of this, says Manning, “[t]echnogenesis cannot be premapped. […] Rather than
mapping the technology—as a prosthesis—onto a moving body, it is necessary to incite
the movement to appear out of the technological process that is the machinic
assemblage of individuation. To make the movement appear does not mean to restrict
the movement to the parameters of the technology. It does not mean to delimit
movement to gesture. We require operations that traverse the spectrum of the
technology’s potential metastability in relation to a becoming-body. When technology
begins to operate along this spectrum it forms an associated milieu with the interval that
is the becoming-body. Technology not mapped-onto but emergent-with a body-
becoming might make different durations felt along the stratum that is the sensing body
185

in movement. […] There is no doubt this already happens – but still too rarely.
Techniques for technogenetic emergence must become part of the technology’s
interface: we must develop techniques that create new associated milieus never distinct
from the ontogenetic body. Technological recomposition must no longer be inserted into
a body-system: it must be emergent with it.” (Manning, 2009, pp. 74–75).
It is for this reason that, if dancing bodies and gestural bodies are to co-
individuate, such must happen in relation to one same associated milieu. In this sense,
the associated milieu of the technical individuals in formation is a condition of their
differentiation and of their choreographic nexus. This is also to say that the co-
individuation of dancing bodies and gestural bodies corresponds to the emergence of
different species of technologies. There are technologies that allow for choreographic
transductions to occur and there are technologies that allow for choreographic
transductions to be resolved in domains of mnemonic extension. In technogenesis, the
informational exchange between what will have become a dancing body and what will
have become a gestural body is key for the process to tap into the system's originary
technicity. With the exertion of problematic forces onto what is given, both the dancing
body and its gestural expressions can emerge from one same relation. Both of them can
result from and belong to one same problematic field, which is the system's very
technicity. If dancing bodies and gestural bodies are not to supplement one another,
these different technologies must become one another's associated milieu. Their
individuation must result from an exchange of information between potentials
belonging to different orders of magnitude, but yet belonging to the same topological
continuum.
Furthermore, asks Manning, if “[t]echnogenesis cannot be premapped, [h]ow
then can it work alongside a technological system whose parameters are set?” (2009, p.
74). This question pertains, evidently, to the limits of possibility of the digital domain. It
pertains to the tension between the excessive reality of the dancing body and the
possibilities of digital computation. The answer to this question might be approached by
considering the invention of technologies that, at once, deal with the potentials of
individuation and with the kinds of relation whereby different species of individuals are
expressed. Such technologies allow for what has been resolved in one individuation to
be differently known or expressed in another, by means of transduction. In other words,
the answer to this question regards not the determination of parameters on the basis of
what is given and known, but rather their determination on the basis of what is not
known. Which is to say that digital algorithms need to be invented together with the
186

actuality and the virtuality of movement. As Manning puts it, the question is then
“[h]ow to create functioning parameters for software development on the basis of
something that cannot be known, that can only be felt in its effects? Technology
becoming technogenetic involves inflecting the digital with virtual potential, bringing to
the fore movement’s incipiency and its relational matrix. How does a movement that
cannot yet be seen make itself known?” (2009, p. 72).
From the examples discussed throughout this study, it is perhaps the G F that
attends the most to these concerns. After all, its algorithms strive to depict what cannot
be computed as such, i.e. qualities of movement. To invent digital algorithms that define
movement qualities in terms of discrete quantities of data is to necessarily undergo a
process of transduction. If the software is to recognize gesture on the basis of a
quantitative definition, it needs to be set according to parameters that express the
subjective and conceptual diagrams of gesture, as known from and with the dancing
body's experience. For such transduction to occur, movement needs to be experienced in
all its varieties. An experience tantamount to a subject constituted together with the
constitution of what it comes to know. A subject that, because of being embedded in the
same milieu of potentials from which movement comes to be expressed, necessarily
experiences movement's intensive incipiency towards the actualization of extension.
The knowledge of a movement quality is therefore a processual one. It regards
the process whereby determinate expressions appear and not solely their appearance.
Notwithstanding this knowledge's analogical character, the GF's algorithms do in fact
correspond to determinate quantities of data and, as such, to the expressions of the
dancing body. Here, recognition occurs on the basis of given possibilities, which when
actualized regard but the end product of individuation. Nevertheless, these algorithmic
definitions of gesture can express gesture in different ways. After all, they are set to not
only compute variable quantities of data, but also to do it in accordance with a
parametric structure that is itself a set of different possibilities. In this sense, these
algorithms convey not a knowledge of gesture as finalized expression, but as the
resolution of a movement that comprises virtuality and actuality, preaccelaration and
displacement, potentials and possibilities. The reduction of these varieties to the
expressive possibilities of digital media should therefore be here understood as the
resolution of an individuation from which the knowledge of movement as a whole was
not absent. The subjects involved in this process were sufficiently implicated in it to
individuate a knowledge together with the individuation of the objects known. Were
their knowledge not an analogical one, and these algorithmic expressions would
187

probably not allow for such a degree of variation. 
Some other digital algorithms of the choreographic objects discussed in the
previous chapter also stand as good examples of how to create parametric structures on
the basis of what cannot be known and is accepted as such. The “Reactor for Awareness
in Motion” responded quite precisely to Manning's question by having developed some
of its algorithms not only on the basis of what was known about the dancing body, but
also in accordance with a co-individuation of dancing bodies and gestural bodies. Not
only were the problems of how to represent the dancing body in the digital domain the
source from which determinate resolutions were extracted, but also the intertwinement
of dancing bodies and gestural bodies in the process of their development served the
determination of resolutions that, rather than only conforming dancing bodies to the
possibilities of the digital domain, expressed the veritable technogenesis of their
affective and co-constitutive relation. This is how the digital domain gets infected by
what cannot be known but that, notwithstanding, contributes determinately for the
technical system's development. It is by means of this co-individuation between dancing
bodies and gestural bodies that the virtual potentials of the system's associated milieu
get to be conveyed towards resolutions proper of a technogenetic process. Which is also
Manning's understanding of how to resolve the problem of technogenetic transduction
when including the digital domain into the system of individuation. Since digital
computation cannot tap into the virtual because it “must conform to actual ones and
zeros”, for the philosopher the solution resides in “bringing the analog into the digital
mix (by intermixing new technologies with dancing bodies such that the dancing body
is emergent with the technology rather than simply added to it), [so that] the technical
system might tend toward ontogenesis, toward technogenetic evolution” (2009, p. 65).
 But this position also entails the credo that digital algorithms, in themselves, are
but a set of programmed possibilities with no relation whatsoever with the virtual. What
this view perhaps dismisses is the capacity of digital computation to stand by itself as a
mode of thought. In which case the compression of data into data, i.e. the calculation of
possibilities for the expression of determinate cases of solution, would necessarily
comprise the ingression of virtuality into computation itself. It is a condition for digital
computation to occur within the limits of its own possibilities. Digital algorithms
compute data according to determinate parametric structures and within the possibilities
of digital coding itself. But if the result of algorithmic computations in the digital
domain is the accretion of data on data, it can be argued that, being this an event, it
necessarily holds at some point a relation with virtuality. The temporal vector that is
188

formed with the accretion of data can be argued to correspond not only to the
progression of a metric time, but also to the durational experience of the computational
system. Hence, the question is: can experience be addressed in any way to digital
computation? In other words, and besides the technogenetic mixing of analog and
digital domains, can the very process of digital computation regard the durational
progression of a virtual experience? If so, the digital domain would comprise in itself
unmappable dimensions. It would be excessive in relation to itself and its algorithmic
computations could be understood as modes of thought in their own right.
The question regarding whether or not the virtual is a constitutive dimension of
digital computation can be understood in two different ways. It can be understood in
terms of how the digital domain affects with its own indetermination the progression of
technical experimentation. And it can be understood in terms of how digital
computation is itself pervaded by undetermined potentials, being therefore irreducible to
determinate sets of limited possibilities. These two perspectives can, notwithstanding,
be thought as corresponding to one same reality. For, if the case in question regards how
potentials can exist with the expressive determination of digital choreographies, then
what must be acknowledged in regard to potentiality itself is the very fact that, as this
verges virtuality towards actuality, it distributes tendencies of formation throughout a
topological continuum without which different orders of magnitude could not
communicate. This continuum was already mentioned to be the means by which
different multiplicities connect with one another and form differentiated parts of one
overall encompassing whole.146 But, further, it bears with itself the hypothesis that the
distinction according to which continuity is exclusive of virtuality and discontinuity
exclusive of actuality no longer holds. The indistinction between the one and the other
would thus allow for potentiality to pervade not only the conditions on which
technogenetic transductions unfold but also the very workings of digital computation. In
this case, not only would digital algorithms have to be considered together with a
continuum of constitutive potentials, but also the relation between virtuality and
actuality would have to be reconsidered with regard to this same continuum. This
chapter's following sections will entertain this idea, of which it can be advanced that, as
it has already been mentioned in other various instances throughout this study, rhythm is
key. It is by means of a rhythmic relation between potentials belonging to different
orders of magnitude that the virtual and the actual can be said to exist immanently in
one another, not any longer on the basis of a distinction between intensity and
146 See pages 33 – 37 of Section 1.1.
189

extension, but rather on the basis of a continuum of potentials where these dualities no
longer hold. In this sense, this is a hypothesis that dismisses the Bergsonian distinction
between duration and space, only to call for yet another way of conceiving the
relationship between qualities and quantities.
Posing questions with regard to the experiential character of digital computation
is therefore not to dismiss the necessity of inflecting the digital with the analog, but
rather to question whether the digital domain is itself capable of generating novelty as
such. If digital algorithms are to be thought as being constituent elements of technical
networks, communicating not only with one another, but also with other technical
individuals, their computational system must be granted to comprise the undetermined
potentials implicated in informational exchange. In this sense, the creation of novelty
should be possible in the digital domain without any necessary recourse to its analog
counterpart. Of course the one cannot be thought without the other, for the analog
pervades the digital as the very ground on which this runs. But to say that the digital
domain can generate novelty is to say that, at the very level of digital code, algorithms
are capable of more than what is possible. In other words, insofar as digital computation
can generate novelty, it must comprise more than possibility. If the excessive reality of
digital computation is to be found at the very level of binary code, then its potentials
might very well be not qualitative but quantitative. This hypothesis, according to which
there might be quantities of data that, despite of being constitutive of the digital domain,
are not computable, necessarily implies a notion of potentiality that, rather than
regarding only qualitative potentials, regards as well quantitative ones. With the idea of
a continuum of potentials extending itself throughout different domains of expression,
the very distinction between analog and digital domains dissipates to give place to a
distinction between unstructured and structured quantities of data. Likewise, and
inasmuch as the notion of a continuum in extension is, according to what has until now
been discussed, a paradox, both the duality between continuity and discontinuity and the
duality between quantities and qualities become blurred. This notion of “extensive
continuum” will be here approached from the perspective of Alfred N. Whitehead's
philosophy of extension (1978, pp. 61–82). For it has been he, as philosopher and
mathematician, who most thoroughly proposed and discussed this idea and its
implications in what regards the relation between actuality and virtuality, potentiality
and possibility, the past and the present, and so on. Importantly, the notion of structure
remains key to understand how potentials can be simultaneously virtual and actual.
Meaning that, not only in regard to digital media, but also in regard to systems of
190

individuation in general, the extensive continuum's potentials can only be understood as
data that is not structured, that is, as the unstructured kind of data that pervades
whatever determinate form.
6.2 - Algorithmic Complexity
The notion of “algorithm” is endemic to computer science, where its definition
finds in the words of American philosopher David Berlinski a synthetic and precise
enunciation: “an algorithm is a finite procedure, written in a fixed symbolic vocabulary,
governed by precise instructions, moving in discrete steps, 1, 2, 3, whose execution
requires no insight, cleverness, intuition, intelligence, or perspicuity, and that sooner or
later comes to an end” (2001, p. 9). In the guise of what has already been mentioned,
this enunciation depicts, even if not explicitly, an algorithm's transductive character. It
affirms algorithms as concrete cases of solution for the problematic abstractions from
which they derive. As the expression of problems, they convey possibilities of
resolution. As solution, they can be seen either as simple mechanical formulas or as
propositions capable of eliciting further individuations. And if, as proffered by
Whitehead, “the proposition constitutes what the feeling has felt” (1978, p. 186), then
the question is how can propositional algorithms feel the data computed? Such question
will be discussed ahead. For now, what matters to notice is that, as technical objects,
digital algorithms are interfaces apt to convey transductions. They convey the
knowledge of a determinate problem into a computational system that, if it proceeds on
the basis of informational exchanges, it necessarily inflects its own development with
undetermined potentials. On this ground, digital algorithms must be seen not only as
mechanical recipes.
As interfaces of transduction, algorithms necessarily bridge abstraction and
expression. If considered from the perspective of their expressions, algorithms do
function as signs for the computation of solutions to the problems that they pose. If
considered from the perspective of their abstractions, algorithms are conceptual tools
that can be expressed in different domains. From which it follows that each algorithm
requires an appropriate domain of expression. A cooking recipe, for example, as a
function of expression, requires not a digital matter of content but rather actual food.
And this is not to say that the encounter between the one and the other cannot be
simulated by digital means. As already mentioned, to the extent that the possibility
191

space of digital simulations coincides with the simulated processes' space, it can act as
the condition after which cases of solution that are also possible in regard to the
referential process are expressed. Notwithstanding, the digital simulation of a cooking
recipe does not result in edibles. Hence, it does not resolve the problematic structure of
the diagram to which it belongs. In the same way, a mathematical problem might very
well be better resolved by means of digital computation than by the exercise of cooking.
But beyond the adequacy of domains of expression in regard to the problematic
structure of determinate diagrams, the transferability that the latter's abstractions assure
in regard to the former attests the fundamental core of an algorithm. If one same
algorithm can be expressed in different domains, it does not depend on them. As such, it
is determinate and abstract. It is the diagrammatic arrangement of a knowledge that
pertains to the ways in which a given problem can be solved.
The relation between an algorithm's abstractions and its material conditions of
execution can be thought either in terms of the extrapolation of formal procedures into
material processes or in terms of their pragmatic reality, that is, from the perspective
according to which algorithms, by and in themselves, are “actants” (Latour, 1996). The
first approach marked the advent of cybernetics as a science of control based on the idea
that physical processes are reducible to mathematical abstractions and that, therefore,
they can be simulated—of which one recent reformulation has been proffered by
mathematician Stephen Wolfram (2002), who conceives of the whole universe as a giant
computer, reducible to the mathematical calculation of algorithmic sets. The second
approach fundamentally deals with the notion that there are incomputable data that not
only pervade algorithmic computation but that moreover are its very condition—a
notion that not only undermines the first approach but that also obliges algorithms to be
considered together with their associated milieus. The basic argument of a pragmatic
approach to algorithmic procedures, which opposes it to any sort of radical formalism,
is put in the following way by media theorist Andrew Goffey: “formal logics are
inherently incomplete and indiscernibles exist” (2008, p. 19). And what this means in
regard to the actual effects that algorithms might have in the world is that, at the very
heart of the processes with which datasets are computed for the generation of novel
facts of unity, exist incomputable and random quantities of data that open what would
be otherwise finite to unpredictable modes of affect, connection and creativity. In this
way, what most fundamentally defines the pragmatic approach to algorithmic
computation is the fact that it not only takes into consideration the possibility spaces of
each dataset but also the potentials that pervade them.
192

Already in the beginnings of computer science, Alan Turing had acknowledged
the existence of incomputable problems within computation. The British mathematician
conceived of the Turing machine, the first prototypical computer, as an algorithmic
application capable of determining whether a problem was susceptible of being solved
mechanically or not (Herken, 1995). The algorithmic set of instructions given to it was
in this case, as well as in the case of the computers that would follow, the basic
condition on which this could solve a problem or not. In this sense, and as much as
computation can be defined in terms of problem solving, algorithms are its fundamental
condition. Algorithms are the model with which a given problem can be computed and
actually solved. Symbolically, this is expressed by means of a procedure that computes
whether a given number belongs to an algorithmic set or not. By making use of Boolean
logic,147 computer science has dedicated itself to investigating how to answer to sets of
questions by means of a binary logic, always answering either yes or no. In the binary
language of digital code, this means that all the possible variables of a given set are
defined as 1 (the universal set), whereas 0 defines an empty set containing no variable
of the algorithmic set defined by 1. Digital computation therefore corresponds to the
mathematical calculation of whether a variable corresponds to the universal set defined
by 1 or not (in which case it is defined as 0). And it is at this very level, which is the
level of the formal languages with which algorithms can be both abstracted and
expressed, that the openness required for their operation manifests the incompleteness
of calculation. For, as media theorist Luciana Parisi reminds us, “Alan Turing
demonstrated that there is no computable function (no finite binary set) that could
correctly answer every question in the problem set. This meant that not every set of
natural numbers is computable, and Turing’s description of the halting problem (the set
of Turing machines that halt on input 0) is one example, among many, of an
incomputable set” (2013, pp. 260–261). 
It is from this very notion of incomputable data existing at the heart of
computation that an algorithmic pragmatism can be asserted. For if algorithms can only
be said to act insofar as they are open to informational exchanges, then what their action
necessarily comprises is a constitutive indetermination and the immanence of
147 This modality of logics, which also goes by the name of pure mathematics, was theorized by British
mathematician George Boole in 1847. This is a logics that favours abstract and universal operations,
instead of concrete and relative ones (such as those involving quantities and magnitudes). From this
dismissal, the mathematician formulated an algebraic system, known as Boolean algebra, which
represents  sets  and  subsets  of  abstract  or  actual  things  and  the  operations  relating  them  (i.e.
coincidence, intersection, inclusion, exclusion and so on). Importantly, for what regards digital
programming, these operations are represented with symbols which indicate values such as OR, AND
and NOT.
193

incomputable data in computation. Moreover, the fact that an algorithm's operations
cannot be considered independently from its data structures determines that its action
necessarily implicates all the data that it cannot compute. The upshot of such
implication is that algorithmic indetermination is a fundamental condition of
computation, a postulate that Parisi also acknowledges by defining computation as “the
capacity of algorithms to compress infinite amounts of data”, whereby “incomputable
data must be the condition, and not the result, of computation” (2013, pp. 260–261).
Even modern computers should be understood according to the indetermination that in
them is implicit. Algorithms are not pure automatic procedures working with absolute
sets of data. Rather, they are technical individuals programmed with limits that regard
the range of possible commutations in the electronic circuits which mediate them.
Algorithms are technical objects designed for operating within the margins of
indetermination given to the computational system. 
It is with these random and incomputable quantities of data that the potentials of
algorithmic emergence can be thought. As potentials they remain undetermined. As data
they are given. And though this might seem a paradox according to what has until now
been expounded, what the notion of given potentials entails, is the actual redefinition of
what potentials are and how they exist amidst systems of individuation. In other words,
these are potentials that no longer can be thought only in qualitative terms, resulting
only from the intensive interplay of forces constitutive of continuous multiplicities, but
that need to be thought in quantitative terms. In this way, actuality itself becomes
potential: not the actual remarkable points of individuated structures, but rather the
actuality of all those points of an individual that are not remarkable but yet constitute
the charged ground against which the individual is remarked. From this standpoint, it
can be argued that what is potential still remains qualitative, since it necessarily results
from intensive forces that relate random and structured quantities of data between one
another. Under these conditions, potentiality can be argued to remain relational and thus
dependent on the intervallic forces with which forms (random or non-random) affect
one another. But what the notion of incomputabilities brings forth is the very idea of a
past that, despite being given to the constitution of novel facts, is not determinately
given. In other words, what is given is not known, it is random and, as such,
unpredictable in regard to the ways in which it might come to ingress into novel facts of
unity. For this very reason, Goffey writes that: “just because the development of an
algorithm requires a level of de facto formal abstraction, which then allows that
algorithm to be applied to other kinds of content, does not mean that we have exhausted
194

everything that we need to know to understand the processes of which it is a part”
(2008, p. 18). What the notion of given potentials thus proposes is a redefinition of the
relation between quantities and qualities. In other words, if potentials can be thought as
pertaining both to what is given, but yet unknown, and to the intensive forces with
which disparities amidst these random quantities of data come to occur, what
necessarily needs to be acknowledged is the processual character of potentiality. The
constitutive immanence between qualities and quantities needs to be considered from an
affective point of view, according to which a permanent rhythm of actualization and
deactualization, quantification and qualification, forces the individuating system to
inform the future (individual) with what is given from the past. Given potentials thus
concern the unknown both in actuality and in virtuality. And, as it will be discussed
ahead, because the past can be given undeterminably, virtuality can also be seen as
random quantities of data, rather than only as a transcendental kind of memory. 
Goffey points out two different aspects that offer a mode of approaching these
incomputabilities. First, the structuration of data implicates an “incorporeal
transformation”148 that, by definition, cannot be computed. This means that the passage
from raw data to structured data, necessary to the operation of algorithms, implicates a
change in the status of the things to which they correspond. Take the example of a
personal name inscribed on an online form for a journal's subscription. Before the array
of alphanumerical characters is included in the server's database, the person in question
is not yet a subscriber. After the name has been included, the person has become a
subscriber. The transformation of the person's status, which corresponds for example to
a change in the way the person thinks of itself, is missed by the structuration of finite
sets of data. In spite of occurring together with the algorithmic procedure, this
incorporeal transformation is not accounted for by the structuration of data. Algorithmic
procedures effect changes that are neither compressible nor computable. In Goffey's
words: “Algorithms act, but they do so as part of an ill-defined network of actions upon
148 This expression, “incorporeal transformation”, is used by Goffey with the precise effect of echoing
both J. L. Austin's speech act theory and Michel Foucault's philosophy of the event. In regard to the
former, it is known how Austin differentiated the constantive and the performative elements of an act
of speech. On the one hand, a speech act does describe things in the world, but on the other hand it
also effects changes in the world. In this sense, the performative speech act refers only to itself,
enacting the semantic value of speech (Austin, 1975). In regard to the latter, it is here enough to quote
how Foucault implicated incorporeality at the heart of the event: “[…] certainly not immaterial; it
takes effect, becomes effect, always on the level of materiality. Events have their place; they consist
in relation to, coexistence with, dispersion of, the cross-checking accumulation and the selection of
material elements; it occurs as an effect of, and in, material dispersion. Let us say that the philosophy
of event should advance in the direction, at first sight paradoxical, of an incorporeal materialism.”
(2007, p. 231).
195

actions, part of a complex of power-knowledge relations, in which unintended
consequences, like the side effects of a program’s behaviour, can become critically
important” (2008, p. 19). This can be better understood when recalling Simondon's
theory of networks. The very networkability of algorithms (with data structures, other
algorithms, machines, machine's users, and so on), implicates resonances that can easily
involve regions of the network that are not directly implicated in a given computation.
The “side effects” of a computation can in this way be located at any point whatsoever
of the network partaken by an algorithm. 
Another way to conceive of technical networks is through what media theorist
Matthew Fuller (2005) designates as “media ecologies”. The author has developed this
notion in order to account for the fact that, be it at the level of the mechanical supports
dedicated to the transmission of events or at the level of the software with which
information is codified, the objective unification of a whole does not suffice to explain
the processes by means of which technical networks evolve. Modes of potentiality must
be considered as being constituent of the systems composed by the interaction of media
objects. For Fuller, “the only way to find things out about what happens when complex
objects such as media systems interact is to carry out such interactions – it has to be
done live, with no control sample”. And, in order to do this, he further adds, “[o]bjects
[...] should also be understood to mean processes embodied as objects, as elements in a
composition”. In this sense, the constituent parts of one whole “no longer exist simply
as discrete bits that stay separate”, but rather “set in play a process of mutual
stimulation that exceeds what they are as a set”. (Ibid., p. 1). As in Simondon's theory of
individuation, here too, information exceeds the set's constituent elements. It opens the
technical system to an associated milieu of potentials, which is the very means by which
the system can in any case access its preindividual reality and engender from its own
resources novel resolutions. As such, objects can be considered from the viewpoint of
the processes that they partake and of which they are a remarkable expression. A
standpoint that accords with the notion of ecology, which for Fuller is “one of the most
expressive that language currently has to indicate the massive and dynamic interrelation
of processes and objects, beings and things, patterns and matter” (Ibid, p. 2). As it
perhaps has already become explicit throughout this study's development, conceiving
objects as processes does not cease to be in tension with the fact that objects can be
sensed, perceived and used as unchanging unities. The dual character of an object, both
as part and as whole, does not cease to be a problem. But as much as problems are a
condition of individuation, the very distinction between movement and stasis, between
196

an openness towards the self-excess of being and the objective structures with which
this excess is kept in form, ceases to exist. It is in terms of a system's overall
development that an object must be considered. Neither only as form nor only as
process, but rather as a dynamic entity with structural points and contrasting grounds,
which exchange energies with and are converted into one another, from metastability to
metastability. 
Goffey's second approach to incomputabilities regards the excess of information.
One possible definition of excess can be that it corresponds to what cannot be
compressed. Though informational excess is a necessary condition of individuation, it
cannot be determinately synthesized. A system's preindividual reality will never be
individual. It partakes individuation, but it resists resolution. It is always, even after
individuation, indeterminate excess. In regard to computation, excess is that which
cannot be compressed into determinate arrays of binary data. In this way, inasmuch as
incompressible and incomputable varieties of data pervade algorithmic ecologies, they
affect computation. As Goffey says, “indiscernibles exist”. Even at the level of digital
programming. “Formal logics [cannot but be] inherently incomplete”. Computation
itself distinguishes what is discernible, and thus numerable, from what is not. It
organizes into arrays of numerable quantities of data that which is random and
unstructured. But this compression of data does not assure the synthesis according to
which all that is given gets to be computed. On the contrary, raw data is computable and
computed, but only to a certain extent. Amidst it, random quantities of data remain
indiscernible and incomputable. Which is the very reason why, despite the limits of
algorithms' possibility spaces, computation can still generate the unexpected and the
accidental. In Goffey's words: “[m]achines break down, programs are buggy, projects
are abandoned and systems hacked”. (2008, p. 19).
Information theorist Gregory Chaitin (2005) has been a major proponent of the
notion that random numbers are intrinsic to algorithmic computation. The author argues
that there are quantities of data underlying computation that cannot be counted. Even
the most simple algorithm used for sorting a list of numbers is “infected”149 with random
149 This term, “infection”, is characteristic of the way in which philosopher Alfred N. Whitehead thinks
of the inevitable ingression of abstractions into actual occasions of experience. In philosopher of
science Isabelle Stengers' words: “'Infection' is the term Whitehead chooses to designate, in a generic
way, what the poets celebrate as 'presence'. Celebration refers to the fact that it is a poet's experience
that is infected by the mountain, gloomy and ancient. [...] This infectious holding-together is not a
fusion but a valorization, a determinate shaping, conferring a value-that is, a role-on what is
prehended. The fact that the variables of a function, in the same way as the poet's experience, require
a 'value' thus ceases to belong to linguistic contingency. Far from being a mere quantity, the value of
a variable presupposes the stability of the role that one thing plays for something else and measures
197

quantities of data that cannot be sorted and grouped into a finite set of numbers. As
such, any computation operates amidst an infinity of discrete quantities of data. The
incomputability of the infinity of numbers underlying computation can in a way be said
to be an intrinsic quality of algorithms. This is not the kind of infinity of a numerical
interval's infinitesimals. It does not correspond to the transcendental numbers of an
uncountable infinity.150 Rather, it corresponds to an infinity of discrete quantities of data
that are random and thus uncountable. Their randomness corresponds to the fact that, in
spite of being discrete, they are not structured. In Chaitin's words, “something is random
if it can’t be compressed into a shorter description.” (2001, p. 18). The infinity of
random quantities in computation consists of unstructured data that cannot be
compressed either into finite numbers or into finite sets of instructions. Indetermination
is made to be a necessary condition to computation. A condition from which it follows
that both algorithms and the mathematical axioms that underly computation are
incomplete.
To the incomputable number implicit in the computational order of data, Chaitin
(2005) calls “Omega”. A real number that is nevertheless random and thus complex.
The author argues that the complexity of Omega results from the fact that the
infinitesimals existing in between any two points cannot be reduced to the finite results
of integral calculus. Omega thus corresponds to random quantities of data that cannot be
counted nor ordered. The infinity in computation is complex because it is irreducible to
numerical calculus. Nonetheless, it is together with this infinity that algorithmic
the importance of that role. […] The term 'infection' is thus technical, that is, neutral with regard to
the differences we attribute to what endures.” (2011, pp. 157–158). Interestingly for this study,
Stengers also points out how Whitehead uses the term “infection” to think the body. She writes that:
“For Whitehead, the parts do not constitute the whole without the whole infecting the parts. In other
words, the identity, or the enduring pattern, of the whole and the parts is strictly contemporary. This is
why the same term, 'infection', can be used both to designate the relations between the whole and the
parts, and to describe the relations of a living organism with its environment. If the body exists for its
parts, it is because its parts are infected by such-and-such an obstinate aspect of what we call the
body, but which, for them, is a portion of their environment; if the parts exist for each other and for
the body, it is because the respective patterns of each are highly sensitive to any modification of the
environment they constitute for one another.” (Ibid., p. 174).
150 As mentioned before, when accounting for Bergson's concept of virtuality (see Section 1.1), the
topological space of an infinitesimal continuity (consisting of transcendental, and thus undetermined,
factors of determination) is non-actual in absolute. As such, it is uncountable and, ultimately, virtual.
Hence, the virtual, considered in this way, can never belong to the random quantities of data that
underly algorithmic computation (if the smooth space of continuous variation is to be kept). Precisely
because of the constitutive incompleteness of algorithmic objects, which is tantamount to an
immanence between random quantities and determinate numbers, actuality is neither finite nor it can
contain the totality of space and time. Contrary to the topological variation of the spatio-temporal
continuum, what this immanence attests is the very fact that infinity exists as quantitative potentials
amidst the definiteness of actuality. In other words, the additive sequencing of instructions through
which algorithms “array alternative states for sequencing into alternative routines” (Massumi, 2002,
p. 137) not only creates data, but creates it with a constitutive difference.
198

computations group countable numbers for the execution of finite sets of instructions.
From this standpoint, algorithms can be conceived both as finite sets of instructions and
as being pervaded and conditioned by random quantities of data. Algorithms can only
be defined by determinate sets of structured data as much as they are also defined by the
infinity of random quantities of data existing together with any set of finite numbers.
This is clearly a standpoint that differs from a universal computation, according to
which finite sets of instructions are enough to generate all the complexity of the world.
Chaitin argues that the world's complexity corresponds to its incalculability, that is, to
the real number by means of which virtuality and actuality become immanent in one
another and which is to be found in all strings of countable numbers. Accordingly, the
binary logic of probabilities with which cybernetics approached Turing's conception of
the computer, as much as it is based on the idea that complexity is reducible to the finite
numbers of algorithmic computation, cannot account for the intrinsic incompleteness of
knowledge. The binarism of algorithmic objects does not consider the complex infinity
constitutive of random quantities of data existing at the heart of any computation. What
Chaitin's notion of Omega brings forth is the idea that algorithms are not only finite sets
of instructions but also random quantities of data that, notwithstanding their discrete
character, are incomputable.
Underlying Chaitin's theory of algorithmic complexity is a conception of
information that does not pertain to finite and measurable spatio-temporal quantities.
Rather, it pertains to irreducible, random and complex quantities of data. Here,
information is defined in terms of “computational entropy”. And this is so precisely
because any countable quantity of data is considered to include within itself Omega's
random infinity, an infinity that computation cannot exhaust (i.e. there's more quantity
to it than to finite numbers). What can then be said with regard to the relation between
this infinity of discrete points and the finite numbers with which computation executes
its counting procedures is that each of the latter is necessarily an indivisible whole
composed of uncountable parts. The difference between Chaitin's and cybernetics'
notions of information is that, whereas the latter is considered as a seamless unity of
finite parts, the former is considered together with random quantities of data.151 
151 It should be reminded that, as mentioned before (see page 56, Section 2.1), Gilbert Simondon also
criticized the cybernetic conception of information, since it did not account for information's intrinsic
infinity. While characterizing information as the process by which a difference between potentials
belonging to different orders of magnitude is resolved, Simondon instead introduces infinity at the
heart of information. In this way, instead of being a unified entity, information is considered from the
standpoint of the differences underlying intensive quantities. As much as these differences are
potential conditions of individuation, information is necessarily heterogeneous or, in other words,
made of different parts, and pervaded by uncountable infinities.
199

The upshot of this, in what regards the problems that such complex notion of
information poses to the cybernetic logic of control, is that in this way parts can be
considered as being larger than wholes. Because they necessarily comprise discrete
infinities, the random quantities of data underlying algorithmic computation are
necessarily larger than the finite forms of those same algorithms. Conversely, not only
are finite quantities smaller than their immanent infinities, but also parts, such as simple
algorithms, are irreducible to the systems that they might partake, such as full blown
software programs. According to Chaitin's theory, algorithmic objects are not reducible
to finite series of simpler parts, due to their openness to an infinity of discrete and
random quantities of data. With such infinity, the notion of universal computation is no
longer possible. The mathematical reduction of every single factor of determination
(quantitative and qualitative) into finite sets no longer holds. Chaitin's theory of
algorithmic complexity demonstrates that the limits of computation are not given only
by the digital domain's limits of possibility, but also, and more fundamentally, by the
random quantities of data pervading algorithms. As much as incomputable quantities of
random data are irreducible to the necessary finitude of algorithmic instructions, it is
here, in this irreducibility, that computation finds, first and foremost, its limits. 
The random quantities of data constitutive of algorithmic computation should
moreover be understood as the very condition that allows for algorithms to be in contact
with one another, i.e. for them to be capable of exchanging information. It is this
connectability that realizes the mathematical infinity of Omega, in conformity to
Simondon's notion of networks, according to which objects are open to the infinity of
potentials by means of information. Only by constituting itself as the mediatic field
where different orders of magnitude communicate with one another can an object not be
isolated. And insofar as it is not, it necessarily exchanges information with other
objects. From which it follows that any algorithmic object necessarily partakes the
constitution of informational networks. What Chaitin's notion of Omega specifies in
regard to Simondon's conception of networks is the quality of the potential infinities by
means of which actuality is open to informational resolutions. Instead of being a
transcendental and uncountable number, the potential infinity that opens objects to one
another (and therefore to the inscription of time)152 is a quantitative quality, i.e. it is a
152 Let us recall Deleuze's statement on the inscription of time in wholes: “According to Bergson, the
whole is neither given nor giveable. […] if the whole is not giveable, it is because it is the Open, and
because its nature is to change constantly, or to give rise to something new, in short, to endure. […]
So that each time we find ourselves confronted with a duration, or in a duration, we may conclude
that there exists somewhere a whole which is changing, and which is open somewhere.” (1986, p. 9).
200

quality made of an infinity of discrete quantities. On the basis of all that was previously
expounded in relation to Simondon's notion of technicity,153 it becomes possible to
conceive of algorithms not only in terms of finite numbers arrayed in iterative
sequences, to which an infinity of steps can always be added, but also in terms of the
infinity with which they are open to exchange information between one another. 
From here onwards, the problems posed by Chaitin's theory of algorithmic
complexity, both to computation and to the generic definition of objects, will be
addressed from two distinct perspectives. They will be addressed from the perspective
of objects and from the perspective of processes. These two approaches are meant to
contrast a phenomenological perspective with a speculative one. The exposition of a
phenomenological perspective is aimed at addressing the definite character of objects,
specially by articulating the mathematical definition of algorithmic objects with their
expressive qualities. The exposition of a speculative perspective is aimed at exploring
the notion of the extensive continuum. By approaching objects as processual entities,
their definiteness will be put into question and both their virtuality and their actuality
will be reconsidered in terms of the relation between random and structured quantities
of data. In sum, the following inquiry will build considerations towards a notion of
digital potentiality.
6.3 - Object Orientation
Recently, the American philosopher Graham Harman (2002, 2005, 2011) has
proffered an “object-oriented metaphysics”154 that tries to conciliate the individual
autonomy of objects with their capacity to be in relation with one another. For him,
objects do not change and are discontinuous with one another. A condition that impedes
any sort of approach taking direct relations between objects as being the ground on
which objects themselves are to be explained. From this standpoint, and regardless of its
possible variations, an object remains unchanged because it does neither depend on its
153 See page 81, Section 2.5.
154 Also designated as object-oriented philosophy or object-oriented ontology. These terms have been
derived by Harman from “object-oriented programming”. Contrary to software programmes
conceived as series of routines and subroutines to be executed, object-oriented programming
conceives them as bundles of interactive objects. Moreover, each object is conceived as a discrete
bundle of algorithmic procedures based on discrete units of programming logic. Each object has its
own functional autonomy. It receives and sends messages to other objects, while simultaneously
processing data according to its own functions. For more on object-oriented programming, see
Crutzen & Kotkamp, 2008.
201

variable expressions (e.g. the different ways to construct a chair) nor on its variable
appearances (e.g. the different ways in which a chair can be perceived). In Harman's
words: “When I circle an object or when it rotates freely before me, I do not see a
discrete series of closely related contents and then make an arbitrary decision that they
all belong together as a set of closely linked specific profiles. Instead, what I experience
is always one object undergoing accidental, transient changes that do not alter the thing
itself.” (2005, p. 98). The qualities of an object, such as colour, fragrance, weight, and
so on, are therefore for Harman distinct from one another and from the object itself.
They are said to constitute a field of relatedness that can be thought and experienced
without objects. “In this way the fleshly medium of loose qualities is placed everywhere
in the world” (Ibid, p. 91). To the point of being that which allows for objects to enter in
relation with one another. The problem of explaining how objects are related to one
another, when granted the case that they are radically distinct from one another, finds in
their own qualities the field of potentials and the space of possibilities by means of
which relations can come to be established. From which two different questions arise: if
qualities are different from the objects that they qualify, then how are they related, not
only to objects, but also to one another?; and, does the relation between qualities
belonging to different objects constitute a novel object? In order to answer to these
questions, Harman's object-oriented philosophy divides the world in two different kinds
of objects. There are real objects, characterized by their radical discontinuity relatively
to one another and to the qualities existing in the world, and there are sensual objects, a
designation which discloses the fact that they exist only in relation to qualities. 
Harman's notion of real objects is his own take on the problem of how to explain
the independence of objects from qualities. One can say that a chair does not need to be
made out of wood in order to be a chair, but also that there are some minimal
requirements for it to be a chair. Meaning that, without a surface capable of supporting a
person's back and another capable of supporting the person's buttocks, simultaneously,
any object will hardly qualify as a chair. In this sense, there is a relatedness of parts that
necessarily includes a minimum of different qualities. An object can be defined by
determinate relationships between qualities, rather than by the qualities themselves. In
Harman's words: “An object is real not by virtue of being tiny and fundamental, but by
virtue of having an intrinsic reality that is not reducible to its subcomponents or
exhausted by its functional effects on other things” (2009, p. 215). From this, what is
most important to retain is the implicit tension between the fact that objects are
independent from their qualities and the fact that they cannot be thought without them.
202

With such formulation, what seems to be most determinant for an object's definition is
(perhaps not surprisingly) relation. Relation both as the constitutive excess of objects
and qualities and as what cannot be reduced to either the one or the other. Conversely,
this is to say that objects are irreducible to qualities, since qualities are irreducible to the
relations that they partake and which express objects.
It follows that an object's intrinsic character results from a process that cannot be
fully known because it is simply too complex. For Harman (2005, p. 174), an object's
intrinsic character results from “indirect or vicarious” relations, a notion depicting the
non-linearity of the qualitative relations underlying any objective formation. Indirect
relations explain why it is possible for objects to loose certain attributes and still remain
what they are. They assure that an object's attributes are not interchangeable and that
what therefore results from a bundle of qualities is but the object's singular and
unrepeatable expression. In this sense, an object can endure as long as its qualitative
relations are not destroyed. In contrast, one singular object can never be repeated in the
exact same way, for its qualitative self-affection cannot be known as such. Hence, it is
vicarious. It remains inaccessible, in spite of being determinant for what may result
from the resolution of problems posed at the diagrammatic level of materiality. For
example, though the flowers of one same species of plant may be similar to one another,
no one flower is alike. Each results from singular movements of individuation where the
actual resolution of problems in potential expresses the undetermined, unconscious and
unknowable depth of the material abstract machine. The indetermination of potential
relations in a continuum of qualitative affects is the indirect or vicarious cause of
individuation. Any object is unrepeatable because its vicarious cause, being
unknowable, remains inaccessible. Its constitution is irreproducible and, therefore,
singular. Which also means that no object can be reduced to a sum of parts. There is
always more to it than its actual resolution. It is excessive over itself, but not in any
determinate way. It is vicariously excessive, since the source of its individuation (i.e. its
preindividual reality) remains implicit in its resolute actuality. Hence, no object can be
fully known. Any object is only accessible up to a certain point. Beyond this, it is
vicariously undetermined with regard to itself. If objects are somewhat inaccessible, it is
only because qualities are fundamentally inaccessible too. To say that objects and
qualities are inaccessible is not the same as saying that they don't exist. “The
inaccessibility of the subterranean depth of the sun does not entail its nonexistence.”
(Harman, 2005, p. 86). It is rather to say that they exist as a potential to be in relation
with one another. From which it follows that only determinate modes of association
203

between qualities and objects can be accessed. Such association, which is expression
itself, is understood by Harman as being a “phenomenon”. A notion that Harman (Ibid.,
pp. 7–70) owes to the work of the so called “carnal phenomenologists”, a strand of
philosophers including Maurice Merleau-Ponty, Emmanuel Levinas and Alphonso
Lingis. 
Phenomenology was first systematized by Edmund Husserl (1960, 2013), whom
inherited from René Descartes and John Locke the idea that objects possess primary and
secondary qualities. This distinction, according to which Husserl based his theoretical
explorations both on the mathematization of the world and on phenomenological
intentionality, can be understood in terms of causality and access. Whereas secondary
qualities can be directly accessed, for the reason that they correspond to the qualitative
expressions of objects, including colour, shape, mass, and any quality accessible by
means of a sensible system, primary qualities cannot, for they are considered to be the
cause of secondary ones. While primary qualities can be approached by means of
mathematical abstractions and cannot be directly sensed, secondary qualities are not
mathemathizable and can only be directly sensed. Harman explicitly argues against a
world divided in this manner, for the reason that this is a distinction that posits a
hierarchy between immutable substances and derivative relations. In his words: “One of
the objections made against theories of substance is that they pamper some elite layer of
explanatory things – subatomic particles for the sciences, or everyday specimens like
horses and trees for Aristotle – while explaining away all more complex entities as
secondary products of the combination of simple parts. Either everything is made of
atoms, and moods are explained away as the by-product of brain chemicals; or machines
are viewed as artificial composites with no reality of their own.” Against this
distinction, Harman posits that “[w]hat we have is not a universe split between
aristocratic natural kinds and miserable, pauper-like accidents. Instead, we have a
universe made up of objects wrapped in objects wrapped in objects wrapped in objects”.
(Harman, 2005, pp. 84–85).
It is, nevertheless, by making use of the notion of substance that Harman defines
objects. For him, “[e]very object is both a substance and a complex of relations”. Not
only this, but if “[w]hen two objects enter into genuine relation, even if they do not
permanently fuse together, they generate a reality that has all of the features that we
require of an object”, then “any relation must count as a substance”. (2005, pp. 85).
According to this view, relations are objects. Which accords with the fractal geometry
that the regressive wrapping of objects into one another proposes. Moreover, according
204

to Harman, “[t]he reason we call these objects 'substances' is not because they are
ultimate or indestructible, but simply because none of them can be identified with any
(or even all) of their relations with other entities. None of them is a pristine kernel of
substantial unity unspoiled by interior parts. We never reach some final layer of tiny
components that explains everything else, but enter instead into an indefinite regress of
parts and wholes.” (Ibid.). For this reason, the notion of substance regards here relations
that, in spite of assuring an object's identity, are inaccessible. For Harman, it is this
inaccessible character of objects that constitutes not only their reality, but the real as
such. Which is a standpoint that goes directly against a metaphysics of presence. In this
sense, real objects are withdrawn from any possibility of knowledge. “It is not even
possible to get 'closer' to the things in such a way that presence could provide some sort
of measuring stick for how nearly we have approached reality”, says Harman (Ibid.,
p.86). Because such inaccessibility doesn't say much of the world except for the fact
that it resists both material and conceptual reductions, it can be said to be the reason
why Harman's philosophy has such a speculative tone. In fact, it is precisely because of
this that his work can be included in the recent trend in continental philosophy
designated as “speculative realism”, which results precisely for various tentatives to
overcome the shortcomings of “philosophies of human access” (Harman, 2005).
In contrast, objects are accessible via relations. One can see how yellow the sun
is, or feel its warmth, but only insofar as the conditions of sensation necessarily include
a number of other objects, such as the atmosphere, sensorial organs, a nervous system,
and so on. In this sense, perception requires more than one object. Colour does not
happen without an eye, weight does not happen without a difference between masses,
proprioception does not happen without muscles, and so on. To define an object in terms
of qualities is to define it in terms of its relation to other objects. In Harman's
philosophy, this is how sensual objects differ from real ones: they exist in relation.
Insofar as they are accessible, they comprise relations between different objects, from
which their qualifying attributes emerge. The fractal geometry of objects proposed by
Harman's object-oriented metaphysics, i.e. the wrapping of objects into one another, is
simultaneously the cause and the effect of a phenomenon of exteriority. Only because
objects exist outside of themselves, with other objects, can they be defined by indirect
relations within a bundle of qualities. Sensual objects coincide with their presence in
other objects. In opposition, a real object has no exteriority. It is inaccessible and
therefore cannot exist together with the interior reality of other objects. Real objects
coincide only with themselves. Harman's understanding of the world as being divided
205

between real and sensual objects corresponds to a metaphysics that is itself divided in
terms of absence and presence (being that, here, absence regards a lack of exteriority
and presence a qualitative relation between objects). Since, in this way, presence
coincides with relation, relations themselves are granted an objective status. Relations
are objective because they coincide with the exteriority of presence, which unifies the
emergence of different qualities in an act of perception.
It is worth noting that Harman's belief on a substantial core of objects owes
much to phenomenology's method of eidetic reduction, which is commonly performed
by means of mathematical abstractions. In contrast, sensual objects can be thought by
means of a phenomenological kind of reduction, which ultimately synthesizes interiority
with the intentional act of a subjective experience. While the interiority of an object
remains inaccessible, it suffices to imagine it for the object to become intentional and, in
this way, acquire a degree of exteriority, i.e. relatedness. For such reason, in the
phenomenological tradition and specially in Husserl's philosophy, the common outcome
of thinking the world beyond intentionality has been the subsumption of eidetic
reduction by phenomenological reduction. Which is to say that, even if the eidetic core
of objects is approachable by means of mathematical abstractions, it remains in all
occasions fundamentally inaccessible.
Notwithstanding, Harman insists that, in order for objects to be defined, they
need to be granted an eidetic reality. More than unchanging substances, Harman thinks
the eidos of things as dynamic kernels of relations, accessible only in effect. In this
sense, an object's unchanging reality is necessarily somehow related with its variable
attributes. “There is one sense in which a substance is not affected by its qualities at all,
since it can lose some of them while remaining itself, but another sense in which it
depends on them utterly. But this means that the union of an object with its own essence
requires vicarious bonding no less than the bond between one thing and another.”
(Harman, 2005, p. 93). Hence, this conception of vicarious bonding implies that there is
a certain reciprocity between real objects and sensual qualities. Not only are objects
qualified by given attributes, but they are the very reason why different qualities can
establish determinate facts of togetherness. “Consider an apple”, says Harman, “[i]ts
sweetness and fragrance and colour and price and nutritional value are to a large extent
distinct. Yet somehow all of these qualities are unified in a single thing, despite their
relative inability to interfere with one another” (Ibid.). Vicarious causation at once
approximates Harman's object-oriented metaphysics to a transcendental level of
determination and to an immanent reality of constitution, both of which are objective. In
206

this way, objects are defined by a codetermination between their own vicarious depth
and the accessible surface of their qualitative attributes. This sort of codetermination
should be thought to regard as well general relations between parts and wholes. As
Harman explains, for example, “it cannot really be said that windmills are made of
ladders, pumps, rotating blades, and wire-mesh crow's nests. Or rather, it is made of
these things only in a derivative, material sense. Although the windmill needs these
smaller parts in order to exist, it never fully deploys these objects in their total reality,
but makes use of them only by reducing them to useful caricatures. That is to say, a
windmill does not fully sound the depths of its own pieces any more than a human
observer does. It merely siphons away the needed qualities from these objects, just as
animal stomachs reduce the sparkling allure of fruits to brutal, one-dimensional fuels.”
(Ibid., pp. 93–94). From this, Harman extracts the formula that “the sum of parts is
always greater than the whole” (Ibid.), since each part is only related to the whole to the
degree that the whole reduces it. As much as an object is part of a whole, it can only be
to that whole a part of what itself is as a whole. This partiality of access between two
different objects coincides with the depth that each one possesses and which is
inaccessible to the other. Conversely, only the surface of an object can be directly
accessed by another object. 
“If objects exceed any of their perceptual or causal relations with other objects,
if they inhabit some still undefined vacuous space of reality, the question immediately
arises as to how they interact at all. More concisely: we have the problem of nonrelating
objects that somehow relate” (Harman, 2005, p. 91). In order to deal with this problem,
Harman conceives of objects as modules that are capable of connecting to one another.
In his words, “objects do not fully manifest to each other but communicate with one
another through the levels that bring their qualities into communion” (Ibid., p. 68). The
paradigmatic example of this are atoms, for atoms can combine with one another in as
many ways as the objects known to result from their assemblages. This is where
Harman's object-oriented metaphysics can start being related to processes of algorithmic
computation. Because what determines the ways in which non-relating objects do in fact
relate are rules as simple as quantitative relations of electric attraction and repulsion. In
this regard, it is possible to compute relations without further knowledge about the
intrinsic reality of the objects involved. Or, which amounts to the same thing, “the levels
that bring qualities into communion” can be thought quantitatively. Harman himself
doesn't do this. What he inherits from phenomenology is a concern with perception (and
thus accessibility) and with what might exist beyond its variations, that is, with the
207

eidetic core of objects. Nonetheless, in his object-oriented metaphysics, quantities are
conflated with the levels of inter-objective communication. They are thought spatially,
but not in a way that specifies their relation to qualities. 
Harman's philosophy proposes a general schema of relations where qualities are
related to one another so as to form objects, and objects can only be related to one
another qualitatively. Here, it seems straightforward to think that, in such schema of
spatial modularity, there must exist qualities that are quantitatively determined. Meaning
that the qualitative determination of objects must at some point result from the accretion
of space on space occurring with their modular assemblage. In this sense, there are
variable degrees of spatial magnitude underlying and conditioning the expression of
qualities. Colour is a good example, since the quantities of primary colours, such as red,
green and blue, determine the resulting expression of their own mixture. Mix blue and
green, and you'll get yellow. Change the ratio between these two colours' quantities and
you'll get different tonalities of yellow. The relation between two colour-objects results
in the emergence of a third novel object. Hence, the qualitative expression of an
encounter between parts necessarily depends on how much each of the parts participates
in the whole. Despite the fact that quantities and qualities are hardly inextricable from
one another, the different levels of relation between objects do indicate their spatial
character and thus the quantitative aspect of determination involved in their causality.
Which is to say that, at different orders of magnitude (or even different domains, for that
matter), the quantitative inclusion of objects can have different results, depending on the
given spaces. The same quantities of colour will generate different results, depending on
how other objects, such as a support of inscription, react to the mix. Therefore, the
many levels that can be granted to belong to an object, be them accessible or not, must
be understood under the prism of a quantitative relation between qualitative objects.
The notion of “level”, inherited by Harman from Lingis' phenomenology, is
central to an object-oriented metaphysics, since it allows for the reconciliation between
objects' eidetic inaccessibility and their capacity to be in relation with one another. But
instead of level, Harman calls it “medium”, which he defines in the following manner:
“A medium is any space in which two objects interact, whether the human mind be one
of these objects or not. Human sense experience is only one particular zone or medium
of the world, and possibly not even the most interesting one. The medium between
objects is the glue that makes possible the entire carpentry of things – without it, the
world would remain a set of noncommunicating crystalline spheres sleeping away in
private vacuums.” (2005, p. 91). In other words, the medium is the “intermediate zone
208

through which objects signal to one another, and transfer energies for the benefit or
destruction of one another.” (Ibid., p. 70). In order for two different atoms to relate to
one another, a medium is required. Importantly, the medium cannot be thought without
the atoms themselves. And to the extent that one same type of atom can participate in
different types of molecules, and these in different types of compounds, and these in
different types of bodies, and so on, what necessarily results from this style of
organization is a multimediatic structuration of connectivity or, in other words, from an
object's perspective, connections at different levels. Ultimately, for Harman, such
connections remain inaccessible. “Since no causation between [objects] can be direct, it
clearly can only be vicarious, taking place by means of some unspecified intermediary.”
(Ibid.). Which is to say that the causal relations occurring throughout the different levels
that mediate the communication between objects are indirect and inaccessible. Despite
its real dimension, an object can in this way be thought to be structured by the different
levels throughout which it is in fact related to other objects. The levels of an object are
neither internal nor external to it. Rather, they are the object's very spatiality. They
correspond to the spatial structures throughout which the events of one given scale are
communicated to other scales. In an object-oriented metaphysics, there is no relation
outside of objects. Across different scales, objects comprise the different levels of their
relatedness. For example, one can think of the body's joints. They simultaneously
connect and separate different regions of the body. Whereas they can be seen as objects
in themselves, they can also be seen as being part of any of the connected regions. A
joint is both an object and a medium. In fact, fractal geometries like this can be found in
whatever kind of network. Every object is a multimediatic cluster. Every medium is an
object. Objects within objects, media within media, ad infinitum.
The fractal geometry according to which objects are wrapped around and into
one another results therefore from a levelled exchange of energies. A novel object can
only come about by means of a communication of events between levels. A perspective
which is close to Simondon's understanding of relations on the basis of notions such as
information and metastability. Notwithstanding, Harman himself is critical of the idea
that potentials constitute an intrinsic dimension of objects. For him, objects do reserve a
capacity to establish novel relations, but this potential is necessarily actual. In his
words: “This secret reservoir cannot be the ‘potential’, because the potential needs to be
inscribed somewhere actual right now, and if the actual is entirely determined by its
relations then this gets us nowhere” (2009, p. 187). Here, at the same time that
potentiality is conflated with actuality, it is also conflated with resolute determinations.
209

“The potential can only mean a potential for future relations, and the actual can only
mean what is in and of itself actual apart from any relations” (Ibid.). This understanding
of potentials conforms to the idea that actuality is relative to itself and potentiality
relative to future objects. But, in contrast to Simondon, Harman understands potentials
as being determinately given. From which it follows that he grants to virtuality no
special value. Of the notion of virtuality he says that it “merely plays the double game
of saying that true reality in the universe is both connected and separate, both
continuous and heterogeneous” (Ibid.). But by saying this, what Harman seems to
dismiss is the immanent factor of determination implied in the conjunctive article “and”,
which he uses. For such conjunction between disjunctive parts implies not only their
relation, but more specifically, their relation in potential, which necessarily implicates
an immanent factor of determination between what is given and what is not. What
Harman dismisses is the general potential of constitution that is actually nowhere to be
found but that, notwithstanding, is real. As such, it is undetermined. For if novelty is to
occur, the world needs to include a general potential of creativity. Hence, what
Harman's philosophy overrides is the constitutive indetermination of affect. Instead of
accounting for this reality, Harman instead engages himself with a renewal of
occasionalism, not by making use of any notion of transcendence, but rather by using
the notion of “vicarious causation”. Instead of an indeterminate cause, what this notion
implies is the idea that all causation is actual but, inasmuch as it is inaccessible, non-
linear and too complex to be known. According to the author, if neither potentiality nor
virtuality qualify for the task of causation and for a distinction between real and sensual
objects, “[t]he only thing that will fit the bill is a non-relational actuality: objects that
exist quite apart from their relation to other objects, and even apart from their relation to
their own pieces” (Harman, 2009, p. 187). 
In regard to algorithmic objects and to the computations in which they might be
involved, this conception of vicarious causation is somewhat problematic. In a sense, all
the constituent elements of an algorithmic object can be distinguished from one another
in an infinite regression that necessarily leads to the kind of Harman's conclusions.
Which is to say that all objects correspond to mediatic levels of communication between
other objects, even if not actually, at least in the sort of way that Harman grants their
potential to be like, that is, as determinate possibilities. What in this way can come to be
known are the very operations of communication that objects partake. This not only
allows for a knowledge of structures, but also for a knowledge of the contrasting
grounds against which objective structures are remarked. Notwithstanding these terms,
210

this is by no means to say that an object-oriented metaphysics, as theorized by Harman,
conceives of process in terms of undetermined potentials and of individuals with
associated milieus. In fact, as much as such metaphysical approach conceives of all
reality as actual, novelty is hardly made to be a part of the picture. This approach
postulates an ontology of possibilities, regardless of what cannot be known because of
being vicarious. In the actual spaces of an object-oriented world, novelty is more
correctly seen as the outcome of possibilities that, because of being vicarious, cannot be
anticipated. It could be argued that, in this case (like with the principles of an universal
computation), objects are combinable with one another in as many ways as possible. In
which case, emergents would merely correspond to the outcomes of a combinatorics
that, despite being possibly unpredictable, is determinately given and therefore
knowable. Whereas this is the case of a computable possibility space, the vicarious
causation that Harman argues to be fundamental for the understanding of an object-
oriented world precludes this ontology's possibilities from being computed. This factor
of unknowability at the heart of possibility is the very incomputability of objects. But,
in contrast to Chaitin's theory of algorithmic complexity, this is not an incomputability
made out of random quantities of data. In fact, as much as in Harman's philosophy this
randomness pertains to the unknowable core of objects, what the notion of vicarious
causation overrides is the very necessity to define the indetermination constitutive of
this lack of knowledge. If the notion of vicarious causation pertains to process's
indetermination, then the quality of such indetermination remains to be discussed. A
lack that corresponds as well to an absent discussion on the relationship between
quantities and qualities.
While striving to articulate objects with relations, Harman's object-oriented
metaphysics results in a seamless conflation of forms with actuality. Here, the paradox
resides in the incompatibility between the assumption that actual determinations are
knowable and the assumption according to which beyond what can be known exists
only actuality. Because in this philosophy the latter is only accepted to be determined, it
should therefore be knowable. But because a factor of unknowability needs to be
granted to reality, the notion of vicarious causation comes into use in order to conceal
this paradox in an inexplicable space. In other words, Harman's philosophy doesn't
really discuss the relation between what is known and what is not. It doesn't consider
the dynamisms of affect between the unconscious and the resolute determinations
resulting from it. The spatial character of an object-oriented ontology does provide a
way to conceive of algorithmic objects and their relations. Any algorithmic object can in
211

this way be conceived as a multimediatic module throughout which information is
transmitted. But even here, with the notion of information, Harman's philosophy leaves
no space for indetermination. In an object-oriented metaphysics, information cannot but
correspond to the serialization of data. In short, what this theory overlooks is
indetermination in general. More specifically, it does not account for an actuality that is
itself random and undetermined. It does not strive to consider the kinds of quantities
that are unaccountable by the qualitative expression of objects and their relations. If one
is to take Chaitin's proof of Omega seriously, then a whole field of excessive quantities
must be considered. And instead of equating actuality with what is determined, as
Harman does, one needs to consider it as well in undetermined terms. From which it
follows that, instead of a qualitative continuum resulting out of a total quantitative
determination, what one gets is an extensive continuum pervaded by incomplete and
undetermined quantities. In order to discuss the notion of the extensive continuum,
which comprises both the spatiotemporal distribution of objects and an infinity of
random quantities, bigger than the realized qualities, this study will now turn to Alfred
N. Whitehead's process philosophy. In this way, not only objects will be conceded a
processual character, but also and precisely because of this, their parts will be conceived
as being bigger and more random than their determinate and qualitative expressions.
But before this, it is perhaps worth noting that an inquiry on the relationship
between qualities and quantities, from the perspective of algorithmic objects, shouldn't
be understood as pertaining only to digital computation. One should bear in mind that
digital simulations are feasible not only because they share the possibility space with the
systems of reference, but also because their algorithms coincide with these systems's
processes.155 Be it on the side of digital simulations or on the side of their systems of
reference, algorithms can be found as what results from the co-individuation of subjects
and objects, that is, as the knowledge of the models according to which processes
unfold. If, for example, there would not be a specific sequence of genes responsible for
producing a specific protein, we wouldn't be able to create this same protein by means
of computational procedures. Which is simply to say that the genetic code itself is the
basis of a complex ecology of algorithmic procedures by means of which determinate
syntheses are actualized. In this regard, the field of biotechnology is most exemplary.
One moves from conceiving of the world as a set of autonomous algorithmic
155 For a philosophical incursion into, not only all sorts of digital simulations, but also more broadly the
synthetic style of reasoning underlying them, see Manuel DeLanda's book “Philosophy and
Simulation: The Emergence of Synthetic Reason” (2011).
212

procedures, from which we can only derive simulations, to the practice of programming
with its own codes. In this manner, instead of just simulating processes, we become able
to create systems that, unlike any others before them, result from a knowledgeable
manipulation of the world's most intrinsic algorithms. Thus, to inquire into the mode of
relation between quantities and qualities, from the perspective of algorithmic objects,
corresponds more to a given take on the world, i.e. to the assumption that its processes
unfold according to an algorithmic architecture, than to a specific focus on digital
computation. It is nonetheless from such scope that digital computation might come to
be understood under a new light.
6.4 - Process Orientation
It was philosopher Alfred N. Whitehead (a notable influence on Gilles Deleuze's
philosophy) who most consistently and systematically argued for the immanence of
transcendental ideas and actual experiences, that is, for the inextricable relation between
transcendental objects and the actual conditions of emergence from which empirical
facts result. To the objects of transcendental memory Whitehead calls “eternal objects”,
and to the objects of empirical memory he calls “actual occasions” or “actual entities”.
For him, eternal objects correspond to the ideas of what has been already once
objectified, i.e. the regularity of past occasions. Ideas that, because they are potential in
regard to future occasions, can ingress time and again into novel facts of unity, i.e. into
the formation of experience, perception and empirical memory. In Whitehead's words,
“an eternal object can be described only in terms of its potentiality for 'ingression' into
the becoming of actual entities; and its analysis only discloses other eternal objects. It is
a pure potential” (1978, p. 23). For example, the idea of blue, before being expressed, is
neither this or that expression of blue, but rather the general schema, or pure abstraction,
encompassing all possible expressions of blue. Each expression of blue necessarily
depends on spatio-temporal conditions that determine the ingressing idea's variation (i.e.
no one blue is alike) and conserve its virtual invariance (i.e. blue as an ideal pattern or
eternal object). 
In order to conceive this processual relation between virtuality and actuality,
instead of conflating the virtual with the topological invariance of infinitesimal division,
Whitehead elaborates a “mereotopology” where ideas are actual but, nonetheless,
distributed across a continuum of relations. In this way, virtuality is made to correspond
213

to an infinite series of discrete points, rather than to a continuous infinity. At the same
time that it abstracts ideas from actuality, it remains implicit in its discrete multiplicities.
This results in virtual-actual dynamisms that correspond to infinite extensions of
inclusion and exclusion between wholes and parts, rather than to rhythmic pulsations
between movements of actualization and deactualization, in the sense of topological
processes. Mereotopology—a mode of thought that articulates mereology with topology
—refers to the study of extensive relations between parts and wholes (Whitehead, 1978,
pp. 281–333). Media theorist Luciana Parisi explains Whitehead's use of this method in
the following way: “Whitehead’s analysis of parthood relations (mereology, from the
Greek mero, 'part') was an ontological alternative to set theory. It dispensed with
abstract entities and treated all objects of quantification as individuals. As a formal
theory, mereology is an attempt to set out the general principles underlying the
relationships between a whole and its constituent parts, as opposed to set theory’s search
for the principles that underlie the relationships between a class and its constituent
members. As is often argued, mereology could not explain by itself, however, the notion
of a whole (a self-connected whole, such as a stone or a whistle, as opposed to a
scattered entity of disconnected parts, such as a broken glass, an archipelago, or the sum
of two distinct cats). Whitehead’s early attempts to characterize his ontology of events
provide a good exemplification of this mereological dilemma. For Whitehead, a
necessary condition for two events to have a sum was that they were at least 'joined' to
each other, i.e., connected (despite being or not being discrete). These connections,
however, concerned spatiotemporal entities, and could not be defined directly in terms
of plain mereological primitives. To overcome the bounds of mereology, the
microscopic discontinuity of matter (and its atomic composition) had to be overcome.
The question of what characterized an object required topological and not mereological
analysis. From this standpoint, two distinct events could be perfectly spatiotemporally
colocated without occupying the spatiotemporal region at which they were located, and
could therefore share the region with other entities. The combination of mereology and
topology contributed to Whitehead’s articulation of the notion of the extended
continuum.” (Parisi, 2013, pp. 309–310).
In Whitehead's theory of regional extension, parts do not preexist the relations
that they come to establish. Rather, they are defined by the ways in which they include
and exclude themselves from one another. In this perspective, continuity ceases to be
exclusively virtual, condemning the actual to be discontinuous, to become proper of
extension itself. Each actual entity is defined by the relations of extension that it
214

partakes with other entities. Their contact generates concrete limit-points and surfaces
of contact that no longer fall into the topological infinity of infinitesimals. Rather, these
are discrete conditions of transition from one spatiotemporal region to another,
organized in accordance with a continuity of potential discontinuities (i.e. discrete
points of contact). Here, connection concerns the critical limits at which the state of a
regional system is altered to the point of having to change. The passage from one state
of affairs to another is designated by Whitehead as “concrescence”, which “is the name
for the process in which the universe of many things acquires an individual unity in a
determinate relegation of each item of the 'many' to its subordination in the constitution
of the novel tone” (1978, p. 211). As such, the transitory connectivity of spatiotemporal
regions corresponds to the unification of a multiplicity of actual entities. It is the
constitution of a mereotopological space where parts and wholes are related to one
another in extension. 
If computation is considered, it is here, with Whitehead's extensive schema, that
digital algorithms can be understood beyond the credo of a disjunction between
virtuality and actuality. To the extent that digital computation can be seen as an
accretion of data on data, its algorithms can be understood as concrescences. Of course
in this framework an algorithm can also be said to be an actual entity. But in this regard,
it matters to say, together with Whitehead, that “[t]here are not 'the concrescence' and
'the novel thing' [or actual entity]: when we analyse the novel thing we find nothing but
the concrescence” (Whitehead, 1978, p. 211). And the reason for this, the philosopher
explains, is that “'[a]ctuality' means nothing else than this ultimate entry into the
concrete, in abstraction from which there is mere nonentity. In other words, abstraction
from the notion of 'entry into the concrete' is a self-contradictory notion, since it asks us
to conceive a thing as not a thing” (Ibid.). From this standpoint, algorithms themselves
can be understood as processes. For, as Whitehead proffers, “[a]n actual entity is a
process, and is not describable in terms of the morphology of a 'stuff.'” (Ibid., p. 41).
Algorithms ingather data into the concrescence of novel facts of unity, which on their
turn become part of the extensive schema where all actual entities are potentially related
to one another. Such perspective of digital computation becomes all the more adequate
if the parametric structure of algorithms is considered. Such structures can in this way
be seen as extensive spaces where concrescences take place. Their constituent entities,
rather than being discontinuous, in the fashion of digital bits of data, are continuous
with one another in the extensive whole where their own constitution takes place.
Importantly, this is a whole that, by reason of being the object of both an “indefinite
215

divisibility” and an “unbounded extension”, which according to Whitehead are the main
features of the extensive continuum, comprises in itself the infinity of virtual potentials. 
It can nevertheless be argued that the results of parametric computation pertain
to a space of topological invariance. After all, parametricism is a mode of control
characteristic of cybernetics and of the pervasive culture of prediction that followed
from it. Parametric algorithms can be used as functions of control with regard to the
variation of results. From which follows the possibility of approaching algorithms, and
specially parametric ones, both from different standpoints with regard to space and from
different conceptions of virtuality. If one thinks, for example, of the gestural bodies
expressed by the parametric algorithms of the Gesture Follower (discussed in Section
5.1), one can say that they take form in accordance with the topological invariance of a
determinate definition of gesture. The expressions actually vary, but within the limits of
possibility given to the software in the form of parametric structures. The expression of
gesture is constrained by what is possible at the intersection of imagination and digital
programming, and thus made to be the function with which gesture can be predicted, i.e.
followed, and controlled (by signalling the learning subject with the binary possibility
of conformity between the different domains of expression at stake). On the other hand,
the parametric structure of the algorithms expressing here the definition of gesture
entails a mereotopology of extensive relations between wholes and parts. As much as
given parameters correspond to discrete quantities of data, the computation of
parametric algorithms corresponds to the concrescence of many series of data.
Computation realizes the many potentials of relation existing between the infinity of
discrete parts in concrescence. A parametric algorithm can thus be seen as an extensive
schema where many discrete quantities of data intersect with and overlap to one
another, forming a mereotopological infinity. 
It is acknowledgeable that Whitehead's theory of extension and his
mereotopological approach fit the consideration that algorithms are more than finite sets
of data. A mereotopological approach allows for considering algorithms' incomputable
data with a notion of space that, at the same time that it articulates the undetermined
with the determined, it articulates as well the virtual with the actual in a way that
somewhat resolves the problem of how to understand the processual relation between
quantities and qualities. For this reason, Whitehead's theory of extension deserves to be
further expounded, so that the processes whereby incomputabilities infect the
calculation of actuality can be better understood. Needless to say that this conforms to
Chaitin's theory of algorithmic complexity.
216

For Whitehead, ideas “exhibit the definiteness of mathematical relations” (1978,
p. 327). Only this allows abstraction to measure the physical world in an exact way. In
contrast to relativity theory, which conflates the laws of physics with geometry and
relegates abstraction to the limits of space's infinitesimal divisibility, Whitehead
proposes a disarticulation between abstractions and expressions so that the measurement
of space can occur in purely formal terms (1978, pp. 283–289, 294–301). On the one
hand, this amounts to saying that only the potentials of pure abstractions can define the
mathematical relations actually established between the different parts of one extensive
whole. On the other, it is to say that the contact between the different entities cannot
actually express the definiteness of mathematical relations. It follows that there is
necessarily a degree of indetermination constitutive of the extensive continuum's
mereotopological relations. If one were to perform, concretely, the partition of a whole,
one would necessarily find impossible to express the definiteness of mathematical
relations. To the same extent that this is concretely impossible, it is possible in
abstraction. Only in abstraction can the definiteness of mathematical relations be
defined. Notwithstanding, the potentials of such relations do exist immanently in
extension. The pure potentials of eternal objects are immanent in the extensive
continuum's mereotopology. Abstraction in general and the definiteness of mathematical
relations in particular, rather than doubling in potential what can in fact come to occur,
simply correspond to yet undetermined relations of contact between the extensive
continuum's actual regions of space-time. As such, mathematical relations are pure
potentials. 
Accordingly, if spatial relations can be measured, and if measurement is a
method of abstraction, then space is to be thought in terms of extensive abstractions.
Such corollary owes much to the fact that, in Whitehead's philosophy, virtuality is not
considered to be a formless potential, capable of being determined in many possible
ways, but rather a series of infinite ideas, each of which distinct from the rest. Since
each actual occasion is a singular event, the pattern of occurrence that it comes to
inscribe in the continuum of extensions is historically located. Ideas participate in this
way in the continuum of potentials, at the same time that their historical ingression into
actuality allows them to become distinct from one another. They exist as general
potentials, but they also become historically located and actually distinct from one
another. With the implication of ideas in the actual definition of the world's expression,
not only are virtuality and actuality assured to be immanent in one another, but also
ideas are granted definiteness because of being implicated, as general potentials, in the
217

actual continuum of extensive relations between parts and wholes.
Whereas ideas are here conceived as general potentials of expression, the
extensive continuum where they exist and from which they acquire definiteness is seen
to be not without its own non-abstract capacities. Which is to say that matter itself is
here too conceived as being autonomously active, not only capable of expressing the
ideality of patterns, but also capable of moving in accordance with its own specific, i.e.
non-general, potentials. In this sense, Whitehead's schema of extension coincides with
the previously expounded notion of matter's diagram.156 It grants matter the capacity to
organize itself, with no necessity for external factors of determination. The reciprocal
determinability of forces and forms that constitutes the physical pole of reality, provides
the ground on which abstractions can be imagined, for it is in matter itself that ideas, in
potential and before subjectification, are already implicit. Which is to say that the
diagram of matter is doubled by an abstract one: the “mental pole” of all material
formations. For Whitehead, “no actual entity is devoid of either pole, though their
relative importance differs in different actual entities” (1978, p. 239). It is from this very
conception of abstraction in actuality that the notion of experience is disentangled from
subjectivity. Because “an actual entity may, or may not, be conscious of some part of its
experience” (Ibid, p. 53), Whitehead postulates the presupposition of experience by
consciousness, rather than the opposite. Hence, it can be said that the world experiences
itself, with no necessity for a conscious subject. The mental pole of reality grants the
world the capacity to think itself, as this selects from the potentials of eternity the ideas
that it chooses to actually realize. Conversely, all matter abstracts the world in its own
way. Be it through the layered stratification of geological sediments or through the
formal variation of waters drops and snow flakes, matter's physical expression always
expresses ideas. With the primacy of experience over consciousness, Whitehead's
process-oriented metaphysics distances itself from the kind of dualities that divide the
world between given subjects and object, to define experience as the process through
which the mental and physical poles of reality co-exist and co-evolve, immanently in
one another. Experience unfolds the general potentials of abstraction together with the
relative potentials of matter's diagrammatic dynamisms towards a constant rearticulation
of novelty with what is actually given from the past. Experience: a continuous definition
of ideas by means of extensive creation.
To the schema of extensive abstraction, Whitehead calls the “extensive
156 See pages 134-136, Section 4.3.
218

continuum” (Ibid., pp. 61–82). This continuity of extension is a potential for indefinite
division, which grants it with the capacity to express the definiteness of mathematical
relations. The general potentials of ideas are here granted an actuality that, rather than
being determined, is undetermined. It is through such indetermination that the extensive
schema of general expression ceases to relate only discrete and discontinuous entities, to
not only relate them in a continuous field of potentials but also relate them to these
same potentials, i.e. to the ideal patterns of occurrence that they express each time anew.
From which it follows that each determinate expression necessarily implicates
undetermined quantities of data that allow for it to connect to all other actual entities, if
not in fact, at least in potential. Conversely, it is only by means of these potentials'
ingression into the concrescence of novel facts of unity that the continuum becomes
extensive, i.e. that it acquires determinate standpoints with regard to its overall
development. Whitehead explains the relationship between the extensive continuum and
the concrescences that in it take place in the following way: “The real potentialities
relative to all standpoints are coordinated as diverse determinations of one extensive
continuum. This extensive continuum is one relational complex in which all potential
objectifications find their niche. It underlies the whole world, past, present, and future.
[…] the properties of this continuum are very few and do not include the relationships
of metrical geometry. An extensive continuum is a complex of entities united by the
various allied relationships of whole to part, and of overlapping so as to possess
common parts, and of contact, and of other relationships derived from these primary
relationships. The notion of a 'continuum' involves both the property of indefinite
divisibility and the property of unbounded extension.” (Ibid., p. 66). 
If the extensive continuum holds a potential of division, then it is by actual
means that this potential is realized. On the one hand, the continuum is undetermined. It
infects concretization with real potentials of division. On the other, actual division is a
sort of atomization. In Whitehead's words: “Actual entities atomize the extensive
continuum. [...] For each process of concrescence a regional standpoint in the world,
defining a limited potentiality for objectifications, has been adopted. In the mere
extensive continuum there is no principle to determine what regional quanta shall be
atomized, so as to form the real perspective standpoint for the primary data constituting
the basic phase in the concrescence of an actual entity.” (Ibid., 67). There is, therefore,
an absolute potential of extension in the continuum. But as much as actual entities
correspond to determinate standpoints and each entity implicates undetermined
quantities of data, potentials need also to be seen as being relative to one another.
219

Accordingly, “[w]e have always to consider two meanings of potentiality: (a) the
'general' potentiality, which is the bundle of possibilities, mutually consistent or
alternative, provided by the multiplicity of eternal objects, and (b) the 'real' potentiality,
which is conditioned by the data provided by the actual world. General potentiality is
absolute, and real potentiality is relative to some actual entity, taken as a standpoint
whereby the actual world is defined.” (Ibid., p. 65). 
In order to better understand the relationship between general and real potentials,
let's once again consider the example of colour. Once granted that whatever expression
of blue cannot be but a singular event, and that it can only be so insofar as the general
potential of blue exists as a potential of relatedness between the multiplicity of actual
entities in concrescence, it must be acknowledged that absolute and relative potentials
are immanent in one another. The eternal object blue exists in actuality as much as
actual entities exist in the continuum of eternal objects. There is no one singular
expression of blue that doesn't implicate the eternal object blue. Reciprocally, the
general idea of blue does not exist without being implicated in actuality, i.e. without
being somehow expressed. Real, local and relative potentials are intrinsic to the objects
of eternity, since these constitute the continuum that each actual occasion cuts. Each
actual cut realizes potentials relatively to the concrescent data, which are themselves
approximations, in continuity, to the general potentials of relatedness that the continuum
provides. 
Inasmuch as actual entities implicate general potentials, they can be said to be
randomly located in the continuum. Or, they can be said to be located everywhere in the
continuum. In contrast, inasmuch as they are determinately inscribed in the continuum,
they are historically circumscribed and therefore actually defined relatively to one
another. This double character of space, simultaneously relative and general, is
explained by Whitehead in the following way: “In the mere continuum there are
contrary potentialities; in the actual world there are definite atomic actualities
determining one coherent system of real divisions throughout the region of actuality.
Every actual entity in its relationship to other actual entities is in this sense somewhere
in the continuum, and arises out of the data provided by this standpoint. But in another
sense it is everywhere throughout the continuum; for its constitution includes the
objectifications of the actual world and thereby includes the continuum; also the
potential objectifications of itself contribute to the real potentialities whose solidarity
the continuum expresses. Thus the continuum is present in each actual entity, and each
actual entity pervades the continuum.” (Ibid., p. 67). This results in a fractal
220

geometrization of space and time that, contrary to Harman's object-oriented
metaphysics, depends on the immanent relation between random quantities of data and
the continuum's determinate standpoints.
As a potential to ingress into actual occasions and to realize ideal relations
between different spatiotemporal regions, the extensive continuum expresses the general
schema according to which the actual contact of parts comes to occur. While the
continuum unifies actual occasions by providing the potential of their relatedness, actual
occasions cut the continuum's potentials by realizing the ideality of patterns. The
actualization of a potential idea is thus a discrete cut in the continuous infinity of
discrete points constituting the Whiteheadian virtual. While not determinate in itself, a
potential idea determines the precision of the cut with which it gets to be determined, in
its concrete occurrence. Such determination involves an exclusive limitation of what is
admitted into the actual occasions of experience. Meaning that, with each concrescence,
only some eternal objects of the whole continuum are realized. For Whitehead, “[t]his
element of 'exclusive limitation' is the definiteness essential for the synthetic unity of an
actual entity” (Ibid., p. 66). The cut that each actual occasion operates in the gregarious
continuity of discrete points marks the transitional limit between stationary data and
concrescent emergence.
Moreover, says the philosopher, concrescence “embodies a determinate attitude
of 'yes' or 'no'” (Ibid.). It selects and limits ingression in order to define the actual
occasion. Such selection happens by means of what he calls “prehensions”. A
prehension refers to the immanent affectivity between the actual entities in
concrescence. It registers the affective transformation that takes place when one entity
enters another's world. An object is prehended by a subject, simultaneously to their
reciprocal concrescence as the singular terms of a real affective connection. But also a
thought prehends another thought; the contraction of a muscle prehends the extension of
another muscle; and an arrow prehends the target that it comes to hit when in flight.
Through prehensions, actual occasions come to relate to one another by including or
excluding themselves from one another, in extension. This is what Whitehead calls,
respectively, positive and negative prehensions. Through positive and negative
prehensions, the actual occasions decide and select on what to admit into the final
synthesis of process.
The concrescence of actual entities corresponds to the concrete determination of
the present by the immediate past, a determination tantamount to the one of the future
221

by the present. This actualization, tells us Whitehead, is initiated with the “pure
reception of the actual world in its guise of objective datum for aesthetic synthesis”, a
movement that necessarily comes to include in the actual occasion a multiplicity of
previous entities. This process, in which “the many become one, and are increased by
one”, is guided by what the author calls “the ultimate metaphysical principle”, that is,
“the advance from disjunction to conjunction, creating a novel entity other than the
entities given in disjunction. The novel entity is at once the togetherness of the 'many'
which it finds, and also it is one among the disjunctive 'many' which it leaves; it is a
novel entity, disjunctively among the many entities which it synthesizes.” Each creative
process is therefore determined by the actual data that it can receive into concrescence.
The concrescence resolves the extensive continuum's indetermination into a coherent
coordination of different standpoints and, in this way, synthesises it aesthetically. (Ibid.,
p. 21).
Whitehead's extensive continuum undoes the split between space and time that
was still so prevalent in Bergson's theory of duration, to give prevalence to the notion of
an infinity of discrete points. In contrast to Bergson's philosophy, which understands
experience according to duration, Whitehead's notion of the extensive continuum
provides the possibility of conceiving the relation between intensive and extensive
multiplicities in terms of an atemporal depth (of affect). Here, resonance is key. For it is
through the processual resonance of the extensive continuum that a multiplicity of
spatio-temporalities can co-exist. Contrary to the continual flow of becoming so
characteristic of durational experience, the extensive continuum's actual entities come to
be in contact with one another by selecting the potentials of eternity into the vibratory
resonance of the concrescent becoming. The extensive continuum is a field of
becoming, the internal resonance of which assures the affective prehension between
actuals entities.
From this standpoint, algorithmic objects can be seen under a different light. In
contrast to Harman's object-oriented metaphysics', Whitehead's philosophy offers the
possibility of understanding algorithmic objects as processes. Algorithms can be thought
in terms of both physical and conceptual prehensions of data. They can actually prehend
data, but not without prehending as well, conceptually, the eternal objects available to
be selected into concrescence. Moreover, instead of relegating algorithms' mathematical
definiteness to some inaccessible depth, it understands it as belonging to extension
itself, while it remains undetermined and, therefore, just a general potential. To say that
algorithms prehend the general potentials of ideas is to say that they reorganize the
222

extensive continuum by constituting, out of the immanent relation between random data
and determinate standpoints, novel facts of unity. As such, they are actual entities. They
are the very concrescence through which what is given into process, both determinately
and indeterminately, comes to be selected for the latter's termination. For, as Whitehead
explains, “[t]he ‘formal’ constitution of an actual entity, is a process of transition from
indetermination towards terminal determination. But the indetermination is referent to
determinate data. The ‘objective’ constitution of an actual entity is its terminal
determination, considered as a complex of component determinates by reason of which
the actual entity is a datum for the creative advance.” (1978, p. 45). In the guise of
Chaitin's theory of algorithmic complexity, Whitehead's notion of the extensive
continuum provides a consistent framework to conceive of the incomputability of
algorithms. Instead of just random quantities of data, Chaitin's Omega is seen, under the
light of Whitehead's philosophy, as an infinite series of eternal objects.
Whitehead's theory of the extensive continuum is closer to Chaitin's theory of
algorithmic complexity than to Bergson's theory of duration. The pervasion of
algorithmic computation by an infinite number, corollary derived from the theory of
Omega, is paralleled by the understanding that algorithms actually prehend, either
positively or negatively, infinite series of data. Both Omega and the extensive
continuum's eternal objects grant algorithms the capacity to interpolate and accrete data
in infinite ways. This is the way in which algorithms realize the mathematical concept
of infinity. Such infinity can be thought in terms of incomputable and random quantities
of data, which pervade every single computational process. But it can be thought as well
as the excess of actuality over itself. What Whitehead's notion of the extensive
continuum facilitates with regard to conceiving this excess, is the conception that
potentials, instead of being qualitative multiplicities, correspond to the indefinite
divisibility of an extensive space that cannot be bounded. And this is not to say that
intensive qualities are not accountable by Whitehead's theory of extension. On the
contrary, it is to say that it is precisely by means of indefinitely discrete and unbounded
quantities that qualities are expressed. 
6.5 - Thoughtful Character
Algorithmic excess, in accordance both with Chaitin's theory of algorithmic
complexity and with Whitehead's theory of extension, does result in a processual
223

dynamism whereby incomputable quantities of data are prehended into the resolution of
initial disparities between the extensive continuum's potentials. As actual occasions of
experience, algorithms cannot be fully synthesised into expression. The parts of an
algorithmic object are necessarily larger than the whole, because of their constitutive
infinity. To prehend the eternal objects of such infinity into the concrete resolutions of
computation means nothing else but to think. This is the major outcome that can be said
to result from approaching the algorithms of digital computation with the extensive
schema of Whitehead's philosophy. Inasmuch as algorithms prehend, not only
physically but also conceptually, the many potentials of the extensive continuum where
they exist, they are the conditional basis of a thoughtful character that must be granted
to digital computation. Since algorithms prehend the incomputable quantities of data
constitutive of the extensive continuum's series of infinite ideas, digital computation
does not occur without being infected with ideas that it cannot compute. With such
incomputabilities, digital computation is assured with a capacity to eventuate
concrescences that cannot be fully predicted. It is granted the capacity to generate facts
of togetherness that are truly novel. Further, the irreducibility of those infinite ideas
potentially given to the concrescences of algorithmic computation confers to the latter
the very status of thought. Inasmuch as algorithmic computation prehends the
conceptual infinity of the extensive continuum where it occurs and to which it belongs,
it does not occur without abstracting its own procedural determinations with ideas that
cannot be known as such.
Recently, Luciana Parisi proposed that the thoughtful character of computation,
and more specifically of digital algorithms, should be considered not as what results
from cognition, but rather as what corresponds to the undetermined reality existing at
the heart of computation and constituting its excessive character. She designates this
mode of mode thought as “soft(ware)157 thought”, which she describes in the following
way: “Soft thought is not a tool for thinking (i.e., for planning, calculating, and
rationalizing) space-time. Instead, soft thought is a way of producing computational
space-time. The algorithmic processing of data is not just a means to explore new
spatio-temporal forms. Instead, this automated prehension of data is equivalent to the
157 In his book “Software Studies”, Matthew Fuller notes that “[r]ecent etymological research credits
John W. Tukey with the first published use of the term 'software'. In a 1958 article for American
Mathematical Monthly he described how the mathematical and logical instructions for electronic
calculators had become increasingly important [in the following way]: 'Today the ‘software’
comprising the carefully planned interpretive routines, compilers, and other aspects of automative
programming are at least as important to the modern electronic calculator as its ‘hardware’ of tubes,
transistors, wires, tapes and the like'.” (2008, p. 2).
224

immanent construction of digital spatiotemporalities. From this standpoint, soft thought
cannot be simply disqualified for being a mechanical calculation of possibilities. At the
same time, it may also be misleading to assume that computation is yet another
extension of living thought. Soft thought is instead the mental pole of an algorithmic
actual object. It is the conceptual prehension of infinite data that defines computational
actualities or spatiotemporalities as the point at which algorithms stop being determined
by the efficient order of sequences and rather prehend their incomputable limit. Soft
thought thus explains algorithmic computation as an actual mode of thinking that cannot
be reproduced or instantiated by the neuroarchitecture of the brain (the neurosynaptic
network), or to the neurophenomenology of the mind (the reflexive ability of the mind
to become aware of its actions on the world). Soft thought, in consequence, is
autonomous from cognition and perception.” (2013, p. 169). 
It follows that algorithmic objects are conceptual prehensions of incomputable
quantities of data. In fact, only by being so can algorithmic objects be said to be
independent from any material order of symbolic coordination, that is, to neither depend
on computational machines (hardware) nor on the symbolic languages that they use
(software). Soft-thought is abstract in a way that neither requires concretization in terms
of what could resemble the neuroarchitecture of the brain or the neurophenomenology
of the mind nor any sort of linguistic expression.158 The algorithmic objects of soft-
thought are defined more fundamentally by their immanent connection with unknown
and undetermined potentials than by whatever possible determination that they might
express. Which is not to say that algorithmic objects are fully undetermined or that they
exist only in abstraction. Algorithmic objects are models of transduction. Their
determination conditions and constrains the passage from one state to another of infinity
itself. They convey the transfer and amplification of abstract forces towards
diagrammatic determinations and, possibly, their actual expressions. But it is only
158 It is worth noting that Parisi, by using both the expression “neuroarchitecture” and the expression
“neurophenomenology”, is referring to what she designates as “the split between the neurocognitive
and the neuroperceptual understanding of thought” (2013, p. 177). This split can be synthetically
understood with the following passage: “If neuroarchitecture aims at designing the experience of
space according to adaptive neural responses to the environment, neurophenomenology argues that it
is the structure of experience – and not the cognitive mapping of the brain’s adaptation to space – that
leads us to view cognition as enacted experience. According to enactivism, the interaction between
thought and space – between experience and architecture – cannot coincide with a neural pack of
connections, but rather needs to be studied in terms of first-person, experiential evidence of spatial
phenomena or of variations such as depth, height, volume, temperature, colour, sound, etc. For
neuroarchitecture on the other hand [...] the data collected on these variations [...] are enough to
qualify these elements of interaction as first-person […]. Neurophenomenology instead employs
specific first-person methods in order to generate original first-person data, which can then be used to
guide the study of physiological processes.” (Parisi, 2013, p. 182).
225

insofar as algorithms convey the influence of random quantities of data over the various
degrees of their own determination and of the determination of their effects that they
can be said to be the subject of soft-thought. And this is not to say that soft-thought is to
be understood as the kind of reflexive cognition so typical of neurophenomenologies,
such as the enactivist theories of cognition, perception and the mind (Parisi, 2013, pp.
180–185). On the contrary, because soft-thought is defined as “a manifestation of
incomputable infinity or the conceptual prehension of incompressible data that suspends
the order of algorithmic sequences.” (Ibid., p. 17), it can only be experienced either non-
consciously or in terms of its unpredictable effects.
This requires perhaps a twofold explanation, one that explains the unconscious
experience of thought and the novelty that from it might result. In the case of
algorithmic computation, novelty corresponds to what results from the infection of
incomputable quantities of data in computation itself, a creative capacity that can be
best understood when accounting for the structure of parametric algorithms. As
previously mentioned, the space of parametric algorithms can be approached either
topologically or mereotopologically. If the relation between parameters is approached
from a topological perspective, expression is seen as the result of determinate
parametric variations. But if the relation between parameters is approached from a
mereotopological perspective, it must be acknowledged that the computation of finite
datasets is pervaded by and infected with an immanent and constitutive infinity of
discrete and random quantities of data. In this way, variations in parametric expression
are seen to result not from direct causes but rather from the mobilization of
undetermined potentials. If the information exchanged between parameters is
considered to be undetermined and random, then its effects on the overall structure of
algorithms cannot be said to result exclusively from direct causations. Instead, a whole
process of individuation needs to be acknowledged. Between the general potentials of
ideas and the actual entities which express them, there necessarily needs to occur an
exchange of information that, not only is the means by which a novel resolution can
come into being, and therefore constitute a determinate standpoint in the historicity of
the extensive continuum, but also the very cancellation of an initial disparity between
potentials. In this sense, the algorithmic processing of information from which
determinate quantities of data can emerge, necessarily corresponds to the resolution of
problems in potential. Novelty can then appear as the expression of more than what has
been algorithmically programmed. An expression which asserts algorithms as the very
prehension of incomputable quantities of data. With this, it must be acknowledged that
226

only the conceptual prehension of random quantities of data realizes computation's
potential to “deploy new actualities of relation or space events that are new and invisible
to parametric programming” (Parisi, 2013, p. 171). The effective deployment of novel
relations without perceivable effects thus regards the already mentioned presupposition
of experience by consciousness. As such, in the extensive continuum, novelty is
constant. It is always already there, not only potentially but also as the actual
deployment of relational events that, even if unperceivable, are real and contributive.
It is from this standpoint that soft-thought's abstract character can be asserted.
Since mechanical understandings of thought do not account for the prehension of
infinity, soft-thought cannot be reduced to the algorithmic programming of
computational languages. It is always more than that. From the perspective of digital
programming languages, the incomputable infinity of random quantities of data is
somewhat of a blind-spot from which dysfunctional results may appear. After all, as
already quoted, “[m]achines break down, programs are buggy, projects are abandoned
and systems hacked” (Goffey, 2008, p. 19). But, as Parisi also argues, “[...] far from
being computational failures”, all these, “are instead [...] symptoms of algorithmic
thought” (Ibid., p. 172). Because in all these cases algorithms process more data than
what they have been programmed to, instead of being conceived only as ordered and
finite sets of data, they must be conceived as conceptual prehensions of computational
infinities. Though cognitive models such as those corresponding to the
neuroarchitecture of the brain, i.e. cognitivism, or to the neurophenomenology of the
mind, i.e. enactivism, can be used to approach algorithms, they do not account for the
excessive reality of quantity existing amidst the structures of ordered data that the
execution of predetermined and automated procedures requires. For both the one and
the other, algorithms correspond to no more than to the programming languages used
for the execution of sequential thought, the conditional basis of which is the concrete
materiality of computational machines. As Parisi points out, “[f]or cognitivism, the
condition for algorithmic processing is any physical architecture that runs the
instructions through the connection of data that form a neural network; for enactivism,
this condition is an environment in which the neural structure of cognition is
dynamically triggered through sensorimotor perception. Thus while for cognitivism
algorithmic processing is equivalent to cognitive states, for enactivism it is the effect of
being embedded within an environment that allows cognitive states (as neural changes)
to emerge. Consequently, and although they offer what seem to be incompatible
ontological frameworks, both approaches conceive of algorithms as executable
227

procedures, as codes that perform thoughts upon a material substratum, or which cause
thoughts to emerge from the latter. Yet regardless of whether these thoughts emerge
from neural connections or are constructed throughout the sensorimotor schema of
perception, algorithmic procedures remain the executers of thought. In short, the
conditions for algorithmic processing are established by the sense in which the physical
architecture of the brain is always already set to ensure the performance of thought.
What is missing from these approaches is the possibility of conceiving algorithmic
processing as a mode of thought, an expression or finite actuality, and not as the
instrument through which thought can be performed, whether through neural nets or
enacted via embodiment.” (2013, pp. 185–186).
Against the hegemonic prevalence of “the architecture of the brain” as the
paradigm according to which thought is to be explained, Parisi argues for a conception
of algorithmic thought independent both from the “mechanical functionalism” of the
neuroarchitecture of the brain and from the “embedded vitalism” of the
neurophenomenology of the mind. In contrast to these perspectives, it is contended that
algorithmic thought must be considered from the perspective of its prehensive character.
Algorithms must be conceived as prehensions of data that, if looked upon from the
perspective of the extensive continuum's excessive character, are necessarily conceptual.
Such conceptual prehensions of infinity abstract the physical prehensions of data, not as
models according to which the definiteness of mathematical relations is instantiated, but
rather as infections of excessive and incomputable quantities of data in actual
computation. The abstract character of soft-thought regards therefore the existence of
incomputable quantities of data at the heart of computation or, in other words, the
constitution of the extensive continuum (from which computation feeds off data into
concrescence) in terms of eternal objects.
According to this, abstraction is a fundamental condition of the singular
constitution of determinate standpoints. The eternal objects of the extensive continuum
infect the determinate character of any occasion of experience. In the case of
algorithmic objects, this infection corresponds to the affective determination of
computation by random and incomputable quantities of data. Only through the notion of
prehension can this infection be understood. After all, what remains outside of
computation is not absolutely excluded from process. On the contrary, since they are
intrinsic to actuality, incomputable data necessarily partake computation. To say that
there is an excessive field of multidimensional quantities pervading process in general
and computation in particular is to say that, from the perspective of the actual entities in
228

concrescence, these excessive quantities of data correspond to what is negatively
prehended into process. As already mentioned, a “negative prehension holds its datum
as inoperative in the progressive concrescence of prehensions constituting the [novel
fact of] unity [...] (Whitehead, 1978, pp. 23–24). As such, it is a function of subtraction.
It doesn't subtract eternal objects from the actual occasions of experience, but rather
actual occasions from the extensive continuum's eternal objects. Some general
potentials are positively prehended into the actual occasions of experience, some are
negatively prehended. But never the extensive continuum's eternal objects can be said to
be inaccessible to the occurrent concrescences. They are of process and, as such, one of
its fundamental conditions. Which is the very reason why it is possible to conceive of
soft-thought as a fundamentally abstract process. Inasmuch as algorithms can be defined
as conceptual prehensions of incomputable quantities of data, the structuration of soft-
thought owes more to what is negatively prehended into computation than to what is
positively prehended. Incomputabilities can then be defined as those quantities of data
that, despite being a fundamental condition to computation, are negatively prehended
into concrescence.
From this standpoint, it is perhaps worth to emphasize the importance of
negative prehensions in process. For Whitehead, “[t]he importance of negative
prehensions arises from the fact, that (i) actual entities form a system, in the sense of
entering into each other's constitutions, (ii) that by the ontological principle every entity
is felt by some actual entity,159 (iii) that, as a consequence of (i) and (ii), every entity in
the actual world of a concrescent actuality has some gradation of real relevance to that
concrescence, (iv) that, in consequence of (iii), the negative prehension of an entity is a
positive fact with its emotional subjective form, (v) there is a mutual sensitivity of the
subjective forms of prehensions, so that they are not indifferent to each other, (vi) the
concrescence issues in one concrete feeling, the satisfaction.” (1978, p. 41). This term,
satisfaction, depicts in Whitehead's philosophy the termination of concrescences. Of it,
159 “The 'ontological principle' broadens and extends a general principle laid down by John Locke in his
Essay (Bk. II, Ch. XXIII, Sect. 7), when he asserts that 'power' is 'a great part of our complex ideas of
substances'. The notion of 'substance' is transformed into that of 'actual entity'; and the notion of
'power' is transformed into the principle that the reasons for things are always to be found in the
composite nature of definite actual entities – in the nature of God for reasons of the highest
absoluteness, and in the nature of definite temporal actual entities for reasons which refer to a
particular environment. The ontological principle can be summarized as: no actual entity, then no
reason.” (Whitehead, 1978, pp. 18–19). As such, “[t]his ontological principle means that actual
entities are the only reasons; so that to search for a reason is to search for one or more actual entities.
It follows that any condition to be satisfied by one actual entity in its process expresses a fact either
about the 'real internal constitutions' of some other actual entities, or about the 'subjective aim'
conditioning that process.” (Ibid., p. 24).
229

the philosopher says: “The actual entity terminates its becoming in one complex feeling
involving a completely determinate bond with every item in the universe, the bond
being either a positive or a negative prehension. This termination is the 'satisfaction' of
the actual entity.” (Ibid., p. 44). Thus, everything in concrescence is a positive affect, be
it a positive prehension or a negative one. The satisfaction of actual entities assures the
determinate bond by which they come to be part of the whole extensive continuum.
Negative prehensions assure that, when satisfied, the actual entity remains bonded with
the extensive continuum. They assure that its concrescence conveys unlived, unknown
and unexpressed potentials. Only in this way it is possible to conceive of concrescence
as a process that, at once, feeds off from the potentials of the extensive continuum and
feeds back into them, becoming as such a relative standpoint amidst the general
potentials of all eternal objects. Only in this way is possible to assure that, after
concrescence, negatively prehended eternal objects remain available, as general
potentials, for further concrescences. The relevance of negative prehensions “must
express some real fact of togetherness among forms. The ontological principle can be
expressed as: All real togetherness is togetherness in the formal constitution of an
actuality. So if there be a relevance of what in the temporal world is unrealized, the
relevance must express a fact of togetherness in the formal constitution of a non-
temporal actuality.” (Ibid., p. 32). In other words, actual entities must become part of the
extensive continuum via the negative prehension of eternal objects. In any actual
occasion of experience, what is not lived is as constitutive of it as what is.
It follows that algorithms must be conceived beyond the positive prehension of
data. Not only beyond expression, but more fundamentally beyond perception and
cognition. The negative prehension of eternal objects corresponds here, in digital
computation, to the prehension of data that are not computable but without which
computation cannot occur. The reason why random quantities of data are a fundamental
condition for the exercise of digital computation regards the general potentials that these
incomputabilities convey. As much as actual occasions unfold together with the
exchange of information between concrescent parts, not only do they physically prehend
the actual data available, but they also conceptually prehend the continuum's eternal
objects. In Parisi's words: “Digital algorithms do not simply compute these
incomputable algorithms (as is suggested by Chaitin’s discovery of Omega, for instance,
which as a discrete infinity appears among the innumerable number of incomputables),
but also negatively prehend the infinity of infinities that define their capacities of
prediction independently of the sequential execution of codes. These negative
230

prehensions explain that computation is not simply a form of cognition that constructs
cognitive maps as recipes for action. On the contrary, the negative prehension of infinite
incomputable algorithms leads us to conclude from the understanding of random,
patternless, or contingent data that [software is] irreducible to one overarching system
of thought qua cognition. Instead, this negative prehension reveals that there are infinite
modes of thought, involving a multiplicity of predictive capacities that correspond to
nonunified (chemical, physical, biological, digital) patterns of decision making. In order
to address the existence of these heterogeneous modes of thought, which are not always
already referable to an eternally unchangeable being, it is important to conceive of
algorithmic procedures as actualities that are defined by both physical and conceptual
prehensions. This means that the sequential order of programming is only an aspect of
computation. Yet we must bear in mind that any algorithmic execution is conditioned by
the conceptual prehension of incomputables.” (2013, p. 222).
Therefore, algorithms cannot be understood without the conceptual prehension
of incomputable quantities of data. Not only this, but inasmuch as these
incomputabilities correspond to the extensive continuum's eternal objects, they are
capable of determining any algorithm whatsoever. Because the determination of
algorithmic objects necessarily results from the conceptual prehension of undetermined
data, these general potentials cannot be understood without the extensive continuum, i.e.
without the notion that, from a multiplicity of satisfied concrescences, not only result
actual relations but also potential ones. The principle of immanence between actual
relations and potential ones can be simply understood as the positive character of the
concrescence of prehensions. Concrescence itself is creative, since it brings into
constitution novel facts of unity. Regardless of being included into or excluded from
concrescence, prehensions hold an absolutely positive value of creativity. Negative
prehensions constitute the ground against which positive prehensions are contrasted. If
this relation is considered in terms of eternal objects and actual occasions, it can be
easily understood that the concrescence of prehensions conveys both what is expressed
and what is not. As much as the abstract machine of the infinity of eternal objects moves
together with the concrescences that it energizes and by means of which it is extended,
experience exceeds consciousness, cognition, perception, and so on. Soft-thought
cannot be known as such. But it can be acknowledged to be as fundamental to
computation as the unconscious is to any other mode of thought. There's always more to
process than what meets the subject.
There is no other way to conceive of the immanence of undetermined potentials
231

in the extensive continuum's determined actuality if not through the notion of process.
In the frame of media theory, the extensive continuum has been characterized by Steve
Goodman and Luciana Parisi in terms of a “rhythmic anarchitecture”. In their words:
“To the becoming of continuity we call rhythmic anarchitecture, where anarchitecture
denotes a method of composition, which feeds off the vibratory tension between
contrasting occasions. A rhythmic anarchitecture is amodal and atemporal. Rhythm
proper, cannot be perceived purely via the five senses but is crucially transensory or
even nonsensuous. Rhythmic anarchitecture is concerned with the virtuality of quantum
vibration. It is necessary here to go beyond the quantification of vibration in physics
into primary frequencies. For us, it is rhythm as potential relation, which is key. If
rhythm defines the discontinuous vibrations of matter, then we must also ontologically
prioritize the in-between of oscillation, the vibration of vibration, the virtuality of the
tremble. The rhythmic potential that is an eternal object, cannot be reduced to its
phenomenological corporeality. The vibratory resonance between actual occasions in
their own regions of space-time occurs through the rhythmic potential of eternal objects,
which enables the participation of one entity in another. The rhythmic potential of an
eternal object exceeds the actual occasion into which it ingresses. To become, an actual
entity must be out of phase with itself.” (2009).
Not only the negative prehension of eternal objects assures the bond between
actual entities, but concrescence itself is only possible because of the extensive
continuum's indetermination. Concrescences can only occur by means of an affective
resonance of non-localized relations between actual entities. These are clearly
Simondonian terms. For, if actual entities must fall out of phase with themselves in
order to come into being, then dephasings are only possible when potentials of different
orders come to affect one another. From this perspective, the concrescence of
prehensions can be seen as a movement of transduction: it transfers principles of
individuation and amplifies them in a network of vibratory resonances. The extensive
continuum's rhythmic anarchitecture therefore regards the ingression of what cannot be
sensed into the order of the sensible and of the virtual-actual dynamisms that result from
this. From which it follows that, in the case of algorithmic objects, rhythm necessarily
pertains to the prehension of what cannot be computed into determinate algorithmic
expressions. This notion of rhythmic anarchitecture is most adequate to understand the
workings of soft-thought. The conceptual prehension of infinite quantities of random
data assures the ground on which the resonance of contrasting entities can take place. If
positive prehensions contribute to expression, negative prehensions assure the implicit
232

endurance of eternal objects amidst actual entities. Only the vibratory resonance of
affect between actual entities assures that the latter can, not only be inscribed in the
extensive continuum as local, relative and historical potentials, but also be connected to
one another by means of mereotopological relations of extension. The negative
prehension of discrete and random quantities of data relates actual entities, such as
algorithms, to one another via the extensive continuum's general potentials.
6.6 - Speculative Proposition
If the individuation of a technogenetic body requires technicity, if it requires an
excess of information transferred and amplified across the networks that it partakes,
then it also requires that these potentials, the ones of information, are not only
physically, but also conceptually prehended into individuation. Not only this, but
inasmuch as the concrescence of prehensions in individuation includes both positive and
negative prehensions, its physical and mental poles equally include that which is felt
and that which is extracted from feeling. From this important insight brought about by a
processual perspective on algorithmic computation follows that the potentials of a
technogenetic body necessarily exceed, not only the structure of individuals, but also
the feelings that individuals might capture from the experiential event of their own
individuation. The potentials of information are therefore to be acknowledged as
partaking the concrescence of prehensions not only with what is positively prehended
and thus known, but also with all the negatively prehended data that can be neither felt
nor known. The information of technical networks conveys, therefore, more than the
resolution of process. It conveys as well all the irresolutions that are insufficiently
problematic to be positively prehended.
The excessive character of information cannot be stressed enough. In what
regards technogenesis and the constitution of a technogenetic body, information is an all
pervasive and most determinant dimension. The technogenetic body cannot be
considered without the processual character of its informing resolutions. Both the
occurrence of technical transductions and the formal constitution of technical networks
are functions of information. It is by means of information that the different domains of
a technical network can communicate with one another. Information opens the
communicating domains to one same continuous field, by transducing the latter's
potentials. Once information has occurred, i.e. once it has been exchanged, its resolution
233

conserves, in the whole's structured parts, the enabling potentials of the latter's
connection. By means of information, the unknown remains immanent in the
technogenetic body, i.e. it remains immanent in the individuating system's sensitive and
cognitive capacities.
It follows that it is possible to conceive of technogenesis as a process that can be
enhanced by being opened to the unknown, that is, by the technical determination of a
series of connections that will inevitably open the system to the infinity of potentials
existing in the extensive continuum to which it belongs. As such, it is the contention of
this study that, the more connections are consciously created, the more the system will
prehend what it cannot compress and the more it will be infected by potentials that it
cannot predict. If both positive and negative prehensions condition technogenesis, it is
by maximizing the technical system's capacity to exchange information and resonate
with itself, that the unconscious forces in it implicated can be fostered and enhanced.
Since the saturation of technical connections necessarily heightens the system's self-
affectivity, it potentiates as well its tendencies towards the emergence of unpredictable
results. Hence, the proposed equation is: the more relations are actually established
between different parts of the whole, the more the extensive continuum will become,
unpredictably.
The assumption that novelty results from the ingression of undetermined
potentials into the concrescence of prehensions has been a guideline for this study. From
the beginning, especially together with Simondon's approach to technical individuation,
it has been argued that, for a transformation to occur, i.e. for a system to fall out of
phase with itself and move from one state of affairs to another, an incompatibility
between potentials needs to occur. The relation between potentials belonging to
different orders of magnitude needs to come to the critical point of an informational
exchange, i.e. to the point at which potential energy is transformed into the kind of
movement that restructures the system towards a novel state of metastability. But more
than this processual account of the relation between forces and forms, what is here
being proposed is the simple realization that, the more actual connections are built by
technical means, the more the system will tend to fall out of phase with itself. If the
generative potentials of the unconscious are in any case at work within the extensive
continuum's becoming, it is by means of technical individuation, with a special focus on
the actual complication of informational networks, that the technogenetic body can
become more than what it is, generating in this way what can be neither anticipated nor
regulated. The more information is made to open the technogenetic body to the infinity
234

of its own potentials, the more this will confuse its implicated domains. The
technogenetic body can be defined by this very heterogeneity. The more heterogeneous
it is, the more unpredictable it becomes. As such, heterogeneity is here tantamount to
the prehension of infinity. It corresponds to the vibratory activity of technogenesis'
rhythmic anarchitecture, and it is equally proportional to the individuating system's
creativity. The more heterogeneous a system becomes, the more it is capable of
overcoming the limits of its own possibilities. In sum, only because connectivity is a
determinant function of technical individuation, can the increment of connections be
said to enhance the technogenetic body's technicity. 
Whereas Simondon's theory of technical individuation conserves the split
between actuality and virtuality, still so prevalent in Bergson's theory of duration,
Whitehead's theory of extension avoids such break by affirming ideas as undetermined
but yet discrete potentials, immanent in the extensive continuum's determination. Not
only this, but it is by thinking in terms of an extensive continuum that the relation
between the virtual, the potential and the actual, so fundamental in Simondon's theory of
individuation, can be best tackled. With Whitehead's theory of extension, the continuum
is conceived in terms of relations between undetermined and determined potentials, i.e.
between actual entities and eternal objects. This notion of the extensive continuum
facilitates the connection not only between virtuality and actuality, but also between the
different domains implicated in a system of technical individuation. With this notion, it
is the very distinction between the subjects and the objects of knowledge that ceases to
exist.
Notwithstanding this turn, it should be reminded that the notion of knowledge is
deeply implicated in the notion of technical individuation. Also, because of the
difference between co-individuating subjects and objects, it is the very notion of
allagmatics that is found to be deeply implicated in technical individuation. Allagmatics,
it should be reminded, corresponds to the reciprocal and dynamic convertibility between
abstract ideas and concrete solutions. It regards the convertibility between structures and
the processes by means of which these transmit potentials between one another. In
between expression and abstraction, technical individuation progresses in a heuristic
fashion, to which experimentation is key. Allagmatics thus concerns the abstract
machine's double dynamism of content-expression encounters. The genetic past of
emergence gives birth to thoughts that, on their turn, are capable of expressing
themselves. In any case, allagmatics is said to be a theory of knowledge precisely
because it regards the dynamisms by which subjects and objects are co-constituted.
235

There is no other way to conceive of allagmatics but as a dynamism constitutive of
technical transduction. And, notwithstanding the fact that information is here conceived
as being undetermined, it is through the conceptual prehension of what cannot be
compressed into concrescence that the workings of the abstract machine in allagmatics
can be best understood. 
The abstract machine pervades the system of individuation by including in its
actuality a blind-spot: the same diagrammatic fracture in transitioning between states
that corresponds to the immanent infinity of eternal objects. In contrast to the
topological understanding of process, according to which only the virtual is continuous
as a result of the infinitesimal discontinuities of actuality, the mereotopological schema
of Whitehead's philosophy allows for conceiving the abstract machine as a
mereotopological potential, immanent in extension. The diagrammatic fracture in
transitioning between states must be conceived of as the ingression into concrescence of
what can neither be known nor felt, but which is as fundamental to resolution as what
can. The constitution of technical individuals such as algorithms, or of technical
networks such as computational machines, must therefore be conceived on the basis of
an extensive continuum from which individuation feeds off its potentials. Rather than
being conceived in accordance with a virtual-actual split, technical individuation must
be conceived as an accretion of actuality whereby determinate standpoints can emerge.
Despite the fact that subjective and objective perspectives contribute in determinate
ways with the past to future resolutions, it is by means of undetermined potentials that
such resolutions can come about. Any concrescence prehends into the emergent facts
both what it can select and what it cannot. From which it follows both the integration of
technical individuals in the extensive continuum, and the integration of the continuum
in technical individuals. The workings of the abstract machine need therefore to be
located at the level of the extensive continuum's actual indetermination. It is the
ingression of purely undetermined potentials into technical concrescences that not only
allows for novelty to occur (as a function of affection) but for it to fundamentally
condition the ways in which determinate and relative potentials can once again be
prehended. In individuation, novelty is not something that can appear, but rather
something that is always already there (appearing, so to say), even if not perceptibly. 
To say that the individuation of a technogenetic body is enhanced by actual
increments, is to assume that these increments do enhance the extensive continuum's
connectivity. Only by connecting, intensively, the extensive continuum's regions, can its
complexity be brought to perception. Complexity, novelty and infinity are all
236

designations that depict the immanent character of the abstract machine at the heart
process. They all depict an undetermined reality existing not at the end of an
infinitesimal division of space, but rather at the level of actuality itself (actual
indetermination being itself just another name for the indefinite divisibility with which
Whitehead defines the unbounded extension of the continuum). But this is not a plea to
either render the invisible visible or expand consciousness and knowledge. Rather, it is
the following proposition: in order to overcome the dictates of regulation, prediction
and control, all of which are organized solely in accordance with determinate sorts of
actuality, the unknown must be not only accepted as constitutive of developmental
processes but also as a potential to connect all that is known or knowable. There is no
other way for technical individuals to become than through the concrescence of negative
and positive prehensions. And the more data is prehended into concrescence, the more
the extensive continuum is restructured. 
It is the contention of this study that algorithmic computation can be seen as a
paradigm of technical individuation. An algorithm has all the necessary ingredients to
allow for the characteristic resumptions of technicity: it can be known, transmitted and
iterated, but not without an immanent infinity of potentials, which in themselves are not
computable. The fact that the rise of computational machines has served both the
codification and automation of technics, confirms the latter's algorithmic character. But
it confirms as well allagmatic transduction as the veritable operation of technical
progress. And this is so because the informational exchange between humans and
machines operates on the basis of both what is known and what is not. Both general and
relative potentials participate in transferring and amplifying information across scales
and domains. Both participate in the extensive continuum's rhythmic anarchitecture.
The individuation of choreographic knowledge can therefore be said to
correspond to the determination of procedures with the potential to be expressed in
different ways. This stands in accordance with the algorithmic paradigm. The examples
discussed in this study demonstrate that the algorithmic character of thought is most
suitable for the transmission of choreographic principles of individuation. In a very
literal way, algorithmic automation allows for the digital domain to express
choreographic knowledge. Hence, the diagrams of choreographic knowledge are, at
least potentially, algorithmic. Which agrees with Forsythe's comprehension of how there
are choreographic thoughts that coincide with algorithmic ones.160
160 Though a review of algorithmic strategies in the history of choreography has not been made here,
other cases beyond Forsythe's choreographic procedures can be mentioned as being paradigmatic of
237

From this standpoint, and together with the argument that algorithms are not
exclusive of digital programming, but that they rather express a specific way of
thinking, the individuation of choreographic knowledge must be granted to comprise
what is negatively prehended into concrescence. Choreographic knowledge must be
considered together with the technological milieu of its own individuation. The fact that
the cases discussed here have used digital technologies to assert choreographic
knowledge is just one example of the interdisciplinary conditions of these same
assertions. Though the interdisciplinary character of these projects has been just briefly
mentioned, this remark is enough to consider the difference in connectivity conveyed by
them in contrast to less interdisciplinary or transindividual approaches. Regardless of
the domains of abstraction and expression summoned by the projects in case, what
matters to acknowledge is the tendency that these projects demonstrated towards the
complication of process, i.e. towards the saturation of process with general and relative
potentials of connectivity. In fact, it seems evident that the larger a research project is—
i.e. the more people, technologies, time frames, geographical scales, knowledge fields,
and so on, it involves—the more complicated it gets.161 But rather than this complication
being a burden, the argument here is that it potentiates the creation of novelty in
technical individuation. It is with such complication that the individuation of knowledge
can yield unanticipated results.
The complication of process that follows from the increment of actual
connections in technical networks thus potentiates the affective prehension of both
algorithmic choreography. It is here enough to mention that it was Merce Cunningham, the American
choreographer who, from the fifties onwards, set himself to emancipate dance from all other forms of
theatrical expression (and thus to modernize it as an autonomous artistic form, where “movement is
only about movement”), that pioneered the use of algorithmic procedures to compose dance.
Cunningham’s drive to de-subjectify choreography brought him to experiment with compositional
procedures involving chance. Since chance procedures require the calculation of ideas, choreographic
composition became in this way equated with computation. This would bring Cunningham to work
with computers for the calculation of complex conditions of possibility, making him “the first
choreographer of international renown who routinely utilized the computer as a choreographic tool”
(Copeland, 2004, p. 168). But more fundamentally, what Cunningham activated when applying the
faculty of computation to the composition of dance, was the very idea of choreographic software.
When commenting upon the software-like methodologies and aesthetics of Merce Cunningham's
choreographic work, Stamatia Portanova has conflated these two terms, i.e. composition and
computation, into one: “compu-sition” (2013, pp. 97 – 132). With this term, Portanova indicates how
much the procedural character of many choreographic practices quantifies not only spatio-temporal
actualities but also of virtual infinities. Which is to say that, because choreographic compu-sition
(like any other composition) involves both determinate quantities and the immanent infinity of
random data, it can be said to be a mode of thought in its own right. After these first compu-sitional
experiments, the field of dance expanded considerably, most notably with the next generation of New
York based choreographers, such as Trisha Brown, Steve Paxton, Simone Forti, Yvonne Rainer,
Douglas Dunn and David Gordon, most of whom had danced with Cunningham.
161 The paradigmatic case being the Motion Bank project, the documentation of which, accessible at
http://motionbank.org/en/documentation, indicates the inherent complexity.
238

determined and undetermined data. It opens the system of individuation to its self-
excess and it intensifies its tendencies towards dephasing. And what remains most
acknowledgeable in regard to such increment is the intensification of affect between
different quantities of data. If negative prehensions are as determinant to concrescence
as positive ones, the increment of actual connections does not only correspond to the
increment of physical data but also to the increment of conceptual data. The more actual
connections are built into the system, the more the system will generate its own ideas
(be them known or not). From which it follows that the more connections are built into
the system, the more the system will be capable of conceptually prehend eternal objects
into the concrescent resolution of differences in potential. 
The exchange between contexts of research, fields of knowledge and processes
of technical concretization, all conveyed by the projects here discussed, stands for the
sort of ethical ground that inevitably brings forth a wider range of ideas. These projects'
digital choreographies attest this. Not only could these novel choreographies be
expressed as they were because of the networks that came to condition them, as the
eternal objects in concrescence could not have been prehended as they were if it were
not for these same networks. Which is to say that it was by reason of the information
exchanged between the different domains here at stake that a whole field of potentials
could be brought into process. And inasmuch as these potentials remain undetermined,
they can only be negatively prehended. In short, in these projects' (as in others alike)162
there were more ideas than those expressed. 
What the openness of technical networks towards different domains of thought
and expression thus conveys is the affective becoming of the extensive continuum. A
becoming partaken by both undetermined problems and determinate solutions. The
technological milieus involved in process do transmit potentials by formal means, that
is, the knowability of ideas and expressions is a condition for the transductive
transmission of what cannot be known. But, likewise, the potentials of eternal objects
are a condition for the concrescence of determinate diagrams, i.e. for the emergence of
knowable ideas and expressions. In process, neither the one nor the other can be thought
independently. The reciprocal conditioning of potentials and structures is the same as
162 Though this study has only dealt with examples that make use of digital media, similar examples that
don't could also be discussed. Some of these are: the already mentioned (see Page 18) “Mind and
Movement: Choreographic Thinking Tools”, by Wayne McGregor/Random Dance; Anne Teresa de
Keersmaeker's “A Choreographer’s Score”, edited by dance theoretician Bojana Cvejic; the
“FUNKTIONEN” toolbox, by choreographer Thomas Lehmen; the “Everybody’s Performance
Scores”, published by www.everybodystoolbox.net; and the publication series “Scores”, by
Tanzquartier Wien (http://www.tqw.at/en/scores).
239

the reciprocal and affective implication of quantities and qualities. In relation to one
another, they constitute the fundamental condition for the becoming of a rhythmic
anarchitecture. And inasmuch as rhythm is not constant, but rather subjectable to the
intensification of problems and to the constraints of extension, it is by these very means
that the continuum's becoming can generate novel knowledge and ideas that cannot be
known as such. 
These tendencies in process—intensification and constraining—are inextricable
from one another. Constraining intensifies potentials, since it creates actual differences
in the extensive continuum. In turn, the intensification that follows from constraining
can be strong enough to create disparities in the extensive continuum's potentials.
Which is the reason why adding relations to process intensifies informational resonance
and charges the extensive continuum with more potentials. In short, the more
connections in process, the more ideas in formation. The examples discussed in this
study demonstrate this. But more than this being a simple formation of determinate
instances of knowledge, it is a complex one. More than generating knowledge, these
projects intensified the extensive continuum by creating actual connections between
different domains of thought and expression. These connections constrain the
continuum's rhythmic becoming and, in this way, determine possibilities of abstraction
and expression. Additionally, they charge the continuum with ideas that cannot be
known, but which are fundamental to individuation. It is therefore by intensifying the
extensive continuum's connections that the transindividual character of knowledge is
potentiated. Only by connecting differences and intensifying disparities can
transindividual potentials individuate novel instances of knowledge and charge the
extensive continuum with the generative capacities of real but yet undetermined
relations. 
240

CONCLUSION
If seen as a map of the encounter between dance and technology, this study's
topology entails a number of entangled problems. First, there is the problem of novelty:
on which conditions can choreographic novelty occur? Second, there is the problem of
objecthood: how are choreographic objects to be understood if the conditions of novelty
necessarily implicate potentials? Third, there is the problem of potentiality: how are
potentials to be understood if the objects to which they belong are expressible in
different domains? Fourth, there is the problem of transmission: how are objects
transmitted from one domain to another and what happens there? Fifth, there if the
problem of relation: how is abstraction related to expression? Of course all these
questions can be formulated differently, and the list can also go on. But what matters
here to understand is that all these problems are implicated in one another. Precisely
because of this, the present study can be seen as diagramming the plane of composition
of the encounter between dance and technology. Framing these study's concerns with
novelty, potentiality and process with the work of process philosophers, being that such
tradition is fundamentally concerned with the relationship between continuity and
discontinuity, quantities and qualities, virtuality and actuality, can also be said to have
biased its own development. Expressing by means of writing, i.e. discontinuously, the
reality of choreographic processes, i.e. a real continuity, attests that it is itself a diagram
and that it maps the topology of the encounter between dance and technology.
If the logic of relation between problems and solutions presented before (e.g. in
Section 4.1) is to be followed, then it should be possible to synthesize at this point a
series of solutions for the problems just mentioned. Not only this, but all the remaining
hypotheses followed throughout this study should by now have acquired a determinate
degree of resolution. In order to expose such resolutions, a brief concluding summary
will be now addressed to each of the previous chapters.
Chapter One – It could be asked: “Why should an inquiry into the digital
expressions of choreographic knowledge start with ontological concerns about
movement and bodies?”. The answer has been given and is quite simple: it is not
possible to inquire into a kind of knowledge that concerns moving bodies if not by
inquiring as well into the latter's definitions. After all, specific understandings of
moving bodies necessarily condition what is to be understood by choreographic
knowledge. In this respect, it can be said that the incursion into Henry Bergson's take on
241

the theory of multiplicities has proved to be telling. Not only has movement been
argued to be more than dislocation, but also such excess has become equated with what,
in movement, is irreducible to space. As such, it has been shown that movement
necessarily implicates a temporal dimension of change, which Bergson defines as
“duration”—the elastic interval where bodies move as a whole. Such notion of whole
remained echoing throughout this study's development. Already here, it became equated
with the very infinity of potentials to which, in order to move, bodies must open. As
indicated by Gilles Deleuze, the whole of a moving body is neither given nor giveable.
It is absolutely irreducible to extension, but yet conditional to and encompassing of its
transformations. Hence, movement must be thought in terms of virtual-actual
dynamisms that express space, but not without abstracting it with the constitution of
memory. There is a most fundamental point to this: such virtual-actual dynamisms are
only assured by a constitutive principle of immanence. Such principle assures that space
and time cannot be thought without one another and that the mode of their relation is
fundamentally undetermined. Here, such indetermination has been addressed to
potentiality itself. From the perspective of Bergson's theory of duration, potentials are
more correctly seen as being virtual, rather than actual. Notwithstanding, throughout
this study, such view has been contested. If, for example, potentials are to be granted to
the digital domain, they must be actual and, somehow, compose the continuum whereby
virtuality and actuality relate, immanently, to one another. Furthermore, it matters to say
that this relation's indetermination has been also addressed in different ways throughout
the study. Most importantly, it has been conceptualized in terms of affect—the reality of
relation that, being undetermined, is irreducible to finite expressions, but that
nevertheless assures a continuous exchange between the memory of time and the
expressions of space.
With this in mind, this study proceeded with a focus on the encounter between
dance and technology. To inquire into such encounter, while considering the virtual-
actual dynamisms of movement, is to ask how the memory of time gets to be contracted
into spatial expression. Already here, the notion that the encounter between dance and
technology is in fact choreography (as this is commonly understood) started to be laid
out. To think dance technologically is to necessarily constitute instances of knowledge
that regard ways of dancing. The fact that such knowledge must, at some point of its
determination, be expressible by means of dancing, attests its transmissibility. It is a
knowledge that can be transmitted from body to body and from dancing to writing. As
such, here, the problematic concern with the virtual-actual dynamisms of movement is
242

not only a concern tantamount to how the memory of dance can be expressed, either by
means of the dancing body or by means of writing, but also a concern with how such
dynamisms unfold in the very process of choreographic transmission. The definition of
such dynamisms by a constitutive principle of immanence and, therefore, by a potential
that can create what cannot be predicted, because it is yet undermined, indicates that the
encounter between dance and technology is capable of creating novel instances of
choreographic knowledge. Such capacity is notwithstanding problematic when it comes
to consider that what can be transmitted has necessarily to be known and, therefore,
determined. If it is already determined, it cannot be new. Hence, the question posed
here: how can the encounter between dance and technology create of novel instances of
choreographic knowledge? Not new for given subjects and objects, but new in a way
that brings into constitution the very subjects and objects of novel and emergent
relations. In a sense, this first Chapter served to pose this problem. 
Chapter Two – Simondon's theory of individuation has been presented here with
the intent of explaining, on the one hand, how the virtual-actual dynamisms of
movement unfold in the case of technical systems and, on the other hand, how such
processes can be modelled towards the expression of new individuals. Though this
constituted the ground upon which the topological character of choreographic objects
has been later approached (facilitating in this way the understanding that such objects
can be expressed in infinite ways without loosing their diagrammatic character, i.e.
technicity), it can be argued that all things here said with regard to this philosophical
system have been scarcely developed. To put it more bluntly, from all the concepts
exposed, only some resulted in being fundamental to the subsequent analysis and
discourse. This is not to say that the incursion here essayed into Simondon's philosophy
is not of value. Rather the contrary. It is to say that this philosophy has such far-reaching
implications with regard to the thought of process and transindividual life that it
demands further investments. This study's focus on choreographic objects barely
indicates some possible ways of coping with this author's challenging thought. Even in
regard to the conceptualization of choreography, the outcomes here proposed can be
said to be short of what it might be possible. This study only opens the field of relations
between choreographic thought and the fundamental concerns of process philosophy.
An opening that is not exclusive. The references used here from Erin Manning's work
indicate her engagement with such relation. In this regard, she's only one amongst
several. Such interest is recent and therefore still pregnant with potentials. This study
partakes this interest and strives to contribute to the understanding of its potentials. In
243

this respect, Simondon's work stands as an inevitable reference due to its dedication to
technics. Of course other names could be summoned. For example, Martin Heidegger.
But this requires further investigations. Up to this point, what can be said in regard to
Simondon's philosophy is that it provides a unique standpoint for thinking the relation
between the different kinds of individuals involved both in the process of knowledge
making and in the process of choreographic creation. The prevalence given by
Simondon to the transductive character of thought, with its analogical mode of
individuating knowledge, seems to be fundamental to understand how choreography can
in fact be granted the status of thought. The choreographic object's irreducibility to its
abstractions and to its expressions results in the corollary that it is also, necessarily,
processual. As such, it must be approached in accordance with its potentials and seen
from the perspective of its whole movement. To say that an object moves is to say that
its very existence depends on the relation between determinate structures and
undetermined potentials. A relation that, insofar as it allows time to be inscribed in the
developmental system where it occurs, constitutes the object as the non-subjective pole
of one choreographic idea. The choreographic object is therefore the logical result of a
choreographic movement of thought. The correspondence between such movement and
technical individuation is one insight that Simondon's philosophy allows to be followed,
together with all the implications that come along with it. In sum, only by having
incurred into Simondon's work, could this study come to the point of understanding the
processual dynamisms of choreographic creation. Which amounts to saying that the
Simondonian notions of individual, information, transduction and technicity seem to be
fundamental for a definition of choreography as a movement of thought. 
Chapter Three – In order to tackle the thought of technical individuation in the
encounter between dance and technology, this Chapter set itself to inquire into the
constitution of choreographic knowledge. On the one hand, this was done by defining
choreography as system of technical individuation capable of constituting both the
subjects and the objects of knowledge. On the other hand, it was done by specifying
such definition with the example of one of William Forsythe's “Improvisation
Technologies”. It was shown how choreographic creation is the sort of technical
individuation that necessarily composes networks of informational exchange between
dancing bodies and writing technologies. The difference between such elements of a
network has been argued to be conditional for the creation of novel instances of
choreographic knowledge. It is the asymmetry between dancing and writing that assures
the necessary potentials for a choreographic system to become problematic and, with
244

this, resolve itself into novel expressions. Here, whereas writing has been equated with
spatiotemporal structures, dancing has been equated with the movement that pervades
them. Of course this is a somewhat loose distinction, which should be further explored.
Notwithstanding, such distinction sufficed to assert that, in this way, choreographic
writing can be understood as the creation of invariant functions of expression.
Regardless of being abstract or concrete, such functions assure the choreographic
system's continuity, i.e. they assure that the system's structures endure throughout
transitions between domains of individuation. Because of this, choreography—the
writing of dance—has been defined as the choreotechnical formation of mnemonic
structures capable of enduring throughout the many processes of their own
transmission. Such invariant functions have been defined both in terms of potentiality
and in terms of rhythm. They regard the kinds of problems that, in potential, can be
posed to choreographic individuation. They regard the continuity of potentials that,
while connecting abstractions to expressions, is capable of transferring one same
problematic structure across different domains. Such structure is problematic because it
necessarily relates an idea with determinate conditions of individuation. The problem is
therefore always a difference between abstract potentials and concrete possibilities. On
the other hand, positing choreographic problems necessarily occurs by means of a
rhythmic differentiation of potentials and possibilities, which has been designated as
nexus. Such nexus corresponds to the problematic structure of one choreography's
invariant functions. Its expressions are always singular but, insofar as they are related to
one another by a continuity of potentials, they have in common the same kind of
problems. Hence, the different expressions of one same choreography correspond to
different resolutions of one same problematic structure. 
Defining this structure as “a model of potential transition from one state to
another in any space imaginable”, as William Forsythe has, and acknowledging that
such model only acquires a degree of determination when in relation to concrete
conditions of individuation, has led this study to define the choreographic object in
tripartite but entangled terms: its problematic structure is capable of eliciting technical
action; this does not occur without an emphasis on the affective intermodality of the
senses; such synaesthetic indetermination is modulated by the technical act, necessarily
in accordance with a general set of parametric constraints. The case here discussed of
one of Forsythe's “Improvisation Technologies” has served to confirm the choreographic
object's topological character. In regard to the object's characteristics, such topology is
to be understood as the very continuity of potentials that, depending on the domain of
245

individuation, will express itself differently. The multimodal expression of each of the
“Improvisation Technologies” attests precisely this: it attests that one same
choreographic object can express itself in different ways, all conveying the structure of
its own potentials, a structure which is generically defined by determinate margins of
indetermination (i.e. parameters). Such multimodal expression attests as well the other
two aspects of the choreographic object: when its different expressions are juxtaposed,
its parametric structure becomes explicitly defined as what, between them, does not
change; the fact that such definition results from the different expressions' relationship
attests that it is precisely by means of relating the different modalities of sense that the
choreographic nexus becomes better perceived. In this respect, the most clear example
of a choreographic act given till this point regards the act of reading, i.e. it regards the
learning subject's capacity to perceive a nexus of movements in an assemblage of signs.
The capacity of choreography's multimodal expressions to elicit such perception has
been here formulated in the following way: the concurrence of different nexuses defines
a common structure, which is the structure of the very choreographic object to which
they belong.
Such structure has been argued to be diagrammatic. Choreographic diagrams are
structures with the potential to connect to other structures and form networks with
particular nexuses of movement. They are topological planes that necessarily become
problematic when related to concrete conditions of individuation. To say that the
difference between potentials and possibilities is structured diagrammatically means
that each choreographic problem necessarily bears with it the mark of the object to
which it belongs. Since such mark is primarily defined by the object’s diagram, it has
been argued to corresponds to the object's generic idea, which becomes ever singular
when in resolution of its problematic relation with determinate domains of
individuation. For this reason, it has been contended that the problematic difference of
choreographic individuation necessarily corresponds to singular iterations of a given
object's generic idea. From which three conclusions followed: 1) the choreographic
object is an idea that, because it pertains to a nexus of movements, is potentially
problematic and therefore capable of expressing itself in different ways; 2) the
choreographic object can only express itself in different ways by transferring its
problematic potentials across domains by means of transduction; 3) the choreographic
object is irreducible both to abstraction and to expression and, as such, most aptly seen
as a process in itself.
Chapter Four – If the choreographic object can elicit technical transductions,
246

then it is propositional. Such equation has been here argued by drawing from Gilles
Deleuze's theory of ideas, which also allowed for defining the object's diagrammatic
character with three distinct phases: it is formless, subjective and expressive. The
formless diagram of choreography corresponds to the unconscious of process. It regards
the very continuum through which what cannot be known relates itself to potentials that,
even if argued to be actual, are nonetheless undetermined. Inasmuch as choreographic
transduction individuates instances of knowledge, the formless diagram of a
problematic idea is the continuity that assures the many resolutions' connection. As
such, it assures as well the connection between subjective and expressive diagrams. The
choreotechnical act necessarily co-relates these two diagrams: it determines them as the
subjective and objective poles of one epistemological relation. Whereas the subjective
diagram corresponds to the idea's conceptual determination, the expressive diagram
objectifies it in extension. This led this study to consider the means by which diagrams
can be expressed and to explore how both the abstract diagram of potentials and the
subjective diagram of concepts participate in such process. This allowed for making the
case that, because choreographic transduction necessarily intertwines, in a dynamic and
affective manner, the diagram's three phases (which, as argued in Chapter 2, are
necessarily contemporary to one another), there is always in this process an implicated
potential to express unpredictable and therefore novel facts. In short, only because there
is an unconscious and undetermined potential in process, can this express novelty. The
choreographic object's propositional character is therefore related with the potentials
that it always implicates, regardless of its phase. Nevertheless, it is only by being
determined that the object can in fact become propositional. For the choreographic
proposition elicits the feeling of a contrast that necessarily corresponds to the object's
differential topology. Since such feeling is charged with potentials, it can serve the
resolution of their differences into novel determinations. 
This study proceeded by discussing Emio Greco and Pieter Scholten's “Double
Skin/DoubleMind” choreographic object, not only to look upon its propositional
character, but also to exemplify how such dynamic diagrammatism partakes
choreographic transduction. Out of this, it was realized that, insofar as the digital
domain is coded, it is the object's conceptual diagram that assures its nexus' preservation
across expressions. This has to do with the fact that the knowledge transduced from
dancing to writing is necessarily conceptual. Of course dance can be said to implicate
many other kinds of knowledge, such as all those pertaining to kinetic automatisms. But
it is the very conceptualization of the dancing body that allows choreography to be
247

expressed by means other than dance (as argued by Forsythe, in Chapter 3).
Additionally, it has to do with the fact that the digital domain is itself conceptually
structured. As such, it requires that what is not discrete and quantifiable becomes so. If
there is a logic in expressing this one choreographic object by digital means, it is
precisely that of dealing with the problems implicated in such transduction. Such
problems necessarily regard the difference between what is continuous in experience
and what is discontinuous in expression. Here, choreography's characteristic problem of
the difference between dancing and writing has been specified with a difference
between the qualities of the dancing body and the quantities of digital media. Such
problem was resolved both with the conceptual structuration of media objects (i.e.
videos, scores and texts) and with the digital programming of algorithms meant to
represent the dancing body's movement qualities. This latter case was discussed only in
the following Chapter. What matters here to retain is that the different matters of content
used to represent in the digital domain this one choreographic object, had to be
subjected to the dictates of a conceptual structure, without which the object's nexus
could not be expressed in such a definite manner. As with the case of Forsythe's
“Improvisation Technologies”, such conceptual structure acts as a function of expression
and assures that the different matters of content are related to one another according to
the choreographic nexus that it represents. 
Chapter Five – In order to tackle the relationship between quantities and
qualities, this Chapter analyzed a series of cases that, in contrast to the ones previously
discussed, convey choreographic functions of expression by means of digital
algorithms. Instead of expressing just one case of solution, such algorithms are
programmed to compute datasets (i.e. matters of content) and iterate the resolution of
the choreographic problems defining them. Each series of iterations corresponds
therefore to the expression of a choreographic nexus that can only be said to be so if
digital algorithms are granted to implicate potentials. Such notion of a digital potential
is tantamount to the problem of the relation between quantities and qualities. For if, till
this point in the study, potentials had been only thought in terms of continuous
multiplicities, the notion of a digital potential requires that the discrete quantities of
digital data are related, at the very level of computation, with undetermined potentials. A
thorough tentative for resolving this problem was made in Chapter 6.
Chapter 5 resulted in a distinction between the dancing body and its written
representations, in terms of gesture. Since most of these algorithms were programmed
to structure videographic data and compute representations of the dancing body, such
248

representations were said to correspond to determinate definitions of gesture used to
define the algorithms themselves. The parametric structure of such algorithms
represents therefore the very structure of the concept of gesture used to programmed
them. From which it follows that the distinction between the dancing body and its
written representations—here designated as gestural body—is also a distinction between
qualities and quantities, i.e. a difference between the continuity of qualitative potentials
and the discontinuity of quantitative possibilities. Here again, such distinction
corresponds to the fact that, for choreo-knowledge to be transmitted, it needs to be not
only determined, but also conceptually structured. Only the conceptualization of choreo-
knowledge allows for its expression in the form of gestures and, as such, in linguistic
forms. It is precisely because dance's conceptual structures are resumable across
domains that choreographic objects can be said to be algorithmic. They are algorithmic
with regard to the diagram of their own ideas. As shown, in the cases in question, the
digital representations of gesture have been expressed by parametric descriptors that
serve the computation of many cases of solution for one same choreographic problem.
Such gestural bodies are therefore fundamentally different from dancing bodies because
they express choreography's determination in the form of discrete quantities of digital
data. As already argued and confirmed here, it is this very difference that allows for
choreographic transduction to individuate novel instances of knowledge and, in this
case, for gesture's conceptual structure to be digitally expressed. The fact that such
determination is here used to compute, iteratively, the content-expression encounter
constitutive of writing, attests both such algorithms' dynamic character and the fact that
their expressions correspond to the many possibilities of the encounter's set. The limits
of possibility of gesture's parametric structure are the limits of what can come to be
known by digital means in regard to choreographic ideas. Notwithstanding, designating
such algorithms as metaphors entails the notion that their possibility space is open to
undetermined potentials. These potentials belong to the choreographic environments
where such algorithms are embedded. But they also correspond to the hypothesis that,
beyond possibility, computation can create novel and unpredictable expressions. Once
more, this is the problem of a digital potential, which in this Chapter was just indicated
to belong to algorithmic computation.
Chapter Six – From this standpoint, this study's final chapter set itself off to
pursue the notion of a digital potential and, with this, to open the scope of the varieties
of thought present in choreographic creation. What here seems to be most clear is that,
despite the digital having been defined as being exclusively possibilistic, computation
249

cannot synthesize all digital data into countable quantities. Which is to say that, even
when considering the digital domain in terms of discrete quantities of data, it must be
granted that computation cannot structure all such data and that, therefore, it remains
under the influence of a certain degree of indetermination. As such, in computation
itself, there must exist incomputabilities. 
The implications of such realization are far-reaching. For, if indetermination can
be understood as being quantitative and discrete, then the very notion of a qualitative
potential becomes compromised. In fact, from such conclusion, it is the very split
between virtuality and actuality that must be reconsidered. What resulted from this
chapter's incursions both into Chaitin's theory of algorithmic complexity and into
Whitehead's theory of extension, was the realization that virtuality can be thought in
quantitative terms, rather than only in qualitative ones. In this sense, potentiality
corresponds to random quantities of data that exist together with determined ones by
means of a rhythmic anarchitecture of extension. Despite the notion of rhythmic
anarchitecture having not been here extensively discussed, it sufficed to conceptualize
Whitehead's extensive continuum in terms of an immanent and rhythmic relation
between undetermined and determined quantities of data. In fact, this seems to be the
link missed by this study from the beginning. The relation between quantities and
qualities that to this point remained associated with a relation between continuous
potentials and discontinuous possibilities, is here, with the notion of the extensive
continuum's rhythmic anarchitecture, reformulated both in terms of quantitative
qualities and in terms of qualitative quantities. Such terms result from the understanding
that virtuality is, in fact, actual. As such, it corresponds to the general potential that
random quantities of data implicated in extension have to partake individuation and, in
this way, infect the resolution of processual problems with what cannot be anticipated
(because it cannot be known). In a sense, the notion that the virtual is continuous and
the actual discontinuous is here reformulated with the notion that they are both the one
and the other. The general potentials of virtuality are discrete because they belong to the
indetermination of actual data. And the relative possibilities of actuality are as well
discrete because they correspond to what is in fact determinate. To say that both virtual
and actual quantities of data are related to one another by means of an extensive
continuum is to say that, in spite of being discrete, they are related to one another by the
affective resonance that they have with one another when partaking the same
individuations. In this sense, all is extensively discrete but, nonetheless, affectively
continuous.
250

Such notion of affect in the extensive continuum has been here conceptualized in
terms of prehension. In fact, it was such notion that allowed for the understanding of
digital computation in terms of process. For if the digital domain is pervaded by random
and incomputable quantities of data, then it is the affective prehension of data in process
(i.e. concrescence) that allows it to be creative. To look upon digital algorithms in this
way is to define them as prehensions of data that are both physical and conceptual. They
are physical because they correspond to computations of concrete data (i.e. computation
is expressive). They are conceptual, not only because the content-expression encounter
constitutive of digital writing implicates the ideas programmed, but also and primarily
because they are infected by random quantities of data, which are their very condition,
but which they cannot synthetically express. Ultimately, and according to Whitehead's
notion of eternal objects, the ideas implicated in digital algorithms necessarily
correspond to the random quantities of digital data. As such, in digital computation, it is
the conceptual prehension of data that allows for algorithms to comprehend ideas and,
therefore, explicate the resolution of their problematic potentials. In this way, digital
algorithms can, not only convey their programmed ideas, but also convey new ideas (as
the very result of digital computation). Together with Luciana Parisi's notion of soft
thought, the conceptual capacity of digital computation has been here argued to be a
mode of thought in its own right. One that coincides with the rhythm of affect in the
extensive continuum's becoming. 
From this standpoint, choreography's technogenetic capacities were defined in
terms of a heterogeneous multiplicity of parts related to one another by means of
extension, which for this very reason allow different modalities of thought (i.e.
conceptual prehensions of infinity) to co-occur. Finally, this study came to propose the
following: the more connections are created, constrained and intensified, the more the
technical system will become problematic and, with its networked potentials, tend to
individuate novelty. In this regard, it should be noted that the digital milieu is most apt
to prompt technical novelty for the simple reason that its machines, due to their
computational capacity, can create magnitudes of connectivity that only have a parallel
in the biosphere. As such, because of its increasing reticularity, the noosphere can be
expected to become more and more unpredictable.
From this study's central arguments (i.e. that the encounter between dance and
technology is choreography itself, that choreography can be creative only on the
condition of a constitutive indetermination of potentials, and that the choreographic
expression of such potentials is necessarily diagrammatic and algorithmic) a concluding
251

remark can now be made: Choreography is undergoing a veritable revolution. It is
emancipating itself from traditional notions of dance and becoming something more.
Most importantly, such mobilization of potentials affirms choreography itself as mode
of thought. More than yielding this or that expressive and revolutionary result,
choreography's potentials are its strongest force, especially when on the move. They
move ideas that only choreography can convey and, in this way, change its modes of
existence within the all encompassing transindividuation that we all are currently living.
Choreography is becoming, and we are becoming with it: we are becoming
choreographic. If there is anything that can follow from this study, it is the thought of
choreography in parallel to its developments as a mode of thought. Concretely, this can
regard any domain whatsoever. It can follow choreography into the domain of art, it can
follow it into the social domain, and it can follow it still into the domain of machines
(especially in what regards the increasing complexification their networks).
Notwithstanding, all such possibilities share one horizon: to not only accompany
choreography's developments, but to also contribute to its expansion.
252

LIST OF REFERENCES
Alaoui, S. F. (2012). Analyse du geste dansé et retours visuels par modèles physiques :
apport des qualités de mouvement à l’interaction avec le corps entier.
Université Paris Sud – Paris XI.
Andereck, M. (2009). Video Abstraction Tool / Process Catalog. http://synchronousobje
cts.osu.edu/content.html#/VideoAbstractionTool.
Arbeau, T. (1925). Orchesography: a treatise in the form of a dialogue whereby all
manner of persons may easily acquire and practice the honourable exercise of
dancing. New York: Dance Horizons.
Aristotle. (1931). De Anima. In J. A. Smith (Trans.), The Works of Aristotle (W. D.
Ross, Vol. III). Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Aristotle. (1999). Physics. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Austin, J. L. (1975). How to Do Things with Words. Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard
University Press.
Bastien, M. (2007). Notation-in-Progress. In S. Delahunta (Ed.), (Capturing Intention):
Documentation, Analysis and Notation Research Based on the Work of Emio
Greco/PC. Emio Greco/PC and AHK/Lectoraat, 48–55.
Baxmann, I. (2007). The Body as Archive. In Knowledge in Motion: Perspectives of
Artistic and Scientific Research in Dance (pp. 207–216). Berlin: Tanz Scripte.
Benjamin, W. (2008). The work of art in the age of its technological reproducibility, and
other writings on media. Cambridge, Massachusetts: Belknap Press of Harvard
University Press.
Bergson, H. (1944). Creative Evolution. New York: The Modern Library.
Bergson, H. (2001). Time and Free Will: An Essay on the Immediate Data of
Consciousness. Mineola, NY: Dover Publications.
Bergson, H. (2002). Henri Bergson: Key Writings. London: Continuum.
Bergson, H. (2007). The Creative Mind: An Introduction to Metaphysics. Mineola, NY:
Dover Publications.
Berlinski, D. (2001). The Advent of the Algorithm: The 300-Year Journey from an Idea
to the Computer. New York: Harcourt.
Bermúdez, B. (2007). Butoh-Kaden: a notation system for Butoh-Fu. In S. Delahunta
(Ed.), (Capturing Intention): Documentation, Analysis and Notation Research
Based on the Work of Emio Greco/PC. Emio Greco/PC and AHK/Lectoraat, 58–
61.
Bevilacqua, F. (2007). Momentary notes on capturing gestures. In S. Delahunta (Ed.),
(Capturing Intention): Documentation, Analysis and Notation Research Based
on the Work of Emio Greco/PC. Emio Greco/PC and AHK/Lectoraat, 26 – 31.
Bevilacqua, F., Zamborlin, B., Sypniewski, A., Schnell, N., Guédy, F., &
Rasamimanana, N. (2010). Continuous realtime gesture following and
recognition. In Gesture in embodied communication and human-computer
interaction. Springer, 73–84.
Birringer, J. (2013). What score? Pre-choreography and post-choreography.
253

International Journal of Performance Arts & Digital Media, 9(1), 7–13. 
Birringer, J. H. (1998). Media & Performance: Along the Border. Baltimore, Maryland:
Johns Hopkins University Press.
Bolter, J. D., & Grusin, R. (1998). Remediation: Understanding New Media. 
Cambridge, Massachussets: MIT Press. 
Burt, R. (2004). Undoing postmodern dance history. Brussels: Sarma. 
Campen, C. van. (2010). The Hidden Sense: Synesthesia in Art and Science. Cambridge,
Massachusetts: MIT Press.
Chaitin, G. (2005). Meta Math!: The Quest for Omega. New York, NY: Pantheon.
Chaitin, G. J. (2001). Exploring RANDOMNESS. New York, NY: Springer.
Clark, A. (1998). Being there: Putting brain, body, and world together again.
Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press.
Clark, A. (2003). Natural-born cyborgs: Minds, technologies, and the future of human
intelligence. Oxford: Oxford University Press, USA.
Clark, A. (2008). Supersizing the mind: Embodiment, action, and cognitive extension.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Combes, M. (2013). Gilbert Simondon and the philosophy of the transindividual.
Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press.
Copeland, R. (2004). Merce Cunningham and the Modernizing of Modern Dance.
Routledge.
Crutzen, C., & Kotkamp, E. (2008). Object Orientation. In M. Fuller (Ed.), Software
Studies: A Lexicon (pp. 200–220). Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press.
Delahunta, S. (2003). Open Source Choreography? In Code: The Language of Our
Time. Katalog zur Ars Electronica 2003 (pp. 304–310). Ostfildern: Hatje Cantz.
Delahunta, S. (2006). Co-descriptions and Collaborative Composition. Presented at the
Opening presentation at Choreographic Computations (a NIME06/IRCAM
workshop), Paris.
Delahunta, S. (Ed.). (2007a). (Capturing Intention): Documentation, Analysis and
Notation Research Based on the Work of Emio Greco. PC. Emio Greco | PC and
Amsterdamse Hogeschool voor de Kunsten.
Delahunta, S. (2007b). The body has to be clear and the words have to be right. In S.
Delahunta (Ed.), (Capturing Intention): Documentation, Analysis and Notation
Research Based on the Work of Emio Greco/PC. Emio Greco/PC and
AHK/Lectoraat, 5–9.
Delahunta, S. (2007c). The moment to question... Double Skin | Double Mind. In S.
Delahunta (Ed.), (Capturing Intention): Documentation, Analysis and Notation
Research Based on the Work of Emio Greco/PC. Emio Greco/PC and
AHK/Lectoraat, 58–61.
Delanda, M. (2000). Deleuze, diagrams, and the genesis of form.
Amerikastudien/American Studies, 45(1), 33–41.
DeLanda, M. (2011). Philosophy and Simulation: The Emergence of Synthetic Reason.
London: Continuum.
Deleuze, G. (1986). Cinema 1: the movement-image. Minneapolis, MN: University of
Minnesota Press.
254

Deleuze, G. (1988a). Bergsonism. Cambridge, Massachusetts: Zone Books.
Deleuze, G. (1988b). Foucault. Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press.
Deleuze, G. (1993). The Fold: Leibniz and the Baroque. (T. Conley, Trans.). London:
Continuum.
Deleuze, G. (1994). Difference and repetition. Columbia University Press.
Deleuze, G., & Guattari, F. (1987). A thousand plateaus: capitalism and schizophrenia.
Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press.
Derrida, J. (1973). Speech and Phenomena, and Other Essays on Husserl’s Theory of
Signs. Illinois, IL: Northwestern University Press.
Derrida, J. (1976). Of grammatology. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press.
Derrida, J. (1978). The theater of cruelty and the closure of representation. Theater,
9(3), 6–19.
Derrida, J. (1982). Margins of Philosophy.  Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Doruff, S. (2006). The Translocal Event and the Polyrhythmic Diagram. Central Saint
Martins College of Art & Design, University of the Arts, London.
Elo, M. (2012). Digital finger: beyond phenomenological figures of touch. Journal of
AESTHETICS & CULTURE, 4(0).
Fernandes, C., & Bermudez, B. (2010). Inventing the interactive glossary: an approach
to documenting contemporary dance. Notation: Special Issue of RTRSRCH
Journal, 2(2), 29 – 31.
Feuillet, Raoul Auger (1968). Choréographie: Ou l’art de décrire la danse, New York: 
Broude Bros. 
Forsythe, W. (2008). William Forsythe: Suspense . New York, NY: Distributed Art Pub
Incorporated.
Forsythe, W. (2012). William Forsythe: Improvisation Technologies A Tool for the
Analytical Dance Eye. Karlsruhe, Ostfildern: ZKM/Hatje Cantz Verlag.
Forsythe, W., Shaw, N. Z., & Palazzi, M. (2009). The Dance, The Data, The Objects.
http://synchronousobjects.osu.edu/assets/objects/introduction/danceDataObjectE
ssays.pdf
Foucault, M. (2007). Archaeology of knowledge. London: Routledge.
Foucault, M. (2012a). Discipline & Punish: The Birth of the Prison. New York, NY:
Knopf Doubleday Publishing Group.
Foucault, M. (2012b). The History of Sexuality: An Introduction. New York, NY: Knopf
Doubleday Publishing Group.
Fuller, M. (2005). Media Ecologies: Materialist Energies In Art And Technoculture.
Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press.
Fuller, M. (Ed.). (2008). Software Studies: A Lexicon. Cambridge, Massachusetts:
Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press.
Gallagher, S. (2005). How the Body Shapes the Mind. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Garelick, R. K. (2007). Electric Salome: Loie Fuller’s Performance of Modernism.
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Gil, J. (2001). Movimento Total, O Corpo e a Dança. Lisboa: Relógio d’Água.
255

Goffey, A. (2008). Algorithm. In M. Fuller (Ed.), Software Studies: A Lexicon.
Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press.
Guattari, F. (1995). Chaosmosis: An Ethico-aesthetic Paradigm. Bloomington, IN:
Indiana University Press.
Guattari, F. (2012). Schizoanalytic cartographies. New York: Bloomsbury.
Guest, A. H. (1977). Labanotation: Or, Kinetography Laban : the System of Analyzing
and Recording Movement. London: Taylor & Francis.
Harman, D. U. P. of P. G., & Harman, G. (2011). The Quadruple Object. Lanham, MD:
National Book Network.
Harman, G. (2002). Tool-being: Heidegger and the metaphyics of objects. Chicago:
Open Court.
Harman, G. (2005). Guerrilla metaphysics: phenomenology and the carpentry of things.
Chicago: Open Court.
Harman, G. (2009). Prince of networks: Bruno Latour and metaphysics. Prahran,
Victoria: Re.press.
Hayles, N. K. (2008). How We Became Posthuman: Virtual Bodies in Cybernetics,
Literature, and Informatics.  Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Heijenoort, J. V. (1967). From Frege to Gödel: A Source Book in Mathematical Logic,
1879-1931. Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press.
Heller-Roazen, D. (2007). The inner touch: archaeology of a sensation. Cambridge,
Massachusetts: Zone Books.
Herken, R. (1995). The Universal Turing Machine: A Half-Century Survey. Vienna:
Springer.
Husserl, E. (1960). Cartesian Meditations: An Introduction to Phenomenology. (D.
Cairns, Trans.). Leiden: Martinus Nijhoff Publishers.
Husserl, E. (2013). Logical Investigations. London: Routledge.
Hutchins, E. (1995a). Cognition in the Wild. Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press.
Hutchins, E. (1995b). How a cockpit remembers its speeds. Cognitive Science, 19(3),
265–288.
Johnson, M. (1987). The Body in the Mind: The Bodily Basis of Meaning, Imagination,
and Reason. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Johnson, M. (2012). The Meaning of the Body: Aesthetics of Human Understanding.
Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Jones, A., & Heathfield, A. (2012). Perform, Repeat, Record: Live Art in History.
Bristol: Intellect Books.
Khoshelham, K., & Elberink, S. O. (2012). Accuracy and Resolution of Kinect Depth
Data for Indoor Mapping Applications. Sensors, 12(12), 1437–1454.
Klingenbeck, F. (1990). What Should one Write Down and What not. In V. Preston-
Dunlop & S. Lahusen (Eds.), Schriftanz – A View of German Dance in the
Weimar Republic. London: Dance Books.
Knoespel, K. J. (2002). Diagrammatic Transformation of Architectural Space.
PHILOSOPHICA-GENT, (70), 11–36.
Laban, R. von. (1956). Principles of dance and movement notation: With 114 basic
256

movement graphs and their explanation. Macdonald & Evans.
Lakoff, G. (2006). Conceptual metaphor. Cognitive Linguistics: Basic Readings. Berlin:
Mounton de Gruyter, 185–238.
Lakoff, G., & Johnson, M. (1980). Metaphors We Live By. Chicago, IL: University of
Chicago Press.
Lakoff, G., & Núñez, R. E. (2000). Where Mathematics Comes from: How the
Embodied Mind Brings Mathematics Into Being. New York, NY: Basic Books.
LaMarre, T. (2012). Humans and Machines. Inflections, 5, 29–67.
Latour, B. (1996). On actor-network theory. Soziale Welt, 47(4), 369–381.
Lehoux, N. (2013). Dance literacy and digital media: Negotiating past, present and
future representations of movement. International Journal of Performance Arts
& Digital Media, 9(1), 153–174.
Lepecki, A. (2004). Inscribing Dance. In A. Lepecki (Ed.), Of the presence of the body:
Essays on dance and performance theory. Middletown, CT: Wesleyan
University Press, 124–139. 
Lepecki, A. (2007). Choreography as Apparatus of Capture. The Drama Review, 51(2),
119–123.
Lepecki, A. (2010). The Body as Archive: Will to Re-Enact and the Afterlives of
Dances. Dance Research Journal, 42(2), 29.
Lingis, A. (1993). Bodies that Touch Us. Thesis Eleven, 36(1), 159–167. 
MacKenzie, A. (2002). Transductions: Bodies and Machines at Speed. London:
Continuum.
Manning, E. (2009). Relationscapes movement, art, philosophy. Cambridge,
Massachusetts: MIT Press.
Manning, E. (2013). Always More Than One: Individuation’s Dance. Durham, NC:
Duke University Press.
Martinet, A. (1984). Double articulation as a criterion of linguisticity. Language
Sciences, 6(1), 31–38.
Massumi, B. (1992). A user’s guide to capitalism and schizophrenia: derivations from
Deleuze and Guattari. Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press.
Massumi, B. (2002). Parables for the Virtual: Movement, Affect, Sensation. Durham,
NC: Duke University Press.
Maturana, H. R. (1975). The organization of the living: a theory of the living
organization. International Journal of Man-Machine Studies, 7(3), 313–332.
Noë, A. (2004). Action in Perception. Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press.
Parisi, L. (2013). Contagious Architecture: Computation, Aesthetics, and Space.
Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press.
Parisi, L., & Goodman, S. (2009). Extensive Continuum – Towards a Rhythmic
Anarchitecture. Inflexions. A Journal for Research Creation, (2).
Peirce, C. S. (1895). Manuscripts on Existential Graphs (Vol. CP 2.279).
Peirce, C. S. (1998). The Essential Peirce: Selected Philosophical Writings.
Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press.
257

Phelan, P. (1993). Unmarked the politics of performance. London: Routledge.
Portanova, S. (2013). Moving without a body: digital philosophy and choreographic
thought. Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press.
Rancière, J. (2004). The Politics of Aesthetics. London: Continuum.
Rancière, J. (2010). Dissensus on politics and aesthetics. London: Continuum.
Riemann, B. (1873). On the Hypotheses which Lie at the Bases of Geometry. Nature,
3(183, 184), 14–17, 36, 37.
Sabisch, P. (2011). Choreographing Relations. Practical Philosophy and Contemporary
Choreography. München: epodium.
Schechner, R. (2011). Between Theatre and Anthropology. Philadelphia, PA: University
of Pennsylvania Press.
Schneider, R. (2001). Archives: Performance Remains. Performance Research, 6(2),
100–108.
Schneider, R. (2011). Performing remains: art and war in times of theatrical
reenactment. London: Routledge.
Shaw, N. Z. (2009). Video Abstraction Tool / Process Catalog. http://synchronousobject
s.osu.edu/content.html#/VideoAbstractionTool.
Simondon, G. (1958). Psycho-sociologie de la technicité. Bulletin de l’Ecole Pratique
de Psychologie et de Pédagogie de Lyon.
Simondon, G. (1969). Du mode d’existence des objets techniques. Paris: Aubier-
Montaigne.
Simondon, G. (1992). The genesis of the individual.  Incorporations, 6, 296–319. 
Simondon, G. (1995). L’individu et sa genèse physico-biologique. Bernin: Editions
Jérôme Millon.
Simondon, G. (2005). L’individuation à la lumière des notions de forme et
d’information. Bernin: Editions Jérôme Millon.
Simondon, G. (2006a). Cours sur la Perception. Chatou: Editions de la Transparence.
Simondon, G. (2006b). L’Invention dans les techniques. Paris: Seuil.
Simondon, G. (2009). The position of the problem of ontogenesis. Parrhesia, 7, 4–16.
Smith, B. (1996). Mereotopology: A theory of parts and boundaries. Data & Knowledge
Engineering, 20(3), 287–303.
Stengers, I. (2011). Thinking with Whitehead: a free and wild creation of concepts.
Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press.
Stiegler, B. (1998). Technics and time: the fault of Epimetheus. Redwood, CA: Stanford
University Press.
Taylor, D. (2003). The Archive and the Repertoire: Performing Cultural Memory in the
Americas. Durham, NC: Duke University Press.
Valverde, I. C. (2004). Interfacing Dance and Technology: A Theoretical Framework
for Performance in the Digital Domain. University of California, Riverside.
Van Imschoot, M. (2005). Rests in Pieces: On Scores, Notation and the Trace in Dance.
Multitudes, 2(21), 107–116.
Varela, F. J., Rosch, E., & Thompson, E. (1992). The embodied mind: Cognitive science
258

and human experience. Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT press.
Watson, J. (2011). Guattari’s Diagrammatic Thought: Writing Between Lacan and
Deleuze.  London: Continuum.
Weisstein, E. W. (2002). Algorithm. http://mathworld.wolfram.com/Algorithm.html
Whitehead, A. N. (1961). The Interpretation of Science, Selected Essays. (Johnson, A.
H., Ed.). Indianapolis, New York: The Bobbs-Merrill Company, Inc.
Whitehead, A. N. (1978). Process and reality: an essay in cosmology : Gifford Lectures
delivered in the University of Edinburgh during the session 1927-28. New York:
The Free Press.
Wiener, N. (1965). Cybernetics Or Control and Communication in the Animal and the
Machine. Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press.
Zizek, S. (2014). Event: A Philosophical Journey Through A Concept. Brooklyn, NY:
Melville House.
259

LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS
Illustration 1: 
“Improvisation Technologies' Dropping Curves”..............................105
Illustration 2: 
“Double Skin | Double Mind” DVD-ROM Structure.........................129
Illustration 3: 
“Double Skin | Double Mind” DVD-ROM GUI................................130
Illustration 4: 
“Gesture Follower” Diagrams............................................................155
Illustration 5: 
“Double Skin | Double Mind” Interactive Installation.......................159
Illustration 6: 
“Video Abstraction Tool”....................................................................164
Illustration 7: 
“Synchronous Objects” Graphic Score...............................................166
Illustration 8: 
One Flat Thing, Reproduced” Cueing System...................................167
Illustration 9: 
“Cue Visualizer Tool” GUI.................................................................168
Illustration 10: “No Time to Fly” Overlaid Paths........................................................169
Illustration 11: “No Time to Fly” Digital Adaption.....................................................169
Illustration 12: “Piecemaker” GUI and the “Performers” of “Seven Duets”.............172
Illustration 13: “Interactive Attentive Agent”.............................................................174
Illustration 14: “Reactor for Awareness in Motion”...................................................177
Illustration 15: “RAM Dance Toolkit” Animation.......................................................178
260

