1 
Abs
We 
onto
con
(BF
dev
and 
(con
We 
repr
type
such
1. Th
1.1 
In the w
been tra
1 With a
Ontolog
Costa, P
Simons.
the NIH
Ontolog
CLASSI
stract 
begin by de
ology, focus
sistent repre
FO), a top-le
elopment o
medicine. B
ntinuant) an
examine ho
resentation 
es, and we o
h processes 
e Backgr
Applied O
wake of the 
ansformed i
acknowledge
gy since its in
Pierre Grenon
 The work o
H Roadmap f
gy). 
IFYING PR
Pr
escribing re
sing especia
esentation o
evel ontolog
f lower leve
BFO is a bi
nd four-dime
ow BFO-co
of scientific
outline on th
within the 
round of A
Ontologies 
successful s
into a discip
ements to al
nception, an
n, Ingvar Joh
on this paper
for Medical R
ROCESSES
B
reprint versi
ecent develo
ally on the w
of scientific
gy that is se
el ontologie
categorial o
ensionalist 
onformant d
c data deriv
his basis the
BFO frame
Applied 
in Biology
sequencing 
pline in whi
ll of those w
nd with speci
hansson, Kev
r was partiall
Research, G
S: AN ESSA
Barry Smith
opments in t
ways ontolo
 data. We th
rving as dom
es in many s
ontology, em
(occurrent) 
omain onto
ing from th
e first steps 
ework.1 
Ontology
y 
of the hum
ch compute
who have w
ial thanks to 
vin Mulligan
ly supported
Grant 1 U 54 
AY IN APPL
h 
on of a paper in Ratio, 25:4 (2012), 463-488
the burgeon
ogies are pro
hen introduc
main-neutra
specialist di
mbracing bo
perspective
logies can d
e measurem
of an appro
y 
man genome,
er processin
worked on th
Thomas Bit
n, Chris Mun
d by the Nati
HG004028 
LIED ONT
ning discipli
oviding a m
ce Basic Fo
al framewor
sciplines, ab
oth three-dim
es within a s
deal with th
ment of proc
oach to the c
, contempor
ng of genom
he developm
ttner, Werne
ngall, Alan R
ional Institut
(National C
TOLOGY 
ine of appli
means for the
ormal Ontol
rk for the 
bove all in b
mensionalis
single fram
he consisten
cesses of dif
classificatio
rary biology
mic data play
ment of Basic
er Ceusters, D
Ruttenberg, a
tes of Health
enter for Bio
ed 
e 
logy 
biology 
st 
ework. 
t 
fferent 
on of 
y has 
ys an 
c Formal 
Damiano 
and Peter 
h through 
omedical 

 
 
2 
 
essential role. But genomic data processed by computers are useful to our understanding of, 
say, animal behavior, or human health and disease, only if some way can be found to link 
these data to theoretical assertions using terms that are intelligible to biologists. Such links 
are created by means of what biologists call ‘ontologies’, which are classifications of 
biological and other phenomena used to annotate (or ‘tag’) genomic and other experimental 
data in a systematic way that enables computers to gain consistent access even to data that 
has been collected in highly heterogeneous ways.2 
 
When scientists are collecting data, this still frequently happens in a poorly coordinated 
fashion, and this is so even where the scientists in question are working in the same field. The 
data are in consequence difficult to aggregate in ways that might be useful in testing 
hypotheses or in drawing comparisons. In former times the needed connections were drawn 
through manual intervention by human beings familiar with the subject-matter. The 
indispensability of computers to the processing of data in information-intensive areas of 
science, however, has brought the recognition that ways need to be found to establish such 
connections computationally. The rise of science-based ontologies3 is one product of this 
recognition.4  
 
We shall focus in what follows on those ontologies that are being developed on the basis 
of the assumption that, to create an ontology that brings benefits to scientists working with 
data in a given domain, the ontology should employ classifications that are based on the 
established scientific understanding of the entities and relations in this domain.5 An ontology 
of this sort comprises theoretical terms used to represent the types or classes of entities in 
some given domain together with relational expressions representing the relations between 
 
2 David P. Hill, et al., ‘Gene Ontology Annotations: What They Mean and Where They Come From’, 
BMC Bioinformatics, 9 (2008), S2. 
3 On May 7, 2012 a google query for ‘ontology and database’ returned some 10 million hits, almost 
twice as many as are returned for the query ‘ontology and philosophy’. 
4 Judith Blake, ‘Bio-ontologies – fast and furious’, Nature Biotechnology 22 (2004), 773-774. 
5 Some of the principles governing ontologies of this sort are set forth and defended in Barry Smith 
and Werner Ceusters, ‘Ontological Realism as a Methodology for Coordinated Evolution of Scientific 
Ontologies’, Applied Ontology, 5 (2010), 139–188.  

 
 
3 
 
these en
advanta
experim
 
 
Each on
nodes o
as repre
terms (s
instance
in the g
 
6 We use
‘class’ is
ntities. It the
ages brough
mental data e
Figu
Nodes in
ntology can
of a directed
esenting typ
such as ‘cel
es which ar
graph are joi
e these expre
s often used 
ereby exten
ht by the Inte
expressed in
re 1: Fragment
n the graph rep
 be conceiv
d acyclical g
pes or univer
ll’ or ‘electr
re the sorts o
ined by edg
essions synon
for what we 
nds into the t
ernational S
n quantitativ
ts of the Gene O
present types in
ved as a set o
graph, as in 
rsals,6 whic
ron’) used in
of entities th
ges represen
nymously in
are here call
terminology
System of U
ve terms.  
Ontology from 
n reality; edges
of terms (no
Figure 1. W
ch are the so
n formulatin
hat are obse
ting relation
n what follow
ling types or
y of scientif
Units to the 
http://www.e
s represent is_a
ouns and no
We can think
orts of entiti
ng scientific
erved in scie
ns between 
ws. In the wid
r universals. 
fic theories 
consistent r
ebi.ac.uk/Quick
a and part_of r
oun phrases)
k of the nod
ies represen
c theories, a
entific expe
the types, o
der ontologic
some of the
representatio
kGO/.  
relations. 
) which form
des in such a
nted by the g
and which h
eriments. Th
of which the
cal literature
e 
on of 
 
m the 
a graph 
general 
have 
he nodes 
e most 
 the term 

 
 
4 
 
important (illustrated in Figure 1) are is_a (abbreviating ‘is a subtype of’) and part_of.7 
 
When two nodes are joined together by the is_a relation, as for example in: 
(1)  
receptor activity is_a molecular function 
then this represents an assertion to the effect that all instances of the first type are also 
instances of the second type.  
 
When two nodes are joined together by the part_of relation, as in 
(2)  
viral receptor activity part_of response to virus 
then this represents an assertion to the effect that every instance of the first type is a part of 
some instance of the second type. (Here ‘part of’ in the unitalicized form represents the 
familiar instance-level parthood relation holding between, for example, your finger and your 
hand, or between the first half of a football match and the whole match.8) 
 
1.2 
The Common Logic Interchange Format and the Web Ontology Language  
Ontological axioms such as (1) and (2), together with accompanying definitions of terms and 
relations, are formulated using logical languages – typically fragments of first-order logic – 
developed to facilitate the representation and interchange of information and data among 
disparate computer systems.9 Prominent examples are the (CLIF) Common Logic 
Interchange Format10 and the (OWL) Web Ontology Language11. Common Logic is an ISO 
Standard family of languages with an expressivity equivalent to that of first-order logic. 
OWL-DL is a fragment of the language of first order logic belonging to the family of what 
are called Description Logics. While OWL-DL is marked by severe restrictions on its 
expressivity, the theories formulated in its terms have desirable computational properties. 
 
7 Barry Smith, et al., ‘Relations in Biomedical Ontologies’, Genome Biology (2005), 6 (5), R46.  
8 See again ‘Relations in Biomedical Ontologies’.  
9 http://metadata-stds.org/24707/index.html 
10 Common Logic – A Framework for a Family of Logic-Based Languages, ed. Harry Delugach. 
ISO/IEC JTC 1/SC 32N1377, International Standards Organization Final Committee Draft, 2005-12-
13; http://cl.tamu.edu/docs/cl/32N1377T-FCD24707.pdf. 
11 ‘OWL 2 Web Ontology Language’, http://www.w3.org/TR/owl2-overview. 

 
 
5 
 
Because logical languages such as CLIF or OWL are used in their formulation, ontologies 
themselves can be viewed as simple first-order theories. Providing care is taken to use terms, 
definitions and relational expressions in consistent ways in different ontologies, such theories 
can be merged at will to create larger ontologies and, at least in the case of ontologies 
formulated using a language like OWL, the consistency of such mergers can be checked 
automatically using dedicated software applications called ‘reasoners’.12 
 
1.3 
The Gene Ontology 
It is the Gene Ontology (GO), portions of which are illustrated in Figure 1, which is the most 
successful ontology currently being used by scientists in reasoning with experimental data.13 
The GO consists of three sub-ontologies, together comprehending some 30,000 terms 
representing types and subtypes of biological processes, molecular functions, and cellular 
components. The GO is used by researchers in biology and biomedicine as a controlled 
vocabulary for describing in species-neutral fashion the attributes of genes and gene products 
(for example proteins) identified both in experiments on model organisms such as mouse or 
fly and in clinical studies of human beings. The GO offers a set of terms, such as ‘membrane’ 
or ‘viral receptor activity’ or ‘meiosis’, which are defined in ways which reflect the usage of 
biologists. It thereby provides a means of computationally associating humanly intelligible 
descriptions of biological phenomena with the massive quantities of sequence data being 
made available through genomic experimentation. Because the GO is species neutral, it 
provides a means of comparing data pertaining to different organisms in a way which allows 
results gained through experimentation on non-human organisms to be exploited in studies of 
human health and disease.14 
 
 
12 http://www.w3.org/2007/OWL/wiki/Implementations. 
13 The Gene Ontology Consortium, et al., ‘Gene Ontology: Tool for the Unification of Biology’, 
Nature Genetics, 2000 May; 25(1): 25–29. 
14 See for example A. Mohammadi et al., ‘Identification of Disease-Causing Genes Using Microarray 
Data Mining and Gene Ontology,’ BMC Medical Genomics, 2011; 4: 12. 

 
 
6 
 
1.4    The Gene Ontology and the Unification of Science 
The GO is described by its originators as a ‘tool for the unification of biology’, and we can 
see how it is being used, in conjunction with other ontologies such as the Protein15 and Cell 
Ontologies16, to realize at least a part of the old logical empiricist vision of a logical 
unification of scientific knowledge.17 One aspect of this realization – not clearly anticipated 
by the logical empiricists – is the degree to which not only do theoretical assertions need to 
be unified through use of common logically structured ontologies, but so also do 
experimental data (for example gene or protein sequence data) compiled in databases 
processed by computers. In addition, bioinformaticians have discovered that additional 
ontology resources are needed to unify both of these with assertions about the experimental 
and computational procedures used to generate the data. This aspect of the unification of 
science is addressed by the Ontology for Biomedical Investigations (OBI),18 which 
comprehends a set of terms which can be used to describe the attributes of experiments in 
biological and related domains. The goal is a logically well-structured set of preferred terms 
and logical definitions that can be used to support common access to, and computational 
reasoning over, data about experiments in order to address the problems which arise at the 
point where experimental methods (or protocols or statistical algorithms or sample processing 
techniques or software or equipment used) have become so complex as to cause problems for 
the interpretation and comparison of the results achieved with their aid. The underlying idea 
is that use of the OBI vocabulary to annotate results obtained through experimentation would 
make these results not only more easily interpretable by human beings but also more reliably 
 
15 Darren A. Natale, et al. ‘The Protein Ontology: A Structured Representation of Protein Forms and 
Complexes’, Nucleic Acids Research, 39 (2011), D539-45. 
16 Terrence F. Meehan, et al. ‘Logical Development of the Cell Ontology’, BMC Bioinformatics 12 
(2011), 6. 
17 Rudolf Carnap, ‘Logical Foundations of the Unity of Science’, International Encyclopaedia of 
Unified Science, vol. I, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1938. Compare also J. J. Woodger, The 
Axiomatic Method in Biology, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1937, and the discussion in 
Smith and Ceusters, ‘Ontological Realism’. 
18 Ryan R. Brinkman, et al., ‘Modeling Biomedical Experimental Processes with OBI’, Journal of 
Biomedical Semantics, 2010, 1, Suppl. 1.  

 
 
7 
 
processable by computers. 
 
2. Basic Formal Ontology  
As will by now be clear, the principal concerns of applied ontologists are highly practical in 
nature. Just occasionally, however, they still face problems of a recognizably philosophical 
sort, and one such problem – relating to the treatment of process measurement data – is the 
topic of this essay. 
 
Basic Formal Ontology (BFO) is a domain-neutral resource used by biologists and others 
to provide a top-level ontology that can serve as a common starting point for the creation of 
domain ontologies in different areas of science.19 BFO provides a formal-ontological 
architecture and a set of very general terms and relations that are currently being used by 
more than 100 ontology development groups in biology and other fields.20 
 
BFO is, by the standards predominant in contemporary ontology, very small, consisting 
of just 34 terms (see Figure 2), including both familiar terms such as ‘process’, ‘object’, 
‘function’, ‘role’ and  ‘disposition’, and less familiar terms such as ‘generically dependent 
continuant’ and ‘continuant fiat boundary’. Each of these terms must either be declared 
primitive and elucidated by examples and accompanying axioms, or it must be defined in a 
logically coherent way in terms of these primitives.  
 
 
19 http://ontology.buffalo.edu/BFO/Reference 
20 http://www.ifomis.org/bfo/users. 

 
 
8 
 
 
21 See Smmith and Ceusters, ‘Onto
Figure 2. Dra
ological Real
aft BFO 2.0 is_a
lism’. 
a Hierarchy21 
 

 
 
9 
 
2.1 
Continuants and Occurrents 
BFO takes as its starting point a familiar distinction between two sets of views, which we can 
refer to as four-dimensionalist and three-dimensionalist, respectively. Four-dimensionalists 
(in simple terms) see reality as consisting exclusively of four-dimensional entities (variously 
referred to as processes, events, occurrents, perdurants, spacetime-worms, and so forth). They 
thereby regard all talk of entities of other sorts – for example, of three-dimensional things 
such as you and me – as a mere locution, to be eliminated in favour of some ultimate four-
dimensionalist translation. (A four-dimensionalist might hold, for example, that only 
processes exist, and that talk of continuously existing things pertains rather to special kinds of 
processual entities, for example to continuous series of processes of a bill-clintonizing sort.22) 
The three-dimensionalists who embrace positions at the opposite extreme see reality as 
consisting exclusively of entities extended along the three spatial dimensions, and they view 
all change in terms of the different attributes truly predicable of such entities at different 
times. Talk of processes, from this perspective, is a mere locution to be eliminated in favour 
of some ultimate three-dimensionalist translation.  
 
Both families of views bring benefits of their own. In the field of medical ontology, for 
example, four-dimensionalism provides a natural framework for the ontological treatment of 
processes of, say, drug interaction or immune response, while three-dimensionalism provides 
a similarly natural framework for the treatment of the chemical, histological and anatomical 
structures which participate in such processes.  
 
Unfortunately, the two sets of views are standardly formulated in a way which forces a 
choice between one or the other. BFO, in contrast, is founded on a bicategorial approach 
which seeks to combine elements of both the three-dimensionalist and four-dimensionalist 
perspectives.23 Thus it incorporates an ontology of continuants and an ontology of occurrents 
within a single framework in a way that seeks to reconcile the contrasting logico-ontological 
orders reigning in each.   
 
22 W. V. O. Quine, Word and Object (Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press), 1960. 
23 Pierre Grenon and Barry Smith, ‘SNAP and SPAN: Towards Dynamic Spatial Ontology’, Spatial 
Cognition and Computation, 4 (2004), 69–103. 

 
 
10 
 
 
2.2 
Zemach’s ‘Four Ontologies’  
BFO’s treatment of the dichotomy between continuants and occurrents is adapted in part 
from the strategy proposed by Zemach in his ‘Four Ontologies’24 for distinguishing between 
continuant and non-continuant entities, which Zemach calls ‘things’ and ‘events’, 
respectively. The former, for Zemach, are defined by the fact that they can be sliced (in 
actuality, or in imagination) to yield parts only along the spatial dimension – for example 
those parts of your table which we call its legs, top, nails, and so on.25 The latter, in contrast, 
can be sliced to yield parts along any spatial and temporal dimensions. For example: the first 
year of the life of your table; the entire life of your table top (as contrasted with the life of 
your table legs); and so forth. As Zemach puts it: 
 
An event is an entity that exists, in its entirety, in the area defined by its spatiotemporal 
boundaries, and each part of this area contains a part of the whole event. There are obviously 
indefinitely many ways to carve the world into events, some of which are useful and interesting 
(e.g., for the physicist) and some of which – the vast majority – seem to us to create hodge-podge 
collections of no interest whatsoever. (‘Four Ontologies’, pp. 233 f.) 
 
Zemach notes that it is the ontology of continuants that comes most naturally to normal 
persons: 
 
We normally regard almost every object we come across as a [continuant entity]: this chair, my 
pencil, my friend Richard Roe, the tree around the corner, the fly that crawls on the page. [The 
names we give to chairs and dogs] in our language, obey a grammar which is fundamentally 
dissimilar to the grammar of names of events. (‘Four Ontologies’, p. 240)  
 
You, for example, are a continuant; your arms and legs are parts of you; your childhood, 
 
24 Eddy Zemach, ‘Four Ontologies’, Journal of Philosophy 23 (1970), 231-247. 
25 ‘My desk stretches from the window to the door. It has spatial parts, and can be sliced (in space) in 
two. With respect to time, however, a thing is a continuant.’ (‘Four Ontologies’, p. 240) 

 
 
11 
 
however, is not a part of you; rather, it is a part of your life. Continuants are entities which 
have no parts along the time axis; that is, they may be extended along the three spatial 
dimensions, not however along the temporal dimension.  
 
It will be important for what follows that BFO generalizes Zemach’s idea of a continuant 
entity by allowing not only things (such as pencils and people) as continuants, but also 
entities that are dependent on things, such as qualities and dispositions such as solubility and 
fragility.26 The solubility of a given portion of salt requires a dissolving process in order to be 
realized or manifested. A quality, for BFO, is a dependent continuant that does not require 
such a process of realization of this sort.  
 
BFO departs from Zemach also in its account of occurrent entities. What Zemach refers 
to as ‘events’ are in every case the whole content of a spatiotemporal region. As we shall see, 
however, what BFO ‘processes’ are conceived in such a way that multiple processes are able 
to occupy the same spatiotemporal region, as for example when a process of your running 
down the street is co-located with a process of your getting warmer. 
 
The distinction between continuants and occurrents is for BFO categorical. All the parts 
of continuants are continuants, and any whole to which a continuant belongs is also a 
continuant. Similarly, all the parts of occurrents are occurrents, and any whole to which an 
occurrent belongs is also an occurrent. This division flows from two essentially different 
ways of existing in time. For each continuant, there is some temporal interval during which it 
exists. For each occurrent there is some temporal interval during which it occurs. Certainly 
there are manifold connections between continuants and occurrents, but they are secured in 
BFO not through parthood relations, but rather through relations of participation.27 
 
2.3 
The Ontological Square 
In allowing not only things but also entities that are dependent on things as continuants, BFO 
 
26 As we shall see below, processes, for BFO, are also dependent entities; they depend for their 
existence on the independent continuant entities which are their participants.  
27 Barry Smith and Pierre Grenon, ‘The Cornucopia of Formal-Ontological Relations’, Dialectica 58: 
3 (2004), 279–296. 

 
 
12 
 
draws on Aristotle’s ideas concerning the division of substances and accidents, which 
reappears in BFO as the division between independent and dependent continuants. Given that 
BFO accepts also the distinction between universals and particulars, it thus recapitulates 
Aristotle’s ontological square,28 as represented in  
Table 1. 
 
Independent Continuant 
Dependent Continuant 
Type 
 
planet 
organism 
cell 
 
 temperature 
 30° Celsius temperature 
 sickle shape 
Instance 
 
   this planet 
   this organism 
   this cell 
 
this temperature 
this 30° Celsius 
temperature 
this sickle shape 
 
 
Table 1: Aristotle's Ontological Square in BFO form 
  
2.4 
Determinable and Determinate Quality Universals 
Qualities are first-class entities in the BFO ontology (of the sort referred to elsewhere in the 
 
28 See Barry Smith, ‘Against Fantology’, in J. C. Marek and M. E. Reicher (eds.), Experience and 
Analysis, Vienna: HPT&ÖBV, 2005, 153–170. Compare also E. J. Lowe, The Four-Category 
Ontology. A Metaphysical Foundation for Natural Science, Oxford University Press: Oxford 2006, 
and Luc Schneider, ‘Revisiting the Ontological Square’, in A. Galton and R. Mizoguchi (eds.), 
Formal Ontology in Information Systems, Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference, 
Amsterdam: IOS Press, 2010, 73–86. 
 
depends on 
 
instantiates 
 
instantiates 

 
 
13 
 
literatur
indepen
bearers.
tempera
length, 
 
Det
univers
then it i
inhering
determi
determi
 
Figure 3: 
 
 
 
29 Ingvar
30 To sa
instance
re as ‘tropes
ndent contin
. Qualities i
ature, length
and 4 kg ma
erminable q
al is exemp
is exemplifi
g in John fr
inable unive
inate temper
John's tempera
r Johansson, 
ay that a qua
e of this univ
s’, or ‘indiv
nuant entitie
instantiate q
h and mass)
ass).29  
quality univ
plified by a p
ied at every 
om the begi
ersal temper
rature unive
ature and som
‘Determinab
ality univers
ersal is depe
vidual accid
es (such as m
quality univ
) and determ
versals are r
particular b
such time.3
inning to th
rature throu
ersals from 
e of the determ
bles are Univ
sal is exemp
ndent upon (
ents’). They
molecules, o
versals, whic
minate (such
igid in the s
earer at any
30 John’s tem
he end of his
ughout John
one momen
minable and de
versals,’ The
plified by an
(inheres in) t
is-a r
y are entitie
organisms, 
ch are divid
h as 37.0°C
sense that, i
y time durin
mperature (
s existence)
n’s life, even
nt to the nex
eterminate univ
e Monist, 83 
 independen
this independ
relations
es which are
planets) wh
ded into dete
C temperatur
f a determin
ng which thi
(a certain qu
) instantiates
n while inst
xt, as illustr
versals it instan
(2000), 101–
nt continuant
dent continua
e dependent
hich are thei
erminable (s
re, 1.6 mete
nable qualit
is bearer exi
uality instan
s the same 
tantiating di
rated in Figu
ntiates at differ
–121. 
t is to say th
ant as its bea
t on the 
ir 
such as 
er 
ty 
ists, 
nce 
ifferent 
ure 3.  
 
rent times 
hat some 
arer. 

 
 
14 
 
 
We note in passing that the determinate temperature universals are independent of 
whatever system of units is used to describe them. The universals here referred to in terms of 
degrees Celsius would be instantiated even in a world in which the Celsius or any other 
system of units had never been proposed. We note also that for certain families of 
determinate qualities we can draw a distinction between what we can think of as absolute and 
relative values, respectively. The Kelvin scale is a scale of absolute temperature values in this 
sense. 
 
We can acknowledge also a second sense of ‘relative’ for determinate qualities that is 
involved for example when clinicians speak of temperatures as falling within some ‘normal’ 
range. A single person has a normal temperature in this sense only relative to (the 
temperature qualities of) persons in one or other larger population (for example healthy 
persons at rest in an indoor environment, persons recovering from pneumonia, persons 
sharing a certain genetic mutation in common, and so on).  
 
3. Processes in BFO 
Our primary concern in the remainder of this essay is with BFO’s treatment of occurrents, 
which include processes, process boundaries (for example beginnings and endings), 
spatiotemporal regions, and temporal intervals and temporal instants. BFO uses ‘occupies’ to 
refer to the relation that holds between an occurrent and the spatiotemporal region which it 
exactly fills. Processes and process boundaries occupy spatiotemporal regions and they span 
temporal intervals and temporal instants, respectively. Processes are thus distinguished from 
process boundaries in that the former, but not the latter, are temporally extended. 
 
The assertion that one entity is an occurrent part of a second entity means simply that 
both are occurrents and that the first is a part – for example a sub-process – of the second. 
The sum of all processes taking place in your upper body during the course of your life is a 
proper occurrent part of the sum of processes taking place in your whole body during the 
same period. There is however a narrower relation which holds between occurrents a and b in 
the case where a is exactly the restriction of b to a temporal region that is a proper part of the 
temporal region spanned by b. When this relation holds, we shall say that a and b stand in the 

 
 
15 
 
relation of temporal parthood, defined as follows:31  
 
a temporal_part_of b =Def. 
a occurrent_part_of b  
& for some temporal region r (a spans r  
& for all occurrents c, r   
 
if (c spans r & r occurrent_part_of r)  
then (c occurrent_part_of a iff c occurrent_part_of b))) 
 
The first quarter of a game of football is a temporal part of the whole game. The process of 
your heart beating from 4pm to 5pm today is a temporal part of the entire process of your 
heart beating throughout your life. The 4th year of your life is a temporal part of your life, as 
is the process boundary which separates the 3rd and 4th years of your life. The process of a 
footballer’s heart beating once is an occurrent part, but not a temporal part, of the whole 
game (because when this heart beat occurs many other things are occurring which are also 
occurrent parts of the whole game). 
 
3.1 
BFO’s Treatment of Quality Measurement Data 
When BFO is used to annotate the results of measurements of qualities, then in a typical case, 
for example in the case where your height is being measured, the following elements can be 
distinguished: 
(1) the BFO:object that is you, 
(2) the BFO:quality that is your height, 
(3) the BFO:one-dimensional spatial region, stretching at some time t between the top 
of your head and the base of your feet, that is measured when we measure your 
height at t.  
 
The result of this measurement is expressed by means of  
 
31 Compare Peter M. Simons, Parts. A Study in Ontology, Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1987, p. 132. 

 
 
16 
 
 
(4) the BFO:generically dependent continuant expression: ‘1.7 m tall’.  
 
 
Each item on this list is unproblematically identifiable as instantiating a BFO category. 
(4) is an information artifact.32 It can be stored, for instance, as a record in some file on your 
laptop. The record is said to be generically dependent upon its bearer since it can be 
transferred to another laptop through a process of exact copying. The temperature of your 
laptop, in contrast, is specifically dependent on the laptop, since a temperature (a specific 
instance of the universal temperature) cannot migrate from one body to another. 
 
3.2 
Ontological Treatment of Process Measurements 
What happens, now, when we attempt to develop a corresponding analysis in BFO terms of 
the data resulting from measurements of processes? In the case of a body moving with 
constant speed, for example, we can here distinguish at least the following elements:  
 
(1) the BFO:object that is moving (changing its spatial location), 
(2) the BFO:process of moving (change of spatial location), 
(3) the BFO:spatiotemporal region occupied by this process (the path of the motion), 
(4) the BFO:temporal region spanned by this process (the temporal projection of (3)), 
(5) the speed of the process (rate of change of the spatial location of (1)), 
 
where (5) is represented by means of  
 
(6) the BFO:generically dependent continuant expression: ‘3.12 meters per second’. 
 
Each of the items (1)-(4) and (6) instantiates a readily identifiable BFO category. For item 
(5), on the other hand, there is no candidate category in the BFO ontology, since there is no 
 
32 http://code.google.com/p/information-artifact-ontology/. 

 
 
17 
 
counterpart on the occurrent side for BFO’s qualities of independent continuants.33  
 
3.3  
Why Processes Do Not Change 
To see why not, we need to understand the reason why qualities of independent continuants 
are accepted by BFO as first class entities. This turns on the fact that independent continuants 
can change from one time to the next by gaining and losing qualities. No counterpart of such 
change can be accepted by BFO on the occurrent side, since it follows trivially from BFO’s 
four-dimensionalist account of occurrents that occurrents cannot change.  
 
Processes, in particular, cannot change on the four-dimensionalist view, because 
processes are changes (they are changes in those independent continuant entities which are 
their participants).34  Certainly we have ways of speaking whose surface grammar suggests 
that processes can change. But when we say, for example, let’s speed up this process, then 
what we mean (in four-dimensionalist terms) is: let’s ensure that some on-going process is 
one which will be quicker than the process that would have occurred had we not made some 
specific extra effort.  
 
Continuants may change not only through change in qualities but also in other ways. For 
example they may gain and lose parts over time, as for example when you gain and lose cells 
from your body. To address such changes, BFO’s instance-level continuant parthood relation 
is indexed by time. The counterpart relation on the side of occurrents, in contrast, holds 
always in a non-indexed way.35 If a process p1 occupying temporal interval t1 is a part of a 
second process p2 occupying temporal interval t2, then p1 is timelessly a part of p2 just as t1 is 
 
33 Note that we could view speed in BFO terms as a (non-rigid) quality of the moving object, a view 
conformant with our way of speaking when we talk, for example, of the speed of light, or the speed of 
the earth, or the speed of a billiard ball. We believe that a view along these lines for process 
measurement data in general can and should be developed, since processes of each different type can 
occur only if there are corresponding types of qualities and dispositions on the side of the continuants 
which are their participants. thus we see a view of this sort as a supplement to an account along the 
lines presented in the text.  
34 Antony Galton and Riichiro Mizoguchi, ‘The Water Falls but the Waterfall Does Not Fall: New 
Perspectives on Objects, Processes and Events”, Applied Ontology, 4 (2009), 71-107. 
35 See again Smith, et al., ‘Relations in Biomedical Ontologies’. 

 
 
18 
 
timelessly a part of t2.  
 
A second way in which continuants, but not occurrents, may change is by instantiating 
non-rigid universals. We saw examples of this in our discussion of dependent continuant 
universals such as temperature above. But examples can be found also among independent 
continuant universals such as larva or fetus. If some organism a instantiates the universal 
larva at t, for example, then it does not follow that a instantiates larva at all times at which a 
exists. Universals on the side of occurrents, in contrast, are always rigid, so that if an 
occurrent instantiates a universal at some time, then it instantiates this universal at all times.36  
 
An apparent analogue of the phenomenon of non-rigidity in the realm of occurrents is 
illustrated by a case such as the following. Suppose John, half way through some 20 minute 
running process p, increases his running speed from 6 to 7 mph. Could we not then say that 
the process p instantiates the determinate universal 6 mph running process in the first 10 
minute interval and the determinate universal 7 mph running process in the second? On the 
four-dimensionalist view, the answer to this question is ‘no’: p never instantiates the 
universal 6 mph running process, any more than the front half of my rabbit instantiates the 
universal rabbit. What we can more properly assert is that p, timelessly, has a sub-process p1 
(a temporal part of p), which instantiates the universal 6 mph running process, and a 
subsequent sub-process p2 (a second temporal part of p) which instantiates the universal 7 
mph running process.  
 
3.4  
First Approximation to a Solution of the Problem of Process Measurement 
Data 
How, then, do we respond to the need on the part of the users of BFO to annotate data 
deriving from measurements which have processes as their targets? 
 
Our response is, in first approximation, very simple: when we predicate, for instance, ‘has 
speed 3.12 m/s’, of a certain process of motion, then we are asserting, not that that the 
process in question has some special quality which the same process, in another scenario, 
might conceivably have lacked. Rather, we are asserting that this process is of a certain 
 
36 See again ‘Relations in Biomedical Ontologies’. 

 
 
19 
 
special type. Thus an assertion to the effect that  
 
(1) motion p has speed v  
 
is analogous, not to:  
 
(2) rabbit r has weight w,  
 
but rather to:  
 
(3) rabbit r instance_of universal rabbit.  
 
(1), in other words, should be interpreted as being of the form: 
  
(4)  motion p instance_of universal motion with speed v. 
 
where the universal motion with speed v is a specification of the universal motion.37  
 
This treatment of attribution in terms of instantiation reflects what is standard policy in 
other parts of BFO in accordance with its goal of remaining ontologically simple. There are 
no qualities of occurrents, in BFO, just as there are no qualities of qualities, and also no 
qualities of spatial or temporal regions. Leaving aside the single case of qualities of 
independent continuants, attributions in BFO are quite generally treated in terms of the 
relation of instantiation, as in Table 2: 
 
spatial region r has volume w 
r instance_of universal region with volume w 
height quality q has value 2 meters at t 
q projects onto a one-dimensional spatial region r 
at t and r instance of universal 2 meter long one-
 
37 See Ingvar Johansson, ‘Four Kinds of Is_a Relation’, in Katherine Munn and Barry Smith (eds.), 
Applied Ontology, Frankfurt/Lancaster: ontos, 2008, 269–293. 

 
 
20 
 
dimensional spatial region 
temporal region t has duration d 
t instance_of universal temporal region with 
duration d 
temperature quality q has value 63° 
Celsius 
q instance_of universal 63° Celsius temperature 
quality 
process p has duration d 
process p spans temporal region t and t instance_of 
universal temporal region with duration d 
motion p of object o has trajectory with 
shape s 
the sequence of locations occupied by object o at 
successive instants of time forms a spatiotemporal 
region t and t instance_of universal spatiotemporal 
region with shape s 
Table 2: Examples of attributions in BFO 
 
3.5 
Processes as Dependent Entities 
Processes themselves stand to the independent continuants which are their participants in a 
relation that is analogous to that in which qualities stand to the independent continuants 
which are their bearers. In both cases we have to deal with the relation of what BFO calls 
specific dependence.38 This means that we can extend the ontological square in  
Table 1 with a representation of the relation between instances and universals on the side of 
occurrents to create an ontological sextet, as follows:39 
 
38 See again Smith and Grenon, ‘Cornucopia’. 
39 See again Smith, ‘Against Fantology’. 

 
 
21 
 
 
 
Independent 
Continuant 
Dependent  
Continuant 
Occurrent 
Type 
 Planet 
 organism 
 cell 
temperature 
30° Celsius temperature 
sickle shape 
course of temperature 
changes 
life of organism 
life of cell 
Instance 
 
 
 
this planet 
this organism 
this cell 
 
 
 
John’s temperature 
this 30° Celsius 
temperature in this 
organism now 
this sickle shape 
 
 
 
 
the course of  
temperature changes in  
John during his lifetime 
John’s life 
the life of this cell 
 
Table 3: The Ontological Sextet 
 
 
 
Our strategy, now, is to use the instantiation relation captured in the rightmost column of 
Table 3 as basis for an account of the truthmakers of process attributions. But to make an 
approach along these lines work, certain problems still need to be addressed.  
 
4. Process Profiles  
We note, first, that a single running process p might be an instance of multiple determinable 
universals such as: 
running process 
constant speed running process 
cardiovascular exercise process 
air-displacement process 
 
instantiates 
 
depends on 
 
depends on  
 
instantiates 
 
instantiates 

 
 
22 
 
compression sock testing process  
as well as of multiple determinate universals such as  
running process of 30 minute duration 
3.12 m/s motion process 
9.2 calories per minute energy burning process 
30.12 liters per kilometer oxygen utilizing process 
and so on. 
 
How, given the complexity of this list and of the many similar lists which could be 
created for many other types of process, are we to create classifications of the process 
universals instantiated in different domains in the sort of principled way that will be 
necessary to ensure consistency and interoperability when classifications are needed for the 
annotation of data in domains such as physiology or pathology? 
 
To see the lines of our answer to this question, consider Figure 4, which illustrates the 
cardiac events occurring in the left ventricle of a human heart. This figure tells us that each 
successive beating of the heart is such as to involve multiple  different sorts of physiological 
processes, corresponding to measurements along the six distinct dimensions of aortic 
pressure, atrial pressure, ventricular pressure, ventricular volume, electrical activity, and 
voltage40, respectively.41  
 
 
40 Here voltage is used as a proxy for the intensity of sound. 
41 As de Bono, et al., point out, these measurements reflect the variables encoded in models of human 
physiology created by scientists using of ordinary differential equations (Bernard de Bono, Robert 
Hoehndorf, et al., ‘The RICORDO Approach to Semantic Interoperability for Biomedical Data and 
Models: Strategy, Standards and Solutions’, BMC Research Notes 4 (2011), 31).  

 
 
23 
 
 
 
The
process
exampl
series o
numeric
commo
 
Wh
same p
process
process
termino
 
42 Cardia
Figure 4. 
ese structur
ses can be 
e of the sam
of moves, t
cally but qu
n we shall r
at they shar
process prof
s profile un
ses along m
ology, to a d
ac Cycle, Le
A Wiggers diag
ral dimens
compared. 
me rate, or 
then there 
ualitatively 
refer to in w
re in comm
ofile univers
niversals re
multiple di
different det
ft Ventricle, 
gram, showing
sions are, 
When com
when comp
is somethi
– ‘the same
what follows
mon more p
sal. The fi
eflecting th
ifferent axe
terminable p
http://en.wik
g the cardiac pro
equivalent
mparing tw
paring two 
ing in each
e’. This som
s to as a pro
recisely is
igure illustr
e fact that 
es, each o
process pro
kipedia.org/w
ocesses occurr
tly, differen
wo heart be
games of c
h of the tw
mething wh
ocess profile
that each c
rates multip
we can m
f which c
file univers
wiki/Cardiac
ing in the left v
nt dimensi
eating proc
hess as con
wo process
hich the two
e. 
ontains an 
ple instanti
measure and
orresponds,
al. 
c_cycle. 
ventricle42 
ions along
esses as be
nsisting of th
es which i
o processes 
instantiatio
iations of m
d compare 
, in our p
     
g which 
eing for 
he same 
is – not 
share in 
n of the 
multiple 
cardiac 
proposed 

 
 
24 
 
 
In the running case, similarly, we can measure and compare along different structural 
dimensions pertaining to speed of motion, energy consumed, oxygen utilized, and so forth. In 
each case we focus on some one structural dimension and thereby ignore, through a process 
of selective abstraction, all other dimensions within the whole process.  
 
Not every dimension of comparison between processes corresponds to a determinable 
process profile universal in the sense here intended. When we compare processes as to their 
duration, for example, or as to the time at which they occur or their trajectory in space and 
time, then we can advert simply to the temporal or spatiotemporal regions which the 
processes occupy (see again Table 2 above). We can compare processes also for example in 
terms of whether they involve the same participants, or take place in the same spatial regions. 
Process profiles enter into the picture only where it is something (thus some occurrent entity) 
in the processes themselves that serves as fundamentum comparationis. 
 
 
4.1 
Quality Process Profiles 
The simplest example of a process profile is that part of a process which serves as the target 
of selective abstraction focused on a sequence of instances of determinate qualities such as 
temperature or height. When we measure, for example, the process of temperature increase 
in patient John, then there is a sequence of determinate temperature qualities whose values 
when measured on some scale are recorded on John’s temperature chart. Process profiles of 
this simple sort can very often be represented by means of a graph in which measures of a 
certain quality are plotted against time.  
 
4.2 
Rate Process Profiles 
On a somewhat higher level of complexity are what we shall call rate process profiles, which 
are the targets of selective abstraction focused not on determinate quality magnitudes plotted 
over successive instants of time, but rather on certain ratios between these magnitudes and 
associated intervals of elapsed time. A speed process profile, for example, is represented by a 
graph plotting against time the ratio of distance covered per unit of time. Since rates may 
change, and since such changes, too, may have rates of change, we have to deal here with a 
hierarchy of process profile universals at successive levels, including: 
speed profile 
constant speed profile  

 
 
25 
 
2 mph constant speed profile 
3 mph constant speed profile 
acceleration profile (increasing speed profile) 
 
constant acceleration profile  
 
 
32ft/s2 acceleration profile 
 
 
33 ft/s2 acceleration profile 
 
variable acceleration profile 
 
 
increasing acceleration profile 
and so on. 
 
The types and subtypes listed here are in some respects analogous to the determinable and 
determinable types and subtypes of qualities recognized by BFO-conformant ontologies on 
the continuant side discussed already in our discussion of Figure 3 above. And here, too, the 
reader must bear in mind that the determinate process profile universals in question – while 
they need to be referred to in reporting results of measurement acts using specific units of 
measure – are in and of themselves unit-specification independent.  
 
Measurement data representing rates are often expressed in terms not of the process 
profile instantiated across a temporal interval, but rather of what holds at some specific 
temporal instant. The latter is then defined in terms of the former in the following way:  
 
     (1) John is moving with speed v at time instant t  
 
asserts, roughly, that there is some temporal interval (t1, t2), including t in its interior, in 
which the speed v process profile universal is instantiated. More precisely (in order to take 
account of the fact that John may be moving with a continuously changing speed in the 
neighborhood of t), (1) must be formulated in something like the following terms: 
(2)  Given any ε, however small, we can find some interval (t1, t2), including t in its 
interior, during which the speed w at which John is moving is such that the difference 
between w and v is less than ε.43 
 
43 ε, v and w are assumed to be measured in some common unit of velocity. 

 
 
26 
 
 
4.3 
Cyclical Process Profiles 
One important sub-family of rate process profiles is illustrated by cyclical processes, for 
example the 60 beats per minute beating process of John’s heart, or the 120 beats per minute 
of his drumming process, and so on.  
 
Cyclical process profiles are a subtype of rate process profiles in which the salient ratio is 
not distance covered but rather number of cycles per unit of time. Here again we find a 
variety of more specialized universals at lower levels of generality, including for example: 
   rate process profile 
cyclical process profile 
regular cyclical process profile 
3 bpm cyclical process profile 
4 bpm cyclical process profile 
irregular cyclical process profile 
 
increasing cyclical process profile 
and so on. 
 
In the case of a regular cyclical process profile, a rate can be assigned in the simplest 
possible fashion by dividing the number of cycles by the duration of the temporal region 
occupied by the process profile as a whole. Irregular cyclical process profiles, for example as 
identified in the clinic, or in a morse code transmission, or in readings on an aircraft 
instrument panel, may be of specific interest because they are of diagnostic or forensic 
significance.  
5. Conclusion: Towards an Ontology of Time Series Graphs 
We have dealt in the foregoing with only a small selection of the ways in which processes 
can be classified through division into types and subtypes. One important next step will deal 
with the ways in which such classification is complicated by the fact that processes are 
embedded within a series of larger process wholes, each nested within yet larger 
process wholes. Thus when a billiard ball is moving across a table, we can focus on the 
ball’s motion relative to the table, but we can also focus on the larger process which is 
the motion of the body‐table system relative to the motion of the earth; or we can focus 
on the motion of the body‐table‐earth system relative to the movement of the sun; and 
so forth.  

 
 
27 
 
 
Human physiological processes, too, are embedded within series of larger wholes in this 
way. When studying the heart, for example, physiologists may investigate processes within 
the interior of the left ventricle, interactions between the left ventricle and other parts of the 
cardiovascular system, interactions between this system and other bodily systems, and so on. 
Physiologists may be interested in the processes involving multiple organisms; for example 
they may be interested in some given organism as part of one or other larger whole which 
includes some population of organisms of a relevant similar type (all humans, all human 
babies of a given birth weight, all athletes, and so on). Normal processes are defined for this 
larger population (as normal qualities were defined above), and deviations from this norm are 
defined for the single organism relative thereto.   
 
A further application of the theory of process profiles will include the development of an 
ontology of time series graphs in terms of a view of process profiles as the truthmakers for 
such graphs. On this basis we will then explore how the ontology of process profiles might 
throw light on the semantics of differential equations and of the various mathematical models 
of dynamic systems in physics, biology and other disciplines constructed on their basis.44 
 
We will investigate also how the theory can be applied not merely to quantitative 
information artifacts but also to other sorts of symbolic representations of processes, as for 
instance when a chess game is represented in one or other of the standard chess notations, or 
when a symphony performance is represented in a score. Interestingly, this score itself serves 
also to provide the set of instructions for the unfolding performance, and we shall explore 
also ways in which the idea of process profiles may help to throw light on how such planned 
processes depend on, and are at the same represented by, the plans or protocols which define 
them.  
 
44 Exploratory work along these lines is described in Daniel L. Cook, et al. ‘Physical Properties of 
Biological Entities: An Introduction to the Ontology of Physics for Biology,’ PLoS ONE, 2011, 6(12): 
e28708. 

