BOOTSTRAPPING LANGUAGE ACQUISITION
1
Bootstrapping Language Acquisition
Omri Abend and Tom Kwiatkowski and Nathaniel J. Smith
and Sharon Goldwater and Mark Steedman
Institute of Language, Cognition and Computation
School of Informatics
University of Edinburgh 1
Abstract
The semantic bootstrapping hypothesis proposes that children acquire their native
language through exposure to sentences of the language paired with structured rep-
resentations of their meaning, whose component substructures can be associated
with words and syntactic structures used to express these concepts. The child’s
task is then to learn a language-speciﬁc grammar and lexicon based on (proba-
bly contextually ambiguous, possibly somewhat noisy) pairs of sentences and their
meaning representations (logical forms).
Starting from these assumptions, we develop a Bayesian probabilistic account of
semantically bootstrapped ﬁrst-language acquisition in the child, based on tech-
niques from computational parsing and interpretation of unrestricted text. Our
learner jointly models (a) word learning: the mapping between components of
the given sentential meaning and lexical words (or phrases) of the language, and
(b) syntax learning: the projection of lexical elements onto sentences by universal
construction-free syntactic rules. Using an incremental learning algorithm, we ap-
ply the model to a dataset of real syntactically complex child-directed utterances
and (pseudo) logical forms, the latter including contextually plausible but irrelevant
distractors. Taking the Eve section of the CHILDES corpus as input, the model
simulates several well-documented phenomena from the developmental literature.
In particular, the model exhibits syntactic bootstrapping effects (in which previ-
ously learned constructions facilitate the learning of novel words), sudden jumps
in learning without explicit parameter setting, acceleration of word-learning (the
“vocabulary spurt”), an initial bias favoring the learning of nouns over verbs, and
one-shot learning of words and their meanings. The learner thus demonstrates how
statistical learning over structured representations can provide a uniﬁed account for
these seemingly disparate phenomena.
Keywords: language acquisition; syntactic bootstrapping; semantic bootstrapping;
computational modeling; Bayesian model; cross-situational learning
1OA is now at the Departments of Computer Science & Cognitive Science, The Hebrew University of Jerusalem. TK
is now at Google Research. NJS is now at the Berkeley Institute of Data Science, University of California, Berkeley.

1
Introduction
One of the fundamental challenges facing a child language learner is the problem of general-
izing beyond the input. Using various social and other extralinguistic cues, a child may be able to
work out the meaning of particular utterances they hear, like “you read the book” or “Eve will read
Lassie”, if these are encountered in the appropriate contexts. But merely memorizing and repro-
ducing earlier utterances is not enough: children must also somehow use these experiences to learn
to produce and interpret novel utterances, like “you read Lassie” and “show me the book”. There
are many proposals for how this might be achieved, but abstractly speaking it seems to require the
ability to explicitly or implicitly (a) decompose the utterance’s form into syntactic units, (b) decom-
pose the utterance’s meaning into semantic units, (c) learn lexical mappings between these syntactic
and semantic units, and (d) learn the language-speciﬁc patterns that guide their recombination (so
that e.g. “Eve will read Lassie to Fraser”, “will Eve read Fraser Lassie?”, and “will Fraser read
Eve Lassie?” have different meanings, despite using the same or nearly the same words). A fur-
ther challenge is that even in child-directed speech, many sentences are more complex than “you
read Lassie”; the child’s input consists of a mixture of high- and low-frequency words falling into
a variety of syntactic categories and arranged into a variety of more or less complex syntactic con-
structions.
In this work, we present a Bayesian language-learning model focused on the acquisition of
compositional syntax and semantics in an incremental, naturalistic setting. That is, our model re-
ceives training examples consisting of whole utterances paired with noisy representations of the
whole utterance’s meaning, and from these it learns probabilistic representations of the semantics
and syntax of individual words, in such a way that it becomes able to recombine these words to un-
derstand novel utterances and express novel meanings. This requires that the model simultaneously
learn how to parse syntactic constructions, assign meaning to speciﬁc words, and use syntactic reg-
ularities (for example, in verb argument structure) to guide interpretation of ambiguous input. Our
training data consists of real, syntactically complex child-directed utterances drawn from a single
child in the CHILDES corpus, and our training is incremental in the sense that the model is pre-
sented with each utterance exactly once, in the same order that the child actually encountered them.
The work described here represents an advance over previous models that focused on learning
either word meanings or syntax given the other (see below for a review). By developing a joint
learning model we are able to explore how these phenomena interact during learning. A handful
of other joint learning models have been presented in the literature, but these have either worked
from synthetic input with varying degrees of realism (Beekhuizen,
2015;
Maurits, Perfors, &
Navarro, 2009) or have not yet been evaluated on speciﬁc phenomena known from child language
acquisition, as we do here (Chrupała, Kádár, & Alishahi, 2015; Jones, 2015). In particular, we
show in a series of simulations that our model exhibits syntactic bootstrapping effects (in which
previously learned constructions facilitate the learning of novel words), sudden jumps in learning
without explicit parameter setting, acceleration of word-learning (the “vocabulary spurt”), an initial
bias favoring the learning of nouns over verbs, and one-shot learning of words and their meanings.
These results suggest that there is no need to postulate distinct learning mechanisms to explain
these various phenomena; rather they can all be explained through a single mechanism of statistical
learning over structured representations.

BOOTSTRAPPING LANGUAGE ACQUISITION
2
1.1
Theoretical underpinnings
Our model falls under the general umbrella of “Semantic Bootstrapping” theory, which as-
sumes that the child can access a structural representation of the intended semantics or conceptual
content of the utterance, and that such representations are sufﬁciently homomorphic to the syntax of
the adult language for a mapping from sentences to meanings to be determined (Bowerman 1973;
Brown 1973; E. Clark 1973; Grimshaw 1981; Pinker 1979; Schlesinger 1971; cf. Wexler and
Culicover 1980:78-84; Berwick 1985:22-24). By “homomorphic”, we simply mean that meaning
representation and syntax stand in a “type-to-type” relation, according to which every syntactic type
(such as the English intransitive verb) corresponds to a semantic type (such as the predicate), and
every rule (such as English S →NP VP) corresponds to a semantic operation (such as function
application of the predicate to the subject).
Early accounts of semantic bootstrapping (e.g. Wexler and Culicover 1980 and Berwick
1985) assumed perfect access to a single meaning representation in the form of an Aspects-style
Deep Structure already aligned to the words of the language. Yet, as we shall see, semantic boot-
strapping is sufﬁciently powerful that such strong assumptions are unnecessary.
Since, on the surface, languages differ in many ways—for example with respect to the order
of heads and complements, and in whether such aspects of meaning as tense, causality, evidentiality,
and information structure are explicitly marked—the meaning representations must be expressed in
a universal prelinguistic conceptual representation, in whose terms all such distinctions are express-
able. The mapping must further be learned by general principles that apply to all languages. These
general principles are often referred to as “universal grammar”, although the term is somewhat mis-
leading in the present context since the model we develop is agnostic as to whether these principles
are unique to language or apply more generally in cognition.
A number of speciﬁc instantiations of the semantic bootstrapping theory have been proposed
over the years. For example, “parameter setting” accounts of language acquisition assume, follow-
ing Chomsky (1981), that grammars for each natural language can be described by a ﬁnite number
of ﬁnitely-valued parameters, such as head-position, pro-drop, or polysynthesis (Hyams, 1986, and
much subsequent work). Language acquisition then takes a form that has been likened to a game of
Twenty-Questions (Yang, 2006, Ch:7), whereby parameters can be set when the child encounters
“triggers”, or sentences that can only be analysed under one setting of a parameter. For example, for
Hyams (1986), the fact that English has lexical expletive subjects (e.g., it in it rained) is unequivocal
evidence that the pro-drop parameter is negative, while for others the position of the verb in simple
intransitive sentences in Welsh is evidence for head-initiality. Such triggers are usually discussed in
purely syntactic terms. However, in both examples, the child needs to know which of the words is
the verb, which requires a prior stage of semantic bootstrapping at the level of the lexicon (Hyams
1986:132-133).
Unfortunately, parameter setting seems to raise as many questions as it answers. First, there
are a number of uncertainties concerning the way the learner initially identiﬁes the syntactic cat-
egories of the words, the speciﬁc inventory of parameters that are needed, and the aspects of the
data that “trigger” their setting (Gibson and Wexler 1994; P. Niyogi and Berwick 1996; J. D. Fodor
1998). Second, several combinatoric problems arise from simplistic search strategies in this param-
eter space (J. D. Fodor & Sakas, 2005). Here, we will demonstrate that step-like learning curves
used to argue for parameter-setting approaches (Thornton & Tesan, 2007) can be explained by a
statistical model without explicit linguistic parameters.

BOOTSTRAPPING LANGUAGE ACQUISITION
3
A further variant of the semantic bootstrapping theory to be discussed below postulates a sec-
ond, later, stage of “syntactic bootstrapping” (Braine, 1992; Gleitman, 1990; Landau & Gleitman,
1985; Trueswell & Gleitman, 2007), during which the existence of early semantically boostrapped
syntax allows rapid or even “one-shot” learning of lexical items, including ones for which the sit-
uation of utterance offers little or no direct evidence. Early discussions of syntactic bootstrapping
implied that it is a learning mechanism in its own right, distinct from semantic bootstrapping. How-
ever, we will demonstrate that these effects attributed to syntactic bootstrapping emerge naturally
under the theory presented here. That is, our learner exhibits syntactic bootstrapping effects (using
syntax to accelerate word learning) without the need for a distinct mechanism: the mechanism of
semantic bootstrapping is sufﬁcient to engender the effects.
Although varieties of semantic bootstrapping carry considerable currency, some researchers
have pursued an alternative distributional approach (Redington, Chater, & Finch, 1998), which
assumes that grammatical structure can be inferred from statistical properties of strings alone. Many
proponents of this approach invoke Artiﬁcial Neural Network (ANN) computational models as an
explanation for how this could be done—see Elman et al. (1996) for examples—while others in
both cognitive science and computer science have proposed methods using structured probabilistic
models (Cohn, Blunsom, & Goldwater, 2010; D. Klein & Manning, 2004; Perfors, Tenenbaum,
& Regier, 2011). The distributional approach is appealing to some because it avoids the assumption
that the child can access meanings expressed in a language of mind that is homomorphic to spoken
language in the sense deﬁned above, but inaccessible to adult introspection and whose detailed
character is otherwise unknown.
There has been some success in using this kind of meaning-free approach to learn non-
syntactic structure such as word- and syllable-level boundaries (Goldwater, Grifﬁths, & Johnson,
2009; Johnson & Goldwater, 2009; Phillips & Pearl, 2014). However, attempts to infer syn-
tactic structures such as dependency or constituency structure, and even syntactic categories, have
been notably less successful despite considerable effort (e.g. Abend, Reichart, & Rappoport, 2010;
Christodoulopoulos, Goldwater, & Steedman, 2010; Cohn et al., 2010; D. Klein & Manning,
2004, 2005). Within the context of state-of-the-art natural language processing (NLP) applications,
ANN models that have no explicit structured representations have yielded excellent language mod-
eling performance (i.e., prediction of probable vs. improbable word sequences) (e.g., Mikolov,
Karaﬁát, Burget, Cernock`y, & Khudanpur, 2010; Sundermeyer, Schlüter, & Ney, 2012). They
have also been used to learn distributed word representations that capture some important semantic
and syntactic information (Mikolov, Yih, & Zweig, 2013). Yet the reason these models work as
well as they do in NLP tasks arises from the way they mix sentence-internal syntax and semantics
with pragmatics and frequency of collocation. Thus, they often learn to conﬂate antonyms as well as
synonyms to similar representations (Turney & Pantel, 2010). This representation creates problems
for the compositional semantics of logical operators (such as negation) of a kind that the child never
exhibits.
1.2
Overview of the learner
In this work, we take a close relation between syntax and compositional semantics as a given.
We also follow the basic premise of semantic bootstrapping that the learner is able to infer the
meaning of at least some of the language she hears on the basis of nonlinguistic context. However,
unlike some other versions of semantic bootstrapping, we assume that the available meanings are at

BOOTSTRAPPING LANGUAGE ACQUISITION
4
the level of utterances rather than individual words, and that word meanings (i.e., the mapping from
words to parts of the utterance meaning) are learned from such data.
We represent the meaning of an utterance as a sentential logical form. Thus, the aim of the
learner is to generalize from the input pairs of an observed sentence and a possible meaning in order
to interpret new sentences whose meaning is unavailable contextually, and to generate new sentences
that express an intended meaning. Because of the limitations of available corpus annotations, the
logical forms we consider are restricted to predicate-argument relations, and lack the interpersonal
content whose importance in language acquisition is generally recognized. We examine the nature
of such content in section 4.4, where we argue that our model can be expected to generalize to more
realistic meaning representations.
Recent work suggests that the infant’s physically limited view of the world, combined with
social, gestural, prosodic, and other cues, may lead to considerably less ambiguity in inferring utter-
ance meanings than has previously been supposed (C. Yu & Smith, 2012, 2013; Yurovsky, Smith,
& Yu, 2013). Nevertheless, most contexts of utterance are likely to support more than one possible
meaning, so it is likely that the child will have to cope with a number of distracting spurious mean-
ing candidates. We model propositional ambiguity in the input available to the learner by assuming
each input utterance s is paired with several contextually plausible logical forms {m1,...,mk}, of
which only one is correct and the rest serve as distractors. While these meaning representations are
assumed to reﬂect an internal language of mind, our model is general enough to allow the inclu-
sion of various types of content in the logical forms, including social, information-structural, and
perceptual.
Within this general framework, we develop a statistical learner that jointly models both (a)
the mapping between components of the given sentential meaning and words (or phrases) of the
language, and (b) the projection of lexical elements onto constituents and sentences by syntactic
rules. In earlier work, we deﬁned the learner and gave preliminary simulation results (Kwiatkowski,
Goldwater, Zettlemoyer, & Steedman, 2012); here we expand considerably on the description of
the learner, the range of simulations, and the discussion in relation to human language acquisition.
There has been considerable previous work by others on both word learning and syntactic ac-
quisition, but they have until very recently been treated separately. Thus, models of cross-situational
word learning have generally focused on learning either word-meaning mappings (mainly object
referents) in the absence of syntax (Alishahi, Fazly, & Stevenson, 2008; M. Frank, Goodman, &
Tenenbaum, 2009; McMurray, Horst, & Samuelson, 2012; Plunkett, Sinha, Møller, & Strandsby,
1992; Regier, 2005; Siskind, 1996; C. Yu & Ballard, 2007), or learning verb-argument struc-
tures assuming nouns and/or syntax are known (Alishahi & Stevenson, 2008, 2010; Barak, Fazly,
& Stevenson, 2013;
Beekhuizen, Bod, Fazly, Stevenson, & Verhagen, 2014;
Chang, 2008;
Morris, Cottrell, & Elman, 2000; S. Niyogi, 2002).2 Conversely, most models of syntactic acqui-
sition have considered learning from meaning-free word sequences alone (see discussion above),
or have treated word-meaning mapping and syntactic learning as distinct stages of learning, with
word meanings learned ﬁrst followed by syntax (Buttery,
2006;
Dominey & Boucher,
2005;
Villavicencio, 2002).
2Most of these verb-learning models actually model argument structure generalization (e.g., predicting that if a verb
has been seen in a double object construction, it might also be acceptable in a dative construction). We do not address
this type of generalization directly in the model presented here. However, Kwiatkowski, Zettlemoyer, Goldwater, and
Steedman (2011) have developed lexical generalization methods for similar models that could begin to address this
problem.

BOOTSTRAPPING LANGUAGE ACQUISITION
5
Several previous researchers have demonstrated that correct (adult-like) knowledge of syn-
tax (e.g., known part-of-speech categories or syntactic parses) can help with word-learning (Fazly,
Alishahi, & Stevenson, 2010; Göksun, Küntay, & Naigles, 2008; Mellish, 1989; Thomforde
& Steedman, 2011; Ural, Yuret, Ketrez, Koçba¸s, & Küntay, 2009; H. Yu & Siskind, 2013),
and a few (Alishahi & Chrupała, 2012; C. Yu, 2006) have gone further in showing that learned
(and therefore imperfect) knowledge of POS categories can help with word learning. However,
these models are not truly joint learners, since the learned semantics does not feed back into further
reﬁnement of POS categories.
By treating word learning and syntactic acquisition jointly, our proposal provides a working
model of how these two aspects of language can be learned simultaneously in a mutually reinforcing
way. And unlike models such as those of Maurits et al. (2009) and Beekhuizen (2015), our model
learns from real corpus data, meaning it needs to handle variable-length sentences and predicates
with differing numbers of arguments, as well as phenomena such as multiple predicates per sentence
(including hierarchical relationships, e.g., want to go) and logical operators, such as negation and
conjunction. To tackle this challenging scenario, we adopt techniques originally developed for the
task of “semantic parsing" (more properly, semantic parser induction) in computational linguistics
(Kwiatkowski, Zettlemoyer, Goldwater, & Steedman, 2010; Kwiatkowski et al., 2011; Thompson
& Mooney, 2003; Zettlemoyer & Collins, 2005, 2007).
Our model rests on two key features which we believe to be critical to early syntactic and se-
mantic acquisition in children. The ﬁrst, shared by most of the models above, is statistical learning.
Our model uses a probabilistic grammar and lexicon whose model parameters are updated using
an incremental learning algorithm. (By parameters here, we mean the probabilities in the model;
our model does not include linguistic parameters in the sense noted earlier of Chomsky (1981) and
Hyams (1986).) This statistical framework allows the model to take advantage of incomplete in-
formation while being robust to noise. Although some statistical learners have been criticized for
showing learning curves that are too gradual—unlike the sudden jumps in performance sometimes
seen in children (Thornton & Tesan, 2007)—we show that our model does not suffer from this
problem.
The second key feature of our model is its use of syntactically guided semantic composition-
ality. This concept lies at the heart of most linguistic theories, yet has rarely featured in previous
computational models of acquisition. As noted above, many models have focused either on syn-
tax or semantics alone, with another large group considering the syntax-semantics interface only
as it applies to verb learning. Of those models that have considered both syntax and semantics for
full sentences, many have assumed that the meaning of a sentence is simply the set of meanings
of the words in that sentence (Alishahi & Chrupała, 2012; Allen & Seidenberg, 1999; Fazly et
al., 2010; C. Yu, 2006). Connor, Fisher, and Roth (2012) addressed the acquisition of shallow
semantic structures (predicate-argument structures and their semantic roles) from sentential mean-
ing representations consisting of the set of semantic roles evoked by the sentence. Villavicencio
(2002) and Buttery (2006) make similar assumptions to our own about semantic representation and
composition, but also assume a separate stage of word learning prior to syntactic learning, with no
ﬂow of information from syntax back to word learning as in our joint model. Thus, their models
are unable to capture syntactic bootstrapping effects. Chrupała et al. (2015) have a joint learning
model, but no explicit syntactic or semantic structure. The model most similar to our own in this
respect is that of Jones (2015), but as noted above, the simulations in that work are more limited
than those we include here.

BOOTSTRAPPING LANGUAGE ACQUISITION
6
Much of the power of our model comes from this assumption that syntactic and semantic
composition are closely coupled. To implement this assumption, we have based our model on Com-
binatory Categorial Grammar (CCG, Steedman, 1996b, 2000, 2012). CCG has been extensively
applied to parsing and interpretation of unrestricted text (Auli & Lopez, 2011; S. Clark & Curran,
2004; Hockenmaier, 2003; Lewis & Steedman, 2014), and has received considerable attention
recently in the computational literature on semantic parser induction (e.g., Artzi, Das, & Petrov,
2014; Krishnamurthy & Mitchell, 2014; Kwiatkowski et al., 2010, 2011; Matuszek, Fitzgerald,
Zettlemoyer, Bo, & Fox, 2012; Zettlemoyer & Collins, 2005, 2007).
This attention stems from two essential properties of CCG. First, unlike Lexicalized Tree-
Adjoining Grammar (Joshi & Schabes, 1997), Generalized Phrase Structure Grammar (Gazdar,
Klein, Pullum, & Sag, 1985), and Head-driven PSG (Pollard & Sag, 1994)—but like LFG (Bres-
nan, 1982) and the Minimalist program (Chomsky, 1995)—a single nondisjunctive lexical entry
governs both in situ and extracted arguments of the verb. Second, the latter kind of dependencies
are established without the overhead for the learner of empty categories and functional uncertainty
or movement, of the kind used in LFG and the Minimalist Program.
These properties of CCG, together with its low near-context-free expressive power and sim-
plicity of expression, have made it attractive both for semantic parsing, and for our purposes here.
Nevertheless, the presented framework can in principle be implemented with any compositional
grammar formalism as long as (1) it allows for the effective enumeration of all possible syntac-
tic/semantic derivations given a sentence paired with its meaning representation; and (2) it is asso-
ciated with a probabilistic model that decomposes over these derivations.
Using our incremental learning algorithm, the learner is trained on utterances from the Eve
corpus (Brown, 1973; Brown & Bellugi, 1964) in the CHILDES database (MacWhinney, 2000),
with meaning representations produced automatically from an existing dependency annotation of
the corpus (Sagae, Davis, Lavie, MacWhinney, & Wintner, 2010). We use these automatically
produced meaning representations as a proxy for the child’s actual meaning representation in the
hidden conceptual language of mind. (Crucially, our model entirely ignores the alignment in these
data between logical constants and English words, as if the sentences were in a completely unknown
language.)
We evaluate our model in several ways. First, we test the learner’s ability to correctly produce
the meaning representations of sentences in the ﬁnal Eve session (not included in the training data).
This is a very harsh evaluation, since the learner is trained on only a small sample of the data the
actual child Eve was exposed to by the relevant date. Nevertheless, we show a consistent increase in
performance throughout learning and robustness to the presence of distractor meaning representa-
tions during training. Next, we perform simulations showing that a number of disparate phenomena
from the language acquisition literature fall out naturally from our approach. These phenomena
include sudden jumps in learning without explicit parameter setting; acceleration of word-learning
(the “vocabulary spurt”); an initial bias favoring the learning of nouns over verbs; and one-shot
learning of words and their meanings, including simulations of several experiments previously used
to illustrate syntactic bootstrapping effects. The success of the model in replicating these ﬁndings
argues that separate accounts of semantic and syntactic bootstrapping are unnecessary; rather, a
joint learner employing statistical learning over structured representations provides a single uniﬁed
account of both.

BOOTSTRAPPING LANGUAGE ACQUISITION
7
2
Semantic Bootstrapping for Grammar Acquisition
The premise of this work is that the child at the onset of language acquisition enjoys direct
access to some form of pre-linguistic conceptual representations. We are not committed to these
representations taking any particular symbolic or non-symbolic form, but for the compositional
learning process to proceed, there must be some kind of structure in which complex concepts can
be decomposed into more primitive concepts, and here we will abstractly represent this concep-
tual compositionality using a logical language. Such universal semantics or conceptual structure,
broadly construed, has often been argued to be the most plausible source for the universal learning
biases that enable language acquisition (Chomsky 1965:27-30; Crain and Nakayama 1987; 1995:54-
55; Pinker 1979; Croft 2001; Ambridge, Pine, and Lieven 2014). The child’s task is therefore to
consider all the different ways that natural language allows chunks of meaning representation to be
associated with lexical categories for the language they are presented with.
Concretely, we address the following learning problem. Given a corpus of transcribed ut-
terances, paired with representations of their meaning (henceforth, their logical forms), the goal of
learning is to induce a mapping between utterances (or transcribed text) to meaning representations,
so as to support the correct interpretation of unseen text, namely by assigning it correct logical
forms.
The model represents two types of information: a (probabilistic) pairing between lexical
items and their meaning representation, and a distribution over the syntactic derivations the learner
has been exposed to (a probabilistic grammar). The sensitivity of the infant learning language to
statistical trends observed in the data has been demonstrated in multiple levels of linguistic repre-
sentation (Gómez & Maye, 2005; Mintz, 2003; Saffran, Aslin, & Newport, 1996, inter alia) and
is a key factor in this account of semantic bootstrapping.
Much of the difﬁculty in this setting stems from not being able to directly observe the mean-
ing of individual words and the derivation trees, as the only supervision provided is of sentential
meaning representations. In order to infer the probabilistic grammar and word meanings, the model
entertains all possible derivations and word-meaning pairings, and weighs these based on their like-
lihood according to its hitherto acquired beliefs. This weighted space of derivations is subsequently
used to update the beliefs of the learner when exposed to the next utterance.
2.1
Meaning Representations
Meanings of sentences in CCG (and in our model) are expressed in ﬁrst-order predicate logic.
The example
(1) a. “you like the doggies!”
b. like(you,doggies)
expresses a relation like between the entity you and the entity doggies.
Of course, we do not believe that the child’s conceptual representation is as simple as this.
As Tomasello (1999) has pointed out, the content that the child is actually working with and that
actually provides it with the incentive to engage with language is highly interpersonal and social—
probably more like something paraphraseable as “Mum is sharing my liking the doggies”. Never-
theless, our model needs to represent the child’s semantics somehow. For simplicity, we’ll use terms
of a naive English-centric lambda-calculus, and defer the question of what a more psychologically
realistic human logical language might actually look like until section 4.4.

BOOTSTRAPPING LANGUAGE ACQUISITION
8
The lambda-calculus uses the λ-operator to deﬁne functions. These may be used to repre-
sent functional meanings of utterances but they may also be used as a “glue language” to compose
elements of ﬁrst order logical expressions like the above. For example, the function λxλy.like(y,x)
can be combined with the argument doggies to give the phrasal meaning λy.like(y,doggies) (corre-
sponding to the VP “like the doggies”) via the lambda-calculus operation of function application.
In function application, the formal argument x (introduced by the lambda notation) is replaced by
doggies in the remainder of the expression.
Our model uses typed λ-expressions, where each variable and constant is given a semantic
type. These types may either be atomic—such as e for entities (e.g., you, doggies) and t for truth
values—or they may be complex—for instance, sleep is a function from entities to a truth value, of
type (e,t), and like is a (Curried) function from pairs of entities to a truth value, of type (e,(e,t)).
Lambda-calculus operations such as function application and composition are only allowed between
forms of compatible types. For brevity, we will often not state semantic types explicitly.
Despite the shortcomings of such an approach to semantic representation, the logical forms
we use do meet the minimal criteria of (1) not encoding word order information and (2) not encod-
ing information about the correct segmentation of the utterance’s semantic forms above the level of
atomic semantic symbols. For example, the logical form like(you,doggies) does not determine the
number of lexical items that will give rise to this composite representation. The space of possible
derivations that can give rise to like(you,doggies) includes the possibilities that there are four words
in the sentence, one matching like, one matching you and one matching doggies, but also the possi-
bility that the meaning is partitioned into other numbers of words, including the possibility that the
whole meaning corresponds to a single word.
2.2
The Grammar
Combinatory Categorial Grammar (CCG) is a strongly lexicalised linguistic formalism that
tightly couples syntactic types and corresponding semantic λ-terms. Each CCG lexical item in the
lexicon L is a triplet, written
word ⊢syntactic category : semantic form.
Examples include:3
you ⊢NP : you
sleep ⊢S\NP : λx.sleep(x)
like ⊢(S\NP)/NP : λxλy.like(y,x)
the ⊢NP/N : λf.the(x,f(x))
doggies ⊢N : λx.dogs(x)
Syntactic categories may be atomic (e.g., S or NP) or complex (e.g., S\NP or (S\NP)/NP).
Slash operators in complex categories deﬁne functions from the domain on the right of the slash to
the result on the left in much the same way as lambda operators do in the corresponding semantic
forms. The difference is that the direction of the slash operator deﬁnes the linear order of function
3Determiner semantics is represented as generalized quantiﬁers. Namely, the(x,f(x)) should be read as the generalized
quantiﬁer the over x, applied to f(x).

BOOTSTRAPPING LANGUAGE ACQUISITION
9
and argument in the sentence. For example, S/NP corresponds to a constituent that along with an
NP to its right forms a constituent with the category S, while S\NP is similar but requires an NP to
its left to form an S. For example, in the English sentence “you sleep”, the verb “sleep” has the latter
category, S\NP. In a verb-initial language like Welsh, the corresponding intransitive verb meaning
“sleep” has the former category, S/NP.
CCG uses a small set of combinatory rules to concurrently combine constituents according
to their syntactic types and compose their semantic representations. Two simple combinatory rules
are forward (>) and backward (<) application:
X/Y : f
Y : g
⇒
X : f(g)
(>)
Y : g
X\Y : f
⇒
X : f(g)
(<)
Given the lexicon above, the phrase “you like the doggies” can be parsed using these rules as
follows, where each step in the parse is labeled with the combinatory rule (> or <) that was used:
you
like
the
doggies
NP
S\NP/NP
NP/N
N
you
λxλy.like(y,x)
λ f.the(x, f(x))
λx.dogs(x)
>
NP
the(x,dogs(x))
>
S\NP
λy.like(y,the(x,dogs(x)))
<
S
like(you,the(x,dogs(x)))
It is standard to write CCG parse trees as in the above diagram, with leaves at the top and
combinatory operations written next to constituent demarcation lines. However, the same derivation
could also be written in phrase-structure form as follows (semantics omitted):
S
NP
you
S\NP
S\NP/NP
like
NP
NP/N
the
N
doggies
A bit more needs to be said about transitive verbs. Unlike unary intransitive predicates and
the determiner categories, transitive verbs in English, such as “like” in the example above, could in
principle be associated with either of the two syntactic categories in (2), both of which support a
derivation of the ﬁnal logical form.
(2) a. like ⊢(S\NP)/NP : λxλy.like(y,x)
b. like ⊢(S/NP)\NP : λyλx.like(y,x)

BOOTSTRAPPING LANGUAGE ACQUISITION
10
However, we will assume here that the universally permitted set of transitive categories excludes
cases of verb-medial categories (SVO or OVS) where, as in 2(b), the verb attaches ﬁrst to the seman-
tic subject.4 The learner therefore considers only the following six possible categories/constituent
orders for transitive verbs, only one of which will work for English:5
(3) a. SOV ⊢(S\NP)\NP : λyλx.like(x,y)
b. SVO ⊢(S\NP)/NP : λyλx.like(x,y)
c. VSO ⊢(S/NP)/NP : λxλy.like(x,y)
d. VOS ⊢(S/NP)/NP : λyλx.like(x,y)
e. OVS ⊢(S/NP)\NP : λyλx.like(x,y)
f. OSV ⊢(S\NP)\NP : λxλy.like(x,y)
Finally, we note that our model also includes CCG combinatory rules of forward (> B) and
backward (< B) composition:
X/Y : f
Y/Z : g
⇒
X/Z : λx.f(g(x))
(> B)
Y\Z : g
X\Y : f
⇒
X\Z : λx.f(g(x))
(< B)
These rules are crucial to the CCG analysis of unbounded dependency-inducing constructions such
as relativization, to which we return in the discussion of later learning in section 4.4.
2.3
The Probabilistic Model
The goal of the presented model is to learn a form-meaning mapping that can support the
correct interpretation of unseen text. We assume that this mapping involves a latent syntactic struc-
ture that mediates between phonological/orthographic and semantic form. Given the uncertainty
involved in grammar induction (as a ﬁnite number of examples does not uniquely determine a CCG
grammar, or any other plausible class of grammars), we formulate the problem of acquisition as one
of probabilistic inference.
There are two ways to construe the use of probabilistic modeling. In one, probabilities serve
to make rational inferences in an uncertain environment. In this case, the target grammar can be
formulated without the use of probabilities, while the probabilistic model represents the “belief” of
the model in each of the possible non-probabilistic hypotheses. Alternatively, the target grammar
itself is assumed to be probabilistic, either because it captures information that is probabilistic in
nature or because the model does not have access to some of the information that would be needed
to disambiguate (for example, semantic distinctions not represented in the logical forms we use).
Our model and results are consistent with either interpretation; we will return to discuss this point
in Section 4.
We take a Bayesian inference approach and explore learning through an idealized rational
learner that induces the grammar most supported by the observed data given the assumptions made
by the model. We depart from this idealized setting only in assuming that learning is done incre-
mentally, so that the learner has no access to previously observed examples beyond what has already
been learned from them (i.e., the updated parameters of the statistical model). Using an incremental
4This assumption rules out verb-medial ergative languages but can be circumvented by subcategorizing the subject
and object NPs based on their case.
5We assume, following Baldridge (2002), that free word-order languages simply have more than one of these cate-
gories.

BOOTSTRAPPING LANGUAGE ACQUISITION
11
algorithm makes it easy to examine how the learner’s grammar and behavior develop over time as
examples are presented, and is of course more psychologically plausible than a batch algorithm.
As discussed above, our model takes as input a sequence of sentences, each paired with
one or more possible meanings. For the moment, assume each sentence s is paired with a single
meaning m. The learner also maintains a probability distribution over model parameters Θ. These
parameters specify the probabilities of using or combining lexical items into phrases according to
different rules, and can be thought of as the learner’s grammar (including the lexicon, as CCG is
a lexicalized formalism). The distribution over Θ thus represents the learner’s belief about which
grammars are most plausible given the input so far.
Before observing a particular (s,m) pair, the learner has some prior probability distribution
over the grammar, P(Θ). At the beginning of the learning process, this prior will be entirely ﬂat, and
will assign equal probability to symmetric options (e.g., verb-ﬁnal vs. verb-initial) as the learner
doesn’t know anything speciﬁc about the language being learned.6
However, the prior will be
updated with each new example. Upon observing an (s,m) pair, the learner infers the probabilities
of all possible syntactic derivation trees t that could provide a derivation of the (s,m) pair, along
with a posterior distribution over Θ. That is, the learner infers a distribution P(t,Θ|s,m), which can
be expressed using Bayes’ rule as:
(1)
P(t,Θ | s,m) = P(s,m,t | Θ)P(Θ)
P(s,m)
As learning progresses, the prior for each new example is in fact the posterior distribution learned
after observing the previous example, so over time the prior will become much more peaked, assign-
ing high probability to lexical items and rules used frequently in the previously inferred derivations.
For the model to be complete, we also need to specify how to compute the likelihood
P(s,m,t|Θ), which determines how probable different derivations are under a particular grammar.
(For any (s,m) pair, P(s,m) is a constant that simply normalizes the posterior distribution to sum to
1, so we don’t need to deﬁne it explicitly.)
As is usual in Bayesian models, we will deﬁne the likelihood using a generative formulation,
i.e., we will deﬁne a probabilistic process that describes how (s,m,t) triples (derivations) are as-
sumed to be generated given a particular set of parameters Θ. This process will consist of multiple
steps; by multiplying together the probabilities at each step we can determine the probability of the
ﬁnal complete derivation P(s,m,t | Θ). The learner that we present in Section 2.4 incrementally
changes the parameters Θ to increase the probabilities of derivations that support the (s,m) pairs
seen during training.7
Consider now a particular (s,m,t) derivation,
such as the one given above for
“you like the doggies” : like(you,the(x,dogs(x))) and repeated here:
6There is nothing in our model to exclude asymmetric priors, such as those proposed by Culbertson, Smolensky, and
Wilson (2013). We assume a ﬂat initial prior as it is the most conservative option.
7Since the syntactic tree t for any particular (s,m) pair is never directly observed, the likelihood term favors values of
Θ that assign high probability to the set of possible derivations t(s,m) of the (s,m) pair in question—Appendix B describes
how the space of all possible derivations is deﬁned. When multiple (s,m) pairs are observed, the likelihood favors Θ that
assign high probability to the set of all derivations of all observed pairs. This goal can be achieved by assigning high
probability to derivations with subparts that can be used to explain many different (s,m) pairs. Assigning high probability
to an idiosyncratic parse could raise the probability of t(s,m) for a particular (s,m) pair, but will steal probability mass
from other parses that are more generally applicable, thus making the possible derivations for all other (s,m) pairs less
likely.

BOOTSTRAPPING LANGUAGE ACQUISITION
12
you
like
the
doggies
NP
S\NP/NP
NP/N
N
you
λxλy.like(y,x)
λ f.the(x, f(x))
λx.dogs(x)
>
NP
the(x,dogs(x))
>
S\NP
λy.like(y,the(x,dogs(x)))
<
S
like(you,the(x,dogs(x)))
The probability of such a derivation will have three parts. First, the probability of all of
the function applications needed to decompose each parent node into each child combination of
nodes. These are essentially the rules of the syntax. Second, the probability with which each of the
resulting leaf syntactic category child nodes (e.g., NP or NP/N) is assigned a given meaning (e.g.,
you or λf.the(x,f(x))). Third, the probability with which each meaning corresponds to a word in
the sentence (e.g., ’you’ or ’the’).
Formally, let w1,...,wn be the words in the sentence s, m1,...,mn be their meaning repre-
sentations (i.e., the meanings of each leaf in the derivation tree), and c1,...,cn be their syntactic
categories. The derivation is generated as follows:
1. Generate each syntactic rule in the derivation, with probability P(γ | a) for a rule a →γ with
parent category a and child categories γ. Each parent category X either generates a pair
of child categories through inverse application or composition (e.g., X may generate X/Y
and Y; X/Z may generate X/Y and Y/Z; See Appendix B for the formal deﬁnition of this
procedure), or generates a leaf by generating the symbol XLEX. We assume all derivations
start with the START symbol, but for brevity omit this and the XLEX categories from the
example derivations shown. The probability of this step is given as:
(2)
PSYNTAX(t) = ∏
a→γ∈t
P(γ | a)
2. For each leaf syntactic category ci in c1,...,cn, generate the corresponding meaning represen-
tation mi with probability P(mi | ci). The probability of this step is given as:
(3)
PMEANINGS(m|t) =
n
∏
i=1
P(mi | ci)
3. For each mi, generate the corresponding word wi with probability P(wi | mi). The probability
of this step is given as:
(4)
PWORDS(s|m) =
n
∏
i=1
P(wi | mi)

BOOTSTRAPPING LANGUAGE ACQUISITION
13
Putting these steps together, we get the overall probability of a derivation:
P(s,m,t) = PSYNTAX(t)·PMEANINGS(m|t)·PWORDS(s|m)
(5)
For instance, the probability of the above derivation of “you like the doggies” is the product
of the following three terms:
PSYNTAX(t) =P(S | START)×P(NP, S\NP | S)×P(S\NP/NP, S\NP | S\NP)×
P(NP/N, N | NP)×P(NP/N, N | NP)×
P(NPLEX | NP)×P([S\NP/NP]LEX | S\NP/NP)×
P([NP/N]LEX | NP/N)×P(NLEX | N)
PMEANINGS(m|t) =P(you | NPLEX)×P(λxλy.like(y,x) | [S\NP/NP]LEX)×
P(λ f.the(x, f(x)) | [NP/N]LEX)×P(λx.dogs(x) | NLEX)
PWORDS(s|m) =P(you | you)×P(like | λxλy.like(y,x))×
P(the | λ f.the(x, f(x)))×P(dogs | λx.dogs(x))
This model is essentially a probabilistic context-free grammar (PCFG). While naive PCFGs
impose conditional independence assumptions that are too strong to characterize natural language,
they can be augmented to overcome this problem (Charniak, 1997; Collins, 1997). PCFGs are a
simple and well-understood class of models with standard parsing and learning algorithms, and are
powerful enough to do well in prediction of both phrase-structure trees (Collins, 1997) and CCG
derivation trees (Hockenmaier & Steedman, 2002) in naturalistic settings. Future work will explore
the use of richer families of distributions.
In order to complete the model, we still need to deﬁne how the distributions used in Equations
2, 3 and 4 are calculated: P(γ | a), P(m | c), and P(w | m). First, consider P(γ | a), the distribution
over possible expansions γ given a syntactic production head a. Notice that this distribution needs
to be deﬁned over an inﬁnite set of possible expansions, since the learner does not know ahead of
time which expansions will be needed for their language. Recent probabilistic models of language
acquisition (Alishahi & Stevenson, 2008, 2010; Feldman, Grifﬁths, Goldwater, & Morgan, 2013;
S. Frank, Feldman, & Goldwater, 2014; Goldwater et al., 2009), have demonstrated that Dirichlet
Processes can be used to successfully model such inﬁnite distributions, so we adopt that approach
here. When applied to our problem (see Appendix A for details), the Dirichlet Process deﬁnes the
probability of a particular expansion given the production head as
(6)
P(γ | a) = na→γ +αsynHa
na +αsyn
where na→γ is the number of times the rule a →γ has been used previously in a derivation, na is
the number of times any rule expanding a has been used, and αsyn is a ﬁxed parameter of the model
which determines the learner’s tendency to infer derivations containing (any) new rule that has not
been used previously. Ha, another ﬁxed parameter of the model, is a prior distribution over rules: of
all the rules headed by a that have not been used before, which ones are more likely to be used?
Notice that under this deﬁnition, the more a rule has been used relative to other expansions
of the same parent, the higher its probability will be. Over time, rules with higher probability will

BOOTSTRAPPING LANGUAGE ACQUISITION
14
be used more, incurring higher counts, which raises their probability even more: a virtuous cycle of
learning. However, even rules that have never been used before (with na→γ =0) have some non-zero
probability associated with them, as determined by the values of αsyn and Ha. We deﬁne Ha without
any particular bias towards any of the CCG operators, or any of the atomic syntactic categories.
However, we do include a bias towards simpler syntactic categories (e.g., expanding an NP into
(NP/N,N) would be a priori more likely than expanding it into (NP/(N/N),N/N)).
The remaining two distributions P(m | c) (the distribution over leaf meaning representations
given the syntactic category) and P(w | m) (the distribution over wordforms given a meaning rep-
resentation m) are also deﬁned using Dirichlet Processes. Again, these provide well-deﬁned distri-
butions over the inﬁnite sets of possible meaning representations and wordforms, assigning higher
probability to meanings and words that have been seen more frequently, but non-zero probability
to novel meanings and words. The prior distribution over unseen meanings prefers simpler logical
expressions (those containing fewer logical constants), and the prior distribution over unseen words
prefers shorter words. See Appendix A for details.
2.4
The Learning Algorithm
The previous subsections described the input, internal representations, and probabilistic
model used by our learner. This subsection explains how the learner processes the input data in
order to determine the possible derivations of each (sentence, meaning) pair and update its knowl-
edge of the parameters Θ on the basis of the input and its derivations.
At a high level, the learning algorithm is straightforward. The corpus contains sentences
s1 ...sN, and we assume for the moment that each si is paired with a single unambiguous meaning
representation mi. The learner processes the corpus incrementally, at each step considering the pair
(si,mi) and computing the set of possible derivations ti for this pair. Roughly speaking, a single
derivation can be found by recursively splitting si and mi into smaller and smaller chunks that,
when recombined using the CCG application and composition rules, will yield the original input
pair. By considering all possible splits at each step in this process, all possible derivations can
be found and their probabilities computed based on the learner’s current beliefs about Θ and the
probabilistic model described in Section 2.3.8 Details of the splitting process, including how the
possible syntactic categories are determined for each chunk, can be found in Appendix B.
Next, the learner updates its beliefs about Θ. Each derivation in ti will include binary (com-
binatory) rules as well as unary rules that generate the leaf syntactic categories, meaning represen-
tations, and wordforms. The learner updates its probabilities for any rules used in ti, weighting
the number of times a rule is used by the probability of the derivation(s) in which it is used. In
other words, the learner will increase the probability of a rule more if it is used frequently, or in
a derivation that has high probability according to the current model parameters. It is also impor-
tant to account for the fact that early on, the learner’s prior is based on little evidence, whereas
later it is based on much more evidence. We therefore assume that early in learning the learner
makes larger updates, weighting the evidence from the current example more heavily relative to the
model’s previously learned prior. The rate at which learning drops off is controlled by an additional
ﬁxed parameter, the learning rate. A more gradual change in the learning rate means the learner
will continue to make large updates for longer, effectively forgetting more about early examples and
8We efﬁciently store and compute probabilities over the set of possible derivations by using a “packed forest” repre-
sentation of the kind used in chart parsing in computational linguistics.

BOOTSTRAPPING LANGUAGE ACQUISITION
15
taking longer to converge. Details of the update procedure can be found in Appendix C.9
The only change needed in order to handle the more realistic condition where the child/learner
has to consider more than one possible meaning for each sentence is that the set of derivations
considered is the union of all possible derivations for the current sentence paired with each possible
meaning. In this scenario, rules that are used in derivations for the incorrect meaning may gain
some probability mass, especially early on when the learner has little evidence of the correct rules.
However, they will quickly be swamped by the correct rules, for the same reason that rules used in
incorrect derivations of the correct meaning are. That is, the correct rules apply consistently (and
therefore frequently) across a wide range of sentences, leading to increasingly high probabilities for
those rules and a virtuous cycle of learning. As we shall see, even when there is an unknown word
in the sentence, the learner’s increasing knowledge about the rules that are typically used in other
sentences can lead to very rapid learning of new words (both their meanings and syntax) later on in
learning.
To illustrate the learning algorithm, consider a very simple example in which the child’s
ﬁrst input is “more doggies”, which we will assume, simplifying as usual, that she understands as
more(dogs). Upon hearing this sentence, the child inversely applies the CCG combinators to retrieve
every derivation possible under CCG that yields the input pair “more doggies” : more(dogs). In
this case, there are three possible derivations:
(4) a.
more
doggies
NP/N : more N : dogs
>
NP : more(dogs)
b.
more
doggies
N : dogs NP\N : more
<
NP : more(dogs)
c.
more doggies
NP : more(dogs)
The following set of candidate lexical entries can be read off the three derivations in (4):
(5) a.
more ⊢NP/N : more
b.
more ⊢N : dogs
c.
doggies ⊢NP/N : more
d.
doggies ⊢N : dogs
e. more doggies ⊢NP : more(dogs)
Since this is the ﬁrst utterance the child hears, the correct lexical entries (a, d) and incorrect
entries (b, c) are completely symmetrical and therefore equiprobable: if the child wants to say more
she is as likely to choose “dogs” as “more”. Lexical entry (e) will have lower probability because
the priors over wordforms and logical forms favor shorter and simpler entries.
Now suppose the child encounters a second utterance, “more cookies”, which will have three
9We show later that within broad limits, the learning rate has no interesting effects on the overall performance of the
learner.

BOOTSTRAPPING LANGUAGE ACQUISITION
16
derivations and ﬁve possible lexical entries analogous to those for “more doggies”, with the correct
derivation being:
(6)
more
cookies
NP/N : more N : cookies
>
NP : more(cookies)
In this case the correct derivation will receive higher probability than the incorrect ones, due
to the child’s previous experience with “more doggies”. In particular, because “more” : more has
occurred already in a possible derivation, P(more | more) will be higher than P(more | cookies)
or P(cookies | more), and this will give a higher probability overall to the correct derivation,
even though at this point there is no preference based on syntax.
That is, prior to observing
“more cookies”, noun-initial and noun-ﬁnal NPs have both been seen once in equiprobable deriva-
tions, so P(N, NP/N | NP) is equal to P(NP\N, N | NP). Importantly for future learning, however,
the child is now able to update her syntactic probabilities based on this example. Because the deriva-
tion in (6) has higher probability than the competing derivations, the NP →NP/N N rule will be
updated to receive higher probability than the alternative NP →N NP\N, and in future examples
this will allow the child to use syntax to help infer the meanings of novel words. Our simulations
in Sections 3.4 and 3.5 suggest that this effect leads to an acceleration of learning over time, and
Section 3.7 shows that the same effect can explain results from classic syntactic bootstrapping ex-
periments, where children use word order to correctly learn the meaning of a novel verb used with
two familiar nouns (e.g., the man daxed the baby).
It should be noted that, due to the incremental nature of our learning algorithm, observing an
utterance like “more cookies” does not cause the model probabilities for dogs to be updated; i.e., the
probability that dogs is realized as “doggies” will still be equal to the probability that it is realized as
“more”. This behaviour would differ with a batch learning algorithm, since “more cookies” provides
evidence that more is realized as “more”, so that in “more doggies”, dogs is more likely providing
the semantics for “doggies”. In our incremental algorithm, the parameters for any particular word
are only updated when that word is seen. In that sense, the model built by the incremental learner is
an approximation to what would be learned by an exact batch learner.
2.5
Generating meanings for novel sentences
To evaluate our account of language learning, we apply the resulting parser to unseen sen-
tences and ask it to supply the corresponding meaning representation. Because of the generative
formulation of the model, there is a straightforward probabilistic interpretation of this task. In par-
ticular, given an input sentence s and the model’s current estimate of the parameters Θ, we predict
the most probable, i.e., maximum a posteriori (MAP), meaning representation m∗and syntactic tree
t∗:
t∗,m∗
=
argmax
m,t
P(m,t | s,Θ)
(7)
=
argmax
m,t
P(m,t,s | Θ)
P(s | Θ)
(8)
=
argmax
m,t
P(m,t,s | Θ)
(9)
where Eq (9) follows from (8) because P(s | Θ) doesn’t depend on m or t.

BOOTSTRAPPING LANGUAGE ACQUISITION
17
As the model is an instance of a PCFG, we use the standard probabilistic CKY algorithm
for computing the most likely (m,t,s) triplet given the parameters of the model.10 We note that the
model is unable to predict m if s contains unknown words, as the logical constants used to represent
them can be any of an inﬁnite set of unknown items. Instead, the model predicts the most likely
shell logical form, where anonymous but semantically typed place-holders replace unseen constants.
For example, suppose the model sees the sentence “Mary blicks John” with no paired logical form
(corresponding to a situation where the child hears the sentence but cannot infer the semantics from
non-linguistic context). If it has learned enough about the syntax and semantics of other verbs and
about the meaning of “Mary” and “John”, then it will be able to infer the meaning of the sentence
as PLACE_HOLDER(Mary,John), indicating that it knows “blick” is a verb taking two arguments
in a particular order, but does not know the speciﬁc lexical meaning of “blick”. We also investigate
learning of this kind, using artiﬁcial unseen words.
3
Simulations
We conduct a range of simulations with our model, looking at four main types of effects:
(1) learning curves, both in terms of the model’s overall generalization ability, and its learning of
speciﬁc grammatical phenomena; (2) syntactic bootstrapping effects, where previously acquired
constructions accelerate the pace at which words are learned (we show overall trends and simulate
speciﬁc behavioral experiments); (3) one-shot learning effects, showing that the model is able to
infer the meaning of newly observed words, given that enough about the syntax and the rest of the
words in the sentence is known; (4) ﬁndings as to the relative pace of learning of nouns and verbs.
Our simulations are summarized in Table 1 and described in detail below, following the
description of the input data.
3.1
Input to the Learner
3.1.1
Corpus.
We know of no corpus of child-directed utterances manually annotated
with compatible logical forms.
Instead, we use the Eve corpus (Brown & Bellugi,
1964) in
the CHILDES database (MacWhinney,
2000) and construct the logical representations semi-
automatically based on the dependency and morphosyntactic category annotations of Sagae et al.
(2010), using the general method of Çakıcı (2005) and Ambati, Deoskar, and Steedman (2016).
The Eve corpus contains 20 roughly two-hour sessions, two per month, collected longitudi-
nally from a single child aged 18-27 months. The dependency annotations were converted to logical
forms using a manually deﬁned mapping that addresses major constructions, such as verb-argument
structure, coordination, WH and yes/no questions, copulas and auxiliaries. The mapping covers
41% of the utterances in the corpus, yielding 5831 utterances. About a quarter of the discarded
utterances consist of one-word interjections such as “hmm” or “yeah”. We further ﬁltered out sen-
tences of 10 words or more, and of 10 or more extractable sub-expressions, leaving a ﬁnal corpus
of 5123 utterances. We divide this into a training set of 4915 utterances (sessions 1–19), and a held-
out test set of 208 utterances (session 20). Some example sentence-meaning pairs can be found in
Appendix D11.
10Strictly speaking, the model is an inﬁnite PCFG, which (unlike a standard PCFG), places some probability mass on
unseen expansions. However, such expansions are excluded when predicting the MAP representation.
11The derived corpus is available online through the corresponding author’s website.

BOOTSTRAPPING LANGUAGE ACQUISITION
18
Section
Figure(s)
Simulation and Main Effect
3.2
1
Parsing accuracy improves over time; performance is robust to propositional uncer-
tainty.
3.3
2, 3, 4, 5
The model learns word ordering: that transitive sentences are SVO, and that deter-
miners and prepositions are pre-nominal. Steep learning curves are exhibited despite
having no explicit parameter-setting.
3.4
6, 7, 8, 9
The model demonstrates one-shot learning of verbs, nouns, determiners and preposi-
tions in later stages of acquisition. These results can be seen as a naturalistic (corpus-
based) analogue to the carefully controlled simulations reported in Figures 14-16,
and therefore as a separate illustration of how learned syntactic knowledge can help
accelerate word learning (the “syntactic bootstrapping” effect; Gleitman 1990).
3.5
10, 11
The model exhibits acceleration in the learning pace of transitive verbs and of nouns,
similar to the “vocabulary spurt” observed in children (Reznick & Goldﬁeld, 1992).
Again, these results can be viewed as (partly) due to syntactic bootstrapping.
3.6
12, 13
The model obtains a larger production vocabulary of nouns than of verbs, despite not
being explicitly biased to do so (Gentner, 1982; Tomasello, 1992:210). Moreover,
in the presence of distractors, verbs are initially under-represented in the learner’s
production vocabulary (compared to nouns), relative to what can be predicted from
the verb to noun input ratio in the child-directed utterances (Gentner & Boroditsky,
2001 and references therein).
3.7
14, 15, 16
The model simulates results from classic syntactic bootstrapping experiments. It per-
forms one-shot learning, using its acquired knowledge of syntax to disambiguate be-
tween possible meanings for a transitive verb (following Fisher, Hall, Rakowitz, and
Gleitman 1994) and between noun-like and preposition-like meanings for a novel
word (following Fisher, Klingler, and Song 2006).
Table 1
Navigation table for the presented simulations and main effects.
This is the only dataset of its kind that we know of. However, it should be noted that it
constitutes what we estimate to be less than 2% of the data that the actual child Eve was learning
from over this same period in order to achieve the competence implicit in session 20, the held-out
test set. It will become apparent below that this dataset is only just large enough to make stable and
convergent learning possible, given our current model and learning algorithm.
3.1.2
Propositional Uncertainty.
In order to relax the overly optimistic assumption that
the child is exposed to entirely unambiguous situations, we add some uncertainty as to the correct
logical form. We do so by pairing each utterance with several logical forms, only one of the which
is the correct one. Rather than choosing distractor logical forms at random, we follow Fazly et al.
(2010) in choosing distractors from nearby utterances in the corpus, so they are likely to share some
semantic content with correct logical forms (as they were uttered in a similar situation). In partic-
ular, distractors are taken to be the logical forms of the w utterances preceding and following the
target training example, where w ∈{0,1,2,3}. We hence explore four settings: one with no propo-
sitional uncertainty (target logical form alone), and three with increasing amount of propositional
uncertainty (target plus two, four and six distractors).

BOOTSTRAPPING LANGUAGE ACQUISITION
19
(a)
(b)
Figure 1. The model is trained by incrementally viewing sentences from the ﬁrst i (x-axis) sessions,
each paired with a correct meaning and up to six distractor meanings; it is then tested on its accuracy
(y-axis) at correctly assigning full sentence-level meanings to unseen test set sentences, using the
20th session as a test set. In Figure 1(a), sentences containing any previously unseen word are
automatically marked as incorrect (since no speciﬁc semantics can be assigned to that word); in
Figure 1(b), the model can guess placeholder meanings for unseen words, and receives credit if the
rest of the semantic form is correct.
3.2
Parsing Unseen Sentences
We begin by evaluating our parser’s learning performance by training it on varying amounts
of data, from 1-19 sessions. After training on the ﬁrst i sessions (for i = 1...19), we test the learner’s
ability to parse the sentences in the held-out test ﬁle (session 20). We use a single test ﬁle rather
than testing each time on session i+1 to isolate the changes in performance due to learning, rather
than confounding results with possible changes in the test data over time.
For each utterance in the test ﬁle, we use the parsing model to predict the MAP estimate
for m∗and compare this to the target meaning. As described in Section 2.5, when a word has
never been seen at training time our parser has the ability to “guess” a shell logical form with
placeholders for unseen constant and predicate names. Figure 1 presents the prediction accuracy,
i.e., the proportion of utterances for which the prediction m∗matches the target meaning with and
without word-meaning guessing.
The low performance at all levels of uncertainty is largely due to the sparsity of the data with
21% of all training sentences containing a previously unseen word. Nevertheless, while increasing
the propositional uncertainty slows the learning down, the learner shows increasing performance
over time in all cases. This is an indication of the model’s robustness to noise, a major issue of
concern in computational models of acquisition (Siskind, 1996; Yang, 2002).
3.3
Learning word order
We next examine the model’s learning of syntax, starting with transitive verbs. There are eight
possible “word orders” (categories including semantic forms) that a transitive may be associated
with, two of which are only applicable to ergative languages, and are ruled out by stipulation (see
Section 2.2). The proposed model does not have a parameter that directly represents its belief as

BOOTSTRAPPING LANGUAGE ACQUISITION
20
(a) No Distractors
(b) 2 Distractors
(c) 4 Distractors
(d) 6 Distractors
Figure 2. Learning that English is an SVO language. Plots show the relative posterior probability
assigned by the model to the six possible categories of transitive verbs. The x-axis is the number of
training utterances seen so far. In the 2 distractor setting, the failure to assign most of the probability
mass to the correct SVO category is an artefact of the small dataset (see text).
Figure 3.
The relative probability of the six categories considered for transitive verbs in the 2
distractor setting, as a function of the number of seen utterances, where the learning rate is modiﬁed
to be more gradual. The correct SVO category is learned quickly and effectively.

BOOTSTRAPPING LANGUAGE ACQUISITION
21
to which of the categories is the correct one. However, the model does maintain a distribution
over syntactic expansions and logical forms, which we use to compute the model’s learned prior
distribution over the six remaining transitive verb categories (where the model’s beliefs after seeing
the training data are its prior over the categories used to parse any new utterance).
Figure 2 presents the relative probability for the transitive verb categories in the various set-
tings. In all cases, the correct SVO category is learned to be the most probable upon convergence.
In the three cases with propositional uncertainty, we see that the SVO category receives very little
probability after 100 iterations (after an initial probability of 1
6). The model is, however, able to
recover, and eventually the correct SVO order is learned to be the most probable. However, in the
2 distractor setting the SVO category is never overwhelmingly favored over the other categories (as
it is in all the other settings). This stems from the difﬁculty in setting a learning rate that works
well across many different experimental settings given the small size of the training set. Conse-
quently, in this case the algorithm does not manage to recover from its initial under-estimation of
the relative probability of SVO, since the learning rate is too steep to allow effectively weighing in
further evidence observed later in learning. To conﬁrm this, we experimented with a more gradual
learning rate (details in Appendix C), and present the relative probabilities of the six categories for
this setting in Figure 3, which indeed shows a clear preference for SVO.
Results with a few other values for the learning rate present similar trends with some changes
in the details. Under all settings the correct grammatical categories are favored (and with deter-
miners and prepositions, overwhelmingly so) and the learning of individual words follows similar
patterns to those described in the following section. Changes in details include more ﬂuctuating
learning curves when the learning rate is more moderate, and somewhat different parameter values
upon convergence.
To show that the model also learns the correct word order for other categories, we examined
determiners (Figure 4) and prepositions (Figure 5), both in the high-uncertainty settings.12 (It is
uninformative to look at nouns since the logical form in this case uniquely determines the syntactic
category, namely N.) Results show that the model quickly converges to the correct options (pre-
nominal rather than post-nominal determiners, and prepositions rather than postpositions), even in
the presence of high propositional uncertainty. In fact, the learning curves are even steeper than for
verbs, despite having no explicit “head-direction” parameter to set.
3.4
Learning Curves of Individual Words
We next examine the learning curves for individual words, again starting with transitive verbs.
To do so, we estimate the probability P(v, SVO | mv) (henceforth, “correct production probability”
or CPP) for a given transitive verb form v and its associated logical form mv. This probability is a
proxy to the production beliefs of the child, i.e., her ability to utter the correct word and syntactic
category, given an intended meaning. This is a strict measure, as it requires learning both the correct
logical form and the correct syntactic category for the verb. We condition on the logical form instead
of the word form in order to avoid penalizing homographs, which are particularly common in our
model, which e.g. treats the word “run” in “they run”, “run along now”, and “I want to run” as
having three unrelated syntactic and logical forms which just happen to have the same surface form.
This means that even a perfect learner would have P(mthird person plural run | run) < 1, simply because
12We consider only prepositions that introduce an argument rather than an adjunct. Adjunct prepositions have different
syntactic and semantic types and are hence excluded by conditioning on the logical form.

BOOTSTRAPPING LANGUAGE ACQUISITION
22
(a) Syntactic disposition for determiners, 4 distractors
(b) Syntactic disposition for determiners, 6 distractors
Figure 4. Learning word order for determiners. Plots show the relative probability of generating
a pre-nominal vs. a post-nominal determiner in the (a) 4 distractor and (b) 6 distractor setting, as a
function of the number of training utterances seen.
some probability mass must also be reserved for P(mimperative run | run), and this effect would vary
in unpredictable ways for different word forms, making it difﬁcult to assess the success of learning.
By contrast, in our training data each logical form uniquely determines the correct syntactic type
and word form, so that a perfectly successful learner should always approach a CPP of 1.
Figure 6 shows how the CPP varies over the course of training for a few transitive verbs,
both frequent (“move”, “want”, “ﬁx”) and less frequent (“cracked”, “needs”). With no propositional
uncertainty, all of these verbs are learned rapidly within a short timeframe after they are encountered.
In the cases of 4 and 6 distractors, learning of word order is more gradual, revealing how innacurate
beliefs about the structure of the language inﬂuence the learning of speciﬁc verbs. Indeed, verbs
that are ﬁrst observed in an earlier stage of learning (e.g., “want”, “ﬁx”, “move”) no longer exhibit
one-shot learning: instead, they are learned only gradually (and even seem to be “un-learned” on
(a) Syntactic disposition for prepositions, 4 distractors (b) Syntactic disposition for prepositions, 6 distractors
Figure 5. Learning word order for prepositions. Plots show the relative probability of generating a
preposition vs. a postposition in the (a) 4 distractor and (b) 6 distractor setting, as a function of the
number of training utterances seen.

BOOTSTRAPPING LANGUAGE ACQUISITION
23
(a) No Distractors
(b) No Distractors (zoomed in)
(c) 4 Distractors
(d) 4 Distractors (zoomed in)
(e) 6 Distractors
(f) 6 Distractors (zoomed in)
Figure 6. Learning curves showing the correct production probability for verbs of different frequen-
cies in the (top) 0-distractor, (middle) 4-distractor, and (bottom) 6-distractor settings, as a function
of the number of utterances observed. (Results from the 2 distractor setting in this case are un-
informative since the model fails to learn SVO word order well: see Figure 2(b) and associated
discussion.) Plots on the right zoom in on the ﬁrst stage of learning, and also show horizontal
“timelines” for each word with tickmarks indicating, for each 20-utterance block, whether the word
occurred in that block. (The color and top-to-bottom order of the timelines matches the words in
the legend.) Large jumps in the plots generally correspond to observations in which the given verb
appears, while smaller changes can occur due to ﬁne-tuning of higher-order model parameters (e.g.,
the overall probability of transitive verbs having SVO syntax). The frequencies for these verbs are:
f(move) = 18, f(want) = 70, f(cracked) = 1, f(needs) = 3, f(ﬁx) = 11.

BOOTSTRAPPING LANGUAGE ACQUISITION
24
(a) 4 Distractors
(b) 4 Distractors (zoomed in)
(c) 6 Distractors
(d) 6 Distractors (zoomed in)
Figure 7.
Learning curves showing the CPP for nouns of different frequencies in the (top) 4-
distractor and (bottom) 6-distractor settings, as a function of the number of utterances observed.
Right-hand plots zoom in on the earlier stage of learning, as in Figure 6. The frequencies are:
f(skunk) = 2, f(bird) = 3, f(baby) = 12, f(man) = 29, f(girl) = 52.
occasion; though the model is able to recover from the error).
Interestingly, the model’s knowledge about these words can actually improve even without
seeing them again (see utterances 500-1000 in the 4 and 6 distractor cases) as its implicit higher-
order beliefs about grammatical structure (e.g., SVO word order) change. As the model learns more
about the language, its acquired knowledge also provides a strong prior guiding the interpretation of
utterances containing new verbs. This leads to much more rapid learning of verbs ﬁrst observed late
in learning (“cracked”, “needs”). There are two ways in which prior learning can help: ﬁrst, know-
ing the meanings of (some) other words in the sentence reduces the uncertainty about the meaning
of the verb. Second, as we demonstrate in Section 3.7, even if no other words in the sentence are
known, simply having high prior probability associated with rules instantiated by SVO categories
will help to disambiguate the verb’s meaning: syntactic bootstrapping at work. In the naturalis-
tic setting of this simulation, these two sources of knowledge are inextricably linked; Section 3.7
isolates the syntactic effect by simulating a controlled laboratory experiment.
Of course, if our analysis is correct, then these patterns of learning should not be restricted
to verbs. Figure 7 presents the CPP for various nouns of different frequencies, showing the high-

BOOTSTRAPPING LANGUAGE ACQUISITION
25
(a) 4 distractors
(b) 4 Distractors (zoomed in)
(c) 6 distractors
(d) 6 Distractors (zoomed in)
Figure 8.
Learning curves showing the CPP for determiners of different frequencies in the (top)
4-distractor and (bottom) 6-distractor settings, as a function of the number of utterances observed.
Right-hand plots zoom in on the earlier stage of learning, as in Figure 6. The frequencies are:
f(his) = 17, f(any) = 9, f(a) = 351, f(more) = 23, f(the) = 321.
uncertainty scenarios where the differences between early and late learning should be more pro-
nounced. These plots suggest that nouns are easier to learn than verbs (we return to this point in
Section 3.6), since most of the nouns are learned rapidly, even early on (note the zoomed in plots
only go to 1000 utterances here). Nevertheless, nouns observed in the very earliest part of learning
do tend to require more observations to learn than those ﬁrst observed later: in some cases learning
is more gradual (as for “man”); in others the word may be observed a few times with little or no
learning, before then being learned all at once (as for “girl”). Figure 8 and Figure 9 show similar
effects for some individual determiners and prepositions.
To summarize, results from looking at learning curves for individual words suggest that words
ﬁrst observed early in the learning process are initially learned gradually (or in some cases suddenly
but after several occurrences), while those that ﬁrst appear later on are learned more rapidly, often
after only a single occurrence. These ﬁndings, which we explore further in the following section,
suggest that qualitative changes in the shape of the learning curves can be explained by a single
statistical learning mechanism, which improves as it learns (see also Fazly et al. 2010; Regier 2005
and references therein). This single mechanism can also explain the ability to learn from just one

BOOTSTRAPPING LANGUAGE ACQUISITION
26
(a) 4 distractors
(b) 4 Distractors (zoomed in)
(c) 6 distractors
(d) 6 Distractors (zoomed in)
Figure 9. Learning curves showing the CPP for prepositions of different frequencies in the (top)
4-distractor and (bottom) 6-distractor settings, as a function of the number of utterances observed.
Right-hand plots zoom in on the earlier stage of learning, as in Figure 6. The frequencies are:
f(with) = 53, f(at) = 17, f(in) = 86, f(about) = 7, f(on) = 78.
example, a phenomenon we return to in Section 3.7.
3.5
Acceleration of learning and the vocabulary spurt
The learning curves for individual words presented in the previous section suggested that
words encountered early in acquisition are learned more slowly than those ﬁrst encountered at a
later point. We now show that this ﬁnding is not restricted to the particular words we examined, and
we also explore the consequences for vocabulary size as word learning accelerates over time.
For the ﬁrst analysis, we look at transitive verbs. Notice that, on average, a high-frequency
verb will appear ﬁrst earlier in the corpus than a low-frequency verb. Thus, if words that ﬁrst occur
late tend to be learned more rapidly, then on average low-frequency verbs will be learned in fewer
examples, and high-frequency verbs will require more examples.
To test this hypothesis, we divide verbs into two bins: high-frequency (occurs more than 10
times in the corpus) or low-frequency (occurs 10 or fewer times). For each bin, we compute the

BOOTSTRAPPING LANGUAGE ACQUISITION
27
(a) 4 Distractors
(b) 6 Distractors
Figure 10. The average CPP (y-axis) for frequent and infrequent verbs, after observing n examples
(x-axis). Because the nth example of a low-frequency verb occurs later in training (on average),
fewer examples are required to reach a given level of proﬁciency. We use a frequency threshold of
10, leading to 99 infrequent verbs and 23 frequent verbs. We do not plot 7-9 occurrences because
only eight of the infrequent verbs have 7 or more occurrences. Results are shown only for the 4-
and 6-distractor settings because in the low-distraction setting, all verbs are learned so quickly that
it obscures the effect.
average CPP for all verbs after seeing n instances of that verb type.13 We plot this average CPP as
a function of n in Figure 10, which indeed shows the predicted trend.
Our second analysis, which focuses on nouns, is more directly comparable to observations
from real children. Speciﬁcally, after an initial period in which the vocabulary of the child is re-
stricted to no more than a few words, a sudden increase in the production vocabulary size is ob-
served, usually around the age of 18–24 months (Reznick & Goldﬁeld, 1992). The trends we have
already observed in individual words, when taken together over the whole vocabulary, should yield
exactly this kind of accelerated learning.
Figure 11 conﬁrms this prediction (see Fazly et al. 2010 for a related ﬁnding). We plot an
estimate of the size of the noun production vocabulary as a function of the number of observed
utterances. The noun vocabulary size is deﬁned as the number of nouns whose CPP exceeds a
threshold of 0.8. We present results for the 6 distractors setting in which the trends can be seen
most clearly, as the initial learning stage is longer. Results show that after an initial period (up to
about 200 utterances) in which the vocabulary size increases slowly, the slope of the curve changes
and nouns are learned at a faster rate. This could be partly due to syntactic bootstrapping from
knowledge about determiner and preposition ordering, which is acquired very early (as shown in
Figures 4 and 5). It is likely also due to the fact that as more nouns are learned, any sentence
containing those nouns has fewer other unknown words, so overall uncertainty is reduced. In any
case, the results suggest that no special mechanism or change in processing is needed to explain the
vocabulary spurt, it simply arises from the nature of the statistical learner.
13Many verbs are ambiguous between multiple logical forms. We therefore deﬁne a verb type according to its mv rather
than its written form.

BOOTSTRAPPING LANGUAGE ACQUISITION
28
Figure 11. The size of the production vocabulary of nouns as a function of the number of utterances
seen, for the 6 distractors setting. The production vocabulary is deﬁned as all nouns with a CPP of
at least 0.8.
3.6
Comparing noun and verb learning
It is well-known that nouns predominate over verbs in the early lexicons of English-learning
children, although there is considerable individual and cross-linguistic variation, and some verbs or
predicative categories are among the earliest vocabulary items acquired for some children (Gentner,
1982; Tomasello, 1992:210). Figure 12 shows that our learner shows a similar trend, accumulating
nouns faster than transitive verbs, but learning some verbs right from the start.14
This observed bias towards nouns cannot be ascribed to a difference in the conceptual com-
plexity of nouns and verbs, or a difference in their level of concreteness (see Snedeker & Gleitman,
2004 for a review of proposals based on these ideas), as our model does not distinguish nouns and
verbs on any such dimensions.
Moreover, the larger noun vocabulary in our model doesn’t simply reﬂect the input frequen-
cies of nouns and verbs: Figure 13 presents the ratio of verb types to noun types in the input, as
well as in the production vocabulary for the different distractor settings. In the more realistic 2-, 4-
and 6-distractor settings, the verb:noun ratio starts off lower than that in the input, and only later
converges to the input ratio. That is, early on (especially in the ﬁrst few hundreds of sentences),
verbs are under-represented relative to their input rate. In the no-distractors setting, the learned rate
is similar to the input rate.15 This under-representation of verbs in the early phase of learning is con-
sistent with claims of noun bias in the literature, i.e., that the the ratio of verbs to nouns is lower in
child productions than in the child directed speech (see discussion in Gentner & Boroditsky, 2001).
Comparing the plots in Figure 13 with the learning curves for word order shown earlier
suggests an explanation for the noun bias in our model, namely that: (1) early on, nouns are over-
14There are many different ways to count word types, e.g., deciding whether to lump or split a verb by subcategoriza-
tion, tense, agreement, mood and other grammatical systems may result in different counts. Here we focus on transitive
verbs, counting types of all inﬂections, while counting only singular nouns against the noun’s vocabulary. Thus, any
difference between the noun and transitive verb vocabulary sizes is a conservative estimate. These methodological issues
play a lesser role when comparing the ratios of the input and learned vocabularies (see below).
15The plot appears to show that verbs are over-represented for the ﬁrst 80 utterances, but as the vocabulary is very
small at this point (no more than ten words of each category), the difference between the learned and input ratios is likely
not statistically signiﬁcant.

BOOTSTRAPPING LANGUAGE ACQUISITION
29
(a) 4 Distractors
(b) 6 Distractors
Figure 12. A comparison of the noun and transitive verb vocabulary sizes in the (a) 4-distractor and
(b) 6-distractor settings. The curves present the sizes of the production vocabularies of nouns and
transitive verbs (deﬁned as words with CPP at least 0.8) as a function of the number of observed
utterances. Results indicate that nouns account for a larger part of the vocabulary than transitive
verbs. The relative vocabulary sizes for the 0- and 2-distractor settings are nearly identical to what
is shown, but more words are learned in the 0-distractor setting.
Figure 13.
A comparison of the ratio of transitive verbs and nouns in the child-directed input,
relative to this ratio in the child’s production vocabulary (deﬁned as words with CPP at least 0.8).
Curves are presented for all four distractor settings. Results indicate that the ratios converge to
similar values in all settings, but that in the 2, 4 and 6 distractor settings verbs are initially under-
represented relative to their presence in the input.

BOOTSTRAPPING LANGUAGE ACQUISITION
30
represented in the vocabulary because the syntactic constructions of noun phrases (involving de-
terminers and prepositions) are learned more quickly than those of transitive clauses (chieﬂy, the
category of transitive verbs), allowing syntactic bootstrapping to start earlier for nouns and increase
the rate of noun learning; (2) as learning progresses, and once the structure of transitive clauses is
learned too, the rate of verb learning “catches up” to that of nouns, and the larger noun vocabulary
can be directly ascribed to the differing frequencies of verbs and nouns in child-directed speech. In-
deed, the point of acquisition of the correct SVO category in the different settings (Figure 2) largely
matches the later phase of convergence between the input and learned rate. The no-distractor setting
thus does not display an early under-representation of verbs simply because the syntax of transitives
is learned very early on.
This explanation is indeed consistent with the proposal of Snedeker and Gleitman (2004)
that verbs lag behind nouns because learning verbs requires greater linguistic (rather than concep-
tual) development on the part of the child. In particular, they argue that verb learning requires
more knowledge about the surrounding sentential context (including its syntax) so the learner gets
additional cues beyond just the non-linguistic situational context.
Beyond this hypothesis, our model also suggests that the use of syntactic cues might kick in
earlier for nouns than for verbs. Whether this holds true in infants likely requires further behavioral
study, since most behavioral work on syntactic bootstrapping has focused on verbs (see Fisher,
Gertner, Scott, & Yuan, 2010 for a review). Nevertheless, some studies do suggest that infants are
able to use syntactic and morphological cues earlier in noun processing than verb processing (see
Cauvet et al., 2014 for a review). It is therefore plausible that syntactic information relevant to
nouns is learned and used earlier, and that the resulting bootstrapping effect could further explain
the early noun bias in children’s vocabulary.
3.7
Syntactic bootstrapping for one-shot learning of nonce words
So far, all our analyses have focused on the “natural” timecourse of learning, studying what
the simulated child might know at a particular moment in time as a result of their particular and
idiosyncratic history of exposure to language. Much of the literature on child language learning,
however, focuses on what children of different ages are able to learn based on controlled exposure
to a small number of examples in a laboratory setting. In this section, we follow suit, by ﬁrst training
our model on the ﬁrst n examples from the corpus (to simulate the background knowledge a child
of a particular age might bring to the lab), and then exposing it to a small number of hand-crafted
training examples and studying what it learns from these.
In particular, we examine the model’s ability to deal with cases like Fisher et al.’s (1994)
chase/ﬂee example, where the same physical situation seems to support more than one logical form.
Fisher et al. (1994) ask how it is that children faced with (made up) examples like the following
avoid the error of making an OVS lexical entry for “ﬂee” with the meaning chase:
(7) “Kitties ﬂee doggies”
It is important that words like “ﬂee”, where the instigator of the event is realized as an object
rather than a subject, are relatively rare. (For example, there are eight occurrences of any form
of “ﬂee” in the entire English CHILDES corpus—over 17M tokens—of which none is transitive.)
Therefore, the child will have encountered plenty of normal transitive verbs (where the instigator is
the subject) before encountering examples like (7).
In terms of our model, this means that, by the time (7) is encountered, the learned prior

BOOTSTRAPPING LANGUAGE ACQUISITION
31
probability of the instantiated rules for combining transitive SVO verbs with their object and sub-
ject will be substantially greater than the priors for OVS verbs. This will lead to a much higher
probability for the correct meaning and SVO syntax for “ﬂee” than for an OVS lexical item with
the same meaning as “chase”. Of course, the model also entertains other possibilities, such as that
“ﬂee” means cats, that “kitties” means ﬂee, etc. However, assuming that “kitties” and “doggies”
have been encountered relatively often, so that “ﬂee” is the only unfamiliar word in the sentence,
then the model will assign a very low probability to these additional spurious hypotheses.
In fact, we will see that after training, the model can determine the correct meaning for a
transitive verb even in the face of signiﬁcantly greater ambiguity, when the meanings of other words
in the sentence are not known, because the learned prior over the OVS syntactic category, which is
not attested elsewhere in the data, becomes exceedingly low.
Gleitman and colleagues have described the process by which the child resolves this type of
contextual ambiguity as “syntactic bootstrapping”, meaning that lexical acquisition is guided by the
child’s knowledge of the language-speciﬁc grammar, as opposed to the semantics (Gleitman, 1990;
Gleitman, Cassidy, Nappa, Papafragou, & Trueswell, 2005). However, in present terms such an
inﬂuence on learning simply emerges from the statistical model required for semantic bootstrapping.
We will return to this point in the General Discussion.
3.7.1
Nonce verbs.
Our ﬁrst simulation is inspired by the experiments of Gertner, Fisher,
and Eisengart (2006), where children at the age of 21 and 25 months were presented with two
pictures, one in which a girl is performing some action over a boy, and one in which it is the other
way around. The pictures were paired with a description, either “the boy gorped the girl” or “the
girl gorped the boy”. Results showed a disposition of the children to select the interpretation (that
is, to look at the picture) in which the actor coincided with the subject rather than the object of the
sentence.
Here, we examine the model’s ability to correctly interpret the nonce verb “dax” in the sen-
tence “the man daxed the baby”, when presented with two possible meaning representations: one in
which the man is performing an action over the baby, and one in which the baby is performing an
action over the man. In order to correctly infer the meaning of “daxed” (analogous to Fisher et al’s
“ﬂee” and Gertner et al.’s “gorped”) the model has to rely on its learned prior to favor SVO over
OVS interpretations, as the two interpretations are otherwise symmetrical. Results show the model
quickly learns to favor the correct SVO interpretation for “daxed”.
Speciﬁcally, we ﬁrst train the model on the ﬁrst n examples of the CHILDES corpus, in
intervals of 100 examples (4 and 6 distractors settings), and then present the model with one more
sentence – literally, the string “the man daxed the baby” – which is paired with both the SVO- and
OVS-supporting logical forms. (Intuitively, the SVO-supporting logical form involving the man
daxing the baby is ‘correct’, while the OVS-supporting logical form involving the baby daxing
the man is a ‘distractor’, but the model is simply presented both as two a priori equally likely
possibilities.) We then query the model’s state to compute several predictions.
First, we ask which of the two logical forms the model assigns a higher posterior probability,
and ﬁnd that from n = 200 examples and onwards the correct SVO interpretation is always pre-
ferred. Next, we use the strict CPP statistic to assess the model’s success at learning the nonce verb
“daxed” : λxλy.daxed(y,x) based on this single training example (Figure 14) and ﬁnd that it is
quite successful despite the syntactic complexity of the surrounding sentence.
3.7.2
Multiple novel words.
The above simulation examined the model’s ability to per-
form syntactic bootstrapping to learn an unknown verb in the presence of uncertainty between an

BOOTSTRAPPING LANGUAGE ACQUISITION
32
(a) “The man daxed the baby”, 4 distractors
(b) “The man daxed the baby”, 6 distractors
Figure 14. Syntactic bootstrapping: The model’s CPP for the unknown word “daxed” (y-axis) after
training on n utterances from the corpus (x-axis) followed by a single presentation of the sentence
“The man daxed the baby” with SVO/OVS ambiguous semantics. During training only, either four
(Figure 14(a)) or six (Figure 14(b)) distractors are included along with each correct logical form.
(a) “Jacky daxed Jacob”, 4 distractors
(b) “Jacky daxed Jacob”, 6 distractors
Figure 15. Syntactic bootstrapping: The model’s CPP for the word “daxed” (y-axis) after training
on n utterances from the corpus (x-axis) plus one exposure to “Jacky daxed Jacob”, where all three
words are unknown. During training only, either four (Figure 15(a)) or six (Figure 15(b)) distractors
are included along with each correct logical form. In both cases, the correct interpretation of the
test sentence is the most likely one upon convergence.

BOOTSTRAPPING LANGUAGE ACQUISITION
33
(a) “This is corp Mommy”, 4 distractors
(b) “This is corp Mommy”, 6 distractors
(c) “This is the corp”, 4 distractors
(d) “This is the corp”, 6 distractors
Figure 16.
The correct production probability (y-axis) for the unknown word “corp” in the sen-
tences “This is corp Mommy”, where it should be interpreted as a preposition (16(a) and 16(b)), and
“This is the corp” (16(c) and 16(d)), where it should be interpreted as a noun, as a function of the
number of training examples seen (x-axis). The model is trained in the 4 and 6 distractors settings.
SVO and an OVS interpretation. We next examine the model’s performance in a simulated experi-
ment where the utterance is ambiguous between all possible word orders. We ﬁnd that also in this
setting, the model is able to determine the correct SVO order, due to its high (learned) prior over the
rules instantiated by the SVO category as opposed to the alternatives.
Concretely, in this simulation the model is trained on n examples from the corpus, and then
receives the single utterance “Jacky daxed Jacob”, where “Jacky”, “Jacob” and “daxed” are all un-
known words, paired with the logical form daxed(jacky,jacob). This corresponds to a situation
where the child is exposed to a scene in which some hitherto unnamed person performs an unusual
action on another unnamed person. A priori, there are many possible interpretations that are con-
sistent with this utterance; for example, in a VSO language we would expect a child to interpret
“Jacky” as a verb meaning daxed(x,y), and “daxed” as a noun meaning jacky, and if we exposed
our model to this example alone without any other training data, then it would indeed assign this
interpretation just as high a probability as the intended SVO interpretation. What this simulated ex-
periment tests, therefore, is the model’s ability to make higher-order syntactic generalizations from
the English-based training corpus, and apply them to this novel utterance.

BOOTSTRAPPING LANGUAGE ACQUISITION
34
First, we ask which derivation tree for “Jacky daxed Jacob” : daxed(daxer,daxee) is as-
signed the highest probability, and ﬁnd that the correct SVO derivation is preferred in all cases
where n ≥500 for the 4 distractor case and n ≥800 for the 6 distractor case. We further examine
the model’s ability to assign “daxed” the correct SVO interpretation by plotting the CPP of the word
“daxed” after training on n training examples, followed by the dax example. Figure 15(a) and (b)
present this probability for the 4 and 6 distractor settings respectively. These results demonstrate
the model’s ability to correctly interpret “daxed” (and consequently the sentence) in this more am-
biguous setting after training on a single example of the verb, proving the model’s ability to learn
and apply syntactic generalizations even in the presence of propositional uncertainty.
3.7.3
Nonce nouns and prepositions.
Finally, we examine the cases of nouns and prepo-
sitions, conﬁrming the model’s ability to perform syntactic bootstrapping in these categories as well.
We take inspiration from Fisher et al. (2006), who demonstrated 2-year old’s disposition to interpret
“corp” in “this is a corp” as a noun (and therefore assign it a noun-compatible meaning), while
interpreting “acorp” in “this is acorp the baby” as a preposition (with a preposition-like meaning).
In our case, we feed the model with either of the two utterances: “this is the corp” and “this is corp
Mommy”, paired with two possible logical forms: one where “corp” is compatible with the noun
category and another where “corp” is compatible with the preposition category.16 The model as-
signs “corp” a noun interpretation in the ﬁrst example, and a preposition interpretation in the second.
Concretely, as before the model is trained on n examples in the 4 and 6 distractors settings, and then
given a single instance of either of the “corp” examples, paired with the two possible logical forms.
The steep learning curves of this simulation are given in Figure 16, indicating that once again the
model is able to use its knowledge of syntax to correctly disambiguate between the meanings, just
as the children in the experiment did.
4
General Discussion
We have presented an incremental model of language acquisition that learns a probabilistic
CCG grammar from utterances paired with one or more potential meanings. The learning model
assumes no knowledge speciﬁc to the target language, but does assume that the learner has access
to a universal functional mapping from syntactic to semantic types (E. Klein & Sag, 1985), as well
as a Bayesian model favoring grammars with heavy reuse of existing rules and lexical types. It is
one of only a few computational models that learn syntax and semantics concurrently, and the only
one we know of that both (a) learns from a naturalistic corpus and (b) is evaluated on a wide range
of phenomena from the acquisition literature. Moreover, the model is fully generative, meaning that
it can be used for both parsing (understanding) and generation, and that probability distributions
over subsets of the variables (e.g., individual lexical items) are well-deﬁned—a property we used
in many of our analyses. Like some very recent proposals (Beekhuizen, 2015; Jones, 2015) but
unlike earlier work (Buttery, 2006; Gibson & Wexler, 1994; Sakas & Fodor, 2001; Siskind,
1992; Villavicencio, 2002; Yang, 2002), we also evaluate our learner by parsing sentences onto
their meanings, rather than just examining the learner’s ability to set a small number of predeﬁned
syntactic parameters.
Together, these properties of our model and evaluation allow us to investigate the relation-
ship between word learning and syntactic acquisition in a more realistic setting than previous work.
16The slight modiﬁcations of Fisher et al.’s examples were done in order to arrive at a pair of utterances of the same
length, in which the non-nonce words are learned very early on.

BOOTSTRAPPING LANGUAGE ACQUISITION
35
Results from our simulations suggest that the kind of probabilistic semantic bootstrapping model
proposed here is sufﬁcient to explain a range of phenomena from the acquisition literature: accel-
eration of word learning, including one-shot learning of many items later in acquisition; the pre-
dominance of nouns over verbs in early acquisition; and the ability to disambiguate word meanings
using syntax. All of these behaviors emerge from the basic assumptions of the model; no additional
stipulations or mechanisms are required. Finally, our work addresses a criticism levelled against
some statistical learners—that their learning curves are too gradual (Thornton & Tesan, 2007). By
demonstrating sudden learning of word order and of word meanings, our model shows that statistical
learners can account for sudden changes in children’s grammars.
In the remainder of the discussion, we expand on a few of these points, highlight some con-
nections between our model and earlier theories of acquisition, and discuss how our model might
generalize to more realistic meaning representations.
4.1
Syntactic bootstrapping revisited
It has long been noted that the onset of syntactically productive language is accompanied
by an explosion of advances in qualitatively different “operational” cognitive abilities (Vygotsky,
1934/1986). These ﬁndings suggest that language has a feedback effect that facilitates access to
difﬁcult concepts, a view that is further supported by the early work of Oléron (1953) and Furth
(1961), who demonstrated that deaf children who were linguistically deprived (by being denied
access to sign) showed speciﬁc cognitive deﬁcits in non-perceptually evident concepts.
This view is also consistent with Gleitman’s (1990) proposal that the availability of syntax
enables the child to “syntactically bootstrap” lexical entries for verbs (such as “promise”) that may
not be situationally evident. However, we have argued that such syntactic bootstrapping is only
possible when the child has access to a model of the relation between language-speciﬁc syntax and
the universal conceptual representation. Our simulations of learning novel transitive verbs, inspired
by the chase/ﬂee ambiguity and related behavioral studies, support this argument and demonstrate
that syntactic bootstrapping need not be postulated as a distinct mechanism, but is emergent from a
semantic bootstrapping approach such as the one proposed here.
In that sense, the so-called “syntactic” bootstrapping effect might better be termed “struc-
tural”, since it relies crucially on (and arises directly from) the homomorphism between syntactic
and semantic types. Although the child might eventually learn the meanings of novel predicates
in any case, structural bootstrapping serves to highlight the meaning that is most plausible in light
of the child’s previously acquired grammatical knowledge. Our model operationalizes that previ-
ously acquired knowledge as a probabilistic grammar, where the probabilities learned from previous
examples act as the prior distribution when faced with a new example. When learning from a natu-
ralistic corpus, these priors become sufﬁciently peaked that the learner is able to identify the correct
verb meanings in examples with ambiguous semantic roles, like “the man daxed the baby”. More
generally, the learner’s accumulating syntactic knowledge (along with knowing more word mean-
ings) causes an acceleration of learning, which we demonstrated both for verbs and nouns.
4.2
Relationship to Non-probabilistic and Parameter-Setting Approaches
Like other probabilistic approaches to language acquisition, our proposal avoids many of the
stipulations required by non-probabilistic approaches. In particular, there is no need for a Subset
Principle (Berwick, 1985) or the ordered presentation of unambiguous parametric triggers, both of

BOOTSTRAPPING LANGUAGE ACQUISITION
36
which appear to present serious problems for the language learner (Angluin 1980; Becker 2005;
J. D. Fodor and Sakas 2005). Nor does our approach contradict widely-held assumptions concerning
the lack of negative evidence in the child’s input. The child can progress from the universal superset
grammar to the language-speciﬁc target grammar entirely on the basis of positive evidence. This
positive evidence raises the probability of correct hypotheses at the expense of incorrect ones, in-
cluding those introduced by error and noise. The only evidence that the child needs is a reasonable
proportion of utterances that are sufﬁciently short for them to deal with.
Nevertheless, our proposal does share some commonalities with earlier non-probabilistic ap-
proaches. For example, it resembles the proposal of J. D. Fodor (1998) as developed in Sakas and
Fodor (2001) and P. Niyogi (2006) in that it treats the acquisition of grammar as arising from pars-
ing with a universal “supergrammar”, which includes all possible syntactic structures allowed in any
language that are compatible with the data (J. A. Fodor, Bever, and Garrett 1974:475). However,
our learner uses a different algorithm to converge on the target grammar. Rather than learning rules
in an all or none fashion on the basis of parametrically unambiguous sentences, it uses all process-
able utterances to adjust the probabilities of all elements of the grammar for which there is positive
evidence. In this respect, it more closely resembles the proposal of Yang (2002). However it differs
from both in eschewing the view that grammar learning is parameter setting, and from the latter in
using a Bayesian learning model rather than Mathematical Learning Theory (Atkinson, Bower, &
Crothers, 1965).
We eschew parameter setting because if the parameters are implicit in the rules or categories
themselves, which can be learned directly, neither the child nor the theory need be concerned with
parameters other than as a prior distribution over the seen alternatives. For the child, all-or-none
parameter-setting would be counterproductive, making it hard to learn the many languages that
have exceptional lexical items or inconsistent settings of parameters across lexical types, as in the
English auxiliary verb system and Italian subject-postposing intransitives. Of course, languages
do tend toward consistent (if violable) values of parameters like headedness across categories for
related semantic types (such as verbs and prepositions). Such consistency will make learning easier
under the present theory, by raising the model’s probabilities for recurring rules and categories,
leading to higher prior probabilities for those rules and categories when they are re-encountered in
future. It is less clear that representing this consistency explicitly, rather than implicitly in the model
and the evolving prior, will help the individual child learning its ﬁrst language.
4.3
Cognitive plausibility and interpretation of probabilities
Our model is based on similar mathematical principles to other Bayesian models of language
acquisition (e.g., Feldman et al., 2013; M. Frank et al., 2009; Goldwater et al., 2009; Grif-
ﬁths & Tenenbaum, 2005, 2006; Perfors, Tenenbaum, & Wonnacott, 2010; Xu & Tenenbaum,
2007), and shares with them the attractive properties noted above: the probabilistic framework per-
mits the learner to accumulate evidence over time and eventually make strong inferences about
the language-speciﬁc grammar, without the need for negative evidence and in a way that is robust
to noise. However, unlike many Bayesian models, our learner uses an incremental learning algo-
rithm rather than adopting an ideal observer approach. We adopted this approach in the interests
of cognitive plausibility and in order to easily examine the progress of learning over time. As a
result our learner has no guarantee of optimality, but is aligned with other recent work investigating
cognitively plausible approximate learning strategies for Bayesian learners (Pearl, Goldwater, &

BOOTSTRAPPING LANGUAGE ACQUISITION
37
Steyvers, 2010; Sanborn, in press; Sanborn, Grifﬁths, & Navarro, 2010; Shi, Grifﬁths, Feldman,
& Sanborn, 2010).
Nevertheless it is worth noting that, despite the incremental algorithm, some other aspects of
our learner are less cognitively plausible. In particular, to process each input example the learner
generates all parses consistent with that example. This can require signiﬁcant memory and com-
putation, especially for longer sentences, and indeed is not incremental at the level of words, as
human sentence processing is generally accepted to be. However, it might be possible to develop
further approximations to reduce the computational requirements, for example by computing pa-
rameter updates based on a high probability subset of the possible parses. Another approach might
be particle ﬁltering, which has been used by some other recent models to model memory limitations
in incremental sentence processing and other tasks (Levy, Reali, & Grifﬁths, 2009; Sanborn et al.,
2010; Shi et al., 2010).
Regardless of the learning algorithm, the use of probabilities raises the question of how ex-
actly a notion like “the adult grammar” should be understood in this model, where the grammar
represents a probability distribution over all hypotheses that the child learner has ever entertained,
albeit one that has converged with most of the probability mass concentrated in correct lexical entries
and rules of derivation, as opposed to spurious determiners like “doggies” and rules for combining
them with nouns like “more”.
Such a grammar/model could in principle be pruned to eliminate such obvious dead wood.
However, the grammar would remain probabilistic in nature. This conclusion might seem to con-
ﬂict with traditional theories of competence, but such probabilistic grammars are now widespread
in models of gradience in language processing and gradient grammaticality (Bresnan & Nikitina,
2003; Hale, 2001; Jurafsky, 1996; Levy, 2008; Sorace & Keller, 2005). Some have argued
that gradience in competence is distinct from that in performance (Crocker & Keller, 2005). Our
model’s probabilities closely reﬂect processing (i.e., frequency of use). However, even if interpreted
as a model of competence, it can in principle model both gradient and hard judgements, the latter
either as extremely low-probability events, or as structures that are entirely absent from the proba-
bilistic grammar. Our model would then instantiate a theory of learning for such gradient grammars,
analogous to various learning models proposed for stochastic Optimality Theoretic grammars (e.g.,
Boersma & Hayes, 2001; Goldwater & Johnson, 2003; Hayes & Wilson, 2008).
4.4
Towards More Realistic Meaning Representation
The meaning representations for child-directed utterance considered in this work have been
necessarily simpliﬁed in content, because the CHILDES annotations that we have to work with
are limited to narrow, propositional literal meaning. However, the content that the child learns from
surely also includes aspects of the social interaction that the child is engaged in (Tomasello & Farrar,
1986, passim). It is the latter that provides the primary motivation for the child to learn language,
particularly in the earliest stages. Such interpersonal content is lacking in the CHILDES annotation.
We know of no fully convincing or widely accepted formal semantic representation for these
interpersonal aspects of discourse meaning, much less any such representation that we believe hu-
man annotators could apply consistently to labelled corpora of child directed utterance (Calhoun et
al., 2010; Cook & Bildhauer, 2011).
However, we do believe that the knowledge representation identiﬁed by Tomasello can be ex-
pressed as compositional semantic formulas, not fundamentally different from the ones we use here

BOOTSTRAPPING LANGUAGE ACQUISITION
38
to demonstrate the workings of our learner. Indeed, Steedman (2014) proposed such a compositional
formulation for one major component of interactional learning, namely information structure.
The term “information structure” refers to the packaging of the content of an utterance along
a number of dimensions that have been referred to in the literature—not always consistently—as
“topic”, “comment”, “contrast” and the like, together with markers of speaker and hearer orienta-
tion of these meaning components (Bolinger, 1965; Halliday, 1967; Ladd, 1996; Steedman,
2014), often expressed by prosodical markers such as pitch contour and metrical alignment (Cal-
houn, 2010, 2012). Intonational prosody is used exuberantly in speech by and to children, and we
know that infants are sensitive to the interpersonal signiﬁcance of intonation from a very early age
(Fernald, 1993; Fernald et al., 1989).
It is therefore likely that when a child hears her mother pointing at newly observed dogs and
saying “More doggies!”, the child’s representation of the utterance includes the information that a
new entity or property is introduced to the common ground, and that she considers the possibility
that this information is conveyed by the speaker’s intonation contour. Using the intonational notation
of Pierrehumbert and Hirschberg (1990) (H* and LL% are a high accent and low boundary tone
respectively) and sub-categorizing the syntactic categories to correspond to information-structural
distinctions, the derivation might look as follows (+,ρ marks a positive polarity rheme or comment,
and φ marks a complete phonological phrase):
(8)
MORE
DOGGIES
!
H∗
H∗
LL%
NP+,ρ/N+,ρ
N+,ρ
Xφ\⋆Xπ,η
>
NP+,ρ
<
NPφ
The semantics of this sentence can be glossed as: “Mum makes the property afforded by
more dogs common ground”. The details of the semantics of information structure go beyond the
immediate concerns of this paper: the example is merely intended to suggest that interpersonal
aspects of meaning can be treated as formally as more standard content.
Intonation structure does not always align with traditional syntactic structure even in adult di-
alog, and the two diverge even more in child-directed and child-originated speech (Fisher & Tokura,
1996; Gerken, 1996; Gerken, Jusczyk, & Mandel, 1994). However, in CCG, intonation structure
is united with a freer notion of derivational structure. Consider the child in a similar situation to the
above, who hears example (1) from Section 2.1 “You like the doggies!” with the intonation contour
discussed by Fisher herself and by Steedman (1996a):17
17This derivation crucially involves type-raising of the subject You. Type raising simply exchanges the roles of function
and argument, making the subject apply to the predicate to give the same result. Although, in the interests of simpliﬁ-
cation, we have glossed over the point in the preceding discussion of the learner, all NPs are always type-raised in this
sense by a lexical process analogous to morphological case, or what the linguists call “structural” case, so the object is
also type-raised. Thus, this example involves the CCG equivalent of nominative and accusative case. The responsibility
for deciding which structural case is relevant lies with the parsing model, rather than the grammar.

BOOTSTRAPPING LANGUAGE ACQUISITION
39
(9)
You
LIKE
the doggies!
H∗
L
LL%
S/(S\NP) (S\NP)/NP Xφ\⋆Xπ,η Sφ\(Sφ/NPφ)
>B
S/NP
<
Sφ/NPφ
<
Sφ
“Mum supposes the properties the dogs afford to be common ground, Mum makes it common
ground it’s what I like.”
Fisher points out that the L intermediate phrase boundary that she observed after the verb
makes the intonation structure inconsistent with standard assumptions about English NP-VP surface
constituency. However, CCG embodies a more permissive notion of constituency, allowing for
constituents such as “you like”, consistent with the intonation structure above. As the derivation
requires the use of the forward composition rule, indicated as >B, the intonation contour provides
positive evidence for applying the composition rule to the ﬁrst two categories, supporting syntactic
learning from prosodic cues. Far from being inconsistent with the syntax of English, the intonation
structure is aligned to the notion of constituent structure that the child will later ﬁnd essential to the
analysis of relative clause structures like the following:
(10) [The [doggie [that [you like]S/NP]N\N]N]NP
Thus, the child can acquire the relative construction without needing to call on a distinct and other-
wise unmotivated mechanism of movement. This strong homomorphism between interpretation and
syntactic constituency motivates the use of CCG as the model of grammar in a theory of language
acquisition.
It is also worth noting that even the content that is expressed in our input meaning rep-
resentations is inevitably more shallow and English-speciﬁc than we would like, even though it
abstracts away from English-speciﬁc word order. For example, comparison with other Germanic
languages suggests that the logical form that the child brings to (9) may be something more like
give(pleasure(you),dogs), so that the lexical entry for “like” of type (e,(e,t)) is the following, ex-
hibiting the same “quirky” relation between (structural) nominative case and an underlying dative
role that Icelandic exhibits morphologically for the corresponding verb:
(11) like := (S\NP)/NP : λxλy.give(pleasure(y),x)
However, dealing with these further issues is beyond the scope of the present investigation,
because of the small amount of data we have to work with, and the restricted nature of the annotation
available to us.
5
Conclusion
This paper has presented, to our knowledge, the ﬁrst model of child language acquisition
that jointly learns both word meanings and syntax and is evaluated on naturalistic child-directed
sentences paired with structured representations of their meaning. We have demonstrated that the
model reproduces several important characteristics of child language acquisition, including rapid
learning of word order, an acceleration in vocabulary learning, one-shot learning of novel words,
and syntactic bootstrapping effects.

BOOTSTRAPPING LANGUAGE ACQUISITION
40
Taken together, these results support our basic claim that syntax is learned by semantic boot-
strapping from contextually available semantic interpretations using a statistical learning mecha-
nism that operates over a universally available set of grammatical possibilities. This learning mech-
anism gradually shifts probability mass towards frequent candidates, allowing the child to rapidly
acquire an (approximately) correct grammar even in the face of competing ambiguous alternative
meanings. Altogether, the model offers a uniﬁed account of several behavioral phenomena, demon-
strating in particular that both syntactic bootstrapping effects and changes in the pace of learning
emerge naturally from the kind of statistical semantic bootstrapping model presented here—no ad-
ditional mechanisms are needed.
Acknowledgements
The work was supported in part by ERC Advanced Fellowship 249520 GRAMPLUS, EU
IST Cognitive Systems IP EC-FP7-270273 Xperience, ARC Discovery grants DP 110102506 and
160102156, and James S McDonnell Foundation Scholar Award 220020374. We thank Julia Hock-
enmaier, Mark Johnson, and Luke Zettlemoyer for guidance in the early stages of this research, and
Inbal Arnon, Jennifer Culbertson, and Ida Szubert for their feedback on a draft of this article.
References
Abend, O., Reichart, R., & Rappoport, A. (2010). Improved unsupervised POS induction through prototype
discovery. In Proceedings of the 48th annual meeting of the association for computational linguistics
(pp. 1298–1307).
Alishahi, A., & Chrupała, G. (2012). Concurrent acquisition of word meaning and lexical categories. In
Proceedings of the 2012 joint conference on empirical methods in natural language processing and
computational natural language learning (p. 643-654). Jeju Island.
Alishahi, A., Fazly, A., & Stevenson, S. (2008). Fast mapping in word learning: What probabilities tell us.
In Proceedings of the twelfth conference on computational natural language learning (pp. 57–64).
Alishahi, A., & Stevenson, S.
(2008).
A computational model of early argument structure acquisition.
Cognitive Science, 32, 789-834.
Alishahi, A., & Stevenson, S. (2010). A computational model of learning semantic roles from child-directed
language. Language and Cognitive Processes, 25(1), 50–93.
Allen, J., & Seidenberg, M. S. (1999). The emergence of grammaticality in connectionist networks. The
emergence of language, 115–151.
Ambati, B. R., Deoskar, T., & Steedman, M. (2016). Hindi CCGbank: A CCG treebank from the Hindi
dependency treebank. Language Resources and Evaluation, 50, submitted.
Ambridge, B., Pine, J., & Lieven, E. (2014). Child language acquisition: Why universal grammar doesn’t
help. Language, 90, e53–e90.
Angluin, D. (1980). Inductive inference of formal languages from positive data. Information and Control,
45, 117-135.
Artzi, Y., Das, D., & Petrov, S. (2014). Learning compact lexicons for CCG semantic parsing. In Proceedings
of the 2014 conference on empirical methods in natural language processing (p. 1273-1283).
Atkinson, R., Bower, G., & Crothers, E. (1965). Introduction to mathematical learning theory. Wiley.
Auli, M., & Lopez, A.
(2011).
A comparison of loopy belief propagation and dual decomposition for
integrated CCG supertagging and parsing. In Proceedings of the 49th annual meeting of the association
for computational linguistics: Human language technologies (p. 470-480). Portland, OR: ACL.
Baldridge, J. (2002). Lexically speciﬁed derivational control in Combinatory Categorial Grammar (Unpub-
lished doctoral dissertation). University of Edinburgh.
Barak, L., Fazly, A., & Stevenson, S. (2013). Modeling the emergence of an exemplar verb in construction
learning. In Proceedings of the 35th annual conference of the cognitive science society. Berlin.

BOOTSTRAPPING LANGUAGE ACQUISITION
41
Beal, M. J. (2003). Variational algorithms for approximate Bayesian inference (Unpublished doctoral dis-
sertation). University of London.
Becker, M. (2005). Raising, control, and the subset principle. In Proceedings of the 24th west coast confer-
ence on formal linguistics (p. 52-60). Somerville, MA: Cascadilla Proceedings Project.
Beekhuizen, B. (2015). Constructions emerging: a usage-based model of the acquisition of grammar (Un-
published doctoral dissertation). Leiden University.
Beekhuizen, B., Bod, R., Fazly, A., Stevenson, S., & Verhagen, A. (2014). A usage-based model of early
grammatical development. In Proceedings of the ACL workshop on cognitive modeling and computa-
tional linguistics. Baltimore, MD.
Berwick, R. (1985). The acquisition of syntactic knowledge. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Boersma, P., & Hayes, B. (2001). Empirical tests of the Gradual Learning Algorithm. Linguistic Inquiry,
32(1), 45–86.
Bolinger, D. (1965). Forms of English. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Bowerman, M. (1973). Structural relationships in children’s utterances: Syntactic or semantic? In Cognitive
development and the acquisition of language. Academic Press.
Braine, M. (1992). What sort of innate structure is needed to "bootstrap" into syntax? Cognition, 45, 77-100.
Bresnan, J. (Ed.). (1982). The mental representation of grammatical relations. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Bresnan, J., & Nikitina, T. (2003). On the gradience of the dative alternation. Unpublished manuscript.
Stanford University.
Brown, R. (1973). A ﬁrst language: the early stages. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Brown, R., & Bellugi, U. (1964). Three processes in the child’s acquisition of syntax. In E. Lenneberg (Ed.),
New directions in the study of language (p. 131-161). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Buttery, P. (2006). Computational models for ﬁrst language acquisition (Unpublished doctoral dissertation).
University of Cambridge.
Calhoun, S. (2010). The centrality of metrical structure in signaling information structure: A probabilistic
perspective. Language, 86, 1-42.
Calhoun, S. (2012). The theme/rheme distinction: Accent type or relative prominence? Journal of Phonetics,
40, 329-349.
Calhoun, S., Carletta, J., Brenier, J., Mayo, N., Jurafsky, D., Steedman, M., & Beaver, D. (2010). The NXT-
format Switchboard corpus: A rich resource for investigating the syntax, semantics, pragmatics, and
prosody of dialog. Language Resources and Evaluation, 44, 387-419.
Cauvet, E., Limissuri, R., Millotte, S., Skoruppa, K., Cabrol, D., & Christophe, A. (2014). Function words
constrain on-line recognition of verbs and nouns in French 18-month-olds. Language Learning and
Development, 10(1), 1–18.
Çakıcı, R. (2005). Automatic induction of a CCG grammar for Turkish. In Proceedings of the acl student
workshop (p. 73-78). ACL.
Chang, N. C.-L. (2008). Constructing grammar: A computational model of the emergence of early construc-
tions. ProQuest.
Charniak, E. (1997). Statistical parsing with a context-free grammar and word statistics. In Proceedings of
the 14th national conference of the american association for artiﬁcial intelligence (p. 598-603).
Chomsky, N. (1965). Aspects of the theory of syntax. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Chomsky, N. (1981). Lectures on government and binding. Dordrecht: Foris.
Chomsky, N. (1995). The minimalist program. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Christodoulopoulos, C., Goldwater, S., & Steedman, M. (2010). Two decades of unsupervised POS tagging—
how far have we come? In Proceedings of the conference on empirical methods in natural language
processing (p. 575-584). ACL.
Chrupała, G., Kádár, Á., & Alishahi, A. (2015). Learning language through pictures. In Proceedings of the
53nd annual meeting of the association for computational linguistics (pp. 112–118).
Clark, E. (1973). What’s in a word? on the child’s acquisition of semantics in his ﬁrst language. In T. Moore
(Ed.), Cognitive development and the acquisition of language (p. 65-110). Academic Press.
Clark, S., & Curran, J. R. (2004). Parsing the WSJ using CCG and log-linear models. In Proceedings of the

BOOTSTRAPPING LANGUAGE ACQUISITION
42
42nd annual meeting of the association for computational linguistics (p. 104-111). Barcelona, Spain:
ACL.
Cohn, T., Blunsom, P., & Goldwater, S. (2010). Inducing tree-substitution grammars. The Journal of Machine
Learning Research, 9999, 3053-3096.
Collins, M. (1997). Three generative lexicalized models for statistical parsing. In Proceedings of the 35th
annual meeting of the association for computational linguistics (p. 16-23). Madrid: ACL.
Connor, M., Fisher, C., & Roth, D. (2012). Starting from scratch in semantic role labeling: Early indirect
supervision. In Cognitive aspects of computational language acquisition (p. 257-296). Springer.
Cook, P., & Bildhauer, F. (2011). Annotating information structure: The case of topic. In Beyond semantics:
Corpus based investigations of pragmatic and discourse phenomena (p. 45-56). Ruhr Universität,
Bochum: Bochumer Linguistische Arbeitsberichte.
Crain, S., & Nakayama, M. (1987). Structure dependence in grammar formation. Language, 522-543.
Crocker, M. W., & Keller, F. (2005). Probabilistic grammars as models of gradience in language processing.
In Gradience in grammar: Generative perspectives. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
Croft, W. (2001). Radical construction grammar: Syntactic theory in typological perspective. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Culbertson, J., Smolensky, P., & Wilson, C. (2013). Cognitive biases, linguistic universals, and constraint-
based grammar learning. Topics in Cognitive Science, 5, 392-424.
Dominey, P. F., & Boucher, J.-D. (2005). Learning to talk about events from narrated video in a construction
grammar framework. Artiﬁcial Intelligence, 167(1), 31–61.
Elman, J., Bates, E., Johnson, M. H., Karmiloff-Smith, A., Parisi, D., & Plunkett, K. (1996). Rethinking
innateness: A connectionist perspective on development. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Fazly, A., Alishahi, A., & Stevenson, S. (2010). A probabilistic computational model of cross-situational
word learning. Cognitive Science, 34, 1017-1063.
Feldman, N. H., Grifﬁths, T. L., Goldwater, S., & Morgan, J. L. (2013). A role for the developing lexicon in
phonetic category acquisition. Psychological Review, 120(4), 751–778.
Fernald, A. (1993). Approval and disapproval: Infant responsiveness to vocal affect in familiar and unfamiliar
languages. Child Development, 64, 657-667.
Fernald, A., Taeschner, T., Dunn, J., Papousek, M., Boysson-Bardies, B., & Fukui, I. (1989). A cross-
language study of prosodic modiﬁcations in mothers’ and fathers’ speech to infants. Journal of Child
Language, 16, 477-501.
Fisher, C., Gertner, Y., Scott, R., & Yuan, S.
(2010).
Syntactic bootstrapping.
Wiley Interdisciplinary
Reviews: Cognitive Science, 1, 143-149.
Fisher, C., Hall, G., Rakowitz, S., & Gleitman, L. (1994). When it is better to receive than to give: Syntactic
and conceptual constraints on vocabulary growth. Lingua, 92, 333-375.
Fisher, C., Klingler, S. L., & Song, H.-j. (2006). What does syntax say about space? 2-year-olds use sentence
structure to learn new prepositions. Cognition, 101(1), B19-B29.
Fisher, C., & Tokura, H. (1996). Prosody in speech to infants: Direct and indirect acoustic cues to syntactic
structure. In J. Morgan & K. Demuth (Eds.), Signal to syntax: Bootstrapping from speech to grammar
in early acquisition (p. 343-363). Erlbaum.
Fodor, J. A., Bever, T., & Garrett, M. (1974). The psychology of language. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Fodor, J. D. (1998). Unambiguous triggers. Linguistic Inquiry, 29, 1-36.
Fodor, J. D., & Sakas, W. (2005). The subset principle in syntax: Costs of compliance. Journal of Linguistics,
41, 513-569.
Frank, M., Goodman, N., & Tenenbaum, J. (2009). Using speakers’ referential intentions to model early
cross-situational word learning. Psychological Science, 20, 578-585.
Frank, S., Feldman, N., & Goldwater, S. (2014). Weak semantic context helps phonetic learning in a model
of infant language acquisition. In Proceedings of the 52nd annual meeting of the association of com-
putational linguistics.
Furth, H. (1961). The inﬂuence of language on the development of concept formation in deaf children.
Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology, 63, 386-389.

BOOTSTRAPPING LANGUAGE ACQUISITION
43
Gazdar, G., Klein, E., Pullum, G. K., & Sag, I. (1985). Generalized phrase structure grammar. Oxford:
Blackwell.
Gentner, D. (1982). Why nouns are learned before verbs: Linguistic relativity versus natural partitioning. In
S. Kuczaj (Ed.), Language development (Vol. 2, p. 301-334). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Gentner, D., & Boroditsky, L. (2001). Individuation, relativity, and early word learning. In M. Bowerman &
S. Levinson (Eds.), (p. 215-256). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Gerken, L. (1996). Prosodic structure in young children’s language production. Langauge, 72, 683-712.
Gerken, L., Jusczyk, P., & Mandel, D. (1994). When prosody fails to cue syntactic structure. Cognition, 51,
237-265.
Gertner, Y., Fisher, C., & Eisengart, J. (2006). Learning words and rules abstract knowledge of word order
in early sentence comprehension. Psychological Science, 17(8), 684–691.
Gibson, E., & Wexler, K. (1994). Triggers. Linguistic Inquiry, 25, 355-407.
Gleitman, L. (1990). The structural sources of verb meanings. Language Acquisition, 1, 1-55.
Gleitman, L., Cassidy, K., Nappa, R., Papafragou, A., & Trueswell, J. C. (2005). Hard words. Language
Learning and Development, 1, 23-64.
Göksun, T., Küntay, A. C., & Naigles, L. R. (2008). Turkish children use morphosyntactic bootstrapping in
interpreting verb meaning. Journal of Child Language, 35, 291-323.
Goldwater, S., Grifﬁths, T., & Johnson, M. (2009). A Bayesian framework for word segmentation: Exploring
the effects of context. Cognition, 112, 21-54.
Goldwater, S., & Johnson, M. (2003). Learning OT constraint rankings using a Maximum Entropy model.
In Proceedings of the workshop on variation within optimality theory (pp. 113–122).
Stockholm
University.
Gómez, R., & Maye, J. (2005). The developmental trajectory of nonadjacent dependency learning. Infancy,
7(2), 183–206.
Grifﬁths, T., & Tenenbaum, J. (2005). Structure and strength in causal induction. Cognitive Psychology, 51,
334-384.
Grifﬁths, T., & Tenenbaum, J. (2006). Optimal predictions in everyday cognition. Psychological Science,
17, 767 -773.
Grimshaw, J. (1981). Form, function and the language acquisition device. In L. Baker & J. McCarthy (Eds.),
The logical problem of language acquisition (p. 165-182). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Hale, J. (2001). A probabilistic Earley parser as a psycholinguistic model. In Proceedings of the 2nd
meeting of the north american chapter of the association for computational linguistics (p. 159-166).
Pittsburgh, PA.
Halliday, M. (1967). Intonation and grammar in British English. The Hague: Mouton.
Hayes, B., & Wilson, C. (2008). A maximum entropy model of phonotactics and phonotactic learning.
Linguistic inquiry, 39(3), 379–440.
Hockenmaier, J. (2003). Parsing with generative models of predicate-argument structure. In Proceedings of
the 41st meeting of the association for computational linguistics, sapporo (p. 359-366). San Francisco:
Morgan-Kaufmann.
Hockenmaier, J., & Steedman, M. (2002). Generative models for statistical parsing with Combinatory Cate-
gorial Grammar. In Proceedings of the 40th meeting of the association for computational linguistics
(p. 335-342). Philadelphia.
Hoffman, M., Blei, D., & Bach, F. (2010). Online learning for latent Dirichlet allocation. Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems, 23, 856-864.
Hyams, N. (1986). Language acquisition and the theory of parameters. Dordrecht: Reidel.
Johnson, M., & Goldwater, S. (2009). Improving nonparametric Bayesian inference: Experiments on unsu-
pervised word segmentation with adaptor grammars. In Proceedings of human language technologies:
The 2009 annual conference of the north American chapter of the association for computational lin-
guistics.
Jones, B. K. (2015). Learning words and syntactic cues in highly ambiguous contexts (Unpublished doctoral
dissertation). University of Edinburgh.

BOOTSTRAPPING LANGUAGE ACQUISITION
44
Joshi, A., & Schabes, Y. (1997). Tree-Adjoining Grammars. In G. Rozenberg & A. Salomaa (Eds.), Hand-
book of formal languages (Vol. 3, p. 69-124). Berlin: Springer.
Jurafsky, D. (1996). A probabilistic model of lexical and syntactic access and disambiguation. Cognitive
Science, 20(2), 137–194.
Klein, D., & Manning, C. D. (2004). Corpus-based induction of syntactic structure: Models of dependency
and constituency. In Proceedings of the 42nd annual meeting of the association for computational
linguistics (p. 479-486). Barcelona: ACL.
Klein, D., & Manning, C. D. (2005). Natural language grammar induction with a generative constituent-
context model. Pattern Recognition, 38, 1407-1419.
Klein, E., & Sag, I. A. (1985). Type-driven translation. Linguistics and Philosophy, 8, 163-201.
Krishnamurthy, J., & Mitchell, T. (2014). Joint syntactic and semantic parsing with combinatory categorial
grammar. In Proceedings of the 52nd annual meeting of the association for computational linguistics
(volume 1: Long papers) (p. 1188-1198). Baltimore, MD.
Kwiatkowski, T. (2012). Probabilistic grammar induction from sentences and structured meanings (Unpub-
lished doctoral dissertation). University of Edinburgh.
Kwiatkowski, T., Goldwater, S., Zettlemoyer, L., & Steedman, M. (2012). A probabilistic model of syntactic
and semantic acquisition from child-directed utterances and their meanings. In Proceedings of the
13th conference of the european chapter of the ACL (EACL 2012) (p. 234-244). Avignon: ACL.
Kwiatkowski, T., Zettlemoyer, L., Goldwater, S., & Steedman, M. (2010). Inducing probabilistic CCG gram-
mars from logical form with higher-order uniﬁcation. In Proceedings of the conference on empirical
methods in natural language processing (p. 1223-1233). Cambridge, MA: ACL.
Kwiatkowski, T., Zettlemoyer, L., Goldwater, S., & Steedman, M. (2011). Lexical generalization in CCG
grammar induction for semantic parsing. In Proceedings of the conference on empirical methods in
natural language processing (p. 1512-1523). Edinburgh: ACL.
Ladd, D. R. (1996). Intonational phonology. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. (2nd edition revised
2008)
Landau, B., & Gleitman, L. (1985). Language and experience: Evidence from the blind child. Cambridge,
MA: Harvard University Press.
Levy, R. (2008). Expectation-based syntactic comprehension. Cognition, 106, 1126-1177.
Levy, R., Reali, F., & Grifﬁths, T. L. (2009). Modeling the effects of memory on human online sentence pro-
cessing with particle ﬁlters. In Proceedings of the 22nd conference on neural information processing
systems (nips).
Lewis, M., & Steedman, M. (2014). A∗CCG parsing with a supertag-factored model. In Proceedings of the
conference on empirical methods in natural language processing (p. 990-1000). Doha, Qatar: ACL.
MacWhinney, B. (2000). The CHILDES project: Tools for analyzing talk. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Matuszek, C., Fitzgerald, N., Zettlemoyer, L., Bo, L., & Fox, D. (2012). A joint model of language and
perception for grounded attribute learning. In Proceedings of the 29th international conference on
machine learning (icml).
Maurits, L., Perfors, A., & Navarro, D. (2009). Joint acquisition of word order and word reference. In
Proceedings of the 31st annual conference of the cognitive science society (p. 1728-1733).
McMurray, B., Horst, J. S., & Samuelson, L. K. (2012). Word learning emerges from the interaction of online
referent selection and slow associative learning. Psychological review, 119(4), 831.
Mellish, C. (1989). Some chart-based techniques for parsing ill-formed input. In Proceedings of the 27th
annual meeting of the association for computational linguistics (p. 102-109).
Mikolov, T., Karaﬁát, M., Burget, L., Cernock`y, J., & Khudanpur, S. (2010). Recurrent neural network based
language model. In Interspeech 2010, 11th annual conference of the international speech communi-
cation association (pp. 1045–1048).
Mikolov, T., Yih, W.-t., & Zweig, G. (2013). Linguistic regularities in continuous space word represen-
tations. In Proceedings of the 2013 conference of the north american chapter of the association for
computational linguistics: Human language technologies (p. 746-751). Atlanta: ACL.
Mintz, T. (2003). Frequent frames as a cue for grammatical categories in child directed speech. Cognition,

BOOTSTRAPPING LANGUAGE ACQUISITION
45
90, 91-117.
Morris, W. C., Cottrell, G. W., & Elman, J. (2000). A connectionist simulation of the empirical acquisition
of grammatical relations. In Hybrid neural systems (pp. 175–193). Springer.
Niyogi, P. (2006). Computational nature of language learning and evolution. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Niyogi, P., & Berwick, R. (1996). A language learning model for ﬁnite parameter spaces. Cognition, 61,
161-193.
Niyogi, S. (2002). Bayesian learning at the syntax-semantics interface. In Proceedings of the 24th annual
conference of the cognitive science society (Vol. 36, p. 58-63).
Oléron, P. (1953). Conceptual thinking of the deaf. American Annals of the Deaf, 98, 304-310.
Pearl, L., Goldwater, S., & Steyvers, M.
(2010).
How ideal are we? incorporating human limitations
into Bayesian models of word segmentation. In Proceedings of the 34th annual boston university
conference on child language development. Somerville, MA: Cascadilla Press.
Perfors, A., Tenenbaum, J., & Regier, T. (2011). The learnability of abstract syntactic principles. Cognition,
118, 306-338.
Perfors, A., Tenenbaum, J., & Wonnacott, E. (2010). Variability, negative evidence, and the acquisition of
verb argument constructions. Journal of Child Language, 37, 607-642.
Phillips, L., & Pearl, L. (2014). Bayesian inference as a cross-linguistic word segmentation strategy: Al-
ways learning useful things. In Proceedings of the computational and cognitive models of language
acquisition and language processing workshop at EACL.
Pierrehumbert, J., & Hirschberg, J. (1990). The meaning of intonational contours in the interpretation of
discourse. In P. Cohen, J. Morgan, & M. Pollack (Eds.), Intentions in communication (p. 271-312).
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Pinker, S. (1979). Formal models of language learning. Cognition, 7, 217-283.
Plunkett, K., Sinha, C., Møller, M. F., & Strandsby, O. (1992). Symbol grounding or the emergence of
symbols? vocabulary growth in children and a connectionist net. Connection Science, 4(3-4), 293–
312.
Pollard, C., & Sag, I. (1994). Head driven phrase structure grammar. Stanford, CA: CSLI Publications.
Redington, M., Chater, N., & Finch, S. (1998). Distributional information: A powerful cue for acquiring
syntactic categories. Cognitive Science, 22, 425-469.
Regier, T. (2005). The emergence of words: Attentional learning in form and meaning. Cognitive science,
29(6), 819–865.
Reznick, J. S., & Goldﬁeld, B. A. (1992). Rapid change in lexical development in comprehension and
production. Developmental psychology, 28(3), 406.
Ross, J. R. (1967). Constraints on variables in syntax (Unpublished doctoral dissertation). MIT. (Published
as Ross 1986)
Ross, J. R. (1986). Inﬁnite syntax! Norton, NJ: Ablex.
Saffran, J., Aslin, R., & Newport, E. (1996). Statistical learning by 8-month-old infants. Science, 274,
1926-1928.
Sagae, K., Davis, E., Lavie, A., MacWhinney, B., & Wintner, S. (2010). Morphosyntactic annotation of
childes transcripts. Journal of Child Language, 37, 705-729.
Sakas, W., & Fodor, J. D. (2001). The structural triggers learner. In S. Bertolo (Ed.), Language acquisition
and learnability (p. 172-233). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Sanborn, A. (in press). Types of approximation for probabilistic cognition: sampling and variational. Brain
and Cognition.
Sanborn, A., Grifﬁths, T., & Navarro, D. (2010). Rational approximations to rational models: Alternative
algorithms for category learning. Psychological Review, 117, 1144-1167.
Sato, M.-A. (2001). Online model selection based on the variational Bayes. Neural Computation, 13(7),
1649-1681.
Schlesinger, I. (1971). Production of utterances and language acquisition. In D. Slobin (Ed.), The ontogenesis
of grammar (p. 63-101). New York: Academic Press.
Shi, L., Grifﬁths, T., Feldman, N., & Sanborn, A. (2010). Exemplar models as a mechanism for performing

BOOTSTRAPPING LANGUAGE ACQUISITION
46
Bayesian inference. Psychonomic bulletin & review, 17(4), 443–464.
Siskind, J. (1992). Naive physics, event perception, lexical semantics, and language acquisition (Unpublished
doctoral dissertation). MIT.
Siskind, J. (1996). A computational study of cross-situational techniques for learning word-to-meaning
mappings. Cognition, 61, 39-91.
Snedeker, J., & Gleitman, L. (2004). Why it is hard to label our concepts. In G. Hall & S. Waxman (Eds.),
Weaving a lexicon (p. 257-294). MIT Press.
Sorace, A., & Keller, F. (2005). Gradience in linguistic data. Lingua, 115, 1497-1524.
Steedman, M. (1996a). The role of prosody and semantics in the acquisition of syntax. In J. Morgan &
K. Demuth (Eds.), Signal to syntax (p. 331-342). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Steedman, M. (1996b). Surface structure and interpretation. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Steedman, M. (2000). The syntactic process. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Steedman, M. (2012). Taking scope: The natural semantics of quantiﬁers. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Steedman, M. (2014). The surface-compositional semantics of English intonation. Language, 90, 2-57.
Sundermeyer, M., Schlüter, R., & Ney, H. (2012). LSTM neural networks for language modeling. In
Proceedings of interspeech (pp. 194–197).
Thomforde, E., & Steedman, M. (2011). Semi-supervised CCG lexicon extension. In Proceedings of the
conference on empirical methods in natural language processing (p. 1246-1256). ACL.
Thompson, C., & Mooney, R. (2003). Acquiring word-meaning mappings for natural language interfaces.
Journal of Artiﬁcial Intelligence Research, 18, 1-44.
Thornton, R., & Tesan, G. (2007). Categorical acquisition: Parameter setting in Universal Grammar. Biolin-
guistics, 1, 49-98.
Tomasello, M. (1992). First verbs: a case study in early grammatical development. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Tomasello, M. (1999). The cultural origins of human cognition. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Tomasello, M., & Farrar, M. (1986). Joint attention and early language. Child development, 1454-1463.
Trueswell, J., & Gleitman, L. (2007). Learning to parse and its implications for language acquisition. In
G. Gaskell (Ed.), Oxford handbook of psycholinguistics (p. 635-656). Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Turney, P., & Pantel, P. (2010). From frequency to meaning: Vector space models of semantics. Journal of
Artiﬁcial Intelligence Research, 37, 141-188.
Ural, A. E., Yuret, D., Ketrez, F. N., Koçba¸s, D., & Küntay, A. C. (2009). Morphological cues vs. num-
ber of nominals in learning verb types in Turkish: The syntactic bootstrapping mechanism revisited.
Language and Cognitive Processes, 24, 1393-1405.
Villavicencio, A. (2002). The acquisition of a uniﬁcation-based generalised categorial grammar (Unpub-
lished doctoral dissertation). University of Cambridge.
Vygotsky, L. (1934/1986). Thought and language. MIT Press: Cambridge, MA. (Trans. A. Kozulin))
Wexler, K., & Culicover, P. (1980). Formal principles of language acquisition. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Xu, F., & Tenenbaum, J. B. (2007). Word learning as bayesian inference. Psychological review, 114(2), 245.
Yang, C. (2002). Knowledge and learning in natural language. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Yang, C. (2006). The inﬁnite gift. New York: Scribner.
Yu, C. (2006). Learning syntax–semantics mappings to bootstrap word learning. In Proceedings of the 28th
annual conference of the cognitive science society (p. 924-929).
Yu, C., & Ballard, D. H. (2007). A uniﬁed model of early word learning: Integrating statistical and social
cues. Neurocomputing, 70, 2149-2165.
Yu, C., & Smith, L. B. (2012). Embodied attention and word learning by toddlers. Cognition, 125(2),
244–262.
Yu, C., & Smith, L. B. (2013). Joint attention without gaze following: human infants and their parents
coordinate visual attention to objects through eye-hand coordination. PloS one, 8(11), e79659.
Yu, H., & Siskind, J. (2013). Grounded language learning from video described with sentences. In Proceed-
ings of the 51st annual meeting of the association for computational linguistics (p. 53-63). Soﬁa.

BOOTSTRAPPING LANGUAGE ACQUISITION
47
Yurovsky, D., Smith, L. B., & Yu, C. (2013). Statistical word learning at scale: the baby’s view is better.
Developmental science, 16(6), 959–966.
Zettlemoyer, L., & Collins, M. (2005). Learning to map sentences to logical form: Structured classiﬁcation
with Probabilistic Categorial Grammars. In Proceedings of the 21st conference on uncertainty in AI
(UAI) (p. 658-666). Edinburgh: AAAI.
Zettlemoyer, L., & Collins, M. (2007). Online learning of relaxed CCG grammars for parsing to logical
form. In Proceedings of the joint conference on empirical methods in natural language processing
and computational natural language learning (p. 678-687). Prague: ACL.
Appendix A
The Probabilistic Model
Recall the probabilistic model, deﬁning a family of distributions over (s,m,t) triplets consisting of
an utterance, meaning representations for the leaves, and a derivation tree. The model is an instance
of a Probabilistic Context-free Grammar (PCFG), and decomposes over the derivation steps (or
expansions). Speciﬁcally, let w1,...,wn be the words in the sentence s, m1,...,mn be their meaning
representations and c1,...,cn be their syntactic categories (the syntactic categories at the leaves of
t). The probability of an (s,m,t) triplet is:
P(s,m,t) = ∏
a→γ∈t
P(γ | a)·
n
∏
i=1
P(mi | ci)·
n
∏
i=1
P(wi | mi)
(10)
Deﬁning the model consists of deﬁning the distribution of the different expansions: the dis-
tribution P(γ | a) over each syntactic expansion γ (consisting of one or more nonterminal syntactic
categories) given its parent nonterminal category a; the distribution P(mi | ci) over each leaf mean-
ing representation given its (terminal) syntactic category; and the distribution P(wi | mi) over each
word given its meaning representation. We refer to all these cases collectively as expansions of
the parent category (a, ci or mi). The distributions of the expansions are deﬁned using Dirichlet
Processes (DPs). A DP can serve as the prior over a discrete distribution with inﬁnite support, and
(as noted in Section 2.3) yields the following posterior distribution over expansions:
(11)
P(γ | a) = na→γ +αsynHa
na +αsyn
where na→γ is the number of times the expansion a →γ has been used previously and na is the
number of times any expansion headed by a has been used (in fact, since we never actually observe
any parses, the algorithm we describe in Appendix C deﬁnes na→γ and na as the expectations of
these numbers). The model has two hyperparameters: the base distribution Ha and concentration
parameter αa, discussed below. We use here the notation for syntactic expansions, but the same
equation applies to the expansion of a category into meaning representation c →m or meaning
representation into wordform m →w.
A Dirichlet Process is therefore deﬁned by the concentration parameter and base distribution
(which are stipulated in this work), and the sufﬁcient statistics na→b for every a,b, which are es-
timated from the training data. As only a ﬁnite number of (a,b) pairs are non-zero at any given
point of the inference procedure, we store the pseudo-counts for these pairs explicitly. The follow-
ing subsections deﬁne the base distributions and concentration parameters used in each part of the
model.

BOOTSTRAPPING LANGUAGE ACQUISITION
48
Syntactic Expansions
First we deﬁne the base distribution of syntactic expansions. We begin by deﬁning an auxil-
iary distribution over the space of syntactic categories, i.e., the set of all categories that can be de-
ﬁned using brackets and slashes over the set of atomic categories. For a category c, we deﬁne nslashes
as the number of slash symbols in c (e.g., nslashes of an atomic category is 0 and nslashes(S\NP/NP)
is 2). Then:
(12)
Prcats(c) ∝0.2nslashes(c)+1
While this does not deﬁne a proper distribution over all syntactic categories of any length (as
ΣcPrcats(c) is unbounded), it can be normalized if we assume the vocabulary and formula length are
bounded, resulting in a well-deﬁned distribution.
The possible expansions from a syntactic category X depend on its identity. We ﬁrst deﬁne
nop(X) as the number of possible CCG inverted operators that can apply to X. Any category X can
expand using right and left inverted application, resulting in (X/Y,Y) and (Y,X\Y). If X is complex
(e.g., X = X1/X2), it can also be expanded through inverted composition (e.g., to X1/Y and Y/X2).
In general, if X is complex and takes its ﬁrst k arguments to its right (left), it can be expanded
through right (left) inverted composition of orders 1,...,k. nop can be deﬁned accordingly. For
each of the allowable operators, the expansion is fully determined by the identity of the introduced
category (Y in the examples above). In addition, a category may always be expanded into a lexical
item by generating the symbol XLEX. Ha for a syntactic category a is then deﬁned as:
(13)
Ha(b) ∝



0.5·C(b)
b = aLEX
Prcats(Y)
2·nop
b is a syntactic expansion, introducing Y
C(b) equals 1 if nslashes(b) < 2, equals 4
3 if b’s innermost slashes are in the same direction
(both arguments to the right or both to the left, as in X/Y/Z), and equals 2
3 otherwise (innermost
slashes in different directions, as in X/Y\Z). This term corrects the base distribution to be uniform
over the six possible constituent orders for a transitive verb after the exclusion of the two cases
where the verb attaches ﬁrst to the ﬁrst semantic argument (see Section 2.2).
Meaning Representations
The distribution of the expansion of leaf categories into meaning representations P(mi | ci) is
done in two steps. First, ci generates a shell-meaning representation, which does not contain any
constants but instead has (typed) placeholders. Another generation step is then used to expand the
shells into fully-ﬂedged meaning representations. For instance, to generate the meaning representa-
tion mi = λx.cookie(x), the corresponding leaf ci ﬁrst generates msh
i = λx.P(x), and then generates
mi given msh
i .
The reason for performing this two-step derivation is to allow the model to learn a disposition
towards sub-classes of logical forms. For instance, assume the learner is exposed to a Verb-Subject-
Object language, and correctly learns that the category S/NP/NP is more likely than the other
transitive categories. Now assume the learner faces a transitive clause, in which none of the words

BOOTSTRAPPING LANGUAGE ACQUISITION
49
are known w1w2w3 : p(arg1,arg2). The model will correctly assign high probability to analyses
where w1 corresponds to p, but without the additional ci →msh will be unable to determine whether
w2 corresponds to arg1 and w3 to arg2 or the other way around. Recall that the VSO and VOS
derivations differ only in the meaning representation assigned to w1 (Section 2.2). Speciﬁcally,
VSO involves the expansion λxλy.p(x,y) →w1 and VOS the expansion λyλx.p(x,y) →w1. Both
of these derivations have not been previously observed and are symmetrical. A single derivation
step would therefore assign them equal probabilities, regardless of whether other learned transitive
verbs have VSO or VOS lexical entries.
Using the intermediate shell generation step addresses this problem. If the observed data
better attests for VSO than VOS verbs, the derivation S/NP/NP →λxλy.PLACE_HOLDER(x,y)
would gain a higher probability mass than S/NP/NP →λyλx.PLACE_HOLDER(x,y). Conse-
quently, the VSO interpretation for w1 would be preferred over the VOS.
Both derivation steps ci →msh
i and msh
i →mi are modelled as DPs18. The base distribution in
both cases is similarly deﬁned19:
(14)
Hsem(m) ∝e#sym+2#vars
where #sym is the number of constants, logical operators and quantiﬁers appearing in m, and
#vars is the number of variable types (not instances) appearing in m. Again this is an improper
distribution, but can be normalized if we assume the vocabulary and formula length are bounded.
The inclusion of shell logical forms in the derivation process serves an additional purpose
when inferring meaning representations for sentences s that contain unknown words. While ac-
curate inference is impossible in this case, as the model has no information what logical constants
correspond to the unknown words, it is able to infer the most likely logical form, where for unknown
words wi, msh is inferred instead of mi. This may result in a meaning representation for the sentence
that contains place-holders instead of some of the logical constants, but is otherwise accurate.
Wordforms
The base distribution of the generation of words from logical types mi →wi is deﬁned as
follows:
(15)
Hword(w) = 0.002|w|
where |w| is the number of characters in w.
18We use the same DP for ci’s that only differ in the slash direction. For instance, ci = S/NP and ci = S\NP share
a distribution of P(· | ci). This was done to prevent an artefact where unknown meaning representations generated from
an infrequent category receive disproportionally large probability mass relative to their probability for being generated
from a frequent category. This modiﬁcation introduces an additional simplifying independence assumption (namely that
the distribution of meaning representations does not depend on the directionality of the corresponding leaf syntactic
category), which we intend to review in future work.
19Much of the space over which the base distribution is deﬁned cannot be attested for due to type constraints. For
instance, where the leaf category is of type ci = NP, the resulting meaning representation must be of type e. Nevertheless,
we use this base distribution uniformly for its simplicity.

BOOTSTRAPPING LANGUAGE ACQUISITION
50
Syntactic Category
Semantic Type
Example Phrase
Sdcl
⟨ev,t⟩
I took it ⊢
Sdcl : λe.took(i,it,e)
St
t
I’m angry ⊢St : angry(i)
Swh
⟨e,⟨ev,t⟩⟩
Who took it? ⊢Swh : λxλe.took(x,it,e)
Sq
⟨ev,t⟩
Did you take it? ⊢
Sq : λe.Q(take(you,it,e))
N
⟨e,t⟩
cookie ⊢N : λx.cookie(x)
NP
e
John ⊢NP : john
PP
⟨ev,t⟩
on John ⊢
PP : λe.on(john,e)
Figure B1. Atomic Syntactic Categories and their corresponding semantic types.
Concentration parameters
The concentration parameters we use are αsyn = 1 for the syntactic expansions, αsh = 1000
for the expansions of syntactic categories to shells, αm = 500 for the expansions of shells to meaning
representations, and αw = 1 for the expansion of meaning representations to words.
Appendix B
The Space of Possible Derivations
The set of allowed parses t is deﬁned by the function T , mapping pairs of strings and meaning
representations (s,m) into a set of possible derivations. Here we review the splitting procedure of
Kwiatkowski et al. (2010) that is used to generate CCG lexical items and describe how it is used by
T to create a packed chart representation of all parses t that are consistent with (s,m).
The splitting procedure takes as input a CCG category X : h, such as NP : a(x,cookie(x)),
and returns a set of category splits. Each category split is a pair of CCG categories (Cl : ml,Cr : mr)
(ordered by their linear order) that can be recombined to give X: h using one of the CCG combinators
in Section 2.2. The CCG category splitting procedure has two parts: logical splitting of the category
semantics h; and syntactic splitting of the syntactic category X. Each logical split of h is a pair of
lambda expressions (f,g) in the following set:
(16)
{(f,g) | h = f(g) ∨h = λx.f(g(x))},
which means that f and g can be recombined using either function application or function com-
position to give the original lambda expression h. A number of further linguistically motivated
constraints on possible splits apply, such as an “Across the Board” constraint that says that abstrac-
tion over a term A must apply to all instances of A, and an “A over A” constraint that says you only
consider the topmost term of type A for abstraction, and not any terms of the same type A that it
may contain (cf. Ross 1967). These are similar to the constraints described in Kwiatkowski (2012,
:116–118). An example split of the lambda expression h = a(x,cookie(x)) is the pair
(17)
(λy.a(x,y(x)),λx.cookie(x)),
where λy.a(x,y(x)) applied to λx.cookie(x) returns the original expression a(x,cookie(x)).
If f and g can be recombined to give h with function application, and X is the syntactic
category of h, then X is split by a reversal of the CCG application combinators in Section 2.2,
yielding the following set of possible categories for f and g:
{(X/Y : f Y : g),(Y : g : X\Y : f)}
(18)

BOOTSTRAPPING LANGUAGE ACQUISITION
51
where X : h and h = f(g). Similarly, if f and g can be recombined to give h with function compo-
sition and if X = X1/X2, then X is split by a reversal of the CCG composition combinator, yielding:
{(X1/Y : f Y/X2 : g}
(19)
where X : h and h = λx.f(g(x)). Analogous inverted combinators apply for the case of X = X1\X2
and higher-order inverted composition combinators.
The categories that are introduced as a result of a split (Y in (18) and Z in (19)) are labelled
via a functional mapping cat from semantic type T to syntactic category:
cat(T) =



Atomic(T)
if T ∈Figure B1
cat(T1)/cat(T2)
if T = ⟨T1,T2⟩
cat(T1)\cat(T2)
if T = ⟨T1,T2⟩



which uses the Atomic function illustrated in Figure B1 to map semantic-type to basic CCG syn-
tactic category.
As an example, the logical split in (17) supports two CCG category splits, one for each of the
CCG application rules.
(NP/N : λy.a(x,y(x)), N : λx.cookie(x))
(20)
(N : λx.cookie(x), NP\N : λy.a(x,y(x)))
(21)
The parse generation algorithm T uses the function split to generate all CCG category
pairs that are an allowed split of an input category X : h:
{(Cl : ml,Cr : mr)} = split(X : h),
(22)
and then packs a chart representation of t in a top-down fashion starting with a single cell
entry Cm : m for the top node shared by all parses t. T cycles over all cell entries in increasingly
small spans and populates the chart with their splits. For any cell entry X : h spanning more than
one word T generates a set of pairs representing the splits of X : h. For each split (Cl : ml,Cr : mr)
and every binary partition (wi:k,wk:j) of the word-span T creates two new cell entries in the chart:
(Cl : ml)i:k and (Cr : mr)k:j.
Input : Sentence [w1,...,wn], top node Cm : m
Output: Packed parse chart Ch containing t
Ch = [ [{}1,...,{}n]1, ... ,[{}1,...,{}n]n ]
Ch[1][n−1] = Cm : m
for i = n,...,2; j = 1...(n−i)+1 do
for X : h ∈Ch[j][i] do
for (Cl : ml,Cr : mr) ∈split(X : h) do
for k = 1,...,i−1 do
Ch[j][k] ←Cl : ml
Ch[j +k][i−k] ←Cr : mr
Algorithm 1: Generating t with T .
Algorithm 1 shows how the learner uses T to generate a packed chart representation of t in
the chart Ch. The function T massively overgenerates parses for any given natural language. The

BOOTSTRAPPING LANGUAGE ACQUISITION
52
probabilistic parsing model (see Appendix A) is used to choose the best parse from the overgener-
ated set.
Appendix C
The Learning Algorithm
The parameters of the model are estimated incrementally based on one example at a time. Each
example is a pair (s,m) of an input sentence s and a set of possible meanings m. The algorithm
estimates the posterior distribution P(t,Θ | s,m): the joint distribution over possible derivations t of
s and the model parameters Θ.
Since estimating this distribution exactly is intractable, we use a mean ﬁeld approximation,
considering a simpler family of distributions Q(t,Θ) such that Q decomposes as follows:
Q(t,Θ) = Q(t)Q(Θ)
We may now approximate D = P(t,Θ | s,m) by ﬁnding the distribution Q(t,Θ) that minimizes
the KL divergence from D using the Variational Bayes EM algorithm (VBEM). We adapt existing
techniques for online VBEM (Beal, 2003; Hoffman, Blei, & Bach, 2010; Sato, 2001).
The algorithm iteratively performs two steps. Given an instance (s,m), the ﬁrst step (“oVBE-
step”) creates a packed forest representation t of the space of possible derivations that yield any of
the observed sentence-meaning pairs (see Appendix B for details). This packed representation is
used to estimate the expected number of times the expansion a →γ appears in the derivation space
for the current example: Et[a →γ]. (As above, we use the notation for syntactic expansions, but
the algorithm also considers the expansion of a category into meaning representation c →m or
meaning representation into wordform m →w.) The second step (“oVBM-step”) then computes the
estimated number of times that a →γ appeared in any derivation of any of the observed examples.
These estimates correspond to the pseudo-counts na→γ that deﬁne the Dirichlet Process deﬁning the
distribution over the expansions of a. The computation is done by extrapolating the previous value
of na→γ with Et[a →γ]. In short, the oVBE step estimates the distribution over latent derivations
t given a (sentence, possible meanings) pair, while the oVBM step estimates the parameters of the
model, represented as pseudo-counts na→γ, given that distribution.
The full algorithm is presented in Algorithm 2. For each s and possible meaning representa-
tion m′ ∈m it uses the function T to generate a set of consistent parses t′.
In the parameter update step, the training algorithm updates the pseudo-counts associated
with each of the expansions a →γ that have been observed in any of the derivations generated for
this example.
We follow Hoffman et al. (2010) in using an online update schedule that knows, prior to
training, the number of training instances that will be seen N. This is a small contravention of the
conditions required for the algorithm to be truly online. In practice, the value of N is used by the
algorithm to weight the effects of the prior against those of the observed data and need not exactly
match the amount of data to be seen. We further follow Hoffman et al. in introducing a learning
rate ηi = (50+i)−0.8, where i is the iteration number. The more gradual learning rate, discussed in
Section 3.3, is ηi = (50+i)−0.6.20
20For brevity, some of the ﬁgures in Section 3.3 are only presented for the 4 and 6 distractor settings. For transitives
with the more gradual rate, the correct SVO category is only favored by a small margin over the alternatives, which is
reﬂected in the CPP for individual transitives and in the CPP of the nonce transitive after a single exposure: they are

BOOTSTRAPPING LANGUAGE ACQUISITION
53
Input : Corpus D = {(si,mi)|i = 1,...,N}, Function T , Semantics to syntactic category mapping
cat.
Output: Model Parameters {na→γ}
for i = 1,...,N do
ti = {}
for m′ ∈mi do
Cm′ = cat(m′)
ti = ti ∪T (si,Cm′ : m′)
for a →γ ∈ti do
oVBE-step: Compute Eti[a →γ]
oVBM-step: Update na→γ ←(1−ηi)na→γ +ηi ·N ·Eti[a →b]
Algorithm 2: Learning the lexicon and the model parameters.
Appendix D
Examples of Sentence-Meaning Pairs used in the Simulation Experiments
Below are examples of sentence-meaning pairs taken from the converted dependency-annotated Eve
corpus used in the simulation experiments. Predicate symbols and constants are written in the form
POS|af , where POS is the symbol’s part of speech, and f are additional features, where applicable
(often inﬂectional features). However, for the purposes of this work, all symbols are viewed as
non-decomposable. The parts of speech determine the semantic types, which are here omitted for
brevity.
“you go .”
:
λev.v|go(pro|you,ev)
“you get a ﬂy .”
:
λev.v|get(pro|you,det|a(e,n|fly(e)),ev)
“who are you calling ?”
:
λe.λev.aux|bePRESENT
(part|callPROGRESSIVE(pro|you,e,ev),ev)
“you read about the choochoo .”
:
λev.v|readZERO(pro|you,ev)∧
prep|about(det|the(e,n|choochoo(e)),ev)
both low in absolute terms. In all other experiments and settings, the model behaves similarly as in the 4 and 6 distractor
settings.

